-  *

3  3333  09654

B  FREDERICK  2
CARLYLEt  THOMAS*
HISTORY  OF  FRIEDRICH  II
OF  PRUSSIA?  CALLED*
VOL.  5

NNBR  951161480

HSS

SEP

The  Newark
Public  Library

Astor,  Lenox  and  Tilden  Foundations

016

EDITION  DE  LUXE

HISTORY

OF

FRIEDRICH  II. OF  PRUSSIA

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT

BY

THOMAS CARLYLE

VOL.  III.

BOSTON

DANA ESTES AND CHARLES E.  LAURIAT

1884

toe  |Lua;e

Limited  to  Three  Hundred  and  Fifteen  Copies
on  Parchment  Linen  Paper

Of  which  this  is  No. ..£
And  Thirty-Five  Copies  on  Japanese  Paper

ffamftvftige

JOHN WILSON AND SON, UNIVKRSITY PRKSS.

QTY  Of  NIW  YOW
CONTENTS.

m  1 1 4
jib  I !  4

3300k IX.  —  Continued.

LAST  STAGE  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  APPRENTICESHIP: LIFE IN

RUPPIN. 1732-1736.

CHAPTER  PAGE

XI. IN PAPA'S  SICK- ROOM  ; PRUSSIAN INSPECTIONS  ; END or

WAR  . .  3

3300k  X.

AT  REINSBERG,  1736-1740.

I. MANSION  OF  E-EiNSBEua 22

Of  Monsieur  Jordan  and  the  Literary  Set,  p.  32.

II. OF  VOLTAIRE  AND  THE  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCES ... 37

III.  CROWN-PRINCE  MAKES  A  MORNING  CALL 70

IV.  NEWS  OF  THE  DAY 79

Of  Berg  and  Jiilich  again  ;  and  of  Luiscius  with  the  One  Razor,
p.  85.

V. VISIT  AT  Loo 89

Crown-Prince becomes a Freemason; and  is harangued  by

Monsieur  de  Bielfeld,  p.  93.
Seckendorf  gets  lodged  in  Griitz,  100.
The  Ear  of  Jenkins  re-emerges,  102.

I^*"\  S* ^\ *** f\.

•A 6  0  a  9

7

iv  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  PAGE

VI. LAST  YEAR  OF REINSBERG  : JOURNEY  TO  PRETJSSEN . .
Pine's  Horace;  and  the  Anti-Machiavel,  p.  106.
Jfriedrich  in  Preussen  again; at  the  Stud  of  Trakehnen. A
feat  Event  coming  on,  112.

VII.  LAST  YEAR  OF  REINSBERG  :  TRANSIT OF  BALTIMORE  AND

OTHER  PERSONS  AND  THINGS 117

Bielfeld,  what  he  saw  at  Reinsberg  and  around,  p.  122.
Turk  "War  ends  ;  Spauish  War  begins. A  Wedding  in  Peters-
burg, 126.

VIII.  DEATH  OF  F.RIEDRICH  WILHELM  130

XI.

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS IN  HAND. 1740.

I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION 146

Fricdrich  will  make  Men  happy :  Corn-Magazines,  p.  151.

Abolition  of  Legal  Torture,  153.

Will  have  Philosophers about  him,  and  a real Academy of

Sciences,  155.

And  Every  One  shall  get  to  Heaven  in  his  own  Way,  157.
Free  Press,  and  Newspapers  the  best  Instructors,  158.
Intends  to  be  Practical  withal,  and  every  inch  a  King,  162.
Behavior  to  his  Mother  ;  to  his  Wife,  168.
No  Change  in  his  Father's  Methods  or  Ministries,  170.

II. THE  HOMAGINGS 177

Friedrich accepts the Homages,  personally,  in  Three  Places,
p.  181.

III.  FRIEDRICH  MAKES  AN  EXCURSION,  NOT  OF  DIRECT  SORT,

INTO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES 190

Friedrich  strikes  off  to  the  left,  and  has  a  View  of  Strasburg  for

Two  Days,  p.  197.
Friedrich  finds  M.  de  Maupertuis  ;  not  yet  M.  de  Voltaire,  211.

IV.  VOLTAIRE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW  WITH  FRIEDRICH .... 216

Particulars  of  First  Interview,  on  severe  Scrutiny,  p.  221.
What  Voltaire  thought  of  the  Interview  Twenty  Years  after-
wards, 223.
What  Voltaire  thought  of  the  Interview  at  the  Time,  227.

CONTENTS.  v

CHAPTER  PAGE

V. AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL 231

How  the  Herstallers  had  behaved  to  Friedrich  "Wilhelm,  p.  233.
Friedrich  takes  the  Rod  out  of  Pickle,  236.
What  Voltaire  thought  of  Herstal,  241.

VI. RETURNS  BY  HANOVER; DOES  NOT CALL  ON  HIS  ROYAL

UNCLE  THERE 245

VII. WITHDRAWS  TO  REINSBERG,  HOPING  A  PEACEABLE  WINTER 253
Wilhelmina's  Return-Visit,  p.  254.
Unexpected  News  at  Reinsherg,  258.

VIII. THE  KAISER'S  DEATH 2GO

IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG  IN  CONSEQUENCE . . 267
Mystery  in  Berlin,  for  Seven  Weeks,  while  the  Preparations

go  on ;  Voltaire  visits  Friedrich  to  decipher  it,  hut  cannot,

p.  271.

View  of  Friedrich  hehind  the  Veil,  275.
Excellency  Botta  has  Audience ;  then  Excellency  Dickens,  and

others ;  December  6th,  the  Mystery  is  out,  280.
Masked  Ball,  at  Berlin,  12th-13th  December,  284.

3Soofe  XII.

FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR,  AWAKENING  A GENERAL  EUROPEAN
ONE,  BEGINS. 17-40-1741.

I. OF  SCHLESIEN, OR SlLESIA 287

Historical  Epochs  of  Schlesien  ; — after  the  Quads  and  March-
men,  p.  289.

II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU 294

Friedrich  at  Crossen,  and  still  in  his  own  Territory,  I4th-16th

Dec. ;  —  steps  into  Schlesien,  p.  296.

What  Glogau  and  the  Government  at  Breslau,  did  upon  it,  299.
March  to  Weichau  (Saturday,  17th,  and  stay  Sunday  there)  ;  to

Milkau  (Monday  19th) ;  get  to Herrendorf,  within  sight  of

Glogau,  December  22d,  305.

III. PROBLEM  OF  GLOGAU 312

What  Berlin  is  saying  ;  what  Friedrich  is  thinking,  p.  316.
Schwerin  at  Lieguitz  ;  Friedrich  hushes  up  the  Glogau  Problem,
and  starts  with  his  best  speed  for  Breslau,  322.

vi  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  PAGE

IV. BRESLAU  UNDER  SOFT  PRESSURE ......... 325

King  enters  Brcslau  ;  stays  there,  gracious  and  vigilant,  Four
Days  (Jan.  2d-6th,  1741),  p.  329.

V. FRIEDRICH  PUSHES  FORWARD  TOWARDS  BRIEG  AND  NEISSE 332
Friedrich  conies  across  to  Ottmachau  ;  sits  there,  in  survey  of
Neisse,  till  his  Cannon  come,  p.  336.

VI. NEISSE  is  BOMBARDED  .............

Browne  vanishes  in  a  slight  Flash  of  Fire,  p.  347.

VII. AT  VERSAILLES,  THE  MOST  CHRISTIAN  MAJESTY  CHANGES

HIS  SHIRT,  AND  BELLEISLE  is  SEEN  WITH  PAPERS . 349
Of  Belleisle  and  his  Plans,  p.  355.

VIII. PHENOMENA  IN  PETERSBURG .......... 362

IX. FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA ......... 3?2

Skirmish  of  Baumgarten,  27th  February,  1741,  p.  376.

Aspects  of  Breslau,  380.

Austria  is  standing  to  Arms,  383.

The  Young  Dessauer  captures Glogau (March  9th)  ; the  Old

Dessauer, by his  Camp  of Go'ttin (April  2d),  checkmates

certain  Designing  Persons,  388.
Friedrich takes the  Field,  with some  Pomp; goes into  the

Mountains,  —  but  comes  fast  back,  395.

X. BATTLE  OF  MOLLWITZ ............. 406

Of  Friedrich's  Disappearance  into  Fairyland,  in  the  Interim;
and  of  Maupertuis's  similar  Adventure,  p.  425.

XI. THE  BURSTING  FORTH  OF  BEDLAMS:  BELLEISLE  AND  THE

BREAKERS  OF  PRAGMATIC  SANCTION ...... 432

Who  was  to  blame  for  the  Austrian-Succession  "War  ?  p.  436.
How  Belleisle  made  Visit  to  Teutschland  ;  and  there  was  no  fit

Henry  the  Fowler  to  welcome  him,  438.
Downbreak  of  Pragmatic  Sanction  ;  Manner  of  the  chief  Art-

ists in  handling  their  Covenants,  442.
Concerning  the  Imperial  Election  (Kaiserwahl)  that  is  to  be  ;

Candidates  for  Kaisership,  450.
Teutschland  to  be  carved  into  something  of  Symmetry,  should

the  Belleisle  Enterprises  succeed,  454.
Belleisle  on  Visit  to  Friedrich  ;  sees  Friedrich  besiege  Brieg,

with  Effect,  457-

CONTENTS.  vii

CHAPTER  PAGE

XII.  SORROWS  or  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY 463

1.  Snatch of Parliamentary  Eloquence  by Mr.  Viner  (19th

April,  1741),  p.  464.

2.  Constitutional  Historian  on  the  Phenomenon  of  Walpole  in

England,  468.

3.  Of  the  Spanish  War,  or  the  Jenkins's-Ear  Question,  472.
Succinct  History  of  the  Spanish  War,  which  began  in  1739 ;

and  ended —  When  did  it  end  ?  476.

XIII.  SMALL-WAR  :  FIRST  EMERGENCE  OF  ZIETIIEN  THE  HUSSAR

GENERAL  INTO  NOTICE 488

MAPS.
BATTLE  OP  MOLLWITZ to  face  p.  431

FIRST  Two  SILESIAN  WARS  .  at  end  of  Volume

ILLUSTRATIONS.

PORTRAIT: FRIEDRICH  IN  OLD  AGE.

Painted  by  RAMBEBG. Engraved  by  J.  C.  BUTTEE.

Frontispiece.

PORTRAIT  : FRIEDRICH  II.

Painted  by  PESNE. Photogravure  by  F.  H.  ALLEN.

To  face  page  1.

HISTORY OF

FRIEDEICH II.  OF PEUSSIA,

CALLED

FREDERICK  THE GREAT.

IN  TWENTY-ONE  BOOKS.

VOL. VII.

JffiOPEftTT  OP  THE  CITY  OF  NEW  YOEK
IHJB  KEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBiUfiY
BESEEVE

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

BOOK IX.

(CONTINUED.)

LAST  STAGE  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  APPRENTICESHIP

LIFE  IN  RUPPIN.

1732-1736.

CHAPTEE  XI.

IN PAPA'S SICK-ROOM  ; PRUSSIAN INSPECTIONS  : END OF WAR.

IT  appears,  Friedrich  met  a  cordial  reception  in  the  sick-
room at  Potsdam ;  and,  in  spite  of  his  levities  to  Wilhelmina,
was  struck  to  the  heart  by  what  he  saw  there.  For  months  to
come,  he  seems  to  be  continually  running  between  Potsdam
and  Euppin,  eager  to  minister  to  his  sick  Father,  when  mili-
tary leave  is  procurable.  Other  fact,  about  him,  other  aspect
of  him,  in  those  months,  is  not  on  record  for  us.

Of  his  young  Madam,  or  Princess-Eoyal,  peaceably  resident
at  Berlin  or  at  Schonhausen,  and  doing  the  vacant  officialities,
formal  visitings  and  the  like,  we  hear  nothing ;  of  Queen
Sophie  and  the  others,  nothing :  anxious,  all  of  them,  no  doubt,
about  the  event  at  Potsdam,  and  otherwise  silent  to  us.  His
Majesty's  illness  comes  and  goes  ;  now  hope,  and  again  almost
none.  Margraf  of  Schwedt  and  his  young  Bride,  we  already
know,  were  married  in  November ;  and  Lieutenant  Chasot
(two  days  old  in  Berlin)  told  us,  there  was  Dinner  by  the
Crown-Prince  to  all  the  Eoyal  Family  on  that  occasion ;  —

4  HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE. BOOK  IX.

Sept.-Oct.  1734.

poor  Majesty  out  at  Potsdam  languishing  in  the  background,
meanwhile.

His  Carnival  the  Crown-Prince  passes  naturally  at  Berlin.
We  find  he  takes  a  good  deal  to  the  French  Ambassador,  one
Marquis  de  la  Chetardie  ;  a  showy  restless  character,  of  fame
in  the  Gazettes  of  that  time;  who  did  much  intriguing  at
Petersburg  some  years  hence,  first  in  a  signally  triumphant
way,  and  then  in  a  signally  untriumphant ;  and  is  not  now
worth  any  knowledge  but  a  transient  accidental  one.  Chetar-
die came  hither  about  Stanislaus  and  his  affairs  ;  tried  hard,
but  in  vain,  to  tempt  Friedrich  Wilhelm  into  interference ;  —
is  naturally  anxious  to  captivate  the  Crown-Prince,  in  present
circumstances.

Friedrich  Wilhelm  lay  at  Potsdam,  between  death  and  life,
for  almost  four  months  to  come ;  the  Newspapers  speculating
much  on  his  situation ;  political  people  extremely  anxious
what  would  become  of  him,  —  or  in  fact,  when  he  would  die ;
for  that  was  considered  the  likely  issue.  Fassmann  gives
dolorous  clippings  from  the  Leyden  Gazette,  all  in  a  blubber
of  tears,  according  to  the  then  fashion,  but  full  of  impertinent
curiosity  withal.  And  from  the  Seckendorf  private  Papers
there  are  Extracts  of  a  still  more  inquisitive  and  notable  char-
acter :  Seckendorf  and  the  Kaiser  having  an  intense  interest
in  this  painful  occurrence.

Seckendorf  is  not  now  himself  at  Berlin  ;  but  running  much
about,  on  other  errands ;  can  only  see  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  if
at  all,  in  a  passing  way.  And  even  this  will  soon  cease ;  —
and  in  fact,  to  us  it  is  by  far  the  most  excellent  result  of  this
French- Austrian  War,  that  it  carries  Seckendorf  clear  away ;
who  now  quits  Berlin  and  the  Diplomatic  line,  and  obligingly
goes  out  of  our  sight  henceforth.  The  old  Ordnance-Master,
as  an  Imperial  General  of  rank,  is  needed  now  for  War-Service,
if  he  has  any  skill  that  way.  In  those  late  months,  he  was
duly  in  attendance  at  Philipsburg  and  the  Rhine-Campaign,
in  a  subaltern  torpid  capacity,  like  Brunswick-Bevern  and  the
others  ;  ready  for  work,  had  there  been  any :  but  next  season,
he  expects  to  have  a  Division  of  his  own,  and  to  do  something
considerable.  —  In  regard  to  Berlin  and  the  Diplomacies,  he

CHAP.  XL  IN  PAPA'S  SICK-ROOM.  5

Sept.-Oct.  1734.

has  appointed  a  Nephew  of  his,  a  Seckendorf  Junior,  to  take
his  place  there  ;  to  keep  the  old  machinery  in  gear,  if  nothing
more ;  and  furnish  copious  reports  during  the  present  crisis.
These  Eeports  of  Seckendorf  Junior  —  full  of  eavesdroppings,
got  from  a  Kammermohr  (Nigger  Lackey),  who  waits  in  the
sick-room  at  Potsdam,  and  is  sensible  to  bribes  —  have  been
printed;  and  we  mean  to  glance  slightly  into  them.  But
as  to  Seckendorf  Senior,  readers  can  entertain  the  fixed  hope
that  they  have  at  length  done  with  him;  that,  in  these
our  premises,  we  shall  never  see  him  again ;  —  nay  shall
see  him,  on  extraneous  dim  fields,  far  enough  away,  smarting
and  suffering,  till  even  we  are  almost  sorry  for  the  old
knave ! —

Friedrich  Wilhelm's  own  prevailing  opinion  is,  that  he
cannot  recover.  His  bodily  sufferings  are  great :  dropsically
swollen,  sometimes  like  to  be  choked :  no  bed  that  he  can  bear
to  lie  on  ;  —  oftenest  rolls  about  in  a  Bath-chair  ;  very  heavy-
laden  indeed;  and  I  think  of  tenderer  humor  than  in  for-
mer sicknesses.  To  the  Old  Dessauer  he  writes,  few  days
after  getting  home  to  Potsdam :  "  I  am  ready  to  quit  the
world,  as  Your  Dilection  knows,  and  has  various  times  heard
me  say.  One  ship  sails  faster,  another  slower ;  but  they
come  all  to  one  haven.  Let  it  be  with  me,  then,  as  the  Most
High  has  determined  for  me." 1  He  has  settled  his  affairs,
Fassmann  says,  so  far  as  possible;  settled  the  order  of  his
funeral,  How  he  is  to  be  buried,  in  the  Garrison  Church  of
Potsdam,  without  pomp  or  fuss,  like  a  Prussian  Soldier ;  and
what  regiment  or  regiments  it  is  that  are  to  do  the  triple
volley  over  him,  by  way  of  finis  and  long  farewell.  His  soul's
interests  too,  —  we  need  not  doubt  he  is  in  deep  conference,
in  deep  consideration  about  these ;  though  nothing  is  said  on
that  point.  A  serious  man  always,  much  feeling  what  im-
mense facts  he  was  surrounded  with ;  and  here  is  now  the
summing  up  of  all  facts.  Occasionally,  again,  he  has  hopes  ;
orders  up  "two  hundred  of  his  Potsdam  Giants  to  march
through  the  sick-room,"  since  he  cannot  get  out  to  them ;  or

1  Orlich,  Geschichte  der  Schlesischen  Kriege  (Berlin,  1841),  i.  14.  "From the
Dessau  Archives  ;  date,  21st  September,  1734."

6  HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE.  BOOK  IX.

Sept.-Oct.  1734.

old  Generals,  Buddenbrock,  Waldau,  come  and  take  their  pipe
there,  in  reminiscence  of  a  Tabagie.  Here,  direct  from  the
fountain-head,  or  Nigger  Lackey  bribed  by  Seckendorf  Junior,
is  a  notice  or  two  :  —

"Potsdam,  September  30th,  1734.  Yesterday,  for  half  an
hour,  the  King  could  get  no  breath :  he  keeps  them  continu-
ally rolling  him  about "  in  his  Bath-chair,  "  over  the  room,  and
cries  '  Luft,  Luft  (Air,  air)  ! '

"  October  2d.  The  King  is  not  going  to  die  just  yet ;  but
will  scarcely  see  Christmas.  He  gets  on  his  clothes ;  argues
with  the  Doctors,  is  impatient;  won't  have  people  speak  of
his  illness  ;  —  is  quite  black  in  the  face  ;  drinks  nothing  but
Moll  [which  we  suppose  to  be  small  bitter  beer],  takes  physic,
writes  in  bed.

"  October  5th.  The  Nigger  tells  me  things  are  better.  The
King  begins  to  bring  up  phlegm ;  drinks  a  great  deal  of  oat-
meal water  \_Hafergrutzwasser,  comfortable  to  the  sick]  ;  says
to  the  Nigger :  '  Pray  diligently,  all  of  you ;  perhaps  I  shall
not  die  ! ' "

October  5th :  this  is  the  day  the  Crown-Prince  arrives
at  Baireuth ;  to  be  called  away  by  express  four  days  after.
How  valuable,  at  Vienna  or  elsewhere,  our  dark  friend  the
Lackey's  medical  opinion  is,  may  be  gathered  from  this  other
Entry,  three  weeks  farther  on,  —  enough  to  suffice  us  on  that
head : —

"The  Nigger  tells  me  he  has  a  bad  opinion  of  the  King's
health.  If  you  roll  the  King  a  little  fast  in  his  Bath-chair,
you  hear  the  water  jumble  in  his  body,"  —  with  astonish-
ment !  "  King  gets  into  passions ;  has  beaten  the  pages
[may  we  hope,  our  dark  friend  among  the  rest?],  so  that
it  was  feared  apoplexy  would  take  him."

This  will  suffice  for  the  physiological  part ;  let  us  now  hear
our  poor  friend  on  the  Crown-Prince  and  his  arrival :  —

"  October  Vltli.  Keturn  of  the  Prince-Royal  to  Potsdam ;
tender  reception.  —  October  21st.  Things  look  ill  in  Potsdam.

CHAP.  XL  IN PAPA'S SICK-ROOM.  7

Sept.-Oct.  1734.

The  other  leg  is  now  also  begun  running ;  and  above  a  quart
(maas)  of  water  has  come  from  it.  Without  a  miracle,  the
King  cannot  live,"  —  thinks  our  dark  friend.  "  The  Prince-
Boyal  is  truly  affected  (y entablement  attendri)  at  the  King's
situation;  has  his  eyes  full  of  water,  has  wept  the  eyes  out
of  his  head :  has  schemed  in  all  ways  to  contrive  a  commo-
dious bed  for  the  King ;  would  n't  go  away  from  Potsdam.
King  forced  him  away ;  he  is  to  return  Saturday  afternoon.
The  Prince-Royal  has  been  heard  to  say,  'If  the  King  will
let  me  live  in  my  own  way,  I  would  give  an  arm  to  lengthen
his  life  for  twenty  years.'  King  always  calls  him  Fritzchen.
But  Fritzchen,"  thinks  Seckendorf  Junior,  "knows  nothing
about  business.  The  King  is  aware  of  it ;  and  said  in  the
face  of  him  one  day :  '  If  thou  begin  at  the  wrong  end  with
things,  and  all  go  topsy-turvy  after  I  am  gone,  I  will  laugh  at
thee  out  of  my  grave  ! '

So  Friedrich  Wilhelm;  laboring  amid  the  mortal  quick-
sands ;  looking  into  the  Inevitable,  in  various  moods.  But
the  mernorablest  speech  he  made  to  Fritzchen  or  to  anybody
at  present,  was  that  covert  one  about  the  Kaiser  and  Secken-
dorf, and  the  sudden  flash  of  insight  he  got,  from  some  word
of  Seckendorf's,  into  what  they  had  been  meaning  with  him
all  along.  Eiding  through  the  village  of  Priort,  in  debate
about  Vienna  politics  of  a  strange  nature,  Seckendorf  said
something,  which  illuminated  his  Majesty,  dark  for  so  many
years,  and  showed  him  where  he  was.  A  ghastly  horror  of  a
country,  yawning  indisputable  there;  revealed  to  one  as  if
by  momentary  lightning,  in  that  manner !  This  is  a  speech
which  all  the  ambassadors  report,  and  which  was  already
mentioned  by  us,  —  in  reference  to  that  opprobrious  Proposal
about  the  Crown-Prince's  Marriage,  "Marry  with  England,
after  all ;  never  mind  breaking  your  word !  "  Here  is  the
manner  of  it,  with  time  and  place :  —

"  Sunday  last,"  Sunday,  17th  October,  1734,  reports  Secken-
dorf, Junior,  through  the  Nigger  or  some  better  witness,  "the
1  Seckendorf  (Baron),  Journal  Secret;  cited  in  Fb'rster,  ii.  142.

8  HIS  APPKENTICESHIP, LAST  STAGE. BOOK  IX.

Jan.  1735.

King  said  to  the  Prince-Koyal :  '  My  dear  Son,  I  tell  thee  1
got  my  death  at  Priort.  I  entreat  thee,  above  all  things  in
the  world,  don't  trust  those  people  (denen  Leuten),  however
many  promises  they  make.  That  day,  it  was  April  17th,
1733,  there  was  a  man  said  something  to  me  :  it  was  as  if  you
had  turned  a  dagger  round  in  my  heart.'  "  l  —

Figure  that,  spoken  from  amid  the  dark  sick  whirlpools,  the
mortal  quicksands,  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  voice,  dangerously
plaintive ;  what  a  wild  sincerity,  almost  pathos,  is  in  it ;  and
whether  Fritzchen,  with  his  eyes  all  bewept  even  for  what
Papa  had  suffered  in  that  matter,  felt  lively  gratitudes  to  the
House  of  Austria  at  this  moment !  —

It  was  four  months  after,  "  21st  January,  1735," 2  when  the
King  first  got  back  to  Berlin,  to  enlighten  the  eyes  of  the
Carnival  a  little,  as  his  wont  had  been.  The  crisis  of  his
Majesty's  illness  is  over,  present  danger  gone ;  and  the  Car-
nival people,  not  without  some  real  gladness,  though  proba-
bly with  less  than  they  pretend,  can  report  him  well  again.
Which  is  far  from  being  the  fact,  if  they  knew  it.  Friedrich
Wilhelm  is  on  his  feet  again;  but  he  never  more  was  well.
Nor  has  he  forgotten  that  word  at  Priort,  "  like  the  turning
of  a  dagger  in  one's  heart ; "  —  and  indeed  gets  himself  con-
tinually reminded  of  it  by  practical  commentaries  from  the
Vienna  Quarter.

In  April,  Prince  Lichtenstein  arrives  on  Embassy  with
three  requests  or  demands  from  Vienna :  "  1°.  That,  besides
the  Ten  Thousand  due  by  Treaty,  his  Majesty  would  send
his  Eeich's-Contingent,"  not  comprehended  in  those  Ten  Thou-
sand,, thinks  the  Kaiser.  "2°.  That  he  would  have  the  goodness
to  dismiss  Marquis  de  la  Chetardie  the  French  Ambassador,  as
a  plainly  superfluous  person  at  a  well-affected  German  Court
in  present  circumstances  ;  "  —  person  excessively  dangerous,
should  the  present  Majesty  die,  Crown-Prince  being  so  fond
of  that  Chetardie.  « 3°.  That  his  Prussian  Majesty  do  give
up  the  false  Polish  Majesty  Stanislaus,  and  no  longer  harbor

1  Seckendorf  {Baron),  Journal  Secret;  cited  in  Forster,  ii.  142.

2  Fassmann,  p.  533.

CHAP.  XL  IN  PAPA'S  SICK-ROOM.  9

April,  1735.

him  in  East  Preussen  or  elsewhere."  The  whole  of  which
demands  his  Prussian  Majesty  refuses ;  the  latter  two  espe-
cially, as  something  notably  high  on  the  Kaiser's  part,  or  on
any  mortal's,  to  a  free  Sovereign  and  Gentleman.  Prince
Lichtenstein  is  eloquent,  conciliatory ;  but  it  avails  not.  He
has  to  go  home  empty-handed  ;  —  manages  to  leave  with  Herr
von  Suhrn,  who  took  care  of  it  for  us,  that  Anecdote  of  the
Crown-Prince's  behavior  under  cannon-shot  from  Philipsburg
last  year ;  and  does  nothing  else  recordable,  in  Berlin.

The  Crown-Prince's  hopes  were  set,  with  all  eagerness,  on
getting  to  the  Rhine-Campaign  next  ensuing ;  nor  did  the
King  refuse,  for  a  long  while,  but  still  less  did  he  consent ;
and  in  the  end  there  came  nothing  of  it.  From  an  early
period  of  the  year,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  sees  too  well  what  kind
of  campaigning  the  Kaiser  will  now  make ;  at  a  certain  Wed-
ding-dinner where  his  Majesty  was,  —  precisely  a  fortnight
after  his  Majesty's  arrival  in  Berlin,  —  Seckendorf  Junior  has
got,  by  eavesdropping,  this  utterance  of  his  Majesty's  :  "  The
Kaiser  has  not  a  groschen  of  money.  His  Army  in  Lornbardy
is  gone  to  twenty-four  thousand  men,  will  have  to  retire  into
the  Mountains.  Next  campaign  [just  coming],  he  will  lose
Mantua  and  the  Tyrol.  God's  righteous  judgment  it  is :  a
War  like  this  !  Comes  of  flinging  old  principles  overboard,  —
of  meddling  in  business  that  was  none  of  yours  ;  "  and  more,
of  a  plangent  alarming  nature.1

Friedrich  Wilhelm  sends  back  his  Ten  Thousand,  accord-
ing to  contract ;  sends,  over  and  above,  a  beautiful  stock  of
"copper  pontoons"  to  help  the  Imperial  Majesty  in  that
Paver  Country,  says  Fassmann ;  —  sends  also  a  supernume-
rary Troop  of  Hussars,  who  are  worth  mentioning,  "  Six-score
horse  of  Hussar  type,"  under  one  Captain  Ziethen,  a  taciturn,
much-enduring,  much-observing  man,  whom  we  shall  see  again :
these  are  to  be  diligently  helpful,  as  is  natural ;  but  they  are
also,  for  their  own  behoof,  to  be  diligently  observant,  and
learn  the  Austrian  Hussar  methods,  which  his  Majesty  last
year  saw  to  be  much  superior.  Nobody  that  knows  Ziethen
doubts  but  he  learnt ;  Hussar-Colonel  Baronay,  his  Austrian
1  Forster,  ii.  144  (and  date  it  from  Militair-Lexikon,  ii.  54).

10  HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE. BOOK  IX.

April-Sept.  1735.

teacher  here,  became  too  well  convinced  of  it  when  they  met
on  a  future  occasion.1  All  this  his  Majesty  did  for  the  ensu-
ing campaign:  but  as  to  the  Crown-Prince's  going  thither,
after  repeated  requests  on  his  part,  it  is  at  last  signified  to
him,  deep  in  the  season,  that  it  cannot  be  :  "  Won't  answer
for  a  Crown-Prince  to  be  sharer  in  such  a  Campaign ;  —  be
patient,  my  good  Fritzchen,  I  will  find  other  work  for  thee."  2
Fritzchen  is  sent  into  Preussen,  to  do  the  Keviewings  and
Inspections  there ;  Papa  not  being  able  for  them  this  season ;
and  strict  manifold  Inspection,  in  those  parts,  being  more  than
usually  necessary,  owing  to  the  Eussian-Polish  troubles.  On
this  errand,  which  is  clearly  a  promotion,  though  in  present
circumstances  not  a  welcome  one  for  the  Crown-Prince,  he
sets  out  without  delay ;  and  passes  there  the  equinoctial  and
autumnal  season,  in  a  much  more  useful  way  than  he  could
have  done  in  the  Rhine-Campaign.

In  the  Rhine- Moselle  Country  and  elsewhere  the  poor  Kai-
ser does  exert  himself  to  make  a  Campaign  of  it ;  but  without
the  least  success.  Having  not  a  groschen  of  money,  how
could  he  succeed  ?  Noailles,  as  foreseen,  manoeuvres  him,
hitch  after  hitch,  out  of  Italy  ;  French  are  greatly  superior,
more  especially  when  Montemar,  having  once  got  Carlos
crowned  in  Naples  and  put  secure,  comes  to  assist  the  French ;
Kaiser  has  to  lean  for  shelter  on  the  Tyrol  Alps,  as  predicted.
Italy,  all  but  some  sieging  of  strong-places,  may  be  considered
as  lost  for  the  present.

Nor  on  the  Ehine  did  things  go  better.  Old  Eugene,  "  the
shadow  of  himself,"  had  no  more  effect  this  year  than  last :
nor,  though  Lacy  and  Ten  Thousand  Russians  came  as  allies,
Poland  being  all  settled  now,  could  the  least  good  be  done.
Reich's-Feldmarschall  Karl  Alexander  of  Wiirtemberg  did
"  burn  a  Magazine  "  (probably  of  hay  among  better  provender)
by  his  bomb-shells,  on  one  occasion.  Also  the  Prussian  Ten

1  Life  of  Zielhm  (veridical  but  inexact,  by  the  Frau  von  Blumenthal,  a
kinswoman  of  his;  English  Translation,  very  ill  printed,  Berlin,  1803),  p.  54.

2  Friedrich's  Letter,  5th  September,  1735 ;  Friedrich  Wilhelrn's  Answer
next  day  ((Euvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xxvii.  part  3d,  93-95).

CHAP.  XI.  PKUSSIAN  INSPECTIONS.  11

Sept.-Oct.  1735.

Thousand  —  Old  Dessauer  leading  them,  General  Roder  hav-
ing fallen  ill  —  burnt  something:  an  Islet  in  the  Ehine,  if
I  recollect,  "  Islet  of  Lorch  near  Bingen,"  where  the  French
had  a  post ;  which  and  whom  the  Old  Dessauer  burnt  away.
And  then  Seckendorf,  at  the  head  of  thirty  thousand,  he,
after  long  delays,  marched  to  Trarbach  in  the  interior  Mo-
selle Country ;  and  got  into  some  explosive  sputter  of  battle
with  Belleisle,  one  afternoon,  —  some  say,  rather  beating
Belleisle ;  but  a  good  judge  says,  it  was  a  mutual  flurry  and
terror  they  threw  one  another  into.1  Seckendorf  meant  to
try  again  on  the  morrow :  but  there  came  an  estafette  that
night :  "  Preliminaries  signed  (Vienna,  3d  October,  1735)  ;  —
try  no  farther ! "  2  And  this  was  the  second  Rhine-Campaign,
and  the  end  of  the  Kaiser's  French  War.  The  Sea-Powers,
steadily  refusing  money,  diligently  run  about,  offering  terms
of  arbitration;  and  the  Kaiser,  beaten  at  every  point,  and
reduced  to  his  last  groschen,  is  obliged  to  comply.  He  will
have  a  pretty  bill  to  pay  for  his  Polish-Election  frolic,  were
the  settlement  done  !  Fleury  is  pacific,  full  of  bland  candor
to  the  Sea-Powers ;  the  Kaiser,  after  long  higgling  upon  arti-
cles, will  have  to  accept  the  bill.

The  Crown-Prince,  meanwhile,  has  a  successful  journey  into
Preussen;  sees  new  interesting  scenes,  Salzburg  Emigrants,
exiled  Polish  Majesties ;  inspects  the  soldiering,  the  schooling,
the  tax-gathering,  the  domain-farming,  with  a  perspicacity,  a
dexterity  and  completeness  that  much  pleases  Papa.  Frac-
tions of  the  Reports  sent  home  exist  for  us  :  let  the  reader
take  a  glance  of  one  only  ;  the  first  of  the  series ;  dated  Marien-
werder  (just  across  the  Weichsel,  fairly  out  of  Polish  Preus-
sen and  into  our  own),  27th  September,  1735,  and  addressed
to  the  "  Most  All-gracious  King  and  Father ; "  —  abridged  for
the  reader's  behoof  :  —

...  "In  Polish  Preussen,  lately  the  Seat  of  War,  things
look  hideously  waste  ;  one  sees  nothing  but  women  and  a  few

1  (Euvrcs  de  Frederic,  i.  168.

2  "Cessation  is  to  be,  5th  November  for  Germany,  15th  for  Italy;  Prelimi-
naries" were,  Vienna,  "3d  October,"  1735  (Scholl,  ii.  245).

12 HIS  APPKENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE.  BOOK  IX.

Sept.-Oct.  1735.

children;  it  is  said  the  people  are  mostly  running  away,"  —
owing  to  the  Eussian-Polish  procedures  there,  in  consequence
of  the  blessed  Election  they  have  had.  King  August,  whom,
your  Majesty  is  not  in  love  with,  has  prevailed  at  this  rate  of
expense.  King  Stanislaus,  protected  by  your  Majesty  in  spite
of  Kaisers  and  Czarinas,  waits  in  Konigsberg,  till  the  Peace,
now  supposed  to  be  coming,  say  what  is  to  become  of  him :
once  in  Konigsberg,  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  to  see  him.  "  A
detachment  of  five-and-twenty  Saxon  Dragoons  of  the  Regi-
ment Arnstedt,  marching  towards  Dantzig,  met  me :  their
horses  were  in  tolerable  case ;  but  some  are  piebald,  some
sorrel,  and  some  brown  among  them,"  which  will  be  shocking
to  your  Majesty,  "  and  the  people  did  not  look  well."  .  .  .

"  Got  hither  to  Marienwerder,  last  night :  have  inspected
the  two  Companies  which  are  here,  that  is  to  say,  Lieutenant-
Col.  Meier's  and  Eittmeister  Hans's.  In  very  good  trim,  both
of  them ;  and  though  neither  the  men  nor  their  horses  are
of  extraordinary  size,  they  are  handsome  well-drilled  fellows,
and  a  fine  set  of  stiff-built  horses  (gedrungenen  Pferden).  The
fellows  sit  them  like  pictures  (reiten  wie  die  Puppen) ;  I  saw
them  do  their  wheelings.  Meier  has  some  fine  recruits ;  in
particular  two  ;  "  —  nor  has  the  Kittmeister  been  wanting  in
that  respect.  "  Young  horses  "  too  are  coming  well  on,  sleek
of  skin.  In  short,  all  is  right  on  the  military  side.1

Civil  business,  too,  of  all  kinds,  the  Crown-Prince  looked
into,  with  a  sharp  intelligent  eye  ;  —  gave  praise,  gave  censure
in  the  right  place ;  put  various  things  on  a  straight  footing,
which  were  awry  when  he  found  them.  In  fact,  it  is  Papa's
second  self ;  looks  into  the  bottom  of  all  things  quite  as  Papa
would  have  done,  and  is  fatal  to  mendacities,  practical  or
vocal,  wherever  he  meets  them.  What  a  joy  to  Papa  :  "Here,
after  all,  is  one  that  can  replace  me,  in  case  of  accident.  This
Apprentice  of  mine,  after  all,  he  has  fairly  learned  the  Art ;
and  will  continue  it  when  I  am  gone  ! "  —

Yes,  your  Majesty,  it  is  a  Prince-Royal  wise  to  recognize
your  Majesty's  rough  wisdom,  on  all  manner  of  points ;  will

1  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxvii.  part  3d,  p.  97.

CHAP.  XI.  PEUSSIAN  INSPECTIONS.  13

Sept.-Oct.  1735.

not  be  a  DeviVs-friend,  I  think,  any  more  than  your  Majesty
was.  Here  truly  are  rare  talents ;  like  your  Majesty  and  un-
like ;  —  and  has  a  steady  swiftness  in  him,  as  of  an  eagle,  over
and  above !  Such  powers  of  practical  judgment,  of  skilful
action,  are  rare  in  one's  twenty-third  year.  And  still  rarer,
have  readers  noted  what  a  power  of  holding  his  peace  this
young  man  has  ?  Fruit  of  his  sufferings,  of  the  hard  life  he
has  had.  Most  important  power ;  under  which  all  other  use-
ful ones  will  more  and  more  ripen  for  him.  This  Prince
already  knows  his  own  mind,  on  a  good  many  points  ;  pri-
vately, amid  the  world's  vague  clamor  jargoning  round  him  to
no  purpose,  he  is  capable  of  having  his  mind  made  up  into
definite  Yes  and  No,  —  so  as  will  surprise  us  one  day.

Friedrich  Wilhelrn,  we  perceive,1  was  in  a  high  degree  con-
tent with  this  performance  of  the  Prussian  Mission :  a  very
great  comfort  to  his  sick  mind,  in  those  months  and  after-
wards. Here  are  talents,  here  are  qualities,  —  visibly  the
Friedrich- Wilhelm  stuff  throughout,  but  cast  in  an  infinitely
improved  type  :  —  what  a  blessing  we  did  not  cut  off  that  young
Head,  at  the  Kaiser's  dictation,  in  former  years  !  —

At  Konigsberg,  as  we  learn  in  a  dim  indirect  manner,  the
Crown-Prince  sees  King  Stanislaus  twice  or  thrice,  —  not
formally,  lest  there  be  political  offence  taken,  but  incidentally
at  the  houses  of  third-parties ;  —  and  is  much  pleased  with  the
old  gentleman ;  who  is  of  cultivated  good-natured  ways,  and
has  surely  many  curious  things,  from  Charles  XII.  downwards,
to  tell  a  young  man.2  Stanislaus  has  abundance  of  useless
refugee  Polish  Magnates  about  him,  with  their  useless  crowds
of  servants,  and  no  money  in  pocket ;  Konigsberg  all  on  flut-
ter, with  their  draperies  and  them,  "  like  a  little  Warsaw :  "
so  that  Stanislaus's  big  French  pension,  moderate  Prussian
monthly  allowance,  and  all  resources,  are  inadequate ;  and,  in
fact,  in  the  end,  these  Magnates  had  to  vanish,  many  of  them,
without  settling  their  accounts  in  Konigsberg.8  For  the
present  they  wait  here,  Stanislaus  and  they,  till  Fleury  and

1  His  Letter,  24th  October,  1735. (Ib.  p.  99).

2  Came  8th  October,  went  21st  ((Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxvii.  part  3d,  p.  98).

3  History  of  Stanislaus.

14  HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE. BOOK  IX.

Oct.  1735.

the  Kaiser,  shaking  the  urn  of  doom  in  abstruse  treaty  after
battle,  decide  what  is  to  become  of  them.

Friedrich  returned  to  Dantzig  :  saw  that  famous  City,  and
late  scene  of  War ;  tracing  with  lively  interest  the  footsteps
of  Munnich  and  his  Siege  operations,  —  some  of  which  are
much  blamed  by  judges,  and  by  this  young  Soldier  among  the
rest.  There  is  a  pretty  Letter  of  his  from  Dantzig,  turning
mainly  on  those  points.  Letter  written  to  his  young  Brother-
in-law,  Karl  of  Brunswick,  who  is  now  become  Duke  there ;
Grandfather  and  Father  both  dead  ; 1  and  has  just  been  blessed
with  an  Heir,  to  boot.  Congratulation  on  the  birth  of  this
Heir  is  the  formal  purport  of  the  Letter,  though  it  runs  ever
and  anon  into  a  military  strain.  Here  are  some  sentences  in  a
condensed  form :  —

"  Dantzig,  26th  October,  1735.  .  .  .  Thank  my  dear  Sister  for
her  services.  I  am  charmed  that  she  has  made  you  papa  with
so  good  a  grace.  I  fear  you  won't  stop  there  ;  but  will  go  on
peopling  the  world  "  —  one  knows  not  to  what  extent  —  "  with
your  amiable  race.  Would  have  written  sooner ;  but  I  am
just  returning  from  the  depths  of  the  barbarous  Countries;
and  having  been  charged  with  innumerable  commissions  which
I  did  not  understand  too  well,  had  no  good  possibility  to  think
or  to  write.

"  I  have  viewed  all  the  Eussian  labors  in  these  parts  ;  have
had  the  assault  on  the  Hagelsberg  narrated  to  me  ;  been  on  the
grounds  ;  —  and  own  I  had  a  better  opinion  of  Marshal  Mun-
nich than  to  think  him  capable  of  so  distracted  an  enterprise.2
.  .  .  Adieu,  my  dear  Brother.  My  compliments  to  the  amia-
ble young  Mother.  Tell  her,  I  beg  you,  that  her  proof-essays
are  masterpieces  (coups  d'essai  sont  des  coups  de  maitre)."  .  .  .

"  Your  most,"  &c.,

"  FREDERIC."

1  Grandfather,  1st  March,  1735;  Father  (who lost the Lines  of  Ettlinqen
lately  in  our  sight),  3d  September,  1735. Supra,  vol.  vi.  p.  372.

2  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxvii.  part  2d,  p.  31. Pressed  for  time,  and  in  want
of  battering-cannon,  he  attempted  to  seize  this  Hagelsberg,  one  of  the  outlying
defences of  Dantzig,  by  nocturnal storm ;  lost  two  thousand  men  ;  and  re-
tired, without  doing  "what was flatly  impossible,"  thinks  the  Crown-Prince.
See  Mannstein,  pp.  77-79,  for  an  account  of  it.

CHAP.  XL  END OF WAR.  15

Jan.-April,  1736.

The  Brunswick  Masterpiece,  achieved  on  this  occasion,  grew
to  be  a  man  and  Duke,  famous  enough  in  the  Newspapers  in
time  coming :  Champagne,  1792 ;  Jena,  1806 ;  George  IV.'s
Queen  Caroline  ;  these  and  other  distracted  phenomena  (pretty
much  blotting  out  the  earlier  better  sort)  still  keep  him  hang-
ing painfully  in  men's  memory.  From  his  birth,  now  in  this
Prussian  Journey  of  our  Crown-Prince,  to  his  death-stroke  on
the  Field  of  Jena,  what  a  seventy-one  years  !  —

Fleury  and  the  Kaiser,  though  it  is  long  before  the  signa-
ture and  last  finish  can  take  place,  are  come  to  terms  of  set-
tlement, at  the  Crown-Prince's  return ;  and  it  is  known,  in
political  circles,  what  the  Kaiser's  Polish-Election  damages
will  probably  amount  to.  Here  are,  in  substance,  the  only  con-
ditions that  could  be  got  for  him :  —

"  1°.  Baby  Carlos,  crowned  in  Naples,  cannot  be  pulled  out
again:  Naples,  the  Two  Sicilies,  are  gone  without  return.
That  is  the  first  loss ;  please  Heaven  it  be  the  worst !  On
the  other  hand,  Baby  Carlos  will,  as  some  faint  compensation,
surrender  to  your  Imperial  Majesty  his  Parma  and  Piacenza
apanages ;  and  you  shall  get  back  your  Lombardy,  —  all  but
a  scantling  which  we  fling  to  the  Sardinian  Majesty  ;  who  is
a  good  deal  huffed,  having  had  possession  of  the  Milanese
these  two  years  past,  in  terms  of  his  bargain  with  Fleury.
Pacific  Fleury  says  to  him :  '  Bargain  cannot  be  kept,  your
Majesty ;  please  to  quit  the  Milanese  again,  and  put  up  with
this  scantling.'

"  2°.  The  Crown  of  Poland,  August  III.  has  got  it,  by  Eus-
sian  bombardings  and  other  measures  :  Crown  shall  stay  with
August,  —  all  the  rather  as  there  would  be  no  dispossessing
him,  at  this  stage.  He  was  your  Imperial  Majesty's  Candi-
date ;  let  him  be  the  winner  there,  for  your  Imperial  Majesty's
comfort.

"  3°.  And  then  as  to  poor  Stanislaus  ?  Well,  let  Stanislaus
be  Titular  Majesty  of  Poland  for  life ;  —  which  indeed  will  do
little  for  him :  —  but  in  addition,  we  propose,  That,  the  Duke-
dom of  Lorraine  being  now  in  our  hands,  Majesty  Stanislaus
have  the  life-rent  of  Lorraine  to  subsist  upon ;  and  —  and  that

16 HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE.  BOOK  IX.

Jan.-April,  1736.

Lorraine  fall  to  us  of  France  on  his  decease !  — '  Lorraine  ? '
exclaim  the  Kaiser,  and  the  Eeich,  and  the  Kaiser's  intended
Son-in-law  Franz  Duke  of  Lorraine.  There  is  indeed  a  loss
and  a  disgrace ;  a  heavy  item  in  the  Election  damages !

"  4°.  As  to  Duke  Franz,  there  is  a  remedy.  The  old  Duke
of  Florence,  last  of  the  Medici,  is  about  to  die  childless :  let
the  now  Duke  of  Lorraine,  your  Imperial  Majesty's  intended
Son-in-law,  have  Florence  instead.  —  And  so  it  had  to  be
settled.  '  Lorraine  ?  To  Stanislaus,  to  France  ? '  exclaimed
the  poor  Kaiser,  still  more  the  poor  Eeich,  and  poor  Duke
Franz.  This  was  the  bitterest  cut  of  all ;  but  there  was  no
getting  past  it.  This  too  had  to  be  allowed,  this  item  for  the
Election  breakages  in  Poland.  And  so  France,  after  nibbling
for  several  centuries,  swallows  Lorraine  whole.  Duke  Franz
attempted  to  stand  out ;  remonstrated  much,  with  Kaiser  and
Hofrath,  at  Vienna,  on  this  unheard-of  proposal :  but  they  told
him  it  was  irremediable  ;  told  him  at  last  (one  Bartenstein,  a
famed  Aulic  Official,  told  him),  '  No  Lorraine,  no  Archduchess,
your  Serenity ! '  —  and  Franz  had  to  comply.  Lorraine  is  gone ;
cunning  Fleury  has  swallowed  it  whole.  '  That  was  what  he
meant  in  picking  this  quarrel ! '  said  Teutschland  mournfully.
Fleury  was  very  pacific,  candid  in  aspect  to  the  Sea-Powers
and  others  ;  and  did  not  crow  afflictively,  did  not  say  what  he
had  meant.

"5°.  One  immense  consolation  for  the  Kaiser,  if  for  no
other,  is  :  France  guarantees  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  —
though  with  very  great  difficulty ;  spending  a  couple  of  years,
chiefly  on  this  latter  point  as  was  thought.1  How  it  kept
said  guarantee,  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel."

And  these  were  the  damages  the  poor  Kaiser  had  to  pay  for
meddling  in  Polish  Elections  ;  for  galloping  thither  in  chase
of  his  Shadows.  No  such  account  of  broken  windows  was
ever  presented  to  a  man  before.  This  may  be  considered  as
the  consummation  of  the  Kaiser's  Shadow-Hunt;  or  at  least  its
igniting  and  exploding  point.  His  Duel  with  the  Termagant
has  at  last  ended ;  in  total  defeat  to  him  on  every  point.
Shadow-Hunt  does  not  end ;  though  it  is  now  mostly  vanished ;
1  Treaty  on  it  not  signed  till  18th  November,  1738  (Scholl,  ii.  246).

CHAP.  XI.  END OF WAK.  17

May,  1736.

exploded  in  fire.  Shadow-Hunt  is  now  gone  all  to  Pragmatic
Sanction,  as  it  were :  that  now  is  the  one  thing  left  in  Nature
for  a  Kaiser  ;  and  that  he  will  love,  and  chase,  as  the  summary
of  all  things.  From  this  point  he  steadily  goes  down,  and  at
a  rapid  rate  ;  —  getting  into  disastrous  Turk  Wars,  with  as  little
preparation  for  War  or  Fact  as  a  life-long  Hunt  of  Shadows
presupposes ;  Eugene  gone  from  him,  and  nothing  but  Seckeu-
dorfs  to  manage  for  him ;  —  and  sinks  to  a  low  pitch  indeed.
We  will  leave  him  here ;  shall  hope  to  see  but  little  more  of
him.

In  the  Summer  of  1736,  in  consequence  of  these  arrange-
ments,—  which  were  completed  so  far,  though  difficulties  on
Pragmatic  Sanction  and  other  points  retarded  the  final  signa-
ture for  many  months  longer,  —  the  Titular  Majesty  Stanis-
laus girt  himself  together  for  departure  towards  his  new
Dominion  or  Life-rent ;  quitted  Konigsberg ;  traversed  Prus-
sian Poland,  safe  this  time,  "  under  escort  of  Lieutenant-
General  von  Katte  [our  poor  Katte  of  Ciistrin's  Father]  and
fifty  cuirassiers ; "  reached  Berlin  in  the  middle  of  May,  under
flowerier  aspects  than  usual.  He  travelled  under  the  title  of
"  Count "  Something,  and  alighted  at  the  French  Ambassador's
in  Berlin:  but  Friedrich  Wilhelm  treated  him.  like  a  real
Majesty,  almost  like  a  real  Brother;  had  him  over  to  the
Palace ;  rushed  out  to  meet  him.  there,  I  forget  how  many
steps  beyond  the  proper  limits ;  and  was  hospitality  itself  and
munificence  itself ;  —  and,  in  fact,  that  night  and  all  the  other
nights,  "they  smoked  above  thirty  pipes  together,"  for  one
item.  May  21st,  1736,1  Ex-Majesty  Stanislaus  went  on  his
way  again ;  towards  France,  —  towards  Meudon,  a  quiet  Royal
House  in  France,  —  till  Luneville,  Nanci,  and  their  Lorraine
Palaces  are  quite  ready.  There,  in  these  latter,  he  at  length
does  find  resting-place,  poor  innocent  insipid  mortal,  after
such  tossings  to  and  fro :  and  M.  de  Voltaire,  and  others  of

1  Forster  (i.  227),  following  loose  Pollnitz  (ii.  478),  dates  it  1735 :  a  more
considerable  error,  if  looked  into,  than  is  usual  in  Herr  Forster ;  who  is  not
an  ill-informed  nor  inexact  man ;  —  though,  alas,  in  respect  of  method  (that  is
to  say,  want  of  visible  method,  indication,  or  human  arrangement),  probably
the  most  confused  of  all  the  Germans !

VOL.  VII.  2

18  HIS  APPKENTICESHIP, LAST STAGE. BOOK  IX.

May,  1736.

mark,  having  sometimes  enlivened  the  insipid  Court  there,
Titular  King  Stanislaus  has  still  a  kind  of  remembrance  among
mankind.

Of  his  Prussian  Majesty  we  said  that,  though  the  Berlin
populations  reported  him  well  again,  it  was  not  so.  The  truth
is,  his  Majesty  was  never  well  again.  From  this  point,  age
only  forty-seven,  he  continues  broken  in  bodily  constitution ;
clogged  more  and  more  with  physical  impediments  ;  and  his
History,  personal  and  political  withal,  is  as  that  of  an  old  man,
finishing  his  day.  To  the  last  he  pulls  steadily,  neglecting  no
business,  suffering  nothing  to  go  wrong.  Building  operations
go  on  at  Berlin ;  pushed  more  than  ever,  in  these  years,  by  the
rigorous  Derschau,  who  has  got  that  in  charge.  No  man  of
money  or  rank  in  Berlin  but  Derschau  is  upon  him,  with
heavier  and  heavier  compulsion  to  build :  which  is  felt  to  be
tyrannous ;  and  occasions  an  ever-deepening  grumble  among
the  moneyed  classes.  At  Potsdam  his  Majesty  himself  is  the
Builder ;  and  gives  the  Houses  away  to  persons  of  merit.1

Nor  is  the  Army  less  an  object,  perhaps  almost  more.  Nay,
at  one  time,  old  Kur-Pfalz  being  reckoned  in  a  dying  condition,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  is  about  ranking  his  men,  prepared  to  fight
for  his  rights  in  Jiilich  and  Berg ;  Kaiser  having  openly  gone
over,  and  joined  with  France  against  his  Majesty  in  that  mat-
ter. However,  the  old  Kur-Pfalz  did  not  die,  and  there  came
nothing  of  fight  in  Friedrich  Wilhelin's  time.  But  his  History,
on  the  political  side,  is  henceforth  mainly  a  commentary  to
him  on  that  "word"  he  heard  in  Priort,  "which  was  as  if
you  had  turned  a  dagger  in  my  heart ! "  With  the  Kaiser  he
has  fallen  out :  there  arise  unfriendly  passages  between  them,
sometimes  sarcastic  on  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  part,  in  reference
to  this  very  War  now  ended.  Thus,  when  complaint  rose
about  the  Prussian  misbehaviors  on  their  late  marches  (misbe-
haviors notable  in  Countries  where  their  recruiting  operations
had  been  troubled),  the  Kaiser  took  a  high  severe  tone,  not
assuaging,  rather  aggravating  the  matter ;  and,  for  his  own
share,  winded  up  by  a  strict  prohibition  of  Prussian  recruiting

l  Pollnitz,  ii.  469.

CHAP.  XT.  END OF WAR.  19

May,  1736.

in  any  and  every  part  of  the  Imperial  Dominions.  Which
Friedrich  Wilhelm  took  extremely  ill.  This  is  from  a  letter
of  his  to  the  Crown-Prince,  and  after  the  first  gust  of  wrath
had  spent  itself :  "  It  is  a  clear  disadvantage,  this  prohibition
of  recruiting  in  the  Kaiser's  Countries.  That  is  our  thanks  for
the  Ten  Thousand  men  sent  him,  and  for  all  the  deference  I
have  shown  the  Kaiser  at  all  times ;  and  by  this  you  may  see
that  it  would  be  of  no  use  if  one  even  sacrificed  oneself  to  him.
So  long  as  they  need  us,  they  contiime  to  natter ;  but  no  sooner
is  the  strait  thought  to  be  over,  and  help  not  wanted,  than
they  pull  off  the  mask,  and  have  not  the  least  acknowledg-
ment. The  considerations  that  will  occur  to  you  on  this
matter  may  put  it  in  your  power  to  be  prepared  against  similar
occasions  in  time  coming."  1

Thus,  again,  in  regard  to  the  winter-quarters  of  the  Ziethen
Hussars.  Prussian  Majesty,  we  recollect,  had  sent  a  Supernu-
merary Squadron  to  the  last  Campaign  on  the  Rhine.  They
were  learning  their  business,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  knew ;  but
also  were  fighting  for  the  Kaiser,  —  that  was  what  the  Kaiser
knew  about  them.  Somewhat  to  his  surprise,  in  the  course  of
next  year,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  received,  from  the  Vienna  War-
Office,  a  little  Bill  of  10,284  florins  (£1,028  8s.)  charged  to  him
for  the  winter-quarters  of  these  Hussars.  He  at  once  paid  the
little  Bill,  with  only  this  observation :  "  Heartily  glad  that  I
can  help  the  Imperial  jErarium  with  that  £1,028  8s.  With
the  sincerest  wishes  for  hundred-thousandfold  increase  to  it
in  said  Mrarium  ;  otherwise  it  won't  go  very  far !  " 2

At  a  later  period,  in  the  course  of  his  disastrous  Turk
War,  the  Kaiser,  famishing  for  money,  set  about  borrowing
a  million  gulden  (£100,000)  from  the  Banking  House  Splitt-
gerber  and  Daun  at  Berlin.  Splittgerber  and  Daun  had  not
the  money,  could  not  raise  it :  "  Advance  us  that  sum,  in  their
name,  your  Majesty,"  proposes  the  Vienna  Court :  "  There
shall  be  three-per-cent  bonus,  interest  six  per  cent,  and  secu-
rity beyond  all  question ! "  To  which  fine  offer  his  Majesty
answers,  addressing  Seckendorf  Junior:  "Touching  the  pro-

1  6th  February,  1736  :  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxvii.  part  3d,  p.  102.

2  Letter  to  Seckendorf  (Senior) :  Forster,  ii.  150.

20  HIS  APPRENTICESHIP,  LAST  STAGE. BOOK  IX.

May,  1736.

posal  of  my  giving  the  Bankers  Splittgerber  and  Daun  a  lift,
with  a  million  gulden,  to  assist  in  that  loan  of  theirs,  —  said  pro-
posal, as  I  am  not  a  merchant  accustomed  to  deal  in  profits  and
percentages,  cannot  in  that  form  take  effect.  Out  of  old  friend-
ship, however,  I  am,  on  Theiro  Imperial  Majesty's  request,
extremely  ready  to  pay  down,  once  and  away  (a  fond  perdu},  a
couple  of  million  gulden,  provided  the  Imperial  Majesty  will
grant  me  the  conditions  known  to  your  Uncle  [fulfilment  of
that  now  oldish  Jiilich-and-Berg  promise,  namely  !]  which  are
fair.  In  such  case  the  thing  shall  be  rapidly  completed !  " 1

In  a  word,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  falls  out  with  the  Kaiser
more  and  more;  experiences  more  and  more  what  a  Kaiser
this  has  been  towards  him.  Queen  Sophie  has  fallen  silent  in
the  History  Books  ;  both  the  Majesties  may  look  remorsefully,
but  perhaps  best  in  silence,  over  the  breakages  and  wrecks
this  Kaiser  has  brought  upon  them.  Friedrich  Wilhelm  does
not  meanly  hate  the  Kaiser :  good  man,  he  sometimes  pities
him ;  sometimes,  we  perceive,  has  a  touch  of  authentic  con-
tempt for  him.  But  his  thoughts,  in  that  quarter,  premature
old  age  aggravating  them,  are  generally  of  a  tragic  nature,  not
to  be  spoken  without  tears ;  and  the  tears  have  a  flash  at  the
bottom  of  them,  when  he  looks  round  on  Fritz  and  says,  "  There
is  one,  though,  that  will  avenge  me  ! "  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  to
the  last  a  broad  strong  phenomenon,  keeps  wending  downward,
homeward,  from  this  point;  the  Kaiser  too,  we  perceive,  is
rapidly  consummating  his  enormous  Spectre-Hunts  and  Duels
with  Termagants,  and  before  long  will  be  at  rest.  We  have
well-nigh  done  with  both  these  Majesties.

The  Crown-Prince,  by  his  judicious  obedient  procedures  in
these  Four  Years  at  Kuppin,  at  a  distance  from  Papa,  has,  as
it  were,  completed  his  Apprenticeship;  and,  especially  by  this
last  Inspection-Journey  into  Preussen,  may  be  said  to  have
delivered  his  Proof-Essay  with  a  distinguished  success.  He
is  now  out  of  his  Apprenticeship ;  entitled  to  take  up  his
Indentures,  whenever  need  shall  be.  The  rugged  old  Master
cannot  but  declare  him  competent,  qualified  to  try  his  own
1  Forster,  ii.  151  (without  date  there).

CHAP.  XI.  END  OP  WAR.  21

May,  1736.

hand  without  supervision :  —  after  all  those  unheard-of  con-
fusions, like  to  set  the  shop  on  fire  at  one  time,  it  is  a  blessedly
successful  Apprenticeship  !  Let  him  now,  theoretically  at
least,  in  the  realms  of  Art,  Literature,  Spiritual  Improvement,
do  his  Wanderjahre,  over  at  Keinsberg,  still  in  the  old  region,
—  still  well  apart  from  Papa,  who  agrees  best  not  in  imme-
diate contact ;  —  and  be  happy  in  the  new  Domesticities,  and
larger  opportunities,  provided  for  him  there ;  till  a  certain
time  come,  which  none  of  us  are  in  haste  for.

BOOK X.

AT  REINSBERG.

1736-1740.

CHAPTEE  I.

MANSION OF REINSBERG.

ON  the  Crown-Prince's  Marriage,  three  years  ago,  when  the
Ami  or  Government-District  liii.ppin,  with  its  incomings,  was
assigned  to  him  for  revenue,  we  heard  withal  of  a  residence
getting  ready.  Hint  had  fallen  from  the  Prince,  that  Reins-
berg,  an  old  Country-seat,  standing  with  its  Domain  round  it
in  that  little  Territory  of  Ruppin,  and  probably  purchasable  as
was  understood,  might  be  pleasant,  were  it  once  his  and  well
put  in  repair.  Which  hint  the  kind  paternal  Majesty  instantly
proceeded  to  act  upon.  He  straightway  gave  orders  for  the
purchase  of  Reinsberg ;  concluded  said  purchase,  on  fair  terms,
after  some  months'  bargaining ; l  —  and  set  his  best  Architect,
one  Kemeter,  to  work,  in  concert  with  the  Crown-Prince,  to
new-build  and  enlarge  the  decayed  Schloss  of  Reinsberg  into
such  a  Mansion  as  the  young  Royal  Highness  and  his  Wife
would  like.

Kemeter  has  been  busy,  all  this  while ;  a  solid,  elegant,  yet
frugal  builder  :  and  now  the  main  body  of  the  Mansion  is  com-
plete, or  nearly  so,  the  wings  and  adjuncts  going  steadily  for-
ward ;  Mansion  so  far  ready  that  the  Royal  Highnesses  can
take  up  their  abode  in  it.  Which  they  do,  this  Autumn,  1736 ;

1  23d  October,  1733,  order  given,  —  16th  March,  1734,  purchase  completed
(Preuss,  i.  75).

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  KEINSBERG.  23

Aug.  1736.

and  fairly  commence  Joint  Housekeeping,  in  a  permanent  man-
ner. Hitherto  it  has  been  intermittent  only :  hitherto  the
Crown-Princess  has  resided  in  their  Berlin  Mansion,  or  in  her
own  Country-house  at  Schonhausen ;  Husband  not  habitually
with  her,  except  when  on  leave  of  absence  from  Kuppin,  in
Carnival  time  or  for  shorter  periods.  At  Euppin  his  life  has
been  rather  that  of  a  bachelor,  or  husband  abroad  on  business,
up  to  this  time.  But  now  at  Reinsberg  they  do  kindle  the
sacred  hearth  together;  "6th  August,  1736,"  the  date  of  that
important  event.  They  have  got  their  Court  about  them,
dames  and  cavaliers  more  than  we  expected ;  they  have  ar-
ranged the  furnitures  of  their  existence  here  on  fit  scale,  and
set  up  their  Lares  and  Penates  on  a  thrifty  footing.  Majesty
and  Queen  come  out  on  a  visit  to  them  next  month ; ]  —  raising
the  sacred  hearth  into  its  first  considerable  blaze,  and  crowning
the  operation  in  a  human  manner.

And  so  there  has  a  new  epoch  arisen  for  the  Crown-Prince
and  his  Consort.  A  new,  and  much-improved  one.  It  lasted
into  the  fourth  year  ;  rather  improving  all  the  way  :  and  only
Kingship,  which,  if  a  higher  sphere,  was  a  far  less  pleasant  one,
put  an  end  to  it.  Friedrich's  happiest  time  was  this  at  Reins-
berg  ;  the  little  Four  Years  of  Hope,  Composure,  realizable
Idealism  :  an  actual  snatch  of  something  like  the  Idyllic,  ap-
pointed him  in  a  life-pilgrimage  consisting  otherwise  of  real-
isms oftenest  contradictory  enough,  and  sometimes  of  very
grim  complexion.  He  is  master  of  his  work,  he  is  adjusted
to  the  practical  conditions  set  him ;  conditions  once  complied
with,  daily  work  done,  he  lives  to  the  Muses,  to  the  spiritual
improvements,  to  the  social  enjoyments ;  and  has,  though  not
without  flaws  of  ill-weather,  —  from  the  Tobacco-Parliament
perhaps  rather  less  than  formerly,  and  from  the  Finance-quarter
perhaps  rather  more,  —  a  sunny  time.  His  innocent  insipidity
of  a  Wife,  too,  appears  to  have  been  happy.  She  had  the  charm
of  youth,  of  good  looks  ;  a  wholesome  perfect  loyalty  of  char-
acter withal ;  and  did  not  "  take  to  pouting,"  as  was  once  appre-
hended of  her,  but  pleasantly  gave  and  received  of  what  was
going.  This  poor  Crown-Princess,  afterwards  Queen,  has  been

*  4th  September,  1736  (Ib.).

24  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

heard,  in  her  old  age,  reverting,  in  a  touching  transient  way,
to  the  glad  days  she  had  at  Eeinsberg.  Complaint  openly  was
never  heard  from  her,  in  any  kind  of  days ;  but  these  doubtless
were  the  best  of  her  life.

Eeinsberg,  we  said,  is  in  the  Ami  Kuppin ;  naturally  under
the  Crown-Prince's  government  at  present :  the  little  Town  or
Village  of  Eeinsberg  stands  about  ten  miles  north  of  the  Town
Euppin ;  —  not  quite  a  third-part  as  big  as  Euppin  is  in  our
time,  and  much  more  pleasantly  situated.  The  country  about
is  of  comfortable,  not  unpicturesque  character ;  to  be  distin-
guished almost  as  beautiful,  in  that  region  of  sand  and  moor.
Lakes  abound  in  it ;  tilled  fields ;  heights  called  "  hills  ;  "  and
wood  of  fair  growth,  —  one  reads  of  "  beech-avenues,"  of  "  high
linden-avenues  :  "  —  a  country  rather  of  the  ornamented  sort,
before  the  Prince  with  his  improvements  settled  there.  Many
lakes  and  lakelets  in  it,  as  usual  hereabouts ;  the  loitering
waters  straggle,  all  over  that  region,  into  meshes  of  lakes.
Eeinsberg  itself,  Village  and  Schloss,  stands  on  the  edge  of  a
pleasant  Lake,  last  of  a  mesh  of  such :  the  summary,  or  out-
fall, of  which,  already  here  a  good  strong  brook  or  stream,  is
called  the  Bhein,  Ehyn  or  Eein ;  and  gives  name  to  the  little
place.  We  heard  of  the  Eein  at  Euppin :  it  is  there  counted
as  a  kind  of  river;  still  more,  twenty  miles  farther  down,
where  it  falls  into  the  Havel,  on  its  way  to  the  Elbe.  The
waters,  I  think,  are  drab-colored,  not  peat-brown :  and  here,
at  the  source,  or  outfall  from  that  mesh  of  lakes,  where  Eeins-
berg is,  the  country  seems  to  be  about  the  best ;  —  sufficient,  in
picturesqueness  and  otherwise,  to  satisfy  a  reasonable  man.

The  little  Town  is  very  old  ;  but,  till  the  Crown-Prince  set-
tled there,  had  no  peculiar  vitality  in  it.  I  think  there  are
now  some  potteries,  glass-manufactories  :  Friedrich  Wilhelm,
just  while  the  Crown-Prince  was  removing  thither,  settled  a
first  Glass-work  there  ;  which  took  good  root,  and  rose  to  emi-
nence in  the  crystal,  Bohemian-crystal,  white-glass,  cut-glass,
and  other  commoner  lines,  in  the  Crown-Prince's  time.1

Eeinsberg  stands  on  the  east  or  southeast  side  of  its  pretty

1  Beschrcibunfj  des  LustschlosRes  $c.  zu  Rfinsberg  (Berlin,  1788) ;  Author,  a
"  Lieutenant  Hennert,"  thoroughly  acquainted  with  his  subject.

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  REINSBERG.  25

Aug.  1736.

Lake  :  Lake  is  called  "  the  Grinerick  See "  (as  all  those  re-
mote Lakes  have  their  names)  ;  Mansion  is  between  the  Town
and  Lake.  A  Mansion  fronting,  we  may  say,  four  ways ;  for
it  is  of  quadrangular  form,  with  a  wet  moat  from  the  Lake
begirdling  it,  and  has  a  spacious  court  for  interior:  but  the
principal  entrance  is  from  the  Town  side ;  for  the  rest,  the
Building  is  ashlar  on  all  sides,  front  and  rear.  Stands  there,
handsomely  abutting  on  the  Lake  with  two  Towers,  a  Tower
at  each  angle,  which  it  has  on  that  lakeward  side ;  and  looks,
over  Eeinsberg,  and  its  steeple  rising  amid  friendly  umbrage
which  hides  the  house-tops,  towards  the  rising  sun.  Town-
ward  there  is  room  for  a  spacious  esplanade  ;  and  then  for  the
stables,  outbuildings,  well  masked ;  which  still  farther  shut  off
the  Town.  To  this  day,  Eeinsberg  stands  with  the  air  of  a
solid  respectable  Edifice  ;  still  massive,  rain-tight,  though  long
since  deserted  by  the  Princeships,  —  by  Friedrich  nearly  six-
score  years  ago,  and  nearly  threescore  by  Prince  Henri,  a
Brother  of  Friedrich's,  who  afterwards  had  it.  Last  accounts
I  got  were,  of  talk  there  had  risen  of  planting  an  extensive
Normal- School  there ;  which  promising  plan  had  been  laid
aside  again  for  the  time.

The  old  Schloss,  residence  of  the  Bredows  and  other  feudal
people  for  a  long  while,  had  good  solid  masonry  in  it,  and
around  it  orchards,  potherb  gardens ;  which  Friedrich  Wil-
helm's  Architects  took  good  care  to  extend  and  improve,  not  to
throw  away :  the  result  of  their  art  is  what  we  see,  a  beautiful
Country-House,  what  might  be  called  a  Country-Palace  with
all  its  adjuncts; — and  at  a  rate  of  expense  which  would
fill  English  readers,  of  this  time,  with  amazement.  Much
is  admirable  to  us  as  we  study  Eeinsberg,  what  it  had
been,  what  it  became,  and  how  it  was  made;  but  nothing
more  so  than  the  small  modicum  of  money  it  cost.  To  our
wondering  thought,  it  seems  as  if  the  shilling,  in  those  parts,
were  equal  to  the  guinea  in  these ;  and  the  reason,  if  we  ask
it,  is  by  no  means  flattering  altogether.  «  Change  in  the  value
of  money  ?  "  Alas,  reader,  no ;  that  is  not  above  the  fourth
part  of  the  phenomenon.  Three-fourths  of  the  phenomenon
are  change  in  the  methods  of  administering  money,  —  differ-

26  AT  EEINSBERG.  ABocT,oX-

Aug.  1736.

ence  between  managing  it  with  wisdom  and  veracity  on  both
sides,  and  managing  it  with  unwisdom  and  mendacity  on  both
sides.  Which  is  very  great  indeed ;  and  infinitely  sadder
than  any  one,  in  these  times,  will  believe! — But  we  cannot
dwell  on  this  consideration.  Let  the  reader  take  it  with  him,
as  a  constant  accompaniment  in  whatever  work  of  Friedrich
Wilhelm's  or  of  Friedrich  his  Son's,  he  now  or  at  any  other
time  may  be  contemplating.  Impious  waste,  which  means
disorder  and  dishonesty,  and  loss  of  much  other  than  money
to  all  parties,  —  disgusting  aspect  of  human  creatures,  master
and  servant,  working  together  as  if  they  were  not  human,  —
will  be  spared  him  in  those  foreign  departments  ;  and  in  an
English  heart  thoughts  will  arise,  perhaps,  of  a  wholesome
tendency,  though  very  sad,  as  times  are.

It  would  but  weary  the  reader  to  describe  this  Crown-
Prince  Mansion  ;  which,  by  desperate  study  of  our  abstruse
materials,  it  is  possible  to  do  with  auctioneer  minuteness.
There  are  engraved  Views  of  Keinsberg  and  its  Environs ;  which
used  to  lie  conspicuous  in  the  portfolios  of  collectors,  —  which
I  have  not  seen.1  Of  the  House  itself,  engraved  Frontages
(Facades),  Ground-plans,  are  more  accessible  ;  and  along  with
them,  descriptions  which  are  little  descriptive,  —  wearisomely
detailed,  and  as  it  were  dark  by  excess  of  light  (auctioneer
light)  thrown  on  them.  The  reader  sees,  in  general,  a  fine
symmetrical  Block  of  Buildings,  standing  in  rectangular  shape,
in  the  above  locality  :  —  about  two  hundred  English  feet,  each,
the  two  longer  sides  measure,  the  Townward  and  the  Lakeward,
on  their  outer  front :  about  a  hundred  and  thirty,  each,  the
two  shorter ;  or  a  hundred  and  fifty,  taking  in  their  Towers
just  spoken  of.  The  fourth  or  Lakeward  side,  however,
which  is  one  of  the  longer  pair,  consists  mainly  of  "  Colon-
nade ;  "  spacious  Colonnade  "  with  vases  and  statues  ;  "  catch-
ing up  the  outskirts  of  said  Towers,  and  handsomely  uniting
everything.

Beyond  doubt,  a  dignified,  substantial  pile  of  stone-work ;
all  of  good  proportions.  Architecture  everywhere  of  cheer-
fully serious,  solidly  graceful  character  ;  all  of  sterling  ashlar  ;
1  See  Henncrt,  just  cited,  for  the  titles  of  them.

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  REINSBERG.  27

Aug.  1736.

the  due  risalites  (projecting  spaces)  with  their  attics  and
statues  atop,  the  due  architraves,  cornices  and  corbels,  —  in
short  the  due  opulence  of  ornament  being  introduced,  and  only
the  due.  Genuine  sculptors,  genuine  painters,  artists  have
been  busy ;  and  in  fact  all  the  suitable  fine  arts,  and  all  the
necessary  solid  ones,  have  worked  together,  with  a  noticeable
fidelity,  comfortable  to  the  very  beholder  to  this  day.  Gen-
eral height  is  about  forty  feet ;  two  stories  of  ample  propor-
tions :  the  Towers  overlooking  them  are  sixty  feet  in  height.
Extent  of  outer  frontage,  if  you  go  all  round,  and  omit  the
Colonnade,  will  be  five  hundred  feet  and  more  :  this,  with  the
rearward  face,  is  a  thousand  feet  of  room  frontage  :  —  fancy
the  extent  of  lodging  space.  For  "  all  the  kitchens  and  ap-
purtenances are  underground ;  "  the  "  left  front "  (which  is  a
new  part  of  the  Edifice)  rising  comfortably  over  these.  Win-
dows I  did  not  count;  but  they  must  go  high  up  into  the
Hundreds.  No  end  to  lodging  space.  Nay  in  a  detached  side-
edifice  subsequently  built,  called  Cavalier  House,  I  read  of
there  being,  for  one  item,  "  fifty  lodging  rooms,"  and  for  an-
other "  a  theatre."  And  if  an  English  Duke  of  Trumps  were
to  look  at  the  bills  for  all  that,  —  his  astonishment  would
be  extreme,  and  perhaps  in  a  degree  painful  and  salutary  to
him.

In  one  of  these  Towers  the  Crown-Prince  has  his  Library :
a  beautiful  apartment ;  nothing  wanting  to  it  that  the  arts
could  furnish,  "ceiling  done  by  Pesne "  with  allegorical
geniuses  and  what  not ;  looks  out  on  mere  sky,  mere  earth
and  water  in  an  ornamental  state  :  silent  as  in  Elysium.  It
is  there  we  are  to  fancy  the  Correspondence  written,  the
Poetries  and  literary  industries  going  on.  There,  or  stepping
down  for  a  turn  in  the  open  air,  or  sauntering  meditatively
under  the  Colonnade  with  its  statues  and  vases  (where  weather
is  no  object),  one  commands  the  Lake,  with  its  little  tufted
Islands,  "Hemus  Island"  much  famed  among  them,  and
"  high  beech-woods  "  on  the  farther  side.  The  Lake  is  very
pretty,  all  say;  lying  between  you  and  the  sunset; — with
perhaps  some  other  lakelet,  or  solitary  pool  in  the  wilderness,
many  miles  away,  "  revealing  itself  as  a  cup  of  molten  gold,"

28  AT REINSBEEG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

at  that  interesting  ..moment.  What  the  Book-Collection  was,
in  the  interior,  I  know  not  except  by  mere  guess.

The  Crown-Princess's  Apartment,  too,  which  remained  un-
altered at  the  last  accounts  had  of  it,1  is  very  fine;  —  take
the  anteroom  for  specimen :  "  This  fine  room,"  some  twenty
feet  height  of  ceiling,  "  has  six  windows  ;  three  of  them,  in
the  main  front,  looking  towards  the  Town,  the  other  three
towards  the  Interior  Court.  The  light  from  these  windows
is  heightened  by  mirrors  covering  all  the  piers  (Schafte,
interspaces  of  the  walls),  to  an  uncommonly  splendid  pitch ;
and  shows  the  painting  of  the  ceiling,  which  again  is  by
the  famous  Pesne,  to  much  perfection.  The  Artist  himself,
too,  has  managed  to  lay  on  his  colors  there  so  softly,  and  with
such  delicate  skill,  that  the  light-beams  seem  to  prolong
themselves  in  the  painted  clouds  and  air,  as  if  it  were  the
real  sky  you  had  overhead."  There  in  that  cloud-region
"  Mars  is  being  disarmed  by  the  Love-goddesses,  and  they  are
sporting  with  his  weapons.  He  stretches  out  his  arm  towards
the  Goddess,  who  looks  upon  him  with  fond  glances.  Cupids
are  spreading  out  a  draping."  That  is  Pesne's  luxurious
performance  in  the  ceiling.  —  "  Weapon-festoons,  in  basso-
relievo,  gilt,  adorn  the  walls  of  this  room ;  and  two  Pictures,
also  by  Pesne,  which  represent,  in  life  size,  the  late  King  and
Queen  [our  good  friends  Friedrich  Wilhelm  and  his  Sophie],
are  worthy  of  attention.  Over  each  of  the  doors,  you  find  in
low-relief  the  Profiles  of  Hannibal,  Pompey,  Scipio,  Cassar,
introduced  as  Medallions."

All  this  is  very  fine ;  but  all  this  is  little  to  another  ceiling,
in  some  big  Saloon  elsewhere,  Music-saloon,  I  think :  Black
Night,  making  off,  with  all  her  sickly  dews,  at  one  end  of  the
ceiling ;  and  at  the  other  end,  the  Steeds  of  Phoebus  bursting
forth,  and  the  glittering  shafts  of  Day, — with  Cupids,  Love-
goddesses,  War-gods,  not  omitting  Bacchus  and  his  vines,  all
getting  beautifully  awake  in  consequence.  A  very  fine  room
indeed ;  —  used  as  a  Music-saloon,  or  I  know  not  what,  —  and
the  ceiling  of  it  almost  an  ideal,  say  the  connoisseurs.

Endless  gardens,  pavilions,  grottos,  hermitages,  orangeries,
1  From  Hennert,  namely,  in  1778.

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  REINSBERG.  29

Aug.  1736.

artificial  ruins,  parks  and  pleasances  surround  this  favored
spot  and  its  Schloss ;  nothing  wanting  in  it  that  a  Prince's
establishment  needs,  —  except  indeed  it  be  hounds,  for  which
this  Prince  never  had  the  least  demand.

Except  the  old  Euppin  duties,  which  imply  continual  jour-
neyings  thither,  distance  only  a  morning's  ride  ;  except  these,
and  occasional  commissions  from  Papa,  Friedrich  is  left  master
of  his  time  and  pursuits  in  this  new  Mansion.  There  are  visits
to  Potsdam,  periodical  appearances  at  Berlin;  some  Corre-
spondence to  keep  the  Tobacco-Parliament  in  tune.  But  Fried-
rich's  taste  is  for  the  Literatures,  Philosophies :  a  young
Prince  bent  seriously  to  cultivate  his  mind  ;  to  attain  some
clear  knowledge  of  this  world,  so  all-important  to  him.  And
he  does  seriously  read,  study  and  reflect  a  good  deal ;  his  main
recreations,  seemingly,  are  Music,  and  the  converse  of  well-
informed,  friendly  men.  In  Music  we  find  him  particularly
rich.  Daily,  at  a  fixed  hour  of  the  afternoon,  there  is  concert
held ;  the  reader  has  seen  in  what  kind  of  room :  and  if  the
Artists  entertained  here  for  that  function  were  enumerated
(high  names,  not  yet  forgotten  in  the  Musical  world),  it  would
still  more  astonish  readers.  I  count  them  to  the  number
of  twenty  or  nineteen ;  and  mention  only  that  "  the  two
Brothers  Graun  "  and  "  the  two  Brothers  Benda  "  were  of  the
lot;  suppressing  four  other  Fiddlers  of  eminence,  and  "a
Pianist  who  is  known  to  everybody."  l  The  Prince  has  a  fine
sensibility  to  Music :  does  himself,  with  thrilling  adagios  on
the  flute,  join  in  these  harmonious  acts ;  and,  no  doubt,  if
rightly  vigilant  against  the  Nonsenses,  gets  profit,  now  and
henceforth,  from  this  part  of  his  resources.

He  has  visits,  calls  to  make,  on  distinguished  persons  within
reach ;  he  has  much  Correspondence,  of  a  Literary  or  Social
nature.  For  instance,  there  is  Suhm  the  Saxon  Envoy  trans-
lating Wolf's  Philosophy  into  French  for  him ;  sending  it  in
fascicles  ;  with  endless  Letters  to  and  from,  upon  it,  —  which
were  then  highly  interesting,  but  are  now  dead  to  every  reader.
The  Crown-Prince  has  got  a  Post-Office  established  at  Eeins-

1  Hennert,  p.  21.

30  AT  EEINSBERa.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

berg;  leathern  functionary  of  some  sort  comes  lumbering
round,  southward,  "  from  the  Mecklenburg  quarter  twice  a
week,  and  goes  by  Fehrbellin,"  for  the  benefit  of  his  Corre-
spondences. Of  his  calls  in  the  neighborhood,  we  mean  to
show  the  reader  one  sample,  before  long ;  and  only  one.

There  are  Lists  given  us  of  the  Prince's  "  Court  "  at  Reins-
berg  ;  and  one  reads,  and  again  reads,  the  dreariest  unmemo-
rable  accounts  of  them ;  but  cannot,  with  all  one's  industry,
attain  any  definite  understanding  of  what  they  were  employed
in,  day  after  day,  at  Eeinsberg :  —  still  more  are  their  salaries
and  maintenance  a  mystery  to  us,  in  that  frugal  establishment.
There  is  Wolden  for  Hofmarschall,  our  old  Ciistrin  friend;
there  is  Colonel  Senning,  old  Marlborough  Colonel  with  the
wooden  leg,  who  taught  Friedrich  his  drillings  and  artillery-
practices  in  boyhood,  a  fine  sagacious  old  gentleman  this  latter.
There  is a M.  Jordan,  Ex-Preacher,  an  ingenious  Prussian-
Frenchman,  still  young,  who  acts  as  "  Eeader  and  Librarian  ; "
of  whom  we  shall  hear  a  good  deal  more. "  Intendant "  is
Captain (Ex-Captain) Knobelsdorf; a  very sensible  accom-
plished man,  whom  we  saw  once  at  Baireuth ;  who  has  been
to  Italy  since,  and  is  now  returned  with  beautiful  talents  for
Architecture  :  it  is  he  that  now  undertakes  the  completing  of
Beinsberg,1  which  he  will  skilfully  accomplish  in  the  course
of  the  next  three  years. Twenty  Musicians  on  wind  or  string ;
Painters,  Antoine  Pesne  but  one  of  them  ;  Sculptors,  Glume
and  others  of  eminence ;  and  Hof-Cavaliers,  to  we  know  not
what  extent :  —  how  was  such  a  Court  kept  up,  in  harmonious
free  dignity,  and  no  halt  in  its  finances,  or  mean  pinch  of  any
kind  visible  ? The  Prince  did  get  in  debt ;  but  not  deep,  and
it  was  mainly  for  the  tall  recruits  he  had  to  purchase. His
money-accounts  are  by  no  means  fully  known  to  me  :  but  I
should  question  if  his  expenditure (such  is  my  guess)  ever
reached  £3,000  a  year ;  and  am  obliged  to  reflect  more  and
more,  as  the  ancient  Cato  did,  what  an  admirable  revenue
frugality  is !

Many  of  the  Cavaliers,  I  find,  for  one  thing,  were  of  the
Kegiinent  Goltz ;  that  was  one  evident  economy. "  Bittineister

1  Hennert,  p.  29.

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  REINSBERG.  31

Aug.  1736.

von  Chasot,"  as  the  Books  call  him  :  readers  saw  that  Chasot
flying  to  Prince  Eugene,  and  know  him  since  the  Siege  of
Philipsburg.  He  is  not  yet  Kittmeister,  or  Captain  of  Horse,
as  he  became  ;  but  is  of  the  Euppin  Garrison  ;  Hof-Cavalier ;
"attended  Friedrich  on  his  late  Prussian  journey;"  and  is
much  a  favorite,  when  he  can  be  spared  from  Euppin.  Cap-
tain Wylich,  afterwards  a  General  of  mark ;  the  Lieutenant
Buddenbrock  who  did  the  parson-charivari  at  Euppin,  but  is
now  reformed  from  those  practices :  all  these  are  of  Goltz.
Colonel  Keyserling,  not  of  Goltz,  nor  in  active  military  duty
here,  is  a  friend  of  very  old  standing ;  was  officially  named  as
"  Companion  "  to  the  Prince,  a  long  while  back  ;  and  got  into
trouble  on  his  account  in  the  disastrous  Ante-Ciistrin  or  Flight
Epoch :  one  of  the  Prince's  first  acts,  when  he  got  pardoned
after  Ciistrin,  was  to  beg  for  the  pardon  of  this  Keyserling ;
and  now  he  has  him  here,  and  is  very  fond  of  him.  A  Cour-
lander,  of  good  family,  this  Keyserling ;  of  good  gifts  too,  —
which,  it  was  once  thought,  would  be  practically  sublime  ;  for
he  carried  off  all  manner  of  college  prizes,  and  was  the  Admi-
rable-Crichton  of  Konigsberg  University  and  the  Graduates
there.  But  in  the  end  they  proved  to  be  gifts  of  the  vocal
sort  rather:  and  have  led  only  to  what  we  see.  A  man,  I
should  guess,  rather  of  buoyant  vivacity  than  of  depth  or
strength  in  intellect  or  otherwise.  Excessively  buoyant,  in-
genious ;  full  of  wit,  kindly  exuberance ;  a  loyal-hearted,  gay-
tempered  man,  and  much  a  favorite  in  society  as  well  as  with
the  Prince.  If  we  were  to  dwell  on  Eeinsberg,  Keyserling
would  come  prominently  forward.

Major  von  Stille,  ultimately  Major-General  von  Stille,  I
should  also  mention :  near  twenty  years  older  than  the  Prince ;
a  wise  thoughtful  soldier  (went,  by  permission,  to  the  Siege
of  Dantzig  lately,  to  improve  himself)  ;  a  man  capable  of  rugged
service,  when  the  time  comes.  His  military  writings  were  once
in  considerable  esteem  with  professional  men;  and  still  im-
press a  lay  reader  with  favorable  notions  towards  Stille,  as  a
man  of  real  worth  and  sense.1

1  Campagnes  du  Roi  de  Prusse ;  —  a  posthumous  Book ;  anterior  to  the  Seven-
Years  War.

32  AT  KEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

Of  Monsieur  Jordan  and  the  Literary  Set.

There  is,  of  course,  a  Chaplain  in  the  Establishment :  a
Keverend  "  M.  Deschamps ; "  who  preaches  to  them  all,  —  in
French  no  doubt.  Friedrich  never  hears  Deschamps :  Fried-
rich  is  always  over  at  Ruppin  on  Sundays ;  and  there  "  him-
self reads  a  sermon  to  the  Garrison,"  as  part  of  the  day's
duties.  Eeads  finely,  in  a  melodious  feeling  manner,  says
Formey,  who  can  judge:  "even  in  his  old  days,  he  would  in-
cidentally," when  some  Emeritus  Parson,  like  Formey,  chanced
to  be  with  him,  "  roll  out  choice  passages  from  Bossuet,  from
Massillon,"  in  a  voice  and  with  a  look,  which  would  have  been
perfection  in  the  pulpit,  thinks  Formey.1

M.  Jordan,  though  he  was  called  "Lecteur  (Eeader),"  did
not  read  to  him,  I  can  perceive  ;  but  took  charge  of  the
Books;  busied  himself  honestly  to  be  useful  in  all  manner
of  literary  or  quasi-literary  ways.  He  was,  as  his  name
indicates,  from  the  French-refugee  department :  a  recent  ac-
quisition, much  valued  at  Reinsberg.  As  he  makes  a  figure
afterwards,  we  had  better  mark  him  a  little.

Jordan's  parents  were  wealthy  religious  persons,  in  trade  at
Berlin ;  this  Jordan  (Charles  Etienne,  age  now  thirty-six)  was
their  eldest  son.  It  seems  they  had  destined  him  from  birth,
consulting  their  own  pious  feelings  merely,  to  be  a  Preacher
of  the  Gospel ;  the  other  sons,  all  of  them  reckoned  clever  too,
were  brought  up  to  secular  employments.  And  preach  he,  this
poor  Charles  Etienne,  accordingly  did;  what  best  Gospel  he
had ;  in  an  honest  manner,  all  say,  —  though  never  with  other
than  a  kind  of  reluctance  on  the  part  of  Nature,  forced  out  of
her  course.  He  had  wedded,  been  clergyman  in  two  successive
country  places ;  when  his  wife  died,  leaving  him  one  little
daughter,  and  a  heart  much  overset  by  that  event.  Friends,
wealthy  Brothers  probably,  had  pushed  him  out  into  the  free
air,  in  these  circumstances :  "  Take  a  Tour ;  Holland,  Eng-
land ;  feel  the  winds  blowing,  see  the  sun  shining,  as  in  times
past :  it  will  do  you  good  ! "

Jordan,  in  the  course  of  his  Tour,  came  to  composure  on
1  Souvenirs  d'un  Citoyen  (2de  edition,  Paris,  1797),  i.  37.

CHAP.  I.  MANSION  OF  REINSBERG.  S3

Aug.  1736.

several  points.  He  found  that,  by  frugality,  by  wise  manage-
ment of  some  peculiuni  already  his,  his  little  Daughter  and  he
might  have  quietness  at  Berlin,  and  the  necessary  food  and
raiment ;  —  and,  on  the  whole,  that  he  would  altogether  cease
preaching,  and  settle  down  there,  among  his  Books,  in  a  frugal
manner.  Which  he  did ;  —  and  was  living  so,  when  the  Prince,
searching  for  that  kind  of  person,  got  tidings  of  him.  And
here  he  is  at  Eeinsberg ;  bustling  about,  in  a  brisk,  modestly
frank  and  cheerful  manner :  well  liked  by  everybody  ;  by  his
Master  very  well  and  ever  better,  who  grew  into  real  regard,
esteem  and  even  friendship  for  him,  and  has  much  Corre-
spondence, of  a  freer  kind  than  is  common  to  him,  with  little
Jordan,  so  long  as  they  lived  together.  Jordan's  death,  ten
years  hence,  was  probably  the  one  considerable  pain  he  had
ever  given  his  neighbors,  in  this  the  ultimate  section  of  his
life.

I  find  him  described,  at  Eeinsberg,  as  a  small  nimble  figure,
of  Southern-French  aspect ;  black,  uncommonly  bright  eyes ;
and  a  general  aspect  of  adroitness,  modesty,  sense,  sincerity ;
good  prognostics,  which  on  acquaintance  with  the  man  were
pleasantly  fulfilled.

For  the  sake  of  these  considerations,  I  fished  out,  from  the
Old-Book  Catalogues  and  sea  of  forgetfulness,  some  of  the
poor  Books  he  wrote  ;  especially  a  Voyage  Litteraire*  Jour-
nal of  that  first  Sanitary  Excursion  or  Tour  he  took,  to  get
the  clouds  blown  from  his  mind.  A  Literary  Voyage  which
awakens  a  kind  of  tragic  feeling  ;  being  itself  dead,  and  treat-
ing of  matters  which  are  all  gone  dead.  So  many  immortal
writers,  Dutch  chiefly,  whom  Jordan  is  enabled  to  report  as
having  effloresced,  or  being  soon  to  effloresce,  in  such  and  such
forms,  of  Books  important  to  be  learned  :  leafy,  blossomy  For-
est of  Literature,  waving  glorious  in  the  then  sunlight  to
Jordan  ;  —  and  it  lies  all  now,  to  Jordan  and  us,  not  withered
only,  but  abolished ;  compressed  into  a  film  of  indiscriminate
peat.  Consider  what  that  peat  is  made  of,  0  celebrated  or
uncelebrated  reader,  and  take  a  moral  from  Jordan's  Book  !

1  Histoire  d'un  Voyage  Litteraire  fait,  en  MDCCXXXIII.,  en  France,  en  Angle-
terre  et  en  Hollande  (2de  edition,  &  La  Haye,  1736).

VOL. VII.  3

34  AT KEIXSBERG.  BOOK  x.

Aug.  1736.

Other  merit,  except  indeed  clearness  and  commendable  brev-
ity, the  Voyage  Litteraire  or  other  little  Books  of  Jordan's
have  not  now.  A  few  of  his  Letters  to  Friedrich,  which  ex-
ist, are  the  only  writings  with  the  least  life  left  in  them,  and
this  an  accidental  life,  not  momentous  to  him  or  us.  Dryas-
dust informs  me,  "  Abbe  Jordan,  alone  of  the  Crown-Prince's
cavaliers,  sleeps  in  the  Town  of  Keinsberg,  not  in  the  Schloss  :  "
and  if  I  ask,  Why  ?  —  there  is  no  answer.  Probably  his  poor
little  Daughterkin  was  beside  him  there  ?  —

We  have  to  say  of  Friedrich's  Associates,  that  generally
they  were  of  intelligent  type,  each  of  them  master  of  some-
thing or  other,  and  capable  of  rational  discourse  upon  that
at  least.  Integrity,  loyalty  of  character,  was  indispensable ;
good  humor,  wit  if  it  could  be  had,  were  much  in  request.
There  was  no  man  of  shining  distinction  there  ;  but  they  were
the  best  that  could  be  had,  and  that  is  saying  all.  Friedrich
cannot  be  said,  either  as  Prince  or  as  King,  to  have  been
superlatively  successful  in  his  choice  of  associates.  With  one
single  exception,  to  be  noticed  shortly,  there  is  not  one  of
them  whom  we  should  now  remember  except  for  Friedrich's
sake  ;  —  uniformly  they  are  men  whom  it  is  now  a  weariness
to  hear  of,  except  in  a  cursory  manner.  One  man  of  shining
parts  he  had,  and  one  only  ;  no  man  ever  of  really  high  and
great  mind.  The  latter  sort  are  not  so  easy  to  get;  rarely
producible  on  the  soil  of  this  Earth  !  Nor  is  it  certain  how
Friedrich  might  have  managed  with  one  of  this  sort,  or  he
with  Friedrich  ;  —  though  Friedrich  unquestionably  would
have  tried,  had  the  chance  offered.  For  he  loved  intellect  as
few  men  on  the  throne,  or  off  it,  ever  did ;  and  the  little  he
could  gather  of  it  round  him  often  seems  to  me  a  fact  tragical
rather  than  otherwise.

With  the  outer  Berlin  social  world,  acting  and  reacting,
Friedrich  has  his  connections,  which  obscurely  emerge  on  us
now  and  then.  Literary  Eminences,  who  are  generally  of
Theological  vesture  ;  any  follower  of  Philosophy,  especially
if  he  be  of  refined  manners  withal,  or  known  in  fashionable
life,  is  sure  to  attract  him;  and  gains  ample  recognition  at

CHAP.  I.  MANSION OF  EEINSBERG.  35

Aug.  1736.

Eeinsberg  or  on  Town-visits.  But  the  Berlin  Theological  or
Literary  world  at  that  time,  still  more  the  Berlin  Social,  like
a  sunk  extinct  object,  continues  very  dim  in  those  old  records ;
and  to  say  truth,  what  features  we  have  of  it  do  not  invite  to
miraculous  efforts  for  farther  acquaintance.  Venerable  Beau-
sobre,  with  his  History  of  the  Manic/leans,1  and  other  learned
things,  —  we  heard  of  him  long  since,  in  Toland  and  the  Re-
publican Queen's  time,  as  a  light  of  the  world.  He  is  now
fourscore,  grown  white  as  snow ;  very  serene,  polite,  with  a
smack  of  French  noblesse  in  him,  perhaps  a  smack  of  affecta-
tion traceable  too.  The  Crown-Prince,  on  one  of  his  Berlin
visits,  wished  to  see  this  Beausobre ;  got  a  meeting  appointed,
in  somebody's  rooms  "  in  the  French  College,"  and  waited
for  the  venerable  man.  Venerable  man  entered,  loftily  serene
as  a  martyr  Preacher  of  the  Word,  something  of  an  ancient
Seigneur  de  Beausobre  in  him,  too ;  for  the  rest,  soft  as  sun-
set, and  really  with  fine  radiances,  in  a  somewhat  twisted  state,
in  that  good  old  mind  of  his.  "  What  have  you  been  reading
lately,  M.  de  Beausobre  ?  "  said  the  Prince,  to  begin  conver-
sation. "  Ah,  Monseigneur,  I  have  just  risen  from,  reading
the  sublimest  piece  of  writing  that  exists."  —  "  And  what  ?  "
"  The  exordium  of  St.  John's  Gospel :  In  the  Beginning  was
the  Word ;  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  — "
Which  somewhat  took  the  Prince  by  surprise,  as  Formey  re-
ports ;  though  he  rallied  straightway,  and  got  good  conversa-
tion out  of  the  old  gentleman.  To  whom,  we  perceive,  he
writes  once  or  twice,2  —  a  copy  of  his  own  verses  to  correct,
on  one  occasion,  —  and  is  very  respectful  and  considerate.

Formey  tells  us  of  another  French  sage,  personally  known
to  the  Prince  since  Boyhood;  for  he  used  to  be  about  the
Palace,  doing  something.  This  is  one  La  Croze  ;  Professor  of,
I  think,  "  Philosophy  "  in  the  French  College  :  sublime  Mon-

1  Histoire  critique  de  Manichee  et  du  Maniclttfisme :  wrote  also  Remarques
frc.  sur  le  Nouveau  Testament,  which  were  once  famous  ;  Histoire  de  la  Refor-
mation ;  &c.  &c. He  is  Beausobre  Senior ;  there  were  two  Sons  (one  of  them
born  in  second  wedlock,  after  Papa  was  70),  who  were  likewise  given  to
writing.  —  See  Formey,  Souvenirs  d'un  Citoyen,  i.  33-39.

2  (Euvres  de  Fr€d€nc,  xvi.  121-126. Dates  are  all  of  1737;  the  last  of
Beausobre's  years.

36  AT  EEIXSBERG.  BOOK  x.

Aug.  1736.

ster  of  Erudition,  at  that  time ;  forgotten  now,  I  fear,  by
everybody.  Swag-bellied,  short  of  wind ;  liable  to  rages,  to
utterances  of  a  coarse  nature  ;  a  decidedly  ugly,  monstrous
and  rather  stupid  kind  of  man.  Knew  twenty  languages,  in
a  coarse  inexact  way.  Attempted  deep  kinds  of  discourse,  in
the  lecture-room  and  elsewhere ;  but  usually  broke  off  into
endless  welters  of  anecdote,  not  always  of  cleanly  nature ;  and
after  every  two  or  three  words,  a  desperate  sigh,  not  for
sorrow,  but  on  account  of  flabbiness  and  fat.  Forruey  gives
a  portraiture  of  him ;  not  worth  copying  farther.  The  same
Formey,  standing  one  day  somewhere  on  the  streets  of  Berlin,
was  himself,  he  cannot  doubt,  seen  by  the  Crown-Prince  in
passing ;  "  who  asked  M.  Jordan,  who  that  was,"  and  got  an-
swer :  —  is  not  that  a  comfortable  fact  ?  Nothing  farther
came  of  it ;  —  respectable  Ex-Parson  Formey,  though  ever
ready  with  his  pen,  being  indeed  of  very  vapid  nature,  not
wanted  at  Reinsberg,  as  we  can  guess.

There  is  M.  Achard,  too,  another  Preacher,  supreme  of  his
sort,  in  the  then  Berlin  circles  ;  to  whom  or  from  whom  a
Letter  or  two  exist.  Letters  worthless,  if  it  were  not  for  one
dim  indication :  That,  on  inquiry,  the  Crown-Prince  had  been
consulting  this  supreme  Achard  on  the  difficulties  of  Ortho-
doxy ; l  and  had  given  him  texts,  or  a  text,  to  preach  from.
Supreme  Achard  did  not  abolish  the  difficulties  for  his  inquir-
ing Prince,  —  who  complains  respectfully  that  "his  faith  is
weak,"  and  leaves  us  dark  as  to  particulars.  This  Achard
passage  is  almost  the  only  hint  we  have  of  what  might  have
been  an  important  chapter :  Friedrich's  Religious  History  at
Reinsberg.  The  expression  "  weak  faith  "  I  take  to  be  meant
not  in  mockery,  but  in  ingenuous  regret  and  solicitude  ;  much
painful  fermentation,  probably,  on  the  religious  question  in
those  Reinsberg  years  !  But  the  old  "  GnadenwaJil "  business,
the  Free-Grace  controversy,  had  taught  him  to  be  cautious  as
to  what  he  uttered  on  those  points.  The  fermentation,  there-
fore, had  to  go  on  under  cover ;  what  the  result  of  it  was,  is
notorious  enough ;  though  the  steps  of  the  process  are  not  in
any  point  known.

1  (Euures  de  Frtdtric,  xvi.  pp.  112-117  :  date,  March-June,  1736.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY CORRESPONDENCE.  37

Aug.  1736.

Enough  now  of  such  details.  Outwardly  or  inwardly,  there
is  no  History,  or  almost  none,  to  be  had  of  this  Reinsberg
Period;  the  extensive  records  of  it  consisting,  as  usual,
mainly  of  chaotic  nugatory  matter,  opaque  to  the  mind  of
readers.  There  is  copious  correspondence  of  the  Crown-
Prince,  with  at  least  dates  to  it  for  most  part:  but  this,
which  should  be  the  main  resource,  proves  likewise  a  poor
one;  the  Crown-Prince's  Letters,  now  or  afterwards,  being
almost  never  of  a  deep  or  intimate  quality ;  and  seldom
turning  on  events  or  facts  at  all,  and  then  not  always  on
facts  interesting,  on  facts  clearly  apprehensible  to  us  in  that
extinct  element.

The  Thing,  we  know  always,  is  there  ;  but  vision  of  the
Thing  is  only  to  be  had  faintly,  intermittently.  Dim  inane
twilight,  with  here  and  there  a  transient  spark  falling  some-
whither in  it; — you  do  at  last,  by  desperate  persistence,  get
to  discern  outlines,  features  :  — "  The  Thing  cannot  always
have  been  No-thing,"  you  reflect !  Outlines,  features  :  —  and
perhaps,  after  all,  those  are  mostly  what  the  reader  wants  on
this  occasion.

CHAPTER II.

OF VOLTAIKE AND THE LITERARY CORRESPONDENCES.

ONE  of  Friedrich's  grand  purposes  at  Reinsberg,  to  himself
privately  the  grandest  there,  which  he  follows  with  constant
loyalty  and  ardor,  is  that  of  scaling  the  heights  of  the  Muses'
Hill  withal ;  of  attaining  mastership,  discipleship,  in  Art  and
Philosophy ;  —  or  in  candor  let  us  call  it,  what  it  truly  was,
that  of  enlightening  and  fortifying  himself  with  clear  knowl-
edge, clear  belief,  on  all  sides  ;  and  acquiring  some  spiritual
panoply  in  which  to  front  the  coming  practicalities  of  life.
This,  he  feels  well,  will  be  a  noble  use  of  his  seclusion  in
those  still  places ;  and  it  must  be  owned,  he  struggles  and
endeavors  towards  this,  with  great  perseverance,  by  all

38  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

the  methods  in  his  power,  here,  or  wherever  afterwards  he
might  be.

Here  at  Keinsberg,  one  of  his  readiest  methods,  his  pleasant-
est  if  not  his  usefulest,  is  that  of  getting  into  correspondence
with  the  chief  spirits  of  his  time.  Which  accordingly  he
forthwith  sets  about,  after  getting  into  Eeinsberg,  and  con-
tinues, as  we  shall  see,  with  much  assiduity.  Eollin,  Fontenelle,
and  other  French  lights  of  the  then  firmament,  —  his  Letters
to  them  exist ;  and  could  be  given  in  some  quantity :  but  it
is  better  not.  They  are  intrinsically  the  common  Letters  on
such  occasions  :  "  0  sublime  demi-god  of  literature,  how  small
are  princely  distinctions  to  such  a  glory  as  thine  ;  thou  who
enterest  within  the  veil  of  the  temple,  and  issuest  with  thy
face  shining  !  "  —  To  which  the  response  is :  "  Hm,  think  you
so,  most  happy,  gracious,  illustrious  Prince,  with  every  con-
venience round  you,  and  such  prospects  ahead  ?  Well,  thank
you,  at  any  rate,  —  and,  as  the  Irish  say,  more  power  to  your
Honor's  Glory  ! "  This  really  is  nearly  all  that  said  Sets  of
Letters  contain  ;  and  except  perhaps  the  Voltaire  Set,  none  of
them  give  symptoms  of  much  capacity  to  contain  more.

Certainly  there  was  no  want  of  Literary  Men  discernible
from  Keinsberg  at  that  time;  and  the  young  Prince  corre-
sponds with  a  good  many  of  them ;  temporal  potentate  saluting
spiritual,  from  the  distance,  —  in  a  way  highly  interesting  to
the  then  parties,  but  now  without  interest,  except  of  the  reflex
kind,  to  any  creature.  A  very  cold  and  empty  portion,  this,
of  the  Friedrich  Correspondence;  standing  there  to  testify
what  his  admiration  was  for  literary  talent,  or  the  great  repu-
tation of  such ;  but  in  itself  uninstructive  utterly,  and  of
freezing  influence  on  the  now  living  mind.  Most  of  those
French  lights  of  the  then  firmament  are  gone  out.  Forgotten
altogether ;  or  recognized,  like  Rollin  and  others,  for  polished
dullards,  university  big-wigs,  and  long-winded  commonplace
persons,  deserving  nothing  but  oblivion.  To  Montesquieu,  —
not  yet  called  "  Baron  de  Montesquieu  "  with  Esprit  des  Lois,
but  "  M.  de  Secondat "  with  (Anonymous)  Lettres  Persanes,
and  already  known  to  the  world  for  a  person  of  sharp  auda-
cious eyesight,  —  it  does  not  appear  that  Friedrich  addressed

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  39

Aug.  1736.

any  Letter,  now  or  afterwards.  No  notice  of  Montesquieu;
nor  of  some  others,  the  absence  of  whom  is  a  little  unex-
pected. Probably  it  was  want  of  knowledge  mainly ;  for  his
appetite  was  not  fastidious  at  this  time.  And  certainly  he
did  hit  the  centre  of  the  mark,  and  get  into  the  very  kernel
of  French  literature,  when,  in  1736,  hardly  yet  established  in
his  new  quarters,  he  addressed  himself  to  the  shining  figure
known  to  us  as  "  Arouet  Junior  "  long  since,  and  now  called
M.  de  Voltaire  ;  which  latter  is  still  a  name  notable  in  Fried-
rich's  History  and  that  of  Mankind.  Friedrich's  first  Letter,
challenging  Voltaire  to  correspondence,  dates  itself  8th  August,
1736 ;  and  Voltaire's  Answer  —  the  Eeinsberg  Household  still
only  in  its  second  month  —  was  probably  the  brightest  event
which  had  yet  befallen  there.

On  various  accounts  it  will  behoove  us  to  look  a  good  deal
more  strictly  into  this  Voltaire ;  and,  as  his  relations  to  Fried-
rich  and  to  the  world  are  so  multiplex,  endeavor  to  disengage
the  real  likeness  of  the  man  from  the  circumambient  noise
and  confusion  which  in  his  instance  continue  very  great.
"Voltaire  was  the  spiritual  complement  of  Friedrich,"  says
Sauerteig  once :  "  what  little  of  lasting  their  poor  Century
produced  lies  mainly  in  these  Two.  A  very  somnambulating
Century !  But  what  little  it  did,  we  must  call  Friedrich ;
what  little  it  thought,  Voltaire.  Other  fruit  we  have  not
from  it  to  speak  of,  at  this  day.  Voltaire,  and  what  can  be
faithfully  done  on  the  Voltaire  Creed ;  '  Eealized  Voltairism ; '
—  admit  it,  reader,  not  in  a  too  triumphant  humor,  —  is  not
that  pretty  much  the  net  historical  product  of  the  Eighteenth
Century  ?  The  rest  of  its  history  either  pure  somnambulism ;
or  a  mere  Controversy,  to  the  effect,  '  Eealized  Voltairism  ?
How  soon  shall  it  be  realized,  then  ?  Not  at  once,  surely ! '
So  that  Friedrich  and  Voltaire  are  related,  not  by  accident
only.  They  are,  they  for  want  of  better,  the  two  Original
Men  of  their  Century ;  the  chief  and  in  a  sense  the  sole
products  of  their  Century.  They  alone  remain  to  us  as  still
living  results  from  it,  —  such  as  they  are.  And  the  rest,
truly,  ought  to  depart  and  vanish  (as  they  are  now  doing) ;
being  mere  ephemera;  contemporary  eaters,  scramblers  for

40  AT REINSBERa.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

provender,  talkers  of  acceptable  hearsay;  and  related  merely
to  the  butteries  and  wiggeries  of  their  time,  and  not  related  to
the  Perennialities  at  all,  as  these  Two  were."  —  With  more
of  the  like  sort  from  Sauerteig.

M.  de  Voltaire,  who  used  to  be  M.  Fra^ois-Marie  Arouet,
was  at  this  time  about  forty,1  and  had  gone  through  various
fortunes ;  a  man,  now  and  henceforth,  in  a  high  degree  con-
spicuous, and  questionable  to  his  fellow-creatures.  Clear
knowledge  of  him  ought,  at  this  stage,  to  be  common ;  but
unexpectedly  it  is  not.  What  endless  writing  and  biography-
ing  there  has  been  about  this  man ;  in  which  one  still  reads,
with  a  kind  of  lazy  satisfaction,  due  to  the  subject,  and  to
the  French  genius  in  that  department !  But  the  man  himself,
and  his  environment  and  practical  aspects,  what  the  actual
physiognomy  of  his  life  and  of  him  can  have  been,  is  dark
from  beginning  to  ending ;  and  much  is  left  in  an  ambiguous
undecipherable  condition  to  us.  A  proper  History  of  Voltaire,
in  which  should  be  discoverable,  luminous  to  human  creatures,
what  he  was,  what  element  he  lived  in,  what  work  he  did :
this  is  still  a  problem  for  the  genius  of  France  !  —

His  Father's  name  is  known  to  us  ;  the  name  of  his  Father's
profession,  too,  but  not  clearly  the  nature  of  it;  still  less
his  Father's  character,  economic  circumstances,  physiognomy
spiritual  or  social:  not  the  least  possibility  granted  you  of
forming  an  image,  however  faint,  of  that  notable  man  and
household,  which  distinguished  itself  to  all  the  earth  by  pro-
ducing little  Francois  into  the  light  of  this  sun.  Of  Madame
Arouet,  who,  or  what,  or  how  she  was,  nothing  whatever  is
known.  A  human  reader,  pestered  continually  with  the
Madame-Denises,  Abbe-Mignots  and  enigmatic  nieces  and
nephews,  would  have  wished  to  know,  at  least,  what  children,
besides  Francis,  Madame  Arouet  had :  once  for  all,  How
many  children  ?  Name  them,  with  year  of  birth,  year  of
death,  according  to  the  church-registers :  they  all,  at  any  rate,

1  Born  20th  February,  1694;  the  younger  of  two  sons:  Father,  "Francois
Arouet,  a  Notary  of  the  Chatelet,  ultimately  Treasurer  of  the  Chamber  of
Accounts ; "  Mother,  "  Marguerite  d'Auuiart,  of  a  noble  family  of  Poitou."

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  41

Aug.  1736.

had  that  degree  of  history !  No  ;  even  that  has  not  been
done.  Beneficent  correspondents  of  my  own  make  answer,
after  some  research,  No  register  of  the  Arouets  anywhere  to
be  had.  The  very  name  VOLTAIRE,  if  you  ask  whence  came
it?  there  is  no  answer,  or  worse  than  none.  —  The  fit  "His-
tory "  of  this  man,  which  might  be  one  of  the  shining  Epics
of  his  Century,  and  the  lucid  summary  and  soul  of  any  History
France  then  had,  but  which  would  require  almost  a  French
demi-god  to  do  it,  is  still  a  great  way  off,  if  on  the  road  at  all !
For  present  purposes,  we  select  what  follows  from  a  well-
known  hand : —

"  Youth  of  Voltaire  (1694-1725). — French  Biographers  have
left  the  Arouet  Household  very  dark  for  us ;  meanwhile  we
can  perceive,  or  guess,  that  it  was  moderately  well  in  economic
respects ;  that  Francois  was  the  second  of  the  Two  Sons ;  and
that  old  Arouet,  a  steady,  practical  and  perhaps  rather  sharp-
tempered  old  gentleman,  of  official  legal  habits  and  position,
'Notary  of  the  Chatelet'  and  something  else,  had  destined
him  for  the  Law  Profession ;  as  was  natural  enough  to  a  son
of  M.  Arouet,  who  had  himself  succeeded  well  in  Law,  and
could  there,  best  of  all,  open  roads  for  a  clever  second  son.
Fra^ois  accordingly  sat  '  in  chambers,'  as  we  call  it ;  and
his  fellow-clerks  much  loved  him,  —  the  most  amusing  fellow
in  the  world.  Sat  in  chambers,  even  became  an  advocate ;
but  did  not  in  the  least  take  to  advocateship ;  —  took  to
poetry,  and  other  airy  dangerous  courses,  speculative,  prac-
tical ;  causing  family  explosions  and  rebukes,  which  were
without  effect  on  him.  A  young  fool,  bent  on  sportful  pur-
suits instead  of  serious ;  more  and  more  shuddering  at  Law.
To  the  surprise  and  indignation  of  M.  Arouet  Senior.  Law,
with  its  wigs  and  sheepskins,  pointing  towards  high  honors
and  deep  flesh-pots,  had  no  charms  for  the  young  fool ;  he
could  not  be  made  to  like  Law.

"  Whereupon  arose  explosions,  as  we  hint ;  family  explo-
sions on  the  part  of  M.  Arouet  Senior ;  such  that  friends  had
to  interfere,  and  it  was  uncertain  what  would  come  of  it.  One
judicious  friend,  'M.  Caumartin/  took  the  young  fellow  home

42  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

to  his  house  in  the  country  for  a  time  ;  —  and  there,  inciden-
tally, brought  him  acquainted  with  old  gentlemen  deep  in  the
traditions  of  Henri  Quatre  and  the  cognate  topics ;  which
much  inflamed  the  young  fellow,  and  produced  big  schemes  in
the  head  of  him.

"  M.  Arouet  Senior  stood  strong  for  Law ;  but  it  was  becom-
ing daily  more  impossible.  Madrigals,  dramas  (not  without
actresses),  satirical  wit,  airy  verse,  and  all  manner  of  adven-
turous speculation,  were  what  this  young  man  went  upon;
and  was  getting  more  and  more  loved  for ;  introduced,  even,
to  the  superior  circles,  and  recognized  there  as  one  of  the
brightest  young  fellows  ever  seen.  Which  tended,  of  course,
to  confirm  him  in  his  folly,  and  open  other  outlooks  and  har-
bors of  refuge  than  the  paternal  one.

"  Such  things,  strange  to  M.  Arouet  Senior,  were  in  vogue
then ;  wicked  Eegent  d'Orleans  having  succeeded  sublime
Louis  XIV.,  and  set  strange  fashions  to  the  Quality.  Not
likely  to  profit  this  fool  Frangois,  thought  M.  Arouet  Senior ;
and  was  much  confirmed  in  his  notion,  when  a  rhymed  Lam-
poon against  the  Government  having  come  out  (Les  fai  vu,  as
they  call  it x),  and  become  the  rage,  as  a  clever  thing  of  the
kind  will,  it  was  imputed  to  the  brightest  young  fellow  in
France,  M.  Arouet's  Son.  Who,  in  fact,  was  not  the  Author ;
but  was  not  believed  on  his  denial ;  and  saw  himself,  in  spite
of  his  high  connections,  ruthlessly  lodged  in  the  Bastille  in
consequence.  '  Let  him  sit,'  thought  M.  Arouet  Senior,  '  and
come  to  his  senses  there ! '  He  sat  for  eighteen  months
(age  still  little  above  twenty)  ;  but  privately  employed  his
time,  not  in  repentance,  or  in  serious  legal  studies,  but  in
writing  a  Poem  on  his  Henri  Quatre.  '  Epic  Poem,'  no  less  ;
La  Ligue,  as  he  then  called  it ;  which  it  was  his  hope  the
whole  world  would  one  day  fall  in  love  with ;  —  as  it  did.  Nay,
in  two  years  more,  he  had  done  a  Play,  (Edipe  the  renowned
name  of  it ;  which  '  ran  for  forty-eight  nights '  (18th  Novem-
ber, 1718,  the  first  of  them) ;  and  was  enough  to  turn  any

1  "  I  have  seen  (j'ai  vu)  "  this  ignominy  occur,  "  I  have  seen  "  that  other,  —
to  the  amount  of  a  dozen  or  two  ; —  "  and  am  not  yet  twenty."  Copy  of  it,
and  guess  as  to  authorship,  in  (Euires  de  Voltaire,  i.  321.

CHAP.  II.  LITEEAEY CORRESPONDENCE.  43

Aug.  1736.

head  of  such  age.  Law  may  be  considered  hopeless,  even  by
M.  Arouet  Senior.

"  Try  him  in  the  Diplomatic  line  ;  break  these  bad  habits
and  connections,  thought  M.  Arouet,  at  one  time ;  and  sent
him  to  the  French  Ambassador  in  Holland,  —  on  good  be-
havior, as  it  were,  and  by  way  of  temporary  banishment.  But
neither  did  this  answer.  On  the  contrary,  the  young  fellow
got  into  scrapes  again ;  got  into  amatory  intrigues,  —  young
lady  visiting  you  in  men's  clothes,  young  lady's  mother  invei-
gling, and  I  know  not  what ;  —  so  that  the  Ambassador  was
glad  to  send  him  home  again  unmarried  ;  marked,  as  it  were,
'  Glass,  with  care  ! '  And  the  young  lady's  mother  printed
his  Letters,  not  the  least  worth  reading :  —  and  the  old
M.  Arouet  seems  now  to  have  flung  up  his  head ;  to  have  set-
tled some  small  allowance  on  him,  with  peremptory  no-hope
of  more,  and  said,  '  Go  your  own  way,  then,  foolish  junior  :  the
elder  shall  be  my  son.'  M.  Arouet  disappears  at  this  point,
or  nearly  so,  from,  the  history  of  his  son  Francois ;  and  I  think
must  have  died  in  not  many  years.  Poor  old  M.  Arouet  closed
his  old  eyes  without  the  least  conception  what  a  prodigious
ever-memorable  thing  he  had  done  unknowingly,  in  sending
this  Francis  into  the  world,  to  kindle  such  universal  '  dry
dung-heap  of  a  rotten  world/  and  set  it  blazing !  Francois,  his
Father's  synonym,  came  to  be  representative  of  the  family,
after  all ;  the  elder  Brother  also  having  died  before  long.  Ex-
cept certain  confused  niece-and-nephew  personages,  progeny
of  the  sisters,  Frangois  has  no  more  trouble  or  solacement
from  the  paternal  household.  Francois  meanwhile  is  his
Father's  synonym,  and  signs  Arouet  Junior,  '  Fra^ois  Arouet
1.  j.  (lejeune).'

" '  All  of  us  Princes,  then,  or  Poets  ! '  said  he,  one  night  at
supper,  looking  to  right  and  left :  the  brightest  fellow  in  the
world,  well  fit  to  be  Phoebus  Apollo  of  such  circles  ;  and  great
things  now  ahead  of  him.  Dissolute  Eegent  d'Orleans,  po-
litest, most  debauched  of  men,  and  very  witty,  holds  the  helm  ;
near  him  Dubois  the  Devil's  Cardinal,  and  so  many  bright
spirits.  All  the  Luciferous  Spiritualism  there  is  in  France
is  lifting  anchor,  under  these  auspices,  joyfully  towards  new

44  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

latitudes  and  Isles  of  the  Blest.  What  may  not  Francois  hope
to  become  ?  '  Hmph ! '  answers  M.  Arouet  Senior,  steadily,
so  long  as  he  lives.  Here  are  one  or  two  subsequent  phases,
epochs  or  turning-points,  of  the  young  gentleman's  career.

"Phasis  First  (1725-1728). — The  accomplished  Due  de
Sulli  (Year  1725,  day  not  recorded),  is  giving  in  his  hotel  a
dinner,  such  as  usual ;  and  a  bright  witty  company  is  assem-
bled ;  —  the  brightest  young  fellow  in  France  sure  to  be  there ;
and  with  his  electric  coruscations  illuminating  everything,  and
keeping  the  table  in  a  roar.  To  the  delight  of  most ;  not  to
that  of  a  certain  splenetic  ill-given  Due  de  Kohan ;  grandee
of  high  rank,  great  haughtiness,  and  very  ill-behavior  in  the
world ;  who  feels  impatient  at  the  notice  taken  of  a  mere  civic
individual,  Arouet  Junior.  '  Quel  est  done  ce  jeune  homme  qui
parle  si  haut,  Who  is  this  young  man  that  talks  so  loud,  then  ? '
exclaims  the  proud  splenetic  Duke.  <  Monseigneur,'  flashes
the  young  man  back  upon  him  in  an  electric  manner,  'it  is
one  who  does  not  drag  a  big  name  about  with  him ;  but  who
secures  respect  for  the  name  he  has  ! '  Figure  that,  in  the
penetrating  grandly  clangorous  voice  (voix  sombre  et  majes-
tueuse),  and  the  momentary  flash  of  eyes  that  attended  it.  Due
de  Rohan  rose,  in  a  sulphurous  frame  of  mind ;  and  went  his
ways.  What  date  ?  You  ask  the  idle  French  Biographer  in
vain  ;  —  see  only,  after  more  and  more  inspection,  that  the
incident  is  true ;  and  with  labor  date  it,  summer  of  the  Year
1725.  Treaty  of  Utrecht  itself,  though  all  the  Newspapers
and  Own  Correspondents  were  so  interested  in  it,  was  perhaps
but  a  foolish  matter  to  date  in  comparison  !

"  About  a  week  after,  M.  Arouet  Junior  was  again  dining
with  the  Due  de  Sulli,  and  a  fine  company  as  before.  A  ser-
vant whispers  him,  That  somebody  has  called,  and  wants  him
below.  '  Cannot  come,'  answers  Arouet ;  l  how  can  I,  so  en-
gaged ? '  Servant  returns  after  a  minute  or  two  :  '  Pardon,
Monsieur ;  I  am.  to  say,  it  is  to  do  an  act  of  beneficence  that
you  are  wanted  below ! '  Arouet  lays  down  his  knife  and
fork  ;  descends  instantly  to  see  what  act  it  is.  A  carriage  is
in  the  court,  and  hackney-coach  near  it:  'Would  Monsieur

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  45

Aug.  1736.

have  the  extreme  goodness  to  come  to  the  door  of  the  carriage,
in  a  case  of  necessity  ?  '  At  the  door  of  the  carriage,  hands
seize  the  collar  of  him,  hold  him  as  in  a  vice  ;  diabolic  visage
of  Due  de  Eohan  is  visible  inside,  who  utters,  looking  to  the
hackney-coach,  some  '  Voila,  Now  then  ! '  Whereupon  the
hackney-coach  opens,  gives  out  three  porters,  or  hired  bullies,
with  the  due  implements  :  scandalous  actuality  of  horsewhip-
ping descends  on  the  back  of  poor  Arouet,  who  shrieks  and
execrates  to  no  purpose,  nobody  being  near.  '  That  will  do,'
says  Eohan  at  last,  and  the  gallant  ducal  party  drive  off ;
young  Arouet,  with  torn  frills  and  deranged  hair,  rushing  up-
stairs again,  in  such  a  mood  as  is  easy  to  fancy.  Everybody
is  sorry,  inconsolable,  everybody  shocked;  nobody  volunteers
to  help  in  avenging.  '  Monseigneur  de  Sulli,  is  not  such
atrocity  done  to  one  of  your  guests,  an  insult  to  yourself  ? '
asks  Arouet.  '  Well,  yes  perhaps,  but '  —  Monseigneur  de
Sulli  shrugs  his  shoulders,  and  proposes  nothing.  Arouet
withdrew,  of  course  in  a  most  blazing  condition,  to  consider
what  he  could,  on  his  own  strength,  do  in  this  conjuncture.

"His  Biographer  Duvernet  says,  he  decided  on  doing  two
things  :  learning  English  and  the  small-sword  exercise.1  He
retired  to  the  country  for  six  months,  and  perfected  himself
in  these  two  branches.  Being  perfect,  he  challenged  Due  de
Eohan  in  the  proper  manner  ;  applying  ingenious  compulsives
withal,  to  secure  acceptance  of  the  challenge.  Eohan  accepted,
not  without  some  difficulty,  and  compulsion  at  the  Theatre  or
otherwise  :  —  accepted,  but  withal  confessed  to  his  wife.  The
result  was,  no  measuring  of  swords  took  place ;  and  Eohan
only  blighted  by  public  opinion,  or  incapable  of  farther  blight
that  way,  went  at  large ;  a  convenient  Lettre  de  Cachet  hav-
ing put  Arouet  again  in  the  Bastille.  Where  for  six  months

1  La  Vie  de  Voltaire,  par  M (a  Geneve,  1786),  pp.  55-57  ;  or  pp.  60-63,

in  his second  form of  the Book. The  "  M "  is an Abbe Duvernet  ;

of  no  great  mark  otherwise.  He  got  into  "Revolution  trouble  afterwards,  but
escaped  with  his  head ;  and  republished  his  Book,  swollen  out  somewhat  by
new  "  Anecdotes  "  and  republican  bluster,  in  this  second  instance ;  signing
himself  T.  J.  D.  V (Paris,  1797).  A  vague  but  not  dark  or  menda-
cious little  Book  ;  with  traces  of  real  eyesight  in  it,  —  by  one  who  had  person-
ally known  Voltaire,  or  at  least  seen  and  heard  him.

46  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

Arouet  lodged  a  second  time,  the  innocent  not  the  guilty ;
making,  we  can  well  suppose,  innumerable  reflections  on  the
phenomena  of  human  life.  Imprisonment  once  over,  he  has-
tily quitted  for  England ;  shaking  the  dust  of  ungrateful
France  off  his  feet,  —  resolved  to  change  his  unhappy  name,
for  one  thing.

"  Srnelfungus,  denouncing  the  torpid  fatuity  of  Voltaire's
Biographers,  says  he  never  met  with  one  Frenchman,  even
of  the  Literary  classes,  who  could  tell  him  whence  this  name
VOLTAIRE  originated.  'A  petite  terre,  small  family  estate,'
they  said;  and  sent  him  hunting  through  Topographies,  far
and  wide,  to  no  purpose.  Others  answered,  '  Volterra  in  Italy,
some  connection  with  Volterra,'  —  and  seemed  even  to  know
that  this  was  but  fatuity.  '  In  ever-talking,  ever-printing  Paris,
is  it  as  in  Timbuctoo,  then,  which  neither  prints  nor  has
anything  to  print  ?  '  exclaims  poor  Smelfungus  !  He  tells  us
at  last,  the  name  Voltaire  is  a  mere  Anagram  of  Arouet  I.  j.  —
you  try  it ;  A.R.O.U.E.T.L.J.  =  V.O.L.T.A.I.R.E  ;  and  perceive  at
once,  with  obligations  to  Smelfungus,  that  he  has  settled  this
small  matter  for  you,  and  that  you  can  be  silent  upon  it
forever  thenceforth.

"  The  anagram  VOLTAIRE,  gloomily  settled  in  the  Bastille  in
this  manner,  can  be  reckoned  a  very  famous  wide-sounding
outer  result  of  the  Rohan  impertinence  and  blackguardism;
but  it  is  not  worth  naming  beside  the  inner  intrinsic  result,
of  banishing  Voltaire  to  England  at  this  point  of  his  course.
England  was  full  of  Constitutionality  and  Freethinking ;  To-
lands,  Collinses,  Wollastons,  Bolingbrokes,  still  living;  very
free  indeed.  England,  one  is  astonished  to  see,  has  its  royal-
republican  ways  of  doing ;  something  Roman  in  it,  from  Peer-
age down  to  Plebs ;  strange  and  curious  to  the  eye  of  M.  de
Voltaire.  Sciences  flourishing  ;  Newton  still  alive,  white  with
fourscore  years,  the  venerable  hoary  man ;  Locke's  Gospel  of
Common  Sense  in  full  vogue,  or  even  done  into  verse,  by  in-
comparable Mr.  Pope,  for  the  cultivated  upper  classes.  In
science,  in  religion,  in  politics,  what  a  surprising  '  liberty '
allowed  or  taken  !  Never  was  a  freer  turn  of  thinking.  And
(what  to  M.  de  Voltaire  is  a  pleasant  feature)  it  is  Freethinking

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  47

Aug.  1736.

with  ruffles  to  its  shirt  and  rings  on  its  fingers  ;  — never  yet,
the  least,  dreaming  of  the  shirtless  or  sansculottic  state  that
lies  ahead  for  it !  That  is  the  palmy  condition  of  English
Liberty,  when  M.  de  Voltaire  arrives  there.

"  In  a  man  just  out  of  the  Bastille  on  those  terms,  there  is
a  mind  driven  by  hard  suffering  into  seriousness,  and  provoked
by  indignant  comparisons  and  remembrances.  As  if  you  had
elaborately  ploughed  and  pulverized  the  mind  of  this  Voltaire
to  receive  with  its  utmost  avidity,  and  strength  of  fertility,
whatever  seed  England  may  have  for  it.  That  was  a  notable
conjuncture  of  a  man  with  circumstances.  The  question,  Is
this  man  to  grow  up  a  Court  Poet ;  to  do  legitimate  dramas,
lampoons,  witty  verses,  and  wild  spiritual  and  practical  mag-
nificences, the  like  never  seen;  Princes  and  Princesses  rec-
ognizing him  as  plainly  divine,  and  keeping  him  tied  by
enchantments  to  that  poor  trade  as  his  task  in  life  ?  is  an-
swered in  the  negative.  No :  and  it  is  not  quite  to  decorate
and  comfort  your  '  dry  dung-heap  '  of  a  world,  or  the  fortunate
cocks  that  scratch  on  it,  that  the  man  Voltaire  is  here ;  but
to  shoot  lightnings  into  it,  and  set  it  ablaze  one  day !  That
was  an  important  alternative ;  truly  of  world-importance  to
the  poor  generations  that  now  are  ;  and  it  was  settled,  in  good
part,  by  this  voyage  to  England,  as  one  may  surmise.  Such
is  sometimes  the  use  of  a  dissolute  Rohan  in  this  world ;  for
the  gods  make  implements  of  all  manner  of  things.

"  M.  de  Voltaire  (for  we  now  drop  the  Arouet  altogether,  and
never  hear  of  it  more)  came  to  England  —  when  ?  Quitted
England  —  when?  Sorrow  on  all  fatuous  Biographers,  who
spend  their  time  not  in  laying  permanent  foundation-stones,
but  in  fencing  with  the  wind !  —  I  at  last  find  indisputably,  it
was  in  1726  that  he  came  to  England : *  and  he  himself  tells
us  that  he  quitted  it  'in  1728.'  Spent,  therefore,  some  two
years  there  in  all,  —  last  year  of  George  I.'s  reign,  and  first
of  George  II.'s.  But  mere  inanity  and  darkness  visible  reign,
in  all  his  Biographies,  over  this  period  of  his  life,  which  was
above  all  others  worth  investigating  :  seek  not  to  know  it ;  no

1  Got  out  of  the  Bastille,  with  orders  to  leave  France, "  29th  April  "  of  that
year  ((Euvres  de  Voltaire,  i.  40  n.).

48  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

man  has  inquired  into  it,  probably  no  competent  man  now  ever
will.  By  hints  in  certain  Letters  of  the  period,  we  learn  that
he  lodged,  or  at  one  time  lodged,  in  'Maiden  Lane,  Covent
Garden ; '  one  of  those  old  Houses  that  yet  stand  in  Maiden
Lane  :  for  which  small  fact  let  us  be  thankful.  His  own  Let-
ters of  the  period  are  dated  now  and  then  from  '  Wandsworth.'
Allusions  there  are  to  Bolingbroke ;  but  the  Wandsworth  is
not  Bolingbroke's  mansion,  which  stood  in  Battersea ;  the
Wandsworth  was  one  Edward  Fawkener's ;  a  man  somewhat
admirable  to  young  Voltaire,  but  extinct  now,  or  nearly  so,  in
human  memory.  He  had  been  a  Turkey  Merchant,  it  would
seem,  and  nevertheless  was  admitted  to  speak  his  word  in  in-
tellectual, even  in  political  circles ;  which  was  wonderful  to
young  Voltaire.  This  Fawkener,  I  think,  became  Sir  Edward
Fawkener,  and  some  kind  of  (  Secretary  to  the  Duke  of  Cum-
berland : '  —  I  judge  it  to  be  the  same  Fawkener;  a  man  highly
unmemorable  now,  were  it  not  for  the  young  Frenchman  he
was  hospitable  to.  Fawkener's  and  Bolingbroke's  are  perhaps
the  only  names  that  turn  up  in  Voltaire's  Letters  of  this  Eng-
lish Period :  over  which  generally  there  reigns,  in  the  French
Biographies,  inane  darkness,  with  an  intimation,  half  involun-
tary, that  it  should  have  been  made  luminous,  and  would  if
perfectly  easy.

"  We  know,  from  other  sources,  that  he  had  acquaintance
with  many  men  in  England,  with  all  manner  of  important
men :  Notes  to  Pope  in  Voltaire -English,  visit  of  Voltaire  to
Congreve,  Notes  even  to  such  as  Lady  Sundon  in  the  interior
of  the  Palace,  are  known  of.  The  brightest  young  fellow  in
the  world  did  not  want  for  introductions  to  the  highest  quar-
ters, in  that  time  of  political  alliance,  and  extensive  private
acquaintance,  between  his  Country  and  ours.  And  all  this  he
was  the  man  to  improve,  both  in  the  trivial  and  the  deep
sense.  His  bow  to  the  divine  Princess  Caroline  and  suite,
could  it  fail  in  graceful  reverence  or  what  else  was  needed  ?
Dexterous  right  words  in  the  right  places,  winged  with  esprit
so  called :  that  was  the  man's  supreme  talent,  in  which  he  had
no  match,  to  the  last.  A  most  brilliant,  swift,  far -glancing
young  man,  disposed  to  make  himself  generally  agreeable.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  49

Aug.  1736.

For  the  rest,  his  wonder,  we  can  see,  was  kept  awake ;  won-
der readily  inclining,  in  his  circumstances,  towards  admiration.
The  stereotype  figure  of  the  Englishman,  always  the  same,
which  turns  up  in  Voltaire's  Works,  is  worth  noting  in  this
respect.  A  rugged  surly  kind  of  fellow,  much-enduring,  not
intrinsically  bad  ;  splenetic  without  complaint,  standing  oddly
inexpugnable  in  that  natural  stoicism  of  his ;  taciturn,  yet
with  strange  flashes  of  speech  in  him  now  and  then,  some-
thing which  goes  beyond  laughter  and  articulate  logic,  and  is
the  taciturn  elixir  of  these  two,  what  they  call  'humor'  in
their  dialect :  this  is  pretty  much  the  reverse  of  Voltaire's  own
self,  and  therefore  all  the  welcomer  to  him  ;  delineated  always
with  a  kind  of  mockery,  but  with  evident  love.  What  excel-
lences are  in  England,  thought  Voltaire ;  no  Bastille  in  it,  for
one  thing  !  Newton's  Philosophy  annihilated  the  vortexes  of
Descartes  for  him ;  Locke's  Toleration  is  very  grand  (espe-
cially if  all  is  uncertain,  and  you  are  in  the  minority) ;  then
Collins,  Wollaston  and  Company,  — no  vile  Jesuits  here,  strong
in  their  mendacious  mal-odorous  stupidity,  despicablest  yet
most  dangerous  of  creatures,  to  check  freedom  of  thought !
Illustrious  Mr.  Pope,  of  the  Essay  on  Man,  surely  he  is  admi-
rable; as  are  Pericles  Bolingbroke,  and  many  others.  Even
Bolingbroke's  high-lacquered  brass  is  gold  to  this  young
French  friend  of  his.  —  Through  all  which  admirations  and
exaggerations  the  progress  of  the  young  man,  toward  certain
very  serious  attainments  and  achievements,  is  conceivable
enough.

"  One  other  man,  who  ought  to  be  mentioned  in  the  Biogra-
phies, I  find  Voltaire  to  have  made  acquaintance  with,  in  Eng-
land :  a  German  M.  Fabrice,  one  of  several  Brothers  called
Fabrice  or  Fabricius,  —  concerning  whom,  how  he  had  been
at  Bender,  and  how  Voltaire  picked  Charles  Douze  from  the
memory  of  him,  there  was  already  mention.  The  same  Fabrice
who  held  poor  George  I.  in  his  arms  while  they  drove,  gallop-
ing, to  Osnabriick,  that  night,  in  extremis :  —  not  needing  men-
tion again.  The  following  is  more  to  the  point.

"  Voltaire,  among  his  multifarious  studies  while  in  England,
did  not  forget  that  of  economics  :  his  Poem  La  Ligue,  —  sur-

VOL. VII.  4

50  AT  KEINSBEEG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  173G.

reptitiously  printed,  three  years  since,  under  that  title  (one
Desfontaines,  a  hungry  Ex-Jesuit,  the  perpetrator),1 — he  now
took  in  hand  for  his  own  benefit ;  washed  it  clean  of  its  blots  ;
christened  it  Henriade,  under  which  name  it  is  still  known
over  all  the  world ;  —  and  printed  it ;  published  it  here,  by
subscription,  in  1726;  one  of  the  first  things  he  undertook.
Very  splendid  subscription  ;  headed  by  Princess  Caroline,  and
much  favored  by  the  opulent  of  quality.  Which  yielded  an
unknown  but  very  considerable  sum  of  thousands  sterling,  and
grounded  not  only  the  world-renown  but  the  domestic  finance
of  M.  de  Voltaire.  For  the  fame  of  the  '  new  epic,'  as  this
Henriade  was  called,  soon  spread  into  all  lands.  And  such
fame,  and  other  agencies  on  his  behalf,  having  opened  the
way  home  for  Voltaire,  he  took  this  sum  of  Thousands  Sterling
along  with  him  ;  laid  it  out  judiciously  in  some  city  lottery,  or
profitable  scrip  then  going  at  Paris,  which  at  once  doubled
the  amount :  after  which  he  invested  it  in  Corn-trade,  Army
Clothing,  Barbary-trade,  Commissariat  Bacon-trade,  all  manner
of  well-chosen  trades,  —  being  one  of  the  shrewdest  financiers
on  record ;  —  and  never  from  that  day  wanted  abundance  of
money,  for  one  thing.  Which  he  judged  to  be  extremely  ex-
pedient for  a  literary  man,  especially  in  times  of  Jesuit  and
other  tribulation.  '  You  have  only  to  watch,'  he  would  say,
1  what  scrips,  public  loans,  investments  in  the  field  of  agio,
are  offered ;  if  you  exert  any  judgment,  it  is  easy  to  gain
there  :  do  not  the  stupidest  of  mortals  gain  there,  by  intensely
attending  to  it  ? '

"Voltaire  got  almost  nothing  by  his  Books,  which  he  gen-
erally had  to  disavow,  and  denounce  as  surreptitious  suppositi-
tious scandals,  when  some  sharp-set  Book-seller,  in  whose  way
he  had  laid  the  savory  article  as  bait,  chose  to  risk  his  ears
for  the  profit  of  snatching  and  publishing  it.  Next  to  nothing
by  his  Books  ;  but  by  his  fine  finance-talent  otherwise,  he  had
become  possessed  of  ample  moneys.  Which  were  so  cunningly
disposed,  too,  that  he  had  resources  in  every  Country  ;  and
no  conceivable  combination  of  confiscating  Jesuits  and  dark
fanatic  Official  Persons  could  throw  him  out  of  a  livelihood,

1  1723,  Vie,  par  T.  J.  D.  V.  (that  is,  "  M "  in  the  second  form),  p.  59.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  51

Aug.  1736.

whithersoever  lie  might  be  forced  to  run.  A  man  that  looks
facts  in  the  face ;  which  is  creditable  of  him.  The  vulgar
call  it  avarice  and  the  like,  as  their  way  is  :  but  M.  de  Voltaire
is  convinced  that  effects  will  follow  causes ;  and  that  it  well
beseems  a  lonely  Ishmaelite,  hunting  his  way  through  the
howling  wildernesses  and  confused  ravenous  populations  of
this  world,  to  have  money  in  his  pocket.  He  died  with  a
revenue  of  some  £7,000  a  year,  probably  as  good  as  £20,000
at  present ;  the  richest  literary  man  ever  heard  of  hitherto,
as  well  as  the  remarkablest  in  some  other  respects.  But  we
have  to  mark  the  second  phasis  of  his  life  [in  which  Friedrich
now  sees  him],  and  how  it  grew  out  of  this  first  one.

"Phasis  Second  (1728-1733).  —  Eeturning home  as  if  quietly
triumphant,  with  such  a  talent  in  him,  and  such  a  sanction  put
upon  it  and  him  by  a  neighboring  Nation,  and  by  all  the  world,
Voltaire  was  warmly  received,  in  his  old  aristocratic  circles,
by  cultivated  France  generally ;  and  now  in  1728,  in  his  thirty-
second  year,  might  begin  to  have  definite  outlooks  of  a  suf-
ficiently royal  kind,  in  Literature  and  otherwise.  Nor  is  he
slow,  far  from  it,  to  advance,  to  conquer  and  enjoy.  He  writes
successful  literature,  falls  in  love  with  women  of  quality ;
encourages  the  indigent  and  humble  ;  eclipses,  and  in  case  of
need  tramples  down,  the  too  proud.  He  elegizes  poor  Adrienne
Lecouvreur,  the  Actress,  -  -  our  poor  friend  the  Comte  de
Saxe's  female  friend  ;  who  loyally  emptied  out  her  whole  purse
for  him,  £30,000  in  one  sum,  that  he  might  try  for  Courland,
and  whether  he  could  fall  in  love  with  her  of  the  Swollen
Cheek  there ;  which  proved  impossible.  Elegizes  Adrienne,  we
say,  and  even  buries  her  under  cloud  of  night :  ready  to  protect
unfortunate  females  of  merit.  Especially  theatrical  females  ;
having  much  to  do  in  the  theatre,  which  we  perceive  to  be  the
pulpit  or  real  preaching-place  of  cultivated  France  in  those
years.  All  manner  of  verse,  all  manner  of  prose,  he  dashes
off  with  surprising  speed  and  grace :  showers  of  light  spray
for  the  moment ;  and  always  some  current  of  graver  enterprise,
Siecle  de  Louis  Quatorze  or  the  like,  going  on  beneath  it.  For
he  is  a  most  diligent,  swift,  unresting  man ;  and  studies  and

52  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

learns  amazingly  in  such  a  rackety  existence.  Victorious
enough  in  some  senses  ;  defeat,  in  Literature,  never  visited
him.  His  Plays,  coming  thick  on  the  heels  of  one  another,
rapid  brilliant  pieces,  are  brilliantly  received  by  the  unofficial
•world ;  and  ought  to  dethrone  dull  Crebillon,  and  the  sleepy
potentates  of  Poetry  that  now  are.  Which  in  fact  is  their
result  with  the  public ;  but  not  yet  in  the  highest  courtly
places  ;  — a  defect  much  to  be  condemned  and  lamented.

"  Numerous  enemies  arise,  as  is  natural,  of  an  envious  ven-
omous description  ;  this  is  another  ever-widening  shadow  in  the
sunshine.  In  fact  we  perceive  he  has,  besides  the  inner  obsta-
cles and  griefs,  two  classes  of  outward  ones  :  There  are  Lions
on  his  path  and  also  Dogs.  Lions  are  the  Ex-Bishop  of  Mire-
poix,  and  certain  other  dark  Holy  Fathers,  or  potent  orthodox
Official  Persons.  These,  though  Voltaire  does  not  yet  declare
his  heterodoxy  (which,  indeed,  is  but  the  or^odoxy  of  the  cul-
tivated private  circles),  perceive  well  enough,  even  by  the
Henriade,  and  its  talk  of  '  tolerance,'  horror  of  '  fanaticism '
and  the  like,  what  this  one's  'doxy  is  ;  and  how  dangerous  he,
not  a  mere  mute  man  of  quality,  but  a  talking  spirit  with
winged  words,  may  be ;  —  and  they  much  annoy  and  terrify
him,  by  their  roaring  in  the  distance.  Which  roaring  cannot,
of  course,  convince  ;  and  since  it  is  not  permitted  to  kill,  can
only  provoke  a  talking  spirit  into  still  deeper  strains  of  hetero-
doxy for  his  own  private  behoof.  These  are  the  Lions  on  his
path :  beasts  conscious  to  themselves  of  good  intentions  ;  but
manifesting  from  Voltaire's  point  of  view,  it  must  be  owned,
a  physiognomy  unlovely  to  a  degree.  '  Light  is  superior  to
darkness,  I  should  think,'  meditates  Voltaire;  'power  of
thought  to  the  want  of  power !  The  Ane  de  Mirepoix  (Ass  of
Mirepoix),1  pretending  to  use  me  in  this  manner,  is  it  other,
in  the  court  of  Khadarnanthus,  than  transcendent  Stupidity,

1  Poor  joke  of  Voltaire's,  continually  applied  to  this  Bishop,  or  Ex-Bishop,
—  who  was  thought,  generally,  a  rather  tenebrific  man  for  appointment  to  the
Feuille  des  B€ne"fices  (charge  of  nominating  Bishops,  keeping  King's  con-
science, £c.)  ;  and  who,  in  that  capacity,  signed  himself  Anc  (by  no  means
"  Ane,"  but  "  Ancien,  Whilom  "  )  de  Mirepoix,  —  to  the  enragement  of  Vol-
taire often  enough.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  53

Aug.  1736.

with  transcendent  Insolence  superadded  ? '  Voltaire  grows
more  and  more  heterodox  ;  and  is  ripening  towards  dangerous
utterances,  though  he  strives  to  hold  in.

"  The  Dogs  upon  his  path,  again,  are  all  the  disloyal  envious
persons  of  the  Writing  Class,  whom  his  success  has  offended  ;
and,  more  generally,  all  the  dishonest  hungry  persons  who  can
gain  a  morsel  by  biting  him :  and  their  name  is  legion.  It
must  be  owned,  about  as  ugly  a  Doggery  (' in  fa  me  Canaille'
he  might  well  reckon  them)  as  has,  before  or  since,  infested
the  path  of  a  man.  They  are  not  hired  and  set  on,  as  angry
suspicion  might  suggest;  but  they  are  covertly  somewhat
patronized  by  the  Mirepoix,  or  orthodox  Official  class.  Scanda-
lous Ex- Jesuit  Desf ontaines,  Thersites  Freron,  —  these  are  but
types  of  an  endless  Doggery  ;  whose  names  and  works  should
be  blotted  out ;  whose  one  claim  to  memory  is,  that  the  riding
man  so  often  angrily  sprang  down,  and  tried  horsewhipping
them  into  silence.  A  vain  attempt.  The  individual  hound
flies  howling,  abjectly  petitioning  and  promising;  but  the  rest
bark  all  with  new  comfort,  and  even  he  starts  again  straight-
way. It  is  bad  travelling  in  those  woods,  with  such  Lions
and  such  Dogs.  And  then  the  sparsely  scattered  Human
Creatures  (so  we  may  call  them  in  contrast,  persons  of  Quality
for  most  part)  are  not  always  what  they  should  be.  The
grand  mansions  you  arrive  at,  in  this  waste-howling  solitude,
prove  sometimes  essentially  Robber-towers  ;  —  and  there  may
be  Armida  Palaces,  and  divine-looking  Arrnidas,  where  your
ultimate  fate  is  still  worse.

'  Que  le  monde  est  rempli  d'enchanteurs,  je  ne  dis  rien  d' enchanter  esses  !  '

To  think  of  it,  the  solitary  Ishmaelite  journeying,  never  so
well  mounted,  through  such  a  wilderness  :  with  lions,  dogs,
human  robbers  and  Armidas  all  about  him;  himself  lonely,
friendless  under  the  stars  :  —  one  could  pity  him  withal,  though
that  is  not  the  feeling  he  solicits ;  nor  gets  hitherto,  even  at
this  impartial  distance.

"  One  of  the  beautiful  creatures  of  Quality,  —  we  hope,  not
an  Armida,  —  who  came  athwart  Voltaire,  in  these  times,  was
a  Madame  du  Chatelet ;  distinguished  from  all  the  others  by  a

54  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

love  of  mathematics  and  the  pure  sciences,  were  it  nothing
else.  She  was  still  young,  under  thirty ;  the  literary  man
still  under  forty.  With  her  Husband,  to  whom  she  had
brought  a  child,  or  couple  of  children,  there  was  no  formal
quarrel ;  but  they  were  living  apart,  neither  much  heeding  the
other,  as  was  by  no  means  a  case  without  example  at  that
time ;  Monsieur  soldiering,  and  philandering  about,  in  garrison
or  elsewhere ;  Madame,  in  a  like  humor,  doing  the  best  for
herself  in  the  high  circles  of  society,  to  which  he  and  she
belonged.  Most  wearisome  barren  circles  to  a  person  of
thought,  as  both  she  and  M.  de  Voltaire  emphatically  admitted
to  one  another,  on  first  making  acquaintance.  But  is  there  no
help?

"Madame  had  tried  the  pure  sciences  and  philosophies,  in
Books  :  but  how  much  more  charming,  when  they  come  to  you
as  a  Human  Philosopher  ;  handsome,  magnanimous,  and  the
wittiest  man  in  the  world  !  Young  Madame  was  not  regularly
beautiful ;  but  she  was  very  piquant,  radiant,  adventurous  ;
understood  other  things  than  the  pure  sciences,  and  could  be
abundantly  coquettish  and  engaging.  I  have  known  her  scut-
tle off,  on  an  evening,  with  a  couple  of  adventurous  young
wives  of  Quality,  to  the  remote  lodging  of  the  witty  M.  de
Voltaire,  and  make  his  dim  evening  radiant  to  him.1  Then
again,  in  public  crowds,  I  have  seen  them ;  obliged  to  dis-
mount to  the  peril  of  Madame's  diamonds,  there  being  a  jam
of  carriages,  and  no  getting  forward  for  half  the  day.  In
short,  they  are  becoming  more  and  more  intimate,  to  the  ex-
tremest  degree ;  and,  scorning  the  world,  thank  Heaven  that
they  are  mutually  indispensable.  Cannot  we  get  away  from
this  scurvy  wasp's-nest  of  a  Paris,  thought  they,  and  live  to
ourselves  and  our  books  ?

"  Madame  was  of  high  quality,  one  of  the  Breteuils  ;  but
was  poor  in  comparison,  and  her  Husband  the  like.  An  old
Chateau  of  theirs,  named  Cirey,  stands  in  a  pleasant  enough
little  valley  in  Champagne  ;  but  so  dilapidated,  gaunt  and
vacant,  nobody  can  live  in  it.  Voltaire,  who  is  by  this  time  a
man  of  ample  moneys,  furnishes  the  requisite  cash ;  Madame

1  One  of  Voltaire's  Letters.

CHAP.  n.  LITEKAEY  CORRESPONDENCE.  55

Aug.  1736.

and  he,  in  sweet  symphony,  concert  the  plans  :  Cirey  is  re-
paired, at  least  parts  of  it  are,  into  a  boudoir  of  the  gods,
regardless  of  expense ;  nothing  ever  seen  so  tasteful,  so  mag-
nificent ;  and  the  two  withdraw  thither  to  study,  in  peace,
what  sciences,  pure  and  other,  they  have  a  mind  to.  They
are  recognized  as  lovers,  by  the  Parisian  public,  with  little
audible  censure  from  anybody  there,  —  with  none  at  all  from
the  easy  Husband ;  who  occasionally  even  visits  Cirey,  if  he  be
passing  that  way ;  and  is  content  to  take  matters  as  he  finds
them,  without  looking  below  the  surface.1  For  the  Ten  Com-
mandments are  at  a  singular  pass  in  cultivated  France  at  this
epoch.  Such  illicit-idyllic  form  of  life  has  been  the  form  of
Voltaire's  since  1733,"  —  for  some  three  years  now,  when
Friedrich  and  we  first  make  acquaintance  with  him.  "  It
lasted  above  a  dozen  years  more  :  an  illicit  marriage  after  its
sort,  and  subject  only  to  the  liabilities  of  such.  Perhaps  we
may  look  in  upon  the  Cirey  Household,  ourselves,  at  some
future  time ;  and  "  —  This  Editor  hopes  not !

"  Madame  admits  that  for  the  first  ten  years  it  was,  on  the
whole,  sublime ;  a  perfect  Eden  on  Earth,  though  stormy  now
and  then.2  After  ten  years,  it  began  to  grow  decidedly
dimmer ;  and  in  the  course  of  few  years  more,  it  became  un-
deniably evident  that  M.  de  Voltaire  '  did  not  love  me  as  for-
merly :'  —  in  fact,  if  Madame  could  have  seen  it,  M.  de  Voltaire
was  growing  old,  losing  his  teeth,  and  the  like ;  and  did  not  care
for  anything  as  formerly  !  Which  was  a  dreadful  discovery,
and  gave  rise  to  results  by  and  by.

"  In  this  retreat  at  Cirey,  varied  with  flying  visits  to  Paris,
and  kept  awake  by  multifarious  Correspondences,  the  quantity

1  See  (whosoever  is  curious)  Madame  de  Grafigny,  Vie  Privee  de  Voltaire
etde  Madame  du  Chatelet  (Paris,  1820). A  six  months  of  actual  Letters  writ-
ten by  poor  Grafigny,  while  sheltering  at  Cirey,  Winter  and Spring,  1 738-
1739  ;  straitened  there  in  various  respects,  — extremely  ill  off  for  fuel,  among
other  things. Rugged  practical  Letters,  shadowing  out  to  us,  unconsciously
oftenest,  and  like  a  very  mirror,  the  splendid  and  the  sordid,  the  seamy  side
and  the  smooth,  of  Life  at  Cirey,  in  her  experience  of  it. Published,  four-
score years  after,  under  the  above  title.

2  Lettres  Infdites  de  Madame  la  Marquise  du  Chastelet ;  auxquelles  on  a  joint
une  Dissertation  (&c.  of  hers)  :  Paris,  1806.

56  AT  KEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

of  Literature  done  by  the  two  was  great  and  miscellaneous.
By  Madame,  chiefly  in  the  region  of  the  pure  sciences,  in
Newtonian  Dissertations,  competitions  for  Prizes,  and  the  like :
really  sound  and  ingenious  Pieces,  entirely  forgotten  long
since.  By  Voltaire,  in  serious  Tragedies,  Histories,  in  light
Sketches  and  deep  Dissertations :  —  mockery  getting  ever
wilder  with  him  ;  the  satirical  vein,  in  prose  and  verse,  amaz-
ingly copious,  and  growing  more  and  more  heterodox,  as  we
can  perceive.  His  troubles  from  the  ecclesiastical  or  Lion
kind  in  the  Literary  forest,  still  more  from  the  rabid  Doggery
in  it,  are  manifold,  incessant.  And  it  is  pleasantly  notable,  —
during  these  first  ten  years,  —  with  what  desperate  intensity,
vigilance  and  fierceness,  Madame  watches  over  all  his  interests
and  liabilities  and  casualties  great  and  small;  leaping  with
her  whole  force  into  M.  de  Voltaire's  scale  of  the  balance,
careless  of  antecedences  and  consequences  alike ;  flying,  with
the  spirit  of  an  angry  brood-hen,  at  the  face  of  mastiffs,  in
defence  of  any  feather  that  is  M.  de  Voltaire's.  To  which
Voltaire  replies,  as  he  well  may,  with  eloquent  gratitude  ;
with  Verses  to  the  divine  Emilie,  with  Gifts  to  her,  verses
and  gifts  the  prettiest  in  the  world ;  —  and  industriously
celebrates  the  divine  Emilie  to  herself  and  all  third  par-
ties.

"  An  ardent,  aerial,  gracefully  predominant,  and  in  the  end
somewhat  termagant  female  figure,  this  divine  Emilie.  Her
temper,  radiant  rather  than  bland,  was  none  of  the  patientest
on  occasion ;  nor  was  M.  de  Voltaire  the  least  of  a  Job,  if  you
came  athwart  him  the  wrong  way.  I  have  heard,  their  do-
mestic symphony  was  liable  to  furious  flaws,  —  let  us  hope
at  great  distances  apart :  —  that  '  plates,'  in  presence  of  the
lackeys,  actual  crockery  or  metal,  have  been  known  to  fly
from  end  to  end  of  the  dinner-table ;  nay  they  mention
'knives'  (though  only  in  the  way  of  oratorical  action)  ;  and
Voltaire  has  been  heard  to  exclaim,  the  sombre  and  majestic
voice  of  him  risen  to  a  very  high  pitch :  '  Ne  me  regardez  tant
de  ces  yeux  hagards  et  louches,  Don't  fix  those  haggard  side-
long eyes  on  me  in  that  way  !'  — mere  shrillness  of  pale  rage
presiding  over  the  scene.  But  we  hope  it  was  only  once  in

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  57

Aug.  1736.

the  quarter,  or  seldomer :  after  which,  the  element  would  be
clearer  for  some  time.  A  lonesome  literary  man,  who  has
got  a  Brood  Phoenix  to  preside  over  him,  and  fly  at  the
face  of  gods  and  men  for  him  in  that  manner,  ought  to  be
grateful.

"  Perhaps  we  shall  one  day  glance,  personally,  as  it  were,
into  Cirey  with  our  readers  ; "  —  Not  with  this  Editor  or  his  !
"  It  will  turn  out  beyond  the  reader's  expectation.  Tolerable
illicit  resting-place,  so  far  as  the  illicit  can  be  tolerable,  for  a
lonesome  Man  of  Letters,  who  goes  into  the  illicit.  Helpful-
ness, affection,  or  the  flattering  image  of  such,  are  by  no  means
wanting :  squalls  of  infirm  temper  are  not  more  frequent  than
in  the  most  licit  establishments  of  a  similar  sort.  Madame,
about  this  time,  has  a  swift  Palfrey,  l  Rossignol  (Nightingale) '
the  name  of  him ;  and  gallops  fairy-like  through  the  winding
valleys  ;  being  an  ardent  rider,  and  well-looking  on  horseback.
Voltaire's  study  is  inlaid  with  —  the  Grafigny  knows  all  what :
—  mere  china  tiles,  gilt  sculptures,  marble  slabs,  and  the  su-
preme of  taste  and  expense  :  study  fit  for  the  Phoebus  Apollo
of  France,  so  far  as  Madame  could  contrive  it.  Takes  coffee
with  Madame,  in  the  Gallery,  about  noon.  And  his  bedroom,
I  expressly  discern,1  looks  out  upon  a  running  brook,  the
murmur  of  which  is  pleasant  to  one."

Enough,  enough.  We  can  perceive  what  kind  of  Voltaire
it  was  to  whom  the  Crown-Prince  now  addressed  himself ;  and
how  luminous  an  object,  shining  afar  out  of  the  solitudes  of
Champagne  upon  the  ardent  young  man,  still  so  capable  of
admiration.  Model  Epic,  Henriade ;  model  History,  Charles
Douze ;  sublime  Tragedies,  Cesar,  Alzire  and  others,  which
readers  still  know  though  with  less  enthusiasm,  are  blooming
fresh  in  Eriedrich's  memory  and  heart ;  such  Literature  as
man  never  saw  before ;  and  in  the  background  Friedrich  has
inarticulately  a  feeling  as  if,  in  this  man,  there  were  some-
thing grander  than  all  Literatures:  a  Eeform  of  human
Thought  itself ;  a  new  "  Gospel,"  good-tidings  or  God's-Mes-
sage,  by  this  man ;  —  which  Friedrich  does  not  suspect,  as  the

1  Letters  of  Voltaire.

58  AT  REIXSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

world  with  horror  does,  to  be  a  new  Ba'spel,  or  Devil's-Mes-
sage  of  bad-tidings !  A  sublime  enough  Voltaire ;  radiant
enough,  over  at  Cirey  yonder.  To  all  lands,  a  visible  Phoebus
Apollo,  climbing  the  eastern  steeps ;  with  arrows  of  celestial
"  new  light "  in  his  quiver ;  capable  of  stretching  many  a  big
foul  Python,  belly  uppermost,  in  its  native  mud,  and  ridding
the  poor  world  of  her  Nightmares  and  Mud-Serpents  in  some
measure,  we  may  hope  !  —

And  so  there  begins,  from  this  point,  a  lively  Correspond-
ence between  Friedrich  and  Voltaire  ;  which,  with  some  inter-
ruptions of  a  notable  sort,  continued  during  their  mutual  Life  ;
and  is  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the  Biographies  of  both.  The
world  talked  much  of  it,  and  still  talks ;  and  has  now  at  last
got  it  all  collected,  and  elucidated  into  a  dimly  legible  form
for  studious  readers.1  It  is  by  no  means  the  diabolically
wicked  Correspondence  it  was  thought  to  be ;  the  reverse,
indeed,  on  both  sides ;  —  but  it  has  unfortunately  become
a  very  dxill  one,  to  the  actual  generation  of  mankind.  Not
without  intrinsic  merit ;  on  the  contrary  (if  you  read  intensely,
and  bring  the  extinct  alive  again),  it  sparkles  notably  with
epistolary  grace  and  vivacity ;  and,  on  any  terms,  it  has  still
passages  of  biographical  and  other  interest :  but  the  substance
of  it,  then  so  new  and  shining,  has  fallen  absolutely  common-
place, the  property  of  all  the  world,  since  then ;  and  is  now
very  wearisome  to  the  reader.  No  doctrine  or  opinion  in  it
that  you  have  not  heard,  with  clear  belief  or  clear  disbelief,
a  hundred  times,  and  could  wish  rather  not  to  hear  again.
The  common  fate  of  philosophical  originalities  in  this  world.
As  a  Biographical  Document,  it  is  worth  a  very  strict  perusal,
if  you  are  interested  that  way  in  either  Friedrich  or  Voltaire  :
finely  significant  hints  and  traits,  though  often  almost  evan-
escent, so  slight  are  they,  abound  in  this  Correspondence;
frankness,  veracity  under  graceful  forms,  being  the  rule  of  it,
strange  to  say !  As  an  illustration  of  Two  memorable  Char-
acters, and  of  their  Century ;  showing  on  what  terms  the  sage
Plato  of  the  Eighteenth  Century  and  his  Tyrant  Dionysius

1  Preuss,  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  (xxi.  xxii.  xxiii.,  Berlin,  1853) ;  who  super-
sedes the  lazy  French  Editors  in  this  matter.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  59

Aug.  1736.

correspond,  and  what  their  manners  are  to  one  another,  it  may
long  have  a  kind  of  interest  to  mankind :  otherwise  it  has  not
much  left.

In  Friedrich's  History  it  was,  no  doubt,  an  important  fact,
that  there  lived  a  Voltaire  along  with  him,  twenty  years  his
senior.  With  another  Theory  of  the  Universe  than  the  Vol-
taire one,  how  much  other  had  Friedrich  too  been !  But  the
Theory  called  by  Voltaire's  name  was  not  properly  of  Voltaire's
creating,  but  only  of  his  uttering  and  publishing  5  it  lay  ready
for  everybody's  finding,  and  could  not  well  have  been  alto-
gether missed  by  such  a  one  as  Friedrich.  So  that  perhaps  we
exaggerate  the  effects  of  Voltaire  on  him,  though  undoubtedly
they  were  considerable.  Considerable ;  but  not  derived  from
this  express  correspondence,  which  seldom  turns  on  didactic
points  at  all ;  derived  rather  from  Voltaire's  Printed  Works,
where  they  lay  derivable  to  all  the  world.  Certain  enough
it  is,  Voltaire  was  at  this  time,  and  continued  all  his  days,
Friedrich's  chief  Thinker  in  the  world ;  unofficially,  the  chief
Preacher,  Prophet  and  Priest  of  this  Working  King ;  —  no
better  off  for  a  spiritual  Trismegistus  was  poor  Friedrich  in
the  world !  On  the  practical  side,  Friedrich  soon  outgrew
him,  —  perhaps  had  already  outgrown,  having  far  more  ve-
racity of  character,  and  an  intellect  far  better  built  in  the
silent  parts  of  it,  and  trained  too  by  hard  experiences  to  know
shadow  from  substance ;  —  outgrew  him,  and  gradually  learned
to  look  down  upon  him,  occasionally  with  much  contempt,  in
regard  to  the  practical.  But  in  all  changes  of  humor  towards
Voltaire,  Friedrich,  we  observe,  considers  him  as  plainly
supreme  in  speculative  intellect ;  and  has  no  doubt  but,  for
thinking  and  speaking,  Nature  never  made  such  another.
Which  may  be  taken  as  a  notable  feature  of  Friedrich's  His-
tory ;  and  gives  rise  to  passages  between  Voltaire  and  him,
which  will  make  much  noise  in  time  coming.

Here,  meanwhile,  faithfully  presented  though  in  condensed
form,  is  the  starting  of  the  Correspondence ;  First  Letter  of  it,
and  first  Response.  Two  Pieces  which  were  once  bright  as  the
summer  sunrise  on  both  sides,  but  are  now  fallen  very  dim ;
and  have  much  needed  condensation,  and  abridgment  by  omis-

60  AT EE1NSBERG.  BOOK  X.

8th  Aug.  1736.

sion  of  the  unessential,  —  so  lengthy  are  they,  so  extinct  and
almost  dreary  to  us  !  Sublime  "  Wolf  "  and  his  "  Philosophy,"
how  he  was  hunted  out  of  Halle  with  it,  long  since ;  and  now
shines  from  Marburg,  his- "  Philosophy "  and  he  supreme
among  mankind:  this,  and  other  extinct  points,  the  reader's
fancy  will  endeavor  to  rekindle  in  some  slight  measure :  —

To  H.  de  Voltaire,  at  Cirey  (from  the  Crown-Prince).

"BERLIN,  8th  August,  1736.

"  MONSIEUR,  —  Although  I  have  not  the  satisfaction  of
knowing  you  personally,  you  are  not  the  less  known  to  me
through  your  Works.  They  are  treasures  of  the  inind,  if  I
may  so  express  myself;  and  they  reveal  to  the  reader  new
beauties  at  every  fresh  perusal.  I  think  I  have  recognized  in
them  the  character  of  their  ingenious  Author,  who  does  honor
to  our  age  and  to  human  nature.  If  ever  the  dispute  on  the
comparative  merits  of  the  Moderns  and  the  Ancients  should  be
revived,  the  modern  great  men  will  owe  it  to  you,  and  to  you
only,  that  the  scale  is  turned  in  their  favor.  With  the  excel-
lent quality  of  Poet  you  join  innumerable  others  more  or  less
related  to  it.  Never  did  Poet  before  put  Metaphysics  into
rhythmic  cadence :  to  you  the  honor  was  reserved  of  doing
it  first.

"This  taste  for  Philosophy  manifested  in  your  writings,
induces  me  to  send  you  a  translated  Copy  of  the  Accusation
and  defence  of  H.  Wolf,  the  most  celebrated  Philosopher  of
our  days  ;  who,  for  having  carried  light  into  the  darkest  places
of  Metaphysics,  is  cruelly  accused  of  irreligion  and  atheism.
Such  is  the  destiny  of  great  men ;  their  superior  genius  ex-
poses them  to  the  poisoned  arrows  of  calumny  and  envy.  I
am  about  getting  a  Translation  made  of  the  Treatise  on  God,
the  Soul,  and  the  World,"  —  Translation  done  by  an  Excellency
Suhm,  as  has  been  hinted,  — "  from  the  pen  of  the  same
Author.  I  will  send  it  you  when  it  is  finished ;  and  I  am  sure
that  the  force  of  evidence  in  all  his  propositions,  and  their
close  geometrical  sequence,  will  strike  you.

"  The  kindness  and  assistance  you  afford  to  all  who  devote

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  61

8th  Aug.  1736.

themselves  to  the  Arts  and  Sciences,  makes  me  hope  that  you
will  not  exclude  me  from  the  number  of  those  whom  you  find
worthy  of  your  instructions :  —  it  is  so  I  would  call  your  inter-
course by  Correspondence  of  Letters ;  which  cannot  be  other
than  profitable  to  every  thinking  being.  .  .  .

..."  beauties  without  number  in  your  works.  Your  Hen-
riade  delights  me.  The  tragedy  of  Cesar  shows  us  sustained
characters ;  the  sentiments  in  it  are  magnificent  and  grand,  and
one  feels  that  Brutus  is  either  a  Boman,  or  else  an  Englishman
(ou  un  Romain  ou  un  Anglais).  Your  Alzire,  to  the  graces  of
novelty  adds  .  .  .

"  Monsieur,  there  is  nothing  I  wish  so  much  as  to  possess
all  your  Writings,"  even  those  not  printed  hitherto.  "  Pray,
Monsieur,  do  communicate  them  to  me  without  reserve.  If
there  be  amongst  your  Manuscripts  any  that  you  wish  to  con-
ceal from  the  eyes  of  the  public,  I  engage  to  keep  them  in  the
profoundest  secrecy.  I  am  unluckily  aware,  that  the  faith  of
Princes  is  an  object  of  little  respect  in  our  days  ;  nevertheless
I  hope  you  will  make  an  exception  from  the  general  rule  in
my  favor.  I  should  think  myself  richer  in  the  possession  of
your  Works  than  in  that  of  all  the  transient  goods  of  Fortune.
These  the  same  chance  grants  and  takes  away :  your  Works
one  can  make  one's  own  by  means  of  memory,  so  that  they
last  us  whilst  it  lasts.  Knowing  how  weak  my  own  memory
is,  I  am  in  the  highest  degree  select  in  what  I  trust  to  it.

"If  Poetry  were  what  it  was  before  your  appearance,  a
strumming  of  wearisome  idyls,  insipid  eclogues,  tuneful  noth-
ings, I  should  renounce  it  forever : "  but  in  your  hands  it  be-
comes ennobled ;  a  melodious  "  course  of  morals ;  worthy  of
the  admiration  and  the  study  of  cultivated  minds  (des  hon-
netes  gens}.  You"  —  in  fine,  "you  inspire  the  ambition  to
follow  in  your  footsteps.  But  I,  how  often  have  I  said  to
myself :  '  Malkeureux,  throw  down  a  burden  which  is  above
thy  strength !  One  cannot  imitate  Voltaire,  without  being
Voltaire ! '

"  It  is  in  such  moments  that  I  have  felt  how  small  are  those
advantages  of  birth,  those  vapors  of  grandeur,  with  which
vanity  would  solace  us !  They  amount  to  little,  properly  to

62  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

26th  Aug.  1736.

nothing  (pour  mieux  dire,  a  rien).  Nature,  when  she  pleases,
forms  a  great  soul,  endowed  with  faculties  that  can  advance
the  Arts  and  Sciences  ;  and  it  is  the  part  of  Princes  to  recom-
pense his  noble  toils.  Ah,  would  Glory  but  make  use  of  me
to  crown  your  successes  !  My  only  fear  would  be,  lest  this
Country,  little  fertile  in  laurels,  proved  unable  to  furnish
enough  of  them.

"If  my  destiny  refuse  me  the  happiness  of  being  able  to
possess  you,  may  I,  at  least,  hope  one  day  to  see  the  man
whom  I  have  admired  so  long  now  from  afar ;  and  to  assure
you,  by  word  of  mouth,  that  I  am,  —  With  all  the  esteem  and
consideration  due  to  those  who,  following  the  torch  of  truth
for  guide,  consecrate  their  labors  to  the  Public,  —  Monsieur,
your  affectionate  friend,

"FREDERIC,  P.  B.  of  Prussia."1

By  what  route  or  conveyance  this  Letter  went,  I  cannot  say.
In  general,  it  is  to  be  observed,  these  Friedrich- Voltaire  Let-
ters —  liable  perhaps  to  be  considered  contraband  at  both  ends
of  their  course  —  do  not  go  by  the  Post ;  but  by  French-Prus-
sian Ministers,  by  Hamburg  Merchants,  and  other  safe  sub-
terranean channels.  Voltaire,  with  enthusiasm,  and  no  doubt
promptly,  answers  within  three  weeks  :  —

To  the  Crown-Prince,  at  Reinsbery  (from  Voltaire).

"  CIRET,  26th  August,  1736.

"  MONSEIGNEUR, — A  man  must  be  void  of  all  feeling  who
were  not  infinitely  moved  by  the  Letter  which  your  Royal
Highness  has  deigned  to  honor  me  with.  My  self-love  is  only
too  much  flattered  by  it :  but  my  love  of  Mankind,  which  I
have  always  nourished  in  my  heart,  and  which,  I  venture  to
say,  forms  the  basis  of  my  character,  has  given  me  a  very
much  purer  pleasure,  — to  see  that  there  is,  now  in  the  world,
a  Prince  who  thinks  as  a  man  ;  a  Philosopher  Prince,  who  will
make  men  happy.

"Permit  me  to  say,  there  is  not  a  man  on  the  earth  but

1  (Euvres  de  Fr&dgric,  xxi.  6.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY CORRESPONDENCE.  63

2tJthAug.  1T36.

owes  thanks  for  the  care  you  take  to  cultivate  by  sound  phi-
losophy a  soul  that  is  born  for  command.  Good  kings  there
never  were  except  those  that  had  begun  by  seeking  to  instruct
themselves ;  by  knowing  good  men  from  bad ;  by  loving  what
was  true,  by  detesting  persecution  and  superstition.  No
Prince,  persisting  in  such  thoughts,  but  might  bring  back  the
golden  age  into  his  Countries  !  And  why  do  so  few  Princes
seek  this  glory  ?  You  feel  it,  Monseigneur,  it  is  because  they
all  think  more  of  their  Koyalty  than  of  Mankind.  Precisely
the  reverse  is  your  case :  —  and,  unless,  one  day,  the  tumult  of
business  and  the  wickedness  of  men  alter  so  divine  a  charac-
ter, you  will  be  worshipped  by  your  People,  and  loved  by  the
whole  world.  Philosophers,  worthy  of  the  name,  will  flock  to
your  States ;  thinkers  will  crowd  round  that  throne,  as  the
skilfulest  artisans  do  to  the  city  where  their  art  is  in  request.
The  illustrious  Queen  Christina  quitted  her  kingdom  to  go  in
search  of  the  Arts  ;  reign  you,  Monseigneur,  and  the  Arts  will
come  to  seek  you.

"  May  you  only  never  be  disgusted  with  the  Sciences  by  the
quarrels  of  their  Cultivators  !  A  race  of  men  no  better  than
Courtiers ;  often  enough  as  greedy,  intriguing,  false  and  cruel
as  these,"  and  still  more  ridiculous  in  the  mischief  they  do.
"And  how  sad  for  mankind  that  the  very  Interpreters  of
Heaven's  commandments,  the  Theologians,  I  mean,  are  some-
times the  most  dangerous  of  all!  Professed  messengers  of  the
Divinity,  yet  men  sometimes  of  obscure  ideas  and  pernicious
behavior ;  their  soul  blown  out  with  mere  darkness  ;  full  of
gall  and  pride,  in  proportion  as  it  is  empty  of  truths.  Every
thinking  being  who  is  not  of  their  opinion  is  an  Atheist ;  and
every  King  who  does  not  favor  them  will  be  damned.  Dan-
gerous to  the  very  throne ;  and  yet  intrinsically  insignificant :  "
best  way  is,  leave  their  big  talk  and  them  alone ;  speedy  col-
lapse will  follow.  .  .  .

"I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  your  Eoyal  Highness  for  the
gift  of  that  little  Book  about  Monsieur  Wolf.  I  respect  Meta-
physical ideas ;  rays  of  lightning  they  are  in  the  midst  of  deep
night.  More,  I  think,  is  not  to  be  hoped  from  Metaphysics.
It  does  not  seem  likely  that  the  First-principles  of  things  will

64  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

26th  Aug.  1736.

ever  be  known.  The  mice  that  nestle  in  some  little  holes  of
an  immense  Building,  know  not  whether  it  is  eternal,  or  who
the  Architect,  or  why  he  built  it.  Such  mice  are  we  ;  and  the
Divine  Architect  who  built  the  Universe  has  never,  that  I
know  of,  told  his  secret  to  one  of  us.  If  anybody  could  pre-
tend to  guess  correctly,  it  is  M.  Wolf."  Beautiful  in  your
Koyal  Highness  to  protect  such  a  man.  And  how  beautiful  it
will  be,  to  send  me  his  chief  Book,  as  you  have  the  kindness
to  promise  !  "  The  Heir  of  a  Monarchy,  from  his  palace,  at-
tending to  the  wants  of  a  recluse  far  off  !  Condescend  to  afford
me  the  pleasure  of  that  Book,  Monseigneur.  .  .  .

"  What  your  Eoyal  Highness  thinks  of  poetry  is  just :
verses  that  do  not  teach  men  new  and  touching  truths,  do  not
deserve  to  be  read."  As  to  my  own  poor  verses  —  But,  after
all,  "  that  Henriade  is  the  writing  of  an  Honest  Man :  fit,  in
that  sense,  that  it  find  grace  with  a  Philosopher  Prince.

"  I  will  obey  your  commands  as  to  sending  those  unpublished
Pieces.  You  shall  be  my  public,  Monseigneur ;  your  criticisms
will  be  my  reward :  it  is  a  price  few  Sovereigns  can  pay.  I  am
sure  of  your  secrecy :  your  virtue  and  your  intellect  must  be
in  proportion.  I  should  indeed  consider  it  a  precious  happi-
ness to  come  and  pay  my  court  to  your  Koyal  Highness !  One
travels  to  Home  to  see  paintings  and  ruins :  a  Prince  such
as  you  is  a  much  more  singular  object ;  worthier  of  a  long
journey  !  But  the  friendship  [divine  Emilie's]  which  keeps
me  in  this  retirement  does  not  permit  my  leaving  it.  No
doubt  you  think  with  Julian,  that  great  and  much  calumni-
ated man,  who  said,  'Friends  should  always  be  preferred  to
Kings.'

"  In  whatever  corner  of  the  world  I  may  end  my  life,  be  as-
sured, Monseigneur,  my  wishes  will  continually  be  for  you,  —
that  is  to  say,  for  a  whole  People's  happiness.  My  heart  will
rank  itself  among  your  subjects ;  your  glory  will  ever  be  dear
to  me.  I  shall  wish,  May  you  always  be  like  yourself,  and
may  other  Kings  be  like  you  !  —  I  am,  with  profound  respect,
your  Royal  Highness's  most  humble

"  VOLTAIKE."  l

1  (Euvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xxi.  10.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  65

Aug.  1736.

The  Correspondence,  once  kindled,  went  on  apace;  and
soon  burst  forth,  finding  nourishment  all  round,  into  a  shining
little  household  fire,  pleasant  to  the  hands  and  hearts  of  both
parties.  Consent  of  opinions  on  important  matters  is  not
wanting ;  nor  is  emphasis  in  declaring  the  same.  The  mutual
admiration,  which  is  high,  —  high  and  intrinsic  on  Friedrich's
side;  and  on  Voltaire's,  high  if  in  part  extrinsic,  —  by  no
means  wants  for  emphasis  of  statement:  superlatives,  tem-
pered by  the  best  art,  pass  and  repass.  Friedrich,  reading
Voltaire's  immortal  Manuscripts,  confesses  with  a  blush,  before
long,  that  he  himself  is  a  poor  Apprentice  that  way.  Voltaire,
at  sight  of  the  Princely  Productions,  is  full  of  admiration,  of
encouragement ;  does  a  little  in  correcting,  solecisms  of  gram-
mar chiefly ;  a  little,  by  no  means  much.  But  it  is  a  growing
branch  of  employment;  now  and  henceforth  almost  the  one
reality  of  function  Voltaire  can  find  for  himself  in  this  beauti-
ful Correspondence.  For,  "  Oh  what  a  Crown-Prince,  ripening
forward  to  be  the  delight  of  human  nature,  and  realize  the
dream  of  sages,  Philosophy  upon  the  Throne  ! "  And  on  the
other  side,  "  Oh  what  a  Phoebus  Apollo,  mounting  the  eastern
sky,  chasing  the  Nightmares,  —  sowing  the  Earth  with  Orient
pearl,  to  begin  with  !  "  —  In  which  fine  duet,  it  must  be  said,
the  Prince  is  perceptibly  the  truer  singer ;  singing  within
compass,  and  from  the  heart ;  while  the  Phoebus  shows  him-
self acquainted  with  art,  and  warbles  in  seductive  quavers,
now  and  then  beyond  the  pitch  of  his  voice.  We  must  own
also,  Friedrich  proves  little  seducible  ;  shows  himself  laudably
indifferent  to  such  siren-singing  ;  —  perhaps  more  used  to  flat-
tery, and  knowing  by  experience  how  little  meal  is  to  be  made
of  chaff.  Voltaire,  in  an  ungrateful  France,  naturally  plumes
himself  a  good  deal  on  such  recognition  by  a  Foreign  Kising
Sun;  and,  of  the  two,  thoiigh  so  many  years  the  elder,  is
much  more  like  losing  head  a  little.

Elegant  gifts  are  despatched  to  Cirey ;  gold-amber  trinkets
for  Madame,  perhaps  an  amber  inkholder  for  Monsieur :  price-
less at  Cirey  as  the  gifts  of  the  very  gods.  By  and  by,  a  mes-
senger goes  express :  the  witty  Colonel  Keyserling,  witty  but
experienced,  whom  we  once  named  at  Eeinsberg ;  he  is  to  go

VOL VII.  6

66  AT EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

and  see  with  his  eyes,  since  his  Master  cannot.  What  a  mes-
senger there ;  ambassador  from  star  to  star  !  Keyserling's
report  at  Eeinsberg  is  not  given;  but  we  have  Grafigny's,
which  is  probably  the  more  impartial.  Keyserling's  embassy
was  in  the  end  of  next  year  ; J  and  there  is  plenty  of  airy
writing  about  it  and  him,  in  these  Letters.

Friedrich  has  translated  the  name  Keyserling  (diminutive
of  Kaiser)  into  "  Csesarion ;  "  —  and  I  should  have  said,  he
plays  much  upon  names  and  also  upon  things,  at  Eeinsberg,
in  that  style  ;  and  has  a  good  deal  of  airy  symbolism,  and
cloud-work  ingeniously  painted  round  the  solidities  of  his  life
there.  Especially  a  "  Bayard  Order,"  as  he  calls  it :  Twelve
of  his  selectest  Friends  made  into  a  Chivalry  Brotherhood,
the  names  of  whom  are  all  changed,  "  Ceesarion "  one  of
them ;  with  dainty  devices,  and  mimetic  procedures  of  the
due  sort.  Which  are  not  wholly  mummery ;  but  have  a  spice
of  reality,  to  flavor  them  to  a  serious  young  heart.  For  the
selection  was  rigorous,  superior  merit  and  behavior  a  strict
condition ;  and  indeed  several  of  these  Bayard  Chevaliers
proved  notable  practical  Champions  in  time  coming ;  —  for
example  Captain  Fouquet,  of  whom  we  have  heard  before,  in
the  dark  Ciistrin  days.  This  is  a  mentionable  feature  of  the
Eeinsberg  life,  and  of  the  young  Prince's  character  there:
pleasant  to  know  of,  from  this  distance ;  but  not  now  worth
knowing  more  in  detail.

The  Friedrich- Voltaire  Correspondence  contains  much  in-
cense ;  due  whiffs  of  it,  from  Eeinsberg  side,  to  the  "  divine
Ernilie,"  Voltaire's  quasi  better-half  or  worse-half ;  who  re-
sponds always  in  her  divinest  manner  to  Eeinsberg,  eager  for
more  acquaintance  there.  The  Du  Chatelets  had  a  Lawsuit
in  Brabant;  very  inveterate,  perhaps  a  hundred  years  old  or
more  ;  with  the  "  House  of  Honsbrouck  :  " 2  this,  not  to  speak
of  other  caiises,  flights  from  French  peril  and  the  like,  often
brought  Voltaire  and  his  Dame  into  those  parts  ;  and  gave
rise  to  occasional  hopes  of  meeting  with  Friedrich ;  which
could  not  take  effect.  In  more  practical  style,  Voltaire  solicits

1  3d  November,  1737  (as  we  gather  from  the  Correspondence).

2  Lettres  Incites  de  Voltaire  (Paris,  1826),  p.  9.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  67

Aug.  1736.

of  him  :  "  Could  not  your  Boyal  Highness  perhaps  graciously
speak  to  some  of  those  Judicial  Big  wigs  in  Brabant,  and  flap
them  up  a  little  ! "  Which  Friedrich,  I  think,  did,  by  some
good  means.  Happily,  by  one  means  or  other,  Voltaire  got
the  Lawsuit  ended,  — 1740,  we  might  guess,  but  the  time  is
not  specified ;  —  and  Friedrich  had  a  new  claim,  had  there  been
need  of  new,  to  be  regarded  with  worship  by  Madame.1  But
the  proposed  meeting  with  Madame  could  never  take  effect ;
not  even  when  Friedrich's  hands  were  free.  IsTay  I  notice  at
last,  Friedrich  had  privately  determined  it  never  should  ;
Madame  evidently  an  inconvenient  element  to  him.  A  young
man  not  wanting  in  private  power  of  eyesight ;  and  able  to
distinguish  chaff  from  meal !  Voltaire  and  he  will  meet ;
meet,  and  also  part;  and  there  will  be  passages  between
them :  —  and  the  reader  will  again  hear  of  this  Correspond-
ence of  theirs,  where  it  has  a  biographical  interest.  We  are
to  conceive  it,  at  present,  as  a  principal  light  of  life  to  the
young  heart  at  Eeinsberg ;  a  cheerful  new  fire,  almost  an
altar-fire,  irradiating  the  common  dusk  for  him  there.

Of  another  Correspondence,  beautifully  irradiative  for  the
young  heart,  we  must  say  almost  nothing :  the  Correspondence
with  Suhm.  Suhni  the  Saxon  Minister,  whom  we  have  occa-
sionally heard  of,  is  an  old  Friend  of  the  Crown-Prince's,  dear
and  helpful  to  him  :  it  is  he  who  is  now  doing  those  Transla-
tions of  Wolf,  of  which  Voltaire  lately  saw  specimens  ;  trans-
lating Wolf  at  large,  for  the  young  man's  behoof.  The  young
man,  restless  to  know  the  best  Philosophy  going,  had  tried
reading  of  Wolf's  chief  Book ;  found  it  too  abstruse,  in  Wolf's
German  :  wherefore  Suhm  translates ;  sends  it  to  him  in  limpid
French  ;  fascicle  by  fascicle,  with  commentaries  ;  young  man
doing  his  best  to  understand  and  admire,  —  gratefully,  not
too  successfully,  we  can  perceive.  That  is  the  staple  of  the
famous  Suhm  Correspondence  ;  staple  which  nobody  could  now
bear  to  be  concerned  with.

Suhm  is  also  helpful  in  finance  difficulties,  which  are  pretty

1  Record  of  all  this,  left,  like  innumerable  other  things  there,  in  an  intrin-
sically dark  condition,  lies  in  Voltaire's  Lftters,  —  not  much  worth  hunting  up
into  clear  daylight,  the  process  being  so  difficult  to  a  stranger.

68  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1736.

frequent;  works  out  subventions,  loans  under  a  handsome
form,  from  the  Czarina's  and  other  Courts.  Which  is  an  opera-
tion of  the  utmost  delicacy;  perilous,  should  it  be  heard  of
at  Potsdam.  Wherefore  Suhm  and  the  Prince  have  a  covert
language  for  it :  and  affect  still  to  be  speaking  of  "  Publish-
ers "  and  "  new  Volumes,"  when  they  mean  Lenders  and
Bank-Draughts.  All  these  loans,  I  will  hope,  were  accurately
paid  one  day,  as  that  from  George  II.  was,  in  "rouleaus  of
new  gold."  We  need  not  doubt  the  wholesome  charm  and
blessing  of  so  intimate  a  Correspondence  to  the  Crown-Prince :
and  indeed  his  real  love  of  the  amiable  Suhm,  as  Suhm's  of
him,  comes  beautifully  to  light  in  these  Letters :  but  otherwise
they  are  not  now  to  be  read  without  weariness,  even  dreari-
ness, and  have  become  a  biographical  reminiscence  merely.

Concerning  Graf  von  Manteufel,  a  third  Literary  Corre-
spondent, and  the  only  other  considerable  one,  here,  from  a
German  Commentator  on  this  matter,  is  a  Clipping  that  will
suffice :  —

"  Manteufel  was  Saxon  by  birth,  long  a  Minister  of  August
the  Strong,  but  quarrelled  with  August,  owing  to  some  frail
female  it  is  said,  and  had  withdrawn  to  Berlin  a  few  years
ago.  He  shines  there  among  the  fashionable  philosophical
classes ;  underhand,  perhaps  does  a  little  in  the  vohmteer
political  line  withal ;  being  a  very  busy  pushing  gentleman.
Tall  of  stature,  'perfectly  handsome  at  the  age  of  sixty;'1
great  partisan  of  Wolf  and  the  Philosophies,  awake  to  the
Orthodoxies  too.  Writes  flowing  elegant  French,  in  a  softly
trenchant,  somewhat  too  all-knowing  style.  High  manners
traceable  in  him ;  but  nothing  of  the  noble  loyalty,  natural
politeness  and  pious  lucency  of  Suhm.  One  of  his  Letters  to
Friedrich  has  this  slightly  impertinent  passage  ;  —  Friedrich,
just  getting  settled  in  Reinsberg,  having  transiently  men-
tioned '  the  quantity  of  fair  sex '  that  had  come  about  him.
there  :  —

"  'Berlin,  26th  August, 1736  (to  the  Crown-Prince). .  .  .
I  am  well  persuaded  your  Boyal  Highness  will  regulate  all
1  Forrney,  Souvenirs  d'un  Clioyen,  i.  39-45.

CHAP.  II.  LITERARY  CORRESPONDENCE.  69

Aug.  1736.

that  to  perfection,  and  so  manage  that  your  fair  sex  will  be
charmed  to  find  themselves  with  you  at  Reinsberg,  and  you
charmed  to  have  them  there.  But  permit  me,  your  Royal
Highness,  to  repeat  in  this  place,  what  I  one  day  took  the
liberty  of  saying  here  at  Berlin :  Nothing  in  the  world  would
better  suit  the  present  interests  of  your  Royal  Highness  and  of
us  all,  than  some  Heir  of  your  Royal  Highness's  making !  Per-
haps the  tranquil  convenience  with  which  your  Royal  Highness
at  Reinsberg  can  now  attend  to  that  object,  will  be  of  better
effect  than  all  those  hasty  and  transitory  visits  at  Berlin  were.
At  least  I  wish  it  with  the  best  of  my  heart.  I  beg  pardon,
Mon seigneur,  for  intruding  thus  into  everything  which  con-
cerns your  Royal  Highness  ; '  —  In  truth,  I  am  a  rather  impu-
dent busybodyish  fellow,  with  superabundant  dashing  manner,
speculation,  utterance;  and  shall  get  myself  ordered  out  of
the  Country,  by  my  present  correspondent,  by  and  by. —
*  Being  ever,'  with  the  due  enthusiasm,  '  MANTEUFEL.'  1

"  To  which  Friedrich's  Answer  is  of  a  kind  to  put  a  gag  in
the  foul  mouth  of  certain  extraordinary  Parnphleteerings,  that
were  once  very  copious  in  the  world ;  and,  in  particular,  to  set
at  rest  the  Herr  Dr.  Zimmermann,  and  his  poor  puddle  of
calumnies  and  credulities,  got  together  in  that  weak  pursuit
of  physiology  under  obscene  circumstances ;  —

"  Which  is  the  one  good  result  I  have  gathered  from  the
Manteufel  Correspondence,"  continues  our  German  friend;
whom  I  vote  with !  —  Or  if  the  English  reader  never  saw
those  Zimmermann  or  other  dog-like  Pamphleteerings  and
surmisings,  let  this  Excerpt  be  mysterious  and  superfluous  to
the  thankful  English  reader.

On  the  whole,  we  conceive  to  ourselves  the  abundant  nature
of  Friedrich's  Correspondence,  literary  and  other;  and  what
kind  of  event  the  transit  of  that  Post  functionary  "  from
Fehrbellin  northwards,"  with  his  leathern  bags,  "twice  a
week,"  may  have  been  at  Reinsberg,  in  those  years.

1  (Envres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xxv.  487; — Friedrich's  Answer  is,  Eeinsberg,  23d
September  (Ib.  489).

70  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct-Nov.  1736.

CHAPTER  III.

CROWN-PRINCE MAKES A MORNING CALL.

THURSDAY,  25th  October,  1736,  the  Crown-Prince,  with  Lieu-
tenant Buddenbrock  and  an  attendant  or  two,  drove  over  into
Mecklenburg,  to  a  Village  and  serene  Schloss  called  Mirow,
intending  a  small  act  of  neighborly  civility  there ;  on  which
perhaps  an  English  reader  of  our  time  will  consent  to  accom-
pany him.  It  is  but  some  ten  or  twelve  miles  off,  in  a  north-
erly direction ;  Keinsberg  being  close  on  the  frontier  there.
A  pleasant  enough  morning's-drive,  with  the  October  sun  shin-
ing on  the  silent  heaths,  on  the  many-colored  woods  and  you.

Mirow  is  an  Apanage  for  one  of  the  Mecklenburg-Strelitz
junior  branches  :  Mecklenburg-Strelitz  being  itself  a  junior
compared  to  the  Mecklenburg-Schwerin  of  which,  and  its  in-
fatuated Duke,  we  have  heard  so  much  in  times  past.  Mirow
and  even  Strelitz  are  not  in  a  very  shining  state,  —  but  indeed,
we  shall  see  them,  as  it  were,  with  eyes.  And  the  English
reader  is  to  note  especially  those  Mirow  people,  as  perhaps  of
some  small  interest  to  him,  if  he  knew  it.  The  Crown-Prince
reports  to  Papa,  in  a  satirical  vein,  not  ungenially,  and  with
much  more  freedom  than  is  usual  in  those  Keinsberg  letters
of  his  :  —

"  To  his  Prussian  Majesty  (from  the  Crown-Prince).

"  EEINSBERG,  26th  October,  1736.

.  .  .  "Yesterday  I  went  across  to  Mirow.  To  give  my  Most
All-gracious  Father  an  idea  of  the  place,  I  cannot  liken  it  to
anything  higher  than  Gross-Kreutz  [term  of  comparison  lost
upon  us  ;  say  Garrat,  at  a  venture,  or  the  Clachan  of  Aber-
foyle]  :  the  one  house  in  it,  that  can  be  called  a  house,  is  not
so  good  as  the  Parson's  there.  I  made  straight  for  the  Schloss ;
which  is  pretty  much  like  the  Garden-house  in  Bornim  :  only

CHAP.  III. CROWN-PRINCE  MAKES  A  CALL.  71

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

there  is  a  rampart  round  it ;  and  an  old  Tower,  considerably  in
ruins,  serves  as  a  Gateway  to  the  House.

"  Coming  on  the  Drawbridge,  I  perceived  an  old  stocking-
knitter  disguised  as  Grenadier,  with  his  cap,  cartridge-box  and
musket  laid  to  a  side,  that  they  might  not  hinder  him.  in  his
knitting-work.  As  I  advanced,  he  asked, '  Whence  I  came,  and
whitherward  I  was  going  ? '  I  answered,  that  '  I  came  from
the  Post-house,  and  was  going  over  this  Bridge : '  whereupon
the  Grenadier,  quite  in  a  passion,  ran  to  the  Tower ;  where  he
opened  a  door,  and  called  out  the  Corporal.  The  Corporal
seemed  to  have  hardly  been  out  of  bed  ;  and  in  his  great  haste,
had  not  taken  time  to  put  on  his  shoes,  nor  quite  button  his
breeches  ;  with  much  flurry  he  asked  us,  '  Where  we  were
for,  and  how  we  came  to  treat  the  Sentry  in  that  manner  ? '
Without  answering  him  at  all,  we  went  our  way  towards  the
Schloss.

"  Never  in  my  life  should  I  have  taken  this  for  a  Schloss,
had  it  not  been  that  there  were  two  glass  lamps  fixed  at  the
door-posts,  and  the  figures  of  two  Cranes  standing  in  front  of
them,  by  way  of  Guards.  We  made  up  to  the  House ;  and
after  knocking  almost  half  an  hour  to  no  purpose,  there  peered
out  at  last  an  exceedingly  old  woman,  who  looked  as  if  she
might  have  nursed  the  Prince  of  Mirow's  father.  The  poor
•woman,  at  sight  of  strangers,  was  so  terrified,  she  slammed
the  door  to  in  our  faces.  We  knocked  again ;  and  seeing
there  could  nothing  be  made  of  it,  we  went  round  to  the
stables ;  where  a  fellow  told  us,  '  The  young  Prince  with  his
Consort  was  gone  to  Neu-Strelitz,  a  couple  of  miles  off  [ten
miles  English]  ;  and  the  Duchess  his  Mother,  who  lives  here,
had  given  him,  to  make  the  better  figure,  all  her  people
along  with  him  ;  keeping  nobody  but  the  old  woman  to
herself.'

"  It  was  still  early ;  so  I  thought  I  could  not  do  better  than
profit  by  the  opportunity,  and  have  a  look  at  Keu-Strelitz.
We  took  post-horses ;  and  got  thither  about  noon.  Neu-Strelitz
is  properly  a  Village ;  with  only  one  street  in  it,  where  Cham-
berlains, Office-Clerks,  Domestics  all  lodge,  and  where  there  is
an  Inn.  I  cannot  better  describe  it  to  my  Most  All-gracious

72  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

Father  than  by  that  street  in  Gumbinnen  where  you  go  up  to
the  Town-hall,  —  except  that  no  house  here  is  whitewashed.
The  Schloss  is  fine,  and  lies  on  a  lake,  with  a  big  garden ;
pretty  much  like  Eeinsberg  in  situation.

"  The  first  question  I  asked  here  was  for  the  Prince  of
Mirow :  but  they  told  me  he  had  just  driven  off  again  to  a
place  called  Kanow ;  which  is  only  a  couple  of  miles  English
from  Mirow,  where  we  had  been.  Buddenbrock,  who  is  ac-
quainted with  Neu-Strelitz,  got  me,  from  a  chamberlain,  some-
thing to  eat ;  and  in  the  mean  while,  that  Bohme  came  in,  who
was  Adjutant  in  my  Most  All-gracious  Father's  Eegiment  [not
of  Goltz,  but  King's  presumably]  :  Bohme  did  not  know  me
till  I  hinted  to  him  who  I  was.  He  told  me, '  The  Duke  of
Strelitz  was  an  excellent  seamster ; '"  fit  to  be  Tailor  to  your
Majesty  in  a  manner,  had  not  Fate  been  cruel,  " '  and  that  he
made  beautiful  dressing-gowns  (cassaquins)  with  his  needle.'
This  made  me  curious  to  see  him :  so  we  had  ourselves  pre-
sented as  Foreigners  ;  and  it  went  off  so  well  that  nobody
recognized  me.  I  cannot  better  describe  the  Duke  than  by
saying  he  is  like  old  Stahl  [famed  old  medical  man  at  Berlin,
dead  last  year,  physiognomy  not  known  to  actual  readers],
in  a  blond  Abbe's-periwig.  He  is  extremely  silly  (Mode) ;  his
Hofrath  Altrock  tells  him,  as  it  were,  everything  he  has  to
say."  About  fifty,  this  poor  Duke ;  shrunk  into  needlework,
for  a  quiet  life,  amid  such  tumults  from  Schwerin  and  else-
where.

"  Having  taken  leave,  we  drove  right  off  to  Kanow ;  and
got  thither  about  six.  It  is  a  mere  Village ;  and  the  Prince's
Pleasure-House  (Lusthaus)  here  is  nothing  better  than  an  or-
dinary Hunting-Lodge,  such  as  any  Forest-keeper  has.  I
alighted  at  the  Miller's ;  and  had  myself  announced "  at  the
Lusthaus,  "  by  his  maid :  upon  which  the  Major-Domo  (Haus-
Hofmeister)  came  over  to  the  Mill,  and  complimented  me ;  with
whom  I  proceeded  to  the  Eesidenz,"  that  is,  back  again  to
Mirow,  "  where  the  whole  Mirow  Family  were  assembled.  The
Mother  is  a  Princess  of  Schwartzburg,  and  still  the  cleverest
of  them  all,"  still  under  sixty ;  good  old  Mother,  intent  that
her  poor  Son  should  appear  to  advantage,  when  visiting  the

CHAP.  III.  CROWN-PRINCE  MAKES  A  CALL.  73

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

more  opulent  Serenities.  "  His  Aunt  also,"  mother's  sister,
"  was  there.  The  Lady  Spouse  is  small ;  a  Niece  to  the  Prince
of  Hildburghausen,  who  is  in  the  Kaiser's  service  :  she  was  in
the  family-way;  but  (aler)  seemed  otherwise  to  be  a  very
good  Princess.

"  The  first  thing  they  entertained  me  with  was,  the  sad  mis-
fortune come  upon  their  best  Cook ;  who,  with  the  cart  that
was  bringing  the  provisions,  had  overset,  and  broken  his  arm ;
so  that  the  provisions  had  all  gone  to  nothing.  Privately  I
have  had  inquiries  made ;  there  was  not  a  word  of  truth  in
the  story.  At  last  we  went  to  table ;  and,  sure  enough,  it
looked  as  if  the  Cook  and  his  provisions  had  corne  to  some
mishap  ;  for  certainly  in  the  Three  Crowns  at  Potsdam  [worst
inn,  one  may  guess,  in  the  satirical  vein],  there  is  better  eating
than  here.

"  At  table,  there  was  talk  of  nothing  but  of  all  the  German
Princes  who  are  not  right  in  their  wits  (nicht  recht  kluy),"  as
Mirow  himself,  your  Majesty  knows,  is  reputed  to  be !  "  There
was  Weimar,1  Gotha,  Waldeck,  Hoyrn,  and  the  whole  lot  of
them,  brought  upon  the  carpet :  —  and  after  our  good  Host  had
got  considerably  drunk,  we  rose,  —  and  he  lovingly  promised
me  that  '  he  and  his  whole  Family  would  come  and  visit  Reins-
berg.'  Come  he  certainly  will ;  but  how  I  shall  get  rid  of  him,
God  knows.

"  I  most  submissively  beg  pardon  of  my  Most  All-gracious
Father  for  this  long  Letter ;  and  "  —  we  will  terminate  here.2

Dilapidated  Mirow  and  its  inmates,  portrayed  in  this  satiri-
cal way,  except  as  a  view  of  Serene  Highnesses  fallen  into
Sleepy  Hollow,  excites  little  notice  in  the  indolent  mind  ;  and
that  little,  rather  pleasantly  contemptuous  than  really  profit-
able. But  one  fact  ought  to  kindle  momentary  interest  in  Eng-

1  Wilhelmina's  acquaintance ;  wedded,  not  without  difficulty,  to  a  super-
fluous Baireuth  Sister-in-law  by  Wilhelmina  (Memoires  dc  Wilhelmina,  ii.  185—
194): Grandfather  of Goethe's  Friend;  —  is  nothing  like  fairly  out  of  his
wits ;  only  has  a  flea  (as  we  may  say)  dancing  occasionally  in  the  ear  of  him.
Perhaps  it  is  so  with  the  rest  of  these  Serenities,  here  fallen  upon  evil  tongues  ?

2  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxvii.  part  3d,  pp.  104-106.

74  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

lish  readers  :  the  young  foolish  Herr,  in  this  dilapidated  place,
is  no  other  than  our  "  Old  Queen  Charlotte's  "  Father  that  is
to  be,  —  a  kind  of  Ancestor  of  ours,  though  we  little  guessed
it !  English  readers  will  scan  him  with  new  curiosity,  when
he  pays  that  return  visit  at  Reinsberg.  Which  he  does  within
the  fortnight :  —

••6-1

"  To  his  Prussian  Majesty  (from  the  Crown-Prince).

"REINSBERG,  8th  November,  1736.

.  .  .  "that  my  Most  All-gracious  Father  has  had  the  gra-
ciousness  to  send  us  some  Swans.  My  Wife  also  has  been  ex-
ceedingly delighted  at  the  fine  Present  sent  her.  .  .  .  General
Praetorius,"  Danish  Envoy,  with  whose  Court  there  is  some  tiff
of  quarrel,  "  came  hither  yesterday  to  take  leave  of  us ;  he
seems  very  unwilling  to  quit  Prussia.

"  This  morning  about  three  o'clock,  my  people  woke  me,
with  word  that  there  was  a  Stafette  come  with  Letters,"  —
from  your  Majesty  or  Heaven  knows  whom  !  "  I  spring  up
in  all  haste  ;  and  opening  the  Letter,  —  find  it  is  from  the
Prince  of  Mirow ;  who  informs  me  that  '  he  will  be  here  to-
day at  noon.'  I  have  got  all  things  in  readiness  to  receive
him,  as  if  he  were  the  Kaiser  in  person ;  and  I  hope  there
will  be  material  for  some  amusement  to  my  Most  All-gracious
Father,  by  next  post."  —  Next  post  is  half  a  week  hence  :  —

"  To  his  Prussian  Majesty  (from  the  Crown-Prince).

"  REINSBERG,  llth  November.

..."  The  Prince  of  Mirow's  visit  was  so  curious,  I  must
give  my  Most  All-gracious  Father  a  particular  report  of  it.
In  my  last,  I  mentioned  how  General  Praetorius  had  come  to  us  :
he  was  in  the  room,  when  I  entered  with  the  Prince  of  Mirow ;
at  sight  of  him  Praetorius  exclaimed,  loud  enough  to  be  heard
by  everybody,  l  Voila  le  Prince  Cajucaf'1  Not  one  of  us
could  help  laughing ;  and  I  had  my  own  trouble  to  turn  it  so
that  he  did  not  get  angry.

"  Scarcely  was  the  Prince  got  in,  when  they  came  to  tell  me,
1  Nickname  out  of  some  Romance,  fallen  extinct  long  since.

CHAP.  III. CROWN-PRINCE  MAKES  A  CALL.  75

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

for  his  worse  luck,  that  Prince  Heinrich,"  the  111  Margraf,
"was  come ;  — who  accordingly  trotted  him  out,  in  such  a  way
that  we  thought  we  should  all  have  died  with  laughing.  Inces-
sant praises  were  given  him,  especially  for  his  fine  clothes,  his
fine  air,  and  his  uncommon  agility  in  dancing.  And  indeed  I
thought  the  dancing  would  never  end.

"  In  the  afternoon,  to  spoil  his  fine  coat,"  —  a  contrivance
of  the  111  Margraf 's,  I  should  think,  —  "  we  stept  out  to  shoot
at  target  in  the  rain :  he  would  not  speak  of  it,  but  one  could
observe  he  was  in  much  anxiety  about  the  coat.  In  the  even-
ing, he  got  a  glass  or  two  in  his  head,  and  grew  extremely
merry ;  said  at  last,  l  He  was  sorry  that,  for  divers  state-
reasons  and  businesses  of  moment,  he  must  of  necessity  return
home ; '  —  which,  however,  he  put  off  till  about  two  in  the
morning.  I  think,  next  day  he  would  not  remember  very  much
of  it.

"  Prince  Heinrich  is  gone  to  his  Eegiment  again ;  "  Preetorius
too  is  off ;  —  and  we  end  with  the  proper  Kow-tow.1

These  Strelitzers,  we  said,  are  juniors  to  infatuated  Schwe-
rin;  and  poor  Mirow  is  again  junior  to  Strelitz  :  plainly  one
of  the  least  opulent  of  Residences.  At  present,  it  is  Dowager
Apanage  ( Wittwen-Sitz)  to  the  Widow  of  the  late  Strelitz  of
blessed  memory  :  here,  with  her  one  Child,  a  boy  now  grown
to  what  manhood  we  see,  has  the  Serene  Dowager  lived,  these
twenty-eight  years  past ;  a  Schwartzburg  by  birth,  "  the  clev-
erest head  among  them  all."  Twenty-eight  years  in  dilapi-
dated Mirow :  so  long  has  that  Tailoring  Duke,  her  eldest  step-
son (child  of  a  prior  wife)  been  Supreme  Head  of  Mecklen-
burg-Strelitz  ;  employed  with  his  needle,  or  we  know  not  how,
—  collapsed  plainly  into  tailoring  at  this  date.  There  was
but  one  other  Son  ;  this  clever  Lady's,  twenty  years  junior,  —
"  Prince  of  Mirow  "  whom  we  now  see.  Karl  Ludwig  Fried-
rich  is  the  name  of  this  one  ;  age  now  twenty-eight  gone.  He,
ever  since  the  third  month  of  him,  when  the  poor  Serene
Father  died  ("  May,  1703  "),  has  been  at  Mirow  with  Mamma  ;
getting  what  education  there  was,  —  not  too  successfully,  as
1  CEuvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xvii.  part  3d,  p.  109.

76  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

would  appear.  Eight  years  ago,  "  in  1726,"  Mamma  sent  him
off  upon  his  travels ;  to  Geneva,  Italy,  France  :  he  looked  in
upon  Vienna,  too ;  got  a  Lieutenant-Colonelcy  in  the  Kaiser's
Service,  but  did  not  like  it ;  soon  gave  it  up  ;  and  returned  home
to  vegetate,  perhaps  to  seek  a  wife, — having  prospects  of
succession  in  Strelitz.  For  the  Serene  Half-Brother  proves
to  have  no  children :  were  his  tailoring  once  finished  in  the
world,  our  Prince  of  Mirow  is  Duke  in  Chief.  On  this  basis
he  wedded  last  year ;  the  little  Wife  has  already  brought  him
one  child,  a  Daughter  ;  and  has  (as  Friedrich  notices)  another
under  way,  if  it  prosper.  No  lack  of  Daughters,  nor  of  Sons
by  and  by :  eight  years  hence  came  the  little  Charlotte,  —  sub-
sequently Mother  of  England :  much  to  her  and  our  astonish-
ment.1

The  poor  man  did  not  live  to  be  Duke  of  Strelitz ;  he
died,  1752,  in  little  Charlotte's  eighth  year ;  Tailor  Duke
surviving  him  a  few  months.  Little  Charlotte's  Brother  did
then  succeed,  and  lasted  till  1794;  after  whom  a  second
Brother,  father  of  the  now  Serene  Strelitzes ;  —  who  also  is
genealogically  notable.  For  from  him  there  came  another  still
more  famous  Queen  :  Louisa  of  Prussia ;  beautiful  to  look
upon,  as  "  Aunt  Charlotte  "  was  not,  in  a  high  degree  ;  and
who  showed  herself  a  Heroine  in  Napoleon's  time,  as  Aunt
Charlotte  never  was  called  to  do.  Both  Aunt  and  Niece
were  women  of  sense,  of  probity,  propriety  ;  fairly  beyond
the  average  of  Queens.  And  as  to  their  early  poverty,  ridicu-
lous to  this  gold-nugget  generation,  I  rather  guess  it  may  have
done  them  benefits  which  the  gold-nugget  generation,  in  its
Queens  and  otherwise,  stands  far  more  in  want  of  than  it
thinks.

But  enough  of  this  Prince  of  Mirow,  whom  Friedrich  has  ac-
cidentally unearthed  for  us.  Indeed  there  is  no  farther  history
of  him,  for  or  against.  He  evidently  was  not  thought  to  have
invented  gunpowder,  by  the  public.  And  yet  who  knows  but,

1  Born  (at Mirow)  19th May,  1744;  married  (London), 8th  September,  1761  ;
died,  18th  November,  1818  (Michaelis,  ii.  445,  446;  Hiibner,  t.  195;  CErtel,
pp.  43,  22).

CHAP.  III. CROWN-PKINCE  MAKES  A  CALL.  77

Oct.-Nov.  1736.

in  his  very  simplicity,  there  lay  something  far  beyond  the  111
Margraf  to  whom  he  was  so  quizzable  ?  Poor  down-pressed
brother  mortal ;  sornnainbulating  so  pacifically  in  Sleepy  Hol-
low yonder,  and  making  no  complaint !

He  continued,  though  soon  with  less  enthusiasm,  and  in  the
end  very  rarely,  a  visitor  of  Friedrich's  during  this  Reinsberg
time.  Patriotic  English  readers  may  as  well  take  the  few
remaining  vestiges,  too,  before  quite  dismissing  him  to  Sleepy
Hollow.  Here  they  are,  swept  accurately  together,  from  that
Correspondence  of  Friedrich  with  Papa :  —

"  Reinsberg,  18th  November,  1736.  .  .  .  report  most  submis-
sively that  the  Prince  of  Mirow  has  again  been  here,  with  his
Mother,  Wife,  Aunt,  Hofdames,  Cavaliers  and  entire  House-
hold ;  so  that  I  thought  it  was  the  Flight  out  of  Egypt  [Exo-
dus of  the  Jews].  I  begin  to  have  a  fear  of  those  good
people,  as  they  assured  me  they  would  have  such  pleasure  in
coming  often ! "

"  Reinsberg,  1st  February,  1737."  Let  us  give  it  in  the  Origi-
nal too,  as  a  specimen  of  German  spelling :  —

"  Der  Printz  von  Mihrau  ist  vohr  einigen  thagen  hier  gewes-
sen  und  haben  wier  einige  Wasser  schwermer  in  der  See  ihm  zu
Ehren  gesmissen,  seine  frau  ist  mit  einer  thoten  Printzesin  nie-
der  geKomen.  —  Der  General  schulenburg  ist  heute  hier  gekom-
men  und  wirdt  morgen  "  —  That  is  to  say  :  —

"  The  Prince  of  Mirow  was  here  a  few  days  ago ;  and  we
let  off,  in  honor  of  him,  a  few  water-rockets  over  the  Lake :
his  Wife  has  been  brought  to  bed  of  a  dead  Princess.  Gen-
eral Schulenburg  [with  a  small  s]  came  hither  to-day;  and
to-morrow  will "...

"  Reinsberg,  2StIi  March,  1737.  .  .  .  Prince  von  Mirow  was
here  yesterday  ;  and  tried  shooting  at  the  popinjay  with  us ;
he  cannot  see  rightly,  and  shoots  always  with  help  of  an  opera-
glass."

"  Ruppin,  2Qth  October,  1737.  The  Prince  of  Mirow  was
with  us  last  Friday ;  and  babbled  much  in  his  high  way  ;
among  other  things,  white-lied  to  us,  that  the  Kaiserinn  gave
him  a  certain  porcelain  snuff-box  he  was  handling;  but  on

T8  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct. -Nov.  1736.

being  questioned  more  tightly,  he  confessed  to me he had
bought  it  in  Vienna."  1

And  so  let  him  somnambulate  yonder,  till  the  two  Queens,
like  winged  Psyches,  one  after  the  other,  manage  to  emerge
from  him.

Friedrich's  Letters  to  his  Father  are  described  by  some
Prussian  Editors  as  "  very  attractive,  sehr  anziehende  Briefe  /  "
which,  to  a  Foreign  reader,  seems  a  strange  account  of  them.
Letters  very  hard  to  understand  completely ;  and  rather  in-
significant when  understood.  They  turn  on  Gifts  sent  to  and
sent  from,  "swans,"  "hams,"  with  the  unspeakable  thanks
for  them ;  on  recruits  of  so  many  inches  ;  on  the  visitors
that  have  been  ;  they  assure  us  that  "there  is  no  sickness  in
the  regiment,"  or  tell  expressly  how  much:  —  wholly  small
facts  ;  nothing  of  speculation,  and  of  ceremonial  pipe-clay  a
great  deal.  We  know  already  under  what  nightmare  con-
ditions Friedrich  wrote  to  his  Father!  The  attitude  of  the
Crown-Prince,  sincerely  reverent  and  filial,  though  obliged
to  appear  ineffably  so,  and  on  the  whole  struggling  under
such  mountains  of  encumbrance,  yet  loyally  maintaining  his
equilibrium,  does  at  last  acquire,  in  these  Letters,  silently  a
kind  of  beauty  to  the  best  class  of  readers.  But  that  is  nearly
their  sole  merit.  By  far  the  most  human  of  them,  that  on
the  first  visit  to  Mirow,  the  reader  has  now  seen ;  and  may
thank  us  much  that  we  show  him  no  more  of  them.2

1  Briefe  an  Voter,  p.  71  (caret  in  (Euvres)  ;  pp.  85-114.—  See  Ib.  6tli  No-
vember, 1737,  for  faint  trace  of  a  visit ;  and  25th  September,  1739,  for  another
still  fainter,  the  last  there  is.

2  Frie.drich  des  Grossen  Briefe  an  seinen Voter  (Berlin,  1838). Reduced  in
size,  by  suitable  omissions  ;  and  properly  spelt ;  but  with  little  other  elucida-
tion for  a  stranger  :  in  (Euvres,  xxvii.  part  3d.  pp.  1-123  (Berlin,  1856).

VW.  NEWS  OF  THE  DAY.  79

July-Dec.  1737.

CHAPTER IV.

NEWS OF THE DAY.

WHILE  these  Mirow  visits  are  about  their  best,  and  much
else  at  Eeinsberg  is  in  comfortable  progress,  Friedrich's  first
year  there  just  ending,  there  come  accounts  from  England
of  quarrels  broken  out  between  the  Britannic  Majesty  and
his  Prince  of  Wales.  Discrepancies  risen  now  to  a  height ;
and  getting  into  the  very  Newspapers ;  —  the  Kising  Sun
too  little  under  the  control  of  the  Setting,  in  that  unquiet
Country !

Prince  Fred  of  England  did  not  get  to  the  Ehine  Cam-
paign, as  we  saw :  he  got  some  increase  of  Revenue,  a  House-
hold of  his  own ;  and  finally  a  Wife,  as  he  had  requested :
a  Sachsen-Gotha  Princess  ;  who,  peerless  Wilhelmina  being
unattainable,  was  welcome  to  Prince  Fred.  She  is  in  the
family-way,  this  summer  1737,  a  very  young  lady  still ;  result
thought  to  be  due  —  When?  Result  being  potential  Heir  to
the  British  Nation,  there  ought  to  have  been  good  calculation
of  the  time  when !  But  apparently  nobody  had  well  turned
his  attention  that  way.  Or  if  Fred  and  Spouse  had,  as
is  presumable,  Fred  had  given  no  notice  to  the  Paternal
Majesty,  —  "Let  Paternal  Majesty,  always  so  cross  to  me,
look  out  for  himself  in  that  matter."  Certain  it  is,  Fred
and  Spouse,  in  the  beginning  of  August,  1737,  are  out  at
Hampton  Court ;  potential  Heir  due  before  long,  and  no  prep-
aration made  for  it.  August  llth  in  the  evening,  out  at
solitary  Hampton  Court ;  the  poor  young  Mother's  pains  came
on ;  no  Chancellor  there,  no  Archbishop  to  see  the  birth,
—  in  fact,  hardly  the  least  medical  help,  and  of  political
altogether  none.  Fred,  in  his  flurry,  or  by  forethought,  —
instead  of  dashing  off  expresses,  at  a  gallop  as  of  Epsom,  to
summon  the  necessary  persons  and  appliances,  yoked  wheeled

80  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

July-Dec.  1737.

vehicles  and  rolled  off  to  the  old  unprovided  Palace  of  St.
James's,  London,  with  his  poor  Wife  in  person  !  Unwarned,
unprovided ;  where  nevertheless  she  was  safely  delivered
that  same  night,  —  safely,  as  if  by  miracle.  The  crisis  might
have  taken  her  on  the  very  highway:  never  was  such  an
imprudence.  Owing,  I  will  believe,  to  Fred's  sudden  flurry
in  the  unprovided  moment,  —  unprovided,  by  reason  of  prior
desuetudes  and  discouragements  to  speech,  on  Papa's  side.
A  shade  of  malice  there  might  also  be.  Papa  doubts  not,  it
was  malice  aforethought  all  of  it.  "  Had  the  potential  Heir
of  the  British  Nation  gone  to  wreck,  or  been  born  on  the
highway,  from  my  quarrels  with  this  bad  Fred,  what  a  scrape
had  I  been  in  !  "  thinks  Papa,  and  is  in  a  towering  permanence
of  wrath  ever  since;  the  very  Newspapers  and  coffee-houses
and  populaces  now  all  getting  vocal  with  it.

Papa,  as  it  turned  out,  never  more  saw  the  face  of  Fred.
Judicious  Mamma,  Queen  Caroline,  could  not  help  a  visit,
one  visit  to  the  poor  young  Mother,  so  soon  as  proper :  com-
ing out  from  the  visit,  Prince  Fred  obsequiously  escorting
her  to  her  carriage,  found  a  crowd  of  people  and  populace,
in  front  of  St.  James's  ;  and  there  knelt  down  on  the  street,
in  his  fine  silk  breeches,  careless  of  the  mud,  to  "beg  a
Mother's  blessing,"  and  show  what  a  son  he  was,  he  for  his
part,  in  this  sad  discrepancy  that  had  risen  !  Mamma  threw
a  silent  glance  on  him,  containing  volumes  of  mixed  tenor ;
drove  off ;  and  saw  no  more  of  Fred,  she  either.  I  fear,  this
kneeling  in  the  mud  tells  against  Prince  Fred ;  but  in  truth
I  do  not  know,  nor  even  much  care.1  What  a  noise  in  Eng-
land about  nothing  at  all !  —  What  a  noisy  Country,  your
Prussian  Majesty!  Foolish  "rising  sun"  not  restrainable
there  by  the  setting  or  shining  one;  opposition  parties
bowling  him  about  among  the  constellations,  like  a  very
mad  object !  —

But  in  a  month  or  two,  there  comes  worse  news  out  of  Eng-
land ;  falling  heavy  on  the  heart  of  Prussian  Majesty :  news
that  Queen  Caroline  herself  is  dead.2  Died  as  she  had  lived,

1  Lord  Hervey,  Memoirs  of  George,  the  Second,  ii.  362-370,  409.

2  "  Sunday  evening,  1st  December  (20th  Nov.),  1737." Ib.  pp.  510-539.

CHAP.  IV.  NEWS OF THE DAY.  81

July-Dec.  1737.

with  much  constancy  of  mind,  with  a  graceful  modest  courage
and  endurance ;  sinking  quietly  under  the  load  of  private  mis-
eries long  quietly  kept  hidden,  but  now  become  too  heavy,  and
for  which  the  appointed  rest  was  now  here.  Little  George
blubbered  a  good  deal ;  fidgeted  and  flustered  a  good  deal :
much  put  about,  poor  foolish  little  soul.  The  dying  Caroline
recommended  him  to  Walpole ;  advised  his  Majesty  to  marry
again.  "  Non,j'aurai  des  mattresses  (No,  I  '11  have  mistresses)  ! "
sobbed  his  Majesty  passionately.  "Ah,  mon  Dieu,  cela  n'em-
peche  pas  (that  does  not  hinder) !  "  answered  she,  from  long
experience  of  the  case.  There  is  something  stoically  tragic  in
the  history  of  Caroline  with  her  flighty  vaporing  little  King :
seldom  had  foolish  husband  so  wise  a  wife.  "  Dead ! "  thought
Friedrich  Wilhelm,  looking  back  through  the  whirlwinds  of
life,  into  sunny  young  scenes  far  enough  away :  "  Dead !  "  —
Walpole  continued  to  manage  the  little  King;  but  not  for
long;  England  itself  rising  in  objection.  Jenkins's  Ear,  I  un-
derstand, is  lying  in  cotton ;  and  there  are  mad  inflammable
strata  in  that  Nation,  capable  of  exploding  at  a  great  rate.

From  the  Eastern  regions  our  Newspapers  are  very  full  of
events  :  War  with  the  Turk  going  on  there ;  Eussia  and  Austria
both  doing  their  best  against  the  Turk.  The  Eussians  had
hardly  finished  their  Polish-Election  fighting,  when  they  de-
cided to  have  a  stroke  at  the  Turk,  —  Turk  always  an  especial
eye-sorrow  to  them,  since  that  "  Treaty  of  the  Pruth,"  and  Czar
Peter's  sad  rebuff  there :  —  Miinnich  marched  direct  out  of
Poland  through  the  Ukraine,  with  his  eye  on  the  Crimea  and
furious  business  in  that  quarter.  This  is  his  second  Campaign
there,  this  of  1737 ;  and  furious  business  has  not  failed.  Last
year  he  stormed  the  Lines  of  Perecop,  tore  open  the  Crimea ;
took  Azoph,  he  or  Lacy  under  him ;  took  many  things :  this
year  he  had  laid  his  plans  for  Oczakow ;  —  takes  Oczakow,  —
fiery  event,  blazing  in  all  the  Newspapers,  at  Eeinsberg  and
elsewhere.  Concerning  which  will  the  reader  accept  this  con-
densed testimony  by  an  eye-witness  ?

"  Oczakow,  13th  July,  1737.  Day  before  yesterday,  Feld-
marschall  Miinnich  got  to  Oczakow,  as  he  had  planned,"  —
strong  Turkish  Town  in  the  nook  between  the  Black  Sea  and

VOL. VII.  6

82  AT  REmSBERG.  BOOK  X.

July-Dec.  1737.

the  estuary  of  the  Dnieper  ;  —  "  with  intention  to  besiege  it.
Siege-train,  stores  of  every  sort,  which  he  had  set  afloat  upon
the  Dnieper  in  time  enough,  were  to  have  been  ready  for  him
at  Oczakow.  But  the  flotilla  had  been  detained  by  shallows,
by  waterfalls ;  not  a  boat  was  come,  nor  could  anybody  say
when  they  were  coming.  Meanwhile  nothing  is  to  be  had
here ;  the  very  face  of  the  earth  the  Turks  have  burnt :  not
a  blade  of  grass  for  cavalry  within  eight  miles,  nor  a  stick  of
wood  for  engineers ;  not  a  hole  for  covert,  and  the  ground  so
hard  you  cannot  raise  redoubts  on  it :  Miiunich  perceives  he
must  attempt,  nevertheless.

"  On  his  right,  by  the  sea-shore,  Munnich  finds  some  remains
of  gardens,  palisades ;  scrapes  together  some  vestige  of  shelter
there  (five  thousand,  or  even  ten  thousand  pioneers  working
desperately  all  that  first  night,  llth  July,  with  only  half  suc-
cess) ;  and  on  the  morrow  commences  firing  with  what  artillery
he  has.  Much  outfired  by  the  Turks  inside  ;  —  his  enterprise
as  good  as  desperate,  unless  the  Dnieper  flotilla  come  soon.
July  12th,  all  day  the  firing  continues,  and  all  night;  Turks
extremely  furious  :  about  an  hour  before  daybreak,  we  notice
burning  in  the  interior,  'Some  wooden  house  kindled  by  us,
town  got  on  fire  yonder,'  —  and,  praise  to  Heaven,  they  do  not
seem  to  succeed  in  quenching  it  again.  Munnich  turns  out,  in
various  divisions  ;  intent  on  trying  something,  had  he  the  least
engineer  furniture  ;  —  hopes  desperately  there  may  be  promise
for  him  in  that  internal  burning  still  visible.

"In  the  centre  of  Munnich's  line  is  one  General  Keith,  a
deliberate  stalwart  Scotch  gentleman,  whom  we  shall  know
better ;  Munnich  himself  is  to  the  right :  Could  not  one  try  it
by  scalade ;  keep  the  internal  burning  free  to  spread,  at  any
rate  ?  l  Advance  within  musket-shot,  General  Keith  ! '  orders
Munnich's  Aide-de-Camp  cantering  up.  '  I  have  been  this  good
while  within  it,'  answers  Keith,  pointing  to  his  dead  men.
Aide-de-Camp  canters  up  a  second  time :  '  Advance  within
half  musket-shot,  General  Keith,  and  quit  any  covert  you
have  ! '  Keith  does  so ;  sends,  with  his  respects  to  Feld-
marschall  Munnich,  his  remonstrance  against  such  a  waste  of
human  life.  Aide-de-Camp  canters  up  a  third  time :  '  Feld-

CHAP.  IV.  NEWS OF THE DAY.  83

July-Dec.  1737.

marschall  Miinnich  is  for  trying  a  scalade ;  hopes  General
Keith  will  do  his  best  to  co-operate ! '  l  Forward,  then  ! '  an-
swers Keith ;  advances  close  to  the  glacis ;  finds  a  wet  ditch
twelve  feet  broad,  and  has  not  a  stick  of  engineer  furniture.
Keith  waits  there  two  hours ;  his  men,  under  fire  all  the  while,
trying  this  and  that  to  get  across  ;  Miinuich's  scalade  going  off
ineffectual  in  like  manner :  —  till  at  length  Keith's  men,  and
all  men,  tire  of  such  a  business,  and  roll  back  in  great  confu-
sion out  of  shot-range.  Miinnich  gives  himself  up  for  lost.
And  indeed,  says  Mannstein,  had  the  Turks  sallied  out  in  pur-
suit at  that  moment,  they  might  have  chased  us  back  to  Russia.
But  the  Turks  did  not  sally.  And  the  internal  conflagration
is  not  quenched,  far  from  it ;  —  and  about  nine  A.M.  their
Powder-Magazine,  conflagration  reaching  it,  roared  aloft  into
the  air,  and  killed  seven  thousand  of  them,"  1 —

So  that  Oczakow  was  taken,  sure  enough ;  terms,  life  only :
and  every  remaining  Turk  packs  off  from  it,  some  "twenty
thousand  inhabitants  young  and  old  "  for  one  sad  item.  —  A
very  blazing  semi-absurd  event,  to  be  read  of  in  Prussian  mili-
tary circles,  —  where  General  Keith  will  be  better  known  one
day.

Eussian  War  with  the  Turk :  that  means  withal,  by  old
Treaties,  aid  of  thirty  thousand  men  from  the  Kaiser  to  Eussia.
Kaiser,  so  ruined  lately,  how  can  he  send  thirty  thousand,  and
keep  them  recruited,  in  such  distant  expedition  ?  Kaiser,
much  meditating,  is  advised  it  will  be  better  to  go  frankly  into
the  Turk  on  his  own  score,  and  try  for  slices  of  profit  from
him  in  this  game.  Kaiser  declares  war  against  the  Turk ;  and
what  is  still  more  interesting  to  Friedrich  Wilhelm  and  the
Berlin  Circles,  Seckendorf  is  named  General  of  it.  Feldzeug-
meister  now  Feldmarschall  Seckendorf,  envy  may  say  what  it
will,  he  has  marched  this  season  into  the  Lower-Donau  Coun-
tries, —  going  to  besiege  Widdin,  they  say.  —  at  the  head  of  a
big  Army  (on  paper,  almost  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  light
troops  and  heavy)  —  virtually  Commander-in-Chief  ;  though
nominally  our  fine  young  friend  Franz  of  Lorraine  bears  the
title  of  Commander,  whom  Seckendorf  is  to  dry-nurse  in  the

1  Mannstein,  pp.  151-156.

84  AT  KEINSBEEG.  BOOK  X.

July-Dec.  1737.

way  sometimes  practised.  Going  to  besiege  Widdin,  they  say.
So  lias  the  poor  Kaiser  been  advised.  His  wise  old  Eugene  is
now  gone ; l  I  fear  his  advisers,  —  a  youngish  Feldzeugmeister,
Prince  of  Hildburghausen,  the  chief  favorite  among  them,  —
are  none  of  the  wisest.  All  Protestants,  we  observe,  these
favorite  Hildburghausens,  Schmettaus,  Seckendorfs  of  his ;
and  Vienna  is  an  orthodox  papal  Court ;  —  and  there  is  a  Hof-
kriegsrath  (Supreme  Council  of  War),  which  has  ruined  many
a  General,  poking  too  meddlesomely  into  his  affairs  !  On  the
whole,  Seckendorf  will  have  his  difficulties.  Here  is  a  scene,
on  the  Lower  Donau,  different  enough  from  that  at  Oczakow,
not  far  from  contemporaneous  with  it.  The  Austrian  Army
is  at  Kolitz,  a  march  or  two  beyond  Belgrade  :  —

"  Kolitz,  2d  July,  1737.  This  day,  the  Army  not  being  on
march,  but  allowed  to  rest  itself,  Grand  Duke  Franz  went  into
the  woods  to  hunt.  Hunting  up  and  down,  he  lost  himself ;
did  not  return  at  evening ;  and,  as  the  night  closed  in  and  no
Generalissimo  visible,  the  Generalissimo  ad  Latus  (such  the
title  they  had  contrived  for  Seckendorf)  was  in  much  alarm.
Generalissimo  ad  Latus  ordered  out  his  whole  force  of  drum-
mers, trumpeters  :  To  fling  themselves,  postwise,  deeper  and
deeper  into  the  woods  all  round ;  to  drum  there,  and  blow,  in
ever-widening  circle,  in  prescribed  notes,  and  with  all  energy,
till  the  Grand  Duke  were  found.  Grand  Duke  being  found,
Seckendorf  remonstrated,  rebuked ;  a  thought  too  earnestly,
some  say,  his  temper  being  flurried,"  —  voice  snuffling  some-
what in  alt,  with  lisp  to  help  :  —  "so  that  the  Grand  Duke
took  offence ;  flung  off  in  a  huff :  and  always  looked  askance
on  the  Feldmarschall  from  that  time  ;  "  2  —  quitting  him  alto-
gether before  long  ;  and  marching  with  Khevenhliller,  Wallis,
Hildburghausen,  or  any  of  the  subordinate  Generals  rather.
Probably  Widdin  will  not  go  the  road  of  Oczakow,  nor  the
Austrians  prosper  like  the  Eussians,  this  summer.

Pollnitz,  in  Tobacco-Parliament,  and  in  certain  Berlin  cir-
cles foolishly  agape  about  this  new  Feldmarschall,  maintains

1  Died  30th  April,  1736.

2  See  Lebensgeschichte  des  Grafen  von  Schmettau  (by  his  Son :  Berlin,  1806),
i.  27.

CHAP.  IV.  NEWS  OF  THE  DAY.  85

July-Dec.  1737.

always,  Seckendorf  will  come  to  nothing ;  which  his  Majesty
zealously  contradicts, — his  Majesty,  and  some  short-sighted
private  individuals  still  favorable  to  Seckendorf.1  Exactly
one  week  after  that  singular  drum-and-trunipet  operation  on
Duke  Franz,  the  Last  of  the  Medici  dies  at  Florence ; 2  and
Serene  Franz,  if  he  knew  it,  is  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  ac-
cording to  bargain :  a  matter  important  to  himself  chiefly,
and  to  France,  who,  for  Stanislaus  and  Lorraine's  sake,  has
had  to  pay  him  some  £200,000  a  year  during  the  brief  inter-
mediate state.

Of  Berg  and  Julich  again;  and  of  Luiscius  with  the

One  Razor.

These  remote  occurrences  are  of  small  interest  to  his  Prus-
sian Majesty,  in  comparison  with  the  Pfalz  affair,  the  Cleve-
Jiilich  succession,  which  lies  so  near  home.  His  Majesty  is
uncommonly  anxious  to  have  this  matter  settled,  in  peace,  if
possible.  Kaiser  and  Keich,  with  the  other  Mediating  Powers,
go  on  mediating ;  but  when  will  they  decide  ?  This  year  the
old  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  one  Brother  of  the  older  Kur-Pfalz
Karl  Philip,  dies ;  nothing  now  between  us  and  the  event
itself,  but  Karl  Philip  alone,  who  is  verging  towards  eighty :
the  decision,  to  be  peaceable,  ought  to  be  speedy  !  Friedrich
Wilhelm,  in  January  last,  sent  the  expert  Degenfeld,  once  of
London,  to  old  Karl  Philip ;  and  has  him  still  there,  with  the
most  conciliatory  offers  :  "  Will  leave  your  Sulzbachs  a  part,
then ;  will  be  content  with  part,  instead  of  the  whole,  which
is  mine  if  there  be  force  in  sealed  parchment ;  will  do  anything
for  peace ! "  To  which  the  old  Kur-Pfalz,  foolish  old  creature,
is  steadily  deaf ;  answers  vaguely,  negatively  always,  in  a
polite  manner  ;  pushing  his  Majesty  upon  extremities  painful
to  think  of.  "  We  hate  war ;  but  cannot  quite  do  without
justice,  your  Serenity,"  thinks  Friedrich  Wilhelm :  "  must  it
be  the  eighty  thousand  iron  ramrods,  then  ?  "  Obstinate  Seren-
ity continues  deaf ;  and  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  negotiations,  there

1  Pollnitz,  Memoiren,  ii.  497-502.

2  9th  July  (Fastes  de  Louis  XV.,  p.  304).

86  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

July-Dec.  1737.

at  Mannheim,  over  in  Holland,  and  through  Holland  with  Eng-
land, not  to  speak  of  Kaiser  and  Reich  close  at  hand,  become
very  intense ;  vehemently  earnest,  about  this  matter,  for  the
next  two  years.  The  details  of  which,  inexpressibly  uninter-
esting, shall  be  spared  the  reader.

Summary  is,  these  Mediating  Powers  will  be  of  no  help  to
his  Majesty ;  not  even  the  Dutch  will,  with  whom  he  is  spe-
cially in  friendship  :  nay,  in  the  third  year  it  becomes  fatally
manifest,  the  chief  Mediating  Powers,  Kaiser  and  France,
listening  rather  to  political  convenience,  than  to  the  claims  of
justice,  go  direct  in  Kur-Pfalz's  favor  ;  —  by  formal  treaty  of
their  own,1  France  and  the  Kaiser  settle,  "  That  the  Sulzbachers
shall,  as  a  preliminary,  get  provisional  possession,  on  the  now
Serenity's  decease  ;  and  shall  continue  undisturbed  for  two
years,  till  Law  decide  between  his  Prussian  Majesty  and  them."
Two  years  ;  Law  decide  ;  —  and  we  know  what  are  the  nine-
points  in  a  Law-case !  This,  at  last,  proved  too  much  for  his
Majesty.  Majesty's  abstruse  dubitations,  meditations  on  such
treatment  by  a  Kaiser  and  others,  did  then,  it  appears,  gloom-
ily settle  into  fixed  private  purpose  of  trying  it  by  the  iron
ramrods,  when  old  Kur-Pf alz  should  die,  —  of  marching  with
eighty  thousand  men  into  the  Cleve  Countries,  and  so  wel-
coming any  Sulzbach  or  other  guests  that  might  arrive.
Happily  old  Kur-Pfalz  did  not  die  in  his  Majesty's  time  ;
survived  his  Majesty  several  years  :  so  that  the  matter  fell
into  other  hands,  —  and  was  settled  very  well,  near  a  century
after.

Of  certain  wranglings  with  the  little  Town  of  Herstal,  —
Prussian  Town  (part  of  the  Orange  Heritage,  once  King  Pepin's
Town,  if  that  were  any  matter  now)  in  the  Bishop  of  Liege's
neighborhood,  Town  highly  insignificant  otherwise,  —  we  shall
say  nothing  here,  as  they  will  fall  to  be  treated,  and  be  settled,
at  an  after  stage.  Friedrich  Wilhelrn  was  much  grieved  by
the  contumacies  of  that  paltry  little  Herstal ;  and  by  the  Bishop
of  Liege's  high-flown  procedures  in  countenancing  them ;  —
especially  in  a  recruiting  case  that  had  fallen  out  there,  and

1  "Versailles,  13th  January,  1739"  (Olrich,  Geschichte  der  Schlesischen
Kriege,  i.  13) ;  Mauvillon,  ii.  405-446  ;  &c.

CHAP.  IV.  NEWS  OF  THE  DAY.  87

July-Dec.  1737.

brought  matters  to  a  head.1  The  Kaiser  too  was  afflictively
high  in  countenancing  the  Bishop  ;  —  for  which  both  Kaiser
and  Bishop  got  due  payment  in  time.  But  his  Prussian  Maj-
esty would  not  kindle  the  world  for  such  a  paltriness  ;  and  so
left  it  hanging  in  a  vexatious  condition.  Such  things,  it  is
remarked,  weigh  heavier  on  his  now  infirm  Majesty  than  they
were  wont.  He  is  more  subject  to  fits  of  hypochondria,  to
talk  of  abdicating.  "  All  gone  wrong !  "  he  would  say,  if  any
little  flaw  rose,  about  recruiting  or  the  like.  "  One  might  go
and  live  at  Venice,  were  one  rid  of  it ! "  2  And  his  deep-stung
clangorous  growl  against  the  Kaiser's  treatment  of  him  bursts
out,  from  time  to  time  ;  though  he  oftenest  pities  the  Kaiser,
too  ;  seeing  him  at  such  a  pass  with  his  Turk  War  and  other-
wise.

It  was  in  this  Pfalz  business  that  Herr  Luiscius,  the  Prus-
sian Minister  in  Holland,  got  into  trouble ;  of  whom  there  is
a  light  dash  of  outline-portraiture  by  Voltaire,  which  has  made
him  memorable  to  readers.  This  "  fat  King  of  Prussia,"  says
Voltaire,  was  a  dreadfully  avaricious  fellow,  unbeautiful  to  a
high  degree  in  his  proceedings  with  mankind  :  —

"  He  had  a  Minister  at  the  Hague  called  Luiscius ;  who
certainly  of  all  Ministers  of  Crowned  Heads  was  the  worst
paid.  This  poor  man,  to  warm  himself,  had  made  some  trees
be  felled  in  the  Garden  of  Honslardik,  which  belonged  at  that
time  to  the  House  of  Prussia ;  he  thereupon  received  de-
spatches from  the  King,  intimating  that  a  year  of  his  salary
was  forfeited.  Luiscius,  in  despair,  cut  his  throat  with  prob-
ably the  one  razor  he  had  (seul  rasoir  qu'il  eut)  ;  an  old  valet
came  to  his  assistance,  and  unhappily  saved  his  life.  In
after  years,  I  found  his  Excellency  at  the  Hague ;  and  have
occasionally  given  him  an  alms  at  the  door  of  the  Vieille  Cour
(Old  Court),  a  Palace  belonging  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  where
this  poor  Ambassador  had  lived  a  dozen  years.  It  must  be

1  "December,  1738,"  is  crisis  of  the  recruiting  case  (ffelden-Geschickte,  ii.
63);  "17th  February,  1739,"  Bishop's  high-flown  appearance  in  it  (ib.  67);
Kaiser's  in  consequence,  "  10th  April,  1739."

2  Forster  (place  lost).

88  AT KEINSBERa.  BOOK  X.

July-Dec.  1737.

owned,  Turkey  is  a  republic  iu  comparison  to  the  despotism
exercised  by  Friedrich  Wilhelm." l

Here  truly  is  a  witty  sketch ;  consummately  dashed  off,  as
nobody  but  Voltaire  could ;  "  round  as  Giotto's  0,"  done  at
one  stroke.  Of  which  the  prose  facts  are  only  as  follows.
Luiscius,  Prussian  Resident,  not  distinguished  by  salary  or
otherwise,  had,  at  one  stage  of  these  negotiations,  been  told,
from  head-quarters,  He  might,  in  casual  extra-official  ways,  if
it  seemed  furthersome,  give  their  High  Mightinesses  the  hope,
or  notion,  that  his  Majesty  did  not  intend  actual  war  about
that  Cleve-Jiilich  Succession,  —  being  a  pacific  Majesty,  and
unwilling  to  involve  his  neighbors  and  mankind.  Luiscius,
instead  of  casual  hint  delicately  dropped  in  some  good  way,
had  proceeded  by  direct  declaration;  frank  assurance  to  the
High  Mightinesses,  That  there  would  be  no  war.  Which  had
never  been  quite  his  Majesty's  meaning,  and  perhaps  was  now
becoming  rather  the  reverse  of  it.  Disavowal  of  Luiscius
had  to  ensue  thereupon ;  who  produced  defensively  his  instruc-
tion from  head-quarters  ;  but  got  only  rebukes  for  such  heavy-
footed  clumsy  procedure,  so  unlike  Diplomacy  with  its  shoes
of  felt ;  —  and,  in  brief,  was  turned  out  of  the  Diplomatic
function,  as  unfit  for  it ;  and  appointed  to  manage  certain
Orange  Properties,  fragments  of  the  Orange  Heritage  which
his  Majesty  still  has  in  those  Countries.  This  misadventure
sank  heavily  on  the  spirits  of  Luiscius,  otherwise  none  of  the
strongest-minded  of  men.  Nor  did  he  prosper  in  managing
the  Orange  Properties  :  on  the  contrary,  he  again  fell  into
mistakes ;  got  soundly  rebuked  for  injudicious  conduct  there,  —
"  cutting  trees,"  planting  trees,  or  whatever  it  was ;  —  and  this
produced  such  an  effect  on  Luiscius,  that  he  made  an  attempt
on  his  own  throat,  distracted  mortal;  and  was  only  stopped
by  somebody  rushing  in.  "  It  was  not  the  first  time  he  had
tried  that  feat,"  says  Pollnitz,  "  and  been  prevented  ;  nor  was
it  long  till  he  made  a  new  attempt,  which  was  again  frus-
trated :  and  always  afterwards  his  relations  kept  him  close
in  view  : "  Majesty  writing  comfortable  forgiveness  to  the
perturbed  creature,  and  also  "  settling  a  pension  on  him ; "

1  (Euvres  de  Voltaire  ( Vie  Privee,  or  what  they  now  call  Me'moires),  ii.  15.

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  89

8th  July,  1T38.

adequate,  we  can  hope,  and  not  excessive;  "which  Luiscius
continued  to  receive,  at  the  Hague,  so  long  as  he  lived."
These  are  the  prose  facts;  not  definitely  dated  to  us,  but
perfectly  clear  otherwise.1

Voltaire,  in  his  Dutch  excursions,  did  sometimes,  in  after
years,  lodge  in  that  old  vacant  Palace,  called  Vieille  Cour,
at  the  Hague;  where  he  gracefully  celebrates  the  decayed
forsaken  state  of  matters ;  dusky  vast  rooms  with  dim  gild-
ing; forgotten  libraries  '-veiled  under  the  biggest  spider-webs
in  Europe ; "  for  the  rest,  an  uncommonly  quiet  place,  con-
venient for  a  writing  man,  besides  costing  nothing.  A  son
of  this  Luiscius,  a  good  young  lad,  it  also  appears,  was  occa-
sionally Voltaire's  amanuensis  there ;  him  he  did  recommend
zealously  to  the  new  King  of  Prussia,  who  was  not  deaf  on
the  occasion.  This,  in  the  fire  of  satirical  wit,  is  what  we  can
transiently  call  "  giving  alms  to  a  Prussian  Excellency  ;  "  —
not  now  excellent,  but  pensioned  and  cracked ;  and  the  reader
perceives,  Luiscius  had  probably  more  than  one  razor,  had
not  one  been  enough,  when  he  did  the  rash  act !  Friedrich
employed  Luiscius  Junior,  with  no  result  that  we  hear  of
farther ;  and  seems  to  have  thought  Luiscius  Senior  an  ab-
surd fellow,  not  worth  mentioning  again :  "  ran  away  from
the  Cleve  Country  [probably  some  mad-house  there]  above  a
year  ago,  I  hear ;  and  what  is  the  matter  where  such  a  crack-
brain  end  ?  "  2

CHAPTER  V.

VISIT AT LOO.

THE  Pfalz  question  being  in  such  a  predicament,  and  Luis-
cius diplomatizing  upon  it  in  such  heavy-footed  manner,  his
Majesty  thinks  a  journey  to  Holland,  to  visit  one's  Kinsfolk

1  Pollnitz,  ii.  495,  496  ;  —  the  "  new  attempt "  seems  to  have  been  "  June,
1739  "  (  Gentleman's  Magazine,  in  mense,  p.  331).

2  Voltaire,  (Euvres  (Letter  to  Friedrich,  7th  October,  1740),  Ixxii.  261 ;  and
Friedrich's  answer  (wrong  dated),  ib.  265  ;  Preuss,  xxii.  33.

90  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

8th  July,  1738.

there,  and  incidentally  speak  a  word  with,  the  High  Mighti-
nesses upon  Pfalz,  would  not  be  amiss.  Such  journey  is
decided  on ;  Crown-Prince  to  accompany.  Summer  of  1738 :
a  short  visit,  quite  without  fuss  ;  to  last  only  three  days  ;  —
mere  sequel  to  the  Reviews  held  in  those  adjacent  Cleve
Countries;  so  that  the  Gazetteers  may  take  no  notice.  All
which  was  done  accordingly  :  Crown-Prince's  first  sight  of
Holland ;  and  one  of  the  few  reportable  points  of  his
Eeinsberg  life,  and  not  quite  without  memorability  to  him
and  us.

On  the  8th  of  July,  1738,  the  Review  Party  got  upon  the
road  for  Wesel :  all  through  July,  they  did  their  reviewing
in  those  Cleve  Countries ;  and  then  struck  across  for  the
Palace  of  Loo  in  Geldern,  where  a  Prince  of  Orange  count-
able kinsman  to  his  Prussian  Majesty,  and  a  Princess  still
more  nearly  connected,  —  English  George's  Daughter,  own

niece  to  his  Prussian  Majesty,  —  are  in  waiting  for  this  dis-
tinguished honor.  The  Prince  of  Orange  we  have  already
seen,  for  a  moment  once  ;  at  the  siege  of  Philipsburg  four
years  ago,  when  the  sale  of  Chasot's  horses  went  off  so  well.
"  Nothing  like  selling  horses  when  your  company  have  dined
well,"  whispered  he  to  Chasot,  at  that  time  ;  since  which  date
we  have  heard  nothing  of  his  Highness.

He  is  not  a  beautiful  man ;  he  has  a  crooked  back,  and
features  conformable ;  but  is  of  prompt  vivacious  nature,  and
does  not  want  for  sense  and  good-humor.  Paternal  George,
the  gossips  say,  warned  his  Princess,  when  this  marriage  was
talked  of,  "  You  will  find  him  very  ill-looking,  though  ! "  "  And
if  I  found  him  a  baboon  — !  "  answered  she  ;  being  so  heartily
tired  of  St.  James's.  And  in  fact,  for  anything  I  have  heard,
they  do  well  enough  together.  She  is  George  II.'s  eldest
Princess ;  —  next  elder  to  our  poor  Amelia,  who  was  once  so
interesting  to  us  !  What  the  Crown-Prince  now  thought  of  all
that,  I  do  not  know  ;  but  the  Books  say,  poor  Amelia  wore  the
willow,  and  specially  wore  the  Prince's  miniature  on  her  breast
all  her  days  after,  which  were  many.  Grew  corpulent,  some-
what a  huddle  in  appearance  and  equipment,  "eyelids  like
upper-lips,"  for  one  item :  but  when  life  itself  fled,  the  minia-

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  91

8th  July,  1738.

ture  was  found  in  its  old  place,  resting  on  the  old  heart
after  some  sixty  years.  0  Time,  0  Sons  and  Daughters  of
Time !  —

His  Majesty's  reception  at  Loo  was  of  the  kind  he  liked,  —
cordial,  honorable,  unceremonious ;  and  these  were  three
pleasant  days  he  had.  Pleasant  for  the  Crown-Prince  too;
as  the  whole  Journey  had  rather  been;  Papa,  with  covert
satisfaction,  finding  him  a  wise  creature,  after  all,  and  "  more
serious  "  than  formerly.  "  Hm,  you  don't  know  what  things
are  in  that  Fritz  ! "  his  Majesty  murmured  sometimes,  in  these
later  years,  with  a  fine  light  in  his  eyes.

Loo  itself  is  a  beautiful  Palace  :  "  Loo,  close  by  the  Village
Appeldoorn,  is  a  stately  brick  edifice,  built  with  architectural
regularity  ;  has  finely  decorated  rooms,  beautiful  gardens,  and
round  are  superb  alleys  of  oak  and  linden."  1  There  saunters
pleasantly  our  Crown-Prince,  for  these  three  days  ;  —  and  one
glad  incident  I  do  perceive  to  have  befallen  him  there  :  the
arrival  of  a  Letter  from  Voltaire.  Letter  much  expected,
which  had  followed  him  from  Wesel ;  and  which  he  answers
here,  in  this  brick  Palace,  among  the  superb  avenues  and
gardens.2

No  doubt  a  glad  incident,  irradiating,  as  with  a  sudden  sun-
burst in  gray  weather,  the  commonplace  of  things.  Here  is
news  worth  listening  to ;  news  as  from  the  empyrean !  Free
interchange  of  poetries  and  proses,  of  heroic  sentiments  and
opinions,  between  the  Unique  of  Sages  and  the  Paragon  of
Crown-Princes;  how  charming  to  both!  Literary  business,
we  perceive,  is  brisk  on  both  hands  ;  at  Cirey  the  Discours  sur
I'Homme  ("Sixth  Discours"  arrives  in  this  packet  at  Loo,
surely  a  deathless  piece  of  singing) ;  nor  is  Eeinsberg  idle :
Eeinsberg  is  copiously  doing  verse,  such  verse  !  and  in  prose,
very  earnestly,  an  "  Anti-Machiavel ;  "  which  soon  afterwards
filled  all  the  then  world,  though  it  has  now  fallen  so  silent
again.  And  at  Paris,  as  Voltaire  announces  with  a  flourish,
"M.  de  Maupertuis's  excellent  Book,  Figure  de  la  Terre,  is

1  Biisching,  Erdbeschreibung,  viii.  69.

2  (Euvres,  xxi.  203,  the  Letter,  "  Cirey,  June,  1738  ; "  Ib.  222,  the  Answer
to  it,  "  Loo,  6th  August,  1738."

92  AT KEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

6th  Aug.  1738.

out ; " 1  M.  de  Maupertuis,  home  from  the  Polar  regions  and
from  measuring  the  Earth  there ;  the  sublimest  miracle  in
Paris  society  at  present.  Might  build,  new-build,  an  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Berlin  for  your  Koyal  Highness,  one  day  ?  sug-
gests Voltaire,  on  this  occasion  :  and  Friedrich,  as  we  shall
see,  takes  the  hint.  One  passage  of  the  Crown-Prince's
Answer  is  in  these  terms  ;  —  fixing  this  Loo  visit  to  its  date
for  us,  at  any  rate  :  —

"Loo  in  Holland,  6th  August,  1739.  ...  I  write  from  a  place
where  there  lived  once  a  great  man  [William  III.  of  England,
our  Dutch  "William] ;  which  is  now  the  Prince  of  Orange's
House.  The  demon  of  Ambition  sheds  its  unhappy  poisons
over  his  days.  He  might  be  the  most  fortunate  of  men ;  and
he  is  devoured  by  chagrins  in  his  beautiful  Palace  here,  in  the
middle  of  his  gardens  and  of  a  brilliant  Court.  It  is  pity
in  truth;  for  he  is  a  Prince  with  no  end  of  wit  (infiniment
d*  esprit),  and  has  respectable  qualites."  Not  Stadtholder,  un-
luckily ;  that  is  where  the  shoe  pinches ;  the  Dutch  are  on  the
Republican  tack,  and  will  not  have  a  Stadtholder  at  present.
No  help  for  it  in  one's  beautiful  gardens  and  avenues  of  oak
and  linden.

"  I  have  talked  a  great  deal  about  Newton  with  the  Prin-
cess,"—  about  Newton;  never  hinted  at  Amelia;  not  per-
missible !  —  "  from  Newton  we  passed  to  Leibnitz ;  and  from
Leibnitz  to  the  Late  Queen  of  England,"  Caroline  lately  gone,
"  who,  the  Prince  told  me,  was  of  Clarke's  sentiment "  on  that
important  theological  controversy  now  dead  to  mankind.  —
And  of  Jenkins  and  his  Ear  did  the  Princess  say  nothing  ?
That  is  now  becoming  a  high  phenomenon  in  England !  But
readers  must  wait  a  little.

Pity  that  we  cannot  give  these  two  Letters  in  full ;  that  no
reader,  almost,  could  be  made  to  understand  them,  or  to  care

1  Paris,  1738:  Maupertuis's  "measurement  of  a  degree,"  in  the  utmost
North,  1736-1737  (to  prove  the  Earth  flattened  there).  Vivid  Narrative  ;  some-
what gesticulative,  but  duly  brief.  The  only  Book  of  that  great  Maupertuis
which  is  now  readable  to  human  nature.

iv.  VISIT  AT  LOO.  93

6th  Aug.  1738.

for  them  when  understood.  Such  the  cruelty  of  Time  upon
this  Voltaire-Friedrich  Correspondence,  and  some  others ;
which  were  once  so  rosy,  sunny,  and  are  now  fallen  drearily
extinct,  —  studiable  by  Editors  only !  In  itself  the  Friedrich-
Voltaire  Correspondence,  we  can  see,  was  charming;  very
blossoiny  at  present :  businesses  increasing  ;  mutual  admiration
now  risen  to  a  great  height,  —  admiration  sincere  on  both
sides,  most  so  on  the  Prince's,  and  extravagantly  expressed  on
both  sides,  most  so  on  Voltaire's.

Crown-Prince  becomes  a  Freemason;  and  is  harangued  by
Monsieur  de  Bielfeld.

His  Majesty,  we  said,  had  three  pleasant  days  at  Loo  ;  dis-
coursing, as  with  friends,  on  public  matters,  or  even  on  more
private  matters,  in  a  frank  unconstrained  way.  He  is  not  to
be  called  "Majesty"  on  this  occasion;  but  the  fact,  at  Loo,
and  by  the  leading  Mightinesses  of  the  Republic,  who  come
copiously  to  compliment  him  there,  is  well  remembered.  Talk
there  was,  with  such  leading  Mightinesses,  about  the  Jiilich-
and-Berg  question,  aim  of  this  Journey :  earnest  enough  pri-
vate talk  with  some  of  them :  but  it  availed  nothing ;  and
would  not  be  worth  reporting  now  to  any  creature,  if  we  even
knew  it.  In  fact,  the  Journey  itself  remains  mentionable
chiefly  by  one  very  trifling  circumstance  ;  and  then  by  another,
not  important  either,  which  followed  out  of  that.  The  trifling
circumstance  is,  —  That  Friedrich,  in  the  course  of  this  Jour-
ney, became  a  Freemason :  and  the  unimportant  sequel  was,
That  he  made  acquaintance  with  one  Bielfeld,  on  the  occasion ;
who  afterwards  wrote  a  Book  about  him,  which  was  once  much
read,  though  never  much  worth  reading,  and  is  still  citable,
with  precaution,  now  and  then.1  Trifling  circumstance,  of
Freemasonry,  as  we  read  in  Bielfeld  and  in  many  Books  after
him,  befell  in  manner  following.

Among  the  dinner-guests  at  Loo,  one  of  those  three  days,
was  a  Prince  of  Lippe-Biickeburg,  —  Prince  of  small  territory,

1  Monsieur  le  Baron  de  Bielfeld,  Lettres  Familieres  et  Autres,  1763;  —
second  edition,  2  vols.  k  Leide,  1767,  is  the  one  we  use  here.

94  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

6th  Aug.  1738.

but  of  great  speculation  ;  whose  territory  lies  on  the  Weser,
leading  to  Dutch  connections  ;  and  whose  speculations  stretch
over  all  the  Universe,  in  a  high  fantastic  style :  —  he  was  a
dinner-guest ;  and  one  of  the  topics  that  came  up  was  Free-
masonry; a  phantasmal  kind  of  object,  which  had  kindled
itself,  or  rekindled,  in  those  years,  in  England  first  of  all;
and  was  now  hovering  about,  a  good  deal,  in  Germany  and
other  countries ;  pretending  to  be  a  new  light  of  Heaven,  and
not  a  bog-meteor  of  phosphorated  hydrogen,  conspicuous  in
the  murk  of  things.  Bog-meteor,  foolish  putrescent  will-o'-
wisp,  his  Majesty  promptly  defined  it  to  be :  Tom-foolery  and
Kinderspiel,  what  else  ?  Whereupon  ingenious  Eiickeburg,
who  was  himself  a  Mason,  man  of  forty  by  this  time,  and  had
high  things  in  him  of  the  Quixotic  type,  ventured  on  defence ;
and  was  so  respectful,  eloquent,  dexterous,  ingenious,  he  quite
captivated,  if  not  his  Majesty,  at  least  the  Crown-Prince,  who
was  more  enthusiastic  for  high  things.  Crown-Prince,  after
table,  took  his  Durchlaucht  of  Biickeburg  aside  ;  talked  farther
on  the  subject,  expressed  his  admiration,  his  conviction, — his
wish  to  be  admitted  into  such  a  Hero  Fraternity.  Nothing
could  be  welcomer  to  Durchlaucht.  And  so,  in  all  privacy,  it
was  made  up  betweeen  them,  That  Durchlaucht,  summoning
as  many  mystic  Brothers  out  of  Hamburg  as  were  needful,
should  be  in  waiting  with  them,  on  the  Crown-Prince's  road
homeward,  —  say  at  Brunswick,  night  before  the  Fair,  where
we  are  to  be,  — and  there  make  the  Crown-Prince  a  Mason.1

This  is  Bielfeld's  account,  repeated  ever  since ;  substantially
correct,  except  that  the  scene  was  not  Loo  at  all :  dinner  and
dialogue,  it  now  appears,  took  place  in  Durchlaucht's  own
neighborhood,  during  the  Cleve  Eeview  time;  "probably  at
Minden,  17th  July ; "  and  all  was  settled  into  fixed  program
before  Loo  came  in  sight.2  Bielfeld's  report  of  the  subsequent

1  Bielfeld,  i.  14-16  ;  Preuss,  i.  Ill  ;  Preuss,  Buchfur  Jedermann,  i.  41.

2  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xvs.  201  :  Friedrich's  Letter  to  this  Durchlaucht,
"  Comte  de  Schaumbourg-Lippe  "  he  calls  him  ;  date,  "  Moyland,  26th  July,
1738:"  Moyland,  a  certain  Schloss,  or  habitable  Mansion,  of  his  Majesty's,
few  miles  to  north  of  Mors  in  the  Cleve  Country ;  where  his  Majesty  used
often  to  pause ;  —  and  where  (what  will  be  much  more  remarkable  to  readers)
the  Crown-Prince  and  Voltaire  had  their  first  meeting,  two  years  hence.

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  95

12th  Aug.  1738.

procedure  at  Brunswick,  as  he  saw  it  and  was  himself  part
of  it,  is  liable  to  no  mistakes,  at  least  of  the  involuntary
kind;  and  may,  for  anything  we  know,  be  correct  in  every
particular.

He  says  (veiling  it  under  discreet  asterisks,  which  are  now
decipherable  enough),  The  Durchlaucht  of  Lippe-Biickeburg
had  summoned  six  Brethren  of  the  Hamburg  Lodge  ;  of  whom
we  mention  only  a  Graf  von  Kielmannsegge,  a  Baron  von
Oberg,  both  from  Hanover,  and  Bielfeld  himself,  a  Merchant's
Son,  of  Hamburg ;  these,  with  "  Kielmannsegge's  Valet  to  act
as  Tiler,"  Valet  being  also  a  Mason,  and  the  rule  equality  of
mankind,  —  were  to  have  the  honor  of  initiating  the  Crown-
Prince.  They  arrived  at  the  Western  Gate  of  Brunswick  on
the  llth  of  August,  as  prearranged ;  Prussian  Majesty  not  yet
come,  but  coming  punctually  on  the  morrow.  It  is  Fair -time  ;
all  manner  of  traders,  pedlers,  showmen  rendezvousing ;  many
neighboring  Nobility  too,  as  was  still  the  habit.  "  Such  a
bulk  of  light  luggage  ?  "  said  the  Custom-house  people  at  the
Gate; — but  were  pacified  by  slipping  them  a  ducat.  Upon
which  we  drove  to  "  Korn's  Hotel "  (if  anybody  now  knew
it) ;  and  there  patiently  waited.  No  great  things  of  a  Hotel,
says  Bielfeld;  but  can  be  put  up  with  ; — worst  feature  is,  we
discover  a  Hanover  acquaintance  lodging  close  by,  nothing
but  a  wooden  partition  between  us :  How  if  he  should  over-
hear !  —

Prussian  Majesty  and  suite,  under  universal  cannon-salvos,
arrived,  Sunday  the  12th ;  to  stay  till  Wednesday  (three  days)
with  his  august  Son-in-law  and  Daughter  here.  Durchlaucht
Lippe  presents  himself  at  Court,  the  rest  of  us  not ;  privately
settles  with  the  Prince  :  "  Tuesday  night,  eve  of  his  Majesty's
departure ;  that  shall  be  the  night :  at  Korn's  Hotel,  late
enough !  "  And  there,  accordingly,  on  the  appointed  night,
14th-15th  August,  1738,  the  light-luggage  trunks  have  yielded
their  stage-properties  ;  Jachin  and  Boaz  are  set  up,  and  all
things  are  ready ;  Tiler  (Kielmannsegge's  Valet)  watching
with  drawn  sword  against  the  profane.  As  to  our  Hanover
neighbor,  on  the  other  side  the  partition,  says  Bielfeld,  we
waited  on  him,  this  day  after  dinner,  successively  paying  our

96  AT REINSBEEG.  BOOK  X.

15th  Aug.  1738.

respects  ;  successively  pledged  him  in  so  many  bumpers,  he  is
lying  dead  drunk  hours  ago,  could  not  overhear  a  cannon-
battery,  he.  And  soon  after  midnight,  the  Crown-Prince
glides  in,  a  Captain  Wartensleben  accompanying,  who  is  also
a  candidate;  and  the  mysterious  rites  are  accomplished  on
both  of  them,  on  the  Crown-Prince  first,  without  accident,
and  in  the  usual  way.

Bielfeld  could  not  enough  admire  the  demeanor  of  this
Prince,  his  clearness,  sense,  quiet  brilliancy ;  and  how  he  was
so  "intrepid,"  and  "possessed  himself  so  gracefully  in  the
most  critical  instants."  Extremely  genial  air,  and  so  young,
looks  younger  even  than  his  years :  handsome  to  a  degree,
though  of  short  stature.  Physiognomy,  features,  quite  charm-
ing ;  fine  auburn  hair  (beau  brun),  a  negligent  plenty  of  it ;
"his  large  blue  eyes  have  something  at  once  severe,  sweet
and  gracious."  Eligible  Mason  indeed.  Had  better  make
despatch  at  present,  lest  Papa  be  getting  on  the  road  before
him !  —  Bielfeld  delivered  a  small  address,  composed  before-
hand ;  with  which  the  Prince  seemed  to  be  content.  And  so,
with  masonic  grip,  they  made  their  adieus  for  the  present ;
and  the  Crown-Prince  and  Wartensleben  were  back  at  their
posts,  ready  for  the  road  along  with  his  Majesty.

His  Majesty  came  on  Sunday ;  goes  on  Wednesday,  home
now  at  a  stretch ;  and,  we  hope,  has  had  a  good  time  of  it  here,
these  three  days.  Daughter  Charlotte  and  her  Serene  Hus-
band, well  with  their  subjects,  well  with  one  another,  are
doing  well ;  have  already  two  little  Children  ;  a  Boy  the  elder,
of  whom  we  have  heard :  Boy's  name  is  Karl,  age  now  three ;
sprightly,  reckoned  very  clever,  by  the  fond  parents  ;  —  who
has  many  things  to  do  in  the  world,  by  and  by ;  to  attack  the
French  Kevolution,  and  be  blown  to  pieces  by  it  on  the  Field
of  Jena,  for  final  thing  !  That  is  the  fate  of  little  Karl,  who
frolics  about  here,  so  sunshiny  and  ingenuous  at  present.

Karl's  Grandmother,  the  Serene  Dowager  Duchess,  Fried-
rich's  own  Mother-in-law,  his  Majesty  and  Friedrich  would
also  of  course  see  here.  Fine  Younger  Sons  of  hers  are  com-
ing forward  ;  the  reigning  Duke  beautifully  careful  about  the

CHAP.  V.  VISIT  AT  LOO.  9T

15th  Aug.  1738.

furtherance  of  these  Cadets  of  the  House.  Here  is  Prince
Ferdinand,  for  instance  ;  just  getting  ready  for  the  Grand
Tour  ;  goes  in  a  month  hence : x  a  fine  eupeptic  loyal  young
fellow ;  who,  in  a  twenty  years  more,  will  be  Chatham's  Gen-
eralissimo, and  fight  the  French  to  some  purpose.  A  Brother
of  his,  the  next  elder,  is  now  fighting  the  Turks  for  his
Kaiser ;  does  not  like  it  at  all,  under  such  Seckendorfs  and
War-Ministries  as  there  are.  Then,  elder  still,  eldest  of  all
the  Cadets,  there  is  Anton  Ulrich,  over  at  Petersburg  for  some
years  past,  with  outlooks  high  enough :  To  wed  the  Mecklen-
burg Princess  there  (Daughter  of  the  unutterable  Duke),  and
be  as  good  as  Czar  of  all  the  Russias  one  day.  Little  to  his
profit,  poor  soul !  —  These,  historically  ascertainable,  are  the
aspects  of  the  Brunswick  Court  during  those  three  days  of
Royal  Visit,  in  Fair-time  ;  and  may  serve  to  date  the  Masonic
Transaction  for  us,  which  the  Crown-Prince  has  just  accom-
plished over  at  Korn's.

As  for  the  Transaction  itself,  there  is  intrinsically  no  harm
in  this  initiation,  we  will  hope  :  but  it  behooves  to  be  kept
well  hidden  from  Papa.  Papa's  good  opinion  of  the  Prince
has  sensibly  risen,  in  the  course  of  this  Journey,  "  so  rational,
serious,  not  dangling  about  among  the  women  as  formerly ; "
—  and  what  a  shock  would  this  of  Korn's  Hotel  be,  should
Papa  hear  of  it !  Poor  Papa,  from  officious  tale-bearers  he
hears  many  things :  is  in  distress  about  Voltaire,  about  Het-
erodoxies ;  —  and  summoned  the  Crown-Prince,  by  express,
from  Eeinsberg,  on  one  occasion  lately,  over  to  Potsdam,  "  to
take  the  Communion  "  there,  by  way  of  case-hardening  against
Voltaire  and  Heterodoxies  !  Think  of  it,  human  readers  !  —
We  will  add  the  following  stray  particulars,  more  or  less
illustrative  of  the  Masonic  Transaction;  and  so  end  that
trifling  affair.

The  Captain  Wartensleben,  fellow-recipient  of  the  mysteries
at  Brunswick,  is  youngest  son,  by  a  second  marriage,  of  old
Feldmarschall  Wartensleben,  now  deceased;  and  is  conse-
quently Uncle,  Half-Uncle,  of  poor  Lieutenant  Katte,  though

1  Mauvillon  (Fils,  son  of  him  whom  we  cite  otherwise),  Geschichte  Ferdi-
nands Herzoys  von  Braunschweig- Liineburg  (Leipzig,  1794),  i.  17-25.

VOL. VII.  7

98  AT  EEINSBEEG.  BOOK  x.

15th  Aug.  1738.

some  years  younger  than  Katte  would  now  have  been.  Tender
memories  hang  by  Wartensleben,  in  a  silent  way !  He  is
Captain  in  the  Potsdam  Giants  ;  somewhat  an  intimate,  and
not  undeservedly  so,  of  the  Crown-Prince  ;  —  succeeds  Wolden
as  Hofrnarschall  at  Keinsberg,  not  many  months  after  this ;
Wolden  having  died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  Of  Bielfeld
comes  a  Book,  slightly  citable ;  from  no  other  of  the  Brethren,
or  their  Feat  at  Korn's,  comes  (we  may  say)  anything  what-
ever. The  Crown-Prince  prosecuted  his  Masonry,  at  Eeinsberg
or  elsewhere,  occasionally,  for  a  year  or  two ;  but  was  never
ardent  in  it ;  and  very  soon  after  his  Accession,  left  off  alto-
gether :  "  Child's-play  and  ignis  fatuus  mainly !  "  A  Royal
Lodge  was  established  at  Berlin,  of  which  the  new  King  con-
sented to  be  patron  ;  but  he  never  once  entered  the  place ;  and
only  his  Portrait  (a  welcornely  good  one,  still  to  be  found
there)  presided  over  the  mysteries  in  that  Establishment.
Harmless  "  fire,"  but  too  "  fatuous  ; "  mere  flame-circles  cut  in
the  air,  for  infants,  we  know  how  !  —

With  Lippe-Biickeburg  there  ensued  some  Correspondence,
high  enough  on  his  Serenity's  side ;  but  it  soon  languished  on
the  Prince's  side  ;  and  in  private  Poetry,  within  a  two  years
of  this  Brunswick  scene,  we  find  Lippe  used  proverbially  for
a  type-specimen  of  Fools.1  A  windy  fantastic  individual ;  —
overwhelmed  in  finance-difficulties  too !  Lippe  continued  writ-
ing ;  but  "  only  Secretaries  now  answered  him  "  from  Berlin.
A  son  of  his,  son  and  successor,  something  of  a  Quixote  too,
but  notable  in  Artillery-practice  and  otherwise,  will  turn  up  at
a  future  stage.

Nor  is  Bielfeld  with  his  Book  a  thing  of  much  moment  to
Friedrich  or  to  us.  Bielfeld  too  has  a  light  airy  vein  of  talk  ;
loves  Voltaire  and  the  Philosophies  in  a  light  way  ;  —  knows
the  arts  of  Society,  especially  the  art  of  flattering ;  and  would
fain  make  himself  agreeable  to  the  Crown-Prince,  being  anxious
to  rise  in  the  world.  His  Father  is  a  Hamburg  Merchant,
Hamburg  "  Sealing-wax  Manufacturer,"  not  ill  off  for  money :

1  "  Taciturne,  Caton,  avec  mes  bons  parents,
Aussi  fou  que  la  Lippe  avec  les  jeunes  gens."

(Euvres,  xi.  80  (Discours  sur  la  Faussete,  written  1740).

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  99

15th  Aug.  1738.

Son  has  been  at  schools,  high  schools,  under  tutors,  posture-
masters  ;  swashes  about  on  those  terms,  with  French  esprit  in
his  mouth,  and  lace  ruffles  at  his  wrists ;  still  under  thirty ;
showy  enough,  sharp  enough ;  considerably  a  coxcomb,  as  is
still  evident.  He  did  transiently  get  about  Friedrich,  as  we
shall  see ;  and  hoped  to  have  sold  his  heart  to  good  purpose
there  ;  —  was,  by  and  by,  employed  in  slight  functions ;  not
found  fit  for  grave  ones.  In  the  course  of  some  years,  he  got
a  title  of  Baron ;  and  sold  his  heart  more  advantageously,  to
some  rich  Widow  or  Fraulein ;  with  whom  he  retired  to  Sax-
ony, and  there  lived  on  an  Estate  he  had  purchased,  a  stranger
to  Prussia  thenceforth.

His  Book  (Lettres  Familieres  et  Autres,  all  turning  on  Fried-
rich),  which  came  out  in  1763,  at  the  height  of  Friedrich's
fame,  and  was  much  read,  is  still  freely  cited  by  Historians  as
an  Authority.  But  the  reading  of  a  few  pages  sufficiently  inti-
mates that  these  "  Letters  "  never  can  have  gone  through  a
terrestrial  Post-office  ;  that  thay  are  an  afterthought,  composed
from  vague  memory  and  imagination,  in  that  fine  Saxon  re-
treat ;  — a  sorrowful  ghost-like  "  Travels  of  Anacharsis"  instead
of  living  words  by  an  eye-witness  !  lSTot  to  be  cited  "  freely  "
at  all,  but  sparingly  and  under  conditions.  They  abound  in
small  errors,  in  misdates,  mistakes ;  small  fictions  even,  and
impossible  pretensions:  —  foolish  mortal,  to  write  down  his
bit  of  knowledge  in  that  form  !  For  the  man,  in  spite  of  his
lace  ruffles  and  gesticulations,  has  brisk  eyesight  of  a  super-
ficial kind :  he  could  have  done  us  this  little  service  (appar-
ently his  one  mission  in  the  world,  for  which  Nature  gave  him
bed  and  board  here)  ;  and  he,  the  lace  ruffles  having  gone  into
his  soul,  has  been  tempted  into  misdoing  it !  —  Bielf eld  and
Bielfeld's  Book,  such  as  they  are,  appear  to  be  the  one  con-
qiiest  Friedrich  got  of  Freemasonry ;  no  other  result  now
traceable  to  us  of  that  adventure  in  Korn's  Hotel,  crowning
event  of  the  Journey  to  Loo.

100  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  x.

15th  Aug.  1738.

Seckendorf  gets  lodged  in Grratz.

Feldmarschall  Seckendorf,  after  unheard-of  wrestlings  with,
the  Turk  War,  and  the  Vienna  War-Office  (Hofkriegsrath),  is
sitting,  for  the  last  three  weeks,  —  where  thinks  the  reader  ?

—  in  the  Fortress  of  Gratz  among  the  Hills  of  Styria ;  a  State-
Prisoner,  not  likely  to  get  out  soon  ! Seckendorf  led  forth,
in  1737,  "  such  an  Army,  for  number,  spirit  and  equipment,"
say  the  Vienna  people,  "  as  never  marched  against  the  Turk
before  ; "  and  it  must  be  owned,  his  ill  success  has  been  un-
paralleled. The  blame  was  not altogether  his; not  chiefly
his,  except  for  his  rash  undertaking  of  the  thing,  on  such  terms
as  there  were. But  the  truth  is,  that  first  scene  we  saw  of  him,

—  an  Army  all  gone  out  trumpeting  and  drumming  into  the
woods  to  find  its  Comniander-in-Chief,  —  was  an  emblem  of  the
Campaign  in  general. Excellent  Army ;  but  commanded  by  no-
body in  particular ;  commanded  by  a  Hofkriegsrath  at  Vienna,
by  a  Franz  Duke of Tuscany,  by  Feldmarschall  Seckendorf,
and  by  subordinates  who  were  disobedient  to  him : which  ac-
cordingly, almost  without  help  of  the  Turk  and  his  disorderly
ferocity,  rubbed  itself  to  pieces  before  long. Roamed  about,
now  hither  now  thither,  with  plans  laid  and  then  with  plans
suddenly  altered,  Captain being Chaos  mainly;  in swampy
countries,  by  overflowing  rivers,  in  hunger,  hot  weather,  forced
marches  ;  till  it  was  marched  gradually  off  its  feet ;  and  the
clouds  of  chaotic  Turks,  who  did  finally  show  face,  had  a  cheap
pennyworth  of  it. Never  was  such  a  campaign  seen  as  this  of
Seckendorf  in  1737,  said  mankind. Except  indeed that  the
present  one,  Campaign  of  1738,  in  those  parts,  under  a  dif-
ferent hand,  is  still  worse  ;  and  the  Campaign  of  1739,  under
still  a  different,  will  be  worst  of  all !  —  Kaiser  Karl  and  his
Austrians  do  not  prosper  in  this  Turk  War,  as  the  Russians  do,

—  who  indeed  have  got  a  General  equal  to  his  task :  Miinnich,  a
famed  master  in  the  art  of  handling  Turks  and  War-Ministries  :
real  father  of  Russian  Soldiering,  say  the  Russians  still.1

1  See  Mannstein  for  Miinnich's  plans  with  the  Turk  (methods  and  devices
of  steady  Discipline  in  small  numbers  versus  impetuous  Ferocity  in  great)  ;
and  Berenhorst  (Betrachtungen  iiber  die  Kriegskunst,  Leipzig,  1796),  a  first-rate
Authority,  for  examples  and  eulogies  of  them.

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  101

15th  Aug.  1738.

Campaign  1737,  with  clouds  of  chaotic  Turks  now  sabring
on  the  skirts  of  it,  had  not  yet  ended,  when  Seckendorf  was
called  out  of  it ;  on  polite  pretexts,  home  to  Vienna ;  and  the
command  given  to  another.  At  the  gates  of  Vienna,  in  the
last  days  of  October,  1737,  an  Official  Person,  waiting  for
the  Felclmarschall,  was  sorry  to  inform  him,  That  he,  Feld-
marschall  Seckendorf,  was  under  arrest ;  arrest  in  his  own
house,  in  the  Kohlmarkt  (Cabbage-market  so  called),  a  captain
and  twelve  musketeers  to  watch  over  him  with  fixed  bayonets
there ;  strictly  private,  till  the  Hbfkriegsrath  had  satisfied
themselves  in  a  point  or  two.  "  Hmph ! "  snuffled  he ;  with
brow  blushing  slate-color,  I  should  think,  and  gray  eyes  much
alight.  And  ever  since,  for  ten  months  or  so,  Seckendorf,
sealed  up  in  the  Cabbage-market,  has  been  fencing  for  life
with  the  Hofkriegsrath ;  who  want  satisfaction  upon  "  eighty-
six  "  different  "  points  ;  "  and  make  no  end  of  chicaning  to
one's  clear  answers.  And  the  Jesuits  preach,  too:  " A  Here-
tic, born  enemy  of  Christ  and  his  Kaiser;  what  is  the  use
of  questioning ! "  And  the  Heathen  rage,  and  all  men  gnash
their  teeth,  in  this  uncomfortable  manner.

Answering  done,  there  comes  no  verdict,  much  less  any
acquittal ;  the  captain  and  twelve  musketeers,  three  of  them
with  fixed  bayonets  in  one's  very  bedroom,  continue.  One
evening,  21st  July,  1738,  glorious  news  from  the  seat  of
War  —  not  till  evening,  as  the  Imperial  Majesty  was  out
hunting  —  enters  Vienna ;  blowing  trumpets ;  shaking  flags :
"  Grand  Victory  over  the  Turks  ! "  so  we  call  some  poor  skir-
mish there  has  been ;  and  Vienna  bursting  all  into  three-
times-three,  the  populace  get  very  high.  Populace  rush  to
the  Kohlmarkt :  break  the  Seckendorf  windows ;  intent  to
massacre  the  Seckendorf,  had  not  fresh  military  come,  who
were  obliged  to  fire  and  kill  one  or  two.  "The  house  cap-
tain and  his  twelve  musketeers,  of  themselves,  did  wonders ;
Seckendorf  and  all  his  domestics  were  in  arms  :  "  "  Jarni-
bleu "  for  the  last  time !  —  This  is  while  the  Crown-Prince  is
at  Wesel;  sound  asleep,  most  likely;  Loo,  and  the  Masonic
adventure,  perhaps  twinkling  prophetically  in  his  dreams.

At  two  next  morning,  an  Official  Gentleman  informs  Seek-

102  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

15th  Aug.  1738.

endorf,  That  he,  for  his  part,  must  awaken,  and  go  to  Gratz.
And  in  one  hour  more  (3  A.M.),  the  Official  Gentleman  rolls
off  with  him ;  drives  all  day ;  and  delivers  his  Prisoner  at
Gratz  :  —  "  Not  so  much  as  a  room  ready  there ;  Prisoner  had
to  wait  an  hour  in  the  carriage,"  till  some  summary  prepara-
tion were  made.  Wall-neighbors  of  the  poor  Feldmarschall,
in  his  Fortress  here,  were  "a  Gold-Cook  (swindling  Alchemist),
who  had  gone  crazy ;  and  an  Irish  Lieutenant,  confined  thirty-
two  years  for  some  love-adventure,  likewise  pretty  crazy ;
their  noises  in  the  night-time  much  disturbed  the  Feldmar-
schall." 1  One  human  thing  there  still  is  in  his  lot,  the  Feld-
marschall's  old  Grafinn.  True  old  Dame,  she,  both  in  the
Kohlmarkt  and  at  Gratz,  stands  by  him,  "imprisoned  along
with  him"  if  it  must  be  so;  ministering,  comforting,  as  only
a  true  Wife  can ;  —  and  hope  has  not  quite  taken  wing.

Rough  old  Feldmarschall ;  now  turned  of  sixty  :  never  made
such  a  Campaign  before,  as  this  of  1737  followed  by  1738 !
There  sits  he ;  and  will  not  trouble  us  any  more  during  the
present  Kaiser's  lifetime.  Friedrich  Wilhelm  is  amazed  at
these  sudden  cantings  of  Fortune's  wheel,  and  grieves  honestly
as  for  an  old  friend :  even  the  Crown-Prince  finds  Seckendorf
punished  unjustly  ;  and  is  almost  sorry  for  him,  after  all  that
has  come  and  gone.

The  Ear  of  Jenkins  re-emerges.

We  must  add  the  following,  distilled  from  the  English
Newspapers,  though  it  is  now  almost  four  months  after
date : —

"London,  1st  April,  1738.  In  the  English  House  of  Com-
mons, much  more  in  the  English  Public,  there  has  been  furious
debating  for  a  fortnight  past :  Committee  of  the  whole  House,
examining  witnesses,  hearing  counsel ;  subject,  the  Termagant
of  Spain,  and  her  West-Indian  procedures ;  —  she,  by  her
procedures  somewhere,  is  always  cutting  out  work  for  man-
kind! How  English  and  other  strangers,  fallen-in  with  in
those  seas,  are  treated  by  the  Spaniards,  readers  have  heard,

1  Scckendorfs  Lelen,  ii.  170-277. See  Schmettau,  pp.  27-59.

CHAP.  V.  VISIT AT LOO.  103

15th  Aug.  1738.

nay  have  chanced  to  see ;  and  it  is  a  fact  painfully  known  to
all  nations.  Fact  which  England,  for  one  nation,  can  no
longer  put  up  with.  Walpole  and  the  Official  Persons  would
fain  smooth  the  matter;  but  the  West-India  Interest,  the
City,  all  Mercantile  and  Navigation  Interests  are  in  dead
earnest :  Committee  of  the  whole  House,  '  Presided  by  Alder-
man Perry/  has  not  ears  enough  to  hear  the  immensities  of
evidence  offered;  slow  Public  is  gradually  kindling  to  some
sense  of  it.  This  had  gone  on  for  two  weeks,  when  —  what
shall  we  say  ?  —  the  Ear  of  Jenkins  re-emerged  for  the  second
time ;  and  produced  important  effects  !

"  Where  Jenkins  had  been  all  this  while,  —  steadfastly  navi-
gating to  and  fro,  steadfastly  eating  tough  junk  with  a  wetting
of  rum ;  not  thinking  too  much  of  past  labors,  yet  privately
'  always  keeping  his  lost  Ear  in  cotton '  (with  a  kind  of
ursine  piety,  or  other  dumb  feeling),  —  no  mortal  now  knows.
But  to  all  mortals  it  is  evident  he  was  home  in  London  at
this  time ;  no  doubt  a  noted  member  of  Wapping  society,  the
much-enduring  Jenkins.  And  witnesses,  probably  not  one
but  many,  had  mentioned  him  to  this  Committee,  as  a  case
eminently  in  point.  Committee,  as  can  still  be  read  in  its
Pthadamanthine  Journals,  orders :  '  Die  Jovis,  16°  Martii
1737-1738,  That  Captain  Eobert  Jenkins  do  attend  this  House
immediately ; '  and  then  more  specially,  '  17°  Martii'  cap-
tious objections  having  risen  in  Official  quarters,  as  we  guess,

—  'That  Captain  Kobert Jenkins  do  attend upon  Tuesday
morning  next.' l Tuesday  next  is  21st  March,  —  1st  of  April,
1738,  by  our  modern  Calendar ;  —  and on  that day,  not  a
doubt,  Jenkins  does  attend; narrates  that  tremendous  pas-
sage we  already  heard  of,  seven  years  ago,  in  the  entrance
of  the  Gulf  of  Florida ;  and  produces  his  Ear  wrapt  in  cotton  :

—  setting  all  on  flame  (except  the  Official  persons)  at  sight
of  it."

Official  persons,  as  their  wont  is  in  the  pressure  of  debate,
endeavored  to  deny,  to  insinuate  in  their  vile  Newspapers,
That  Jenkins  lost  his  Ear  nearer  home  and  not  for  nothing;
1  Commons  Journals,  xxiii.  (in  diebus).

104  AT EEINSBERG.  ^

1 1  39*

as  one  still  reads  in  the  History  Books.1  Sheer  calumnies,
•we  now  find.  Jenkins's  account  was  doubtless  abundantly
emphatic ;  but  there  is  no  ground  to  question  the  substantial
truth  of  him  and  it.  And  so,  after  seven  years  of  unnotice-
able  burning  upon  the  thick  skin  of  the  English  Public,  the
case  of  Jenkins  accidentally  burns  through,  and  sets  England
bellowing;  such  a  smart  is  there  of  it,  —  not  to  be  soothed
by  Official  wet-cloths;  but  getting  worse  and  worse,  for  the
nineteen  months  ensuing.  And  in  short  —  But  we  will  not
anticipate !

CHAPTER  VI.

LAST YEAH OF REIXSBERG ; JOURNEY TO PREUSSEN.

THE  Idyllium  of  Eeinsberg  —  of  which,  except  in  the  way
of  sketchy  suggestion,  there  can  no  history  be  given  —  lasted
less  than  four  years  ;  and  is  now  coming  to  an  end,  unex-
pectedly soon.  A  pleasant  Arcadian  Summer  in  one's  life  ;  —
though  it  has  not  wanted  its  occasional  discords,  flaws  of  ill
weather  in  the  general  sunshine.  Papa,  always  in  uncertain
health  of  late,  is  getting  heavier  of  foot  and  of  heart  under
his  heavy  burdens  ;  and  sometimes  falls  abstruse  enough,  lia-
ble to  bewilderments  from  bad  people  and  events  :  not  much
worth  noticing  here.2  But  the  Crown-Prince  has  learned  to
deal  with  all  this ;  all  this  is  of  transient  nature  ;  and  a  bright
long  future  seems  to  lie  ahead  at  Eeinsberg ;  —  brightened  es-
pecially by  the  Literary  Element ;  which,  in  this  year  of  1739,
is  brisker  than  it  had  ever  been.  Distinguished  Visitors,  of  a
literary  turn,  look  in  at  Reinsberg ;  the  Voltaire  Correspond-
ence is  very  lively  ;  on  Friedrich's  part  there  is  copious  pro-
duction, various  enterprise,  in  the  form  of  prose  and  verse  ;
thoughts  even  of  going  to  press  with  some  of  it :  in  short,  the
Literary  Interest  rises  very  prominent  at  Reinsberg  in  1739.

1  Tindal  (xx.  372),  Coxe,  &c.

2  See  Pollnitz,  ii.  509-515;  Friedrich's  Letter  to  Wilhelmina  ("Berlin,  20th
January,  1739  :"  in  GEuvres,  xxvii.  part  1st,  pp.  60,  61)  ;  &c.  £c.

CHAP.  VI.  LAST  YEAR  OF  REINSBERO.  105

1739.

Biography  is  apt  to  forget  the  Literature  there  (having  her
reasons)  ;  but  must  at  last  take  some  notice  of  it,  among  the
phenomena  of  the  year.

To  the  young  Prince  himself,  "  courting  tranquillity,"  as  his
door-lintel  intimated,1  and  forbidden  to  be  active  except  within
limits,  this  of  Literature  was  all  along  the  great  light  of  exist-
ence at  Reinsberg ;  the  supplement  to  all  other  employments
or  wants  of  employment  there.  To  Friedrich  himself,  in  those
old  days,  a  great  and  supreme  interest ;  while  again,  to  the
modern  Biographer  of  him,  it  has  become  dark  and  vacant ;  a
thing  to  be  shunned,  not  sought.  So  that  the  fact  as  it  stood
with  Friedrich  differs  far  from  any  description  that  can  be
given  of  the  fact.  Alas,  we  have  said  already,  and  the  con-
stant truth  is,  Friedrich's  literatures,  his  distinguished  liter-
ary visitors  and  enterprises,  which  were  once  brand-new  and
brilliant,  have  grown  old  as  a  garment,  and  are  a  sorrow
rather  than  otherwise  to  existing  mankind !  Conscientious
readers,  who  would  represent  to  themselves  the  vanished
scene  at  Keinsberg,  in  this  point  more  especially,  must  make
an  effort.

As  biographical  documents,  these  Poetries  and  Proses  of  the
young  man  give  a  very  pretty  testimony  of  him ;  but  are  not
of  value  otherwise.  In  fact,  they  promise,  if  we  look  well  into
them,  That  here  is  probably  a  practical  faculty  and  intellect
of  the  highest  kind ;  which  again,  on  the  speculative,  especially
on  the  poetical  side,  will  never  be  considerable,  nor  has  even
tried  to  be  so.  This  young  soul  does  not  deal  in  meditation
at  all,  and  his  tendencies  are  the  reverse  of  sentimental.  Here
is  no  introspection,  morbid  or  other,  no  pathos  or  complaint,
no  melodious  informing  of  the  public  what  dreadful  emotions
you  labor  under  :  here,  in  rapid  prompt  form,  indicating  that
it  is  truth  and  not  fable,  are  generous  aspirations  for  the  world
and  yourself,  generous  pride,  disdain  of  the  ignoble,  of  the  dark,
mendacious;  —  here,  in  short,  is  a  swift-handed,  valiant,  steel-
bright  kind  of  soul ;  very  likely  for  a  King's,  if  other  things
answer,  and  not  likely  for  a  Poet's.  No  doubt  he  could  have
made  something  of  Literature  too  ;  could  have  written  Books,
1  "  Frederico  tranquillitatem  colenti"  (Infra,  p.  123).

106  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

1739.

and  left  some  stamp  of  a  veracious,  more  or  less  victorious  in-
tellect, in  that  strange  province  too.  But  then  he  must  have
applied  himself  to  it,  as  he  did  to  reigning  :  done  in  the  cur-
sory style,  we  see  what  it  has  come  to.

It  is  certain,  Friedrich's  reputation  suffers,  at  this  day,  from
his  writing.  Prom  his  not  having  written  nothing,  he  stands
lower  with  the  world.  Which  seems  hard  measure  ;  —  though
perhaps  it  is  the  law  of  the  case,  after  all.  "  Nobody  in  these
days,"  says  my  poor  Friend,  "has  the  least  notion  of  the  sinful
waste  there  is  in  talk,  whether  by  pen  or  tongue.  Better  prob-
ably that  King  Friedrich  had  written  no  Verses ;  nay  I  know
not  that  David's  Psalms  did  David's  Kingship  any  good ! "
Which  may  be  truer  than  it  seems.  Fine  aspirations,  gen-
erous convictions,  purposes,  —  they  are  thought  very  fine :  but
it  is  good,  on  various  accounts,  to  keep  them  rather  silent ;
strictly  iinvocal,  except  on  call  of  real  business  ;  so  dangerous
are  they  for  becoming  conscious  of  themselves  !  Most  things
do  not  ripen  at  all  except  underground.  And  it  is  a  sad  but
sure  truth,  that  every  time  you  speak  of  a  fine  purpose,  espe-
cially if  with  eloquence  and  to  the  admiration  of  by-standers,
there  is  the  less  chance  of  your  ever  making  a  fact  of  it  in
your  poor  life.  —  If  Eeinsberg,  and  its  vacancy  of  great  em-
ployment, was  the  cause  of  Friedrich's  verse-writing,  we  will
not  praise  Keinsberg  on  that  head !  But  the  truth  is,  Fried-
rich's  verses  came  from,  him  with  uncommon  fluency ;  and
were  not  a  deep  matter,  but  a  shallow  one,  in  any  sense.  Not
much  more  to  him  than  speaking  with  a  will ;  than  fantasying
on  the  flute  in  an  animated  strain.  Ever  and  anon  through
his  life,  on  small  hint  from  without  or  on  great,  there  was
found  a  certain  leakage  of  verses,  which  he  was  prompt  to
utter ;  —  and  the  case  at  Eeinsberg,  or  afterwards,  is  not  so
serious  as  we  might  imagine.

*•&••

Pine's  Horace ;  and  the  Anti-MachiaveL

In  late  months  Friedrich  had  conceived  one  notable  project ;
which  demands  a  word  in  this  place.  Did  modern  readers
ever  hear  of  "  John  Pine,  the  celebrated  English  Engraver  "  ?

CHAP.  VI.  LAST  YEAR  OF  REINSBERG.  107

1739.

John  Pine,  a  man  of  good  scholarship,  good  skill  with  his
burin,  did  "Tapestries  of  the  House  of  Lords,"  and  other
things  of  a  celebrated  nature,  famous  at  home  and  abroad:
but  his  peculiar  feat,  which  had  commended  him  at  Reins-
berg,  was  an  Edition  of  Horace  :  exquisite  old  Flaccus  brought
to  perfection,  as  it  were;  all  done  with  vignettes,  classical
borderings,  symbolic  marginal  ornaments,  in  fine  taste  and
accuracy,  the  Text  itself  engraved  ;  all  by  the  exquisite  burin
of  Pine.1  This  Edition  had  come  out  last  year,  famous  over
the  world  ;  and  was  by  and  by,  as  rumor  bore,  to  be  followed
by  a  Virgil  done  in  the  like  exquisite  manner.

The  Pine  Horace,  part  of  the  Pine  Virgil  too,  still  exist  in
the  libraries  of  the  curious  ;  and  are  doubtless  known  to  the
proper  parties,  though  much  forgotten  by  others  of  us.  To
Friedrich,  scanning  the  Pine  phenomenon  with  interest  then
brand-new,  it  seemed  an  admirable  tribute  to  classical  genius ;
and  the  idea  occurred  to  him,  "Is  not  there,  by  Heaven's
blessing,  a  living  genius,  classical  like  those  antique  Romans,
and  worthy  of  a  like  tribute  ?  "  Friedrich's  idea  was,  That
Voltaire  being  clearly  the  supreme  of  Poets,  the  Henriade,  his
supreme  of  Poems,  ought  to  be  engraved  like  Flaccus  ;  text
and  all,  with  vignettes,  tail-pieces,  classical  borderings  beau-
tifully symbolic  and  exact;  by  the  exquisite  burin  of  Pine.
Which  idea  the  young  hero-worshipper,  in  spite  of  his  finance-
difficulties,  had  resolved  to  realize ;  and  was  even  now  busy
with  it,  since  his  return  from  Loo.  "  Such  beautiful  enthu-
siasm," say  some  readers ;  "  and  in  behalf  of  that  particular
demi-god ! "  Alas,  yes  ;  to  Friedrich  he  was  the  best  demi-
god then  going;  and  Friedrich  never  had  any  doubt  about
him.

For  the  rest,  this  heroic  idea  could  not  realize  itself ;  and
we  are  happy  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  Pine  or  the
Henriade.  Correspondences  were  entered  into  with  Pine,  and
some  pains  taken :  Pine's  high  prices  were  as  nothing ;  but
Pine  was  busy  with  his  Virgil ;  probably,  in  fact,  had  little
stomach  for  the  Henriade ;  "  could  not  for  seven  years  to
come  enter  upon  it :  "  so  that  the  matter  had  to  die  away ;
1  "London,  1737  "  (Biographic  Universelle,  xxxiv.  465).

108  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

1739.

and  nothing  came  of  it  but  a  small  Dissertation,  or  Introduc-
tory Essay,  which  the  Prince  had  got  ready,  —  which  is  still
to  be  found  printed  in  Voltaire's  Works  *  and  in  Friedrich's,
if  anybody  now  cared  much  to  read  it.  Preuss  says  it  was
finished,  "the  10th  August,  1739;"  and  that  minute  fact  in
Chronology,  with  the  above  tale  of  Hero-worship  hanging  to  it,
will  suffice  my  readers  and  me.

But  there  is  another  literary  project  on  hand,  which  did
take  effect ;  —  much  worthy  of  mention,  this  year ;  the  whole
world  having  risen  into  such  a  Chorus  of  Te  Deum  at  sight  of
it  next  year.  In  this  year  falls,  what  at  any  rate  was  a  great
event  to  Friedrich,  as  literary  man.  the  printing  of  his  first
Book,  —  assiduous  writing  of  it  with  an  eye  to  print.  The
Book  is  that  "celebrated  Anti-Machiavel,"  ever-praiseworthy
Refutation  of  Machiavel's  Prince ;  concerning  which  there
are  such  immensities  of  Voltaire  Correspondence,  now  become,
like  the  Book  itself,  inane  to  all  readers.  This  was  the  chosen
soul's  employment  of  Friedrich,  the  flower  of  life  to  him,  at
Eeinsberg,  through  the  year  1739.  It  did  not  actually  get  to
press  till  Spring  1740  ;  nor  actually  come  out  till  Autumn,  —
by  which  time  a  great  change  had  occurred  in  Friedrich's  title
and  circumstances :  but  we  may  as  well  say  here  what  little  is
to  be  said  of  it  for  modern  readers.

"  The  Crown-Prince,  reading  this  bad  Book  of  Machiavel's,
years  ago,  had  been  struck,  as  all  honest  souls,  especially  gov-
ernors or  apprentices  to  governing,  must  be,  if  they  thought
of  reading  such  a  thing,  with  its  badness,  its  falsity,  detesta-
bility ;  and  came  by  degrees,  obliquely  fishing  out  Voltaire's
opinion  as  he  went  along,  on  the  notion  of  refuting  Machi-
avel ;  and  did  refute  him,  the  best  he  could.  Set  down,
namely,  his  own  earnest  contradiction  to  such  ungrounded
noxious  doctrines  ;  elaborating  the  same  more  and  more  into
clear  logical  utterance,  till  it  swelled  into  a  little  Volume ;
which,  so  excellent  was  it,  so  important  to  mankind,  Voltaire
and  friends  were  clear  for  publishing.  Published  accordingly
it  was ;  goes  through  the  press  next  Summer  (1740),  under

1  (Euvres,  xiii.  393-402.

CHAP.  VI.  LAST YEAR  OF REINSBERG.  109

1739.

Voltaire's  anxious  superintendence : l  for  the  Prince  has  at
length  consented ;  and  Voltaire  hands  the  Manuscript,  with
mystery  yet  with  hints,  to  a  Dutch  Bookseller,  one  Van  Duren
at  the  Hague,  who  is  eager  enough  to  print  such  an  article.
Voltaire  himself  —  such  his  magnanimous  friendship,  espe-
cially if  one  have  Dutch  Lawsuits,  or  business  of  one's  own,
in  those  parts  —  takes  charge  of  correcting ;  lodges  himself
in  the  '  Old  Court '  (Prussian  Mansion,  called  Vieille  Cour,  at
the  Hague,  where  '  Luiscius,'  figuratively  speaking,  may  '  get
an  alms '  from  us)  ;  and  therefrom  corrects,  alters  ;  corre-
sponds with  the  Prince  and  Van  Duren,  at  a  great  rate.  Keeps
correcting,  altering,  till  Van  Duren  thinks  he  is  spoiling  it  for
sale ;  —  and  privately  determines  to  preserve  the  original  Man-
uscript, and  have  an  edition  of  that,  with  only  such  corrections
as  seem  good  to  Van  Duren.  A  treasonous  step  on  this  mule
of  a  Bookseller's  part,  thinks  Voltaire  ;  but  mulishly  persisted
in  by  the  man.  Endless  correspondence,  to  right  and  left,
ensues  ;  intolerably  wearisome  to  every  reader.  And,  in  fine,
there  came  out,  in  Autumn  next,"  —  the  Crown-Prince  no
longer  a  Crown-Prince  by  that  time,  but  shining  conspicuous
under  Higher  Title,  —  "  not  one  Anti-Machiavel  only,  but  a
couple  or  a  trio  of  Anti-Machiavels ;  as  printed  '  at  the
Hague ; '  as  reprinted  '  at  London '  or  elsewhere ;  the  con-
fused Bibliography  of  which  has  now  fallen  very  insignificant.
First  there  was  the  Voltaire  text,  Authorized  Edition,  '  end  of
September,  1740 ; '  then  came,  in  few  weeks,  the  Van  Duren
one ;  then,  probably,  a  third,  combining  the  two,  the  variations
given  as  foot-notes  :  — in  short,  I  know  not  how  many  editions,
translations,  printings  and  reprintings;  all  the  world  being

1  Here,  gathered  from  Friedrich's  Letters  to  Voltaire,  is  the  Chronology  of
the  little  Enterprise:  —

1738,  March  21,  June  17,  "  Machiavel  a  baneful  man,"  thinks  Friedrich.
"  Ought  to  be  refuted  by  somebody  ?  "  thinks  he  (date  not  known).

1739,  March  22,  Friedrich  thinks  of  doing  it  himself. Plas  done  it,  Decem-
ber 4 ;  —  "a  Book  which  ought  to  be  printed,"  say  Voltaire  and  the  literary
visitors.

1740,  April  26,  Book  given  up  to  Voltaire  for  printing. Printing  finished  ;
Book  appears,  "  end  of  September,"  when  a  great  change  had  occurred  in
Friedrich's  title  and  position.

110  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

1739.

much  taken  up  with  such  a  message  from  the  upper  regions,
and  eager  to  read  it  in  any  form.

"  As  to  Friedrich  himself,  who  of  course  says  nothing  of  the
Anti-Machiavel  in  public,  he  privately,  to  Voltaire,  disowns
all  these  editions ;  and  intends  to  give  a  new  one  of  his  own,
which  shall  be  the  right  article ;  but  never  did  it,  having  far
other  work  cut  out  for  him  in  the  months  that  came.  But
how  zealous  the  world's  humor  was  in  that  matter,  no  modern
reader  can  conceive  to  himself.  In  the  frightful  Compilation
called  Helden-Geschichte,  which  we  sometimes  cite,  there  are,
excerpted  from  the  then  'Bibliotheques'  (Nouvelle  Bibliotheque
and  another ;  shining  Periodicals  of  the  time,  now  gone  quite
dead),  two  '  reviews '  of  the  Anti-Machiavel,  which  fill  modern
readers  with  amazement  :  such  a  Domine  dimittas  chanted
over  such  an  article  !  —  These  details,  in  any  other  than  the
Biographical  point  of  view,  are  now  infinitely  unimportant."

Truly,  yes !  The  Crown-Prince's  Anti-Machiavel,  final  cor-
rect edition  (in  two  forms,  Voltaire's  as  corrected,  and  the
Prince's  own  as  written),  stands  now  in  clear  type ;  *  and,  after
all  that  jumble  of  printing  and  counter-printing,  we  can  any  of
us  read  it  in  a  few  hours ;  but,  alas,  almost  none  of  us  with  the
least  interest,  or,  as  it  were,  with  any  profit  whatever.  So  dif-
ferent is  present  tense  from  past,  in  all  things,  especially  in
things  like  these  !  It  is  sixscore  years  since  the  Anti-Machiavel
appeared.  The  spectacle  of  one  who  was  himself  a  King  (for  the
mysterious  fact  was  well  known  to  Van  Duren  and  everybody)
stepping  forth  to  say  with  conviction,  That  Kingship  was  not
a  thing  of  attorney  mendacity,  to  be  done  under  the  patronage
of  Beelzebub,  but  of  human  veracity,  to  be  set  about  under  quite
Other  patronage  ;  and  that,  in  fact,  a  King  was  the  "  born  ser-
vant of  his  People  "  (domestique  Friedrich  once  calls  it),  rather
than  otherwise :  this,  naturally  enough,  rose  upon  the  then  popu-
lations, unused  to  such  language,  like  the  dawn  of  a  new  day  ;
and  was  welcomed  with  such  applauses  as  are  now  incredible,
after  all  that  has  come  and  gone  !  Alas,  in  these  sixscore
years,  it  has  been  found  so  easy  to  profess  and  speak,  even
with  sincerity !  The  actual  Hero-Kings  were  long  used  to  be
1  Preuss,  CEuvres  de  Frederic,  viii.  61-163.

CHAP.  VI.  LAST YEAR  OF EEINSBERG.  Ill

1739.

silent ;  and  the  Sham-Hero  kind  grow  only  the  more  desperate
for  us,  the  more  they  speak  and  profess  !  —  This  Anti-Machicts-
vel  of  Friedrich's  is  a  clear  distinct  Treatise ;  confutes,  or  at
least  heartily  contradicts,  paragraph  by  paragraph,  the  incredi-
ble sophistries  of  Machiavel.  Nay  it  leaves  us,  if  we  suffi-
ciently force  our  attention,  with  the  comfortable  sense  that
his  Royal  Highness  is  speaking  with  conviction,  and  honestly
from  the  heart,  in  the  affair :  but  that  is  all  the  conquest
we  get  of  it,  in  these  days.  Treatise  fallen  more  extinct  to
existing  mankind  it  would  not  be  easy  to  name.

Perhaps  indeed  mankind  is  getting  weary  of  the  question
altogether.  Machiavel  himself  one  now  reads  only  by  com-
pulsion. "  What  is  the  use  of  arguing  with  anybody  that  can
believe  in  Machiavel  ?  "  asks  mankind,  or  might  well  ask ;  and,
except  for  Editorial  purposes,  eschews  any  Anti- Machiavel ;
impatient  to  be  rid  of  bane  and  antidote  both.  Truly  the
world  has  had  a  pother  with  this  little  Nicol6  Machiavelli
and  his  perverse  little  Book :  —  pity  almost  that  a  Friedrich
Wilhelm,  taking  his  rounds  at  that  point  of  time,  had  not  had
the  "  refuting  "  of  him ;  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  method  would
have  been  briefer  than  Friedrich's  !  But  let  us  hope  the  thing
is  now,  practically,  about  completed.  And  as  to  the  other
question,  "Was  the  Signor  Nicolo  serious  in  this  perverse
little  Book  ;  or  did  he  only  do  it  ironically,  with  a  serious
inverse  purpose  ? "  we  will  leave  that  to  be  decided,  any
time  convenient,  by  people  who  are  much  at  leisure  in  the
world !  —

The  printing  of  the  Anti-Machiavel  was  not  intrinsically
momentous  in  Friedrich's  history ;  yet  it  might  as  well  have
been  dispensed  with.  He  had  here  drawn  a  fine  program,  and
needlessly  placarded  it  for  the  street  populations  :  and  after-
wards there  rose,  as  could  not  fail  on  their  part,  comparison
between  program  and  performance  ;  scornful  cry,  chiefly  from,
men  of  weak  judgment,  "Is  this  King  an  ^wta'-Machiavel,
then  ?  Pfui ! "  Of  which,  —  though  Voltaire's  voice,  too,  was
heard  in  it,  in  angry  moments,  —  we  shall  say  nothing :  the
reader,  looking  for  himself,  will  judge  by  and  by.  And  here-
with enough  of  the  Anti-Machiavel.  Composition  of  Anti-

112  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

27th  July,  1739.

Machiavel  and  speculation  of  the  Pine  Henriade  lasted,  both
of  them,  all  through  this  Year  1739,  and  farther  :  from  these
two  items,  not  to  mention  any  other,  readers  can  figure  suffi-
ciently how  literary  a  year  it  was.

Friedrich  in  Preussen  again ;  at  the  Stud  of  Trakelinen.
A  tragically  great  Event  coming  on.

In  July  this  year  the  Crown-Prince  went  with  Papa  on
the  Prussian  Review-journey.1  Such  attendance  on  Review-
journeys,  a  mark  of  his  being  well  with  Papa,  is  now  becoming
usual ;  they  are  agreeable  excursions,  and  cannot  but  be  instruc-
tive as  well.  On  this  occasion,  things  went  beautifully  with
him.  Out  in  those  grassy  Countries,  in  the  bright  Summer,
once  more  he  had  an  unusually  fine  time ;  —  and  two  very
special  pleasures  befell  him.  First  was,  a  sight  of  the  Emi-
grants, our  Salzburgers  and  other,  in  their  flourishing  con-
dition, over  in  Lithuania  yonder.  Delightful  to  see  how  the
waste  is  blossoming  up  again ;  busy  men,  with  their  industries,
their  steady  pious  husbandries,  making  all  things  green  and
fruitful:  horse-droves,  cattle-herds,  waving  cornfields ;  —  a  very
"  Schmalzgrube  (Butter-pit)  "  of  those  Northern  parts,  as  it  is
since  called.2  The  Crown-Prince's  own  words  on  this  matter
we  will  give ;  they  are  in  a  Letter  of  his  to  Voltaire,  perhaps
already  known  to  some  readers  ;  —  and  we  can  observe  he
writes  rather  copiously  from  those  localities  at  present,  and  in
a  cheerful  humor  with  everybody.

"  Insterburg,  27th  July,  1739  (Crown-Prince  to  Voltaire).  .  .  .
Prussian  Lithuania  is  a  Country  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles
long,  by  from  sixty  to  forty  broad ; 3  it  was  ravaged  by  Pes-
tilence at  the  beginning  of  this  Century;  and  they  say
three  hundred  thousand  people  died  of  disease  and  famine."
Ravaged  by  Pestilence  and  the  neglect  of  King  Friedrich  I. ;
till  my  Father,  once  his  hands  were  free,  made  personal  survey
of  it,  and  took  it  up,  in  earnest.

1  "  Set  out,  7th  July  "  (CEuvres,  xxvii.  part  1st,  67  n.).

2  Biisching,  Erdbeschreibunrj,  ii.  1049.

8  "  Miles  English"  we  always  mean,  unless  &c.

CHAP.  VI.  JOURNEY  TO  PREUSSEN.  113

27th  July,  1739.

"Since  that  time,"  say  twenty  years  ago,  "there  is  no  ex-
pense that  the  King  has  been  afraid  of,  in  order  to  succeed  in
his  salutary  views.  He  made,  in  the  first  place,  regulations
full  of  wisdom ;  he  rebuilt  wherever  the  Pestilence  had  deso-
lated :  thousands  of  families,  from  the  ends  of  Europe,"  seven-
teen thousand  Salzburgers  for  the  last  item,  "  were  conducted
hither ;  the  Country  repeopled  itself ;  trade  began  to  flourish
again ;  —  and  now,  in  these  fertile  regions,  abundance  reigns
more  than  it  ever  did.

"  There  are  above  half  a  million  of  inhabitants  in  Lithuania ;
there  are  more  towns  than  there  ever  were,  more  flocks  than
formerly,  more  wealth  and  more  productiveness  than  in  any
other  part  of  Germany.  And  all  this  that  I  tell  you  of  is  due
to  the  King  alone  :  who  not  only  gave  the  orders,  but  superin-
tended the  execution  of  them ;  it  was  he  that  devised  the  plans,
and  himself  got  them  carried  to  fulfilment ;  and  spared  neither
care  nor  pains,  nor  immense  expenditures,  nor  promises  nor
recompenses,  to  secure  happiness  and  life  to  this  half-million
of  thinking  beings,  who  owe  to  him  alone  that  they  have  pos-
sessions and  felicity  in  the  world.

"  I  hope  this  detail  does  not  weary  you.  I  depend  on  your
humanity  extending  itself  to  your  Lithuanian  brethren,  as  well
as  to  your  French,  English,  German,  or  other,  —  all  the  more
as,  to  my  great  astonishment,  I  passed  through  villages  where
you  hear  nothing  spoken  but  French.  —  I  have  found  some-
thing so  heroic,  in  the  generous  and  laborious  way  in  which  the
King  addressed  himself  to  making  this  desert  flourish  with
inhabitants  and  happy  industries  and  fruits,  that  it  seemed  to
me  you  would  feel  the  same  sentiments  in  learning  the  circum-
stances of  such  a  re-establishment.

"  I  daily  expect  news  of  you  from  Enghien  [in  those  Dutch-
Lawsuit  Countries],  .  .  .  The  divine  Emilie ;  .  .  .  the  Duke
[D'Aremberg,  Austrian  Soldier,  of  convivial  turn,  —  remote
Welsh-Uncle  to  a  certain  little  Prince  de  Ligne,  now  spinning
tops  in  those  parts ; 1  not  otherwise  interesting],  whom  Apollo

1  Born  23d  May,  1735,  this  latter  little  Prince;  lasted  till  13th  December,
1814  ("  danse,  mais  il  ne  marc/ie  pas  ").

VOL.  VII.  8

114  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1739.

contends  for  against  Bacchus.  .  .  .  Adieu. Ne  m'oulliez  pas,
mon  cher  ami."  1

This  is  one  pleasant  scene,  to  the  Crown-Prince  and  us,  in
those  grassy  localities.  And  now  we  have  to  mention  that,
about  a  fortnight  later,  at  Konigsberg  one  day,  in  reference
to  a  certain  Royal  Stud  or  Horse-breeding  Establishment  in
those  same  Lithuanian  regions,  there  had  a  still  livelier  sat-
isfaction happened  him ;  satisfaction  of  a  personal  and  filial
nature.  The  name  of  this  Eoyal  Stud,  inestimable  on  such
ground,  is  Trakehnen,  —  lies  south  of  Tilsit,  in  an  upper  valley
of  the  Pregel  river  ;  —  very  extensive  Horse-Establishment,
"  with  seven  farms  under  it,"  say  the  Books,  and  all  "  in  the
most  perfect  order,"  they  need  hardly  add,  Friedrich  Wilhelm
being  master  of  it.  Well,  the  Koyal  Party  was  at  Konigsberg,
so  far  on  the  road  homewards  again  from  those  outlying  parts,
when  Friedrich  Wilhelm  said  one  day  to  his  Son,  quite  in  a
cursory  manner,  "  I  give  thee  that  Stud  of  Trakehnen ;  thou
must  go  back  and  look  to  it ;  "  which  struck  Fritz  quite  dumb
at  the  moment.

For  it  is  worth  near  upon  £2,000  a  year  (12,000  thalers)  ;
a  welcome  new  item  in  our  impoverished  budget ;  and  it  is  an
undeniable  sign  of  Papa's  good-humor  with  us,  which  is  more
precious  still.  Fritz  made  his  acknowledgments,  eloquent  with
looks,  eloquent  with  voice,  on  coming  to  himself ;  and  is,  in
fact,  very  proud  of  his  gift,  and  celebrates  it  to  his  Wilhelmina,
to  Camas  and  others  who  have  a  right  to  know  such  a  thing.
Grand  useful  gift ;  and  handed  over  by  Papa  grandly,  in  three
business  words,  as  if  it  had  been  a  brace  of  game :  "  I  give
it  thee,  Fritz  !  "  A  thing  not  to  be  forgotten.  "  At  bottom,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  was  not  avaricious"  (not  a  miser,  only  a
man  grandly  abhorring  waste,  as  the  poor  vulgar  cannot  do),
"  not  avaricious,"  says  Pollnitz  once ;  "  he  made  munificent
gifts,  and  never  thought  of  them  more."  This  of  Trakehnen,
—  perhaps  there  might  be  a  whiff  of  coming  Fate  concerned
in  it  withal :  "  I  shall  soon  be  dead,  not  able  to  give  thee  any-
thing, poor  Fritz  !  "  To  the  Prince  and  us  it  is  very  beautiful ;

1  CEuvres,  xxi.  304,  305.

CHAP.  VI.  JOURNEY  TO  PREUSSEN.  115

Aug.  1739.

a  fine  effulgence  of  the  inner  man  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm.  The
Prince  returned  to  Trakehnen,  on  this  glad  errand ;  settled
the  business  details  there  ;  and,  after  a  few  days,  went  home
by  a  route  of  his  own ;  —  well  satisfied  with  this  Prussian-
Review  journey,  as  we  may  imagine.

One  sad  thing  there  was,  though  Friedrich  did  not  yet  know
how  sad,  in  this  Re  view-journey :  the  new  fit  of  illness  that
overtook  his  Majesty.  From  Pollnitz,  who  was  of  the  party,
we  have  details  on  that  head.  In  his  Majesty's  last  bad  ill-
ness, five  years  ago,  when  all  seemed  hopeless,  it  appears  the
surgeons  had  relieved  him,  —  in  fact  recovered  him,  bringing
off  the  bad  humors  in  quantity,  —  by  an  incision  in  the  foot
or  leg.  In  the  course  of  the  present  fatigues,  this  old  wound
broke  out  again ;  which  of  course  stood  much  in  the  way  of
his  Majesty;  and  could  not  be  neglected,  as  probably  the
causes  of  it  were.  A  regimental  surgeon,  Pollnitz  says,  was
called  in  ;  who,  in  two  days,  healed  the  wound,  —  and  declared
all  to  be  right  again ;  though  in  fact,  as  we  may  judge,  it
was  dangerously  worse  than  before.  "  All  well  here,"  writes
Friedrich ;  "  the  King  has  been  out  of  order,  but  is  now  entirely
recovered  (tout  a  fait  remis)."  1

Much  reviewing  and  heavy  business  followed  at  Konigsberg ;
—  gift  of  Trakehneu,  and  departure  of  the  Crown-Prince  for
Trakehnen,  winding  it  up.  Directly  on  the  heel  of  which,  his
Majesty  turned  homewards,  the  Crown-Prince  not  to  meet  him
till  once  at  Berlin  again.  Majesty's  first  stage  was  at  Pillau,
where  we  have  been.  At  Pillau,  or  next  day  at  Dantzig,  Poll-
nitz observed  a  change  in  his  Majesty's  humor,  which  had  been
quite  sunshiny  all  this  journey  hitherto.  At  Dantzig  Pollnitz
first  noticed  it ;  but  at  every  new  stage  it  grew  worse,  evil
accidents  occurring  to  worsen  it ;  and  at  Berlin  it  was  worst
of  all ;  —  and,  alas,  his  poor  Majesty  never  recovered  his  sun-
shine in  this  world  again  !  Here  is  Pollnitz's  account  of  the
journey  homewards:  —

"  Till  now,"  till  Pillau  and  Dantzig,  "  his  Majesty  had  been
in  especially  good  humor  ;  but  in  Dantzig  his  cheerfulness  for-
1  "Konigsberg,  30th  July,  1739,"  to  his  Wife  (CEuvres,  xxvi.  6).

116  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Aug.  1739.

sook  him ;  —  and  it  never  came  back.  He  arrived  about  ten
at  night  in  that  City  [Wednesday,  12th  August,  or  thereby]  ;
slept  there  ;  and  was  off  again  next  morning  at  five.  He  drove
only  thirty  miles  this  day ;  stopped  in  Lupow  [coast  road
through  Pommern],  with  Herr  von  Grumkow  [the  late  Grum-
kow's  Brother],  Kanimer  President  in  this  Pommern  Province.
From  Lupow  he  went  to  a  poor  Village  near  Belgard,  eighty
miles  farther ; "  —  last  village  on  the  great  road,  Belgard  lying
to  left  a  little,  on  a  side  road ;  —  "  and  stayed  there  overnight.

"  At  Belgard,  next  morning,  he  reviewed  the  Dragoon  Regi-
ment von  Platen  ;  and  was  very  ill  content  with  it.  And  no-
body, with  the  least  understanding  of  that  business,  but  must
own  that  never  did  Prussian  Regiment  manoeuvre  worse.  Con-
scious themselves  how  bad  it  was,  they  lost  head,  and  got  into
open  confusion.  The  King  did  all  that  was  possible  to  help
them  into  order  again.  He  withdrew  thrice  over,  to  give  the
Officers  time  to  recover  themselves ;  but  it  was  all  in  vain.
The  King,  contrary  to  wont,  restrained  himself  amazingly,  and
would  not  show  his  displeasure  in  public.  He  got  into  his
carriage,  and  drove  away  with  the  Fiirst  of  Anhalt,"  Old  Des-
sauer,  "  and  Von  Winterfeld,"  Captain  in  the  Giant  Regiment,
"who  is  now  Major-General  von  Winterfeld  j1  not  staying  to
dine  with  G-eneral  von  Platen,  as  was  always  his  custom  with
Commandants  whom  he  had  reviewed.  He  bade  Prince  Wil-
helm  and  the  rest  of  us  stay  and  dine  ;  he  himself  drove  away,"
—  towards  the  great  road  again,  and  some  uncertain  lodging
there.

"We  stayed  accordingly;  and  did  full  justice  to  the  good
cheer,"  —  though  poor  Platen  would  certainly  look  flustered,
one  may  fancy.  "  But  as  the  Prince  was  anxious  to  come  up
with  his  Majesty  again,  and  knew  not  where  he  would  meet
him,  we  had  to  be  very  swift  with  the  business.

"  We  found  the  King  with  Anhalt  and  Winterfeld,  by  and
by ;  sitting  in  a  village,  in  front  of  a  barn,  and  eating  a  cold
pie  there,  which  the  Fiirst  of  Anhalt  had  chanced  to  have  with
him ;  his  Majesty,  owing  to  what  he  had  seen  on  the  parade-

1  Major-General  since  1 743,  of  high  fame ;  fell  in  fight,  7th  September,
1757.

CHAP.  VII.  BALTIMORE  AND ALGAROTTI.  117

20th-25th  Sept.  1739.

ground,  was  in  the  utmost  ill-humor  (hocJist  ubler  Laune).  Next
day,  Saturday,  he  went  a  hundred  and  fifty  or  two  hundred
miles  ;  and  arrived  in  Berlin  at  ten  at  night.  Not  expected
there  till  the  morrow  ;  so  that  his  rooms  were  locked,  —  her
Majesty  being  over  in  Monbijou,  giving  her  children  a  Ball ;  " 1
—  and  we  can  fancy  what  a  frame  of  mind  there  was  !

Nobody,  not  at  first  even  the  Doctors,  much  heeded  this
new  fit  of  illness  ;  which  went  and  came  :  "  changed  temper,"
deeper  or  less  deep  gloom  of  "  bad  humor,"  being  the  main
phenomenon  to  by-standers.  But  the  sad  truth  was,  his  Maj-
esty never  did  recover  his  sunshine  ;  from  Pillau  onwards  he
was  slowly  entering  into  the  shadows  of  the  total  Last  Eclipse ;
and  his  journeyings  and  reviewings  in  this  world  were  all  done.
Ten  months  hence,  Pollnitz  and  others  knew  better  what  it
had  been !  —

CHAPTER  VII.

LAST  YEAK  OF  REINSBERG  : TRANSIT  OF  BALTIMORE  AND  OTHER

PERSONS AND THINGS.

FRIEDRICH  had  not  been  long  home  again  from  Trakehnen
and  Preussen,  when  the  routine  of  things  at  Eeinsberg  was
illuminated  by  Visitors,  of  brilliant  and  learned  quality  ;  some
of  whom,  a  certain  Signor  Algarotti  for  one,  require  passing
mention  here.  Algarotti,  who  became  a  permanent  friend  or
satellite,  very  luminous  to  the  Prince,  and  was  much  about
him  in  coming  years,  first  shone  out  upon  the  scene  at  this
time,  —  coming  unexpectedly,  and  from  the  Eastward  as  it
chanced.

On  his  own  score,  Algarotti  has  become  a  wearisome  liter-
ary man  to  modern  readers :  one  of  those  half-remembered
men  ;  whose  books  seem  to  claim  a  reading,  and  do  not  repay
it  you  when  given.  Treatises,  of  a  serious  nature,  On  the
Opera;  setting  forth,  in  earnest,  the  potential  "moral  uses  "  of

1  Pollnitz,  ii.  534-537.

118  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  x.

25th  Sept.  1739.

the  Opera,  and  dedicated  to  Chatham ;  Neutonianismo  per  le
Donne  (Astronomy  for  Ladies)  :  the  mere  Titles  of  such  things
are  fatally  sufficient  to  us  ;  and  we  cannot,  without  effort,  nor
with  it,  recall  the  brilliancy  of  Algarotti  and  them  to  his  con-
temporary world.

Algarotti  was  a  rich  Venetian  Merchant's  Son,  precisely
about  the  Crown-Prince's  age  ;  shone  greatly  in  his  studies  at
Bologna  and  elsewhere  ;  had  written  Poesies  (Rime)  ;  written
especially  that  Neivtonianism  for  the  Dames  (equal  to  Fonte-
nelle,  said  Fame,  and  orthodox  Newtonian  withal,  not  hetero-
dox or  Cartesian) ;  and  had  shone,  respected,  at  Paris,  on  the
strength  of  it,  for  three  or  four  years  past :  friend  of  Voltaire
in  consequence,  of  Voltaire  and  his  divine  Ernilie,  and  a  wel-
come guest  at  Cirey  ;  friend  of  the  cultivated  world  generally,
which  was  then  laboring,  divine  Emilie  in  the  van  of  it,  to
understand  Newton  and  be  orthodox  in  this  department  of
things.  Algarotti  did  fine  Poesies,  too,  once  and  again;  did
Classical  Scholarships,  and  much  else :  everywhere  a  clear-
headed, methodically  distinct,  concise  kind  of  man.  A  high
style  of  breeding  about  him,  too ;  had  powers  of  pleasing,  and
used  them :  a  man  beautifully  lucent  in  society,  gentle  yet  im-
pregnable there ;  keeping  himself  unspotted  from  the  world
and  its  discrepancies,  —  really  with  considerable  prudence,
first  and  last.

He  is  somewhat  of  the  Bielfeld  type ;  a  Merchant's  Son,  we
observe,  like  Bielfeld  ;  but  a  Venetian  Merchant's,  not  a  Ham-
burg's ;  and  also  of  better  natural  stuff  than  Bielfeld.  Con-
centrated himself  upon  his  task  with  more  seriousness,  and
made  a  higher  thing  of  it  than  Bielfeld ;  though,  after  all,  it
was  the  same  task  the  two  had.  Alas,  our  "  Swan  of  Padua  "
(so  they  sometimes  called  him)  only  sailed,  paddling  grandly,
no-whither,  —  as  the  Swan-Goose  of  the  Elbe  did,  in  a  less
stately  manner !  One  cannot  well  bear  to  read  his  Books.
There  is  no  light  upon  Friedrich  to  tempt  us  ;  better  light
than  Bielfeld's  there  could  have  been,  and  much  of  it :  but  he
prudently,  as  well  as  proudly,  forbore  such  topics.  He  ap-
proaches very  near  fertility  and  geniality  in  his  writings,  but
never  reaches  it.  Dilettantism  become  serious  and  strenuous,

CHAP.  VII.  BALTIMORE AND ALGAROTTI.  119

26th  Sept.  1739.

in  those  departments  —  Well,  it  was  beautiful  to  young  Fried-
rich  and  the  world  at  that  time,  though  it  is  not  to  us  !  —
Young  Algarotti,  twenty-seven  this  year,  has  been  touring
about  as  a  celebrity  these  four  years  past,  on  the  strength  of
his  fine  manners  and  Newtonianism  for  the  Dames.

It  was  under  escort  of  Baltimore,  "an  English  Milord,"
recommended  from  Potsdam  itself,  that  Algarotti  came  to
Eeinsberg ;  the  Signor  had  much  to  do  with  English  people
now  and  after.  Where  Baltimore  first  picked  him  up,  I  know
not :  but  they  have  been  to  Eussia  together ;  Baltimore  by
twelve  years  the  elder  of  the  two :  and  now,  getting  home
towards  England  again,  they  call  at  Eeinsberg  in  the  fine  Au-
tumn weather ;  —  and  considerably  captivate  the  Crown-Prince,
Baltimore  playing  chief,  in  that  as  in  other  points.  The  visit
lasted  five  days  : 1  there  was  copious  speech  on  many  things  ;
—  discussion  about  Printing  of  the  Anti-Machiavel ;  Algarotti
to  get  it  printed  in  England,  Algarotti  to  get  Pine  and  his
Engraved  Henriade  put  under  way ;  neither  of  which  projects
took  effect ;  —  readers  can  conceive  what  a  charming  five  days
these  were.  Here,  in  the  Crown-Prince's  own  words,  are  some
brief  glimmerings  which  will  suffice  us  :  —

Eeinsberg,  25th  Sept.  1739  (Crown-Prince  to  Papa).  .  .  .
that  "  nothing  new  has  occurred  in  the  Regiment,  and  we  have
few  sick.  Here  has  the  English  Milord,  who  was  at  Pots-
dam, passing  through  [stayed  five  days,  though  we  call  it
passing,  and  suppress  the  Algarotti,  Baltimore  being  indeed
chief].  He  is  gone  towards  Hamburg,  to  take  ship  for  Eng-
land there.  As  I  heard  that  my  Most  All-gracious  Father
wished  I  should  show  him  courtesy,  I  have  done  for  him  what
I  could.  The  Prince  of  Mirow  has  also  been  here,"  —  our  old
Strelitz  friend.  Of  Baltimore  nothing  more  to  Papa.  But  to
another  Correspondent,  to  the  good  Suhm  (who  is  now  at
Petersburg,  and  much  in  our  intimacy,  ready  to  transact  loans
for  us,  translate  Wolf,  or  do  what  is  wanted),  there  is  this
passage  next  day  :  —

Eeinsberg,  26th  September,  1739  (to  Suhm).  "  We  have  had
Milord  Baltimore  here,  and  the  young  Algarotti ;  both  of  them
1  20th-25th  September,  1739  (CEuvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xiv.  p.  xiv).

120  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

10th  Oct.  1739.

men  who,  by  their  accomplishments,  cannot  but  conciliate  the
esteem  and  consideration  of  all  who  see  them.  We  talked
much  of  you  [Suhm],  of  Philosophy,  of  Science,  Art  ;  in
short,  of  all  that  can  be  included  in  the  taste  of  cultivated
people  (Jwnnetes  gens)."  1  And  again  to  another,  about  two
weeks  hence : —

Eeinsberg,  10th  October,  1739  (to  Voltaire).  «  We  have  had
Milord  Baltimore  and  Algarotti  here,  who  are  going  back  to
England.  This  Milord  is  a  very  sensible  man  (homme  tres-
sense) ;  who  possesses  a  great  deal  of  knowledge,  and  thinks,
like  us,  that  sciences  can  be  no  disparagement  to  nobility,  nor
degrade  an  illustrious  rank.  I  admired  the  genius  of  this
Anglais,  as  one  does  a  fine  face  through  a  crape  veil.  He
speaks  French  very  ill,  yet  one  likes  to  hear  him  speak  it;
and  as  for  his  English,  he  pronounces  it  so  quick,  there  is  no
possibility  of  following  him.  He  calls  a  Kussian  '  a  mechani-
cal animal.'  He  says  '  Petersburg  is  the  eye  of  Kussia,  with
which  it  keeps  civilized  countries  in  sight ;  if  you  took  this
eye  from  it,  Eussia  would  fall  again  into  barbarism,  out  of
which  it  is  just  struggling.' 2  .  .  .  Young  Algarotti,  whom
you  know,  pleased  me  beyond  measure.  He  promised  that
he "  —  But  Baltimore,  promise  or  not,  is  the  chief  figure  at
present.

Evidently  an  original  kind  of  figure  to  us,  cet  Anglais.  And
indeed  there  is  already  finished  a  rhymed  Epistle  to  Balti-
more ;  Epitre  sur  la  Liberte  (copy  goes  in  that  same  Letter,  for
Voltaire's  behoof),  which  dates  itself  likewise  October  10th ;
beginning,  —

"  L 'esprit  libre,  Milord,  qui  regne  en  Angleterre,"

which,  though  it  is  full  of  fine  sincere  sentiments,  about
human  dignity,  papal  superstition,  Newton,  Locke,  and  as-
pirations for  progress  of  culture  in  Prussia,  no  reader  could
stand  at  this  epoch.

What  Baltimore  said  in  answer  to  the  Epitre,  we  do  not
know ;  probably  not  much  :  it  does  not  appear  he  ever  saw  or
spoke  to  Friedrich  a  second  time. Three  weeks  after,  Fried-
rich  writing  to  Algarotti,  has  these  words :  "  I  pray  you  make
1  (Euvrcs  de  Frederic,  xvi.  378.  2  Ib.  xxi.  326,  327.

CHAP.  VII. BALTIMOEE  AND  ALGAKOTTI.  121

Oct.  1739.

my  friendships  to  Milord  Baltimore,  whose  character  and
manner  of  thinking  I  truly  esteem.  I  hope  he  has,  by  this
time,  got  my  Epitre  on  the  English  Liberty  of  Thought."  1
And  so  Baltimore  passes  on,  silent  in  History  henceforth,  —
though  Friedrich  seems  to  have  remembered  him  to  late  times,
as  a  kind  of  type-figure  when  England  came  into  his  head.
For  the  sake  of  this  small  transit  over  the  sun's  disk,  I  have
made  some  inquiry  about  Baltimore ;  but  found  very  little ;  —
perhaps  enough :  —

"  He  was  Charles,  Sixth  Lord  Baltimore,  it  appears ;  Sixth,
and  last  but  one.  First  of  the  Baltirnores,  we  know,  was
Secretary  Calvert  (1618-1624),  who  colonized  Maryland ;  last
of  them  (1774)  was  the  Son  of  this  Charles ;  something  of  a
fool,  to  judge  by  the  face  of  him  in  Portraits,  and  by  some  of
his  doings  in  the  world.  He,  that  Seventh  Baltimore,  printed
one  or  two  little  Volumes  ('  now  of  extreme  rarity,'  —  cannot
be  too  rare)  ;  and  winded  up  by  standing  an  ugly  Trial  at
Kingston  Assizes  (plaintiff  an  unfortunate  female).  After
which  he  retired  to  Naples,  and  there  ended,  1774;  the  last  of
these  Milords.2

"  He  of  the  Kingston  Assizes,  we  say,  was  not  this  Charles ;
but  his  Son,  whom  let  the  reader  forget.  Charles,  age  forty
at  this  time,  had  travelled  about  the  Continent  a  good  deal :
once,  long  ago,  we  imagined  we  had  got  a  glimpse  of  him  (but
it  was  a  guess  merely)  lounging  about  Luneville  and  Lorraine,
along  with  Lyttelton,  in  the  Congress-of-Soissons  time  ?  Not
long  after  that,  it  is  certain  enough,  he  got  appointed  a  Gentle-
man of  the  Bedchamber  to  Prince  Fred ;  who  was  a  friend  of
speculative  talkers  and  cultivated  people.  In  which  situation
Charles  Sixth  Baron  Baltimore  continued  all  his  days  after;
and  might  have  risen  by  means  of  Fred,  as  he  was  anxious
enough  to  do,  had  both  of  them  lived;  but  they  both  died;
Baltimore  first,  in  1751,  a  year  before  Fred.  Bubb  Dodding-
ton,  diligent  laborer  in  the  same  Fred  vineyard,  was  much  in-
fested by  this  Baltimore,  — who,  drunk  or  sober  (for  he  occa-

1  29th  October  1739,  To  Algarotti  in  London  (CEuvres,  xviii.  5).

2  Walpole  (by  Park),  Catalogue  of  Royal  and  Noble  Authors  (London,  1806),
v.  278.

122  AT  REINSBEKG.

Oct.

sionally  gets  into  liquor),  is  always  putting  out  Bubb,  and
stands  too  well  with  our  Koyal  Master,  one  secretly  fears  !
Baltimore's  finances,  I  can  guess,  were  not  in  too  good  order;
mostly  an  Absentee ;  Irish  Estates  not  managed  in  the  first
style,  while  one  is  busy  in  the  Fred  vineyard  !  '  The  best  and
honestest  man  in  the  world,  with  a  good  deal  of  jumbled
knowledge,'  Walpole  calls  him  once :  '  but  not  capable  of  con-
ducting a  party.' " J  Oh  no  ;  —  and  died,  at  any  rate,  Spring
1751 : 2  and  we  will  not  mention  him  farther.

Bielfeld,  what  Tie  saw  at  Reinsberg  and  around.

Directly  on  the  rear  of  these  fine  visitors,  came,  by  invita-
tion, a  pair  of  the  Korn's-Hotel  people  ;  Masonic  friends ;  one
of  whom  was  Bielfeld,  whose  dainty  Installation  Speech  and
ways  of  procedure  had  been  of  promise  to  the  Prince  on  that
occasion.  "Baron  von  Oberg"  was  the  other:  —  Hanoverian
Baron :  the  same  who  went  into  the  Wars,  and  was  a  "  Gen-
eral von  Oberg  "  twenty  years  hence  ?  The  same  or  another,
it  does  not  much  concern  us.  Nor  does  the  visit  much,  or  at
all ;  except  that  Bielfeld,  being  of  writing  nature,  professes
to  give  ocular  account  of  it.  Honest  transcript  of  what  a
human  creature  actually  saw  at  Reinsberg,  and  in  the  Berlin
environment  at  that  date,  would  have  had  a  value  to  mankind :
but  Bielfeld  has  adopted  the  fictitious  form  ;  and  pretty  much
ruined  for  us  any  transcript  there  is.  Exaggeration,  gesticu-
lation, fantastic  uncertainty  afflict  the  reader ;  and  prevent
comfortable  belief,  except  where  there  is  other  evidence  than
Bielfeld's.

At  Berlin  the  beautiful  straight  streets,  Linden  Avenues
(perhaps  a  better  sample  than  those  of  our  day),  were  notable
to  Bielfeld  ;  bridges,  statues  very  fine  ;  grand  esplanades,  and
such  military  drilling  and  parading  as  was  never  seen.  He
had  dinner-invitations,  too,  in  quantity  ;  likes  this  one  and
that  (all  in  prudent  asterisks),  — likes  Truchsess  von  Waldburg

1  Walpole's  Letters  to  Mann  (London,  1843),  ii.  175  :  27th  January,  1747.
See  ib.  i.  82.

2  Peerage  of  Ireland  (London,  1768),  ii.  172-174.

CHAP.  VII.  WHAT  BIELFELD  SAW.  123

Oct.  1739.

very  much,  and  his  strange  mode  of  bachelor  housekeeping,
and  the  way  he  dines  and  talks  among  his  fellow-creatures,
or  sits  studious  among  his  Military  Books  and  Paper-litters.
But  all  is  loose  far-off  sketching,  in  the  style  of  Anacharsis  the
Younger  ;  and  makes  no  solid  impression.

Getting  to  Eeinsberg,  to  the  Town,  to  the  Schloss,  he  crosses
the  esplanade,  the  moat ;  sees  what  we  know,  beautiful  square
Mansion  among  its  woods  and  waters  ;  —  and  almost  nothing
that  we  do  not  know,  except  the  way  the  moat-bridge  is
lighted :  "  Bridge  furnished,"  he  says,  "  with  seven  Statues
representing  the  seven  Planets,  each  holding  in  her  hand  a
glass  lamp  in  the  form  of  a  globe ; "  — which  is  a  pretty  object
in  the  night-time.  The  House  is  now  finished ;  Knobelsdorf
rejoicing  in  his  success ;  Pesne  and  others  giving  the  last
touch  to  some  ceilings  of  a  sublime  nature.  On  the  lintel  of
the  gate  is  inscribed  Frederico  Tranquillitatem  Colenti  (To
Friedrich  courting  Tranquillity).  The  gardens,  walks,  her-
mitages, grottos,  are  very  spacious,  fine :  not  yet  completed,  —
perhaps  will  never  be.  A  Temple  of  Bacchus  is  just  now  on
hand,  somewhere  in  those  labyrinthic  woods  :  "  twelve  gigantic
Satyrs  as  caryatides,  crowned  by  an  inverted  Punch-bowl  for
dome ; "  that  is  the  ingenious  Knobelsdorf 's  idea,  pleasant
to  the  mind.  Knobelsdorf  is  of  austere  aspect ;  austere,  yet
benevolent  and  full  of  honest  sagacity;  the  very  picture  of
sound  sense,  thinks  Bielfeld.  M.  Jordan  is  handsome,  though
of  small  stature ;  agreeable  expression  of  face ;  eye  extremely
vivid  ;  brown  complexion,  bushy  eyebrows  as  well  as  beard  are
black.1

Or  did  the  reader  ever  hear  of  "M.  Fredersdorf,"  Head
Valet  at  this  time  ?  Fredersdorf  will  become,  as  it  were,
Privy-Purse,  House-Friend,  and  domestic  Factotum,  and  play
a  great  part  in  coming  years.  "  A  tall  handsome  man ; "  much
"  silent  sense,  civility,  dexterity  ;  "  something  "  magnificently
clever  in  him,"  thinks  Bielfeld  (now,  or  else  twenty  years
afterwards) ;  whom  we  can  believe.2  He  was  a  gift  from  Gen-
eral Schwerin,  this  Fredersdorf ;  once  a  Private  in  Schwerin's
regiment,  at  Frankfurt-on-Oder,  —  excellent  on  the  flute,  for
i  Bielfeld  (abridged),  i.  45.  2  Ib.  p.  49.

124  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.  1739.

one  quality.  Schwerin,  who  had  an  eye  for  men,  sent  him
to  Friedrich,  in  the  Ciistrin  time  ;  hoping  he  might  suit  in
fluting  and  otherwise.  Which  he  conspicuously  did.  Biel-
f eld's  account,  we  must  candidly  say,  appears  to  be  an  after-
thought ;  but  readers  can  make  their  profit  of  it,  all  the
same.

As  to  the  Crown-Prince  and  Princess,  words  fail  to  express
their  gracious  perfections,  their  affabilities,  polite  ingenui-
ties :  —  Bielf eld's  words  do  give  us  some  pleasant  shadowy
conceivability  of  the  Crown-Princess  :  —

"  Tall,  and  perfect  in  shape ;  bust  such  as  a  sculptor  might
copy  5  complexion  of  the  finest ;  features  ditto ;  nose,  I  con-
fess, smallish  and  pointed,  but  excellent  of  that  kind ;  hair  of
the  supremest  flaxen,  '  shining '  like  a  flood  of  sunbeams,  when
the  powder  is  off  it.  A  humane  ingenuous  Princess;  little
negligences  in  toilet  or  the  like,  if  such  occur,  even  these  set
her  off,  so  ingenuous  are  they.  Speaks  little  ;  but  always  to
the  purpose,  in  a  simple,  cheerful  and  wise  way.  Dances
beautifully ;  heart  (her  soubrette  assures  me)  is  heavenly ;  —
and  'perhaps  no  Princess  living  has  a  finer  set  of  dia-
monds.' }

Of  the  Crown-Princess  there  is  some  pleasant  shadow  traced
as  on  cobweb,  to  this  effect.  But  of  the  Crown-Prince  there
is  no  forming  the  least  conception  from  what  he  says  :  —  this
is  mere  cobweb  with  Nothing  elaborately  painted  on  it.  Nor
do  the  portraits  of  the  others  attract  by  their  verisimilitude.
Here  is  Colonel  Keyserling,  for  instance ;  the  witty  Cour-
lander,  famous  enough  in  the  Priedrich  circle ;  who  went  on
embassy  to  Cirey,  and  much  else  :  he  "  whirls  in  with  uproar
(fracas)  like  Boreas  in  the  Ballet ; "  fowling-piece  on  shoulder,
and  in  his  "  dressing-gown "  withal,  which  is  still  stranger  ;
snatches  off  Bielfeld,  unknown  till  that  moment,  to  sit  by  him
while  dressing ;  and  there,  with  much  capering,  pirouetting,
and  indeed  almost  ground-and-lofty  tumbling,  for  accompani-
ment, "  talks  of  Horses,  Mathematics,  Painting,  Architecture,
Literature,  and  the  Art  of  War,"  while  he  dresses.  This  gen-
tleman was  once  Colonel  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  Army  ;  is
now  fairly  turned  of  forty,  and  has  been  in  troubles  :  we  hope

CHAP.  VII.  WHAT BIELFELD SAW.  125

Oct,  1739.

he  is  not  like  in  the  Bielfeld  Portrait ;  —  otherwise,  how  happy
that  we  never  had  the  honor  of  knowing  him !  Indeed,  the
Crown-Prince's  Household  generally,  as  Bielfeld  paints  it  in
flourishes  of  panegyric,  is  but  unattractive ;  barren  to  the
modern  on-looker ;  partly  the  Painter's  blame,  we  doubt  not.
He  gives  details  about  their  mode  of  dining,  taking  coffee,
doing  concert ;  —  and  describes  once  an  incidental  drinking-
bout  got  up  aforethought  by  the  Prince  ;  which  is  probably  in
good  part  fiction,  though  not  ill  done.  These  fantastic  sketch-
ings, rigorously  winnowed  into  the  credible  and  actual,  leave
no  great  residue  in  that  kind ;  but  what  little  they  do  leave
is  of  favorable  and  pleasant  nature.

Bielfeld  made  a  visit  privately  to  Potsdam,  too :  saw  the
Giants  drill ;  made  acquaintance  with  important  Captains  of
theirs  (all  in  asterisks)  at  Potsdam ;  with  whom  he  dined,  not
in  a  too  credible  manner,  and  even  danced.  Among  the  aste-
risks, we  easily  pick  out  Captain  Wartensleben  (of  the  Korn's-
Hotel  operation),  and  Winterfeld,  a  still  more  important  Cap-
tain, whom  we  saw  dining  on  cold  pie  with  his  Majesty,  at
a  barn-door  in  Pommern,  not  long  since.  Of  the  Giants,  or
their  life  at  Potsdam,  Bielfeld's  word  is  not  worth  hearing,  —
worth  suppressing  rather ;  his  knowledge  being  so  small,  and
hung  forth  in  so  fantastic  a  way.  This  transient  sight  he  had
of  his  Majesty  in  person ;  this,  which  is  worth  something  to
us,  —  fact  being  evidently  lodged  in  it.  "  After  church-
parade,"  Autumn  Sunday  afternoon  (day  uncertain,  Bielfeld's
date  being  fictitious,  and  even  impossible),  Majesty  drove  out
to  Wusterhausen,  "  where  the  quantities  of  game  surpass  all
belief ; "  and  Bielfeld  had  one  glimpse  of  him  :  —

"  I  saw  his  Majesty  only,  as  it  were,  in  passing.  If  I  may
judge  by  his  Portraits,  he  must  have  been  of  a  perfect  beauty
in  his  young  time  ;  but  it  must  be  confessed  there  is  nothing
left  of  it  now.  His  eyes  truly  are  fine ;  but  the  glance  of
them  is  terrible  :  his  complexion  is  composed  of  the  strongest
tints  of  red,  blue,  yellow,  green,"  —  not  a  lovely  complexion
at  all ;  "  big  head  ;  the  thick  neck  sunk  between  the  shoul-
ders ;  figure  short  and  heavy  (courte  et  ramassee)."  1

1  Bielfeld,  p.  35.

126  AT  REINSBEKG.  ,7

Oct.  1739.

"  Going  out  to  Wusterhausen,"  then,  that  afternoon,  "  Octo-
ber, 1739."  How  his  Majesty  is  crushed  down  ;  quite  bulged
out  of  shape  in  that  sad  way,  by  the  weight  of  time  and  its
pressures :  his  thoughts,  too,  most  likely,  of  a  heavy-laden
and  abstruse  nature  !  The  old  Pfalz  Controversy  has  misgone
with  him :  Pfalz,  and  so  much  else  in  the  world  ;  —  the  world
in  whole,  probably  enough,  near  ending  to  him ;  the  final
shadows,  sombre,  grand  and  mournful,  closing  in  upon  him  !

Turk  War  ends  ;  Spanish  War  begins. A  Wedding  in

Petersburg.

Last  news  come  to  Potsdam  in  these  days  is,  The  Kaiser
has  ended  his  disastrous  Turk  War ;  been  obliged  to  end  it ;
sudden  downbreak,  and  as  it  were  panic  terror,  having  at  last
come  upon  his  unfortunate  Generals  in  those  parts.  Duke
Franz  was  passionate  to  be  out  of  such  a  thing ;  Franz,  Gen-
eral Neipperg  and  others;  and  now,  "2d  September,  1739,"
like  lodgers  leaping  from  a  burning  house,  they  are  out  of
it.  The  Turk  gets  Belgrade  itself,  not  to  mention  wide  ter-
ritories farther  east,  —  Belgrade  without  shot  fired  ;  —  nay  the
Turk  was  hardly  to  be  kept  from  hanging  the  Imperial  Mes-
senger (a  General  Neipperg,  Duke  Franz's  old  Tutor,  and  chief
Confidant,  whom  we  shall  hear  more  of  elsewhere),  whose
passport  was  not  quite  right  on  this  occasion  !  —  Never  was
a  more  disgraceful  Peace.  But  also  never  had  been  worse
fighting ;  planless,  changeful,  powerless,  melting  into  futility
at  every  step :  —  not  to  be  mended  by  imprisonments  in  Gratz,
and  still  harsher  treatment  of  individuals.  "  Has  all  success
forsaken  me,  then,  since  Eugene  died  ?  "  said  the  Kaiser ;  and
snatched  at  this  Turk  Peace  ;  glad  to  have  it,  by  mediation  of
France,  and  on  any  terms.

Has  not  this  Kaiser  lost  his  outlying  properties  at  a  fear-
ful rate  ?  Naples  is  gone ;  Spanish  Bourbon  sits  in  our
Naples ;  comparatively  little  left  for  us  in  Italy.  And  now
the  very  Turk  has  beaten  us  small ;  insolently  fillips  the  Im-
perial nose  of  us,  —  threatening  to  hang  our  Neipperg,  and
the  like.  Were  it  not  for  Anne  of  Russia,  whose  big  horse-

CHAP.  VII.  JENKINS.  127

Oct.  1739.

whip  falls  heavy  on  this  Turk,  he  might  almost  get  to  Vienna
again,  for  anything  we  could  do !  A  Kaiser  worthy  to  be
pitied  ;  —  whom  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  we  perceive,  does  honestly
pity.  A  Kaiser  much  beggared,  much  disgraced,  in  late  years ;
who  has  played  a  huge  life-game  so  long,  diplomatizing,  war-
ring ;  and,  except  the  Shadow  of  Pragmatic  Sanction,  has
nothing  to  retire  upon.

The  Russians  protested,  with  astonishment,  against  such
Turk  Peace  on  the  Kaiser's  part.  But  there  was  no  help  for
it.  One  ally  is  gone,  the  Kaiser  has  let  go  this  Western  skirt
of  the  Turk ;  and  "  Tharnas  Kouli  Khan  "  (called  also  Nadir
Shah,  famed  Oriental  slasher  and  slayer  of  that  time)  no
longer  stands  upon  the  Eastern  skirt,  but  "has  entered  India,"
it  appears  :  the  Russians  —  their  cash,  too,  running  low  —
do  themselves  make  peace,  "  about  a  month  after ; "  restoring
Azoph  and  nearly  all  their  conquests  ;  putting  off  the  ruin  of
the  Turk  till  a  better  time.

War  is  over  in  the  East,  then ;  but  another  in  the  West,
England  against  Spain  (Spain  and  France  to  help),  is  about
beginning.  Readers  remember  how  Jenkins's  Ear  re-emerged,
Spring  gone  a  year,  in  a  blazing  condition  ?  Here,  through
Sylvanus  Urban  himself,  are  two  direct  glimpses,  a  twelve-
month nearer  hand,  which  show  us  how  the  matter  has  been
proceeding  since :  —

"  London,  19th  February,  1739.  The  City  Authorities,"  —
laying  or  going  to  lay  "  the  foundation  of  the  Mansion-House  "
(Edifice  now  very  black  in  our  time),  and  doing  other  things
of  little  moment  to  us,  "  had  a  Masquerade  at  the  Guildhall
this  night.  There  was  a  very  splendid  appearance  at  the
Masquerade ;  but  among  the  many  humorous  and  whimsical
characters,  what  seemed  most  to  engage  attention  was  a  Span-
iard, who  called  himself  '  Knight  of  the  Ear ; '  as  Badge  of
which  Order  he  wore  on  his  breast  the  form  of  a  Star,  with  its
points  tinged  in  blood  ;  and  on  the  body  of  it  an  Ear  painted,
and  in  capital  letters  the  word  JENKINS  encircling  it.  Across
his  shoulder  there  hung,  instead  of  ribbon,  a  large  Halter ;
which  he  held  up  to  several  persons  dressed  as  English  Sailors,

128  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.  1739.

who  seemed  in  great  terror  of  him,  and  falling  on  their  knees
suffered  him  to  rummage  their  pockets  ;  which  done,  he  would
insolently  dismiss  them  with  strokes  of  his  halter.  Several  of
the  Sailors  had  a  bloody  Ear  hanging  down  from  their  heads ;
and  on  their  hats  were  these  words,  Ear  for  Ear ;  on  others,
No  Search  or  no  Trade ;  with  the  like  sentences."  1  The  con-
flagration evidently  going  on ;  not  likely  to  be  damped  down
again,  by  ministerial  art !  —

"  London,  Vdth  March,  1739."  Grand  Debate  in  Parliament,
on  the  late  "Spanish  Convention,"  pretended  Bargain  of  re-
dress lately  got  from  Spain :  Approve  the  Convention,  or  Not
approve  ?  "A  hundred  Members  were  in  the  House  of  Com-
mons before  seven,  this  morning ;  and  four  hundred  had  taken
their  seat  by  ten  ;  which  is  an  unheard-of  thing.  Prince  of
Wales,"  Fred  in  person,  "was  in  the  gallery  till  twelve  at
night,  and  had  his  dinner  sent  to  him.  Sir  Eobert  Walpole
rose :  ;  Sir,  the  great  pains  that  have  been  taken  to  influence
all  ranks  and  degrees  of  men  in  this  Nation  —  ...  But  give
me  leave  to '  "  —  apply  a  wet  cloth  to  Honorable  Gentlemen.
Which  he  does,  really  with  skill  and  sense.  France  and  the
others  are  so  strong,  he  urges  ;  England  so  unprepared  ;
Kaiser  at  such  a  pass ;  '  War  like  to  be,  about  the  Palati-
nate Dispute  [our  friend  Friedrich  Wilhelm's] :  Where  is
England  to  get  allies  ? '  —  and  hours  long  of  the  like  sort.  A
judicious  wet  cloth ;  which  proved  unavailing.

For  "  William  Pitts  "  (so  they  spell  the  great  Chatham  that
is  to  be)  was  eloquent  on  the  other  side :  "  Despairing  Mer-
chants," "  Voice  of  England,"  and  so  on.  And  the  world  was
all  in  an  inflamed  state.  And  Mr.  Pulteney  exclaimed  :  Palat-
inate ?  Allies  ?  "  We  need  no  allies  ;  the  case  of  Mr.  Jen-
kins will  raise  us  volunteers  everywhere  !  "  And  in  short,  —
after  eight  months  more  of  haggling,  and  applying  wet  cloths,
—  Walpole,  in  the  name  of  England,  has  to  declare  War
against  Spain ; 2  the  public  humor  proving  unquenchable  on

1  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1739,  p.  103  ;  —  our  dates,  as  always,  are  N.  s.

2  "3d  November  (23d  October),  1739."

CHAP.  VII.  ANTON ULRICH.  129

Oct.  1739.

that  matter.  War ;  and  no  Peace  to  be,  "  till  our  undoubted
right,"  to  roadway  on  the  oceans  of  this  Planet,  become  per-
manently manifest  to  the  Spanish  Majesty.

Such  the  effect  of  a  small  Ear,  kept  about  one  in  cotton,
from  ursine  piety  or  other  feelings.  Has  not  Jenkins's  Ear
re-emerged,  with  a  vengeance  ?  It  has  kindled  a  War  :  dan-
gerous for  kindling  other  Wars,  and  setting  the  whole  world
on  fire,  —  as  will  be  too  evident  in  the  sequel !  The  Ear  of
Jenkins  is  a  singular  thing.  Might  have  mounted  to  be  a  con-
stellation, like  Berenice's  Hair,  and  other  small  facts  become
mythical,  had  the  English  People  been  of  poetic  turn  !  Enough
of  it,  for  the  time  being.  —

This  Summer,  Anton  Ulrich,  at  Petersburg,  did  wed  his
Serene  Mecklenburg  Princess,  Heiress  of  all  the  Russias :
"July  14th,  1739,"  — three  months  before  that  Drive  to  Wus-
terhausen,  which  we  saw  lately.  Little  Anton  Ulrich,  Cadet
of  Brunswick  ;  our  Friedrich's  Brother-in-Law ;  —  a  noticeably
small  man  in  comparison  to  such  bulk  of  destiny,  thinks  Fried-
rich,  though  the  case  is  not  without  example  ! 1

"  Anton  Ulrich  is  now  five-and-twenty,"  says  one  of  my  Note-
books ;  "  a  young  gentleman  of  small  stature,  shining  courage
in  battle,  but  somewhat  shy  and  bashful;  who  has  had  his
troubles  in  Petersburg  society,  till  the  trial  came,  —  and  will
have.  Here  are  the  stages  of  Anton  Ulrich's  felicity  :  —

"  Winter,  1732-1733.  He  was  sent  for  to  Petersburg  (his
Serene  Aunt  the  German  Kaiserinn,  and  Kaiser  Karl's  diplo-
matists, suggesting  it  there),  with  the  view  of  his  paying
court  to  the  young  Mecklenburg  Princess,  Heiress  of  all  the
Kussias,  of  whom  we  have  often  heard.  February,  1733,  he
arrived  on  this  errand  ;  —  not  approved  of  at  all  by  the  Meck-
lenburg Princess,  by  Czarina  Anne  or  anybody  there :  what
can  be  done  with  such  an  uncomfortable  little  creature  ?
They  gave  him  the  Colonelcy  of  Cuirassiers  :  '  Drill  there,
and  endure.'

1  A  Letter  of  his  to  Suhm  ;  touching  on  Franz  of  Lorraine  and  this  Anton
Ulrich.

VOL. VII.  9

130  AT  REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

Oct.  1739.

"  Spring,  1737.  Much-enduring,  diligently  drilling,  for  four
years  past,  he  went  this  year  to  the  Turk  War  under  Miin-
nich ;  —  much  pleased  Miinnich,  at  Oczakow  and  elsewhere ;
who  reports  in  the  War-Office  high  things  of  him.  And  on
the  whole,  —  the  serene  Vienna  people  now  again  bestirring
themselves,  with  whom  we  are  in  copartnery  in  this  Turk
business,  —  little  Anton  Ulrich  is  encouraged  to  proceed.
Proceeds  ;  formally  demands  his  Mecklenburg  Princess  ;  and,

"  July  14:th,  1739,  weds  her ;  the  happiest  little  man  in  all
the  Russias,  and  with  the  biggest  destiny,  if  it  prosper.  Next
year,  too,  there  came  a  son  and  heir ;  whom  they  called  Iwan,
in  honor  of  his  Russian  Great-grandfather.  Shall  we  add
the  subsequent  felicities  of  Anton  Ulrich  here ;  or  wait  till
another  opportunity  ?  "

Better  wait.  This  is  all,  and  more  than  all,  his  Prussian
Majesty,  rolling  out  of  Wusterhausen  that  afternoon,  ever
knew  of  them,  or  needed  to  know  !  —

CHAPTER  VIII.

DEATH OF FRIEDRICH WILHELM.

AT  Wusterhausen,  this  Autumn,  there  is  game  as  usual,
but  little  or  no  hunting  for  the  King.  He  has  to  sit  drearily
within  doors,  for  most  part ;  listening  to  the  rustle  of  falling
leaves,  to  dim  Winter  coming  with  its  rains  and  winds.  Field-
sports  are  a  rumor  from  without :  for  him  now  no  joyous  sow-
baiting,  deer-chasing; — that,  like  other  things,  is  past.

In  the  beginning  of  November,  he  came  to  Berlin;  was
worse  there,  and  again  was  better ;  —  strove  to  do  the  Carnival,
as  had  been  customary;  but,  in  a  languid,  lamed  manner.
One  night  he  looked  in  upon  an  evening-party  which  General
Schulenburg  was  giving:  he  returned  home,  chilled,  shiver-
ing ;  could  not,  all  night,  be  brought  to  heat  again.  It  was  the

CHAP.  VIII.  DEATH  OF  FEIEDEICH  WILHELM. 131

Nov.  1739-April,  1740.

last  evening-party  Friedrich  Wilhelrn  ever  went  to.1  Lieu-
tenant-General Schulenburg :  the  same  who  doomed  young
Friedrich  to  death,  as  President  of  the  Court-Martial ;  and
then  wrote  the  Three  Letters  about  him  which  we  once  looked
into  :  illuminates  himself  in  this  manner  in  Berlin  society,  —
Carnival  season,  1740,  weather  fiercely  cold.  Maypole  Schulen-
burg the  lean  Aunt,  Ex-Mistress  of  George  I.,  over  in  Lon-
don, —  I  think  she  must  now  be  dead  ?  Or  if  not  dead,  why
not !  Memory,  for  the  tenth  time,  fails  me,  of  the  humanly
unmemorable,  whom  perhaps  even  flunkies  should  forget;
and  I  will  try  it  no  more.  The  stalwart  Lieutenant-General
will  reappear  on  us  once,  twice  at  the  utmost,  and  never
again.  He  gave  the  last  evening-party  Friedrich  Wilhelni
ever  went  to.

Poor  Friedrich  Wilhelm  is  in  truth  very  ill ;  tosses  about
all  day,  in  and  out  of  bed,  —  bed  and  wheeled-chair  drearily
alternating  ;  suffers  much  ;  —  and  again,  in  Diplomatic  circles,
the  rumors  are  rife  and  sinister.  Ever  from  this  chill  at
Schulenburg's  the  medicines  did  him  no  good,  says  Pollnitz :
if  he  rallied,  it  was  the  effect  of  Nature,  and  only  temporary.
He  does  daily,  with  punctuality,  his  Official  business  ;  perhaps
the  best  two  hours  he  has  of  the  four-and-twenty,  for  the  time
hangs  heavy  on  him.  His  old  Generals  sit  round  his  bed,  talk-
ing, smoking,  as  it  was  five  years  ago;  his  Feekin  and  his
Children  much  about  him,  out  and  in  :  the  heavy-laden,  weary
hours  roll  round  as  they  can.  In  general  there  is  a  kind  of
constant  Tabaks-Collegium,  old  Flans,  Camas,  Hacke,  Pollnitz,
Derschau,  and  the  rest  by  turns  always  there ;  the  royal
Patient  cannot  be  left  alone,  without  faces  he  likes:  other
Generals,  estimable  in  their  way,  have  a  physiognomy  displeas-
ing to  the  sick  man ;  and  will  smart  for  it  if  they  enter,  —
"  At  sight  of  him  every  pain  grows  painfuler ! "  —  the  poor
King  being  of  poetic  temperament,  as  we  often  say.  Friends
are  encouraged  to  smoke,  especially  to  keep  up  a  stream  of
talk ;  if  at  any  time  he  fall  into  a  doze  and  they  cease  talk-
ing, the  silence  will  awaken  him.

He  is  worst  off  in  the  night ;  sleep  very  bad :  and  among
1  Pollnitz  (ii.  538) ;  who  gives  no  date.

132  AT  EEINSBERG.  .  BOOK  X.

Nov.  1739-April,  1740.

his  sore  bodily  pains,  ennui  falls  very  heavy  to  a  mind  so  rest-
less. He  can  paint,  he  can  whittle,  chisel :  at  last  they  even
mount  him  a  table,  in  his  bed,  with  joiner's  tools,  mallets,
glue-pots,  where  he  makes  small  carpentry,  —  the  talk  to  go  on
the  while  ;  —  often  at  night  is  the  sound  of  his  mallet  audible
in  the  Palace  Esplanade  ;  and  Berlin  townsfolk  pause  to  listen,
with  many  thoughts  of  a  sympathetic  or  at  least  inarticulate
character :  "  Hm,  Weh,  Ihro  Majestdt :  ach  Gott,  pale  Death
knocks  with  impartial  foot  at  the  huts  of  poor  men  and  the
Palaces  of  Kings  ! "  x  Keverend  Herr  Koloff,  whom  they  call
Provost  (Probst,  Chief  Clergyman)  Roloff,  a  pious  honest  man
and  preacher,  he,  I  could  guess,  has  already  been  giving  spirit-
ual counsel  now  and  then ;  later  interviews  with  Roloff  are
expressly  on  record:  for  it  is  the  King's  private  thought,
ever  and  anon  borne  in  vipon  him,  that  death  itself  is  in  this
business.

Queen  and  Children,  mostly  hoping  hitherto,  though  fear-
ing too,  live  in  much  anxiety  and  agitation.  The  Crown-
Prince  is  often  over  from  Reinsberg ;  must  not  come  too
often,  nor  even  inquire  too  much :  his  affectionate  solicitude
might  be  mistaken  for  solicitude  of  another  kind!  It  is
certain  he  is  in  no  haste  to  be  King ;  to  quit  the  haunts  of
the  Muses,  and  embark  on  Kingship.  Certain,  too,  he  loves
his  Father  ;  shudders  at  the  thought  of  losing  him.  And  yet
again  there  will  gleams  intrude  of  a  contrary  thought ;  which
the  filial  heart  disowns,  with  a  kind  of  horror,  "  Down,  thou
impious  thought!" — We  perceive  he  manages  in  general  to
push  the  crisis  away  from  him ;  to  believe  that  real  danger
is  still  distant.  His  demeanor,  so  far  as  we  can  gather  from
his  Letters  or  other  evidence,  is  amiable,  prudent,  natural;
altogether  that  of  a  human  Son  in  those  difficult  circumstances.
Poor  Papa  is  heavy-laden  :  let  us  help  to  bear  his  burdens  ;  —
let  us  hope  the  crisis  is  still  far  off  !  —

Once,  on  a  favorable  evening,  probably  about  the  beginning
of  April,  when  he  felt  as  if  improving,  Friedrich  Wilhelm
resolved  to  dress,  and  hold  Tobacco-Parliament  again  in  a
formal  manner.  Let  us  look  in  there,  through  the  eyes

i  Pollnitz,  ii.  539.

CHAP.  vm.  DEATH  OF FRIEDEICH  WILHELM. 133

Nov.  1739-ApnI,  1740.

of Pollnitz,  who  was of  it,  upon  the  last Tobacco-Parlia-
ment :  —

"A  numerous  party;  Schwerin,  Hacke,  Derschau,  all  the
chiefs  and  commandants  of  the  Berlin  Garrison  are  there ;
the  old  circle  full ;  social  human  speech  once  more,  and  pipes
alight ;  pleasant  to  the  King.  He  does  not  himself  smoke  on
this  occasion ;  but  he  is  unusually  lively  in  talk ;  much  enjoys
the  returning  glimpse  of  old  days ;  and  the  Tobacco  circle  was
proceeding  through  its  phases,  successful  beyond  common.
All  at  once  the  Crown-Prince  steps  in;  direct  from  Reins-
berg : l  an  unexpected  pleasure.  At  sight  of  whom  the  To-
bacco circle,  taken  on  the  sudden,  simultaneously  started
up,  and  made  him  a  bow.  Eule  is,  in  Tobacco-Parliament
you  do  not  rise  for  anybody ;  and  they  have  risen.  Which
struck  the  sick  heart  in  a  strange  painful  way.  <Hm,  the
Rising  Sun  ? '  thinks  he ;  *  Rules  broken  through,  for  the
Rising  Sun.  But  I  am  not  dead  yet,  as  you  shall  know ! '
ringing  for  his  servants  in  great  wrath ;  and  had  himself
rolled  out,  regardless  of  protestations  and  excuses.  '  Hither,
you  Hacke  ! '  said  he.

"  Hacke  followed  ;  but  it  was  only  to  return  on  the  instant,
with  the  King's  order,  '  That  you  instantly  quit  the  Palace,
all  of  you,  and  don't  come  back  ! '  Solemn  respectful  message
to  his  Majesty  was  of  no  effect,  or  of  less  ;  they  had  to  go,  on
those  terms  ;  and  Pollnitz,  making  for  his  Majesty's  apart-
ment next  morning  as  usual,  was  twitched  by  a  Gens-d'arme,
'  No  admittance  !'  And  it  was  days  before  the  matter  would
come  round  again,  under  earnest  protestations  from  the  one
side,  and  truculent  rebukes  from  the  other."  2  Figure  the
Crown-Prince,  figure  the  poor  sick  Majesty  ;  and  what  a  time
in  those  localities  !

With  the  bright  spring  weather  he  seemed  to  revive;
towards  the  end  of  April  he  resolved  for  Potsdam,  everybody
thinking  him  much  better,  and  the  outer  Public  reckoning  the
crisis  of  the  illness  over.  He  himself  knew  other.  It  was
on  the  27th  of  the  month  that  he  went ;  he  said,  "  Fare  thee

1  12th  April,  1740  ?  ((Euvres,  xxvii.  part  1st,  p.  29) ;  Pollnitz  is  dateless.

2  Pollnitz  (abridged),  ii.  540.

134  AT REINSBERO.  %  BOOK .  X.

27th  April,  1740.

well,  then,  Berlin  ;  I  am  to  die  in  Potsdam,  then  (ich  werde  in
Potsdam  sterlen)  !  "  The  May-flowers  came  late  j  the  weather
was  changeful,  ungenial  for  the  sick  man:  this  winter  of
1740  had  been  the  coldest  on  record ;  it  extended  itself  into
the  very  summer ;  and  brought  great  distress  of  every  kind ;

of  which  some  oral  rumor  still  survives  in  all  countries.

Friedrich  Wilhelm  heard  complaints  of  scarcity  among  the
people ;  admonitions  to  open  his  Corn-granaries  (such  as  he
always  has  in  store  against  that  kind  of  accident)  ;  but  he
still  hesitated  and  refused;  unable  to  look  into  it  himself,
and  fearing  deceptions.

For  the  rest,  he  is  struggling  between  death  and  life ;  in
general  persuaded  that  the  end  is  fast  hastening  on.  He
sends  for  Chief  Preacher  Koloff  out  to  Potsdam;  has  some
notable  dialogues  with  Eoloff,  and  with  two  other  Potsdam
Clergymen,  of  which  there  is  record  still  left  us.  In  these,
as  in  all  his  demeanor  at  this  supreme  time,  we  see  the  big
rugged  block  of  manhood  come  out  very  vividly  ;  strong  in
his  simplicity,  in  his  veracity.  Friedrich  Wilhelrn's  wish  is
to  know  from  Eoloff  what  the  chances  are  for  him  in  the
other  world,  —  which  is  not  less  certain  than  Potsdam  and
the  giant  grenadiers  to  Friedrich  Wilhelm ;  and  where,  he
perceives,  never  half  so  clearly  before,  he  shall  actually
peel  off  his  Kinghood,  and  stand  before  God  Almighty,  no
better  than  a  naked  beggar.  Eoloff's  prognostics  are  not  so
encouraging  as  the  King  had  hoped.  Surely  this  King  "  never
took  or  coveted  what  was  not  his  ;  kept  true  to  his  marriage-
vow,  in  spite  of  horrible  examples  everywhere ;  believed  the
Bible,  honored  the  Preachers,  went  diligently  to  Church,  and
tried  to  do  what  he  understood  God's  commandments  were  ? ':
To  all  which  Eoloff,  a  courageous  pious  man,  answers  with
discreet  words  and  shakngs  of  the  head.  "Did  I  behave
ill,  then ;  did  I  ever  do  injustice  ?  "  Eoloff  mentions  Baron
Schlubhut  the  defalcating  Amtmann,  hanged  at  Konigsberg
without  even  a  trial.  "  He  had  no  trial ;  but  was  there  any
doubt  lie  had  justice  ?  A  public  thief,  confessing  he  had
stolen  the  taxes  he  was  set  to  gather ;  insolently  offering,  as
if  that  were  all,  to  repay  the  money,  and  saying,  It  was  not

CHAP.  VIII. DEATH OF FRIEDRICH WILHELM.  135

May,  1740.

Manier  (good  manners)  to  hang  a  nobleman  !  "  Eoloff  shakes
his  head,  Too  violent,  your  Majesty,  and  savoring  of  the
tyrannous.  The  poor  King  must  repent.

"  Well,  —  is  there  anything  more  ?  Out  with  it,  then  ;
better  now  than  too  late  !  "  —  Much  oppression,  forcing  men
to  build  in  Berlin.  —  "  Oppression  ?  was  it  not  their  benefit,
as  well  as  Berlin's  and  the  Country's  ?  I  had  no  interest
in  it  other.  Derschau,  you  who  managed  it  ? "  and  his
Majesty  turned  to  Derschau.  For  all  the  smoking  generals
and  company  are  still  here  ;  nor  will  his  Majesty  consent  to
dismiss  them  from  the  presence  and  be  alone  with  Eoloff  :
"  What  is  there  to  conceal  ?  They  are  people  of  honor,  and
my  friends."  Derschau,  whose  feats  in  the  building  way
are  not  unknown  even  to  us,  answers  with  a  hard  face,  It
was  all  right  and  orderly  ;  nothing  out  of  square  in  his  build-
ing operations.  To  which  Eoloff  shakes  his  head:  "A
thing  of  public  notoriety,  Herr  General."  —  "I  will  prove
everything  before  a  Court,"  answers  the  Herr  General  with
still  harder  face ;  Eoloff  still  austerely  shaking  his  head.
Hm  !  —  And  then  there  is  forgiveness  of  enemies  ;  your  Maj-
esty is  bound  to  forgive  all  men,  or  how  can  you  ask  to  be
forgiven  ?  "  Well,  I  will,  I  do ;  you  Feekin,  write  to  your
Brother  (unforgivablest  of  beings),  after  I  am  dead,  that  I
forgave  him,  died  in  peace  with  him."  —  Better  her  Majesty
should  write  at  once,  suggests  Eoloff.  —  "  No,  after  I  am  dead,"
persists  the  Son  of  Nature,  —  that  will  be  safer ! l  An  un-
wedgeable  and  gnarled  big  block  of  manhood  and  simplicity
and  sincerity ;  such  as  we  rarely  get  sight  of  among  the  mod-
ern sons  of  Adam,  among  the  crowned  sons  nearly  never.
At  parting  he  said  to  Eoloff,  "You  (Er,  He)  do  not  spare
me ;  it  is  right.  You  do  your  duty  like  an  honest  Christian
man." 2

1  Wrote  accordingly,  "  not  able  to  finish  without  many  tears ;  "  honest
sensible  Letter  (though  indifferently  spelt),  "Berlin,  1st  June,  1740;"  —
lies  now  in  State-Paper  Office :  "  Royal  Letters,  vol.  xciv.,  Prussia,  1689-
1777."

2  Notata  ex  ore  Eoloffi  ("found among  the  Seckendorf  Papers,"  no  date  but
"May,  1740  "),  in  Forster,  ii.  154,  155  ;  in  a  fragmentary  state :  completed  in
Pollnitz,  ii.  545-549.

136  AT EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

26th  May,  1740.

Roloff,  I  perceive,  had  several  Dialogues  with  the  King;
and  stayed  in  Potsdam  some  days  for  that  object.  The  above
bit  of  jotting  is  from,  the  Seckendorf  Papers  (probably  picked
up  by  Seckendorf  Junior),  and  is  dated  only  "  May."  Of  the
two  Potsdam  Preachers,  one  of  whom  is  "  Oesfeld,  Chaplain
of  the  Giant  Grenadiers,"  and  the  other  is  "  Cochius,  Calvinist
Hofprediger,"  each  published  on  his  own  score  some  Notes
of  dialogue  and  circumstance ; 1  which  are  to  the  same  effect,
so  far  as  they  concern  us ;  and  exhibit  the  same  rugged  Sou  of
Nature,  looking  with  all  his  eyesight  into  the  near  Eternity,
and  sinking  in  a  human  and  not  inhuman  manner  amid  the
floods  of  Time.  "  Wa,  Wa,  what  great  God  is  this,  that  pulls
down  the  strength  of  the  strongest  Kings  !  "  —

The  poor  King's  state  is  very  restless,  fluctuates  from  day
to  day ;  he  is  impatient  of  bed ;  sleeps  very  ill ;  is  up  when-
ever possible ;  rolls  about  in  his  wheeled-chair,  and  even  gets
into  the  air :  at  one  time  looking  strong,  as  if  there  were  still
months  in  him,  and  anon  sunk  in  fainting  weakness,  as  if  he
had  few  minutes  to  live.  Friedrich  at  Reinsberg  corresponds
very  secretly  with  Dr.  Eller;  has  other  friends  at  Potsdam
whose  secret  news  he  very  anxiously  reads.  To  the  last  he
cannot  bring  himself  to  think  it  serious.2

On  Thursday,  26th  of  May,  an  express  from  Eller,  or  the
Potsdam  friends,  arrives  at  Reinsberg :  He  is  to  come  quickly,
if  he  would  see  his  Father  again  alive !  The  step  may  have
clanger,  too ;  but  Friedrich,  a  world  of  feelings  urging  him,  is
on  the  road  next  morning  before  the  sun.  His  journey  may
be  fancied ;  the  like  of  it  falls  to  all  men.  Arriving  at  last,
turning  hastily  a  corner  of  the  Potsdam  Schloss,  Friedrich

1  Cochius the  Hofprediger's (Calvinist  Court-Chaplain's)  Account  of  his
Interviews  (first  of  them  "Friday,  27th  May,  1740,  about  9  P.M.");  followed
by  ditto  from  Oesfeld  (Chaplain  of  the  Giants),  who  usuaUy  accompanied
Cochius,  — are  in  Seyfarth,  Geschichte  Friedrich  des  Grossen  (Leipzig,  1783-
1788),  i.  (Beylage)  24-40. Seyfarth  was  "  Regiments-Auditor  "  in  Halle  :  his
Work,  solid  though  stupid,  consists  nearly  altogether  of  multifarious  Beylagen
(Appendices)  and  Notes ;  which  are  creditably  accurate,  and  often  curious ;
and,  as  usual,  have  no  Index  for  an  unfortunate  reader.

2  Letter  to  Eller,  25th  May,  1740  (CEuvres),  xvi.  184.

CHAP.  VIIT. DEATH OF FRIEDRICH  WILHELM.  137

27th  May,  1740.

sees  some  gathering  in  the  distance :  it  is  his  Father  in  his
rollwagen  (wheeled-chair),  —  not  dying ;  but  out  of  doors,  giv-
ing orders  about  founding  a  House,  or  seeing  it  done.  House
for  one  Philips,  a  crabbed  Englishman  he  has ;  whose  tongue
is  none  of  the  best,  not  even  to  Majesty  itself,  but  whose
merits  as  a  Groom,  of  English  and  other  Horses,  are  without
parallel  in  those  parts.  Without  parallel,  and  deserve  a  House
before  we  die.  Let  us  see  it  set  agoing,  this  blessed  May-
day !  Of  Philips,  who  survived  deep  into  Friedrich's  time,
and  uttered  rough  sayings  (in  mixed  intelligible  dialect)  when
put  upon  in  his  grooming,  or  otherwise  disturbed,  I  could
obtain  no  farther  account :  the  man  did  not  care  to  be  put  in
History  (a  very  small  service  to  a  man)  ;  cared  to  have  a  house
with  trim  fittings,  and  to  do  his  grooming  well,  the  fortunate
Philips.

At  sight  of  his  Son,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  threw  out  his  arms ;
the  Son  kneeling  sank  upon  his  breast,  and  they  embraced
with  tears.  My  Father,  my  Father ;  My  Son,  my  Son !  It
was  a  scene  to  make  all  by-standers  and  even  Philips  weep.  —
Probably  the  emotion  hurt  the  old  King ;  he  had  to  be  taken
in  again  straightway,  his  show  of  strength  suddenly  gone,  and
bed  the  only  place  for  him.  This  same  Friday  he  dictated  to
one  of  his  Ministers  (Boden,  who  was  in  close  attendance)
the  Instruction  for  his  Funeral ;  a  rude  characteristic  Piece,
which  perhaps  the  English  reader  knows.  Too  long  and  rude
for  reprinting  here.1

He  is  to  be  buried  in  his  uniform,  the  Potsdam  Grenadiers
his  escort ;  with  military  decorum,  three  volleys  fired  (and
take  care  they  be  well  fired,  "  nicht  plackeren "),  so  many
cannon-salvos  ;  —  and  no  fuss  or  flaunting  ceremony :  sim-
plicity and  decency  is  what  the  tenant  of  that  oak  coffin
wants,  as  he  always  did  when  owner  of  wider  dominions.
The  coffin,  which  he  has  ready  and  beside  him  in  the  Palace
this  good  while,  is  a  stout  piece  of  carpentry,  with  leather
straps  and  other  improvements ;  he  views  it  from  time  to
time  ;  solaces  his  truculent  imagination  with  the  look  of  it :

1  Copy  of  it,  in  Seyfarth  (ubi  suprk),  i.  19-24. Translated  in  Mauvillon
(ii.  432-437) ;  in  &c.  &c.

138  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

27th-30th  May,  1740.

"I  shall  sleep  right  well  there"  he  -would  say.  The  image
he  has  of  his  Burial,  we  perceive,  is  of  perfect  visuality,  equal
to  what  a  Defoe  could  do  in  imagining.  All  is  seen,  settled  to
the  last  minuteness  :  the  coffin  is  to  be  borne  out  by  so  and  so,
at  such  and  such  a  door ;  this  detachment  is  to  fall-in  here,
that  there,  in  the  attitude  of  "  cover  arms  "  (musket  inverted
under  left  arm)  ;  and  the  band  is  to  play,  with  all  its  blacka-
moors, O  Haupt  voll  Blut  und  Wunden  (0  Head,  all  bleeding
wounded)  ;  a  Dirge  his  Majesty  had  liked,  who  knew  music,
and  had  a  love  for  it,  after  his  sort.  Good  Son  of  Nature  :  a
dumb  Poet,  as  I  say  always  ;  most  dumb,  but  real ;  the  value
of  him  great,  and  unknown  in  these  babbling  times.  It  was
on  this  same  Friday  night  that  Cochius  was  first  sent  for ;
Cochius,  and  Oesfeld  with  him,  "  about  nine  o'clock."

For  the  next  three  days  (Saturday  to  Monday)  when  his
cough  and  many  sufferings  would  permit  him,  Friedrich
Wilhelm.  had  long  private  dialogues  with  his  Son ;  instruct-
ing him,  as  was  evident,  in  the  mysteries  of  State  ;  in  what
knowledge,  as  to  persons  and  to  things,  he  reckoned  might
be  usefulesfc  to  him.  What  the  lessons  were,  we  know  not;
the  way  of  taking  them  had  given  pleasure  to  the  old  man :
he  was  heard  to  say,  perhaps  more  than  once,  when  the
Generals  were  called  in,  and  the  dialogue  interrupted  for  a
while  :  "  Am  not  I  happy  to  have  such  a  Son  to  leave  behind
me  !  "  And  the  grimly  sympathetic  Generals  testified  assent ;
endeavored  to  talk  a  little,  could  at  least  smoke,  and  look
friendly  ;  till  the  King  gathered  strength  for  continuing  his
instructions  to  his  Successor.  All  else  was  as  if  settled  with
him  ;  this  had  still  remained  to  do.  This  once  done  (finished,
Monday  night),  why  not  abdicate  altogether;  and  die  dis-
engaged, be  it  in  a  day  or  in  a  month,  since  that  is  now  the
one  work  left  ?  Friedrich  Wilhelm  does  so  purpose.

His  state,  now  as  all  along,  was  fluctuating,  uncertain,
restless.  He  was  heard  murmuring  prayers  ;  he  would  say
sometimes,  "  Pray  for  me ;  Betet,  betet"  And  more  than
once,  in  deep  tone :  "  Lord,  enter  not  into  judgment  with
Thy  servant,  for  in  Thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  jus-
tified ! "  The  wild  Son  of  Nature,  looking  into  Life  and

CHAP  VIII. DEATH  OF  FRIEDEICH  WILHELM.  139

31st  May,  1740.

Death,  into  Judgment  and  Eternity,  finds  that  these  things
are  very  great.  This  too  is  a  characteristic  trait :  In  a  cer-
tain German  Hymn  (Why  fret  or  murmur,  then?  the  title  of
it),  which  they  often  sang  to  him,  or  along  with  him,  as  he
much  loved  it,  are  these  words,  "  Naked  I  came  into  the
world,  and  naked  shall  I  go,"  —  "No,"  said  he,  "always
with  vivacity,"  at  this  passage;  "not  quite  naked,  I  shall
have  my  uniform  on :  "  Let  us  be  exact,  since  we  are  at  it !
After  which  the  singing  proceeded  again.  "The  late  Graf
Alexander  von  Wartenberg"  —  Captain  Wartenberg,  whom
we  know,  and  whose  opportunities  —  "was  wont  to  relate
this." !

Tuesday,  31st  May,  "about  one  in  the  morning,"  Cochius
was  again  sent  for.  He  found  the  King  in  very  pious  mood,
but  in  great  distress,  and  afraid  he  might  yet  have  much  pain
to  suffer.  Cochius  prayed  with  him ;  talked  piously.  "  I  can
remember  nothing,"  said  the  King;  "I  cannot  pray,  I  have
forgotten  all  my  prayers."  —  "Prayer  is  not  in  words,  but
in  the  thought  of  the  heart,"  said  Cochius ;  and  soothed  the
heavy-laden  man  as  he  could.  "Fare  you  well,"  said  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm,  at  length ;  "  most  likely  we  shall  not  meet  again
in  this  world."  Whereat  Cochius  burst  into  tears,  arid  with-
drew. About  four,  the  King  was  again  out  of  bed ;  wished  to
see  his  youngest  Boy,  who  had  been  ill  of  measles,  but  was
doing  well :  "  Poor  little  Ferdinand,  adieu,  then,  iny  little
child ! "  This  is  the  Father  of  that  fine  Louis  Ferdinand,  who
was  killed  at  Jena ;  concerning  whom  Berlin,  in  certain  eman-
cipated circles  of  it,  still  speaks  with  regret.  He,  the  Louis
Ferdinand,  had  fine  qualities ;  but  went  far  a-roving,  into  radi-
calism, into  romantic  love,  into  champagne ;  and  was  cut  down
on  the  threshold  of  Jena,  desperately  fighting,  —  perhaps
happily  for  him.

From  little  Ferdinand's  room  Friedrich  Wilhelm  has  himself
rolled  into  Queen  Sophie's.  "  Feekin,  0  my  Feekin,  thou  must
rise  this  day,  and  help  me  what  thou  canst.  This  day  I  am
going  to  die  ;  thou  wilt  be  with  me  this  day ! "  The  good  Wife
rises :  I  know  not  that  it  was  the  first  time  she  had  been  so
1  Biiscliing  (in  1786),  Beitrage,  iv.  100.

140  AT  EEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

31st  May,  1740.

called ;  but  it  did  prove  the  last.  Friedrich  Wilhelm  has  de-
cided, as  the  first  thing  he  will  do,  to  abdicate ;  and  all  the
Official  persons  and  companions  of  the  sick-room,  Pdllnitz
among  them,  not  long  after  sunrise,  are  called  to  see  it  done.
Pollnitz,  huddling  on  his  clothes,  arrived  about  five :  in  a  cor-
ridor he  sees  the  wheeled-chair  and  poor  sick  King ;  steps  aside
to  let  him.  pass  :  "  '  It  is  over  (Das  ist  vollbracht},'  said  the
King,  looking  up  to  me  as  he  passed :  he  had  on  his  nightcap,
and  a  blue  mantle  thrown  round  him."  He  was  wheeled  into
his  anteroom ;  there  let  the  company  assemble  :  many  of  them
are  already  there.

The  royal  stables  are  visible  from  this  room :  Friedrich
Wilhelm  orders  the  horses  to  be  ridden  out :  you  old  Fiirst  of
Anhalt-Dessau  my  oldest  friend,  you  Colonel  Hacke  faithfulest
of  Adjutant-Generals,  take  each  of  you  a  horse,  the  best  you
can  pick  out :  it  is  my  last  gift  to  you.  Dessau,  in  silence,
with  dumb-show  of  thanks,  points  to  a  horse,  any  horse  :  "  You
have  chosen  the  very  worst,"  said  Friedrich  Wilhelm  :  "  Take
that  other,  I  will  warrant  him  a  good  one  ! "  The  grim  old
Dessauer  thanks  in  silence ;  speechless  grief  is  on  that  stern
gunpowder  face,  and  he  seems  even  to  be  struggling  with  tears.
"  Nay,  nay,  my  friend,"  Friedrich  Wilhelm  said,  "  this  is  a  debt
we  have  all  to  pay."

The  Official  people,  Queen,  Friedrich,  Minister  Boden,  Min-
ister Podewils,  and  even  Pollnitz,  being  now  all  present,  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm  makes  his  Declaration,  at  considerable  length ;
old  General  Bredow  repeating  it  aloud,1  sentence  by  sentence,
the  King's  own  voice  being  too  weak ;  so  that  all  may  hear :
"That  he  abdicates,  gives  up  wholly,  in  favor  of  his  good
Son  Friedrich ;  that  foreign  Ambassadors  are  to  be  informed ;
that  you  are  all  to  be  true  and  loyal  to  my  Son  as  you  were  to
me  "  —  and  what  else  is  needful.  To  which  the  judicious
Podewils  makes  answer,  "  That  there  must  first  be  a  written
Deed  of  his  high  Transaction  executed,  which  shall  be  straight-
way set  about ;  the  Deed  once  executed,  signed  and  sealed,  —
the  high  Royal  will,  in  all  points,  takes  effect."  Alas,  before
Podewils  has  done  speaking,  the  King  is  like  falling  into  a

1  Pollnitz,  ii.  561.

CHAP.  VIII. DEATH OF FEIEDRICH WILHELM.  141

31st  May,  1740.

faint ;  does  faint,  and  is  carried  to  bed :  too  unlikely  any  Deed
of  Abdication  will  be  needed.

Ups  and  downs  there  still  were ;  sore  fluctuating  labor,  as
the  poor  King  struggles  to  his  final  rest,  this  morning.  He
was  at  the  window  again,  when  the  Wacht-parade  (Grenadiers
on  Guard)  turned  out ;  he  saw  them  make  their  evolutions  for
the  last  time.1  After  which,  new  relapse,  new  fluctuation.  It
was  about  eleven  o'clock,  when  Cochius  was  again  sent  for.
The  King  lay  speechless,  seemingly  still  conscious,  in  bed ;
Cochius  prays  with  fervor,  in  a  loud  tone,  that  the  dying  King
may  hear  and  join.  "  Not  so  loud ! "  says  the  King,  rallying
a  little.  He  had  remembered  that  it  was  the  season  when
his  servants  got  their  new  liveries ;  they  had  been  ordered  to
appear  this  day  in  full  new  costume  :  "  0  vanity  !  0  vanity  ! "
said  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  at  sight  of  the  ornamented  plush.
"  Pray  for  me,  pray  for  me ;  my  trust  is  in  the  Saviour !  "  he
often  said.  His  pains,  his  weakness  are  great ;  the  cordage  of
a  most  tough  heart  rending  itself  piece  by  piece.  At  one  time,
he  called  for  a  mirror :  that  is  certain :  —  rugged  wild  man,
son  of  Nature  to  the  last.  The  mirror  was  brought ;  what  he
said  at  sight  of  his  face  is  variously  reported :  "  Not  so  worn
out  as  I  thought,"  is  Pollnitz's  account,  and  the  likeliest ;  —
though  perhaps  he  said  several  things,  "  ugly  face,"  "  as  good
as  dead  already ;  "  and  continued  the  inspection  for  some
moments.2  A  grim,  strange  thing.

"Feel  my  pulse,  Pitsch,"  said  he,  noticing  the  Surgeon  of
his  Giants :  "  tell  me  how  long  this  will  last."  —  "  Alas,  not
long,"  answered  Pitsch.  —  "  Say  not,  alas ;  but  how  do  you  (He)
know  ?  "  —  "  The  pulse  is  gone  ! "  —  "  Impossible,"  said  he,  lift-
ing his  arm :  "  how  could  I  move  my  fingers  so,  if  the  pulse
were  gone  ? "  Pitsch  looked  mournfully  steadfast.  "  Herr
Jesu,  to  thee  I  live ;  Herr  Jesu,  to  thee  I  die ;  in  life  and  in
death  thou  art  my  gain  (Du  list  mein  Gewinn)."  These  were
the  last  words  Friedrich  Wilhelm  spoke  in  this  world.  He
again  fell  into  a  faint.  Eller  gave  a  signal  to  the  Crown-Prince
to  take  the  Queen  away.  Scarcely  were  they  out  of  the  room,
when  the  faint  had  deepened  into  death ;  and  Friedrich  Wil-
1  Pauli,  viii.  280.  2  Pollnitz,  ii.  564  ;  Wilhelmina,  ii.  321.

142  AT REINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

31st  May,  1740.

helm,  at  rest  from  all  his  labors,  slept  with  the  primeval  sons
of  Thor.

No  Baresark  of  them,  nor  Odin's  self,  I  think,  was  a  bit  of
truer  human  stuff ;  —  I  confess  his  value  to  me,  in  these  sad
times,  is  rare  and  great.  Considering  the  usual  Histrionic,
Papin's-Digester,  Truculent-Charlatan  and  other  species  of
"  Kings,"  alone  attainable  for  the  sunk  flunky  populations  of
an  Era  given  up  to  Mammon  and  the  worship  of  its  own  belly,
what  would  not  such  a  population  give  for  a  Friedrich  Wil-
helm,  to  guide  it  on  the  road  back  from  Orcus  a  little  ?  "  Would
give,"  I  have  written ;  but  alas,  it  ought  to  have  been  "  shoidd
give."  What  they  "  would  "  give  is  too  mournfully  plain  to
me,  in  spite  of  ballot-boxes :  a  steady  and  tremendous  truth
from  the  days  of  Barabbas  downwards  and  upwards  !  —  Tues-
day, 31st  May,  1740,  between  one  and  two  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon, Friedrich  Wilhelm  died ;  age  fifty-two,  coming  loth
August  next.  Same  day,  Friedrich  his  Son  was  proclaimed  at
Berlin ;  quilted  heralds,  with  sound  of  trumpet  and  the  like,
doing  what  is  customary  on  such  occasions.

On  Saturday,  4th  June,  the  King's  body  is  laid  out  in  state ;
all  Potsdam  at  liberty  to  come  and  see.  He  lies  there,  in  his
regimentals,  in  his  oaken  coffin,  on  a  raised  place  in  the
middle  of  the  room ;  decent  mortuary  draperies,  lamps,  gar-
lands, banderols  furnishing  the  room  and  him :  at  his  feet,
on  a  black-velvet  tabouret  (stool),  are  the  chivalry  emblems,
helmet,  gauntlets,  spurs  ;  and  on  similar  stools,  at  the  right
hand  and  the  left,  lie  his  military  insignia,  hat  and  sash,
sword,  guidon,  and  what  else  is  fit.  Around,  in  silence,  sit
nine  veteran  military  dignitaries ;  Buddenbrock,  Waldau,
Derschau,  Einsiedel,  and  five  others  whom  we  omit  to  name.
Silent  they  sit.  A  grim  earnest  sight  in  the  shine  of  the
lamplight,  as  you  pass  out  of  the  June  sun.  Many  went,  all
day  ;  looked  once  again  on  the  face  that  was  to  vanish.  Pre-
cisely at  ten  at  night,  the  coffin-lid  is  screwed  down  :  twelvo
Potsdam  Captains  take  the  coffin  on  their  shoulders  ;  four-and
twenty  Corporals  with  wax  torches,  four-and-twenty  Sergeants
with  inverted  halberts  lowered  ;  certain  Generals  on  order,

CHAP. .VID ..DEATH OF FKIEDRICH  WILHELM.  143

31st  May,  1740,

and  very  many  following  as  volunteers ;  these  perform  the
actual  burial,  —  carry  the  body  to  the  Garrison  Church,  where
are  clergy  waiting,  which  is  but  a  small  step  off ;  see  it  lodged,
oak  coffin  and  all,  in  a  marble  coffin  in  the  side  vault  there,
which  is  known  to  Tourists.1  It  is  the  end  of  the  week,  and
the  actual  burial  is  done,  —  hastened  forward  for  reasons  we
can  guess.

Filial  piety  by  no  means  intends  to  defraud  a  loved  Father
of  the  Spartan  ceremonial  contemplated  as  obsequies  by  him :
very  far  from  it.  Filial  piety  will  conform  to  that  with  rigor ;
only  adding  what  musical  and  other  splendors  are  possible,
to  testify  his  love  still  more.  And  so,  almost  three  weeks
hence,  on  the  23d  of  the  month,  with  the  aid  of  Dresden
Artists,  of  Latin  Cantatas  and  other  pomps  (not  inexcusable,
though  somewhat  out  of  keeping),  the  due  Funeral  is  done,
no  Corpse  but  a  Wax  Effigy  present  in  it;  —  and  in  all
points,  that  of  the  Potsdam  Grenadiers  not  forgotten,  there
was  rigorous  conformity  to  the  Instruction  left.  In  all  points,
even  to  the  extensive  funeral  dinner,  and  drinking  of  the
appointed  cask  of  wine,  "  the  best  cask  in  my  cellar."  Adieu,
0  King.

The  Potsdam  Grenadiers  fired  their  three  volleys  (not
"plackering"  as  I  have  reason  to  believe,  but  well) ;  got  their
allowance,  dinner-liquor,  and  appointed  coin  of  money :  it
was  the  last  service  required  of  them  in  this  world.  That
same  night  they  were  dissolved,  the  whole  Four  Thousand
of  them,  at  a  stroke ;  and  ceased  to  exist  as  Potsdam  Grena-
diers. Colonels,  Captains,  all  the  Officers  known  to  be  of
merit,  were  advanced,  at  least  transferred.  Of  the  common
men,  a  minority,  of  not  inhuman  height  and  of  worth  other-
wise, were  formed  into  a  new  Eegiment  on  the  common  terms :
the  stupid  splay-footed  eight-feet  mass  were  allowed  to  stalk
off  whither  they  pleased,  or  vegetate  on  frugal  pensions ;  Irish
Kirkman,  and  a  few  others  neither  knock-kneed  nor  without
head,  were  appointed  heyducs,  that  is,  porters  to  the  King's
or  other  Palaces  ;  and  did  that  duty  in  what  was  considered
an  ornamental  manner.

1  Pauli,  viii.  281.

144  AT  KEINSBERG.  BOOK  X.

31st  May,  1740.

Here  are  still  two  things  capable  of  being  fished  up  from
the  sea  of  nugatory  matter  ;  and  meditated  on  by  readers,  till
the  following  Books  open.

The  last  breath  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm  having  fled,  Friedrich
hurried  to  a  private  room ;  sat  there  all  in  tears  ;  looking  back
through  the  gulfs  of  the  Past,  upon  such  a  Father  now  rapt
away  forever.  Sad  all,  and  soft  in  the  moonlight  of  memory,
—  the  lost  Loved  One  all  in  the  right  as  we  now  see,  we  all
in  the  wrong  !  —  This,  it  appears,  was  the  Son's  fixed  opinion.
Seven  years  hence,  here  is  how  Friedrich  concludes  the  His-
tory of  his  Father,  written  with  a  loyal  admiration  through-
out :  "  We  have  left  under  silence  the  domestic  chagrins  of
this  great  Prince :  readers  must  have  some  indulgence  for  the
faults  of  the  Children,  in  consideration  of  the  virtues  of  such
a  Father."  i  All  in  tears  he  sits  at  present,  meditating  these
sad  things.

In  a  little  while  the  Old  Dessauer,  about  to  leave  for  Dessau,
ventures  in  to  the  Crown-Prince,  Crown-Prince  no  longer ;
"  embraces  his  knees ; "  offers,  weeping,  his  condolence,  his
congratulation ;  —  hopes  withal  that  his  sons  and  he  will  be
continued  in  their  old  posts,  and  that  he,  the  Old  Dessauer,
"  will  have  the  same  authority  as  in  the  late  reign."  Fried-
rich's  eyes,  at  this  last  clause,  flash  out  tearless,  strangely
Olympian.  "In  your  posts  I  have  no  thought  of  making
change :  in  your  posts,  yes ;  —  and  as  to  authority,  I  know  of
none  there  can  be  but  what  resides  in  the  King  that  is  sover-
eign ! "  Which,  as  it  were,  struck  the  breath  out  of  the  Old
Dessauer ;  and  sent  him  home  with  a  painful  miscellany  of
feelings,  astonishment  not  wanting  among  them.

At  an  after  hour,  the  same  night,  Friedrich  went  to  Berlin ;
met  by  acclamation  enough.  He  slept  there,  not  without
tumult  of  dreams,  one  may  fancy ;  and  on  awakening  next
morning,  the  first  sound  he  heard  was  that  of  the  Regiment
Glasenap  under  his  windows,  swearing  fealty  to  the  new
King.  He  sprang  out  of  bed  in  a  tempest  of  emotion ;  bustled
distractedly  to  and  fro,  wildly  weeping.  Pollnitz,  who  came
into  the  anteroom,  found  him  in  this  state,  "half-dressed,
1  (Euvres,  i.  174  (Mtfmoires  de  Brandebourg  :  finished  about  1747).

CHAP.  Vin DEATH  OF FRIEDRICH  WILHELM.  145

Sist  May,  1740.

with  dishevelled  hair,  in  tears,  and  as  if  beside  himself."
"  These  huzzaings  only  tell  me  what  I  have  lost ! "  said  the
new  King.  —  "  He  was  in  great  suffering,"  suggested  Pollnitz  ;
"  he  is  now  at  rest."  "  True,  he  suffered ;  but  he  was  here
with  us  :  and  now  —  ! "  l

1  Ranke  (ii.  46,  47),  from  certain  Fragments,  still  in  manuscript,  of  P611-
nitz's  Memoiren.

VOL. VII.  10

BOOK XL

FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS IN  HAND.
June-December,  1740.

CHAPTER  I.

PHENOMENA OF FRIEDRICH's ACCESSION.

IN  Berlin,  from  Tuesday,  31st  May,  1740,  day  of  the  late
King's  death,  till  the  Thursday  following,  the  post  was  stopped
and  the  gates  closed ;  no  estafette  can  be  despatched,  though
Dickens  and  all  the  Ambassadors  are  busy  writing.  On  the
Thursday,  Eegiments,  Officers,  principal  Officials  having  sworn,
and  the  new  King  being  fairly  in  the  saddle,  estafettes  and
post-boys  shoot  forth  at  the  top  of  their  speed ;  and  Kumor,
towards  every  point  of  the  compass,  apprises  mankind  what
immense  news  there  is.1

A  King's  Accession  is  always  a  hopeful  phenomenon  to  the
public ;  more  especially  a  young  King's,  who  has  been  talked
of  for  his  talents  and  aspirings,  —  for  his  sufferings,  were  it
nothing  more,  —  and  whose  Anti-Machiavel  is  understood  to
be  in  the  press.  Vaguely  everywhere  there  has  a  notion  gone
abroad  that  this  young  King  will  prove  considerable.  Here  at
last  has  a  Lover  of  Philosophy  got  upon  the  throne,  and  great
philanthropies  and  magnanimities  are  to  be  expected,  think
rash  editors  and  idle  mankind.  Hash  editors  in  England  and
elsewhere,  we  observe,  are  ready  to  believe  that  Friedrich  has
not  only  disbanded  the  Potsdam  Giants  ;  but  means  to  "  reduce
1  Dickens  (in  State-Paper  Office),  4th  June,  1740.

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 147

1740.

the  Prussian  Army  one  half  "  or  so,  for  ease  (temporary  ease,
which  we  hope  will  be  lasting)  of  parties  concerned ;  and  to
go  much  upon  emancipation,  political  rose-water,  and  friend-
ship to  humanity,  as  we  now  call  it.

At  his  first  meeting  of  Council,  they  say,  he  put  this  ques-
tion, "  Could  not  the  Prussian  Army  be  reduced  to  45,000  ?  "
The  excellent  young  man.  To  which  the  Council  had  an-
swered, "  Hardly,  your  Majesty !  The  Julich-and-Berg  affair
is  so  ominous  hitherto  !  "  These  may  be  secrets,  and  dubious
to  people  out  of  doors,  thinks  a  wise  editor ;  but  one  thing
patent  to  the  day  was  this,  surely  symbolical  enough :  On  one
of  his  Majesty's  first  drives  to  Potsdam  or  from  it,  a  thousand
children,  —  in  round  numbers  a  thousand  of  them,  all  with  the
red  string  round  their  necks,  and  liable  to  be  taken  for  soldiers,
if  needed  in  the  regiment  of  their  Canton,  — "  a  thousand
children  met  this  young  King  at  a  turn  of  his  road ;  and  with
shrill  unison  of  wail,  sang  out :  "  Oh,  deliver  us  from  slavery,"
—  from  the  red  threads,  your  Majesty.  Why  should  poor  we
be  liable  to  suffer  hardship  for  our  Country  or  otherwise,  your
Majesty  !  Can  no  one  else  be  got  to  do  it  ?  sang  out  the  thou-
sand children.  And  his  Majesty  assented  on  the  spot,  thinks
the  rash  editor.1  "  Goose,  Madam  ?  "  exclaimed  a  philanthro-
pist projector  once,  whose  scheme  of  sweeping  chimneys  by
pulling  a  live  goose  down  through  them  was  objected  to  :
"  Goose,  Madam  ?  You  can  take  two  ducks,  then,  if  you  are
so  sorry  for  the  goose ! "  —  Eash  editors  think  there  is  to  be
a  reign  of  Astrsea  Redux  in  Prussia,  by  means  of  this  young
King  ;  and  forget  to  ask  themselves,  as  the  young  King  must
by  no  means  do,  How  far  Astraea  may  be  possible,  for  Prussia
and  him  ?

At  home,  too,  there  is  prophesying  enough,  vague  hope
enough,  which  for  most  part  goes  wide  of  the  mark.  This
young  King,  we  know,  did  prove  considerable  ;  but  not  in  the
way  shaped  out  for  him  by  the  public  ;  —  it  was  in  far  other
ways  !  For  no  public  in  the  least  knows,  in  such  cases  :  nor
does  the  man  himself  know,  except  gradually  and  if  he  strive
to  learn.  As  to  the  public,  —  "  Doubtless,"  says  a  friend  of
1  Gentleman's  Magazine  (London,  1740),  x  318;  Newspapers,  &c.

148 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

mine,  "doubtless  it  was  the  Atlantic  Ocean  tliat  carried  Co-
lumbus to  America ;  lucky  for  the  Atlantic,  and  for  Columbus
and  us :  but  the  Atlantic  did  not  quite  vote  that  way  from  the
first ;  nay  its  votes,  I  believe,  were  very  various  at  different
stages  of  the  matter  !  "  This  is  a  truth  which  kings  and  men,
not  intending  to  be  drift-logs  or  waste  brine  obedient  to  the
Moon,  are  much  called  to  have  in  mind  withal,  from  perhaps
an  early  stage  of  their  voyage.

Friedrich's  actual  demeanor  in  these  his  first  weeks,  which
is  still  decipherable  if  one  study  well,  has  in  truth  a  good  deal
of  the  brilliant,  of  the  popular-magnanimous  ;  but  manifests
strong  solid  quality  withal,  and  a  head  steadier  than  might
have  been  expected.  For  the  Berlin  world  is  all  in  a  rather
Auroral  condition ;  and  Friedrich  too  is,  —  the  chains  suddenly
cut  loose,  and  such  hopes  opened  for  the  young  man.  He  has
great  things  ahead ;  feels  in  himself  great  things,  and  doubtless
exults  in  the  thought  of  realizing  them.  Magnanimous  enough,
popular,  hopeful  enough,  with  Voltaire  and  the  highest  of  the
world  looking  on  :  — but  yet  he  is  wise,  too ;  creditably  aware
that  there  are  limits,  that  this  is  a  bargain,  and  the  terms  of
it  inexorable.  We  discern  with  pleasure  the  old  veracity  of
character  shining  through  this  giddy  new  element ;  that  all
these  fine  procedures  are  at  least  unaffected,  to  a  singular  de-
gree true,  and  the  product  of  nature,  on  his  part ;  and  that,
in  short,  the  complete  respect  for  Fact,  which  used  to  be  a
quality  of  his,  and  which  is  among  the  highest  and  also  rarest
in  man,  has  on  no  side  deserted  him  at  present.

A  trace  of  airy  exuberance,  of  natural  exultancy,  not  quite
repressible,  on  the  sudden  change  to  freedom  and  supreme
power  from  what  had  gone  before  :  perhaps  that  also  might  be
legible,  if  in  those  opaque  bead-rolls  which  are  called  Histories
of  Friedrich  anything  human  could  with  certainty  be  read  !
He  flies  much  about  from  place  to  place ;  now  at  Potsdam,  now
at  Berlin,  at  Charlottenburg,  Keinsberg  ;  nothing  loath  to  run
whither  business  calls  him,  and  appear  in  public :  the  gazetteer
world,  as  we  noticed,  which  has  been  hitherto  a  most  mute
world,  breaks  out  here  and  there  into  a  kind  of  husky  jubilation
over  the  great  things  he  is  daily  doing,  and  rejoices  in  the  pros-

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF FRIEDKICH'S  ACCESSION. 149

pect  of  having  a  Philosopher  King ;  which  function  the  young
man,  only  twenty-eight  gone,  cannot  but  wish  to  fulfil  for  the
gazetteers  and  the  world.  He  is  a  busy  man ;  and  walks  boldly
into  his  grand  enterprise  of  "  making  men  happy,"  to  the  ad-
miration of  Voltaire  and  an  enlightened  public  far  and  near.

Bielfeld  speaks  of  immense  concourses  of  people  crowding
about  Charlottenburg,  to  congratulate,  to  solicit,  to  &c. ;  tells
us  how  he  himself  had  to  lodge  almost  in  outhouses,  in  that
royal  village  of  hope.  His  emotions  at  Keinsberg,  and  every-
body's, while  Friedrich  Wilhelm  lay  dying,  and  all  stood  like
greyhounds  on  the  slip ;  and  with  what  arrow-swiftness  they
shot  away  when  the  great  news  came  :  all  this  he  has  already
described  at  wearisome  length,  in  his  fantastic  semi-fabulous
way.1  Friedrich  himself  seemed  moderately  glad  to  see  Biel-
feld ;  received  his  high-flown  congratulations  with  a  benevolent
yet  somewhat  composed  air ;  and  gave  him  afterwards,  in  the
course  of  weeks,  an  unexpectedly  small  appointment :  To  go
to  Hanover,  under  Truchsess  von  Waldburg,  and  announce  our
Accession.  Which  is  but  a  simple,  mostly  formal  service ;  yet
perhaps  what  Bielfeld  is  best  equal  to.

The  Britannic  Majesty,  or  at  least  his  Hanover  people  have
been  beforehand  with  this  civility;  Baron  Miinchhausen,  no
doubt  by  orders  given  for  such  contingency,  had  appeared  at
Berlin  with  the  due  compliment  and  condolence  almost  on  the
first  day  of  the  New  Reign ;  first  messenger  of  all  on  that
errand ;  Britannic  Majesty  evidently  in  a  conciliatory  humor,
—  having  his  dangerous  Spanish  War  on  hand.  Britannic
Majesty  in  person,  shortly  after,  gets  across  to  Hanover ;  and
Friedrich  despatches  Truchsess,  with  Bielfeld  adjoined,  to
return  the  courtesy.

Friedrich  does  not  neglect  these  points  of  good  manners;
along  with  which  something  of  substantial  may  be  privately
conjoined.  For  example,  if  he  had  in  secret  his  eye  on  Jiilich
and  Berg,  could  anything  be  fitter  than  to  ascertain  what  the
French  will  think  of  such  an  enterprise  ?  What  the  French ;
and  next  to  them  what  the  English,  that  is  to  say,  Hanoverians,
who  meddle  much  in  affairs  of  the  Eeich.  For  these  reasons

1  Bielfeld,  i.  68-77;  ib.  81.

150 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XL

1740.

and  others  he  likewise,  probably  -with,  more  study  than  in
the  Bielfeld  case,  despatches  Colonel  Camas  to  make  his  com-
pliment at  the  French  Court,  and  in  an  expert  way  take
soundings  there.  Carnas,  a  fat  sedate  military  gentleman,  of
advanced  years,  full  of  observation,  experience  and  sound
sense,  —  "  with  one  arm,  which  he  makes  do  the  work  of  two,
and  nobody  can  notice  that  the  other  arm  resting  in  his  coat-
breast  is  of  cork,  so  expert  is  he,"  —  will  do  in  this  matter
what  is  feasible ;  probably  not  much  for  the  present.  He  is  to
call  on  Voltaire,  as  he  passes,  who  is  in  Holland  again,  at  the
Hague  for  some  months  back  ;  and  deliver  him  "  a  little  cask
of  Hungary  Wine,"  which  probably  his  Majesty  had  thought
exquisite.  Of  which,  and  the  other  insignificant  passages  be-
tween them,  we  hear  more  than  enough  in  the  writings  and
correspondences  of  Voltaire  about  this  time.

In  such  way  Friedrich  disposes  of  his  Bielfelds ;  who  are
rather  numerous  about  him  now  and  henceforth.  Adventurers
from  all  quarters,  especially  of  the  literary  type,  in  hopes  of
being  employed,  much  hovered  round  Friedrich  through  his
whole  reign.  But  they  met  a  rather  strict  judge  on  arriv-
ing; it  cannot  be  said  they  found  it  such  a  Goshen  as  they
expected.

Favor,  friendly  intimacy,  it  is  visible  from  the  first,  avails
nothing  with  this  young  King ;  beyond  and  before  all  things
he  will  have  his  work  done,  and  looks  out  exclusively  for  the
man  ablest  to  do  it.  Hence  Bielfeld  goes  to  Hanover,  to
grin  out  euphuisms,  and  make  graceful  court-bows  to  our  sub-
lime little  Uncle  there.  On  the  other  hand,  Friedrich  insti-
tutes a  new  Knighthood,  Order  of  Merit  so  called ;  which  indeed
is  but  a  small  feat,  testifying  mere  hope  and  exuberance  as
yet ;  and  may  even  be  made  worse  than  nothing,  according
to  the  Knights  he  shall  manage  to  have.  Happily  it  proved
a  successful  new  Order  in  this  last  all-essential  particular ;
and,  to  the  end  of  Friedrich's  life,  continued  to  be  a  great  and
coveted  distinction  among  the  Prussians.

Beyond  doubt  this  is  a  radiant  enough  young  Majesty ;  en-
titled to  hope,  and  to  be  the  cause  of  hope.  Handsome,  to

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 151

begin  with;  decidedly  well-looking,  all  say,  and  of  graceful
presence,  though  hardly  five  feet  seven,  and  perhaps  stouter
of  limb  than  the  strict  Belvedere  standard.1  Has  a  fine  free
expressive  face ;  nothing  of  austerity  in  it ;  not  a  proud  face,
or  not  too  proud,  yet  rapidly  flashing  on  you  all  manner  of
high  meanings.2  Such  a  man,  in  the  bloom  of  his  years ;  with
such  a  possibility  ahead,  and  Voltaire  and  mankind  waiting
applausive  !  —  Let  us  try  to  select,  and  extricate  into  coherence
and  visibility  out  of  those  Historical  dust-heaps,  a  few  of  the
symptomatic  phenomena,  or  physiognomic  procedures  of  Fried-
rich  in  his  first  weeks  of  Kingship,  by  way  of  contribution  to
some  Portraiture  of  his  then  inner-man.

Friedrich  will  make  Men  happy  : Corn-Magazines.

On  the  day  after  his  Accession,  Officers  and  chief  Ministers
taking  the  Oath,  Friedrich,  to  his  Officers,  "  on  whom  he  counts
for  the  same  zeal  now  which  he  had  witnessed  as  their  com-
rade," recommends  mildness  of  demeanor  from  the  higher  to
the  lower,  and  that  the  common  soldier  be  not  treated  with
harshness  when  not  deserved :  and  to  his  Ministers  he  is  still
more  emphatic,  in  the  like  or  a  higher  strain.  Officially  an-
nouncing to  them,  by  Letter,  that  a  new  Eeign  has  commenced,
he  uses  these  words,  legible  soon  after  to  a  glad  Berlin  public :
"  Our  grand  care  will  be,  To  further  the  Country's  well-being,
and  to  make  every  one  of  our  subjects  (einen  jeden  unserer
Unterthanen)  contented  and  happy.  Our  will  is,  not  that  you
strive  to  enrich  Us  by  vexation  of  Our  subjects ;  but  rather
that  you  aim  steadily  as  well  towards  the  advantage  of  the
Country  as  Our  particular  interest,  forasmuch  as  We  make  no
difference  between  these  two  objects,"  but  consider  them  one

1  Height,  it  appears,  was  five  feet  five  inches  (Rhenish),  which  in  Eng-
lish measure  is  five  feet  seven  or  a  hair's-breadth  less. Preuss,  twice  over,  by
a  mistake  unusual  with  him,  gives  "  five  feet  two  inches  three  lines  "  as  the
correct  cipher  (which  it  is  of  Napoleon's  measure  in  French  feet)  ;  then  settles
on  the  above  dimensions  from  unexceptionable  authority  (Preuss,  Buck  fur
Jedermann,  i.  18 ;  Preuss,  Friedrich  der  Grosse,  i.  39  and  419).

2  Wille's  Engraving  after  Pesne  (excellent,  both  Picture  and  Engraving)
is  reckoned  the  best  Likeness  in  that  form.

152 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

and  the  same.  This  is  written,  and  gets  into  print  within  the
month  ;  and  his  Majesty,  that  same  day  (Wednesday,  2d  June),
when  it  came  to  personal  reception,  and  actual  taking  of  the
Oath,  was  pleased  to  add  in  words,  which  also  were  printed
shortly,  this  comfortable  corollary :  "  My  will  henceforth  is,
If  it  ever  chance  that  my  particular  interest  and  the  gen-
eral good  of  my  Countries  should  seem  to  go  against  each
other,  —  in  that  case,  my  will  is,  That  the  latter  always  be
preferred.'' 1

This  is  a  fine  dialect  for  incipient  Royalty ;  and  it  is  brand-
new  at  that  time.  It  excites  an  admiration  in  the  then  popu-
lations, which  to  us,  so  long  used  to  it  and  to  what  commonly
comes  of  it,  is  not  conceivable  at  once.  There  can  be  no  doubt
the  young  King  does  faithfully  intend  to  develop  himself  in
the  way  of  making  men  happy ;  but  here,  as  elsewhere,  are
limits  which  he  will  recognize  ahead,  some  of  them  perhaps
nearer  than  was  expected.

Meanwhile  his  first  acts,  in  this  direction,  correspond  to
these  fine  words.  The  year  1740,  still  grim  with  cold  into  the
heart  of  summer,  bids  fair  to  have  a  late  poor  harvest,  and
famine  threatens  to  add  itself  to  other  hardships  there  have
been.  Recognizing  the  actualities  of  the  case,  what  his  poor
Father  could  not,  he  opens  the  Public  Granaries,  —  a  wise  re-
source they  have  in  Prussian  countries  against  the  year  of
scarcity ;  —  orders  grain  to  be  sold  out,  at  reasonable  rates,  to
the  suffering  poor;  and  takes  the  due  pains,  considerable  in
some  cases,  that  this  be  rendered  feasible  everywhere  in  his
dominions.  "Berlin,  2d  June,"  is  the  first  date  of  this  im-
portant order ;  fine  program  to  his  Ministers,  which,  we  read,
is  no  sooner  uttered,  than  some  performance  follows.  An
evident  piece  of  wisdom  and  humanity ;  for  which  doubtless
blessings  of  a  very  sincere  kind  rise  to  him  from  several
millions  of  his  fellow-mortals.

Nay  furthermore,  as  can  be  dimly  gathered,  this  scarcity
continuing,  some  continuous  mode  of  management  was  set  on

1  Dickens,  Despatch,  4th  June,  1740  :  Preuss,  Friedrichs  Jugend  und  Thron-
besteigung  (Berlin,  1840),  p.  325;  —  quoting  from  the  Berlin  Newspapers  of
28th  June  and  2d  July,  1740.

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 153

1740.

foot  for  the  Poor;  and  there  is  nominated,  with  salary,  with
outline  of  plan  and  other  requisites,  as  "  Inspector  of  the
Poor,"  to  his  own  and  our  surprise,  M.  Jordan,  late  Header
to  the  Crown-Prince,  and  still  much  the  intimate  of  his  royal
Friend.  Inspector  who  seems  to  do  his  work  very  well.
And  in  the  November  coming  this  is  what  we  see :  "  One
thousand  poor  old  women,  the  destitute  of  Berlin,  set  to
spin,"  at  his  Majesty's  charges ;  vacant  houses,  hired  for
them  in  certain  streets  and  suburbs,  have  been  new-planked,
partitioned,  warmed;  and  spinning  is  there  for  any  diligent
female  soul.  There  a  thousand  of  them  sit,  under  proper
officers,  proper  wages,  treatment ;  —  and  the  hum  of  their
poor  spindles,  and  of  their  poor  inarticulate  old  hearts,  is
a  comfort,  if  one  chance  to  think  of  it.  —  Of  "distressed
needlewomen "  who  cannot  sew,  nor  be  taught  to  do  it ;  who,
in  private  truth,  are  mutinous  maid-servants  come  at  last  to
the  net  upshot  of  their  anarchies ;  of  these,  or  of  the  like
incurable  phenomena,  I  hear  nothing  in  Berlin ;  and  can
believe  that,  under  this  King,  Indigence  itself  may  still  have
something  of  a  human  aspect,  not  a  brutal  or  diabolic  as  is
commoner  in  some  places.  —  This  is  one  of  Friedrich's  first
acts,  this  opening  of  the  Corn-magazines,  and  arrangements
for  the  Destitute ; 1  and  of  this  there  can  be  no  criticism.
The  sound  of  hungry  pots  set  boiling,  on  judicious  principles ;
the  hum  of  those  old  women's  spindles  in  the  warm  rooms  :
gods  and  men  are  well  pleased  to  hear  such  sounds  ;  and
accept  the  same  as  part,  real  though  infinitesimally  small,  of
the  sphere-harmonies  of  this  Universe  !

Abolition  of  Legal  Torture.

Friedrich  makes  haste,  next,  to  strike  into  Law-improve-
ments. It  is  but  the  morrow  after  this  of  the  Corn-magazines,

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  367.  Rodenbeck,  Tagebuch  aus  Friedrichs  des  Grossen
Regentenleben  (Berlin,  1840),  i.  2,  26  (2d  June,  October,  1740) :  a  meritorious,
laborious,  though  essentially  chaotic  Book,  unexpectedly  futile  of  result  to  the
reader ;  settles  for  each  Day  of  Friedrich's  Reign,  so  far  as  possible,  where
Friedrich  was  and  what  doing ;  fatally  wants  all  index  &c.,  as  usual.

154 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

by  Kabinets-Ordre  (Act  of  Parliament  such  as  they  can  have
in  that  Country,  where  the  Three  Estates  sit  all  under  one
Three-cornered  Hat,  and  the  debates  are  kept  silent,  and  only
the  upshot  of  them,  more  or  less  faithfully,  is  made  public),

—  by  Cabinet  Order,  3d  June,  1740,  he  abolishes  the  use  of
Torture  in  Criminal  Trials.1 Legal  Torture,  "Question" as
they  mildly  call  it,  is  at  an  end  from  this  date. Not  in  any
Prussian  Court  shall  a  "question"  try  for  answer  again  by
that  savage  method. The  use  of  Torture  had,  I  believe,  fallen
rather  obsolete  in  Prussia; but  now  the  very  threat  of  it
shall  vanish,  —  the  threat  of  it,  as  we  may  remember,  had
reached  Friedrich  himself,  at  one  time. Three  or  four  years
ago,  it  is  farther  said,  a  dark  murder  happened  in  Berlin:
Man  killed  one  night  in  the  open  streets ;  murderer  discover-
able by  no  method, — unless  he  were  a  certain  Candidatus
of Divinity  to whom some  trace  of evidence  pointed,  but
who  sorrowfully  persisted  in  absolute  and  total  denial. This
poor  Candidatus had  been  threatened with the rack ; and
would  most  likely  have  at  length  got  it,  had  not  the  real
murderer  been  discovered,  —  much to the discredit of the
rack  in  Berlin. This  Candidatus  was  only  threatened ; nor
do  I  know  when  the  last  actual instance  in  Prussia  was ;
but  in  enlightened  France,  and  most other  countries,  there
was  as  yet  no  scruple  upon  it. Barbier,  the  Diarist  at  Paris,
some  time  after  this,  tells  us  of  a  gang  of  thieves  there,  who
were  regularly  put  to  the  torture; and  "they  blabbed  too,
ils  ontjase,"  says  Barbier  with  official  jocosity.2

Friedrich's  Cabinet  Order,  we  need  not  say,  was  greeted
everywhere,  at  home  and  abroad,  by  three  rounds  of  applause ;

—  in  which  surely  all  of  us  still  join;  though  the  per  contra
also  is  becoming  visible  to  some  of  us,  and  our  enthusiasm
grows less complete than formerly. This  was  Friedrich's
first  step  in  Law-Reform,  done  on  his  fourth  day  of  Kingship.
A  long  career  in  that  kind  lies  ahead  of  him;  in  reform  of

1  Preuss,  Friedrichs  Jugend  und  Thronbesteigung (Berlin, 1840,  —  a  minor
Book  of  Preuss's),  p.  340. Rodenbeck,  i.  14  ("  3d  June  ").

2  Barbier,  Journal  Historique  du  Regne  de  Louis  XV.  (Paris,  1849),  ii.  338
(date  "Dec.  1742").

I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 155

Law,  civil  as  well  as  criminal,  his  efforts  ended  with  life
only.  For  his  love  of  Justice  was  really  great ;  and  the
mendacities  and  wiggeries,  attached  to  such  a  necessary  of
life  as  Law,  found  no  favor  from  him  at  any  time.

Will have  Philosophers  about him,  and  a  real  Academy

of  {Sciences.

To  neglect  the  Philosophies,  Fine  Arts,  interests  of  Human
Culture,  he  is  least  of  all  likely.  The  idea  of  building  up  the
Academy  of  Sciences  to  its  pristine  height,  or  far  higher,
is  evidently  one  of  those  that  have  long  lain  in  the  Crown-
Prince's  mind,  eager  to  realize  themselves.  Immortal  Wolf,
exiled  but  safe  at  Marburg,  and  refusing  to  return  in  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm's  time,  had  lately  dedicated  a  Book  to  the
Crown-Prince ;  indicating  that  perhaps,  under  a  new  Reign,
he  might  be  more  persuadable.  Fried  rich  makes  haste  to
persuade;  instructs  the  proper  person,  Reverend  Herr  Rein-
beck,  Head  of  the  Consistorium  at  Berlin,  to  write  and  ne-
gotiate. "  All  reasonable  conditions  shall  be  granted "  the
immortal  Wolf,  —  and  Friedrich  adds  with  his  own  hand  as
Postscript :  "  I  request  you  (IJm)  to  use  all  diligence  about
Wolf.  A  man  that  seeks  truth,  and  loves  it,  must  be  reckoned
precious  in  any  human  society;  and  I  think  you  will  make
a  conquest  in  the  realm  of  truth  if  you  persuade  Wolf  hither
again."1  This  is  of  date  June  6th;  not  yet  a  week  since
Friedrich  came  to  be  King.  The  Reinbeck-Wolf  negotiation
which  ensued  can  be  read  in  Biisching  by  the  curious.2  It
represents  to  us  a  croaky,  thrifty,  long-headed  old  Herr  Pro-
fessor, in  no  haste  to  quit  Marburg  except  for  something
better :  "  obliged  to  wear  woollen  shoes  and  leggings ; "  "  bad
at  mounting  stairs;"  and  otherwise  needing  soft  treatment.
Willing,  though  with  caution,  to  work  at  an  Academy  of
Sciences  ;  —  but  dubious  if  the  French  are  so  admirable  as  they
seem  to  themselves  in  such  operations.  Veteran  Wolf,  one
dimly  begins  to  learn,  could  himself  build  a  German  Academy

1  In  (Em-res  de  Fr€d€iic  (xxvii.  ii.  185),  the  Letter  given.

2  Biisching's  Beitrdge  (§  Freiherr  von  Wolf),  i.  63-137.

156 FEIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

of  Sciences,  to  some  purpose,  if  encouraged !  This  latter  was
probably  the  stone  of  stumbling  in  that  direction.  Veteran
Wolf  did  not  get  to  be  President  in  the  New  Academy  of
Sciences ;  but  was  brought  back,  "  streets  all  in  triumph,"
to  his  old  place  at  Halle ;  and  there,  with  little  other  work
that  was  heard  of,  but  we  hope  in  warm  shoes  and  without
much  mounting  of  stairs,  lived  peaceably  victorious  the  rest
of  his  days.

Friedrich's  thoughts  are  not  of  a  German  home-built  Acad-
emy, but  of  a  French  one :  and  for  this  he  already  knows  a
builder ;  has  silently  had  him  in  his  eye,  these  two  years  past,
—  Voltaire  giving  hint,  in  the  Letter  we  once  heard  of  at  Loo.
Builder  shall  be  that  sublime  Maupertuis  ;  scientific  lion  of
Paris,  ever  since  his  feat  in  the  Polar  regions,  and  the  charm-
ing Narrative  he  gave  of  it.  "  What  a  feat,  what  a  book ! "
exclaimed  the  Parisian  cultivated  circles,  male  and  female,  on
that  occasion ;  and  Maupertuis,  with  plenty  of  bluster  in  him
carefully  suppressed,  assents  in  a  grandly  modest  way.  His
Portraits  are  in  the  Printshops  ever  since  ;  one  very  singular
Portrait,  just  coming  out  (at  which  there  is  some  laughing)  :
a  coarse-featured,  blusterous,  rather  triumphant-looking  man,
blusterous,  though  finely  complacent  for  the  nonce  ;  in  copious
dressing-gown  and  fur  cap ;  comfortably  squeezing  the  Earth
and  her  meridians  flat  (as  if  he  had  done  it),  with  his  left
hand ;  and  with  the  other,  and  its  outstretched  finger,  asking
mankind,  "  Are  not  you  aware,  then  ?  "  —  "  Are  not  we  !  "
answers  Voltaire  by  and  by,  with  endless  waggeries  upon  him,
though  at  present  so  reverent.  Friedrich,  in  these  same  days,
writes  this  Autograph ;  which  who  of  men  or  lions  could
resist  ?

To  Monsieur  de  Maupertuis,  at  Paris.

(No  date  ;  —  datable,  June,  1740.)

"  My  heart  and  my  inclination  excited  in  me,  from  the  mo-
ment I  mounted  the  throne,  the  desire  of  having  you  here,
that  you  might  put  our  Berlin  Academy  into  the  shape  you
alone  are  capable  of  giving  it.  Come,  then,  come  and  insert
into  this  wild  crab-tree  the  graft  of  the  Sciences,  that  it  may

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 157

1740.

bear  fruit.  You  have  shown  the  Figure  of  the  Earth  to  man-
kind ;  show  also  to  a  King  how  sweet  it  is  to  possess  such  a
man  as  you.

"  Monsieur  de  Maupertuis,  —  Votre  tres-affectionne

"F£D£RIC"  (sic).1

This  Letter  —  how  could  Maupertuis  prevent  some  accident
in  such  a  case  ?  —  got  into  the  Newspapers ;  glorious  for  Fried-
rich,  glorious  for  Maupertuis;  and  raised  matters  to  a  still
higher  pitch.  Maupertuis  is  on  the  road,  and  we  shall  see
him  before  long.

And  Every  One  shall  get  to  Heaven  in  his  own  Way.

Here  is  another  little  fact  which  had  immense  renown  at
home  and  abroad,  in  those  summer  months  and  long  afterwards.

June  22d,  1740,  the  Geistliche  Departement  (Board  of  Eeli-
gion,  we  may  term  it)  reports  that  the  Koman-Catholic  Schools,
which  have  been  in  use  these  eight  years  past,  for  children  of
soldiers  belonging  to  that  persuasion,  "  are,  especially  in  Ber-
lin, perverted,  directly  in  the  teeth  of  Eoyal  Ordinance,  1732,
to  seducing  Protestants  into  Catholicism  ;  "  annexed,  or  ready
for  annexing,  "  is  the  specific  Eeport  of  Fiscal-General  to  this
effect : "  —  upon  which,  what  would  it  please  his  Majesty  to
direct  us  to  do  ?

His  Majesty  writes  on  the  margin  these  words,  rough  and
ready,  which  we  give  with  all  their  grammatical  blotches  on
them  ;  indicating  a  mind  made  up  on  one  subject,  which  was
much  more  dubious  then,  to  most  other  minds,  than  it  now

is

"  Die  Eeligionen  Musen  (mussen)  alle  Tollerirt  (tolerirt)  wer-
den,  und  Mus  (muss)  der  Fiscal  nuhr  (nur)  das  Auge  darauf
haben,  das  (class)  keine  der  andern  abrug  Tuhe  (Altbruch  thue),
den  (denn)  hier  mus  (muss)  ein  jeder  nach  seiner  Fasson  Selich
(Faqon  seluj)  werden."  2

1  (Euvres,  xvii.  i.  334. The  fantastic  "  Federic,"  instead  of  Frede'ric,"  is,
by  this  time,  the  common  signature  to  French  Letters.

2  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  333  ;  Rodenbeck,  in  die.

158 FRIEDRICH  TAKES THE  REINS IN HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

Which  in  English  might  run  as  follows  :  —

"  All  Religions  must  be  tolerated  (Tollerated)^  and  the  Fis-
cal must  have  an  eye  that  none  of  them  make  unjust  encroach-
ment on  the  other ;  for  in  this  Country  every  man  must  get
to  Heaven  in  his  own  way."

Wonderful  words ;  precious  to  the  then  leading  spirits,
and  which  (the  spelling  and  grammar  being  mended)  flew
abroad  over  all  the  world :  the  enlightened  Public  everywhere
answering  his  Majesty,  once  more,  with  its  loudest  "Bravis-
sirno ! "  on  this  occasion.  With  what  enthusiasm  of  admiring
wonder,  it  is  now  difficult  to  fancy,  after  the  lapse  of  sixscore
years  !  And  indeed,  in  regard  to  all  these  worthy  acts  of
Human  Improvement  which  we  are  now  concerned  with,  ac-
count should  be  held  (were  it  possible)  on  Friedrich's  behalf
how  extremely  original,  and  bright  with  the  splendor  of  new
gold,  they  then  were  :  and  how  extremely  they  are  fallen  dim,
by  general  circulation,  since  that.  Account  should  be  held ;
and  yet  it  is  not  possible,  no  human  imagination  is  adequate
to  it,  in  the  times  we  are  now  got  into.

Free  Press,  and  Newspapers  the  best  Instructors.

Toleration,  in  Friedrich's  spiritual  circumstances,  was  per-
haps no  great  feat  to  Friedrich :  but  what  the  reader  hardly
expected  of  him  was  Freedom  of  the  Press,  or  an  attempt  that
way !  From  England,  from  Holland,  Friedrich  had  heard  of
Free  Press,  of  Newspapers  the  best  Instructors  :  it  is  a  fact
that  he  hastens  to  plant  a  seed  of  that  kind  at  Berlin ;  sets
about  it  "on  the  second  day  of  his  reign,"  so  eager  is  he.
Berlin  had  already  some  meagre  Intelligenz-Blatt  (Weekly
or  Thrice- Weekly  Advertiser),  perhaps  two  ;  but  it  is  a  real
Newspaper,  frondent  with  genial  leafy  speculation,  and  food
for  the  mind,  that  Friedrich  is  intent  upon :  a  "  Literary-
Political  Newspaper,"  or  were  it  even  two  Newspapers,  one
French,  one  German ;  and  he  rapidly  makes  the  arrangements
for  it ;  despatches  Jordan,  on  the  second  day,  to  seek  some
fit  Frenchman.  Arrangements  are  soon  made  :  a  Bookselling

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 159

1740.

Printer,  Haude,  Bookseller  once  to  the  Prince-Koyal,  —  whom
we  saw  once  in  a  domestic  flash-of-lightning  long  ago,1  —  is
encouraged  to  proceed  with  the  improved  German  article,  Mer-
cury or  whatever  they  called  it ;  vapid  Formey,  a  facile  pen,
but  not  a  forcible,  is  the  Editor  sought  out  by  Jordan  for  the
French  one.  And,  in  short,  No.  1  of  Formey  shows  itself  in
print  within  a  month ;  '2  and  Haude  and  he,  Haude  picking  up
some  grand  Editor  in  Hamburg,  do  their  best  for  the  instruc-
tion of  mankind.

In  not  many  months,  Formey,  a  facile  and  learned  but
rather  vapid  gentleman,  demitted  or  was  dismissed ;  and  the
Journals  coalesced  into  one,  or  split  into  two  again  ;  and  went
I  know  not  what  road,  or  roads,  in  time  coming,  —  none  that
led  to  results  worth  naming.  Freedom  of  the  Press,  in  the
case  of  these  Journals,  was  never  violated,  nor  was  any  need
for  violating  it.  General  Freedom  of  the  Press  Friedrich  did
not  grant,  in  any  quite  Official  or  steady  way ;  but  in  practice,
under  him,  it  always  had  a  kind  of  real  existence,  though  a
fluctuating,  ambiguous  one.  And  we  have  to  note,  through
Friedrich's  whole  reign,  a  marked  disinclination  to  concern
himself  with  Censorship,  or  the  shackling  of  men's  poor
tongues  and  pens ;  nothing  but  some  officious  report  that
there  was  offence  to  Foreign  Courts,  or  the  chance  of  offence,
in  a  poor  man's  pamphlet,  could  induce  Friedrich  to  interfere
with  him  or  it,  —  and  indeed  his  interference  was  generally
against  his  Ministers  for  having  wrong  informed  him,  and  in
favor  of  the  poor  Pamphleteer  appealing  at  the  fountain-head.8
To  the  end  of  his  life,  disgusting  Satires  against  him,  Vie
Privee  by  Voltaire,  Matinees  du  Boi  de  Prusse,  and  still  worse
Lies  and  Nonsenses,  were  freely  sold  at  Berlin,  and  even  bore
to  be  printed  there,  Friedrich  saying  nothing,  caring  nothing.

1  Antea,  Book  vi.  c.  7.

2  "  2d  July,  1740  :  "  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung ,  p.  330  ;  and  Formey,  Souvenirs,
i.  107,  rectified  by  the  exact  Herr  Preuss.

8  Anonymous  (Laveaux),  Vie  de  Frederic  II.,  Boi  de  Prusse.  (Strasbourg,
1787),  iv.  82.  A  worthless,  now  nearly  forgotten  Book;  but  competent  on
this  point,  if  on  any;  Laveaux  (a  handy  fellow,  fugitive  Ex-Monk,  with
fugitive  Ex-Nun  attached)  having  lived  much  at  Berlin,  always  in  the  pam-
phleteering line.

160 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

He  lias  been  known  to  burn  Pamphlets  publicly,  —  one  Pam-
phlet we  shall  ourselves  see  on  fire  yet ;  —  but  it  was  without
the  least  hatred  to  them,  and  for  official  reasons  merely.  To
the  last,  he  would  answer  his  reporting  Ministers,  "  La  presse
est  libre  (Free  press,  you  must  consider)  ! "  —  grandly  reluctant
to  meddle  with  the  press,  or  go  down  upon  the  dogs  barking
at  his  door.  Those  ill  effects  of  Free  Press  (first  stage  of  the
ill  effects)  he  endured  in  this  manner;  but  the  good  effects
seem  to  have  fallen  below  his  expectation.  Friedrich's  enthu-
siam  for  freedom  of  the  press,  prompt  enough,  as  we  see,  never
rose  to  the  extreme  pitch,  and  it  rather  sank  than  increased
as  he  continued  his  experiences  of  men  and  things.  This  of
Formey  and  the  two  Newspapers  was  the  only  express  attempt
he  made  in  that  direction ;  and  it  proved  a  rather  disappoint-
ing one.  The  two  Newspapers  went  their  way  thenceforth,
Friedrich  sometimes  making  use  of  them  for  small  purposes,
once  or  twice  writing  an  article  himself,  of  wildly  quizzical
nature,  perhaps  to  be  noticed  by  us  when  the  time  comes ;  but
are  otherwise,  except  for  chronological  purposes,  of  the  last
degree  of  insignificance  to  gods  or  men.

"  Freedom  of  the  Press,"  says  my  melancholic  Friend,  "  is
a  noble  thing ;  and  in  certain  Nations,  at  certain  epochs,  pro-
duces glorious  effects,  —  chiefly  in  the  revolutionary  line,  where
that  has  grown  indispensable.  Freedom  of  the  Press  is  pos-
sible, where  everybody  disapproves  the  least  abuse  of  it ;  where
the  ' Censorship'  is,  as  it  were,  exercised  by  all  the  world.
When  the  world  (as,  even  in  the  freest  countries,  it  almost
irresistibly  tends  to  become)  is  no  longer  in  a  case  to  exercise
that  salutary  function,  and  cannot  keep  down  loud  unwise
speaking,  loud  unwise  persuasion,  and  rebuke  it  into  silence
whenever  printed,  Freedom  of  the  Press  will  not  answer  very
long,  among  sane  human  creatures  :  and  indeed,  in  Nations
not  in  an  exceptional  case,  it  becomes  impossible  amazingly
soon ! "  —

All  these  are  phenomena  of  Friedrich's  first  week.  Let
these  suffice  as  sample,  in  that  first  kind.  Splendid  indica-
tions surely ;  and  shot  forth  in  swift  enough  succession,  flash

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 161

1740.

following  flash,  upon  an  attentive  world.  Betokening,  shall
we  say,  what  internal  sea  of  splendor,  struggling  to  disclose
itself,  probably  lies  in  this  young  King;  and  how  high  his
hopes  go  for  mankind  and  himself?  Yes,  surely; — and  in-
troducing, we  remark  withal,  the  "  ISTew  Era,"  of  Philanthropy,
Enlightenment  and  so  much  else ;  with  French  Kevolution,
and  a  "  world  well  suicided "  hanging  in  the  rear  !  Clearly
enough,  to  this  young  ardent  Friedrich,  foremost  man  of  his
Time,  and  capable  of  doing  its  inarticulate  or  dumb  aspirings,
belongs  that  questionable  honor ;  and  a  very  singular  one  it
would  have  seemed  to  Friedrich,  had  he  lived  to  see  what  it
meant !

Friedrich's  rapidity  and  activity,  in  the  first  months  of  his
reign,  were  wonderful  to  mankind ;  as  indeed  through  life  he
continued  to  be  a  most  rapid  and  active  King.  He  flies  about ;
mustering  Troops,  Ministerial  Boards,  passing  Edicts,  inspect-
ing, accepting  Homages  of  Provinces  ;  —  decides  and  does,
every  day  that  passes,  an  amazing  number  of  things.  Writes
many  Letters,  too  ;  finds  moments  even  for  some  verses  ;  and
occasionally  draws  a  snatch  of  melody  from  his  flute.

His  Letters  are  copiously  preserved ;  but,  as  usual,  they  are
in  swift  official  tone,  and  tell  us  almost  nothing.  To  his  Sis-
ters he  writes  assurances  ;  to  his  friends,  his  Suhms,  Duhans,
Voltaire s,  eager  invitations,  general  or  particular,  to  come  to
him.  "  My  state  has  changed,"  is  his  phrase  to  Voltaire  and
other  dear  intimates ;  a  tone  of  pensiveness,  at  first  even  of
sorrow  and  pathos  traceable  in  it ;  "  Come  to  me,"  —  and  the
tone,  in  an  old  dialect,  different  from  Friedrich's,  might  have
meant,  "  Pray  for  me."  An  immense  new  scene  is  opened,  full
of  possibilities  of  good  and  bad.  His  hopes  being  great,  his
anxieties,  the  shadow  of  them,  are  proportionate.  Duhan  (his
good  old  Tutor)  does  arrive,  Algarotti  arrives,  warmly  wel-
comed, both :  with  Voltaire  there  are  difficulties ;  but  surely
he  too  will,  before  long,  manage  to  arrive.  The  good  Suhm,
who  had  been  Saxon  Minister  at  Petersburg  to  his  sorrow
this  long  while  back,  got  in  motion  soon  enough;  but,  alas,
his  lungs  were  ruined  by  the  Russian  climate,  and  he  did  not
arrive.  Something  pathetic  still  in  those  final  Letters  of  Suhm.

VOL.  VII.  11

162 FEIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

Passionately  speeding  on,  like  a  spent  steed  struggling  home-
ward; he  has  to  pause  at  Warsaw,  and  in  a  few  days  dies
there,  —  in  a  way  mournful  to  Friedrich  and  us  !  To  Duhan,
and  Duhan's  children  afterwards,  he  was  punctually,  not  too
lavishly,  attentive  ;  in  like  manner  to  Suhm's  Nephews,  whom
the  dying  man  had  recommended  to  him.  —  We  will  now
glance  shortly  at  a  second  and  contemporaneous  phasis  of
Friedrich's  affairs.

Intends  to  be  Practical  withal,  and  every  inch  a  King.

Friedrich  is  far  indeed  from  thinking  to  reduce  his  Army,
as  the  Foreign  Editor  imagines.  On  the  contrary,  he  is,  with
all  industry,  increasing  it.  He  changed  the  Potsdam  Giants
into  four  regiments  of  the  usual  stature ;  he  is  busy  bargaining
with  his  Brother-in-law  of  Brunswick,  and  with  other  neigh-
bors, for  still  new  regiments  ;  —  makes  up,  within  the  next
few  months,  Eight  Kegirnents,  an  increase  of,  say,  16,000  men.
It  would  appear  he  means  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  practicalities
withal ;  means  to  have  a  Fighting- Apparatus  of  the  utmost
potentiality,  for  one  thing !  Here  are  other  indications.

We  saw  the  Old  Dessauer,  in  a  sad  hour  lately,  speaking
beside  the  mark ;  and  with  what  Olympian  glance,  suddenly
tearless,  the  new  King  flashed  out  upon  him,  knowing  nothing
of  "  authority  "  that  could  reside  in  any  Dessauer.  Nor  was
that  a  solitary  experience;  the  like  befell  wherever  needed.
Heinrich  of  Schwedt,  the  111  Margraf,  advancing  with  jocose
countenance  in  the  way  of  old  comradeship,  in  those  first
days,  met  unexpected  rebuff,  and  was  reduced  to  gravity  on
the  sudden  :  "  Jetzt  bin  ich  Konig,  —  My  Cousin,  I  am  now
King  !  "  a  fact  which  the  111  Margraf  could  never  get  forgot-
ten again.  Lieutenant-General  Schulenburg,  too,  the  didactic
Schulenburg,  presuming  on  old  familiarity,  and  willing  to  wipe
out  the  misfortune  of  having  once  condemned  us  to  death,
which  nobody  is  now  upbraiding  him  with,  rushes  up  from
Landsberg,  unbidden,  to  pay  his  congratulations  and  condo-
lences, driven  by  irresistible  exuberance  of  loyalty:  to  his
astonishment,  he  is  reminded  (thing  certain,  manner  of  the

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 163

1740.

thing  not  known),  That  an  Officer  cannot  quit  his  post  with-
out order;  that  he,  at  this  moment,  ought  to  be  in  Lands-
berg  ! *  Schulenburg  has  a  hard  old  military  face  ;  but  here
is  a  young  face  too,  which  has  grown  unexpectedly  rigorous.
Fancy  the  blank  look  of  little  Schulenburg ;  the  light  of  him
snuffed  out  in  this  manner  on  a  sudden.  It  is  said  he  had
thoughts  of  resigning,  so  indignant  was  he  :  no  doubt  he  went
home  to  Landsberg  gloomily  reflective,  with  the  pipe-clay  of
his  mind  in  such  a  ruinous  condition.  But  there  was  no
serious  anger,  on  Friedrich's  part ;  and  he  consoled  his  little
Schulenburg  soon  after,  by  expediting  some  promotion  he  had
intended  him.  "  Terribly  proud  young  Majesty  this,"  exclaim
the  sweet  voices.  And  indeed,  if  they  are  to  have  a  Saturnian
Kingdom,  by  appearance  it  will  be  on  conditions  only  !

Anticipations  there  had  been,  that  old  unkindnesses  against
the  Crown-Prince,  some  of  which  were  cruel  enough,  might  be
remembered  now :  and  certain  people  had  their  just  fears,  con-
sidering what  account  stood  against  them ;  others,  vice  versa,
their  hopes.  But  neither  the  fears  nor  the  hopes  realized
themselves  ;  especially  the  fears  proved  altogether  ground-
less. Derschau,  who  had  voted  Death  in  that  Copenick  Court-
Martial,  upon  the  Crown-Prince,  is  continued  in  his  functions,
in  the  light  of  his  King's  countenance,  as  if  nothing  such  had
been.  Derschau,  and  all  others  so  concerned ;  not  the  least
question  was  made  of  them,  nor  of  what  they  had  thought  or
had  done  or  said,  on  an  occasion  once  so  tragically  vital  to  a
certain  man.

Nor  is  reward  much  regulated  by  past  services  to  the  Crown-
Prince,  or  even  by  sufferings  endured  for  him.  "  Shocking  in-
gratitude ! "  exclaim  the  sweet  voices  here  too,  —  being  of  weak
judgment,  many  of  them  !  Poor  Katte's  Father,  a  faithful  old
Soldier,  not  capable  of  being  more,  he  does,  rather  conspicu-
ously, make  Feldmarschall,  make  Eeichsgraf ;  happy,  could
these  honors  be  a  consolation  to  the  old  man.  The  Miinchows
of  Ciistrin,  —  readers  remember  their  kindness  in  that  sad
time  ;  how  the  young  boy  went  into  petticoats  again,  and
came  to  the  Crown-Prince's  cell  with  all  manner  of  furnish-
1  Stenzel,  iv.  41 ;  Preuss,  Tlironbesteigung ;  &c.

164 FRIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

ings, — the  Miinchows,  father  and  sons,  this  young  gentleman
of  the  petticoats  among  them,  he  took  immediate  pains  to  re-
ward by  promotion :  eldest  son  was  advanced  into  the  General
Directoriuin  ;  two  younger  sons,  to  Majorship,  to  Captaincy,
in  their  respective  Regiments ;  him  of  the  petticoats  "  he  had
already  taken  altogether  to  himself," 1  and  of  him  we  shall  see
a  glimpse  at  Wilhelrnina's  shortly,  as  a  "milkbeard  (jeune
morveux)  "  in  personal  attendance  on  his  Majesty.  This  was
a  notable  exception.  And  in  effect  there  came  good  public
service,  eminent  some  of  it,  from  these  Miinchows  in  their
various  departments.  And  it  was  at  length  perceived  to  have
been,  in  the  main,  because  they  were  of  visible  faculty  for  do-
ing work  that  they  had  got  work  to  do ;  and  the  exceptional
case  of  the  Miinchows  became  confirmatory  of  the  rule.

Lieutenant  Keith,  again,  whom  we  once  saw  galloping  from
Wesel  to  save  his  life  in  that  bad  affair  of  the  Crown-Prince's
and  his,  was  nothing  like  so  fortunate.  Lieutenant  Keith,  by
speed  on  that  Wesel  occasion,  and  help  of  Chesterfield's  Secre-
tary, got  across  to  England ;  got  into  the  Portuguese  service  ;
and  has  there  been  soldiering,  very  silently,  these  ten  years
past,  —  skin  and  body  safe,  though  his  effigy  was  cut  in  four
quarters  and  nailed  to  the  gallows  at  Wesel ;  —  waiting  a  time
that  would  come.  Time  being  come,  Lieutenant  Keith  hastened
home ;  appealed  to  his  effigy  on  the  gallows  ;  —  and  was  made
a  Lieutenant-Colonel  merely,  with  some  slight  appendages,  as
that  of  Stallmeister  (Curator  of  the  Stables)  and  something
else ;  income  still  straitened,  though  enough  to  live  upon.2
Small  promotion,  in  comparison  with  hope,  thought  the  poor
Lieutenant ;  but  had  to  rest  satisfied  with  it ;  and  struggle  to
understand  that  perhaps  he  was  fit  for  nothing  bigger,  and
that  he  must  exert  himself  to  do  this  small  thing  well.  Hard-
ness of  heart  in  high  places  !  Friedrich,  one  is  glad  to  see,
had  not  forgotten  the  poor  fellow,  could  he  have  done  better
with  him.  Some  ten  years  hence,  quite  incidentally,  there
came  to  Keith,  one  morning,  a  fine  purse  of  money  from  his
Majesty,  one  pretty  gift  in  Keith's  experience; — much  the

1  Preuss,  i.  66.

2  Preuss,  Friedrich  mil  seinen  Verwandten  und  Freunden,  p.  281.

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF FKIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 165

1740.

topic  in  Berlin,  while  a  certain  solemn  English  gentleman
happened  to  be  passing  that  way  (whom  we  mean  to  detain  a
little  by  and  by),  who  reports  it  for  us  with  all  the  circum-
stances.1

Lieutenant  Spaen  too  had  got  into  trouble  for  the  Crown-
Prince's  sake,  though  we  have  forgotten  him  again;  had
"admitted  Katte  to  interviews,"  or  we  forget  what;  —  had
sat  his  "  year  in  Spandau "  in  consequence ;  been  dismissed
the  Prussian  service,  and  had  taken  service  with  the  Dutch.
Lieutenant  Spaen  either  did  not  return  at  all,  or  disliked  the
aspects  when  he  did,  and  immediately  withdrew  to  Holland
again.  Which  probably  was  wise  of  him.  At  a  late  period,
King  Friedrich,  then  a  great  King,  on  one  of  his  Cleve  Jour-
neys, fell  in  with  Spaen ;  who  had  become  a  Dutch  General  of
rank,  and  was  of  good  manners  and  style  of  conversation :
King  Friedrich  was  charmed  to  see  him;  became  his  guest  for
the  night ;  conversed  delightfully  with  him,  about  old  Prus-
sian matters  and  about  new ;  and  in  the  colloquy  never  once
alluded  to  that  interesting  passage  in  his  young  life  and
Spaen's.2  Hard  as  polished  steel !  thinks  Spaen  perhaps ;
but,  if  candid,  must  ask  himself  withal,  Are  facts  any  softer,
or  the  Laws  of  Kingship  to  a  man  that  holds  it  ?  —  Keith
silently  did  his  Lieutenant-Colonelcy  with  the  appendages,
while  life  lasted :  of  the  Page  Keith,  his  Brother,  who  indeed
had  blabbed  upon  the  Prince,  as  we  remember,  and  was  not
entitled  to  be  clamorous,  I  never  heard  that  there  was  any  no-
tice taken ;  and  figure  him  to  myself  as  walking  with  shoul-
dered firelock,  a  private  Fusileer,  all  his  life  afterwards,  with
many  reflections  on  things  bygone.3

Old  friendship,  it  would  seem,  is  without  weight  in  public
appointments  here:  old  friends  are  somewhat  astonished  to
find  this  friend  of  theirs  a  King  every  inch !  To  old  com-

1  Sir  Jonas  Hanway,  Travels,  &c.  (London,  1753),  ii.  202. Date  of  the  Gift
is  1750.

2  Nicolai,  AneMoten,  vi.  178.

8  These  and  the  other  Prussian  Keiths  are  all  of  Scotch  extraction ;  the
Prussians,  in  natural  German  fashion,  pronounce  their  name  Kah-it  (English
"  Kite  "  with  nothing  of  the  y  in  it),  as  may  be  wort'h  remembering  in  a  more
important  instance.

166 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

rades,  if  they  were  useless,  much  more  if  they  were  worse
than  useless,  how  disappointing  !  "  One  wretched  Herr  [name
suppressed,  but  known  at  the  time,  and  talked  of,  and  whis-
pered of],  who  had,  like  several  others,  hoping  to  rise  that
way,  been  industrious  in  encouraging  the  Crown-Prince's  vices
as  to  women,  was  so  shocked  at  the  return  he  now  met,  that  in
despair  he  hanged  himself  in  Lobeyiin  "  (Lobegun,  Magdeburg
Country)  :  here  is  a  case  for  the  humane  ! 1

Friend  Keyserling  himself,  "  Caesarion  "  that  used  to  be,
can  get  nothing,  though  we  love  him  much;  being  an  idle
topsy-turvy  fellow  with  revenues  of  his  own.  Jordan,  with
his  fine-drawn  wit,  French  logics,  Literary  Travels,  thin  exacti-
tude ;  what  can  be  done  for  Jordan  ?  Him  also  his  new  Maj-
esty loves  much ;  and  knows  that,  without  some  official  living,
poor  Jordan  has  no  resource.  Jordan,  after  some  waiting  and
survey,  is  made  "  Inspector  of  the  Poor  ; "  —  busy  this  Autumn
looking  out  for  vacant  houses,  and  arrangements  for  the  thou-
sand spinning  women ;  —  continues  to  be  employed  in  mixed
literary  services  (hunting  up  of  Formey,  for  Editor,  was  one
instance),  and  to  be  in  much  real  intimacy.  That  also  was
perhaps  about  the  real  amount  of  amiable  Jordan.  To  get
Jordan  a  living  by  planting  him  in  some  office  which  he  could
not  do ;  to  warm  Jordan  by  burning  our  royal  bed  for  him :
that  had  not  entered  into  the  mind  of  Jordan's  royal  friend.
The  Munchows  he  did  promote ;  the  Finks,  sons  of  his  Tutor
Finkenstein:  to  these  and  other  old  comrades,  in  whom  he
had  discovered  fitness,  it  is  no  doubt  abundantly  grateful  to
him  to  recognize  and  employ  it.  As  he  notably  does,  in  these
and  in  other  instances.  But  before  all  things  he  has  decided
to  remember  that  he  is  King ;  that  he  must  accept  the  severe
laws  of  that  trust,  and  do  it,  or  not  have  done  anything.

An  inverse  sign,  pointing  in  the  same  way,  is  the  passionate
search  he  is  making  in  Foreign  Countries  for  such  men  as  will
suit  him.  In  these  same  months,  for  example,  he  bethinks
him  of  two  Counts  Schmettau,  in  the  Austrian  Service,  with
whom  he  had  made  acquaintance  in  the  Rhine  Campaign ;  of
a  Count  von  Kothenburg,  whom  he  saw  in  the  French  Camp
1  Kiister,  Characterzuge  dcsfrc.  von  Saldern  (Berlin,  1793),  p.  63.

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF FRIEDEICH'S  ACCESSION. 167

1740.

there ;  and  is  negotiating  to  have  them  if  possible.  The
Schmettaus  are  Prussian  by  birth,  though  in  Austrian  Ser-
vice ;  them  he  obtains  under  form  of  an  Order  home,  with
good  conditions  under  it ;  they  came,  and  proved  useful  men
to  him.  Kothenburg,  a  shining  kind  of  figure  in  Diplomacy  as
well  as  Soldiership,  was  Alsacian  German,  foreign  to  Prussia ;
but  him  too  Friedrich  obtained,  and  made  much  of,  as  will  be
notable  by  and  by.  And  in  fact  the  soul  of  all  these  noble
tendencies  in  Friedrich,  which  surely  are  considerable,  is  even
this,  That  he  loves  men  of  merit,  and  does  not  love  men  of
none  ;  that  he  has  an  endless  appetite  for  men  of  merit,  and
feels,  consciously  and  otherwise,  that  they  are  the  one  thing
beautiful,  the  one  thing  needful  to  him.

This,  which  is  the  product  of  all  fine  tendencies,  is  likewise
their  centre  or  focus  out  of  which  they  start  again,  with  some
chance  of  fulfilment ;  —  and  we  may  judge  in  how  many  direc-
tions Friedrich  was  willing  to  expand  himself,  by  the  multifa-
rious kinds  he  was  inviting,  and  negotiating  for.  Academicians,
—  and  not  Maupertuis  only,  but  all  manner  of  mathematical
geniuses  (Euler  whom  he  got,  's  Gravesande,  Muschenbroek
whom  he  failed  of)  ;  and  Literary  geniuses  innumerable,  first
and  last.  Academicians,  Musicians,  Players,  Dancers  even ;
much  more  Soldiers  and  Civil-Service  men :  no  man  that  car-
ries any  honest  "  Can  do  "  about  with  him  but  may  expect
some  welcome  here.  Which  continued  through  Friedrich's
reign ;  and  involved  him  in  much  petty  trouble,  not  always
successful  in  the  lower  kinds  of  it.  For  his  Court  was  the
cynosure  of  ambitious  creatures  on  the  wing,  or  inclined  for
taking  wing :  like  a  lantern  kindled  in  the  darkness  of  the
world ;  —  and  many  owls  impinged  upon  him  ;  wThom  he  had  to
dismiss  with  brevity.

Perhaps  it  had  been  better  to  stand  by  mere  Prussian  or
German  merit,  native  to  the  ground  ?  Or  rather,  undoubtedly
it  had !  In  some  departments,  as  in  the  military,  the  admin-
istrative, diplomatic,  Friedrich  was  himself  among  the  best
of  judges :  but  in  various  others  he  had  mainly  (mainly,  by
no  means  blindly  or  solely)  to  accept  noise  of  reputation  as
evidence  of  merit ;  and  in  these,  if  we  compute  with  rigor,  his

168 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XL

1740.

success  was  intrinsically  not  considerable.  The  more  honor
to  him  that  he  never  wearied  of  trying.  "A  man  that  does
not  care  for  merit,"  says  the  adage,  "  cannot  himself  have
any."  But  a  King  that  does  not  care  for  merit,  what  shall
we  say  of  such  a  King !  —

Behavior  to  his  Mother; to  his Wife.

One  other  fine  feature,  significant  of  many,  let  us  notice:
his  affection  for  his  Mother.  When  his  Mother  addressed
him  as  "Your  Majesty,"  he  answered,  as  the  Books  are  care-
ful to  tell  us :  "  Call  me  Son ;  that  is  the  Title  of  all  others
most  agreeable  to  me  ! "  Words  which,  there  can  be  no  doubt,
came  from  the  heart.  Fain  would  he  shoot  forth  to  greatness
in  filial  piety,  as  otherwise ;  fain  solace  himself  in  doing  some-
thing kind  to  his  Mother.  Generously,  lovingly ;  though  again
with  clear  view  of  the  limits.  He  decrees  for  her  a  Title
higher  than  had  been  customary,  as  well  as  more  accordant
with  his  feelings;  not  "Queen  Dowager,"  but  "Her  Majesty
the  Queen  Mother."  He  decides  to  build  her  a  new  Palace ;
"  under  the  Lindens  "  it  is  to  be,  and  of  due  magnificence :  in
a  month  or  two,  he  had  even  got  bits  of  the  foundation  dug,
and  the  Houses  to  be  pulled  down  bought  or  bargained  for ; l  —
which  enterprise,  however,  was  renounced,  no  doubt  with  con-
sent, as  the  public  aspects  darkened.  Nothing  in  the  way  of
honor,  in  the  way  of  real  affection  heartily  felt  and  demon-
strated, was  wantiug  to  Queen  Sophie  in  her  widowhood.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  of  public  influence  no  vestige  was
allowed,  if  any  was  ever  claimed ;  and  the  good  kind  Mother
lived  in  her  Monbijou,  the  centre  and  summit  of  Berlin
society ;  and  restricted  herself  wisely  to  private  matters.  She
has  her  domesticities,  family  affections,  readings,  speculations ;
gives  evening  parties  at  Monbijou.  One  glimpse  of  her  in
1742  we  get,  that  of  a  perfectly  private  royal  Lady;  which
though  it  has  little  meaning,  yet  as  it  is  authentic,  coming  from
Biisching's  hand,  may  serve  as  one  little  twinkle  in  that  total
darkness,  and  shall  be  left  to  the  reader  and  his  fancy :  —

1  Eodenbeck,  p.  15  (30th  June-23d  Aug.  1740) ;  and  correct  Stenzel  (iv.  44).

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FEIEDKICH'S  ACCESSION. 169

1740.

A  Count  Henkel,  a  Thuringian  gentleman,  of  high  specula-
tion, high  pietistic  ways,  extremely  devout,  and  given  even  to
writing  of  religion,  came  to  Berlin  about  some  Silesian  proper-
ties, —  a  man  I  should  think  of  lofty  melancholic  aspect ;  and,
in  severe  type,  somewhat  of  a  lion,  on  account  of  his  Book
called  "  Death-bed  Scenes,  in  four  Volumes."  Came  to  Berlin  ;
and  on  the  15th  August,  1742,  towards  evening  (as  the  ever-
punctual  Biisching  looking  into  Henkel's  Papers  gives  it),
"was  presented  to  the  Queen  Mother;  who  retained  him  to
supper;  supper  not  beginning  till  about  ten  o'clock.  The
Queen  Mother  was  extremely  gracious  to  Henkel ;  but  investi-
gated him  a  good  deal,  and  put  a  great  many  questions,"  not
quite  easy  to  answer  in  that  circle,  "  as,  Why  he  did  not  play  ?
What  he  thought  of  comedies  and  operas  ?  What  Preachers
he  was  acquainted  with  in  Berlin  ?  Whether  he  too  was  a
Writer  of  Books  ?  [covertly  alluding  to  the  Death-led  Scenes,
notes  Biisching].  And  abundance  of  other  questioning.  She
also  recounted  many  fantastic  anecdotes  (yiel  Abenteuerliches)
about  Count  von  Zinzendorf  [Founder  of  Hernnhuth,  far-
shining  spiritual  Paladin  of  that  day,  whom  her  Majesty
thinks  rather  a  spiritual  Quixote]  ;  and  declared  that  they  were
strictly  true."  1  Upon  which,  exit  Henkel,  borne  by  Biisching,
and  our  light  is  snuffed  out.

This  is  one  momentary  glance  I  have  met  with  of  Queen
Sophie  in  her  Dowager  state.  The  rest,  though  there  were
seventeen  years  of  it  in  all,  is  silent  to  mankind  and  me ;  and
only  her  death,  and  her  Son's  great  grief  about  it,  so  great  as
to  be  surprising,  is  mentioned  in  the  Books.

Actual  painful  sorrow  about  his  Father,  much  more  any
new  outburst  of  weeping  and  lamenting,  is  not  on  record,  after
that  first  morning.  Time  does  its  work  ;  and  in  such  a  whirl
of  occupations,  sooner  than  elsewhere  :  and  the  loved  Dead  lie
silent  in  their  mausoleum  in  our  hearts,  —  serenely  sad  as
Eternity,  not  in  loud  sorrow  as  of  Time.  Friedrich  was  pious
as  a  Son,  however  he  might  be  on  other  heads.  To  the  last
years  of  his  life,  as  from  the  first  days  of  his  reign,  it  was  evi-
dent in  what  honor  he  held  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  memory  ;  and

1  Biisching's  Beitrage,  iv.  27.

170 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

the  words  "iny  Father,"  when  they  turned  up  in  discourse,
had  in  that  fine  voice  of  his  a  tone  which  the  observers  noted.
"  To  his  Mother  he  failed  no  day,  when  in  Berlin,  however
busy,  to  make  his  visit ;  and  he  never  spoke  to  her,  except  hat
in  hand."

With  his  own  Queen,  Friedrich  still  consorts  a  good  deal,  in
these  first  times  ;  is  with  her  at  Charlottenburg,  Berlin,  Pots-
dam, Reinsberg,  for  a  day  or  two,  as  occasion  gives ;  sometimes
at  Eeinsberg  for  weeks  running,  in  the  intervals  of  war  and
business  :  glad  to  be  at  rest  amid  his  old  pursuits,  by  the  side
of  a  kind  innocent  being  familiar  to  him.  So  it  lasts  for  a
length  of  time.  But  these  happy  intervals,  we  can  remark,
grow  rarer  :  whether  the  Lady's  humor,  as  they  became  rarer,
might  not  sink  withal,  and  produce  an  acceleration  in  the  rate
of  decline  ?  She  was  thought  to  be  capable  of  "  pouting  (faire
lafachee)"  at  one  period  !  We  are  left  to  our  guesses ;  there
is  not  anywhere  the  smallest  whisper  to  guide  us.  Deep
silence  reigns  in  all  Prussian  Books.  —  To  feel  or  to  suspect
yourself  neglected,  and  to  become  more  amiable  thereupon
(in  which  course  alone  lies  hope),  is  difficult  for  any  Qiieen !
Enough,  we  can  observe  these  meetings,  within  two  or  three
years,  have  become  much  rarer ;  and  perhaps  about  the  end  of
the  third  or  fourth  year,  they  altogether  cease  ;  and  pass  merely
into  the  formal  character.  In  which  state  they  continued  fixed,
liable  to  no  uncertainty ;  and  were  transacted,  to  the  end  of
Friedrich's  life,  with  inflexible  regularity  as  the  annual  reviews
were.  This  is  a  curious  section  of  his  life ;  which  there  will  be
other  opportunities  of  noticing.  But  there  is  yet  no  thought
of  it  anywhere,  nor  for  years  to  come ;  though  fables  to  the
contrary  were  once  current  in  Books.1

No  Change  in  his  Father's  Methods  or  Ministries.

In  the  old  mode  of  Administration,  in  the  Ministries,  Gov-
ernment Boards,  he  made  no  change.  These  administrative
methods  of  his  wise  Father's  are  admirable  to  Friedrich,  who
knows  them  well ;  and  they  continue  to  be  so.  These  men  of

1  Laveaux,  £c.

CHAP.  I.  PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 171

1740.

his  Father's,  them  also  Friedrich  knows,  and  that  they  were
well  chosen.  In  methods  or  in  men,  he  is  inclined  to  make
the  minimum  of  alteration  at  present.  One  Finance  Hofrath
of  a  projecting  turn,  named  Eckart,  who  had  abused  the  last
weak  years  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  and  much  afflicted  mankind
by  the  favor  he  was  in :  this  Eckart  Friedrich  appointed  a
commission  to  inquire  into  ;  found  the  public  right  in  regard
to  Eckart,  and  dismissed  him  with  ignominy,  not  with  much
other  punishment.  Minister  Boden,  on  the  contrary,  high  in
the  Finance  Department,  who  had  also  been  much  grumbled
at,  Friedrich  found  to  be  a  good  man :  and  Friedrich  not  only
retained  Boden,  but  advanced  him ;  and  continued  to  make
more  and  more  use  of  him  in  time  coming.  His  love  of  per-
fection in  work  done,  his  care  of  thrift,  seemed  almost  greater
than  his  late  Father's  had  been, — to  the  disappointment  of
many.  In  the  other  Departments,  Podewils,  Thulmeyer  and
the  rest  went  on  as  heretofore  ;  —  only  in  general  with  less  to
do,  the  young  King  doing  more  himself  than  had  been  usual.
Valori,  "mon  gros  Valori  (my  fat  Valori),"  French  Minister
here,  whom  we  shall  know  better,  writes  home  of  the  new
King  of  Prussia :  "  He  begins  his  government,  as  by  all  appear-
ance he  will  carry  it  on,  in  a  highly  satisfactory  way ;  every-
where traits  of  benevolence,  sympathy  for  his  subjects,  respect
shown  to  the  memory  of  the  Deceased," 1  —  no  change  made,
where  it  evidently  is  not  for  the  better.

Friedrich's  "  Three  principal  Secretaries  of  State,"  as  we
should  designate  them,  are  very  remarkable.  Three  Clerks  he
found,  or  had  known  of,  somewhere  in  the  Public  Offices ;  and
now  took,  under  some  advanced  title,  to  be  specially  his  own
Private  Clerks ;  three  vigorous  long-headed  young  fellows,
"Eichel,  Schuhmacher,  Lautensack"  the  obscure  names  of
them ; 2  out  of  whom,  now  and  all  along  henceforth,  he  got
immensities  of  work  in  that  kind.  They  lasted  all  his  life ;
and,  of  course,  grew  ever  more  expert  at  their  function.  Close,

1  Mtmoires  des  Negotiations  du  Marquis  de Valori  (a  Paris,  1820),  i.  20
("June  13th,  1740  "). A  valuable  Book,  which  we  shall  often  have  to  quote:
edited  in  a  lamentably  ignorant  manner.

2  Rodenbeck,  15th  June,  1740.

172 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

silent;  exact  as  machinery  :  ever  ready,  from  the  smallest
clear  hint,  marginal  pencil-mark,  almost  from  a  glance  of  the
eye,  to  clothe  the  Royal  Will  in  official  form,  with  the  due
rugged  clearness  and  thrift  of  words.  "  Came  punctually  at
four  in  the  morning  in  summer,  five  in  winter  ;  "  did  daily  the
day's  work ;  and  kept  their  mouths  well  shut.  A  very  notable
Trio  of  men  ;  serving  his  Majesty  and  the  Prussian  Nation  as
Principal  Secretaries  of  State,  on  those  cheap  terms ;  —  nay
almost  as  Houses  of  Parliament  with  Standing  Committees
and  appendages,  so  many  Acts  of  Parliament  admittedly  rather
wise,  being  passed  daily  by  his  Majesty's  help  and  theirs  !  —
Friedrich  paid  them  rather  well ;  they  saw  no  society ;  lived
wholly  to  their  work,  and  to  their  own  families.  Eichel  alone
of  the  three  was  mentioned  at  all  by  mankind,  and  that  ob-
scurely ;  an  "  abstruse,  reserved,  long-headed  kind  of  man  ;  "  and
"  made  a  great  deal  of  money  in  the  end,"  insinuates  Biisching,1
no  friend  of  Friedrich's  or  his.

In  superficial  respects,  again,  Friedrich  finds  that  the  Prus-
sian King  ought  to  have  a  King's  Establishment,  and  maintain
a  decent  splendor  among  his  neighbors,  —  as  is  not  quite  the
case  at  present.  In  this  respect  he  does  make  changes.  A
certain  quantity  of  new  Pages,  new  Goldsticks  ;  some  con-
siderable, not  too  considerable,  new-furbishing  of  the  Royal
Household,  —  as  it  were,  a  fair  coat  of  new  paint,  with  gilding
not  profuse,  —  brought  it  to  the  right  pitch  for  this  King.
About  "a  hundred  and  fifty"  new  figures  of  the  Page  and
Goldstick  kind,  is  the  reckoning  given.8  So  many  of  these ;
and  there  is  an  increase  of  16,000  to  one's  Army  going  on :
that  is  the  proportion  noticeable.  In  the  facts  as  his  Father
left  them  Friedrich  persisted  all  his  life ;  in  the  semblances  or
outer  vestures  he  changed,  to  this  extent  for  the  present.  —
These  are  the  Phenomena  of  Friedrich's  Accession,  noted
by  us.

Readers  see  there  is  radiance  enough,  perhaps  slightly  in
excess,  but  of  intrinsically  good  quality,  in  the  Aurora  of  this
new  Reign. A  brilliant  valiant  young  King ;  much  splendor
1  Beitrage,  v.  238,  &c.  2  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  353.

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION- 173

1740.

of  what  we  could  call  a  golden  or  soft  nature  (visible  in  those
"  New-Era  "  doings  of  his,  in  those  strong  affections  to  his
Friends)  ;  and  also,  what  we  like  almost  better  in  him,  some-
thing of  a  steel-bright  or  stellar  splendor  (meaning,  clearness  of
eyesight,  intrepidity,  severe  loyalty  to  fact),  —  which  is  a  fine
addition  to  the  softer  element,  and  will  keep  it  and  its  philan-
thropies and  magnanimities  well  under  rule.  Such  a  man  is
rare  in  this  world ;  how  extremely  rare  such  a  man  born  King !
He  is  swift  and  he  is  persistent ;  sharply  discerning,  fearless  to
resolve  and  perform ;  carries  his  great  endowments  lightly,  as  if
they  were  not  heavy  to  him.  He  has  known  hard  misery,  been
taught  by  stripes ;  a  light  stoicism  sits  gracefully  on  him.

"  What  he  will  grow  to  ?  "  Probably  to  something  consid-
erable. Very  certainly  to  something  far  short  of  his  aspira-
tions ;  far  different  from  his  own  hopes  ;  and  the  world's  con-
cerning him.  It  is  not  we,  it  is  Father  Time  that  does  the
controlling  and  fulfilling  of  our  hopes  ;  and  strange  work  he
makes  of  them  and  us.  For  example,  has  not  Friedrich's
grand  "New  Era,"  inaugurated  by  him  in  a  week,  with  the
leading  spirits  all  adoring,  issued  since  in  French  Eevolution
and  a  "  world  well  suicided,"  —  the  leading  spirits  much
thrown  out  in  consequence !  New  Era  has  gone  to  great
lengths  since  Friedrich's  time  ;  and  the  leading  spirits  do  not
now  adore  it,  but  yawn  over  it,  or  worse  !  Which  changes  to
us  the  then  aspect  of  Friedrich,  and  his  epoch  and  his  aspira-
tions, a  good  deal.  —  On  the  whole,  Friedrich  will  go  his  way,
Time  and  the  leading  spirits  going  theirs  ;  and,  like  the  rest
of  us,  will  grow  to  what  he  can.  His  actual  size  is  not  great
among  the  Kingdoms :  his  outward  resources  are  rather  to  be
called  small.  The  Prussian  Dominion  at  that  date  is,  in  ex-
tent, about  four-fifths  of  an  England  Proper,  and  perhaps
not  one-fifth  so  fertile :  subject  Population  is  well  under  Two
Millions  and  a  Half;  Eevenue  not  much  above  One  Million
Sterling,1  —  very  small,  were  not  thrift  such  a  vectigal.

1  The  exact  statistic  cipher  is,  at  Friedrich's  Accession :  Prussian  Territo-
ries, 2,275  square  miles  German  (56,875  English) ;  Population,  2,240,000;  An-
nual Eevenue,  7,371,707  thalers  7  groschen  (£1,105,756  without  the  pence).
See  Preuss,  Buck  fur  Jedermann,  i.  49  ;  Stenzel,  iii.  692;  &c.

174 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1(40.

This  young  King  is  magnanimous  ;  not  much  to  be  called
ambitious,  or  not  in  the  vulgar  sense  almost  at  all,  —  strange
as  it  may  sound  to  readers.  His  hopes  at  this  time  are  many ;
—  and  among  them,  I  perceive,  there  is  not  wanting  secretly,
in  spite  of  his  experiences,  some  hope  that  he  himself  may  be
a  good  deal  "  happier  "  than  formerly.  Nor  is  there  any  ascetic
humor,  on  his  part,  to  forbid  trial.  He  is  much  determined
to  try.  Probably  enough,  as  we  guess  and  gather,  his  agreea-
blest  anticipations,  at  this  time,  were  of  Reinsberg:  How,  in
the  intervals  of  work  well  done,  he  would  live  there  wholly  to
the  Muses  ;  have  his  chosen  spirits  round  him,  his  colloquies,
his  suppers  of  the  gods.  Why  not  ?  There  might  be  a  King
of  Intellects  conceivable  withal ;  protecting,  cherishing,  practi-
cally guiding  the  chosen  Illuminative  Souls  of  this  world.  A
new  Charlemagne,  the  smallest  new  Charlemagne  of  Spiritual
type,  with  his  Paladins  round  him  ;  how  glorious,  how  salu-
tary in  the  dim  generations  now  going !  —  These  too  were
hopes  which  proved  signally  futile.  Rigorous  Time  could  not
grant  these  at  all ;  —  granted,  in  his  own  hard  way,  other  things
instead.  But,  all  along,  the  Life-element,  the  Epoch,  though
Friedrich  took  it  kindly  and  never  complained,  was  ungenial
to  such  a  man.

"  Somewhat  of  a  rotten  Epoch,  this  into  which  Friedrich
has  been  born,  to  shape  himself  and  his  activities  royal  and
other !  "  —  exclaims  Smelf ungus  once :  "  In  an  older  earnest
Time,  when  the  eternally  awful  meanings  of  this  Universe
had  not  yet  sunk  into  dubieties  to  any  one,  much  less  into
levities  or  into  mendacities,  into  huge  hypocrisies  carefully
regulated,  —  so  luminous,  vivid  and  ingenuous  a  young  crea-
ture had  not  wanted  divine  manna  in  his  Pilgrimage  through
Life.  Nor,  in  that  case,  had  he  come  out  of  it  in  so  lean  a
condition.  But  the  highest  man  of  us  is  born  brother  to  his
Contemporaries ;  struggle  as  he  may,  there  is  no  escaping  the
family  likeness.  By  spasmodic  indignant  contradiction  of
them,  by  stupid  compliance  with  them, — you  will  inversely
resemble,  if  you  do  not  directly ;  like  the  starling,  you  can't
get  out !  —  Most  surely,  if  there  do  fall  manna  from  Heaven,
in  the  given  Generation,  and  nourish  in  us  reverence  and

CHAP.  I. PHENOMENA  OF  FRIEDRICH'S  ACCESSION. 175

1740.

genial  nobleness  day  by  day,  it  is  blessed  and  well.  Failing
that,  in  regard  to  our  poor  spiritual  interests,  there  is  sure  to
be  one  of  two  results :  mockery,  contempt,  disbelief,  what  we
may  call  short-diet  to  the  length  of  very  famine  (which  was
Friedrich's  case)  ;  or  else  slow-poison,  carefully  elaborated  and
provided  by  way  of  daily  nourishment.

"  Unhappy  souls,  these  same !  The  slow-poison  has  gone
deep  into  them.  Instead  of  manna,  this  long  while  back,  they
have  been  living  on  mouldy  corrupt  meats  sweetened  by  sugar-
of-lead;  or  perhaps,  like  Voltaire,  a  few  individuals  prefer
hunger,  as  the  cleaner  alternative ;  and  in  contemptuous,  barren,
mocking  humor,  not  yet  got  the  length  of  geniality  or  indigna-
tion, snuff  the  east-wind  by  way  of  spiritual  diet.  Pilgriming
along  on  such  nourishment,  the  best  human  soul  fails  to  be-
come very  ruddy !  —  Tidings  about  Heaven  are  fallen  so  uncer-
tain, but  the  Earth  and  her  joys  are  still  interesting :  '  Take
to  the  Earth  and  her  joys ;  —  let  your  soul  go  oat,  since  it
must;  let  your  five  senses  and  their  appetites  be  well  alive.5
That  is  a  dreadful  '  Sham-Christian  Dispensation '  to  be  born
under !  You  wonder  at  the  want  of  heroism  in  the  Eighteenth
Century.  Wonder  rather  at  the  degree  of  heroism  it  had;
wonder  how  many  souls  there  still  are  to  be  met  with  in  it  of
some  effective  capability,  though  dieting  in  that  way,  —  noth-
ing else  to  be  had  in  the  shops  about.  Carterets,  Belleisles,
Friedrichs,  Voltaires ;  Chathams,  Franklins,  Choiseuls :  there
is  an  effective  stroke  of  work,  a  fine  fire  of  heroic  pride,  in  this
man  and  the  other ;  not  yet  extinguished  by  spiritual  famine
or  slow-poison ;  so  robust  is  Nature  the  mighty  Mother  !  —

"  But  in  general,  that  sad  Gospel,  '  Souls  extinct,  Stomachs
well  alive  ! '  is  the  credible  one,  not  articulately  preached,  but
practically  believed  by  the  abject  generations,  and  acted  on  as
it  never  was  before.  What  immense  sensualities  there  were,
is  known ;  and  also  (as  some  small  offset,  though  that  has  not
yet  begun  in  1740)  what  immense  quantities  of  Physical
Labor  and  contrivance  were  got  out  of  mankind,  in  that  Epoch
and  down  to  this  day.  As  if,  having  lost  its  Heaven,  it  had
struck  desperately  down  into  the  Earth ;  as  if  it  were  a  beaver-
kind,  and  not  a  mankind  any  more.  We  had  once  a  Barba-

176 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

rossa ;  and  a  world  all  grandly  true.  But  from  that  to  Karl  VI.,
and  his  Holy  Komish  Reich  in  such  a  state  of  '  Holiness '  — ! "
I  here  cut  short  my  abstruse  Friend.

Eeaders  are  impatient  to  have  done  with  these  miscel-
laneous preludings,  and  to  be  once  definitely  under  way,  such
a  Journey  lying  ahead.  Yes,  readers ;  a  Journey  indeed  !
And,  at  this  point,  permit  me  to  warn  you  that,  where  the
ground,  where  Dryasdust  and  the  Destinies,  yield  anything
humanly  illustrative  of  Friedrich  and  his  Work,  one  will
have  to  linger,  and  carefully  gather  it,  even  as  here.  Large
tracts  occur,  bestrewn  with  mere  pedantisms,  diplomatic  cob-
webberies,  learned  marine-stores,  and  inhuman  matter,  over
which  we  shall  have  to  skip  empty-handed :  this  also  was
among  the  sad  conditions  of  our  Enterprise,  that  it  has  to  go
now  too  slow  and  again  too  fast ;  not  in  proportion  to  natural
importance  of  objects,  but  to  several  inferior  considerations
withal.  So  busy  has  perverse  Destiny  been  on  it;  perverse
Destiny,  edacious  Chance  ;  —  and  the  Dryasdusts,  too,  and
Nightmares,  in  Prussia  as  elsewhere,  we  know  how  strong
they  are  !

Friedrich's  character  in  old  age  has  doubtless  its  curious
affinities,  its  disguised  identities,  with  these  prognostic  fea-
tures and  indications  of  his  youth :  and  to  our  readers,  —  if
we  do  ever  get  them  to  the  goal,  of  seeing  Friedrich  a  little
with  their  own  eyes  and  judgments,  —  there  may  be  pleasant
contrasts  and  comparisons  of  that  kind  in  store,  one  day.
But  the  far  commoner  experience  (which  also  has  been  my
own),  —  here  is  Smelfungus's  stern  account  of  that :  —

"  My  friend,  you  will  be  luckier  than  I,  if,  after  ten  years,
not  to  say,  in  a  sense,  twenty  years,  thirty  years,  of  reading
and  rummaging  in  those  sad  Prussian  Books,  ancient  and  new
(which  often  are  laudably  authentic,  too,  and  exact  as  to  de-
tails), you  can  gather  any  character  whatever  of  Friedrich,  in
any  period  of  his  life,  or  conceive  him  as  a  Human  Entity
at  all !  It  is  strange,  after  such  thousand-fold  writing,  but  it
is  true,  his  History  is  considerably  unintelligible  to  mankind
at  this  hour ;  left  chaotic,  enigmatic,  in  a  good  many  points,  —
the  military  part  of  it  alone  being  brought  to  clearness,  and

CHAP.  II.  THE HOM AGINGS.  177

1740.

rendered  fairly  conceivable  and  credible  to  those  who  will
study.  And  as  to  the  Man  himself,  or  what  his  real  Physiog-
nomy can  have  been  — !  Well,  it  must  be  owned  few  men
were  of  such  rapidity  of  face  and  aspect ;  so  difficult  to  seize
the  features  of.  In  his  action,  too,  there  was  such  rapidity,
such  secrecy,  suddenness  :  a  man  that  could  not  be  read,  even
by  the  candid,  except  as  in  flashes  of  lightning.  And  then
the  anger  of  by-standers,  tmcandid,  who  got  hurt  by  him ;  the
hasty  malevolences,  the  stupidities,  the  opacities :  enough,  in
modern  times,  what  is  saying  much,  perhaps  no  man's  motives,
intentions,  and  procedure  have  been  more  belied,  misunder-
stood, misrepresented,  during  his  life.  Nor,  I  think,  since
that,  have  many  men  fared  worse,  by  the  Limner  or  Bio-
graphic class,  the  favorable  to  him  and  the  unfavorable  ;  or
been  so  smeared  of  and  blotched  of,  and  reduced  to  a  mere
blur  and  dazzlement  of  cross-lights,  incoherences,  incredibili-
ties, in  which  nothing,  not  so  much  as  a  human  nose,  is  clearly
discernible  by  way  of  feature  !  "  —  Courage,  reader,  neverthe-
less ;  on  the  above  terms  let  us  march  according  to  promise.

CHAPTER  II.

THE HOMAGINGS.

YOUNG  Friedrich,  as  his  Father  had  doue,  considers  it  un-
necessary to  be  crowned.  Old  Friedrich,  first  of  the  name,
and  of  the  King  series,  we  did  see  crowned,  with  a  pinch
of  snuff  tempering  the  solemnities.  That  Coronation  once
well  done  suffices  all  his  descendants  hitherto.  Such  an
expense  of  money,  —  of  diluted  mendacity  too !  Such  ha-
ranguing, gesturing,  symbolic  fugling,  all  grown  half  false  :  —
avoid  lying,  even  with  your  eyes,  or  knees,  or  the  coat  upon
your  back,  so  far  as  you  easily  can !

Nothing  of  Coronation  :  but  it  is  thought  needful  to  have
the  Huldigungen  (Homagings)  done,  the  Fealties  sworn ;  and

VOL VII.  12

178 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

the  young  Majesty  in  due  course  goes  about,  or  gives  direc-
tions, now  here  now  there,  in  his  various  Provinces,  get-
ting that  accomplished.  But  even  in  that,  Friedrich  is  by
no  means  strait-laced  or  punctilious  ;  does  it  commonly  by
Deputy :  only  in  three  places,  Konigsberg,  Berlin,  Cleve,
does  he  appear  in  person.  Mainly  by  deputy ;  and  always
with  the  minimum  of  fuss,  and  no  haranguing  that  could
be  avoided.  Nowhere  are  the  old  Stdnde  (Provincial  Parlia-
ments) assembled,  now  or  afterwards :  sufficient  for  this  and
for  every  occasion  are  the  "  Permanent  Committees  of  the
Stdnde ; "  nor  is  much  speaking,  unessential  for  despatch  of
business,  used  to  these.

"  Stdnde  —  of  Ritterschaft  mainly,  of  Gentry  small  and
great  —  existed  once  in  all  those  Countries,  as  elsewhere,"
says  one  Historian ;  "  and  some  of  them,  in  Preussen,  for
example,  used  to  be  rather  loud,  and  inclined  to  turbulence,
till  the  curb,  from  a  judicious  bridle-hand,  would  admonish
them.  But,  for  a  long  while  past,  —  especially  since  the
Great  Elector's  time,  who  got  an  '  Excise  Law '  passed,  or  the
foundations  of  a  good  Excise  Law  laid ; 1  and,  what  with
Excise,  what  with  Domain-Farms,  had  a  fixed  Annual  Budget,
which  he  reckoned  fair  to  both  parties, — they  have  been
dying  out  for  want  of  work;  and,  under  Friedrich  Wilhelm,
may  be  said  to  have  gone  quite  dead.  What  work  was  left
for  them  ?  Prussian  Budget  is  fixed,  many  things  are  fixed  :
why  talk  of  them  farther  ?  The  Prussian  King,  nothing  of  a
fool  like  certain  others,"  —  which  indeed  is  the  cardinal  point,
though  my  Author  does  not  say  so,  —  "  is  respectfully  aware
of  the  facts  round  him ;  and  can  listen  to  the  rumors  too,  so
far  as  he  finds  good.  The  King  sees  himself  terribly  in-
terested to  get  into  the  right  course  in  all  things,  and  avoid
the  wrong  one  !  Probably  he  does,  in  his  way,  seek  '  wise
Advice  concerning  the  arduous  matters  of  the  Kingdom ; '
nay  I  believe  he  is  diligent  to  have  it  of  the  wisest :  —  who
knows  if  Stdnde  would  always  give  it  wiser ;  especially  Stdnde
in  the  haranguing  condition  ?  "  —  Enough,  they  are  not  applied
to.  There  is  no  Freedom  in  that  Country.  "  ISTo  Freedom  to
1  Preuss,  iv.  432;  and  Thronbesteigung,  pp.  379-383.

CHAP.  II.  THE  HOMAGINGS.  179

June-Sept.  1740.

speak  of,"  continues  lie  :  "  but  I  do  a  little  envy  them  their
Fixed  Budget,  and  some  other  things.  What  pleasure  there
can  be  in  having  your  household  arrangements  tumbled  into
disorder  every  new  Year,  by  a  new-contrived  scale  of  expenses
for  you,  I  never  could  ascertain  !  "  —

Friedrich  is  not  the  man  to  awaken  Parliamentary  sleeping-
dogs  well  settled  by  his  Ancestors.  Once  or  twice,  out  of
Preussen,  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  time,  there  was  heard  some
whimper,  which  sounded  like  the  beginning  of  a  bark.  But
Friedrich  Wilhelm  was  on  the  alert  for  it :  Are  you  coming
in  with  your  Nie  Pozwalam  (your  Liberum  Veto),  then  ?  None
of  your  Polish  vagaries  here.  "  Tout  le  pays  sera  mine  (the
whole  Country  will  be  ruined),"  say  you  ?  (Such  had  been
the  poor  Marshal  or  Provincial  Speaker's  Remonstrance  on
one  occasion)  :  "  I  don't  believe  a  word  of  that.  But  I  do
believe  the  Government  by  Junkers  [Country  Squires]  and
Nie  Pozwalam  will  be  ruined,"  —  as  it  is  fully  meant  to  be !
"  I  am  establishing  the  King's  Sovereignty  like  a  rock  of
bronze  (Ich  stabilire  die  Souverainetat  wie  einen  Rocher  von
Bronze)"  some  extremely  strong  kind  of  rock ! *  This  was
one  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  marginalia  in  response  to  such  a
thing;  and  the  mutinous  whimper  died  out  again.  Parlia^
mentary  Assemblages  are  sometimes  Collective  Wisdoms,  but
by  no  means  always  so.  In  Magdeburg  we  remember  what
trouble  Friedrich  Wilhelm  had  with  his  unreasonable  Eitters.
Patters  there,  in  their  assembled  capacity,  had  the  Eeich
behind  them,  and  could  not  be  dealt  with  like  Preussen:  but
Friedrich  Wilhelm,  by  wise  slow  methods,  managed  Magde-
burg too,  and  reduced  it  to  silence,  or  to  words  necessary  for
despatch  of  business.

In  each  Province,  a  Permanent  Committee  —  chosen,  I  sup-
pose, by  King  and  Knights  assenting ;  chosen  I  know  not  how,
but  admitted  to  be  wisely  chosen  —  represents  the  once  Par-
liament or  Stande ;  and  has  its  potency  for  doing  good  service
in  regard  to  all  Provincial  matters,  from  roads  and  bridges
upwards,  and  is  impotent  to  do  the  least  harm.  Roads  and

1  Forster,  b.  iii.  ( Urlcundenbuch,  i.  50)  ;  Preuss,  iv.  420  n.  "  Nie  Pozwalam  "
(the  formula  of  Liberum  Veto]  signifies  "  I  Don't  Permit !  "

180 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XT.

1740.

bridges,  Church  matters,  repartition  of  the  Land-dues,  Army
matters,  —  in  fact  they  are  an  effective  non-haranguing  Parlia-
ment, to  the  King's  Deputy  in  every  such  Province ;  well  cal-
culated to  illuminate  and  forward  his  subaltern  Amtmen  and
him.  Nay,  we  observe  it  is  oftenest  in  the  way  of  gifts  and
solacements  that  the  King  articulately  communicates  with
these  Committees  or  their  Kitterschafts.  Projects  for  Drain-
ing of  Bogs,  for  improved  Highways,  for  better  Husbandry ;
loans  granted  them,  Loan-Banks  established  for  the  Province's
behoof :  —  no  need  of  parliamentary  eloquence  on  such  occa-
sions, but  of  something  far  different.

It  is  from  this  quiescent,  or  busy  but  noiseless  kind  of
Stande  and  Populations  that  Friedrich  has  his  Huldigung  to
take  ;  —  and  the  operation,  whether  done  personally  or  by
deputy,  must  be  an  abundantly  simple  one.  He,  for  his  part,
is  fortunate  enough  to  find  everywhere  the  Sovereignty  estab-
lished ;  "  rock  of  bronze  "  not  the  least  shaken  in  his  time.
He  will  graciously  undertake,  by  Written  Act,  which  is  read
before  the  Stande,  King  or  King's  Deputy  witnessing  there,
"  To  maintain  the  privileges  "  of  his  Stande  and  Populations  ;
the  Stande  answer,  on  oath,  with  lifted  hand,  and  express  invo-
cation of  Heaven,  That  they  will  obey  him  as  true  subjects ;
And  so  —  doubtless  with  something  of  dining  superadded,  but
no  whisper  of  it  put  on  record  —  the  Huldigung  will  every-
where very  quietly  transact  itself.

The  Huldigung  itself  is  nothing  to  us,  even  with  Friedrich
there,  —  as  at  Konigsberg,  Berlin,  Cleve,  the  three  exceptional
places.  To  which,  nevertheless,  let  us  briefly  attend  him,  for
the  sake  of  here  and  there  some  direct  glimpse  we  may  get
of  the  then  Friedrich's  actual  physiognomy  and  ways.  Other
direct  view,  or  the  chance  of  such,  is  not  conceded  us  out  of
those  sad  Prussian  Books ;  which  are  very  full  on  this  of  the
Huldigung,  if  silent  on  so  many  other  points.1

1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p  382.

CHAP.  II.  THE  HOMAGINGS.  181

7th  July,  1740.

Friedrich  accepts  the  Homages,  personally,  in  Three  Places.

To  Konigsberg  is  his  first  excursion  on  this  errand.  Preussen
has  perhaps,  or  may  be  suspected  of  having,  some  remnants
of  sour  humors  left  in  it,  and  remembrances  of  Stdnde  with
haranguings  and  even  mutinies :  there  if  anywhere  the  King
in  person  may  do  good  on  such  an  occasion.  He  left  Berlin,
July  7th,  bound  thitherward ;  here  is  Note  of  that  first  Royal
Tour,  —  specimen  of  several  hundreds  such,  which  he  had  to
do  in  the  course  of  the  next  forty-five  years.

"  Friend  Algarotti,  charming  talker,  attended  him ;  who  else,
official  and  non-official,  ask  not.  The  Journey  is  to  be  circui-
tous ;  to  combine  various  businesses,  and  also  to  have  its  amuse-
ments. They  went  by  Ciistrin ;  glancing  at  old  known  Country,
which  is  at  its  greenest  in  this  season.  By  Ciistrin,  across  the
Neumark,  into  Pommern ;  after  that  by  an  intricate  winding
route;  reviewing  regiments,  inspecting  garrisons,  now  here
now  there ;  doing  all  manner  of  inspections ;  talking  I  know
not  what ;  oftenest  lodging  with  favored  Generals,  if  it  suited.
Distance  to  Konigsberg,  by  the  direct  road,  is  about  500  miles ;
by  this  winding  one,  it  must  have  been  800 :  Journey  thither
took  nine  days  in  all.  Obliquely  through  Pommern,  almost  to
the  coast  of  the  Baltic ;  their  ultimatum  there  a  place  called
Coslin.  where  they  reviewed  with  strictness,  —  omitting  Col-
berg,  a  small  Sea-Fortress  not  far  rearward,  time  being  short.
Thence  into  West-Preussen,  into  Polish  Territory,  and  swiftly
across  that;  keeping  Dantzig  and  its  noises  wide  enough  to
the  left :  one  night  in  Poland ;  and  the  next  they  are  in  Ost-
Preussen,  place  called  Liebstadt,  —  again  on  home-ground,  and
diligently  reviewing  there.

"  The  review  at  Liebstadt  is  remarkable  in  this,  That  the
regiments,  one  regiment  especially,  not  being  what  was  fit,  a
certain  Grenadier-Captain  got  cashiered  on  the  spot ;  and  the
old  Commandant  himself  was  soon  after  pensioned,  and  more
gently  sent  his  ways.  So  strict  is  his  Majesty.  Contrari-
wise, he  found  Lieutenant-General  von  Katte's  Garrison,  at
Angerburg,  next  day,  in  a  very  high  perfection ;  and  Colonel

182 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

Posaclowsky's  regiment  specially  so ;  with  which  latter  gentle-
man he  lodged  that  night,  and  made  him  farther  happy  by  the
Order  of  Merit :  Colonel  Posadowsky,  Garrison  of  Angerburg,
far  off  in  East-Preussen,  Chevalier  of  the  Order  of  Merit  hence-
forth, if  we  ever  meet  him  again.  To  the  good  old  Lieutenant-
General  von  Katte,  who  no  doubt  dined  with  them,  his  Majesty
handed,  on  the  same  occasion,  a  Patent  of  Feldmarschall ;  —
intends  soon  to  make  him  Graf ;  and  did  it,  as  readers  know.
Both  Colonel  and  General  attended  him  thenceforth,  still  by
a  circuitous  route,  to  Konigsberg,  to  assist  in  the  solemnities
there.  By  Gumbinnen,  by  Trakehnen,  —  the  Stud  of  Tra-
kehnen :  that  also  his  Majesty  saw,  and  made  review  of ;  not
without  emotion,  we  can  fancy,  as  the  sleek  colts  were  trotted
out  on  those  new  terms  !  At  Trakehnen,  Katte  and  the  Colonel
would  be  his  Majesty's  guests,  for  the  night  they  stayed.
This  is  their  extreme  point  eastward ;  Konigsberg  now  lies  a
good  way  west  of  them.  But  at  Trakehnen  they  turn ;  and,
Saturday,  16th  July,  1740,  after  another  hundred  miles  or
so,  along  the  pleasant  valley  of  the  Pregel,  get  to  Konigsberg :
ready  to  begin  business  on  Monday  morning,  —  on  Sunday  if
necessary."  l

On  Sunday  there  did  a  kind  of  memorability  occur :  The
Huldigunys-Predigt  (Homage  Sermon)  by  a  reverend  Herr
Quandt,  chief  Preacher  there.  Which  would  not  be  worth
mentioning,  except  for  this  circumstance,  that  his  Majesty
exceedingly  admired  Quandt,  and  thought  him  a  most  Demos-
thenic genius,  and  the  best  of  all  the  Germans.  Quandt's
text  was  in  these  words :  "  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy
side,  thou  Son  of  Jesse  ;  Peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  and  peace  be
to  thine  helpers  ;  for  thy  God  helpeth  thee."  2  Quandt  began,
in  a  sonorous  voice,  raising  his  face  with  respectful  enthusiasm
to  the  King,  "  Thine  are  we,  0  Friedrich,  and  on  thy  side,  thou
Son  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm  ; "  and  so  went  on :  sermon  brief,
sonorous,  compact,  and  sticking  close  to  its  text.  Friedrich
stood  immovable,  gazing  on  the  eloquent  Demosthenic  Quandt,
with  admiration  heightened  by  surprise ;  —  wrote  of  Quandt  to

1  From  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  pp.  382,  385;  Kodenbeck,  p.  16;  &c.

2  First  Chronicles,  xii.  18.

CHAP.  II.  THE  HOMAGINGS.  183

June-Sept.  1740.

Voltaire  ;  and,  with  sustained  enthusiasm,  to  the  Public  long
afterwards ;  and  to  the  end  of  his  days  was  wont  to  make
Quandt  an  exception,  if  perhaps  almost  the  only  one,  from
German  barbarism,  and  disharmony  of  mind  and  tongue.  So
that  poor  Quandt  cannot  ever  since  get  entirely  forgotten,  but
needs  always  to  be  raked  up  again,  for  this  reason  when  others
have  ceased :  an  almost  melancholy  adventure  for  poor  Quandt
and  Another !  —

The  Huldigung  was  rather  grand ;  Harangue  and  Counter-
harangue  permitted  to  the  due  length,  and  proper  festivities
following  :  but  the  Stdnde  could  not  manage  to  get  into  vocal
covenanting  or  deliberating  at  all ;  Friedrich  before  leaving
Berlin  had  answered  their  hint  or  request  that  way,  in  these
words  :  "  We  are  likewise  graciously  inclined  to  give  to  the
said  Stdnde,  before  their  Homaging,  the  same  assurance  which
they  got  from  our  Herr  Father's  Majesty,  who  is  now  with
God," —  general  assurance  that  their,  and  everybody's,  "  Eights
shall  be  maintained  [as  we  see  they  are],  —  with  which,  it  is
hoped  (hoffentlicli),  they  will  be  content,  and  get  to  peace  upon
this  matter  (sich  dalei  beruhigen  werden)."  x  It  will  be  best
for  them. !

Friedrich  gave  away  much  corn  here ;  that  is,  opened  his
Corn-Granaries,  on  charitable  terms,  and  took  all  manner  of
measures,  here  as  in  other  places,  for  relief  of  the  scarcity
there  was.  Of  the  illuminations,  never  so  grand,  the  reader
shall  hear  nothing.  A  "  Torch-Procession  of  the  Students  "
turned  out  a  pretty  thing :  —  Students  marching  with  torches,
with  fine  wind-music,  regulated  enthusiasm,  fine  succinct  ad-
dress to  his  Majesty ;  and  all  the  world  escorting,  with  its
"Live  Forever  !  "  Friedrich  gave  the  Students  "a  Trlnk-Gelag
(Banquet  of  Liquors),"  how  arranged  I  do  not  know :  and  to
the  Speaker  of  the  Address,  a  likely  young  gentleman  with
Von  to  his  name,  he  offered  an  Ensigncy  of  Foot  ("  in  Camas's
Fusileer  Eegiment,"  —  Camas  now  gone  to  Paris,  embassying),
which  was  joyfully  accepted.  Joyfully  accepted  ;  —  and  it
turned  out  well  for  all  parties  ;  the  young  gentleman  hav-
ing risen,  where  merit  was  the  rule  of  rising,  and  become

1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  380.

184 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

Graf  and  Lieutenant-General,  in  the  course  of  the  next  fifty
years.1

Huldigung  and  Torch-Procession  over,  the  Koyal  Party
dashed  rapidly  off,  next  morning  (21st  July),  homewards  by
the  shortest  route ;  and,  in  three  days  more,  by  Frankfurt-on-
Oder  (where  a  glimpse  of  General  Schwerin,  a  favorite  Gen-
eral, was  to  be  had),  were  safe  in  Berlin ;  received  with  accla-
mation, nay  with  "  blessings  and  even  tears  "  some  say,  after
this  pleasant  Fortnight's  Tour.  General  Schwerin,  it  is  ru-
mored, will  be  made  Feldmarschall  straightway,  the  Miinchows
are  getting  so  promoted  as  we  said;  edicts  are  coming  out,
much  business  speeding  forward,  and  the  tongues  of  men  keep
wagging.

Berlin  Huldigung  —  and  indeed,  by  Deputy,  that  of  nearly
all  the  other  Towns  —  was  on  Tuesday,  August  2d.  At  Ber-
lin his  Majesty  was  present  in  the  matter :  but,  except  the
gazing  multitudes,  and  hussar  regiments,  ranked  in  the
Schloss-Platz  and  streets  adjoining,  there  was  little  of  nota-
ble in  it ;  the  upholstery  arrangements  thrifty  in  the  extreme.
His  Majesty  is  prone  to  thrift  in  this  of  the  Huldigung,  as
would  appear ;  perhaps  regarding  the  affair  as  scenic  merely.
Here,  besides  this  of  Berlin,  is  another  instance  just  occur-
ring. It  appears,  the  Quedlinburg  people,  shut  out  from  the
light  of  the  actual  Koyal  Countenance,  cannot  do  their  Honi-
aging  by  Deputy,  without  at  least  a  Portrait  of  the  King  and
of  the  Queen :  How  manage  ?  asks  the  Official  Person.  "  Have
a  Couple  of  Daubs  done  in  Berlin,  three  guineas  apiece  ;  send
them  these,"  answers  the  King ! 2

Here  in  the  Berlin  Schloss,  scene  the  Large  Hall  within  doors,
there  is  a  "  platform  raised  three  steps  ;  and  on  this,  by  way
of  a  kind  of  throne,  an  arm-chair  covered  with  old  black  vel-
vet ; "  the  whole  surmounted  by  a  canopy  also  of  old  black
velvet :  not  a  sublime  piece  of  upholstery ;  but  reckoned  ade-
quate. Friedrich  mounted  the  three  steps  ;  stood  before  the

1  Preuss,  Thronbesteiguny,  p.  387.

'2  "  On  doit  faire  barbouiller  de  mauvaises  copies  a  Berlin,  la  piece  a  20  ecus.  —
FR."  Preuss,  ii.  (Urkundenbuch,  8.  222).

CHAP.  II.  THE HOMAGINGS.  185

June-Sept.  1740.

old  chair,  his  Princes  standing  promiscuously  behind  it ;  his
Hitters  in  quantity,  in  front  and  to  right  and  left,  on  the
floor.  Some  Minister  of  the  Interior  explains  suitably,  not
at  too  great  length,  what  they  are  met  for ;  some  junior
Official,  junior  but  of  quality,  responded  briefly,  for  himself
and  his  order,  to  the  effect,  "Yea,  truly:"  the  Huldigunys-
Urkunde  (Deed  of  Homage)  was  then  read  by  the  proper  Clerk,
and  the  Eitters  all  swore ;  audibly,  with  lifted  hands.  This
is  the  Hitter  Huldigung.

His  Majesty  then  steps  out  to  the  Balcony,  for  Oath  and
Homage  of  the  general  Population.  General  population. gave
its  oath,  and  "  three  great  shouts  over  and  above."  "  Es  lebe
der  Konig  ! "  thrice,  with  all  their  throats.  Upon  which  a
shower  of  Medals,  "Homage-Medals,"  gold  and  silver  (quan-
tity not  mentioned)  rained  down  upon  them,  in  due  succession ;
and  were  scrambled  for,  in  the  usual  way.  "His  Majesty,"
they  write,  and  this  is  perhaps  the  one  point  worth  notice,
"  his  Majesty,  contrary  to  custom  and  to  etiquette,  remained
on  the  Balcony,  some  time  after  the  ceremony,  perhaps  a
full  half -hour  ; "  —  silent  there,  "  with  his  look  fixed  atten-
tively on  the  immeasurable  multitude  before  the  Schloss ;
and  seemed  sunk  in  deep  reflection  (Betrachtung)  :  "  —  an
almost  aAvfully  eloquent  though  inarticulate  phenomenon  to
his  Majesty,  that  of  those  multitudes  scrambling  and  huzza-
ing there !  *

These,  with  the  Cleve  one,  are  all  the  Homagings  Friedrich
was  personally  present  at ;  the  others  he  did  by  Deputy,  all  in
one  day  (2d  August)  ;  and  without  fuss.  Scenic  matters  these ;
in  which,  except  where  he  can,  as  in  the  Konigsberg  case,  com-
bine inspections  and  grave  businesses  with  them,  he  takes  no
interest.  However,  he  is  now,  for  the  sake  chiefly  of  inspec-
tions and  other  real  objects,  bent  on  a  Journey  to  Cleve ;  —  the
fellow  of  that  to  Konigsberg  :  Konigsberg,  Preussen,  the  east-
ernmost outlying  wing  of  his  long  straggling  Dominions  ;  and
then  Cleve-Jiilich,  its  counterpart  on  the  southwestern  side,  —
there  also,  with  such  contingencies  hanging  over  Cleve-Jiilich,
1  Preuss,  Thrcmbesteigung,  p.  289.

186 FKIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

it  were  proper  to  make  some  mustering  of  the  Frontier  garri-
sons and  affairs.1  His  Majesty  so  purposes  :  and  we  purpose
again  to  accompany,  —  not  for  inspection  and  mustering,  but
for  an  unexpected  reason.  The  grave  Journey  to  Cleve  has
an  appendage,  or  comic  side-piece,  hanging  to  it ;  more  than
one  appendage  ;  which  the  reader  must  not  miss  !  —  Before
setting  out,  read  these  two  Fractions,  snatched  from  the  Diplo-
matist Wastebag ;  looking  well,  we  gain  there  some  momentary
view  of  Friedrich  on  the  business  side.  Of  Friedrich,  and  also
of  Another  :  —

Sunday,  14th  August,  1740,  Dickens,  who  has  been  report-
ing hitherto  in  a  favorable,  though  in  a  languid  exoteric
manner,  not  being  in  any  height  of  favor,  England  or  he,  —
had  express  Audience  of  his  Majesty;  being  summoned  out
to  Potsdam  for  that  end :  "  Sunday  evening,  about  7  P.M."  —
Majesty  intending  to  be  off  on  the  Cleve  Journey  to-morrow.
Let  us  accompany  Dickens.  Eeaders  may  remember,  George
II.  has  been  at  Hanover  for  some  weeks  past ;  Bielfeld  dili-
gently grinning  euphemisms  and  courtly  graciosities  to  him  ;
Truchsess  hinting,  on  opportunity,  that  there  are  perhaps
weighty  businesses  in  the  rear ;  which,  however,  on  the  Bri-
tannic side,  seem  loath  to  start.  Britannic  Majesty  is  much
at  a  loss  about  his  Spanish  War,  so  dangerous  for  kindling
France  and  the  whole  world  upon  him.  In  regard  to  which
Prussia  might  be  so  important,  for  or  against.  —  This,  in  com-
pressed form,  is  what  Dickens  witnesses  at  Potsdam  that  Sun-
day evening  from  7  P.M.  :  —

"Audience  lasted  above  an  hour:  King  turned  directly
upon  business ;  wishes  to  have  '  Categorical  Answers '  as  to
Three  Points  already  submitted  to  his  Britannic  Majesty's
consideration.  Clear  footing  indispensable  between  us.  What
you  want  of  me  ?  say  it,  and  be  plain.  What  I  want  of  you
is,  These  three  things  :  —

''  1°.  Guarantee  for  Jiilich  and  Berg.  All  the  world  knows
whose  these  Duchies  are.  Will  his  Britannic  Majesty  guaran-

1  In  regard  to  the  Day  of  Huldigung  at  Cleve,  which  happily  is  not  of  the
least  moment  to  us,  Preuss  (Thronbesteigung,  p.  390)  and  Eelden- Geschichte,
(L  423)  seem  to  be  in  flat  contradiction.

CHAP.  II.  THE HOMAGINGS.  1ST

14th  Aug.  1740.

tee  me  there  ? And  if  so,  How,  and  to  what  lengths,  will  he
proceed  about  it  ?

"2°.  Settlement  about  Ost-Friesland.  Expectancy  of  Ost-
Friesland,  soon  to  fall  heirless,  which  was  granted  me  long
since,  though  Hanover  makes  hagglings,  counter-claimings  :  I
must  have  some  Settlement  about  that.

"  3°.  The  like  about  those  perplexities  in  Mecklenburg.  No
difficulty  there  if  we  try  heartily,  nor  is  there  such  pressing
haste  about  it.

"  These  are  my  three  claims  on  England ;  and  I  will  try  to
serve  England  as  far  in  return,  if  it  will  tell  me  how.  <  Ah,
beware  of  throwing  yourself  into  the  arms  of  France ! '  mod-
estly suggests  Dickens.  —  '  Well,  if  France  will  guarantee  me
those  Duchies,  and  you  will  not  do  anything?'  answers  his
Majesty  with  a  fine  laugh :  'England  I  consider  my  most  natu-
ral friend  and  ally ;  but  I  must  know  what  there  is  to  depend
on  there.  Princes  are  ruled  by  their  interest ;  cannot  follow
their  feelings.  Let  me  have  an  explicit  answer ;  say,  at
Wesel,  where  I  am  to  be  on  the  24th,' "  ten  days  hence.  Bri-
tannic Majesty  is  at  Hanover,  and  can  answer  within  that
time.  "This  he  twice  told  me,  'Wesel,  24th,'  in  the  course
of  our  interview.  Permit  me  to  recommend  the  matter  to
your  Lordship,"  —  my  Lord  Harrington,  now  attending  the
Britannic  Majesty.

"During  the  whole  audience,"  adds  Dickens,  "the  King  was
in  extreme  good  humor ;  and  not  only  heard  with  attention
all  the  considerations  I  offered,  but  was  not  the  least  offended
at  any  objections  I  made  to  what  he  said.  It  is  undoubtedly
the  best  way  to  behave  with  frankness  to  him."  These  last
are  Dickens's  own  words  ;  let  them  modestly  be  a  memoran-
dum to  your  Lordship.  This  King  goes  himself  direct  to  the
point ;  and  straightforwardness,  as  a  primary  condition,  will
profit  your  Lordship  with  him.1

Most  true  advice,  this  ;  —  and  would  perhaps  be  followed,

were  it  quite  easy! But  things  are  very  complicated. And

the  Britannic  Majesty,  much  plagued  with  Spanish  War  and

Parliamentary  noises  in  that  unquiet  Island,  is  doubtless  glad

i  Dickens  (in  State-Paper  Office,  17th  August,  1740).

188 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

to  get  away  to  Hanover  for  a  little ;  and  would  fain  be  on
holiday  in  these  fine  rural  months.  Which  is  not  well  possi-
ble either.  Jenkins's  Ear,  rising  at  last  like  a  fiery  portent,
has  kindled  the  London  Fog  over  yonder,  in  a  strange  way,
and  the  murky  stagnancy  is  all  getting  on  fire  ;  the  English
intent,  as  seldom  any  Nation  was,  to  give  the  Spaniards  an
effectual  beating.  Which  they  hope  they  can,  —  though  unex-
pected difficulties  will  occur.  And,  in  the  mean  while,  what
a  riddle  of  potentialities  for  his  poor  Majesty  to  read,  and
pick  his  way  from  !  —

Bielfeld,  in  spite  of  all  this,  would  fain  be  full  of  admiration
for  the  Britannic  Majesty.  Confesses  he  is  below  the  middle
size,  in  fact  a  tiny  little  creature,  but  then  his  shape  is  per-
fect ;  leg  much  to  be  commended,  —  which  his  Majesty  knows,
standing  always  with  one  leg  slightly  advanced,  and  the  Order
of  the  Garter  on  it,  that  mankind  may  take  notice.  Here  is
Bielfeld's  description  faithfully  abridged  :  —

"Big  blue  eyes,  perhaps  rather  of  parboiled  character,
though  proud  enough ;  eyes  flush  with  his  face  or  more,  rather
in  relief  than  on  a  level  with  it,"  —  a  fleur  de  tete,  after  the
manner  of  a  fish,  if  one  might  say  so,  and  betokening  such  an
intellect  behind  them  !  "  Attitude  constrained,  leg  advanced
in  that  way ;  his  courtiers  call  it  majestic.  Biggish  mouth,
strictly  shut  in  the  crescent  or  horse-shoe  form  (fermee  en
croissant)  ;  curly  wig  (a  nceuds,  reminding  you  of  lamb's-wool,
color  not  known)  ;  eyebrows,  however,  you  can  see  are  ashy-
blond  ;  general  tint  is  fundamentally  livid  ;  but  when  in  good
case,  the  royal  skin  will  take  tolerably  bright  colors  (prend
d'assez  belles  couleurs).  As  to  the  royal  mind  and  understand-
ing, what  shall  Bielfeld  say  ?  That  his  Majesty  sometimes
makes  ingenious  and  just  remarks,  and  is  laudably  serious  at
all  times,  and  can  majestically  hold  his  tongue,  and  stand  with
advanced  leg,  and  eyes  rather  more  than  flush.  Sense  of  his
dignity  is  high,  as  it  ought  to  be ;  on  great  occasions  you  see
pride  and  a  kind  of  joy  mantling  in  the  royal  countenance.
Has  been  known  to  make  explosions,  and  to  be  very  furious  to
Prince  Fred  and  others,  when  pricked  into  :  —  but,  my  friend,
what  mortal  is  exempt  from  failings  ?  Majesty  reads  the  Eng-

CHAP.  II.  THE  HOMAGINGS.  189

June-Sept.  1740.

lish  Newspapers  every  morning  in  bed,  which  are  often  biting.
Majesty  has  his  Walmoden,  a  Hanoverian  Improper  Female,
Countess  of  Yarmouth  so  called ;  quiet,  autumnal,  fair  corn-
plexioned,  stupid ;  who  is  much  a  comfort  to  him.  She  keeps
out  of  mischief,  political  or  other ;  and  gives  Bielf eld  a  gra-
cious nod  now  and  then." J  Harrington  is  here  too ;  —  and
Britannic  Majesty  and  he  are  busy  governing  the  English
Nation  on  these  terms.  —  We  return  now  to  the  Prussian
Majesty.

About  six  weeks  after  that  of  Dickens,  —  Cleve  Journey
and  much  else  now  ended,  —  Praetorius  the  Danish  Envoy,
whom  we  slightly  knew  at  Eeinsberg  once,  gives  this  testi-
mony ;  writing  home  to  an  Excellency  at  Copenhagen,  whose
name  we  need  not  inquire  into :  —

"  To  give  your  Excellency  a  just  idea  of  the  new  Govern-
ment here,  I  must  observe  that  hitherto  the  King  of  Prussia
does  as  it  were  everything  himself ;  and  that,  excepting  the
Finance  Minister  von  Boden,  who  preaches  frugality,  and  finds
for  that  doctrine  uncommon  acceptance,  almost  greater  even
than  in  the  former  reign,  his  Majesty  allows  no  counselling
from  any  Minister ;  so  that  Herr  von  Podewils,  who  is  now  the
working  hand  in  the  department  of  Foreign  Affairs,  has  noth-
ing given  him  to  do  but  to  expedite  the  orders  he  receives  from
the  Cabinet,  his  advice  not  being  asked  upon  any  matter ;  and
so  it  is  with  the  other  Ministers.  People  thought  the  loss  of
Herr  von  Thulmeyer,"  veteran  Foreign  Minister  whom  we
have  transiently  heard  of  in  the  Double-Marriage  time,  and
perhaps  have  even  seen  at  London  or  elsewhere,2  "would  be
irreparable ;  so  expert  was  he,  and  a  living  archive  in  that
business :  however,  his  post  seems  to  have  vanished  with
himself.  His  salary  is  divided  between  Plerr  von  Podewils,"
whom  the  reader  will  sometimes  hear  of  again,  "  Kriegsrath
(Councillor  of  War)  von  Ilgen,"  son  of  the  old  gentleman  we
used  to  know,  "  and  Hofrath  Sellentin  who  is  Rendant  of  the
Legations-Kasse"  (Ambassadors'  Paymaster,  we  could  guess,
Ambassador  Body  having  specialty  of  cash  assigned  it,  com-
parable with  the  specialty  of  value  received  from  it,  in  this
1  Bielfeld,  i.  158.  2  Died  4th  August  (Rodenbeck,  p.  20).

190 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

strict  frugal  Country),  —  neither  of  which  two  latter  names
shall  the  reader  be  troubled  with  farther.  "  A  good  many  reso-
lutions, and  responses  by  the  King,  I  have  seen :  they  combine
laconic  expression  with  an  admirable  business  eye  (Geschdfts-
blick~).  Unhappily,"  —  at  least  for  us  in  the  Diplomatic  line,
for  your  Excellency  and  me  unhappily,  —  "there  is  nobody
about  the  King  who  possesses  his  complete  confidence,  or
whom  we  can  make  use  of  in  regard  to  the  necessary  intro-
ductions and  preliminary  movements.  Hereby  it  comes  that,

—  as  certain  things  can  only  be  handled  with  cautious  fore-
sight and  circumlocution,  and  in  the  way  of  beginning  wide,

—  an  Ambassador  here  is  more  thrown out of his course
than  in  any  other  Court ;  and  knows  not,  though  his  object
were  steadily  in  sight,  what  road  to  strike  into  for  getting
towards  it."1

CHAPTER III.

FRIEDRICH MAKES AN EXCURSION,  NOT OF DIRECT SORT,  INTO

THE CLEVE COUNTRIES.

KING  Friedrich  did  not  quite  keep  his  day  at  Wesel ;  indeed
this  24th  was  not  the  first  day,  but  the  last  of  several,  he  had
appointed  to  himself  for  finis  to  that  Journey  in  the  Cleve
Countries ;  Journey  rather  complex  to  arrange.  He  has  sev-
eral businesses  ahead  in  those  parts  ;  and,  as  usual,  will  group
them  with  good  judgment,  and  thrift  of  time.  Not  inspec-
tions merely,  but  amusements,  meetings  with  friends,  especially
French  friends :  the  question  is,  how  to  group  them  with  skill,
so  that  the  necessary  elements  may  converge  at  the  right  mo-
ment, and  one  shot  kill  three  or  four  birds.  This  is  Fried-
rich's  fine  way,  perceptible  in  all  these  Journeys.  The  French
friends,  flying  each  on  his  own  track,  with  his  own  load  of
impediments,  Voltaire  with  his  Madame  for  instance,  are  a
difficult  element  in  such  problem ;  and  there  has  been,  and  is,
1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  377  (2d  October,  1740).

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 191

1740.

much  scheming  and  corresponding  about  it,  within  the  last
month  especially.

Voltaire  is  now  at  Brussels  with  his  Du  Chatelet,  prosecut-
ing that  endless  "  lawsuit  with  the  House  of  Honsbruck,"  —
which  he,  and  we,  are  both  desirous  to  have  done  with.  He  is
at  the  Hague,  too,  now  and  then  ;  printing,  about  to  print,  the
Anti-Machiavel ;  corresponding,  to  right  and  left,  quarrelling
with  Van  Duren  the  Printer  ;  lives,  while  there,  in  the  Vieille
Cour,  in  the  vast  dusky  rooms  with  faded  gilding,  and  grand
old  Bookshelves  "with  the  biggest  spider-webs  in  Europe."
Brussels  is  his  place  for  Law-Consultations,  general  family
residence  ;  the  Hague  and  that  old  spider-web  Palace  for  cor-
recting Proof-sheets ;  doing  one's  own  private  studies,  which
we  never  quite  neglect.  Fain  would  Friedrich  see  him,  fain
he  Friedrich ;  but  there  is  a  divine  Emilie,  there  is  a  Mau-
pertuis,  there  are  —  In  short,  never  were  such  difficulties,  in
the  cooking  of  an  egg  with  water  boiling ;  and  much  vain  cor-
respondence has  already  been  on  that  subject,  as  on  others
equally  extinct.  Correspondence  which  is  not  pleasant  read-
ing at  this  time  ;  the  rather  as  no  reader  can,  without  endless
searching,  even  understand  it.  Correspondence  left  to  us,  not
in  the  cosmic,  elucidated  or  legible  state ;  left  mainly  as  the
Editorial  rubbish-wagons  chose  to  shoot  it;  like  a  tumbled
quarry,  like  the  ruins  of  a  sacked  city  ;  —  avoidable  by  readers
who  are  not  forced  into  it ! x  Take  the  following  select  bricks
as  sample,  which  are  of  some  use ;  the  general  Heading  is,

King  Friedrich  to  M.  de  Voltaire  (at  the  Hague,  or  at

Brussels).

"  Charlottenburg,  I2t7i  June,  1740.  —  ...  My  dear  Voltaire,
resist  no  longer  the  eagerness  I  have  to  see  you.  Do  in  my
favor  whatever  your  humanity  allows.  In  the  end  of  August
I  go  to  Wesel,  and  perhaps  farther.  Promise  that  you  will

1  Herr  Preuss's  edition  ( (Euvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  vols.  xxi.  xxii.  xxiii.)  has  come
out  since  the  above  was  written  :  it  is  agreeably  exceptional ;  being,  for  the
first  time,  correctly  printed,  and  the  editor  himself  having  mostly  understood
it,  —  though  the  reader  still  cannot,  on  the  terms  there  allowed.

192 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

come  and  join  me  ;  for  I  could  not  live  happy,  nor  die  tranquil,
without  having  embraced  you !  Thousand  compliments  to  the
Marquise,"  divine  Emilie.  "I  am  busy  with  both  hands
[Corn-Magazines.  Free  Press,  Abolition  of  Torture,  and  much
else] ;  working  at  the  Army  with  the  one  hand,  at  the  People
and  the  Fine  Arts  with  the  other."

"Berlin,  5th  August,  1740.  —  ...  I  will  write  to  Madame
du  Chatelet,  in  compliance  with  your  wish : "  mark  it,  reader.
"  To  speak  to  you  frankly  concerning  her  journey,  it  is  Vol-
taire, it  is  you,  it  is  my  Friend  that  I  desire  to  see ;  and  the
divine  Emilie  with  all  her  divinity  is  only  the  Accessory  of
the  Apollo  Newtonized.

"  I  cannot  yet  say  whether  I  shall  travel  [incognito  into  for-
eign parts  a  little]  or  not  travel ; "  there  have  been  rumors,
perhaps  private  wishes  ;  but  —  ..."  Adieu,  dear  friend ;  sub-
lime spirit,  first-born  of  thinking  beings.  Love  me  always
sincerely,  and  be  persuaded  that  none  can  love  and  esteem  you
more  than  I.  Vale.  FEDERIC."

"Berlin,  6th  August  [which  is  next  day].  —  You  will  have
received  a  Letter  from  me  dated  yesterday ;  this  is  the  second
I  write  to  you  from  Berlin ;  I  refer  you  to  what  was  in  the
other.  If  it  must  be  (fauf)  that  Emilie  accompany  Apollo,  I
consent ;  but  if  I  could  see  you  alone,  that  is  what  I  would
prefer.  I  should  be  too  much  dazzled;  I  could  not  stand
so  much  splendor  all  at  once ;  it  would  overpower  me.  I
should  need  the  veil  of  Moses  to  temper  the  united  radiance
of  your  two  divinities."  ...  In  short,  don't  bring  her,  if  you
please.

"  Remusberg  [poetic  for  Reinsberg~\,  8th  August,  1740.  — ...
My  dear  Voltaire,  I  do  believe  Van  Duren  costs  you  more
trouble  and  pains  than  you  had  with  Henri  Quatre.  In  versi-
fying the  Life  of  a  Hero,  you  wrote  the  history  of  your  own
thoughts  ;  but  in  coercing  a  scoundrel  you  fence  with  an  enemy
who  is  not  worthy  of  you."  To  punish  him,  and  cut  short  his
profits,  "print,  then,  as  you  wish  [your  own  edition  of  the
Anti-Machiavel,  to  go  along  with  his,  and  trip  the  feet  from
it].  Faites  rouler  la  presse  ;  erase,  change,  correct;  do  as  you

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 193

1740.

see  best ;  your  judgment  about  it  shall  be  mine."  —  "  In  eight
days  I  leave  for  [where  thinks  the  reader  ?  "  Dantzig  "  de-
liberately print  all  the  Editors,  careful  Preuss  among  them ;
overturning  the  terrestrial  azimuths  for  us,  and  making  day
night !]  —  for  Leipzig,  and  reckon  on  being  at  Frankfurt  on
the  22d.  In  case  you  could  be  there,  I  expect,  on  my  passage,
to  give  you  lodging!  At  Cleve  or  in  Holland,  I  depend  for
certain  on  embracing  you."  l

Intrinsically  the  Friedrich  correspondence  at  this  time,  with
Voltaire  especially,  among  many  friends  now  on  the  wing
towards  Berlin  and  sending  letters,  has,  —  if  you  are  forced
into  struggling  for  some  understanding  of  it,  and  do  get  to  read
parts  of  it  with  the  eyes  of  Friedrich  and  Voltaire,  —  has  a  cer-
tain amiability ;  and  is  nothing  like  so  waste  and  dreary  as  it
looks  in  the  chaotic  or  sacked-city  condition.  Friedrich  writes
with  brevity,  oftenest  on  practicalities  (the  Anti-Machiavel,  the
coming  Interview,  and  the  like),  evidently  no  time  to  spare ;
writes  always  with  considerable  sincerity ;  with  friendliness,
much  admiration,  and  an  ingenuous  vivacity,  to  M.  de  Vol-
taire. Voltaire,  at  his  leisure  in  Brussels  or  the  Old-Palace
and  its  spider-webs,  writes  much  more  expansively ;  not  with
insincerity,  he  either;  —  with  endless  airy  graciosities,  and
ingenious  twirls,  and  touches  of  nattering  unction,  which  latter,
he  is  aware,  must  not  be  laid  on  too  thick.  As  thus :  —

In  regard  to  the  Anti-Machiavel,  —  Sire,  deign  to  give  me
your  permissions  as  to  the  scoundrel  of  a  Van  Duren;  well
worth  while,  Sire,  — "  it  is  a  monument  for  the  latest  pos-
terity; the  only  Book  worthy  of  a  King  for  these  fifteen
hundred  years."

This  is  a  strongish  trowelful,  thrown  on  direct,  with  adroit-
ness ;  and  even  this  has  a  kind  of  sincerity.  Safer,  however,
to  do  it  in  the  oblique  or  reflex  way,  —  by  Ambassador  Camas,
for  example :  —

"  I  will  tell  you  boldly,  Sir  [you  M.  de  Camas],  I  put  more
value  on  this  Book  (Anti-Machiavel)  than  on  the  Emperor

1  Preuss,  (Euvres  de  Frtde'ric,  xx.  pp.  5, 19-21 ;  Voltaire,  (Euvres,  Ixxii.  226,
&c.  (not  worth  citing,  in  comparison).

VOL.  VII.  13

194 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

Julian's  Ccesar,  or  on  the  Maxims  of  Marcus  Aurelius," I  do

indeed,  having  a  kind  of  property  in  it  withal ! 1

In  fact,  Voltaire  too  is  beautiful,  in  this  part  of  the  Cor-
respondence; but  much  in  a  twitter,  —  the  Queen  of  Sheba,
not  the  sedate  Solomon,  in  prospect  of  what  is  coming.  He
plumes  himself  a  little,  we  perceive,  to  his  d'Argentals  and
French  Correspondents,  on  this  sublime  intercourse  he  has  got
into  with  a  Crowned  Head,  the  cynosure  of  mankind :  —  Per-
haps even  you,  my  best  friend,  did  not  quite  know  me,  and
what  merits  I  had !  Plumes  himself  a  little ;  but  studies  to  be
modest  withal ;  has  not  much  of  the  peacock,  and  of  the  turkey
has  nothing,  to  his  old  friends.  All  which  is  very  naive  and
transparent;  natural  and  even  pretty,  on  the  part  of  M.  de
Voltaire  as  the  weaker  vessel.  —  For  the  rest,  it  is  certain
Maupertuis  is  getting  under  way  at  Paris  towards  the  Cleve
rendezvous.  Brussels,  too,  is  so  near  these  Cleve  Countries  ;
within  two  days'  good  driving :  —  if  only  the  times  and  routes
would  rightly  intersect  ?

Friedrich's  intention  is  by  no  means  for  a  straight  journey
towards  Cleve :  he  intends  for  Baireuth  first,  then  back  from
Baireuth  to  Cleve, — making  a  huge  southward  elbow  on  the
map,  with  Baireuth  for  apex  or  turning-point :  —  in  this  man-
ner he  will  make  the  times  suit,  and  have  a  convergence  at
Cleve.  To  Baireuth;  —  who  knows  if  not  farther  ?  All  sum-
mer there  has  gone  fitfully  a  rumor,  that  he  wished  to  see
France ;  perhaps  Paris  itself  incognito  ?  The  rumor,  which
was  heard  even  at  Petersburg,2  is  now  sunk  dead  again ;  but
privately,  there  is  no  doubt,  a  glimpse  of  the  sublime  French
Nation  would  be  welcome  to  Friedrich.  He  could  never  get
to  Travelling  in  his  young  time ;  missed  his  Grand  Tour  alto-
gether, much  as  he  wished  it ;  and  he  is  capable  of  pranks !
—  Enough,  on  Monday  morning,  loth  August,  1740,3  Friedrich
and  Suite  leave  Potsdam,  early  enough ;  go,  by  Leipzig,  by  the

1  Voltaire,  (Euvres,  Ixxii.  280  (to  Camas,  18th  October,  1740).

2  Raumer's  Beitrage  (English  Translation,  London,  1837),  p.  15  (Finch's
Despatch,  24th  June,  1740).

8  Rodenbeck,  p.  15,  slightly  in  error:  see  Dickens's  Interview,  supra,  p.  187.

CHAP.  m. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 195

1740.

route  already  known  to  readers,  through.  Coburg  and  the  Voigt-
land  regions ;  Wilhelnrina  has  got  warning,  sits  eagerly  expect-
ing her  Brother  in  the  Hermitage  at  Baireuth,  gladdest  of
shrill  sisters ;  and  full  of  anxieties  how  her  Brother  would  now
be.  The  travelling  party  consisted,  besides  the  King,  of  seven
persons :  Prince  August  Wilhelm,  King's  next  Brother,  Heir-
apparent  if  there  come  no  children,  now  a  brisk  youth  of
eighteen;  Leopold  Prince  of  Anhalt-Dessau,  Old  Dessauer's
eldest,  what  we  may  call  the  "  Young  Dessauer ; "  Colonel  von
Borck,  whom  we  shall  hear  of  again;  Colonel  von  Stille,
already  heard  of  (grave  men  of  fifty,  these  two) ;  milk-beard
Munchow,  an  Adjutant,  youngest  of  the  promoted  Munchows  ;
Algarotti,  indispensable  for  talk  ;  and  Fredersdorf,  the  House-
Steward  and  domestic  Factotum,  once  Private  in  Schwerin's
Regiment,  whom  Bielfeld  so  admired  at  Eeinsberg,  foreseeing
what  he  would  come  to.  One  of  Friedrich's  late  acts  was  to
give  Factotum  Fredersdorf  an  Estate  of  Land  (small  enough,
I  fancy,  but  with  country-house  on  it)  for  solace  to  the
leisure  of  so  useful  a  man,  —  studious  of  chemistry  too,  as  I
have  heard.  Seven  in  all,  besides  the  King.1  Direct  towards
Baireuth,  incognito,  and  at  the  top  of  their  speed.  Wednes-
day, 17th,  they  actually  arrive.  Poor  Wilhelmina,  she  finds
her  Brother  changed ;  become  a  King  in  fact,  and  sternly  soli-
tary ;  alone  in  soul,  even  as  a  King  must  be ! 2 —

"Algarotti,  one  of  the  first  beaux-esprits  of  this  age,"  as
Wilhelmina  defines  him,  —  Friend  Algarotti,  the  young  Vene-
tian gentleman  of  elegance,  in  dusky  skin,  in  very  white  linen
and  frills,  with  his  fervid  black  eyes,  "  does  the  expenses  of
the  conversation."  He  is  full  of  elegant  logic,  has  specula-
tions on  the  great  world  and  the  little,  on  Nature,  Art,  Papistry,
Anti-Papistry,  and  takes  up  the  Opera  in  an  earnest  manner,
as  capable  of  being  a  school  of  virtue  and  the  moral  sublime.
His  respectable  Books  on  the  Opera  and  other  topics  are  now
all  forgotten,  and  crave  not  to  be  mentioned.  To  me  he  is
not  supremely  beautiful,  though  much  the  gentleman  in  man-
ners as  in  ruffles,  and  ingeniously  logical:  —  rather  yellow  to

1  Rodenbeck,  p.  19  (and  for  Chamberlain  Fredersdorf's  estate,  p.  15).

2  Wilhelmina,  ii.  322,  323.

196 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

me,  in  mind  as  in  skin,  and  with  a  taint  of  obsolete  Venetian
Macassar.  But  to  Friedrich  he  is  thrice-dear ;  who  loves  the
sharp  faceted  cut  of  the  man,  and  does  not  object  to  his  yel-
low or  Extinct-Macassar  qualities  of  mind.  Thanks  to  that
wandering  Baltimore  for  picking  up  such  a  jewel  and  carry-
ing him  Northward !  Algarotti  himself  likes  the  North :
here  in  our  hardy  climates,  —  especially  at  Berlin,  and  were
his  loved  Friedrich  not  a  King,  —  Algarotti  could  be  very
happy  in  the  liberty  allowed.  At  London,  where  there  is  no
King,  or  none  to  speak  of,  and  plenty  of  free  Intelligences,
Carterets,  Lytteltons,  young  Pitts  and  the  like,  he  is  also  well,
were  it  not  for  the  horrid  smoke  upon  one's  linen,  and  the
little  or  no  French  of  those  proud  Islanders.

Wilhelmina  seems  to  like  him  here ;  is  glad,  at  any  rate,
that  he  does  the  costs  of  conversation,  better  or  worse.  In
the  rest  is  no  hope.  Stille,  Borck  are  accomplished  military
gentlemen ;  but  of  tacit  nature,  reflective,  practical,  rather
than  discursive,  and  do  not  waste  themselves  by  inconti-
nence of  tongue.  Stille,  by  his  military  Commentaries,  which
are  still  known  to  soldiers  that  read,  maintains  some  lasting
remembrance  of  himself:  Borck  we  shall  see  engaged  in  a
small  bit  of  business  before  long.  As  to  Miinchow,  the  jeune
morveux  of  an  Adjutant,  he,  though  his  manners  are  well
enough,  and  he  wears  military  plumes  in  his  hat,  is  still  an
unfledged  young  creature,  "  bill  still  yellow,"  so  to  speak  ;  —
and  marks  himself  chiefly  by  a  visible  hankering  after  that
troublesome  creature  Marwitz,  who  is  always  coquetting.
Friedrich's  conversation,  especially  to  me  Wilhelmina,  seems
"  guinde,  set  on  stilts,"  likewise  there  are  frequent  cuts  of
banter  in  him;  and  it  is  painfully  evident  he  distinguishes
my  Sister  of  Anspach  and  her  foolish  Husband,  whom  he  has
invited  over  hither  in  a  most  eager  manner,  beyond  what  a
poor  Wilhelmina  with  her  old  love  can  pretend  to.  Patience,
niy  shrill  Princess,  Beauty  of  Baireuth  and  the  world ;  let  us
hope  all  will  come  right  again !  My  shrill  Princess  —  who
has  a  melodious  strength  like  that  of  war-fifes,  too  —  knows
how  to  be  patient ;  and  veils  many  things,  though  of  a  highly
unhypocritical  nature.

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 197
1740.

These  were  Three  great  Days  at  Baireuth ;  Wilhelinina  is
to  come  soon,  and  return  the  visit  at  Berlin. To  wait  upon
the  King,  known  though  incognito,  "  the  Bishop  of  Bamberg  "
came  driving  over : 1  Schdnborn,  Austrian  Kanzler,  or  who  ?
His  old  City  we  once  saw  (and  plenty  of  hanged  malefactors
swinging  round  it,  during  that  Journey  to  the  Reicli) ;  —  but
the  Bishop  himself  never  to  our knowledge,  Bishop  being
absent  then. I  hope  it  is  the  same  Bishop  of  Baniberg,  whom
a  Friend  of  Biisching's,  touring  there  about  that  same  time,
saw  dining  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner,  with  mediaeval
trumpeters,  "  with  waiters  in  spurs  and  buff-belts ;  "  2  if  it  is
not,  I  have  not  the  slightest  shadow  of  acquaintance  with
him,  —  there  have  been  so  many  Bishops  of  Bamberg with
whom  one  wishes  to  have  none  ! On  the  third  day  Friedrich
and  his  company  went  away,  towards  Wurzburg  ;  and  Wilhel-
mina  was  left alone  with  her  reflections. "I had  had  so
much  to  say  to  him  ;  I  had  got  nothing  said  at  all :  "  alas,  it
is  ever  so. "The  King  was  so  changed,  grown  so  much  bigger
(grandi),  you  could  not  have  known  him  again ;  "  stands  finely
erect  and  at  full  breadth,  every  inch  a  King ;  his  very  stature,
you  would  say,  increased.  —  Adieu,  my  Princess,  pearl  of  Prin-
cesses ;  all  readers  will  expect  your  return-visit  at  Berlin,  which,
is  to  be  soon.

Friedrich  strikes  off  to  the  left,  and  has  a View  of
Strasburg  for Two  Days.

Through  Wurzburg,  Frankf  urt-on-Mayn,  speeds  Friedrich ;  —
Wilhelmina  and  mankind  understand  that  it  is  homewards
and  to  Cleve ;  but  at  Frankfurt,  in  deepest  privacy,  there  occurs
a  sudden  whirl  southward,  —  up  the  Ehine- Valley ;  direct  to-
wards Strasburg,  for  a  sight  of  France  in  that  quarter  !  So
has  Friedrich  decided,  —  not  quite  suddenly,  on  new  Letters
here,  or  new  computations  about  Cleve  ;  but  by  forethought
taken  at  Baireuth,  as  rather  appears.  From  Frankfurt  to  Stras-
burg, say  150  miles ;  from  Strasburg  home,  is  not  much  farther
than  from  Frankfurt  home  :  it  can  be  done,  then ;  husht !

1  Helden-Gesc/richte,  i.  419.

2  Busching's  Beitrage ;  —  Schlosser  (History  of  the  Eighteenth  Century)  also
quotes  the  scene.

198 FEIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

The  incognito  is  to  be  rigorous :  Friedrich  becomes  Comte
Dufour,  a  Prussian-French  gentleman ;  Prince  August  Wil-
helm  is  Graf  von  Schaffgotsch,  Algarotti  is  Graf  von  Pfuhl,
Germans  these  two ;  what  Leopold,  the  Young  Dessauer,
called  himself,  —  still  less  what  the  others,  or  whether  the
others  were  there  at  all,  and  not  shoved  on,  direct  towards
Wesel,  out  of  the  way  as  is  likelier,  —  can  remain  uncertain
to  readers  and  me.  From  Frankfurt,  then,  on  Monday
morning,  22d  August,  1740,  as  I  compute,  through  old  known
Philipsburg-Campaign  country,  and  the  lines  of  Ettlingen
and  Stollhof en ;  there  the  Koyal  Party  speeds  eagerly  (weather
very  bad,  as  appears)  :  and  it  is  certain  they  are  at  Kehl  on
Tuesday  evening ;  looking  across  the  long  Ehine  Bridge,  Stras-
burg  and  its  steeples  now  close  at  hand.

This  looks  to  be  a  romantic  fine  passage  in  the  History  of
the  young  King ;  —  though  in  truth  it  is  not,  and  proves  but
a  feeble  story  either  to  him  or  us.  Concerning  which,  how-
ever, the  reader,  especially  if  he  should  hear  that  there  exists
precise  Account  of  it,  Two  Accounts  indeed,  one  from  the
King's  own  hand,  will  not  fail  of  a  certain  craving  to  become
acquainted  with  details.  This  craving,  foolish  rather  than
wise,  we  consider  it  thriftiest  to  satisfy  at  once ;  and  shall
give  the  King's  Narrative  entire,  though  it  is  a  jingling  lean
scraggy  Piece,  partly  rhyme,  "  in  the  manner  of  Bachaumont
and  La  Chapelle ;  "  written  at  the  gallop,  a  few  days  hence,
and  despatched  to  Voltaire  :  —  "  You,"  dear  Voltaire,  "  wish
to  know  what  I  have  been  about,  since  leaving  Berlin ;  an-
nexed you  will  find  a  description  of  it,"  writes  Friedrich.1
Out  of  Voltaire's  and  other  people's  waste-baskets,  it  has  at
length  been  fished  up,  patch  by  patch,  and  pasted  together  by
victorious  modern  Editors  ;  and  here  it  is  again  entire.  The
other  Narrative,  which  got  into  the  Newspapers  soon  after,  is
likewise  of  authentic  nature,  —  Fassmann,  our  poor  old  friend,
confirming  it,  if  that  were  needful,  — and  is  happily  in  prose.2

1  (Euvres,  xxii.  25  (Wesel,  2cl  September,  1740).

2  Given  in  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  420-423;  — see  likewise  Fassmann's  Merk-
wurdigster  Regierungs-Antritt  (poor  old  Book  on  Friedrich's  Accession) ;  Preuss
(Thronbesteiyung,  pp.  395-400) ;  &c.  &c.

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 199

1740.

Holding  these  two  Pieces  well  together,  and  giving  the  King's
faithfully  translated,  in  a  complete  state,  it  will  be  possible  to
satisfy  foolish  cravings,  and  make  this  Strasburg  Adventure
luminous  enough.

King  Friedrich  to  Voltaire  (from  Wesel,  2d  September,  1740),
chiefly  in  Doggerel,  concerning  the  Run  to  Strasburg.1

"I  have  just  finished  a  Journey,  intermingled  with  singular
adventures,  sometimes  pleasant,  sometimes  the  reverse.  You
know  I  had  set  out  for  Baireuth,"  —  Bruxelles  the  beautiful
French  Editor  wrote,  which  makes  Egyptian  darkness  of  the
Piece  !  —  "to  see  a  Sister  whom  I  love  no  less  than  esteem.
On  the  road  [thither  or  thence ;  or  likeliest,  there],  Algarotti
and  I  consulted  the  map,  to  settle  our  route  for  returning
by  Wesel.  Frankfurt-on-Mayn  comes  always  as  a  principal
stage ;  —  Strasburg  was  no  great  roundabout :  we  chose  that
route  in  preference.  The  incognito  was  decided,  names  pitched
upon  [Comte  Dufour,  and  the  others]  ;  story  we  were  to  tell :
in  fine,  all  was  arranged  and  concerted  to  a  nicety  as  well  as
possible.  We  fancied  we  should  get  to  Strasburg  in  three
days  [from  Baireuth].

But  Heaven,  which  disposes  of  all  Mais  le  del,  qui  de  tout  dispose,

things,

Differently  regulated  this  thing.  Eegla  di/eremment  la  chose.

With  lank-sided  coursers,  Avec  de  coursiers  efflanques,

Lineal  descendants  from  Rosinante,  En  ligne  droites  issus  deEosinante,

With  ploughmen  in  the  dress  of  Et des paysans en postilions

postilions,  masques,

Blockheads  of  impertinent  nature  ;  Butors  de  race  impertinente,

Our  carriages  sticking  fast  a  hun-  Notre  carrosse  en  cent  lieux  ac-

dred  times  in  the  road,  croche,

We  went  along  with  gravity  at  a  Nous  allions  gravement,  d'une  al-

leisurely  pace,  Jure  indolente,

Knocking  against  the  crags.  Gravitant  contre  les  rochers.

1  Part  of  it,  incorrect,  in  Voltaire,  CEuvres  (scandalous  Piece  now  called
Memoires,  once  Vie  Prive'e  du  Roi  de  Prusse),  ii.  24-26;  finally,  in  Preuss,
CEuvres  de  Frtfdtric,  xiv.  156-161,  the  real  and  complete  affair,  as  fished  up
by  victorious  Preuss  and  others.

200 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.

The atmosphere  in uproar  with

loud  thunder,
The  rain-torrents  streaming  over

the  Earth
Threatened  mankind  with  the  Day  of

Judgment  [very  bad  weather] ,
And  in  spite  of  our  impatience,
Four  good  days  are,  in  penance,
Lost  forever  in  these  jumblings.

BOOK  XL

1740.

Les  airs  emus  par  le  bruyant  ton-

nerre,
Les  torrents  d'eau  repandus  sur  la

terre,
Du  dernier  jour  menacaient  Us  hu-

mains  ;

Et  malgre  notre  impatience,
Quatre  bons  jours  en  penitence
Sont  pour  jamais  perdus  dans  les

charrains.

"  Had  all  our  fatalities  been  limited  to  stoppages  of  speed
on  the  journey,  we  should  have  taken  patience ;  but,  after
frightful  roads,  we  found  lodgings  still  frightfuler.

For  greedy  landlords
Seeing  us  pressed  by  hunger
Did,  in  a  more  than  frugal  manner,
In  their  infernal  hovels,
Poisoning  instead  of  feeding,
Steal  from  us  our  crowns.
0 age different [in good  cheer]
from  that  of  Lucullus  !

Car  des  Jiotes  inter  esses,
De  la  faim  nous  voyant  presses,
Ifune  fagon  plus  que  frugale,
Dans  une  chaumiere  infemale,
En  nous  empoisonnant,
Nous  volaient  nos  ecus.
0  siecle  different  des  temps  de  Lu-
cullus !

"  Frightful  roads  ;  short  of  victual,  short  of  drink  :  nor  was
that  all.  We  had  to  undergo  a  variety  of  accidents ;  and  cer-
tainly our  equipage  must  have  had  a  singular  air,  for  in  every
new  place  we  came  to,  they  took  us  for  something  different.

Some  took  us  for  Kings,

Some  for  pickpockets  well  disguised;
Others  for  old  acquaintances.
At  times  the  people  crowded  out,
Looked  us  in  the  eyes,
Like  clowns  impertinently  curious.

Our  lively  Italian  [  Algarotti]  swore ;

For  myself  I  took  patience  ;

The  young  Count  [my  gay  younger
Brother,  eighteen  at  present]
quizzed  and  frolicked ;

Les  uns  nous  prenaient  pour  des

rois,

D'autres  pour  des  filous  courtois,
D'autrespour  gens  de  connaissance;
Parfois  le  peuple  s'attroupait,
Entre  les  yeux  nous  regardait
En  badauds  curieux,  remplis  d'im-

pertinence.

Notre  vif  Italien  jurait,
Pour  moi  je  prenais  patience,
Lejeune  Comte  foldtrait,

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 201

1740.

The  "big  Count  [Heir-apparent  of Le  grand  Comte  se  dandinait,

Dessau] silently  swung his

head,
Wishing this fine Journey to Et  ce  beau  vogage  de  France

France,
In  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  most Dans  le  fond  de  son  cceur  chre-

christianly  at  the  Devil.  tiennement  damnait.

"We  failed  not,  however,  to  struggle  gradually  along;  at
last  we  arrived  in  that  Stronghold,  where  [as  preface  to  the
War  of  1734,  known  to  some  of  us]  —

Where  the  garrison,  too  supple,
Surrendered  so  piteously
After  the  first  blurt  of  explosion
From  the  cannon  of  the  French.

Ou,  a  garnison,  troupe  flasque,
Se  rendit  si  piteusement
Apres  la  premiere  bourasque
Du  canon  frangais  foudroyant.

You  recognize  Kehl  in  this  description.  It  was  in  that  fine
Fortress, — where,  by  the  way,  the  breaches  are  still  lying  un-
repaired [Eeich  being  a  slow  corpus  in  regard  to  such  things],
—  that  the  Postmaster,  a  man  of  more  foresight  than  we,  asked
If  we  had  got  passports  ?

No,  said  I  to  him ;  of  passports
We  never  had  the  whim.
Strong  ones  I  believe  it  would  need
To  recall,  to  our  side  of  the  limit,
Subjects  of  Pluto  King  of  the  Dead  :
But,  from  the  Germanic  Empire
Into  the  gallant  and  cynical  abode
Of  Messieurs  your  pretty  French-
men, —

A  jolly  and  beaming  air,
Rubicund faces,  not ignorant of

wine,
These are  the  passports which,

legible  if  you  look  on  us,
Our  troop  produces  to  you  for  that
end.

Non,  lui  dis-je,  des  passe-ports
Nous  n'eumes  jamais  la  folie.
H  en  faudrait,  je  crois,  de  forts
Pour  ressusciter  a  la  vie
De  chez  Pluton  le  roi  des  morts  ;
Mais  de  Yempire  germanique
Au  sejour  galant  et  cynique
De  Messieurs  vos  jolis  Frangais,

Un  air  rebondissant  etfraisf
Une  face  rouge  et  bachigue,

Sont  les  passe-ports  qu'en  nos  traits
Vous  produit  id  noire  clique.

"  IsTo,  Messieurs,  said  the  provident  Master  of  Passports ;
no  salvation  without  passport.  Seeing  then  that  Necessity
had  got  us  in  the  dilemma  of  either  manufacturing  passports

202 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

ourselves  or  not  entering  Strasburg,  we  took  the  former  branch
of  the  alternative  and  manufactured  one ;  —  in  which  feat
the  Prussian  arms,  which  I  had  on  my  seal,  were  marvellously
furthersome."

This  is  a  fact,  as  the  old  Newspapers  and  confirmatory  Fass-
mann  more  directly  apprise  us.  "  The  Landlord  [or  Post-
master] at  Kehl,  having  signified  that  there  was  no  crossing
without  Passport,"  Friedrich,  at  first  somewhat  taken  aback,
bethought  him  of  his  watch-seal  with  the  Eoyal  Arms  on  it ;
and  soon  manufactured  the  necessary  Passport,  signeted  in
due  form ;  —  which,  however,  gave  a  suspicion  to  the  Innkeeper
as  to  the  quality  of  his  Guest.  After  which,  Tuesday  evening,
23d  August,  "  they  at  once  got  across  to  Strasburg,"  says  my
Newspaper  Friend,  "and  put  up  at  the  Sign  of  the  Raven
there."  Or  in  Friedrich's  own  jingle  :  —

"We  arrived  at  Strasburg;  and  the  Custom-house  corsair,
with  his  inspectors,  seemed  content  with  our  evidences.

These  scoundrels  spied  us,  Ces  scelerats  iwus  epiaient,

With  one  eye  reading  our  passport,  Ifun  ail  k  passe-port  lisaient,

With  the  other  ogling  our  purse.  De  Tautre  lorgnaient  noire  bourse.

Gold,  which  was  always  a  resource,  L'or,  qui  toujours  fut  de  ressource,

Which  brought  Jove  to  the  enjoy-  Par  lequel  Jupin  jouissait

ment

Of  Danae  whom  he  caressed  ;  De  Danae',  qu'il  caressait;

Gold,  by  which  Csesar  governed  LJor,  par  qui  Cesar  gouvernait

The  world  happy  under  his  sway  ;  Le  monde  heureux  sous  son  entire;

Gold,  more  a  divinity  than  Mars  L'or,  plus  dieu  que  Mars  et  I'A-

or  Love ;  mour,

Wonder-working  Gold  introduced  Le  mime  or  sut  nous  introduire,

us,

That  evening,  within  the  walls  of  Le  soir,  dans  les  murs  de  Stras-

Strasburg."  *  bourg.

Sad  doggerel ;  permissible  perhaps  as  a  sample  of  the  Fried-
rich  manufacture,  surely  not  otherwise  !  There  remains  yet

1  Given  thus  far,  with  several  slight  errors,  in  Voltaire,  ii.  24-26 ;  —  the
remainder,  long  unknown,  had  to  be  fished  up,  patch  by  patch  (Preuss,
(Euvresde  Fre'dfric,  xiv.  159-161).

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 203

1740.

more  than  half  of  it ;  readers  see  what  their  foolish  craving
has  brought  upon  them !  Doggerel  out  of  which  no  clear  story,
such  story  as  there  is,  can  be  had  ;  though,  except  the  exaggera-
tion and  contortion,  there  is  nothing  of  fiction  in  it.  We  fly
to  the  Newspaper,  happily  at  least  a  prose  composition,  which
begins  at  this  point ;  and  shall  use  the  Doggerel  henceforth  as
illustration  only  or  as  repetition  in  the  Friedrich-mirror,  of  a
thing  otherwise  made  clear  to  us :  —

Having  got  into  Strasburg  and  the  Raven  Hotel ;  Friedrich
now  on  French  ground  at  last,  or  at  least  on  Half-French,
German-French,  is  intent  to  make  the  most  of  circumstances.
The  Landlord,  with  one  of  Friedrich's  servants,  is  straightway
despatched  into  the  proper  coffee-houses  to  raise  a  supper-party
of  Officers;  politely  asks  any  likely  Officer,  "If  he  will  not
do  a  foreign  Gentleman  [seemingly  of  some  distinction,  signi-
fies Boniface]  the  honor  to  sup  with  him  at  the  Kaven  ?  "  —
"  No,  by  Jupiter  !  "  answer  the  most,  in  their  various  dialects  :
"  who  is  he  that  we  should  sup  with  him  ?  "  Three,  struck
by  the  singularity  of  the  thing,  undertake  ;  and  with  these
we  must  be  content.  Friedrich  —  or  call  him  M.  le  Comte
Dufour,  with  Pfuhl,  Schaffgotsch  and  such  escort  as  we  see  —
politely  apologizes  on  the  entrance  of  these  officers  :  "  Many
pardons,  gentlemen,  and  many  thanks.  Knowing  nobody ;
desirous  of  acquaintance :  —  since  you  are  so  good,  how
happy,  by  a  little  informality,  to  have  brought  brave  Officers
to  keep  me  company,  whom  I  value  beyond  other  kinds  of
men ! "

The  Officers  found  their  host  a  most  engaging  gentleman :
his  supper  was  superb,  plenty  of  wine,  "  and  one  red  kind  they
had  never  tasted  before,  and  liked  extremely ; "  —  of  which
he  sent  some  bottles  to  their  lodging  next  day.  The  conversa-
tion turned  on  military  matters,  and  was  enlivened  with  the
due  sallies.  This  foreign  Count  speaks  French  wonderfully ;  a
brilliant  man,  whom  the  others  rather  fear :  perhaps  something
more  than  a  Count  ?  The  Officers,  loath  to  go,  remembered
that  their  two  battalions  had  to  parade  next  morning,  that
it  was  time  to  be  in  bed :  "  I  will  go  to  your  review,"  said
the  Stranger  Count :  the  delighted  Officers  undertake  to  come

204 FRIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

and  fetch  him,  they  settle  with  him  time  and  method ;  how-
happy  !

On  the  morrow,  accordingly,  they  call  and  fetch  him ;  he
looks  at  the  review ;  review  done,  they  ask  him  to  supper  for
this  evening  :  "  With  pleasure !  "  and  "  walks  with  them  about
the  Esplanade,  to  see  the  guard  march  by."  Before  parting,
he  takes  their  names,  writes  them  in  his  tablets  ;  says,  with  a
smile,  "  He  is  too  much  obliged  ever  to  forget  them."  This  is
Wednesday,  the  24th  of  August,  1740  ;  Field-Marshal  Broglio
is  Commandant  in  Strasburg,  and  these  obliging  Officers  are
"  of  the  regiment  Piedmont,"  —  their  names  on  the  King's
tablets  I  never  heard  mentioned  by  anybody  (or  never  till  the
King's  Doggerel  was  fished  up  again).  Field-Marshal  Broglio
my  readers  have  transiently  seen,  afar  off ;  —  "  galloping  with
only  one  boot,"  some  say  "  almost  in  his  shirt,"  at  the  Ford  of
Secchia,  in  those  Italian  campaigns,  five  years  ago,  the  Aus-
trians  having  stolen  across  upon  him :  —  he  had  a  furious
gallop,  with  no  end  of  ridicule,  on  that  occasion ;  is  now  Com-
mandant here  ;  and  we  shall  have  a  great  deal  more  to  do  with
him  within  the  next  year  or  two.

"  This  same  day,  24th,  while  I  [the  Newspaper  volunteer
Reporter  or  Own  Correspondent,  seemingly  a  person  of  some
standing,  whose  words  carry  credibility  in  the  tone  of  them]
was  with  Field-Marshal  Broglio  our  Governor  here,  there  came
two  gentlemen  to  be  presented  to  him ;  '  German  Cavaliers '
they  were  called ;  who,  I  now  find,  must  have  been  the  Prince
of  Prussia  and  Algarotti.  The  Field-Marshal,"  —  a  rather
high-stalking  white-headed  old  military  gentleman,  bordering
on  seventy,  of  Piedmontese  air  and  breed,  apt  to  be  sudden
and  make  flounderings,  but  the  soul  of  honor,  "  was  very  polite
to  the  two  Cavaliers,  and  kept  them  to  dinner.  After  dinner
there  came  a  so-styled  '  Silesian  Nobleman,'  who  likewise  was
presented  to  the  Field-Marshal,  and  affected  not  to  know  the
other  two :  him  I  now  find  to  have  been  the  Prince  of  Anhalt."

Of  his  Majesty's  supper  with  the  Officers  that  Wednesday,
we  are  left  to  think  how  brilliant  it  was :  his  Majesty,  we
hear  farther,  went  to  the  Opera  that  night,  —  the  Polichinello
or  whatever  the  "  Italian  Comodie  "  was  ;  —  "  and  a  little  girl

CHAP.  in. EXCUKSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 205

1740.

came  to  Ms  box  with  two  lottery-tickets  fifteen  pence  each,
begging  the  foreign  Gentleman  for  the  love  of  Heaven  to  buy
them  of  her ;  which  he  did,  tearing  them  up  at  once,  and  giv-
ing the  poor  creature  four  ducats,"  equivalent  to  two  guineas,
or  say  in  effect  even  five  pounds  of  the  present  British  currency.
The  fame  of  this  foreign  Count  and  his  party  at  The  Raven
is  becoming  very  loud  over  Strasburg,  especially  in  military
circles.  Our  volunteer  Own  Correspondent  proceeds  (whom
we  mean  to  contrast  with  the  Royal  Doggerel  by  and  by)  :  —

"  Next  morning,"  Thursday,  25th  August,  "  as  the  Marshal
with  above  two  hundred  Officers  was  out  walking  on  the
Esplanade,  there  came  a  soldier  of  the  Regiment  Luxemburg,
who,  after  some  stiff  fugling  motions,  of  the  nature  of  saluta-
tion partly,  and  partly  demand  for  privacy,  intimated  to  the
Marshal  surprising  news :  That  the  Stranger  in  The  Raven
was  the  King  of  Prussia  in  person ;  he,  the  soldier,  at  present
of  the  Regiment  Luxemburg,  had  in  other  days,  before  he
deserted,  been  of  the  Prussian  Crown-Prince's  regiment;  had
consequently  seen  him  in  Berlin,  Potsdam  and  elsewhere  a
thousand  times  and  more,  and  even  stood  sentry  where  he
was :  the  fact  is  beyond  dispute,  your  Excellency  !  said  this
soldier."  — Whew  !

Whereupon  a  certain  Colonel,  Marquis  de  Loigle,  with  or
without  a  hint  from  Broglio,  makes  off  for  The  Raven  ;  intro-
duces himself,  as  was  easy ;  contrives  to  get  invited  to  stay
dinner,  which  also  was  easy.  During  dinner  the  foreign  Gen-
tleman expressed  some  wish  to  see  their  fortress.  Colonel
Loigle  sends  word  to  Broglio ;  Broglio  despatches  straightway
an  Officer  and  fine  carriage  :  "  Will  the  foreign  Gentleman  do
me  the  honor  ?  "  The  foreign  Gentleman,  still  struggling  for
incognito,  declines  the  uppermost  seat  of  honor  in  the  carriage ;
the  two  Officers,  Loigle  and  this  new  one,  insist  on  taking  the
inferior  place.  Alas,  the  incognito  is  pretty  much  out.  Call-
ing at  some  coffee-house  or  the  like  on  the  road,  a  certain
female,  "  Madame  de  Fieniie,"  named  the  foreign  Gentleman
"  Sire,"  —  which  so  startled  him  that,  though  he  utterly  de-
clined such  title,  the  two  Officers  saw  well  how  it  was.

"After  survey  of  the  works,  the  two  attendant  Officers  had

206 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

returned  to  the  Field-Marshal ;  and  about  4  P.M.  the  high
Stranger  made  appearance  there.  But  the  thing  had  now
got  wind,  '  King  of  Prussia  here  incognito ! '  The  place  was
full  of  Officers,  who  carne  crowding  about  him:  he  escaped
deftly  into  the  Marechal' s  own  Cabinet;  sat  there,  an  hour,
talking  to  the  Marechal  [little  admiring  the  Marechal's  talk,
as  we  shall  find],  still  insisting  on  the  incognito,"  —  to  which
Broglio,  put  out  in  his  high  paces  by  this  sudden  thing,  and
apt  to  flounder,  as  I  have  heard,  was  not  polite  enough  to
conform  altogether.  "  What  shall  I  do,  in  this  sudden  case  ?  "
poor  Broglio  is  thinking  to  himself:  "must  write  to  Court;
perhaps  try  to  detain  —  ?  "  Friedrich's  chief  thought  natu-
rally is,  One  cannot  be  away  out  of  this  too  soon.  "  Sha'n't
we  go  to  the  Play,  then,  Monsieur  le  Marechal  ?  Play-hour  is
come ! "  —  Own  Correspondent  of  the  Newspaper  proceeds :  —

"  The  Marechal  then  went  to  the  Play,  and  all  his  Officers
with  him ;  thinking  their  royal  prize  was  close  at  their  heels.
Marechal  and  Officers  fairly  ahead,  coast  once  clear,  their
royal  prize  hastened  back  to  The  Eaven,  paid  his  bill;  has-
tily summoning  Schaffgotsch  and  the  others  within  hearing ;
shot  off  like  lightning ;  and  was  seen  in  Strasburg  no  more.
Algarotti,  who  was  in  the  box  with  Broglio,  heard  the  news
in  the  house ;  regretful  rumor  among  the  Officers,  '  He  is
gone  ! '  In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  Algarotti  too  slipped
out ;  and  vanished  by  extra  post "  —  straight  towards  Wesel ;
but  could  not  overtake  the  King  (whose  road,  in  the  latter
part  of  it,  went  zigzag,  on  business  as  is  likely),  nor  see  him
again  till  they  met  in  that  Town.1

This  is  the  Prose  Truth  of  those  fifty  or  eight-and-forty
hours  in  Strasburg,  which  were  so  mythic  and  romantic  at
that  time.  Shall  we  now  apply  to  the  Royal  Doggerel  again,
where  we  left  off,  and  see  the  other  side  of  the  picture  ?
Once  settled  in  The  Eaven,  within  Strasburg's  walls,  the
Doggerel  continues  :  —

"  You  fancy  well  that  there  was  now  something  to  exercise
my  curiosity ;  and  what  desire  I  had  to  know  the  French
Nation  in  France  itself.

1  From  Hdden-Geschichle  (i.  420-424),  &c.

CHAP.  m. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 207

1740.

La  je  vis  enfin  ces  Frangais
Dont  vous  avez  chante  la  gloire  ;
Peuple  meprise  des  Anglais,
Que  leur  triste  raison  remplit  de

bile  noire  ;

Ces  Franqais,  que  nos  Allemands
Pensent  tous  price's  de  bon  sens  ;
Ces  Frangais,  dont  I  'amour  pour-
rait  dieter  Vhistoire,
Je  dis  I'amourvolage,  etnon  T  amour

constant ;
Ce  peuple  fou,  brusque  et  galant,

Chansonnier  insupportable,
Superbe  en  sa  fortune,  en  son  mal-

heur  rampant,

D'un  bavardage  impitoyable,
Pour  cacher  le  creux  d'un  esprit

ignorant,

Tendre  amant  de  la  bagatelle,
Elle  entre  seule  en  sa  cervelle  ;

Le'ger,  indiscret,  imprudent,

Comme  une  girouette  il  revire  a  tout

vent.
Des  siecles  des  Cesar s  ceuxdes  Louis

sont  T  ombre  ;
Rome  efface  Paris  en  tout  sens,  en

tout  point.
Non,  des  vils  Franqais  vous  n'etes

pas  du  nombre  ;
Vous  pensez,  Us  ne  pensent  point.

There  I  saw  at  length  those  French,

Of  whom  you  have  sung  the  glories ;

A  people  despised  by  the  English,

Whom  their  sad  rationality  fills
with  black  bile ;

Those  French,  whom  our  Germans

Reckon  all  to  be  destitute  of  sense  ;

Those  French,  whose  History  con-
sists of  Love-stories,

I  mean  the  wandering  kind  of  Love,
not  the  constant ;

Foolish  this  People,  headlong,
high-going,

Which  sings  beyond  endurance ;

Lofty  in  its  good  fortune,  crawling
in  its  bad ;

Of  an  unpitying  extent  of  babble,

To  hide  the  vacancy  of  its  igno-
rant mind.

Of  the  Trifling  it  is  a  tender  lover ;

The  Trifling  alone  takes  possession
of  its  braiu.

People  flighty,  indiscreet,  impru-
dent,

Turning  like  the  weathercock  to
every  wind.

Of  the  ages  of  the  Csesars  those  of
the  Louises  are  the  shadow  ;

Paris  is  the  ghost  of  Rome,  take  it
how  you  will.

No,  of  those  vile  French  you  are
not  one :

You  think;  they  do  not  think  at  all.

"Pardon,  dear  Voltaire,  this  definition  of  the  French;  at
worst,  it  is  only  of  those  in  Strasburg  I  speak.  To  scrape
acquaintance,  I  had  to  invite  some  Officers  on  our  arrival,
whom  of  course  I  did  not  know.

Three  of  them  came  at  once,
Gayer,  more  content  than  Kings  ;
Singing  with  rusty  voice,

Trois  d'eux  s'en  vinrent  a  la  fois,
Plusgais,  plus  contents  que  des  rois,
Chantant  d'une  voix  enroue'e,

208 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

In  verse,  their  amorous  exploits, En  vers,  leurs  amoureux  exploits,
Set  to  a  hornpipe.  Ajustes  sur  une  bourree.

"M.  de  la  Crochardiere  and  M.  Malosa  [two  names  from
the  tablets,  third  wanting]  had  just  come  from  a  dinner  where
the  wine  had  not  been  spared.

Of  their  hot  friendship  I  saw  the  De  leur  chaude  amitie'je  vis  croitre

flame  grow,  le  flamme,

The  Universe  would  have  taken  Uunivers  nous  eut  pris  pour  des

us  for  perfect  friends  :  amis  parfaits  ;

But  the  instant  of  good-night  blew  Mais  Vinstant  des  adieux  en  de-
out  the  business ;  truisit  la  trame,

Friendship  disappeared  without  re-  L'amitie  disparut,  sans  causer  des

grets,  regrets,

With  the  games,  the  wine,  the  ta-  Avec  lejeu,  le  vin,  et  la  table,  et  les

ble  and  the  viands.  mets.

"  Next  day,  Monsieur  the  Gouverneur  of  the  Town  and  Prov-
ince, Marechal  of  France,  Chevalier  of  the  Orders  of  the
King,  &c.  &c.,  —  Marechal  Due  de  Broglio,  in  fact,"  who  was
surprised  at  Secchia  in  the  late  War,  —

This  General  always  surprised.  Ce  general  toujours  surpris,

Whom  with  regret  young  Louis  Qu'a  regret  lejeune  Louis

[your  King]

Saw  without  breeches  in  Italy  x  Vit  sans  culottes  en  Italic,

Galloping  to  hide  away  his  life  Courir  pour  de'rober  sa  vie

From the Germans, unpolite  Aux  Germains,  guerriers  impolis.

fighters  ;  —

this  General  wished  to  investigate  your  Comte  Dufour,  —
foreign  Count,  who  the  instant  he  arrives  sets  about  inviting
people  to  supper  that  are  perfect  strangers.  He  took  the
poor  Count  for  a  sharper;  and  prudently  advised  M.  de  la
Crocliardiere  not  to  be  duped  by  him.  It  was  unluckily  the
good  Marechal  that  proved  to  be  duped.

He  was  born  for  surprise.  II  e'tait  ne  pour  la  surprise.

His  white  hair,  his  gray  beard,  Ses  cheveux  blancs,  sa  barbe  grise,

1  "  With  only  one  boot,"  was  the  milder  rumor ;  which  we  adopted  (supra,
vol.  vi.  p.  472),  but  this  sadder  one,  too,  was  current ;  and  "  Broglio's  breeches,"
or  the  vain  aspiration  after  them,  like  a  vanished  ghost  of  breeches,  often
enough  turn  up  in  the  old  Pamphlets.

CHAP.  III.  EXCUESION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTEIES. 209

1740.

Formed  a  reverend  exterior.  Formaient  un  sage  exterieur.

Outsides  are  often  deceptive  :  Le  dehors  est  souvent  trompeur  ;

He  that,  by  the  binding,  judges  Quijuge  par  la  reliure

Of  a  Book  and  its  Author  D'un  ouvrage  et  de  son  auteur

May,  after  a  page  of  reading,  Dans  une  page  de  lecture

Chance  to  recognize  his  mistake.  Peut  reconnaitre  son  erreur.

"  That  was  my  own  experience ;  for  of  wisdom  I  could
find  nothing  except  in  his  gray  hair  and  decrepit  appearance.
His  first  opening  betrayed  him;  no  great  well  of  wit  this
Marechal,

Who,  drunk  with  his  own  grandeur,  Qui,  de  sa  grandeur  enivre,

Informs  you  of  his  name  and  his  Decline  son  nom  et  ses  titres,

titles,

And  authority  as  good  as  unlim-  Et  son  pouvoir  a  rien  borne.

ited.

He  cited  to  me  all  the  records  H  me  cita  tons  les  registres

Where  his  name  is  registered,  Ou,  son  nom  est  enregistre' ;

Babbled  about  his  immense  power,  Bavard  de  son  pouvoir  immense,

About  his  valor,  his  talents  De  sa  valeur,  de  ces  talents

So  salutary  to  France  ;  —  Si  salutaires  a  la  France  :

He  forgot  that,  three  years  ago l  II  oubliait,  passe  trois  cms,

Men  did  not  praise  his  prudence.  Qu'on  ne  louait  pas  sa  prudence.

"Not  satisfied  with  seeing  the  Marechal,  I  saw  guard
mounted

By  these  Frenchmen,  burning  with  A  ces  Frangais  bnllants  de  gloire,

giory,

Who,  on  four  sous  a  day,  Dotes  de  quatre  sous  par  jour,

Will  make  of  Kings  and  of  Heroes  Qui  des  rois,  des  he'ros  font  fleurir

the  memory  flourish  :  la  m&noire,

Slaves  crowned  by  the  hands  of  Esclaves  couronne's  des  mains  de  la

Victory,  victoire,

Unlucky  herds  whom  the  Court  Troupeaiix  malheureux  que  la  cour

Tinkles  hither  and  thither  by  the  Dirige  au  seul  bruit  du  tambour.

sound  of  fife  and  drum.

"That  was  my  fated  term.  A  deserter  from  our  troops
got  eye  on  me,  recognized  me  and  denounced  me.

1  Six  to  a  nearness,  —  "15th  September,  1734,"  if  your  Majesty  will  be
exact.

VOL.  vu.  14

210 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  KEINS  IN  HAND. BooK

J

This wretched  gallows-bird got  Ce  malheureux  pendard  me  vit,

eye  on  me ;

Such  is  the  lot  of  all  earthly  things ;  C'est  le  sort  de  toutes  les  choses  ;

And  so  of  our  fine  mystery  Ainsi  de  notre  pot  aux  roses

The  whole  secret  came  to  light."  Tout  le  secret  se  decouvrit.

Well;  we  must  take  this  glimpse,  such  as  it  is,  into  the
interior  of  the  young  man,  —  fine  buoyant,  pungent  German
spirit,  roadways  for  it  very  bad,  and  universal  rain-torrents
falling,  yet  with  coruscations  from  a  higher  quarter ;  —  and
you  can  forget,  if  need  be,  the  "  Literature "  of  this  young
Majesty,  as  you  would  a  staccato  on  the  flute  by  him !  In
after  months,  on  new  occasion  rising,  "  there  was  no  end  to
his  gibings  and  bitter  pleasantries  on  the  ridiculous  reception
Broglio  had  given  him  at  Strasburg,"  says  Valori,1  —  of  which
this  Doggerel  itself  offers  specimen.

"  Probably  the  weakest  Piece  I  ever  translated  ?  "  exclaims
one,  who  has  translated  several  such.  Nevertheless  there  is
a  straggle  of  pungent  sense  in  it,  —  like  the  outskirts  of  light-
ning, seen  in  that  dismally  wet  weather,  which  the  Eoyal
Party  had.  Its  wit  is  very  copious,  but  slashy,  bantery,  and
proceeds  mainly  by  exaggeration  and  turning  topsy-turvy ;  &
rather  barren  species  of  wit.  Of  humor,  in  the  fine  poetic
sense,  no  vestige.  But  there  is  surprising  veracity,  —  truth-
fulness unimpeachable,  if  you  will  read  well.  What  promp-
titude, too  ;  —  what  funds  for  conversation,  when  needed  !
This  scraggy  Piece,  which  is  better  than  the  things  people
often  talk  to  one  another,  was  evidently  written  as  fast  as
the  pen  could  go.  —  "  It  is  done,  if  such  a  Hand  could  have
done  it,  in  the  manner  of  Bachaumont  and  La  Chapelle,"
says  Voltaire  scornfully,  in  that  scandalous  Vie  Prive'e;  —
of  which  phrase  this  is  the  commentary,  if  readers  need

one:  —

"  Some  seventy  or  eighty  years  before  that  date,  a  M.  Bachau-
mont and  a  M.  la  Chapelle,  his  intimate,  published,  in  Prose
skipping  off  into  dancings  of  Verse  every  now  and  then,  '  a
charming  Relation  of  a  certain  Voyage  or  Home  Tour'  (whence

1  Memoires,  i.  88.

CHAP.  ill.  EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE COUNTRIES. 211

1740.

or  whither,  or  correctly  when,  this  Editor  forgets),1  which  they
had  made  in  partnership.  '  Relation '  capable  still  of  being
read,  if  one  were  tolerably  idle ;  —  it  was  found  then  to  be
charming,  by  all  the  world ;  and  gave  rise  to  a  new  fashion  in
writing ;  which  Voltaire  often  adopts,  and  is  supremely  good
at ;  and  in  which  Friedrich,  who  is  also  fond  of  it,  by  no
means  succeeds  so  well."

Enough,  Friedrich  got  to  Wesel,  back  to  his  business,  in
a  day  or  two ;  and  had  done,  as  we  forever  have,  with  the
Strasburg  Escapade  and  its  Doggerel.

Friedrich  finds  M.  de  Maupertuis  ;  not  yet  M.  de  Voltaire.

Friedrich  got  to  Wesel  on  the  29th;  found  Maupertuis
waiting  there,  according  to  appointment :  an  elaborately  po-
lite, somewhat  sublime  scientific  gentbman ;  ready  to  "  en-
graft on  the  Berlin  crab-tree,"  and  produce  real  apples  and
Academics  there,  so  soon  as  the  King,  the  proprietor,  may
have  leisure  for  such  a  thing.  Algarotti  has  already  the  honor
of  some  acquaintance  with  Maupertuis.  Maupertuis  has  been
at  Brussels,  on  the  road  hither ;  saw  Voltaire  and  even  Ma-
dame, —  which  latter  was  rather  a  ticklish  operation,  owing  to
grudges  and  tiffs  of  quarrel  that  had  risen,  but  it  proved  suc-
cessful under  the  delicate  guidance  of  Voltaire.  Voltaire  is
up  to  oiling  the  wheels :  "  There  you  are,  Monsieur,  like  the
[don't  name  What,  though  profane  Voltaire  does,  writing
to  Maupertuis  a  month  ago]  —  Three  Kings  running  after
you !  "  A  new  Pension  to  you  from  France  ;  Eussia  outbid-
ding France  to  have  you  ;  and  then  that  Letter  of  Friedrich's,
which  is  in  all  the  Newspapers :  "  Three  Kings,"  —  you
plainly  great  man,  Trismegistus  of  the  Sciences  called  Pure  !
Madame  honors  you,  has  always  done  :  one  word  of  apology

1  "  First  printed  in  1665,"  say  the  Bibliographies  ;  "  hut  known  to  La  Fon-
taine some  time  before."  Good  !  —  Bachaumont,  practically  an  important  and
distinguished  person,  not  literary  by  trade,  or  indeed  otherwise  than  by  ennui,
was  he  that  had  given  (some  fifteen  years  before)  the  Nickname  Fronde  (Bick-
ering of  Schoolboys)  to  the  wretched  Historical  Object  which  is  still  so  desig-
nated in  French  annals.

212 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

to the high, female mind, it will  work wonders ;  —  come
now ! 1

No  reader  guesses  in  our  time  what  a  shining  celestial  body
the  Maupertuis,  who  is  now  fallen  so  dim  again,  then  was  to
mankind. In  cultivated  French  society  there  is  no  such  lion
as  M.  Maupertuis  since  he  returned  from  flattening  the  Earth
in  the  Arctic  regions. "  The Exact  Sciences,  what  else  is
there  to  depend  on  ?  "  thinks  French  cultivated  society :  "  and
has not  Monsieur done a feat in that  line  ? " Monsieur,
with  fine  ex-military  manners,  has  a  certain  austere  gravity,
reticent  loftiness  and  polite  dogmatism,  which  confirms  that
opinion. A  studious  ex-military  man,  —  was Captain  of  Dra-
goons once,  but  too  fond  of  study,  —  who  is  conscious  to  him-
self, or  who  would  fain  be  conscious,  that  he  is,  in  all  points,
mathematical,  moral  and  other,  the  man. A  difficult  man  to
live  with  in  society. Comes  really  near  the  limit  of  what  we
call  genius,  of  originality,  poetic  greatness  in  thinking ;  —  but
never  once  can  get  fairly  over  said  limit,  though  always  strug-
gling dreadfully  to  do  so. Think  of  it ! A  fatal  kind  of  man  ;
especially  if  you  have  made  a  lion  of  him  at  any  time. Of
his  envies,  deep-hidden  splenetic  discontents  and  rages,  with
Voltaire's  return  for  them,  there  will  be  enough  to  say  in  the
ulterior stages. He wears  —  at least ten  years hence he
openly  wears,  though  I  hope  it is  not  yet  so flagrant  —  "a
red  wig  with  yellow  bottom (criniere  jaune)  ;  "  and  as  Flat-
tener  of  the  Earth,  is,  with  his  own  flattish  red  countenance
and  impregnable  stony  eyes,  a  man  formidable  to  look  upon,
though  intent  to  be  amiable  if  you  do  the  proper  homage. As
to  the  quarrel  with  Madame  take  this  Note  ;  which  may  prove
illustrative  of  some  things  by  and  by :  —

Maupertuis  is  well  known  at  Cirey ;  such  a  lion  could  not
fail  there.  All  manner  of  Bernouillis,  Clairauts,  high  mathe-
matical people,  are  frequent  guests  at  Cirey :  reverenced  by
Madame,  —  who  indeed  has  had  her  own  private  Professor  of
Mathematics ;  one  Konig  from  Switzerland  (recommended  by
those  Bernouillis),  diligently  teaching  her  the  Pure  Sciences

1  Voltaire,  (Euvres,  Ixxii.  217,  216,  230  (Hague,  21st  July,  1740,  and  Brus-
sels, 9tli  Aug.  &c).

CHAP.  in.  EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 213

1740.

this  good  while  back,  not  without  effect ;  and  has  only  just
parted  with  him,  when  she  left  on  this  Brussels  expedition.
A  bon  garcon,  Voltaire  says ;  though  otherwise,  I  think,  a  little
noisy  on  occasion. There  has  been  no  end  of  Madame's  kind-
ness to  him,  nay  to  his  Brother  and  him,  —  sons  of  a  Theologi-
cal Professorial  Syriac-Hebrew  kind  of  man  at  Berne,  who  has
too  many  sons ;  —  and  I  grieve  to  report  that  this  heedless
Konig  has  produced  an  explosion  in  Madame's  feelings,  such
as  little  beseemed  him. On  the  road  to  Paris,  namely,  as  we
drove  hitherward  to  the  Honsbruck  Lawsuit  by  way  of  Paris,
in  Autumn  last,  there  had  fallen  out  some  dispute,  about  the
monads,  the  vis  viva,  the  infinitely  little,  between  Madame
and  Konig;  dispute  which  rose crescendo  in disharmonious
duet,  and  "  ended,"  testifies  M.  de  Voltaire,  "  in  a  scene  tres-
desagreable." Madame,  with  an  effort,  forgave  the  thought-
less fellow,  who  is  still  rather  young,  and  is  without  malice.
But  thoughtless  Konig,  strong  in  his  opinion  about  the  infi-
nitely little,  appealed  to  Maupertuis  :  "Am  not  I  right,  Mon-
sieur ?  " "He  is  right  beyond  question!"  wrote  Maupertuis
to  Madame ; "  somewhat dryly,"  thinks Voltaire : and  the
result  is,  there  is  considerable  rage  in  one  celestial  mind  ever
since  against  another  male  one  in  red  wig  and  yellow  bottom ;
and  they  are  not  on  speaking  terms,  for  a  good  many  months
past. Voltaire  has  his  heart  sore  ("fen  ai  le  cceur  perce")
about  it,  needs  to  double-dose  Maupertuis  with  flattery ;  and
in  fact  has  used  the  utmost  diplomacy  to  effect  some  varnish
of  a  reconcilement  as  Maupertuis  passed  on  this  occasion. As
for  Konig,  who  had  studied  in  some  Dutch  university,  he  went
by  and  by  to  be  Librarian  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  ;  and  we
shall  not  fail  to  hear  of  him  again,  —  once  more  upon  the
infinitely  little.1

Voltaire  too,  in  his  way,  is  fond  of  these  mathematical  peo-
ple ;  eager  enough  to  fish  for  knowledge,  here  as  in  all  ele-
ments, when  he  has  the  chance  offered :  this  is  much  an
interest  of  his  at  present.  And  he  does  attain  sound  ideas,
outlines  of  ideas,  in  this  province,  —  though  privately  def ec-

1  From  (Euvres  de  Voltaire,  ii.  126,  Ixxii.  (20,  216,  230),  Ixiii.  (229-239),
&c.  &c.

214 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

tive  in  the  due  transcendency  of  admiration  for  it ;  —  was
wont  to  discuss  cheerily  with  Konig,  about  vis  viva,  monads,
gravitation  and  the  infinitely  little ;  above  all,  bows  to  the
ground  before  the  red-wigged  Bashaw,  Mattener  of  the  Earth,
whom  for  Madame's  sake  and  his  own  he  is  anxious  to  be  well
with.  "  Fall  on  your  face  nine  times,  ye  esoteric  of  only  Im-
pure Science !  "  —  intimates  Maupertuis  to  mankind.  "By  all
means  !  "  answers  M.  de  Voltaire,  doing  it  with  alacrity ;  with
a  kind  of  loyalty,  one  can  perceive,  and  also  with  a  hypoc-
risy grounded  on  love  of  peace.  If  that  is  the  nature  of  the
Bashaw,  and  one's  sole  mode  of  fishing  knowledge  from  him,
why  not  ?  thinks  M.  de  Voltaire.  His  patience  with  M.  de
Maupertuis,  first  and  last,  was  very  great.  But  we  shall  find
it  explode  at  length,  a  dozen  years  hence,  in  a  conspicuous
manner  !  —

"  Maupertuis  had  come  to  us  to  Cirey,  with  Jean  Bernouilli,"
says  Voltaire  ;  "  and  thenceforth  Maupertuis,  who  was  born
the  most  jealous  of  men,  took  me  for  the  object  of  this  pas-
sion, which  has  always  been  very  dear  to  him."  l  Husht,
Monsieur  !  —  Here  is  a  poor  rheumatic  kind  of  Letter,  which
illustrates  the  interim  condition,  after  that  varnish  of  recon-
cilement at  Brussels  :  —

Voltaire  to  M.  de  Maupertuis  (at  Wesel,  waiting  for  the  King,

or  with  him  rather).

"  BRUSSELS,  29th  August  (1740),  3d  year  since
the  world  flattened.

"How  the  Devil,  great  Philosopher,  would  you  have  had
me  write  to  you  at  Wesel  ?  I  fancied  you  gone  from  Wesel,
to  seek  the  King  of  Sages  on  his  Journey  somewhere.  I  had
understood,  too,  they  were  so  delighted  to  have  you  in  that
fortified  lodge  (bouge  fortifii)  that  you  must  be  taking  pleasure
there,  for  he  that  gives  pleasure  gets  it.

"  You  have  already  seen  the  jolly  Ambassador  of  the  amia-
blest  Monarch  in  the  world,"  —  Camas,  a  fattish  man,  on  his
road  to  Versailles  (who  called  at  Brussels  here,  with  fine

1  Vie  Prive'e.

CHAP.  III. EXCURSION  TO  THE  CLEVE  COUNTRIES. 215

compliments,  and  a  keg  of  Hungary  Wine,  as  you  may  have
heard  whispered).  "No  doubt  M.  de  Cainas  is  with  you.  For
my  own  share,  I  think  it  is  after  you  that  he  is  running  at
present.  But  in  truth,  at  the  hour  while  I  say  this,  you  are
with  the  King  ; "  —  a  lucky  guess  ;  King  did  return  to  Wesel
this  very  day.  "The  Philosopher  and  the  Prince  perceive
already  that  they  are  made  for  each  other.  You  and  M.  Alga-
rotti  will  say,  Faciamus  7iic  tria  tabernacula:  as  to  me,  I  can
only  make  duo  tabernacula,'"  —  profane  Voltaire  !

"  Without  doubt  I  would  be  with  you  if  I  were  not  at  Brus-
sels ;  but  my  heart  is  with  you  all  the  same ;  and  is  the  sub-
ject, all  the  same,  of  a  King  who  is  formed  to  reign  over  every
thinking  and  feeling  being.  I  do  not  despair  that  Madame  du
Chatelet  will  find  herself  somewhere  on  your  route  :  it  will
be  a  scene  in  a  fairy  tale ;  —  she  will  arrive  with  a  sufficient
reason  [as  your  Leibnitz  says]  and  with  monads.  She  does
not  love  you  the  less  though  she  now  believes  the  universe  a
plenum,  and  has  renounced  the  notion  of  void.  Over  her  you
have  an  ascendant  which  you  will  never  lose.  In  fine,  my
dear  Monsieur,  I  wish  as  ardently  as  she  to  embrace  you  the
soonest  possible.  I  recommend  myself  to  your  friendship  in
the  Court,  worthy  of  you,  where  you  now  are."  —  Tout  a  vous,
somewhat  rheumatic !  *

Always  an  anxious  almost  tremulous  desire  to  conciliate
this  big  glaring  geometrical  bully  in  red  wig.  Through  the
sensitive  transparent  being  of  M.  de  Voltaire,  you  may  see
that  feeling  almost  painfully  busy  in  every  Letter  he  writes
to  the  Flattener  of  the  Earth.

1  Voltaire,  Ixxii.  p.  243.

216 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

CHAPTER  IV.
VOLTAIKE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW  WITH  FRIEDRICH.

AT  Wesel,  in  the  rear  of  all  this  travelling  and  excitement,
Friedrich  falls  unwell ;  breaks  down  there  into  an  aguish
feverish  distemper,  which,  for  several  months  after,  impeded
his  movements,  would  he  have  yielded  to  it.  He  has  much
business  on  hand,  too,  —  some  of  it  of  prickly  nature  just
now; — but  is  intent  as  ever  on  seeing  Voltaire,  among  the
first  things.  Diligently  reading  in  the  Voltaire-Friedrich  Cor-
respondence (which  is  a  sad  jumble  of  misdates  and  opacities,
in  the  common  editions),1  this  of  the  aguish  condition  fre-
quently turns  up ;  "  Quartan  ague,"  it  seems ;  occasionally
very  bad ;  but  Friedrich  struggles  with  it ;  will  not  be  cheated
of  any  of  his  purposes  by  it.

He  had  a  busy  fortnight  here ;  busier  than  we  yet  imagine.
Much  employment  there  naturally  is  of  the  usual  Inspection
sort  5  which  fails  in  no  quarter  of  his  Dominions,  but  which
may  be  particularly  important  here,  in  these  disputed  Berg-
Jiilich  Countries,  when  the  time  of  decision  falls.  How  he
does  his  Inspections  we  know  ;  —  and  there  are  still  weightier
matters  afoot  here,  in  a  silent  way,  of  which  we  shall  have
to  speak  before  long,  and  all  the  world  will  speak.  Business
enough,  parts  of  it  grave  and  silent,  going  on,  and  the  much
that  is  public,  miscellaneous,  small :  done,  all  of  it,  in  a  rapid
punctual  precise  manner ;  —  and  always,  after  the  crowded
day,  some  passages  of  Supper  with  the  Sages,  to  wind  up  with
on  melodious  terms.  A  most  alert  and  miscellaneously  busy
young  King,  in  spite  of  the  ague.

1  Preuss  (the  recent  latest  Editor,  and  the  only  well-informed  one,  as  we
said)  prints  with  accuracy;  but  cannot  be  read  at  all  (in  the  sense  of  under-
stood) without  other  light.

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S FIRST INTERVIEW.  217

2d-llth  Sept.  1740.

It  was  in  these  Cleve  Countries,  and  now  as  probably  as
afterwards,  that  the  light  scene  recorded  in  Laveaux's  poor
History,  and  in  all  the  Anecdote-Books,  transacted  itself  one
day.  Substance  of  the  story  is  true  ;  though  the  details  of  it
go  all  at  random,  —  somewhat  to  this  effect :  —

"Inspecting  his  Finance  Affairs,  and  questioning  the  par-
ties interested,  Friedrich  notices  a  certain  Convent  in  Cleve,
which  appears  to  have,  payable  from  the  Forest-dues,  consid-
erable revenues  bequeathed  by  the  old  Dukes,  '  for  masses  to
be  said  on  their  behalf.'  He  goes  to  look  at  the  place ;  ques-
tions the  Monks  on  this  point,  who  are  all  drawn  out  in  two
rows,  and  have  broken  into  Te-Deum  at  sight  of  him :  '  Husht !
You  still  say  those  Masses,  then  ? '  '  Certainly,  your  Maj-
esty i '  —  <  And  what  good  does  anybody  get  of  them  ? '  '  Your
Majesty,  those  old  Sovereigns  are  to  obtain  Heavenly  mercy
by  them,  to  be  delivered  out  of  Purgatory  by  them.'  — '  Purga-
tory ?  It  is  a  sore  thing  for  the  Forests,  all  this  while !  And
they  are  not  yet  out,  those  poor  souls,  after  so  many  hundred
years  of  praying  ? '  Monks  have  a  fatal  apprehension,  No.
'  When  will  they  be  out,  and  the  thing  complete  ? '  Monks
cannot  say.  '  Send  me  a  courier  whenever  it  is  complete ! '
sneers  the  King,  and  leaves  them  to  their  Te-Deum"  1

Mournful  state  of  the  Catholic  Keligion  so  called  !  How
long  must  these  wretched  Monks  go  on  doing  their  lazy
thrice-deleterious  torpid  blasphemy;  and  a  King,  not  histri-
onic but  real,  merely  signify  that  he  laughs  at  them  and  it  ?
Meseems  a  heavier  whip  than  that  of  satire  might  be  in  place
here,  your  Majesty  ?  The  lighter  whip  is  easier  ;  —  Ah  yes,
undoubtedly !  cry  many  men.  But  horrible  accounts  are  run-
ning up,  enough  to  sink  the  world  at  last,  while  the  heavier
whip  is  lazily  withheld,  and  lazy  blasphemy,  fallen  torpid,

1  C.  Hildebrandt's  Modern  Edition  of  the  (mostly  dubious)  Anekdoten  und
CharaJcterziiqe  aus  dem  Leben  Friedrichs  des  Grossen  (and  a  very  ignorant  and
careless  Edition  it  is  ;  6  vols.  I2mo,  Halberstadt,  1829),  ii.  160 ;  Laveaux  (whom
we  already  cited),  Vie  de  Frederic ;  &c.  &c.  Nicolai's  Anekdoten  alone,  which
are  not  included  in  this  Hildebrandt  Collection,  are  of  sure  authenticity ;  the
rest,  occasionally  true,  and  often  with  a  kind  of  mythic  truth  in  them  worth
attending  to,  are  otherwise  of  all  degrees  of  dubiety,  down  to  the  palpably
false  and  absurd.

218 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.

chronic,  and  quite  unconscious  of  being  blasphemous,  insinu-
ates itself  into  the  very  heart's-blood  of  mankind !  Patience,
however;  the  heavy  whip  too  is  coming,  —  unless  universal
death  be  coming.  King  Friedrich  is  not  the  man  to  wield
such  whip.  Quite  other  work  is  in  store  for  King  Friedrich ;
and  Nature  will  not,  by  any  suggestion  of  that  terrible  task,
put  him  out  in  the  one  he  has.  He  is  nothing  of  a  Luther,
of  a  Cromwell ;  can  look  upon  fakirs  praying  by  their  rota-
tory calabash,  as  a  ludicrous  platitude  ;  and  grin  delicately  as
above,  with  the  approval  of  his  wiser  contemporaries.  Speed
to  him  on  his  own  course  !

What  answer  Friedrich  found  to  his  English  proposals,  —
answer  due  here  on  the  24th  from  Captain  Dickens,  —  I  do
not  pointedly  learn  ;  but  can  judge  of  it  by  Harrington's  reply
to  that  Despatch  of  Dickens's,  which  entreated  candor  and
open  dealing  towards  his  Prussian  Majesty.  Harrington  is
at  Herrenhausen,  still  with  the  Britannic  Majesty  there ;  both
of  them  much  at  a  loss  about  their  Spanish  War,  and  the
French  and  other  aspects  upon  it :  "  Suppose  his  Prussian
Majesty  were  to  give  himself  to  France  against  us ! "  We
•will  hope,  not.  Harrington's  reply  is  to  the  effect,  "  Hum,
drum :  —  Berg  and  Jiilich,  say  you  ?  Impossible  to  answer  ;
minds  not  made  up  here  :  —  What  will  his  Prussian  Majesty
do  for  us  ?  "  Not  much,  I  should  guess,  till  something  more
categorical  come  from  you  !  His  Prussian  Majesty  is  careful
not  to  spoil  anything  by  over-haste  ;  but  will  wait  and  try  far-
ther to  the  utmost,  Whether  England  or  France  is  the  likelier
bargain  for  him.

Better  still,  the  Prussian  Majesty  is  intent  to  do  something
for  himself  in  that  Berg-Jiilich  matter :  we  find  him  silently  ex-
amining these  Wesel  localities  for  a  proper  "  entrenched  Camp,"
Camp  say  of  40,000,  against  a  certain  contingency  that  may  be
looked  for.  Camp  which  will  much  occupy  the  Gazetteers  when
they  get  eye  on  it.  This  is  one  of  the  concerns  he  silently
attends  to,  on  occasion,  while  riding  about  in  the  Cleve  Coun-
tries. Then  there  is  another  small  item  of  business,  important
to  do  well,  which  is  now  in  silence  diligently  getting  under
way  at  Wesel ;  which  also  is  of  remarkable  nature,  and  will

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW.  219

2d-llth  Sept.  1740.

astonish  the  Gazetteer  and  Diplomatic  circles.  This  is  the
affair  with  the  Bishop  of  Liege,  called  also  the  Affair  of  Hers-
tal,  which  his  Majesty  has  had  privately  laid  up  in  the  corner
of  his  mind,  as  a  thing  to  be  done  during  this  Excursion.  Of
which  the  reader  shall  hear  anon,  to  great  lengths,  —  were  a
certain  small  preliminary  matter,  Voltaire's  Arrival  in  these
parts,  once  off  our  hands.

Friedrich's  First  Meeting  with  Voltaire  !  These  other  high
things  were  once  loud  in  the  Gazetteer  and  Diplomatic  circles,
and  had  no  doubt  they  were  the  World's  History ;  and  now
they  are  sunk  wholly  to  the  Nightmares,  and  all  mortals  have
forgotten  them,  —  and  it  is  such  a  task  as  seldom  was  to  resus-
citate the  least  memory  of  them,  on  just  cause  of  a  Friedrich
or  the  like,  so  impatient  are  men  of  what  is  putrid  and  ex-
tinct :  —  and  a  quite  unnoticed  thing,  Voltaire's  First  Interview,
all  readers  are  on  the  alert  for  it,  and  ready  to  demand  of  me
impossibilities  about  it !  Patience,  readers.  You  shall  see  it,
without  and  within,  in  such  light  as  there  was,  and  form  some
actual  notion  of  it,  if  you  will  co-operate.  From  the  circum-
ambient inanity  of  Old  Newspapers,  Historical  shot-rubbish,
and  unintelligible  Correspondences,  we  sift  out  the  following
particulars,  of  this  First  Meeting,  or  actual  Osculation  of  the
Stars.

The  Newspapers,  though  their  eyes  were  not  yet  of  the
Argus  quality  now  familiar  to  us,  have  been  intent  on  Fried-
rich  during  this  Baireuth-Cleve  Journey,  especially  since  that
sudden  eclipse  of  him  at  Strasburg  lately ;  forming  now  one
scheme  of  route  for  him,  now  another ;  Newspapers,  and  even
private  friends,  being  a  good  deal  uncertain  about  his  move-
ments. Rumor  now  ran,  since  his  reappearance  in  the  Cleve
Countries,  that  Friedrich  meant  to  have  a  look  at  Holland
before  going  home.  And  that  had,  in  fact,  been  a  notion  or
intention  of  Friedrich's.  "  Holland  ?  We  could  pass  through
Brussels  on  the  way,  and  see  Voltaire  !  "  thought  he.

In  Brussels  this  was,  of  course,  the  rumor  of  rumors.  As
Voltaire's  Letters,  visibly  in  a  twitter,  still  testify  to  us.
King  of  Prussia  coming  !  Madame  du  Chatelet,  the  "  Princess

220 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

Tour  "  (that  is,  Tour-and-Taxis),  all  manner  of  high  Dames  are
on  the  tiptoe.  Princess  Tour  hopes  she  shall  lodge  this  un-
paralleled Prince  in  her  Palace :  "  You,  Madame  ?  "  answers
the  Du  Chatelet,  privately,  with  a  toss  of  her  head :  "  His  Maj-
esty, I  hope,  belongs  more  to  M.  de  Voltaire  and  me :  he  shall
lodge  here,  please  Heaven  ! "  Voltaire,  I  can  observe,  has  sub-
lime hostelry  arrangements  chalked  out  for  his  Majesty,  in
case  he  go  to  Paris ;  which  he  does  n't,  as  we  know.  Voltaire
is  all  on  the  alert,  awake  to  the  great  contingencies  far  and
near ;  the  Chatelet-Voltaire  breakfast-table,  — fancy  it  on  those
interesting  mornings,  while  the  post  comes  round ! 1

Alas,  in  the  first  days  of  September,  —  Friedrich's  Letter  is
dated  "  Wesel,  2d "  (and  has  the  Strasburg  Doggerel  enclosed
in  it),  —  the  Brussels  Postman  delivers  far  other  intelligence
at  one's  door  ;  very  mortifying  to  Madame  :  "  That  his  Majesty
is  fallen  ill  at  Wesel ;  has  an  aguish  fever  hanging  on  him,  and
only  hopes  to  coine  : "  Voila,  Madame  !  —  Next  Letter,  Wesel,
Monday,  5th  September,  is  to  the  effect :  "  Do  still  much  hope
to  come ;  to-morrow  is  my  trembling  day ;  if  that  prove  to  be
off  !  "  —  Out  upon  it,  that  proves  not  to  be  off ;  that  is  on :
next  Letter,  Tuesday,  September  6th,  which  comes  by  express
(Courier  dashing  up  with  it,  say  on  the  Thursday  following)
is,  —  alas,  Madame  !  —  here  it  is  :  —

King  FriedricJi  to  M.  de  Voltaire  at  Brussels.

"WESEL,  6th  September,  1740.

"  MY  DEAR  VOLTAIRE,  —  In  spite  of  myself,  I  have  to  yield
to  the  Quartan  Fever,  which  is  more  tenacious  than  a  Jansenist ;
and  whatever  desire  I  had  of  going  to  Antwerp  and  Brussels,
I  find  myself  not  in  a  condition  to  undertake  such  a  journey
without  risk.  I  would  ask  of  you,  then,  if  the  road  from
Brussels  to  Cleve  would  not  to  you  seem  too  long  for  a  meet-
ing ;  it  is  the  one  means  of  seeing  you  which  remains  to  me.
Confess  that  I  am  unlucky ;  for  now  when  I  could  dispose  of
my  person,  and  nothing  hinders  me  from  seeing  you,  the  fever

1  Voltaire,  xxii.  238-256  (Letters  22d  August-22d  September,  1740).

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW.  221

llth  Sept,  1740.

gets  its  hand  into  the  business,  and  seems  to  intend  disputing
ine  that  satisfaction.

"  Let  us  deceive  the  fever,  my  dear  Voltaire  ;  and  let  ine  at
least  have  the  pleasure  of  embracing  you.  Make  my  best  ex-
cuses [polite,  rather  than  sincere]  to  Madame  the  Marquise,  that
I  cannot  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  her  at  Brussels.  All
that  are  about  me  know  the  intention  I  was  in ;  which  certainly
nothing  but  the  fever  could  have  made  me  change.

"  Sunday  next  I  shall  be  at  a  little  Place  near  Cleve,"  —
Schloss  of  Moyland,  which,  and  the  route  to  which,  this  Courier
can  tell  you  of ;  — "  where  I  shall  be  able  to  possess  you  at
my  ease.  If  the  sight  of  you  don't  cure  me,  I  will  send  for  a
Confessor  at  once.  Adieu ;  you  know  my  sentiments  and  my
heart.1  FEDERIC."

After  which  the  Correspondence  suddenly  extinguishes  it-
self ;  ceases  for  about  a  fortnight,  —  in  the  bad  misdated  Edi-
tions even  does  worse ;  —  and  we  are  left  to  thick  darkness,  to
our  own  poor  shifts  ;  Dryasdust  being  grandly  silent  on  this
small  interest  of  ours.  What  is  to  be  done  ?

Particulars  of  First  Interview,  on  severe  Scrutiny.

Here,  from  a  painful  Predecessor  whose  Papers  I  inherit,
are  some  old  documents  and  Studies  on  the  subject,  —  sorrow-
ful collection,  in  fact,  of  what  poor  sparks  of  certainty  were
to  be  found  hovering  in  that  dark  element ;  —  which  do  at  last
(so  luminous  are  certainties  always,  or  "  sparks "  that  will
shine  steady)  coalesce  into  some  feeble  general  twilight,  feeble
but  indubitable ;  and  even  show  the  sympathetic  reader  how
they  were  searched  out  and  brought  together.  We  number
and  label  these  poor  Patches  of  Evidence  on  so  small  a  matter ;
and  leave  them  to  the  curious :  —

No.  1.  Date  of  the  First  Interview.  It  is  certain  Voltaire  did
arrive  at  the  little  Schloss  of  Moyland,  September  llth,  Sun-
day night, — which  is  the  "Sunday"  just  specified  in  Fried-
rich's  Letter.  Voltaire  had  at  once  decided  on  complying,  —
1  Preuss,  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxii.  27.

222 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

what  else  ?  —  and  lost  no  time  in  packing  himself  :  King's
Courier  on  Thursday  late ;  Voltaire  on  the  road  on  Saturday
early,  or  the  night  before.  With  Madame's  shrill  blessing
(not  the  most  musical  in  this  vexing  case),  and  plenty  of  fuss.
"  Was  wont  to  travel  in  considerable  style,"  I  am  told  ;  "  the
innkeepers  calling  him  "  Your  Lordship  (M.  le  Comte)."  Ar-
rives, sure  enough,  Sunday  night ;  old  Schloss  of  Moyland,  six
miles  from  Cleve ;  "  moonlight,"  I  find,  —  the  Harvest  Moon.
Visit  lasted  three  days.1

No.  2.  Voltaire's  Drive  thither.  Schloss  Moyland  :  How  far
from  Brussels,  and  by  what  route  ?  By  Louvain,  Tillemont,
Tongres  to  Maestricht;  then  from  Maestricht  up  the  Maas
(left  bank)  to  Venlo,  where  cross  ;  through  Geldern  and  Goch
to  Cleve :  between  the  Maas  and  Rhine  this  last  portion.  Flat
damp  country  ;  tolerably  under  tillage ;  original  constituents
bog  and  sand.  Distances  I  guess  to  be :  To  Tongres  60  miles
and  odd ;  to  Maestricht  12  or  15,  from  Maestricht  75 ;  in  all
150  miles  English.  Two  days'  driving  ?  There  is  equinoctial
moon,  and  still  above  twelve  hours  of  sunlight  for  "M.  le
Comte."

No.  3.  Of  the  Place  Where.  Voltaire,  who  should  have
known,  calls  it  "petit  Chateau  de  Meuse  ;  "  which  is  a  Castle
existing  nowhere  but  in  Dreams.  Other  French  Biographers
are  still  more  imaginary.  The  little  Schloss  of  Moyland  —
by  no  means  "  Meuse,"  nor  even  Mors,  which  Voltaire  probably
means  in  saying  Chateau  de  Meuse  —  was,  as  the  least  inquiry
settles  beyond  question,  the  place  where  Voltaire  and  Fried-
rich  first  met.  Frieclrich  Wilhelm  used  often  to  lodge  there
in  his  Cleve  journeys :  he  made  thither  for  shelter,  in  the  sick-
ness that  overtook  him  in  friend  Ginkel's  house,  coming  home
from  the  Rhine  Campaign  in  1734 ;  lay  there  for  several  weeks
after  quitting  Ginkel's.  Any  other  light  I  can  get  upon  it,  is
darkness  visible.  Busching  pointedly  informs  me,2  "It  is  a
Parish  [or  patch  of  country  under  one  priest],  and  Till  and  it
are  a  Jurisdiction  "  (pair  of  patches  under  one  court  of  jus-
tice) :  —  which  does  not  much  illuminate  the  inquiring  mind.

1  Eodenbeck,  p.  21  ;  Preuss,  &c.  &c.

2  Erdbeschreibung,  v.  659,  677.

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW.  223

llth-14th  Sept.  1740.

Small  patch,  this  of  Moyland,  size  not  given  ;  "was  bought,"
says  he,  "  in  1695,  by  Friedrich  afterwards  First  King,  from
the  Family  of  Spaen,"  —  we  once  knew  a  Lieutenant  Spaen,
of  those  Dutch  regions,  —  "  and  was  named  a  Royal  Mansion
ever  thereafter."  Who  lived  in  it;  what  kind  of  thing  was  it,
is  it  ?  Altum  silentium,  from  Biisching  and  mankind.  Be-
longed to  the  Spaens,  fifty  years  ago ;  —  some  shadow  of  our
poor  banished  friend  the  Lieutenant  resting  on  it  ?  Dim
enough  old  Mansion,  with  "  court "  to  it,  with  modicum  of
equipment ;  lying  there  in  the  moonlight ;  —  did  not  look  sub-
lime to  Voltaire  on  stepping  out.  So  that  all  our  knowledge
reduces  itself  to  this  one  point:  of  finding  Moyland  in  the
Map,  with  date,  with  reminiscence  to  us,  hanging  by  it  hence-
forth !  Good.1

Mors  —  which  is  near  the  Town  of  Ruhrort,  about  midway
between  Wesel  and  Diisseldorf  —  must  be  some  forty  miles
from  Moyland,  forty-five  from  Cleve ;  southward  of  both.  So
that  the  place,  "  a  deux  lieues  de  Cleves"  is,  even  by  Voltaire's
showing,  this  Moyland;  were  there  otherwise  any  doubt
upon  it.  "  Chateau  de  Meuse  "  —  hanging  out  a  prospect  of
Mors  to  us  — is  bad  usage  to  readers.  Of  an  intelligent  man,
not  to  say  a  Trismegistus  of  men,  one  expects  he  will  know  in
what  town  he  is,  after  three  days'  experience,  as  here.  But  he
does  not  always ;  he  hangs  out  a  mere  "  shadow  of  Mors  by
moonlight,"  till  we  learn  better.  Duvernet,  his  Biographer,
even  calls  it  "  Sleus-Meuse  ;  "  some  wonderful  idea  of  Sluices
and  a  Eiver  attached  to  it,  in  Duvernet's  head ! 2

What  Voltaire  thought  of  the  Interview)  Twenty  Tears

afterwards.

Of  the  Interview  itself,  with  general  bird's-eye  view  of  the
Visit  combined  (in  a  very  incorrect  state),  there  is  direct  testi-

1  Stieler's  Deutschland  (excellent  Map  in  25  Pieces),  Piece  12.  — Till  is  a
mile  or  two  northeast  from  Moyland ;  Moyland  about  5  or  6  southeast  from
Cleve.

2  Duvernet  (2d/ora  of  him,  — that  is,  Vie  de  Voltaire  par  T.  J.  D.  V.),
p.  117.

224 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

mony  by  Voltaire  himself.  Voltaire  himself,  twenty  years
after,  in  far  other  humor,  all  jarred  into  angry  sarcasm,  for
causes  we  shall  see  by  and  by,  —  Voltaire,  at  the  request  of
friends,  writes  down,  as  his  Friedrich  Reminiscences,  that
scandalous  Vie  Privee  above  spoken  of,  a  most  sad  Document ;
and  this  is  the  passage  referring  to  "the  little  Place  in  the
neighborhood  of  Cleve,"  where  Friedrich  now  waited  for  him  :
errors  corrected  by  our  laborious  Friend.  After  quoting  some-
thing of  that  Strasburg  Doggerel,  the  whole  of  which  is  now
too  well  known  to  us,  Voltaire  proceeds :  —

"  From  Strasburg  he,"  King  Friedrich,  "  went  to  see  his
Lower  German  Provinces ;  he  said  he  would  come  and  see  me
incognito  at  Brussels.  We  prepared  a  fine  house  for  him,"  —
were  ready  to  prepare  such  hired  house  as  we  had  for  him,
with  many  apologies  for  its  slight  degree  of  perfection  (error
first),  —  "  but  having  fallen  ill  in  the  little  Mansion-Royal  of
Meuse  (Chateau  de  Meuse})  a  couple  of  leagues  from  Cleve,"  —
fell  ill  at  Wesel;  and  there  is  no  Chateau  de  Meuse  in  the
world  (errors  2d  and  3d),  —  "  he  wrote  to  me  that  he  expected
I  would  make  the  advances.  I  went,  accordingly,  to  pre-
sent my  profound  homages.  Maupertuis,  who  already  had  his
views,  and  was  possessed  with  the  rage  of  being  President  to
an  Academy,  had  of  his  own  accord,"  —  no,  being  invited,  and
at  my  suggestion  (error  4tft),  —  "  presented  himself  there ;  and
was  lodged  with  Algarotti  and  Keyserling  [which  latter,  I
suppose,  had  come  from  Berlin,  not  being  of  the  Strasburg
party,  he]  in  a  garret  of  this  Palace.

"  At  the  door  of  the  court,  I  found,  by  way  of  guard,  one
soldier.  Privy-Councillor  Rambonet,  Minister  of  State  —
[very  subaltern  man ;  never  heard  of  him  except  in  the  Herstal
Business,  and  here]  was  walking  in  the  court ;  blowing  in
his  fingers  to  keep  them  warm."  Sunday  night,  llth  Septem-
ber, 1740 ;  world  all  bathed  in  moonshine  ;  and  mortals  mostly
shrunk  into  their  huts,  out  of  the  raw  air.  "  He  "  Rambonet
"  wore  big  linen  ruffles  at  his  wrists,  very  dirty  [visibly  so  in
the  moonlight  ?  Error  5th  extends  ad  libitum  over  all  the
following  details]  ;  a  holed  hat ;  an  old  official  periwig,"  —
ruined  into  a  totally  unsyinrnetric  state,  as  would  seem, —

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S FIRST INTERVIEW.  225

llth-14th  Sept.  1740.

"one  side  of  which  hung  down  into  one  of  his  pockets,  and
the  other  scarcely  crossed  his  shoulder.  I  was  told,  this  man
was  now  intrusted  with  an  affair  of  importance  here ;  and  that
proved  true,"  —  the  Herstal  Affair.

"  I  was  led  into  his  Majesty's  apartment.  Nothing  but  four
bare  walls  there.  By  the  light  of  a  candle,  I  perceived,  in  a
closet,  a  little  truckle-bed  two  feet  and  a  half  broad,  on  which
lay  a  little  man  muffled  up  in  a  dressing-gown  of  coarse  blue
duffel :  this  was  the  King,  sweating  and  shivering  under  a
wretched  blanket  there,  in  a  violent  fit  of  fever.  I  made  my
reverence,  and  began  the  acquaintance  by  feeling  his  pulse,  as
if  I  had  been  his  chief  physician.  The  fit  over,  he  dressed
himself,  and  took  his  place  at  table.  Algarotti,  Keyserling,
Maupertuis,  and  the  King's  Envoy  to  the  States-General "  —
one  Kasf eld  (skilled  in  Herstal  matters,  I  could  guess),  —  "  we
were  of  this  supper,  and  discussed,  naturally  in  a  profound
manner,  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  Liberty,  Fate,  the  An-
drogynes of  Plato  [the  Androgynoi,  or  Men- Women,  in  Plato's
Convivium ;  by  no  means  the  finest  symbolic  fancy  of  the
divine  Plato],  — and  other  small  topics  of  that  nature."  *

This  is  Voltaire's  account  of  the  Visit,  —  which  included
three  "  Suppers,"  all  huddled  into  one  by  him  here ;  —  and  he
says  nothing  more  of  it ;  launching  off  now  into  new  errors,
about  Herstal,  the  Anti-Machiavel,  and  so  forth :  new  and
uglier  errors,  with  much  more  of  mendacity  and  serious  malice
in  them,  than  in  this  harmless  half-dozen  now  put  on  the
score  against  him.

Of  this  Supper-Party,  I  know  by  face  four  of  the  guests  :
Maupertuis,  Voltaire,  Algarotti,  Keyserling  ;  —  Rasfeld,  Kam-
bonet  can  sit  as  simulacra  or  mute  accompaniment.  Voltaire
arrived  on  Sunday  evening  ;  stayed  till  Wednesday.  Wednes-
day morning,  14th  of  the  month,  the  Party  broke  up :  Voltaire
rolling  off  to  left  hand,  towards  Brussels,  or  the  Hague ;  King
to  right,  on  inspection  business,  and  circuitously  homewards.
Three  Suppers  there  had  been,  two  busy  Days  intervening ;
discussions  about  Fate  and  the  Androgynoi  of  Plato  by  no
means  the  one  thing  done  by  Voltaire  and  the  rest,  on  this  occa-
1  Voltaire,  (Euvres  (Piece  once  called  Vie  Priv&),  ii.  26,  27.

VOL.  VII.  15

226 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XL

1740.

sion.  "We  shall  find  elsewhere,  "he  declaimed  his  Mahomet"
(sublime  new  Tragedy,  not  yet  come  out),  in  the  course  of
these  three  evenings,  to  the  "speechless  admiration"  of  his
Koyal  Host,  for  one  ;  and,  in  the  daytime,  that  he  even  drew
his  pen  about  the  Herstal  Business,  which  is  now  getting  to
its  crisis,  and  wrote  one  of  the  Manifestoes,  still  discoverable.
And  we  need  not  doubt,  in  spite  of  his  now  sneering  tone,  that
things  ran  high  and  grand  here,  in  this  paltry  little  Schloss  of
Moyland ;  and  that  those  three  were  actually  Suppers  of  the
Gods,  for  the  time  being.

"  Councillor  Rambonet,"  with  the  holed  hat  and  unsymmet-
ric  wig,  continues  Voltaire  in  the  satirical  vein,  "  had  mean-
while mounted  a  hired  hack  (cheval  de  louage  ;  "  mischievous
Voltaire,  I  have  no  doubt  he  went  on  wheels,  probably  of  his
own)  :  "  he  rode  all  night ;  and  next  morning  arrived  at  the
gates  of  Liege ;  where  he  took  Act  in  the  name  of  the  King
his  Master,  whilst  2,000  men  of  the  Wesel  Troops  laid  Liege
under  contribution.  The  pretext  of  this  fine  Marching  of
Troops,"  —  not  a  pretext  at  all,  but  the  assertion,  correct  in
all  points,  of  just  claims  long  trodden  down,  and  now  made
good  with  more  spirit  than  had  been  expected,  —  "  was  certain
rights  which  the  King  pretended  to,  over  a  suburb  of  Liege.
He  even  charged  me  to  work  at  a  Manifesto ;  and  I  made  one,
good  or  bad ;  not  doubting  but  a  King  with  whom  I  supped,
and  who  called  me  his  friend,  must  be  in  the  right.  The  affair
soon  settled  itself  by  means  of  a  million  of  ducats,"  —  nothing
like  the  sum,  as  we  shall  see,  —  "  which  he  exacted  by  weight,
to  clear  the  costs  of  the  Tour  to  Strasburg,  which,  according
to  his  complaint  in  that  Poetic  Letter  [Doggerel  above  given],
were  so  heavy."

That  is  Voltaire's  view  ;  grown  very  corrosive  after  Twenty
Years.  He  admits,  with  all  the  satire  :  "  I  naturally  felt  my-
self attached  to  him ;  for  he  had  wit,  graces  ;  and  moreover
he  was  a  King,  which  always  forms  a  potent  seduction,  so
weak  is  human  nature.  Usually  it  is  we  of  the  writing  sort
that  flatter  Kings :  but  this  King  praised  me  from  head  to  foot,
while  the  Abbe  Desfontaines  and  other  scoundrels  (gredins)
were  busy  defaming  me  in  Paris  at  least  once  a  week."

CHAP.  IV.  VOLTAIRE'S FIRST INTERVIEW.  227

llth-14th  Sept.  1740.

What  Voltaire  thought  of  the  Interview  at  the  Time.

But  let  us  take  the  contemporary  account,  which,  also  we
have  at  first  hand ;  which  is  almost  pathetic  to  read ;  such  a
contrast  between  ruddy  morning  and  the  storms  of  the  after-
noon !  Here  are  two  Letters  from  Voltaire ;  fine  transparent
human  Letters,  as  his  generally  are :  the  first  of  them  written
directly  on  getting  back  to  the  Hague,  and  to  the  feeling  of
his  eclipsed  condition.

Voltaire  to  M.  de  Maupertuis  (with  the  King).

"THE  HAGUE,  18th  September,  1740.

"  I  serve  you,  Monsieur,  sooner  than  I  promised ;  and  that
is  the  way  you  ought  to  be  served.  I  send  you  the  answer
of  M.  Smith,"  —  probably  some  German  or  Dutch  Schmidt,
spelt  here  in  English,  connected  with  the  Sciences,  say  with
water-carriage,  the  typographies,  or  one  need  not  know  what ;
"  you  will  see  where  the  question  stands.

"  When  we  both  left  Cleve/'  —  14th  of  the  month,  Wednes-
day last ;  18th  is  Sunday,  in  this  old  cobwebby  Palace,  where
I  am  correcting  Anti-Machiavel,  —  "  and  you  took  to  the  right,"

—  King,  homewards,  got  to  Ham  that  evening,  —  "I  could
have thought  I  was  at  the  Last  Judgment,  where  the  Bon
Dieu  separates  the  elect  from  the  damned. Divus  Fredericus
said  to  you,  '  Sit  down  at  my  right  hand  in  the  Paradise  of
Berlin ; '  and  to  me,  '  Depart,  thou  accursed,  into  Holland.'

"  Here  I  am  accordingly  in  this  phlegmatic  place  of  punish-
ment, far  from  the  divine  fire  which  animates  the  Friedrichs,
the  Maupertuis,  the  Algarottis.  For  God's  love,  do  me  the
charity  of  some  sparks  in  these  stagnant  waters  where  I  am,"

—  stiffening,  cooling,  —  "  stupefying  to  death. Instruct  me  of
your  pleasures,  of  your  designs. You  will  doubtless  see  M.  de
Valori," — readers  know  de  Valori;  his  Book  has  been  pub-
lished ;  edited,  as  too  usual,  by  a  Human  Nightmare,  ignorant
of  his  subject  and  indeed  of  almost  all  other  things,  and  liable
to  mistakes  in  every  page  ;  yet  partly  readable,  if  you  carry
lanterns,  and  love  "  mon  gros  Valori : "  —  "  offer  him,  I  pray

228 FKIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

you,  my  respects.  If  I  do  not  write  to  him,  the  reason  is,  I
have  no  news  to  send :  I  should  be  as  exact  as  I  am  devoted,
if  my  correspondence  could  be  useful  or  agreeable  to  him.

"  Won't  you  have  me  send  you  some  Books  ?  If  I  be  still
in  Holland  when  your  orders  come,  I  will  obey  in  a  moment.
I  pray  you  do  not  forget  me  to  M.  de  Keyserling,"  —  Csesarion
whom  we  once  had  at  Cirey ;  a  headlong  dusky  little  man  of
wit  (library  turned  topsy-turvy,  as  Wilhelmina  called  him),
whom  we  have  seen.

"Tell  me,  I  beg,  if  the  enormous  monad  of  Volfius  —
[Wolf,  would  the  reader  like  to  hear  about  him  ?  If  so,  he
has  only  to  speak !]  is  arguing  at  Marburg,  at  Berlin,  or  at
Hall  [Halle,  which  is  a  very  different  place].

"Adieu,  Monsieur:  you  can  address  your  orders  to  me  'At
the  Hague  : '  they  will  be  forwarded  wherever  I  am ;  and
I  shall  be,  anywhere  on  earth,  —  Yours  forever  (a  vous  pour
jamais)."  1

Letter  Second,  of  which  a  fragment  may  be  given,  is  to  one
Cideville,  a  month  later  ;  all  the  more  genuine  as  there  was  no
chance  of  the  King's  hearing  about  this  one.  Cideville,  some
kind  of  literary  Advocate  at  Rouen  (who  is  wearisomely  known
to  the  reader  of  Voltaire's  Letters),  had  done,  what  is  rather
an  endemical  disorder  at  this  time,  some  Verses  for  the  King
of  Prussia,  which  he  wished  to  be  presented  to  his  Majesty.
The  presentation,  owing  to  accidents,  did  not  take  place  ;  hear
how  Voltaire,  from  his  cobweb  Palace  at  the  Hague,  busy  with
AntirMachiavel,  Van  Duren  and  many  other  things,  —  18th
October,  1740,  on  which  day  we  find  him  writing  many  Letters,
—  explains  the  sad  accident :  —

Voltaire  to  M.  de  Cideville  (at  Kouen).

"Ai  THE  HAGUE,  KING  OF  PRUSSIA'S  PALACE,
18th  October,  1740.

"...  This  is  my  case,  dear  Cideville.  When  you  sent  me,
enclosed  in  your  Letter,  those  Verses  (among  which  there  are
some  of  charming  and  inimitable  turn)  for  our  Marcus  Aurelius

l  Voltaire,  Ixxii.  252.

CHAP- IV.  VOLTAIRE'S  FIRST  INTERVIEW.  229

llth-14th  Sept.  1740.

of  the  North,  I  did  well  design  to  pay  my  court  to  him  with
them.  He  was  at  that  time  to  have  come  to  Brussels  incognito :
we  expected  him  there ;  but  the  Quartan  Fever,  which  unhap-
pily he  still  has,  deranged  all  his  projects.  He  sent  me  a
courier  to  Brussels,"  — mark  that  point,  my  Cideville ;  —  "  and
so  I  set  out  to  find  him  in  the  neighborhood  of  Cleve.

"  It  was  there  I  saw  one  of  the  amiablest  men  in  the  world,
who  forms  the  charm  of  society,  who  would  be  everywhere
sought  after  if  he  were  not  King ;  a  philosopher  without  auster-
ity ;  full  of  sweetness,  complaisance  and  obliging  ways  (agre-
mens)  ;  not  remembering  that  he  is  King  when  he  meets  his
friends ;  indeed  so  completely  forgetting  it  that  he  made  me
too  almost  forget  it,  and  I  needed  an  effort  of  memory  to  recol-
lect that  I  here  saw  sitting  at  the  foot  of  my  bed  a  Sovereign
who  had  an  Army  of  100,000  men.  That  was  the  moment  to
have  read  your  amiable  Verses  to  him  :  "  —  yes ;  but  then  ?  —
"  Madame  du  Chatelet,  who  was  to  have  sent  them  to  me,  did
not,  ne  V  a  pas  fait"  Alas,  no,  they  are  still  at  Brussels,  those
charming  Verses ;  and  I,  for  a  month  past,  am  here  in  my
cobweb  Palace  !  But  I  swear  to  you,  the  instant  I  return  to
Brussels,  I,  &c.  &C.1

Finally,  here  is  what  Friedrich  thought  of  it,  ten  days  after
parting  with  Voltaire.  We  will  read  this  also  (though  other-
wise ahead  of  us  as  yet)  ;  to  be  certified  on  all  sides,  and  sated
for  the  rest  of  our  lives,  concerning  the  Friedrich-Voltaire
First  Interview.

King  Friedrich  to  M.  Jordan  (at  Berlin).

POTSDAM,  24th  September,  1740.

"Most  respectable  Inspector  of  the  poor,  the  invalids,  or-
phans, crazy  people  and  Bedlams,  —  I  have  read  with  mature
meditation  the  very  profound  Jordanic  Letter  which  was  wait-
ing here ;  "  —  and  do  accept  your  learned  proposal.

"  I  have  seen  that  Voltaire  whom  I  was  so  curious  to  know ;
but  I  saw  him  with  the  Quartan  hanging  on  me,  and  my  mind

1  Voltaire,  Ixxii.  282.

230 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

as  unstrung  as  my  body.  With  men  of  his  kind  one  ought  not
to  be  sick ;  one  ought  even  to  be  specially  well,  and  in  better
health  than  common,  if  one  could.

"  He  has  the  eloquence  of  Cicero,  the  mildness  of  Pliny,  the
•wisdom  of  Agrippa ;  he  combines,  in  short,  what  is  to  be  col-
lected of  virtues  and  talents  from  the  three  greatest  men  of
Antiquity.  His  intellect  is  at  work  incessantly ;  every  drop
of  ink  is  a  trait  of  wit  from  his  pen.  He  declaimed  his  Ma-
homet to  us,  an  admirable  Tragedy  which  he  has  done,"  —
which  the  Official  people  smelling  heresies  in  it  ("  toleration,"
"  horrors  of  fanaticism,"  and  the  like)  will  not  let  him  act,  as
readers  too  well  know  :  —  "  he  transported  us  out  of  ourselves ;
I  could  only  admire  and  hold  my  tongue.  The  Du  Chatelet
is  lucky  to  have  him  :  for  of  the  good  things  he  flings  out  at
random,  a  person  who  had  no  faculty  but  memory  might  make
a  brilliant  Book.  That  Minerva  has  just  published  her  Work
on  Physics  :  not  wholly  bad.  It  was  Konig  "  —  whom  we
know,  and  whose  late  tempest  in  a  certain  teapot  —  "that
dictated  the  theme  to  her  :  she  has  adjusted,  ornamented  here
and  there  with  some  touch  picked  from  Voltaire  at  her  Suppers.
The  Chapter  on  Space  is  pitiable  ;  the  "  —  in  short,  she  is  still
raw  in  the  Pure  Sciences,  and  should  have  waited.  .  .  .

"Adieu,  most  learned,  most  scientific,  most  profound  Jor-
dan, —  or  rather  most  gallant,  most  amiable,  most  jovial
Jordan ;  —  I  salute  thee,  with  assurance  of  all  those  old  feel-
ings which  thou  hast  the  art  of  inspiring  in  every  one  that
knows  thee.  Vale.

"  I  write  the  moment  of  my  arrival :  be  obliged  to  me,  friend ;
for  I  have  been  working,  I  am  going  to  work  still,  like  a  Turk,
or  like  a  Jordan." 1

This  is  hastily  thrown  off  for  Friend  Jordan,  the  instant
after  his  Majesty's  circuitous  return  home.  Eeaders  cannot
yet  attend  his  Majesty  there,  till  they  have  brought  the  Affair
of  Herstal,  and  other  remainders  of  the  Cleve  Journey,  along
with  them.

1  (Euvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xvii.  71.

i  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  231

Sept.  1740.

CHAPTEE  V.

AFFAIR OF HEKSTAL.

THIS  Bambonet,  whom  Voltaire  found  walking  in  the  court
of  the  old  Castle  of  Moyland,  is  an  official  gentleman,  other-
wise unknown  to  History,  who  has  lately  been  engaged  in  a
Public  Affair ;  and  is  now  off  again  about  it,  "  on  a  hired  hack  "
or  otherwise,  —  with  very  good  instructions  in  his  head.  Affair
which,  though  in  itself  but  small,  is  now  beginning  to  make
great  noise  in  the  world,  as  Friedrich  wends  homewards  out
of  his  Cleve  Journey.  He  has  set  it  fairly  alight,  Voltaire
and  he,  before  quitting  Moyland ;  and  now  it  will  go  of  itself.
The  Affair  of  Herstal,  or  of  the  Bishop  of  Liege ;  Friedrich's
first  appearance  on  the  stage  of  politics.  Concerning  which
some  very  brief  notice,  if  intelligible,  will  suffice  readers  of
the  present  day.

Heristal,  now  called  Herstal,  was  once  a  Castle  known  to  all
mankind ;  King  Pipin's  Castle,  who  styled  himself  "  Pipin  of
Heristal,"  before  he  became  King  of  the  Franks  and  begot
Charlemagne.  It  lies  on  the  Maas,  in  that  fruitful  Spa  Coun-
try ;  left  bank  of  the  Maas,  a  little  to  the  north  of  Liege ;  and
probably  began  existence  as  a  grander  place  than  Liege  (Lut-
tic/i),  which  was,  at  first,  some  Monastery  dependent  on  secular
Herstal  and  its  grandeurs  :  —  think  only  how  the  race  has  gone
between  these  two  entities ;  spiritual  Liege  now  a  big  City,
black  with  the  smoke  of  forges  and  steam-mills ;  Herstal  an
insignificant  Village,  accidentally  talked  of  for  a  few  weeks  in
1740,  and  no  chance  ever  to  be  mentioned  again  by  men.

Herstal,  in  the  confused  vicissitudes  of  a  thousand  years,
had  passed  through  various  fortunes,  and  undergone  change  of
owners  often  enough.  Fifty  years  ago  it  was  in  the  hands  of

232 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

the  Nassau-Orange  House ;  Dutch.  William,  our  English  Prot-
estant King,  who  probably  scarce  knew  of  his  possessing  it,
was  Lord  of  Herstal  till  his  death.  Dutch  William  had  no
children  to  inherit  Herstal :  he  was  of  kinship  to  the  Prussian
House,  as  readers  are  aware ;  and  from  that  circumstance,  not
without  a  great  deal  of  discussion,  and  difficult  "  Division  of
the  Orange  Heritage,"  this  Herstal  had,  at  the  long  last,  fallen
to  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  share ;  it  and  Neuchatel,  and  the  Cob-
web Palace,  and  some  other  places  and  pertinents.

For  Dutch  William  was  of  kin,  we  say;  Friedrich  I.  of
Prussia,  by  his  Mother  the  noble  Wife  of  the  Great  Elector,
was  full  cousin  to  Dutch  William  :  and  the  Marriage  Contracts
were  express,  —  though  the  High  Mightinesses  made  difficul-
ties, and  the  collateral  Orange  branches  were  abundantly  reluc-
tant, when  it  came  to  the  fulfilling  point.  For  indeed  the
matter  was  intricate.  Orange  itself,  for  example,  what  was  to
be  done  with  the  Principality  of  Orange  ?  Clearly  Prussia's ;
but  it  lies  imbedded  deep  in  the  belly  of  France ;  that  will
be  a  Caesarean-Operation  for  you !  Had  not  Neuchatel  hap-
pened just  then  to  fall  home  to  France  (or  in  some  measure  to
France)  and  be  heirless,  Prussia's  Heritage  of  Orange  would
have  done  little  for  Prussia !  Principality  of  Orange  was,  by
this  chance,  long  since,  mainly  in  the  First  King's  time,  got
settled : x  but  there  needed  many  years  more  of  good  waiting,
and  of  good  pushing,  on  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  part;  and  it
was  not  till  1732  that  Friedrich  Wilhelm  got  the  Dutch  Heri-
tages finally  brought  to  the  square :  Neuchatel  and  Valengin,
as  aforesaid,  in  lieu  of  Orange;  and  now  furthermore,  the
Old  Palace  at  Loo  (that  Vieille  Cour  and  biggest  cobwebs),
with  pertinents,  with  Garden  of  Honslardik ;  and  a  string  of
items,  bigger  and  less,  not  worth  enumerating.  Of  the  items,
this  Herstal  was  one ;  —  and  truly,  so  far  as  this  went,  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm  often  thought  he  had  better  never  have  seen  it,
so  much  trouble  did  it  bring  him.

1  Neuchatel,  3d  November,  1707,  to  Friedrich  I.,  natives  preferring  him  to
"  Fifteen  other  Claimants ; "  Louis  XIV.  loudly  protesting  :  not  till  Treaty
of  Utrecht  (14th  March  1713,  first  month  of  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  reign)  would
Louis  XIV.,  on  cession  of  Orange,  consent  and  sanction.

V.  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  233

4th-28th  Sept.  1740.

How  the  Herstallers  had  behaved  to  Friedrich  Wilhelm.

The  Herstal  people,  knowing  the  Prussian  recruiting-system
and  other  rigors,  were  extremely  unwilling  to  come  under
Friedrich  Wilhelm's  sway,  could  they  have  helped  it.  They
refused  fealty,  swore  they  never  would  swear :  nor  did  they,
till  the  appearance,  or  indubitable  foreshine,  of  Friedrich  Wil-
helm's bayonets  advancing  on  them  from  the  East,  brought
compliance.  And  always  after,  spite  of  such  quasi-fealty,  they
showed  a  pig-like  obstinacy  of  humor ;  a  certain  insignificant,
and  as  it  were  impertinent,  deep-rooted  desire  to  thwart,  irri-
tate and  contradict  the  said  Friedrich  Wilhelm.  Especially  in
any  recruiting  matter  that  might  arise,  knowing  that  to  be  the
weak  side  of  his  Prussian  Majesty.  All  this  would  have
amounted  to  nothing,  had  it  not  been  that  their  neighbor,  the
Prince  Bishop  of  Liege,  who  imagined  himself  to  have  some
obscure  claims  of  sovereignty  over  Herstal,  and  thought  the
present  a  good  opportunity  for  asserting  these,  was  diligent  to
aid  and  abet  the  Herstal  people  in  such  their  mutinous  acts.
Obscure  claims  ;  of  which  this  is  the  summary,  should  the
reader  not  prefer  to  skip  it :  —

"  The  Bishop  of  Liege's  claims  on  Herstal  (which  lie  wrapt
from  mankind  in  the  extensive  jungle  of  his  law-pleadings,  like
a  Bedlam  happily  fallen  extinct)  seem  to  me  to  have  grown
mainly  from  two  facts  more  or  less  radical.

"  Fact  first.  In  Kaiser  Barbarossa's  time,  year  1171,  Herstal
had  been  given  in  pawn  to  the  Church  of  Liege,  for  a  loan,  by
the  then  proprietor,  Duke  of  Lorraine  and  Brabant.  Loan  was
repaid,  I  do  not  learn  when,  and  the  Pawn  given  back ;  to  the
satisfaction  of  said  Duke,  or  Duke's  Heirs ;  never  quite  to  the  sat-
isfaction of  the  Church,  which  had  been  in  possession,  and  was
loath  to  quit,  after  hoping  to  continue.  '  Give  us  back  Herstal ;
it  ought  to  be  ours  ! '  Unappeasable  sigh  or  grumble  to  this
effect  is  heard  thenceforth,  at  intervals,  in  the  Chapter  of  Liege,
and  has  not  ceased  in  Friedrich's  time.  But  as  the  world,  in  its
loud  thoroughfares,  seldom  or  never  heard,  or  could  hear,  such
sighing  in  the  Chapter,  nothing  had  come  of  it,  —  till  —

"  Fact  second. In  Kaiser  Karl  V.'s  time,  the  Prince  Bishop

234 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.'

1740.

of  Liege  happened  to  be  a  Natural  Son  of  old  Kaiser  Max's ;  —
and  had  friends  at  headquarters,  of  a  very  choice  nature.
Had,  namely,  in  this  sort,  Kaiser  Karl  for  Nephew  or  Half-
Nephew  ;  and  what  perhaps  was  still  better,  as  nearer  hand,  had
Karl's  Aunt,  Maria  Queen  of  Hungary,  then  Governess  of  the
Netherlands,  for  Half-Sister.  Liege,  in  these  choice  circum-
stances, and  by  other  good  chances  that  turned  up,  again  got
temporary  clutch  or  half-clutch  of  Herstal,  for  a  couple  of  years
(date  1546-1548,  the  Prince  of  Orange,  real  proprietor,  whose
Ancestor  had  bought  it  for  money  down,  being  then  a  minor)  ;
once,  and  perhaps  a  second  time  in  like  circumstance  ;  but
had  always  to  renounce  it  again,  when  the  Prince  of  Orange
came  to  maturity.  And  ever  since,  the  Chapter  of  Lie*ge  sighs
as  before,  '  Herstal  is  perhaps  in  a  sense  ours.  We  had  once
some  kind  of  right  to  it ! '  —  sigh  inaudible  in  the  loud  public
thoroughfares.  That  is  the  Bishop's  claim.  The  name  of
him,  if  anybody  care  for  it,  is  '  Georg  Ludwig,  titular  Count  of
Berg]  now  a  very  old  man  :  Bishop  of  Liege,  he,  and  has  been
snatching  at  Herstal  again,  very  eagerly  by  any  skirt  or  tagrag
that  might  happen  to  fly  loose,  these  eight  years  past,  in  a  rash
and  provoking  manner ; 1  —  age  eighty-two  at  present ;  poor
old  fool,  he  had  better  have  sat  quiet.  There  lies  a  rod  in
pickle  for  him,  during  these  late  months ;  and  will  be  surpris-
ingly laid  on,  were  the  time  come  ! "

"  I  have  Law  Authority  over  Herstal,  and  power  of  judg-
ing there  in  the  last  appeal,"  said  this  Bishop :  —  "  You !  "
thought  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  who  was  far  off,  and  had  little
time  to  waste.  — "  Any  Prussian  recruiter  that  behaves  ill,
bring  him  to  me ! "  said  the  Bishop,  who  was  on  the  spot.
And  accordingly  it  had  been  done ;  one  notable  instance  two
years  ago  :  a  Prussian  Lieutenant  locked  in  the  Liege  jail,  on
complaint  of  riotous  Herstal ;  thereupon  a  Prussian  Officer
of  rank  (Colonel  Kreutzen,  worthy  old  Malplaquet  gentleman)
coming  as  Koyal  Messenger,  not  admitted  to  audience,  nay
laid  hold  of  by  the  Liege  bailiff  instead ;  and  other  unheard-
of  procedures.2  So  that  Friedrich  Wilhelm  had  nothing  but

1  Ddices  du  Pais  de  Li€ge.  (Liege,  1738) ;  Helden-Geschichte,  ii.  57-62.

2  Hdden-Gesddckte,  ii.  63-73.

CHAP.  V.  AFFAIR  OF  IIEESTAL.  235

4th-28th  Sept.  1740.

trouble  with  this  petty  Herstal,  and  must  have  thought  his
neighbor  Bishop  a  very  contentious  high-flying  gentleman,
who  took  great  liberties  with  the  Lion's  whiskers,  when  he
had  the  big  animal  at  an  advantage.

The  episcopal  procedures,  eight  years  ago,  about  the  First
Homaging  of  Herstal,  had  been  of  similar  complexion ;  nor
had  other  such  failed  in  the  interim,  though  this  last  outrage
exceeded  them  all.  This  last  began  in  the  end  of  1738  ;  and
span  itself  out  through  1739,  when  Friedrich  Wilhelm  lay
in  his  final  sickness,  less  able  to  deal  with  it  than  formerly.
Being  a  peaceable  man,  unwilling  to  awaken  conflagrations
for  a  small  matter,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  had  offered,  through
Kreutzen  on  this  occasion,  to  part  with  Herstal  altogether ;  to
sell  it,  for  100,000  thalers,  say  £16,000,  to  the  high-flying
Bishop,  and  honestly  wash  his  hands  of  it.  But  the  high-
flying Bishop  did  not  consent,  gave  no  definite  answer;  and
so  the  matter  lay,  —  like  an  unsettled  extremely  irritating
paltry  little  matter,  —  at  the  time  Friedrich  Wilhelm  died.

The  Gazetteers  and  public  knew  little  about  these  particu-
lars, or  had  forgotten  them  again ;  but  at  the  Prussian  Court
they  were  in  lively  remembrance.  What  the  young  Friedrich's
opinion  about  them  had  been  we  gather  from  this  succinct  no-
tice of  the  thing,  written  seven  or  eight  years  afterwards,  exact
in  all  points,  and  still  carrying  a  breath  of  the  old  humor  in  it.
"A  miserable  Bishop  of  Liege  thought  it  a  proud  thing  to  in-
sult the  late  King.  Some  subjects  of  Herstal,  which  belongs
to  Prussia,  had  revolted ;  the  Bishop  gave  them  his  protection.
Colonel  Kreutzen  was  sent  to  Liege,  to  compose  the  thing
by  treaty  ;  credentials  with  him,  full  power,  and  all  in  order.
Imagine  it,  the  Bishop  would  not  receive  him !  Three  days,
day  after  day,  he  saw  this  Envoy  apply  at  his  Palace,  and
always  denied  him  entrance.  These  things  had  grown  past
endurance." l  And.  Friedrich  had  taken  note  of  Herstal  along
with  him,  on  this  Cleve  Journey ;  privately  intending  to  put
Herstal  and  the  high-flying  Bishop  on  a  suitabler  footing,  be-
fore his  return  from  those  countries.

For  indeed,  on  Friedrich's  Accession, matters  had  grown
1  Preuss,  (Euvres  (Memoires  de  Brandebourg),  ii.  53.

236 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

•worse,  not  better.  Of  course  there  was  Fealty  to  be  sworn ;
but  the  Herstal  people,  abetted  by  the  high-flying  Bishop,
have  declined  swearing  it.  Apology  for  the  past,  prospect  of
amendment  for  the  future,  there  is  less  than  ever.  What  is
the  young  King  to  do  with  this  paltry  little  Hamlet  of  Hers-
tal ?  He  could,  in  theory,  go  into  some  Eeichs-Hofrath,  some
Eeichs-Kammergericht  (kind  of  treble  and  tenfold  English
Court-of-Chancery,  which  has  lawsuits  280  years  old),  —  if  he
were  a  theoretic  German  King.  He  can  plead  in  the  Diets,
and  the  Wetzlar  Eeichs-Kaminergericht  without  end :  "  All
German  Sovereigns  have  power  to  send  their  Ambassador
thither,  who  is  like  a  mastiff  chained  in  the  back-yard  [ob-
serves Friedrich  elsewhere]  with  privilege  of  barking  at  the
Moon,"  —  unrestricted  privilege  of  barking  at  the  Moon,  if
that  will  avail  a  practical  man,  or  King's  Ambassador.  Or
perhaps  the  Bishop  of  Liege  will  bethink  him,  at  last,  what
considerable  liberty  he  is  taking  with  some  people's  whiskers  ?
Four  months  are  gone ;  Bishop  of  Liege  has  not  in  the  least
bethought  him  :  we  are  in  the  neighborhood  in  person,  with
note  of  the  thing  in  our  memory.

Friedrich  takes  the  Rod  out  of  Pickle.

Accordingly  the  Eath  Eambonet,  whom  Voltaire  found  at
Moyland  that  Sunday  night,  had  been  over  at  Liege ;  went
exactly  a  week  before  ;  with  this  message  of  very  peremptory
tenor  from  his  Majesty :  —

To  the  Prince  Bishop  of  Liege.

"  WESEL,  4th  September,  1740.

"Mr  COUSIN,  —  Knowing  all  the  assaults  (atteintes)  made
by  you  upon  my  indisputable  rights  over  my  free  Barony  of
Herstal ;  and  how  the  seditious  ringleaders  there,  for  several
years  past,  have  been  countenanced  (bestarket)  by  you  in  their
detestable  acts  of  disobedience  against  me,  —  I  have  com-
manded my  Privy  Councillor  Eambonet  to  repair  to  your
presence,  and  in  my  name  to  require  from  you,  within  two
days,  a  distinct  and  categorical  answer  to  this  question  :

CHAP.  V.  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  237

4th-28th  Sept.  1740.

Whether  you  are  still  minded  to  assert  your  pretended  sov-
ereignty over  Herstal;  and  whether  you  will  protect  the
rebels  at  Herstal,  in  their  disorders  and  abominable  disobe-
dience ?

"  In  case  you  refuse,  or  delay  beyond  the  term,  the  Answer
which  I  hereby  of  right  demand,  you  will  render  yourself
alone  responsible,  before  the  world,  for  the  consequences
which  infallibly  will  follow.  I  am,  with  much  considera-
tion, —  My  Cousin,  —

"  Your  very  affectionate  Cousin,

"  FRIEDEICH.  " 1

Rambonet  had  started  straightway  for  Liege,  with  this  mis-
sive ;  and  had  duly  presented  it  there,  I  guess  on  the  7th,  —
with  notice  that  he  would  wait  forty-eight  hours,  and  then
return  with  what  answer  or  no-answer  there  might  be.  Get-
ting no  written  answer,  or  distinct  verbal  one ;  getting  only
some  vague  nnirnblement  as  good  as  none,  Rambonet  had  dis-
appeared from  Liege  on  the  9th ;  and  was  home  at  Moyland
when  Voltaire  arrived  that  Sunday  evening, — just  walking
about  to  come  to  heat  again,  after  reporting  progress  to  the
above  effect.

Rambonet,  I  judge,  enjoyed  only  one  of  those  divine  Sup-
pers at  Moyland ;  and  dashed  off  again,  "  on  hired  hack  "  or
otherwise,  the  very  next  morning;  that  contingency  of  No-
answer  having  been  the  anticipated  one,  and  all  things  put
in  perfect  readiness  for  it.  Rambonet's  new  errand  was  to
"  take  act,"  as  Voltaire  calls  it,  "  at  the  Gates  of  Liege,"  —  to
deliver  at  Liege  a  succinct  Manifesto,  Pair  of  Manifestoes,  both
in  Print  (ready  beforehand),  and  bearing  date  that  same  Sun-
day, "  Wesel,  llth  September ; "  much  calculated  to  amaze
his  Reverence  at  Lidge.  Succinct  good  Manifestoes,  said  to
be  of  Friedrich's  own  writing ;  the  essential  of  the  two  is
this :  —

1  Helden-Gesclrichte,  ii.  75,  111.

238 FEIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  KEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

Exposition  of  the  Reasons  which  have  induced  his  Majesty  the
King  of  Prussia  to  make  just  Reprisals  on  the  Prince  Bishop
of  Liege.

"His  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia,  being  driven  beyond
bounds  by  the  rude  proceedings  of  the  Prince  Bishop  of  Liege,
has  with  regret  seen  himself  forced  to  recur  to  the  Method  of
Arms,  in  order  to  repress  the  violence  and  affront  which  the
Bishop  has  attempted  to  put  upon  him.  This  resolution  has
cost  his  Majesty  much  pain ;  the  rather  as  he  is,  by  principle
and  disposition,  far  remote  from  whatever  could  have  the
least  relation  to  rigor  and  severity.

"But  seeing  himself  compelled  by  the  Bishop  of  Liege
to  take  new  methods,  he  had  no  other  course  but  to  main-
tain the  justice  of  his  rights  (la  justice  de  ses  droits),  and
demand  reparation  for  the  indignity  done  upon  his  Minister
Von  Kreuzen,  as  well  as  for  the  contempt  with  which  the
Bishop  of  Liege  has  neglected  even  to  answer  the  Letter  of
the  King.

"As  too  much  rigor  borders  upon  cruelty,  so  too  much
patience  resembles  weakness.  Thus,  although  the  King  would
willingly  have  sacrificed  his  interests  to  the  public  peace  and
tranquillity,  it  was  not  possible  to  do  so  in  reference  to  his
honor;  and  that  is  the  chief  motive  which  has  determined
him  to  this  resolution,  so  contrary  to  his  intentions.

"  In  vain  has  it  been  attempted,  by  methods  of  mildness,  to
come  to  a  friendly  agreement :  it  has  been  found,  on  the  con-
trary, that  the  King's  moderation  only  increased  the  Prince's
arrogance ;  that  mildness  of  conduct  on  one  side  only  furnished
resources  to  pride  on  the  other ;  and  that,  in  fine,  instead  of
gaining  by  soft  procedure,  one  was  insensibly  becoming  an
object  of  vexation  and  disdain.

"  There  being  no  means  to  have  justice  but  in  doing  it  for
oneself,  and  the  King  being  Sovereign  enough  for  such  a
duty,  —  he  intends  to  make  the  Prince  of  Liege  feel  how  far
he  was  in  the  wrong  to  abuse  such  moderation  so  unworthily.
But  in  spite  of  so  much  unhandsome  behavior  on  the  part  of

CHAP.  V.  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  239

llth  Sept.  1740.

this  Prince,  the  King  will  not  be  inflexible;  satisfied  with
having  shown  the  said  Prince  that  he  can  punish  him,  and
too  just  to  overwhelm  him.  FREDERIC.1

"  WESEL,  September  llth,  1740."

Whether  Eambonet  insinuated  his  Paper-Packet  into  the
Palace  of  Seraing,  left  it  at  the  Gate  of  Liege  (fixed  by  nail,
if  he  saw  good),  or  in  what  manner  he  "took  act,"  I  never
knew;  and  indeed  Eambonet  vanishes  from  human  History
at  this  point :  it  is  certain  only  that  he  did  his  Formality,
say  two  days  hence;  —  and  that  the  Fact  foreshadowed  by
it  is  likewise  in  the  same  hours,  hour  after  hour,  getting
steadily  done.

For  the  Manifestoes  printed  beforehand,  dated  Wesel,  llth
September,  were  not  the  only  thing  ready  at  Wesel ;  waiting,
as  on  the  slip,  for  the  contingency  of  No-answer.  Major-
General  Borck,  with  the  due  Battalions,  squadrons  and  equip-
ments, was  also  ready.  Major-General  Borck,  the  same  who
was  with  us  at  Baireuth  lately,  had  just  returned  from  that
journey,  when  he  got  orders  to  collect  2,000  men,  horse  and
foot,  with  the  due  proportion  of  artillery,  from  the  Prussian
Garrisons  in  these  parts ;  and  to  be  ready  for  marching  with
them,  the  instant  the  contingency  of  No-answer  arrives, —
Sunday,  llth,  as  can  be  foreseen.  Borck  knows  his  route:
To  Maaseyk,  a  respectable  Town  of  the  Bishop's,  the  handiest
for  Wesel;  to  occupy  Maaseyk  and  the  adjoining  "Counties
of  Lotz  and  Horn ;  "  and  lie  there  at  the  Bishop's  charge  till
his  Eeverence's  mind  alter.

Borck  is  ready,  to  the  last  pontoon,  the  last  munition-loaf ;
and  no  sooner  is  signal  given  of  the  No-answer  come,  than
Borck,  that  same  "  Sunday,  llth,"  gets  under  way ;  marches,
steady  as  clock-work,  towards  Maaseyk  (fifty  miles  southwest
of  him,  distance  now  lessening  every  hour) ;  crosses  the  Maas,
by  help  of  his  pontoons ;  is  now  in  the  Bishop's  Territory,  and
enters  Maaseyk,  evening  of  "Wednesday,  14th,"  —  that  very
day  Voltaire  and  his  Majesty  had  parted,  going  different  ways

1  Helden-Geschichte,  ii.  77. Said  to  be  by  Friedrich  himself  (Stenzel,  iv.  59).

240 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1/40.

from  Moyland ;  and  probably  about  the  same  hour  while  Eam-
bonet  was  "  taking  act  at  the  Gate  of  Liege,"  by  nail-hainmer
or  otherwise.  All  goes  punctual,  swift,  cog  hitting  pinion  far
and  near,  in  this  small  Herstal  Business  ;  and  there  is  no  mis-
take made,  and  a  minimum  of  time  spent.

Borck's  management  was  throughout  good :  punctual,  qui-
etly exact,  polite,  mildly  inflexible.  Fain  would  the  Maaseyk
Town-Baths  have  shut  their  gates  on  him ;  desperately  con-
juring him,  "  Respite  for  a  few  hours,  till  we  send  to  Liege
for  instructions  !  "  But  it  was  to  no  purpose.  "  Unbolt,  ihr
Herren ;  swift,  or  the  petard  will  have  to  do  it !  "  Borck
publishes  his  Proclamation,  a  mild-spoken  rigorous  Piece  ;  sig-
nifies to  the  Maaseyk  Authorities,  That  he  has  to  exact  a  Con-
tribution of  20,000  thalers  (£3,000)  here,  Contribution  payable
in  three  days  ;  that  he  furthermore,  while  he  continues  in
these  parts,  will  need  such  and  such  rations,  accommodations,
allowances,  —  "  fifty  louis  (say  guineas)  daily  for  his  own  pri-
vate expenses,"  one  item  ;  —  and,  in  mild  rhadamanthine  lan-
guage, waves  aside  all  remonstrance,  refusal  or  delay,  as
superfluous  considerations:  Unless  said  Contribution  and  re-
quired supplies  come  in,  it  will  be  his  painful  duty  to  bring
them  in.1

The  high-flying  Bishop,  much  astonished,  does  now  eagerly
answer  his  Prussian  Majesty,  "  Was  from  home,  was  ill,
thought  he  had  answered ;  is  the  most  ill-used  of  Bishops  ; "
and  other  things  of  a  hysteric  character.2  And  there  came
forth,  as  natural  to  the  situation,  multitudinous  complainings,
manifestoings,  applications  to  the  Kaiser,  to  the  French,  to
the  Dutch,  of  a  very  shrieky  character  on  the  Bishop  of  Liege's
part ;  sparingly,  if  at  all  noticed  on  Friedrich's  :  the  whole  of
which  we  shall  consider  ourselves  free  to  leave  undisturbed  in
the  rubbish-abysses,  as  henceforth  conceivable  to  the  reader.
"  Sed  spem  stupende  fefellit  eventus,"  shrieks  the  poor  old
Bishop,  making  moan  to  the  Kaiser  :  "  ecce  enim,  prcemissd
duntaxat  und  Literd,  one  Letter,"  and  little  more,  "  the  said
King  of  Borussia  has,  with  about  2,000  horse  and  foot,  and
warlike  engines,  in  this  month  of  September,  entered  the  Ter-

i  Helden-Gesdiichte,  i.  427 ;  ii.  113. 2  Ib.  ii.  85,  86  (date,  16th  September).

CHAP.  v.  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  241

4th-28th  Sept.  1740.

ritory  of  Liege ; " 1  which  is  an  undeniable  truth,  but  an  una-
vailing. Borck  is  there,  and  "  2,000  good  arguments  with
him,"  as  Voltaire  defines  the  phenomenon.  Friedrich,  except
to  explain  pertinently  what  my  readers  already  know,  does
not  write  or  speak  farther  on  the  subject ;  and  readers  and  he
may  consider  the  Herstal  Affair,  thus  set  agoing  under  Borck's
auspices,  as  in  effect  finished  ;  and  that  his  Majesty  has  left  it
on  a  satisfactory  footing,  and  may  safely  turn  his  back  on  it,
to  wait  the  sure  issue  at  Berlin  before  long.

What  Voltaire  thought  of  Herstal.

Voltaire  told  us  he  himself  "did  one  Manifesto,  good  or
bad,"  on  this  Herstal  business  :  —  where  is  that  Piece,  then,
what  has  become  of  it  ?  Dig  well  in  the  realms  of  Chaos,
rectifying  stupidities  more  or  less  enormous,  the  Piece  itself
is  still  discoverable;  and,  were  pieces  by  Voltaire  much  a
rarity  instead  of  the  reverse,  might  be  resuscitated  by  a  good
Editor,  and  printed  in  his  Works.  Lies  buried  in  the  lone-
some rubbish-mountains  of  that  Helden-Geschichte,  —  let  a
Siste  Viator,  scratched  on  the  surface,  mark  where.2  Appar-
ently that  is  the  Piece  by  Voltaire  ?  Yes,  on  reading  that,
it  has  every  internal  evidence ;  distinguishes  itself  from  the
surrounding  pieces,  like  a  slab  of  compact  polished  stone,  in  a
floor  rammed  together  out  of  ruinous  old  bricks,  broken  bottles
and  mortar-dust ;  —  agrees,  too,  if  you  examine  by  the  micro-
scope, with  the  external  indications,  which  are  sure  and  at
last  clear,  though  infinitesimally  small ;  and  is  beyond  doubt
Voltaire's,  if  it  were  now  good  for  much.

It  is  not  properly  a  Manifesto,  but  an  anonymous  memoir
published  in  the  Newspapers,  explaining  to  impartial  man-
kind, in  a  legible  brief  manner,  what  the  old  and  recent  His-
tory of  Herstal,  and  the  Troubles  of  Herstal,  have  been,  and
how  chimerical  and  "  null  to  the  extreme  of  nullity  (nulles  de
toute  nullite)  "  this  poor  Bishop's  pretensions  upon  it  are.  Vol-
taire expressly  piques  himself  on  this  Piece  ; 3  brags  also  how

l  Hdden-Geschiclite,  ii.  88.  2  Ib.  ii.  93-98.

3  Letter  to  Friedrich:  dateless,  datable  "soon  after  17th  September;"
which  the  rash  dark  Editors  have  by  guess  misdated  "  August ; "  or,  what

VOL. VII.  16

242 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.

he  settled  "  M.  de  Fenelon  [French  Ambassador  at  the  Hague],
who  came  to  me  the  clay  before  yesterday,"  much  out  of  square
upon  the  Herstal  Business,  till  I  pulled  him  straight.  And  it
is  evident  (beautifully  so,  your  Majesty)  how  Voltaire  busied
himself  in  the  Gazettes  and  Diplomatic  circles,  setting  Fried-
rich's  case  right;  Voltaire  very  loyal  to  Friedrich  and  his
Liege  Cause  at  that  time ;  —  and  the  contrast  between  what
his  contemporary  Letters  say  on  the  subject,  and  what  his
ulterior  Pasquil  called  Vie  Privee  says,  is  again  great.

The  dull  stagnant  world,  shaken  awake  by  this  Liege  ad-
venture, gives  voice  variously ;  and  in  the  Gazetteer  and  Diplo-
matic circles  it  is  much  criticised,  by  no  means  everywhere  in
the  favorable  tone  at  this  first  blush  of  the  business.  "  He
had  written  an  ^t-Machiavel,"  says  the  Abbe  St.  Pierre,
and  even  says  Voltaire  (in  the  Pasquil,  not  the  contemporary
Letters),  "  and  he  acts  thus  ! "  Truly  he  does,  Monsieur  de
Voltaire ;  and  all  men,  with  light  upon  the  subject,  or  even
with  the  reverse  upon  it,  must  make  their  criticisms.  For  the
rest,  Borck's  "  2,000  arguments  "  are  there  ;  which  Borck  han-
dles well,  with  polite  calm  rigor :  by  degrees  the  dust  will  fall,
and  facts  everywhere  be  seen  for  what  they  are.

As  to  the  high-flying  Bishop,  finding  that  hysterics  are  but
wasted  on  Friedrich  and  Borck,  and  produce  no  effect  with
their  2,000  validities,  he  flies  next  to  the  Kaiser,  to  the  Impe-
rial Diet,  in  shrill-sounding  Latin  obtestations,  of  which  we
already  gave  a  flying  snatch :  "  Your  humillssimus  and  fide-
lissimus  Vassallus,  and  most  obsequient  Servant,  Georgius
Ludovicus ;  meek,  modest,  and  unspeakably  in  the  right :
was  ever  Member  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  so  snubbed,
and  grasped  by  the  windpipe,  before  ?  Oh,  help  him,  great
Kaiser,  bid  the  iron  gripe  loosen  itself ! " 1  The  Kaiser  does
so,  in  heavy  Latin  rescripts,  in  German  Dehortatoriums  more
than  one,  of  a  sulky,  imperative,  and  indeed  very  lofty  tenor ;
"Let  Georgius  Ludovicus  go,  foolish  rash  young  Dilection

was  safer  for  them,  omitted  it  altogether. CEuvres  de  Voltaire  (Paris,  1818,
40  vols.)  gives  the  Letter,  xxxix.  442  (see  also  ibid.  453,  463) ;  later  Editors,
and  even  Preuss,  take  the  safer  course.
1  Helden-Geschichte,  ii.  86-116.

CHAP.  V.  AFFAIR  OF  HERSTAL.  243

28th  Sept.  1740.

(Liebden,  not  Majesty,  we  ourselves  being  the  only  Majesty),
and  I  will  judge  between  you  ;  otherwise  —  ! "  said  the  Kai-
ser, ponderously  shaking  his  Olympian  wig,  and  lifting  his
gilt  cane,  or  sceptre  of  mankind,  in  an  Olympian  manner.
Here  are  some  touches  of  his  second  sublirnest  Dehortatorium
addressed  to  Friedrich,  in  a  very  compressed  state  : x  —

We  Karl  the  Sixth,  Kaiser  of  (Titles  enough},  .  .  .  "  Con-
sidering these,  in  the  Holy  Roman  Reich,  almost  unheard-of
violent  Doings  (Thatlichkeiten),  which  We,  in  Our  Supreme-
Judge  Office,  cannot  altogether  justify,  nor  will  endure  .  .  .
We  have  the  trust  that  you  yourself  will  magnanimously  see
How  evil  counsellors  have  misled  your  Dilection  to  commence
your  Reign,  not  by  showing  example  of  Obedience  to  the  Laws
appointed  for  all  members  of  the  Reich,  for  the  weak  and  for
the  strong  alike,  but  by  such  Doings  (Thathandlungen)  as  in
all  quarters  must  cause  a  great  surprise.

"  We  give  your  Dilection  to  know,  therefore,  That  you  must
straightway  withdraw  those  troops  which  have  broken  into  the
Liege  Territory  ;  make  speedy  restitution  of  all  that  has  been
extorted ;  —  especially  General  von  Borck  to  give  back  at  once
those  50  louis  d'or  daily  drawn  by  him,  to  renounce  his  de-
mand of  the  20,000  thalers,  to  make  good  all  damage  done,
and  retire  with  his  whole  military  force  (Militz)  over  the
Liege  boundaries  ;  —  and  in  brief,  that  you  will,  by  law  or
arbitration,  manage  to  agree  with  the  Prince  Bishop  of  Lie'ge,
who  wishes  it  very  much.  These  things  We  expect  from  your
Dilection,  as  Kurfiirst  of  Brandenburg,  within  the  space  of
Two  Months  from  the  Issuing  of  this  ;  and  remain,"  —  Yours
as  you  shall  demean  yourself,  —  KARL.

"  Given  at  Wien,  4th  of  October,  1740."  —  The  last  Dehor-
tatorium ever  signed  by  Karl  VI.  In  two  weeks  after  he  ate
too  many  mushrooms,  —  and  immense  results  followed !

Dehortatoriums  had  their  interest,  at  Berlin  and  elsewhere,

for  the Diplomatic circles ; but  did  not  produce  the least

effect  on  Borck or Friedrich ; though  Friedrich  noted the

Kaiser's  manner  in  these  things,  and  thought  privately  to

1  Helden-Geschichte,  ii.  127  ;  a.  first  and  milder  (ibid.  73).

244 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

himself,  as  was  evident  to  the  discerning,  "  What  an  amount
of  wig  on  that  old  gentleman !  "  A  notable  Kaiser's  Ambas-
sador, Herr  Botta,  who  had  come  with  some  Accession  com-
pliments, in  these  weeks,  was  treated  slightingly  by  Friedrich ;
hardly  admitted  to  Audience  ;  and  Friedrich's  public  reply  to
the  last  Dehortatorium  had  almost  something  of  sarcasm  in
it :  Evil  counsellors  yourself,  Most  Dread  Kaiser !  It  is  you
that  are  "misled  by  counsellors,  who  might  chance  to  set
Germany  on  fire,  were  others  as  unwise  as  they ! "  Which
latter  phrase  was  remarkable  to  mankind.  —  There  is  a  long
account  already  run  up  between  that  old  gentleman,  with  his
Seckendorfs,  Grumkows,  with  his  dull  insolencies,  wiggeries,
and  this  young  gentleman,  who  has  nearly  had  his  heart
broken  and  his  Father's  house  driven  mad  by  them !  Borck
remains  at  his  post ;  rations  duly  delivered,  and  fifty  louis  a
day  for  his  own  private  expenses ;  and  there  is  no  answer  to
the  Kaiser,  or  in  sharp  brief  terms  (about  "  chances  of  setting
Germany  on  fire  "),  rather  worse  than  none.

Eeaders  see,  as  well  as  Friedrich  did,  what  the  upshot  of
this  affair  must  be  ;  —  we  will  now  finish  it  off,  and  wash  our
hands  of  it,  before  following  his  Majesty  to  Berlin.  The
poor  Bishop  had  applied,  shrieking,  to  the  French  for  help ;  —
and  there  came  some  colloquial  passages  between  Voltaire  and
Fcnelon,  if  that  were  a  result.  He  had  shrieked  in  like  man-
ner to  the  Dutch,  but  without  result  of  any  kind  traceable  in
that  quarter  :  nowhere,  except  from  the  Kaiser,  is  so  much  as
a  Dehortatorium  to  be  got.  Whereupon  the  once  high-flying,
now  vainly  shrieking  Bishop  discerns  clearly  that  there  is  but
one  course  left,  —  the  course  which  has  lain  wide  open  for
some  years  past,  had  not  his  flight  gone  too  high  for  seeing
it.  Before  three  weeks  are  over,  seeing  how  Dehortatoriums
go,  he  sends  his  Ambassadors  to  Berlin,  his  apologies,  pro-
posals:1 "Would  not  your  Majesty  perhaps  consent  to  sell
this  Herstal,  as  your  Father  of  glorious  memory  was  pleased
to  be  willing  once  ?  '

Friedrich answers  straightway  to the  effect :  "  Certainly  !

1  Ambassadors  arrived  28th  September;  last  Dehortatorium  not  yet  out.
Business  was  completed  20th  October  (Rodenbeck,  in  diebus).

CHAP.  VI.  ROYAL  UNCLE  AT  HANOVER.  245

16th  Sept.  1740.

Pay  me  the  price  it  was  once  already  offered  for :  100,000
thalers,  plus  the  expenses  since  incurred.  That  will  be
180,000  thalers,  besides  what  you  have  spent  already  on
General  Borck's  days'  wages.  To  which  we  will  add  that
wretched  little  fraction  of  Old  Debt,  clear  as  noon,  but  never
paid  nor  any  part  of  it ;  60,000  thalers,  due  by  the  See  of
Liege  ever  since  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht ;  60,000,  for  which  we
will  charge  no  interest :  that  will  make  240,000  thalers,  —
£36,000,  instead  of  the  old  sum  you  might  have  had  it  at.
Produce  that  cash ;  and  take  Herstal,  and  all  the  dust  that
has  risen  out  of  it,  well  home  with  you."1  The  Bishop
thankfully  complies  in  all  points ;  negotiation  speedily  done
("  20th  Oct."  the  final  date)  :  Bishop  has  not,  I  think,  quite
so  much  cash  on  hand ;  but  will  pay  all  he  has,  and  4  per
centum  interest  till  the  whole  be  liquidated.  His  Ambassa-
dors "  get  gold  snuffboxes  ;  "  and  return  mildly  glad  !

And  thus,  in  some  six  weeks  after  Borck's  arrival  in  those
parts,  Borck's  function  is  well  done.  The  noise  of  Gazettes
and  Diplomatic  circles  lays  itself  again ;  and  Herstal,  famous
once  for  King  Pipin,  and  famous  again  for  King  Friedrich,
lapses  at  length  into  obscurity,  which  we  hope  will  never
end.  Hope; — though  who  can  say?  Roucoux,  quite  close
upon  it,  becomes  a  Battle-ground  in  some  few  years ;  and
memorabilities  go  much  at  random  in  this  world  !

CHAPTER  VI.

RETURNS  BY  HANOVER  ;  DOES  NOT  CALL  ON  HIS  ROYAL  UNCLE

THERE.

FRIEDRICH  spent  ten  days  on  his  circuitous  journey  home ;
considerable  inspection  to  be  done,  in  Minden,  Magdeburg,  not
to  speak  of  other  businesses  he  had.  The  old  Newspapers  are
still  more  intent  upon  him,  now  that  the  Herstal  Affair  has
broken  into  flame :  especially  the  English  Newspapers ;  who
1  Stenzel,  iv.  60,  who  counts  in  gulden,  and  is  not  distinct.

246 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

guess  that  there  are  passages  of  courtship  going  on  between
great  George  their  King  and  him.  Here  is  one  fact,  correct  in
every  point,  for  the  old  London  Public  :  "  Letters  from  Han-
over say,  that  the  King  of  Prussia  passed  within  a  small  dis-
tance of  that  City  the  16th  inst.  N.S.,  on  his  return  to  Berlin,
but  did  not  stop  at  Herrenhausen ;  "  —  about  which  there  has
been  such  hoping  and  speculating  among  us  lately.1  A  fact
which  the  extinct  Editor  seems  to  meditate  for  a  day  or  two ;
after  which  he  says  (partly  in  italics),  opening  his  lips  the
second  time,  like  a  Friar  Bacon's  Head  significant  to  the  Pub-
lic :  "  Letters  from  Hanover  tell  us  that  the  Interview,  which
it  was  said  his  Majesty  was  to  have  with  the  King  of  Prussia,
did  not  take  place,  for  certain  private  reasons,  which  our  Corre-
spondent leaves  us  to  guess  at !  "

It  is  well  known  Friedrich  did  not  love  his  little  Uncle,  then
or  thenceforth ;  still  less  his  little  Uncle  him  :  "  What  is  this
Prussia,  rising  alongside  of  us,  higher  and  higher,  as  if  it  would
reach  our  own  sublime  level !  "  thinks  the  little  Uncle  to  him-
self. At  present  there  is  no  quarrel  between  them;  on  the
contrary,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is  a  mutual  capability  of  help-
ing one  another,  which  both  recognize ;  but  will  an  interview
tend  to  forward  that  useful  result  ?  Friedrich,  in  the  intervals
of  an  ague?  with  Herstal  just  broken  out,  may  have  wisely
decided,  No.  "Our  sublime  little  Uncle,  of  the  waxy  com-
plexion, with  the  proudly  staring  fish-eyes,  —  no  wit  in  him,
not  much  sense,  and  a  great  deal  of  pride,  —  stands  dreadfully
erect,  'plumb  and  more,'  with  the  Garter-leg  advanced,  when
one  goes  to  see  him ;  and  his  remarks  are  not  of  an  entertain-
ing nature.  Leave  him  standing  there :  to  him  let  Truchsess
and  Bielfeld  suffice,  in  these  hurries,  in  this  ague  that  is  still
upon  us."  Upon  which  the  dull  old  Newspapers,  Owls  of
Minerva  that  then  were,  endeavor  to  draw  inferences.  The
noticeable  fact  is,  Friedrich  did,  on  this  occasion,  pass  within
a  mile  or  two  of  his  royal  Uncle,  without  seeing  him ;  and
had  not,  through  life,  another  opportunity;  never  saw  the
sublime  little  man  at  all,  nor  was  again  so  near  him.

1  Daily  Post,  22d  September,  1 740 ;  other  London  Newspapers  from  Julj
31st  downwards.

CHAP.  VI.  ROYAL  UNCLE  AT  HANOVER.  247

16th  Sept.  1740.

I  believe  Friedrich  little  knows  the  thick-coming  difficulties
of  his  Britannic  Majesty  at  this  juncture ;  and  is  too  impa-
tient of  these  laggard  procedures  on  the  part  of  a  man  with
eyes  a  fleur-de-tete.  Modern  readers  too  have  forgotten  Jen-
kins's Ear  ;  it  is  not  till  after  long  study  and  survey  that  one
begins  to  perceive  the  anomalous  profundities  of  that  pheno-
menon to  the  poor  English  Nation  and  its  poor  George  II.

The  English  sent  off,  last  year,  a  scanty  Expedition,  "  six
ships  of  the  line,"  only  six,  under  Vernon,  a  fiery  Admiral,  a
little  given  to  be  fiery  in  Parliamentary  talk  withal ;  and  these
did  proceed  to  Porto-Bello  on  the  Spanish  Main  of  South
America ;  did  hurl  out  on  Porto-Bello  such  a  fiery  destructive
deluge,  of  gunnery  and  bayonet-work,  as  quickly  reduced  the
poor  place  to  the  verge  of  ruin,  and  forced  it  to  surrender  with
whatever  navy,  garrison,  goods  and  resources  were  in  it,  to  the
discretion  of  fiery  Vernon,  —  who  does  not  prove  implacable,
he  or  his,  to  a  petitioning  enemy.  Yes,  humble  the  insolent,
but  then  be  merciful  to  them,  say  the  admiring  Gazetteers.
"  The  actual  monster,"  how  cheering  to  think,  "  who  tore  off
Mr.  Jenkins's  Ear,  was  got  hold  of  [actual  monster,  or  even
three  or  four  different  monsters  who  each  did  it,  the  "  hold  got "
being  mythical,  as  readers  see],  and  naturally  thought  he  would
be  slit  to  ribbons ;  but  our  people  magnanimously  pardoned
him,  magnanimously  flung  him  aside  out  of  sight ; " x  impossible
to  shoot  a  dog  in  cold  blood.

Whereupon  Vernon  returned  home  triumphant ;  and  there
burst  forth  such  a  jubilation,  over  the  day  of  small  things,  as
is  now  astonishing  to  think  of.  Had  the  Termagant's  own
Thalamus  and  Treasury  been  bombarded  suddenly  one  night
by  red-hot  balls,  Madrid  City  laid  in  ashes,  or  Baby  Carlos's
Apanage  extinguished  from  Creation,  there  could  hardly  have
been  greater  English  joy  (witness  the  "  Porto-Bellos "  they
still  have,  new  Towns  so  named) ;  so  flamy  is  the  murky  ele-
ment growing  on  that  head.  And  indeed  had  the  cipher  of
tar-barrels  burnt,  and  of  ale-barrels  drunk,  and  the  general
account  of  wick  and  tallow  spent  in  illuminations  and  in  alder-

1  Gentleman's  Magazine,-*..  124,  145  (date  of  the  Event  is  3d  December  N.S.,
1739).

248 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

manic  exertions  on  the  matter,  been  accurately  taken,  one  doubts
if  Porto-Bello  sold,  without  shot  fired,  to  the  highest  bidder,
at  its  floweriest,  would  have  covered  such  a  sum.  For  they  are
a  singular  Nation,  if  stirred  up  from  their  stagnancy ;  and  are
much  in  earnest  about  this  Spanish  War.

It  is  said  there  is  now  another  far  grander  Expedition  on
the  stocks  :  military  this  time  as  well  as  naval,  intended  for
the  Spanish  Main ;  —  but  of  that,  for  the  present,  we  will
defer  speaking.  Enough,  the  Spanish  War  is  a  most  serious
and  most  furious  business  to  those  old  English ;  and,  to  us,  after
forced  study  of  it,  shines  out  like  far-off  conflagration,  with  a
certain  lurid  significance  in  the  then  night  of  things.  Night
otherwise  fallen  dark  and  somniferous  to  modern  mankind.
As  Britannic  Majesty  and  his  Walpoles  have,  from  the  first,
been  dead  against  this  Spanish  War,  the  problem  is  all  the
more  ominous,  and  the  dreadful  corollaries  that  may  hang  by
it  the  more  distressing  to  the  royal  mind.

For  example,  there  is  known,  or  as  good  as  known,  to  be
virtually  some  Family  Compact,  or  covenanted  Brotherhood  of
Bourbonism,  French  and  Spanish:  political  people  quake  to
ask  themselves,  "  How  will  the  French  keep  out  of  this  War,
if  it  continue  any  length  of  time  ?  And  in  that  case,  how  will
Austria,  Europe  at  large  ?  Jenkins's  Ear  will  have  kindled
the  Universe,  not  the  Spanish  Main  only,  and  we  shall  be  at
a  fine  pass  !  "  The  Britannic  Majesty  reflects  that  if  France
take  to  fighting  him,  the  first  stab  given  will  probably  be  in  the
accessiblest  quarter  and  the  intensely  most  sensitive,  —  our
own  Electoral  Dominions  where  no  Parliament  plagues  us,  our
dear  native  country,  Hanover.  Extremely  interesting  to  know
what  Friedrich  of  Prussia  will  do  in  such  contingency  ?

Well,  truly  it  might  have  been  King  George's  best  bargain
to  close  with  Friedrich ;  to  guarantee  Jiilich  and  Berg,  and
get  Fredrich  to  stand  between  the  French  and  Hanover ;  while
George,  with  an  England  behind  him,  in  such  humor,  went
wholly  into  that  Spanish  Business,  the  one  thing  needful  to
them  at  present.  Truly;  but  then  again,  there  are  consider-
ations :  "  What  is  this  Friedrich,  just  come  out  upon  the  world  ?
What  real  fighting  power  has  he,  after  all  that  ridiculous  drill-

CHAP.  VI.  ROYAL  UNCLE  AT  HANOVER.  249

16th  Sept.  1740.

ing  and  recruiting  Friedrich  Wilhelm  made  ?  Will  lie  be  faith-
ful in  bargain ;  is  not,  perhaps,  from  of  old,  his  bias  always
toward  France  rather  ?  And  the  Kaiser,  what  will  the  Kaiser
say  to  it  ?  "  These  are  questions  for  a  Britannic  Majesty !
Seldom  was  seen  such  an  insoluble  imbroglio  of  potentialities  ;
dangerous  to  touch,  dangerous  to  leave  lying;  —  and  his  Bri-
tannic Majesty's  procedures  upon  it  are  of  a  very  slow  intricate
sort ;  and  will  grow  still  more  so,  year  after  year,  in  the  new
intricacies  that  are  coming,  and  be  a  weariness  to  my  readers
and  me.  For  observe  the  simultaneous  fact.  All  this  while,
Robinson  at  Vienna  is  dunning  the  Imperial  Majesty  to  re-
member old  Marlborough  days  and  the  Laws  of  Nature ;  and
declare  for  us  against  France,  in  case  of  the  worst.  What  an
attempt !  Imperial  Majesty  has  no  money ;  Imperial  Maj-
esty remembers  recent  days  rather,  and  his  own  last  quarrel
with  France  (on  the  Polish-Election  score),  in  which  you  Sea-
Powers  cruelly  stood  neuter !  One  comfort,  and  pretty  much
one  only,  is  left  to  a  nearly  bankrupt  Imperial  heart ;  that
France  does  at  any  rate  ratify  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  instead
of  enemy  to  that  inestimable  Document  has  become  friend,  —
if  only  she  be  well  let  alone.  "  Let  well  alone,"  says  the  sad
Kaiser,  bankrupt  of  heart  as  well  as  purse  :  "  I  have  saved  the
Pragmatic,  got  Fleury  to  guarantee  it ;  I  will  hunt  wild  swine
and  not  shadows  any  more  :  ask  me  not ! "  And  now  this
Herstal  business  ;  the  Imperial  Dehortatoriums,  perhaps  of  a
high  nature,  that  are  like  to  come  ?  More  hopeless  proposition
the  Britannic  Majesty  never  made  than  this  to  the  Kaiser.
But  he  persists  in  it,  orders  Eobinson  to  persist ;  knocks  at
the  Austrian  door  with  one  hand,  at  the  Prussian  or  Anti-
Austrian  with  the  other ;  and  gazes,  with  those  proud  fish-eyes,
into  perils  and  potentialities  and  a  sea  of  troubles.  Weari-
some to  think  of,  were  not  one  bound  to  it !  Here,  from  a
singular  Constitutional  History  of  England,  not  yet  got  into
print,  are  two  Excerpts ;  which  I  will  request  the  reader  to
try  if  he  can  take  along  with  him,  in  view  of  much  that  is
coming  :  —

1.  A  just  War.  — "  This  War,  which  posterity  scoffs  at  as
the  War  for  Jenkins's  Ear,  was,  if  we  examine  it,  a  quite  indis-

250 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

pensable  one ;  the  dim  much-bewildered  English,  driven  into
it  by  their  deepest  instincts,  were,  in  a  chaotic  inarticulate
way,  right  and  not  wrong  in  taking  it  as  the  Commandment  of
Heaven.  For  such,  in  a  sense,  it  was ;  as  shall  by  and  by
appear.  Not  perhaps  since  the  grand  Keformation  Contro-
versy, under  Oliver  Cromwell  and  Elizabeth,  had  there,  to  this
poor  English  People  (who  are  essentially  dumb,  inarticulate,
from  the  weight  of  meaning  they  have,  notwithstanding  the
palaver  one  hears  from  them  in  certain  epochs),  been  a  more
authentic  cause  of  War.  And,  what  was  the  fatal  and  yet
foolish  circumstance,  their  Constitutional  Captains,  especially
their  King,  would  never  and  could  never  regard  it  as  such ;
but  had  to  be  forced  into  it  by  the  public  rage,  there  being  no
other  method  left  in  the  case.

"I  say,  a  most  necessary  War,  though  of  a  most  stupid
appearance;  such  the  fatality  of  it:  —  begun,  carried  on,
ended,  as  if  by  a  People  in  a  state  of  somnambulism  !  More
confused  operation  never  was.  A  solid  placid  People,  heavily
asleep  (and  snoring  much,  shall  we  say,  and  inarticulately
grunting  and  struggling  under  indigestions,  Constitutional  and
other  ?  Do  but  listen  to  the  hum  of  those  extinct  Pamphlets
and  Parliamentary  Oratories  of  theirs!), — yet  an  honestly
intending  People ;  and  keenly  alive  to  any  commandment  from
Heaven,  that  could  pierce  through  the  thick  skin  of  them  into
their  big  obstinate  heart.  Such  a  commandment,  then  and
there,  was  that  monition  about  Jenkins's  Ear.  Upon  which,
so  pungent  was  it  to  them,  they  started  violently  out  of  bed,
into  painful  sleep-walking ;  and  went,  for  twenty  years  and
more,  clambering  and  sprawling  about,  far  and  wide,  on  the
giddy  edge  of  precipices,  over  house-tops  and  frightful  cornices
and  parapets ;  in  a  dim  fulfilment  of  the  said  Heaven's  com-
mand. I  reckon  that  this  War,  though  there  were  intervals,
Treaties  of  Peace  more  than  one,  and  the  War  had  various
names,  —  did  not  end  till  1763.  And  then,  by  degrees,  the  poor
English  Nation  found  that  (at,  say,  a  thousand  times  the  neces-
sary expense,  and  with  imminent  peril  to  its  poor  head,  and  all
the  bones  of  its  body)  it  had  actually  succeeded,  —  by  dreadful
exertions  in  its  sleep !  This  will  be  more  apparent  by  and  by ;

CHAP.  VI.  ROYAL  UNCLE  AT  HANOVER.  251

16th  Sept.  1740.

and  may  be  a  kind  of  comfort  to  the  sad  English  reader,  drearily
surveying  such  somnambulisms  on  the  part  of  his  poor  ances-
tors."

2.  Two  Difficulties.  —  "There  are  Two  grand  Difficulties  in
this  Farce-Tragedy  of  a  war  ;  of  which  only  one,  and  that  not
the  worst  of  the  Pair,  is  in  the  least  surmised  by  the  English
hitherto.  Difficulty  First,  which  is  even  worse  than  the  other,
and  will  surprisingly  attend  the  English  in  all  their  Wars  now
coming,  is :  That  their  fighting-apparatus,  though  made  of
excellent  material,  cannot  fight,  —  being  in  disorganic  condi-
tion ;  one  branch  of  it,  especially  the  '  Military '  one  as  they
are  pleased  to  call  it,  being  as  good  as  totally  chaotic,  and  this
in  a  quiet  habitual  manner,  this  long  while  back.  With  the
Naval  branch  it  is  otherwise ;  which  also  is  habitual  there.
The  English  almost  as  if  by  nature  can  sail,  and  fight,  in
ships;  cannot  well  help  doing  it.  Sailors  innumerable  are
bred  to  them  ;  they  are  planted  in  the  Ocean,  opulent  stormy
Neptune  clipping  them  in  all  his  moods  forever  :  and  then  by
nature,  being  a  dumb,  much-enduring,  much-reflecting,  stout,
veracious  and  valiant  kind  of  People,  they  shine  in  that  way
of  life,  which  specially  requires  such.  Without  much  fore-
thought, they  have  sailors  innumerable,  and  of  the  best  qual-
ity. The  English  have  among  them  also,  strange  as  it  may
seem  to  the  cursory  observer,  a  great  gift  of  organizing ;  wit-
ness their  Arkwrights  and  others :  and  this  gift  they  may
often,  in  matters  Naval  more  than  elsewhere,  get  the  chance
of  exercising.  For  a  Ship's  Crew,  or  even  a  Fleet,  unlike  a  land
Army,  is  of  itself  a  unity,  its  fortunes  disjoined,  dependent  on
its  own  management ;  and  it  falls,  moreover,  as  no  land  army
can,  to  the  undivided  guidance  of  one  man,  —  who  (by  hypo-
thesis, being  English)  has  now  and  then,  from  of  old,  chanced
to  be  an  organizing  man ;  and  who  is  always  much  interested
to  know  and  practise  what  has  been  well  organized.  For  you
are  in  contact  with  verities,  to  an  unexampled  degree,  when  you
get  upon  the  Ocean,  with  intent  to  sail  on  it,  much  more  to
fight  on  it ;  —  bottomless  destruction  raging  beneath  you  and
on  all  hands  of  you,  if  you  neglect,  for  any  reason,  the  methods
of  keeping  it  down,  and  making  it  float  you  to  your  aim  !

252 FETEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

The  English.  Navy  is  in  tolerable  order  at  that  period.  But
as  to  the  English  Army,  —  we  may  say  it  is,  in  a  wrong  sense,
the  wonder  of  the  world,  and  continues  so  throughout  the
whole  of  this  History  and  farther !  Never  before,  among  the
rational  sons  of  Adam,  were  Armies  sent  out  on  such  terms,  —
namely  without  a  General,  or  with  no  General  understanding
the  least  of  his  business.  The  English  have  a  notion  that  Gen-
eralship is  not  wanted ;  that  War  is  not  an  Art,  as  playing
Chess  is,  as  finding  the  Longitude,  and  doing  the  Differential
Calculus  are  (and  a  much  deeper  Art  than  any  of  these)  ;  that
War  is  taught  by  Nature,  as  eating  is;  that  courageous  sol-
diers, led  on  by  a  courageous  Wooden  Pole  with  Cocked-hat
on  it,  will  do  very  well.  In  the  world  I  have  not  found  opacity
of  platitude  go  deeper  among  any  People.  This  is  Difficulty
First,  not  yet  suspected  by  an  English  People,  capable  of  great
opacity  on  some  subjects.

"  Difficulty  Second  is,  That  their  Ministry,  whom  they  had
to  force  into  this  War,  perhaps  do  not  go  zealously  upon  it.
And  perhaps  even,  in  the  above  circumstances,  they  totally
want  knowledge  how  to  go  upon  it,  were  they  never  so  zealous  ;
Difficulty  Second  might  be  much  helped,  were  it  not  for  Diffi-
culty First.  But  the  administering  of  War  is  a  thing  also
that  does  not  come  to  a  man  like  eating.  —  This  Second
Difficulty,  suspicion  that  Walpole  and  perhaps  still  higher
heads  want  zeal,  gives  his  Britannic  Majesty  infinite  trouble  ;
and"  —

—  And  so,  in  short,  he  stands  there,  with  the  Garter-leg  ad-
vanced, looking  loftily  into  a  considerable  sea  of  troubles,  —
that  day  when  Friedrich  drove  past  him,  Friday,  16th  Septem-
ber, 1740,  and  never  came  so  near  him  again.

The  next  business  for  Friedrich  was  a  Visit  at  Brunswick,
to  the  Affinities  and  Kindred,  in  passing;  where  also  was
an  important  little  act  to  be  done  :  Betrothal  of  the  young
Prince,  August  Wilhelm,  Heir-Presumptive  whom  we  saw  in
Strasburg,  to  a  Princess  of  that  House,  Louisa  Amelia,  younger
Sister  of  Friedrich's  own  Queen.  A  modest  promising  ar-
rangement ;  which  turned  out  well  enough,  —  though  the

CHAP.  VII.  WITHDRAWS  TO  EEINSBERG.  253

Sept.-Oct.  1740.

young  Prince,  Father  to  the  Kings  that  since  are,  was  not
supremely  fortunate  otherwise.1  After  which,  the  review  at
Magdeburg;  and  home  on  the  24th,  there  to  "be  busy  as  a
Turk  or  as  a  M.  Jordan,"  —  according  to  what  we  read  long
since.

CHAPTER  VII.

WITHDRAWS TO REINSBERG, HOPING A PEACEABLE WINTER.

BY  this  Herstal  token,  which  is  now  blazing  abroad,  now
and  for  a  month  to  come,  it  can  be  judged  that  the  young
King  of  Prussia  intends  to  stand  on  his  own  footing,  quite
peremptorily  if  need  be ;  and  will  by  no  means  have  himself
led  about  in  Imperial  harness,  as  his  late  Father  was.  So  that
a  dull  Public  (Herrenhausen  very  specially),  and  Gazetteer
Owls  of  Minerva  everywhere,  may  expect  events.  All  the
more  indubitably,  when  that  spade-work  comes  to  light  in  the
Wesel  Country.  It  is  privately  certain  (the  Gazetteers  not
yet  sure  about  it,  till  they  see  the  actual  spades  going),  this
new  King  does  fully  intend  to  assert  his  rights  on  Berg-Jiilich ;
and  will  appear  there  with  his  iron  ramrods,  the  instant  old
Kur-Pfalz  shall  decease,  let  France  and  the  Kaiser  say  No  to
it  or  say  Yes.  There  are,  in  fact,  at  a  fit  place,  "Biiderich
in  the  neighborhood  of  Wesel,"  certain  rampart-works,  begin-
nings as  of  an  Entrenched  Camp,  going  on;  —  "for  Review
purposes  merely,"  say  the  Gazetteers,  in  italics.  Here,  it
privately  is  Friedrich's  resolution,  shall  a  Prussian  Army,  of
the  due  strength  (could  be  well-nigh  100,000  strong  if  need-
ful), make  its  appearance,  directly  on  old  Kur-Pfalz's  decease,
if  one  live  to  see  such  event.2  France  and  the  Kaiser  will
probably  take  good  survey  of  that  Biiderich  phenomenon
before  meddling.

1  Betrothal  was  20th  September,  1740;  Marriage,  5th  January,  1742  (Buch-
holz,  i.  207).

2  Stenzel,  iv.  61.

254 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XL

1740.

To  do  his  work  like  a  King,  and  shun  no  peril  and  no  toil
in  the  course  of  what  his  work  may  be,  is  Friedrich's  rule  and
intention.  Nevertheless  it  is  clear  he  expects  to  approve  him-
self magnanimous  rather  in  the  Peaceable  operations  than  in
the  Warlike  ;  and  his  outlooks  are,  of  all  places  and  pursuits,
towards  Eeinsberg  and  the  Fine  Arts,  for  the  time  being.
His  Public  activity  meanwhile  they  describe  as  "  prodigious,"
though  the  ague  still  clings  to  him ;  such  building,  institut-
ing, managing:  Opera-House,  French  Theatre,  Palace  for  his
Mother  ;  —  day  by  day,  many  things  to  be  recorded  by  Editor
Forrney,  though  the  rule  about  them  here  is  silence  except  on
cause.

No  doubt  the  ague  is  itself  privately  a  point  of  moment.
Such  a  vexatious  paltry  little  thing,  in  this  bright  whirl  of
Activities,  Public  and  other,  which  he  continues  managing
in  spite  of  it ;  impatient  to  be  rid  of  it.  But  it  will  not  go  :
there  it  reappears  always,  punctual  to  its  "  fourth  day,"  —
like  a  snarling  street-dog,  in  the  high  Ball-room  and  Work-
room. "He  is  drinking  Pyrmont  water;"  has  himself  pro-
posed Quinquina,  a  remedy  just  come  up,  but  the  Doctors
shook  their  heads  ;  has  tried  snatches  of  Eeinsberg,  too  short ;
he  intends  soon  to  be  out  there  for  a  right  spell  of  country,
there  to  be  "happy,"  and  get  quit  of  his  ague.  The  ague
went,  —  and  by  a  remedy  which  surprised  the  whole  world,
as  will  be  seen !

Willielmina's  Return-  Visit.

Monday,  17th  October,  came  the  Baireuth  Visitors ;  Wilhel-
mina  all  in  a  flutter,  and  tremor  of  joy  and  sorrow,  to  see  her
Brother  again,  her  old  kindred  and  the  altered  scene  of  things.
Poor  Lady,  she  is  perceptibly  more  tremulous  than  usual ;
and  her  Narrative,  not  in  dates  only,  but  in  more  memorable
points,  dances  about  at  a  sad  rate ;  interior  agitations  and
tremulous  shrill  feelings  shivering  her  this  way  and  that,  and
throwing  things  topsy-turvy  in  one's  recollection.  Like  the
magnetic  needle,  shaky  but  steadfast  (agitee  mais  constants).
Truer  nothing  can  be,  points  forever  to  the  Pole;  but  also

CHAP.  VII.  WITHDRAWS  TO  REINSBERG.  255

mo.

what  obliquities  it  makes  ;  will  shiver  aside  in  mad  escapades,
if  you  hold  the  paltriest  bit  of  old  iron  near  it,  —  paltriest
clack  of  gossip  about  this  loved  Brother  of  mine  !  Brother,
we  will  hope,  silently  continues  to  be  Pole,  so  that  the  needle
always  comes  back  again  ;  otherwise  all  would  go  to  wreck.
Here,  in  abridged  and  partly  rectified  form,  are  the  phenomena
witnessed  :  —

"  We  arrived  at  Berlin  the  end  of  October  [Monday,  17th,  as
above  said].  My  younger  Brothers,  followed  by  the  Princes
of  the  Blood  and  by  all  the  Court,  received  us  at  the  bottom
of  the  stairs.  I  was  led  to  my  apartment,  where  I  found  the
Eeigning  Queen,  my  Sisters  [Ulrique,  Amelia],  and  the  Prin-
cesses [of  the  Blood,  as  above,  Schwedt  and  the  rest].  I
learned  with  much  chagrin  that  the  King  was  ill  of  tertian
ague  [quartan  ;  but  that  is  no  matter].  He  sent  me  word  that,
being  in  his  fit,  he  could  not  see  me  ;  but  that  he  depended  on
having  that  pleasure  to-morrow.  The  Queen  Mother,  to  whom
I  went  without  delay,  was  in  a  dark  condition  ;  rooms  all  hung
with  their  lugubrious  drapery  ;  everything  yet  in  the  depth
of  mourning  for  my  Father.  What  a  scene  for  me  !  Nature
has  her  rights  ;  I  can  say  with  truth,  I  have  almost  never  in
my  life  been  so  moved  as  on  this  occasion."  Interview  with
Mamma  —  we  can  fancy  it  —  "was  of  the  most  touching."
Wilhelmina  had  been  absent  eight  years.  She  scarcely  knows
the  young  ones  again,  all  so  grown  ;  —  finds  change  on  change  :
and  that  Time,  as  he  always  is,  has  been  busy.  That  night  the
Supper-Party  was  exclusively  a  Family  one.

Her  Brother's  welcome  to  her  on  the  morrow,  though  ardent
enough,  she  found  deficient  in  sincerity,  deficient  in  several
points  ;  as  indeed  a  Brother  up  to  the  neck  in  business,  and
just  come  out  of  an  ague-fit,  does  not  appear  to  the  best  ad-
vantage. Wilhelraina  noticed  how  ill  he  looked,  so  lean  and
broken-down  (maigre  et  defait)  within  the  last  two  months  ;
but  seems  to  have  taken  no  account  of  it  farther,  in  striking
her  balances  with  Friedrich.  And  indeed  in  her  Narrative  of
this  Visit,  not,  we  will  hope,  in  the  Visit  itself,  she  must  have
been  in  a  high  state  of  magnetic  deflection,  —  pretty  nearly
her  maximum  of  such,  discoverable  in  those  famous  Memoirs,  —

256 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

such  a  tumult  is  there  in  her  statements,  all  gone  to  ground-
and-lofty  tumbling  in  this  place ;  so  discrepant  are  the  still
ascertainable  facts  from  this  topsy-turvy  picture  of  them,
sketched  by  her  four  years  hence  (in  1744).  The  truest  of
magnetic  needles ;  but  so  sensitive,  if  you  bring  foreign  iron
near  it !

Wilhelmina  was  loaded  with  honors  by  an  impartial  Berlin
Public,  that  is,  Court  Public  ;  "  but,  all  being  in  mourning,  the
Court  was  not  brilliant.  The  Queen  Mother  saw  little  com-
pany, and  was  sunk  in  sorrow ;  —  had  not  the  least  influence
in  affairs,  so  jealous  was  the  new  King  of  his  Authority, —
to  the  Queen  Mother's  surprise,"  says  Wilhelmina.  For  the
rest,  here  is  a  King  "becoming  truly  unpopular  [or,  we  fancy
so,  in  our  deflected  state,  and  judging  by  the  rumor  of  cliques]  ;
a  general  discontent  reigning  in  the  Country,  love  of  his  sub-
jects pretty  much  gone ;  people  speaking  of  him  in  no  mea-
sured terms  [in  certain  cliques].  Cares  nothing  about  those
who  helped  him  as  Prince  Royal,  say  some ;  others  complain  of
his  avarice  [meaning  steady  vigilance  in  outlay]  as  surpassing
the  late  King's ;  this  one  complained  of  his  violences  of  tem-
per (emportemens)  ;  that  one  of  his  suspicions,  of  his  distrust,
his  haughtinesses,  his  dissimulation  "  (meaning  polite  impene-
trability Avheii  he  saw  good).  Several  circumstances,  known
to  Wilhelmina's  own  experience,  compel  Wilhelmina's  assent
on  those  points.  "  I  would  have  spoken  to  him  about  them,
if  my  Brother  of  Prussia  [young  August  Wilhelm,  betrothed
the  other  day]  and  the  Queen  Regnant  had  not  dissuaded  me.
Farther  on  I  will  give  the  explanation  of  all  this,"  —  never
did  it  anywhere.  "  I  beg  those  who  may  one  day  read  these
Memoirs,  to  suspend  their  judgment  on  the  character  of  this
great  Prince  till  I  have  developed  it."  1  0  my  Princess,  you
are  true  and  bright,  but  you  are  shrill ;  and  I  admire  the
effect  of  atmospheric  electricity,  not  to  say,  of  any  neigh-
boring marine-store  shop,  or  miserable  bit  of  broken  pan,
on  one  of  the  finest  magnetic  needles  ever  made  and  set
trembling  !

Wilhelmina  is  incapable  of  deliberate  falsehood;  and  this

1  Wilhelmina,  ii.  326.

CHAP.  VII.  WITHDRAWS  TO  REINSBERG.  257

Oct.  1740.

her  impression  or  reminiscence,  with  all  its  exaggeration,  is
entitled  to  be  heard  in  evidence  so  far.  From  this,  and  from
other  sources,  readers  will  assure  themselves  that  discontents
were  not  wanting ;  that  King  Friedrich  was  not  amiable  to
everybody  at  this  time,  —  which  indeed  he  never  grew  to  be
at  any  other  time.  He  had  to  be  a  King ;  that  was  the  trade
he  followed,  not  the  quite  different  one  of  being  amiable  all
round.  Amiability  is  good,  my  Princess  ;  but  the  question
rises,  "  To  whom  ?  —  for  example,  to  the  young  gentleman
who  shot  himself  in  Lobegun  ?  "  There  are  young  gentlemen
and  old  sometimes  in  considerable  quantities,  to  whom,  if  you
were  in  your  duty,  as  a  King  of  men  (or  even  as  a  "  King  of
one  man  and  his  affairs,"  if  that  is  all  your  kingdom),  you
should  have  been  hateful  instead  of  amiable  !  That  is  a  stern
truth  ;  too  much  forgotten  by  Wilhelmina  and  others.  Again,
what  a  deadening  and  killing  circumstance  is  it  in  the  career
of  amiability,  that  you  are  bound  not  to  be  communicative  of
your  inner  man,  but  perpetually  and  strictly  the  reverse  !  It
may  be  doubted  if  a  good  King  can  be  amiable  ;  certainly  he
cannot  in  any  but  the  noblest  ages,  and  then  only  to  a  select
few.  I  should  guess  Friedrich  was  at  no  time  fairly  loved,
not  by  those  nearest  to  him.  He  was  rapid,  decisive ;  of
wiry  compact  nature ;  had  nothing  of  his  Father's  amplitudes,
simplicities  ;  nothing  to  sport  with  and  fondle,  far  from  it.
Tremulous  sensibilities,  ardent  affections ;  these  we  clearly
discover  in  him,  in  extraordinary  vivacity  ;  but  he  wears  them
under  his  polished  panoply,  and  is  outwardly  a  radiant  but
metallic  object  to  mankind.  Let  us  carry  this  along  with  us
in  studying  him  ;  and  thank  Wilhelmina  for  giving  us  hint  of
it  in  her  oblique  way.  —  Wilhelmina's  love  for  her  Brother
rose  to  quite  heroic  pitch  in  coming  years,  and  was  at  its
highest  when  she  died.  That  continuation  of  her  Memoirs
in  which  she  is  to  develop  her  Brother's  character,  was  never
written :  it  has  been  soiight  for  in  modern  times ;  and  a  few
insignificant  pages,  with  evidence  that  there  is  not,  and  was
not,  any  more,  are  all  that  has  turned  up.1

1  Pertz,  Ueber  die  Denkwurd/gkeiten  der  Markgrafin  von  Bayreuth  (Paper  read
in  the  AJcademie  der  Wissenschaften,  Berlin,  25th  April,  1850).

VOL.  VII.  17

258 FKIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS IN HAND.  BOOK  XL

"

Incapable  of  falsity  prepense,  we  say  ;  but  the  known  facts,
which  stand  abundantly  on  record  if  you  care  to  search  them
out,  are  merely  as  follows:  Friedrich,  with  such  sincerity
as  there  might  be,  did  welcome  Wilhelmina  on  the  morrow  of
her  arrival  ;  spoke  of  Eeinsberg,  and  of  air  and  rest,  and  how
pleasant  it  would  be  ;  rolled  off  next  morning,  having  at  last
gathered  up  his  businesses,  and  got  them  well  in  hand,  to
Eeinsberg  accordingly  ;  whither  Wilhelmina,  with  the  Queen
Eegnant  and  others  of  agreeable  quality,  followed  in  two
days;  intending  a  long  and  pleasant  spell  of  country  out
there.  Which  hope  was  tolerably  fulfilled,  even  for  Wilhel-
mina, though  there  did  come  unexpected  interruptions,  not  of
Friedrich's  bringing.

Unexpected  News  at  Reinsberg.

Friedrich's  pursuits  and  intended  conquests,  for  the  pres-
ent, are  of  peaceable  and  even  gay  nature.  French  Theatre,
Italian  Opera-House,  these  are  among  the  immediate  outlooks.
Voltaire,  skilled  in  French  acting,  if  anybody  ever  were,  is
multifariously  negotiating  for  a  Company  of  that  kind,  —  let
him  be  swift,  be  successful.1  An  Italian  Opera  there  shall  be  ;
the  House  is  still  to  be  built  :  Captain  Knobelsdorf,  who  built
Eeinsberg,  whom  we  have  known,  is  to  do  it.  Knobelsdorf
has  gone  to  Italy  on  that  errand  ;  "  went  by  Dresden,  care-
fully examining  the  Opera-House  there,  and  all  the  famed
Opera-Houses  on  his  road."  Graun,  one  of  the  best  judges
living,  is  likewise  off  to  Italy,  gathering  singers.  Our  Opera
too  shall  be  a  successful  thing,  and  we  hope,  a  speedy.  Such
are  Friedrich's  outlooks  at  this  time.

A  miscellaneous  pleasant  company  is  here  ;  Truchsess  and
Bielfeld,  home  from  Hanover,  among  them;  Wilhelmina  is
here;  —  Voltaire  himself  perhaps  coming  again.  Friedrich
drinks  his  Pyrmont  waters  ;  works  at  his  public  businesses
all  day,  which  are  now  well  in  hand,  and  manageable  by  cou-
riers ;  at  evening  he  appears  in  company,  and  is  the  astonish-
ment of  everybody  ;  brilliant,  like  a  new-risen  sun,  as  if  he
1  Letters  of  Voltaire  (passim,  in  these  months).

25tb  Oc7mo  WITHDRAWS  TO  REINSBERG.  259

knew  of  no  illness,  knew  of  no  business,  but  lived  for  amuse-
ment only.  "  He  intends  Private  Theatricals  withal,  and  is
getting  ready  Voltaire's  Mort  de  Cesar."  *  These  were  pretty
days  at  Keinsberg.  This  kind  of  life  lasted  seven  or  eight
weeks,  —  in  spite  of  interruptions  of  subterranean  volcanic
nature,  some  of  which  were  surely  considerable.  Here,  in  the
very  first  week,  coming  almost  volcanically,  is  one,  which
indeed  is  the  sum  of  them  all.

Tuesday  forenoon,  25th  October,  1740,  Express  arrives  at
Keinsberg ;  direct  from  Vienna  five  days  ago ;  finds  Fried-
rich  under  eclipse,  hidden  in  the  interior,  laboring  under  his
ague-fit:  question  rises,  Shall  the  Express  be  introduced,  or
be  held  back  ?  The  news  he  brings  is  huge,  unexpected,  tran-
scendent, and  may  agitate  the  sick  King.  Six  or  seven  heads
go  wagging  on  this  point,  —  who  by  accident  are  narnable,
if  readers  care  :  "  Prince  August  Wilhelm,"  lately  betrothed ;
"Graf  Truchsess,"  home  from  Hanover;  "Colonel  Graf  von
Einkenstein,"  old  Tutor's  Son,  a  familiar  from  boyhood  up-
wards;  "Baron  Pollnitz"  kind  of  chief  Goldstick  now,  or
Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  not  too  witty,  but  the  cause  of  wit ;
"  Jordan,  Bielf eld,"  known  to  us  ;  and  lastly,  "  Fredersdorf,"
Major-domo  and  Factotum,  who  is  grown  from  Valet  to  be
Purse-Keeper,  confidential  Manager,  and  almost  friend,  —  a
notable  personage  in  Friedrich's  History.  They  decide,  "Bet-
ter wait ! "

They  wait  accordingly ;  and  then,  after  about  an  hour,  the
trembling-fit  being  over,  and  Fredersdorf  having  cautiously
preluded  a  little,  and  prepared  the  way,  the  Despatch  is  de-
livered, and  the  King  left  with  his  immense  piece  of  news.
News  that  his  Imperial  Majesty  Karl  VI.  died,  after  short
illness,  on  Thursday,  the  20th  last.  Kaiser  dead :  House  of
Hapsburg,  and  its  Five  Centuries  of  tough  wrestling,  and
uneasy  Dominancy  in  this  world,  ended,  gone  to  the  dis-
taff :  —  the  counter-wrestling  Ambitions  and  Cupidities  not
dead ;  and  nothing  but  Pragmatic  Sanction  left  between  the
fallen  House  and  them !  Friedrich  kept  silence ;  showed
1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  415.

260 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

no  sign  how  transfixed  lie  was  to  hear  such  tidings ;  which,
he  foresaw,  would  have  immeasurable  consequences  in  the
world.

One  of  the  first  was,  that  it  cured  Friedrich  of  his  ague.
It  braced  him  (it,  and  perhaps  "  a  little  quinquina  which  he
now  insisted  on ")  into  such  a  tensity  of  spirit  as  drove  out
his  ague  like  a  mere  hiccough ;  quite  gone  in  the  course  of
next  week  ;  and  we  hear  no  more  of  that  importunate  annoy-
ance. He  summoned  Secretary  Eichel,  "  Be  ready  in  so  many
minutes  hence ;  "  rose  from  his  bed,  dressed  himself  ; 1  —  and
then,  by  Eichel's  help,  sent  off  expresses  for  Schwerin  his
chief  General,  and  Podewils  his  chief  Minister.  A  resolution,
which  is  rising  or  has  risen  in  the  Eoyal  mind,  will  be  ready
for  communicating  to  these  Two  by  the  time  they  arrive,  on
the  second  day  hence.  This  done,  Friedrich,  I  believe,  joined
his  company  in  the  evening ;  and  was  as  light  and  brilliant
as  if  nothing  had  happened.

CHAPTER  VIII.

THE  KAISEK'S  DEATH.

THE  Kaiser's  death  came  upon  the  Public  unexpectedly;
though  not  quite  so  upon  observant  persons  closer  at  hand.
He  was  not  yet  fifty-six  out ;  a  firm-built  man ;  had  been  of
sound  constitution,  of  active,  not  intemperate  habits :  but  in
the  last  six  years,  there  had  come  such  torrents  of  ill  luck
rolling  down  on  him,  he  had  suffered  immensely,  far  beyond
what  the  world  knew  of ;  and  to  those  near  him,  and  anxious
for  him,  his  strength  seemed  much  undermined.  Five  years
ago,  in  summer  1735,  Robinson  reported,  from  a  sure  hand :
"Nothing  can  equal  the  Emperor's  agitation  under  these
disasters  [brought  upon  him  by  Fleury  and  the  Spaniards,
1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung ,  p.  416.

CHAP.  VIII.  THE  KAISEE'S  DEATH.  261

20th  Oct.  1740.

as  after-clap  to  his  Polish-Election  feat].  His  good  Empress
is  terrified,  many  times,  he  will  die  in  the  course  of  the  night,
when  singly  with  her  he  gives  a  loose  to  his  affliction,  confu-
sion and  despair."  Sea-Powers  will  not  help ;  Fleury  and
mere  ruin  will  engulf !  "  What  augments  this  agitation  is  his
distrust  in  every  one  of  his  own  Ministers,  except  perhaps
Bartenstein," *  —  who  is  not  much  of  a  support  either,  though
a  gnarled  weighty  old  stick  in  his  way  ("  Professor  at  Stras-
burg  once  ") :  not  interesting  to  us  here.  The  rest  his  Impe-
rial Majesty  considers  to  be  of  sublimated  blockhead  type,
it  appears.  Prince  Eugene  had  died  lately,  and  with  Eugene
all  good  fortune.

And  then,  close  following,  the  miseries  of  that  Turk  War,
crashing  down  upon  a  man!  They  say,  Duke  Franz,  Maria
Theresa's  Husband,  nominal  Commander  in  those  Campaigns,
with  the  Seckendorfs  and  Wallises  under  him  going  such  a
road,  was  privately  eager  to  have  done  with  the  Business,
on  any  terms,  lest  the  Kaiser  should  die  first,  and  leave  it
weltering.  No  wonder  the  poor  Kaiser  felt  broken,  disgusted
with  the  long  Shadow-Hunt  of  Life;  and  took  to  practical
field-sports  rather.  An  Army  that  cannot  fight,  War-Generals
good  only  to  be  locked  in  Fortresses,  an  Exchequer  that  has
no  money;  after  such  wagging  of  the  wigs,  and  such  Privy-
Councilling  and  such  War-Councilling :  —  let  us  hunt  wild
swine,  and  not  think  of  it !  That,  thank  Heaven,  we  still
have ;  that,  and  Pragmatic  Sanction  well  engrossed,  and
generally  sworn  to  by  mankind,  after  much  effort !  —

The  outer  Public  of  that  time,  and  Voltaire  among  them
more  deliberately  afterwards,  spoke  of  "mushrooms,"  an
"  indigestion  of  mushrooms  ;  "  and  it  is  probable  there  was
something  of  mushrooms  concerned  in  the  event.  Another
subsequent  Frenchman,  still  more  irreverent,  adds  to  this  of
the  "excess  of  mushrooms,"  that  the  Kaiser  made  light  of
it.  "  When  the  Doctors  told  him  he  had  few  hours  to  live,  he
would  not  believe  it ;  and  bantered  his  Physicians  on  the
sad  news.  '  Look  me  in  the  eyes,'  said  he ;  '  have  I  the  air
1  Robinson  to  Lord  Harrington,  5th  July,  1735  (in  State-Paper  Office).

262 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

of  one  dying?  When  you  see  my  sight  growing  dim,  then
let  the  sacraments  be  administered,  whether  I  order  or  not.' "
Doctors  insisting,  the  Kaiser  replied :  " '  Since  you  are  foolish
fellows,  who  know  neither  the  cause  nor  the  state  of  my
disorder,  I  command  that,  once  I  am  dead,  you  open  my  body,
to  know  what  the  matter  was ;  you  can  then  come  and  let
me  know ! ' " x  —  in  which  also  there  is  perhaps  a  glimmering
of  distorted  truth,  though,  as  Monsieur  mistakes  even  the
day  ("  18th  October,"  says  he,  not  20th),  one  can  only  accept
it  as  rumor  from  the  outside.

Here,  by  an  extremely  sombre  domestic  Gentleman  of  great
punctuality  and  great  dulness,  are  the  authentic  particulars,
such  as  it  was  good  to  mention  in  Vienna  circles.2  An  ex-
tremely dull  Gentleman,  but  to  appearance  an  authentic ;  and
so  little  defective  in  reverence  that  he  delicately  expresses
some  astonishment  at  Death's  audacity  this  year,  in  killing
so  many  Crowned  Heads.  "  This  year  1740,"  says  he,  "  though
the  weather  throughout  Europe  had  been  extraordinarily  fine,"
or  fine  for  a  cold  year,  "  had  already  witnessed  several  Deaths
of  Sovereigns :  Pope  Clement  XII.,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  of
Prussia,  the  Queen  Dowager  of  Spain  [Termagant's  old  step-
mother, not  Termagant's  self  by  a  great  way].  But  that  was
not  enough :  unfathomable  Destiny  ventured  now  on  Imperial
Heads  (wagte  sich  auch  an  Kaiser-kronen)  :  Karl  VI.,  namely,
and  Eussia's  great  Monarchess  ; "  —  an  audacity  to  be  re-
marked. Of  Eussia's  great  Monarchess  (Czarina  Anne,  with
the  big  cheek)  we  will  say  nothing  at  present ;  but  of  Karl  VI.
only,  —  abridging  much,  and  studying  arrangement.

"Thursday,  October  13th,  returning  from  Halbthurn,  a
Hunting  Seat  of  his,"  over  in  Hungary  some  fifty  miles,  "to
the  Palace  Favorita  at  Vienna,  his  Imperial  Majesty  felt
slightly  indisposed,"  —  indigestion  of  mushrooms  or  whatever
it  was :  had  begun  at  Halbthurn  the  night  before,  we  rather
understand,  and  was  the  occasion  of  his  leaving.  "  The  Doc-
tors called  it  cold  on  the  stomach,  and  thought  it  of  no

1  Anecdotes  Germaniques  (Paris,  1769),  p.  692.

2  (Anonymous) Des  Sfc.  Romischen  Kaisers  Carl VI. Leben und Thaten
(Frankfurt  und  Leipzig,  1741),  pp.  220-227.

CHAP.  VIII.  THE KAISER'S DEATH.  263

20th  Oct.  1740.

consequence.  In  the  night  of  Saturday,  it  became  alarming ; "
inflammation,  thought  the  Doctors,  inflammation  of  the  liver,
and  used  their  potent  appliances,  which  only  made  the  danger
come  and  go ;  "  and  on  the  Tuesday,  all  day,  the  Doctors  did
not  doubt  his  Imperial  Majesty  was  dying.  ["Look  me  in
the  eyes ;  pack  of  fools ;  you  will  have  to  dissect  me,  you
will  then  know : "  Any  truth  in  all  that  ?  No  matter.]

"At  noon  of  that  Tuesday  he  took  the  Sacrament,  the
Pope's  Nuncio  administering.  His  Majesty  showed  uncom-
monly great  composure  of  soul,  and  resignation  to  the  Divine
Will;"  being  indeed  "certain,"  —  so  he  expressed  it  to  "a
principal  Official  Person  sunk  in  grief  "  (Bartenstein,  shall  we
guess  ?),  who  stood  by  him  —  "  certain  of  his  cause,"  not  afraid
in  contemplating  that  dread  Judgment  now  near :  "  Look  at
me !  A  man  that  is  certain  of  his  cause  can  enter  on  such
a  Journey  with  good  courage  and  a  composed  mind  (mit  gutem
und  gelassenem  Muth}"  To  the  Doctors,  dubitating  what  the
disease  was,  he  said,  "If  Gazelli,"  my  late  worthy  Doctor,
"  were  still  here,  you  would  soon  know ;  but  as  it  is,  you  will
learn  it  when  you  dissect  me ; "  —  and  once  asked  to  be  shown
the  Cup  where  his  heart  would  lie  after  that  operation.

"Sacrament  being  over,"  Tuesday  afternoon,  "he  sent  for
his  Family,  to  bless  them  each  separately.  He  had  a  long
conversation  with  Grand  Duke  Franz,"  titular  of  Lorraine,
actual  of  Tuscany,  "who  had  assiduously  attended  him,  and
continued  to  do  so,  during  the  whole  illness."  The  Grand
Duke's  Spouse, — Maria  Theresa,  the  noble-hearted  and  the
overwhelmed ;  who  is  now  in  an  interesting  state  again
withal ;  a  little  Kaiserkin  (Joseph  II.)  coming  in  five  months ;
first  child,  a  little  girl,  is  now  two  years  old ;  — "  had  been
obliged  to  take  to  bed  three  days  ago ;  laid  up  of  grief  and
terror  (yor  Schmerzen  und  Schreckeri),  ever  since  Sunday  the
16th.  Nor  would  his  Imperial  Majesty  permit  her  to  enter
this  death-room,  on  account  of  her  condition,  so  important
to  the  world;  but  his  Majesty,  turning  towards  that  side
where  her  apartment  was,  raised  his  right  hand,  and  com-
manded her  Husband,  and  the  Archduchess  her  younger
Sister,  to  tell  his  Theresa,  That  he  blessed  her  herewith,  not-

264 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

withstanding  her  absence."  Poor  Kaiser,  poor  Theresa !  "  Most
distressing  of  all  was  the  scene  with  the  Kaiserin.  The  night
before,  on  getting  knowledge  of  the  sad  certainty,  she  had
fainted  utterly  away  (starke  Ohnmacht),  and  had  to  be  carried
into  the  Grand  Duchess's  [Maria  Theresa's]  room.  Being
summoned  now  with  her  Children,  for  the  last  blessing,  she
cried  as  in  despair,  'Do  not  leave  me,  Your  Dilection,  do  not
(Ach  Euer  Liebden  verlassen  mich  dock  nicht) ! '  Poor  good
souls !  "  Her  Imperial  Majesty  would  not  quit  the  room
again,  but  remained  to  the  last.

"Wednesday,  19th,  all  day,  anxiety,  mournful  suspense;"
poor  weeping  Kaiserin  and  all  the  world  waiting ;  the  Inevita-
ble visibly  struggling  on.  "And  in  the  night  of  that  day
[night  of  19th-20th  Oct.,  1740],  between  one  and  two  in  the
morning,  Death  snatched  away  this  most  invaluable  Monarch
(den  preiswurdigsten  Monarchen)  in  the  56th  year  of  his  life  ; "
and  Kaiser  Karl  VI.,  and  the  House  of  Hapsburg  and  its  Five
tough  Centuries  of  good  and  evil  in  this  world  had  ended.
The  poor  Kaiserin  "  closed  the  eyes  "  that  could  now  no  more
behold  her ;  "  kissed  his  hands,  and  was  carried  out  more  dead
than  alive." 1

A  good  affectionate  Kaiserin,  I  do  believe ;  honorable,  truth-
ful, though  unwitty  of  speech,  and  converted  by  Grandpapa  in
a  peculiar  manner.  For  her  Kaiser  too,  after  all,  I  have  a
kind  of  love.  Of  brilliant  articulate  intellect  there  is  noth-
ing ;  nor  of  inarticulate  (as  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  case)  any-
thing considerable :  in  fact  his  Shadow-Hunting,  and  Duelling

1  Anonymous,  ut  supra,  pp.  220-227.  —  Adelung,  Pragmatisclie  Staatsge-
schichte  (Gotha,  1762-1767),  ii.  120.  Johann  Christoph  Adelung;  the  same  who
did  the  Dictionary  and  many  other  deserving  Books  ;  here  is  the  precise  Title :
" Pragmat ische  Staatsgeschichte  Europens,"  that  is,  "Documentary  History  of
Europe,  from  Kaiser  Karl's  Death,  1740,  till  Peace  of  Paris,  1763."  A  solid,
laborious  and  meritorious  Work,  of  its  kind;  extremely  extensive  (9  vols.  4to,
some  of  which  are  double  and  even  treble),  mostly  in  the  undigested,  some-
times in  the  quite  uncooked  or  raw  condition  ;  perhaps  about  a  fifth  part  of  it
consists  of  "  Documents  "  proper,  which  are  skippable.  It  cannot  help  being
dull,  waste,  dreary,  but  is  everywhere  intelligible  (excellent  Indexes  too),  —
and  offers  an  unhappy  reader  by  far  the  best  resource  attainable  for  survey  of
that  sad  Period.

CHAP.  VIII.  THE  KAISER'S  DEATH.  265

20th  Oct.  1740.

with  the  Termagant,  seemed  the  reverse  of  wise.  But  there
was  something  of  a  high  proud  heart  in  it,  too,  if  we  examine  ;
and  even  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  though  in  practice  not  worth
one  regiment  of  iron  ramrods,  indicates  a  profoundly  fixed
determination,  partly  of  loyal  nature,  such  as  the  gods  more
or  less  reward.  "  He  had  been  a  great  builder,"  say  the  His-
tories ;  "  was  a  great  musician,  fit  to  lead  orchestras,  and  had
composed  an  Opera,"  —  poor  Kaiser.  There  came  out  large
traits  of  him,  in  Maria  Theresa  again,  under  an  improved
form,  which  were  much  admired  by  the  world.  He  looks,  in
his  Portraits,  intensely  serious;  a  handsome  man,  stoically
grave ;  much  the  gentleman,  much  the  Kaiser  or  Supreme
Gentleman.  As,  in  life  and  fact,  he  was ;  "  something  solemn
in  him,  even  when  he  laughs,"  the  people  used  to  say.  A
man  honestly  doing  his  very  best  with  his  poor  Kaisership,
and  dying  of  chagrin  by  it.  "  On  opening  the  body,  the  liver-
region  proved  to  be  entirely  deranged ;  in  the  place  where  the
gall-bladder  should  have  been,  a  stone  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's
egg  was  found  grown  into  the  liver,  and  no  gall-bladder  now
there."

That  same  morning,  with  earliest  daylight,  "  Thursday,  20th,
six  A.M.,"  Maria  Theresa  is  proclaimed  by  her  Heralds  over
Vienna :  "  According  to  Pragmatic  Sanction,  Inheritress  of  all
the,"  &c.  &c. ;  —  Sovereign  Archduchess  of  Austria,  Queen  of
Hungary  and  Bohemia,  for  chief  items.  "  At  seven  her  Maj-
esty took  the  Oath  from  the  Generals  and  Presidents  of  Tribu-
nals, —  said,  through  her  tears,  '  All  was  to  stand  on  the  old
footing,  each  in  his  post,' "  —  and  the  other  needful  words.
Couriers  shoot  forth  towards  all  Countries ;  —  one  express
courier  to  Eegensburg,  and  the  enchanted  Wiggeries  there,
to  say  That  a  new  Kaiser  will  be  needed;  Reichs- Vicar  or
Vicars  (Kur-Sachsen  and  whoever  more,  for  they  are  some-
times disagreed  about  it)  will  have  to  administer  in  the
interim.

A  second  courier  we  saw  arrive  at  Reinsberg ;  he  likewise
may  be  important.  The  Bavarian  Minister,  Karl  Albert  Kur-
Baiern's  man,  shot  off  his  express,  like  the  others ;  answer  is,  by

266 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

return  of  courier,  or  even  earlier  (for  a  messenger  was  already
on  the  road),  Make  protest !  "  We  Kur-Baiern  solemnly  pro-
test against  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  the  assumption  of  such
Titles  by  the  Daughter  of  the  late  Kaiser.  King  of  Bohemia,
and  in  good  part  even  of  Austria,  it  is  not  you,  Madam,  but
of  right  we  ;  as,  by  Heaven's  help,  it  is  our  fixed  resolution  to
make  good ! "  Protest  was  presented,  accordingly,  with  all
the  solemnities,  without  loss  of  a  moment.  To  which  Barten-
stein  and  the  Authorities  answered  "  Pooh-pooh,"  as  if  it  were
nothing.  It  is  the  first  ripple  of  an  immeasurable  tide  or
deluge  in  that  kind,  threatening  to  submerge  the  new  Majesty
of  Hungary;  —  as  had  been  foreseen  at  Eeinsberg;  though
Bartenstein  and  the  Authorities  made  light  of  it,  answering
"Pooh-pooh,"  or  almost  "Ha-ha,"  for  the  present.

Her  Hungarian  Majesty's  chief  Generals,  Seckendorf,  Wallis,
Neipperg,  sit  in  their  respective  prison-wards  at  this  time  (from
which  she  soon  liberates  them) :  Kur-Baiern  has  lodged  pro-
test ;  at  Keinsberg  there  will  be  an  important  resolution  ready :

—  and  in  the  Austrian  Treasury  (which  employs  40,000  per-
sons, big  and  little)  there  is  of  cash  or  available  resource,
100,000  florins,  that  is  to  say,  £10,000  net.1 And  unless  Prag-
matic sheepskin  hold  tighter  than  some  persons  expect,  the
affairs  of  Austria  and  of  this  young  Archduchess  are  in  a
threatening  way.

His  Britannic  Majesty  was  on  the  road  home,  about  Hel-
voetsluys  or  on  the  sea  for  Harwich,  that  night  the  Kaiser
died ;  of  whose  illness  he  had  heard  nothing.  At  London,  ten
days  after,  the  sudden  news  struck  dismally  upon  his  Majesty
and  the  Political  Circles  there :  "  No  help,  then,  from  that
quarter,  in  our  Spanish  War  ;  perhaps  far  other  than  help  !  "

—  Nay,  certain  Gazetteers  were  afraid  the  grand  new  Anti-
Spanish  Expedition  itself,  which  was  now,  at  the  long  last,
after  such  confusions  and  delays,  lying  ready,  in  great  strength,
Naval  and  Military,  would  be  countermanded,  —  on  Pragmatic-
Sanction  considerations,  and  the  crisis  probably  imminent.2

1  Mailath,  Geschichte  d(-s  Oestreichiscken  Kaiserstaats  (Hamburg,  1850),  v.  8.

2  London  Newspapers  (31st  Oct.-6th  Nov.,  1740).

CHAP.  IX.  RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG.  267
Oct.-Dec.  1740.

But  it  was  not  countermanded;  it  sailed  all  the  same,  "No-
vember 6th "  (seventh  day  after  the  bad  news) ;  and  made
towards  —  Shall  we  tell  the  reader,  what  is  Officially  a  dead
secret,  though  by  this  time  well  guessed  at  by  the  Public,
English  and  also  Spanish  ?  —  towards  Carthagena,  to  reinforce
fiery  Vernon,  in  the  tropical  latitudes;  and  overset  Spanish
America,  beginning  with  that  important  Town !

Commodore  Anson,  he  also,  after  long  fatal  delays,  is  off,
several  weeks  ago ; J  round  Cape  Horn ;  hoping  (or  perhaps
already  not  hoping)  to  co-operate  from  the  Other  Ocean,  and
be  simultaneous  with  Vernon,  —  on  these  loose  principles  of
keeping  time !  Commodore  Anson  does,  in  effect,  make  a
Voyage  which  is  beautiful,  and  to  mankind  memorable;  but
as  to  keeping  tryst  with  Vernon,  the  very  gods  could  not  do  it
on  those  terms  !

CHAPTER  IX.

RESOLUTION FOEMED AT REINSBERG IN CONSEQUENCE.

THURSDAY,  27th  October,  two  days  after  the  Expresses  went
for  them,  Schwerin  and  Podewils  punctually  arrived  at  Reins-
berg.  They  were  carried  into  the  interior  privacies,  "  to  long
conferences  with  his  Majesty  that  day,  and  for  the  next  four
days ;  Majesty  and  they  even  dining  privately  together ; "
grave  business  of  state,  none  guesses  how  grave,  evidently
going  on.  The  resolution  Friedrich  laid  before  them,  fruit  of
these  two  days  since  the  news  from  Vienna,  was  probably  the
most  important  ever  formed  in  Prussia,  or  in  Europe  during
that  Century  :  Resolution  to  make  good  our  Rights  on  Silesia,
by  this  great  opportunity,  the  best  that  will  ever  offer.  Reso-
lution which  had  sprung,  I  find,  and  got  to  sudden  fixity  in
the  head  of  the  young  King  himself ;  and  which  met  with
little  save  opposition  from  all  the  other  sons  of  Adam,  at  the
first  blush  and  for  long  afterwards.  And,  indeed,  the  making

1  29th  (18th)  September,  1740.

268 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XL

1740.

of  it  good  (of  it,  and  of  the  immense  results  that  hung  by
it)  was  the  main  business  of  this  young  King's  Life  hence-
forth ;  and  cost  him  Labors  like  those  of  Hercules,  and  was
in  the  highest  degree  momentous  to  existing  and  not  yet  ex-
isting millions  of  mankind,  —  to  the  readers  of  this  History
especially.

It  is  almost  touching  to  reflect  how  unexpectedly,  like  a  bolt
out  of  the  blue,  all  this  had  come  upon  Friedrich ;  and  how  it
overset  his  fine  program  for  the  winter  at  Keinsberg,  and  for
his  Life  generally.  Not  the  Peaceable  magnanimities,  but  the
Warlike,  are  the  thing  appointed  Friedrich  this  winter,  and
mainly  henceforth.  Those  "  golden  or  soft  radiances  "  which
we  saw  in  him,  admirable  to  Voltaire  and  to  Friedrich,  and  to
an  esurient  philanthropic  world,  —  it  is  not  those,  it  is  "  the
steel-bright  or  stellar  kind,"  that  are  to  become  predominant  in
Friedrich's  existence  :  grim  hail-storms,  thunders  and  tornado
for  an  existence  to  him,  instead  of  the  opulent  genialities  and
halcyon  weather,  anticipated  by  himself  and  others !  Indis-
putably enough  to  us,  if  not  yet  to  Friedrich,  "  Keinsberg  and
Life  to  the  Muses  "  are  done.  On  a  sudden,  from  the  oppo-
site side  of  the  horizon,  see,  miraculous  Opportunity,  rushing
hitherward,  —  swift,  terrible,  clothed  with  lightning  like  a
courser  of  the  gods  :  dare  you  clutch  him  by  the  thunder-
mane,  and  fling  yourself  upon  him,  and  make  for  the  Empy-
rean by  that  course  rather  ?  Be  immediate  about  it,  then ;
the  time  is  now,  or  else  never !  —  No  fair  judge  can  blame  the
young  man  that  he  laid  hold  of  the  flaming  Opportunity  in
this  manner,  and  obeyed  the  new  omen.  To  seize  such  an
opportunity,  and  perilously  mount  upon  it,  was  the  part  of  a
young  magnanimous  King,  less  sensible  to  the  perils,  and  more
to  the  other  considerations,  than  one  older  would  have  been.

Schwerin  and  Podewils  were,  no  doubt,  astonished  to  learn
what  the  Royal  purpose  was ;  and  could  not  want  for  common-
place objections  many  and  strong,  had  this  been  the  scene  for
dwelling  on  them,  or  dressing  them  out  at  eloquent  length.
But  they  knew  well  this  was  not  the  scene  for  doing  more
than,  with  eloquent  modesty,  hint  them  ;  that  the  Resolution,
being  already  taken,  would  not  alter  for  commonplace ;  and

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 269

Oct.-Dec.  1740.

that  the  question  now  lying  for  honorable  members  was,  How
to  execute  it  ?  It  is  on  this,  as  I  collect,  that  Schwerin  and
Podewils  in  the  King's  company  did,  with  extreme  intensity,
consult  during  those  four  days ;  and  were,  most  probably,  of
considerable  use  to  the  King,  though  some  of  their  modifica-
tions adopted  by  him  turned  out,  not  as  they  had  predicted,
but  as  he.  On  all  the  Military  details  and  outlines,  and  on
all  the  Diplomacies  of  this  business,  here  are  two  Oracles
extremely  worth  consulting  by  the  young  King.

To  seize  Silesia  is  easy :  a  Country  open  on  all  but  the  south
side;  open  especially  on  our  side,  where  a  battalion  of  foot
might  force  it;  the  three  or  four  fortresses,  of  which  only
two,  Glogau  and  Neisse,  can  be  reckoned  strong,  are  provided
with  nothing  as  they  ought  to  be ;  not  above  3,000  fighting
men  in  the  whole  Province,  and  these  little  expecting  fight.
Silesia  can  be  seized  :  but  the  maintaining  of  it  ?  —  We  must
try  to  maintain  it,  thinks  Friedrich.

At  Reinsberg  it  is  not  yet  known  that  Kur-Baiern  has  pro-
tested; but  it  is  well  guessed  he  means  to  do  so,  and  that
France  is  at  his  back  in  some  sort.  Kur-Baiern,  probably
Kur-Sachsen,  and  plenty  more,  France  being  secretly  at  their
back.  What  low  condition  Austria  stands  in,  all  its  ready
resources  run  to  the  lees,  is  known ;  and  that  France,  getting
lively  at  present  with  its  Belleisles  and  adventurous  spirits
not  restrainable  by  Fleury,  is  always  on  the  watch  to  bring
Austria  lower;  capable,  in  spite  of  Pragmatic  Sanction,  to
snatch  the  golden  moment,  and  spring  hunter-like  on  a  mori-
bund Austria,  were  the  hunting-dogs  once  out  and  in  cry.  To
Friedrich  it  seems  unlikely  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  will  be
a  Law  of  Nature  to  mankind,  in  these  circumstances.  His
opinion  is,  "the  old  political  system  has  expired  with  the
Kaiser."  Here  is  Europe,  burning  in  one  corner  of  it  by
Jenkins's  Ear,  and  such  a  smoulder  of  combustible  material
awakening  nearer  hand:  will  not  Europe,  probably,  blaze
into  general  War ;  Pragmatic  Sanction  going  to  waste  sheep-
skin, and  universal  scramble  ensuing  ?  In  which  he  who
has  100,000  good  soldiers,  and  can  handle  them,  may  be  an

270 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS IN HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

important  figure  in  urging  claims,  and  keeping  what  he  has  got
hold  of !  —

Friedrich's  mind,  as  to  the  fact,  is  fixed :  seize  Silesia  we
will :  but  as  to  the  manner  of  doing  it,  Schwerin  and  Podewils
modify  him.  Their  counsel  is :  "  Do  not  step  out  in  hostile
attitude  at  the  very  first,  saying,  'These  Duchies,  Liegnitz,
Brieg,  Wohlau,  Jagerndorf,  are  mine,  and  I  will  fight  for
them ; '  say  only,  '  Having,  as  is  well  known,  interests  of
various  kinds  in  this  Silesia,  I  venture  to  take  charge  of  it  in
the  perilous  times  now  come,  and  will  keep  it  safe  for  the  real
owner.'  Silesia  seized  in  this  fashion,"  continue  they,  "  nego-
tiate with  the  Queen  of  Hungary  ;  offer  her  help,  large  help
in  men  and  money,  against  her  other  enemies ;  perhaps  she
will  consent  to  do  us  right  ?  "  —  "  She  never  will  consent,"
is  Friedrich's  opinion.  "  But  it  is  worth  trying  ?  "  urge  the
Ministers.  —  "  Well,"  answers  Friedrich,  "  be  it  in  that  form  ;
that  is  the  soft-spoken  cautious  form :  any  form  will  do,  if  the
fact  be  there."  That  is  understood  to  have  been  the  figure  of
the  deliberation  in  this  conclave  at  Eeinsberg,  during  the  four
days.1  And  now  it  remains  only  to  fix  the  Military  details,
to  be  ready  in  a  minimum  of  time  ;  and  to  keep  our  prepara-
tions and  intentions  in  impenetrable  darkness  from  all  men,  in
the  interim.  Adieu,  Messieurs.

And  so,  on  the  1st  of  November,  fifth  morning  since  they
came,  Schwerin  and  Podewils,  a  world  of  new  business  silently
ahead  of  them,  return  to  Berlin,  intent  to  begin  the  same.  All
the  Kings  will  have  to  take  their  resolution  on  this  matter ;
wisely,  or  else  unwisely.  King  Friedrich's,  let  it  prove  the
wisest  or  not,  is  notably  the  rapidest,  —  complete,  and  fairly
entering  upon  action,  on  November  1st.  At  London  the  news
of  the  Kaiser's  death  had  arrived  the  day  before ;  Britannic
Majesty  and  Ministry,  thrown  much  into  the  dumps  by  it,
much  into  the  vague,  are  nothing  like  so  prompt  with  their
resolution  on  it.  Somewhat  sorrowfully  in  the  vague.  In
fact,  they  will  go  jumbling  hither  and  thither  for  about  three
years  to  come,  before  making  up  their  minds  to  a  resolution :

1  Stenzel  (from  what  sources  he  does  not  clearly  say,  no  doubt  from  sources
of  some  authenticity)  gives  this  as  summary  of  it,  iv.  61-65.

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 271

Oct.-Dec.  1740.

so  intricate  is  the  affair  to  the  English  Nation  and  them !
Intricate  indeed ;  and  even  imaginary,  —  definable  mainly  as
a  bottomless  abyss  of  nightmare  dreams  to  the  English  Na-
tion and  them  !  Productive  of  strong  somnambulisms,  as  my
friend  has  it !  —

Mystery  in  Berlin,  for  Seven  Weeks,  while  the  Prepara-
tions go  on;  Voltaire  visits  Friedrich  to  decipher  it,  but
cannot.

Podewils  and  Schwerin  gone,  King  Friedrich,  though  still
very  busy  in  working-hours,  returns  to  his  society  and  its
gayeties  and  brilliancies  ;  apparently  with  increased  appetite
after  these  four  days  of  abstinence.  Still  busy  in  his  working-
hours,  as  a  King  must  be ;  couriers  coming  and  going,  hun-
dreds of  businesses  despatched  each  day ;  and  in  the  evening
what  a  relish  for  society,  —  Prsetorius  is  quite  astonished  at
it.  Music,  dancing,  play-acting,  suppers  of  the  gods,  "  not
done  till  four  in  the  morning  sometimes,"  these  are  the  ac-
counts Prsetorius  hears  at  Berlin.  "  From  all  persons  who
return  from  Reinsberg,"  writes  he,  "  the  unanimous  report  is,
That  the  King  works,  the  whole  day  through,  with  an  assiduity
that  is  unique  ;  and  then,  in  the  evening,  gives  himself  to  the
pleasures  of  society,  with  a  vivacity  of  mirth  and  sprightly
humor  which  makes  those  Evening-Parties  charming." 1  So  it
had  to  last,  with  frequent  short  journeys  on  Friedrich's  part,
and  at  last  with  change  to  Berlin  as  head-quarters,  for  about
seven  weeks  to  come, — till  the  beginning  of  December,  and
the  day  of  action,  namely.  A  notable  little  Interim  in  Fried-
rich's  History  and  that  of  Europe.

Friedrich's  secret,  till  almost  the  very  end,  remained  im-
penetrable ;  though,  by  degrees,  his  movements  excited  much
guessing  in  the  Gazetteer  and  Diplomatic  world  everywhere.
Military  matters  do  seem  to  be  getting  brisk  in  Prussia  ;  arse-
nals much  astir  ;  troops  are  seen  mustering,  marching,  plainly
to  a  singular  degree.  Marching  towards  the  Austrian  side,
towards  Silesia,  some  note.  Yes ;  but  also  towards  Cleve,
1  Excerpt,  in  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  418.

272 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1/40.

certain  detachments  of  troops  are  marching,  —  do  not  men
see  ?  And  the  Intrenchment  at  Buderich  in  those  parts,  that
is  getting  forward  withal,  —  though  privately  there  is  not  the
least  prospect  of  using  it,  in  these  altered  circumstances.
Friedrich  already  guesses  that  if  he  could  get  Silesia,  so  in-
valuable on  the  one  skirt  of  him,  he  will  probably  have  to  give
up  his  Berg-Julich  claims  on  the  other  ;  I  fancy  he  is  getting
ready  to  do  so,  should  the  time  come  for  such  alternative.  But
he  labors  at  Buderich,  all  the  same,  and  "  improves  the  roads
in  that  quarter,"  —  which  at  least  may  help  to  keep  an  inquisi-
tive public  at  bay.  These  are  seven  busy  weeks  on  Friedrich's
part,  and  on  the  world's  :  constant  realities  of  preparation,  on
the  one  part,  industriously  veiled;  on  the  other  part,  such
shadows,  guessings,  spyings,  spectral  movements  above  ground
and  below;  Diplomatic  shadows  fencing,  Gazetteer  shadows
rumoring  ;  —  dreams  of  a  world  as  if  near  awakening  to  some-
thing great !  "  All  Officers  on  furlough  have  been  ordered  to
their  posts,"  writes  Bielfeld,  on  those  vague  terms  of  his  :  "  On
arriving  at  Berlin,  you  notice  a  great  agitation  in  all  depart-
ments of  the  State.  The  regiments  are  ordered  to  prepare  their
equipages,  and  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  for  marching.
There  are  magazines  being  formed  at  Frankf urt-on-Oder  and  at
Crossen,"  —  handy  for  Silesia,  you  would  say  ?  "  There  are  con-
siderable trains  of  Artillery  getting  ready,  and  the  King  has
frequent  conferences  with  his  Generals." l  The  authentic  fact
is:  "By  the  middle  of  November,  Troops,  to  the  extent  of
30,000  and  more,  had  got  orders  to  be  ready  for  marching  in
three  weeks  hence  ;  their  public  motions  very  visible  ever  since,
their  actual  purpose  a  mystery  to  all  mortals  except  three.

Towards  the  end  of  November,  it  becomes  the  prevailing
guess  that  the  business  is  immediate,  not  prospective  ;  that
Silesia  may  be  in  the  wind,  not  Jiilich  and  Berg.  Which  infi-
nitely quickens  the  shadowy  rumorings  and  Diplomatic  fenc-
ings of  mankind.  The  French  have  their  special  Ambassador
here ;  a  Marquis  de  Beauvau,  observant  military  gentleman,
who  came  with  the  Accession  Compliment  some  time  ago,  and
1  Bielfeld,  i.  165  (Berlin,  30th  November,  is  the  date  he  puts  to  it).

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 273

Oct.-Dec.  1740.

keeps  his  eyes  well  open,  but  cannot  see  through  mill-stones.
Fleury  is  intensely  desirous  to  know  Friedrich's  secret ;  but
would  fain  keep  his  own  (if  he  yet  have  one),  and  is  himself
quite  tacit  and  reserved.  To  Fleury's  Marquis  de  Beauvau
Friedrich  is  very  gracious ;  but  in  regard  to  secrets,  is  for  a
reciprocal  procedure.  Could  not  Voltaire  go  and  try  ?  It  is
thought  Fleury  had  let  fall  some  hint  to  that  effect,  carried
by  a  bird  of  the  air.  Sure  enough  Voltaire  does  go  ;  is  actually
on  visit  to  his  royal  Friend ;  "  six  days  with  him  at  Keins-
berg ;  "  perhaps  near  a  fortnight  in  all  (20  November-2  Decem-
ber or  so),  hanging  about  those  Berlin  regions,  on  the  survey.
Here  is  an  unexpected  pleasure  to  the  parties ;  —  but  in  regard
to  penetrating  of  secrets,  an  unproductive  one !

Voltaire's  ostensible  errand  was,  To  report  progress  about
the  Anti-Machiavel,  the  Van  Duren  nonsense ;  and,  at  any  rate,
to  settle  the  Money -accounts  on  these  and  other  scores ;  and
to  discourse  Philosophies,  for  a  day  or  two,  with  the  First  of
Men.  The  real  errand,  it  is  pretty  clear,  was  as  above.  Vol-
taire has  always  a  wistful  eye  towards  political  employment,
and  would  fain  make  himself  useful  in  high  quarters.  Fleury
and  he  have  their  touches  of  direct  Correspondence  now  and
then ;  and  obliquely  there  are  always  intermediates  and  chan-
nels. Small  hint,  the  slightest  twinkle  of  Fleury's  eyelashes,
would  be  duly  speeded  to  Voltaire,  and  set  him  going.  We
shall  see  him  expressly  missioned  hither,  on  similar  errand,
by  and  by ;  though  with  as  bad  success  as  at  present.

Of  this  his  First  Visit  to  Berlin,  his  Second  to  Friedrich,
Voltaire  in  the  Vie  Privee  says  nothing.  But  in  his  Siecle  de
Louis  XV.  he  drops,  with  proud  modesty,  a  little  foot-note
upon  it :  "  The  Author  was  with  the  King  of  Prussia  at  that
time  ;  and  can  affirm  that  Cardinal  de  Fleury  was  totally  astray
in  regard  to  the  Prince  he  had  now  to  do  with."  To  which  a
date  slightly  wrong  is  added ;  the  rest  being  perfectly  correct.1
No  other  details  are  to  be  got  anywhere,  if  they  were  of  im-
portance ;  the  very  dates  of  it  in  the  best  Prussian  Books  are
all  slightly  awry.  Here,  by  accident,  are  two  poor  flint-sparks
caught  from  the  dust  whirlwind,  which  yield  a  certain  sufficing
1  (Euvres  (Siecle  de  Louis  XV.,  c.  6),  xxviii.  74.

VOL. VII.  18

274 FEIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

twilight,  when  put  in  their  place ;  and  show  us  both  sides  of
the  matter,  the  smooth  side  and  the  seamy :  —

1. Friedrich  to  Algarotti,  at  Berlin. From  "  Beinsberg,
21st  Nov.,"  showing  the  smooth  side.

"  MY  DEAR  SWAN  OF  PADUA,  —  Voltaire  has  arrived ;  all
sparkling  with  new  beauties,  and  far  more  sociable  than  at
Cleve.  He  is  in  very  good  humor ;  and  makes  less  complain-
ing about  his  ailments  than  usual.  Nothing  can  be  more  frivo-
lous than  our  occupations  here :  "  mere  verse-making,  dancing,
philosophizing,  then  card-playing,  dining,  flirting;  merry  as
birds  on  the  bough  (and  Silesia  mvisible,  except  to  oneself  and
two  others).1

2.  Friedrich  to  Jordan,  at  Berlin.

"  RUPPIN,  28th  November.

"...  Thy  Miser  [Voltaire,  now  gone  to  Berlin,  of  whom
Jordan  is  to  send  news,  as  of  all  things  else],  thy  Miser  shall
drink  to  the  lees  of  his  insatiable  desire  (sic)  to  enrich  him-
self: he  shall  have  the  3,000  thalers  (£450).  He  was  with
me  six  days  :  that  will  be  at  the  rate  of  500  thalers  (£75)  a
day.  That  is  paying  dear  for  one's  nierry-andrew  (c'est  bien
payer  unfou)  ;  never  had  court-fool  such  wages  before." 2

Which  latter,  also  at  first  hand,  shows  us  the  seamy  side.
And  here,  finally,  with  date  happily  appended,  is  a  poetic
snatch,  in  Voltaire's  exquisite  style,  which  with  the  response
gives  us  the  medium  view  :  —

VOLTAIRE'S  ADIEU  ("Billet  de  Conge,  2  December,  1740").

"Non,  malgre'  vos  vertus,  non,  malgre'  vos  appas,
Mon  ame  n'est  point  satisfaite  •,
Non,  vous  n'etes  qu'une  coquette,
Qui  subjuguez  les  cceurs,  et  ne  vous  donnez  pas."

1  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xviii.  25.

2  Tb.  xvii.  72. Particulars  of  the  money-payment (travelling  expenses
chiefly,  rather  exorbitant,  and  this  journey  added  to  the  list ;  and  no  whisper
of  the  considerable  Van-Duren  moneys,  and  copyright  of  Anti-Machiavel,  in
abatement)  are  in  Eodenbeck,  i.  27. Exact  sum  paid  is  3,300  thalers ;  2,000
a  good  while  ago,  1,300  at  this  time,  which  settles  the  greedy  bill.

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 275

2d  Dec.  1740.

FRIEDRICH'S  RESPONSE.

"  Mon  ame  sent  le  prix  de  vos  divins  appas;
Mais  ne  presumez  point  qu'elle  soit  satisfaite.
Traitre,  vous  me  quittez  pour  suivre  une  coquette ;
Moi  je  ne  vous  quitterais  pas."  1

—  Meaning,  perhaps,  in  brief  English  :  V.  "Ah,  you  are  but
a  beautiful  coquette ;  you  charm  away  our  hearts,  and  do
not  give  your  own  [won't  tell  me  your  secret  at  all]  ! "  F.
"  Treacherous  Lothario,  it  is  you  that  quit  me  for  a  coquette
[your  divine  Ernilie  ;  and  won't  stay  here,  and  be  of  my  Acad-
emy] ;  but  however  —  !  "  Friedrich  looked  hopingly  on  the
French,  but  could  not  give  his  secret  except  by  degrees  and
with  reciprocity.  Some  days  hence  he  said  to  Marquis  de
Beauvjiu,  in  the  Audience  of  leave,  a  word  which  was  remem-
bered.

View  of  Friedrich  behind  the Veil.

As  to  Friedrich  himself,  since  about  the  middle  of  No-
vember his  plans  seem  to  have  been  definitely  shaped  out
in  all  points  ;  Troops  so  many,  when  to  be  on  march,  and
how;  no  important  detail  uncertain  since  then.  Novem-
ber 17th,  he  jots  down  a  little  Note,  which  is  to  go  to  Vienna,
were  the  due  hour  come,  by  a  special  Ambassador,  one  Count
Gotter,  acquainted  with  the  ground  there ;  and  explain  to  her
Hungarian  Majesty,  what  his  exact  demands  are,  and  what
the  exact  services  he  will  render.  Of  which  important  little
Paper  readers  shall  hear  again.  Gotter's  demands  are  at  first
to  be  high :  Our  Four  Duchies,  due  by  law  so  long ;  these  and
even  more,  considering  the  important  services  we  propose ;
this  is  to  be  his  first  word; — but,  it  appears,  he  is  privately
prepared  to  put  up  with  Two  Duchies,  if  he  can  have  them
peaceably :  Duchies  of  Sagan  and  Glogau,  which  are  not  of
the  Four  at  all,  but  which  lie  nearest  us,  and  are  far  below  the
value  of  the  Four,  to  Austria  especially.  This  intricate  point
Friedrich  has  already  settled  in  his  mind.  And  indeed  it  is
notably  the  habit  of  this  young  King  to  settle  matters  with
himself  in  good  time :  and  in  regard  to  all  manner  of  points,
1  (Euvres  de  Frederic  (xiv.  167)  ;  (Euvres  de  Voltaire  ;  &c.  &c.

276 FRIEDKICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND.  BOOK  XI.

1740.

he  will  be  found,  on  the  day  of  bargaining  about  them,  to  have
his  own  resolution  formed  and  definitely  fixed ;  —  much  to  his
advantage  over  conflicting  parties,  who  have  theirs  still  flying
loose.

Another  thing  of  much  concernnfent  is,  To  secure  himself
from  danger  of  Russian  interference.  To  this  end  he  de-
spatches Major  Winterfeld  to  Russia,  a  man  well  known  to
him ;  —  day  of  Winterfeld's  departure  is  not  given ;  day  of
his  arrival  in  Petersburg  is  "  19th  December "  just  coming.
Russia,  at  present,  is  rather  in  a  staggering  condition ;  hope-
ful for  Winterfeld's  object.  On  the  28th  of  October  last,
only  eight  days  after  the  Kaiser,  Czarina  Anne  of  Russia,
she  with  the  big  cheek,  once  of  Couiiand,  had  died ;  "  auda-
cious Death,"  as  our  poor  friend  had  it,  "  venturing  upon
another  Crowned  Head  "  there.  Bieren  her  dear  Couiiander,
once  little  better  than  a  Horse-groom,  now  Duke  of  Courland,
Quasi-Husband  to  the  late  Big  Cheek,  and  thereby  sovereign
of  Russia,  this  long  while  past,  is  left  Official  Head  in  Rus-
sia. Poor  little  Anton  Ulrich  and  his  august  Spouse,  well
enough  known  to  us,  have  indeed  produced  a  Czar  Iwan,  some
months  ago,  to  the  joy  of  mankind :  but  Czar  Iwan  is  in  his
cradle :  Father  and  Mother's  function  is  little  other  than  to
rock  the  cradle  of  Iwan ;  Bieren  to  be  Regent  and  Autocrat
over  him  and  them  in  the  interim.  To  their  chagrin,  to  that
of  Feldmarschall  Miinnich  and  many  others  :  the  upshot  of
which  will  be  visible  before  long.  Czarina  Anne's  death  had
seemed  to  Friedrich  the  opportune  removal  of  a  dangerous
neighbor,  known  to  be  in  the  pay  of  Austria :  here  now  are
new  mutually  hostile  parties  springing  up  ;  chance,  surely,  of
a  bargain  with  some  of  them  ?  He  despatches  Winterfeld
on  this  errand  ;  —  probably  the  fittest  man  in  Prussia  for  it.
How  soon  and  perfectly  Winterfeld  succeeded,  and  what  Win-
terfeld was,  and  something  of  what  a  Russia  he  found  it,  we
propose  to  mention  by  and  by.

These,  and  all  points  of  importance,  Friedrich  has  settled
with  himself  some  time  ago.  What  his  own  private  thoughts
on  the  Silesian  Adventure  are,  readers  will  wish  to  know,
since  they  can  at  first  hand.  Hear  Friedrich  himself,  whose

CHAP.  IX. KESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 277

2d  Dec.  1740.

veracity is unquestionable to such as know anything of
him:  —

"  This  Silesian  Project  fulfilled  all  his  (the  King's)  political
views,"  —  summed  them  all  well  up  into  one  head.  "  It  was
a  means  of  acquiring  reputation ;  of  increasing  the  power  of
the  State ;  and  of  terminating  what  concerned  that  long-liti-
gated question  of  the  Berg-Julich  Succession ;  "  —  can  be
sure  of  getting  that,  at  lowest ;  intends  to  give  that  up,  if
necessary.

"  Meanwhile,  before  entirely  determining,  the  King  weighed
the  risks  there  were  in  undertaking  such  a  War,  and  the  ad-
vantages that  were  to  be  hoped  from  it.  On  one  side,  pre-
sented itself  the  potent  House  of  Austria,  not  likely  to  want
resources  with  so  many  vast  Provinces  under  it ;  an  Emperor's
Daughter  attacked,  who  would  naturally  find  allies  in  the  King
of  England,  in  the  Dutch  Republic,  and  so  many  Princes  of
the  Empire  who  had  signed  the  Pragmatic  Sanction."  Russia
was  —  or  had  been,  and  might  again  be — in  the  pay  of
Vienna.  Saxony  might  have  some  clippings  from  Bohemia
thrown  to  it,  and  so  be  gained  over.  Scanty  Harvest,  1740,
threatened  difficulties  as  to  provisioning  of  troops.  "  The
risks  were  great.  One  had  to  apprehend  the  vicissitudes  of
war.  A  single  battle  lost  might  be  decisive.  The  King  had
no  allies  ;  and  his  troops,  hitherto  without  experience,  would
have  to  front  old  Austrian  soldiers,  grown  gray  in  harness,  and
trained  to  war  by  so  many  campaigns.

"  On  the  other  side  were  hopeful  considerations,"  —  four  in
number :  First,  Weak  condition  of  the  Austrian  Court,  Trea-
sury empty,  War- Apparatus  broken  in  pieces;  inexperienced
young  Princess  to  defend  a  disputed  succession,  on  those  terms.
Second,  There  will  be  allies  ;  France  and  England  always  in
rivalry,  both  meddling  in  these  matters,  King  is  sure  to  get
either  the  one  or  the  other.  Third,  Silesian  War  lies  handy
to  us,  and  is  the  only  kind  of  Offensive  War  that  does ;  Coun-
try bordering  on  our  frontier,  and  with  the  Oder  running
through  it  as  a  sure  high-road  for  everything.  Fourth,  "  What
suddenly  turned  the  balance,"  or  at  least  what  kept  it  steady
in  that  posture,  —  "  news  of  the  Czarina's  death  arrives  : "

V

278 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

Russia  has  ceased  to  count  against  us ;  and  become  a  manage-
able quantity.  On,  therefore  !  —

"  Add  to  these  reasons/'  says  the  King,  with  a  candor  which
has  not  been  well  treated  in  the  History  Books,  "  Add  to  these
reasons,  an  Army  ready  for  acting  ;  Funds,  Supplies  all  found
[lying  barrelled  in  the  Schloss  at  Berlin  ]  ;  —  and  perhaps  the
desire  of  making  oneself  a  name,"  from  which  few  of  mor-
tals able  to  achieve  it  are  exempt  in  their  young  time :
"  all  this  was  cause  of  the  War  which  the  King  now  entered
upon." l

"  Desire  to  make  himself  a  name  ;  how  shocking ! "  exclaim,
several  Historians.  "Candor  of  confession  that  he  may  have
had  some  such  desire ;  how  honest ! "  is  what  they  do  not  ex-
claim. As  to  the  justice  of  his  Silesian  Claims,  or  even  to  his
own  belief  about  their  justice,  Friedrich  affords  not  the  least
light  which  can  be  new  to  readers  here.  He  speaks,  when
business  requires  it,  of  "  those  known  rights  "  of  his,  and  with
the  air  of  a  man  who  expects  to  be  believed  on  his  word ;  but
it  is  cursorily,  and  in  the  business  way  only ;  and  there  is  not
here  or  elsewhere  the  least  pleading :  —  a  man,  you  would  say,
considerably  indifferent  to  our  belief  on  that  head;  his  eyes
set  on  the  practical  merely.  "  Just  Rights  ?  What  are  rights,
never  so  just,  which  you  cannot  make  valid  ?  The  world  is
full  of  such.  If  you  have  rights  and  can  assert  them  into
facts,  do  it ;  that  is  worth  doing  ! "  —

We  must  add  two  Notes,  two  small  absinthine  drops,  bitter
but  wholesome,  administered  by  him  to  the  Old  Dessauer,
whose  gloomy  wonder  over  all  this  military  whirl  of  Prussian
things,  and  discontent  that  he,  lately  the  head  authority,  has
never  once  been  spoken  to  on  it,  have  been  great.  Guessing,
at  last,  that  it  was  meant  for  Austria,  a  Power  rather  dear  to
Leopold,  he  can  suppress  himself  no  longer ;  but  breaks  out
into  Cassandra  prophesyings,  which  have  piqued  the  young
King,  and  provoke  this  return :  —

1.  "  Reinsberg,  2<ith  November,  1740.  —  I  have  received  your
Letter,  and  seen  with  what  inquietude  you  view  the  approach-
1  (Euvres  de  Frederic  (Histoire  de  mon  Temps),  i.  128.

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 279

2d  Dec.  1740.

ing  march,  of  my  Troops.  I  hope  you  will  set  your  mind  at
ease  on  that  score  ;  and  wait  with  patience  what  I  intend  with
them  and  you.  I  have  made  all  my  dispositions  ;  and  Your
Serenity  will  learn,  time  enough,  what  my  orders  are,  without
disquieting  yourself  about  them,  as  nothing  has  been  forgotten
or  delayed."  —  FRIEDKICH.

Old  Dessauer,  cut  to  the  bone,  perceives  he  will  have  to  quit
that  method  and  never  resume  it  ;  writes  next  how  painful  it
is  to  an  old  General  to  see  himself  neglected,  as  if  good  for
nothing,  while  his  scholars  are  allowed  to  gather  laurels.
Friedrich's  answer  is  of  soothing  character  :  —

2.  "  Berlin,  2d  December,  1740.  —  You  may  be  assured  I
honor  your  merits  and  capacity  as  a  young  Officer  ought  to
honor  an  old  one,  who  has  given  the  world  so  many  proofs  of
his  talent  (Dexteritat)  ;  nor  will  I  neglect  Your  Serenity  on
any  occasion  when  you  can  help  me  by  your  good  counsel  and
co-operation."  But  it  is  a  mere  "bagatelle"  this  that  I  am
now  upon  ;  though,  next  year,  it  may  become  serious.

For  the  rest,  Saxony  being  a  neighbor  whose  intentions  one
does  not  know,  I  have  privately  purposed  Your  Serenity  should
keep  an  outlook  that  way,  in  my  absence.  Plenty  of  employ-
ment coming  for  Your  Serenity.  "  But  as  to  this  present  Ex-
pedition, I  reserve  it  for  myself  alone  ;  that  the  world  may
not  think  the  King  of  Prussia  marches  with  a  Tutor  to  the
Field."  —

And  therewith  Leopold,  eagerly  complying,  has  to  rest  satis-
fied ;  and  beware  of  too  much  freedom  with  this  young  King
again.

"  Berlin,  December  2d,"  is  the  date  of  that  last  Note  to  the
Dessauer  ;  date  also  of  Voltaire's  Adieu  with  the  Response  ;  —
on  which  same  day,  "  Friday,  December  2d,"  as  I  find  from  the
Old  Books,  his  Majesty,  quitting  the  Eeinsberg  sojourn,  "had
arrived  in  Berlin  about  2  P.M.  ;  accompanied  by  Prince  August
Wilhelm  [betrothed  at  Brunswick  lately]  ;  such  a  crowd  on
1  Orlich,  Geschichte  der  Schlesischen  Kriege  (Berlin,  1841),  i.  38,  39.

280 FRIEDEICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

the  streets  as  if  they  had  never  seen  him  before."  He  con-
tinued at  Berlin  or  in  the  neighborhood  thenceforth.  Busy
days  these ;  and  Berlin  a  much  whispering  City,  as  Regiment
after  Regiment  marches  away.  King  soon  to  follow,  as  is
thought,  —  "  who  himself  sometimes  deigns  to  take  the  Regi-
ments into  highest  own  eyeshine,  hochst-eigenen  Augenschein  "
(that  is,  to  review  them),  say  the  reverential  Editors.  Decem-
ber 6th  —  But  let  us  follow  the  strict  sequence  of  Phenomena
at  Berlin.

Excellency  Botta  has  Audience  ;  then  Excellency  Dickens,
and  others  :  December  Qth,  the  Mystery  is  out.

Of  course  her  Hungarian  Majesty,  and  her  Bartensteins  and
Ministries,  heard  enough  of  those  Prussian  rumors,  interior
Military  activities,  and  enigmatic  movements ;  but  they  seem
strangely  supine  on  the  matter ;  indeed,  they  seem  strangely
supine  on  such  matters  ;  and  lean  at  ease  upon  the  Sea-Powers,
upon  Pragmatic  Sanction  and  other  Laws  of  Nature.  But  at
length  even  they  become  painfully  interested  as  to  Friedrich's
intentions ;  and  despatch  an  Envoy  to  sift  him  a  little :  an  ex-
pert Marchese  di  Botta,  Genoese  by  birth,  skilful  in  the  Rus-
sian and  other  intricacies ;  who  was  here  at  Berlin  lately,  doing
the  Accession  Compliment  (rather  ill  received  at  that  time),
and  is  fit  for  the  job.  Perhaps  Botta  will  penetrate  him  ?
That  is  becoming  desirable,  in  spite  of  the  gay  Private  The-
atricals at  Reinsberg,  and  the  Berlin  Carnival  Balls  he  is  so
occupied  with.

England  is  not  less  interested,  and  the  diligent  Sir  Guy  is
doing  his  best ;  but  can  make  out  nothing  satisfactory ;  —  much
the  reverse  indeed;  and  falls  into  angry  black  anticipations.
"Nobody  here,  great  or  small,"  says  his  Excellency,  "dares
make  any  representation  to  this  young  Prince  against  the
measures  he  is  pursuing ;  though  all  are  sensible  of  the  con-
fusion which  must  follow.  A  Prince  who  had  the  least  regard
to  honor,  truth  and  justice,  could  not  act  the  part  he  is  going
to  do."  Alas,  no,  Excellency  Dickens  !  "  But  it  is  plain  his
only  view  was,  to  deceive  us  all,  and  conceal  for  a  while  his

CHAP.  IX.  EESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG.  281
6th  Dec.  1740.

ambitious  and  mischievous  designs."  *  "  Never  was  such  dis-
simulation ! "  exclaims  the  Diplomatic  world  everywhere,  be-
ing angered  at  it,  as  if  it  were  a  vice  on  the  part  of  a  King
about  to  invade  Silesia.  Dissimulation,  if  that  mean  men-
dacity, is  not  the  name  of  the  thing;  it  is  the  art  of  wear-
ing a  polite  cloak  of  darkness,  and  the  King  is  little  disturbed
what  name  they  call  it.

Botta  did  not  get  to  Berlin  till  December  1st,  had  no  Audi-
ence till  the  5th ;  —  by  which  time  it  is  becoming  evident  to
Excellency  Dickens,  and  to  everybody,  that  Silesia  is  the
thing  meant.  Botta  hints  as  much  in  that  first  Audience,
December  5th :  "  Terrible  roads,  those  Silesian  ones,  your  Maj-
esty !  "  says  Botta,  as  if  historically  merely,  but  with  a  glance
of  the  eye.  "  Hin,"  answers  his  Majesty  in  the  same  tone,
"  the  worst  that  comes  of  them  is  a  little  mud !  "  —  Next  day,
Dickens  had  express  Audience,  "  Berlin,  Tuesday  6th : "  a
smartish,  somewhat  flurried  Colloquy  with  the  King;  which,
well  abridged,  may  stand  as  follows :  —

Dickens.  ..."  Indivisibility  of  the  Austrian  Monarchy,
Sire!" — King.  "Indivisibility?  What  do  you  mean?"  —
Dickens.  "The  maintenance  of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction."  —
King.  "  Do  you  intend  to  support  it  ?  I  hope  not ;  for  such
is  not  my  intention."  (There  is  for  you  ! )  .  .  .

Dickens.  "England  and  Holland  will  much  wonder  at  the
measures  your  Majesty  was  taking,  at  the  moment  when  your
Majesty  proposed  to  join  with  them,  and  were  making  friendly
proposals  !  "  (Has  been  a  deceitful  man,  Sir  Guy,  at  least  an
impenetrable  ; — but  this  latter  is  rather  strong  on  your  part !)
"  What  shall  I  write  to  England  ?  "  ("  When  I  mentioned
this,"  says  Dickens,  "the  King  grew  red  in  the  face,"  eyes
considerably  flashing,  I  should  think.)

King.  "  You  can  have  no  instructions  to  ask  that  question !
And  if  you  had,  I  have  an  answer  ready  for  you.  England
has  no  right  to  inquire  into  my  designs.  Your  great  Sea-
Armaments,  did  I  ask  you  any  questions  about  them  ?  No ;
I  was  and  am  silent  on  that  head ;  only  wishing  you  good  luck,

1  Despatch,  29th  November-3d  December,  1740  :  Kaumer,  p.  58.

282 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  REINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

and  that  you  may  not  get  beaten  by  the  Spaniards."  (Dickens
hastily  draws  in  his  rash  horns  again ;  after  a  pass  or  two,
King's  natural  color  returns.)  .  .  .

King.  "  Austria  as  a  Power  is  necessary  against  the  Turks.
But  in  Germany,  what  need  of  Austria  being  so  superlative  ?
Why  should  not,  say,  Three  Electors  united  be  able  to  oppose
her  ?  .  .  .  Monsieur,  I  find,  it  is  your  notion  in  England,  as
well  as  theirs  in  France,  to  bring  other  Sovereigns  under  your
tutorage,  and  lead  them  about.  Understand  that  I  will  not
be  led  by  either.  .  .  .  Tush,  you  are  like  the  Athenians,  who,
when  Philip  of  Macedon  was  ready  to  invade  them,  spent  their
time  in  haranguing !  "

Dickens.  ..."  Berg  and  Jiilich,  if  we  were  to  guarantee
them  ?  "  —  King.  "  Hm.  Don't  so  much  mind  that  Khine
Country :  difficulties  there,  —  Dutch  always  jealous  of  one.
But,  on  the  other  Frontier,  neither  England  nor  Holland  could
take  umbrage,"  —  points  clearly  to  Silesia,  then,  your  Excel-
lency Dickens  ? l

Alas,  yes  !  Troops  and  military  equipments  are,  for  days
past,  evidently  wending  towards  Frankfurt,  towards  Crossen,
and  even  the  Newspapers  now  hint  that  something  is  on  hand
in  that  quarter.  Nay,  this  same  day,  Tuesday,  6th  December,
there  has  come  out  brief  Official  Announcement,  to  all  the
Foreign  Ministers  at  Berlin,  Excellency  Dickens  among  them,
"That  his  Royal  Majesty,  our  most  all-gracious  Herr,  has
taken  the  resolution  to  advance  a  Body  of  Troops  into  Schle-
sien,"  —  rather  out  of  friendly  views  towards  Austria  (much
business  lying  between  us  about  Schlesien),  not  out  of  hostile
views  by  any  means,  as  all  Excellencies  shall  assure  their
respective  Courts.2  Announcement  which  had  thrown  the
Excellency  Dickens  into  such  a  frame  of  mind,  before  he  got
his  Audience  to-day  !  —

Saturday  following,  which  was  December  10th,  Marquis
de  Beauvau  had  his  Audience  of  leave ;  intending  for  Paris
shortly :  Audience  very  gracious ;  covertly  hinting,  on  both

1  Raumer,  (from  State-Paper  Office),  pp.  63,  64.

2  Copy  of  the  Paper  in  Helden-  Geschichte,  i.  447.

CHAP.  IX.  RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG.  283
llth  Dec.  1740.

sides,  more  than  it  said ;  ending  in  these  words,  on  the  King's
side,  which  have  become  famous  :  "  Adieu,  then,  M.  le  Mar-
quis. I  believe  I  am  going  to  play  your  game  ;  if  the  aces
fall  to  me,  we  will  share  (Je  vais,  je  crois,  jouer  votre  jeu :  si
les  as  me  viennent,  nous  partagerons)  !"  1

To  Botta,  all  this  while,  Friedrich  strove  to  be  specially
civil;  took  him  out  to  Charlottenburg,  that  same  Saturday,
with  the  Queen  and  other  guests ;  but  Botta,  and  all  the
world,  being  now  certain  about  Silesia,  and  that  no  amount  of
mud,  or  other  terror  on  the  roads,  would  be  regarded,  Botta's
thoughts  in  this  evening  party  are  not  of  cheerful  nature.
Next  day,  Sunday,  December  llth,  he  too  gets  his  Audience  of
leave  ;  and  cannot  help  bursting  out,  when  the  King  plainly
tells  him  what  is  now  afoot,  and  that  the  Prussian  Ambas-
sador has  got  instructions  what  to  offer  upon  it  at  Vienna.
"  Sire,  you  are  going  to  ruin  the  House  of  Austria,"  cried
Botta,  "  and  to  plunge  yourself  into  destruction  (vous  abimer)
at  the  same  time  ! "  —  "  Depends  on  the  Queen,"  said  Tried-
rich,  "to  accept  the  Offers  I  have  made  her."  Botta  sank
silent,  seemed  to  reflect,  but  gathering  himself  again,  added
with  an  ironical  air  and  tone  of  voice,  "  They  are  fine  Troops,
those  of  yours,  Sire.  Ours  have  not  the  same  splendor  of  ap-
pearance ;  but  they  have  looked  the  wolf  in  the  face.  Think,
I  conjure  you,  what  you  are  getting  into ! "  Friedrich  an-
swered with  vivacity,  a  little  nettled  at  the  ironical  tone  of
Botta,  and  his  mixed  sympathy  and  menace :  "  You  find  my
troops  are  beautiful;  perhaps  I  shall  convince  you  they  are
good  too."  Yes,  Excellency  Botta,  goodish  troops  ;  and  very
capable  "to  look  the  wolf  in  the  face," — or  perhaps  in  the
tail  too,  before  all  end !  "  Botta  urged  and  entreated  that  at
least  there  should  be  some  delay  in  executing  this  project.
But  the  King  gave  him  to  understand  that  it  was  now  too
late,  and  that  the  Rubicon  was  passed."  2

The  secret  is  now  out,  therefore;  Invasion  of  Silesia  cer-
tain and  close  at  hand.  "A  day  or  two  before  marching,"
may  have  been  this  very  day  when  Botta  got  his  audience,  the

1  Voltaire,  (Euvres  (Siecle  de  Louis'XV ,  c.  6),  xxviii.  74.

2  Friedrich's  own  Account  ((Euvres,  ii.  57).

284 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  KEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

King  assembled  Ms  Chief  Generals,  all  things  ready  out  in
the  Frankfurt-Crossen  region  yonder  ;  and  spoke  to  them  as
follows  ;  briefly  and  to  the  point  :  —

"  Gentlemen,  I  am  undertaking  a  War,  in  which  I  have  no
allies  but  your  valor  and  your  good-will.  My  cause  is  just  ;
my  resources  are  what  we  ourselves  can  do  ;  and  the  issue
lies  in  Fortune.  Eemember  continually  the  glory  which  your
Ancestors  acquired  in  the  plains  of  Warsaw,  at  Fehrbellin,
and  in  the  Expedition  to  Preussen  [across  the  Frische  Haf  on
ice,  that  time].  Your  lot  is  in  your  own  hands  :  distinctions
and  rewards  wait  upon  your  fine  actions  which  shall  merit
them.

"  But  what  need  have  I  to  excite  you  to  glory  ?  It  is  the
one  thing  you  keep  before  your  eyes  ;  the  sole  object  worthy
of  your  labors.  We  are  going  to  front  troops  who,  under
Prince  Eugene,  had  the  highest  reputation.  Though  Prince
Eugene  is  gone,  we  shall  have  to  measure  our  strength  against
brave  soldiers  :  the  greater  will  be  the  honor  if  we  can  conquer.
Adieu,  go  forth.  I  will  follow  you  straightway,  to  the  rendez-
vous of  glory  which  awaits  us."  1

Masked  Ball,  at  Berlin,  12iA-13^A  December.

On  the  evening  of  Monday,  12th,  there  was,  as  usual,  Masked
(or  Half-Masked)  Ball,  at  the  Palace.  As  usual  ;  but  this  time
it  has  become  mentionable  in  World-History.  Bielfeld,  per-
sonally interested,  gives  us  a  vivid  glance  into  it  ;  -  -  which,
though  pretending  to  be  real  and  contemporaneous,  is  unfor-
tunately mythical  only,  and  done  at  a  great  interval  of  years
(dates,  and  even  slight  circumstances  of  fact,  refusing  to  con-
form) ;  —  which,  however,  for  the  truth  there  is  in  it,  we  will
give,  as  better  than  nothing.  Bielfeld's  pretended  date  is,
"  Berlin,  15th  December  ;  "  should  have  been  14th,  —  wrong
by  a  day,  after  one's  best  effort  !

"  Berlin,  15tk  December,  1740.  As  for  me,  dear  Sister,  I  am
like  a  shuttlecock  whom  the  Kings  of  Prussia  and  of  England
hit  with  their  rackets,  and  knock  to  and  fro.  The  night  be-

1  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  ii,  58.

CHAP.  IX. RESOLUTION  FORMED  AT  REINSBERG. 285

13th  Dec.  1740.

fore  last,  I  was  at  the  Palace  Evening  Party  (Assemblee)  ;
which  is  a  sort  of  Ball,  where  you  go  in  domino,  but  without
mask  on  the  face.  The  Queen  was  there,  and  all  the  Court.
About  eight  o'clock  the  King  also  made  his  appearance.  His

Majesty,  noticing  M.  de  G [that  is  de  Guidiken,  or  Guy

Dickens],  English  Minister,  addressed  him ;  led  him  into  the
embrasure  of  a  window,  and  talked  alone  with  him  for  more
than  an  hour  [uncertain,  probably  apocryphal  this].  I  threw,
from  time  to  time,  a  stolen  glance  at  this  dialogue,  which  ap-
peared to  me  to  be  very  lively.  A  moment  after,  being  just
dancing  with  Madame  the  Countess  de  —  Three- Asterisks,  —
I  felt  myself  twitched  by  the  domino  ;  and  turning,  was  much
surprised  to  see  that  it  was  the  King ;  who  took  me  aside,  and
said,  '  Are  your  boots  oiled  ( Vos  bottes  sont-elles  graissees,  Are
you  ready  for  a  journey)  ?  '  I  replied,  '  Sire,  they  will  always
be  so  for  your  Majesty's  service.'  — ( Well,  then,  Truchsess
and  you  are  for  England ;  the  day  after  to-morrow  you  go.
Speak  to  M.  de  Podewils ! '  —  This  was  said  like  a  flash  of
lightning.  His  Majesty  passed  into  another  apartment ;  and
I,  I  went  to  finish  my  minuet  with  the  Lady ;  who  had  been
not  less  astonished  to  see  me  disappear  from  her  eyes,  in  the
middle  of  the  dance,  than  I  was  at  what  the  King  said  to
me."  *  Next  morning,  I  —

The  fact  is,  next  morning,  Truchsess  and  I  began  prepara-
tion for  the  Court  of  London,  —  and  we  did  there,  for  many
months  afterwards,  strive  our  best  to  keep  the  Britannic
Majesty  in  some  kind  of  tune,  amid  the  prevailing  discord
of  events  ;  —  fact  interesting  to  some.  And  the  other  fact,
interesting  to  everybody,  though  Bielfeld  has  not  mentioned
it,  is,  That  King  Friedrich,  the  same  next  morning,  punctually
"  at  the  stroke  of  9,"  rolled  away  Frankfurt-ward,  —  into  the
First  Silesiaii  War  !  Tuesday,  "  13th  December,  this  morn-
ing, the  King,  privately  quitting  the  Ball,  has  gone  [after
some  little  snatch  of  sleep,  we  will  hope]  for  Frankfurt,  to
put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  Troops."  2  Bellona  his  com-

1  Bielfeld,  i.  167,  168.

2  Dickens  (in  State-Paper  Office),  13th  December,  1740;  see  also  Helden-
Geschichte,  i.  452 ;  &c.  &c.

286 FRIEDRICH  TAKES  THE  EEINS  IN  HAND. BOOK  XI.

1740.

paniou  for  long  years  henceforth,  instead  of  Minerva  and  the
Muses,  as  he  had  been  anticipating.

Hereby  is  like  to  be  fulfilled  (except  that  Friedrich  himself
is  perhaps  this  "  little  stone ")  what  Friedrich  prophesied  to
his  Voltaire,  the  day  after  hearing  of  the  Kaiser's  death :  "  I
believe  there  will,  by  June  next,  be  more  talk  of  cannon,  sol-
diers, trenches,  than  of  actresses,  and  dancers  for  the  ballet.
This  small  Event  changes  the  entire  system  of  Europe.  It
is  the  little  stone  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw,  in  his  dream,
loosening  itself,  and  rolling  down  on  the  Image  made  of  Four
Metals,  which  it  shivers  to  ruin."  1

1  Friedrich  to  Voltaire,  busy  gathering  actors  at  that  time,  26th  October,
1740  (CEuvres  de  Frtd&ic,  xxii.  49).

BOOK XII.

FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR,  AWAKENING  A  GENERAL
EUROPEAN  ONE,  BEGINS.

December,  1740-May,  1741.

CHAPTER  I.

OF SCHLESIEN, OK SILESIA.

SCHLESIEN,  what  we  call  Silesia,  lies  in  elliptic  shape,  spread
on  the  top  of  Europe,  partly  girt  with  mountains,  like  the
crown  or  crest  to  that  part  of  the  Earth  ;  —  highest  table-land
of  Germany  or  of  the  Cisalpine  Countries  ;  and  sending  rivers
into  all  the  seas.  The  summit  or  highest  level  of  it  is  in  the
southwest ;  longest  diameter  is  from  northwest  to  southeast.
From  Crossen,  whither  Friedrich  is  now  driving,  to  the  Ja-
blunka  Pass,  which  issues  upon  Hungary,  is  above  250  miles  ;
the  axis,  therefore,  or  longest  diameter,  of  our  Ellipse  we  may
call  250  English  miles  ;  —  its  shortest  or  conjugate  diameter,
from  Friedland  in  Bohemia  (Wallenstein's  old  Friedland),  by
Breslau  across  the  Oder  to  the  Polish  Frontier,  is  about  100.
The  total  area  of  Schlesien  is  counted  to  be  some  20,000  square
miles,  nearly  the  third  of  England  Proper.

Schlesien  —  will  the  reader  learn  to  call  it  by  that  name,
on  occasion  ?  for  in  these  sad  Manuscripts  of  ours  the  names
alternate  —  is  a  fine,  fertile,  useful  and  beautiful  Country.
It  leans  sloping,  as  we  hinted,  to  the  East  and  to  the  North  ;
a  long  curved  buttress  of  Mountains  ("  Riesengebirge,  Giant
Mountains,"  is  their  best-known  name  in  foreign  countries)
holding  it  up  on  the  South  and  West  sides.  This  Giant-

288  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

13th-16th  Dec.  1740.

Mountain  Range,  —  which  is  a  kind  of  continuation  of  the
Saxon-Boheniian  "  Metal  Mountains  (Erzgebirge)  "  and  of  the
straggling  Lausitz  Mountains,  to  westward  of  these,  —  shapes
itself  like  a  bill-hook  (or  elliptically,  as  was  said)  :  handle  and
hook  together  may  be  some  200  miles  in  length.  The  pre-
cipitous side  of  this  is,  in  general,  turned  outwards,  towards
Bohinen,  Mahren,  Ungarn  (Bohemia,  Moravia,  Hungary,  in
our  dialects)  ;  and  Schlesien  lies  inside,  irregularly  sloping
down,  towards  the  Baltic  and  towards  the  utmost  East.  From
the  Bohemian  side  of  these  Mountains  there  rise  two  Rivers :
Elbe,  tending  for  the  West ;  Morawa  for  the  South ;  —  Morawa,
crossing  Moravia,  gets  into  the  Donau,  and  thence  into  the
Black-Sea;  while  Elbe,  after  intricate  adventures  among  the
mountains,  and  then  prosperously  across  the  plains,  is  out,
with  its  many  ships,  into  the  Atlantic.  Two  rivers,  we  say,
from  the  Bohemian  or  steep  side :  and  again,  from  the  Sile-
sian  side,  there  rise  other  two,  the  Oder  and  the  Weichsel
( Vistula)  ;  which  start  pretty  near  one  another  in  the  South-
east, and,  after  wide  windings,  get  both  into  the  Baltic,  at  a
good  distance  apart.

For  the  first  thirty,  or  in  parts,  fifty  miles  from  the  Moun-
tains, Silesia  slopes  somewhat  rapidly ;  and  is  still  to  be  called
a  Hill-country,  rugged  extensive  elevations  diversifying  it :  but
after  that,  the  slope  is  gentle,  and  at  length  insensible,  or
noticeable  only  by  the  way  the  waters  run.  From  the  central
part  of  it,  Schlesien  pictures  itself  to  you  as  a  plain  ;  growing
ever  flatter,  ever  sandier,  as  it  abuts  on  the  monotonous  end-
less sand-flats  of  Poland,  and  the  Brandenburg  territories;
nothing  but  Boundary  Stones  with  their  brass  inscriptions
marking  where  the  transition  is ;  and  only  some  Fortified
Town,  not  far  off,  keeping  the  door  of  the  Country  secure  in
that  quarter.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Mountain  part  of  Schlesien  is  very
picturesque ;  not  of  Alpine  height  anywhere  (the  Schnee-
Koppe  itself  is  under  5,000  feet),  so  that  verdure  and  forest
wood  fail  almost  nowhere  among  the  Mountains;  and  mul-
tiplex industry,  besung  by  rushing  torrents  and  the  swift
young  rivers,  nestles  itself  high  up;  and  from  wheat  hus-

CHAP.  I.  OF  SCHLESIEN.  289

13th-16th  Dec.  1T40.

bandry,  madder  and  maize  husbandry,  to  damask-weaving,
metallurgy,  charcoal-burning,  tar-distillery,  Schlesien  has  many
trades,  and  has  long  been  expert  and  busy  at  them  to  a  high
degree.  A  very  pretty  Ellipsis,  or  irregular  Oval,  on  the  sum-
mit of  the  European  Continent ;  —  "  like  the  palm  of  a  left
hand  well  stretched  out,  with  the  Riesengebirge  for  thumb  ! "
said  a  certain  Herr  to  me,  stretching  out  his  arm  in  that
fashion  towards  the  northwest.  Palm,  well  stretched  out,
measuring  250  miles ;  and  the  crossway  100.  There  are  still
beavers  in  Schlesien ;  the  Katzbach  River  has  gold  grains  in
it,  a  kind  of  Pactolus  not  now  worth  working ;  and  in  the
scraggy  lonesome  pine-woods,  grimy  individuals,  with  kindled
mounds  of  pine-branches  and  smoke  carefully  kept  down  by
sods,  are  sweating  out  a  substance  which  they  inform  you  is
to  be  tar.

Historical  Epochs  of  Schlesien  ;  —  after  the  Quads  and

Marchmen.

Who  first  lived  in  Schlesien,  or  lived  long  since  in  it,  there
is  no  use  in  asking,  nor  in  telling  if  one  knew.  "  The  Quadi
and  the  Lygii,"  says  Dryasdust,  in  a  groping  manner  :  Quadi
and  consorts,  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  Century,  continues  he  with
more  confidence,  shifted  Rome-ward,  following  the  general
track  of  contemporaneous  mankind ;  weak  remnant  of  Quadi
was  thereupon  overpowered  by  Slavic  populations,  and  their
Country  became  Polish,  which  the  eastern  rim  of  it  still  essen-
tially is.  That  was  the  end  of  the  Quadi  in  those  parts,  says
History.  But  they  cannot  speak  nor  appeal  for  themselves ;
History  has  them  much  at  discretion.  Rude  burial  urns,  with
a  handful  of  ashes  in  them,  have  been  dug  up  in  different
places ;  these  are  all  the  Archives  and  Histories  the  Quadi
now  have.  It  appears  their  name  signifies  Wicked.  They  are
those  poor  Quadi  ( Wicked  People)  who  always  go  along  with
the  Marcomanni  (Marchmen),  in  the  bead-roll  Histories  one
reads ;  and  I  almost  guess  they  must  have  been  of  the  same
stock :  "  Wickeds  and  Borderers  ;  "  considered,  on  both  sides
of  the  Border,  to  belong  to  the  Dangerous  Classes  in  those

VOL. VII.  19

290  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

13th-16th  Dec.  1740.

times.  Two  things  are  certain:  First,  quad  and  its  deriva-
tives have,  to  this  day,  in  the  speech  of  rustic  Germans,  some-
thing of  that  meaning,  —  "  nefarious,"  at  least  "  injurious,"
"  hateful,  and  to  be  avoided : "  for  example,  quaddel,  "  a  net-
tle-burn;" quetschen,  "to  smash"  (say,  your  thumb  while
hammering) ;  &c.  &c.  And  then  a  second  thing :  The  Polish
equivalent  word  is  Zle  (Biisching  says  Zlezi) ;  hence  Zlezien,
Schlesien,  meaning  merely  .Zfodland,  Quadland,  what  we  might
called  Damaging  or  Country  where  you  get  into  Trouble.
That  is  the  etymology,  or  what  passes  for  such.  As  to  the
History  of  Schlesien,  hitherwards  of  these  burial  urns  dug
up  in  different  places,  I  notice,  as  not  yet  entirely  buriable,
Three  Epochs.

First  Epoch  ;  Christianity  :  A.D.  966.  Introduction  of  Chris-
tianity ;  to  the  length  of  founding  a  Bishopric  that  year,  so
hopeful  were  the  aspects ;  "  Bishopric  of  Schmoger  "  (Schmay-
ram,  dim  little  Village  still  discoverable  on  the  Polish  fron-
tier, not  far  from  the  Town  of  Namslau)  ;  Bishopric  which,
after  one  removal  farther  inward,  got  across  the  Oder,  to
"  Wratislav"  which  we  now  call  Breslau ;  and  sticks  there,
as  Bishopric  of  Breslau,  to  this  day.  Year  966  :  it  was  in
Adalbert,  our  Prussian  Saint  and  Missionary's  younger  time.
Preaching,  by  zealous  Polacks,  must  have  been  going  on,  while
Adalbert,  Bright  in  Nobleness,  was  studying  at  Magdeburg,
and  ripening  for  high  things  in  the  general  estimation.  This
was  a  new  gift  from  the  Polacks,  this  of  Christianity ;  an  in-
finitely more  important  one  than  that  nickname  of  "  Zlezien,"
or  " Damagiiia,"  stuck  upon  the  poor  Country,  had  been.

Second  Epoch  ;  Get  gradually  cut  loose  from  Poland :  A.D.
1139-1159.  Twenty  years  of  great  trouble  in  Poland,  which
were  of  lasting  benefit  to  Schlesien.  In  1139  the  Polack  King,
a  very  potent  Majesty  whom  we  could  name  but  do  not,  died ;
and  left  his  Dominions  shared  by  punctual  bequest  among  his
five  sons.  Punctual  bequest  did  avail :  but  the  eldest  Son
(who  was  King,  and  had  Schlesien  with  much  else  to  his  share)
began  to  encroach,  to  grasp ;  upon  which  the  others  rose  upon
him,  flung  him  out  into  exile ;  redivided ;  and  hoped  now  they
might  have  quiet.  Hoped,  but  were  disappointed  ;  and  could

r,  OF  SCHLESIEN.  291

Dec.  1740.

come  to  no  sure  bargain  for  the  next  twenty  years,  —  not  till
"the  eldest  brother,"  first  author  of  these  strifes,  "died  an
exile  in  Holstein,"  or  was  just  about  dying,  and  had  agreed
to  take  Schlesien  for  all  claims,  and  be  quiet  thenceforth.

His,  this  eldest's,  three  Sons  did  accordingly,  in  1159,
get  Schlesien  instead  of  him ;  their  uncles  proving  honorable.
Schlesien  thereby  was  happy  enough  to  get  cut  loose  from

Poland,  and  to  continue  loose ;  steering  a  course  of  its  own  ;

parting  farther  and  farther  from  Poland  and  its  habits  and
fortunes.  These  three  Sons,  of  the  late  Polish  Majesty  who
died  in  exile  in  Holstein,  are  the  "  Piast  Dukes,"  much  talked
of  in  Silesian  Histories :  of  whose  merits  I  specify  this  only,
That  they  so  soon  as  possible  strove  to  be  German.  They
were  Progenitors  of  all  the  "Piast  Dukes,"  Proprietors  of
Schlesien  thenceforth,  till  the  last  of  them  died  out  in  1675,
—  and  a  certain  Erbverbriiderung  they  had  entered  into  could
not  take  effect  at  that  time.  Their  merits  as  Sovereign  Dukes
seem  to  have  been  considerable  ;  a  certain  piety,  wisdom  and
nobleness  of  mind  not  rare  among  them ;  and  no  doubt  it  was
partly  their  merit,  if  partly  also  their  good  luck,  that  they
took  to  Germany,  and  leant  thitherward ;  steering  looser  and
looser  from  Poland,  in  their  new  circumstances.  They  them-
selves by  degrees  became  altogether  German ;  their  Countries,
by  silent  immigration,  introduction  of  the  arts,  the  composures
and  sobrieties,  became  essentially  so.  On  the  eastern  rim
there  is  still  a  Polack  remnant,  its  territories  very  sandy,  its
condition  very  bad ;  remnant  which  surely  ought  to  cease  its
Polack  jargon,  and  learn  some  dialect  of  intelligible  Teutsch,
as  the  first  condition  of  improvement.  In  all  other  parts
Teutsch  reigns ;  and  Schlesien  is  a  green  abundant  Country ;
full  of  metallurgy,  damask-weaving,  grain-husbandry,  —  instead
of  gasconade,  gilt  anarchy,  rags,  dirt,  and  Nie  Pozwalam.

A.D.  1327  ;  Get  completely  cut  loose.  The  Piast  Dukes,  who
soon  ceased  to  be  Polish,  and  hung  rather  upon  Bohemia,  and
thereby  upon  Germany,  made  a  great  step  in  that  direction,
when  King  Johann,  old  Ich-Dien  whom  we  ought  to  recollect,
persuaded  most  of  them,  all  of  them  but  two,  "pretio  ac  prece,"
to  become  Feudatories  (Quasi-Feudatories,  but  of  a  sovereign

292  FIRST  SILESIAN WAE.  BOOK  XII.

13th-16th  Dec.  1740.

sort)  to  his  Crown  of  Bohemia.  The  two  who  stood  out,  re-
sisting prayer  and  price,  were  the  Duke  of  Jauer  and  the  Duke
of  Schweidnitz,  —  lofty-minded  gentlemen,  perhaps  a  thought
too  lofty.  But  these  also  Johann's  son,  little  Kaiser  Karl  IV.,
"  marrying  their  heiress,"  contrived  to  bring  in ;  —  one  fruit-
ful adventure  of  little  Karl's,  among  the  many  wasteful  he
made,  in  the  German  Eeich.  Schlesien  is  henceforth  a  bit  of
the  Kingdom  of  Bohemia ;  indissolubly  hooked  to  Germany  ;
and  its  progress  in  the  arts  and  composures,  under  wise  Piasts
with  immigrating  Germans,  we  guess  to  have  become  doubly
rapid.1

Third  Epoch;  Adopt  the  Reformation:  A.  D.  1414-1517.
Schlesien,  hanging  to  Bohemia  in  this  manner,  extensively
adopted  Huss's  doctrines ;  still  more  extensively  Luther's ;
and  that  was  a  difficult  element  in  its  lot,  though,  I  believe,
an  unspeakably  precious  one.  It  cost  above  a  Century  of  sad
tumults,  Zisca  Wars ;  nay  above  two  Centuries,  including  the
Bad  Thirty -Years  War ;  —  which  miseries,  in  Bohemia  Proper,
were  sometimes  very  sad  and  even  horrible.  But  Schlesien,
the  outlying  Country,  did,  in  all  this,  suffer  less  than  Bohemia
Proper ;  and  did  not  lose  its  Evangelical  Doctrine  in  result,  as
unfortunate  Bohemia  did,  and  sink  into  sluttish  "fanatical
torpor,  and  big  Crucifixes  of  japanned  Tin  by  the  wayside,"
though  in  the  course  of  subsequent  years,  named  of  Peace,  it
was  near  doing  so.  Here  are  the  steps,  or  unavailing  counter-
steps,  in  that  latter  direction  :  —

A.D.  1537.  Occurred,  as  we  know,  the  Erbverbiniderung ;
Duke  of  Liegnitz,  and  of  other  extensive  heritages,  making
Deed  of  Brotherhood  with  Kur-Brandenburg ;  —  Deed  for-
bidden, and  so  far  as  might  be,  rubbed  out  and  annihilated  by
the  then  King  of  Bohemia,  subsequently  Kaiser  Ferdinand  I.,
Karl  V.'s  Brother.  Duke  of  Liegnitz  had  to  give  up  his
parchments,  and  become  zero  in  that  matter:  Kur-Bran-
denburg entirely  refused  to  do  so ;  kept  his  parchments,  to
see  if  they  would  not  turn  to  something.

A.D.  1624.  Schlesien,  especially  the  then  Duke  of  Liegnitz
(great-grandson  of  the  Erbverbruderung  one),  and  poor  Johann
1  Biisching,  Erdbeschreibung,  viii.  725  ;  Iliibner,  t.  94.

CHAP.  I.  OF SCHLESIEN.  293

13th-16th  Dec.  1740.

George,  Duke  of  Jagerndorf,  cadet  of  the  then  Kur  -Branden-
burg, went  warmly  ahead  into  the  Winter-King  project,  first
fire  of  the  Thirty- Years  War ;  sufferings  from  Papal  encroach-
ment, in  high  quarters,  being  really  extreme.  Warmly  ahead ;
and  had  to  smart  sharply  for  it ;  —  poor  Johann  George  with
forfeiture  of  Jagerndorf,  with  Reiches-Acht  (Ban  of  the  Em-
pire), and  total  ruin ;  fighting  against  which  he  soon  died.
Act  of  Ban  and  Forfeiture  was  done  tyrannously,  said  most
men ;  and  it  was  persisted  in  equally  so,  till  men  ceased
speaking  of  it ;  —  Jagerndorf  Duchy,  fruit  of  the  Act,  was
held  by  Austria,  ever  after,  in  defiance  of  the  Laws  of  the
Reich.  Eeligious  Oppression  lay  heavy  on  Protestant  Schle-
sien  thenceforth ;  and  many  lukewarm  individualities  were
brought  back  to  Orthodoxy  by  that  method,  successful  in  the
diligent  skilled  hands  of  Jesuit  Eeverend  Fathers,  with  fiscals
and  soldiers  in  the  rear  of  them.

A.D.  1648.  Treaty  of  Westphalia  mended  much  of  this,  and
set  fair  limits  to  Papist  encroachment ;  —  had  said  Treaty
been  kept :  but  how  could  it  ?  By  Orthodox  Authority,  anx-
ious to  recover  lost  souls,  or  at  least  to  have  loyal  subjects,  it
was  publicly  kept  in  name ;  and  tacitly,  in  substance,  it  was
violated  more  and  more.  Of  the  "Blossoming  of  Silesian
Literature,"  spoken  of  in  Books ;  of  the  Poet  Opitz,  Poets
Logau,  Hoffmannswaldau,  who  burst  into  a  kind  of  Song
better  or  worse  at  this  Period,  we  will  remember  nothing ;  but
request  the  reader  to  remember  it,  if  he  is  tunefully  given,  or
thinks  it  a  good  symptom  of  Schlesien.

A.D.  1707.  Treaty  of  Altranstadt :  between  Kaiser  Joseph  I.
and  Karl  XII.  Swedish  Karl,  marching  through  those  parts,  —
out  of  Poland,  in  chase  of  August  the  Physically  Strong,  to-
wards Saxony,  there  to  beat  him  soft,  —  was  waited  upon  by
Silesian  Deputations  of  a  lamentable  nature  ;  was  entreated,
for  the  love  of  Christ  and  His  Evangel,  to  "  Protect  us  poor
Protestants,  and  get  the  Treaty  of  Westphalia  observed  on
our  behalf,  and  fair-play  shown !  "  Which  Karl  did ;  Kaiser
Joseph,  with  such  weight  of  French  War  lying  on  him,  being
much  struck  with  the  tone  of  that  dangerous  Swede.  The
Pope  rebuked  Kaiser  Joseph  for  such  compliance  in  the

294  FIRST  SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

13th-16th  Dec.  1740.

Silesian  matter  :  "  Holy  Father,"  answered  this  Kaiser  (not
of  distinguished  orthodoxy  in  the  House),  "  I  am  too  glad  he
did  not  ask  me  to  become  Lutheran ;  I  know  not  how  I  should
have  helped  myself !  "  1

These  are  the  Three  Epochs  ;  —  most  things,  in  respect  of
this  Third  or  Eeformation  Epoch,  stepping  steadily  downward
hitherto.  As  to  the  Fourth  Epoch,  dating  "  13th  Dec.  1740,"
which  continues,  up  to  our  day  and  farther,  and  is  the  final
and  crowning  Epoch  of  Silesian  History,  —  read  in  the
following  Chapters.

CHAPTER  II.

FRIEDRICH MARCHES ON GLOGAU.

AT  what  hour  Friedrich  ceased  dancing  on  that  famous
Ball-night  of  Bielfeld's,  and  how  long  he  slept  after,  or
whether  at  all,  no  Bielfeld  even  mythically  says  :  but  next
morning,  as  is  patent  to  all  the  world,  Tuesday,  13th  Decem-
ber, 1740,  at  the  stroke  of  nine,  he  steps  into  his  carriage  ;
and  with  small  escort  rolls  away  towards  Frankfurt-on-Oder ; 2
out  upon  an  Enterprise  which  will  have  results  for  himself  and
others.

Two  youngish  military  men,  Adjutant-Generals  both,  were
with  him,  Wartensleben,  Borck;  both  once  fellow  Captains
in  the  Potsdam  Giants,  and  much  in  his  intimacy  ever  since.
Wartensleben  we  once  saw  at  Brunswick,  on  a  Masonic
occasion ;  Borck,  whom  we  here  see  for  the  first  time,  is  not
the  Colonel  Borck  (properly  Major-General)  who  did  the

1  Pauli,  Allgemeine  Preussische  Staats-Geschichte  (viii.  298-592);  Biisching,
Erdbeschreibung  (viii.  700-739) ;  &c.  —  Heinrich  Wuttke,  Friedrichs  des  Grossen
Besitzergreifung  von  Schlesien  (Seizure  of  Silesia  by  Friedrich,  2  vols.  Leipzig,
1843),  I  mention  only  lest  ingenuous  readers  should  be  tempted  by  the  Title
to  buy  it. Wuttke  begins  at  the  Creation  of  the  World ;  and  having,  in  two
heavy  volumes,  at  last  struggled  down  close  to  the  Besitzergreifung  or  Seizure
in  question,  calls  halt ;  and  stands  (at  ease,  we  will  hope)  immovably  there
for  the  seventeen  years  since.

2  Helden-Geschichte,  i,  452  ;  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  456.

CHAP.  II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  295

16th  Dec.  1740.

Herstal  Operation  lately;  still  less  is  he  the  venerable  old
Minister,  Marlborough  Veteran,  and  now  Field-Marshal  Borck,
•whom  Hotham  treated  with,  on  a  certain  occasion.  There
are  numerous  Borcks  always  in  the  King's  service ;  nor  are
these  three,  except  by  loose  cousinry,  related  to  one  another.
The  Borcks  all  come  from  Stettin  quarter ;  a  brave  kindred,
and  old  enough,  —  "  Old  as  the  Devil,  Das  ist  so  old  als  de
Borcken  und  de  Diiwel,"  says  the  Pomeranian  Proverb ;  —
the  Adjutant-General,  a  junior  member  of  the  clan,  chances
to  be  the  notablest  of  them  at  this  moment.  Wartensleben,
Borck,  and  a  certain  Colonel  von  der  Golz,  whom  also  the
King  much  esteems,  these  are  his  company  on  this  drive.
For  escort,  or  guard  of  honor  out  of  Berlin  to  the  next  stages,
there  is  a  small  body  of  Hussars,  Life-guard  and  other
Cavalry,  "  perhaps  500  horse  in  all."

They  drive  rapidly,  through  the  gray  winter ;  reach  Frank-
furt-on-Oder,  sixty  miles  or  more  ;  where  no  doubt  there  is
military  business  waiting.  They  are  forward,  on  the  morrow,
for  dinner,  forty  miles  farther,  at  a  small  Town  called  Crossen,
which  looks  over  into  Silesia ;  and  is,  for  the  present,  head-
quarters to  a  Prussian  Army,  standing  ready  there  and  in  the
environs.  Standing  ready,  or  hourly  marching  in,  and  ren-
dezvousing ;  now  about  28,000  strong,  horse  and  foot.  A
Kearguard  of  Ten  or  Twelve  Thousand  will  march  from
Berlin  in  two  days,  pause  hereabouts,  and  follow  according
to  circumstances  :  Prussian  Army  will  then  be  some  40,000
in  all.  Schwerin  has  been  Commander,  manager  and  main-
spring of  the  business  hitherto  :  henceforth  it  is  to  be  the
King ;  but  Schwerin  under  him  will  still  have  a  Division  of
his  own.

Among  the  Regiments,  we  notice  "Schulenburg  Horse-
Grenadiers,"  —  come  along  from  Landsberg  hither,  these
Horse-Grenadiers,  with  little  Schulenburg  at  the  head  of
them  ;  —  "  Dragoon  Regiment  Bayreuth,"  "  Lifeguard  Carbin-
eers," "  Derschau  of  Foot ; "  and  other  Regiments  and  figures
slightly  known  to  us,  or  that  will  be  better  known.1  Rear-
guard, just  getting  under  way  at  Berlin,  has  for  leaders  the
1  List  in  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  453.

296  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

16th  Dec.  1740.

Prince  of  Holstein-Beck  ("  Holstein-  Vaisselle"  say  wags,  since
the  Principality  went  all  to  Silver-Plate)  and  the  Hereditary
Prince  of  Anhalt-Dessau,  whom  we  called  the  Young  Des-
sauer,  on  the  Strasburg  Journey  lately:  Rearguard,  we  say,
is  of  12,000  ;  main  Army  is  28,000 ;  Horse  and  Foot  are  in
the  proportion  of  about  1  to  3.  Artillery  "consists  of  20
three-pounders ;  4  twelve-pounders ;  4  howitzers  (Haubitzen)  ;
4  big  mortars,  calibre  fifty  pounds ;  and  of  Artillerymen  166
in  all."

With  this  Force  the  young  King  has,  on  his  own  basis
(pretty  much  in  spite  of  all  the  world,  as  we  find  now  and
afterwards),  determined  to  invade  Silesia,  and  lay  hold  of  the
Property  he  has  long  had  there ;  —  not  computing,  for  none
can  compute,  the  sleeping  whirlwinds  he  may  chance  to
awaken  thereby.  Thus  lightly  does  a  man  enter  upon  Enter-
prises which  prove  unexpectedly  momentous,  and  shape  the
whole  remainder  of  his  days  for  him  ;  crossing  the  Rubicon  as
it  were  in  his  sleep.  In  Life,  as  on  Railways  at  certain  points,
—  whether  you  know  it  or  not,  there  is  but  an  inch,  this  way
or  that,  into  what  tram  you  are  shunted  ;  but  try  to  get  out
of  it  again  !  "  The  man  is  mad,  cet  homme-la  est  fol !  "  said
Louis  XV.  when  he  heard  it.1

Friedrich  at Crossen,  and still  in  his  own  Territory,
14iA— 16£A  December ;  —  steps  into  Schlesien.

At  all  events,  the  man  means  to  try ;  —  and  is  here  dining
at  Crossen,  noon  of  Wednesday,  the  14th ;  certain  important
persons,  —  especially  two  Silesian  Gentlemen,  deputed  from
Griinberg,  the  nearest  Silesian  Town,  who  have  come  across  the
border  on  business,  —  having  the  honor  to  dine  with  him.  To
whom  his  manner  is  lively  and  affable ;  lively  in  mood,  as  if
there  lay  no  load  upon  his  spirits.  The  business  of  these  two
Silesian  Gentlemen,  a  Baron  von  Hocke  one  of  them,  a  Baron
von  Kestlitz  the  other,  was  To  present,  on  the  part  of  the
Town  and  Amt  of  Griinberg,  a  solemn  Protest  against  this

1  Raumer,  Beitrdge  (English  Translation, called  Frederick  77.  and  his  Times;
from  British  Museum  and  State-Paper  Office  ;  —  a  very  indistinct  poor  Book,
in  comparison  with  what  it  might  have  been),  p.  73  (24th  Dec.  1740).

CHAP.  II. FRIEDEICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  297

16th  Dec.  1740.

meditated  entrance  on  the  Territory  of  Schlesien ;  Government
itself,  from  Breslau,  ordering  them  to  do  so.  Protest  was
duly  presented ;  Friedrich,  as  his  manner  is,  and  continues  to
be  on  his  march,  glances  politely  into  or  at  the  Protest ;  hands
it,  in  silence,  to  some  page  or  secretary  to  deposit  in  the
due  pigeon-hole  or  waste-basket ;  and  invites  the  two  Silesian
Gentlemen  to  dine  with  him  ;  as,  we  see,  they  have  the  honor
to  do.  "  He  (Er)  lives  near  Grunberg,  then,  Mein  Herr  von
Hocke  ?  "  "  Close  to  it,  IJiro  Majestdt.  My  poor  mansion,
Schloss  of  Deutsch-Kessel,  is  some  fifteen  miles  hence ;  how
infinitely  at  your  Majesty's  service,  should  the  march  prove
inevitable,  and  go  that  way  !  "  —  "  Well,  perhaps  ! "  I  find
Friedrich  did  dine,  the  second  day  hence,  with  one  of  these
Gentlemen ;  and  lodged  with  the  other.  Government  at  Bres-
lau has  ordered  such  Protest,  on  the  part  of  the  Frontier  popu-
lations and  Official  persons  :  and  this  is  all  that  comes  of  it.

During  these  hours,  it  chanced  that  the  big  Bell  of  Crossen
dropped  from  its  steeple,  —  fulness  of  time,  or  entire  rotten-
ness of  axle-tree,  being  at  last  completed,  at  this  fateful  mo-
ment. Perhaps  an  ominous  thing  ?  Friedrich,  as  Caesar  and
others  have  done,  cheerfully  interprets  the  omen  to  his  own
advantage :  "  Sign  that  the  High  is  to  be  brought  low ! "
says  Friedrich.  Were  the  march-routes,  wagon-trains,  and
multifarious  adjustments  perfect  to  the  last  item  here  at
Crossen,  he  will  with  much  cheerfulness  step  into  Silesia,
independent  of  all  Grunberg  Protests  and  fallen  Bells.

On  the  second  day  he  does  actually  cross  ;  "  the  regiments
marching  in,  at  different  points ;  some  reaching  as  far  as  25  miles
in."  It  is  Friday,  16th  December,  1740 ;  there  has  a  game
begun  which  will  last  long  !  They  went  through  the  Village
of  Lasgen ;  that  was  the  first  point  of  Silesian  ground  ("  Cir-
cle of  Schwiebus,"  our  old  friend,  is  on  the  left  near  by) ;  and
"  Schwerin's  Regiment  was  the  foremost."  Others  cross  more
to  the  left  or  right ;  "  marching  through  the  Village  of  Lessen,"
and  other  dim  Villages  and  little  Towns,  round  and  beyond
Grunberg ;  all  regiments  and  divisions  bearing  upon  Grunberg
and  the  Great  Eoad ;  but  artistically  portioned  out,  —  several
miles  in  breadth  (for  the  sake  of  quarters),  and,  as  is  generally

298  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

16th  Dec.  1740.

the  rule,  about  a  day's  march  in  length.  This  evening  nearly
the  whole  Array  was  on  Silesian  ground.

Printed  "  Patent "  or  Proclamation,  briefly  assuring  all  Sile-
sians,  of  whatever  rank,  condition  or  religion,  "That  we
have  come  as  friends  to  them,  and  will  protect  all  persons  in
their  privileges,  and  molest  no  peaceable  mortal,"  is  posted  on
Church-doors,  and  extensively  distributed  by  hand.  Soldiers
are  forbidden,  "  under  penalty  of  the  rods,"  Officers  under  that
of  "cassation  with  infamy,"  to  take  anything,  without  first
bargaining  and  paying  ready  money  for  it.  On  these  terms  the
Silesian  villages  cheerfully  enough  accept  their  new  guests,
interesting  to  the  rural  mind ;  and  though  the  billeting  was
rather  heavy,  "  as  many  as  24  soldiers  to  a  common  Farmer
(Gartner),"  no  complaints  were  made.  In  one  Schloss,  where
the  owners  had  fled,  and  no  human  response  was  to  be  had
by  the  wayworn  soldiery,  there  did  occur  some  breakages  and
impatient  kickings  about ;  which  it  grieved  his  Majesty  to
hear  of,  next  morning ;  —  in  one,  not  in  more.

Official  persons,  we  perceive,  study  to  be  absolutely  passive.
This  was  the  Biirgermeister's  course  at  Griinberg  to-night ;
Grimberg,  first  Town  on  the  Frontier,  sets  an  example  of  pas-
sivity which  cannot  be  surpassed.  Prussian  troops  being  at  the
Gate  of  Griinberg,  Biirgermeister  and  adjuncts  sitting  in  a  tacit
expectant  condition  in  their  Town-hall,  there  arrives  a  Prus-
sian Lieutenant  requiring  of  the  Biirgermeister  the  Key  of
said  Gate.  "  To  deliver  such  Key  ?  Would  to  God  I  durst,
Mein  Herr  Lieutenant ;  but  how  dare  I !  There  is  the  Key
lying :  but  to  give  it  —  You  are  not  the  Queen  of  Hungary's
Officer,  I  doubt  ?  "  —  The  Prussian  Lieutenant  has  to  put  out
hand,  and  take  the  Key  ;  which  he  readily  does.  And  on  the
morrow,  in  returning  it,  when  the  march  recommences,  there
are  the  same  phenomena :  Biirgermeister  or  assistants  dare  not
for  the  life  of  them  touch  that  Key  :  It  lay  on  the  table  ;  and
may  again,  in  the  course  of  Providence,  come  to  lie!  —  The
Prussian  Lieutenant  lays  it  down  accordingly,  and  hurries  out,
with  a  grin  on  his  face.  There  was  much  small  laughter  over
this  transaction ;  Majesty  himself  laughing  well  at  it.  Higher
perfection  of  passivity  no  Biirgermeister  could  show.

CHAP.  II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  299

16th  Dec.  1740.

The  march,  as  readers  understand,  is  towards  G-logau;  a
strongish  Garrison  Town,  now  some  40  miles  ahead ;  the  key
of  Northern  Schlesien.  Grunberg  (where  my  readers  once
slept  for  the  night,  in  the  late  King's  time,  though  they  have
forgotten  it)  is  the  first  and  only  considerable  Town  on  the
hither  side  of  Glogau.  On  to  Glogau,  I  rather  perceive,  the
Army  is  in  good  part  provisioned  before  starting :  after  Glo-
gau,—  we  must  see.  Bread-wagons,  Baggage- wagons,  Ammu-
nition-and-Artillery  wagons,  all  is  in  order ;  Army  artistically
portioned  out.  That  is  the  form  of  march ;  with  Glogau  ahead.
King,  as  we  said  above,  dines  with  his  Baron  von  Hocke,  at
the  Schloss  of  Deutsch-Kessel,  short  way  beyond  Grunberg,
this  first  day:  but  he  by  no  means  loiters  there;  —  cuts
across,  a  dozen  miles  westward,  through  a  country  where  his
vanguard  on  its  various  lines  of  march  ought  to  be  arriving;  —
and  goes  to  lodge,  at  the  Schloss  of  Schweinitz,  with  his  other
Baron,  the  Von  Kestlitz  of  Wednesday  at  Crossen.1  This  is
Friday,  16th  December,  his  first  night  on  Silesian  ground.

What  Grlogau,  and  the  Government  at  Sreslau,  did  upon  it.

Silesia,  in  the  way  of  resistance,  is  not  in  the  least  prepared
for  him.  A  month  ago,  there  were  not  above  3,000  Austrian
Foot  and  600  Horse  in  the  whole  Province :  neither  the  mili-
tary Governor  Count  Wallis,  nor  the  Imperial  Court,  nor  any
Official  Person  near  or  far,  had  the  least  anticipation  of  such  a
Visit.  Count  Wallis,  who  commands  in  Glogau,  did  in  person,
nine  or  ten  days  ago,  as  the  rumors  rose  ever  higher,  run  over
to  Crossen ;  saw  with  his  eyes  the  undeniable  there ;  and  has
been  zealously  endeavoring  ever  since,  what  he  could,  to  take
measures.  Wallis  is  now  shut  in  Glogau ;  his  second,  the  now
Acting  Governor,  General  Browne,  a  still  more  reflective  man,
is  doing  likewise  his  utmost ;  but  on  forlorn  terms,  and  with-
out the  least  guidance  from  Court.  Browne  has,  by  violent
industry,  raked  together,  from  Mahren  and  the  neighboring
countries,  certain  fractions  which  raise  his  Force  to  7,000
Foot:  these  he  throws,  in  small  parties,  into  the  defensible

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  459.

300  FIRST SILESIAN WAB.  BOOK  xil.

16th  Dec.  1740.

points ;  or,  in  larger,  into  the  Chief  Garrisons.  New  Cavalry
he  cannot  get ;  the  old  600  Horse  he  keeps  for  himself,  all  the
marching  Army  he  has.1

Fain  would  he  get  possession  of  Breslau,  and  throw  in  some
garrison  there ;  but  cannot.  Neither  he  nor  Wallis  could  com-
pass that.  Breslau  is  a  City  divided  against  itself,  on  this
matter;  full  of  emotions,  of  expectations,  apprehensions  for
and  against.  There  is  a  Supreme  Silesian  Government  (Ober-
Amt,  "  Head-Office,"  kind  of  Austrian  Vice-Royalty)  in  Bres-
lau ;  and  there  is,  on  Breslau' s  own  score,  a  Town-Eath ;
strictly  Catholic  both  these,  Vienna  the  breath  of  their  nostrils.
But  then  also  there  are  forty-four  Incorporated  Trades ;  Op-
pressed Protestant  in  Majority  ;  to  whom  Vienna  is  not  breath,
but  rather  the  want  of  it.  Lastly,  the  City  calls  itself  Free ;
and  has  crabbed  privileges  still  valid ;  a  "jits  prcesidii  "  (or  right
to  be  one's  own  garrison)  one  of  them,  and  the  most  incon-
venient just  now.  Breslau  is  a  Reichs-Stadt ;  in  theory,  sov-
ereign member  of  the  Eeich,  and  supreme  over  its  own  affairs,
even  as  Austria  itself  :  —  and  the  truth  is,  old  Theory  and  new
Fact,  resolved  not  to  quarrel,  have  lapsed  into  one  another's
arms  in  a  quite  inextricable  way,  in  Breslau  as  elsewhere !
With  a  Head  Government  which  can  get  no  orders  from
Vienna,  the  very  Town-Rath  has  little  alacrity,  inclines  rather
to  passivity  like  Griinberg  ;  and  a  silent  population  threatens
to  become  vocal  if  you  press  upon  it.

Breslau,  that  is  to  say  the  Ober-Amt  there,  has  sent  courier
on  courier  to  Vienna  for  weeks  past :  not  even  an  answer  ;  —
what  can  Vienna  answer,  with  Kur-Baiern  and  others  threat-
ening war  on  it,  and  only  £10,000  in  its  National  Purse  ?
Answer  at  last  is,  "  Don't  bother !  Danger  is  not  so  near.
Why  spend  money  on  couriers,  and  get  into  such  a  taking  ?  '
General  Wallis  came  to  Breslau,  after  what  he  had  seen  at
Crossen ;  and  urged  strongly,  in  the  name  of  self-preservation,
first  law  of  Nature,  to  get  an  Austrian  real  Garrison  intro-
duced ;  wished  much  (horrible  to  think  of !)  "  the  suburbs
should  be  burnt,  and  better  ramparts  raised : "  but  could  not

1  Particulars  in  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  465  ;  total  of  Austrian  Force  seems  to
be  7,800  horse  and  foot.

CHAP.  ii. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  301

16th  Dec.  1740.

succeed  in  any  of  these  points,  nor  even  mention  some  of  them
in  a  public  manner.  "  You  shall  have  a  Protestant  for  com-
mandant," suggested  Wallis  ;  "  there  is  Count  von  Koth,  Sile-
sian-Lutheran,  an  excellent  Soldier  !  "  —  "  Thanks,"  answered
they,  "  we  can  defend  ourselves  ;  we  had  rather  not  have  any  !  "
And  the  Breslau  Burghers  have,  accordingly,  set  to  drill  them-
selves ;  are  bringing  out  old  cannon  in  quantity ;  repairing
breaches  ;  very  strict  in  sentry-work :  "  Perfectly  able  to  de-
fend our  City,  —  so  far  as  we  see  good ! "  —  Tuesday  last,
December  13th  (the  very  day  Friedrich  left  Berlin),  as  this
matter  of  the  Garrison,  long  urged  by  the  Ober-Amt,  had  at
last  been  got  agreed  to  by  the  Town-Rath,  "  on  proviso  of  con-
sulting the  Incorporated  Trades,"  or  at  least  consulting  their
Guild-Masters,  who  are  usually  a  silent  folk,  —  the  Guild-
Masters  suddenly  became  in  part  vocal ;  and  their  forty -four
Guilds  unusually  so  :  — and  there  was  tumult  in  Breslau,  in  the
Salz-Eing  (big  central  Square  or  market-place,  which  they  call
Ring)  such  as  had  not  been ;  idle  population,  and  guild-brethren
of  suspicious  humor,  gathering  in  multitudes  into  and  round
the  fine  old  Town-hall  there  ;  questioning,  answering,  in  louder
and  louder  key ;  at  last  bellowing  quite  in  alt ;  and  on  the
edge  of  naming  into  one  knew  not  what :  *  —  till  the  matter  of
Austrian  Garrison  (much  more,  of  burning  the  suburbs !)  had
to  be  dropt ;  settled  in  what  way  we  see.

Head  Government  (Ober-Amt)  has,  through  its  Northern
official  people,  sent  Protest,  strict  order  to  the  Silesian
Population  to  look  sour  on  the  Prussians: — and  we  saw,  in
consequence,  the  two  Silesian  Gentlemen  did  dine  with  Fried-
rich,  and  he  has  returned  their  visits;  and  the  Mayor  of
Griinberg  would  not  touch  his  keys.  Head  Government  is
now  redacting  a  "  Patent,"  or  still  more  solemn  Protest  of  its
own;  which  likewise  it  will  affix  in  the  Salz-Eing  here,  and
present  to  King  Friedrich:  and  this — except  "despatching
by  boat  down  the  river  a  great  deal  of  meal  to  Glogau,"  which
was  an  important  quiet  thing,  of  Wallis's  enforcing  —  is
pretty  much  all  it  can  do.  No  Austrian  Garrison  can  be
got  in  ("  Perfectly  able  to  defend  ourselves  !  ")  —  let  Govern-

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  469.

302  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.

ment  and  Wallis  or  Browne  contrive  as  they  may.  And  as  to
burning  the  suburbs,  better  not  whisper  of  that  again.  Bres-
lau  feels,  or  would  fain  feel  itself  "  perfectly  able  ;  "  -  has  at
any  rate  no  wish  to  be  bombarded ;  and  contains  privately  a
great  deal  of  Protestant  humor.  Of  all  which,  Friedrich,  it  is
not  doubted,  has  notice  more  or  less  distinct;  and  quickens
his  march  the  more.

General  Browne  is  at  present  in  the  Southern  parts  ;  an  able
active  man  and  soldier  ;  but  with  such  a  force  what  can  he  at-
tempt to  do  ?  There  are  three  strong  places  in  the  Country,
Glogau,  then  Brieg,  both  on  the  Oder  river  ;  lastly  Neisse,  on
the  Neisse  river,  a  branch  of  the  Oder  (one  of  the  four  Neisse
rivers  there  are  in  Germany,  mostly  in  Silesia,  —  not  handy  to
the  accurate  reader  of  German  Books).  Browne  is  in  Neisse  ;
and  will  start  into  a  strange  stare  when  the  flying  post  reaches
him :  Prussians  actually  on  march  !  Debate  with  them,  if  de-
bate there  is  to  be,  Browne  himself  must  contrive  to  do  ;  from
Breslau,  from  Vienna,  no  Government  Supreme  or  Subordinate
can  yield  his  8,000  and  him  the  least  help.

Glogau,  as  we  saw,  means  to  defend  itself ;  at  least,  General
Wallis  the  Commandant  does,  in  spite  of  the  Glogau  public  -,
and  is,  with  his  whole  might,  digging,  palisading,  getting  in
meal,  salt  meat  and  other  provender ;  —  likewise  burning
suburbs,  uncontrollable  he,  in  the  small  place ;  and  clearing
down  the  outside  edifices  and  shelters,  at  a  diligent  rate.
Yesterday,  15th  December,  he  burnt  down  the  "three  Oder-
Mills,  which  lie  outside  the  big  suburban  Tavern,  also  the
Ziegel-Scheune  (Tile-Manufactory),"  and  other  valuable  build-
ings, careless  of  public  lamentation,  —  fire  catching  the  Town
itself,  and  needing  to  be  quenched  again.1  Nay,  he  was  clear
for  burning  down,  or  blowing  up,  the  Protestant  Church,  indis-
pensable sacred  edifice  which  stands  outside  the  walls  :  "  Prus-
sians will  make  a  block-house  of  it ! "  said  Wallis.  A  chief
Protestant,  Baron  von  Something,  begged  passionately  for  only
twelve  hours  of  respite,  —  to  lay  the  case  before  his  Prussian
Majesty.  Respite  conceded,  he  and  another  chief  Protestant
1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  473-475.

CHAP.  II. FRIEDKICH  MAKCHES ON GLOGAU.  303

16th  Dec.  1740.

had  posted  off  accordingly ;  and  did  the  next  morning  (Friday,
16th),  short  way  from  Crossen,  meet  his  Majesty's  carriage ;
who  graciously  pulled  up  for  a  few  instants,  and  listened  to
their  story.  "  Heine  Herren,  you  are  the  first  that  ask  a  favor
of  me  on  Silesian  ground ;  it  shall  be  done  you ! "  said  the
King ;  and  straightway  despatched,  in  polite  style,  his  written
request  to  Wallis,  engaging  to  make  no  military  use  whatever
of  said  Church,  "but  to  attack  by  the  other  side,  if  attack
were  necessary."  Thus  his  Majesty  saved  the  Church  of
Glogau ;  which  of  course  was  a  popular  act.  Getting  to  see
this  Church  himself  a  few  days  hence,  he  said,  "  Why,  it  must
come  down  at  any  rate,  and  be  rebuilt ;  so  ugly  a  thing ! "

Wallis  is  making  strenuous  preparation ;  forces  the  inhabi-
tants, even  the  upper  kinds  of  them,  to  labor  day  and  night  by
relays,  in  his  rampartings,  palisadings ;  is  for  burning  all  the
adjacent  Villages,  — and  would  have  done  it,  had  not  the  peas-
ants themselves  turned  out  in  a  dangerous  state  of  mind.  He
has  got  together  about  1,000  men.  His  powder,  they  say,  is
fifty  years  old ;  but  he  has  eatable  provender  from  Breslau,
and  means  to  hold  out  to  the  utmost.  Headers  must  admit
that  the  Austrian  military,  Graf  von  Wallis  to  begin  with,  —
still  more,  General  Browne,  who  is  a  younger  man  and  has
now  the  head  charge,  —  behave  well  in  their  present  forsaken
condition.  Wallis  (Graf  Franz  Wenzel  this  one,  not  to  be  con-
founded with  an  older  Wallis  heard  of  in  the  late  Turk  War)
is  of  Scotch  descent,  —  as  all  these  Wallises  are  ;  "  came  to
Austria  long  generations  ago  ;  Eeichsgrafs  since  1612  :  "  —
Browne  is  of  Irish  ;  age  now  thirty -five,  ten  years  younger  than
Wallis.  Bead  this  Note  on  the  distinguished  Browne  :  —

"  A  German-Irish  Gentleman,  this  General  (ultimately  Field-
marshal)  Graf  von  Browne  ;  one  of  those  sad  exiled  Irish
Jacobites,  or  sons  of  Jacobites,  who  are  fighting  in  foreign
armies  ;  able  and  notable  men  several  of  them,  and  this  Browne
considerably  the  most  so.  We  shall  meet  him  repeatedly  within
the  next  eighteen  years.  Maximilian-Ulysses  Graf  von  Browne :
I  said  he  was  born  German ;  Basel  his  birthplace  (23d  October,
1705),  Father  also  a  soldier :  he  must  not  be  confounded
with  a  contemporary  Cousin  of  his,  who  is  also  '  Fieldniarshal

304  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

16th  Dec.  1740.

Browne/  but  serves  in  Eussia,  Governor  of  Eiga  for  a  long
time  in  the  coming  years.  This  Austrian  General,  Field-
marshal  Browne,  will  by  and  by  concern  us  somewhat;  and
the  reader  may  take  note  of  him.

"Who  the  Irish  Brothers  Browne,  the  Fathers  of  these
Marshals  Browne,  were  ?  I  have  looked  in  what  Irish  Peerages
and  printed  Eecords  there  were,  but  without  the  least  result.
One  big  dropsical  Book,  of  languid  quality,  called  King  James's
Irish  Army-List,  has  multitudes  of  Brownes  and  others,  in  an
indistinct  form;  but  the  one  Browne  wanted,  the  one  Lacy,
almost  the  one  Lally,  like  the  part  of  Hamlet,  are  omitted.
There  are  so  many  Irish  in  the  like  case  with  these  Brownes.
A  Lacy  we  once  slightly  saw  or  heard  of ;  busy  in  the  Polish-
Election  time,  —  besieging  Dantzig  (investing  Dantzig,  that
Miinnich  might  besiege  it) ;  —  that  Lacy,  •'  Governor  of  Kiga/
whom  the  Russian  Browne  will  succeed,  is  also  Irish :  a  con-
spicuous Eussian  man ;  and  will  have  a  Son  Lacy,  conspicuous
among  the  Austrians.  Maguires,  Ogilvies  (of  the  Irish  stock),
Lieutenants  '  Fitzgeral ; '  very  many  Irish ;  and  there  is  not
the  least  distinct  account  to  be  had  of  any  of  them."  1

Let  us  attend  his  Majesty  on  the  next  few  marches  towards
Glogau,  to  see  the  manner  of  the  thing  a  little ;  after  which
it  will  behoove  us  to  be  much  more  summary,  and  stick  by  the
main  incidents.

1  For  Browne  see  "Anonymous  of  Hamburg"  (so  I  have  had  to  label  a
J.  F.  S.  Geschlchte  des  frc.  —  in  fact,  History  of  Seven- Years  War,  in  succes-
sive volumes,  done  chiefly  by  the  scissors;  Leipzig  and  Frankfurt,  1759,  et
seqq.),  i.  123-131  n. :  elaborate  Note  of  eight  pages  there;  intimating  withal
that  he,  J.  F.  S.,  wrote  the  "  Life  of  Browne,"  a  Book  I  had  in  vain  sought
for ;  and  can  now  guess  to  consist  of  those  same  elaborate  eight  pages,  plus
water  and  lathering  to  the  due  amount.  Anonymous  "  of  Hamburg  "  I  call
my  J.  F.  S.,  —  having  fished  him  out  of  the  dust-abysses  in  that  City  :  a  very
poor  take ;  yet  worth  citing  sometimes,  being  authentic,  as  even  the  darkest
Germans  generally  are.  — For  a  glimpse  of  Lacy  (the  Elder  Lacy)  see  Bii-
sching,  Beitrdge,  vi.  162.  —  For  Wattis  (tombstone  Note  on  Wallis)  see  (among
others  who  are  copious  in  that  kind  of  article,  and  keep  large  sacks  of  it,  in
admired  disorder)  Anonymous  Seyfarth,  Geschichte  Friedrichs  des  Andern
(Leipzig,  1784-1788),  i.  112  n. ;  and  Anonymous,  Leben  der  frc.  Marie  Theresie
(Leipzig,  1781),  27  n. :  laboriously  authentic  Books  both;  essentially  Diction-
aries, —  stuffed  as  into  a  row  of  blind  sacks.

CHAP.  II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  305

17th  Dec.  1740.

March  to  Weichau  (Saturday, 1.1th,  and  stay  /Sunday  there);
to  Milkau  {Monday ,  19£/i) ;  get  to  Herrendorf,  within
sight  of  Grlogau,  December  22d.

Friedrich's  march  proceeds  with  speed  and  regularity.  Strict
discipline  is  maintained ;  all  things  paid  for,  damage  carefully
avoided :  "  We  come,  not  as  invasive  enemies  of  you  or  of  the
Queen  of  Hungary,  but  as  protective  friends  of  Silesia  and  of
her  Majesty's  rights  there  ;  —  her  Majesty  once  allowing  us
(as  it  is  presumable  she  will)  our  own  rights  in  this  Province,
no  man  shall  meddle  with  hers,  while  we  continue  here."  To
that  effect  runs  the  little  "  Patent,"  or  initiatory  Proclamation,
extensively  handed  out,  and  posted  in  public  places,  as  was
said  above ;  and  the  practice  is  conformable.

To  all  men,  coming  with  Protests  or  otherwise,  we  perceive,
the  young  King  is  politeness  itself ;  giving  clear  answer,  and
promise  which  will  be  kept,  on  the  above  principle.  Nothing
angers  him  except  that  gentlemen  should  disbelieve,  and  run
away.  That  a  mansion  be  found  deserted  by  its  owners,  is
the  one  evil  omen  for  such  mansion.  Thus,  at  the  Schloss  of
Weichau  (which  is  still  discoverable  on  the  Map,  across  the
"  Black  Ochel "  and  the  "  White,"  muddy  streams  which  saunter
eastward  towards  the  Oder  there,  nothing  yet  running  west-
ward for  the  Bober,  our  other  limitary  river),  next  night  after
Schweinitz,  second  night  in  Silesia,  there  was  no  Owner  to  be
met  with ;  and  the  look  of  his  Majesty  grew  finster  (dark)  ;  re-
membering what  had  passed  yesternight,  in  like  case,  at  that
other  Schloss  from  which  the  owner  with  his  best  portable
furniture  had  vanished.  At  which  Schloss,  as  above  noticed,
some  disorders  were  committed  by  angry  parties  of  the  march ;
—  doors  burst  open  (doors  standing  impudently  dumb  to  the
rational  proposals  made  them !),  inferior  remainders  of  furni-
ture smashed  into  firewood,  and  the  like,  —  no  doubt  to  his
Majesty's  vexation.  Here  at  Weichau  stricter  measures  were
taken  :  and  yet  difficulties,  risks  were  not  wanting ;  and  the
Amtmann  (Steward  of  the  place)  got  pulled  about,  and  once
even  a  stroke  or  two.  Happily  the  young  Herr  of  Weichau

VOL VII.  20

306  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

18th  Dec.  1740.

appeared  in  person  on  the  morrow,  hearing  his  Majesty  was
still  there  :  "  Papa  is  old ;  lives  at  another  Schloss  ;  could
not  wait  upon  your  Majesty  ;  nor,  till  now,  could  I  have  that
honor."  —  "Well;  lucky  that  you  have  come:  stay  dinner!"
Which  the  young  Count  did,  and  drove  home  in  the  evening
to  reassure  Papa;  his  Majesty  continuing  there  another  night,
and  the  risk  over.1

This  day,  Sunday,  18th,  the  Army  rests ;  their  first  Sunday
in  Silesia,  while  the  young  Count  pays  his  devoir :  and  here
in  W'eichau,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  in  the  Church,  Catholic  nearly
always,  that  the  Heretic  Army  does  its  devotions,  safe  from
weather  at  least :  such  the  Koyal  Order,  they  say ;  which  is
taken  note  of,  by  the  Heterodox  and  by  the  Orthodox.  And
ever  henceforth,  this  is  the  example  followed;  and  in  all
places  where  there  is  no  Protestant  Church  and  the  Catholics
have  one,  the  Prussian  Army-Chaplain  assembles  his  buff-
belted  audience  in  the  latter  :  "  No  offence,  Reverend  Fathers,
but  there  are  hours  for  us,  and  hours  for  you  ;  and  such  is  the
King's  Order."  There  is  regular  divine-service  in  this  Prus-
sian Army ;  and  even  a  good  deal  of  inarticulate  religion,  as
one  may  see  on  examining.

Country  Gentlemen,  Town  Mayors  and  other  civic  Authori-
ties, soon  learn  that  on  these  terms  they  are  safe  with  his
Majesty ;  march  after  march  he  has  interviews  with  such,  to
regulate  the  supplies,  the  necessities  and  accidents  of  the
quartering  of  his  Troops.  Clear,  frank,  open  to  reasonable
representation,  correct  to  his  promise  ;  in  fact,  industriously
conciliatory  and  pacificatory  :  such  is  Friedrich  to  all  Silesian
men.  Provincial  Authorities,  who  can  get  no  instructions
from  Head-quarters ;  Vienna  saying  nothing,  Breslau  nothing,
and  Deputy-Governor  Browne  being  far  south  in  Neisse,  —  are
naturally  in  difficulties :  How  shall  they  act  ?  Best  not  to
act  at  all,  if  one  can  help  it ;  and  follow  the  Mayor  of  Griin-
berg's  unsurpassable  pattern !  —

"  These  Silesians,"  says  an  Excerpt  I  have  made,  "  are  still
in  majority  Protestant;  especially  in  this  Northern  portion  of
the  Province  ;  they  have  had  to  suffer  much  on  that  and  other

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  459.

CHAP  II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON GLOGAU.  307

18th  Dec.  1740.

scores ;  and  are  secretly  or  openly  in  favor  of  the  Prussians.
Official  persons,  all  of  the  Catholic  creed,  have  leant  heavy,
not  always  conscious  of  doing  it,  against  Protestant  rights.
The  Jesuits,  consciously  enough,  have  been  and  are  busy  with
them ;  intent  to  recall  a  Heretic  Population  by  all  methods,
fair  and  unfair.  We  heard  of  Charles  XII. 's  interference,
three-and-thirty  years  ago ;  and  how  the  Kaiser,  hard  bested
at  that  time,  had  to  profess  repentance  and  engage  for  com-
plete amendment.  Amendment  did,  for  the  moment,  accord-
ingly take  place.  Treaty  of  Westphalia  in  all  its  stipulations,
with  precautionary  improvements,  was  re-enacted  as  Treaty
of  Altranstadt ;  with  faithful  intention  of  keeping  it  too,  on
Kaiser  Joseph's  part,  who  was  not  a  superstitious  man:  'Holy
Father,  I  was  too  glad  he  did  not  demand  my  own  conversion
to  the  Protestant  Heresy,  bested  as  I  am,  —  with  Louis  Qua-
torze  and  Company  upon  the  neck  of  me ! '  Some  improve-
ment of  performance,  very  marked  at  first,  did  ensue  upon  this
Altranstadt  Treaty.  But  the  sternly  accurate  Karl  of  Sweden
soon  disappeared  from  the  scene;  Kaiser  Joseph  of  Austria
soon  disappeared ;  and  his  Brother,  Karl  VI.-,  was  a  much  more
orthodox  person.

"  The  Austrian  Government,  and  Kaiser  Karl's  in  particu-
lar, is  not  to  be  called  an  intentionally  unjust  one ;  the  con-
trary, I  rather  find  ;  but  it  is,  beyond  others,  ponderous ;  based
broad  on  such  multiplex  formalities,  old  habitudes  ;  and  gravi-
tation has  a  great  power  over  it.  In  brief,  Official  human
nature,  with  the  best  of  Kaisers  atop,  flagitated  continually
by  Jesuit  Confessors,  does  throw  its  weight  on  a  certain
side  :  —  the  sad  fact  is,  in  a  few  years  the  brightness  of  that
Altranstadt  improvement  began  to  wax  dim  ;  and  now,  under
long  Jesuit  manipulation,  Silesian  things  are  nearly  at  their
old  pass  ;  and  the  patience  of  men  is  heavily  laden.  To  see
your  Chapel  made  a  Soldiers'  Barrack,  your  Protestant  School
become  a  Jesuit  one,  —  Men  did  not  then  think  of  revolting
under  injuries  ;  but  the  poor  Silesian  weaver,  trudging  twenty
miles  for  his  Sunday  sermon ;  and  perceiving  that,  unless  their
Mother  could  teach  the  art  of  reading,  his  boys,  except  under
soul's  peril,  would  now  never  learn  it :  such  a  Silesian  could

308  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

18th  Dec.  1740.

not  want  for  reflections.  Voiceless,  hopeless,  but  heavy ;  and
dwelling  secretly,  as  under  nightmare,  in  a  million  hearts.
Austrian  Officiality,  wilfully  unjust,  or  not  wilfully  so,  is
admitted  to  be  in  a  most  heavy-footed  condition ;  can  adminis-
ter nothing  well.  Good  Government  in  any  kind  is  not  known
here  :  Possibly  the  Prussian  will  be  better  ;  who  can  say  ?

"The  secret  joy  of  these  populations,  as  Friedrich  advances
among  them,  becomes  more  and  more  a  manifest  one.  Catho-
lic Officials  do  not  venture  on  any  definite  hope,  or  definite
balance  of  hope  and  fear ;  but  adopt  the  Mayor  of  Griinberg's
course,  and  study  to  be  passive  and  silent.  The  Jesuit-Priest
kind  are  clear  in  their  minds  for  Austria ;  but  think,  Perhaps
Prussia  itself  will  not  prove  very  tyrannous  ?  At  all  events,
be  silent ;  it  is  unsafe  to  stir.  We  notice  generally,  it  is  only
in  the  Southern  or  Mountain  regions  of  Silesia,  where  the
Catholics  are  in  majority,  that  the  population  is  not  ardently
on  the  Prussian  side.  Passive,  if  they  are  on  the  other  side  ;
accurately  passive  at  lowest,  this  it  is  prescribed  all  prudent
men  to  be."

On  the  18th,  while  divine  service  went  on  at  Weichau,
there  was  at  Breslau  another  phenomenon  observable.  Pro-
vincial Government  in  Breslau  had,  at  length,  after  intense
study,  and  across  such  difficulties  as  we  have  no  idea  of,  got
its  "  Patent,"  or  carefully  worded  Protestation  against  Prus-
sia, brought  to  paper;  and  does,  this  day,  with  considerable
solemnity,  affix  it  to  the  Rathhaus  door  there,  for  the  perusal
of  mankind  ;  despatching  a  Copy  for  his  Prussian  Majesty
withal,  by  two  Messengers  of  dignity.  It  has  needed  courage
screwed  to  the  sticking-place  to  venture  on  such  a  step,  with-
out instruction  from  Head-quarters  ;  and  the  utmost  powers
of  the  Official  mind  have  been  taxed  to  couch  this  Document
in  language  politely  ambiguous,  and  yet  strong  enough  ;  —
too  strong,  some  of  us  now  think  it.  In  any  case,  here  it  now
is  ;  Provincial  Government's  bolt,  so  to  speak,  is  shot.  The
affixing  took  place  under  dark  weather-symptoms ;  actual  out-
burst of  thunder  and  rain  at  the  moment,  not  to  speak  of  the
other  surer  omens.  So  that,  to  the  common  mind  at  Breslau,
it  did  not  seem  there  would  much  fruit  come  of  this  difficult

CHAP.  II. FEIEDRICH  MARCHES ON GLOGAU.  309

19th  Dec.  1740.

performance.  Breslau  is  secretly  a  much-agitated  City;  and
Prussian  Hussar  Parties,  shooting  forth  to  great  distances
ahead,  were,  this  day  for  the  first  time,  observed  within  sight
of  it.

And  on  the  same  Sunday  we  remark  farther,  what  is  still
more  important :  Herr  von  Gotter,  Friedrich's  special  Envoy
to  Vienna,  has  his  first  interview  with  the  Queen  of  Hungary,
or  with  Grand-Duke  Franz  the  Queen's  Husband  and  Co-
Regent  ;  and  presents  there,  from  Friedrich's  own  hand,  writ-
ten we  remember  when,  brief  distinct  Note  of  his  Prussian
Majesty's  actual  Proposals  and  real  meaning  in  regard  to  this
Silesian  Affair.  Proposals  anxiously  conciliatory  in  tone,
but  the  heavy  purport  of  which  is  known  to  us :  Gotter  had
been  despatched,  time  enough,  with  these  Proposals  (written
above  a  month  ago)  ;  but  was  instructed  not  to  arrive  with
them,  till  after  the  actual  entrance  into  Silesia.  And  now
the  response  to  them  is  —  ?  As  good  as  nothing;  perhaps
worse.  Let  that  suffice  us  at  present.  Readers,  on  march
for  Glogau,  would  grudge  to  pause  over  State-papers,  though
we  shall  have  to  read  this  of  Friedrich's  at  some  freer
moment.

Monday,  19th,  before  daybreak,  the  Army  is  astir  again,
simultaneously  wending  forward ;  spread  over  wide  areas,  like
a  vast  cloud  (potential  thunder  in  it)  steadily  advancing  on
the  winds.  Length  of  the  Army,  artistically  portioned  out,
may  be  ten  or  fifteen  miles,  breadth  already  more,  and  grow-
ing more  ;  Schwerin  always  on  the  right  or  western  wing,
close  by  the  Bober  River  as  yet,  through  Naumburg  and  the
Towns  on  that  side,  —  Liegnitz  and  other  important  Towns
lying  ahead  for  Schwerin,  still  farther  apart  from  the  main
Body,  were  Glogau  once  settled.

So  that  the  march  is  in  two  Columns ;  Schwerin,  with  the
westernmost  small  column,  intending  towards  Liegnitz,  and
thence  ever  farther  southward,  with  his  right  leaning  on  the
high  lands  which  rise  more  and  more  into  mountains  as  you
advance.  Friedrich  himself  commands  the  other  column,  has
his  left  upon  the  Oder,  in  a  country  mounting  continually
towards  the  South,  but  with  less  irregularity  of  level,  and

310  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

19th  Dec.  1740.

generally  flat  as  yet.  From  beginning  to  end,  the  entire  field
of  march  lies  between  the  Oder  and  its  tributary  the  Bober  ;
climbing  slowly  towards  the  sources  of  both.  Which  two
rivers,  as  the  reader  may  observe,  form  here  a  rectangular  or
trapezoidal  space,  ever  widening  as  we  go  southward.  Both
rivers,  coming  from  the  Giant  Mountains,  hasten  directly
north ;  but  Oder,  bulging  out  easterly  in  his  sandy  course,  is
obliged  to  turn  fairly  westward  again ;  and  at  Glogau,  and
a  good  space  farther,  flows  in  that  direction ;  —  till  once
Bober  strikes  in,  almost  at  right  angles,  carrying  Oder  with
him,  though  he  is  but  a  branch,  straight  northward  again.
Northward,  but  ever  slower,  to  the  swollen  Pommern  regions,
and  sluggish  exit  into  the  Baltic  there.

One  of  the  worst  features  is  the  state  of  the  weather.  On
Sunday,  at  Breslau,  we  noticed  thunder  bursting  out  on  an
important  occasion  ;  "  ominous,"  some  men  thought ;  —  omen,
for  one  thing,  that  the  weather  was  breaking.  At  Weichau,
that  same  day,  rain  began,  —  the  young  Herr  of  Weichau,
driving  home  to  Papa  from  dinner  with  Majesty,  would  get
his  share  of  it ;  —  and  on  Monday,  19th,  there  was  such  a
pour  of  rain  as  kept  most  wayfarers,  though  it  could  not  the
Prussian  Army,  within  doors.  Rain  in  plunges,  fallen  and
falling,  through  that  blessed  day;  making  roads  into  mere
rivers  of  mud.  The  Prussian  hosts  marched  on,  all  the  same.
Head-quarters,  with  the  van  of  the  wet  Army,  that  night,  were
at  Milkau ;  —  from  which  place  we  have  a  Note  of  Friedrich's
for  Friend  Jordan,  perhaps  producible  by  and  by.  His  Maj-
esty lodged  in  some  opulent  Jesuit  Establishment  there.  And
indeed  he  continued  there,  not  idle,  under  shelter,  for  a  couple
of  days.  The  Jesuits,  by  their  two  head  men,  had  welcomed
him  with  their  choicest  smiles ;  to  whom  the  King  was  very
gracious,  asking  the  two  to  dinner  as  usual,  and  styling  them
"Your  Reverence."  Willing  to  ingratiate  himself  with  per-
sons of  interest  in  this  Country ;  and  likes  talk,  even  with
Jesuits  of  discernment.

On  the  morrow  (20th),  came  to  him,  here  at  Milkau,  —
probably  from  some  near  stage,  for  the  rain  was  pouring
worse  than  ever,  —  that  Breslau  "  Patent,"  or  strongish  Pro-

CHAP.  II. FRIEDRICH  MARCHES  ON  GLOGAU.  311

20th  Dec.  1740.

testation,  by  its  two  Messengers  of  dignity.  The  King  looked
over  it  "without  visible  anger"  or  change  of  countenance;
"handed  it,"  we  expressly  see,  "to  a  Page  to  reposit"  in
the  proper  waste-basket ;  —  spoke  politely  to  the  two  gentle-
men ;  asked  each  or  one  of  them,  "  Are  you  of  the  Ober-Amt
at  Breslau,  then?"  — using  the  style  of  Er  (He). —  "No,
your  Majesty ;  we  are  only  of  the  Land-Stiinde "  (Provincial
Parliament,  such  as  it  is).  "  Upon  which  [do  you  mark  !]
his  Majesty  became  still  more  polite ;  asked  them  to  dinner,
and  used  the  style  of  Sie."  For  their  Patent,  now  lying  safe
in  its  waste-basket,  he  gave  them  signed  receipt  ;  no  other
answer.

Eain  still  heavier,  rain  as  of  Noah,  continued  through  this
Tuesday,  and  for  days  afterwards  :  but  the  Prussian  hosts,
hastening  towards  Glogau,  marched  still  on.  This  Tuesday's
march,  for  the  rearward  of  the  Army,  10,000  foot  and  2,000
horse ;  march  of  ten  hours  long,  from  Weichau  to  the  hamlet
Milkau  (where  his  Majesty  sits  busy  and  affable), — is  thought
to  be  the  wettest  on  record.  Waters  all  out,  bridges  down,
the  Country  one  wild  lake  of  eddying  mud.  Up  to  the  knee
for  many  miles  together ;  up  to  the  middle  for  long  spaces ;
sometimes  even  up  to  the  chin  or  deeper,  where  your  bridge
was  washed  away.  The  Prussians  marched  through  it,  as  if
they  had  been  slate  or  iron.  Kank  and  file,  nobody  quitted
his  rank,  nobody  looked  sour  in  the  face ;  they  took  the  pour-
ing of  the  skies,  and  the  red  seas  of  terrestrial  liquid,  as  mat-
ters that  must  be  ;  cheered  one  another  with  jocosities,  with
choral  snatches  (tobacco,  I  consider,  would  not  burn) ;  and
swashed  unweariedly  forward.  Ten  hours  some  of  them  were
out,  their  march  being  twenty  or  twenty-five  miles  ;  ten  to  fif-
teen was  the  average  distance  come.  Nor,  singular  to  say,  did
any  loss  occur ;  except  of  almost  one  poor  Army-Chaplain,  and
altogether  of  one  poor  Soldier's  Wife  ;  —  sank  dangerously
both  of  them,  beyond  redemption  she,  taking  the  wrong  side
of  some  bridge-parapet.  Poor  Soldier's  Wife,  she  is  not  named
to  me  at  all ;  and  has  no  history  save  this,  and  that  "  she  was
of  the  regiment  Bredow."  But  I  perceive  she  washed  herself
away  in  a  World-Transaction ;  and  there  was  one  rough  Bre-

312  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

21st-22d  Dec.  1740.

dower,  who  probably  sat  sad  that  night  on  getting  to  quarters.
His  Majesty  surveyed  the  damp  battalions  on  the  morrow
(21st),  not  without  sympathy,  not  without  satisfaction  ;  al-
lowed them  a  rest-day  here  at  Milkau,  to  get  dry  and  bright
again ;  and  gave  them  "  fifteen  thalers  a  company,"  which  is
about  ninepence  apiece,  with  some  words  of  praise.1

Next  day,  Thursday,  22d,  his  Majesty  and  they  marched
on  to  Herrendorf  ;  which  is  only  five  miles  from  Glogau,  and
near  enough  for  Head-quarters,  in  the  now  humor  of  the  place.
Wallis  has  his  messenger  at  Herrendorf,  "  Sorry  to  warn  your
Majesty,  That  if  there  be  the  least  hostility  committed,  I  shall
have  to  resist  it  to  the  utmost."  Head-quarters  continue  six
days  at  Herrendorf,  Army  (main  body,  or  left  Column,  of  the
Army)  cantoned  all  round,  till  we  consider  what  to  do.

As  to  the  right  Column,  or  Schwerin's  Division,  that,  after
a  rest-day  or  two,  gathers  itself  into  more  complete  separation
here,  tucking  in  its  eastern  skirts ;  and  gets  on  march  again,
by  its  own  route.  Steadily  southward ;  —  and  from  Liegnitz,
and  the  upland  Countries,  there  will  be  news  of  Schwerin  and
it  before  long.  Kain  ending,  there  ensued  a  ringing  frost ;  —
not  favorable  for  Siege-operations  on  Glogau  :  —  and  Silesia
became  all  of  flinty  glass,  with  white  peaks  to  the  Southwest,
whither  Schwerin  is  gone.

CHAPTER  III.

PROBLEM OF GLOGAU.

FEIEDRICH  was  over  from  Herrendorf  with  the  first  day-
light, "  reconnoitring  Glogau,  and  rode  up  to  the  very  glacis ; "
scanning  it  on  all  sides.2  Since  "Wallis  is  so  resolute,  here  is
an  intricate  little  problem  for  Friedrich,  with  plenty  of  corol-
laries and  conditions  hanging  to  it.  Shall  we  besiege  Glo-
gau, then  ?  We  have  no  siege-cannon  here.  Time  presses,
Breslau  and  all  things  in  such  crisis  ;  and  it  will  take  time,
l  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  482.  2  jb.  i.  434.

nA  PEOBLEM  OF GLOGAU.  313

-28th  Dec.  1740.

By  what  methods  could  Glogau  be  besieged  ?  —  Readers  can
consider  what  a  blind  many-threaded  coil  of  things,  heaping
itself  here  in  wide  welters  round  Glogau,  and  straggling  to
the  world's  end,  Friedrich  has  on  hand  :  probably  those  six
days,  of  Head-quarters  at  Herrendorf,  were  the  busiest  he  had
yet  had.

One  thing  is  evident,  there  ought  to  be  siege-cannon  got
straightway;  and,  still  more  immediate,  the  right  posts  and
battering-places  should  be  ready  against  its  coming.  —  "  Let
the  Young  Dessauer  with  that  Rearguard,  or  Reserve  of
10,000,  which  is  now  at  Crossen,  come  up  and  assist  here,"
orders  Friedrich;  "and  let  him  be  swift,  for  the  hours  are
pregnant!"  On  farther  reflection,  perhaps  on  new  rumors
from  Breslau,  Friedrich  perceives  that  there  can  be  no  besieg-
ing of  Glogau  at  this  point  of  time ;  that  the  Reserve,  Half  of
the  Reserve,  must  be  left  to  "  mask "  it ;  to  hold  it  in  strict
blockade,  with  starvation  daily  advancing  as  an  ally  to  us,  and
with  capture  by  bombarding  possible  when  we  like.  That  is
the  ultimate  decision ;  —  arrived  at  through  a  welter  of  dubie-
ties, counterpoisings  and  perilous  considerations,  which  we
now  take  no  account  of.  A  most  busy  week ;  Friedrich  inces-
santly in  motion,  now  here  now  there ;  and  a  great  deal  of
heavy  work  got  well  and  rapidly  done.  The  details  of  which,
in  these  exuberant  Manuscripts,  would  but  weary  the  reader.
Choosing  of  the  proper  posts  and  battering-places  (post  "  on
the  other  side  of  the  River,"  "on  this  side  of  it,"  "on  the
Island  in  the  middle  of  it "),  and  obstinate  intrenching  and
preparing  of  the  same  in  spite  of  frost ;  "  wooden  bridge  built "
farther  up ;  with  "  regulation  of  the  river-boats,  the  Polish
Ferry,"  and  much  else  :  all  this  we  omit ;  and  will  glance  only
at  one  pregnant  point,  by  way  of  sample  :  —

..."  Most  indispensable  of  all,  the  King  has  to  provide
Subsistences : — and  enters  now  upon  the  new  plan,  which  will
have  to  be  followed  henceforth.  The  Provincial  Chief-men
(Landes-^Eltesten,  'L&nd's-JEldests,  their  title)  are  summoned,
from  nine  or  ten  Circles  which  are  likely  to  be  interested :
they  appear  punctually,  and  in  numbers,  —  lest  contumacy
worsen  the  inevitable.  King  dines  them,  to  start  with  ;  as

314  FIEST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xn.

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

many  as  'ninety-five  covers,'  —  day  not  given,  but  probably
one  of  the  first  in  Herrendorf  :  not  Christmas  itself,  one
hopes  !

"  Dinner  done,  the  ninety-five  Land's-Eldest  are  instructed
by  proper  parties,  What  the  Infantry's  ration  is,  in  meat,  in
bread,  exact  to  the  ounce ;  what  the  Cavalry's  is,  and  that
of  the  Cavalry's  Horse.  Tabular  statement,  succinct,  correct,
clear  to  the  simplest  capacity,  shows  what  quotities  of  men  on
foot,  and  of  men  on  horseback,  or  men  with  draught-cattle,
will  march  through  their  respective  Circles  ;  Land's-Eldests
conclude  what  amount  of  meal  and  butcher's-meat  it  will  be
indispensable  to  have  in  readiness ;  —  what  Land's-Eldest  can
deny  the  fact  ?  These  Papers  still  exist,  at  least  the  long-
winded  Summary  of  them  does :  and  I  own  the  reading  of  it
far  less  insupportable  than  that  of  the  mountains  of  Proclania-
tory,  Manifesto  and  Diplomatic  matter.  Nay  it  leaves  a  cer-
tain wholesome  impression  on  the  mind,  as  of  business  thor-
oughly well  done ;  and  a  matter,  capable,  if  left  in  the  chaotic
state,  of  running  to  all  manner  of  depths  and  heights,  com-
pendiously forced  to  become  cosmic  in  this  manner.

"  These  Land's-Eldest  undertake,  in  a  mildly  resigned  or
even  hopeful  humor.  They  will  manage  as  required,  in  their
own  Circles ;  will  communicate  with  the  Circles  farther  on ;
and  everywhere  the  due  proviants,  prestations,  furtherances,
shall  be  got  together  by  fair  apportionment  on  the  Silesian
Community,  and  be  punctually  ready  as  the  Army  advances.
Book-keeping  there  is  to  be,  legible  record  of  everything ;  on
all  hands  'quittance'  for  everything  furnished;  and  a  time
is  coming,  when  such  quittance,  presented  by  any  Silesian
man,  will  be  counted  money  paid  by  him,  and  remitted  at  the
next  tax-day,  or  otherwise  made  good.  Which  promise  also
was  accurately  kept,  the  hoped-for  time  having  come.  It
must  be  owned  the  Prussian  Army  understands  business ;
and,  with  brevity,  reduces  to  a  minimum  its  own  trouble,  and
that  of  other  people,  non-fighters,  who  have  to  do  with  it.
Non-fighters,  I  say  ;  to  fighters  we  hope  it  will  give  a  respect-
able maximum  of  trouble  when  applied  to !  " 1
i  Helden-Geschickte,  i.  492-499.

CHAP.  III.  PROBLEM OF GLOGAU.  315

22d-2Sth  Dec.  1740.

The  Gotter  Negotiation  at  Vienna,  which  we  saw  begin
there  that  wet  Sunday,  is  now  fast  ending,  as  good  as  ended ;
without  result  except  of  a  negative  kind.  Gotter's  Proposals, —
would  the  reader  wish  to  hear  these  Proposals,  which  were  so
intensely  interesting  at  one  time  ?  They  are  fivefold ;  given
with  great  brevity  by  Friedrich,  by  us  with  still  greater :  —

1°.  "  Will  fling  myself  heartily  into  the  Austrian  scale,  and
endeavor  for  the  interest  of  Austria  in  this  Pragmatic  matter,
with  my  whole  strength  against  every  comer.

2°.  "Will  make  treaty  with  Vienna,  with  Eussia  and  the
Sea-Powers,  to  that  effect.

3°.  "  Will  help  by  vote,  and  with  whole  amount  of  interest
will  endeavor,  to  have  Grand-Duke  Franz,  the  Queen's  Husband,
chosen  Kaiser ;  and  to  maintain  such  choice  against  all  and  sun-
dry. Feel  myself  strong  enough  to  accomplish  this  result ;  and
may,  without  exaggeration,  venture  to  say  it  shall  be  done.

4°.  "To  help  the  Court  of  Vienna  in  getting  its  affairs
into  good  order  and  f encible  condition,  —  will  present  to  it,  on
the  shortest  notice,  Two  Million  Gulden  (£200,000)  ready
money."  —  Infinitely  welcome  this  Fourth  Proposition ;  and
indeed  all  the  other  Three  are  welcome  :  but  they  are  saddled
with  a  final  condition,  which  pulls  down  all  again.  This,
which  is  studiously  worded,  politely  evasive  in  phrase,  and
would  fain  keep  old  controversies  asleep,  though  in  substance
it  is  so  fatally  distinct,  —  we  give  in  the  King's  own  words  :

5°.  "For  such  essential  services  as  those  to  which  I  bind
myself  by  the  above  very  onerous  conditions,  I  naturally
require  a  proportionate  recompense ;  some  suitable  assurance,
as  indemnity  for  all  the  dangers  I  risk,  and  for  the  part  (role)
I  am  ready  to  play :  in  short,  I  require  hereby  the  entire  and
complete  cession  of  all  Silesia,  as  reward  for  my  labors  and
dangers  which  I  take  upon  myself  in  this  course  now  to  be
entered  upon  for  the  preservation  and  renown  of  the  House
of  Austria ;"  — Silesia  all  and  whole;  and  we  say  nothing  of
our  "  rights  "  to  it ;  politely  evasive  to  her  Hungarian  Majesty,
though  in  substance  we  are  so  fatally  distinct.1

1  Preuss,  Thronlesteigung,  p.  451 ;  "  from  Olenschlager,  Geschichte  des  Inter-
regni  [Frankfurt,  1746],  i.  134."

816  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

These  were  Friedrich's  Proposals ;  written  down  with  his
own  hand  at  Keinsberg,  five  or  six  weeks  ago  (November  17th
is  the  date  of  it) ;  in  what  mood,  and  how  wrought  upon  by
Schwerin  and  Podewils,  we  saw  above.  Gotter  has  fulfilled  his
instructions  in  regard  to  this  important  little  Document ;  and
now  the  effect  of  it  is  —  ?  Gotter  can  report  no  good  effect
whatever.  "Be  cautious,"  Friedrich  instructs  him  farther;
"  modify  that  Fifth  Proposal ;  I  will  take  less  than  the  whole,
'  if  attention  is  paid  to  my  just  claims  on  Schlesien.' "  To
that  effect  writes  Friedrich  once  or  twice.  But  it  is  to  no
purpose ;  nor  can  Gotter,  with  all  his  industry,  report  other
than  worse  and  worse.  Nay,  he  reports  before  long,  not
refusal  only,  but  refusal  with  mockery:  "How  strange  that
his  Prussian  Majesty,  whose  official  post  in  Germany,  as  Kur-
Brandenburg  and  Kaiser's  Chamberlain,  has  been  to  present
ewer  and  towel  to  the  House  of  Austria,  should  now  set  up
for  prescribing  rules  to  it ! "  A  piece  of  wit,  which  could  not
but  provoke  Friedrich;  and  warn  him  that  negotiation  on
this  matter  might  as  well  terminate.  Such  had  been  his  own
thought,  from  the  first ;  but  in  compliance  with  Schwerin  and
Podewils  he  was  willing  to  try.

Better  for  Maria  Theresa,  and  for  all  the  world  how
much  better,  could  she  have  accepted  this  Fifth  Proposition !
But  how  could  she,  —  the  high  Imperial  Lady,  keystone  of
Europe,  though  by  accident  with  only  a  few  pounds  of  ready
money  at  present  ?  Twenty  years  of  bitter  fighting,  and
agony  to  herself  and  all  the  world,  were  necessary  first;  a
new  Fact  of  Nature  having  turned  up,  a  new  European  King-
dom with  real  King  to  it;  not  recognizable  as  such,  by  the
young  Queen  of  Hungary  or  by  any  other  person,  till  it  do
its  proofs.

What  Berlin  is  saying  ;  ivJiat  Friedrich  is  thinking.

What  Friedrich's  own  humor  is,  what  Friedrich's  own  inner
man  is  saying  to  him,  while  all  the  world  so  babbles  about
his  Silesian  Adventure  ?  Of  this  too  there  are,  though  in
diluted  state,  some  glimmerings  to  be  had,  —  chiefly  in  the
Correspondence  with  Jordan.

CHAP.  III.  PROBLEM  OF GLOGAU.  317

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

Ingenious  Jordan,  Inspector  of  the  Poor  at  Berlin,  —  his
thousand  old  women  at  their  wheels  humming  pleasantly  in
the  background  of  our  imaginations,  though  he  says  nothing
of  that,  —  writes  twice  a  week  to  his  Majesty  :  pleasant  gos-
sipy Letters,  with  an  easy  respectfulness  not  going  into  syco-
phancy anywhere  ;  which  keep  the  campaigning  King  well
abreast  of  the  Berlin  news  and  rumors:  something  like  the
essence  of  an  Old  Newspaper;  not  without  worth  in  our
present  Enterprise.  One  specimen,  if  we  had  room  !

Jordan  to  the  King  (successively  from  Berlin,  —  somewhat

abridged).

No.  1.  "  Berlin,  l&h  December,  1740  [day  after  his  Majesty
left].  Everybody  here  is  on  tiptoe  for  the  Event  ;  of  which
both  origin  and  end  are  a  riddle  to  the  most.  I  am  charmed
to  see  a  part  of  your  Majesty's  Dominions  in  a  state  of  Pyr-
rhonism ;  the  disease  is  epidemical  here  at  present.  Those
who,  in  the  style  of  theologians,  consider  themselves  entitled
to  be  certain,  maintain  That  your  Majesty  is  expected  with
religious  impatience  by  the  Protestants,  and  that  the  Catholics
hope  to  see  themselves  delivered  from  a  multitude  of  imposts
which  cruelly  tear  up  the  beautiful  bosom  of  their  Church.
You  cannot  but  succeed  in  your  valiant  and  stoical  Enter-
prise, since  both  religion  and  worldly  interest  rank  them-
selves under  your  flag.

"Wallis,"  Austrian  Commandant  in  Glogau,  "they  say,  has
punished  a  Silesian  Heretic  of  enthusiastic  turn,  as  blas-
phemer, for  announcing  that  a  new  Messiah  is  just  coming.
I  have  a  taste  for  that  kind  of  martyrdom.  Critical  persons
consider  the  present  step  as  directly  opposed  to  certain
maxims  in  the  Antl-Machiavel.

"  The  word  Manifesto  —  [your  Majesty's  little  Patent  on
entering  Silesia,  which  no  reader  shall  be  troubled  with  at
present]  —  is  the  burden  of  every  conversation.  Eumor  goes,
there  is  a  short  Piece  of  the  kind  to  come  out  to-day,  by  way
of  preface  to  a  large  complete  exposition,  which  a  certain
Jurisconsult  is  now  busy  with.  People  crowd  to  the  Book-

318  FIRST  SILESIAN WAK.  BOOK  XII.

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

shops  for  it,  as  if  looking  out  for  a  celestial  phenomenon  that
had  been  predicted.  —  This  is  the  beginning  of  my  Gazette ;
can  only  come  out  twice  a  week,  owing  to  the  arrangement  of
the  Posts.  Friday,  the  day  your  Majesty  crosses  into  Silesia,
I  shall  spend  in  prayer  and  devotional  exercises  :  Astronomers
pretend  that  Mars  will  that  day  enter  "  —  no  matter  what.

Note,  The  above  Manifesto  rumor  is  correct ;  Jurisconsult
is  ponderous  Herr  Ludwig,  Kanzler  (Chancellor)  of  Halle
University,  monster  of  law-learning,  —  who  has  money  also,
and  had  to  help  once  with  a  House  in  Berlin  for  one  Niissler,
a  son-in-law  of  his,  transiently  known  to  us  ;  —  ponderous
Ludwig,  matchless  or  difficult  to  match  in  learning  of  this
kind,  will  write  ample  enough  Deductions  (which  lie  in  print
still,  to  the  extent  of  tons'  weight),  and  explain  the  Erlver-
bruderung  and  violence  done  upon  it,  so  that  he  who  runs
may  read.  Postpone  him  to  a  calmer  time.

No.  2.  "Berlin,  Saturday,  17 'th  December.  Manifesto  has
appeared,"  —  can  be  seen,  under  thick  strata  of  cobwebs,  in
many  Books ; 1  is  not  worth  reading  now :  Incontestable
rights  which  our  House  has  for  ages  had  on  Schlesien,  and
which  doubtless  the  Hungarian  Majesty  will  recognize ;  not
the  slightest  injury  intended,  far  indeed  from  that;  and  so
on !  — "  people  are  surprised  at  its  brevity ;  and,  studying
it  as  theologians  do  a  passage  of  Scripture,  can  make  almost
nothing  of  it.  Clear  as  crystal,  says  one ;  dexterously  obscure
by  design,  says  another.

"  Kumor  that  the  Grand-Duke  of  Lorraine,"  Maria  Theresa's
Husband,  "was  at  Reinsberg  incognito  lately,"  Grand-Duke
a  concerting  party,  think  people  looking  into  the  thing  with
strong  spectacles  on  their  nose!  "M.  de  Beauvau  [French
Ambassador  Extraordinary,  to  whom  the  aces  were  promised
if  they  came]  said  one  thing  that  surprised  me :  '  What  put
the  King  on  taking  this  step,  I  do  not  know;  but  perhaps
it  is  not  such  a  bad  one.'  Surprising  news  that  the  Elector
of  Saxony,  King  of  Poland,  is  fallen  into  inconsolable  remorse

1  In  Helden-Gescluchte,  i.  448,  453  (what  Jordan  now  alludes  to)  ;  ib.  559-
592  ("Deduction  "  itself,  Ludwig  in  all  his  strength,  some  three  weeks  hence;
in  Olenschlagcr  (doubtless) ;  in  &c.  £c.

CHAP.  III.  PROBLEM  OF GLOGAU.  319

22d-2Sth  Dec.  1740.

for  changing  his  religion  [to  Papistry,  on  Papa's  hest,  many
long  years  ago]  and  that  it  is  not  to  the  Pope,  but  to  the
King  of  Prussia,  that  he  opens  his  heart  to  steady  his  stagger-
ing orthodoxy."  Very  astonishing  to  Jordan.  "  One  thing  is
certain,  all  Paris  rings  with  your  Majesty's  change  of  re-
ligion" (over  to  Catholicism,  say  those  astonishing  people,
first  conjurers  of  the  universe)!

JSTo.  3.  "Berlin,  20th  December.  M.  de  Beauvau,"  French
Ambassador,  "is  gone.  Ended,  yesterday,  his  survey  of  the
Cabinet  of  Medals  ;  charmed  with  the  same :  charmed  too,
as  the  public  is,  with  the  rich  present  he  has  got  from  said
Cabinet  [coronation  medal  or  medals  in  gold,  I  could  guess] :
people  say  the  King  of  France's  Medal  given  to  our  M.  de
Camas  is  nothing  to  it.

"  Kumor  of  alliance  between  your  Majesty  and  France  with
Sweden," — premature  rumor.  Item,  "Queen  of  Hungary  dead
in  child-birth ; "  —  ditto  with  still  more  emphasis  !  "  The  day
before  yesterday,  in  all  churches,  was  prayer  to  Heaven  for
success  to  your  Majesty's  arms  ;  interest  of  the  Protestant
religion  being  the  one  cause  of  the  War,  or  the  only  one
assigned  by  the  reverend  gentlemen.  At  sound  of  these
words,  the  zeal  of  the  people  kindles :  '  Bless  God  for  raising
such  a  Defender  !  Who  dared  suspect  our  King's  indifference
to  Protestantism  ? '

A  right  clever  thing  this  last  (0  le  beau  coup  d'etat)  !
exclaims  Jordan,  —  though  it  is  not  clever  or  the  contrary,
not  being  dramatically  prearranged,  as  Jordan  exults  to  think.
Jordan,  though  there  are  dregs  of  old  devotion  lying  asleep
in  him,  which  will  start  into  new  activity  when  stirred  again,
is  for  the  present  a  very  unbelieving  little  gentleman,  I  can
perceive.  —  This  is  the  substance  of  public  rumor  at  Berlin
for  one  week.  Friedrich  answers  :  —

"  To  M.  Jordan,  at  Berlin.

"  Quarter  at  Milkau,  towards  Glogau,  19^  December,  1740
[comfortable  Jesuit-Establishment  at  Milkau,  Friedrich  just
got  in,  out  of  the  rain].  —  Seigneur  Jordan,  thy  Letter  has

320  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

given  me  a  deal  of  pleasure  in  regard  to  all  these  talkings  thou
reportest.  To-morrow  [not  to-morrow,  nor  next  day ;  wet  troops
need  a  rest]  I  arrive  at  our  last  station  this  side  Glogau,  which
place  I  hope  to  get  in  a  few  days.  All  favors  my  designs  :
and  I  hope  to  return  to  Berlin,  after  executing  them  gloriously
and  in  a  way  to  be  content  with.  Let  the  ignorant  and  the
envious  talk ;  it  is  not  they  that  shall  ever  serve  as  loadstar  to
my  designs ;  not  they,  but  Glory  [la  Gloire  •  Fame,  depending
not  on  them]  :  with  the  love  of  that  I  am  penetrated  more
than  ever ;  my  troops  have  their  hearts  big  with  it,  and  I
answer  to  thee  for  success.  Adieu,  dear  Jordan.  Write  me
all  the  ill  that  the  public  says  of  thy  Friend,  and  be  persuaded
that  I  love  and  will  esteem  thee  always."  —  F.

Jordan  to  the  King.

No.  4.  "Berlin,  24^th  December.  Your  Majesty's  Letter  fills
me  with  joy  and  contentment.  The  Town  declared  your  Maj-
esty to  be  already  in  Breslau ;  founding  on  some  Letter  to
a  Merchant  here.  Ever  since  they  think  of  your  Majesty  act-
ing for  Protestantism,  they  make  you  step  along  with  strides
of  Achilles  to  the  ends  of  Silesia.  —  Foreign  Courts  are  all
rating  their  Ambassadors  here  for  not  finding  you  out.

"Wolf,"  his  negotiations  concluded  at  last,  "has  entered
Halle  almost  like  the  triumphant  Entry  to  Jerusalem.  A  con-
course of  pedants  escorted  him  to  his  house.  Lange  [his  old
enemy,  who  accused  him  of  Atheism  and  other  things]  has
called  to  see  him,  and  loaded  him.  with  civilities,  to  the  aston-
ishment of  the  old  Orthodox."  There  let  him  rest,  well  but-
toned in  gaiters,  and  avoiding  to  mount  stairs.  ..."  Madame
de  Roucoulles  has  sent  me  the  three  objects  adjoined,  for  your
Majesty's  behoof,"  —  woollen  achievements,  done  by  the  needle,
good  against  the  winter  weather  for  one  she  nursed.  The  good
old  soul.  Enough  now  of  Jordan.1

Voltaire,  who  left  Berlin  2d  or  3d  December,  seems  to  have
been  stopt  by  overflow  of  rivers  about  Cleve,  then  to  have
taken  boat ;  and  is,  about  this  very  time,  writing  to  Friedrich
1  CEuvrcs  de  Fr€d€ric,  xvii.  75-78.

CHAP.  ill.  PROBLEM OF GLOGAU.  321

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

"  from  a  vessel  on  the  Coasts  of  Zealand,  where  I  am  driven
mad."  (Intends,  privately,  for  Paris  before  long,  to  get  his  Ma-
homet acted,  if  possible.)  To  Voltaire,  here  is  a  Note  coming  :

King  to  M.  de  Voltaire  (at  Brussels,  if  once  got  thither).

"  QUARTER  OF  HERRENDORF  IN  SILESIA,
23d  December,  1740.

"  MY  DEAR  VOLTAIRE,  —  I  have  received  two  of  your  Let-
ters ;  but  could  not  answer  sooner ;  I  am  like  Charles  Twelfth's
Chess-King,  who  was  always  kept  on  the  move.  For  a  fort-
night past,  we  have  been  continually  afoot  and  under  way,  in
such  weather  as  you  never  saw.

"  I  am  too  tired  to  reply  to  your  charming  Verses  ;  and  shiv-
ering too  much  with  cold  to  taste  all  the  charm  of  them  :  but
that  will  come  round  again.  Do  not  ask  poetry  from  a  man
who  is  actually  doing  the  work  of  a  wagoner,  and  sometimes
even  of  a  wagoner  stuck  in  the  mud.  Would  you  like  to  know
my  way  of  life  ?  We  march  from  seven  in  the  morning  till
four  in  the  afternoon.  I  dine  then ;  afterwards  I  work,  I  re-
ceive tiresome  visits  ;  with  these  comes  a  detail  of  insipid
matters  of  business.  JT  is  wrong-headed  men,  punctiliously
difficult,  who  are  to  be  set  right ;  heads  too  hot  which  must  be
restrained,  idle  fellows  that  must  be  urged,  impatient  men  that
must  be  rendered  docile,  plunderers  to  restrain  within  the
bounds  of  equity,  babblers  to  hear  babbling,  dumb  people  to
keep  in  talk :  in  fine,  one  has  to  drink  with  those  that  like  it,
to  eat  with  those  that  are  hungry ;  one  has  to  become  a  Jew
with  Jews,  a  Pagan  with  Pagans.

"  Such  are  my  occupations ;  —  which  I  would  willingly  make
over  to  another,  if  the  Phantom  they  call  Fame  (Gloire)  did  not
rise  on  me  too  often.  In  truth,  it  is  a  great  folly,  but  a  folly
difficult  to  cast  away  when  once  you  are  smitten  by  it.
[Phantom  of  Gloire  somewhat  rampant  in  those  first  weeks  ;
let  us  see  whether  it  will  not  lay  itself  again,  forevermore,
before  long !]

"  Adieu,  my  dear  Voltaire ;  may  Heaven  preserve  from  mis-
fortune the  man  I  should  so  like  to  sup  with  at  night,  after
fighting  in  the  morning !  The  Swan  of  Padua  [Algarotti,  with

VOL. Til.  21

322  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

his  big  hook-nose  and  dusky  solemnly  greedy  countenance]  is
going,  I  think,  to  Paris,  to  profit  by  my  absence  ;  the  Philoso-
pher Geometer  [big  Maupertuis,  in  red  wig  and  yellow  frizzles,
vainest  of  human  kind]  is  squaring  curves  ;  poor  little  Jordan
[with  the  kindly  hazel  eyes,  and  pen  that  pleasantly  gossips
to  us]  is  doing  nothing,  or  probably  something  near  it.  Adieu
once  more,  dear  Voltaire ;  do  not  forget  the  absent  who  love
you.  FEDEKIC."  1

Schwerin  at  Liegnitz  ;  Friedrich  hushes  up  the  Grlogau
Problem,  and  starts  with  his  best  speed  for  Breslau.

Meanwhile,  on  the  Western  road,  and  along  the  foot  of  the
snowy  peaks  over  yonder,  Schwerin  with  the  small  Eight
column  is  going  prosperously  forwards.  Two  columns  always,
as  the  reader  recollects,  —  two  parallel  military  currents,  flow-
ing steadily  on,  shooting  out  estafettes,  or  horse-parties,  on
the  right  and  left ;  steadily  submerging  all  Silesia  as  they  flow
forward.  Left  column  or  current  is  in  slight  pause  at  Glogau
here  ;  but  will  directly  be  abreast  again.  On  Tuesday,  27th,
Schwerin  is  within  wind  of  Lieguitz ;  on  Wednesday  morning,
while  the  fires  are  hardly  lighted,  or  the  smoke  of  Liegnitz
risen  among  the  Hills,  Schwerin  has  done  his  feat  with  the
usual  deftness :  Prussian  grenadiers  came  softly  on  the  sentry,
softly  as  a  dream  ;  but  with  sudden  levelling  of  bayonets,
sudden  beckoning,  "  To  your  Guard-house  !  "  —  and  there,  turn
the  key  upon  his  poor  company  and  him.  Whereupon  the
whole  Prussian  column  marches  in;  tramp  tramp,  without
music,  through  the  streets:  in  the  Market-place  they  fold
themselves  into  a  ranked  mass,  and  explode  into  wind-harmony
and  rolling  of  drums.  Liegnitz,  mostly  in  nightcap,  looks
cautiously  out  of  window  :  it  is  a  deed  done,  ihr  Herren  ;  Lieg-
nitz ours,  better  late  than  never ;  and  after  so  many  years,  the
King  has  his  own  again.  Schwerin  is  sumptuously  lodged  in
the  Jesuits'  Palace  :  Liegnitz,  essentially  a  Protestant  Town,
has  many  thoughts  upon  this  event,  but  as  yet  will  be  stingy
of  speaking  them.

1 (Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxii.  57.

CHAP.  III.  PROBLEM OF GLOGAU.  323

22d-28th  Dec.  1740.

Thus  is  Liegnitz  managed.  A  pleasant  Town,  amid  pleasant
hills  on  the  rocky  Katzbach ;  of  which  swift  stream,  and  other
towns  and  passes  on  it,  we  shall  yet  hear  more.  Population,
silently  industrious  in  weaving  and  otherwise,  is  now  above
14,000 ;  was  then  perhaps  about  half  that  number.  Patiently
inarticulate,  by  no  means  bright  in  speech  or  sentiment ;  a
much-enduring,  steady-going,  frugal,  pious  and  very  desirable
people.

The  situation  of  Breslau,  all  this  while,  is  very  critical.
Much  bottled  emotion  in  the  place  ;  no  Austrian  Garrison
admissible ;  Authorities  dare  not  again  propose  such  a  thing,
though  Browne  is  turning  every  stone  for  it,  —  lest  the  emo-
tion burst  bottle,  and  take  fire.  I  have  dim  account  that
Browne  has  been  there,  has  got  300  Austrian  dragoons  into
the  Dom  Insel  (Cathedral  Island ;  "Not  in  the  City,  you  per-
ceive ! "  says  General  Browne :  "  no,  separated  by  the  Oder,
on  both  sides,  from  the  rest  of  the  City ;  that  stately  mass
of  edifices,  and  good  military  post ")  ;  —  and  had  hoped  to
get  the  suburbs  burnt,  after  all.  But  the  bottled  emotion  was
too  dangerous.  For,  underground,  there  are  Anti-JSvownes :
one  especially ;  a  certain  busy  Deblin,  Shoemaker  by  craft,
whom  Friedrich  speaks  of,  but  gives  no  name  to  ;  this  zealous
Cordwainer,  Deblin,  and  he  is  not  the  only  individual  of  like
humor,  operates  on  the  guild-brothers  and  lower  populations  : 1
things  seem  to  be  looking  worse  and  worse  for  the  Authorities,
in  spite  of  General  Browne  and  his  activities  and  dragoons.

What  the  issue  will  be  ?  Judge  if  Friedrich  wished  the
Young  Dessauer  come  !  Friedrich's  Hussar  parties  (or  Schwe-
rin's,  instructed  by  Friedrich)  go  to  look  if  the  Breslau  sub-
urbs are  burnt.  Far  from  it,  if  Friedrich  knew ;  —  the  suburbs
merely  sit  quaking  at  such  a  proposal,  and  wish  the  Prussians
were  here.  "  But  there  is  time  ahead  of  us,"  said  everybody
at  Breslau ;  "  Glogau  will  take  some  sieging !  "  Browne,  in
the  course  of  a  day  or  two,  —  guessing,  I  almost  think,  that
Glogau  was  not  to  be  besieged,  —  ranked  his  300  Austrian
dragoons,  and  rode  away ;  sending  the  Austrian  State-Papers,

1  Preuss,  Thronbesteigung,  p.  469  ; (Euvre.s  de  Frederic,  ii.  61.

324  FIRST  SILESIAN WAR.

in  half  a  score  of  wagons,  ahead  of  him.  "  Archives  of  Bres-
lau  !"  cried  the  general  population,  at  sight  of  these  wagons;
and  largely  turned  out,  with  emotion  again  like  to  unbottle
itself.  "Mere  Tax-Ledgers,  and  records  of  the  Government
Offices  ;  come  and  convince  yourselves  !  "  answered  the  Author-
ities. And  the  ten  wagons  went  on;  calling  at  Ohlau  and
Brieg,  for  farther  lading  of  the  like  kind.  Which  wagons
the  Prussian  light-horse  chased,  but  could  not  catch.  On  to
Miihren  went  these  Archive- wagons  ;  to  Briinn,  far  over  the
Giant  Mountains ;  —  did  not  come  back  for  a  long  while,  nor
to  their  former  Proprietor  at  all.

•  Tuesday,  27th,  Leopold  the  Young  Dessauer  does  finally
arrive,  with  his  Eeserve,  at  Glogau  :  never  man  more  welcome ;
such  a  fermentation  going  on  at  Breslau, — known  to  Fried-
rich,  and  what  it  will  issue  in,  if  he  delay,  not  known.  With
despatch,  Leopold  is  put  into  his  charge ;  posts  all  yielded  to
him  ;  orders  given,  —  blockade  to  be  strictness  itself,  but  no
fighting  if  avoidable  ;  "  starvation  will  soon  do  it,  two  months
at  most,"  hopes  Friedrich,  too  sanguine  as  it  proved :  —  and
with  earliest  daylight  on  the  28th,  Friedrich's  Army,  Fried-
rich  himself  in  the  van  as  usual,  is  on  march  again  ;  at  its  best
speed  for  Breslau.  Eead  this  Xote  for  Jordan  :  —

Friedrich  to  M.  Jordan,  at  Berlin.

"HERRENDORF,  27th  Dec.  1740.

"  SIEUK  JOKDAX, — I  march  to-morrow  for  Breslau;  and
shall  be  there  in  four  days  [three,  it  happened ;  there  rising,
as  would  seem,  new  reason  for  haste].  You  Berliners  [of
the  24th  last]  have  a  spirit  of  prophecy,  which  goes  beyond
me.  In  fine,  I  go  my  road ;  and  thou  wilt  shortly  see  Silesia
ranked  in  the  list  of  our  Provinces.  Adieu ;  this  is  all  I  have
time  to  tell  thee.  Religion  [Silesian  Protestantism,  and  Bres-
lau's  Cordwainer],  religion  and  our  brave  soldiers  will  do  the
rest.

"  Tell  Maupertuis  I  grant  those  Pensions  he  proposes  for
his  Academicians ;  and  that  I  hope  to  find  good  subjects  for
that  dignity  in  the  Country  where  I  am,  withal.  Give  him  my
compliments.  FEDERIC."

CHAP.  IV. BRESLAU  UNDER  SOFT  PRESSURE.  325

1st  Jan.  1741.

The  march  was  of  the  swiftest,  —  swifter  even  than  had
been  expected ;  —  which,  as  Silesia  is  all  ringing  glass,  becomes
more  achievable  than  lately.  But  certain  regiments  outdid
themselves  in  marching ;  "  in  three  marches,  near  upon  sev-
enty miles,"  with  their  baggage  jingling  in  due  proximity.
Through  Glasersdorf,  thence  through  Parchwitz,  JSTeumarkt,
Lissa,  places  that  will  be  better  known  to  us ;  —  on  Saturday,
last  night  of  the  Year,  his  Majesty  lodged  at  a  Schloss  called
Pilsnitz,  five  miles  to  west  of  Breslau ;  and  van-ward  regi-
ments, a  good  few,  quartered  in  the  Western  and  Southern
suburbs  of  Breslau  itself ;  suburbs  decidedly  glad  to  see  them,
and  escape  conflagration.  The  Town-gates  are  hermetically
shut ;  — plenty  of  emotion  bottled  in  the  100,000  hearts  within.
The  sentries  on  the  walls  presented  arms  ;  nay,  it  is  affirmed,
some  could  not  help  exclaiming,  "  Wilkommen,  Ihr  lieben  Herren
(Welcome,  dear  Sirs)  ! " 1

Colonel  Posadowsky  (active  Horse  Colonel  whom  we  have
seen  before,  who  perhaps  has  been  in  Breslau  before)  left
orders  "  at  the  Scultet  Garden-House,"  that  all  must  be  ready
and  the  rooms  warmed,  his  Majesty  intending  to  arrive  here
early  on  the  morrow.  Which  happened  accordingly  ;  Majesty
alighting  duly  at  said  Garden-House,  near  by  the  Schweiduitz
Gate,  —  I  fancy  almost  before  break  of  day.

CHAPTER IV.

BRESLAU UNDER SOFT PRESSURE.

THE  issue  of  this  Breslau  transaction  is  known,  or  could  be
stated  in  few  words ;  nor  is  the  manner  of  it  such  as  would,
for  Breslau's  sake,  deserve  many.  But  we  are  looking  into
Friedrich,  wish  to  know  his  manners  and  aspects :  and  here,
ready  to  our  hand,  a  Paper  turns  up,  compiled  by  an  exact
person  with  better  leisure  than  ours,  minutely  detailing  every

l  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  534.

326  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

1st  Jan.  1741.

part  of  the  affair.  This  Paper,  after  the  question,  Burn  or
insert  ?  is  to  have  the  lot  of  appearing  here,  with  what  abridg-
ments are  possible :  —

"  Sunday,  1st  January,  1741.  The  King  having  established
himself  in  Herrn  Scultet's  Garden-House,  not  far  from  the
Schweidnitz  Gate,  there  began  a  delicate  and  great  operation.
The  Prussians,  in  a  soft  cautious  manner,  in  the  gray  of  the
morning,  push  out  their  sentries  towards  the  three  Gates  on
this  side  of  the  Oder ;  seize  any  '  Excise  House/  or  the  like,
that  may  be  fit  for  a  post ;  and  softly  put  '  twenty  grenadiers  '
in  it.  All  this  before  sunrise.  Breslau  is  rigidly  shut ;  Breslau
thought  always  it  could  stand  upon  its  guard,  if  attacked  ;  — is
now,  in  Official  quarters,  dismally  uncertain  if  it  can ;  general
population  becoming  certain  that  it  cannot,  and  waiting  anxious
on  the  development  of  this  grand  drama.

"About  7  A.M.  a  Prussian  subaltern  advancing  within  cry
of  the  Schweidnitz  Gate,  requests  of  the  Town-guard  there,  To
send  him  out  a  Town-Officer.  Town-Officer  appears  ;  is  in-
formed, '  That  Colonels  Posadowsky  and  Borck,  Commission-
ers or  plenipotentiary  Messengers  from  his  Prussian  Majesty,
desire  admittance  to  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  Breslau,  for  the
purpose  of  signifying  what  his  Prussian  Majesty's  instructions
are.'  Town-Officer  bows,  and  goes  upon  his  errand.  Town-
Officer  is  some  considerable  time  before  he  can  return ;  City
Authorities  being,  as  we  know,  various,  partly  Imperial,  partly
Civic;  elderly;  and  some  of  them  gone  to  church, — for  matins,
or  to  be  out  of  the  way.  However,  he  does  at  last  return ;
admits  the  two  Colonels,  and  escorts  them  honorably,  to  the
Chief  Baths-Syndic  (Lord-Mayor)  old  Herr  von  Gutzmar's ;
where  the  poor  old  "  President  of  the  Ober  Ami "  (Von  Schaff-
gotsch  the  name  of  this  latter)  is  likewise  in  attendance.

"  Prussian  Majesty's  proposals  are  of  the  mildest  sort :
'Nothing  demanded  of  Breslau  but  the  plainly  indispensable
and  indisputable,  That  Prussia  be  in  it  what  Austria  has  been.
In  all  else,  status  quo.  Strict  neutrality  to  Breslau,  respect
for  its  privileges  as  a  Free  City  of  the  Reich ;  protection  to
all  its  rights  and  privileges  whatsoever.  Shall  be  guarded  by
its  own  Garrison ;  no  Prussian  soldier  to  enter  except  with

CHAP.  IV. BRESLAU  UNDER  SOFT  PRESSURE.  327

2d  Jan.  1741.

side-arms ;  only  30  guards  for  the  King's  person,  who  will
visit  the  City  for  a  few  days ;  —  intends  to  form  a  Magazine,
with  guard  of  1,000  men,  but  only  outside  the  City :  no  requi-
sitions ;  ready  money  for  everything.  Chief  Syndic  Gutzmar
and  President  Schaffgotsch  shall  consider  these  points.'1
Syndic  and  President  answer,  Surely !  Cannot,  however,
decide  till  they  have  assembled  the  Town-Rath ;  the  two
Herren  Colonels  will  please  to  be  guests  of  Breslau,  and
lodge  in  the  City  till  then.

"  And  they  lodged,  accordingly,  in  the  '  Grosse  Ring '  (called
also  Salz-Ring,  big  Central  Square,  where  the  Kathhaus  is) ;
and  they  made  and  received  visits,  —  visited  especially  the
Chief  President's  Office,  the  Ober-Amt,  and  signified  there,
that  his  Prussian  Majesty's  expectation  was,  They  would  give
some  account  of  that  rather  high  Proclamation  or  'Patent'
they  had  published  against  him  the  other  day,  amid  thunder
and  lightning  here,  and  what  they  now  thought  would  be
expedient  upon  it  ?  All  in  grave  official  terms,  but  of  such  a
purport  as  was  not  exhilarating  to  everybody  in  those  Ober-
Amt  localities.

"  Monday  morning,  2d  January.  The  Kath  is  assembled ;
and  consults,  —  consults  at  great  length.  .Saz'/i-House  and
Syndic  Gutzmar,  in  such  crisis,  would  fain  have  advice  from
Amt-~H.(mse  or  President  Schaffgotsch ;  but  can  get  none :  con-
siderable coming  and  going  between  them:  at  length,  about
3  in  the  afternoon,  the  Treaty  is  got  drawn  up ;  is  signed  by
the  due  Breslau  hands,  and  by  the  two  Prussian  Colonels,  —
which  latter  ride  out  with  it,  about  4  of  the  clock  ;  victorious
after  thirty  hours.  Straight  towards  the  Scultet  Garden  ride
they;  Town-guard  presenting  Arms,  at  the  Schweidnitz  Gate;
nay  Town-band  breaking  out  into  music,  which  is  never  done
but  to  Ambassadors  and  high  people.  By  thirty  hours  of
steady  soft  pressure,  they  have  brought  it  thus  far.

"  Friedrich  had  waited  patiently  all  Sunday,  keeping  steady
guard  at  the  Gates ;  but  on  Monday,  naturally,  the  thirty  hours
began  to  hang  heavy :  at  all  events,  he  perceived  that  it  would

1  Helden-Geschichte,  \.  537.

328  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

2d  Jan.  1741.

be  well  to  facilitate  conclusions  a  little  from  without.  Bres-
lau  stands  on  the  West,  more  strictly  speaking,  on  the  South
side  of  the  Oder,  which  makes  an  elbow  here,  and  thus  bounds
it,  or  mostly  bounds  it,  on  two  sides.  The  big  drab-colored
Kiver  spreads  out  into  Islands,  of  a  confused  sort,  as  it  passes ;
which  are  partly  built  upon,  and  constitute  suburbs  of  the
Town,  —  stretching  over,  here  and  there,  into  straggles  of
farther  suburb  beyond  the  River,  where  a  road  with  its  bridge
happens  to  cross  for  the  Eastern  parts.  The  principal  of
these  Islands  is  the  Dom  Insel,"  —  known  to  General  Browne
and  us,  —  "  on  which  is  the  Cathedral,  and  the  Close  with  rich
Canons  and  their  edifices  ;  Island  filled  with  strong  high  archi-
tecture ;  and  a  superior  military  post.

"Friedrich  has  already  as  good  as  possessed  himself  of  the
three  landward  Gates,  which  look  to  the  south  and  to  the
west ;  the  riverward  gates,  or  those  on  the  north  and  the  east,
he  perceives  that  it  were  good  now  also  to  have  ;  these,  and
even  perhaps  something  more  ?  '  Gather  all  the  river-boats,
make  a  bridge  of  them  across  the  Oder ;  push  across  400  men : '
this  is  done  on  Monday  morning,  under  the  King's  own  eye.
This  done,  '  March  up  to  that  riverward  Gate,  and  also  to  that
other,  in  a  mild  but  dangerous-looking  manner ;  hew  the  beams
of  said  Gate  in  two  ;  start  the  big  locks  ;  fling  wide  open  said
Gate  and  Gates : '  this  too  is  done ;  Town-guard  looking  mourn-
fully on.  This  done,  '  March  forward  swiftly,  in  two  halves,
without  beat  of  drum,  —  whitherward  you  know ! '

"  Those  three  hundred  Austrian  Dragoons,  we  saw  them
leave  the  Dom  Island,  three  days  ago;  there  are  at  present
only  Six  Men,  of  the  Bishop's  Guard,  walking  under  arms
there,  —  at  the  end  of  the  chief  bridge,  on  the  Townward  side
of  their  Dom  Island.  See,  Prussiau  caps  and  muskets,  ye  six
men  under  arms  !  The  six  men  clutch  at  their  drawbridge,
and  hastily  set  about  hoisting :  —  alas,  another  Prussian  corps,
which  has  come  privately  by  the  eastern  (or  Country-ward)
Bridge,  King  himself  with  it,  taps  them  on  the  shoulder  at
this  instant ;  mildly  constrains  the  six  into  their  guard-house :
the  drawbridge  falls ;  400  Prussian  grenadiers  take  quiet  pos-
session of  the  Dom  Island :  King  may  return  to  the  Scultet

CHAP.  IV. BRESLAU UNDER  SOFT  PRESSURE.  329

2d-6th  Jan.  1741.

Garden,  having  quickened  the  lazy  hours  in  this  manner.  To
such  of  the  Canons  as  he  canie  upon,  his  Majesty  was  most
polite ;  they  most  submiss.  The  six  soldiers  of  the  draw-
bridge, having  spoken  a  little  loud,  —  still  more  a  too  zealous
beef-eater  of  old  Schaffgotsch's  found  here,  who  had  been  very
loud,  —  were  put  under  arrest ;  but  more  for  form's  sake ;  and
were  let  go,  in  a  day  or  two."

Nothing  could  be  gentler  on  Friedrich's  part,  and  on  that  of
his  two  Colonels,  than  this  delicate  operation  throughout :  —
and  at  4  P.M.,  after  thirty  hours  of  waiting,  it  is  done,  and
nobody's  skin  scratched.  Old  Syndic  Gutzmar,  and  the  Town-
Eath,  urged  by  perils  and  a  Town  Population  who  are  Protes-
tant, have  signed  the  Surrender  with  good-will,  at  least  with
resignation,  and  a  feeling  of  relief.  The  Ober-Amt  Officials
have  likewise  had  to  sign;  full  of  all  the  silent  spleen  and
despondency  which  is  natural  to  the  situation  :  spleen  which,
in  the  case  of  old  Schaffgotsch,  weak  with  age,  becomes  pas-
sionately audible  here  and  there.  He  will  have  to  give  account
of  that  injurious  Proclamation,  or  Queen's  "Patent,"  to  this
King  that  has  now  come.

King  enters  Breslau  ;  stays  there,  gracious  and  vigilant,
Four  Days  (Jan.  2d-6th,  1741).

In  the  Royal  Entrance  which  took  place  next  day,  note
these  points.  Syndic  Gutzmar  and  the  Authorities  came  out,
in  grand  coaches,  at  8  in  the  morning ;  had  to  wait  awhile  ;
the  King,  having  ridden  away  to  look  after  his  manifold
affairs,  did  not  get  back  till  10.  Town  Guard  and  Garrison
are  all  drawn  out ;  Gates  all  flung  open,  Prussian  sentries
withdrawn  from  them,  and  from  the  Excise-houses  they  had
seized:  King's  Kitchen-and-Proviant  Carriages  (four  mules  to
each,  with  bells,  with  uncommonly  rich  housings)  :  King's
Body-Coach  very  grand  indeed,  and  grandly  escorted,  the
Thirty  Body-guards  riding  ahead;  but  nothing  in  it,  only  a
most  superfine  cloak  "  lined  wholly  with  ermine  "  flung  upon
the  seat.  Other  Coaches,  more  or  less  grandly  escorted ;  Head
Cup-bearers,  Seneschals,  Princes,  Margraves  :  —  but  where  is

330  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

2d-6th  Jan.  1741.

the  King  ?  King  had  ridden  away,  a  second  time,  with  chief
Generals,  taking  survey  of  the  Town  Walls,  round  as  far  as
the  Ziegel-Thor  (Tile-Gate,  extreme  southeast,  by  the  river-
edge)  :  he  has  thus  made  the  whole  circuit  of  Breslau ;  —  un-
wearied in  picking  up  useful  knowledge,  "  though  it  was  very
cold,"  while  that  Procession  of  Coaches  went  on.

At  noon,  his  Majesty,  thrifty  of  time,  did  enter :  on  horse-
back, Schwerin  riding  with  him;  behind  him  miscellaneous
chief  Officers ;  Borck  and  Posadowsky  among  others ;  some
miscellany  of  Page-people  following.  With  this  natural  es-
cort, he  rode  in ;  Town-Major  (Commandant  of  Town-guard),
with  drawn  sword  going  ahead ;  —  King  wore  his  usual  Cocked
Hat,  and  practical  Blue  Cloak,  both  a  little  dimmed  by  service :
but  his  gray  horse  was  admirable ;  and  four  scarlet  Footmen,
grand  as  galloon  and  silver  fringe  could  make  them,  did  the
due  magnificence  in  dress.  He  was  very  gracious  ;  saluting
to  this  side  and  to  that,  where  he  noticed  people  of  condition
in  the  windows.  "  Along  Schweidnitz  Street,  across  the  Great
Ring,  down  Albrecht  Street."  He  alighted,  to  lodge,  at  the
Count-Schlegenberg  House ;  which  used  to  be  the  Austrian
Cardinal  von  Sinzendorf  Primate  of  Silesia's  hired  lodging,  —
Sinzendorf's  furniture  is  put  gently  aside,  on  this  new  occa-
sion. King  came  011  the  balcony ;  and  stood  there  for  some
minutes,  that  everybody  might  see  him.  The  "  immense  shout-
ings," Dryasdust  assures  me,  have  been  exaggerated ;  and  I  am
warned  not  to  believe  the  Kriegs-Fama  such  and  such  a  Num-
ber, except  after  comparing  it  with  him.  —  That  day  there  was
dinner  of  more  than  thirty  covers,  Chief  Syndic  Gutzmar  and
other  such  guests  ;  but  as  to  the  viands,  says  my  friend,  these,
owing  to  the  haste,  were  nothing  to  speak  of.1

Dinner,  better  and  better  ordered,  King  more  and  more  gra-
cious, so  it  continued  all  the  four  days  of  his  Majesty's  stay :
—  on  the  second  day  he  had  to  rise  suddenly  from  table,  and
leave  his  guests  with  an  apology;  something  having  gone
awry,  at  one  of  the  Gates.  Awry  there,  between  the  Town
Authorities  and  a  General  Jeetz  of  his,  —  who  is  on  march
across  the  River  at  this  moment  (on  what  errand  we  shall

1  Helden-Geschicfite,  i.  545-548.

CHAP.  IV. BRESLAU UNDER  SOFT  PRESSURE.  331

2d-6th  Jan.  1741.

hear),  and  a  little  mistakes  the  terms.  His  Majesty  puts
Jeetz  right ;  and  even  waits,  till  he  sees  his  Brigade  and  him
clear  across.  A  junior  Schaffgotsch,1  not  the  inconsolable
Schaffgotsch  senior,  but  his  Nephew,  was  one  of  the  guests
this  second  day ;  an  ecclesiastic,  but  of  witty  fashionable  type,
and  I  think  a  very  worthless  fellow,  though  of  a  family  im-
portant in  the  Province.  Dinner  falls  about  noon ;  does  not
last  above  two  hours  or  three,  so  that  there  is  space  for  a  ride
("to  the  Dom,"  the  first  afternoon,  "four  runners"  always),
and  for  much  indoor  work,  before  the  supper-hour.

As  the  Austrian  Authorities  sat  silent  in  their  place,  and
gave  no  explanation  of  that  "Patent,"  affixed  amid  thunder
and  lightning,  —  they  got  orders  from  his  Majesty  to  go  their
ways  next  day ;  and  went.  In  behalf  of  old  President  von
Schaffgotsch,  a  chief  of  the  Silesian  Nobility,  and  man  much
loved,  the  Breslau  people,  and  men  from  every  guild  and  rank
of  society,  made  petition  That  he  should  be  allowed  to  con-
tinue in  his  Town  House  here.  Which  "first  request  of
yours  "  his  Majesty,  with  much  grace,  is  sorry  to  be  obliged
to  refuse.  The  suppressed,  and  insuppressible,  weak  indigna-
tion of  old  Schaffgotsch  is  visible  on  the  occasion ;  nor,  I  think,
does  Friedrich  take  it  ill ;  only  sends  him  out  of  the  way  with
it,  for  the  time.  The  Austrian  Ober-Amt  vanished  bodily
from  Breslau  in  this  manner;  and  never  returned.  Proper
"  War-Commission  (Feld-Kriegs-Commissariat)"  with  Miin-
chow,  one  of  those  skilful  Ciistrin  Miinchows,  at  the  top  of  it,
organized  itself  instead;  which,  almost  of  necessity,  became
Supreme  Government  in  a  City  ungoverned  otherwise :  —  and
truly  there  was  little  regret  of  the  Ober-Amt,  in  Breslau ;  and
ever  less,  to  a  marked  extent,  as  the  years  went  on.

On  the  5th  of  January  (fourth  and  last  night  here),  his
Majesty  gave  a  grand  Ball.  Had  hired,  or  Colonel  Posadowsky
instead  of  him  had  hired,  the  Assembly  Rooms  (Redouten-Saal)
for  the  purpose  :  "  Invite  all  the  Nobility  high  and  low  ;  "  —
expense  by  estimate  is  a  ducat  (half -guinea)  each;  do  it
well,  and  his  Majesty  will  pay.  About  6  in  the  evening,  his
Majesty  in  person  did  us  the  honor  to  drive  over ;  opened  the

1  Helden-Geschichte,  ii.  159.

332  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

2d-6th  Jan.  1741.

Ball  with  Madam  the  Countess  von  Schlegenberg  (I  should
guess,  a  Dowager  Lady),  in  whose  house  he  lodges.  I  am  not
aware  that  his  Majesty  danced  much  farther ;  but  he  was  very
condescending,  and  spoke  and  smiled  up  and  down;  —  till,
about  10  P.M.,  an  Officer  came  in  with  a  Letter.  Which  Letter
his  Majesty  having  read,  and  seemingly  asked  a  question  or
two  in  regard  to,  put  silently  in  his  pocket,  as  if  it  were  a  fin-
ished thing.  Nevertheless,  after  a  few  minutes,  his  Majesty
was  found  to  have  silently  withdrawn ;  and  did  not  return,
not  even  to  supper.  Perceiving  which,  all  the  Prussian  offi-
cial people  gradually  withdrew ;  though  the  dancing  and  sup-
ping continued  not  the  less,  to  a  late  hour.1

"  Open  the  Austrian  Mail-bag  (Felleisen)  ;  see  a  little  what
they  are  saying  over  there ! "  Such  order  had  evidently
been  given,  this  night.  In  consequence  of  which,  people
wrote  by  Dresden,  and  not  the  direct  way,  in  future;  wish-
ing to  avoid  that  openable  Felleisen.  Next  morning,  Janu-
ary 6th,  his  Majesty  had  left  for  Ohlau,  —  early,  I  suppose ;
though  there  proved  to  be  nothing  dangerous  ahead  there,
after  all.

CHAPTER  V.

FRIEDRICH PUSHES FORWARD TOWARDS BRIEG AND NEISSE.

OHLAU  is  a  pleasant  little  Town,  two  marches  southeast
of  Breslau ;  with  the  Ohlau  River  on  one  side,  and  the  Oder
on  the  other ;  capable  of  some  defence,  were  there  a  gar-
rison. Brieg  the  important  Fortress,  still  on  the  Oder,  is
some  fifteen  miles  beyond  Ohlau  ;  after  which,  bending
straight  south  and  quitting  Oder,  Neisse  the  still  more  im-
portant may  be  thirty  miles: — from  Breslau  to  Neisse,  by
this  route  (which  is  bow,  not  string),  sixty-five  or  seventy
miles.  One  of  my  Topographers  yields  this  Note,  if  readers
care  for  it :  —

1  Hdden-Geschichte,  i.  557.

CHAP.  v.  FORWARD ON  BRIEG  AND  NEISSE. 333

7th-12th  Jan.  1741.

"  Ohlau  River,  an  insignificant  drab-colored  stream,  rises
well  south  of  Breslau,  about  Strehlen ;  makes,  at  first,  direct
eastward  towards  the  Oder ;  and  then,  when  almost  close  upon
it,  breaks  off  to  north,  and  saunters  along,  irregularly  parallel
to  Oder,  for  twenty  miles  farther,  before  it  can  fall  fairly  in.
To  this  circumstance  both  Breslau  and  a  Town  of  Ohlau  owe
their  existence;  Towns,  both  of  them,  'between  the  waters,'
and  otherwise  well  seated;  Ohlau  sheltering  itself  in  the
attempted  outfall  of  its  little  river ;  Breslau  clustering  itself
about  the  actual  outfall :  both  very  defensible  places  in  the
old  rude  time,  and  good  for  trade  in  all  times.  Both  Oder
and  Ohlau  Eivers  have  split  and  spread  themselves  into
islands  and  deltas  a  good  deal,  at  their  place  of  meeting ;  and
even  have  changed  their  courses,  and  cut  out  new  channels  for
themselves,  in  the  sandy  country  ;  making  a  very  intricate
watery  network  of  a  site  for  Breslau :  and  indeed  the  Ohlau
River  here,  for  centuries  back,  has  been  compelled  into  wide
meanderings,  mere  filling  of  rampart-ditches,  so  that  it  issues
quite  obscurely,  and  in  an  artificial  engineered  condition,  at
Breslau."

Ohlau  had  been  expected  to  make  some  defence;  General
Browne  having  thrown  300  men  into  it,  and  done  what  he
could  for  the  works.  And  Ohlau  did  at  first  threaten  to  make
some ;  but  thought  better  of  it  overnight,  and  in  effect  made
none  ;  but  was  got  (morning  of  January  9th)  on  the  common
terms,  by  merely  marching  up  to  it  in  minatory  posture.
"  Prisoners  of  War,  if  you  make  resistance  ;  Free  Withdrawal
[Liberty  to  march  away,  arms  shouldered,  and  not  serve  against
us  for  a  year],  if  you  have  made  none  :  "  this  is  the  common
course,  where  there  are  Austrian  Soldiers  at  all ;  the  course  where
none  are,  and  only  a  few  Syndics  sit,  with  their  Town-Key  laid
on  the  table,  a  prey  to  the  stronger  hand,  we  have  already  seen.

From  Ohlau,  proper  Detachment,  iinder  General  Kleist,
is  pushed  forward  to  summon  Brieg ;  Jeetz  from  the  other
side  of  the  river  (whom  we  saw  crossing  at  Breslau  the
other  day,  interrupting  his  Majesty's  dinner)  is  to  co-operate
with  Kleist  in  that  enterprise,  — were  the  Country  once  cleared
on  his,  Jeetz's,  east  side  of  Oder ;  especially  were  Namslau

331  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

7th-12th  Jan.  1741.

once  had,  a  small  Town  and  Castle  over  there,  which  com-
mands the  Polish  and  Hungarian  road.  Friedrich's  hopes  are
buoyant ;  Schwerin  is  swiftly  rolling  forward  to  rightward,
nothing  resisting  him  ;  Detachment  is  gone  from  Schwerin,
over  the  Hills,  to  Glatz  (the  Grafschaft,  or  County  Glatz,  an
Appendage  to  Schlesien),  under  excellent  guidance;  under
guidance,  namely,  of  Colonel  Camas,  who  has  just  come  home
from  his  Parisian  Embassy,  and  got  launched  among  the  win-
try mountains,  on  a  new  operation,  —  which,  however,  proves
of  non-effect  for  the  present.1

Indeed,  it  is  observable  that  southward  of  Breslau,  the  dis-
pute, what  dispute  there  can  be,  properly  begins ;  and  that
General  Browne  is  there,  and  shows  himself  a  shining  man  in
this  difficult  position.  It  must  be  owned,  no  General  could
have  made  his  small  means  go  farther.  Effective  garrisons,
1,600  each,  put  into  Brieg  and  Neisse ;  works  repaired,  maga-
zines collected,  there  and  elsewhere ;  the  rest  of  his  poor
7,000  thriftily  sprinkled  about,  in  what  good  posts  there  are,
and  "  capable  of  being  got  together  in  six  hours  : "  a  superior
soldier,  this  Browne,  though  with  a  very  bad  task  ;  and  seems
to  have  inspired  everybody  with  something  of  his  own  temper.
So  that  there  is  marching,  detaching,  miscellaneous  difficulty
for  Friedrich  in  this  quarter,  more  than  had  been  expected.
If  the  fate  of  Brieg  and  Neisse  be  inevitable,  Browne  does
wonders  to  delay  it.

Of  the  Prussian  marches  in  these  parts,  recorded  by  intri-
cate Dryasdust,  there  was  no  point  so  notable  to  me  as  this
unrecorded  one :  the  Stone  Pillar  which,  I  see,  the  Kleist
Detachment  was  sure  to  find,  just  now,  on  the  march  from
Ohlau  to  Brieg;  last  portion  of  that  march,  between  the
village  of  Briesen  and  Brieg.  The  Oder,  flowing  on  your
left  hand,  is  hereabouts  agreeably  clothed  with  woods :  the
country,  originally  a  swamp,  has  been  drained,  and  given  to
the  plough,  in  an  agreeable  manner ;  and  there  is  an  excel-
lent road  paved  with  solid  whinstone,  —  quarried  in  Strehlen,

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  678;  Orlich,  Geschickte  der  beiden  Schlesischen  Krieg?,
i.  49.

CHAP.  V.  FORWARD ON BRIEG AND NEISSE. 335

7th-12th  Jan.  1741.

twenty  miles  away,  among  the  Hills  to  the  right  yonder,  as
you  may  guess  ;  —  road  very  visible  to  the  Prussian  soldier,
though  he  does  not  ask  where  quarried.  These  beautiful  im-
provements, beautiful  humanities,  —  were  done  by  whom  ?
"  Done  in  1584,"  say  the  records,  by  "  George  the  Pious ; "
Duke  of  Liegnitz,  Brieg  and  Wohlau ;  156  years  ago.  "  Pious  "
his  contemporaries  called  this  George  ;  —  he  was  son  of  the
Erbverbt^uderung  Duke,  who  is  so  important  to  us ;  he  was
grandfather's  grandfather  of  the  last  Duke  of  all ;  after  whom
it  was  we  that  should  have  got  these  fine  Territories  ;  they
should  all  have  fallen  to  the  Great  Elector,  had  not  the  Austrian
strong  hand  provided  otherwise.  George  did  these  plantations,
recoveries  to  the  plough ;  made  this  perennial  whinstone  road
across  the  swamps  ;  upon  which,  notable  to  the  roughest  Prus-
sian (being  "  twelve  feet  high  by  eight  feet  square  "),  rises  a
Hewn  Mass  with  this  Inscription  on  it,  —  not  of  the  name  or
date  of  George ;  but  of  a  thought  of  his,  which  is  not  without
a  pious  beauty  to  me  :  —

Straverunt  alii  nobis,  nos  Poster  itati ;
Omnibus  at  Christus  stravit  ad  astro,  viam.

Others  have  made  roads  for  us ;  we  make  them  for  still  others :
Christ  made  a  road  to  the  stars  for  us  all.1

I  know  not  how  many  Brandenburgers  of  General  Kleist's
Detachment,  or  whether  any,  read  this  Stone ;  but  they  do
all  rustle  past  it  there,  claiming  the  Heritage  of  this  Pious
George ;  and  their  mute  dim  interview  with  him,  in  this  man-
ner, is  a  thing  slightly  more  memorable  than  orders  of  the  day,
at  this  date.

It  was  on  the  llth,  two  days  after  Ohlau,  that  General
Kleist  summoned  Brieg ;  and  Brieg  answered  resolutely,  No.
There  is  a  garrison  of  1,600  here,  and  a  proper  magazine :
nothing  for  it  but  to  "  mask  "  Brieg  too ;  Kleist  on  this  side
the  River,  Jeetz  on  that,  —  had  Jeetz  once  done  with  Nams-
lau,  which  he  has  not  by  any  means.  ISTainslau's  answer  was
likewise  stiffly  in  the  negative  ;  and  Jeetz  cannot  do  Namslau,
at  least  not  the  Castle,  all  at  once  ;  having  no  siege-cannon.
1  Zollner,  Brief e  Uber  Schlesitn,  i.  175  ;  Hiibner,  i.  t.  101.

336  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

7th-12th  Jan.  1741.

Seeing  such  stiffness  everywhere,  Friedrich  writes  to  Glogau,
to  the  Young  Dessauer,  "  Siege-artillery  hither  !  Swift,  by  the
Oder  ;  you  dou't  need  it  where  you  are  !  "  and  wishes  it  were
arrived,  for  behoof  of  Neisse  and  these  stiff  humors.

Friedrich  comes  across  to  Ottmacliau ;  sits  there,  in  survey
of  Neisse,  till  his  Cannon  come.

The  Prussians  met  with  serious  resistance,  for  the  first  time
(9th  January,  same  day  when  Ohlau  yielded),  at  a  place  called
Ottmachau  ;  a  considerable  little  Town  and  Castle  on  the
Neisse  Eiver,  not  far  west  of  Neisse  Town,  almost  at  the  very
south  of  Silesia.  It  lay  on  the  route  of  Schwerin's  Column  ;
long  distances  ahead  of  Liegnitz,  —  say,  by  straight  highway
a  hundred  miles  ;  —  during  which,  to  right  and  to  left,  there
had  been  nothing  but  submission  hitherto.  No  resistance  was
expected  here  either,  for  there  was  not  hope  in  any  ;  only  that
Browne  had  been  here  ;  industrious  to  create  delay  till  Neisse
were  got  fully  ready.  He  is,  by  every  means,  girding  up  the
loins  of  Neisse  for  a  tight  defence  ;  has  put  1,600  men  into  it,
with  proper  stores  for  them,  with  a  resolute  skilful  Captain
at  the  top  of  them  :  assiduous  Browne  had  been  at  Ottmachau,
as  the  outpost  of  Neisse,  a  day  or  two  before ;  and,  they  say,
had  admonished  them  "Not  to  yield  on  any  terms,  for  he
would  certainly  come  to  their  relief."  Which  doubtless  he
would  have  done,  had  it  been  in  his  power ;  but  how,  except
by  miracle,  could  it  be  ?  On  the  9th  of  January,  when
Schwerin  comes  up,  Browne  is  again  waiting  hereabouts.
Again  in  defensive  posture,  but  without  force  to  undertake
anything  ;  stands  on  the  Southern  Uplands,  with  Bohmen  and
Mahren  and  the  Giant  Mountains  at  his  back  ;  —  stands,  so  to
speak,  defensive  at  his  own  House-door,  in  this  manner ;  and
will  have,  after  seeing  Ottmachau's  fate  and  Neisse's,  to  duck
in  with  a  slam  !  At  any  rate,  he  had  left  these  Towns  in  the
above  firm  humor,  screwed  to  the  sticking-place ;  and  had  then
galloped  else-whither  to  screw  and  prepare.

And  so  the  Ottmacliau  Austrians,  "  260  picked  grenadiers  "
(400  dragoons  there  also  at  first  were,  who,  after  flourishing

CHAP.  V.  FORWARD  ON  BRIEG  AND  NEISSE. 337

7th-12th  Jan.  1741.

about  on  the  outskirts  as  if  for  fighting,  rode  away),  fire
"  desperat,"  says  my  intricate  friend ; l  entirely  refusing  terms
from  Schwerin;  kill  twelve  of  his  people  (Major  de  Rege,  dis-
tinguished Engineer  Major,  one  of  them) :  so  that  Schwerin
has  to  bring  petards  upon  them,  four  cannon  upon  them  ;  and
burst  in  their  Town  Gate,  almost  their  Castle  Gate,  and  pretty
much  their  Castle  itself ;  —  wasting  three  days  of  his  time
upon  this  paltry  matter.  Upon  which  they  do  signify  a  will-
ingness for  "  Free  Withdrawal."  "  No,  ihr  Herren"  answers
Schwerin;  "not  now;  after  such  mad  explosion.  His  Majesty
will  have  to  settle  it."  Majesty,  who  is  by  this  time  not  far
off,  comes  over  to  Ottmachau  (January  12th) ;  gives  words  of
rebuke,  rebuke  not  very  inexorable  ;  and  admits  them  Prison-
ers of  War.  "  The  officers  were  sent  to  Ciistrin,  common  men
to  Berlin  ;  "  the  usual  arrangement  in  such  case.  Ottmachau
Town  belongs  to  the  Eight  Eeverend  von  Sinzendorf,  Bishop
of  Breslau,  and  Primate  ;  whose  especial  Palace  is  in  Neisse  ;
though  he  "  commonly  sends  his  refractory  Priests  to  do  their
penance  in  the  Schloss  at  Ottmachau  here,"  —  and,  I  should
say,  had  better  himself  make  terms,  and  come  out  hitherward,
under  present  aspects.

Friedrich  continues  at  Ottmachau  ;  head-quarters  there
thenceforth,  till  he  see  Neisse  settled.  On  the  morrow,  13th,
he  learns  that  the  Siege  Artillery  is  at  Grotkau  ;  well  forward
towards  Neisse  ;  half-way  between  Brieg  and  it.  Same  day,
Colonel  Camas  returns  to  him  out  of  Glatz  ;  five  of  his  men
lost ;  and  reports  That  Browne  has  had  the  roads  torn  up,
that  Glatz  is  mere  ice  and  obstruction,  and  that  nothing  can
be  made  of  it  at  this  season.  Good  news  alternating  with  not
so  good.

The  truth  is,  Friedrich  has  got  no  Strong  Place  in  Schlesien ;
all  strengths  make  unexpected  defence  ;  paltry  little  Namslau
itself  cannot  be  quite  taken,  Castle  cannot,  till  Jeetz  gets  his
siege-artillery,  —  which  does  not  come  along  so  fast  as  that  to
Neisse  does.  Here  is  an  Excerpt  from  my  Dryasdust,  exact
though  abridged,  concerning  Jeetz  :  —

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  672-677 ;  Orlich,  i.  50.
VOL.  vu.  22

338  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

12th-15th  Jan.  1741.

"  January  2<lth,  1741.  Prussians,  masters  of  the  Town  for
a  couple  of  weeks  back,  have  got  into  the  Church  at  Namslau,
into  the  Cloister  ;  are  preparing  plank  floors  for  batteries,  cut-
ting loop-holes  ;  diligent  as  possible,  —  siege-guns  now  at  last
just  coming.  The  Castle  fires  fiercely  on  them,  makes  furious
sallies,  steals  six  of  our  oxen,  —  makes  insolent  gestures  from
the  walls ;  at  least  one  soldier  does,  this  day.  '  Sir,  may  I
give  that  fellow  a  shot  ? '  asks  the  Prussian  sentry.  '  Do,
then,'  answers  his  Major  :  '  too  insolent  that  one  ! '  And  the
sentry  explodes  on  him ;  brings  him  plunging  down,  head
foremost  (Jierunter  piirzelte)  ;  the  too  insolent  mortal,  silent
enough  thenceforth."  1  —  Jeetz  did  get  his  cannon,  though  not
till  now,  this  very  day  I  think ;  and  then,  in  a  couple  of  days
more,  Jeetz  finished  off  Namslau  ("  officers  to  Ciistrin,  com-
mon men  to  Berlin  ")  ;  and  thereupon  blockades  the  Eastern
side  of  Brieg,  joining  hands  with  Kleist  on  the  Western :
whereby  Brieg,  like  Glogau,  is  completely  masked,  —  till  the
season  mend.

Friedrich,  now  that  his  artillery  is  come,  expects  no  difficulty
with  Neisse.  A  "paltry  hamlet  (bicoyue)"  he  playfully  calls
it ;  and,  except  this,  Silesia  is  now  his.  Neisse  got  (which
would  be  the  desirable  thing),  or  put  under  "  mask  "  as  Glogau
is,  and  as  Brieg  is  being,  Austria  possesses  not  an  inch  of  land
within  these  borders.  Here  are  some  Epistolary  snatches  ;
still  in  the  light  style,  not  to  say  the  flimsy  and  uplifted  ;  but
worth  giving,  so  transparent  are  they ;  off-hand,  like  words  we
had  heard  his  Majesty  speak,  in  his  high  mood  :  —

King  to  M.  Jordan,  at  Berlin  (two  successive  Letters).

1°.  "  Ottmachau,  14tf/i  January,  1741  [second  day  after  our
arrival  there].  My  dear  Monsieur  Jordan,  my  sweet  Monsieur
Jordan,  my  quiet  Monsieur  Jordan,  my  good,  my  benign,  my
pacific,  my  humanest  Monsieur  Jordan,  —  I  announce  to  Thy
Serenity  the  conquest  of  Silesia ;  I  warn  thee  of  the  bombard-
ment of  Neisse  [just  getting  ready],  and  I  prepare  thee  for
still  more  important  projects  ;  and  instruct  thee  of  the  happiest
successes  that  the  womb  of  Fortune  ever  bore.

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  703.

CHAP.  V.  FORWAKD  ON  BRIEG  AND  NEISSE. 339

12th-17th  Jan.  1741.

"  This  ought  to  suffice  thee.  Be  my  Cicero  as  to  the  justice
of  my  cause,  and  I  will  be  thy  Caesar  as  to  the  execution.
Adieu :  thou  knowest  whether  I  am  not,  with  the  most  cordial
regard,  thy  faithful  friend.  —  F."

2°.  "  Ottmachau,  17th  January,  1741.  I  have  the  honor  to
inform  your  Humanity  that  we  are  christianly  preparing  to
bombard  Neisse ;  and  that  if  the  place  will  not  surrender  of
good-will,  needs  must  that  it  be  beaten  to  powder  (necessite
sera  de  Vabimer).  For  the  rest,  our  affairs  go  the  best  in  the
world ;  and  soon  thou  wilt  hear  nothing  more  of  us.  For  in
ten  days  it  will  all  be  over ;  and  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of
seeing  you  and  hearing  you,  in  about  a  fortnight.

"  I  have  seen  neither  my  Brother  [August  Wilhelm,  not  long
ago  at  Strasburg  with  us,  and  betrothed  since  then]  nor  Key-
serling  :  I  left  them  at  Breslau,  not  to  expose  them  to  the  dan-
gers of  war.  They  perhaps  will  be  a  little  angry ;  but  what
can  I  do  ?  —  The  rather  as,  on  this  occasion,  one  cannot  share
in  the  glory,  unless  one  is  a  mortar  !

"Adieu,  M.  le  Conseiller  [Poor's- JSotf/i,  so  styled].  Go  and
amuse  yourself  with  Horace,  study  Pausanias,  and  be  gay  over
Anacreon.  As  to  me,  who  for  amusement  have  nothing  but
merlons,  fascines  and  gabions,1 1  pray  God  to  grant  me  soon  a
pleasanter  and  peacefuler  occupation,  and  you  health,  satisfac-
tion and  whatever  your  heart  desires. — F."  2

King  Friedrich  to  M.  le  Comte  Algarotti  (gone  on  a  journey).

"  Ottmachau,  17th  January,  1741  [same  day  as  the  above  to
Jordan].  I  have  begun  to  settle  the  Figure  of  Prussia  :  the  out-
line will  not  be  altogether  regular ;  for  the  whole  of  Silesia  is
taken,  except  one  miserable  hamlet  (bicoque),  which  perhaps
I  shall  have  to  keep  blockaded  till  next  spring.

"  Up  to  this  time,  the  whole  conquest  has  cost  only  Twenty

1  Merlons  are  mounds  of  earth  placed  behind  the  solid  or  blind  parts  of
the  parapet  (that  is,  between  the  embrasures)  of  a  Fortification  ;  fascines  are
bundles  of  brushwood  for  filling  up  a  ditch  ;  gabions,  baskets  filled  with  earth,
to  be  ranged  in  defence  till  you  get  trenches  dug.

2  (Euvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xvii.  84.

340  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

12th-17th  Jan.  1741.

Men,  and  Two  Officers,  one  of  whom  is  the  poor  De  Rege,
whom  you  have  seen  at  Berlin,"  —  De  Kege,  Engineer  Major,
killed  here  at  Ottmachau,  in  Schwerin's  late  tussle.

"  You  are  greatly  wanting  to  me  here.  So  soon  as  you  have
talked  that  business  over,  write  to  me  about  it.  [What  is  the
business  ?  Whither  is  the  dusky  Swan  of  Padua  gone  ?]  In
all  these  three  hundred  miles  I  have  found  no  human  creature
comparable  to  the  Swan  of  Padua.  I  would  willingly  give  ten
cubic  leagues  of  ground  for  a  genius  similar  to  yours.  But  I
perceive  I  was  about  entreating  you  to  return  fast,  and  join
me  again,  —  while  you  are  not  yet  arrived  where  your  errand
was.  Make  haste  to  arrive,  then ;  to  execute  your  commission,
and  fly  back  to  me.  I  wish  you  had  a  Fortunatus  Hat ;  it  is
the  only  thing  defective  in  your  outfit.

"  Adieu,  dear  Swan  of  Padua  :  think,  I  pray  you,  sometimes
of  those  who  are  getting  themselves  cut  in  slices  \_echiner,
chined]  for  the  sake  of  glory  here,  and  above  all  do  not  forget
your  friends  who  think  a  thousand  times  of  you.

"  FEDERIC."  1

The  object  of  the  dear  Swan's  journey,  or  even  the  where-
abouts of  it,  cannot  be  discovered  without  difficulty ;  and  is  not
much  worth  discovering.  "  Gone  to  Turin,"  we  at  last  make
out,  "  with  secret  commissions :  "  2  desirable  to  sound  the  Sar-
dinian Majesty  a  little,  who  is  Doorkeeper  of  the  Alps,  between
France  and  Austria,  and  opens  to  the  best  bidder  ?  No  great
things  of  a  meaning  in  this  mission,  we  can  guess,  or  Algarotti
had  not  gone  upon  it,  —  though  he  is  handy,  at  least,  for  keep-
ing it  unnoticed  by  the  Gazetteer  species.  Nor  was  the  Swan
successful,  it  would  seem ;  the  more  the  pity  for  our  Swan !
However,  he  conies  back  safe ;  attends  Friedrich  in  Silesia ;
and  in  the  course  of  next  month  readers  will  see  him,  if  any
reader  wished  it.

1  (Euvres  de  Frfdfric,  xviii.  28.

2  Denina,  La  Prusse  Litttraire  (Berlin,  1790),  i.  198. A  poor  vague  Book;
only  worth  consulting  in  case  of  extremity.

CHAP.  VI.  NEISSE IS BOMBARDED.  341

12th-15th  Jan.  1741.

CHAPTER  VI.

NEISSE IS BOMBAKDED.

NEISSE,  which  Friedrich  calls  a  paltry  hamlet  (bicoque)  is  a
pleasant  strongly  fortified  Town,  then  of  perhaps  6  or  8,000
inhabitants,  now  of  double  that  number ;  stands  on  the  right
or  south  bank  of  the  Neisse,  —  at  this  day,  on  both  banks.
Pleasant  broad  streets,  high  strong  houses,  mostly  of  stone.
Pleasantly  encircled  by  green  Hills,  northward  buttresses  of
the  Giant  Mountains  ;  itself  standing  low  and  level,  on  rich
ground  much  inclined  to  be  swampy.  A  lesser  river,  Biele,  or
Bielau,  coming  from  the  South,  flows  leisurely  enough  into  the
Neisse,  —  filling  all  the  Fortress  ditches,  by  the  road.  Orchard-
growth  and  meadow-growth  are  lordly  (herrlich}  ;  a  land  rich
in  fruit,  and  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  Much  given  to
weaving,  brewing,  stocking-making  ;  and,  moreover,  trades
greatly  in  these  articles,  and  above  all  in  Wine.  Yearly  on
St.  Agnes  Day,  "  21st  January,  if  not  a  Sunday,"  there  is  a
Wine-fair  here  ;  Hungarian,  of  every  quality  from  Tokay  down-
ward, is  gathered  here  for  distribution  into  Germany  and  all  the
Western  Countries.  While  you  drink  your  Tokay,  know  that
it  comes  through  Neisse.  St.  Agues  Day  falls  but  unhandily
this  year  ;  and  I  think  the  Fair  will,  as  they  say,  ausbleiben,  or
not  be  held.

Neisse  is  a  Nest  of  Priests  (P faff  en-Nest),  says  Friedrich
once ;  which  came  in  this  way.  About  600  years  ago,  an  ill-
conditioned  Heir- Apparent  of  the  Liegnitz  Sovereign  to  whom
it  then  belonged,  quarrelled  with  his  Father,  quarrelled  slightly
with  the  Universe ;  and,  after  moping  about  for  some  time,
went  into  the  Church.  Having  Neisse  for  an  apanage  already
his  own,  he  gave  it  to  the  Bishop  of  Breslau ;  whose,  in  spite
of  the  old  Father's  pretestings,  it  continued,  and  continues.

342  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

12th-15th  Jan.  1741.

Bishops  of  Breslau  are  made  very  grand  by  it ;  Bishops  of  Bres-
lau  have  had  their  own  difficulties  here.  Thus  once  (in  our
Perkin-Warbeck  time,  A.D.  1497),  a  Duke  of  Oppeln,  sitting  in
some  Official  Conclave  or  meeting  of  magnates  here,  —  zealous
for  country  privilege,  and  feeling  himself  insufferably  put  upon,
—  started  up,  openly  defiant  of  Official  men ;  glaring  wrath-
fully  into  Duke  Casiinir  of  Teschen  (Bohemian- Austrian  Cap-
tain of  Silesia),  and  into  the  Bishop  of  Breslau  himself ;  nay
at  last,  flashed  out  his  sword  upon  those  sublime  dignitaries.
For  which,  by  and  by,  he  had  to  lay  his  head  on  the  block,  in
the  great  square  here ;  and  died  penitent,  we  hope.

This  place,  my  Dryasdust  informs  me,  had  many  accidents
by  floodage  and  by  fire ;  was  seized  and  re-seized  in  the  Thirty-
Years  War  especially,  at  a  great  rate :  Saxon  Arnheim,  Aus-
trian Hoik,  Swedish  Torstenson ;  no  end  to  the  battering  and
burning  poor  Neisse  had,  to  the  big  ransoms  "  in  new  Reichs-
thalers  and  300  casks  of  wine."  But  it  always  rebuilt  itself,
and  began  business  again.  How  happy  when  it  could  get
under  some  effectual  Protector,  of  the  Liegnitz  line,  of  the
Austrian-Bohemian  line,  and  this  or  the  other  battering,  just
suffered,  was  to  be  the  last  for  some  time  !  —  Here  again  is
a  battering  coming  on  it ;  the  first  of  a  series  that  are  now
imminent.

The  reader  is  requested  to  look  at  Neisse ;  for  besides  the
Tokay  wine,  there  will  things  arrive  there.  —  Neisse  Eiver,  let
us  again  mention,  is  one  of  four  bearing  that  name,  and  all
belonging  to  the  Oder  :  — could  not  they  be  labelled,  then,  or
numbered,  in  some  way  ?  This  Neisse,  which  we  could  call
Neisse  the  First  (and  which  careful  readers  may  as  well  make
acquaintance  with  on  their  Map,  where  too  they  will  find
Neisse  the  Second,  "the  Wiithende  or  Roaring  Neisse,"  and
two  others  which  concern  us  less),  rises  in  the  "  Western
Snow-Mountains  (Schneegebirge),"  Southwestern  or  Glatz  dis-
trict of  the  Giant  Mountains  ;  drains  Glatz  County  and  grows
big  there  ;  washes  the  Town  of  Glatz  ;  then  eastward  by
Ottmachau,  by  Neisse  Town  ;  whence  turning  rather  abruptly
north  or  northeast,  it  gets  into  the  Oder  not  far  south  of
Brieg.

CHAP.  VI.  NEISSE IS BOMBARDED.  343

llth  Jan.  1741.

Neisse  as  a  Place  of  Arms,  the  chief  Fortress  of  Silesia  and
the  nearest  to  Austria,  is  extremely  desirable  for  Friedrich ;
but  there  is  no  hope  of  it  without  some  kind  of  Siege ;  and
Friedrich  determines  to  try  in  that  way.  From  Ottmachau,
accordingly,  and  from  the  other  sides,  the  Siege- Artillery  being
now  at  hand,  due  force  gathers  itself  round  Neisse,  Schwerin
taking  charge ;  and  for  above  a  week  there  is  demonstrating
and  posting,  summoning  and  parleying;  and  then,  for  three
days,  with  pauses  intervening,  there  is  extremely  furious  bom-
bardment, red-hot  at  times  :  "  Will  you  yield,  then  ?  "  —  with
steady  negative  from  ISTeisse.  Friedrich's  quarter  is  at  Ott-
machau, twelve  miles  off ;  from  which  he  can  ride  over,  to  see
and  superintend.  The  fury  of  his  bombardment,  which  natu-
rally grieved  him,  testifies  the  intensity  of  his  wish.  But  it
was  to  no  purpose.  The  Commandant,  Colonel  von  Roth  (the
same  who  was  proposed  for  Breslau  lately,  a  wise  head  and  a
stout,  famed  in  defences)  had  "  poured  water  on  his  ramparts,"
after  well  repairing  them,  —  made  his  ramparts  all  ice  and
glass ;  —  and  done  much  else.  Would  the  reader  care  to  look
for  a  moment  ?  Here,  from  our  waste  Paper-masses,  is  abun-
dance, requiring  only  to  be  abridged  :  —

"  January,  1741 :  Monday,  §th-  Wednesday,  ~Llth.  Monday,
9th,  day  when  that  sputter  at  Ottmachau  began,  —  Prussian
light-troops  appeared  transiently  on  the  heights  about  Neisse,
for  the  first  time.  Directly  on  sight  of  whom,  Commandant
Eoth  assembled  the  Burghers  of  the  place ;  took  a  new  Oath
of  Fidelity  from  one  and  all ;  admonished  them  to  do  their  ut-
most, as  they  should  see  him  do.  The  able-bodied  and  likeliest
of  them  (say  about  400)  he  has  had  arranged  into  Militia
Companies,  with  what  drill  there  could  be  in  the  interim  ;
and  since  his  coming,  has  employed  every  moment  in  making
ready.  Wednesday,  llth,  he  locks  all  the  Gates,  and  stands
strictly  on  his  guard.  The  inhabitants  are  mostly  Catholic ;
with  sumptuous  Bishops  of  Breslau,  with  Kreuzherren  (imagi-
nary Teutsch  or  other  Eitters  with  some  reality  of  money),  with
Jesuit  Dignitaries,  Church  and  Quasi-Church  Officialities,  resi-
dent among  them :  population,  high  and  low,  is  inclined  by
creed  to  the  Queen  of  Hungary.  Commandant  Both  has  only

344  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

12th-15th  Jan.  1741.

1,200  regular  soldiers ;  at  the  outside  1,600  men  under  arms  :
but  he  has  gunpowder,  he  has  meal  ;  experience  also  and
courage ;  and  hopes  these  may  suffice  him  for  a  time.  One
of  the  most  determined  Commandants  ;  expert  in  the  de-
fence of  strong  places.  A  bom  Silesian  (not  Saxon,  as  some
think),  —  and  is  of  the  Augsburg  Confession  ;  but  that  cir-
cumstance is  not  important  here,  though  at  Breslau  Browne
thought  it  was.

"  Thursday,  12th.  The  Prussians,  in  regular  force,  appear
on  the  Kaninchen  Berg  (Cony  Hill,  so  called  from  its  rabbits),
south  of  the  Eiver,  evidently  taking  post  there.  Eoth  fires  a
signal  shot ;  the  Southern  Suburbs  of  Neisse,  as  preappointed,
go  up  in  flame ;  crackle  high  and  far ;  in  a  lamentable  manner
(erbarmlicti),  through  the  grim  winter  air."  This  is  the  day
Friedrich  came  over  to  Ottnmchau,  and  settled  the  sputter
there.

"  Next  day,  and  next  again,  the  same  phenomena  at  Neisse ;
the  Prussians  edging  ever  nearer,  building  their  batteries,  pre-
paring to  open  their  cannonade.  Whereupon  Roth  burns  the
remaining  Suburbs,  with  lamentable  crackle ;  on  all  sides  now
are  mere  ashes.  Bishop's  Mill,  Franciscan  Cloister,  Bishop's
Pleasure-garden,  with  its  summer-houses ;  Bishop's  Hospital,
and  several  Churches :  Eoth  can  spare  none  of  these  things,
with  the  Prussians  nestling  there.  Surely  the  Bishop  himself,
respectable  Cardinal  Graf  von  Sinzendorf,  had  better  get  out
of  these  localities  while  time  yet  is  ? "  "  Saturday,  14th,"
that  was  the  day  Friedrich,  at  Ottmachau,  wrote  as  above  to
Jordan  (Letter  No.  1),  while  the  Neisse  Suburbs  crackled
lamentably,  twelve  miles  off,  "  Schwerin  gets  order  to  break
up,  in  person,  from  Ottmachau  to-morrow,  and  begin  actual
business  on  the  Kaninchen  Hill  yonder.

"  Sunday,  15th.  Schwerin  does ;  marches  across  the  Eiver ;
takes  post  on  the  south  side  of  Neisse :  notable  to  the  Sun-
day rustics.  Nothing  but  burnt  villages  and  black  walls  for
Schwerin,  in  that  Cony -Hill  quarter,  and  all  round ;  and  Eoth
salutes  him  with  one  twenty-four  pounder,  which  did  no  hurt.
And  so  the  cannonade  begins,  Sunday,  15th  ;  and  intermit-
tently, on  both  sides  of  the  Eiver,  continues,  always  bursting

CHAP.  VI.  NEISSE  IS  BOMBAEDED.  345

18th  Jan.  1741.

out  again  at  intervals,  till  Wednesday;  a  mere  preliminary
cannonade  on  Schwerin's  part ;  making  noise,  doing  little
hurt :  intended  more  to  terrify,  but  without  effect  that  way  on
Roth  or  the  Townsfolk.  The  poor  Bishop  did,  on  the  second
day  of  it,  come  out,  and  make  application  to  Schwerin;  was
kindly  conducted  to  his  Majesty,  who  happened  to  be  over
there ;  was  kept  to  dinner ;  and  easily  had  leave  to  retire  to
Freywalde,  a  Country-House  he  has,  in  the  safe  distance.1
There  let  him  be  quiet,  well  out  of  these  confused  batterings
and  burnings  of  property.

"  His  Majesty's  Head-quarter  is  at  Ottmachau,  but  in  two
hours  he  can  be  here  any  day;  and  looks  into  everything;
sorry  that  the  cannonade  does  not  yet  answer.  And  remnants
of  suburbs  are  still  crackling  into  flame  ;  high  Country-Houses
of  Kreuzherren,  of  Jesuits ;  a  fanatic  people  seemingly  all  set
against  us.  '  If  Neisse  will  not  yield  of  good-will,  needs  is  it
must  be  beaten  to  powder,'  wrote  his  Majesty  to  Jordan  in
these  circumstances,  as  we  read  above.  Roth  is  sorry  to  ob-
serve, the  Prussians  have  still  one  good  Bishop's-mansion,  in  a
place  called  the  Karlau  (Karl-Meadow),  with  the  Bishop's
winter  fuel  all  ready  stacked  there ;  but  strives  to  take  order
about  the  same.

"  Wednesday,  18th.  This  day  two  provocations  happened.
First,  in  the  morning  by  his  Majesty's  order,  Colonel  Borck
(the  same  we  saw  at  Herstal)  had  gone  with  a  Trumpeter  to-
wards Eoth ;  intending  to  inform  Roth  how  mild  the  terms
would  be,  how  terrible  the  penalty  of  not  accepting  them.  But
Roth  or  Roth's  people  singularly  disregard  Borck  and  his
Parley  Trumpet ;  answer  its  blasts  by  musketry ;  fire  upon  it,
nay  again  fire  worse  when  it  advances  a  step  farther  ;  on  these
terms  Borck  and  Trumpet  had  to  return.  Which  much  angered
his  Majesty  at  Ottmachau  that  evening ;  as  was  natural.  Same
evening,  our  fine  quarters  in  the  Karlau  crackled  up  in  flame,
the  Bishop's  winter  firewood  all  along  with  it :  this  was  provo-
cation second.  Roth  had  taken  order  with  the  Karlau ;  and
got  a  resolute  Butcher  to  do  the  feat,  under  pretext  of  bring-
ing us  beef.  It  is  piercing  cold ;  only  blackened  walls  for  us

1  Helden-  Geschichte,  i.  683.

346  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xn.

19th-21st  Jan.  1741.

now  in  the  Karlau  or  elsewhere.  His  Majesty,  naturally  much
angered,  orders  for  the  morrow  a  dose  of  bomb-shells  and  red-
hot  balls.  Plant  a  few  mortars  on  the  North  side  too,  orders
his  Majesty.

"  Thursday,  19th.  Accordingly,  by  8  of  the  clock,  cannon
batteries  reawaken  with  a  mighty  noise,  and  red-hot  balls  are
noticeable ;  and  at  10  the  actual  bombarding  bursts  out,  terrible
to  hear  and  see ;  —  first  shell  falling  in  Haubitz  the  Clothier's
shop,  but  being  happily  got  under.  Koth  has  his  City  Militia
companies,  organized  with  water-hose  for  quenching  of  the
red-hot  balls  :  in  which  they  became  expert.  So  that  though
the  fire  caught  many  houses,  they  always  put  it  out.  Late  in
the  night,  hearing  no  word  from  Koth,  the  Prussians  went  to
bed.

" Friday,  20th.  Still  no  word;  on  which,  about  4  P.M.,  the
Prussian  batteries  awaken  again :  volcanic  torrent  of  red-hot
shot  and  shells,  for  seven  hours  ;  still  no  word  from  Eoth.
About  11  at  night  his  Majesty  again  sends  a  Drum  (Parley
Trumpet  or  whatever  it  is)  to  the  Gate;  formally  summons
Eoth  ;  asks  him,  '  If  he  has  well  considered  what  this  can  lead
to  ?  Especially  what  he,  Eoth,  meant  by  firing  on  our  first
Trumpet  on  Wednesday  last  ? '  Eoth  answered,  '  That  as  to
the  Trumpet,  he  had  not  heard  of  it  before.  On  the  other  hand,
that  this  mode  of  sieging  b}r  red-hot  balls  seems  a  little  un-
usual ;  for  the  rest,  that  he  has  himself  no  order  or  intention
but  that  of  resisting  to  the  last.'  Some  say  the  Drum  hereupon
by  order  talked  of  '  pounding  Neisse  into  powder,  mere  child's-
play  hitherto;'  to  which  Eoth  answered  only  by  respectful
dumb-show.

"Saturday,  21st-Monday,  23d.  Midnight  of  Friday-Sat-
urday, on  this  answer  coming,  the  fire-volcanoes  open  again ;
—  nine  hours  long;  shells,  and  red-hot  material,  in  terrible
abundance.  Which  hit  mostly  the  churches,  Jesuits'  Semi-
nariums  and  Collegiums;  but  produced  no  change  in  Eoth.
From  9  A.M.  the  batteries  are  silent.  Silent  still,  next  morn-
ing :  Divine  Service  may  proceed,  if  it  like.  But  at  4  of  the
afternoon,  the  batteries  awaken  worse  than  ever ;  from  seven
to  nine  bombs  going  at  once.  Universal  rage,  of  noise  and

CHAP.  VI.  NEISSE IS BOMBARDED.  347

21st-25th  Jan.  1741.

horrid  glare,  making  night  hideous,  till  10  of  the  clock ;  Both
continuing  inflexible.  This  is  the  last  night  of  the  Siege."

Friedrich  perceived  that  Eoth  would  not  yield;  that  the
utter  smashing-down  of  Neisse  might  more  concern  Friedrich
than  Eoth ;  —  that,  in  fine,  it  would  be  better  to  desist  till  the
weather  altered.  Next  day,  "  Monday,  23d,  between  noon  and
1  o'clock,"  the  Prussians  drew  back;  —  converted  the  siege
into  a  blockade.  Neisse  to  be  masked,  like  Brieg  and  Glogau
(Brieg  only  half  done  yet,  Jeetz  without  cannon  till  to-morrow,
24th,  and  little  Namslau  still  gesticulating)  :  "  The  only  thing
one  could  try  upon  it  was  bombardment.  A  Nest  of  Priests
(Pfaffen-Nest) ;  not  many  troops  in  it :  but  it  cannot  well  be
forced  at  present.  If  spring  were  here,  it  will  cost  a  fort-
night's work." 1

A  noisy  business;  "King's  high  person  much  exposed:  a
bombardier  and  then  a  sergeant  were  killed  close  by  him,  though
in  all  he  lost  only  five  men."  2

Browne  vanishes  in  a  slight  Flash  of  Fire.

Browne  all  this  while  has  hung  on  the  Mountain-side,  wit-
nessing these  things ;  sending  stores  towards  Glatz  southwest-
ward,  and  "  ruining  the  ways  "  behind  them ;  waiting  what
would  become  of  Neisse.  Neisse  done,  Schwerin  is  upon  him ;
Browne  makes  off  Southeastward,  across  the  Mountains,  for
Moravia  and  home ;  Schwerin  following  hard.  At  a  little
place  called  Gratz,3  on  the  Moravian  border,  Browne  faced
round,  tried  to  defend  the  Bridge  of  the  Oppa,  sharply  though
without  effect ;  and  there  came  (January  25th)  a  hot  sputter

1  Friedrich  to  the  Old  Dessaner :  Fraction  of  Letter  (Ottmachau,  16th-21st
January,  1741)  cited  by  Orlich,  i.  51;  —  from  the  Dessau  Archives,  where
Herr  Orlich  has  industriously  been. To  all  but  strictly  military  people  these
pieces  of  Letters  are  the  valuable  feature  of  Orlich's  Book ;  and  a  general
reader  laments  that  it  does  not  all  consist  of  such,  properly  elucidated  and
labelled  into  accessibility.

2  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  680-690.

3  The  name,  in  old Slavic  speech,  signifies  Town;  and  there  are  many
Grdtzes: KonigingT&tz  (Queen's,  which for  brevity  is  now  generally  called
KonigsgT&tz,  in  Bohemia);  Gratz  in  Styria;  Windischgi&tz  (Wendish-town);  &c.

848  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

25th  Jan.  1741.

between  them  for  a  few  minutes  :  —  after  which  Browne  van-
ished into  the  interior,  and  we  hear,  in  these  parts,  compara-
tively little  more  of  him  during  this  War.  Friend  and  foe
must  admit  that  he  has  neglected  nothing ;  and  fairly  made
the  best  of  a  bad  business  here.  He  is  but  an  interim  Gen-
eral, too ;  his  Successor  just  coming ;  and  the  Vienna  Board  of
War  is  frequently  troublesome,  —  to  whose  windy  speculations
Browne  replies  with  sagacious  scepticism,  and  here  and  there
a  touch  of  veiled  sarcasm,  which  was  not  likely  to  conciliate
in  high  places.  Had  her  Hungarian  Majesty  been  able  to
retain  Browne  in  his  post,  instead  of  poor  Neipperg  who  was
sent  instead,  there  might  have  been  a  considerably  different
account  to  give  of  the  sequel.  But  Neipperg  was  Tutor  (War-
Tutor)  to  the  Grand-Duke ;  Browne  is  still  of  young  standing
(age  only  thirty-five),  with  a  touch  of  veiled  sarcasm ;  and
things  must  go  their  course.

In  Schlesien,  Schwerin  is  now  to  command  in  chief;  the
King  going  off  to  Berlin  for  a  little,  naturally  with  plenty  of
errand  there.  The  Prussian  Troops  go  into  Winter-quarters ;
spread  themselves  wide ;  beset  the  good  points,  especially
the  Passes  of  the  Hills,  —  from  Jagerndorf,  eastward  to  the
Jablunka  leading  towards  Hungary  ;  —  nay  they  can,  and  before
long  do,  spread  into  the  Moravian  Territories,  on  the  other  side ;
and  levy  contributions,  the  Queen  proving  unreasonable.

It  was  Monday,  23d,  when  the  Siege  of  Neisse  was  aban-
doned :  on  Wednesday,  Friedrich  himself  turns  homeward ;
looks  into  Schweidnitz,  looks  into  Liegnitz;  and  arrives  at
Berlin  as  the  week  ends,  —  much  acclamation  greeting  him
from  the  multitude.  Except  those  three  masked  Fortresses,
capable  of  no  defence  to  speak  of,  were  Winter  over,  Silesia
is  now  all  Friedrich's,  —  has  fallen  wholly  to  him  in  the  space
of  about  Seven  Weeks.  The  seizure  has  been  easy ;  but  the
retaining  of  it,  perhaps  he  himself  begins  to  see  more  clearly,
will  have  difficulties  !  From  this  point,  the  talk  about  gloire
nearly  ceases  in  his  Correspondence.  In  those  seven  weeks  he
has,  with  gloire  or  otherwise,  cut  out  for  himself  such  a  life  of
labor  as  no  man  of  his  Century  had.

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES  : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPERS. 349

Jan.  1741.

CHAPTER  VII.

AT VERSAILLES, THE MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY CHANGES HIS
SHIRT, AND BELLEISLE IS SEEN WITH PAPERS.

WHILE  Friedrich  was  so  busy  in  Silesia,  the  world  was
not  asleep  around  him ;  the  world  never  is,  though  it  often
seems  to  be,  round  a  man  and  what  action  he  does  in  it.  That
Sunday  morning,  First  Day  of  the  Year  1741,  in  those  same
hours  while  Friedrich,  with  energy,  with  caution,  was  edging
himself  into  Breslau,  there  went  on  in  the  Court  of  Versailles
an  interior  Phenomenon ;  of  which,  having  by  chance  got
access  to  it  face  to  face,  we  propose  to  make  the  reader  par-
ticipant before  going  farther.

Eeaders  are  languidly  aware  that  phenomena  do  go  on
round  their  Friedrich ;  that  their  busy  Friedrich,  with  his
few  Voltaires  and  renowned  persons,  are  not  the  only  popu-
lation of  their  Century,  by  any  means.  Everybody  is  aware
of  that  fact ;  yet,  in  practice,  almost  everybody  is  as  good  as
not  aware;  and  the  World  all  round  one's  Hero  is  a  dark-
ness, a  dormant  vacancy.  How  strange  when,  as  here,  some
Waste-paper  spill  (so  to  speak)  turns  up,  which  you  can  kin-
dle ;  and,  by  the  brief  name  of  it,  bid  a  reader  look  with  his
own  eyes  !  —  From  Herr  Doctor  Biischiug,  who  did  the  Geog-
raphy and  about  a  Hundred  other  Books, — a  man  of  great
worth,  almost  of  genius,  could  he  have  elaborated  his  Hundred
Books  into  Ten  (or  distilled,  into  flasks  of  aqua-vitse,  what
otherwise  lies  tumbling  as  tanks  of  mash  and  wort,  now  run
very  sour  and  mal-odorous) ;  —  it  is  from  Herr  Biisching  that
we  gain  the  following  rough  Piece,  illuminative  if  one  can
kindle  it :  —

The  Titular-Herr  Baron  Anton  von  Geusau,  a  gentleman  of
good  parts,  scholastic  by  profession,  and  of  Protestant  creed,
was  accompanying  as  Travelling  Tutor,  in  those  years,  a

350  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BTOOK£J,L

Jan.  1741.

young  Graf  von  Eeuss.  Graf  von  Reuss  is  one  of  those  indis-
tinct Counts  Reuss,  who  always  call  themselves  "Henry;"
and,  being  now  at  the  eightieth  and  farther,  with  uncountable
collateral  Henrys  intertwisted,  are  become  in  effect  anony-
mous, or  of  nomenclature  inscrutable  to  mankind.  Nor  is  the
young  one  otherwise  of  the  least  interest  to  us  ;  —  except  that
Herr  Anton,  the  Travelling  Tutor,  punctually  kept  a  Journal
of  everything.  Which  Journal,  long  afterwards,  came  into
the  hands  of  Biisching,  also  a  punctual  man ;  and  was  by  him
abridged,  and  set  forth  in  print  in  his  Beitrdge.  Offering  at
present  a  singular  daguerrotype  glimpse  of  the  then  actual
world,  wherever  Graf  von  Keuss  and  his  Geusau  happened  to
be.  Nine-tenths  of  it,  even  in  Biisching's  Abridgment,  are  now
fallen  useless  and  wearisome  ;  but  to  one  studying  the  days
that  then  were,  even  the  effete  commonplace  of  it  occasion-
ally becomes  alive  again.  And  how  interesting  to  catch,  here
and  there,  a  Historical  Figure  on  these  conditions ;  Historical
Figure's  very  self,  in  his  work-day  attitude ;  eating  his  vict-
uals ;  writing,  receiving  letters,  talking  to  his  fellow-creatures  ;
unaware  that  Posterity,  miraculously  through  some  chink  of
the  Travelling  Tutor's  producing,  has  got  its  eye  upon  him.

"  Sunday,  1st  January,  1741,  Geusau  and  his  young  Gentle-
man leave  Paris,  at  5  in  the  morning,  and  drive  out  to  Ver-
sailles ;  intending  to  see  the  ceremonies  of  New-year's  day
there.  Very  wet  weather  it  had  been,  all  Wednesday,  and  for
days  before  ; 1  but  on  this  Sunday,  New-year's  morning,  all  is
ice  and  glass ;  and  they  slid  about  painfully  by  lamplight,  —
with  unroughened  horses,  and  on  the  Hilly  or  Meudon  road,
having  chosen  that  as  fittest,  the  waters  being  out ;  —  not  ar-
riving at  Court  till  9.  Nor  finding  very  much  to  comfort  them,
except  on  the  side  of  curiosity,  when  there.  Ushers,  Intro-
ducteurs,  Cabinet  Secretaries,  were  indeed  assiduous  to  oblige  ;
and  the  King's  Levee  will  be :  but  if  you  follow  it  to  the
Chapel  Royal  to  witness  high  mass,  you  must  kneel  at  eleva-

1  See  in  Barbier  (ii.  283  et  seqq.)  what  terrible  Noah-like  weather  it  had
been ;  big  houses,  long  in  soak,  tumbling  down  at  last  into  the  Seine ;  chasse
af  St.  Genevieve  brought  out  (two  days  ago),  December  30th,  to  try  it  by  mira-
cle ;  &c.  &c.

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES  : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPERS. 351

Jan.  1741.

tion  of  the  host ;  and  this,  as  reformed  Christians,  Eeuss  and
his  Tutor  cannot  undertake  to  do.  They  accept  a  dinner  invi-
tation (12  the  hour)  from  some  good  Samaritan  of  Quality  ;
and,  for  sights,  will  content  themselves  with  the  King's  Levee
itself,  and  generally  with  what  the  King's  Antechamber  and
the  (Eil-de-Bceuf  can  exhibit  to  them.  The  Most  Christian
King's  Levee  [Lever,  literally  here  his  Getting  out  of  Bed]
is  a  daily  miracle  of  these  localities,  only  grander  on  New-
year's  day ;  and  it  is  to  the  following  effect :  —

"  Till  Majesty  please  to  awaken,  you  saunter  in  the  Salle
des  Ambassadeurs ;  whole  crowds  jostling  one  another  there  ;
gossiping  together  in  a  diligent,  insipid  manner ; "  gossip  all
reported ;  snatches  of  which  have  acquired  a  certain  flavor  by
long  keeping  ;  —  which  the  reader  shall  imagine.  "  Meanwhile
you  keep  your  eye  on  the  Grate  of  the  Inner  Court,  which  as
yet  is  only  ajar,  Majesty  inaccessible  as  yet.  Behold,  at  last,
Grate  opens  itself  wide ;  sign  that  Majesty  is  out  of  bed ;  that
the  privileged  of  mankind  may  approach,  and  see  the  mira-
cles." Geusau  continues,  abridged  by  Biisching  and  us  :  —

"  The  whole  Assemblage  passed  now  into  the  King's  Ante-
room ;  had  to  wait  there  about  half  an  hour  more,  before  the
King's  bedroom  was  opened.  But  then  at  last,  lo  you,  —  there
is  the  King,  visible  to  Geusau  and  everybody,  washing  his
hands.'  Which  effected  itself  in  this  way :  '  The  King  was
seated ;  a  gentleman-in-waiting  knelt  before  him,  and  held  the
Ewer,  a  square  vessel  silver-gilt,  firm  upon  the  King's  breast ;
and  another  gentleman-in-waiting  poured  water  on  the  King's
hands.'  Merely  an  official  washing,  we  perceive  ;  the  real,  it
is  to  be  hoped,  had,  in  a  much  more  effectual  way,  been  going
on  during  the  half-hour  just  elapsed.  After  washing,  the
King  rose  for  an  instant;  had  his  dressing-gown,  a  grand
yellow  silky  article  with  silver  flowerings,  pulled  off,  and
flung  round  his  loins ;  upon  which  he  sat  down  again,  and,"  —
observe  it,  ye  privileged  of  mankind,  —  "  the  Change  of  Shirt
took  place  !  '  They  put  the  clean  shirt  down  over  his  head/
says  Anton,  '  and  plucked  up  the  dirty  one  from  within,  so
that  of  the  naked  skin  you  saw  little  or  nothing.' '  Here  is
a  miracle  worth  getting  out  of  bed  to  look  at !

352  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

"  His  Majesty  now  quitted  chair  and  dressing-gown  ;  stood
up  before  the  fire ;  and,  after  getting  on  the  rest  of  his  cloth-
ing, which,  on  account  of  Czarina  Anne's  death  [readers  re-
member that],  was  of  violet  or  mourning  color,  he  had  the
powder-mantle  thrown  round  him,  and  sat  down  at  the  Toi-
lette to  have  his  hair  frizzled.  The  Toilette,  a  table  with
white  cover  shoved  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  had  on  it
a  mirror,  a  powder-knife,  and "  —  no  mortal  cares  what.
"  The  King,"  what  all  mortals  note,  as  they  do  the  heavenly
omens,  "  is  somewhat  talky ;  speaks  sometimes  with  the  Dutch
Ambassador,  sometimes  with  the  Pope's  Nuncio,  who  seems  a
jocose  kind  of  gentleman ;  sometimes  with  different  French
Lords,  and  at  last  with  the  Cardinal  Fleury  also,  —  to  whom,
however,  he  does  not  look  particularly  gracious,"  —  not  par-
ticularly this  time.  These  are  the  omens  ;  happy  who  can
read  them !  —  Majesty  then  did  his  morning-prayer,  assisted
only  by  the  common  Almoners-in-waiting  (Cardinal  took  no
hand,  much  less  any  other)  ;  Majesty  knelt  before  his  bed,
and  finished  the  business  '  in  less  than  six  seconds.'  After
which  mankind  can  ebb  out  to  the  Anteroom  again ;  pay  their
devoir  to  the  Queen's  Majesty,  which  all  do ;  or  wait  for  the
Transit  to  Morning  Chapel,  and  see  Mesdaines  of  France  and
the  others  flitting  past  in  their  sedans.

"  Queen's  Majesty  was  already  altogether  dressed,"  says
Geusau,  almost  as  if  with  some  disappointment ;  "  all  in  black ;
a  most  affable  courteous  Majesty ;  stands  conversing  with  the
Russian  Ambassador,  with  the  Dutch  ditto,  with  the  Ladies
about  her,  and  at  last,  '  in  a  friendly  and  merry  tone,'  with
old  Cardinal  Fleury.  Her  Ladies,  when  the  Queen  spoke  with
them,  showed  no  constraint  at  all;  leant  loosely  with  their
arms  on  the  fire-screens,  and  took  things  easy.  Mesdames  of
France "  —  Geusau  saw  Mesdames.  Poor  little  souls,  they
are  the  Loque,  the  Cochon  (Rag,  Pig,  so  Papa  would  call  them,
dear  Papa),  who  become  tragically  visible  again  in  the  Revo-
lution time: — all  blooming  young  children  as  yet  (Queen's
Majesty  some  thirty-seven  gone),  and  little  dreaming  what
lies  fifty  years  ahead !  King  Louis's  career  of  extraneous
gallantries,  which  ended  in  the  Parc-aux-Cerfs,  is  now  just

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPEES. 353

Jan.  1741.

beginning:  think  of  that  too;  and  of  her  Majesty's  fine  be-
havior under  it  ;  so  affable,  so  patient,  silent,  now  and
always  !  —  "In  a  little  while,  their  Majesties  go  along  the
Great  Gallery  to  Chapel ; "  whither  the  Protestant  mind  can-
not with  comfort  accompany.1

This  is  the  daily  miracle  done  at  Versailles  to  the  believing
multitude  ;  only  that  on  New-year's  day,  and  certain  supreme
occasions,  the  shirt  is  handed  by  a  Prince  of  the  Blood,  and
the  towel  for  drying  the  royal  hands  by  a  ditto,  with  other
improvements ;  and  the  thing  comes  out  in  its  highest  power
of  effulgence,  —  especially  if  you  could  see  high  mass  withal.
In  the  Antechamber  and  CEil-de-Boeuf,  Geusau,  among  hun-
dreds of  phenomena  fallen  dead  to  us,  saw  the  Four  following,
which  have  still  some  life  :  —

1°.  Many  Knights  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Chevaliers  du  Saint
Esprit)  are  about ;  magnificently  piebald  people,  indistinct  to
us,  and  fallen  dead  to  us :  but  there,  among  the  company,
do  not  we  indisputably  see,  "  in  full  Cardinal's  costume,"
Fleury  the  ancient  Prime  Minister  talking  to  her  Majesty  ?
Blandly  smiling ;  soft  as  milk,  yet  with  a  flavor  of  alcoholic
wit  in  him  here  and  there.  That  is  a  man  worth  looking  at,
had  they  painted  him  at  all.  Eed  hat,  red  stockings ;  a  se-
renely definite  old  gentleman,  with  something  of  prudent  wis-
dom, and  a  touch  of  imperceptible  jocosity  at  times ;  mildly
inexpugnable  in  manner :  this  King,  whose  Tutor  he  was
twenty  years  ago,  still  looks  to  him  as  his  father ;  Fleury  is
the  real  King  of  France  at  present.  His  age  is  eighty-seven
gone ;  the  King's  is  thirty  (seven  years  younger  than  his
Queen)  :  and  the  Cardinal  has  red  stockings  and  red  hat ;
veritably  there,  successively  in  both  Antechambers,  seen  by
Geusau,  January  1st,  1741:  that  is  all  I  know.

2°.  The  Prince  de  Clerrnont,  a  Prince  of  the  Blood,  "  handed
the  shirt,"  teste  Geusau.  Some  other  Prince,  notable  to  Geu-
sau, and  to  us  nameless,  had  the  honor  of  the  "  towel :  "  but
this  Prince  de  Clerrnont,  a  dissolute  fellow  of  wasted  parts,
kind  of  Priest,  kind  of  Soldier  too,  is  seen  visibly  handing
the  shirt  there  ;  —  whom  the  reader  and  I,  if  we  cared  about

1  Biisching,  Beitrdge,  ii.  59-78.
VOL.  viz.  23

354  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

it,  shall  again  see,  getting  beaten  by  Prince  Ferdinand,  at
Crefeld,  within  twenty  years  hence.  These  are  points  first
and  second,  slightly  noticeable,  slightly  if  at  all.

Of  the  actual  transit  to  high  mass,  transit  very  visible  in
the  Great  Gallery  or  (Eil-de-Bosuf,  why  should  a  human  being
now  say  anything  ?  Queen,  poor  Stanislaus's  Daughter,  and
her  Ladies,  in  their  sublime  sedans,  one  flood  of  jewels,  sail
first;  next  sails  King  Louis,  shirt  warm  on  his  back,  with
"  thirty-four  Chevaliers  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  escorting ;  next
"the  Dauphin"  (Boy  of  eleven,  Louis  XVL's  Father),  and
"  Mesdames  of  France,  with  "  —  but  even  Geusau  stops  short.
Protestants  cannot  enter  that  Chapel,  without  peril  of  idola-
try ;  wherefore  Geusau  and  Pupil  kept  strolling  in  the  gen-
eral CEil-de-Bosuf,  —  and  "  the  Dutch  Ambassador  approved
of  it,"  he  for  one.  And  here  now  is  another  point,  slightly
noticeable :  —

3°.  High  mass  over,  his  Majesty  sails  back  from  Chapel,  in
the  same  magnificently  piebald  manner;  and  vanishes  into
the  interior ;  leaving  his  Knights  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
other  Courtier  multitude,  to  simmer  about,  and  ebb  away  as
they  found  good.  Geusau  and  his  young  Eeuss  had  now  the
honor  of  being  introduced  to  various  people  ;  among  others
"  to  the  Prince  de  Soubise."  Prince  de  Soubise  :  frivolous,
insignificant  being;  of  whom  I  have  no  portrait  that  is  not
nearly  blank,  and  content  to  be  so ;  —  though  Herr  von  Geu-
sau would  have  one,  with  features  and  costume  to  it,  when
he  heard  of  the  Beating  at  Rossbach,  long  after !  Prince  de
Soubise  is  pretty  much  a  blank  to  everybody  :  —  and  no  sooner
are  we  loose  of  him,  than  (what  every  reader  will  do  well  to
note)

4°.  Our  Herren  Travellers  are  introduced  to  a  real  Nota-
bility :  Monseigneur,  soon  to  be  Marechal,  the  Comte  de
Belleisle ;  whom,  my  readers  and  I  are  to  be  much  concerned
with,  in  time  coming.  "  A  tall  lean  man  (lanyer  hagerer
Mann},  without  much  air  of  quality,"  thinks  Geusau ;  but
with  much  swift  intellect  and  energy,  and  a  distinguished
character,  whatever  Geusau  might  think.  "  Comte  de  Belle-
isle  was  very  civil ;  but  apologized,  in  a  courtly  and  kind  way,

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES  : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPEES. 355

Jan.  1741.

for  the  hurry  he  was  in  ;  regretting  the  impossibility  of  doing
the  honors  to  the  Comte  de  Reuss  in  this  Country,  —  his,
Belleisle's,  Journey  into  Germany,  which  was  close  at  hand,
overwhelming  him  with  occupations  and  engagements  at  pres-
ent. And  indeed,  even  while  he  spoke  to  us,"  says  Geusau,
"  all  manner  of  Papers  were  put  into  his  hand."  l

"  Journey  to  Germany,  Papers  put  into  his  hand  : "  there  is
perhaps  no  Human  Figure  in  the  world,  this  Sunday  (except
the  one  Figure  now  in  those  same  moments  over  at  Breslau,
gently  pressing  upon  the  locked  Gates  there),  who  is  so  mo-
mentous for  our  Silesian  Operations ;  and  indeed  he  will  kin-
dle all  Europe  into  delirium ;  and  produce  mere  thunder  and
lightning,  for  seven  years  to  come,  —  with  almost  no  result  in
it,  except  Silesia !  A  tall  lean  man ;  there  stands  he,  age  now
fifty-six,  just  about  setting  out  on  such  errand.  Whom  one
is  thankful  to  have  seen  for  a  moment,  even  in  that  slight
manner.

Of  Belleisle  and  his  Plans.

Charles  Louis  Auguste  Fouquet,  Comte  de  Belleisle,  is
Grandson  of  that  Intendant  Fouquet,  sumptuous  Financier,
whom  Louis  XIV.  at  last  threw  out,  and  locked  into  the
Fortress  of  Pignerol,  amid  the  Savoy  Alps,  there  to  meditate
for  life,  which  lasted  thirty  years  longer.  It  was  never  un-
derstood that  the  sumptuous  Fouquet  had  altogether  stolen
public  moneys,  nor  indeed  rightly  what  he  had  done  to  merit
Pignerol ;  and  always,  though  fallen  somehow  into  such  dire
disfavor,  he  was  pitied  and  respected  by  a  good  portion  of  the
public.  "  Has  angered  Colbert,"  said  the  public ;  "  dangerous
rivalry  to  Colbert;  that  is  what  has  brought  Pignerol  upon
him."

Out  of  Pignerol  that  Fouquet  never  came  ;  but  his  Family
bloomed  up  into  light  again;  had  its  adventures,  sometimes
its  troubles,  in  the  Eegency  time,  but  was  always  in  a  rising
way  : — and  here,  in  this  tall  lean  man  getting  papers  put  into
his  hand,  it  has  risen  very  high  indeed.  Going  as  Ambassador
Extraordinary  to  the  Germanic  Diet,  "To  assist  good  neigh-
1  Biisching,  ii.  79  ;  see  Barbier,  ii.  282,  287.

356  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

bors,  as  a  neighbor  and  Most  Christian  Majesty  should,  in
choosing  their  new  Kaiser  to  the  best  advantage  :  "  that  is  the
official  color  his  mission  is  to  have.  Surely  a  proud  mission  ;
—  and  Belleisle  intends  to  execute  it  in  a  way  that  will  sur-
prise the  Germanic  Diet  and  mankind.  Privately,  Belleisle
intends  that  he,  by  his  own  industries,  shall  himself  choose
the  right  Kaiser,  such  Kaiser  as  will  suit  the  Most  Christian
Majesty  and  him  ;  he  intends  to  make  a  new  French  thing  of
Germany  in  general ;  and  carries  in  his  head  plans  of  an  amaz-
ing nature  !  He  and  a  Brother  he  has,  called  the  Chevalier  de
Belleisle,  who  is  also  a  distinguished  man,  and  seconds  M.  le
Comte  with  eloquent  fire  and  zeal  in  all  things,  are  grandsons
of  that  old  Fouquet,  and  the  most  shining  men  in  France  at
present.  France  little  dreams  how  much  better  it  perhaps
were,  had  they  also  been  kept  safe  in  Pignerol !  —

The  Count,  lean  and  growing  old,  is  not  healthy ;  is  ever
and  anon  tormented,  and  laid  up  for  weeks,  with  rheumatisms,
gouts  and  ailments  :  but  otherwise  he  is  still  a  swift  ardent
elastic  spirit ;  with  grand  schemes,  with  fiery  notions  and
convictions,  which  captivate  and  hurry  off  men's  minds  more
than  eloquence  could,  so  intensely  true  are  they  to  the  Count
himself ;  —  and  then  his  Brother  the  Chevalier  is  always
there  to  put  them  into  the  due  language  and  logic,  where
needed.1  A  magnanimous  high-flown  spirit ;  thought  to  be  of
supreme  skill  both  in  War  and  in  Diplomacy ;  fit  for  many
things;  and  is  still  full  of  ambition  to  distinguish  himself,
and  tell  the  world  at  all  moments,  "Me  voila  •  World,  I  too
am  here  ! "  —  His  plans,  just  now,  which  are  dim  even  to  him-
self, except  on  the  hither  skirt  of  them,  stretch  out  immea-
surable, and  lie  piled  up  high  as  the  skies.  The  hither  skirt
of  them,  which  will  suffice  the  reader  at  present,  is  :  —

That  your  Grand-Duke  Franz,  Maria  Theresa's  Husband,
shall  in  no  wise,  as  the  world  and  Duke  Franz  expect,  be  the
Kaiser  chosen.  Not  he,  but  another  who  will  suit  France
better :  "  Kur-Sachsen  perhaps,  the  so-called  King  of  Poland  ?
Or  say  it  were  Karl  Albert  Kur-Baiern,  the  hereditary  friend
and  dependent  of  France  ?  We  are  not  tied  to  a  man  :  only,
1  Voltaire,  xxviii.  74 ;  xxix,  392 ;  &c.

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPERS. 357

Jan.  1741.

at  any  and  at  all  rates,  not  Grand-Duke  Franz."  This  is  the
grand,  essential  and  indispensable  point,  alpha  and  omega  of
points  ;  very  clear  this  one  to  Belleisle,  —  and  towards  this
the  first  steps,  if  as  yet  only  the  first,  are  also  clear  to  him.
Namely  that  "the  27th  of  February  next,"  —  which  is  the
time  set  by  Kur-Mainz  and  the  native  Officials  for  the  actual
meeting  of  their  Eeichstag  to  begin  Election  Business,  will  be
too  early  a  time ;  and  must  be  got  postponed.1  Postponed ;
which  will  be  possible,  perhaps  for  long;  one  knows  not  for
how  long :  that  is  a  first  step  definitely  clear  to  Belleisle.
Towards  which,  as  preliminary  to  it  and  to  all  the  others  in  a
dimmer  state,  there  is  a  second  thing  clear,  and  has  even  been
officially  settled  (all  but  the  day)  :  That,  in  the  mean  while,
and  surely  the  sooner  the  better,  he,  Belleisle,  Most  Christian
Majesty's  Ambassador  Extraordinary  to  the  Keichstag  coming,
—  do,  in  his  most  dazzling  and  persuasive  manner,  make  a
Tour  among  German  Courts.  Let  us  visit,  in  our  highest  and
yet  in  our  softest  splendor,  the  accessible  German  Courts,
especially  the  likely  or  well-disposed:  Mainz,  Koln,  Trier,
these,  the  three  called  Spiritual,  lie  on  our  very  route  ;  then
Pfalz,  Baiern,  Sachsen :  —  we  will  tour  diligently  up  and
down ;  try  whether,  by  optic  machinery  and  art-magic  of  the
mind,  one  cannot  bring  them  round.

In  all  these  preliminary  steps  and  points,  and  even  in  that
alpha  and  omega  of  excluding  Grand-Duke  Franz,  and  getting
a  Kaiser  of  his  own,  Belleisle  succeeded.  With  painful  results
to  himself  and  to  millions  of  his  fellow-creatures,  to  readers  of
this  History,  among  others.  And  became  in  consequence  the
most  famous  of  mankind;  and  filled  the  whole  world  with
rumor  of  Belleisle,  in  those  years.  —  A  man  of  such  intrinsic
distinction  as  Belleisle,  whom  Friedrich  afterwards  deliber-
ately called  a  great  Captain,  and  the  only  Frenchman  with  a

1  Adelung,  ii.  185  ("27th  February-lst  March,  1741,  at  Frankfurt-on-
Mayn,"  appointed  by  Kur-Mainz  "Arch-Chancellor  of  the  Reich,"  under
date  November  3d,  1740)  ;  —  ib.  236  ("Delay  for  a  month  or  two,"  suggests
Kur-Pfalz,  on  January  12th,  seconded  by  others  in  the  French  interest)  ;  —
upon  which  the  appointment,  after  some  arguing,  collapsed  into  the  vague,
and  there  ensued  delay  enough  ;  actual  Election  not  till  January  24th,  1 742.

358  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

genius  for  war ;  and  who,  for  some  time,  played  in  Europe  at
large  a  part  like  that  of  Warwick  the  Kingmaker  :  how  has  he
fallen  into  such  oblivion  ?  Many  of  my  readers  never  heard
of  him  before  ;  nor,  in  writing  or  otherwise,  is  there  symptom
that  any  living  memory  now  harbors  him,  or  has  the  least
approach  to  an  image  of  him !  "  For  the  times  are  babbly,"
says  Goethe,  "  And  then  again  the  times  are  dumb :  —

Denn  geschwdtzig  sind  die  Zeiten,
Und  sie  sind  auch  wieder  stumm."

Alas,  if  a  man  sow  only  chaff,  in  never  so  sublime  a  manner,
with  the  whole  Earth  and  the  long-eared  populations  looking
on,  and  chorally  singing  approval,  rendering  night  hideous,  —
it  will  avail  him.  nothing.  And  that,  to  a  lamentable  extent,
was  Belleisle's  case.  His  scheme  of  action  was  in  most  felici-
tously just  accordance  with  the  national  sense  of  France,  but
by  no  means  so  with  the  Laws  of  Nature  and  of  Fact ;  his  aim,
grandiose,  patriotic,  what  you  will,  was  unluckily  false  and
not  true.  How  could  "  the  times  "  continue  talking  of  him  ?
They  found  they  had  already  talked  too  much.  Not  to  say
that  the  French  Kevolution.  has  since  come ;  and  has  blown  all
that  into  the  air,  miles  aloft,  —  where  even  the  solid  part  of
it,  which  must  be  recovered  one  day,  much  more  the  gaseous,
which  we  trust  is  forever  irrecoverable,  now  wanders  and
whirls;  and  many  things  are  abolished,  for  the  present,  of
more  value  than  Belleisle !  —

For  my  own  share,  being,  as  it  were,  forced  accidentally  to
look  at  him  again,  I  find  in  Belleisle  a  really  notable  man ;  far
superior  to  the  vulgar  of  noted  men,  in  his  time  or  ours.  Sad
destiny  for  such  a  man !  But  when  the  general  Life-element
becomes  so  unspeakably  phantasmal  as  under  Louis  XV.,  it  is
difficult  for  any  man  to  be  real ;  to  be  other  than  a  play-actor,
more  or  less  eminent  and  artistically  dressed.  Sad  enough,
surely,  when  the  truth  of  your  relation  to  the  Universe,  and
the  tragically  earnest  meaning  of  your  Life,  is  quite  lied  out  of
you,  by  a  world  sunk  in  lies  ;  and  you  can,  with  effort,  attain
to  nothing  but  to  be  a  more  or  less  splendid  lie  along  with
it !  Your  very  existence  all  become  a  vesture,  a  hypocrisy,  and

CHAP.  VII.  VERSAILLES :  BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPERS.  359
Jan.  1741.

hearsay ;  nothing  left  of  you  but  this  sad  faculty  of  sowing
chaff  in  the  fashionable  manner !  After  Friedrich  and  Vol-
taire, in  both  of  whom,  under  the  given  circumstances,  one
finds  a  perennial  reality,  more  or  less,  —  Belleisle  is  next ;
none  fails  to  escape  the  mournful  common  lot  by  a  nearer  miss
than  Belleisle.

Beyond  doubt,  there  are  in  this  man  the  biggest  projects  any
French  head  has  carried,  since  Louis  XIV.  with  his  sublime
periwig  first  took  to  striking  the  stars.  How  the  indolent
Louis  XV.  and  the  pacific  Fleury  have  been  got  into  this  sub-
limely adventurous  mood  ?  By  Belleisle  chiefly,  men  say  ;  —
and  by  King  Louis's  first  Mistresses,  blown  upon  by  Belleisle  ;
poor  Louis  having  now,  at  length,  left  his  poor  Queen  to  her
reflections,  and  taken  into  that  sad  line,  in  which  by  degrees
he  carried  it  so  far.  There  are  three  of  them,  it  seems  ;  —  the
first  female  souls  that  could  ever  manage  to  kindle,  into  flame
or  into  smoke,  in  this  or  any  other  kind,  that  poor  torpid  male
soul :  those  Mailly  Sisters,  three  in  number  (I  am  shocked  to
hear),  successive,  nay  in  part  simultaneous  !  They  are  proud
women,  especially  the  two  younger;  with  ambition  in  them,
with  a  bravura  magnanimity,  of  the  theatrical  or  operatic  kind ;
of  whom  Louis  is  very  fond.  "  To  raise  France  to  its  place,
your  Majesty ;  the  top  of  the  Universe,  namely  ! "  "  Well ;  if
it  could  be  done,  —  and  quite  without  trouble  ?  "  thinks  Louis.
Bravura  magnanimity,  blown  upon  by  Belleisle,  prevails  among
these  high  Improper  Females,  and  generally  ia  the  Younger
Circles  of  the  Court ;  so  that  poor  old  Fleury  has  had  no
choice  but  to  obey  it  or  retire.  And  so  Belleisle  stalks  across
the  CEil-de-Boeuf  in  that  important  manner,  visibly  to  Geusau ;
and  is  the  shining  object  in  Paris,  and  much  the  topic  there  at
present.

A  few  weeks  hence,  he  is  farther  —  a  little  out  of  the  com-
mon turn,  but  not  beyond  his  military  merits  or  capabilities  —
made  Marechal  de  France ; l  by  way  of  giving  him  a  new
splendor  in  the  German  Political  World,  and  assisting  in  his
operations  there,  which  depend  much  upon  the  laws  of  vision.
French  epigrams  circulate  in  consequence,  and  there  are  witty
l  Pastes  de  Louis  XV.,  i.  356  (12th  February,  1741 ).

360  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

criticisms ;  to  which  Belleisle,  such  a  dusky  world  of  Possibility
lying  ahead,  is  grandly  indifferent.  Marechal  de  France  ;  —
and  Geusau  hears  (what  is  a  fact)  that  there  are  to  be  "  thirty
young  French  Lords  in  his  suite  ; "  his  very  "  Livery,"  or  mere
plush  retinue,  "  to  consist  of  110  persons  ; "  such  an  outfit  for
magnificence  as  was  never  seen  before.  And  in  this  equipment,
"  early  in  March "  (exact  day  not  given),  magnificence  of  out-
side corresponding  to  grandiosity  of  faculty  and  idea,  Belleisle,
we  shall  find,  does  practically  set  off  towards  Germany ;  —  like
a  kind  of  French  Belus,  or  God  of  the  Sun ;  capable  to  dazzle
weak  German  Courts,  by  optical  machinery,  and  to  set  much
rotten  thatch  on  fire  !  —

"There  are  curious  daguerrotype  glimpses  of  old  Paris  to
be  found  in  that  Notebook  of  Geusau's,"  says  another  Excerpt ;
"  which  come  strangely  home  to  us,  like  reality  at  first-hand ;
—  and  a  rather  unexpected  Paris  it  is,  to  most  readers  ;  many
things  then  alive  there,  which  are  now  deep  underground.
Much  Jansenist  Theology  afloat ;  grand  French  Ladies  piously
eager  to  convert  a  young  Protestant  Nobleman  like  Keuss  ;
sublime  Dorcases,  who  do  not  rouge,  or  dress  high,  but  eschew
the  evil  world,  and  are  thrifty  for  the  Poor's  sake,  redeeming
the  time.  There  is  a  Cardinal  de  Polignac,  venerable  sage
and  ex-political  person,  of  astonishing  erudition,  collector  of
Antiques  (with  whom  we  dined) ;  there  is  the  Chevalier
Kamsay,  theological  Scotch  Jacobite,  late  Tutor  of  the  young
Turenne.  So  many  shining  persons,  now  fallen  indistinct
again.  And  then,  besides  gossip,  which  is  of  mild  quality  and
in  fair  proportion,  —  what  talk,  casuistic  and  other,  about  the
Moral  Duties,  the  still  feasible  Pieties,  the  Constitution  Uni-
genitus  !  All  this  alive,  resonant  at  dinner-tables  of  Conserva-
tive stamp ;  the  Miracles  of  Abbe  Paris  much  a  topic  there  :  —
and  not  a  whisper  of  Infidel  Philosophies ;  the  very  name  of
Voltaire  not  once  mentioned  in  the  Eeuss  section  of  Parisian
things.

"There  is  rumor  now  and  then  of  a  'Comte  de  Kothen-
bourg,'  conspicuous  in  the  Parisian  circles ;  a  shining  military
man,  but  seemingly  in  want  of  employment ;  who  has  lost
in  gambling,  within  the  last  four  years,  upwards  of  £50,000

CHAP.  VII. VERSAILLES : BELLEISLE  WITH  PAPERS. 361

Jan.  1741.

(1,300,000  livres,  the  exact  cipher  given).  This  is  the  Graf
von  Eothenburg  whom  Friedrich  made  acquaintance  with,  in
the  Rhine  Campaign  six  years  ago.  and  has  ever  since  had  in
his  eye ;  —  whom,  in  a  few  weeks  hence,  Friedrich  beckons
over  to  him  into  the  Prussian  States  :  ( Hither,  and  you  shall
have  work  ! '  Which  Eothenburg  accepts ;  with  manifold  ad-
vantage to  both  parties  :  —  one  of  Friedrich' s  most  distinguished
friends  for  the  rest  of  his  life.

"  Of  Cardinal  Polignac  there  is  much  said,  and  several  din-
ners with  him  are  transacted,  dialogue  partly  given  :  a  pious
wise  old  gentleman  really,  in  his  kind  (age  now  eighty-four)  ;
looking  mildly  forth  upon  a  world  just  about  to  overset  itself
and  go  topsy-turvy,  as  he  sees  it  will.  His  Anti-Lucretius  was
once  such  a  Poem !  —  but  we  mention  him  here  because  his
fine  Cabinet  of  Antiques  came  to  Berlin  on  his  death,  Friedrich
purchasing ;  and  one  often  hears  of  it  (if  one  cared  to  hear)
from  the  Prussian  Dryasdust  in  subsequent  years.1

"Of  Friedrich's  unexpected  Invasion  of  Silesia  there  are
also  talkings  and  surmisings,  but  in  a  mild  indifferent  tone,
and  much  in  the  vague.  And  in  the  best-informed  circles  it  is
thought  Belleisle  will  manage  to  have  Grand-Duke  Franz,  the
Queen  of  Hungary's  Husband,  chosen  Kaiser,  and,  in  some
mild  good  way,  put  an  end  to  all  that ; "  —  which  is  far  indeed
from  Belleisle's  intention !

i

Came  to  Charlottenburg,  August,  1742  (old  Polignac  had  died  November
last,  ten  months  after  those  Geusau  times) :  cost  of  the  Polignac  Cabinet  was
40,000  thalers  (£6,000)  say  some,  90,000  livres  (under  £4,000)  say  others;
cheap  at  either  price ;  —  and,  by  chance,  came  opportunely,  "  a  fire  having
just  burnt  down  the  Academy  Edifice,"  and  destroyed  much  ware  of  that  kind.
Eodenbeck,  i.  73 ;  Seyfarth  (Anonymous),  Geschichte  Friedrichs  des  Andern,
i.  236.

362  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

CHAPTER  VIII.

PHENOMENA IN PETERSBURG.

I  KNOW  not  whether  Major  Winterfeld,  who  was  sent  to
Petersburg  in  December  last,  had  got  back  to  Berlin  in  Feb-
ruary, now  while  Friedrich  is  there :  but  for  certain  the  good
news  of  him  had,  That  he  had  been  completely  successful,
and  was  coming  speedily,  to  resume  his  soldier  duties  in  right
time.  As  Winterfeld  is  an  important  man  (nearly  buried
into  darkness  in  the  dull  Prussian  Books),  let  us  pause  for  a
moment  on  this  Negotiation  of  his  ;  —  and  on  the  mad  Russian
vicissitudes  which  preceded  and  followed,  so  far  as  they  con-
cern us.  Russia,  a  big  demi-savage  neighbor  next  door,  with
such  caprices,  such  humors  and  interests,  is  always  an  impor-
tant, rather  delicate  object  to  Friedrich ;  and  Fortune's  mad
wheel  is  plunging  and  canting  in  a  strange  headlong  way
there,  of  late.  Czarina  Anne,  we  know,  is  dead;  the  Auto-
crat of  All  the  Russias  following  the  Kaiser  of  the  Romans
within  eight  days.  Iwan,  her  little  Nephew,  still  in  swad-
dling-clothes, is  now  Autocrat  of  All  the  Russias  if  he  knew
it,  poor  little  red-colored  creature ;  and  Anton  Ulrich  and
his  Mecklenburg  Russian  Princess  —  But  let  us  take  up  the
matter  where  our  Notebooks  left  it,  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's
time :  —

"  Czarina  Anne  with  the  big  cheek,"  continues  that  Note-
book,1 "  was  extremely  delighted  to  see  little  Iwan ;  but  enjoyed
him  only  two  months ;  being  herself  in  dying  circumstances.
She  appointed  little  Iwan  her  Successor,  his  Mother  and
Father  to  be  Guardians  over  him ;  but  one  Bieren  (who  writes
himself  Biron,  and  '  Duke  of  Courland,'  being  Czarina's  Quasi-

1  Supra, p.  129.

CHAP.  VIII. PHENOMENA  IN  PETERSBURG.  363

Jan.  1741.

Husband  these  many  years)  to  be  Guardian,  as  it  were,  over
both  them  and  him.  Such  had  been  the  truculent  insatiable
Bieren's  demand  on  his  Czarina.  'You  are  running  on  your
destruction/  said  she,  with  tears ;  but  complied,  as  she  had
been  wont.

"  Czarina  Anne  died  28th  October,  1740 ;  leaving  a  Czar  in
his  cradle ;  little  Czar  Iwan  of  two  months,  with  Mother  and
Father  to  preside  over  him,  and  to  be  themselves  presided
over  by  Bieren,  in  this  manner.1  This  was  the  first  great
change  for  Anton  Ulrich;  but  others  greater  are  coming.
Little  Anton,  readers  know,  is  Friedrich's  Brother-in-law,
much  patronized  by  Austria;  Anton's  spouse  is  the  Half-
Russian  Princess  Catherine  of  Mecklenburg  (now  wholly  Rus-
sian, and  called  Princess  Anne),  whom  Friedrich  at  one  time
thought  of  applying  for,  in  his  distress  about  a  Wife.  These
two,  will  they  side  with  Prussia,  will  they  side  with  Austria  ?
It  was  hardly  worth  inquiry,  had  not  Fortune's  wheel  made
suddenly  a  great  cant,  and  pitched  them  to  the  top,  for  the
time  being.

"  Bieren  lasted  only  twenty  days.  He  was  very  high  and
arbitrary  upon  everybody ;  Anne  and  Anton  Ulrich  suffering
naturally  most  from  him.  They  took  counsel  with  Feldmar-
schall  Munnich  on  the  matter ;  who,  after  study,  declared  it
a  remediable  case.  Friday,  18th  November,  Munnich  had,  by
invitation,  to  dine  with  Duke  Bieren ;  Munnich  went  accord-
ingly that  day,  and  dined ;  Duke  looking  a  little  flurried,  they
say  :  and  the  same  evening,  dinner  being  quite  over,  and  mid-
night come,  Munnich  had  his  measures  all  taken,  soldiers
ready,  warrant  in  hand ;  —  and  arrested  Bieren  in  his  bed ;
mere  Siberia,  before  sunrise,  looming  upon  Bieren.  Never
was  such  a  change  as  this  from  18th  day  to  19th  with  a
supreme  Bieren.  Our  friend  Mannstein,  excellent  punctual
Aide-de-Camp  of  Munnich,  was  the  executor  of  the  feat ;  and
has  left  punctual  record  of  it,  as  he  does  of  everything,  —
what  Bieren  said,  and  what  Madam  Bieren,  who  was  a  little

1  Mannstein,  pp.  264-267  (28th  October,  by  Russian  or  Old  Style,  is  "17th ; "
we  translate,  in  this  and  other  cases,  Russian  or  English,  into  New  Style,  unless
the  contrary  is  indicated).

864  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

obstreperous  on  the  occasion.1  What  side  Anton  Ulrich  and
Spouse  will  take  in  a  quarrel  between  Prussia  and  Austria,
is  now  well  worth  asking.

"  Anton  Ulrich  and  Wife  Anne,  that  is  to  say,  '  Regent
Anne '  and  '  Generalissimo  Anton  Ulrich,'  now  ruled,  with
Miinnich  for  right-hand  man ;  and  these  were  high  times  for
Anton  Ulrich,  Generalissimo  and  Czar's-Father ;  who  indeed
was  modest,  and  did  not  often  interfere  in  words,  though
grieved  at  the  foolish  ways  his  Wife  had.  An  indolent  flabby
kind  of  creature,  she,  unfit  for  an  Autocrat ;  sat  in  her  private
apartments,  all  in  a  huddle  of  undress ;  had  foolish  notions,  —
especially  had  soubrettes  who  led  her  about  by  the  ear.  And
then  there  was  a  'Princess  Elizabeth,'  Cousin-german  of  Regent
Anne,  —  daughter,  that  is  to  say,  last  child  there  now  was,
of  Peter  the  Great  and  his  little  brown  Catherine  :  —  who
should  have  been  better  seen  to.  Harmless  foolish  Princess,
not  without  cunning ;  young,  plump,  and  following  merely  her
flirtations  and  her  orthodox  devotions ;  very  orthodox  and  soft,
but  capable  of  becoming  dangerous,  as  a  centre  of  the  dis-
affected. As  '  Czarina  Elizabeth '  before  long,  and  ultimately
as  'infdme  Catin  du  Nord'  she  — "  But  let  us  not  antici-
pate!

It  was  in  this  posture  of  affairs,  about  a  month  after  it  had
begun,  that  Winterfeld  arrived  in  Petersburg ;  and  addressed
himself  to  Miinnich,  on  the  Prussian  errand.  Winterfeld  was
Miinnich's  Son-in-law  (properly  stepson-in-law,  having  married
Miinnich's  stepdaughter,  a  Fraulein  von  Malzahn,  of  good
Prussian  kin) ;  was  acquainted  with  the  latitudes  and  longi-
tudes here,  and  well  equipped  for  the  operation  in  hand.  To
Madam  Miinnich,  once  Madam  Malzahn,  his  Mother-in-law,  he
carried  a  diamond  ring  of  £1,200,  "small  testimony  of  his
Prussian  Majesty's  regard  to  so  high  a  Prussian  Lady;"  to
Miinnich's  Son  and  Madam's  a  present  of  £3,000  on  the  like
score :  and  the  wheels  being  oiled  in  this  way,  and  the  steam
so  strong  (son  Winterfeld  an  ardent  man,  father  Miinnich
the  like,  supreme  in  Kussia,  and  the  thing  itself  a  salutary
thing),  the  diplomatic  speed  obtained  was  great.  Winterfeld

1  Mannstein,  p.  268.

CHAP.VIH. PHENOMENA  IN  PETERSBURG.  365

Jan.  1741.

had  arrived  in  Petersburg  December  19th :  Treaty  of  Alliance
to  the  effect,  "Firm  friends  and  good  neighbors,  we  Two,
Majesties  of  Prussia  and  of  All  the  Kussias ;  will  help  each
the  other,  if  attacked,  with  12,000  men,"  —was  signed  on  the
27th :  whole  Transaction,  so  important  to  Friedrich,  complete
in  eight  days.  Austrian  Botta,  directly  on  the  heel  of  those
unsatisfactory  Dialogues  about  Silesian  roads,  about  troops
that  were  pretty,  but  had  never  looked  the  wolf  in  the  face,
—  had  rushed  off,  full  speed,  for  Petersburg,  in  hopes  of  run-
ning athwart  such  a  Treaty  as  Winterfeld's,  and  getting  one
for  Austria  instead.  But  he  arrived  too  late;  and  perhaps
could  have  done  nothing  had  he  been  in  time.  Botta  tried
his  utmost  for  years  afterwards,  above  ground  and  below,  to
obstruct  and  reverse  this  thing ;  but  it  was  to  no  purpose,  and
even  to  less  ;  and  only,  in  result,  brought  Botta  himself  into
flagrant  diplomatic  trouble  and  scandal ;  which  made  noise
enough  in  the  then  Gazetteer  world,  and  was  the  finale  of
Botta's  Russian  efforts,1  though  not  worth  mentioning  now.
The  Russian  Notebook  continues  :  —

"Miinnich,  supreme  in  Russia  since  Bieren's  removal,  had
wise  counsels  for  the  Regent  Anne  and  her  Husband  ;  though
perhaps,  being  a  high  old  military  gentleman,  he  might  be
somewhat  abrupt  in  his  ways.  And  there  were  domestic
Ostermanns,  foreign  Bottas,  La  Chetardies,  and  dangerous
Intriguers  and  Opposition  figures,  to  improve  any  grudge  that
might  arise.  Sure  enough,  in  March,  1741,  Feldmarschall
Miiunich  was  forbid  the  Court  (some  Ostermann  succeeding
him  there)  :  ( Ever  true  to  your  Two  Highnesses,  though  no
longer  needed ; '  —  and  withdrew,  in  a  lofty  friendly  strain ;
his  Son  continuing  at  Court,  though  Papa  had  withdrawn.
Supreme  Miinnich  had  lasted  about  four  months  ;  Supreme
Bieren  hardly  three  weeks ;  —  and  Siberia  is  still  agape.

"  Miinnich  being  gone  to  his  own  Town-Mansion,  and  Regent
Anne  sitting  in  hers  in  a  huddle  of  undress ;  little  accessible  to
her  long-headed  melancholic  Ostermann,  and  too  accessible  to
her  Livonian  maid :  with  poor  little  Anton  Ulrich  pouting  and

1  Adelung,  iii.  ii.  289;  Mannstein,  p.  375  ("  Lapuschin  Plot,"  of  Botta's
raising,  found  out  "August,  1743 ; "  —  Botta  put  iii  arrest,  &c.).

366  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XH.

Jan.  1741.

remonstrating,  but  unable  to  help,  —  this  state  of  matters,
with  such  intrigues  undermining  it,  could  not  last  forever.
And  had  not  Princess  Elizabeth  been  of  indolent  luxurious
nature,  intent  upon  her  prayers  and  flirtations,  it  would  have
ended  sooner  even  than  it  did.  Princess  Elizabeth  had  a
Surgeon  called  L'Estoc ;  a  Marquis  de  la  Chetardie,  a  high-
flown  French  Excellency  (who  used  to  be  at  Berlin,  to  our
young  Friedrich's  delight),  was  her  —  What  shall  I  say  ?  La
Chetardie  himself  had  no  scruple  to  say  it !  These  two  plotted
for  her ;  these  were  ready,  —  could  she  have  been  got  ready  ;
which  was  not  so  easy.  Regent  Anne  had  her  suspicions ;  but
the  Princess  was  so  indolent,  so  good :  at  last,  when  directly
taxed  with  such  a  thing,  the  Princess  burst  into  ingenuous
weeping ;  quite  disarmed  Kegent  Anne's  suspicions ;  —  but
found  she  had  now  better  take  L'Estoc's  advice,  and  proceed
at  once.  Which  she  did.

"And  so,  on  the  morrow  morning,  5th  December,  1741,  by
aid  of  the  Preobrazinsky  Regiment,  and  the  motions  usual
on  such  occasions,  —  in  fact  by  merely  pulling  out  the  props
from  an  undermined  state  of  matters,  —  she  reduced  said  state
gently  to  ruin,  ready  for  carting  to  Siberia,  like  its  f oregoers ;
and  was  hereby  Czarina  of  All  the  Russias,  prosperously
enough  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  Twenty  years  or  rather
more.  An  indolent,  orthodox,  plump  creature,  disinclined  to
cruelty;  'not  an  ounce  of  nun's  flesh  in  her  composition,'
said  the  wits.  She  maintained  the  Friedrich  Treaty,  indig-
nant at  Botta  and  his  plots ;  was  well  with  Friedrich,  or
might  have  been  kept  so  by  management,  for  there  was  no
cause  of  quarrel,  but  the  reverse,  between  the  Countries,  —
could  Friedrich  have  held  his  witty  tongue,  when  eaves-
droppers were  by.  But  he  could  not  always  ;  though  he  tried.
And  sarcastic  quizzing  (especially  if  it  be  truth  too),  on  cer-
tain female  topics,  what  Improper  Female,  Czarina  of  All  the
Russias,  could  stand  it  ?  The  history  is  but  a  distressing  one,
a  disgusting  one,  in  human  affairs.  Elizabeth  was  orthodox,
too,  and  Friedrich  not,  (  the  horrid  man ! '  The  fact  is,  —
fact  dismally  indubitable,  though  it  is  huddled  into  discreet
dimness,  and  all  details  of  it  (as  to  what  Friedrich's  witticisms

CHAP.  VIII. PHENOMENA  IN  PETERSBURG.  36T

Jan.  1741.

were,  and  the  like)  are  refused  us  in  the  Prussian  Books,  —
indignation,  owing  to  such  dismal  cause,  became  fixed  hate  on
the  Czarina's  part,  and  there  followed  terrible  results  at  last :
A  Czarina  risen  to  the  cannibal  pitch  upon  a  man,  in  his
extreme  need  ;  — '  infdme  Catin  du  Nord,'  thinks  the  man  !
Friedrich's  wit  cost  him  dear ;  him,  and  half  a  million  others
still  dearer,  twenty  years  hence."  —  Till  which  time  we  will
gladly  leave  the  Czarina  and  it.

Major  von  Winterfeld  had  been  in  Eussia  before  this  ;  and
had  wooed  his  fair  Malzahn  there.  He  is  the  same  Winter-
feld whom  we  once  saw  dining  by  the  wayside  with  the  late
Friedrich  Wilhelm,  on  that  last  Re  view-  Journey  his  Majesty
made.  A  Captain  in  the  Potsdam  Giants  at  that  time ;
always  in  great  favor  with  the  late  King  ;  and  in  still  greater
with  the  present,  —  who  finds  in  him,  we  can  dimly  discover,
and  pretty  much  in  him  alone,  a  soul  somewhat  like  his  own ;
the  one  real  "  peer  "  he  had  about  him.  A  man  of  little
education ;  bred  in  camps  ;  yet  of  a  proud  natural  eminency,
and  rugged  nobleness  of  genius  and  mind.  Let  readers  mark
this  fiery  hero-spirit,  lying  buried  in  those  dull  Books,  like
lightning  among  clay.  Here  is  another  anecdote  of  his
Russian  business  :  —

"  Winterfeld  had  gone,  in  Friedrich  Wilhelm's  time,  with  a
party  of  Prussian  drill-sergeants  for  Petersburg  [year  not
given] ;  and  duly  delivered  them  there.  He  naturally  saw
much  of  Feldmarschall  Miinnich,  naturally  saw  the  Step-
daughter of  the  Feldmarschall,  a  shining  beauty  in  Peters-
burg; Winterfeld  himself  a  man  of  shining  gifts,  and  char-
acter ;  and  one  of  the  handsomest  tall  men  in  the  world.
Mutual  love  between  the  Fraulein  and  him  was  the  rapid
result.  But  how  to  obtain  marriage  ?  Winterfeld  cannot
marry,  without  leave  had  of  his  superiors  :  you,  fair  Mal-
zahn, are  Hof-Dame  of  Princess  Elizabeth,  all  your  fortune
the  jewels  you  wear;  and  it  is  too  possible  she  will  not  let
you  go  !

"  They  agreed  to  be  patient,  to  be  silent ;  to  watch  warily
till  Winterfeld  got  home  to  Prussia,  till  the  Fraulein  Malzahn
could  also  contrive  to  get  home.  Winterfeld  once  home,  and

368  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

the  King's  consent  had,  the  Fraulein  applied  to  Princess
Elizabeth  for  leave  of  absence:  (A  few  months,  to  see  my
friends  in  Deutschland,  your  Highness  ! '  Princess  Elizabeth
looked  hard  at  her;  answered  evasively  this  and  that.  At
last,  being  often  importuned,  she  answered  plainly,  'I  almost
feel  convinced  thou  wilt  never  come  back ! '  Protestations
from  the  Fraulein  were  not  wanting :  —  <  Well  then/  said
Elizabeth,  'if  thou  art  so  sure  of  it,  leave  me  thy  jewels  in
pledge.  Why  not  ? '  The  poor  Fraulein  could  not  say  why  ;
had  to  leave  her  jewels,  which  were  her  whole  fine  fortune,
'worth  100,000  rubles'  (£20,000);  and  is  now  the  brave
Wife  of  Winterf eld  ;  —  but  could  never,  by  direct  entreaty  or
circuitous  interest  and  negotiation,  get  back  the  least  item  of
her  jewels.  Elizabeth,  as  Princess  and  as  Czarina,  was  alike
deaf  on  that  subject.  Now  or  henceforth  that  proved  an
impossible  private  enterprise  for  Winterfeld,  though  he  had
so  easily  succeeded  in  the  public  one."  1

The  new  Czarina  was  not  unmerciful.  Miinnich  and  Com-
pany were  tried  for  life ;  were  condemned  to  die,  and  did
appear  on  the  scaffold  (29th  January,  1742),  ready  for  that
extreme  penalty ;  but  were  there,  on  the  sudden,  pardoned  or
half-pardoned  by  a  merciful  new  Czarina,  and  sent  to  Siberia
and  outer  darkness.  Whither  Bieren  had  preceded  them.  To
outer  darkness  also,  though  a  milder  destiny  had  been  intended
them  at  first,  went  Anton  Ulrich  and  his  Household.  Towards
native  Germany  at  first ;  they  had  got  as  far  as  Biga  on  the
way  to  Germany,  but  were  detained  there,  for  a  long  while
(owing  to  suspicions,  to  Botta  Plots,  or  I  know  not  what),  till
finally  they  were  recalled  into  Kussian  exile.  Strict  enough
exile,  seclusion  about  Archangel  and  elsewhere ;  in  convents,
in  obscure  uncomfortable  places:  —  little  Iwan,  after  vicissi-
tudes, even  went  underground ;  grew  to  manhood,  and  got
killed  (partly  by  accident,  not  quite  by  murder),  some  twenty-
three  years  hence,  in  his  dungeon  in  the  Fortress  of  Schliissel-
burg,  below  the  level  of  the  Ladoga  waters  there.  Unluckier
Household,  which  once  seemed  the  luckiest  of  the  world,
was  never  known.  Canted  suddenly,  in  this  way,  from  the

1  Retzow,  Charakteristik  des  siebenjdhrigen  Krieges  (Berlin,  1802),  i.  45  n.

CHAP.  VIII. PHENOMENA IN  PETERSBURG.  369

Jan.  1741.

very  top  of  Fortune's  wheel  to  the  very  bottom ;  never  to  rise
more  ;  —  and  did  not  even  die,  at  least  not  all  die,  for  thirty
or  forty  years  after.1

This  is  the  Chetardie-L'Estoc  conspiracy,  of  5th  December,
1741 ;  the  pitching  up  of  Princess  Elizabeth,  and  the  pitch-
ing down  of  Anton  Ulrich  and  his  Miinnichs,  who  had  before
pitched  Bieren  down.  After  which,  matters  remained  more
stationary  at  Petersburg :  Czarian  Elizabeth,  fat  indolent  soul,
floated  with  a  certain  native  buoyancy,  with  something  of
bulky  steadiness,  in  the  turbid  plunge  of  things,  and  did  not
sink.  On  the  contrary,  her  reign,  so  called,  was  prosperous,
though  stupid;  her  big  dark  Countries,  kindled  already  into
growth,  went  on  growing  rather.  And,  for  certain,  she  her-
self went  on  growing,  in  orthodox  devotions  of  spiritual  type
(and  in  strangely  heterodox  ditto  of  woraspiritual !)  ;  in  indo-
lent mansuetudes  (fell  rages,  if  you  cut  on  the  raws  at  all !)  ;
in  perpetual  incongruity;  and,  alas,  at  last,  in  brandy-and-
water,  —  till,  as  "  infdme  Catin  du  Nord,"  she  became  terribly
important  to  some  persons  !

At  her  accession,  and  for  two  years  following,  Czarina  Eliz-
abeth, in  spite  of  real  disinclination  that  way,  had  a  War  on
her  hands  :  the  Swedish  War  (August,  1741- August,  1743),
which,  after  long  threatening  on  the  Swedish  side,  had  broken
out  into  unwelcome  actuality,  in  Anton  Ulrich's  time ;  and
which  could  not,  with  all  the  Czarina's  industry,  be  got  rid  of
or  staved  off;  Sweden  being  bent  upon  the  thing,  reason  or
no  reason.  War  not  to  be  spoken  of,  except  on  compulsion,
in  the  most  voluminous  History !  It  was  the  unwisest  of
wars,  we  should  say,  and  in  practice  probably  the  contempti-
blest ;  if  there  were  not  one  other  Swedish  War  coming,  which
vies  with  it  in  these  particulars,  of  which  we  shall  be  obliged

1  Anton  Ulrich,  not  till  15th  May,  1775  (two  Daughters  of  his  went,  after
this,  to  "  Horstens,  a  poor  Country-House  in  Jutland,"  whither  Catherine  II.
had  manumitted  them,  with  pension  ;  —  she  had  wished  Anton  Ulrich  to  go
home,  many  years  before;  but  he  would  not,  from  shame). — Iwan  had
perished  5th  August,  1764  (Catherine  II.  blamed  for  his  death,  but  without
cause);  Iwan's  Mother,  Princess  Anne,  (mercifully)  18th  March,  1746.  See
Eussian  Histories,  Tooke,  Cast€ra,  &c.,  —  none  of  which,  except  Mannstein,  is
good  for  much,  or  to  be  trusted  without  scrutiny.
VOL.  vii.  24

370  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Jan.  1741.

to  speak,  more  or  less,  at  a  future  stage.  Of  this  present
Eussian-Swedish  war,  having  happily  almost  nothing  to  do
with  it,  we  can,  except  in  the  way  of  transient  chronology,
refrain  altogether  from  speaking  or  thinking.

Poor  Sweden,  since  it  shot  Karl  XII.  in  the  trenches  at
Fredericshall,  could  not  get  a  King  again ;  and  is  very  an-
archic under  its  Phantasm  King  and  free  National  Palaver,  —
Senate  with  subaltern  Houses  ; — which  generally  has  French
gold  in  its  pocket,  and  noise  instead  of  wisdom  in  its  head.
Scandalous  to  think  of  or  behold.  The  French,  desirous  to
keep  Eussia  in  play  during  these  high  Belleisle  adventures
now  on  foot,  had,  after  much  egging,  bribing,  flattering,  per-
suaded vain  Sweden  into  this  War  with  Eussia.  "  At  Narva
they  were  80,000,  we  8,000  ;  and  what  became  of  them  ! "  cry
the  Swedes  always.  Yes,  my  friends,  but  you  had  a  Captain
at  Narva ;  you  had  not  yet  shot  your  Captain  when  you  did
Narva !  "  Faction  of  Hats,"  "  Faction  of  Caps  "  (that  is,  night-
caps,  as  being  somnolent  and  disinclined  to  France  and  War)  :
seldom  did  a  once-valiant  far-shining  Nation  sink  to  such
depths,  since  they  shot  their  Captain,  and  said  to  Anarchy,
*'  Thou  art  Captaincy,  we  see,  and  the  Divine  thing  !  "  Of  the
Wars  and  businesses  of  such  a  set  of  mortals  let  us  shun
speaking,  where  possible.

Mannstein  gives  impartial  account,  pleasantly  clear  and  com-
pact, to  such  as  may  be  curious  about  this  Swedish-Eussian
War ;  and,  in  the  didactic  point  of  view,  it  is  not  without
value.  To  us  the  interesting  circumstance  is,  that  it  does  not
interfere  with  our  Silesian  operations  at  all ;  and  may  be  fig-
ured as  a  mere  accompaniment  of  rumbling  discord,  or  vacant
far-off  noise,  going  on  in  those  Northern  parts,  —  to  which
therefore  we  hope  to  be  strangers  in  time  coming.  Here  are
some  dates,  which  the  reader  may  take  with  him,  should  they
chance  to  illustrate  anything  :  —

"  August  4th,  1741.  The  Swedes  declare  War :  '  Will  re-
cover their  lost  portions  of  Finland,  will,'  &c.  &c.  They  had
long  been  meditating  it ;  they  had  Turk  negotiations  going  on,
diligent  emissaries  to  the  Turk  (a  certain  Major  Sinclair  for
one,  whom  the  Eussians  waylaid  and  assassinated  to  get  sight

CHAP.  VIII. PHENOMENA  IN  PETERSBURG.  371

Jan.  1741.

of  his  Papers)  during  the  late  Turk-Eussian  War  ;  but  could
conclude  nothing  while  that  was  in  activity ;  concluded  only
after  that  was  done,  —  striking  the  iron  when  grown  cold.  A
chief  point  in  their  Manifesto  was  the  assassination  of  this
Sinclair ;  scandal  and  atrocity,  of  which  there  is  no  doubt  now
the  Kussians  were  guilty.  Various  pretexts  for  the  War  :  —
prime  movers  to  it,  practically,  were  the  French,  intent  on
keeping  Eussia  employed  while  their  Belleisle  German  adven-
ture went  on,  and  who  had  even  bargained  with  third  parties
to  get  up  a  War  there,  as  we  shall  see.

"  September  3d,  1741.  At  Wilmanstrand,  —  key  of  Wyborg,
their  frontier  stronghold  in  Finland,  which  was  under  Siege,
—  the  Swedes  (about  5,000  of  them,  for  they  had  nothing  to
live  upon,  and  lay  scattered  about  in  fractions)  made  fight,
or  skirmish,  against  a  Eussian  attacking  party :  Swedes,  rather
victorious  on  their  hill-top,  rushed  down ;  and  totally  lost
their  bit  of  victory,  their  Wilmanstrand,  their  Wyborg,  and
even  the  War  itself  ;  —  for  this  was,  in  literal  truth,  the  only
fighting  done  by  them  in  the  entire  course  of  it,  which  lasted
near  two  years  more.  The  rest  of  it  was  retreat,  capitula-
tion, loss  on  loss  without  stroke  struck  ;  till  they  had  lost  all
Finland,  and  were  like  to  lose  Sweden  itself, — Dalecarlian
mutiny  bursting  out  ('  Ye  traitors,  misgovernors,  worthy  of
death  ! '),  with  invasive  Danes  to  rear  of  it ;  —  and  had  to  call
in  the  very  Eussians  to  save  them  from  worse.  Czarina  Eliz-
abeth at  the  time  of  her  accession,  six  months  after  Wilman-
strand, had  made  truce,  was  eager  to  make  peace :  '  By  no
means ! '  answered  Sweden,  taking  arms  again,  or  rather  tak-
ing legs  again;  and  rushing  ruin-ward,  at  the  old  rate,  still
without  stroke.

"June  28th,  1743.  They  did  halt;  made  Peace  of  Abo
(Truce  and  Preliminaries  signed  there,  that  day :  Peace  itself,
August  17th)  ;  Czarina  magnanimously  restoring  most  of  their
Finland  (thinking  to  herself,  '  Not  done  enough  for  me  yet ;
cook  it  a  little  yet ! ')  ;  —  and  settling  who  their  next  King
was  to  be,  among  other  friendly  things.  And  in  November
following,  Keith,  in  his  Eussian  galleys,  with  some  10,000
Eussians  on  board,  arrived  in  Stockholm  ;  protective  against

372  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

19th  Feb.  1741.

Danes  and  mutinous  Dalecarles  :  stayed  there  till  June  of  next
year,  1744."  l Is  not  this  a  War  !

On  the  Russian  side,  General  Keith,  under  Field-marshal
Lacy  as  chief  in  command  (the  same  Keith  whom  we  saw  at
Oczakow  under  Miinnich,  some  time  ago),  had  a  great  deal  of
the  work  and  management ;  which  was  of  a  highly  miscella-
neous kind,  commanding  fleets  of  gunboats,  and  much  else ;
and  readers  of  Mannstein  can  still  judge,  — much  more  could
King  Friedrich,  earnestly  watching  the  affair  itself  as  it  went
on,  —  whether  Keith  did  not  do  it  in  a  solid  and  quietly  emi-
nent and  valiant  manner.  Sagacious,  skilful,  imperturbable,
without  fear  and  without  noise  ;  a  man  quietly  ever  ready.
He  had  quelled,  once,  walking  direct  into  the  heart  of  it,  a
ferocious  Kussian  mutiny,  or  uproar  from  below,  which  would
have  ruined  everything  in  few  minutes  more.2  He  suffered,
with  excellent  silence,  now  and  afterwards,  much  ill-usage  from
above  withal ;  —  till  Friedrich  himself,  in  the  third  year  hence,
was  lucky  enough  to  get  him  as  General.  Friedrich's  Sister
Ulrique,  the  marriage  of  Princess  Ulrique,  —  that  also,  as  it
chanced,  had  something  to  do  with  this  Peace  of  Abo.  But
we  anticipate  too  far.

CHAPTER  IX.

FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA.

FRIEDRICH  stayed  only  three  weeks  at  home  ;  moving  about,
from  Berlin  to  Potsdam,  to  Eeinsberg  and  back :  all  the  gay
world  is  in  Berlin,  at  this  Carnival  time ;  but  Friedrich  has

1  Adelung,  ii.  445. Mannstein,  pp.  297  (Wilmanstrand  Affair,  himself  pres-
ent), 365  (Peace),  373 (Keith's  return  with  his  galleys). Comte de  Hordt
(present  also,  on  the  Swedish  side,  and  subsequently  a  Soldier  of  Friedrich's)
Mfmoires  (Berlin,  1789),  i.  18-88. The  murder  of  Sinclair  (done  by  "  four
Russian  subalterns,  two  miles  from  Naumberg  in  Silesia,  17th  June,  1739,
about  7  P.M.")  is  amply  detailed  from  Documents,  in  a  late  Book :  Weber,
Am  Vier  Jahrhundertm  (Leipzig,  1858),  i.  274-279.

2  Mannstein,  p.  130  (no  date,  April-May,  1742).

CHAP.  IX. FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA.  373

19th  Feb.  1741.

more  to  do  with  business,  of  a  manifold  and  over-earnest
nature,  than  with  Carnival  gayeties.  French  Valori  is  here,
"  my  fat  Valori,"  who  is  beginning  to  be  rather  a  favorite  of
Friedrich's  :  with  Excellency  Valori,  and  with  the  other  For-
eign Excellencies,  there  was  diplomatic  passaging  in  these
weeks ;  and  we  gather  from  Valori,  in  the  inverse  way  (Valori
fallen  sulky),  that  it  was  not  ill  done  on  Friedrich's  part.  He
had  some  private  consultation  with  the  Old  Dessauer,  too;
"  probably  on  military  points,"  thinks  Valori.  At  least  there
was  noticed  more  of  the  drill-sergeant  than  before,  in  his  hand-
ling of  the  Army,  when  he  returned  to  Silesia,  continues  the
sulky  one.  "  Troops  and  generals  did  not  know  him  again,"  —
so  excessively  strict  was  he  grown,  on  the  sudden.  And  truly
"  he  got  into  details  which  were  beneath,  not  only  a  Prince
who  has  great  views,  but  even  a  simple  Captain  of  Infan-
try,"—  according  to  my  (Valori's)  military  notions  and  ex-
periences ! J  —

The  truth  is,  Friedrich  begins  to  see,  more  clearly  than  he
did  with  Gloire  dazzling  him,  that  his  position  is  an  exceedingly
grave  one,  full  of  risk,  in  the  then  mood  and  condition  of  the
world ;  that  he,  in  the  whole  world,  has  no  sure  friend  but  his
Army ;  and  that  in  regard  to  it  he  cannot  be  too  vigilant !
The  world  is  ominous  to  this  youngest  of  the  Kings  more  than
to  another.  Sounds  as  of  general  Political  Earthquake  grum-
ble audibly  to  him  from  the  deeps :  all  Europe  likely,  in  any
event,  to  get  to  loggerheads  on  this  Austrian  Pragmatic  mat-
ter ;  the  Nations  all  watching  him,  to  see  what  he  will  make
of  it:  —  fugleman  he  to  the  European  Nations,  just  about
bursting  up  on  such  an  adventure.  It  may  be  a  glorious  posi-
tion, or  a  not  glorious  ;  but,  for  certain,  it  is  a  dangerous  one,
and  awfully  solitary !  —

Fuglemen  the  world  and  its  Nations  always  have,  when
simultaneously  bent  any-whither,  wisely  or  unwisely ;  and  it  is
natural  that  the  most  adventurous  spirit  take  that  post.  Fried-
rich  has  not  sought  the  post ;  but  following  his  own  objects,
has  got  it;  and  will  be  ignominiously  lost,  and  trampled
to  annihilation  under  the  hoofs  of  the  world,  if  he  do  not

i  Valori,  i.  99.

374  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAK.  BOOK  XII.

Feb.-March,  1741.

mind!  To  keep  well  ahead; — to  be  rapid  as  possible  ;  that
were  good :  —  to  step  aside  were  still  better  !  And  Friedrich.
we  find  is  very  anxious  for  that ;  "  would  be  content  with  the
Duchy  of  Glogau,  and  join  Austria;"  but  there  is  not  the
least  chance  that  way.  His  Special  Envoy  to  Vienna,  Gotter,
and  along  with  him  Borck  the  regular  Minister,  are  come
home ;  all  negotiation  hopeless  at  Vienna ;  and  nothing  but
indignant  war-preparation  going  on  there,  with  the  most  ani-
mated diligence,  and  more  success  than  had  seemed  possible.
That  is  the  law  of  Friedrich's  Silesian  Adventure :  "  For-
ward, therefore,  on  these  terms ;  others  there  are  not :  waste
no  words ! "  Friedrich  recognizes  to  himself  what  the  law  is  ;
pushes  stiffly  forward,  with  a  fine  silence  on  all  that  is  not
practical,  really  with  a  fine  steadiness  of  hope,  and  audacity
against  discouragements.  Of  his  anxieties,  which  could  not
well  be  wanting,  but  which  it  is  royal  to  keep  strictly  under
lock  and  key,  of  these  there  is  no  hint  to  Jordan  or  to  any-
body; and  only  through  accidental  chinks,  on  close  scrutiny,
can  we  discover  that  they  exist.  Symptom  of  despondency,
of  misgiving  or  repenting  about  his  Enterprise,  there  is  none
anywhere,  Friedrich's  fine  gifts  of  silence  (which  go  deeper
than  the  lips)  are  noticeable  here,  as  always ;  and  highly  they
availed  Friedrich  in  leading  his  life,  though  now  inconvenient
to  Biographers  writing  of  the  same  !  —

It  was  not  on  matters  of  drill,  as  Valori  supposes,  that
Friedrich  had  been  consulting  with  the  Old  Dessauer :  this  time
it  was  on  another  matter.  Friedrich  has  two  next  Neighbors
greatly  interested,  none  more  so,  in  the  Pragmatic  Question :
Kur-Sachsen,  Polish  King,  a  foolish  greedy  creature,  who  is
extremely  uncertain  about  his  course  in  it  (and  indeed  always
continued  so,  now  against  Friedrich,  now  for  him,  and  again
against)  ;  and  Kur-Hanover,  our  little  George  of  England,
whose  course  is  certain  as  that  of  the  very  stars,  and  direct
against  Friedrich  at  this  time,  as  indeed,  at  all  times  not  ex-
ceptional, it  is  apt  to  be.  Both  these  Potentates  must  be
attended  to,  in  one's  absence  ;  method  to  be  gentle  but  effect-
ual ;  the  Old  Dessauer  to  do  it :  —  and  this  is  what  these  con-
suitings  had  turned  upon ;  and  in  a  month  or  two,  readers,

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS TO SILESIA.  375

19th  Feb.  1741.

and  an  astonished  Gazetteer  world,  will  see  what  comes  of
them.

It  was  February  19th  when  Friedrich  left  Berlin ;  the  21st
he  spends  at  Glogau,  inspecting  the  Blockade  there,  and  not
ill  content  with  the  measures  taken :  "  Press  that  Wallis  all
you  can,"  enjoins  he :  "  Hunger  seems  to  be  slow  about
it !  Summon  him  again,  were  your  new  Artillery  come  up ;
threaten  with  bombardment ;  but  spare  the  Town,  if  possible.
Artillery  is  coming  :  let  us  have  done  here,  and  soon  ! "  Next
day  he  arrives,  not  at  Breslau  as  some  had  expected,  but  at
Schweidnitz  sidewards ;  a  strong  little  Town,  at  least  an  elabo-
rately fortified,  of  which  we  shall  hear  much  in  time  coming.
It  lies  a  day's  ride  west  of  Breslau :  and  will  be  quieter  for
business  than  a  big  gazing  Capital  would  be,  —  were  Breslau
even  one's  own  city;  which  it  is  not,  though  perhaps  tend-
ing to  be.  Breslau  is  in  transition  circumstances  at  present ;
a  little  uncertain  whose  it  is,  under  its  Miinchows  and  new
managers :  Breslau  he  did  not  visit  at  all  on  this  occasion.
To  Schweidnitz  certain  new  regiments  had  been  ordered,  there
to  be  disposed  of  in  reinforcing :  there,  "in  the  Count  Hoberg's
Mansion,"  he  principally  lodges  for  six  weeks  to  come  ;  shoot-
ing out  on  continual  excursions ;  but  always  returning  to
Schweidnitz,  as  the  centre,  again.

Algarotti,  home  from  Turin  (not  much  of  a  success  there,
but  always  melodious  for  talk),  had  travelled  with  him  ;  Alga-
rotti, and  not  long  after,  Jordan  and  Maupertuis,  bear  him
company,  that  the  vacant  moments  too  be  beautiful.  We  can
fancy  he  has  a  very  busy,  very  anxious,  but  not  an  unpleasant
time.  He  goes  rapidly  about,  visiting  his  posts,  —  chiefly
about  the  Neisse  Valley  ;  Neisse  being  the  prime  object,  were
the  weather  once  come  for  siege-work.  He  is  in  many  Towns
(specified  in  Rodenbeck  and  the  Books,  but  which  may  be
anonymous  here) ;  doubtless  on  many  Steeples  and  Hill-tops ;
questioning  intelligent  natives,  diligently  using  his  own  eyes :
intent  to  make  personal  acquaintance  with  this  new  Country,
—  where,  little  as  he  yet  dreams  of  it,  the  deadly  struggles
of  his  Life  lie  waiting  him,  and  which  he  will  know  to  great
perfection  before  all  is  done  !

376  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Feb.-March,  1741.

Neisse  lies  deep  enough  in  Prussian  environment  ;  like
Brieg,  like  Glogau,  strictly  blockaded ;  our  posts  thereabouts,
among  the  Mountains,  thought  to  be  impregnable.  Never-
theless, what  new  thing  is  this  ?  Here  are  swarms  of  loose
Hussar-Pandour  people,  wild  Austrian  Irregulars,  who  come
pouring  out  of  Glatz  Country ;  disturbing  the  Prussian  posts
towards  that  quarter ;  and  do  not  let  us  want  for  Small  War
(Kleine  Krieg)  so  called.  General  Browne,  it  appears,  is  got
back  to  Glatz  at  this  early  season,  he  and  a  General  Lentulus
busy  there ;  and  these  are  the  compliments  they  send  !  A
very  troublesome  set  of  fellows,  infesting  one's  purlieus  in
winged  predatory  fashion ;  swooping  down  like  a  cloud  of
vulturous  harpies  on  the  sudden ;  fierce  enough,  if  the  chance
favor ;  then  to  wing  again,  if  it  do  not.  Communication,  espe-
cially reconnoitring,  is  not  safe  in  their  neighborhood.  Prus-
sian Infantry,  even  in  small  parties,  generally  beats  them  ;
Prussian  Horse  not,  but  is  oftener  beaten,  —  not  drilled  for
this  rabble  and  their  ways.  In  pitched  fight  they  are  not
dangerous,  rather  are  despicable  to  the  disciplined  man ;  but
can,  on  occasion,  do  a  great  deal  of  mischief.

Thus,  it  was  not  long  after  Friedrich's  coming  into  these
parts,  when  he  learnt  with  sorrow  that  a  Body  of  "  500  Horse
and  500  Foot "  (or  say  it  were  only  300  of  each  kind,  which
is  the  fact a)  had  eluded  our  posts  in  the  Mountains,  and  actu-
ally got  into  Neisse.  "  The  Foot  will  be  of  little  consequence,"
writes  Friedrich ;  "  but  the  Horse,  which  will  disturb  our  com-
munications, are  a  considerable  mischief."  This  was  on  the
oth  of  March.  And  about  a  week  before,  on  the  27th  of  Feb-
ruary, there  had  well-nigh  a  far  graver  thing  befallen,  —
namely  the  capture  of  Friedrich  himself,  and  the  sudden  end
of  all  these  operations.

Skirmish  of  Baumgarten,  27th  February,  1741.

In  most  of  the  Anecdote-Books  there  used  to  figure,  and
still  does,  insisting  on  some  belief  from simple persons,  a
wonderful  Story  in  very  vague  condition  :  How  once  "  in  the
1  Orlich,  i.  79  ;  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  ii.  68.

CHAP.  IX. FRIEDRICH  RETURNS TO SILESIA.  377

27th  Feb.  1741.

Silesian  Wars,"  the  King,  in  those  Upper  Neisse  regions,  in
the  Wartha  district  between  Glatz  and  Neisse,  was,  one  day,
within  an  inch  of  being  taken,  —  clouds  of  Hussars  suddenly
rising  round  him,  as  he  rode  reconnoitring,  with  next  to  no
escort,  only  an  adjutant  or  so  in  attendance.  How  he  shot
away,  keeping  well  in  the  shade  ;  and  erelong  whisked  into  a
Convent  or  Abbey,  the  beautiful  Abbey  of  Kamenz  in  those
parts  ;  and  found  Tobias  Stusche,  excellent  Abbot  of  the  place,
to  whom  he  candidly  disclosed  his  situation.  How  the  excel-
lent Tobias  thereupon  instantly  ordered  the  bells  to  be  rung
for  a  mass  extraordinary,  Monks  not  knowing  why ;  and,  after
bells,  made  his  appearance  in  high  costume,  much  to  the  won-
der of  his  Monks,  with  a  Second  Abbot,  also  in  high  costume,
but  of  shortish  stature,  whom  they  never  saw  before  or  after.
Which  two  Abbots,  or  at  least  Tobias,  proceeded  to  do  the
so-called  divine  office  there  and  then;  letting  loose  the  big
chant  especially,  and  the  growl  of  organs,  in  a  singularly  ex-
pressive manner.  How  the  Pandours  arrived  in  clouds  mean-
while ;  entered,  in  searching  parties,  more  or  less  reverent  of
the  mass;  searched  high  and  low;  but  found  nothing,  and
were  obliged  to  take  Tobias's  blessing  at  last,  and  go  their
ways.  How  the  Second  Abbot  thereupon  swore  eternal  friend-
ship with  Tobias,  in  the  private  apartments ;  and  rode  off  as  —
as  a  rescued  Majesty,  determined  to  be  more  cautious  in  Pan-
dour  Countries  for  the  future  ! 1  —  Which  story,  as  to  the  body
of  it,  is  all  myth ;  though,  as  is  oftenest  the  case,  there  lies  in
it  some  soul  of  fact  too.  The  History-Books,  which  had  not
much  heeded  the  little  fact,  would  have  nothing  to  do  with
this  account  of  it.  Nevertheless  the  people  stuck  to  their
Myth ;  so  that  Dryasdust  (in  punishment  for  his  sinful  blind-
ness to  the  human  and  divine  significance  of  facts)  was  driven
to  investigate  the  business  ;  and  did  at  last  victoriously  bring
it  home  to  the  small  occurrence  now  called  Skirmish  of  Baum-

1  Hildebrandt,  Anekdolen,  i.  1-7.  Pandour  proper  is  a  foot-soldier  (tall
raw-boned  ill-washed  biped,  in  copious  Turk  breeches,  rather  barish  in  the
top  parts  of  him;  carries  a  very  long  musket,  and  has  several  pistols  and
butcher's-knives  stuck  in  his  girdle)  :  specifically  a  footman;  but  readers  will
permit  me  to  use  him  withal,  as  here,  in  the  generic  sense.

378  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

27th  Feb.  1741.

garten,  which  had  nearly  become  so  great  in  the  History  of  the
World,  —  to  the  following  effect.

There  are  two  Valleys  with  roads  that  lead  from  that  South-
west quarter  of  Silesia  towards  Glatz,  each  with  a  little  Town
at  the  end  of  it,  looking  up  into  it :  Wartha  the  name  of  the
one  :  Silberberg  that  of  the  other.  Through  the  Wartha  Val-
ley, which  is  southernmost,  young  Neisse  Eiver  comes  rushing
down,  —  the  blue  mountains  thereabouts  very  pretty,  on  a  clear
spring  day,  says  my  touring  friend.  Both  at  Wartha,  and  at
Silberberg  the  little  Town  which  looks  into  the  mouth  of  the
northernmost  Valley,  the  Prussians  have  a  post.  Old  Ders-
chau,  Malplaquet  Derschau,  with  head-quarters  at  Franken-
stein, some  seven  or  eight  miles  nearer  Schweidnitz,  has  not
failed  in  that  precaution.  Friedrich  wished  to  visit  Silberberg
and  Wartha ;  set  out  accordingly,  27th  February,  with  small
escort,  carelessly  as  usual :  the  Pandour  people  had  wind  of
it ;  knew  his  habits  on  such  occasions  ;  and,  gliding  through
other  roadless  valleys,  under  an  adventurous  Captain,  had  de-
termined to  whirl  him  off.  And  they  were  in  fact  not  far  from
succeeding,  had  not  a  mistake  happened.

Silberberg,  and  Wartha  the  southernmost,  which  stands  upon
the  Neisse  River  (rushing  out  there  into  the  plainer  country),
are  each  about  seven  or  eight  miles  from  Frankenstein,  the
Head-quarters ;  and  there  are  relays  of  posts,  capable  of  sup-
porting one  another,  all  the  way  from  Frankenstein  to  each.
Friedrich  rode  to  Silberberg  first ;  examined  the  post,  found  it
right ;  then  rode  across  to  Wartha,  seven  or  eight  miles  south-
ward ;  examined  Wartha  likewise  ;  after  which,  he  sat  down
to  dinner  in  that  little  Town,  with  an  Officer  or  two  for  com-
pany, —  having,  I  suppose,  found  all  right  in  both  the  posts.
In  the  way  hither,  he  had  made  some  change  in  the  relay
arrangements,  which  at  first  involved  some  diminution  of  his
own  escort,  and  then  some  marching  about  and  re-distributing :
so  that,  externally,  it  seemed  as  if  the  Principal  Eelay-party
were  now  marching  on  Baumgarten,  an  intermediate  Village,
—  at  least  so  the  Pandour  Captain  understands  the  movements
going  on ;  and  crouches  into  the  due  thickets  in  consequence,
not  doubting  but  the  King  himself  is  for  Baumgarten,  and  will

CHAP.  IX. FKIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO SILESIA.  379

27th  Feb.  1741.

be  at  hand  presently.  Principal  relay-party,  a  squadron  of
Schulenburg's  Dragoons,  with  a  stupid  Major  over  them,  is
not  quite  got  into  Baumgarten,  when  "  with  horrible  cries,
the  Pandour  Captain  with  about  500  horse,"  plunges  out  of
cover,  direct  upon  the  throat  of  it :  and  Friedrich,  at  Wartha,
is  but  just  begun  dining  when  tumult  of  distant  musketry
breaks  in  upon  him.  With  Friedrich  himself,  at  this  time,  as
I  count,  there  might  be  150  Horse  ;  in  Wartha  post  itself  are
at  least  "  forty  hussars  and  fifty  foot."  By  no  means  "  noth-
ing but  a  single  adjutant,"  as  the  Myth  bears.

The  stupid  Major  ought  to  have  beaten  this  rabble,  though
above  two  to  one  of  him.  But  he  could  not,  though  he  tried
considerably ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  himself  beaten ;  obliged
to  make  off,  leaving  "  ten  dragoons  killed,  sixteen  prisoners,
one  standard  and  two  kettle-drums  :  "  —  victory  and  all  this
plunder,  ye  Pandour  gentry ;  but  evidently  no  King.  The  Pan-
dour  gentry,  on  the  instant,  made  off  too,  alarm  being  abroad ;
got  into  some  side-valley,  with  their  prisoners  and  drum-and-
standard  honors,  and  vanished  from  view  of  mankind.

Friedrich  had  started  from  dinner;  got  his  escort  under
way,  with  the  forty  hussars  and  the  fifty  foot,  and  what  small
force  was  attainable ;  and  hurried  towards  the  scene.  He  did
see,  by  the  road,  another  strongish  party  of  Pandours ;  dashed
them  across  the  Neisse  Kiver  out  of  sight ;  —  but,  getting  to
Baumgarten,  found  the  field  silent,  and  ten  dead  men  upon  it.
"I  always  told  you  those  Schulenburg  Dragoons  were  good
for  nothing ! "  writes  he  to  the  Old  Dessauer ;  but  gradually
withal,  on  comparing  notes,  finds  what  a  danger  he  had  run,
and  how  rash  and  foolish  he  had  been.  "  An  etourderie  (fool-
ish trick),"  he  calls  it,  writing  to  Jordan  ;  "  a  black  eye ;  "  and
will  avoid  the  like.  Vienna  got  its  two  kettle-drums  and  flag ;
extremely  glad  to  see  them  ;  and  even  sang  Te-Deum  upon
them,  to  general  edification.1  This  is  the  naked  primordial
substance  out  of  which  the  above  Myth  grew  to  its  present
luxuriance  in  the  popular  imagination.  Place,  the  little  Vil-
lage of  Baumgarten;  day,  27th  February,  1741.  Of  Tobias
Stusche  or  the  Convent  of  Kamenz,  not  one  authentic  word

l  Orlich,  i.  62-64.

380  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

Feb.-March,  1741.

on  this  occasion.  Tobias  did  get  promotions,  favors  in  com-
ing years  :  a  worthy  Abbot,  deserving  promotion  on  general
grounds ;  and  master  of  a  Convent  very  picturesque,  but  twelve
miles  from  the  present  scene  of  action.

Aspects  of  Breslau.

Friedrich  avoided  visiting  Breslau,  probably  for  the  reasons
above  given ;  though  there  are  important  interests  of  his  there,
especially  his  chief  Magazine;  and  issues  of  moment  are  si-
lently working  forward.  Here  are  contemporary  Excerpts  (in
abridged  form),  which  are  authentic,  and  of  significance  to  a
lively  reader :  —

"  Breslau,  Middle  of  January,  1741.  The  Prussian  Envoy,
Herr  von  Gotter,  had  appeared  here,  returning  from  Vienna ;
Gotter,  and  then  Borck,  who  made  no  secret  in  Breslau  soci-
ety, That  not  the  slightest  hope  of  a  peaceable  result  existed,
as  society  might  have  flattered  itself ;  but  that  war  and  battle
would  have  to  decide  this  matter.  A  Saxon  Ambassador  was
also  here,  waiting  some  time ;  message  thought  to  be  insignifi-
cant :  —  probably  some  vague  admonitory  stuff  again  from
Kur-Sachsen  (Polish  King,  son  of  August  the  Strong,  a  very
insignificant  man),  who  acts  as  Reichs-  Vicarius  in  those  North-
ern parts."  For  the  reader  is  to  know,  there  are  Reichs-Vicars
more  than  one  (nay  more  than  two  on  this  occasion,  with  con-
siderable jarring  going  on  about  them)  ;  and  I  could  say  much
about  their  dignities,  limits,  duties,1  —  if  indeed  there  were
any  duties,  except  dramatic  ones !  But  the  Keich  itself,  and
Vicarship  along  with  it,  are  fallen  into  a  nearly  imaginary  con-
dition ;  and  the  Eegensburg  Diet  (not  Princes  now,  but  mere
Delegates  of  Princes,  mostly  Bombazine  People),  which,  "  ever
since  1663,"  has  sat  continual,  instead  of  now  and  then,  is  be-
come an  Enchanted  Wiggery,  strange  to  look  upon,  under  those
earnest  stars.  "  As  King  Friedrich  did  not  call  at  Breslau,"
after  those  Neisse  bombardments,  but  rolled  past,  straight
homewards,  the  three  Excellencies  all  departed, — Borck  and
Gotter  to  Berlin,  the  Saxon  home  again  with  his  insignificant
message.

1 Adelung,  ii.  143,  &c.  ;  Kohler,  Reichs- Historic,  pp.  585-589.

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 381

Feb.-March,  1741.

"  January  Vdth.  Schwerin  too  was  here  in  the  course  of  the
winter,  to  see  how  the  magazines  and  other  war-preparations
were  going  on :  Breslau  outwardly  and  inwardly  is  whirling
with  business,  and  offers  phenomena.  For  instance,  it  is
known  that  the  Army-Chest,  heaps  of  silver  and  gold  in  it,
lies  in  the  Scultet  Garden-House,  where  the  King  lodged  ;  and
that  only  one  sentry  walks  there,  and  that  in  the  guard-house
itself,  which  is  some  way  off,  there  are  only  thirty  men.  Janu-
ary 19th,  about  9  of  the  clock,1  alarm  rises,  That  2,000  Diebs-
Gesindel  (Collective  Thief-rabble  of  Breslau  and  dependencies)
are  close  by ;  intending  a  stroke  upon  said  Garden-House  and
Army-Chest !  Perhaps  this  rumor  sprang  of  its  own  accord  ;
—  or  perhaps  not  quite  ?  It  had  been  very  rife ;  and  ran
high ;  not  without  remonstrances  in  Town-Hall,  and  the  like,
which  we  can  imagine.  Issue  was,  The  Officer  on  post  at
Scultet's  loaded  his  treasure  in  carts ;  conveyed  it,  that  same
night,  to  the  interior  of  the  City,  in  fact  to  the  Oberamts-Haus
(Government-House  that  was)  ;  —  which  doubtless  was  a  step
in  the  right  direction.  For  now  the  Two  Feld-Kriegs-Commis-
sariat  Gentlemen  (one  of  whom  is  the  expert  Miinchow,  son  of
our  old  Ciistrin  friend),  supreme  Prussian  Authorities  here,  do
likewise  shift  out  of  their  inns ;  and  take  old  Schaffgotsch's
apartments  in  the  same  Oberamts-Haus ;  mutely  symbolling
that  perhaps  they  are  likely  to  become  a  kind  of  Government.
And  the  reader  can  conceive  how,  in  such  an  element,  the  func-
tion of  governing  would  of  itself  fall  more  and  more  into  their
hands.  They  were  consummately  polite,  discreet,  friendly
towards  all  people ;  and  did  in  effect  manage  their  business,
tax-gatherings  in  money  and  in  kind,  with  a  perfection  and
precision  which  made  the  evil  a  minimum.

"  February  17th.  .  .  .  This  day  also,  there  arrived  at  Bres-
lau, by  boat  up  the  Oder,  ten  heavy  cannon,  three  mortars,  and
ammunition  of  powder,  bomb-shells,  balls,  as  much  as  loaded
fifty  wagons ;  the  whole  of  which  were,  in  like  manner,  for-
warded to  Ohlau.  This  day,  as  on  other  days  before  and  after.
Great  Magazines  forming  here ;  the  Military  chiefly  at  Ohlau ;
at  Breslau  the  Provender  part,  —  and  this  latter  under  note-

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  700.

382  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Feb.-March,  1741.

worthy  circumstances.  In  the  Dom-Island,  namely  ;  which  is
definable  (in  a  case  of  such  necessity)  as  being  'outside  the
walls.'  Especially  as  the  Eeverend  Fathers  have  mostly
glided  into  corners,  and  left  the  place  vacant.  In  the  Dom-
Island,  it  certainly  is  ;  and  such  a  stock,  —  all  bought  for
money  down,  and  spurred  forward  while  the  roads  were  under
frost,  —  '  such  a  stock  as  was  not  thought  to  be  in  all  Silesia,'
says  exaggerative  wonder.  The  vacant  edifices  in  the  Dom-
Island  are  filled  to  the  neck  with  meal  and  corn ;  the  Prussian
brigade  now  quartering  there  ('  without  the  walls,'  in  a  sense)
to  guard  the  same.  And  in  the  Bishop's  Garden  [poor  Sinzen-
dorf,  far  enough  away  and  in  no  want  of  it  just  now]  are  mere
hay-mows,  bigger  than  houses  :  who  can  object,  —  in  a  case  of
necessity  ?  No  man,  unless  he  politically  meddle,  is  meddled
with ;  politically  meddling,  you  are  at  once  picked  up ;  as  one
or  two  are,  —  clapped  into  gentle  arrest,  or,  like  old  Schaff-
gotsch,  and  even  Sinzendorf  before  long,  requested  to  leave
the  Country  till  it  get  settled.  Eigor  there  is,  but  not  in-
tentional injustice  on  Miinchow's  part,  and  there  is  a  studious
avoidance  of  harsh  manner.

"February-March.  Considerable  recruiting  in  Schlesien:
six  hundred  recruits  have  enlisted  in  Breslau  alone.  Also  his
Prussian  Majesty  has  sent  a  supply  of  Protestant  Preach-
ers, ordained  for  the  occasion,  to  minister  where  needed ;  —
which  is  piously  acknowledged  as  a  godsend  in  various  parts  of
Silesia.  Twelve  came  first,  all  Berliners ;  soon  afterwards,
others  from  different  parts,  till,  in  the  end,  there  were  about
Sixty  in  all.  Eigorous,  punctilious  avoidance  of  offence  to  the
Catholic  minorities,  or  of  whatever  least  thing  Silesian  Law
does  not  permit,  is  enjoined  upon  them ;  '  to  preach  in  barns
or  town-halls,  where  by  Law  you  have  no  Church.'  Their
salary  is  about  £30  a  year ;  they  are  all  put  under  supervision
of  the  Chaplain  of  Margraf  Karl's  Eegiment"  (a  judicious
Chaplain,  I  have  no  doubt,  and  fit  to  be  a  Bishop)  ;  and  so  far
as  appears,  mere  benefit  is  got  of  them  by  Schlesien  as  well  as
by  Friedrich,  in  this  function.  Friedrich  is  careful  to  keep  the
balance  level  between  Catholic  and  Protestant ;  but  it  has  hung
at  such  an  angle,  for  a  long  while  past !  In  general,  we  observe

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDEICH  RETURNS TO SILESIA. 383

Feb.-March,  1T41.

the  Catholic  Dignitaries,  and  the  zealous  or  fanatic  of  that
creed,  especially  the  Jesuits,  are  apt  to  be  against  him :  as  for
the  non-fanatic,  they  expect  better  government,  secular  advan-
tage ;  these  latter  weigh  doubtfully,  and  with  less  weight  which-
ever way.  In  the  general  population,  who  are  Protestant,  he
recognizes  friends ;  —  and  has  sent  them  Sixty  Preachers,  which
by  Law  was  their  due  long  since.  Here  follow  two  little  traits,
comic  or  tragi-comic,  with  which  we  can  conclude  :  —

"  Detached  Jesuit  parties,  here  and  there,  seem  to  have  mis-
chief in  hand  in  a  small  way,  encouraging  deserters  and  the
like ;  —  and  we  keep  an  eye  on  them.  No  discontent  else-
where, at  least  none  audible ;  on  the  contrary,  much  enlisting
on  the  part  of  the  Silesian  youth,  with  other  good  symptoms.
But  in  the  Dom,  there  is,  singular  to  say,  a  Goblin  found  walk-
ing, one  night ;  —  advancing,  not  with  airs  from  Heaven,  upon
the  Prussian  sentry  there  !  The  Prussian  sentry  handles  arms ;
pokes  determinedly  into  the  Goblin,  and  finding  him  solid,  ever
more  determinedly,  till  the  Goblin  shrieked  '  Jesus  Maria ! '
and  was  hauled  to  the  Guard-house  for  investigation."  A  weak
Goblin ;  doubtless  of  the  valet  kind ;  worth  only  a  little  whip-
ping ;  but  testifies  what  the  spirit  is.

"Another  time,  two  deserter  Frenchmen  getting  hanged
[such  the  law  in  aggravated  cases],  certain  polite  Jesuits,  who
had  by  permission  been  praying  and  extreme-unctioning  about
them,  came  to  thank  the  Colonel  after  all  was  over.  Colonel,
a  grave  practical  man,  needs  no  i  thanks ; '  would,  however,
'  advise  your  Reverences  to  teach  your  people  that  perjury  is
not  permissible,  that  an  oath  sworn  ought  to  be  kept ; '  and  in
fine  '  would  advise  you  Holy  Fathers  hereabouts,  and  others,
to  have  a  care  lest  you  get  into '  —  And  twitching  his  reins,
rode  away  without  saying  into  what."  1

Austria  is  standing  to  Arms.

Schwerin  has  been  doing  his  best  in  this  interim ;  collect-
ing magazines  with  double  diligence  while  the  roads  are  hard,
taking  up  the  Key-positions  far  and  wide,  from  the  Jablunka

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  723.

384  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Feb.-March,  1741.

round  to  the  Frontier  Valleys  of  Glatz  again.  He  was  through
Jablunka,  at  one  time ;  on  into  Mahren,  as  far  as  Olmiitz  ;
levying  contributions,  emitting  patents :  but  as  to  intimidating
her  Hungarian  Majesty,  if  that  was  the  intention,  or  changing
her  mind  at  all,  that  is  not  the  issue  got.  Austria  has  still
strength,  and  Pragmatic  Sanction  and  the  Laws  of  Nature
have  !  Very  fixed  is  her  Hungarian  Majesty's  determination,
to  part  with  no  inch  of  Territory,  but  to  drive  the  intrusive
Prussians  home  well  punished.

How  she  has  got  the  funds  is,  to  this  day,  a  mystery ;  —
unless  George  and  Walpole,  from  their  Secret-Service  Moneys,
have  smuggled  her  somewhat  ?  For  the  Parliament  is  not
sitting,  and  there  will  be  such  jargonings,  such  delays  :  a  pre-
liminary £100,000,  say  by  degrees  £200,000,  —  we  should  not
miss  it,  and  in  her  Majesty's  hands  it  would  go  far  !  Hints  in
the  English  Dryasdust  we  have ;  but  nothing  definite  ;  and  we
are  left  to  our  guesses.1  A  romantic  story,  first  set  current  by
Voltaire,  has  gone  the  round  of  the  world,  and  still  appears  in
all  Histories  :  How  in  England  there  was  a  Subscription  set
on  foot  for  her  Hungarian  Majesty ;  outcome  of  the  enthusiasm
of  English  Ladies  of  quality,  —  old  Sarah  Duchess  of  Marl-
borough  putting  down  her  name  for  £40,000,  or  indeed  putting
down  the  ready  sum  itself ;  magnanimous  veteran  that  she  was.
Voltaire  says,  omitting  date  and  circumstance,  but  speaking
as  if  it  were  indubitable,  and  a  thing  you  could  see  with  eyes :
"  The  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  widow  of  him  who  had  fought
for  Karl  VI.  [and  with  such  signal  returns  of  gratitude  from
the  said  Karl  VI.],  assembled  the  principal  Ladies  of  London ;
who  engaged  to  furnish  £100,000  among  them ;  the  Duchess
herself  putting  down  \_en  deposa,  tabling  in  corpore~\  £40,000
of  it.  The  Queen  of  Hungary  had  the  greatness  of  soul  to
refuse  this  money ;  —  needing  only,  as  she  intimated,  what  the
Nation  in  Parliament  assembled  might  please  to  offer  her."  2

One  is  sorry  to  run  athwart  such  a  piece  of  mutual  mag-
nanimity ;  but  the  fact  is,  on  considering  a  little  and  asking

1  Tindal  (xx.  497)  says  expressly  £200,000,  but  gives  no  date  or  other  par-
ticular.

2  Voltaire,  (Euvres  (Siede  de  Louis  XV.,  c.  6),  xxviii.  79.

CHAP.  IX. FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA.  385

Feb.-March,  1741.

evidence,  it  turns  out  to  be  mythical.  One  Dilworth,  an  inno-
cent English  soul  (from  whom  our  grandfathers  used  to  learn
Arithmetic,  I  think),  writing  on  the  spot  some  years  after  Vol-
taire, has  this  useful  passage  :  "  It  is  the  great  failing  of  a
strong  imagination  to  catch  greedily  at  wonders.  Voltaire  was
misinformed;  and  would  perhaps  learn,  by  a  second  inquiry,
a  truth  less  splendid  and  amusing.  A  Contribution  was,  by
News-writers  upon  their  own  authority,  fruitlessly  proposed.
It  ended  in  nothing :  the  Parliament  voted  a  supply ;  "  —  that
did  it,  Mr.  Dilworth ;  supplies  enough,  and  many  of  them  !
"  Fruitlessly,  by  News-writers  on  their  own  authority ; "  that
is  the  sad  fact.1

It  is  certain,  little  George,  who  considers  Pragmatic  Sanction
as  the  Keystone  of  Nature  in  a  manner,  has  been  venturing  far
deeper  than  purse  for  that  adorable  object;  and  indeed  has
been  diving,  secretly,  in  muddier  waters  than  we  expected,  to
a  dangerous  extent,  on  behalf  of  it,  at  this  very  time.  In  the
first  days  of  March,  Friedrich  has  heard  from  his  Minister  at
Petersburg  of  a  detestable  Project?  —  project  for  "  Partitioning
the  Prussian  Kingdom,"  no  less  ;  for  fairly  cutting  into  Fried-
rich,  and  paring  him  down  to  the  safe  pitch,  as  an  enemy  to
Pragmatic  and  mankind.  They  say,  a  Treaty,  Draught  of  a
Treaty,  for  that  express  object,  is  now  ready;  and  lies  at
Petersburg,  only  waiting  signature.  Here  is  a  Project!  Con-
tracting parties  (Russian  signature  still  wanting)  are:  Kur-
Sachsen;  her  Hungarian  Majesty;  King  George;  and  that
Eegent  Anne  (Mrs.  Anton  Ulrich,  so  to  speak),  who  sits  in
a  huddle  of  undress,  impatient  of  Political  objects,  but  sensible
to  the  charms  of  handsome  men.  To  the  charms  of  Count

1  The  Life  and  Heroick  Actions  of  Frederick  III.  (sic,  a  common  blunder),
by  W.  H.  Dilworth,  M.  A.  (London,  1758),  p.  25. A  poor  little  Book,  one  of
many  coming  out  on  that  subject  just  then  (for  a  reason  we  shall  see  on  get-
ting thither) ;  which  contains,  of  available  now,  the  above  sentence  and  no
more. Indeed  its  brethren,  one  of  them  by  Samuel  Johnson  (impramus,  the
imprisoned  giant),  do  not  even  contain  that,  and  have  gone  wholly  to  zero. —
Neither  little  Dilworth  nor  big  Voltaire  give  the  least  shadow  of  specific  date  ;
but  both  evidently  mean  Spring,  1742  (not  1741).

2  Orlich,  i.  83  (scrap  of  Note  to  Old  Dessauer ;  no  date  allowed  us  ;  "  early
in  March  ").

VOL.  vii.  25

386  FIRST SILESIANWAE.  BOOK  XII.

Feb. -March,  1741.

Lynar,  especially :  the  handsomest  of  Danish  noblemen  (more
an  ancient  Eoman  than  a  Dane),  whom  the  Polish  Majesty,
calculating  cause  and  effect,  had  despatched  to  her,  with  that
view,  in  the  dead  of  winter  lately.  To  whom  she  has  given
ear  ;  —  dismissing  her  Miinnich,  as  we  saw  above ;  —  and  is
ready  for  signing,  or  perhaps  has  signed  ! l  Friedrich's  aston-
ishment, on  hearing  of  this  "  detestable  Project,"  was  great.
However,  he  takes  his  measures  on  it ;  —  right  lucky  that  he
has  the  Old  Dessauer,  and  machinery  for  acting  on  Kur-
Sachsen  and  the  Britannic  Majesty.  "  Get  your  machinery  in
gear !  "  is  naturally  his  first  order.  And  the  Old  Dessauer
does  it,  with  effect :  of  which  by  and  by.

Never  did  I  hear,  before  or  since,  of  such  a  plunge  into  the
muddy  unfathomable,  on  the  part  of  little  George,  who  was  an
honorable  creature,  and  dubitative  to  excess  :  and  truly  this
rash  plunge  might  have  cost  him  dear,  had  not  he  directly
scrambled  out  again.  Or  did  Friedrich  exaggerate  to  himself
his  Uncle's  real  share  in  the  matter  ?  I  always  guess,  there
had  been  more  of  loose  talk,  of  hypothesis  and  fond  hope,  in
regard  to  George's  share,  than  of  determinate  fact  or  procedure
on  his  own  part.  The  transaction,  having  had  to  be  dropped
on  the  sudden,  remains  somewhat  dark;  but,  in  substance,  it
is  not  doubtful ; 2  and  Parliament  itself  took  afterwards  to  pok-
ing into  it,  though  with  little  effect.  Kur-Sachsen's  objects  in
the  adventure  were  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  but  on  George's  part
it  was  pure  adoration  of  Pragmatic  Sanction,  anxiety  for  the
Keystone  of  Nature,  and  lest  Chaos  come  again.  In  compari-
son with  such  transcendent  divings,  what  is  a  little  Secret-
Service  money  !  —

The  Count  Lynar  of  this  adventure,  who  had  well-nigh  done
such  a  feat  in  Diplomacy,  may  turn  up  transiently  again.  A
conspicuous,  more  or  less  ridiculous  person  of  those  times.
Biisching  (our  Geographical  friend)  had  gone  with  him,  as
Excellency's  Chaplain,  in  this  Kussian  Journey ;  which  is  a
memorable  one  to  Biisching ;  and  still  presents  vividly,  through
his  Book,  those  haggard  Baltic  Coasts  in  midwinter,  to  readers
who  have  business  there.  Such  a  journey  for  grimness  of  out-
1  (Euvres  de  Frfddric,  ii.  68.  2  Tindal,  xx.  497.

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 387

Feb.-March,  1741.

look,  upon  pine-tufts  and  frozen  sand ;  for  cold  (the  Count's
very  tobacco-pipe  freezing  in  his  mouth),  for  hardship,  for  bad
lodging,  and  extremity  of  dirt  in  the  unfreezable  kinds,  as
seldom  was.  They  met,  one  day  on  the  road,  a  Lord  Hynd-
ford,  English  Ambassador  just  returning  from  Petersburg,
with  his  fourgons  and  vehicles,  and  arrangements  for  sleep
and  victual,  in  an  enviably  luxurious  condition,  —  whom  we
shall  meet,  to  our  cost.  They  saw,  in  the  body,  old  Field-
marshal  Lacy,  and  dined  with  him,  at  Riga ;  who  advised
brandy  schnapps  ;  a  recipe  rejected  by  Biisching.  And  other
memorabilia,  which  by  accident  hang  about  this  Lynar.1  —  All
through  Kegent  Anne's  time  he  continued  a  dangerous  object
to  Friedrich ;  and  it  was  a  relief  when  Elizabeth  Catin  became
Autocrat,  instead  of  Deshabille  Anne  and  her  Lynar.  Adieu
to  him,  for  fifteen  years  or  more.

Of  Friedrich's  military  operations,  of  his  magazines,  posts,
diligent  plannings  and  gallopings  about,  in  those  weeks  ;  of  all
this  the  reader  can  form  some  notion  by  looking  on  the  map
and  remembering  what  has  gone  before :  but  that  subterranean
growling  which  attended  him,  prophetic  of  Earthquake,  that
universal  breaking  forth  of  Bedlams,  now  fallen  so  extinct,  no
reader  can  imagine.  Bedlams  totally  extinct  to  everybody ;
but  which  were  then  very  real,  and  raged  wide  as  the  world,
high  as  the  stars,  to  a  hideous  degree  among  the  then  sons  of
men ;  —  unimaginable  now  by  any  mortal.

And,  alas,  this  is  one  of  the  grand  difficulties  for  my  read-
ers and  me ;  Friedrich's  Life-element  having  fallen  into  such
a  dismal  condition.  Most  dismal,  dark,  ugly,  that  Austrian-
Succession  Business,  and  its  world-wide  battlings,  throttlings
and  intriguings  :  not  Dismal  Swamp,  under  a  coverlid  of  Lon-
don Fog,  could  be  uglier !  A  Section  of  "  History  "  so  called,
which  human  nature  shrinks  from  ;  of  which  the  extant  genera-
tion already  knows  nothing,  and  is  impatient  of  hearing  any-
thing !  Truly,  Oblivion  is  very  due  to  such  an  Epoch  :  and  from
me  far  be  it  to  awaken,  beyond  need,  its  sordid  Bedlams,  hap-
pily extinct.  But  without  Life-element,  no  Life  can  be  intel-
1  Busching,  Beitriige,  vi.  132-164.

388  FIEST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

Feb. -March,  1741.

ligible  ;  and  till  Friedrich  and  one  or  two  others  are  extricated
from  it,  Dismal  Swamp  cannot  be  quite  filled  in.  Courage,
reader !  —  Our  Constitutional  Historian  makes  this  farther
reflection  :  —

"English  moneys,  desperate  Russian  intrigues,  Treaties
made  and  Treaties  broken  —  If  instead  of  Pragmatic  Sanction
with  eleven  Potentates  guaranteeing,  Maria  Theresa  had  at
this  time  had  200,000  soldiers  and  a  full  treasury  (as  Prince
Eugene  used  to  advise  the  late  Kaiser),  how  different  might  it
have  been  with  her,  and  with  the  whole  world  that  fell  upon
one  another's  throats  in  her  quarrel !  Some  eight  years  of  the
most  disastrous  War ;  and  except  the  falling  of  Silesia  to  its
new  place,  no  result  gained  by  it.  War  at  any  rate  inevitable,
you  object  ?  English-Spanish  War  having  been  obliged  to
kindle  itself ;  French  sure  to  fall  in,  on  the  Spanish  side  ;
sure  to  fall  upon  Hanover,  so  soon  as  beaten  at  sea,  and  thus
to  involve  all  Europe  ?  Well,  it  is  too  likely.  But,  even  in
that  case,  the  poor  English  would  have  gone  upon  their  neces-
sary Spanish  War,  by  the  direct  road  and  with  their  eyes
open,  instead  of  somnambulatiiig  and  stumbling  over  the
chimney-tops  ;  and  the  settlement  nfight  have  come  far  sooner,
and  far  cheaper  to  mankind.  —  Nay,  we  are  to  admit  that  the
new  place  for  Silesia  was,  likewise,  the  place  appointed  it
by  just  Heaven ;  and  Friedrich's  too  was  a  necessary  War.
Heaven  makes  use  of  Shadow-hunting  Kaisers  too  ;  and  its
ways  in  this  mad  world  are  through  the  great  Deep."

TJie  Young  Dessauer  captures  Grlogau  (March  9th)  ;  the
Old  Dessauer,  by  his  Camp  of  G-ottin  (April  2d),
checkmates  certain  Designing  Persons.

Money  somewhere  her  Hungarian  Majesty  has  got ;  that  is
one  thing  evident.  She  has  an  actual  Army  on  foot,  "  drawn
out  of  Italy,"  or  whence  she  could ;  formidable  Army,  says
rumor,  and  getting  well  equipped ;  —  and  here  are  the  Pandour
Precursors  of  it,  coming  down  like  storm-clouds  through  the
Glatz  valleys  ;  —  nearly  finishing  the  War  for  her  at  a  stroke,
the  other  day,  had  accident  favored ;  —  and  have  thrown  rein-

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA.  389

9th  March,  1741.

forcement  of  600  into  Neisse.  Friedrich  is  not  insensible  to
these  things ;  and  amid  such  alarms  from  far  and  from  near,
is  becoming  eager  to  have,  at  least,  Glogau  in  his  hand.
Glogau,  he  is  of  opinion,  could  now,  and  should,  straightway
be  done.

Glogau  is  not  a  strong  place ;  after  all  the  repairing,  it
could  stand  little  siege,  were  we  careless  of  hurting  it.  But
Wallis  is  obstinate ;  refuses  Free  Withdrawal ;  will  hold  out
to  the  uttermost,  though  his  meal  is  running  low.  He  pre-
tends there  is  relief  coming  ;  relief  just  at  hand ;  and  once,  in
midnight  time,  "  lets  off  a  rocket  and  fires  six  guns,"  alarming
Prince  Leopold  as  if  relief  were  just  in  the  neighborhood.  A
tough  industrious  military  man ;  stiff  to  his  purpose,  and  not
without  shift.

Friedrich  thinks  the  place  might  be  had  by  assault :  "  Open
trenches  ;  set  your  batteries  going,  which  need  not  injure  the
Town ;  need  only  alarm  Wallis,  and  terrify  it ;  then,  under
cover  of  this  noise  and  feint  of  cannonading,  storm  with
vigor."  Leopold,  the  Young  Dessauer,  is  cautious ;  wants
petards  if  he  must  storm,  wants  two  new  battalions  if  he  must
open  trenches ;  —  he  gets  these  requisites,  and  is  still  cuncta-
tory.  Friedrich  has  himself  got  the  notion,  "from  clear  in-
telligence," true  or  not,  that  relief  to  Glogau  is  actually  on
way ;  and  under  such  imminences,  Kussian  and  other,  in  so
ticklish  a  state  of  the  world,  he  becomes  more  and  more  im-
patient that  this  thing  were  done.  In  the  first  week  of  March,
still  hurrying  about  on  inspection-business,  he  writes,  from
four  or  five  different  places  ("  Mollwitz  near  Brieg  "  is  one  of
them,  a  Village  we  shall  soon  know  better),  Note  after  Note
to  Leopold  ;  who  still  makes  difficulties,  and  is  not  yet  perfect
to  the  last  finish  in  his  preparations.  "  Preparations  ! "  an-
swers Friedrich  impatiently  (date  Mollwitz,  5th  March,  the
third  or  fourth  impatient  Note  he  has  sent) ;  and  adds,  just
while  quitting  Mollwitz  for  Ohlau,  this  Postscript  in  his  own
hand :  —

P.  S.  "I  am  sorry  you  have  not  understood  me  !  They  have,
in  Bohmen,  a  regular  enterprise  on  hand  for  the  rescue  of
Glogau.  I  have  Infantry  enough  to  meet  them  ;  but  Cavalry

890  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xii.

9th  March,  1741.

is  quite  wanting. You  must  therefore,  without  delay,  begin
the  siege. Let  us  finish  there,  I  pray  you !  " x

And  next  day,  Monday  6th,  to  cut  the  matter  short,  he  de-
spatches his  General- Adjutant  Goltz  in  person  (the  distance  is
above  seventy  miles),  with  this  Note  wholly  in  autograph,
which  nothing  vocal  on  Leopold's  part  will  answer  :  —

"  Ohlau,  6th  March.  As  I  am  certainly  informed  that  the
Enemy  will  make  some  attempt,  I  hereby  with  all  distinctness
command,  That,  so  soon  as  the  petards  are  come  [which  they
are],  you  attack  Glogau.  And  you  must  make  your  Arrange-
ment (Disposition)  for  more  than  one  attack ;  so  that  if  one
fail,  the  other  shall  certainly  succeed.  I  hope  you  will  put  off
no  longer ;  —  otherwise  the  blame  of  all  the  mischief  that
might  arise  out  of  longer  delay  must  lie  on  you  alone."  2

Goltz  arrived  with  this  emphatic  Piece,  Tuesday  Evening,
after  his  course  of  seventy  miles  :  this  did  at  last  rouse  our
cautious  Young  Dessauer ;  and  so  there  is  next  obtainable,  on
much  compression,  the  following  authentic  Excerpt :  —

"  Glogau,  8th  March,  1741.  His  Durchlaucht  the  Prince
Leopold  summoned  all  the  Generals  at  noon ;  and  informed
them  That,  this  very  night,  Glogau  must  be  won.  He  gave
them  their  Instructions  in  writing  :  where  each  was  to  post
himself ;  with  what  detachments ;  how  to  proceed.  There  are
to  be  three  Attacks :  one  up  stream,  coming  on  with  the  River
to  its  right ;  one  down  stream,  Eiver  to  its  left ;  and  a  third
from  the  landward  side,  perpendicular  to  the  other  two.  The
very  captains  that  shall  go  foremost  are  specified;  at  what
hour  each  is  to  leave  quarters,  so  that  all  be  ready  simulta-
neously, waiting  in  the  posts  assigned;  —  against  what  points
to  advance  out  of  these,  and  storm  Karnpart  and  Wall.  Places,
times,  particulars,  everything  is  fixed  with  mathematical  ex-
actitude :  '  Be  steady,  be  correct,  especially  be  silent ;  and  so
far  as  Law  of  Nature  will  permit,  be  simultaneous  !  When
the  big  steeple  of  Glogau  peals  Midnight,  —  Forward,  with  the
first  stroke  ;  with  the  second,  much  more  with  the  twelfth
stroke,  be  one  and  all  of  you,  in  the  utmost  silence,  advancing !
And,  under  pain  of  death,  two  things  :  Not  one  shot  till  you
1  Orlich,  i.  70.  2  Ib.  i.  71.

CHAP.  IX, FEIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO SILESIA.  391

9th  March,  1741.

are  in ;  No  plundering  when  you  are.'  —  In  this  manner  is  the
silent  three-sided  avalanche  to  be  let  go.  Whereupon,"  says
my  Dryasdust,  "  the  Generals  retired ;  and  had,  for  one  item,
their  fire-arms  all  cleaned  and  new-loaded."  1

Without  plans  of  Glogau,  and  more  detail  and  study  than
the  reader  would  consent  to,  there  can  no  Narrative  be  given.
Glogau  has  Eamparts,  due  King-fence,  palisaded  and  repaired
by  Wallis ;  inside  of  this  is  an  old  Town-Wall,  which  will
need  petards  :  there  are  about  1,000  men  under  Wallis,  and
altogether  on  the  works,  not  to  count  a  mortar  or  two,  fifty-
eight  big  guns.  The  reader  must  conceive  a  poor  Town  under
blockade,  in.  the  wintry  night-time,  with  its  tough  Count
Wallis  ;  ill-off  for  the  necessaries  of  life ;  Town  shrouded  in
darkness,  and  creeping  quietly  to  its  bed.  This  on  the  one
hand :  and  on  the  other  hand,  Prussian  battalions  marching
up,  at  10  o'clock  or  later,  with  the  utmost  softness  of  step ;
"  taking  post  behind  the  ordinary  field-watches ; "  and  at
length,  all  standing  ranked,  in  the  invisible  dark ;  silent,  like
machinery,  like  a  sleeping  avalanche  :  Husht !  —  No  sentry
from  the  walls  dreams  of  such  a  thing.  "  Twelve  !  "  sings  out
the  steeple  of  Glogau ;  and  in  grim  whisper  the  word  is,  "  Vor-
wdrts  !  "  and  the  three-winged  avalanche  is  in  motion.

They  reach  their  glacises,  their  ditches,  covered  ways,  cor-
rect as  mathematics ;  tear  out  chevaux-de-frise,  hew  down
palisades,  in  the  given  number  of  minutes  :  Swift,  ye  Eegi-
ment's-carpenters ;  smite  your  best  !  Tour  cannon-shot  do
now  boom  out  upon  them  ;  which  go  high  over  their  heads,
little  dreaming  how  close  at  hand  they  are.  The  glacis  is
thirty  feet  high,  of  stiff  slope,  and  slippery  with  frost :  no
matter,  the  avalanche,  led  on  by  Leopold  in  person,  by  Margraf
Karl  the  King's  Cousin,  by  Adjutant  Goltz  and  the  chief  per-
sonages, rushes  up  with  strange  impetus  ;  hews  down  a  second
palisade;  surges  in; — Wallis's  sentries  extinct,  or  driven  to
their  main  guards.  There  is  a  singular  fire  in  the  besieging
party.  For  example,  Four  Grenadiers,  —  I  think  of  this
First  Column,  which  succeeded  sooner,  certainly  of  the  Kegi-
ment  Glasenapp,  —  four  grenadiers,  owing  to  slippery  or  other
1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  823 ;  ii.  165.

392  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAS.  BOOK  xn.

9th  March,  1741.

accidents,  in  climbing  the  glacis,  had  fallen  a  few  steps  behind
the  general  body ;  and  on  getting  to  the  top,  took  the  wrong
course,  and  rushed  along  rightward  instead  of  leftward.
Bightward,  the  first  thing  they  come  upon  is  a  mass  of  Aus-
trians  still  ranked  in  arms  ;  fifty -two  men,  as  it  turned  out,
with  their  Captain  over  them.  Slight  stutter  ensues  on  the
part  of  the  Four  Grenadiers ;  but  they  give  one  another  the
hint,  and  dash  forward  :  "  Prisoners  ?  "  ask  they  sternly,  as  if
all  Prussia  had  been  at  their  rear.  The  fifty-two,  in  the
darkness,  in  the  danger  and  alarm,  answer  "  Yes."  —  "  Pile
arms,  then ! "  Three  of  the  grenadiers  stand  to  see  that  done ;
the  fourth  runs  off  for  force,  and  happily  gets  back  with  it
before  the  comedy  had  become  tragic  for  his  comrades.  "  I
must  make  acquaintance  with  these  four  men,"  writes  Fried-
rich,  on  hearing  of  it ;  and  he  did  reward  them  by  present,  by
promotion  to  sergeantcy  (to  ensigncy  one  of  them),  or  what
else  they  were  fit  for.  Grenadiers  of  Glasenapp :  these  are
the  men  Friedrich  heard  swearing-in  under  his  window,  one
memorable  morning  when  he  burst  into  tears !  At  half -past
Twelve,  the  Kamparts,  on  all  sides,  are  ours.

The  Gates  of  the  Town,  under  axe  and  petard,  can  make
little  resistance,  to  Leopold's  Column  or  the  other  two.  A
hole  is  soon  cut  in  the  Town-Gate,  where  Leopold  is ;  and
gallant  Wallis,  who  had  rallied  behind  it,  with  his  Artillery-
General  and  what  they  could  get  together,  fires  through  the
opening,  kills  four  men ;  but  is  then  (by  order,  and  not  till
then)  fired  upon,  and  obliged  to  draw  back,  with  his  Artil-
lery-General mortally  hurt.  Inside  he  attempts  another  rally,
some  200  with  him ;  and  here  and  there  perhaps  a  house-
window  tries  to  give  shot ;  but  it  is  to  no  purpose,  not  the
least  stand  can  be  made.  Poor  "Wallis  is  rapidly  swept  back,
into  the  Market-place,  into  the  Main  Guard-house ;  and  there
piles  arms :  "  Glogau  yours,  Ihr  Herren,  and  we  prisoners  of
War  ! "  The  steeple  had  not  yet  quite  struck  One.  Here  has
been  a  good  hour's-work !

Glogau,  as  in  a  dream,  or  half  awake,  and  timidly  peeping
from  behind  window-curtains,  finds  that  it  is  a  Town  taken.
Glogau  easily  consoles  itself,  I  hear,  or  even  is  generally  glad ;

CHAP.  IX. FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA.  393

9th  March,  1741.

Prussian  discipline  being  so  perfect,  and  ingress  now  free  for
the  necessaries  of  life.  There  was  no  plundering;  not  the
least  insult :  no  townsman  was  hurt ;  not  even  in  houses
where  soldiers  had  tried  firing  from  windows.  The  Prussian
Battalions  rendezvous  in  the  Market-place,  and  go  peaceably
about  their  patrolling,  and  other  business ;  and  meddle  with
nothing  else.  They  lost,  in  killed,  ten  men  ;  had  of  killed  and
wounded,  forty-eight;  the  Austrians  rather  more.1  Wallis
was  to  have  been  set  free  on  parole ;  but  was  not,  —  in  retalia-
tion for  some  severity  of  General  Browne's  in  the  interim
(picking  up  of  two  Silesian  Noblemen,  suspected  of  Prussian
tendency,  and  locking  them  in  Briinn  over  the  Hills),  —  and
had  to  go  to  Berlin,  till  that  was  repaired.  To  the  wounded
Artillery-General  there  was  every  tenderness  shown,  but  he
died  in  few  days.  The  other  Prisoners  were  marched  to  the
Ciistrin-Stettin  quarter ;  "  and  many  of  them  took  Prussian

service."

And  this  is  the  Scalade  of  Glogau :  a  shining  feat  of  those
days  ;  which  had  great  rumor  in  the  Gazettes,  and  over  all  the
then  feverish  Nations,  though  it  has  now  fallen  dim  again,  as
feats  do.  Its  importance  at  that  time,  its  utility  to  Fried-
rich's  affairs,  was  undeniable ;  and  it  filled  Friedrich  with
the  highest  satisfaction,  and  with  admiration  to  overflowing.
Done  9th  March,  1741 ;  in  one  hour,  the  very  earliest  of
the  day.

Goltz  posted  back  to  Schweidnitz  with  the  news  ;  got  thither
about  5  P.M.  ;  and  was  received,  naturally,  with  open  arms.
Friedrich  in  person  marched  out,  next  morning,  to  make  Feu-
de-joie  and  Te-Deum-ing ;  — there  was  Eoyal  Letter  to  Leopold,
which  flamed  through  all  the  Newspapers,  and  can  still  be
read  in  innumerable  Books  ;  Letter  omissible  in  this  place.
We  remark  only  how  punctual  the  King  is,  to  reward  in  money
as  well  as  praise,  and  not  the  high  only,  but  the  low  that  had
deserved :  to  Prince  Leopold  he  presents  £2,000  ;  to  each  pri-
vate soldier  who  had  been  of  the  storm,  say  half  a  guinea,  —
doubling  and  quadrupling,  in  the  special  cases,  to  as  high  as

1  Orlich,  i.  75,  78;  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  829;  irreconcilable  otherwise,  in
some  slight  points.

394  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

March-April,  1741.

twenty  guineas,  of  our  present  money.  To  the  old  Gazetteers,
and  their  readers  everywhere,  this  of  Glogau  is  a  very  efful-
gent business ;  bursting  out  on  them,  like  sudden  Bude-light,
in  the  uncertain  stagnancy  and  expectancy  of  mankind.  Fried-
rich  himself  writes  of  it  to  the  Old  Dessauer :  —

"  The  more  I  think  of  the  Glogau  business,  the  more  impor-
tant I  find  it.  Prince  Leopold  has  achieved  the  prettiest
military  stroke  (die  schonste  Action}  that  has  been  done  in  this
Century.  From  my  heart  I  congratulate  you  on  having  such
a  Son.  In  boldness  of  resolution,  in  plan,  in  execution,  it  is
alike  admirable ;  and  quite  gives  a  turn  to  my  affairs." l

And  indeed,  it  is  a  perfect  example  of  Prussian  discipline,
and  military  quality  in  all  kinds ;  such  as  it  would  be  difficult
to  match  elsewhere.  Most  potently  correct ;  coining  out  every-
where with  the  completeness  and  exactitude  of  mathematics ;
and  has  in  it  such  a  fund  of  martial  fire,  not  only  ready  to
blaze  out  (which  can  be  exampled  elsewhere),  but  capable  of
bottling  itself  in,  and  of  lying  silently  ready.  Which  is  much
rarer ;  and  very  essential  in  soldiering  !  Due  a  little  to  the
Old  Dessauer,  may  we  not  say,  as  well  as  to  the  Young  ?
Friedrich  Wilhelm  is  fallen  silent ;  but  his  heavy  labors,  and
military  and  other  drillings  to  Prussian  mankind,  still  speak
with  an  audible  voice.

About  three  weeks  after  this  of  Glogau,  Leopold  the  Old
Dessauer,  over  in  Brandenburg,  does  another  thing  which  is
important  to  Friedrich,  and  of  great  rumor  in  the  world.
Steps  out,  namely,  with  a  force  of  36,000  men,  horse,  foot  and
artillery,  completely  equipped  in  all  points  ;  and  takes  Camp,
at  this  early  season,  at  a  place  called  Gottin,  not  far  from
Magdeburg,  handy  at  once  for  Saxony  and  for  Hanover  ;  and
continues  there  encamped,  —  "  merely  for  review  purposes."
Headers  can  figure  what  an  astonishment  it  was  to  Kur-Sach-
sen  and  British  George ;  and  how  it  struck  the  wind  out  of
their  Russian  Partition-Dream,  and  awoke  them  to  a  sense  of
the  awful  fact !  —  Capable  of  being  slit  in  pieces,  and  them-
selves partitioned,  at  a  day's  warning,  as  it  were !  It  was  on
1  Date,  13th  March,  1741  (Orlich,  i.  77).

CHAP.  IX.  FEIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 395

March-April,  1741.

April  2d,  that  Leopold,  with  the  first  division  of  the  36,000,
planted  his  flag  near  Gottin.  No  doubt  it  was  the  "  detestable
Project "  that  had  brought  him  out,  at  so  early  a  season  for
tent-life,  and  nobody  could  then  guess  why.  He  steadily
paraded  here,  all  summer  ;  keeping  his  36,000  well  in  drill,
since  there  was  nothing  else  needed  of  him.

The  Camp  at  Gottin  flamed  greatly  abroad  through  the
timorous  imaginations  of  mankind,  that  Year;  and  in  the
Newspapers  are  many  details  of  it.  And,  besides  the  impor-
tant general  fact,  there  is  still  one  little  point  worth  special
mention :  namely,  that  old  Field-marshal  Katte  (Father  of  poor
Lieutenant  Katte  whom  we  knew)  was  of  it ;  and  perhaps
even  got  his  death  by  it :  "  Chief  Commander  of  the  Cavalry
here,"  such  honor  had  he  ;  but  died  at  his  post,  in  a  couple  of
months,  "  at  Eekahn,  May  31st ;  "  1  poor  old  gentleman,  per-
haps unequal  to  the  hardships  of  field-life  at  so  early  a  season
of  the  year.

Friedrich  takes  the  Field,  with  some  Pomp;  goes  into  the
Mountains,  —  but  comes  fast  back.

At  Glogau  there  was  Homaging,  on  the  very  morrow  after
the  storm ;  on  the  second  day,  the  superfluous  regiments
marched  off:  no  want  of  vigorous  activity  to  settle  matters
on  their  new  footing  there.  General  Kalkstein  (Friedrich's
old  Tutor,  whom  readers  have  forgotten  again)  is  to  be  Com-
mandant of  Glogau;  an  office  of  honor,  which  can  be  done
by  deputy  except  in  cases  of  real  stress.  The  place  is  to
be  thoroughly  new-fortified,  —  which  important  point  they
commit  to  Engineer  Wallrave,  a  strong-headed  heavy-built
Dutch  Officer,  long  since  acquired  to  the  service,  on  account
of  his  excellence  in  that  line ;  who  did,  now  and  afterwards,
a  great  deal  of  excellent  engineering  for  Friedrich;  but  for
himself  (being  of  deep  stomach  withal,  and  of  life  too  disso-
lute) made  a  tragic  thing  of  it  ultimately.  As  will  be  seen,
if  we  have  leisure.

In  seven  or  eight  days,  Prince  Leopold  having  wound  up
1  Militair-Lexikon,  ii.  254.

396  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAK.  BOOK  xn.

March-April,  1741.

his  Glogau  affairs,  and  completed  the  new  preliminaries  there,
joins  the  King  at  Schweidnitz.  In  the  highest  favor,  as  was
natural.  Kalkstein  is  to  take  a  main  hand  in  the  Siege  of
Neisse ;  for  which  operation  it  is  hoped  there  will  soon  be
weather,  if  not  favorable  yet  supportable.  What  of  the
force  was  superfluous  at  Glogau  had  at  once  marched  off,  as
we  observed ;  and  is  now  getting  re-distributed  where  needful.
There  is  much  shifting  about ;  strengthening  of  posts,  giving
up  of  posts :  the  whole  of  which  readers  shall  imagine  for
themselves,  —  except  only  two  points  that  are  worth  remem-
bering: First,  that  Kalkstein  with  about  12,000  takes  post
at  Grotkau,  some  twenty-five  miles  north  of  Neisse,  ready
to  move  on,  and  open  trenches,  when  required :  and  second,
that  Holstein-Beck  gets  posted  at  Frankenstein  (chief  place
of  that  Baumgarten  Skirmish),  say  thirty-five  miles  west-by-
north  of  Neisse ;  and  has  some  8  or  10,000  Horse  and  Foot
thereabouts,  spread  up  and  down,  —  who  will  be  much  wanted,
and  not  procurable,  on  an  occasion  that  is  coming.

Friedrich  has  given  up  the  Jablunka  Pass ;  called  in  the
Jablunka  and  remoter  posts  ;  anxious  to  concentrate,  before
the  Enemy  get  nigh.  That  is  the  King's  notion ;  and  surely
a  reasonable  one ;  the  area  of  the  Prussian  Army,  as  I  guess
it  from  the  Maps,  being  above  2,000  square  miles,  beginning
at  Breslau  only,  and  leaving  out  Glogau.  Schwerin  thinks
differently,  but  without  good  basis.  Both  are  agreed,  "The
Austrian  Army  cannot  take  the  field  till  the  forage  come,"
till  the  new  grass  spring,  which  its  cavalry  find  convenient.
That  is  the  fair  supposition ;  but  in  that  both  are  mistaken,
and  Schwerin  the  more  dangerously  of  the  two.  —  Meanwhile,
the  Pandour  swarms  are  observably  getting  rifer,  and  of
stormier  quality ;  and  they  seem  to  harbor  farther  to  the
East  than  formerly,  and  not  to  come  all  out  of  Glatz.  Which
perhaps  are  symptomatic  circumstances  ?  The  worst  effect
of  these  preliminary  Pandour  clouds  is,  Your  scout-service
cannot  live  among  them ;  they  hinder  reconnoitring,  and
keep  the  Enemy  veiled  from  you.  Of  that  sore  mischief
Friedrich  had,  first  and  last,  ample  experience  at  their  hands  !
This  is  but  the  first  instalment  of  Pandours  to  Friedrich;

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 397

27th  March,  1741.

and  the  mere  foretaste  of  what  they  can  do  in  the  veiling
way.

Behind  the  Mountains,  in  this  manner,  all  is  inane  darkness
to  Friedrich  and  Schwerin.  They  know  only  that  Neipperg
is  rendezvousing  at  Olmiitz ;  and  judge  that  he  will  still
spend  many  weeks  upon  it ;  the  real  facts  being :  That  Neip-
perg  —  "who  arrived  in  Oliniitz  on  the  10th  of  March,"  the
very  day  while  Glogau  was  homaging  —  has  been,  he  and
those  above  him  and  those  under  him,  driving  preparations
forward  at  a  furious  rate.  That  Neipperg  held  —  I  think
at  Steinberg  his  hithermost  post,  some  twenty  miles  hither
of  Olmiitz  —  a  Council  of  War,  "all  the  Generals  and  even
Lentulus  from  Glatz,  present  at  it,"  day  not  given ;  where  the
unanimous  decision  was,  "March  straightway;  save  Neisse,
since  Glogau  is  gone  !  "  —  and  in  fine,  That  on  the  26th,
Neipperg  took  the  road  accordingly,  "  in  spite  of  furious
snow  blowing  in  his  face ; "  and  is  ever  since  (30,000  strong,
says  rumor,  but  perhaps  10,000  of  them  mere  Pandours)  un-
weariedly  climbing  the  Mountains,  laboriously  jingling  forward
with  his  heavy  guns  and  ammunition- wagons  ;  "  contending
with  the  steep  snowy  icy  roads ; "  intent  upon  saving  Neisse.
This  is  the  fact ;  profoundly  unknown  to  Friedrich  and
Schwerin ;  who  will  be  much  surprised,  when  it  becomes
patent  to  them  at  the  wrong  time.

Schweldnits,  27tJi  March.  This  day  Friedrich,  with  con-
siderable apparatus,  pomp  and  processional  cymballing,  greatly
the  reverse  of  his  ulterior  use  and  wont  in  such  cases,  quitted
Schweidnitz  and  his  Algarottis ;  solemnly  opening  Campaign
in  this  manner ;  and  drove  off  for  Ottmachau,  having  work
there  for  to-rnorrow.

The  Siege  of  Neisse  is  now  to  proceed  forthwith ;  trenches
to  be  opened  April  4th.  Friedrich  is  still  of  opinion,  that
his  posts  lie  too  wide  apart;  that  especially  Schwerin,  who
is  spread  among  the  Hills  in  Jagerndorf  Country,  ought  to
come  down,  and  take  closer  order  for  covering  the  siege.1
Schwerin  answers,  That  if  the  King  will  spare  him  a  rein-

1  CEuvres  de  Frtdtric,  ii.  70.

398  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

27th  March,  1741.

forcement  of  eight  squadrons  and  nine  battalions  (say  1,200
Horse,  9,000  Foot),  he  will  maintain  himself  where  he  is,
and  no  Enemy  shall  get  across  the  Mountains  at  all.  That
is  Schwerin's  notion;  who  surely  is  something  of  a  judge.
Friedrich  assents ;  will  himself  conduct  the  reinforcement  to
Schwerin,  and  survey  matters,  with  his  own  eyes,  up  yonder.
Friedrich  marches  from  Ottmachau,  accordingly,  29th  March ;
—  Kalkstein,  Holstein-Beck,  and  others  are  to  be  rendezvoused
before  Neisse,  in  the  interim ;  trenches  ready  for  opening  on
the  sixth  day  hence ;  —  and  in  this  manner,  climbs  these
Mountains,  and  sees  Jagerndorf  Country  for  the  first  time.

Beautiful  blue  world  of  Hills,  ridge  piled  on  ridge  behind
that  Neisse  region ;  fruitful  valleys  lapped  in  them,  with  grim
stone  Castles  and  busy  little  Towns  disclosing  themselves
as  we  advance  :  that  is  Jagerndorf  Country,  —  which  Uncle
George  of  Anspach,  hundreds  of  years  ago,  purchased  with
his  own  money ;  which  we  have  now  come  to  lay  hold  of  as
his  Heir !  Friedrich,  I  believe,  thinks  little  of  all  this,  and
does  not  remember  Uncle  George  at  all.  But  such  are  the
facts  ;  and  the  Country,  regarded  or  not,  is  very  blue  and
beautiful,  with  the  Spring  sun  shining  on  it;  or  with  the
sudden  Spring  storms  gathering  wildly  on  the  peaks,  as  if
for  permanent  investiture,  but  vanishing  again  straightway,
leaving  only  a  powdering  of  snow.

He  met  Schwerin  at  Neustadt,  half-way  to  Jagerndorf  ;
whither  they  proceeded  next  day.  "  What  news  have  you  of
the  Enemy  ?  "  was  Friedrich's  first  question.  Schwerin  has
no  news  whatever  ;  only  that  the  Enemy  is  far  off,  hanging  in
long  thin  straggle  from  Olmiitz  westward.  "  I  have  a  spy
out,"  said  Schwerin ;  "  but  he  has  not  returned  yet,"  —  nor
ever  will,  he  might  have  added.  If  diligent  readers  will  now
take  to  their  Map,  and  attend  day  by  day,  an  invincible  Pre-
decessor has  compelled  what  next  follows  into  human  intelli-
gibility, and  into  the  Diary  Form,  for  their  behoof ;  —  readers
of  an  idler  turn  can  skip  :  but  this  confused  hurry-scurry  of
marches  issues  in  something  which  all  will  have  to  attend  to.

"  Jagerndorf,  2d  April,  1741.  This  is  the  day  when  the  Old
Dessauer  makes  appearance  with  the  first  brigades  of  his

CHAP.  ix.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS TO  SILESIA. 399

2d-10th  April,  1741.

Camp  at  Gottin.  Friedrich  is  satisfied  with  what  he  has  seen
of  Jagerndorf  matters  ;  and  intends  returning  towards  Neisse,
there  to  commence  on  the  4th.  He  is  giving  his  final  orders,
and  on  the  point  of  setting  off,  when  —  Seven  Austrian  De-
serters, '  Dragoons  of  Lichtenstein,'  come  in ;  and  report,  That
Neipperg's  Army  is  within  a  few  miles  !  And  scarcely  had
they  done  answering  and  explaining,  when  sounds  rise  of  mus-
ketry and  cannon,  from  our  outposts  on  that  side  ;  intimating
that  here  is  Neipperg's  Army  itself.  Seldom  in  his  life  was
Friedrich  in  an  uglier  situation.  In  Jagerndorf,  an  open
Town,  are  only  some  three  or  four  thousand  men,  '  with  three
field-pieces,  and  as  much  powder  as  will  charge  them  forty
times.'  Happily  these  proved  only  the  Pandour  outskirts  of
Neipperg's  Army,  scouring  about  to  reconnoitre,  and  not  diffi-
cult to  beat ;  the  real  body  of  it  is  ascertained  to  be  at  Freu-
denthal,  fifteen  miles  to  westward,  southwestward  ;  making
towards  Neisse,  it  is  guessed,  by  the  other  or  western  road,
which  is  the  nearer  to  Glatz  and  to  the  Austrian  force
there.

"  Had  Neipperg  known  what  was  in  Jagerndorf  — !  But  he
does  not  know.  He  marches  on,  next  morning,  at  his  usual
slow  rate ;  wide  clouds  of  Pandours  accompanying  and  preced-
ing him  ;  skirmishing  in  upon  all  places  [upon  Jagerndorf,
for  instance,  though  fifteen  miles  wide  of  their  road],  to  ascer-
tain if  Prussians  are  there.  One  can  judge  whether  Friedrich
and  Schwerin  were  thankful  when  the  huge  alarm  produced
nothing !  '  The  mountain,'  as  Friedrich  says,  '  gave  birth  to  a
mouse;' — nay  it  was  a  'mouse'  of  essential  vital  use  to  Fried-
rich  and  Schwerin ;  a  warning,  That  they  must  instantly  collect
themselves,  men  and  goods ;  and  begone  one  and  all  out  of
these  parts,  double-quick  towards  Neisse.  Not  now  with  the
hope  of  besieging  Neisse,  —  far  from  that ;  —  but  of  getting
their  wide-scattered  posts  together  thereabouts,  and  escaping
destruction  in  detail  !

"  April  Uh,  Head-quarters  Neustadt.  By  violent  exertion,
with  the  sacrifice  only  of  some  remote  little  storehouses,  all  is
rendezvoused  at  Jagerndorf,  within  two  days ;  and  this  day
they  march  ;  King  and  vanguard  reaching  Neustadt,  some

400  FIKST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

2d-10th  April,  1741.

twenty-five  miles  forward,  some  twenty  still  from  Neisse.  At
Neustadt,  the  posts  that  had  stood  in  that  neighborhood  are
all  assembled,  and  march  with  the  King  to-morrow.  Of  Neip-
perg,  except  by  transitory  contact  with  his  Pandour  clouds,
they  have  seen  nothing  :  his  road  is  pretty  much  parallel
to  theirs,  and  some  fifteen  miles  leftward,  Glatzward ;  goes
through  Zuckmantel,  Ziegenhals,  straight  upon  Neisse.1  Neip-
perg's  men  are  wearied  with  the  long  climb  out  of  Mahren ;
and  he  struggles  towards  Neisse  as  the  first  object ;  —  holding
upon  Glatz  and  Lentulus  with  his  left.  Numerous  orders  have
been  speeded  from  the  King's  quarters,  at  Jagerndorf,  and
here  at  Neustadt ;  order  especially  to  Holstein-Beck  at  Frank-
enstein, and  to  Kalkstein  at  Grotkau,  How  they  are  to  unite,
first  with  one  another ;  and  then  to  cross  Neisse  River,  and
unite  with  the  King,  —  to  which  end  there  is  already  a  Bridge
laid  for  them,  or  about  to  be  laid  in  good  time.

"  April  5th,  Head-quarters  Steinau.  Steinau  is  a  little  Town
twenty  miles  east  of  Neisse,  on  the  road  to  Kosel  [strongish
place,  on  the  Oder,  some  forty  miles  farther  east]  :  here  Fried-
rich,  with  the  main  body,  take  their  quarters ;  rearguard  being
still  at  Neustadt.  Temporary  Bridge  there  is,  ready  or  all  but
ready,  at  Sorgau  [twelve  miles  to  north  of  us,  on  our  left]  :
by  this  Kalkstein,  with  his  10,000,  comes  punctually  across  ;
while  other  brigades  from  the  Kosel  side  are  also  punctual  in
getting  in ;  which  is  a  great  comfort :  but  of  Holstein-Beck
there  is  no  vestige,  nor  did  there  ever  appear  any.  Holstein,
'  whom  none  of  the  repeated  orders  sent  him  could  reach,'
says  Friedrich,  '  remained  comfortably  in  his  quarters  ;  and
looked  at  the  Enemy  rushing  past  him  to  right  and  left,  with-
out troubling  his  head  with  them.' 2  The  too  easy-minded
Holstein  !  Austrian  Deserters  inform  us,  That  General  Neip-

1  Zuckmantel,  "  Twitch-Cloak,"  occurs  more  than  once  as  a  Town's  name
in  those  regions :  name  which,  says  my  Dryasdust  without  smile  visible,  it
got  from  robberies  done  on  travellers,  "  twitchings  of  your  cloak,"  with  stand-
and-deliver,  as  you  cross  those  wild  mountain  spaces. (Zeiller,  Beschreibung
des  Konigreichs  Boheim,  Frankfurt,  1650;  —  a  rather  worthless  old  Book,  like
the  rest  of  Zeiller's  in  that  kind.)

2  (Euvres  de  Frederic,  ii.  70.

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA. 401

2d-10th  April,  1741.

perg  arrived  to-day  with  his  Army  in  Neisse ;  and  has  there
been  joined  by  Lentulus  with  the  Glatz  force,  chiefly  cavalry,
a  good  many  thousands.  We  may  be  attacked,  then,  this  very
night,  if  they  are  diligent  ?  Friedrich  marks  out  ground  and
plan  in  such  case,  and  how  and  where  each  is  to  rank  himself.
There  came  nothing  of  attack ;  but  the  poor  little  Village  of
Steinau,  with  so  many  troops  in  it  and  baggage-drivers  stum-
bling about,  takes  fire ;  burns  to  ashes ;  '  and  we  had  great
difficulty  in  saving  the  artillery  and  powder  through  the
narrow  streets,  with  the  houses  all  burning  on  each  hand.' '
Fancy  it,  —  and  the  poor  shrieking  inhabitants;  gone  to  silence
long  since  with  their  shrieks,  not  the  least  whisper  left  of
them.  "  The  Prussians  bivouac  on  the  field,  each  in  the  place
that  has  been  marked  out.  Night  extremely  cold."

In  this  poor  Steinau  was  a  Schloss,  which  also  went  up  in
fire ;  disclosing  certain  mysteries  of  an  almost  mythical  nature
to  the  German  Public.  It  was  the  Schloss  of  a  Grafin  von
Callenberg ;  a  dreadful  old  Dowager  of  Medea-Messalina  type,
who  "  always  wore  pistols  about  her ; "  pistols,  and  latterly,
with  more  and  more  constancy,  a  brandy-bottle  ;  —  who  has
been  much  on  the  tongues  of  men  for  a  generation  back.  Herr
Niissler  (readers  recollect  shifty  Niissler)  knew  her,  in  the
way  of  business,  at  one  time ;  with  pity,  if  also  with  horror.
Some  weeks  ago,  she  was,  by  the  Austrian  Commandant  at
Neisse,  summoned  out  of  this  Schloss,  as  in  correspondence
with  Prussian  Officers  :  peasants  breaking  in,  tied  her  with
ropes  to  the  bed  where  she  was ;  put  bed  and  her  into  a  farm-
cart,  and  in  that  scandalous  manner  delivered  her  at  Neisse
to  the  Commandant ;  by  which  adventure,  and  its  rages  and
unspeakabilities,  the  poor  old  Callenberg  is  since  dead.  And
now  the  very  Schloss  is  dead ;  and  there  is  finis  to  a  human
dust-vortex,  such  as  is  sometimes  noisy  for  a  time.  Perhaps
Nussler  may  again  pass  that  way,  if  we  wait.1

"  April  6th,  Head-quarters  Friedland.  To  Friedland  on  the
6th;  —  and  do  not,  as  expected,  get  away  next  morning.
Friedland  is  ten  miles  down  the  Neisse,  which  makes  a  bend
of  near  ninety  degrees  opposite  Steinau;  and  runs  thence

1  Biisching  Beitrage,  ii.  273  et  seqq.
VOL.  vii.  26

402  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAK.  BOOK  XII.

2d-10th  April,  1741.

straight  north  for  the  Oder,  which  it  reaches  some  dozen  miles
or  more  above  Brieg.  Both  Steinau  and  Friedland  are  a  good
distance  from  the  Kiver;  Friedland,  the  nearer  of  the  two,
with  Sorgau  Bridge  direct  west  of  it,  is  perhaps  eight  miles
from  that  important  structure.  There,  being  now  tolerably
rendezvoused,  and  in  strength  for  action,  Friedrich  purposes
to  cross  ISTeisse  Kiver  to-morrow  ;  hoping  perhaps  to  meet
Holstein-Beck,  and  incorporate  him ;  anxious,  at  any  rate,  to
get  between  the  Austrians  and  Ohlau,  where  his  heavy  Artil-
lery, his  Ammunition,  not  to  mention  other  indispensables,
are  lying.  The  peculiarity  of  Neipperg  at  this  time  is,  that
the  ground  he  occupies  bears  no  proportion  to  the  ground  he
commands.  His  regular  Horse  are  supposed  to  be  the  best  in
the  world ;  and  of  the  Pandour  kind,  who  live,  horse  and  man,
mainly  upon  nothing  (which  means  upon  theft),  his  supplies
are  unlimited.  He  sits  like  a  volcanic  reservoir,  therefore,
not  like  a  common  fire  of  such  and  such  intensity  and  power
to  burn ;  —  casts  the  ashes  of  him,  on  all  sides,  to  many  miles
distance.

"  Friday  1th  April,  Friedland  (still  Head-quarters).  Un-
luckily, on  trying,  there  is  no  passage  to  be  had  at  Sorgau.
The  Officer  on  charge  there  still  holds  the  Bridge,  but  has
been  obliged  to  break  away  the  farther  end  of  it ;  '  Lentulus
and  Dragoons,  several  thousands  strong'  (such  is  the  report),
having  taken  post  there.  Friedrich  commands  that  the  Bridge
be  reinstated;  field-pieces  to  defend  it;  Prince  Leopold  to
cross,  and  clear  the  ways.  All  Friday,  Friedrich  waiting  at
Friedland,  was  spent  in  these  details.  Leopold  in  due  force
started  for  Sorgau,  himself  with  Cavalry  in  the  van  j  Leopold
did  storm  across,  and  go  charging  and  fencing,  some  space,  on
the  other  side  ;  but,  seeing  that  it  was  in  truth  Lentulus,  and
Dragoons  without  limit,  had  to  send  report  accordingly  ;  and
then  to  wind  himself  to  this  side  again,  on  new  order  from
the  King.  What  is  to  be  done,  then  ?  Here  is  no  crossing.
Friedrich  decides  to  go  down  the  River ;  he  himself  to  Lowen,
perhaps  near  twenty  miles  farther  down,  but  where  there  is
a  Bridge  and  Highway  leading  over ;  Prince  Leopold,  with
the  heavier  divisions  and  baggages,  to  Michelau,  some  miles

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDRICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 403

2d-10th  April,  1741.

nearer,  and  there  to  build  his  Pontoons  and  cross.  Which
was  effected,  with  success.  And  so,

"  Saturday,  8th  April,  With  great  punctuality,  the  King  and
Leopold  met  at  Michelau,  both  well  across  the  Neisse.  Here
on  Pontoons,  Leopold  had  got  across  about  noon ;  and  pre-
cisely as  he  was  finishing,  the  King's  Column,  which  had
crossed  at  Lowen,  and  come  up  the  left  bank  again,  arrived.
The  King,  much  content  with  Leopold's  behavior,  nominates
him  General  of  Infantry,  a  stage  higher  in  promotion,  there
and  then.  Brieg  Blockade  is,  as  natural,  given  up ;  the  Blockad-
ing Body  joining  with  the  King,  this  morning,  while  he  passed
that  way.  From  Holstein-Beck  not  the  least  whisper,  —  nor
to  him,  if  we  knew  it.

"  Neipperg  has  quitted  Neisse  ;  but  walks  invisible  within
clouds  of  Pandours  ;  nothing  but  guessing  as  to  Neipperg's  mo-
tions. Rightly  swift,  and  awake  to  his  business,  Neipperg
might  have  done,  might  still  do,  a  stroke  upon  us  here.  But
he  takes  it  easy ;  marches  hardly  five  miles  a  day,  since  he
quitted  Neisse  again.  From  Michelau,  Friedrich  for  his  part
turns  southwestward,  in  quest  of  Holstein  and  other  interests ;
marches  towards  Grotkau,  not  intending  much  farther  that
night.  Thick  snow  blowing  in  their  faces,  nothing  to  be  seen
ahead,  the  Prussian  column  tramps  along.1  In  Leipe,  a  little
Hamlet  sidewards  of  the  road,  short  way  from  Grotkau,  our
Hussar  Vanguard  had  found  Austrian  Hussars ;  captured  forty,
and  from  them  learned  that  the  Austrian  Army  is  in  Grotkau ;
that  they  took  Grotkau  half  an  hour  before,  and  are  there  !
A  poor  Lieutenant  Mitschepfal  (whom  I  think  Friedrich  used
to  know  in  Reinsberg)  lay  in  Grotkau,  'with  some  sixty
recruits  and  deserters,'  says  Friedrich,  —  and  with  several
hundreds  of  camp-laborers  (intended  for  the  trenches,  which
will  not  now  be  opened)  :  —  Mitschepfal  made  a  stout  defence ;
but,  after  three  hours  of  it,  had  to  give  in  :  and  there  is  noth-
ing now  for  us  at  Grotkau.  •  Halt,'  therefore  !  Neipperg  is
evidently  pushing  towards  Ohlau,  towards  Breslau,  though  in
a  leisurely  way ;  there  it  will  behoove  us  to  get  the  start  of
him,  if  humanly  possible  :  To  the  right  about,  therefore,  with-

1  (E 'litres  de  Frederic,  ii.  156.

404  FIRST SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

2d-10th  April,  1741.

out  delay !  The  Prussians  repass  Leipe  (much  to  the  wonder
of  its  simple  people) ;  get  along,  some  seven  miles  farther,  on
the  road  for  Ohlau ;  and  quarter,  that  night,  in  what  handy
villages  there  are ;  the  King's  Corps  in  two  Villages,  which
he  calls  '  Pogrel  and  Alsen/  "  —  which  are  to  be  found  still
on  the  Map  as  "Pogarell  and  Alzenau,"  on  the  road  from
Lowen  towards  Ohlau.

This  is  the  end  of  that  March  into  the  Mountains,  with
Neisse  Siege  hanging  triumphant  ahead.  These  are  the
King's  quarters,  this  wintry  Spring  night,  Saturday,  8th
April,  1741 ;  and  it  is  to  be  guessed  there  is  more  of  care  than
of  sleep  provided  for  him.  there.  Seldom,  in  his  life,  was
Friedrich  in  a  more  critical  position ;  and  he  well  knows  it,
none  better.  And  could  have  his  remorses  upon  it,  —  were
these  of  the  least  use  in  present  circumstances.  Here  are  two
Letters  which  he  wrote  that  night ;  veiling,  we  perceive,  a
very  grim  world  of  thoughts  ;  betokening,  however,  a  mind
made  up.  Jordan,  Prince  August  Wilhelm  Heir-Apparent,
and  other  fine  individuals  who  shone  in  the  Schweidnitz  circle
lately,  are  in  Breslau,  safe  sheltered  against  this  bad  juncture ;
Maupertuis  was  not  so  lucky  as  to  go  with  them.

The  King  to  Prince  August  Wilhelm  (in  Breslau).

"POGAEELL,  8th  April,  1741.

"  MY  DEAREST  BROTHER,  —  The  Enemy  has  just  got  into
Silesia ;  we  are  not  more  than  a  mile  (quart  de  mille)  from
them.  To-morrow  must  decide  our  fortune.

"  If  I  die,  do  not  forget  a  Brother  who  has  always  loved
you  very  tenderly.  I  recommend  to  you  my  most  dear  Mother,
my  Domestics,  and  my  First  Battalion  [Lifeguard  of  Foot,
men  picked  from  his  own  old  Euppin  Regiment  and  from  the
disbanded  Giants,  star  of  all  the  Battalions].1  Eichel  and
Schuhmacher  [Two  of  the  Three  Clerks]  are  informed  of  all
my  testamentary  wishes.  Remember  me  always,  you ;  but
console  yourself  for  my  death :  the  glory  of  the  Prussian
Arms,  and  the  honor  of  the  House  have  set  me  in  action,  and

1  See  Preuss,  i.  144,  iv.  309  ;  Nicolai,  Beschreilung  von  Berlin,  iii.  1252.

CHAP.  IX.  FRIEDEICH  RETURNS  TO  SILESIA. 405

2d-10th  April,  1741.

will  guide  me  to  my  last  moment.  You  are  my  sole  Heir  :  I
recommend  to  you,  in  dying,  those  whom  I  have  the  most  loved
during  my  life :  Keyserling,  Jordan,  Wartensleben ;  Hacke,
who  is  a  very  honest  man;  Fredersdorf  [Factotum],  and
Eichel,  in  whom  you  may  place  entire  confidence.  I  be-
queath 8,000  crowns  (£1,200),  which  I  have  with  me,  to  my
Domestics ;  but  all  that  I  have  elsewhere  depends  on  you.
To  each  of  my  Brothers  and  Sisters  make  a  present  in  my
name  ;  a  thousand  affectionate  regards  (amities  et  compliments)
to  my  Sister  of  Baireuth.  You  know  what  I  think  on  their
score  ;  and  you  know  better  than  I  could  tell  you,  the  tender-
ness and  all  the  sentiments  of  most  inviolable  friendship  with
which  I  am,  dearest  Brother,

"  Your  faithful  Brother  and  Servant  till  death,

"FEDERIC."1

The  King  to  M.  Jordan  (in  Breslau).

"  POGARELL,  8th  April,  1741.

"My  DEAR  JORDAN, — We  are  going  to  fight  to-morrow.
Thou  knowest  the  chances  of  war ;  the  life  of  Kings  not  more
regarded  than  that  of  private  people.  I  know  not  what  will
happen  to  me.

"  If  my  destiny  is  finished,  remember  a  friend,  who  loves
thee  always  tenderly :  if  Heaven  prolong  my  days,  I  will
write  to  thee  after  to-morrow,  and  thou  wilt  hear  of  our  vic-
tory. Adieu,  dear  friend ;  I  shall  love  thee  till  death.

«  FEDERIC."  2

The  King,  we  incidentally  discover  somewhere,  "had  no
sleep  that  night ;  "  none,  "  nor  the  next  night  either,"  —  such
a  crisis  coming,  still  not  come.

1  (Euvres  de  Frd€r€ic,  xxvi.  85  ;  List  of  Friedrich's  Testamentary  arrange-
ments in  Note  there,  —  Six  in  all,  at  different  times,  besides  this.

2  Ib.  xvii.  98.

406  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

CHAPTER  X.

BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.

"  TO-MORROW,"  Sunday,  did  not  prove  the  Day  of  Fight,  after
all.  Being  a  day  of  wild  drifting  snow,  so  that  you  could  not
see  twenty  paces,  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  sit  quiet.
The  King  makes  all  his  dispositions ;  sketches  out  punctually,
to  the  last  item,  where  each  is  to  station  himself,  how  the
Army  is  to  advance  in  Four  Columns,  ready  for  Neipperg
wherever  he  may  be,  —  towards  Ohlau  at  any  rate,  whither  it
is  not  doubted  Neipperg  is  bent.  These  snowy  six-and-thirty
hours  at  Pogarell  were  probably,  since  the  Ciistrin  time,  the
most  anxious  of  Friedrich's  life.

Neipperg,  for  his  part,  struggles  forward  a  few  miles,  this
Sunday,  April  9th;  the  Prussians  rest  under  shelter  in  the
wild  weather.  Neipperg's  head-quarters,  this  night,  are  a
small  Village  or  Hamlet,  called  Mollwitz  :  there  and  in  the
adjacent  Hamlets,  chiefly  in  Laugwitz  and  Griiningen,  his
Army  lodges  itself :  —  he  is  now  fairly  got  between  us  and
Ohlau,  —  if,  in  the  blowing  drift,  we  knew  it,  or  he  knew  it.
But,  in  this  confusion  of  the  elements,  neither  party  knows  of
the  other :  Neipperg  has  appointed  that  to-morrow,  Monday,
10th,  shall  be  a  rest-day :  —  appointment  which  could  by  no
means  be  kept,  as  it  turned  out !

Friedrich  had  despatched  messengers  to  Ohlau,  that  the
force  there  should  join  him ;  messengers  are  all  captured.
The  like  message  had  already  gone  to  Brieg,  some  days  before,
and  the  Blockading  Body,  a  good  few  thousand  strong,  quitted
Brieg,  as  we  saw,  and  effected  their  junction  with  him.  All
day,  this  Sunday,  9th,  it  still  snows  and  blows ;  you  cannot
see  a  yard  before  you.  No  hope  now  of  Holstein-Beck.  Not
the  least  news  from  any  quarter ;  Ohlau  uncertain,  too  likely
the  wrong  way :  What  is  to  be  done  ?  We  are  cut  off  from

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE  OF  MOLLWITZ.  407

10th  April,  1741.

our  Magazines,  have  only  provision  for  one  other  day.  "  Had
this  weather  lasted,"  says  an  Austrian  reporter  of  these  things,
"  his  Majesty  would  have  passed  his  time  very  ill." 1

Of  the  Battle  of  Mollwitz,  as  indeed  of  all  Friedrich's  Bat-
tles, there  are  ample  accounts  new  and  old,  of  perfect  authen-
ticity and  scientific  exactitude  ;  so  that  in  regard  to  military
points  the  due  clearness  is,  on  study,  completely  attainable.
But  as  to  personal  or  human  details,  we  are  driven  back  upon
a  miscellany  of  sources ;  most  of  which,  indeed  all  of  which
except  Nicolai,  when  he  sparingly  gives  us  anything,  are  of
questionable  nature ;  and,  without  intending  to  be  dishonest,  do
run  out  into  the  mythical,  and  require  to  be  used  with  caution.
The  latest  and  notablest  of  these,  in  regard  to  Mollwitz,  is  the
pamphlet  of  a  Dr.  Fuchs ;  from  which,  in  spite  of  its  amazing
quality,  we  expect  to  glean  a  serviceable  item  here  and  there.2
It  is  definable  as  probably  the  most  chaotic  Pamphlet  ever
written ;  and  in  many  places,  by  dint  of  unconnected  printing,
bad  grammar,  bad  spelling,  bad  sense,  and  in  short,  of  intrinsic
darkness  in  so  vivacious  a  humor,  it  has  become  abstruse  as
Sanscrit ;  and  really  is  a  sharp  test  of  what  knowledge  you
otherwise  have  of  the  subject.  Might  perhaps  be  used  in  that
way,  by  the  Examining  Military  Boards,  in  Prussia  and  else-
where, if  no  other  use  lie  in  it  ?  Fuchs's  own  contributions,
mere  ignorance,  folly  and  credulity,  are  not  worth  interpret-
ing :  but  he  has  printed,  and  in  the  same  abstruse  form,  one
or  two  curious  Parish  Manuscripts,  particularly  a  "  History  "
of  this  War,  privately  jotted  down  by  the  then  Schoolmaster
of  Mollwitz,  a  good  simple  accurate  old  fellow-creature;

1  FeldzUfje  der  Preussen  (the  complete  Title  is,  Sammlung  ungedriickter  Nach-
richten  so  die  Geschichte  der  Feldzuge  der  Preussen  von  1740 bis  1779  erldutern,
or  in  English  words,  Collection  ofunprinted  Narratives  ivhich  elucidate  the  Prus-
sian Campaigns  from  1740  to  1779  :  5  vols.  Dresden,  1782-1785),  i.  33. Excel-
lent Narratives,  modest,  brief,  effective  (from  Private  Diaries  and  the  like;
many  of  them  given  also  in  Seyfarlh)  ;  well  worth  perusal  by  the  studious
military  man,  and  creditably  characteristic  of  the  Prussian  writers  of  them
and  actors  in  them.

2  Jubelschrift  zur  Feier  (Centenary)  der  Schlacht  bei  Mollwitz,  10  April,  1741,
von  Dr.  Medicinas  Fuchs  (Brieg,  10th  April,  1841).

408  FIKST SILESIAN  WAK.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

through  whose  eyes  it  is  here  and  there  worth  while  to  look.
In  regard  to  Fuchs  himself,  a  late  Tourist  says  :  —

"  This  '  Centenary-Celebration  Pamphlet '  (Celebration  itself,
so  obtuse  was  the  Country,  did  not  take  effect)  was  by  a  zeal-
ous, noisy  but  not  wise,  old  Medical  Gentleman  of  these  parts,
called  Dr.  Fuchs  (Fox)  ;  who  had  set  his  heart  on  raising,  by
subscription,  a  proper  National  Monument  on  the  Field  of
Mollwitz,  and  so  closing  his  old  career.  Subscriptions  did  not
take,  in  that  April,  1841,  nor  in  the  following  months  or  twelve-
months :  the  zealous  Doctor,  therefore,  indignantly  drew  his
own  purse ;  got  a  big  Obelisk  of  Granite  hewn  ready,  with
suitable  Inscription  on  it ;  carted  his  big  Obelisk  from  the
quarries  of  Strehlen ;  assembled  the  Country  round  it,  on
Mollwitz  Field ;  and  passionately  discoursed  and  pleaded,  That
at  least  the  Country  should  bring  block-and-tackle,  with  proper
framework,  and  set  up  this  Obelisk  on  the  pedestal  he  had
there  built  for  it.  The  Country  listened  cheerfully  (for  the
old  Doctor  was  a  popular  man,  clever  though  flighty) ;  but  the
Country  was  again  obtuse  in  the  way  of  active  furtherance,
and  would  not  even  bring  block-and-tackle.  The  old  Doctor
had  to  answer,  '  Well,  then  ! '  and  go  on  his  way  on  more  seri-
ous errands.  The  cattle  have  much  undermined,  and  rubbed
down,  his  poor  Pedestal,  which  is  of  rubble-work ;  his  Obelisk
still  lies  mournfully  horizontal,  uninjured ;  —  and  really  ought
to  be  set  up,  by  some  parish-rate,  or  effort  of  the  community
otherwise."  l

From  the  old  Mollwitz  Schoolmaster  we  distil  the  follow-
ing:—

"  Mollwitz,  Sunday,  9th  April.  Country  for  two  days  back,
was  in  new  alarm  by  the  Austrian  Garrison  of  Brieg  now  left
at  liberty,  who  sallied  out  upon  the  Villages  about,  and  plun-
dered black-cattle,  sheep,  grain,  and  whatever  they  could  come
at.  But  this  clay  (Sunday)  in  Mollwitz  the  whole  Austrian
Army  was  upon  us.  First,  there  went  300  Hussars  through
the  Village  to  Griiningen,  who  quartered  themselves  there ;
and  rushed  hither  and  thither  into  houses,  robbing  and  plun-
dering. From  one  they  took  his  best  horses,  from  another
1  Tourist's  Note  (Brieg,  1858).

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE  OF  MOLLWITZ.  409

10th  April,  1741.

they  took  linen,  clothes,  and  other  furnitures  and  victual.
General  Neuburg  [Neipperg]  halted  here  at  Mollwitz,  with
the  whole  Army ;  before  the  Village,  in  mind  to  quarter.  And
quarter  was  settled,  so  that  a  Bauer  [Plough-Farmer]  got  four
to  five  companies  to  lodge,  and  a  Gartner  [Spade-Farmer]  two
or  three  hundred  cavalry.  The  houses  were  full  of  Officers,
the  Garte  [Garths]  and  the  Fields  full  of  horsemen  and  bag-
gage ;  and  all  round,  you  saw  nothing  but  fires  burning ;  the
Zaune  [wooden  railings]  were  instantly  torn  down  for  fire-
wood ;  the  hay,  straw,  barley  and  haver,  were  eaten  away,  and
brought  to  nothing ;  and  everything  from  the  barns  was  car-
ried out.  And,  as  the  whole  Army  could  not  lodge  itself
with  us,  1,100  Infantry  quartered  at  Laugwitz  ;  Barzdorf  got
400  Cavalry;  and  this  day,  nobody  knew  what  would  come
of  it."  !

Monday  morning,  the  Prussians  are  up  betimes ;  King
Friedrich,  as  above  noted,  had  not,  or  had  hardly  at  all,  slept
during  those  two  nights,  such  his  anxieties.  This  morning,
all  is  calm,  sleeked  out  into  spotless  white  ;  Pogarell  and  the
world  are  wrapt  as  in  a  winding-sheet,  near  two  feet  of  snow
on  the  ground.  Air  hard  and  crisp  ;  a  hot  sun  possible  about
noon  season.  "  By  daybreak  "  we  are  all  astir,  rendezvousing,
ranking,  —  into  Four  Columns  ;  ready  to  advance  in  that
fashion  for  battle,  or  for  deploying  into  battle,  wherever  the
Enemy  turn  up.  The  orders  were  all  given  overnight,  two
nights  ago ;  were  all  understood,  too,  and  known  to  be  rhada-
manthine ;  and,  down  to  the  lowest  pioneer,  no  man  is  uncer-
tain what  to  do.  If  we  but  knew  where  the  Enemy  is;  on
which  side  of  us  ;  what  doing,  what  intending  ?

Scouts,  General-Adjutants  are  out  on  the  quest ;  to  no  pur-
pose hitherto.  One  young  General-Adjutant,  Saldern,  whose
name  we  shall  know  again,  has  ridden  northward,  has  pulled
bridle  some  way  north  of  Pogarell ;  hangs,  gazing  diligently
through  his  spy-glass,  there ;  — can  see  nothing  but  a  Plain  of
silent  snow,  with  sparse  bearding  of  bushes  (nothing  like  a
hedge  in  these  countries),  and  here  and  there  a  tree,  the  miser-
able skeleton  of  a  poplar  :  —  when  happily,  owing  to  an  Aus-

1  Extract  in  Fuchs,  p.  6.

410  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

trian  Dragoon  —  Be  pleased  to  accept  (in  abridged  form)  the
poor  old  Schoolmaster's  account  of  a  small  thing  :  —

"  Austrian  Dragoon  of  the  regiment  Althan,  native  of  Kriese-
witz in  this  neighborhood,  who  was  billeted  in  Christopher
Schonwitz's,  had  been  much  in  want  of  a  clean  shirt,  and  other
interior  outfit ;  and  had,  last  night,  imperatively  despatched
the  man  Scholzke,  a  farm-servant  of  the  said  Christopher's,  off
to  his,  the  Dragoon's,  Father  in  Kriesewitz,  to  procure  such
shirt  or  outfit,  and  to  return  early  with  the  same ;  under  pen-
alty of — Scholzke  and  his  master  dare  not  think  under  what
penalty.  Scholzke,  floundering  homewards  with  the  outfit  from
Kriesewitz,  flounders  at  this  moment  into  Saldern's  sphere  of
vision :  '  Whence,  whither  ? '  asks  Saldern :  '  Dost  thou  know
where  the  Austrians  are  ?  '  '  Recht  gut :  in  Mollwitz,  whither
I  am  going  ! '  Saldern  takes  him  to  the  King,  —  and  that  was
the  first  clear  light  his  Majesty  had  on  the  matter."  l  That
or  something  equivalent,  indisputably  was ;  Saldern  and  "  a
Peasant,"  the  account  of  it  in  all  the  Books.

The  King  says  to  this  Peasant,  "  Thou  shalt  ride  with  me
to-day  ! "  And  Scholzke,  Ploschke  others  call  him,  —  heavy-
footed  rational  biped  knowing  the  ground  there  practically,
every  yard  of  it,  —  did,  as  appears,  attend  the  King  all  morn-
ing; and  do  service,  that  was  recognizable  long  years  after-
wards. "  For  always,"  say  the  Books,  "  when  the  King  held
review  here,  Ploschke  failed  not  to  make  appearance  on  the
field  of  Pogarell,  and  get  recognition  and  a  gift  from  his
Majesty."

At  break  of  day  the  ranking  and  arranging  began.  Pogarell
clock  is  near  striking  ten,  when  the  last  squadron  or  battalion
quits  Pogarell ;  and  the  Four  Columns,  punctiliously  correct,
are  all  under  way.  Two  on  each  side  of  Ohlau  Highway ;
steadily  advancing,  with  pioneers  ahead  to  clear  any  obstacle
there  may  be.  Few  obstacles ;  here  and  there  a  little  ditch
(where  Ploschke's  advice  may  be  good,  under  the  sleek  of  the
snow),  no  fences,  smooth  wide  Plain,  nothing  you  would  even
call  a  knoll  in  it  for  many  miles  ahead  and  around.  Mollwitz
is  some  seven  miles  north  from  Pogarell ;  intermediate  lie

1  Fuchs,  pp.  6,  7.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  411

10th  April,  1741.

dusty  fractions  of  Villages  more  than  one  ;  two  miles  or  more
from  Mollwitz  we  come  to  Pampitz  on  our  left,  the  next  con-
siderable, if  any  of  them  can  be  counted  considerable.

"  All  these  Dorfs,  and  indeed  most  German  ones,"  says  my
Tourist,  "  are  made  on  one  type  ;  an  agglomerate  of  dusty  farm-
yards, with  their  stalls  and  barns ;  all  the  farmyards  huddled
together  in  two  rows  ;  a  broad  negligent  road  between,  seldom
mended,  never  swept  except  by  the  elements.  Generally  there
is  nothing  to  be  seen,  on  each  hand,  but  thatched  roofs,  dead
clay  walls  and  rude  wooden  gates  ;  sometimes  a  poor  public-
house,  with  probable  beer  in  it ;  never  any  shop,  nowhere  any
patch  of  swept  pavement,  or  trim  gathering-place  for  natives
of  a  social  gossipy  turn :  the  road  lies  sleepy,  littery,  good
only  for  utilitarian  purposes.  In  the  middle  of  the  Village
stands  Church  and  Churchyard,  with  probably  some  gnarled
trees  around  it :  Church  often  larger  than  you  expected ;  the
Churchyard,  always  fenced  with  high  stone-and-mortar  wall,
is  usually  the  principal  military  post  of  the  place.  Mollwitz,
at  the  present  day,  has  something  of  whitewash  here  and
there ;  one  of  the  farmer  people,  or  more,  wearing  a  civilized
prosperous  look.  The  belfry  offers  you  a  pleasant  view :  the
roofs  and  steeples  of  Brieg,  pleasantly  visible  to  eastward ;
villages  dotted  about,  Laugwitz,  Barzdorf,  Hermsdorf,  clear  to
your  inquiring :  and  to  westward,  and  to  southward,  tops  of
Hill-country  in  the  distance.  Westward,  twenty  miles  off,  are
pleasant  Hills  ;  and  among  them,  if  you  look  well,  shadowy
Town-spires,  which  you  are  assured  are  Strehlen,  a  place  also
of  interest  in  Friedrich's  History.  —  Your  belfry  itself,  in
Mollwitz,  is  old,  but  not  unsound;  and  the  big  iron  clock
grunts  heavily  at  your  ear,  or  perhaps  bursts  out  in  a  too  deaf-
ening manner,  while  you  study  the  topographies.  Pampitz,
too,  seems  prosperous,  in  its  littery  way ;  the  Church  is  bigger
and  newer,"  —  owing  to  an  accident  we  shall  hear  of  soon ;  —
"  Country  all  about  seems  farmed  with  some  industry,  but  with
shallow  ploughing;  liable  to  drought.  It  is  very  sandy  in
quality;  shorn  of  umbrage;  painfully  naked  to  an  English
eye."  That  is  the  big  champaign,  coated  with  two  feet  of  snow,
where  a  great  Action  is  now  to  go  forward.

412  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

Neipperg,  all  this  while,  is  much  at  his  ease  on  this  white
resting-day.  He  is  just  sitting  down  to  dinner  at  the  Dorf-
schulze's  (Village  Provost,  or  miniature  Mayor  of  Mollwitz),
a  composed  man;  when  —  rockets  or  projectiles,  and  succes-
sive anxious  sputterings  from  the  steeple-tops  of  Brieg,  are
hastily  reported :  what  can  it  mean  ?  Means  little  perhaps ;  —
ISTeipperg  sends  out  a  Hussar  party  to  ascertain,  and  composedly
sets  himself  to  dine.  In  a  little  while  his  Hussar  party  will
come  galloping  back,  faster  than  it  went ;  faster  and  fewer ;  —
and  there  will  be  news  for  Neipperg  during  dinner !  Better
have  had  one  idle  fellow,  one  of  your  20,000,  on  the  Belfry-top
here  looking  out,  though  it  was  a  rest-day  ?  —

The  truth  is,  the  Prussian  advance  goes  on  with  punctilious
exactitude,  by  no  means  rapidly.  Colonel  Count  von  Rothen-
burg, —  the  same  whom  we  lately  heard  of  in  Paris  as  a  miracle
of  gambling,  —  he  now  here,  in  a  new  capacity,  is  warily  lead-
ing the  Vanguard  of  Dragoons ;  warily,  with  the  Four  Columns
well  to  rear  of  him :  the  Austrian  Hussar  party  came  upon
Eothenburg,  not  two  miles  from  Mollwitz  ;  and  suddenly  drew
bridle.  Them  Rothenburg  tumbles  to  the  right-about,  and
chases  ;  —  finds,  on  advancing,  the  Austrian  Army  totally  un-
aware. It  is  thought,  had  Rothenburg  dashed  forward,  and
sent  word  to  the  rearward  to  dash  forward  at  their  swiftest,
the  Austrian  Army  might  have  been  cut  in  pieces  here,  and
never  have  got  together  to  try  battle  at  all.  But  Rothenburg
had  no  orders  ;  nay,  had  orders  Not  to  get  into  fighting ;  —  nor
had  Friedrich  himself,  in  this  his  first  Battle,  learned  that  feline
or  leonine  promptitude  of  spring  which  he  subsequently  mani-
fested. Far  from  it!  Indeed  this  punctilious  deliberation,
and  slow  exactitude  as  on  the  review-ground,  is  wonderful  and
noteworthy  at  the  first  start  of  Friedrich  ;  —  the  faithful  ap-
prentice-hand still  rigorous  to  the  rules  of  the  old  shop.  Ten
years  hence,  twenty  years  hence,  had  Friedrich  found  Neipperg
in  this  condition,  Neipperg's  account  had  been  soon  settled  !  —
Rothenburg  drove  back  the  Hussars,  all  manner  of  successive
Hussar  parties,  and  kept  steadily  ahead  of  the  main  battle,  as
he  had  been  bidden.

Pampitz  Village  being now  passed,  and in rear  of  them

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  413

10th  April,  1741.

to  left,  the  Prussian  Columns  halt  for  some  instants ;  burst
into  field-music ;  take  to  deploying  themselves  into  line.  There
is  solemn  wheeling,  shooting  out  to  right  and  left,  done  with
spotless  precision :  once  in  line,  —  in  two  lines,  "  each  three
men  deep,"  lines  many  yards  apart, — they  will  advance  on
Mollwitz  ;  still  solemnly,  field-music  guiding,  and  banners
spread.  Which  will  be  a  work  of  time.  That  the  King's
frugal  field-dinner  was  shot  away,  from  its  camp-table  near
Pampitz  (as  Fuchs  has  heard),  is  evidently  mythical ;  and  even
impossible,  the  Austrians  having  yet  no  cannon  within  miles
of  him ;  and  being  intent  on  dining  comfortably  themselves,
not  on  firing  at  other  people's  dinners.

Fancy  Neipperg's  state  of  mind,  busy  beginning  dinner  in
the  little  Schulze's,  or  Town-Provost's  house,  when  the  Hussars
dashed  in  at  full  gallop,  shouting  "  Der  Feind,  The  Enemy !
All  in  march  there ;  vanguard  this  side  of  Pampitz ;  killed
forty  of  us  ! "  —  Quick,  your  Plan  of  Battle,  then  ?  Whither-
ward ;  How ;  What  ?  answer  or  perish !  Neipperg  was  in-
finitely struck ;  dropt  knife  and  fork :  "  Send  for  Homer,
General  of  the  Horse  ! "  Eomer  did  the  indispensable  :  a
swift  man,  not  apt  to  lose  head.  Eomer's  battle-plan,  I  should
hope,  is  already  made  ;  or  it  will  fare  ill  with  Neipperg  and
him.  But  beat,  ye  drummers ;  gallop,  ye  aides-de-camp  as  for
life !  The  first  thing  is  to  get  our  Force  together ;  and  it  lies
scattered  about  in  three  other  Villages  besides  Mollwitz,  miles
apart.  Neipperg's  trumpets  clangor,  his  aides-de-camp  gallop :
he  has  his  left  wing  formed,  and  the  other  parts  in  a  state  of
rapid  genesis,  Horse  and  Foot  pouring  in  from  Laugwitz,
Barzdorf,  Griiningeu,  before  the  Prussians  have  quite  done
deploying  themselves,  and  got  well  within  shot  of  him.  Eomer,
by  birth  a  Saxon  gentleman,  by  all  accounts  a  superior  soldier
and  excellent  General  of  Horse,  commands  this  Austrian  left
wing,  General  Goldlein,1  a  Swiss  veteran  of  good  parts,  presid-
ing over  the  Infantry  in  that  quarter.  Neipperg  himself,  were
he  once  complete,  will  command  the  right  wing.

Neipperg  is  to  be  in  two  lines,  as  the  Prussians  are,  with
horse  on  each  wing,  which  is  orthodox  military  order. His
1  (Anonymous)  Maria  Theresa  (already  cited),  p.  8  n.

414  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

length  of  front,  I  should  guess,  nmst  have  been  something
better  than  two  English  miles :  a  sluggish  Brook,  called  of
Laugwitz,  from  the  Village  of  that  name  which  lies  some
way  across,  is  on  his  right  hand ;  sluggish,  boggy ;  stagnating
towards  the  Oder  in  those  parts  :  —  improved  farming  has,
in  our  time,  mostly  dried  the  strip  of  bog,  and  made  it  into
coarse  meadow,  which  is  rather  a  relief  amid  the  dry  sandy
element.  Neipperg's  right  is  covered  by  that.  His  left  rests
on  the  Hamlet  of  Griiningen,  a  mile-and-half  northeast  of
Mollwitz ;  —  meant  to  have  rested  on  Hermsdorf  nearly  east,
but  the  Prussians  have  already  taken  that  up.  The  sun  corn-
ing more  and  more  round  to  west  of  south  (for  it  is  now  past
noon)  shines  right  in  Neipperg's  face,  and  is  against  him :  how
the  wind  is,  nobody  mentions,  —  probably  there  was  no  wind.
His  regular  Cavalry,  8,600,  outnumbers  twice  or  more  that  of
the  Prussians,  not  to  mention  their  quality ;  and  he  has  fewer
Infantry,  somewhat  in  proportion  ;  —  the  entire  force  on  each
side  is  scarcely  above  20,000,  the  Prussians  slightly  in  majority
by  count.  In  field-pieces  Neipperg  is  greatly  outnumbered;
the  Prussians  having  about  threescore,  he  only  eighteen.1  And
now  here  are  the  Prussians,  close  upon  our  left  wing,  not  yet
in  contact  with  the  right,  —  which  in  fact  is  not  yet  got  into
existence  ;  —  thank  Heaven  they  have  not  come  before  our
left  got  into  existence,  as  our  right  (if  you  knew  it)  has  not
yet  quite  finished  doing  !  —

The  Prussians,  though  so  ready  for  deploying,  have  had
their  own  difficulties  and  delays.  Between  the  boggy  Brook
of  Laugwitz  on  their  left,  and  the  Village  of  Hermsdorf,  two
miles  distant,  on  which  their  right  wing  is  to  lean,  there  proves
not  to  be  room  enough ; 2  and  then,  owing  to  mistake  of
Schulenburg  (our  old  pipe-clay  friend,  who  commands  the  right
wing  of  Horse  here,  and  is  not  up  in  time),  there  is  too  much
room.  Not  room  enough  for  all  the  Infantry,  we  say:  the
last  three  Battalions  of  the  front  line  therefore,  the  three  on
the  utmost  right,  wheel  round,  and  stand  athwart ;  en  potence
(as  soldiers  say),  or  at  right  angles  to  the  first  line ;  hanging

1  Kausler,  Atlas  der  merkwiirdigsten  Schlachten,  p.  232.

2  CEuvres  de  Frederic,  ii.  73.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  415

10th  April,  174L

to  it  like  a  kind  of  lid  in  that  part,  —  between  Schulenburg
and  them,  —  had  Schulenburg  coine  up.  Thus  are  the  three
battalions  got  rid  of  at  least ;  "  they  cap  the  First  Prussian
line  rectangularly,  like  a  lid,"  says  my  authority,  —  lid  which
does  not  reach  to  the  Second  Line  by  a  good  way.  This  acci-
dental arrangement  had  material  effects  on  the  right  wing.
Unfortunate  Schulenburg  did  at  last  come  up  :  —  had  he  mis-
calculated the  distances,  then  ?  Once  on  the  ground,  he  will
find  he  does  not  reach  to  Hermsdorf  after  all,  and  that  there
is  now  too  much  room  !  "What  his  degree  of  fault  was  I  know
not ;  Friedrich  has  long  been  dissatisfied  with  these  Dragoons
of  Schulenburg;  "good  for  nothing,  I  always  told  you"  (at
that  Skirmish  of  Baumgarten) :  and  now  here  is  the  Gen-
eral himself  fallen  blundering !  —  In  respect  of  Horse,  the
Austrians  are  more  than  two  to  one ;  to  make  out  our  defi-
ciency, the  King,  imitating  something  he  had  read  about
Gustavus  Adolphus,  intercalates  the  Horse-Squadrons,  on  each
wing,  with  two  Battalions  of  Grenadiers,  and  so  lengthens
them ;  —  "a  manoeuvre  not  likely  to  be  again  imitated,"  he
admits.

All  these  movements  and  arrangements  are  effected  above  a
mile  from  Mollwitz,  no  enemy  yet  visible.  Once  effected,  we
advance  again  with  music  sounding,  sixty  pieces  of  artillery
well  in  front,  —  steady,  steady  !  —  across  the  floor  of  snow
which  is  soon  beaten  smooth  enough,  the  stage,  this  day,  of  a
great  adventure.  And  now  there  is  the  Enemy's  left  wing,
Eomer  and  his  Horse ;  their  right  wing  wider  away,  and  not  yet,
by  a  good  space,  within  cannon-range  of  us.  It  is  towards  Two
of  the  afternoon ;  Schulenburg  now  on  his  ground,  laments  that
he  will  not  reach  to  Hermsdorf ;  —  but  it  may  be  dangerous  now
to  attempt  repairing  that  error  ?  At  Two  of  the  clock,  being
now  fairly  within  distance,  we  salute  Eomer  and  the  Austrian
left,  with  all  our  sixty  cannon ;  and  the  sound  of  drums  and
clarinets  is  drowned  in  universal  artillery  thunder.  Inces-
sant, for  they  take  (by  order)  to  "  swift-shooting,"  which  is
almost  of  the  swiftness  of  musketry  in  our  Prussian  practice ;
and  from  sixty  cannon,  going  at  that  rate,  we  may  fancy  some
effect.  The  Austrian  Horse  of  the  left  wing  do  not  like  it ;

416  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

all  the  less  as  the  Austrians,  rather  short  of  artillery,  have
nothing  yet  to  reply  with.

No  Cavalry  can  stand  long  there,  getting  shivered  in  that
way ;  in  such  a  noise,  were  there  nothing  more.  "  Are  we  to
stand  here  like  milestones,  then,  and  be  all  shot  without  a
stroke  struck  ?  "  "  Steady  ! "  answers  Rorner.  But  nothing
can  keep  them  steady :  "  To  be  shot  like  dogs  (wie  Hunde)  \
For  God's  sake  (TJm  Gottes  Willen),  lead  us  forward,  then,  to
have  a  stroke  at  them ! "  —  in  tones  ever  more  plangent,  plain-
tively indignant ;  growing  ungovernable.  And  Homer  can  get
no  orders  ;  ISTeipperg  is  on  the  extreme  right,  many  things  still
to  settle  there ;  and  here  is  the  cannon-thunder  going,  and
soon  their  very  musketry  will  open.  And  —  and  there  is
Schulenburg,  for  one  thing,  stretching  himself  out  eastwards
(rightwards)  to  get  hold  of  Hermsdorf;  thinking  this  an
opportunity  for  the  manoeuvre.  "  Forward ! "  cries  Romer ;
and  his  thirty  Squadrons,  like  bottled  whirlwind  now  at  last
let  loose,  dash  upon  Schulenburg's  poor  ten  (five  of  them  of
Schulenburg's  own  regiment,  —  who  are  turned  sideways  too,
trotting  towards  Hermsdorf,  at  the  wrong  moment,  —  and  dash
them  into  wild  ruin.  That  must  have  been  a  charge  !  That
was  the  beginning  of  hours  of  chaos,  seemingly  irretrievable,
in  that  Prussian  right  wing.

For  the  Prussian  Horse  fly  wildly ;  and  it  is  in  vain  to  rally.
The  King  is  among  them;  has  come  in  hot  haste,  conjuring
and  commanding:  poor  Schulenburg  addresses  his  own  regi-
ment, "  Oh,  shame,  shame  !  shall  it  be  told,  then  ?  "  rallies  his
own  regiment,  and  some  others ;  charges  fiercely  in  with  them
again ;  gets  a  sabre-slash  across  the  face,  —  does  not  mind  the
sabre-slash,  small  bandaging  will  do ;  —  gets  a  bullet  through
the  head  (or  through  the  heart,  it  is  not  said  which)  ;  *  and
falls  down  dead ;  his  regiment  going  to  the  winds  again,  and
his  care  of  it  and  of  other  things  concluding  in  this  honorable
manner.  Nothing  can  rally  that  right  wing;  or  the  more  you
rally,  the  worse  it  fares :  they  are  clearly  no  match  for  Bonier,
these  Prussian  Horse.  They  fly  along  the  front  of  their
own  First  Line  of  Infantry,  they  fly  between  the  two  Lines ;

i  Heldcn-Geschichte,  i.  899.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  417

10th  April,  1741.

Rbmer  chasing,  —  till  the  fire  of  the  Infantry  (intolerable  to
our  enemies,  and  hitting  some  even  of  our  fugitive  friends)
repels  him.  For  the  notable  point  in  all  this  was  the  con-
duct of  the  Infantry;  and  how  it  stood  in  these  wild  vor-
texes of  ruin ;  impregnable,  immovable,  as  if  every  man  of  it
were  stone ;  and  steadily  poured  out  deluges  of  fire.  —  "  five
Prussian  shots  for  two  Austrian : "  —  such  is  perfect  disci-
pline against  imperfect;  and  the  iron  ramrod  against  the
wooden.

The  intolerable  fire  repels  Homer,  when  he  trenches  on  the
Infantry:  however,  he  captures  nine  of  the  Prussian  sixty
guns ;  has  scattered  their  Horse  to  the  winds ;  and  charges
again  and  again,  hoping  to  break  the  Infantry  too,  —  till  a
bullet  kills  him,  the  gallant  Kb'mer;  and  some  other  has  to
charge  and  try.  It  was  thought,  had  Goldlein  with  his  Aus-
trian Infantry  advanced  to  support  Romer  at  this  juncture,
the  Battle  had  been  gained.  Five  times,  before  Rb'mer  fell
and  after,  the  Austrians  charged  here ;  tried  the  Second  Line
too;  tried  once  to  take  Prince  Leopold  in  rear  there.  But
Prince  Leopold  faced  round,  gave  intolerable  fire ;  on  one  face
as  on  the  other,  he,  or  the  Prussian  Infantry  anywhere,  is  not
to  be  broken.  "  Prince  Friedrich,"  one  of  the  Margraves  of
Schwedt,  King's  Cousin,  whom  we  did  not  know  before,  fell
in  these  wild  rallyings  and  wrestlings  ;  "  by  a  cannon-ball,  at
the  King's  hand,"  not  said  otherwise  where.  He  had  come
as  Volunteer,  few  weeks  ago,  out  of  Holland,  where  he  was
a  rising  General :  he  has  met  his  fate  here,  —  and  Margraf
Karl,  his  Brother,  who  also  gets  wounded,  will  be  a  mournful
man  to-night.

The  Prussian  Horse,  this  right  wing  of  it,  is  a  ruined  body ;
boiling  in  wild  disorder,  flooding  rapidly  away  to  rearward,  —
which  is  the  safest  direction  to  retreat  upon.  They  "  sweep
away  the  King's  person  with  them,"  say  some  cautious  people ;
others  say,  what  is  the  fact,  that  Schwerin  entreated,  and  as
it  were  commanded,  the  King  to  go ;  the  Battle  being,  to  all
appearance,  irretrievable.  Go  he  did,  with  small  escort,  and
on  a  long  ride,  —  to  Oppeln,  a  Prussian  post,  thirty-five  miles
rearward,  where  there  is  a  Bridge  over  the  Oder  and  a  safe
VOL.  vii.  27

418  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xil.

10th  April,  1741.

country  beyond.  So  much  is  indubitable  ;  and  that  he  de-
spatched an  Aide-de-camp  to  gallop  into  Brandenburg,  and  tell
the  Old  Dessauer,  "  Bestir  yourself !  Here  all  seems  lost ! "  —
and  vanished  from  the  Field,  doubtless  in  very  desperate
humor.  Upon  which  the  extraneous  world  has  babbled  a
good  deal,  "  Cowardice  !  Wanted  courage :  Haha ! "  in  its
usual  foolish  way  ;  not  worth  answer  from  him  or  from  us.
Friedrich's  demeanor,  in  that  disaster  of  his  right  wing,  was
furious  despair  rather ;  and  neither  Schulenburg  nor  Mar-
graf  Friedrich,  nor  any  of  the  captains,  killed  or  left  liv-
ing, was  supposed  to  have  sinned  by  "  cowardice  "  in  a  visible
degree ! —

Indisputable  it  is,  though  there  is  deep  mystery  upon  it,
the  King  vanishes  from  Mollwitz  Field  at  this  point  for  six-
teen hours,  into  the  regions  of  Myth,  "  into  Fairyland,"  as
would  once  have  been  said ;  but  reappears  vmharined  in  to-mor-
row's daylight :  at  which  time,  not  sooner,  readers  shall  hear
what  little  is  to  be  said  of  this  obscure  and  much-disfigured
small  affair.  For  the  present  we  hasten  back  to  Mollwitz,  —
where  the  murderous  thunder  rages  unabated  all  this  while  ;
the  very  noise  of  it  alarming  mankind  for  thirty  miles  round.
At  Breslau,  which  is  thirty  good  miles  off,  horrible  dull  grum-
ble was  heard  from  the  southern  quarter  ("  still  better,  if  you
put  a  staff  in  the  ground,  and  set  your  ear  to  it ")  ;  and  from
the  steeple-tops,  there  was  dim  cloudland  of  powder-smoke
discernible  in  the  horizon  there.  "At  Liegnitz,"  which  is
twice  the  distance,  "  the  earth  sensibly  shook,"  l  —  at  least
the  air  did,  and  the  nerves  of  men.

"  Had  Goldlein  but  advanced  with  his  Foot,  in  support  of
gallant  Eomer  ! "  say  the  Austrian  Books.  But  Goldlein  did
not  advance  ;  nor  is  it  certain  he  would  have  found  advantage
in  so  doing :  Goldlein,  where  he  stands,  has  difficulty  enough
to  hold  his  own.  For  the  notable  circumstance,  miraculous
to  military  men,  still  is,  How  the  Prussian  Foot  (men  who
had  never  been  in  fire,  but  whom  Friedrich  Wilhelm  had
drilled  for  twenty  years)  stand  their  ground,  in  this  distrac-
tion of  the  Horse.  Not  even  the  two  outlying  Grenadier
1  Helden-Geschichte ;  and  Jordan's  Letter,  infrk.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  419

10th  April,  1741.

Battalions  will  give  way  :  those  poor  intercalated  Grenadiers,
when  their  Horse  fled  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  they  stand
there,  like  a  fixed  stone-dam  in  that  wild  whirlpool  of  ruin.
They  fix  bayonets,  "bring  their  two  field-pieces  to  flank"
(Winterfeld  was  Captain  there),  and,  from  small  arms  and
big,  deliver  such  a  fire  as  was  very  unexpected.  Nothing  to
be  made  of  Winterfeld  and  them.  They  invincibly  hurl  back
charge  after  charge ;  and,  with  dogged  steadiness,  manoeuvre
themselves  into  the  general  Line  again ;  or  into  contact  with
the  three  superfluous  Battalions,  arranged  en  potence,  whom
we  heard  of.  Those  three,  ranked  athwart  in  this  right  wing
("like  a  lid,"  between  First  Line  and  second),  maintained
themselves  in  like  impregnable  fashion,  —  Winterfeld  com-
manding ;  —  and  proved  unexpectedly,  thinks  Friedrich,  the
saving  of  the  whole.  For  they  also  stood  their  ground  immov-
able, like  rocks ;  steadily  spouting  fire-torrents.  Five  suc-
cessive charges  storm  upon  them,  fruitless  :  "  Steady,  meine
Kinder ;  fix  bayonets,  handle  ramrods  !  There  is  the  Horse-
deluge  thundering  in  upon  you  ;  reserve  your  fire,  till  you  see
the  whites  of  their  eyes,  and  get  the  word ;  then  give  it  them,
and  again  give  it  them :  see  whether  any  man  or  any  horse
can  stand  it !  "

Neipperg,  soon  after  Homer  fell,  had  ordered  Goldlein
forward:  Goldlein  with  his  Infantry  did  advance,  gallantly
enough ;  but  to  no  purpose.  Goldlein  was  soon  shot  dead ;
and  his  Infantry  had  to  fall  back  again,  ineffectual  or  worse.
Iron  ramrods  against  wooden ;  five  shots  to  two :  what  is
there  but  falling  back  ?  Neipperg  sent  fresh  Horse  from  his
right  wing,  with  Berlichingen,  a  new  famed  General  of  Horse ;
Neipperg  is  furiously  bent  to  improve  his  advantage,  to  break
those  Prussians,  who  are  mere  musketeers  left  bare,  and
thinks  that  will  settle  the  account :  but  it  could  in  no  wise
be  done.  The  Austrian  Horse,  after  their  fifth  trial,  renounce
charging ;  fairly  refuse  to  charge  any  more  ;  and  withdraw
dispirited  out  of  ball-range,  or  in  search  of  things  not  imprac-
ticable. The  Hussar  part  of  them  did  something  of  plunder
to  rearward ;  —  and,  besides  poor  Maupertuis's  adventure  (of
which  by  and  by),  and  an  attempt  on  the  Prussian  baggage

420  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

and  knapsacks,  which  proved  to  be  "  too  -well  guarded,"  —
"burnt  the  Church  of  Panipitz,"  as  some  small  consolation.
The  Prussians  had  stript  their  knapsacks,  and  left  them  in
Pampitz :  the  Austrians,  it  was  noticed,  stript  theirs  in  the
Field;  built  walls  of  them,  and  fired  behind  the  same,  in  a
kneeling,  more  or  less  protected  posture, —  which  did  not
avail  them  much.

In  fact,  the  Austrian  Infantry  too,  all  Austrians,  hour  after
hour,  are  getting  wearier  of  it :  neither  Infantry  nor  Cavalry
can  stand  being  riddled  by  swift  shot  in  that  manner.  In
spite  of  their  knapsack  walls,  various  regiments  have  shrunk
out  of  ball-range ;  and  several  cannot,  by  any  persuasion,  be
got  to  come  into  it  again.  Others,  who  do  reluctantly  advance,

—  see  what  a  figure  they  make  ;  man  after  man  edging  away
as  he  can,  so  that  the  regiment  "  stands  forty  to  eighty  men
deep,  with  lanes  through  it  every  two  or  three  yards ;  "  per-
meable everywhere  to  Cavalry,  if  we  had  them  ;  and  turning
nothing  to  the  Enemy  but  color-sergeants  and  bare  poles  of  a
regiment ! And  Eomer  is  dead,  and  Goldlein  of  the  Infantry
is  dead. And  on  their  right  wing,  skirted  by  that  marshy
Brook  of  Laugwitz,  —  Austrian  right  wing  had  been  weakened
by  detachments,  when  Berlichingen  rode  off  to  succeed  Romer,

—  the  Austrians  are  suffering :  Posadowsky's  Horse (among
whom  is  Eothenburg,  once  vanguard),  strengthened  by  rem-
nants who  have  rallied  here,  are  at  last  prospering,  after  re-
verses. And  the  Prussian  fire  of  small  arms,  at  such  rate,  has
lasted now  for five  hours. The  Austrian  Army,  becoming
instead  of  a  web  a  mere  series  of  flying  tatters,  forming  into
stripes  or  lanes  in  the  way  we  see,  appears  to  have  had  about
enough.

These  symptoms  are  not  hidden  from  Schwerin.  His  own
ammunition,  too,  he  knows  is  running  scarce,  and  fighters
here  and  there  are  searching  the  slain  for  cartridges  :  —  Schwe-
rin closes  his  ranks,  trims  and  tightens  himself  a  little  ;  breaks
forth  into  universal  field-music,  and  with  banners  spread,
starts  in  mass  wholly,  "  Forwards  ! "  Forwards  towards  these
Austrians  and  the  setting  sun.

An  intelligent  Austrian  Officer, writing next  week from

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  421

10th  April,  1741.

Neisse,1  confesses  lie  never  saw  anything  more  beautiful.  "  I
can  well  say,  I  never  in  my  life  saw  anything  more  beautiful.
They  marched  with  the  greatest  steadiness,  arrow-straight,
and  their  front  like  a  line  (schnurgleicli),  as  if  they  had  been
upon  parade.  The  glitter  of  their  clear  arms  shone  strangely
in  the  setting  sun,  and  the  fire  from  them  went  on  no  other-
wise than  a  continued  peal  of  thunder."  Grand  picture  indeed ;
but  not  to  be  enjoyed  as  a  Work  of  Art,  for  it  is  coming  upon
us!  "The  spirits  of  our  Army  sank  altogether,"  continues
he ;  "  the  Foot  plainly  giving  way,  Horse  refusing  to  come
forward,  all  things  wavering  towards  dissolution :  "  —  so  that
Neipperg,  to  avoid  worse,  gives  the  word  to  go ;  —  and  they
roll  off  at  double-quick  time,  through  Mollwitz,  over  Laugwitz
Bridge  and  Brook,  towards  Grotkau  by  what  routes  they  can.
The  sun  is  just  sunk  ;  a  quarter  to  eight,  says  the  intelligent
Austrian  Officer,  —  while  the  Austrian  Army,  much  to  its
amazement,  tumbles  forth  in  this  bad  fashion.

They  had  lost  nine  of  their  own  cannon,  and  all  of  those
Prussian  nine  which  they  once  had,  except  one :  eight  cannon
mimis,  in  all.  Prisoners  of  them  were  few,  and  none  of  much
mark :  two  Field-marshals,  Komer  and  Goldlein,  lie  among  the
dead ;  four  more  of  that  rank  are  wounded.  Four  standards
too  are  gone ;  certain  kettle-drums  and  the  like  trophies,  not
in  great  number.  Lieutenant-General  Browne  was  of  these
retreating  Austrians  ;  a  little  fact  worth  noting :  of  his  actions
this  day,  or  of  his  thoughts  (which  latter  surely  must  have
been  considerable),  no  hint  anywhere.  The  Austrians  were
not  much  chased ;  though  they  might  have  been,  —  fresh  Cav-
alry (two  Ohlau  regiments,  drawn  hither  by  the  sound 2)  having
hung  about  to  rear  of  them,  for  some  time  past ;  unable  to  get
into  the  Fight,  or  to  do  any  good  till  now.  Schwerin,  they
say,  though  he  had  two  wounds,  was  for  pursuing  vigorously :
but  Leopold  of  Anhalt  over-persuaded  him  ;  urged  the  dark-
ness, the  uncertainty.  Berlichingen,  with  their  own  Horse,
still  partly  covered  their  rear;  and  the  Prussians,  Ohlauers

1  Feldziige  der  Preussen  (above  cited),  i.  38.

2  Interesting  correct  account  of  their  movements  and  adventures  this  day
and  some  previous  days,  in  Nicolai,  Anekdoten,  ii.  142-148.

422  FIEST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

included,  were  but  weak  in  that  branch  of  the  service.  Pur-
suit lasted  little  more  than  two  miles,  and  was  never  hot.
The  loss  of  men,  on  both  sides,  was  not  far  from  equal,  and
rather  in  favor  of  the  Austrian  side  :  —  Austrians  counted  in
killed,  wounded  and  missing,  4,410  men  ;  Prussians  4,613  ; 1  —
but  the  Prussians  bivouacked  on  the  ground,  or  quartered  in
these  Villages,  with  victory  to  crown  them,  and  the  thought
that  their  hard  day's  work  had  been  well  done.  Besides
Margraf  Friedrich,  Volunteer  from  Holland,  there  lay  among
the  slain  Colonel  Count  von  Finkenstein  (Old  Tutor's  Son),
King's  friend  from  boyhood,  and  much  loved.  He  was  of  the
six  whom  we  saw  consulting  at  the  door  at  Reinsberg,  during
a  certain  ague-fit ;  and  he  now  rests  silent  here,  while  the
matter  has  only  come  thus  far.

Such  was  Mollwitz,  the  first  Battle  for  Silesia ;  which  had
to  cost  many  Battles  first  and  last.  Silesia  will  be  gained,
we  can  expect,  by  fighting  of  this  kind  in  an  honest  cause.
But  here  is  something  already  gained,  which  is  considerable,
and  about  which  there  is  no  doubt.  A  new  Military  Power,
it  would  appear,  has  come  upon  the  scene ;  the  Gazetteer-and-
Diplomatic  world  will  have  to  make  itself  familiar  with  a
name  not  much  heard  of  hitherto  among  the  Nations.  "  A
Nation  which  can  fight,"  think  the  Gazetteers  ;  "  fight  almost
as  the  very  Swedes  did ;  and  is  led  on  by  its  King  too,  —  who
may  prove,  in  his  way,  a  very  Charles  XII.,  or  small  Mace-
donia's Madman,  for  aught  one  knows  ? "  In  which  latter
branch  of  their  prognostic  the  Gazetteers  were  much  out.  —

The  Fame  of  this  Battle,  which  is  now  so  sunk  out  of  mem-
ory, was  great  in  Europe  ;  and  struck,  like  a  huge  war-gong,
with  long  resonance,  through  the  general  ear.  M.  de  Voltaire
had  run  across  to  Lille  in  those  Spring  days  :  there  is  a  good
Troop  of  Players  in  Lille  ;  a  Niece,  Madame  Denis,  wife  of
some  Military  Commissariat  Denis,  important  in  those  parts,
can  lodge  the  divine  Emilie  and  me  ;  —  and  one  could  at  last
see  Mahomet,  after  five  years  of  struggling,  get  upon  the

1  Orlich,  i.  108;  Kausler,  p.  235,  correct;  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  895,  incor-
rect.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  423

10th  April,  1741.

boards,  if  not  yet  in  Paris  by  a  great  way,  yet  in  Lille,  which
is  something.  Mahomet  is  getting  upon  the  boards  on  those
terms  ;  and  has  proceeded,  not  amiss,  through  an  Act  or  two,
when  a  Note  from  the  King  of  Prussia  was  handed  to  Vol-
taire, announcing  the  victory  of  Mollwitz.  Which  delightful
Note  Voltaire  stopt  the  performance  till  he  read  to  the  Audi-
ence :  "  Bravissimo  !  "  answered  the  Audience.  "  You  will
see,"  said  M.  de  Voltaire  to  the  friends  about  him,  "  this
Piece  at  Mollwitz  will  make  mine  succeed :  "  which  proved
to  be  the  fact.1  For  the  French  are  Anti-Austrian ;  and  smell
great  things  in  the  wind.  "  That  man  is  mad,  your  Most
Christian  Majesty  ?  "  "  Not  quite ;  or  at  any  rate  not  mad
only  ! "  think  Louis  and  his  Belleisles  now.

Dimly  poring  in  those  old  Books,  and  squeezing  one's  way
into  face-to-face  view  of  the  extinct  Time,  we  begin  to  notice
what  a  clangorous  rumor  was  in  Mollwitz  to  the  then  genera-
tion of  mankind  ;  —  betokening  many  things  ;  universal  Euro-
pean War,  as  the  first  thing.  Which  duly  came  to  pass ;  as
did,  at  a  slower  rate,  the  ulterior  thing,  not  yet  so  apparent,
that  indeed  a  new  hour  had  struck  on  the  Time  Horologe,  that
a  New  Epoch  had  risen.  Yes,  my  friends.  New  Charles  XII.
or  not,  here  truly  has  a  new  Man  and  King  come  upon  the
scene  :  capable  perhaps  of  doing  something  ?  Slumberous
Europe,  rotting  amid  its  blind  pedantries,  its  lazy  hypocrisies,
conscious  and  unconscious  :  this  man  is  capable  of  shaking  it
a  little  out  of  its  stupid  refuges  of  lies,  and  ignominious  wrap-
pages and  bed-clothes,  which  will  be  its  grave-clothes  other-
wise ;  and  of  intimating  to  it,  afar  off,  that  there  is  still  a
Veracity  in  Things,  and  a  Mendacity  in  Sham-Things,  and  that
the  difference  of  the  two  is  infinitely  more  considerable  than
was  supposed.

This  Mollwitz  is  a  most  deliberate,  regulated,  ponderously
impressive  (gravitatiscli)  Feat  of  Arms,  as  the  reader  sees  ;
done  all  by  Regulation  methods,  with  orthodox  exactitude ;
in  a  slow,  weighty,  almost  pedantic,  but  highly  irrefragable
manner.  It  is  the  triumph  of  Prussian  Discipline ;  of  mili-
tary orthodoxy  well  put  in  practice  :  the  honest  outcome  of
:  Voltaire,  (Euvres  ( Vie  Privte),  ii.  74.

424  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

good  natural  stuff  in  those  Brandenburgers,  and  of  the  su-
preme virtues  of  Drill.  Neipperg  and  his  Austrians  had  much
despised  Prussian  soldiering  :  "  Keep  our  soup  hot,"  cried
they,  on  running  out  this  day  to  rank  themselves  ;  "  hot  a
little,  till  we  drive  these  fellows  to  the  Devil ! "  That  was
their  opinion,  about  noon  this  day  :  but  that  is  an  opinion
they  have  renounced  for  all  remaining  days  and  years.  —  It
is  a  Victory  due  properly  to  Friedrich  Wilhelm  and  the  Old
Dessauer,  who  are  far  away  from  it.  Friedrich  Wilhelm,
though  dead,  fights  here,  and  the  others  only  do  his  bidding
on  this  occasion.  His  Son,  as  yet,  adds  nothing  of  his  own  ;
though  he  will  ever  henceforth  begin  largely  adding,  —  right
careful  withal  to  lose  nothing,  for  the  Friedrich  Wilhelm  con-
tribution is  invaluable,  and  the  basis  of  everything ;  —  but  it  is
curious  to  see  in  what  contrast  this  first  Battle  of  Friedrich's
is  with  his  latter  and  last  ones.

Considering  the  Battle  of  Mollwitz,  and  then,  in  contrast,
the  intricate  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  what  their  consequences
were  and  their  antecedents,  it  is  curious  once  more  !  This,
then,  is  what  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  has  come  to  ?  Twenty
years  of  world-wide  diplomacy,  cunningly  devised  spider-
threads  overnetting  all  the  world,  have  issued  here.  Your
Congresses  of  Cambray,  of  Soissons,  your  Grumkow-Secken-
dorf  Machiavelisms,  all  these  might  as  well  have  lain  in  their
bed.  Eeal  Pragmatic  Sanction  would  have  been,  A  well-trained
Army  and  your  Treasury  full.  Your  Treasury  is  empty  (noth-
ing in  it  but  those  foolish  200,000  English  guineas,  and  the
passionate  cry  for  more)  :  and  your  Army  is  not  trained  as
this  Prussian  one  ;  cannot  keep  its  ground  against  this  one.
Of  all  those  long-headed  Potentates,  simple  Friedrich  Wil-
helm, son  of  Nature,  who  had  the  honesty  to  do  what  Nature
taught  him,  has  come  out  gainer.  You  all  laughed  at  him  as
a  fool :  do  you  begin  to  see  now  who  was  wise,  who  fool  ?  He
has  an  Army  that  "  advances  on  you  with  glittering  musketry,
steady  as  on  the  parade-ground,  and  pours  out  fire  like  one
continuous  thunder-peal;"  so  that,  strange  as  it  seems,  you
find  there  will  actually  be  nothing  for  you  but  —  taking  to

CHAP  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  425

10th  April,  1741.

your  heels,  shall  we  say  ?  —  rolling  off  with  despatch,  as
second-best !  These  things  are  of  singular  omen.  Here  stands
one  that  will  avenge  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  —  if  Friedrich  Wil-
helm  were  not  already  sufficiently  avenged  by  the  mere  ver-
dict of  facts,  which  is  palpably  coming  out,  as  Time  peels  the
wiggeries  away  from  them  more  and  more.  Mollwitz  and  such
places  are  full  of  veracity ;  and  no  head  is  so  thick  as  to  resist
conviction  in  that  kind.

Of  Friedrich; 's  Disappearance  into  Fairyland,  in  the  Interim;
and  of  Maupertuis' 's  similar  Adventure.

Of  the  King's  Flight,  or  sudden  disappearance  into  Fairy-
land, during  this  first  Battle,  the  King  himself,  who  alone
could  have  told  us  fully,  maintained  always  rigorous  silence,
and  nowhere  drops  the  least  hint.  So  that  the  small  fact
has  come  down  to  us  involved  in  a  great  bulk  of  fabulous
cobwebs,  mostly  of  an  ill-natured  character,  set  agoing  by
Voltaire,  Valori  and  others  (which  fabulous  process,  in  the
good-natured  form,  still  continues  itself)  ;  and,  except  for
Nicolai's  good  industry  (in  his  Anekdoten-JSook),  we  should
have  difficulty  even  in  guessing,  not  to  say  understanding,  as
is  now  partly  possible.  The  few  real  particulars  —  and  those
do  verify  themselves,  and  hang  perfectly  together,  when  the
big  globe  of  fable  is  burnt  off  from  them  —  are  to  the  follow-
ing effect.

"  Battle  lost,"  said  Schwerin  :  "  but  what  is  the  loss  of  a
Battle  to  that  of  your  Majesty's  own  Person  ?  For  Heaven's
sake,  go ;  get  across  the  Oder ;  be  you  safe,  till  this  decide
itself  !  "  That  was  reasonable  counsel.  If  defeated,  Schwerin
can  hope  to  retreat  upon  Ohlau,  upon  Breslau,  and  save  the
Magazines.  This  side  the  Oder,  all  will  be  movements,  a
whirlpool  of  Hussars  ;  but  beyond  the  Oder,  all  is  quiet,  open.
To  Ohlau,  to  Glogau,  nay  home  to  Brandenburg  and  the  Old
Dessauer  with  his  Camp  at  Gottin,  the  road  is  free,  by  the
other  side  of  the  Oder.  —  Schwerin  and  Prince  Leopold  urging
him,  the  King  did  ride  away ;  at  what  hour,  with  what  suite,
or  with  what  adventures  (not  mostly  fabulous)  is  not  known  :

426  FIEST SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  1741.

—  but  it  was  towards  Lbwen,  fifteen  miles  off  (where  he
crossed  Neisse  Kiver,  the  other  day)  ;  and  thence  towards
Oppeln,  on  the  Oder,  eighteen  miles  farther  ;  and  the  pace
was  swift.  Leopold,  on  reflection,  ordered  off  a  Squadron  of
Gens-d'Armes  to  overtake  his  Majesty,  at  Lowen  or  sooner ;
which  they  never  did.  Passing  Pampitz,  the  King  threw
Fredersdorf  a  word,  who  was  among  the  baggage  there  :  "  To
Oppeln  ;  bring  the  Purse,  the  Privy  Writings  !  ':  Which
Fredersdorf,  and  the  Clerks  (and  another  Herr,  who  became
Nicolai's  Father-in-law  in  after  years)  did ;  and  joined  the
King  at  Lowen ;  but  I  hope  stopped  there.

The  King's  suite  was  small,  names  not  given ;  but  by  the
time  he  got  to  Lowen,  being  joined  by  cavalry  fugitives  and
the  like,  it  had  got  to  be  seventy  persons :  too  many  for  the
King.  He  selected  what  was  his  of  them ;  ordered  the  gates
to  be  shut  behind  him  on  all  others,  and  again  rode  away.  The
Leopold  Squadron  of  Gens-d'Armes  did  not  arrive  till  after
his  departure  ;  and  having  here  lost  trace  of  him,  called  halt,
and  billeted  for  the  night.  The  King  speeds  silently  to  Op-
peln on  his  excellent  bay  horse,  the  worse-mounted  gradually
giving  in.  At  Oppeln  is  a  Bridge  over  the  Oder,  a  free  Country
beyond  :  Kegirnent  La  Motte  lay,  and  as  the  King  thinks,  still
lies  in  Oppeln  ;  —  but  in  that  he  is  mistaken.  Regiment  La
Motte  is  with  the  baggage  at  Parnpitz,  all  this  day;  and  a
wandering  Hussar  Party,  some  sixty  Austrians,  have  taken
possession  of  Oppeln.  The  King,  and  the  few  who  had  not
yet  broken  down,  arrive  at  the  Gate  of  Oppeln,  late,  under
cloud  of  night :  "  Who  goes  ?  "  cried  the  sentry  from  within.
"  Prussians  !  A  Prussian  Courier  !  "  answer  they ;  —  and  are
fired  upon  through  the  gratings  ;  and  immediately  draw  back,
and  vanish  unhurt  into  Night  again.  "  Had  those  Hussars  only
let  him  in  !  "  said  Austria  afterwards  :  but  they  had  not  such
luck.  It  was  at  this  point,  according  to  Valori,  that  the  King
burst  forth  into  audible  ejaculations  of  a  lamentable  nature.
There  is  no  getting  over,  then,  even  to  Brandenburg,  and  in
an  insolvent  condition.  Not  open  insolvency  and  bankrupt
disgrace  ;  no,  ruin,  and  an  Austrian  jail,  is  the  one  outlook.
"  0  mon  Dieu,  0  God,  it  is  too  much  (e'en  est  trop)  \  "  with  other

CHAP  X  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  427

10th  April,  1741.

the  like  snatches  of  lamentation ; 1  which  are  not  inconceivable
in  a  young  man,  sleepless  for  the  third  night,  in  these  circum-
stances ;  but  which  Valori  knows  nothing  of,  except  by  mali-
cious rumor  from  the  valet  class,  —  who  have  misinformed
Valori  about  several  other  points.

The  King  riding  diligently,  with  or  without  ejaculations,
back  towards  Lowen,  comes  at  an  early  hour  to  the  Mill  of
Hilbersdorf,  within  a  mile-and-half  of  that  place.  He  alights
at  the  Mill ;  sends  one  of  his  attendants,  almost  the  only  one
now  left,  to  inquire  what  is  in  Lowen.  The  answer,  we  know,
is  :  "A  squadron  of  Gens-d' Arm.es  there  ;  furthermore,  a  Prus-
sian Adjutant  come  to  say,  Victory  at  Mollwitz  !  "  Upon  which
the  King  mounts  again  ;  —  issues  into  daylight,  and  concludes
these  mythical  adventures.  That  "  in  Lowen,  in  the  shop  at
the  corner  of  the  Market-place,  Widow  Panzern,  subsequently
Wife  Something-else,  made  his  Majesty  a  cup  of  coffee,  and
served  a  roast  fowl  along  with  it,"  cannot  but  be  welcome
news,  if  true  ;  and  that  his  Majesty  got  to  Mollwitz  again
before  dark  that  same  "  day,"  2  is  liable  to  no  controversy.

In  this  way  was  Friedrich  snatched  by  Morgante  into  Fairy-
land, carried  by  Diana  to  the  top  of  Pindus  (or  even  by  Proser-
pine to  Tartarus,  through  a  bad  sixteen  hours),  till  the  Battle
whirlwind  subsided.  Friendly  imaginative  spirits  would,  in
the  antique  time,  have  so  construed  it :  but  these  moderns
were  malicious-valetish,  not  friendly ;  and  wrapped  the  mat-
ter in  mere  stupid  worlds  of  cobweb,  which  require  burning.
Friedrich  himself  was  stone-silent  on  this  matter,  all  his  life
after ;  but  is  understood  never  quite  to  have  pardoned  Schwerin
for  the  ill-luck  of  giving  him  such  advice.3

Friedrich' s  adventure  is  not  the  only  one  of  that  kind  at
Mollwitz ;  there  is  another  equally  indubitable,  —  which  will
remain  obscure,  half-mythical  to  the  end  of  the  world.  The

1  Valori,  i.  104.  2  Fuchs,  p.  11.

8  Nicolai,  ii.  180-195  (the  one  true  account);  Laveaux,  i.  194;  Valori,  i.
104;  &c.  &c.  (the  myth  in  various  stages).  Most  distractedly  mythical  of  all,
with  the  truth  clear  before  it,  is  the  latest  version,  just  come  out,  in  Was  sick
die  Schlesier  vom  alten  Fritz  erzahlen  (Brieg,  1860),  pp.  113-125.

428  FIRST SILESIAN  WAS.  BOOK  XII.

10th  April,  17-11.

truth  is,  that  Eight  Wing  of  the  Prussian  Army  was  fallen
chaotic,  ruined ;  and  no  man,  not  even  one  who  had  seen  it,  can
give  account  of  what  went  on  there.  The  sage  Maupertuis,
for  example,  had  climbed  some  tree  or  place  of  impregnability
("  tree  "  Voltaire  calls  it,  though  that  is  hardly  probable),  hop-
ing to  see  the  Battle  there.  And  he  did  see  it,  much  too  clearly
at  last !  In  such  a  tide  of  charging  and  chasing,  on  that  Right
Wing  and  round  all  the  Field  in  the  Prussian  rear ;  in  such
wide  bickering  and  boiling  of  Horse-currents,  —  which  fling
out,  round  all  the  Prussian  rear  quarters,  such  a  spray  of  Aus-
trian Hussars  for  one  element,  —  Maupertuis,  I  have  no  doubt,
wishes  much  he  were  at  home,  doing  his  sines  and  tangents.
An  Austrian  Hussar-party  gets  sight  of  him,  on  his  tree  or
other  standpoint  (Voltaire  says  elsewhere  he  was  mounted  on
an  ass,  the  malicious  spirit !)  —  too  certain,  the  Austrian  Hus-
sars got  sight  of  him  :  his  purse,  gold  watch,  all  he  has  of
movable  is  given  frankly;  all  will  not  do.  There  are  frills
about  the  man,  fine  laces,  cloth ;  a  goodish  yellow  wig  on  him,
for  one  thing :  —  their  Slavonic  dialect,  too  fatally  intelligible
by  the  pantomime  accompanying  it,  forces  sage  Maupertuis
from  his  tree  or  standpoint ;  the  big  red  face  flurried  into
scarlet,  I  can  fancy ;  or  scarlet  and  ashy-white  mixed ;  and  —
Let  us  draw  a  veil  over  it !  He  is  next  seen  shirtless,  the  once
very  haughty,  blustery,  and  now  much-humiliated  man ;  still
conscious  of  supreme  acumen,  insight  and  pure  science  ;  and,
though  an  Austrian  prisoner  and  a  monster  of  rags,  struggling
to  believe  that  he  is  a  genius  and  the  Trismegistus  of  man-
kind. What  a  pickle  !  The  sage  Maupertuis,  as  was  natural,
keeps  passionately  asking,  of  gods  and  men,  for  an  Officer  with
some  tincture  of  philosophy,  or  even  who  could  speak  French.
Such  Officer  is  at  last  found ;  humanely  advances  him  money,
a  shirt  and  suit  of  clothes ;  but  can  in  nowise  dispense  with  his
going  to  Vienna  as  prisoner.  Thither  he  went  accordingly ;
still  in  a  mythical  condition.  Of  Voltaire's  laughing,  there  is
no  end ;  and  he  changes  the  myth  from  time  to  time,  on  new
rumors  coming ;  and  there  is  no  truth  to  be  had  from  him.1

1  Voltaire,  CEuvres (Vie Prive),  ii.  33-34;  and  see his  Letters  for  some
weeks  after  the  event.

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  429

12th  April,  1741.

This  much  is  certain :  at  Vienna,  Maupertuis,  prisoner  on
parole,  glided  about  for  some  time  in  deep  eclipse,  till  the
Newspapers  began  babbling  of  him.  He  confessed  then  that
he  was  Maupertuis,  Flattener  of  the  Earth ;  but  for  the  rest,
"told  rather  a  blind  story  about  himself,"  says  Eobinson ;  spoke
as  if  he  had  been  of  the  King's  suite,  "  riding  with  the  King,"
when  that  Hussar  accident  befell ;  —  rather  a  blind  story,  true
story  being  too  sad.  The  Vienna  Sovereignties,  in  the  turn
things  had  taken,  were  extremely  kind;  Grand-Duke  Franz
handsomely  pulled  out  his  own  watch,  hearing  what  road  the
Maupertuis  one  had  gone ;  dismissed  the  Maupertuis,  with
that  and  other  gifts,  home  :  —  to  Brittany  (not  to  Prussia),  till
times  calmed  for  engrafting  the  Sciences.1

On  Wednesday,  Friedrich  writes  this  Note  to  his  Sister  ;  the
first  utterance  we  have  from  him  since  those  wild  roarnings
about  Oppeln  and  Hilbersdorf  Mill :  —

King  to  Wilhelmina  (at  Baireuth  ;  two  days  after  Mollwitz).

"  OHLAU,  12th  April,  1741.

"  MY  DEAREST  SISTER,  —  I  have  the  satisfaction  to  inform
you  that  we  have  yesterday  [day  before  yesterday  ;  but  some
of  us  have  only  had  one  sleep  !]  totally  beaten  the  Austrians.
They  have  lost  more  than  5,000  men,  killed,  wounded  and
prisoners.  We  have  lost  Prince  Friedrich,  Brother  of  Margraf
Karl ;  General  Schulenburg,  Wartensleben  of  the  Carabineers,
and  many  other  Officers.  Our  troops  did  miracles ;  and  the
result  shows  as  much.  It  was  one  of  the  rudest  Battles  fought
within  memory  of  man.

"  I  am  sure  you  will  take  part  in  this  happiness ;  and  that
you  will  not  doubt  of  the  tenderness  with  which  I  am,  my
dearest  Sister,  —  Yours  wholly,  FEDERIC."  a

And  on  the  same  day  there  comes,  from  Breslau,  Jordan's
Answer  to  the  late  anxious  little  Note  from  Pogarell ;  anxieties
now  gone,  and  smoky  misery  changed  into  splendor  of  flame :

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  902;  Robinson's  Despatch  (Vienna,  22d  April,  1741,
N.8.);  Voltaire,  ubi  supra.

2  (Euvres,  xxvii.  i.  101.

430  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xil.

llth  April,  1741.

Jordan  to  the  King  (finds  him  at  Ohlau).

"BEESLAU,  llth  April,  1741.

"SiRE, — Yesterday  I  was  in  terrible  alarms.  The  sound
of  the  cannon  heard,  the  smoke  of  powder  visible  from  the
steeple-tops  here ;  all  led  us  to  suspect  that  there  was  a  Battle
going  on.  Glorious  confirmation  of  it  this  morning !  Nothing
but  rejoicing  among  all  the  Protestant  inhabitants ;  who  had
begun  to  be  in  apprehension,  from  the  rumors  which  the  other
party  took  pleasure  in  spreading.  Persons  who  were  in  the
Battle  cannot  enough  celebrate  the  coolness  and  bravery  of
your  Majesty.  For  myself,  I  am  at  the  overflowing  point.  I
have  run  about  all  day,  announcing  this  glorious  news  to  the
Berliners  who  are  here.  In  my  life  I  have  never  felt  a  more
perfect  satisfaction.

"  M.  de  Camas  is  here,  very  ill  for  the  last  two  days ;  attack
of  fever  —  the  Doctor  hopes  to  bring  him  through,"  —  which
proved  beyond  the  Doctor :  the  good  Camas  died  here  three
days  hence  (age  sixty-three)  ;  an  excellent  German-French-
man, of  much  sense,  dignity  and  honesty ;  familiar  to  Fried-
rich  from  infancy  onwards,  and  no  doubt  regretted  by  him  as
deserved.  The  Widow  Camas,  a  fine  old  Lady,  German  by
birth,  will  again  come  in  view.  Jordan  continues  :  —

"  One  finds,  at  the  corner  of  every  street,  an  orator  of  the
Plebs  celebrating  the  warlike  feats  of  your  Majesty's  troops.
I  have  often,  in  my  idleness,  assisted  at  these  discourses  :  not
artistic  eloquence,  it  must  be  owned,  but  spurting  rude  from
the  heart.  ..."

Jordan  adds  in  his  next  Note  :  "  This  morning  (14th)  I
quitted  M.  de  Camas  ;  who,  it  is  thought,  cannot  last  the  day.
I  have  hardly  left  him  during  his  illness  : "  1  —  and  so  let  that
scene  close.

Neipperg,  meanwhile,  had  fallen  back  on  Neisse ;  taken  up
a  strong  encampment  in  that  neighborhood;  he  lies  there-
abouts all  summer ;  stretched  out,  as  it  were,  in  a  kind  of

1  CEuvres  de  Fr€d€ric,  xvii.  99.

em.tr)>'

f.f.& a Cavalry,
-.g-  Jtetretd/  a£Austrwzt&

CHAP.  X.  BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.  431

12th  April,  1741.

vigilant  dog-sleep  on  the  threshold,  keeping  watch  over  Neisse,
and  tries  fighting  no  more  at  this  time,  or  indeed  ever  after,  to
speak  of.  And  always,  I  think,  with  disadvantage,  when  he
does  try  a  little.  He  had  been  Grand-Duke  Franz's  Tutor  in
War-matters  ;  had  got  into  trouble  at  Belgrade  once  before,  and
was  almost  hanged  by  the  Turks.  George  II.  had  occasionally
the  benefit  of  him,  in  coming  years.  Be  not  too  severe  on
the  poor  man,  as  the  Vienna  public  was  ;  he  had  some  faculty,
though  not  enough.  "  Governor  of  Luxemburg,"  before  long  :
there,  for  most  part,  let  him  peacefully  drill,  and  spend  the
remainder  of  his  poor  life.  Friedrich  says,  neither  Neipperg
nor  himself,  at  this  time,  knew  the  least  of  War ;  and  that  it
would  be  hard  to  settle  which  of  them  made  the  more  blunders
in  their  Silesian  tussle.

Friedrich,  in  about  three  weeks  hence,  was  fully  ready  for
opening  trenches  upon  Brieg ;  did  open  trenches,  accordingly,
by  moonlight,  in  a  grand  nocturnal  manner  (as  readers  shall
see  anon)  ;  and,  by  vigorous  cannonading,  —  Marechalde  Belle-
isle  having  come,  by  this  time,  to  enjoy  the  fine  spectacle,  —
soon  got  possession  of  Brieg,  and  held  it  thenceforth.  Neisse
now  alone  remained,  with  Neipperg  vigilantly  stretched  upon
the  threshold  of  it.  But  the  Marechal  de  Belleisle,  we  say,
had  come ;  that  was  the  weighty  circumstance.  And  before
Neisse  can  be  thought  of,  there  is  a  whole  Europe  bickering
aloft  into  conflict ;  embattling  itself  from  end  to  end,  in  sequel
of  Mollwitz  Battle  ;  and  such  a  preliminary  sea  of  negotiating,
diplomatic  finessing,  pulse-feeling,  projecting  and  palavering,
with  Friedrich  for  centre  all  summer,  as  —  as  I  wish  readers
could  imagine  without  my  speaking  of  it  farther !  But  they
cannot.

432  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

CHAPTER  XI.

THE BURSTING FORTH OF BEDLAMS  : BELLEISLE AND THE
BREAKERS OF PRAGMATIC SANCTION.

THE  Battle  of  Mollwitz  went  off  like  a  signal-shot  among
the  Nations  ;  intimating  that  they  were,  one  and  all,  to  go
battling.  Which  they  did,  with  a  witness  ;  making  a  terrible
thing  of  it,  over  all  the  world,  for  above  seven  years  to  come.
Foolish  Nations;  doomed  to  settle  their  jarring  accounts  in
that  terrible  manner !  Nay,  the  fewest  of  them  had  any
accounts,  except  imaginary  ones,  to  settle  there  at  all ;  and
they  went  into  the  adventure  gratis,  spurred  on  by  spectralities
of  the  sick  brain,  by  phantasms  of  hope,  phantasms  of  terror  ;
and  had,  strictly  speaking,  no  actual  business  in  it  whatever.

Not  that  Mollwitz  kindled  Europe ;  Europe  was  already
kindled  for  some  two  years  past ;  —  especially  since  the  late
Kaiser  died,  and  his  Pragmatic  Sanction  was  superadded  to  the
other  troubles  afoot.  But  ever  since  that  Image  of  Jenkins's
Ear  had  at  last  blazed  up  in  the  slow  English  brain,  like  a
fiery  constellation  or  Sign  in  the  Heavens,  symbolic  of  such
injustices  and  unendurabilities,  and  had  lighted  the  Spanish-
English  War,  Europe  was  slowly  but  pretty  surely  taking  fire.
France  "  could  not  see  Spain  humbled,"  she  said :  England
(in  its  own  dim  feeling,  and  also  in  the  fact  of  things)  could
not  do  at  all  without  considerably  humbling  Spain.  France,
endlessly  interested  in  that  Spanish-English  matter,  was
already  sending  out  fleets,  firing  shots,  —  almost,  or  altogether,
putting  forth  her  hand  in  it.  "  In  which  case,  will  not,  must
not,  Austria  help  us  ?  "  thought  England,  —  and  was  asking,
daily,  at  Vienna  (with  intense  earnestness,  but  without  the
least  result),  through  Excellency  Robinson  there,  when  the
late  Kaiser  died.  Died,  poor  gentleman  ;  —  and  left  his  big
Austrian  Heritages  lying,  as  it  were,  in  the  open  market-place ;

CHAP.  XL  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 433

April-May,  1741.

elaborately  tied  by  diplomatic  packthread  and  Pragmatic
Sanction ;  but  not  otherwise  protected  against  the  assembled
cupidities  of  mankind !  Independently  of  Mollwitz,  or  of
Silesia  altogether,  it  was  next  to  impossible  that  Europe  could
long  avoid  blazing  out ;  especially  unless  the  Spanish-English
quarrel  got  quenched,  of  which  there  was  no  likelihood.

But  if  not  as  cause,  then  as  signal,  or  as  signal  and  cause
together  (which  it  properly  was),  the  Battle  of  Mollwitz  gave
the  finishing  stroke,  and  set  all  in  motion.  This  was  "  the
little  stone  broken  loose  from  the  mountain  ;  "  this,  rather
than  the  late  Kaiser's  Death,  which  Friedrich  defined  in  that
manner.  Or  at  least,  this  was  the  first  leap  it  took ;  hitting
other  stones  big  and  little,  which  again  hit  others  with  their
leaping  and  rolling,  —  till  the  whole  mountain-side  is  in  mo-
tion under  law  of  gravity,  and  you  behold  one  wide  stone-
torrent  thundering  towards  the  valleys  ;  shivering  woods,
farms,  habitations  clean  away  with  it :  fatal  to  any  Image  of
composite  Clay  and  Brass  which  it  may  meet !

There  is,  accordingly,  from  this  point,  a  change  in  Fried-
rich's  Silesian  Adventure ;  which  becomes  infinitely  more  com-
plicated for  him,  —  and  for  those  that  write  of  him,  no  less !
Friedrich's  business  henceforth  is  not  to  be  done  by  direct
fighting,  but  rather  by  waiting  to  see  how,  and  on  what  side,
others  will  fight :  nor  can  we  describe  or  understand  Fried-
rich's  business,  except  as  in  connection  with  the  immense,
obsolete,  and  indeed  delirious  Phenomenon  called  Austrian-
Succession  War,  upon  which  it  is  difficult  to  say  any  human
word.  If  History,  driven  upon  Dismal  Swamp  with  its  hor-
rors and  perils,  can  get  across  unsunk,  she  will  be  lucky  !

For,  directly  on  the  back  of  Mollwitz,  there  ensued,  first,
an  explosion  of  Diplomatic  activity  such  as  was  never  seen
before  ;  Excellencies  from  the  four  winds  taking  wing  towards
Friedrich ;  and  talking  and  insinuating,  and  fencing  and  fu-
gling, after  their  sort,  in  that  Silesian  Camp  of  his,  the  centre
being  there.  A  universal  rookery  of  Diplomatists  ;  —  whose
loud  cackle  and  cawing  is  now  as  if  gone  mad  to  us ;  their
work  wholly  fallen  putrescent  and  avoidable,  dead  to  all  crea-
VOL.  VH.  28

434  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

tures.  And  secondly,  in  the  train  of  that,  there  ensued  a
universal  European  War,  the  French  and  the  English  being
chief  parties  in  it ;  which  abounds  in  battles  and  feats  of
arms,  spirited  but  delirious,  and  cannot  be  got  stilled  for  seven
or  eight  years  to  come ;  and  in  which  Friedrich  and  his  War
swim,  only  as  an  intermittent  Episode  henceforth.  What  to
do  with  such  a  War ;  how  extricate  the  Episode,  and  leave
the  War  lying  ?  The  War  was  at  first  a  good  deal  mad ;  and
is  now,  to  men's  imagination,  fallen  wholly  so  ;  who  indeed
have  managed  mostly  to  forget  it ;  only  the  Episode  (reduced
thereby  to  an  ?mintelligible  state)  retaining  still  some  claims
on  them.

It  is  singular  into  what  oblivion  the  huge  Phenomenon
called  Austrian-Succession  War  has  fallen ;  which,  within  a
hundred  years  ago  or  little  more,  filled  all  mortal  hearts !
The  English  Avere  principals  on  one  side ;  did  themselves
fight  in  it,  with  their  customary  fire,  and  their  customary
guidance  ("courageous  Wooden  Pole  with  Cocked  Hat,"  as
our  friend  called  it) ;  and  paid  all  the  expenses,  which  were
extremely  considerable,  and  are  felt  in  men's  pockets  to  this
day :  but  the  English  have  more  completely  forgotten  it  than
any  other  People.  "  Battle  of  Dettingen,  Battle  of  Fonte-
noy,  —  what,  in  the  Devil's  name,  were  we  ever  doing  there  ?  "
the  impatient  Englishman  asks ;  and  can  give  no  answer,  ex-
cept the  general  one  :  "  Fit  of  insanity ;  Delirium  Tremens,
perhaps  Furens  ;  —  don't  think  of  it !  "  Of  Philippi  and  Ar-
bela  educated  Englishmen  can  render  account ;  and  I  am  told
young  gentlemen  entering  the  Army  are  pointedly  required
to  say  who  commanded  at  Aigos-Potamos  and  wrecked  the
Peloponnesian  Wrar :  but  of  Dettingen  and  Fontenoy,  where
is  the  living  Englishman  that  has  the  least  notion,  or  seeks
for  any  ?  The  Austrian-Succession  War  did  veritably  rage
for  eight  years,  at  a  terrific  rate,  deforming  the  face  of  Earth
and  Heaven  ;  the  English  paying  the  piper  always,  and  found-
ing their  National  Debt  thereby  :  —  but  not  even  that  could
prove  mnemonic  to  them ;  and  they  have  dropped  the  Aus-
trian-Succession War,  with  one  accord,  into  the  general  dust-
bin, and  are  content  it  should  lie  there.  They  have  not,  in

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 435

April- May,  1741.

their  language,  the  least  approach  to  an  intelligible  account
of  it :  How  it  went  on,  whitherward,  whence ;  why  it  was
there  at  all, — are  points  dark  to  the  English,  and  on  which
they  do  not  wish  to  be  informed.  They  have  quitted  the
matter,  as  an  unintelligible  huge  English-and-Foreign  Delir-
ium (which  in  good  part  it  was) ;  Delirium  unintelligible  to
them ;  tedious,  not  to  say  in  parts,  as  those  of  the  Austrian
Subsidies,  hideous  and  disgusting  to  them ;  happily  now  fallen
extinct ;  and  capable  of  being  skipped,  in  one's  inquiries  into
the  wonders  of  this  England  and  this  World.  Which,  in  fact,
is  a  practical  conclusion  not  so  unwise  as  it  looks.

"  Wars  are  not  memorable,"  says  Sauerteig,  "  however  big
they  may  have  been,  whatever  rages  and  miseries  they  may
have  occasioned,  or  however  many  hundreds  of  thousands
they  may  have  been  the  death  of,  —  except  when  they  have
something  of  World-History  in  them  withal.  If  they  are
found  to  have  been  the  travail-throes  of  great  or  considera-
ble changes,  which  continue  permanent  in  the  world,  men  of
some  curiosity  cannot  but  inquire  into  them,  keep  memory
of  them.  But  if  they  were  travail-throes  that  had  no  birth,
who  of  mortals  would  remember  them  ?  Unless  perhaps  the
feats  of  prowess,  virtue,  valor  and  endurance,  they  might  ac-
cidentally give  rise  to,  were  very  great  indeed.  Much  greater
than  the  most  were,  which  came  out  in  that  Austrian-Succes-
sion case  !  Wars  otherwise  are  mere  futile  transitory  dust-
whirlwinds  stilled  in  blood ;  extensive  fits  of  human  insanity,
such  as  we  know  are  too  apt  to  break  out ;  —  such  as  it  rather
beseems  a  faithful  Son  of  the  House  of  Adam  not  to  speak
about  again ;  as  in  houses  where  the  grandfather  was  hanged,
the  topic  of  ropes  is  fitly  avoided.

"  Never  again  will  that  War,  with  its  deliriums,  mad  out-
lays of  blood,  treasure,  and  of  hope  and  terror,  and  far-spread
human  destruction,  rise  into  visual  life  in  any  imagination  of
living  man.  In  vain  shall  Dryasdust  strive :  things  mad,
chaotic  and  without  ascertainable  purpose  or  result,  cannot  be
fixed  into  human  memories.  Fix  them  there  by  never  so
many  Documentary  Histories,  elaborate  long-eared  Pedantries,
and  cunning  threads,  the  poor  human  memory  has  an  alchemy

436  FIEST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

against  such  ill  usage ;  —  it  forgets  them  again ;  grows  to
know  them  as  a  mere  torpor,  a  stupidity  and  horror,  and  in-
stinctively flies  from  Dryasdust  and  them."

Alive  to  any  considerable  degree,  in  the  poor  human  imagi-
nation, this  Editor  does  not  expect  or  even  wish  the  Austrian-
Succession  War  to  be.  Enough  for  him  if  it  could  be  under-
stood sufficiently  to  render  his  poor  History  of  Friedrich
intelligible.  For  it  enwraps  Friedrich  like  a  world-vortex
henceforth  ;  modifies  every  step  of  his  existence  henceforth ;
and  apart  from  it,  there  is  no  understanding  of  his  business
or  him.  "  So  much  as  sticks  to  Friedrich  :  "  that  was  our
original  bargain !  Assist  loyally,  0  reader,  and  we  will  try
to  make  the  indispensable  a  minimum  for  you.

Who  ivas  to  blame  for  the  Austrian-Succession  War  ?

The  first  point  to  be  noted  is,  Where  did  it  originate  ?  To
which  the  answer  mainly  is,  With  that  lean  Gentleman  whom
we  saw  with  Papers  in  the  CEil-de-Boeuf  on  New-year's  day
last.  With  Monseigneur  the  Marechal  de  Belleisle  princi-
pally ;  with  the  ambitious  cupidities  and  baseless  vanities  of
the  French  Court  and  Nation,  as  represented  by  Belleisle.
George  II.'s  Spanish  War,  if  you  will  examine,  had  a  real
necessity  in  it.  Jenkins's  Ear  was  the  ridiculous  outside  fig-
ure this  matter  had  :  Jenkins's  Ear  was  one  final  item  of  it ;
but  the  poor  English  People,  in  their  wrath  and  bellowings
about  that  small  item,  were  intrinsically  meaning :  "  Settle  the
account ;  let  us  have  that  account  cleared  up  and  liquidated ;
it  has  lain  too  long  ! "  And  seldom  were  a  People  more  in
the  right,  as  readers  shall  yet  see.

The  English-Spanish  War  had  a  basis  to  stand  on  in  this
Universe.  The  like  had  the  Prussian-Austrian  one ;  so  all
men  now  admit.  If  Friedrich  had  not  business  there,  what
man  ever  had  in  an  enterprise  he  ventured  on  ?  Friedrich,
after  such  trial  and  proof  as  has  seldom  been,  got  his  claims
on  Schlesien  allowed  by  the  Destinies.  His  claims  on  Schle-
sien  ;  —  and  on  infinitely  higher  things  ;  which  were  found  to
be  his  and  his  Nation's,  though  he  had  not  been  consciously
thinking  of  them  in  making  that  adventure.  For,  as  rny  poor

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 437

April-May,  1741.

Friend  insists,  there  are  Laws  valid  in  Earth  and  in  Heaven ;
and  the  great  soul  of  the  world  is  just.  Friedrich  had  busi-
ness in  this  War;  and  Maria  Theresa  versus  Friedrich  had
likewise  cause  to  appear  in  court,  and  do  her  utmost  pleading
against  him.

But  if  we  ask,  What  Belleisle  or  France  and  Louis  XV.  had
to  do  there  ?  the  answer  is  rigorously,  Nothing.  Their  own
windy  vanities,  ambitions,  sanctioned  not  by  fact  and  the  Al-
mighty Powers,  but  by  phantasm  and  the  babble  of  Versailles ;
transcendent  self-conceit,  intrinsically  insane  ;  pretensions  over
their  fellow-creatures  which  were  without  basis  anywhere  in
Nature,  except  in  the  French  brain  alone :  it  was  this  that
brought  Belleisle  and  France  into  a  German  War.  And  Belle-
isle  and  France  having  gone  into  an  Anti-Pragmatic  War,  the
unlucky  George  and  his  England  were  dragged  into  a  Prag-
matic one,  —  quitting  their  own  business,  on  the  Spanish
Main,  and  hurrying  to  Germany,  —  in  terror  as  at  Doomsday,
and  zeal  to  save  the  Keystone  of  Nature  there.  That  is  the
notable  point  in  regard  to  this  War:  That  France  is  to  be
called  the  author  of  it,  who,  alone  of  all  the  parties,  had  no
business  there  whatever.  And  the  wages  due  to  France  for
such  a  piece  of  industry, — the  reader  will  yet  see  what  wages
France  and  the  other  parties  got,  at  the  tail  of  the  affair.  For
that  too  is  apparent  in  our  day.

We  have  often  said,  the  Spanish-English  War  was  itself
likely  to  have  kindled  Europe ;  and  again  Friedrich's  Silesian
War  was  itself  likely,  —  France  being  nearly  sure  to  interfere.
But  if  both  these  Wars  were  necessary  ones,  and  if  France
interfered  in  either  of  them  on  the  wrong  side,  the  blame  will
be  to  France,  not  to  the  necessary  Wars.  France  could,  in  no
way,  have  interfered  in  a  more  barefacedly  unjust  and  gratui-
tous manner  than  she  now  did  ;  nor,  on  any  terms,  have  so
palpably  made  herself  the  author  of  the  conflagration  of  de-
liriums that  ensued  for  above  Seven  years  henceforth.  Nay
for  above  Twenty  years,  —  the  settlement  of  this  Silesian
Pragmatic-Antipragmatic  matter  (and  of  Jenkins's  Ear,  inci-
dentally, along  with  this  ! )  not  having  fairly  completed  itself
till  1763.

438  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

How  Belleisle  made  Visit  to  Teutschland  ;  and  there  was  no
Jit  Henry  the  Fowler  to  welcome  him.

It  is  very  wrong  to  keep  Enchanted  Wiggeries  sitting  in
this  world,  as  if  they  were  things  still  alive  !  By  a  species  of
"  conservatism,"  which  gets  praised  in  our  Time,  but  which  is
only  a  slothful  cowardice,  base  indifference  to  truth,  and  hatred
to  trouble  in  comparison  with  lies  that  sit  quiet,  men  now  ex-
tensively practise  this  method  of  procedure  ;  —  little  dreaming
how  bad  and  fatal  it  at  all  times  is.  When  the  brains  are  out,
things  really  ought  to  die ;  —  no  matter  what  lovely  things
they  were,  and  still  affect  to  be,  the  brains  being  out,  they
actually  ought  in  all  cases  to  die,  and  with  their  best  speed
get  buried.  Men  had  noses,  at  one  time ;  and  smelt  the  hor-
ror of  a  deceased  reality  fallen  putrid,  of  a  once  dear  verity
become  mendacious,  phantasmal ;  but  they  have,  to  an  immense
degree,  lost  that  organ  since,  and  are  now  living  comfortably
cheek-by-jowl  with  lies.  Lies  of  that  sad  "  conservative  "  kind,
—  and  indeed  of  all  kinds  whatsoever  :  for  that  kind  is  a  gen-
eral mother;  and  breeds,  with  a  fecundity  that  is  appalling,
did  you  heed  it  much  !  —

It  was  pity  that  the  "Holy  Eomish  Keich,  Teutsch  by
Nation,"  had  not  got  itself  buried  some  ages  before.  Once
it  had  brains  and  life,  but  now  they  were  out.  Under  the
sway  of  Barbarossa,  under  our  old  anti-chaotic  friend  Henry
the  Fowler,  how  different  had  it  been  !  No  field  for  a  Belle-
isle  to  come  and  sow  tares  in ;  no  rotten  thatch  for  a  French
Sun-god  to  go  sailing  about  in  the  middle  of,  and  set  fire  to  !
Henry,  when  the  Hungarian  Pan-Slavonic  Savagery  came  upon
him,  had  got  ready  in  the  interim ;  and  a  mangy  dog  was  the
"  tribute  "  he  gave  them ;  followed  by  the  due  extent  of  broken
crowns,  since  they  would  not  be  content  with  that.  That  was
the  due  of  Belleisle  too,  —  had  there  been  a  Henry  to  meet
him  with  it,  on  his  crossing  the  marches,  in  Trier  Country,  in
Spring,  1741 :  "  There,  you  anarchic  Upholstery-Belus,  fancy-
ing yourself  God  of  the  Sun  ;  there  is  what  Teutschland  owes
you.  Go  home  with  that ;  and  mind  your  own  business,  which
I  am  told  is  plentiful,  if  you  had  eye  for  it !  "

CHAP  XL  BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 439

April-Ma)',  1741.

But  the  sad  truth  is,  for  above  Four  Centuries  now,  —  and
especially  for  Three,  since  little  Kaiser  Karl  IV.  "  gave  away
all  the  moneys  of  it,"  in  his  pressing  occasions,  this  Holy
Komish  Eeich,  Teutsch  by  Nation,  has  been  more  and  ever
more  becoming  an  imaginary  quantity ;  the  Kaisership  of  it
not  capable  of  being  worn  by  anybody,  except  a  Hapsburger
who  had  resources  otherwise  his  own. The  fact  is  palpable.
And  Austria,  and  Anti-Eeformation Entity,  "conservative"
in  that  bad  sense,  of  slothfully  abhorring  trouble  in  compari-
son with  lies,  had  not  found  the  poison  more  mal-odorous  in
this  particular  than  in  many  others. And  had  cherished  its
"Holy  Eomish  Eeich" grown unholy, phantasmal,  like  so
much  else  in  Austrian  things  ;  and  had  held  firm  grip  of  it,
these  Three  Hundred  years  ;  and  found  it  a  furthersome  and
suitable  thing,  though  sensible  it  was  more  and  more  becoming
an  Enchanted  Wiggery  pure  and  simple. Nor  have  the  conse-
quences failed ;  they  never  do. Belleisle,  Louis  XIV.,  Henri  II.,
Francois  I.  :  it is long  since the French have known  this
state  of  matters ;  and  been  in  the  habit  of  breaking  in  upon
it,  fomenting  internal  discontents,  getting  up  unjust  Wars,  —
with  or  without  advantage  to  France,  but  with  endless  disad-
vantage to  Germany. Schmalkaldic  War ;  Thirty- Years  War ;
Louis  XIV. 's  Wars,  which  brought  Alsace  and  the  other  fine
cuttings  ;  late  Polish-Election  War,  and  its  Lorraine ;  Austrian-
Succession  War  :  many  are  the  wars  kindled  on  poor  Teutsch-
land by neighbor  France ;  and  large  is  the  sum  of  woes  to
Europe  and  to  it,  chargeable  to  that  score. Which  appears
even  yet  not  to  be  completed  ?  —  Perhaps  not,  even  yet. For
it  is  the  penalty  of  being  loyal  to  Enchanted  Wiggeries  ;  of
living  cheek-by-jowl  with  lies  of  a  peaceable  quality,  and  stuff-
ing your  nostrils,  and  searing  your  soul,  against  the  accursed
odor  they  all  have  !  —  For  I  can  assure  you  the  curse  of  Heaven
does  dwell  in  one  and  all  of  them ;  and  the  son  of  Adam  can-
not too  soon  get  quit  of  their  bad  partnership,  cost  him  what
it  may.

Belleisle's  Journey  as  Sun-god  began  in  March,  —  "  end  of
March,  1741,"  no  date  of  a  day  to  be  had  for  that  memorable

440  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

thing  :  —  and  he  went  gyrating  about  through  the  German
Courts,  for  almost  a  year  afterwards  ;  his  course  rather  erratic,
but  always  in  a  splendor  as  of  Belus,  with  those  hundred
and  thirty  French  Lords  and  Valets,  and  the  glory  of  Most
Christian  King  irradiating  him.  Very  diligent  for  the  first
six  months,  till  September  or  October  next,  which  we  may
call  his  seed-time ;  and  by  no  means  resting  after  nine  or
twelve  months,  while  the  harrowing  and  hoeing  went  on.  In
January,  1742,  he  had  the  great  satisfaction  to  see  a  Bavarian
Kaiser  got,  instead  of  an  Austrian  ;  and  everywhere  the  fruit
of  his  diligent  husbandry  begin  to  beard  fairly  above  ground,
into  a  crop  of  facts  (like  armed  men  from  dragon's  teeth),  and
"  the  pleasure  of  the  "  —  whom  was  it  the  pleasure  of  ?  —
"  prosper  in  his  hands."  Belleisle  was  a  pretty  man  ;  but  I
doubt  it  was  not  "  the  Lord  "  he  was  doing  the  pleasure  of,
on  this  occasion,  but  a  very  Different  Personage,  disguised  to
resemble  him  in  poor  Belleisle's  eyes !  —

Austria  was  not  dangerous  to  France  in  late  times,  and  now
least  of  all ;  how  far  from  it,  —  humbled  by  the  loss  of  Lor-
raine ;  and  now  as  it  were  bankrupt,  itself  in  danger  from  all
the  world.  And  France,  so  far  as  express  Treaties  could  bind
a  Nation,  was  bound  to  maintain  Austria  in  its  present  pos-
sessions. The  bitter  loss  of  Lorraine  had  been  sweetened  to
the  late  Kaiser  by  that  solitary  drop  of  consolation  ;  —  as  his
Failure  of  a  Life  had  been,  poor  man  :  "  Failure  the  most  of
me  has  been ;  but  I  have  got  Pragmatic  Sanction,  thanks  to
Heaven,  and  even  France  has  signed  it ! "  Loss  of  Lorraine,
loss  of  Elsass,  loss  of  the  Three  Bishoprics  ;  since  Karl  V.'s
times,  not  to  speak  of  earlier,  there  has  been  mere  loss  on
loss  :  — and  now  is  the  time  to  consummate  it,  think  Belleisle
and  France,  in  spite  of  Treaties.

Towards  humbling  or  extinguishing  Austria,  Belleisle  has
two  preliminary  things  to  do  :  First,  Break  the  Pragmatic
Sanction,  and  get  everybody  to  break  it;  second,  Guide  the
Kaiserwahl  (Election  of  a  Kaiser),  so  that  it  issue,  not  in
Grand-Duke  Franz,  Maria  Theresa's  Husband,  as  all  expect  it
will,  but  in  another  party  friendly  to  France  :  —  say  in  Karl
Albert  of  Bavaria,  whose  Family  have  long  been  good  clients

CHAP.  XL BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 441

April-May,  1741.

of  ours,  dependent  on  us  for  a  living  in  the  Political  World.
Belleisle,  there  is  little  doubt,  had  from  the  first  cast  his  eye
on  this  unlucky  Karl  Albert  for  Kaiser ;  but  is  uncertain  as  to
carrying  him.  Belleisle  will  take  another  if  he  must;  Kur-
Sachsen,  for  example  ;  —  any  other,  and  all  others,  only  not
the  Grand-Duke  :  that  is  a  point  already  fixed  with  Belleisle,
though  he  keeps  it  well  in  the  background,  and  is  careful  not
to  hint  it  till  the  time  come.

In  regard  to  Pragmatic  Sanction,  Belleisle  and  France  found
no  difficulty,  —  or  the  difficulty  only  (which  we  hope  must
have  been  considerable)  of  eating  their  own  Covenant  in  be-
half of  Pragmatic  Sanction;  and  declaring,  which  they  did
without  visible  blush,  That  it  was  a  Covenant  including,  if  not
expressly,  then  tacitly,  as  all  human  covenants  do,  this  clause,
"  Salvo  jure  tertii  (Saving  the  rights  of  Third  Parties),"  —
that  is,  of  Electors  of  Bavaria,  and  others  who  may  object
against  it !  0  soul  of  honor,  O  first  Nation  of  the  Universe,
was  there  ever  such  a  subterfuge  ?  Here  is  a  field  of  flower-
ing corn,  the  biggest  in  the  world,  begirt  with  elaborate  ring-
fence,  many  miles  of  firm  oak-paling  pitched  and  buttressed ;
—  the  poor  gentleman  now  dead  gave  you  his  Lorraine,  and
almost  his  life,  for  swearing  to  keep  up  said  paling.  And  you
do  keep  it  up,  —  all  except  six  yards  ;  through  which  the  big-
gest team  on  the  highway  can  drive  freely,  and  the  paltriest
cadger's  ass  can  step  in  for  a  bellyful !

It  appears,  the  first  Nation  of  the  Universe  had,  at  an  early
period  of  their  consultations,  hit  upon  this  of  Salvo  jure  tertii,
as  the  method  of  eating  their  Covenant,  before  an  enlightened
public.1  And  they  persisted  in  it,  there  being  no  other  for
them.  An  enlightened  public  grinned  sardonically,  and  was
not  taken  in ;  but,  as  so  many  others  were  eating  their  Cove-
nants, under  equally  poor  subterfuges,  the  enlightened  public
could  not  grin  long  on  any  individual,  —  could  only  gape

i  20th  January,  1741,  in  their  Note  of  Ceremony,  recognizing  Maria
Theresa  as  Queen  of  Hungary,  Note  which  had  been  due  so  very  long  (Ade-
lung,  ii.  206),  there  is  ominous  silence  on  Pragmatic  Sanction ;  "  beginning  of
March,"  there  is  virtual  avowal  of  Salvo  jure  (ib.  279);  — open  avowal  on
Belleisle's  advent  (ib.  305).

442  FIRST SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

mutely,  with  astonishment,  on  all.  A  glorious  example  of
veracity  and  human  nobleness,  set  by  the  gods  of  this  lower
world  to  their  gazing  populations,  who  could  read  in  the
Gazettes  !  What  is  truth,  falsity,  human  Kingship,  human
Swindlership  ?  Are  the  Ten  Commandments  only  a  figure  of
speech,  then  ?  And  it  was  some  beggarly  Attorney -Devil  that
built  this  sublunary  world  and  us  ?  Questions  might  rise ;
had  long  been  rising ;  —  but  now  there  was  about  enough,  and
the  response  to  them  was  falling  due ;  and  Belleisle  himself,
what  is  very  notable,  had  been  appointed  to  get  ready  the
response.  Belleisle  (little  as  Belleisle  dreamt  of  it,  in  these
high  Enterprises)  was  ushering  in,  by  way  of  response,  a
Eagnarok,  or  Twilight  of  the  Gods,  which,  as  "  French  Revo-
lution, or  Apotheosis  of  Sansculottism,"  is  now  well  known ;  —
and  that  is  something  to  consider  of !

DownbreaJc  of  Pragmatic  Sanction; Manner  of  the  chief
Artists  in  handling  their  Covenants.

The  operation  once  accomplished  on  its  own  Pragmatic
Covenant,  France  found  no  difficulty  with  the  others.  Every-
body was  disposed  to  eat  his  Covenant,  who  could  see  advan-
tage in  so  doing,  after  that  admirable  example.  The  difficulty
of  France  and  Belleisle  rather  was,  to  keep  the  hungry  parties
back  :  "  Don't  eat  your  Covenant  till  the  proper  time  ;  patience,
we  say  !  "  A  most  sad  Miscellany  of  Royalties,  coming  all  to
the  point,  "Will  you  eat  your  Covenant,  Will  you  keep  it  ?  "  —
and  eating,  nearly  all ;  in  fact,  wholly  all  that  needed  to  eat.

On  the  first  Invasion  of  Silesia,  Maria  Theresa  had  indig-
nantly complained  in  every  Court ;  and  pointing  to  Pragmatic
Sanction,  had  demanded  that  such  Law  of  Nature  be  com-
plied with,  according  to  covenant.  What  Maria  Theresa  got
by  this  circuit  of  the  Courts,  everybody  still  knows.  Except
England,  which  was  willing,  and  Holland,  which  was  unwill-
ing, all  Courts  had  answered,  more  or  less  uneasily :  "  Law  of
Nature,  —  humph :  yes  ! "  —  and,  far  from  doing  anything,  not
one  of  them  would  with  certainty  promise  to  do  anything.
From  England  alone  and  her  little  King  (to  whom  Pragmatic

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 443

April-May,  1741.

Sanction  is  the  Palladium  of  Human  Freedoms  and  the  Key-
stone of  Nature)  could  she  get  the  least  help.  The  rest  hung
back ;  would  not  open  heart  or  pocket ;  waited  till  they  saw.
They  do  now  see;  now  that  Belleisle  has  done  his  feat  of
Covenant-eating !  —

Eleven  great  Powers,  some  count  Thirteen,  some  Twelve,1

—  but  no  two  agree,  and  hardly  one  agrees  with  himself;  —
enough,  the  Powers  of  Europe,  from  Naples  and  Madrid  to
Russia  and  Sweden,  have  all  signed  it,  let  us  say  a  Dozen  or  a
Baker's-Dozen  of  them. And  except  our  little  English  Paladin
alone,  whose  interest  and  indeed  salvation  seemed  to  him  to
lie  that  way,  and  who  needed  no  Pragmatic  Covenant  to  guide
him,  nobody  whatever  distinguished  himself  by  keeping  it.
Between  December,  1740,  when  Maria  Theresa  set  up  her  cries
in  all  Courts,  on  to  April,  1741,  England,  painfully  dragging
Holland  with  her,  had  alone  of  the  Baker's-Dozen  spoken  word
of  disapproval ;  much  less  done  act  of  hindrance. Two  espe-
cially (France  and  Bavaria,  not  to  mention  Spain)  had  done  the
reverse,  and  disowned,  and  declared  against,  Pragmatic  Sanc-
tion. And  after  the  Battle  of  Mollwitz,  when  the "little
stone"  took  its  first  leap,  and  set  all  thundering,  then  came,
like  the  inrush  of  a  fashion,  throughout  that  high  Miscellany
or  Baker's-Dozen,  the  general  eating  of  Covenants  (which  was
again  quickened  in  August,  for  a  reason  we  shall  see)  :  and
before  November  of  that  Year,  there  was  no  Covenant  left  to
eat. Of  the  Baker's-Dozen  nobody  remained  but  little  George
the  Paladin,  dragging  Holland  painfully  along  with  him ;  —
and  Pragmatic  Sanction  had  gone  to  water,  like  ice  in  a  June
day,  and  its  beautiful  crystalline  qualities  and  prismatic  col-
ors were  forever  vanished  from  the  world. Will  the  reader
note  a  point  or  two,  a  personage  or  two,  in  this  sordid  process,

—  not  for  the  process's  sake,  which  is  very  sordid  and  smells
badly,  but  for  his  own  sake,  to  elucidate  his  own  course  a  little
in  the  intricacies  now  coming  or  come  upon  him  and  me  ?

1°.  Elector  of  Bavaria.  —  Karl  Albert  of  Baiern  is  by  some
counted  as  a  Signer  of  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  by  others
not ; which  occasions  that discrepancy  of  sum-total  in  the
1  Scholl,  ii.  286  ;  Adelung,  list,  ii.  127.

444  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

Books.  And  he  did  once,  in  a  sense,  sign  it,  he  and  his  Brother
of  Koln;  but,  before  the  late  Kaiser's  death,  he  had  openly
drawn  back  from  it  again ;  and  counted  himself  a  Non-signer.
Signer  or  not,  he,  for  his  part,  lost  no  moment  (but  rather  the
contrary)  in  openly  protesting  against  it,  and  signifying  that
he  never  would  acknowledge  it.  Of  this  the  reader  saw  some-
thing, at  the  time  of  her  Hungarian  Majesty's  Accession.
Date  and  circumstances  of  it,  which  deserve  remembering,
are  more  precisely  these :  October  20th,  1740,  Karl  Albert's
Ambassador,  Perusa  by  name,  wrote  to  Karl  from  Vienna,
announcing  that  the  Kaiser  was  just  dead.  From  Miinchen,
on  the  21st,  Karl  Albert,  anticipating  such  an  event,  but  not
yet  knowing  it,  orders  Perusa,  in  case  of  the  Kaiser's  decease,
which  was  considered  probable  at  Miinchen,  to  demand  instant
audience  of  the  proper  party  (Kanzler  Sinzendorf),  and  there
openly  lodge  his  Protest.  Which  Perusa  did,  punctually  in
all  points,  —  no  moment  lost,  but  rather  the  contrary,  as  we
said !  Let  poor  Karl  Albert  have  what  benefit  there  is  in  that
fact.  He  was,  of  all  the  Anti-Pragmatic  Covenant-Breakers
(if  he  ever  fairly  were  such),  the  only  one  that  proceeded
honorably,  openly  and  at  once,  in  the  matter ;  and  he  was,  of
them  all,  by  far  the  most  unfortunate.

This  is  the  poor  gentleman  whom  Belleisle  had  settled  on
for  being  Kaiser.  And  Kaiser  he  became ;  to  his  frightful
sorrow,  as  it  proved :  his  crown  like  a  crown  of  burning  iron,
or  little  better  !  There  is  little  of  him  in  the  Books,  nor  does
one  desire  much  :  a  tall  aquiline  type  of  man ;  much  the  gen-
tleman in  aspect ;  and  in  reality,  of  decorous  serious  deport-
ment, and  the  wish  to  be  high  and  dignified.  He  had  a  kind
of  right,  too,  in  the  Anti-Pragmatic  sense ;  and  was  come  of
Imperial  kindred,  — Kaiser  Ludwig  the  Bavarian,  and  Kaiser
Eupert  of  the  Pfalz,  called  Rupert  Klemm,  or  Rupert  Smith's-
vice,  if  any  reader  now  remember  him,  were  both  of  his  ances-
tors. He  might  fairly  pretend  to  Kaisership  and  to  Austrian
ownership,  —  had  he  otherwise  been  equal  to  such  enterprises.
But,  in  all  ambitions  and  attempts,  howsoever  grounded  other-
wise, there  is  this  strict  question  on  the  threshold :  "  Are
you  of  weight  for  the  adventure ;  are  not  you  far  too  light  for

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 445

April-May,  1741.

it  ?  "  Ambitious  persons  often  slur  this  question ;  and  get
squelched  to  pieces,  by  bringing  the  Twelve  Labors  of  Her-
cules on  Unherculean  backs  !  Not  every  one  is  so  lucky  as  our
Friedrich  in  that  particular,  —  whose  back,  though  with  diffi-
culty, held  out.  Which  poor  Karl  Albert's  never  had  much
likelihood  to  do.  Few  mortals  in  any  age  have  offered  such
an  example  of  the  tragedies  which  Ambition  has  in  store  for
her  votaries ;  and  what  a  matter  Hope  Fulfilled  may  be  to  the
unreflecting  Son  of  Adam.

We  said,  he  had  a  kind  of  right  to  Austria,  withal.  He
descended  by  the  female  line  from  Kaiser  Ferdinand  I.  (as
did  Kur-Sachsen,  though  by  a  younger  Daughter  than  Karl
Albert's  Ancestress)  ;  and  he  appealed  to  Kaiser  Ferdinand's
Settlement  of  the  Succession,  as  a  higher  than  any  subsequent
Pragmatic  could  be.  Upon  which  there  hangs  an  incident;
still  famous  to  German  readers.  Karl  Albert,  getting  into
Public  Argument  in  this  way,  naturally  instructed  Perusa  to
demand  sight  of  Kaiser  Ferdinand's  Last  Will,  the  tenor  of
which  was  known  by  authentic  Copy  in  Miinchen,  if  not  else-
where among  the  kindred.  After  some  delay,  Perusa  (4th
November,  1740),  summoning  the  other  excellencies  to  wit-
ness, got  sight  of  the  Will :  to  his  horror,  there  stood,  in  the
cardinal  passage,  instead  of  "  mdnnliche  "  (male  descendants),
"  eheliche  "  (lawfully  begotten  descendants),  —  fatal  to  Karl
Albert's  claim !  Nor  could  he  prove  that  the  Parchment  had
been  scraped  or  altered,  though  he  kept  trying  and  examining
for  some  days.  He  withdrew  thereupon,  by  order,  straight-
way from  Vienna;  testifying  in  dumb-show  what  he  thought.
"  It  is  your  Copy  that  is  false,"  cried  the  Vienna  people  :  "  it
has  been  foisted  on  you,  with  this  wrong  word  in  it ;  done  by
somebody  (your  friend,  the  Excellency  Herr  von  Hartmann,
shall  we  guess  ?),  wishing  to  curry  favor  with  ambitious  fool-
ish persons  ! "  Such  was  the  Austrian  story.  Perhaps  in
Miinchen  itself  their  Copyist  was  not  known  ;  —  for  aught  I
learn,  the  Copy  was  made  long  since,  and  the  Copyist  dead.
Hartmann,  named  as  Copyist  by  the  Vienna  people,  made
emphatic  public  answer:  "Never  did  I  copy  it,  or  see  it!"
And  there  rose  great  argument,  which  is  not  yet  quite  ended,

446  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xn.

April-May,  1741.

as  to  the  question,  "  Original  falsified,  or  Copy  falsified  ?  "  —
and  the  modern  vote,  I  believe,  rather  clearly  is,  That  the
Austrian  Ofiicials  had  done  it  —  in  a  case  of  necessity.1  Possi-
ble ?  "But  you  will  lose  your  soul ! "  said  the  Parson  once  to
a  poor  old  Gentlewoman,  English  by  Nation,  who  refused,  in
dying,  to  contradict  some  domestic  fiction,  to  give  up  some
domestic  secret :  "  But  you  will  lose  your  soul,  Madam  !  "  —
"  Tush,  what  signifies  my  poor  silly  soul  compared  with  the
honor  of  the  family  ?  "  —

2°.  King  Friedrich.  —  King  Friedrich  may  be  taken  as  the
Anti-Pragmatic  next  in  order  of  time.  He  too  lost  not  a
moment,  and  proceeded  openly;  no  quirking  to  be  charged
upon  him.  His  account  of  himself  in  this  matter  always
was :  "  By  the  Treaty  of  Wusterhausen,  1726,  unquestionably
Prussia  undertook  to  guarantee  Pragmatic  Sanction ;  the  late
Kaiser  undertaking  in  return,  by  the  same  Treaty,  to  secure
Berg  and  Julich  to  Prussia,  and  to  have  some  progress  made
in  it  within  six  months  from  signing.  And  unquestionably
also,  the  late  Kaiser  did  thereupon,  or  even  had  already  done,
precisely  the  reverse ;  namely,  secured,  so  far  as  in  him  was
possible,  Berg  and  Julich  to  Kur-Pfalz.  Such  Treaty,  having
in  this  way  done  suicide,  is  dead  and  become  zero :  and  I  am
free,  in  respect  of  Pragmatic  Sanction,  to  do  whatever  shall
seem  good  to  me.  My  wish  was,  and  would  still  be,  To  main-
tain Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  even  to  support  it  by  100,000
men,  and  secure  the  Election  of  the  Grand-Duke  to  the  Kaiser-
ship, —  were  my  claims  on  Silesia  once  liquidated.  But  these
have  no  concern  with  Pragmatic  Sanction,  for  or  against :
these  are  good  against  whoever  may  fall  Heir  to  the  House
of  Austria,  or  to  Silesia :  and  my  intention  is,  that  the  strong
hand,  so  long  clenched  upon  my  rights,  shall  open  itself  by
this  favorable  opportunity,  and  give  them  out."  That  is

1  Adelung,  ii.  150-154  (14th-20th  November,  1740),  gives  the  public  facts,
•without  commentary.  Hormayr  ( Anemonen  aus  dem  Tagebuch  eines  alien  Pil-
gersmannes,  Jena,  1845,  i.  162-169,  —  our  old  Hormayr  of  the  Austrian  Plutarch,
but  now  Anonymous,  and  in  Opposition  humor)  considers  the  case  nearly
proved  against  Austria,  and  that  Bartenstein  and  one  Bessel,  a  pillar  of  the
Church,  were  concerned  in  it.

CHAP.  XL  BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 447

April-May,  1741.

Friedrich's  case.  And  in  truth,  the  jury  everywhere  has  to
find,  —  so  soon  as  instructed,  which  is  a  long  process  in  some
sections  of  it  (in  England,  for  example),  —  That  Pragmatic
Sanction  has  not,  except  helpless  lamentations,  "  Alas  that
you  should  be  here  to  insist  upon  your  rights,  and  to  open
fists  long  closed ! " — the  least  word  to  say  to  Friedrich.

3°.  Termagant  of  Spain.  —  Perhaps  the  most  distracted  of
the  Anti-Pragmatic  subterfuges  was  that  used  by  Spain,  when
the  She-dragon  or  Termagant  saw  good  to  eat  her  Covenant ;
which  was  at  a  very  early  stage.  The  Termagant's  poor
Husband  is  a  Bourbon,  not  a  Hapsburg  at  all :  "  But  has  not
he  fallen  heir  to  the  Spanish  Hapsburgs ;  become  all  one  as
they,  an  alter-ego  of  the  Spanish  Hapsburgs  ? "  asks  she.
"And  the  Austrian  Hapsburgs  being  out,  do  not  the  Spanish
Hapsburgs  come  in  ?  He,  I  say,  this  ^owr^ow-Hapsburg,  he
is  the  real  Hapsburg,  now  that  the  Austrian  Branch  is  gone ;
President  he  of  the  Golden  Fleece  [which  a  certain  "Arch-
duchess," Maria  Theresa,  had  been  meddling  with]  ;  Proprietor,
he,  of  Austrian  Italy,  and  of  all  or  most  things  Austrian  ! "  —
and  produces  Documentary  Covenants  of  Philip  II.  with  his
Austrian  Cousins;  "to  which  Philip,"  said  the  Termagant,
"  we  Bourbons  surely,  if  you  consider  it,  are  Heir  and  Alter-
Ego  ! "  Is  not  this  a  curious  case  of  testamentary  right ;
human  greed  obliterating  personal  identity  itself?

Belleisle  had  a  great  deal  of  difficulty,  keeping  the  Terma-
gant back  till  things  were  ripe.  Her  hope  practically  was,  Baby
Carlos  being  prosperous  King  of  Naples  this  long  while,  to  get
the  Milanese  for  another  Baby  she  has,  —  Baby  Philip,  whom
she  once  thought  of  making  Pope ;  —  and  she  is  eager  beyond
measure  to  have  a  stroke  at  the  Milanese.  "  Wait ! "  hoarsely
whispers  Belleisle  to  her ;  and  she  can  scarcely  wait.  Maria
Theresa's  Note  of  Announcement,  "New  Queen  of  Hungary,
may  it  please  you ! "  the  French,  as  we  saw,  were  very  long
in  answering.  The  Termagant  did  not  answer  it  at  all ;  com-
plained on  the  contrary,  "  What  is  this,  Madam !  Golden
Fleece,  you  ?  "  —  and,  early  in  March,  informed  mankind  thab
she  was  Spanish  Hapsburg,  the  genuine  article ;  and  sent  off
Excellency  Montijos,  a  little  man  of  great  expense,  to  assist

448  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

at  the  Election  of  a  proper  Kaiser,  and  be  useful  to  Belleisle
in  the  great  things  now  ahead.1

4°.  King  of  Poland.  —  The  most  ticklish  card  in  Belleisle's
game,  and  probably  the  greatest  fool  of  these  Anti-Pragmatic
Dozen,  was  Kur-Sachsen,  King  of  Poland.  He,  like  Karl
Albert  Kur-Baiern,  derives  from  Kaiser  Ferdinand,  though
by  a  younger  Daughter,  and  has  a  like  claim  on  the  Austrian
Succession ;  claim  nullified,  however,  by  that  small  circum-
stance itself,  but  which  he  would  fain  mend  by  one  makeshift
or  another ;  and  thinks  always  it  must  surely  be  good  for
something.  This  is  August  III.,  this  King  of  Poland,  as
readers  know ;  son  of  August  the  Strong :  Papa  made  him
change  to  the  Catholic  religion  so  called,  —  for  the  sake  of
getting  Poland,  which  proves  a  very  poor  possession  to  him.
Who  knows  what  damage  the  poor  creature  may  have  got
by  that  sad  operation ;  —  which  all  Saxony  sighed  to  the
heart  on  hearing  of;  for  it  was  always  hoped  he  had  some
real  religion,  and  would  deliver  them  from  that  Babylonish
Captivity  again !  He  married  Kaiser  Joseph  I.'s  Daughter,  —
Maria  Theresa's  Cousin,  and  by  an  Elder  Brother ;  —  this,
too,  ought  surely  to  be  something  in  the  Anti-Pragmatic  line  ?
It  is  true,  Kur-Baiern  has  to  Wife  another  Daughter  of  Kaiser
Joseph's  ;  but  she  is  the  younger  :  "  I  am  senior  there,  at
least ! "  thinks  the  foolish  man.

Too  true,  he  had  finally,  in  past  years,  to  sign  Pragmatic
Sanction;  no  help  for  it,  no  hope  without  it,  in  that  Polish-
Election  time.  He  will  have  to  eat  his  Covenant,  therefore,
as  the  first  step  in  Anti-Pragmatism ;  and  he  is  extremely
in  doubt  as  to  the  How,  sometimes  as  to  the  Whether.  And
shifts  and  whirls,  accordingly,  at  a  great  rate,  in  these  months
and  years ;  now  on  Maria  Theresa's  side,  deluded  by  shadows
from  Vienna,  and  getting  into  Kussian  Partition-Treaties ;
anon  tickled  by  Belleisle  into  the  reverse  posture ;  then  again
reversing.  An  idle,  easy-tempered,  yet  greedy  creature,  who,

1  Spain's  Golden-Fleece  pretensions,  17th  January,  1741  (Adelung,  ii.  233,
234);  "Publishes  at  Paris,"  in  March  (ib.  293);  and  on  the  23d  March
accredits  Montijos  (ib.  293) :  Italian  War,  held  back  by  Belleisle  and  the
English  Fleets,  cannot  get  begun  till  October  following.

CHAP.  XT.  BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 449

April-May,  1741.

what  with  religious  apostasy  in  early  manhood,  what  with
flaccid  ambitions  since,  and  idle  gapings  after  shadows,  has
lost  helm  in  this  world;  and  will  make  a  very  bad  voyage
for  self  and  country.

His  Palinurus  and  chief  Counsellor,  at  present  and  after-
wards, is  a  Count  von  Briihl,  once  page  to  August  the  Strong  ;
now  risen  to  such  height:  Briihl  of  the  three  hundred  and
sixty-five  suits  of  clothes ;  whom  it  has  grown  wearisome  even
to  laugh  at.  A  cunning  little  wretch,  they  say,  and  of  deft
tongue ;  but  surely  among  the  unwisest  of  all  the  Sons  of
Adam  in  that  day,  and  such  a  Palinurus  as  seldom  steered
before.  Kur-Sachsen,  being  Eeichs-Vicar  in  the  Northern
Parts,  —  (Kur-Baiern  and  Kur-Pfalz,  as  friends  and  good  Wit-
telsbacher  Cousins  surely  ought,  in  a  crisis  like  this,  have
agreed  to  be  t/om^-Vicars  in  the  Southern  Parts,  and  no  longer
quarrel  upon  it),  —  Kur-Sachsen  has  a  good  deal  to  do  in  the
Election  preludings,  formalities  and  prearrangements  ;  and  is
capable,  as  Kur-Pfalz  and  Cousin  always  are,  of  serving  as
chisel  to  Belleisle's  mallet,  in  such  points,  which  will  plenti-
fully turn  up.

5°.  King  of  Sardinia.  —  Eeichs-Vicar  in  the  Italian  Parts
is  Charles  Amadeus  King  of  Sardinia  (tough  old  Victor's  Son,
whom  we  have  heard  of)  :  an  office  mostly  honorary  ;  suitable
to  the  important  individual  who  keeps  the  Door  of  the  Alps.
Charles  Amadeus  had  signed  the  Pragmatic  Sanction  ;  but  eats
his  Covenant,  like  the  others,  on  example  of  France;  —  having,
as  he  now  bethinks  himself,  claims  on  the  Milanese.  There
are  two  claimants  on  the  Milanese,  then  ;  the  Spanish  Terma-
gant, and  he  ?  Yes ;  and  they  will  have  their  difficulties,
their  extensive  tusslings  in  Italian  War  and  otherwise,  to
make  an  adjustment  of  it ;  and  will  give  Belleisle  (at  least  the
Doorkeeper  will)  an  immensity  of  trouble,  in  years  coming.

In  this  way  do  the  Pragmatic  people  eat  their  own  Covenant,
one  after  the  other,  and  are  not  ashamed;  —  till  all  have  eaten,
or  as  good  as  eaten ;  and,  almost  within  year  and  day,  Prag-
matic Sanction  is  a  vanished  quantity ;  and  poor  Kaiser  Karl's
life-labor  is  not  worth  the  sheepskin  and  stationery  it  cost
him.  History  reports  in  sum,  That  "  nobody  kept  the  Prag-
VOL.  vii.  29

450  FIKST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

matic  Sanction ;  that  the  few  [strictly  speaking,  the  one]  who
acted  by  it,  would  have  done  precisely  the  same,  though
there  had  never  been  such  a  Document  in  existence."  To
George  II.,  it  is,  was  and  will  be,  the  Keystone  of  Nature,  the
true  Anti-French  palladium  of  mankind ;  and  he,  dragging  the
unwilling  Dutch  after  him,  will  do  great  things  for  it :  but
nobody  else  does  anything  at  all.  Might  we  hope  to  bid  adieu
to  it,  in  this  manner,  and  never  to  mention  it  again  !  —

Document  more  futile  there  had  not  been  in  Nature,  nor  will
be.  Friedrich  had  not  yet  fought  at  Mollwitz  in  assertion  of
his  Silesian  claim,  when  the  poor  Pope  —  poor  soul,  who  had
no  Covenant  to  eat,  but  took  pattern  by  others  —  claimed,  in
solemn  Allocution,  Parma  and  Piacenza  for  the  Holy  See.1
All  the  world  is  claiming.  Of  the  Court  of  Wiirtemberg  and
its  Pretestings,  and  "  extensive  Deduction "  about  nothing  at
all,  we  do  not  speak ; 2  nor  of  Moutmorency  claiming  Luxem-
burg, of  which  he  is  Titular  "  Duke ; "  nor  of  Monsignore  di
Guastalla  claiming  Mantua ;  nor  of  —  In  brief,  the  fences  are
now  down ;  a  broad  French  gap  in  those  miles  of  elaborate
paling,  which  are  good  only  as  firewood  henceforth,  and  any
ass  may  rush  in  and  claim  a  bellyful.  Great  are  the  works  of
BeUeisle !  —

Concerning  the  Imperial  Election  (Kaiser wahl)  that  is  to
be  ;  Candidates  for  Kaiser  ship.

At  equal  step  with  the  ruining  of  Pragmatic  Sanction  goes
on  that  spoiling  of  Grand-Duke  Franz's  Election  to  the  Kaiser-
ship  :  these  two  operations  run  parallel ;  or  rather,  under  dif-
ferent forms,  they  are  one  and  the  same  operation.  "  To  assist,
as  a  Most  Christian  neighbor  ought,  in  picking  out  the  fit
Kaiser,"  was  Belleisle's  ostensible  mission;  and  indeed  this
does  include  virtually  his  whole  errand.  Till  three  months
after  Belleisle's  appearance  in  the  business,  Grand-Duke  Franz
never  doubted  but  he  should  be  Kaiser ;  Friedrich's  offers  to
help  him  in  it  he  had  scorned,  as  the  offer  of  a  fifth  wheel
to  his  chariot,  already  rushing  on  with  four.  "Here  is  Kur-
1  Adelung,  ii.  376  (5th  April,  1741).  2  Ib.  ii.  195,  403.

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 451

April-May,  1741.

Bohrnen,  Austria's  own  vote,"  counts  the  Grand-Duke  ;  "  Kur-
Sachsen,  doing  Prussian-Partition  Treaties  for  us  ;  Kur-Trier,
our  fat  little  Schonborn,  Austrian  to  the  bone ;  Kur-Mainz,
important  chairman,  regulator  of  the  Conclave ;  here  are  Four
Electors  for  us :  then  also  Kur-Pfalz,  he  surely,  in  return  for
the  Berg-Jiilich  service ;  finally,  and  liable  to  no  question,
Kur- Hanover,  little  George  of  England  with  his  endless  guineas
and  resources,  a  little  Jack-the-Giantkiller,  greater  than  all
Giants,  Paladin  of  the  Pragmatic  and  us  :  here  are  Six  Electors
of  the  Nine.  Let  Brandenburg  and  the  Bavarian  Couple,  Kur-
Baiern  and  Kur-Koln,  do  their  pleasure ! "  This  was  Grand-
Duke  Franz's  calculation.

By  the  time  Belleisle  had  been  three  months  in  Germany,
the  Grand-Duke's  notion  had  changed ;  and  he  began  "  apply-
ing to  the  Sea-Powers,"  "to  Russia,"  and  all  round.  In
Belleisle's  sixth  month,  the  Grand-Duke,  after  such  demolition
of  Pragmatic,  and  such  disasters  and  contradictions  as  had
been,  saw  his  case  to  be  desperate  ;  though  he  still  stuck  to  it,
Austrian-like,  —  or  rather,  Austria  for  him  stuck  to  it,  the
Grand-Duke  being  careless  of  such  things  ;  — and  indeed,  pri-
vately, never  did  give  in,  even  after  the  Election,  as  we  shall
have  to  note.

The  Eeich  itself  being  mainly  a  Phantasm  or  Enchanted
Wiggery,  its  "  Kaiser-Choosing  "  (Kaiserwahl),  —  now  getting
under  way  at  Frankfurt,  with  preliminary  outskirts  at  Regens-
burg,  and  in  the  Chancery  of  Mainz  —  is  very  phantasmal,  not
to  say  ghastly;  and  forbidding,  not  inviting,  to  the  human
eye.  Nine  Kurfursts,  Choosers  of  Teutschland's  real  Captain,
in  none  of  whom  is  there  much  thought  for  Teutschland  or
its  interests,  —  and  indeed  in  hardly  more  than  One  of  whom
(Prussian  Friedrich,  if  readers  will  know  it)  is  there  the  least
thought  that  way  ;  but,  in  general,  much  indifference  to  things
divine  or  diabolic,  and  thought  for  one's  own  paltry  profits  and
losses  only !  So  it  has  long  been  ;  and  so  it  now  is,  more  than
usual.  —  Consider  again,  are  Enchanted  Wiggeries  a  beautiful
thing,  in  this  extremely  earnest  World  ?  —

The  Kaiserwahl  is  an  affair  depending  much  on  processions,

452  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

proclamations,  on  delusions  optical,  acoustic;  on  palaverings,
manoeuvrings,  holdings  back,  then  hasty  pushings  forward ;
and  indeed  is  mainly,  in  more  senses  than  one,  under  guidance
of  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air.  Unbeautiful,  like  a
World-Parliament  of  Nightmares  (if  the  reader  could  conceive
such  a  thing)  ;  huge  formless,  tongueless  monsters  of  that
species,  doing  their  "  three  readings,"  —  under  Presidency  or
chief-pipership  as  above !  Belleisle,  for  his  part,  is  consum-
mately skilful,  and  manages  as  only  himself  could.  Keeps  his
game  well  hidden,  not  a  hint  or  whisper  of  it  except  in  studied
proportions ;  spreads  out  his  lines,  his  birdlime ;  tickles,  en-
tices, astonishes ;  goes  his  rounds,  like  a  subtle  Fowler,  taking
captive  the  minds  of  men ;  a  Phoebus- Apollo,  god  of  melody
and  of  the  sun,  filling  his  net  with  birds.

I  believe,  old  Kur-Pfalz,  for  the  sake  of  French  neighbor-
hood, and  Berg-and-Jiilich,  were  there  nothing  more,  was  very
helpful  to  him ;  —  in  March  past,  when  the  Election  was  to
have  been,  when  it  would  have  gone  at  once  in  favor  of  the
Grand-Duke,  Kur-Pfalz  got  the  Election  "postponed  a  little."
Postponing,  procrastinating ;  then  again  pushing  violently  on,
when  things  are  ripe  :  Belleisle  has  only  to  give  signal  to  a  fit
Kur-Pfalz.  In  all  Kurfiirst  Courts,  the  French  Ambassadors
sing  diligently  to  the  tune  Belleisle  sets  them  ;  and  Courts  give
ear,  or  will  do,  when  the  charmer  himself  arrives.

Kur-Sachsen,  as  above  hinted,  was  his  most  delicate  opera-
tion, in  the  charming  or  trout-tickling  way.  And  Kur-Sachsen
—  and  poor  Saxony,  ever  since  —  knows  if  he  did  not  do  it
well !  "  Deduct  this  Kur-Sachsen  from  the  Austrian  side,"
calculates  Belleisle ;  "  add  him  to  ours,  it  is  almost  an  equality
of  votes.  Kur-Baiern,  our  own  Imperial  Candidate  ;  Kur-Koln,
his  Brother ;  Kur-Pfalz,  by  genealogy  his  Cousin  (not  to  men-
tion Berg-Julich  matters)  ;  here  are  three  Wittelsbachers,  knit
together  ;  three  sure  votes  ;  King  Friedrich,  Kur-Brandenburg,
there  is  a  fourth ;  and  if  Kur-Sachsen  would  join  ?  "  But
who  knows  if  Kur-Sachsen  will !  The  poor  soul  has  himself
thoughts  of  being  Kaiser  ;  then  no  thoughts,  and  again  some  :
thoughts  which  Belleisle  knows  how  to  handle.  "  Yes,  Kaiser
you,  your  Majesty;  excellent  I"  And  sets  to  consider  the

CHAP  XI  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 453

April-May,  1741.

methods  :  "  Hm,  ha,  hm  !  Think,  your  Majesty :  ought  not
that  Bohemian  Vote  to  be  excluded,  for  one  thing  ?  Kur-
Bohmen  is  fallen  into  the  distaff,  Maria  Theresa  herself  can-
not vote.  Surely  question  will  rise,  Whether  distaff  can,
validly,  hand  it  over  to  distaff's  husband,  as  they  are  about
doing  ?  Whether,  in  fact,  Kur-Bohmen  is  not  in  abeyance  for
this  time  ?  "  "  So  !  "  answered  Kur-Sachsen,  Eeichs-Vicarius.
And  thereupon  meetings  were  summoned ;  Nightmare  Com-
mittees sat  on  this  matter  under  the  Keichs-Vicar,  slowly
hatching  it ;  and  at  length  brought  out,  "  Kur-Bohmen  not
transferable  by  the  distaff ;  Kur-Bohmen  in  abeyance  for  this
time."  Greatly  to  the  joy  of  Belleisle ;  infinitely  to  the  cha-
grin of  her  Hungarian  Majesty,  —  who  declared  it  a  crying
injustice  (though  I  believe  legally  done  in  every  point) ;  and
by  and  by,  even  made  it  a  plea  of  Nullity,  destructive  to  the
Election  altogether,  when  her  Hungarian  Majesty's  affairs
looked  up  again,  and  the  world  would  listen  to  Austrian  soph-
istries and  obstinacies.  This  was  an  essential  service  from
Kur-Sachsen.1

After  which  Kur-Sachsen's  own  poor  Kaisership  died  away
into  "  Hm,  ha,  hm  ! "  again,  with  a  grateful  Belleisle.  Who
nevertheless  dexterously  retained  Kur-Sachsen  as  ally;  tick-
ling the  poor  wretch  with  other  baits.  Of  the  Kaiser  he  had
really  meant  all  along,  there  was  dead  silence,  except  between
the  parties ;  no  whisper  heard,  for  six  months  after  it  had  been
agreed  upon ;  none,  for  two  or  near  three  months  after  formal
settlement,  and  signing  and  sealing.  Karl  Albert's  Treaty
with  Belleisle  was  18th  May,  1741;  and  he  did  not  declare
himself  a  Candidate  till  lst-4th  July  following.2  Belleisle
understands  the  Nightmare  Parliaments,  the  electioneering
art,  and  how  to  deal  with  Enchanted  Wiggeries.  More  per-
fect master,  in  that  sad  art,  has  not  turned  up  on  record  to
one's  afflicted  mind.  Such  a  Sun-god,  and  doing  such  a  Scav-
engerism !  Belleisle,  in  the  sixth  month  (end  of  August,  1741),

1  Began,  indistinctly,  "in  March"  (1741);  languid  "for  some  months"
(Adelung,  ii.  292);  "November  4th,"  was  settled  in  the  negative,  "Kur-
Bohmen  not  to  have  a  vote"  (Maria  Theresiens  Leben,  p.  47  n.).

2  Adelung,  ii.  357,  421.

454  FIRST SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

feels  sure  of  a  majority.  How  Belleisle  managed,  after  that,
to  checkmate  George  of  England,  and  make  even  George  vote
for  him,  and  the  Kaiserwahl  to  be  unanimous  against  Grand-
Duke  Franz,  will  be  seen.  Great  are  Belleisle's  doings  in  this
world,  if  they  were  useful  either  to  God  or  man,  or  to  Belleisle
himself  first  of  all !  —

Teutschland  to  be  carved  into  something  of  Symmetry,
should  the  Belleisle  Enterprises  succeed.

Belleisle's  schemes,  in  the  rear  of  all  this  labor,  are  gran-
diose to  a  degree.  Men  wonder  at  the  First  Napoleon's  mad
notions  in  that  kind.  But  no  Napoleon,  in  •  the  fire  of  the
revolutionary  element ;  no  Sham-Napoleon,  in  the  ashes  of  it :
hardly  a  Parisian  Journalist  of  imaginative  turn,  speculating
on  the  First  Nation  of  the  Universe  and  what  its  place  is,  —
could  go  higher  than  did  this  grandiose  Belleisle  ;  a  man  with
clear  thoughts  in  his  head,  under  a  torpid  Louis  XV.  Let  me
see,  thinks  Belleisle.  Germany  with  our  Bavarian  for  Kaiser ;
Germany  to  be  cut  into,  say,  Four  little  Kingdoms  :  1°.  Bavaria
with  the  lean  Kaiserhood ;  2°.  Saxony,  fattened  by  its  share  of
Austria  ;  3°.  Prussia  the  like ;  4°.  Austria  itself,  shorn  down  as
above,  and  shoved  out  to  the  remote  Hungarian  parts  :  voila.
These,  not  reckoning  Hanover,  which  perhaps  we  cannot  get
just  yet,  are  Four  pretty  Sovereignties.  Three,  or  Two,  of
these  hireable  by  gold,  it  is  to  be  hoped.  And  will  not  France
have  a  glorious  time  of  it ;  playing  master  of  the  revels  there,
egging  one  against  the  other !  Yes,  Germany  is  then,  what
Nature  designed  it,  a  Province  of  France  :  little  George  of
Hanover  himself,  and  who  knows  but  England  after  him,  may
one  day  find  their  fate  inevitable,  like  the  others.  0  Louis,
0  my  King,  is  not  this  an  outlook  ?  Louis  le  Grand  was  great ;
but  you  are  likely  to  be  Louis  the  Grandest ;  and  here  is  a
World  shaped,  at  last,  after  the  real  pattern  !

Such  are,  in  sad  truth,  Belleisle's  schemes  ;  not  yet  entirely
hatched  into  daylight  or  articulation ;  but  becoming  articulate,
to  himself  and  others,  more  and  more.  Reader,  keep  them
well  in  mind  :  I  had  rather  not  speak  of  them  again.  They  are

CHAP.  XI. BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 455

April-May,  1741.

essential  to  our  Story  ;  but  they  are  afflictively  vain,  contrary
to  the  Laws  of  Fact ;  and  can,  now  or  henceforth,  in  nowise
be.  My  friend,  it  was  not  Beelzebub,  nor  Mephistopheles,  nor
Autolycus- Apollo  that  built  this  world  and  us ;  it  was  Another.
And  you  will  get  your  crown  well  rapped,  M.  le  Marechal,  for
so  forgetting  that  fact !  France  is  an  extremely  pretty  crea-
ture ;  but  this  of  making  France  the  supreme  Governor  and
God's-Vicegerent  of  Nations,  is,  was,  and  remains,  one  of  the
maddest  notions.  France  at  its  ideal  best,  and  with  a  derni-god
for  King  over  it,  were  by  no  means  fit  for  such  function  ;  nay
of  many  Nations  is  eminently  the  unfittest  for  it.  And  France
at  its  worst  or  nearly  so,  with  a  Louis  XV.  over  it  by  way  of
demi-god  —  0  Belleisle,  what  kind  of  France  is  this;  shining
in  your  grandiose  imagination,  in  such  contrast  to  the  stingy
fact :  like  a  creature  consisting  of  two  enormous  wings,  five
hundred  yards  in  potential  extent,  and  no  body  bigger  than
that  of  a  common  cock,  weighing  three  pounds  avoirdupois.
Cock  with  his  own  gizzard  much  out  of  sorts,  too !

It  was  "  early  in  March " l  when  Belleisle,  the  Artificial
Sun-god,  quitted  Paris  on  this  errand.  He  came  by  the  Moselle
road ;  called  on  the  Rhine  Kurf iirsts,  Koln,  Trier,  Mainz  ;
dazzling  them,  so  far  as  possible,  with  his  splendor  for  the
mind  and  for  the  eye.  He  proceeded  next  to  Dresden,  which
is  a  main  card :  and  where  there  is  immense  manipulation
needed,  and  the  most  delicate  trout-tickling  ;  this  being  a
skittish  fish,  and  an  important,  though  a  foolish.  Belleisle
was  at  Dresden  when  the  Battle  of  Mollwitz  fell  out :  what
a  windfall  into  Belleisle's  game  !  He  ran  across  to  Friedrich
at  Mollwitz,  to  congratulate,  to  consult,  —  as  we  shall  see
anon.

Belleisle,  I  am  informed,  in  this  preliminary  Tour  of  his,
speaks  only,  or  hints  only  (except  in  the  proper  quarters),  of
Election  Business  ;  of  the  need  there  perhaps  is,  on  the  part
of  an  Age  growing  in  liberal  ideas,  to  exclude  the  Austrian
Grand-Duke ;  to  curb  that  ponderous,  harsh,  ungenerous  House
of  Austria,  too  long  lording  it  over  generous  Germany ;  and  to

1  Adeluug,  ii.  305.

456  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

set  up  some  better  House,  —  Bavaria,  for  example ;  Saxony,
for  example  ?  Of  his  plans  in  the  rear  of  this  he  is  silent ;
speaks  only  by  hints,  by  innuendoes,  to  the  proper  parties.
But  ripening  or  ripe,  plans  do  lie  to  rear ;  far-stretching,  high-
soaring  ;  in  part,  dark  even  at  Versailles ;  darkly  fermenting,
not  yet  developed,  in  Belleisle's  own  head;  only  the  Future
Kaiser  a  luminous  fixed  point,  shooting  beams  across  the
grandiose  Creation-Process  going  on  there.

By  the  end  of  August,  1741,  Belleisle  had  become  certain  of
his  game ;  24th  January,  1742,  he  saw  himself  as  if  winner.
Before  August,  1741,  he  had  got  his  Electors  manipulated,
tickled  to  his  purpose,  by  the  witchery  of  a  Phoebus- Autolycus
or  Diplomatic  Sun-god ;  majority  secured  for  a  Bavarian  Kai-
ser, and  against  an  Austrian  one.  And  in  the  course  of  that
month,  —  what  was  still  more  considerable  !  —  he  was  getting,
under  mild  pretexts,  about  a  hundred  thousand  armed  French-
men gently  wafted  over  upon  the  soil  of  Germany.  Two  com-
plete French  Armies,  40,000  each  (plus  their  Reserves),  one
over  the  Upper  Rhine,  one  over  the  Lower;  about  which  we
shall  hear  a  great  deal  in  time  coming  !  Under  rnild  pretexts  :
"  Peaceable  as  lambs,  don't  you  observe  ?  Merely  to  protect
Freedom  of  Election,  in  this  fine  neighbor  country ;  and  as
allies  to  our  Friend  of  Bavaria,  should  he  chance  to  be  new
Kaiser,  and  to  persist  in  his  modest  claims  otherwise."  This
was  his  crowning  stroke.  Which  finished  straightway  the
remnants  of  Pragmatic  Sanction  and  of  every  obstacle;  and
in  a  shining  manner  swept  the  roads  clear.  And  so,  on  Janu-
ary 24th  following,  the  Election,  long  held  back  by  Belleisle's
manoeuvrings,  actually  takes  effect,  —  in  favor  of  Karl  Albert,
our  invaluable  Bavarian  Friend.  Austria  is  left  solitary  in
the  Reich;  Pragmatic  Sanction,  Keystone  of  Nature,  which
Belleisle  and  France  had  sworn  to  keep  in,  is  openly  torn  out
by  Belleisle  and  by  France  and  the  majority  of  mankind ;  and
Belleisle  sees  himself,  to  all  appearance,  winner.

This  was  the  harvest  reaped  by  Belleisle,  within  year  and
day;  after  endless  manoeuvring,  such  as  only  a  Belleisle  in
the  character  of  Diplomatic  Sun-god  could  do.  Beyond  ques-
tion, the  distracted  ambitions  of  several  German  Princes  have

Xf' ,. BELLEISLE  —  COVENANT-BREAKERS. 457

April,  1741.

been  kindled  by  Belleisle ;  what  we  called  the  rotten  thatch
of  Germany  is  well  on  fire.  This  diligent  sowing  in  the
Eeich  —  to  judge  by  the  100,000  armed  men  here,  and  the
counter  hundreds  of  thousands  arming  —  has  been  a  pretty
stroke  of  dragon' s-teeth  husbandry  on  Belleisle's  part.

Belleisle  on  Visit  to  Friedrich  ; sees  Friedrich  besiege
Brieg,  with  Effect.

It  was  April  26th  when  Marechal  de  Belleisle,  with  his
Brother  the  Chevalier,  with  Valori  and  other  bright  accom-
paniment, arrived  in  Friedrieh's  Camp.  "  Camp  of  Mollwitz  "
so  named;  between  Mollwitz  and  Brieg;  where  Friedrich  is
still  resting,  in  a  vigilant  expectant  condition;  and,  except
it  be  the  taking  of  Brieg,  has  nothing  military  on  hand.
Wednesday,  26th  April,  the  distinguished  Excellency  —  es-
corted for  the  last  three  miles  by  120  Horse,  and  the  other
customary  ceremonies  —  makes  his  appearance  :  no  doubt  an
interesting  one  to  Friedrich,  for  this  and  the  days  next  follow-
ing. Their  talk  is  not  reported  anywhere :  nor  is  it  said  with
exactitude  how  far,  whether  wholly  now,  or  only  in  part  now,
Belleisle  expounded  his  sublime  ideas  to  Friedrich ;  or  what
precise  reception  they  got.  Friedrich  himself  writes  long
afterwards  of  the  event  ;  but,  as  usual,  without  precision,
except  in  general  effect.  Now,  or  some  time  after,  Friedrich
says  he  found  Belleisle,  one  morning,  with  brow  clouded,  knit
into  intense  meditation  :  "  Have  you  had  bad  news,  M.  le
Marechal  ?  "  asks  Friedrich.  "  No,  oh  no  !  I  am  considering
what  we  shall  make  of  that  Moravia  ?  "  —  "  Moravia :  Hm  ! "
Friedrich  suppresses  the  glance  that  is  rising  to  his  eyes  :
"Can't  you  give  it  to  Saxony,  then?  Buy  Saxony  into  the
Plan  with  it ! "  "  Excellent,"  answers  Belleisle,  and  unpuckers
his  stern  brow  again.

Friedrich  thinks  highly,  and  about  this  time  often  says  so,
of  the  man  Belleisle:  but  as  to  the  man's  effulgencies,  and
wide-winged  Plans,  none  is  less  seduced  by  them  than  Fried-
rich  :  "  Your  chickens  are  not  hatched,  M.  le  Marechal ;  some
of  us  hope  they  never  will  be, — though  the  incubation-process

458  FIEST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

2Gth  April,  1741.

may  have  uses  for  some  of  us ! "  Friedrich  knows  that  the
Kaisership  given  to  any  other  than  Grand-Duke  Franz  will  be
mostly  an  imaginary  quantity.  "  A  grand  Symbolic  Cloak  in
the  eyes  of  the  vulgar ;  but  empty  of  all  things,  empty  even
of  cash,  for  the  last  Two  Hundred  Years :  Austria  can  wear
it  to  advantage  ;  no  other  mortal.  Hang  it  on  Austria,  which
is  a  solid  human  figure,  —  so."  And  Friedrich  wishes,  and
hopes  always,  Maria  Theresa  will  agree  with  him,  and  get  it
for  her  Husband.  "  But  to  hang  it  on  Bavaria,  which  is  a
lean  bare  pole  ?  Oh,  M.  le  Marechal !  —  And  those  Four  King-
doms of  yours :  what  a  brood  of  poultry,  those !  Chickens
happily  yet  tmhatched ;  —  eggs  addle,  I  should  venture  to
hope  :  —  only  do  go  on  incubating,  M.  le  Marechal ! "  That  is
Friedrich's  notion  of  the  thing.  Belleisle  stayed  with  Fried-
rich  "a  few  days,"  say  the  Books.  After  which,  Friedrich,
finding  Belleisle  too  winged  a  creature,  corresponded,  in  pref-
erence, with  Fleury  and  the  Head  Sources  ;  —  who  are  always
intensely  enough  concerned  about  those  "  aces  "  falling  to  him,
and  how  the  same  are  to  be  "  shared." 1

Instead  of  parade  or  review  in  honor  of  Belleisle,  there  hap-
pened to  be  a  far  grander  military  show,  of  the  practical  kind.
The  Siege  of  Brieg,  the  Opening  of  the  Trenches  before  Brieg,
chanced  to  be  just  ready,  on  Belleisle's  arrival :  —  and  would
have  taken  effect,  we  find,  that  very  night,  April  26th,  had
not  a  sudden  wintry  outburst,  or  "tempest  of  extraordinary
violence,"  prevented.  Next  night,  night  of  the  27th-28th,
under  shine  of  the  full  Moon,  in  the  open  champaign  country,
on  both  sides  of  the  Kiver,  it  did  take  effect.  An  uncom-
monly fine  thing  of  its  sort ;  as  one  can  still  see  by  reading
Friedrich's  strict  Program  for  it,  —  a  most  minute,  precise
and  all-anticipating  Program,  which  still  interests  military
men,  as  Friedrich's  first  Piece  in  that  kind,  —  and  comparing
therewith  the  Narratives  of  the  performance  which  ensued.2

1  Details  in  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  912,  962,  916;  in  OEuvres  de  Frederic,  ii.
79,80;  &c.

2  Ordre  und  Dispositiones  (sic),  wornach  sich  der  General-Lieutenant  von  Kalck-
stein  bei  Eroffnung  der  Trancheen,  $r.  ((Euvres  de  Frederic,  xxx.  39-44)  :  the
Program. Helden-Geschichte,  i.  916-928:  the  Narrative.

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 459

27th  April,  1741.

Kalkstein,  Friedrich's  old  Tutor,  is  Captain  of  the  Siege ;
under  him  Jeetz,  long  used  to  blockading  about  Brieg.  The
silvery  Oder  has  its  due  bridges  for  communication ;  all  is  in
readiness,  and  waiting  manifold  as  in  the  slip, — and  there  is
Engineer  Walrave,  our  Glogau  Dutch  friend,  who  shall,  at  the
right  instant,  "with  his  straw-rope  (StrohseiV)  mark  out  the
first  parallel,"  and  be  swift  about  it !  There  are  2,000  diggers,
with  the  due  implements,  fascines,  equipments  ;  duly  divided,
into  Twelve  equal  Parties,  and  "  always  two  spademen  to  one
pickrnan "  (which  indicates  soft  sandy  ground) :  these,  with
the  escorting  or  covering  battalions,  Twelve  Parties  they  also,
on  both  sides  of  the  River,  are  to  be  in  their  several  stations
at  the  fixed  moments ;  man,  musket,  mattock,  strictly  exact.
They  are  to  advance  at  Midnight ;  the  covering  battalions  so
many  yards  ahead :  no  speaking  is  permissible,  nor  the  least
tobacco-smoking ;  no  drum  to  be  allowed  for  fear  of  accident ;
no  firing,  unless  you  are  fired  on.  The  covering  battalions  are
all  to  "  lie  flat,  so  soon  as  they  get  to  their  ground,  all  but  the
Officers  and  sentries."  To  rear  of  these  stand  Walrave  and
assistants,  silent,  with  their  straw-rope ;  —  silent,  then  anon
swift,  and  in  whisper  or  almost  by  dumb-show,  "  Now,  then  !  "
After  whom  the  diggers,  fascine-inen,  workers,  each  in  his  kind,
shall  fall  to,  silently,  and  dig  and  work  as  for  life.

All  which  is  done ;  exact  as  clock-work :  beautiful  to  see,  or
half  see,  and  speak  of  to  your  Belleisle,  in  the  serene  moon-
light !  Half  an  hour's  marching,  half  an  hour's  swift  digging :
the  Town-clock  of  Brieg  was  hardly  striking  One,  when  "  they
had  dug  themselves  in."  And,  before  daybreak,  they  had,  in
two  batteries,  fifty  cannon  in  position,  with  a  proper  set  of
mortars  (other  side  the  Kiver),  —  ready  to  astonish  Piccolo-
mini  and  his  Austrians  ;  who  had  not  had  the  least  whisper  of
them,  all  night,  though  it  was  full  moon.  Graf  von  Piccolomini,
an  active  gallant  person,  had  refused  terms,  some  time  before ;
and  was  hopefully  intent  on  doing  his  best.  And  now,  sud-
denly, there  rose  round  Piccolomini  such  a  tornado  of  cannon-
ading and  bombardment,  day  after  day,  always  "three  guns  of
ours  playing  against  one  of  theirs,"  that  his  guns  got  ruined ;
that  "  his  hay-magazines  took  fire,"  —  and  the  Schloss  itself,

460  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

4th  May,  1741.

which  was  adjacent  to  them,  took  fire  (a  sad  thing  to  Friedrich,
who  commanded  pause,  that  they  might  try  quenching,  but  in
vain)  :  —  and  that,  in  short,  Piccoloinini  could  not  stand  it ;
but  on  the  4th  of  May,  precisely  after  one  week's  experience,
hung  out  the  white  flag,  and  "  beat  chamade  at  3  of  the  after-
noon." He  was  allowed  to  march  out  next  morning,  with
escort  to  Neisse ;  parole  pledged,  Not  to  serve  against  us  for
two  years  coming.

Friedrich  in  person  (I  rather  guess,  Belleisle  not  now  at  his
side)  saw  the  Garrison  march  out ;  —  kept  Piccolomini  to  din-
ner ;  a  gallant  Piccolomini,  who  had  hoped  to  do  better,  but
could  not.  This  was  a  pretty  enough  piece  of  Siege-practice.
Torstenson,  with  his  Swedes,  had  furiously  besieged  Brieg  in
1642,  a  hundred  years  ago ;  and  could  do  nothing  to  it.  Noth-
ing, but  Avithdraw  again,  futile ;  leaving  1,400  of  his  people
dead.  Friedrich,  the  Austrian  Garrison  once  out,  set  instantly
about  repairing  the  works,  and  improving  them  into  impreg-
nability, —  our  ugly  friend  Walrave  presiding  over  that  opera-
tion too.

Belleisle,  we  may  believe,  so  long  as  he  continued,  was  full
of  polite  wonder  over  these  things ;  perhaps  had  critical  ad-
vices here  and  there,  which  would  be  politely  received.  It  is
certain  he  came  out  extremely  brilliant,  gifted  and  agreeable,
in  the  eyes  of  Friedrich ;  who  often  afterwards,  not  in  the  very
strictest  language,  calls  him  a  great  man,  great  soldier,  and  by
far  the  considerablest  person  you  French  have.  It  is  no  less
certain,  Belleisle  displayed,  so  far  as  displayable,  his  magnifi-
cent Diplomatic  Ware  to  the  best  advantage.  To  which,  we
perceive,  the  young  King  answered,  "Magnificent,  indeed!"
but  would  not  bite  all  at  once ;  and  rather  preferred  corre-
sponding with  Fleury,  on  business  points,  keeping  the  matter
dexterously  hanging,  in  an  illuminated  element  of  hope  and
contingency,  for  the  present.

Belleisle,  after  we  know  not  how  many  days,  returned  to
Dresden  :  perfected  his  work  at  Dresden,  or  shoved  it  well  for-
ward, with  "  that  Moravia  "  as  bait.  "  Yes,  King  of  Moravia,
you,  your  Polish  Majesty,  shall  be  ! "  —  and  it  is  said  the

CHAP.  XI.  BELLEISLE  — COVENANT-BREAKERS. 461

April-May,  1741.

simple  creature  did  so  style  himself,  by  and  by,  in  certain  rare
Manifestoes,  which  still  exist  in  the  cabinets  of  the  curious.
Belleisle  next,  after  only  a  few  days,  went  to  Miinchen ;  to
operate  on  Karl  Albert  Kur-Baiern,  a  willing  subject.  And,
in  short,  Belleisle  whirled  along  incessantly,  torch  in  hand ;
making  his  "  circuit  of  the  German  Courts,"  —  details  of  said
circuit  not  to  be  followed  by  us  farther.  One  small  thing  only
I  have  found  rememberable  ;  probably  true,  though  vague.  At
Miinchen,  still  more  out  at  Nymphenburg,  the  fine  Country-
Palace  not  far  off,  there  was  of  course  long  conferencing,  long
consulting,  secret  and  intense,  between  Belleisle  with  his  people
and  Karl  Albert  with  his.  Karl  Albert,  as  we  know,  was  him-
self willing.  But  a  certain  Baron  von  Unertl  —  heavy -built
Bavarian  of  the  old  type,  an  old  stager  in  the  Bavarian  Minis-
tries—  was  of  far  other  disposition.  One  day,  out  at  Nym-
phenburg,  Unertl  got  to  the  Council-room,  while  Belleisle  and
Company  were  there  :  Unertl  found  the  apartment  locked,
absolutely  no  admittance ;  and  heard  voices,  the  Kurf  first's  and
French  voices,  eagerly  at  work  inside.  "  Admit  me,  Gracious
Herr ;  um  Gottes  Willen,  me  ! "  No  admission.  Unertl,  in
despair,  rushed  round  to  the  garden  side  of  the  Apartment ;
desperately  snatched  a  ladder,  set  it  up  to  the  window,  and
conjured  the  Gracious  Highness :  "  For  the  love  of  Heaven,
my  Allergnadigster,  don't !  Have  no  trade  with  those  French !
Kemember  your  illustrious  Father,  Kurf iirst  Max,  in  the  Eugene-
Marlborough  time,  what  a  job  he  made  of  it,  building  actual
architecture  on  their  big  promises,  which  proved  mere  acres
of  gilt  balloon  !  "  x  Words  terribly  prophetic ;  but  they  were
without  effect  on  Karl  Albert.

The  rest  of  Belleisle's  inflammatory  circuitings  and  exten-
sive travellings,  for  he  had  many  first  and  last  in  this  matter,
shall  be  left  to  the  fancy  of  the  reader.  May  18th,  he  made
formal  Treaty  with  Karl  Albert :  Treaty  of  Nymphenburg,
"  Karl  Albert  to  be  Kaiser ;  Bavaria,  with  Austria  Proper
added  to  it,  a  Kingdom ;  French  armies,  French  moneys,  and
other  fine  items." 2  Treaty  to  be  kept  dead  secret ;  King

1  Hormayr,  Anemonen  (cited  above),  ii.  152.

2  Given  in  Adelung,  ii.  359.

462  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-Maj-,  1741.

Friedrich,  for  the  present,  would  not  accede.1  June  25th,  after
some  preliminary  survey  of  the  place,  Belleisle  made  his  Entry
into  Frankfurt :  magnificent  in  the  extreme.  And  still  did
not  rest  there  ;  but  had  to  rush  about,  back  to  Versailles,  to
Dresden,  hither,  thither  :  it  was  not  till  the  last  day  of  July
that  he  fairly  took  up  his  abode  in  Frankfurt ;  and  —  the
Election  eggs,  so  to  speak,  being  now  all  laid  —  set  himself  to
hatch  the  same.  A  process  which  lasted  him  six  months  longer,
with  curious  phenomena  to  mankind.  Not  till  the  middle  of
August  did  he  bring  those  80,000  Armed  Frenchmen  across  the
Rhine,  "  to  secure  peace  in  those  parts,  and  freedom  of  voting."
Not  till  November  4th  had  Kur-Sachsen,  with  the  Nightmares,
finished  that  important  problem  of  the  Bohemian  Vote,  "  Bohe-
mian Vote  excluded  for  this  time ; "  —  after  which  all  was  ready,
though  still  not  in  the  least  hurry.  November  20th,  came  the
first  actual  "  Election-Conference  (Wahl-Conferenz)  "  in  the
Romer  at  Frankfurt ;  to  which  succeeded  Two  Months  more
of  conferrings  (upon  almost  nothing  at  all)  :  and  finally,  24th
January,  1742,  came  the  Election  itself,  Karl  Albert  the  man ;
poor  wretch,  who  never  saw  another  good  day  in  this  world.

Belleisle  during  those  six  months  was  rather  high  and  airy,
extremely  magnificent ;  but  did  not  want  discretion  :  "  more
like  a  Kurfiirst  than  an  Ambassador ;  "  capable  of  "  visiting
Kur-Mainz,  with  servants  purposely  in  old  liveries,"  —  where
the  case  needed  old,  where  Kur-Mainz  needed  snubbing ;  not
otherwise.2  "  The  Marechal  de  Belleisle,"  says  an  Eye-witness,
of  some  fame  in  those  days,  "  comes  out  in  a  variety  of  parts,
among  us  here  ;  plays  now  the  General,  now  the  Philosopher,
now  the  Minister  of  State,  now  the  French  Marquis  ;  —  and
does  them  all  to  perfection.  Surely  a  master  in  his  art.  His
Brother  the  Chevalier  is  one  of  the  sensiblest  and  best-trained
persons  you  can  see.  He  has  a  penetrating  intellect ;  is  al-
ways occupied,  and  full  of  great  schemes  ;  and  has  neverthe-
less a  staid  kind  of  manner.  He  is  one  of  the  most  important
Personages  here  ;  and  in  all  things  his  Brother's  right  hand." 8
In  Frankfurt,  both  Belleisle  and  his  Brother  were  much  re-

1  Given  in  Adelung,  ii.  421.  '*  Buchholz,  ii.  57  n.

3  Von  Loen,  Rhine  Schriften  (cited  in  Adelung,  ii.  400).

CHAP.  XII.  SORROWS OF  HIS  BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 463

1741.

spected,  the  Brother  especially,  as  men  of  dignified  behavior
and  shining  qualities;  but  as  to  their  hundred  and  thirty
French  Lords  and  other  Valetry,  these  by  their  extravagances
and  excesses  (Ausschweifungen)  made  themselves  extremely
detestable,  it  would  appear.1

CHAPTER  XII.

SORROWS OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY.

GEORGE  II.  did  not  hear  of  Mollwitz  for  above  a  fortnight
after  it  fell  out ;  but  he  had  no  need  of  Mollwitz  to  kindle
his  wrath  or  his  activity  in  that  matter.2  George  II.  had
seen,  all  along,  with  natural  manifold  aversion  and  indigna-
tion, these  high  attempts  of  his  Nephew.  "  Who  is  this  new
little  King,  that  will  not  let  himself  be  snubbed,  and  laughed
at,  and  led  by  the  nose,  as  his  Father  did ;  but  seems  to  be
taking  a  road  of  his  own,  and  tacitly  defying  us  all  ?  A
very  high  conduct  indeed,  for  a  Sovereign  of  that  magnitude.
Aspires  seemingly  to  be  the  leader  among  German  Princes ;
to  reduce  Hanover  and  us,  —  us,  with  the  gold  of  England  in
our  breeches-pocket,  —  to  the  second  place  ?  A  reverend  old
Bishop  of  Liege,  twitched  by  the  rochet,  and  shaken  hither
and  thither,  like  a  reverend  old  clothes-screen,  till  he  agree  to
stand  still  and  conform.  And  now  a  Silesia  seized  upon ;  a
Pragmatic  Sanction  kicked  to  the  winds :  the  whole  world  to
be  turned  topsy-turvy,  and  Hanover  and  us,  with  our  breeches-
pocket,  reduced  to  —  ?  '

The  emotions,  the  prognosticatings,  and  distracted  proced-
ures of  his  Britannic  Majesty,  of  which  we  have  ourselves
seen  somewhat,  in  this  fermentation  of  the  elements,  are

1  Buchholz,  ii.  54 ;  in  Adelung,  ii.  398  n.,  a  French  brocard  on  the  subject,
of  sufficient  emphasis.

2  Mollwitz  first  heard  of  in  London,  April  25th  (14th) ;  Subsidy  of  £300,000
voted  same  day. London  Gazette  (April  llth-14th,  1741) ;  Commons  Journals,
xxiii.  705.

464  FIEST  SILESIAN WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

copiously  set  down  for  us  by  the  English  Dryasdust  (mostly  in
unintelligible  form)  :  but,  except  for  sane  purposes,  one  must
be  careful  not  to  dwell  on  them,  to  the  sorrow  of  readers.
Seldom  was  there  such  a  feat  of  Somnambulism,  as  that  by
the  English  and  their  King  in  the  next  twenty  Years.  To
extract  the  particle  of  sanity  from  it,  and  see  how  the  poor
English  did  get  their  own  errand  done  withal,  and  Jenkins's
Ear  avenged,  —  that  is  the  one  interesting  point ;  Dryasdust
and  the  Nightmares  shall,  to  all  time,  be  welcome  to  the  oth-
ers. Here  are  some  Excerpts,  a  select  few ;  which  will  per-
haps be  our  readiest  expedient.  These  do,  under  certain  main
aspects,  shadow  forth  the  intricate  posture  of  King  George
and  his  Nation,  when  Belleisle,  as  Protagonistes  or  Chief
Bully,  stept  down  into  the  ring,  in  that  manner ;  asking,  "  Is
there  an  Antagonistes,  then,  or  Chief  Defender  ?  "  I  will
label  them,  number  them  ;  and,  with  the  minimum  of  needful
commentary,  leave  them  to  imaginative  readers.

No.  1. Snatch  of  Parliamentary  Eloquence  by  Mr.  Viner

(19th  April,  1741).

The  fuliginous  explosions,  more  or  less  volcanic,  which  went
on  in  Parliament  and  in  English  society,  against  Friedrich's
Silesian  Enterprise,  for  long  years  from  this  date,  are  now  all
dead  and  avoidable,  —  though  they  have  left  their  effects
among  us  to  this  day.  Perhaps  readers  would  like  to  see  the
one  reasonable  word  I  have  fallen  in  with,  of  opposite  ten-
dency ;  Mr.  Viner's  word,  at  the  first  starting  of  that  question :
plainly  sensible  word,  which,  had  it  been  attended  to  (as  it
was  not),  might  have  saved  us  so  much  nonsense,  not  of  idle
talk  only,  but  of  extremely  serious  deed  which  ensued  there-
upon !

"London,  ~L9tk  April,  1741.  This  day  [Mollwitz  not  yet
known,  Camp  of  Gottin  too  well  known  !]  King  George,  in  his
own  high  person,  comes  down  to  the  House  of  Lords,  —  which,
like  the  Other  House,  is  sunk  painfully  in  Walpole  Contro-
versies, Spanish-War  Controversies,  of  a  merely  domestic
nature  ;  —  and  informs  both  Honorable  Houses,  with  extreme

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 465

1741.

caution,  naming  nobody,  That  he  much  wishes  they  would
think  of  helping  him  in  these  alarming  circumstances  of  the
Celestial  Balance,  ready  apparently  to  go  heels  uppermost.
To  which  the  general  answer  is,  '  Yes,  surely  ! '  —  with  a  vote
of  £300,000  for  her  Hungarian  Majesty,  a  few  days  hence.
From  those  continents  of  Parliamentary  tufa,  now  fallen  so
waste  and  mournful,  here  is  one  little  piece  which  ought  to  be
extricated  into  daylight :  —

"  Mr.  Viner  (on  his  legs)  :  ...  *  If  I  mistake  not  the  true
intention  of  the  Address  proposed,'  in  answer  to  his  Majesty's
most  gracious  Speech  from  the  Throne,  '  we  are  invited  to
declare  that  we  will  oppose  the  King  of  Prussia  in  his  at-
tempts upon  Silesia :  a  declaration  in  which  I  see  not  how
any  man  can  concur  who  knows  not  the  nature  of  his  Prussian
Majesty's  Claim,  and  the  Laws  of  the  German  Empire  [nor  do
I,  Mr.  V.~\  \  It  ought  therefore,  Sir,  to  have  been  the  first
endeavor  of  those  by  whom  this  Address  has  been  so  zealously
supported,  to  show  that  his  Prussian  Majesty's  Claim,  so
publicly  explained  [by  Kanzler  Ludwig,  of  Halle,  who,  it  seems,
has  staggered  or  convinced  Mr.  Viner~\,  so  firmly  urged  and  so
strongly  supported,  is  without  foundation  and  reason,  and  is
only  one  of  those  imaginary  titles  which  Ambition  may  always
find  to  the  dominions  of  another.'  (Hear  Mr  Viner  /)  "  * .  .  .

A  most  indispensable  thing,  surely.  Which  was  never  done,
nor  can  ever  be  done ;  but  was  assumed  as  either  unnecessary
or  else  done  of  its  own  accord,  by  that  Collective  Wisdom
of  England  (with  a  sage  George  II.  at  the  head  of  it)  ;  who
plunged  into  Dettingen,  Fontenoy,  Austrian  Subsidies,  Aix-
la-Chapelle,  and  foundation  of  the  English  National  Debt,
among  other  strange  things,  in  consequence !  —

Upon  that  of  Kanzler  Ludwig,  and  the  "  so  public  Explana-
tion "  (which  we  slightly  heard  of  long  since),  here  is  another
Note,  —  unless  readers  prefer  to  skip  it :  —

"  That  the  Diplomatic  and  Political  world  is  universally  in

1  Tindal,  xx.  491,  gives  the  Royal  Speech  (date  in  a  very  slobbery  condi-
tion) ;  see  also  Coxe,  House  of  Austria,  iii.  365.  Viner's  Fragment  of  a
Speech  is  in  Thackeray,  Life  of  Chatham,  i.  87.

VOL. VII.  30

466  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

travail  at  this  time,  no  reader  need  be  told ;  Europe  every-
where in  dim  anxiety,  heavy-laden  expectation  (which  to  us
has  fallen  so  vacant) ;  looking  towards  inevitable  changes  and
the  huge  inane.  All  in  travail ;  —  and  already  uttering  printed
Manifestoes,  Patents,  Deductions,  and  other  public  travail-
shrieks  of  that  kind.  Printed ;  not  to  speak  of  the  unprinted,
of  the  oral  which  vanished  on  the  spot ;  or  even  of  the  written
which  were  shot  forth  by  breathless  estafettes,  and  unhappily
did  not  vanish,  but  lie  in  archives,  still  humming  upon  us,
"  Won't  you  read  me,  then  ?  "  —  Alas,  except  on  compulsion,
No  !  Life  being  precious  (and  time,  which  is  the  stuff  of
life),  No !  —

"  At  Eeinsberg  as  elsewhere,  at  Eeinsberg  first  of  all,  it  had
been  felt,  in  October  last,  that  there  would  be  Manifestoes
needed ;  learned  Proof,  the  more  irrefragable  the  better,  of
our  Eight  to  Silesia.  It  was  settled  there,  Let  Ludwig,  Kanz-
ler  of  the  University  of  Halle,  do  it.  [Herr  Kanzler  Ludwig,
monster  of  Antiquarian,  Legal  and  other  Learning  there :
wealthy,  too,  and  close-fisted ;  whom  we  have  seen  obliged
to  open  his  closed  fist,  and  to  do  building  in  the  Friedrich
Strasse,  before  now ;  Niissler,  his  son-in-law,  having  no  money :
—  as  careless  readers  have  perhaps  forgotten?]  Ludwig  set
about  his  new  task  with  a  proud  joy.  Ludwig  knows  that
story,  if  he  know  anything.  Long  years  ago  he  put  forth  a
Chapter  upon  it ;  weighty  Chapter ;  in  a  Book  of  weight,  said
Judges ;  —  Book  weighing,  in  pounds  avoirdupois  and  other-
wise, none  of  us  now  knows  what : l  —  but,  in  after  years,  it
used  to  be  said  by  flatterers  of  the  Kanzler,  '  Herr  Kanzler,
see  the  effect  of  Learning.  It  was  you,  it  was  your  weighty
Book,  that  caused  all  this  World-tumult,  and  flung  the  Na-
tions into  one  another's  hair  ! '  Upon  which  the  old  Kanzler
would  blush  :  '  You  do  me  too  much  honor  ! '

1  Title  of  this  weighty  Performance  (see  Preuss,  Thronbesteiyung,^.  432)  is,
or  was  (size  not  given),  Germania  Princeps  (Halae,  1702).  Preuss  says  far-
ther, "  That  Book  ii.  c.  3  handles  the  Prussian  claims :  Jagerndorf  being  §  13  ;
Liegnitz,  §  14  ;  Oppeln  and  Ratibor,  §  16  ;  —  and  that  Ludwig  had  sent  a  Copy
of  this  Argument  [weighty  Performance  altogether  1  Or  Book  ii.  c.  3  of
it,  which  would  have  had  a  better  chance  ?  ]  to  King  Friedrich,  on  the  death
of  Kaiser  Karl  VI."

SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 467

1741.

"Ludwig,  directly  on  order  given,  gathered  out  his  docu-
ments again,  in  the  King's  name  this  time ;  and  promised
something  weighty  by  New-year's  day  at  latest."  Doubtless
to  the  joy  of  Niissler,  who  has  still  no  regular  appointment,
though  well  deserving  one.  "And  sure  enough,  on  January
7th,  at  Berlin,  '  in  three  languages,'  Ludwig's  Deduction  had
come  out;  an  eager  Public  waiting  for  it : a  —  and  at  Berlin  it
was  generally  thought  to  be  conclusive.  I  have  looked  into
Ludwig's  Deduction,  stern  duty  urging,  in  this  instance  for
one :  such  portions  as  I  read  are  nothing  like  so  stupid  as  was
expected ;  and,  in  fact,  are  not  to  be  called  stupid  at  all,  but
fit  for  their  purpose,  and  moderately  intelligible  to  those  who
need  them,"  —  which  happily  we  do  not  in  this  place.

Judicious  Mr.  Viner  availed  nothing  against  the  Proposed
Address ;  any  more  than  he  would  against  the  Atlantic  Tide,
coming  in  unanimous,  under  influence  of  the  Moon  itself, —
as  indeed  this  Address,  and  the  triumphant  Subsidy  which
was  voted  in  the  rear  of  it,  may  be  said  to  have  done.2  Sub-
sidy of  £300,000  to  her  Hungarian  Majesty  ;  which,  with  the
£200,000  already  gone  that  road,  makes  a  handsome  Half-
million  for  the  present  Year.  The  first  gush  of  the  Britannic
Fountain,  —  which  flowed  like  an  Amalthea's  Horn  for  seven
years  to  come ;  refreshing  Austria,  and  all  thirsty  Pragmatic
Nations,  to  defend  the  Keystone  of  this  Universe.  Unluckily
every  guinea  of  it  went,  at  the  same  time,  to  encourage  Aus-
tria in  scorning  King  Friedrich's  offers  to  it ;  which  perhaps
are  just  offers,  thinks  Mr.  Viner;  which  once  listened  to,
Pragmatic  Sanction  would  be  safe.8

1  Title  is,  Rechtsgegriindetes  Eigenthum  (in  the  Latin  copies,  Patrimonium,
and  Proprifttf  fonde'e  en  Droit  in  the  French  copies)  des  fyc., — that  is  to  say,
Legal  Right  of  Property  in  the  Royal-Electoral  House  of  Brandenburg  to  the
Duchies  and  Principalities  of  Jdgerndorf,  Liegnitz,  Brieg, Wohlau  (Berlin,  7th
January,  1741).

2  Coxe,  iii.  265.

3  Mr.  Viner  was  of  Pupham,  or  Pupholm,  in  Lincolnshire,  for  which  County
he  sat  then,  and  for  many  years  before  and  after, —  from  about  1713  till  1761,
when  he  died. A  solid,  instructed  man,  say  his  contemporaries. "  He  was  a
friend  of  Bolingbroke's,  and  had  a  house  near  Bolingbroke's  Battersea  one."
He  is  Great  great-grandfather  to  the  present  Mr.  Viner,  and  to  the  Countess
de  Grey  and  Ripon  ;  which  is  an  interesting  little  fact.

468  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

This  Parliament  is  strong  for  Pragmatic  Sanction,  and  has
high  resentments  against  Walpole  ;  in  both  which  points  the
New  Parliament,  just  getting  elected,  will  rival  and  surpass
it,  —  especially  in  the  latter  point,  that  of  uprooting  Walpole,
which  the  Nation  is  bent  on,  with  a  singular  fury.  Pragmatic
Sanction  like  to  be  ruined ;  and  Walpole  furiously  thrown  out :
what  a  pair  of  sorrows  for  poor  George  !  During  his  late  Caro-
line's time,  all  went  peaceably,  and  that  of  "  governing  "  was
a  mere  pleasure ;  Walpole  and  Caroline  cunningly  doing  that
for  him,  and  making  him  believe  he  was  doing  it.  But  now
has  come  the  crisis,  the  collapse ;  and  his  poor  Majesty  left
alone  to  deal  with  it !  —

No.  2. Constitutional  Historian  on  the  Phenomenon  of  Walpole

in  England.

"  For  above  Ten  Years,  Walpole  himself,"  says  my  Consti-
tutional Historian  (unpublished),  "  for  almost  Twenty  Years,
Walpole  virtually  and  through  others,  has  what  they  call
'  governed '  England ;  that  is  to  say,  has  adjusted  the  conflict-
ing Parliamentary  Chaos  into  counterpoise,  by  what  methods
he  had ;  and  allowed  England,  with  Walpole  atop,  to  jumble
whither  it  would  and  could.  Of  crooked  things  made  straight
by  Walpole,  of  heroic  performance  or  intention,  legislative  or
administrative,  by  Walpole,  nobody  ever  heard  ;  never  of  the
least  hand-breadth  gained  from  the  Night-realm  in  England,
on  Walpole's  part:  enough  if  he  could  manage  to  keep  the
Parish  Constable  walking,  and  himself  float  atop.  Which
task  (though  intrinsically  zero  for  the  Community,  but  all-
important  to  the  Walpole,  of  Constitutional  Countries)  is  a
task  almost  beyond  the  faculty  of  man,  if  the  careless  reader
knew  it !

"  This  task  Walpole  did,  —  in  a  sturdy,  deep-bellied,  long-
headed, John-Bull  fashion,  not  unworthy  of  recognition.  A
man  of  very  forcible  natural  eyesight,  strong  natural  heart,  —
courage  in  him  to  all  lengths ;  a  very  block  of  oak,  or  of  oak-
root,  for  natural  strength.  He  was  always  very  quiet  with  it,
too ;  given  to  digest  his  victuals,  and  be  peaceable  with  every-

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 469

1741.

body.  He  had  one  rule,  that  stood  in  place  of  many :  To
keep  out  of  every  business  which  it  was  possible  for  human
wisdom  to  stave  aside.  'What  good  will  you  get  of  going
into  that  ?  Parliamentary  criticism,  argument  and  bothera-
tion ?  Leave  well  alone.  And  even  leave  ill  alone  :  —  are  you
the  tradesman  to  tinker  leaky  vessels  in  England  ?  You  will
not  want  for  work.  Mind  your  pudding,  and  say  little  ! '  At
home  and  abroad,  that  was  the  safe  secret.  For,  in  Foreign
Politics,  his  rule  was  analogous  :  '  Mind  your  own  affairs.  You
are  an  Island,  you  can  do  without  Foreign  Politics;  Peace,
keep  Peace  with  everybody  :  what,  in  the  Devil's  name,  have
you  to  do  with  those  dog-worryings  over  Seas  ?  Once  more,
mind  your  pudding ! '  Not  so  bad  a  rule ;  indeed  it  is  the
better  part  of  an  extremely  good  one ;  —  and  you  might  reckon
it  the  real  rule  for  a  pious  Britannic  Island  (reverent  of  God,
and  contemptuous  of  the  Devil)  in  times  of  general  Down-break
and  Spiritual  Bankruptcy,  when  quarrellings  of  Sovereigns
are  apt  to  be  mere  dog-worryings  and  Devil's  work,  not  good
to  interfere  in.

"  In  this  manner,  Walpole,  by  solid  John-Bull  faculty  (and
methods  of  his  own),  had  balanced  the  Parliamentary  swag-
gings  and  clashings,  for  a  great  while  ;  and  England  had
jumbled  whither  it  could,  always  in  a  stupid,  but  also  in  a
peaceable  way.  As  to  those  same  'methods  of  his  own,'  they
were  —  in  fact  they  were  Bribery.  Actual  purchase  of  votes
by  money  slipt  into  the  hand.  Go  straight  to  the  point.  '  The
direct  real  method  this,'  thinks  Walpole :  '  is  there  in  reality
any  other  ? '  A  terrible  question  to  Constitutional  Countries ;
which,  I  hear,  has  never  been  resolved  in  the  negative,  by  the
modern  improvements  of  science.  Changes  of  form  have  in-
troduced themselves  ;  the  outward  process,  I  hear,  is  now  quite
different.  According  as  the  fashions  and  conditions  alter,  —
according  as  you  have  a  Fourth  Estate  developed,  or  a  Fourth
Estate  still  in  the  grub  stage  and  only  developing,  —  much
variation  of  outward  process  is  conceivable.

"  But  Votes,  under  pain  of  Death  Official,  are  necessary  to
your  poor  Walpole :  and  votes,  I  hear,  are  still  bidden  for,  and
bought.  You  may  buy  them  by  money  down  (which  is  felony,

470  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  .BOOK  XII.

April-May  1741.

and  theft  simple,  against  the  poor  Nation) ;  or  by  preferments
and  appointments  of  the  unmeritorious  man,  —  which  is  felony
double-distilled  (far  deadlier,  though  more  refined),  and  theft
most  compound ;  theft,  not  of  the  poor  Nation's  money,  but  of
its  soul  and  body  so  far,  and  of  all  its  moneys  and  temporal  and
spiritual  interests  whatsoever ;  theft,  you  may  say,  of  collops
cut  from  its  side,  and  poison  put  into  its  heart,  poor  Nation  !
Or  again,  you  may  buy,  not  of  the  Third  Estate  in  such  ways,
but  of  the  Fourth,  or  of  the  Fourth  and  Third  together,  in  other
still  more  felonious  and  deadly,  though  refined  ways.  By  doing
clap-traps,  namely ;  letting  off  Parliamentary  blue-lights,  to
awaken  the  Sleeping  Swineries,  and  charm  them  into  diapason
for  you,  —  what  a  music  !  Or,  without  clap-trap  or  previous
felony  of  your  own,  you  may  feloniously,  in  the  pinch  of  things,
make  truce  with  the  evident  Demagogos,  and  Son  of  Nox  and
of  Perdition,  who  has  got  '  within  those  walls '  of  yours,  and  is
grown  important  to  you  by  the  Awakened  Swineries,  risen  into
alt,  that  follow  him.  Him  you  may,  in  your  dire  hunger  of
votes,  consent  to  comply  with ;  his  Anarchies  you  will  pass  for
him  into  '  Laws,'  as  you  are  pleased  to  term  them ;  —  instead
of  pointing  to  the  whipping-post,  and  to  his  wicked  long  ears,
which  are  so  fit  to  be  nailed  there,  and  of  sternly  recommend-
ing silence,  which  were  the  salutary  thing.  —  Buying  may  be
done  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  The  question,  How  you  buy  ?
is  not,  on  the  moral  side,  an  important  one.  Nay,  as  there
is  a  beauty  in  going  straight  to  the  point,  and  by  that  course
there  is  likely  to  be  the  minimum  of  mendacity  for  you,  per-
haps the  direct  money-method  is  a  shade  less  damnable  than
any  of  the  others  since  discovered ;  —  while,  in  regard  to
practical  damage  resulting,  it  is  of  childlike  harmlessness  in
comparison !

"That  was  Walpole's  method;  with  this  to  aid  his  great
natural  faculty,  long-headed,  deep-bellied,  suitable  to  the  Eng-
lish Parliament  and  Nation,  he  went  along  with  perfect  success
for  ten  or  twenty  years.  And  it  might  have  been  for  longer,  —
had  not  the  English  Nation  accidentally  come  to  wish,  that
it  should  cease  jumbling  wo-whither ;  and  try  to  jumble  some-
whither,  at  least  for  a  little  while,  on  important  business  that

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 471

1741.

had  risen  for  England  in  a  certain  quarter.  Had  it  not  been
for  Jenkins's  Ear  blazing  out  in  the  dark  English  brain,  Wai-
pole  might  have  lasted  still  a  long  while.  But  his  fate  lay
there  :  — the  first  Business  vital  to  England  which  might  turn
up;  and  this  chanced  to  be  the  Spanish  War.  How  vital,
readers  shall  see  anon.  Walpole,  knowing  well  enough  in
what  state  his  War-apparatus  was,  and  that  of  all  his  Appara-
tuses there  was  none  in  a  working  state,  but  the  Parliamentary
one,  —  resisted  the  Spanish  War ;  stood  in  the  door  against  it,
with  a  rhinoceros  determination,  nay  almost  something  of  a
mastiff's ;  resolute  not  to  admit  it,  to  admit  death  as  soon.
Doubtless  he  had  a  feeling  it  would  be  death,  the  sagacious
man ;  —  and  such  it  is  now  proving ;  the  Walpole  Ministry
dying  by  inches  from  it ;  dying  hard,  but  irremediably.

"  The  English  Nation  was  immensely  astonished,  which
Walpole  was  not,  any  more  than  at  the  other  Laws  of  Nature,
to  find  Walpole's  War-apparatus  in  such  a  condition.  All  his
Apparatuses,  Walpole  guesses,  are  in  no  better,  if  it  be  not
the  Parliamentary  one.  The  English  Nation  is  immensely
astonished,  which  Walpole  again  is  not,  to  find  that  his  Par-
liamentary Apparatus  has  been  kept  in  gear  and  smooth-going
by  the  use  of  oil :  '  Miraculous  Scandal  of  Scandals  ! '  thinks
the  English  Nation.  '  Miracle  ?  Law  of  Nature,  you  fools ! '
thinks  Walpole.  And  in  fact  there  is  such  a  storm  roaring  in
England,  in  those  and  in  the  late  and  the  coming  months,  as
threatens  to  be  dangerous  to  high  roofs,  —  dangerous  to  Wal-
pole's head  at  one  time.  Storm  such  as  had  not  been  witnessed
in  men's  memory ;  all  manner  of  Counties  and  Constituencies,
with  solemn  indignation,  charging  their  representatives  to
search  into  that  miraculous  Scandal  of  Scandals,  Law  of
Nature,  or  whatever  it  may  be ;  and  abate  the  same,  at  their
peril.

"  To  the  now  reader  there  is  something  almost  pathetic  in
these  solemn  indignations,  and  high  resolves  to  have  Purity
of  Parliament  and  thorough  Administrative  Reform,  in  spite  of
Nature  and  the  Constitutional  Stars ;  —  and  nothing  I  have
met  with,  not  even  the  Prussian  Dryasdust,  is  so  unsufferably
wearisome,  or  can  pretend  to  equal  in  depth  of  dull  inanity,

472  FIKST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

to  ingenuous  living  readers,  our  poor  English  Dryasdust's  in-
terminable, often-repeated  Narratives,  volume  after  volume,  of
the  debatiugs  and  colleaguings,  the  tossings  and  tumults,  fruit-
less and  endless,  in  Nation  and  National  Palaver,  which  en-
sued thereupon.  Walpole  (in  about  a  year  hence),1  though
he  struck  to  the  ground  like  a  rhinoceros,  was  got  rolled  out.
And  a  Successor,  and  series  of  Successors,  in  the  bright  brand-
new  state,  was  got  rolled  in;  with  immense  shouting  from
mankind  :  —  but  up  to  this  date  we  have  no  reason  to  believe
that  the  Laws  of  Nature  were  got  abrogated  on  that  occasion,
or  that  the  constitutional  stars  have  much  altered  their  courses

since."

That  Walpole  will  probably  be  lost,  goes  much  home  to  the
Eoyal  bosom,  in  these  troublous  Spring  months  of  1741,  as  it
has  done  and  will  do.  And  here,  emerging  from  the  Spanish
Main  just  now,  is  a  second  sorrow,  which  might  quite  transfix
the  Royal  bosom,  and  drive  Majesty  itself  to  despair ;  awaken-
ing such  insoluble  questions,  —  furnishing  such  proof,  that
Walpole  and  a  good  few  other  persons  (persons,  and  also
things,  and  ideas  and  practices,  deep-rooted  in  the  Country)
stand  much  in  need  of  being  lost,  if  England  is  to  go  a  good
road !

The  Spanish  War  being  of  moment  to  us  here,  we  will  let
our  Constitutional  Historian  explain,  in  his  own  dialect,  How
it  was  so  vital  to  England ;  and  shall  even  subjoin  what  he
gives  as  History  of  it,  such  being  so  admirably  succinct,  for
one  quality.

No.  3. Of  the  Spanish  War,  or  the  Jenkins*  s-Ear  Question.

"  There  was  real  cause  for  a  War  with  Spain.  It  is  one  of  the
few  cases,  this,  of  a  war  from  necessity.  Spain,  by  Decree  of
the  Pope,  —  some  Pope  long  ago,  whose  name  we  will  not  re-
member, in  solemn  Conclave,  drawing  accurately  '  his  Meridian

1  February  13tli  (2d),  1742,  quitting  the  House  after  bad  usage  there,  said
he  would  never  enter  it  again  ;  nor  did  :  February  22d,  resigned  in  favor  of
Pulteuey  and  Company  (Tindal,  xx.  530;  Thackeray,  i.  45).

XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 473

Line/  on  I  know  not  what  Telluric  or  Uranic  principles,  no
doubt  with  great  accuracy  'between  Portugal  and  Spain,'  —
was  proprietor  of  all  those  Seas  and  Continents.  And  now
England,  in  the  interim,  by  Decree  of  the  Eternal  Destinies,
had  clearly  come  to  have  property  there,  too  ;  and  to  be  prac-
tically much  concerned  in  that  theoretic  question  of  the  Pope's
Meridian.  There  was  no  reconciling  of  theory  with  fact.
'  Ours  indisputably,'  said  Spain,  with  loud  articulate  voice ;
'  Holiness  the  Pope  made  it  ours  ! '  —  while  fact  and  the  Eng-
lish, by  Decree  of  the  Eternal  Destinies,  had  been  grumbling
inarticulately  the  other  way,  for  almost  two  hundred  years
past,  and  no  result  had.

"  In  Oliver  Cromwell's  time,  it  used  to  be  said,  <  With  Spain,
in  Europe,  there  may  be  peace  or  war ;  but  between  the
Tropics  it  is  always  war.'  A  state  of  things  well  recognized
by  Oliver,  and  acted  on,  according  to  his  opportunities.  No
settlement  was  had  in  Oliver's  brief  time ;  nor  could  any  be
got  since,  when  it  was  becoming  yearly  more  pressing.  Buca-
niers,  desperate  naval  gentlemen  living  on  boucan,  or  hung
beef ;  who  are  also  called  Flibustiers  (Flibutiers,  (  Freebooters/
in  French  pronunciation,  which  is  since  grown  strangely  into
filibusters,  Fillibustiers,  and  other  mad  forms,  in  the  Yankee
Newspapers  now  current)  :  readers  have  heard  of  those  dumb
methods  of  protest.  Dumb  and  furious ;  which  could  bring
no  settlement ;  but  which  did  astonish  the  Pope's  Decree,
slashing  it  with  cutlasses  and  sea-cannon,  in  that  manner,  and
circuitously  forwarded  a  settlement.  Settlement  was  becom-
ing yearly  more  needful :  and,  ever  since  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht
especially,  there  had  been  an  incessant  haggle  going  on,  to
produce  one  ;  without  the  least  effect  hitherto.  What  embas-
syings,  bargainings,  bargain-breakings  ;  what  galloping  of  esta-
fettes ;  acres  of  diplomatic  paper,  now  fallen  to  the  spiders,
who  always  privately  were  the  real  owners !  Not  in  the  Treaty
of  Utrecht,  not  in  the  Congresses  of  Cambray,  of  Soissons,
Convention  of  Pardo,  by  Eipperda,  Horace  Walpole,  or  the
wagging  of  wigs,  could  this  matter  be  settled  at  all.  Near
two  hundred  years  of  chronic  misery  ;  —  and  had  there  been,
under  any  of  those  wigs,  a  Head  capable  of  reading  the

474  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XH.

April-May,  1741.

Heavenly  Mandates,  with  heart  capable  of  following  them,  the
misery  might  have  been  briefly  ended,  by  a  direct  method.
With  what  immense  saving  in  all  kinds,  compared  with  the
oblique  method  gone  upon !  In  quantity  of  bloodshed  needed,
of  money,  of  idle  talk  and  estafettes,  not  to  speak  of  higher
considerations,  the  saving  had  been  incalculable.  For  it  was
England's  one  Cause  of  WTar  during  the  Century  we  are  now
upon ;  and  poor  England's  course,  when  at  last  driven  into  it,
went  ambiguously  circling  round  the  whole  Universe,  instead
of  straight  to  the  mark.  Had  Oliver  Cromwell  lived  ten  years
longer ;  —  but  Oliver  Cromwell  did  not  live ;  and,  instead  of
Heroic  Heads,  there  came  in  Constitutional  Wigs,  which  makes
a  great  difference.

"  The  pretensions  of  Spain  to  keep  Half  the  World  locked
up  in  embargo  were  entirely  chimerical ;  plainly  contradictory
to  the  Laws  of  Nature ;  and  no  amount  of  Pope's  Donation
Acts,  or  Ceremonial  in  Rota  or  Propaganda,  could  redeem
them  from  untenability,  in  the  modern  days.  To  lie  like  a
dog  in  the  manger  over  South  America,  and  say  snarling,
'  None  of  you  shall  trade  here,  though  I  cannot ! '  —  what  Pope
or  body  of  Popes  can  sanction  such  a  procedure  ?  Had  Eng-
land had  a  Head,  instead  of  Wigs,  amid  its  diplomatists,
England,  as  the  chief  party  interested,  would  have  long  since
intimated  gently  to  such  dog  in  the  manger :  '  Dog,  will  you
be  so  obliging  as  rise  !  I  am  grieved  to  say,  we  shall  have  to
do  unpleasant  things  otherwise.  Dogs  have  doors  for  their
hutches  :  but  to  pretend  barring  the  Tropic  of  Cancer,  —  that
is  too  big  a  door  for  any  dog.  Can  nobody  but  you  have  busi-
ness here,  then,  which  is  not  displeasing  to  the  gods  ?  We  bid
you  rise  ! '  And  in  this  mode  there  is  no  doubt  the  dog,  bark
and  bite  as  he  might,  would  have  ended  by  rising ;  not  only
England,  but  all  the  Universe  being  against  him.  And
furthermore,  I  compute  with  certainty,  the  quantity  of  fight-
ing needed  to  obtain  such  result  would,  by  this  mode,  have
been  a  minimum.  The  clear  right  being  there,  and  now  also
the  clear  might,  why  take  refuge  in  diplomatic  wiggeries,  in
Assiento  Treaties,  and  Arrangements  which  are  not  analogous
to  the  facts  ;  which  are  but  wigged  mendacities,  therefore ;

CHAP.XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 475

1741.

and  will  but  aggravate  in  quantity  and  in  quality  the  fighting
yet  needed  ?  Fighting  is  but  (as  has  been  well  said)  a  batter-
ing out  of  the  mendacities,  pretences,  and  imaginary  elements  :
well  battered-out,  these,  like  dust  and  chaff,  fly  torrent-wise
along  the  winds,  and  darken  all  the  sky ;  but  these  once  gone,
there  remain  the  facts  and  their  visible  relation  to  one  another,
and  peace  is  sure.

"  The  Assiento  Treaty  being  fixed  upon,  the  English  ought  to
have  kept  it.  But  the  English  did  not,  in  any  measure  ;  nor
could  pretend  to  have  done.  They  were  entitled  to  supply
Negroes,  in  such  and  such  number,  annually  to  the  Spanish
Plantations  ;  and  besides  this  delightful  branch  of  trade,  to  have
the  privilege  of  selling  certain  quantities  of  their  manufactured
articles  on  those  coasts ;  quantities  regulated  briefly'  by  this
stipulation,  That  their  Assiento  Ship  was  to  be  of  600  tons
burden,  so  many  and  no  more.  The  Assiento  Ship  was  duly  of
600  tons  accordingly,  promise  kept  faithfully  to  the  eye ;  but
the  Assiento  Ship  was  attended  and  escorted  by  provision-
sloops,  small  craft  said  to  be  of  the  most  indispensable  nature
to  it.  Which  provision-sloops,  and  indispensable  small  craft,
not  only  carried  merchandise  as  well,  but  went  and  came  to
Jamaica  and  back,  under  various  pretexts,  with  ever  new  sup-
plies of  merchandise  ;  converting  the  Assiento  Ship  into  a
Floating  Shop,  the  Tons  burden  and  Tons  sale  of  which  set
arithmetic  at  defiance.  This  was  the  fact,  perfectly  well  known
in  England,  veiled  over  by  mere  smuggler  pretences,  and  ob-
stinately persisted  in,  so  profitable  was  it.  Perfectly  well
known  in  Spain  also,  and  to  the  Spanish  Guarda-Costas  and
Sea-Captains  in  those  parts ;  who  were  naturally  kept  in  a
perennial  state  of  rage  by  it,  —  and  disposed  to  fly  out  into
flame  upon  it,  when  a  bad  case  turned  up  !  Such  a  case  that
of  Jenkins  had  seemed  to  them ;  and  their  mode  of  treating
it,  by  tearing  off  Mr.  Jenkins's  Ear,  proved  to  be  —  bad  shall
we  say,  or  good  ?  —  intolerable  to  England's  thick  skin ;  and
brought  matters  to  a  crisis,  in  the  ways  we  saw."  .  .  .

The  Jenkins's-Ear  Question,  which  then  looked  so  mad  to
everybody,  how  sane  has  it  now  grown  to  my  Constitutional

476  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

Friend !  In  abstruse  ludicrous  form  there  lay  immense  ques-
tions involved  in  it ;  which  were  serious  enough,  certain
enough,  though  invisible  to  everybody.  Half  the  World  lay
hidden  in  embryo  under  it.  Colonial-Empire,  whose  is  it  to
be  ?  Shall  Half  the  World  be  England's,  for  industrial  pur-
poses ;  which  is  innocent,  laudable,  conformable  to  the  Multi-
plication-table at  least,  and  other  plain  Laws  ?  Or  shall  it  be
Spain's  for  arrogant-torpid  sham-devotional  purposes,  contra-
dictory to  every  Law  ?  The  incalculable  Yankee  Nation  it-
self, biggest  Phenomenon  (once  thought  beautifulest)  of  these
Ages,  —  this  too,  little  as  careless  readers  on  either  side  of
the  sea  now  know  it,  lay  involved.  Shall  there  be  a  Yankee
Nation,  shall  there  not  be  ;  shall  the  New  World  be  of  Spanish
type,  shall  it  be  of  English  ?  Issues  which  we  may  call  im-
mense. Among  the  then  extant  Sons  of  Adam,  where  was  he
who  could  in  the  faintest  degree  surmise  what  issues  lay  in
the  Jenkins's-Ear  Question  ?  And  it  is  curious  to  consider
now,  with  what  fierce  deep-breathed  doggedness  the  poor
English  Nation,  drawn  by  their  instincts,  held  fast  upon  it,
and  would  take  no  denial,  as  if  they  had  surmised  and  seen.
For  the  instincts  of  simple  guileless  persons  (liable  to  be
counted  stupid,  by  the  unwary)  are  sometimes  of  prophetic
nature,  and  spring  from  the  deep  places  of  this  Universe  !  —
My  Constitutional  Friend  entitles  his  next  Section  Cartha-
gena  ;  but  might  more  fitly  have  headed  it  (for  such  in  reality
it  is,  Carthagena  proving  the  evanescent  point  of  that  sad
business),

Succinct  History  of  the  Spanish War,  which  began  in  1739  ;
and  ended  —  When  did  it  end  ?

1°.  War,  and  Porto-Bello  (November,  1739-March,  1740).
—  "  November  4th,  1739,  War  was  at  length  (after  above  four
months'  obscure  quasi-declaring  of  it,  in  the  shape  of  Orders  in
Council,  Letters  of  Marque,  and  so  on)  got  openly  declared ;
'  Heralds  at  Arms  at  the  usual  places  '  blowing  trumpets  upon
it,  and  reading  the  royal  Manifesto,  date  of  which  is  five  days
earlier,  '  Kensington,  October  30th  (19th).J  The  principal

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 477

1741.

Events  that  ensue,  arrange  themselves  under  Three  Heads,
this  of  Porto-Bello  being  the  first ;  and  (by  intense  smelting)
are  datable  as  follows  :  —  1

"Tuesday  Evening,  1st  December,  1739,  Admiral  Vernon,
our  chosen  Anti-Spaniard,  finding,  a  while  ago,  that  he  had
missed  the  Azogue  Ships  on  the  Coast  of  Spain,  and  must  try
America  and  the  Spanish  Main,  in  that  view  arrives  at  Porto-
Bello.  Next  day,  December  2d,  Vernon  attacks  Porto-Bello ;
attacks  certain  Castles  so  called,  with  furious  broadsiding,  fol-
lowed by  scalading  ;  gets  surrender  (on  the  3d) ;  —  seamen  have
allowance  instead  of  plunder ;  —  blows  up  what  Castles  there
are ;  and  returns  to  Port  Royal  in  Jamaica.

"  Never-imagined  joy  in  England,  and  fame  to  Vernon,  when
the  news  came  :  <  Took  it  with  Six  Ships,'  cry  they  ;  '  the
scurvy  Ministry,  who  had  heard  him,  in  the  fire  of  Parlia-
mentary debate,  say  Six,  would  grant  him  no  more  :  invincible
Vernon ! '  Nay,  next  Year,  I  see,  '  London  was  illuminated  on
the  Anniversary  of  Porto-Bello  :. '  —  day  settled  in  permanence
as  one  of  the  High-tides  of  the  Calendar,  it  would  appear.
And  '  Vernon's  Birthday'  withal  —  how  touching  is  stupidity
when  loyal !  —  was  celebrated  amazingly  in  all  the  chief  Towns,
like  a  kind  of  Christmas,  when  it  came  round  ;  Nature  having
deigned  to  produce  such  a  man,  for  a  poor  Nation  in  difficul-
ties. Invincible  Vernon,  it  is  thought  by  Gazetteers,  'will
look  in  at  Carthagena  shortly ; '  much  more  important  Place,
where  a  certain  Governor  Don  Bias  has  been  insolent  withal,
and  written  Vernon  letters.

"2°.  Preliminaries  to  Carthagena  (March-November,  17 '40).
—  Monday,  14th  March,  1740,  Vernon  did,  accordingly,  look
in  on  Carthagena ; 2  cast  anchor  in  the  shallow  waste  of  surfs
there,  that  Monday ;  and  tried  some  bombarding,  with  bomb-
ketches  and  the  like,  from  Thursday  till  Saturday  following.
Vernon  hopes  he  did  hit  the  Jesuits'  College,  South  Bastion,
Custom-house  and  other  principal  edifices ;  but  found  that

1  Gentleman's  Magazine,  ix.  551,  x.  124,  142, 144, 350 ;  Tindal,  xx.  430-433,
442;  &c.

2  Gentleman's  Magazine,  x.  350.

478  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  xn.

April-May,  1741.

there  was  no  getting  near  enough  on  that  seaward  side.  Pound
that  you  must  force  the  Interior  Harbor,  —  a  big  Inland  Gulf
or  Lake,  which  gushes  in  by  what  they  call  Little-Mouth  (Boca-
Chica),  and  has  its  Booms,  Castles  and  Defences,  which  are
numerous  and  strougish ;  —  and  that,  for  this  end,  you  must
have  seven  or  eight  thousand  Land  Forces,  as  well  as  an  ad-
dition of  Ships.  On  Saturday  Evening,  therefore,  Yernon
calls  in  his  bomb-ketches  ;  sails  past,  examining  these  things  ;
and  goes  forth  on  other  small  adventures.  For  example,  —

"  Sunday,  3d  April,  1740,  '  about  10  at  night,'  opens  cannon-
ade on  Chagres  (place  often  enough  taken,  by  cutlass  and
pistol,  in  the  Bucanier  times)  ;  and,  on  Tuesday,  5th,  gets  sur-
render of  Chagres  :  '  Custom-house  crammed  with  goods,  which
we  set  fire  to.'  On  news  of  which,  there  is  again,  in  England,
joy  over  the  day  of  small  things.  The  poor  English  People
are  set  on  this  business  of  avenging  Jenkins's  Ear,  and  of  hav-
ing the  Ocean  Highway  unbarred ;  and  hope  always  it  can  be
done  by  the  Walpole  Apparatuses,  which  ought  to  be  in  work-
ing order,  and  are  not !  '  Support  this  hero,  you  Walpole  and
Company,  in  his  Carthagena  views :  it  will  be  better  for  you ! '

"Walpole  and  Company,  aware  of  that  fact,  do  take  some
trouble  about  it ;  and  now,  may  not  we  say,  Paullo  majora
canamus  ?  All  through  that  Summer,  1740 "  —  while  King
Friedrich  went  rushing  about,  to  Strasburg,  to  Wesel ;  doing
his  Herstals  and  Practicalities,  with  a  light  high  hand,  in
almost  an  entertaining  manner  ;  and  intent,  still  more,  on  his
Voltaires  and  a  Life  to  the  Muses,  —  "  there  was,  in  England,
serious  heavy  tumult  of  activity,  secret  and  public.  In  the
Dockyards,  on  the  Drill-grounds,  what  a  stir:  Camp  in  the
Isle  of  Wight,  not  to  mention  Portsmouth  and  the  Sea-Indus-
tries ;  6,000  Marines  are  to  be  embarked,  as  well  as  Land
Eegiments,  —  can  anybody  guess  whither  ?  America  itself  is
to  furnish  '  one  Regiment,  with  Scotch  Officers  to  discipline
it,'  if  they  can.

"  Here  is  real  haste  and  effort ;  but  by  no  means  such  speed
as  could  be  wished ;  multiplex  confusions  and  contradictions
occurring,  as  is  usual,  when  your  machinery  runs  foul.  Nor
are  the  Gazetteers  without  their  guesses,  though  they  study  to

CHAP.  XII.  SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY.  479
1741.

be  discreet.  ( Here  is  something  considerable  in  the  wind  ;  a
grand  idea,  for  certain  ; ' —  and  to  men  of  discernment  it  points
surely  towards  Carthagena  and  heroic  Vernon  out  yonder  ?
Government  is  dumb  altogether ;  and  lays  occasional  embargo ;
trying  hard  (without  success),  in  the  delays  that  occurred,  to
keep  it  secret  from  Don  Bias  and  others.  The  outcome  of  all
which  was,

"3°.  Carthagena  itself  (November,  1740 -April,  1741). — On
November  6th,  —  by  no  means  '  July  3d,'  as  your  first  fond
program  bore  ;  which  delay  was  itself  likely  to  be  fatal,  un-
less the  Almanac,  and  course  of  the  Tropical  Seasons  would
delay  along  with  you !  —  we  say,  On  Sunday,  6th  November,
1740  [Kaiser  Karl's  Funeral  just  over,  and  great  thoughts
going  on  at  Reinsberg],  Rear-Admiral  Sir  Chaloner  Ogle,  —  so
many  weeks  and  months  after  the  set  time,  —  does  sail  from
St.  Helen's  (guessed,  for  Carthagena)  ;  all  people  sending
blessings  with  him.  Twenty-five  big  Ships  of  the  Line,  with
three  Half-Regiments  on  board;  fireships,  bomb-ketches,  in
abundance ;  and  eighty  Transports,  with  6,000  drilled  Marines  :
a  Sea-and-Land  Force  fit  to  strengthen.  Hero  Vernon  with  a
witness,  and  realize  his  Carthagena  views.  A  very  great  day
at  Portsmouth  and  St.  Helen's  for  these  Sunday  folk.1

"  Most  obscure  among  the  other  items  in  that  Armada  of  Sir
Chaloner's,  just  taking  leave  of  England  ;  most  obscure  of  the
items  then,  but  now  most  noticeable,  or  almost  alone  notice-
able, is  a  young  Surgeon's-Mate,  —  one  Tobias  Smollett ;  look-
ing over  the  waters  there  and  the  fading  coasts,  not  without
thoughts.  A  proud,  soft-hearted,  though  somewhat  stern-
visaged,  caustic  and  indignant  young  gentleman.  Apt  to  be
caustic  in  speech,  having  sorrows  of  his  own  under  lock  and
key,  on  this  and  subsequent  occasions.  Excellent  Tobias ;  he
has,  little  as  he  hopes  it,  something  considerable  by  way  of
mission  in  this  Expedition,  and  in  this  Universe  generally.
Mission  to  take  Portraiture  of  English  Seamanhood,  with  the

1  Tindal, xx.  463  (Lists,  frc.  there;  date  wrong,  "31st  October,"  instead  of
26th  (o.s.),  — many  things  wrong,  and  all  things  left  loose  and  flabby,  and
not  right !  As  is  poor  Tindal's  way).

480  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  xil.

April-May,  1741.

due  grimness,  due  fidelity ;  and  convey  the  same  to  remote
generations,  before  it  vanish.  Courage,  my  brave  young
Tobias ;  through  endless  sorrows,  contradictions,  toils  and
confusions,  you  will  do  your  errand  in  some  measure ;  and
that  will  be  something  !  —

"  Five  weeks  before  (29th  September,  1740,  which  was  also
several  months  beyond  time  set),  there  had  sailed,  strictly
hidden  by  embargoes  which  were  little  effectual,  another  Ex-
pedition, all  Naval ;  intended  to  be  subsidiary  to  this  one  :
Commodore  Anson's,  of  three  inconsiderable  Ships ;  who  is  to
go  round  Cape  Horn,  if  he  can ;  to  bombard  Spanish  America
from  the  other  side  ;  and  stretch  out  a  hand  to  Vernon  in  his
grand  Carthagena  or  ulterior  views.  Together  they  may  do
some  execution,  if  we  judge  by  the  old  Bucanier  and  Queen-
Elizabeth  experiences  ?  Anson's  Expedition  has  become  fa-
mous in  the  world,  though  Vernon  got  no  good  of  it."

Well !  Here  truly  was  a  business ;  not  so  ill-contrived.
Somebody  of  head  must  have  been  at  the  centre  of  this  :  and
it  might,  in  result,  have  astonished  the  Spaniard,  and  tumbled
him  much  topsy-turvy  in  those  latitudes,  —  had  the  machinery
for  executing  it  been  well  in  gear.  Under  Friedrich  Wilhelm's
captaincy  and  management,  every  person,  every  item,  correct
to  its  time,  to  its  place,  to  its  function,  what  a  thing !  But
with  mere  Walpole  Machinery:  alas,  it  was  far  too  wide  a
Plan  for  Machinery  of  that  kind,  habitually  out  of  order,  and
only  used  to  be  as  correct  as  —  as  it  could.  Those  delays
themselves,  first  to  Anson,  then  to  Ogle,  since  the  Tropical
Almanac  would  not  delay  along  with  them,  had  thrown  both
Enterprises  into  weather  such  as  all  but  meant  impossibility  in
those  latitudes  !  This  was  irremediable ;  —  had  not  been  reme-
diable, by  efforts  and  pushings  here  and  there.  The  best  of
management,  as  under  Anson,  could  not  get  the  better  of  this ;
worst  of  management,  as  in  the  other  case,  was  likely  to  make
a  fine  thing  of  it !  Let  us  hasten  on  :  —

"  January  20th,  1741,  We  arrive,  through  much  rough
weather  and  other  confused  hardships,  at  Port  Eoyal  in  Ja-
maica ;  find  Vernon  waiting  on  the  slip ;  the  American  Regi-
ment, tolerably  drilled  by  the  Scotch  Lieutenants,  in  full

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 481

readiness  and  equipment ;  a  body  of  Negroes  superadded,  by
way  of  pioneer  laborers  fit  for  those  hot  climates.  One  sad
loss  there  had  been  on  the  voyage  hither :  Land  forces  had
lost  their  Commander,  and  did  not  find  another.  General
Cathcart  had  died  of  sickness  on  the  voyage  ;  a  Charles  Lord
Cathcart,  who  was  understood  to  possess  some  knowledge  of
his  business ;  and  his  Successor,  one  Wentworth,  did  not  hap-
pen to  have  any.  Which  was  reckoned  unlucky,  by  the  more
observant.  Vernon,  though  in  haste  for  Carthagena,  is  in  some
anxiety  about  a  powerful  French  Fleet  which  has  been  ma-
noeuvring in  those  waters  for  some  time  ;  intent  on  no  good
that  Vernon  can  imagine.  The  first  thing  now  is,  See  into
that  French  Fleet.  French  Fleet,  on  our  going  to  look  in  the
proper  Island,  is  found  to  be  all  off  for  home ;  men  '  mostly
starved  or  otherwise  dead,'  we  hear ;  so  that  now,  after  this
last  short  delay,  —  To  Carthagena  with  all  sail.

"  Wednesday  Evening,  15th  March,  1741,  We  anchor  in  the
Playa  Grande,  the  waste  surfy  Shallow  which  washes  Cartha-
gena seaward :  124  sail  of  us,  big  and  little.  We  find  Don
Bias  in  a  very  prepared  posture.  Don  Bias  has  been  doing
his  best,  this  twelvemonth  past ;  plugging  up  that  Boca-Chica
(Little  Mouth)  Ingate,  with  batteries,  booms,  great  ships  ;  and
has  castles  not  a  few  thereabouts  and  in  the  Interior  Lake
or  Harbor ;  all  which  he  has  put  in  tolerable  defence,  so  far
as  can  be  judged :  not  an  inactive,  if  an  insolent  Don.  We
spend  the  next  five  days  in  considering  and  surveying  these
Performances  of  his :  What  is  to  be  done  with  them  ;  how,  in
the  first  place,  we  may  force  Boca-Chica ;  and  get  in  upon  his
Interior  Castles  and  him.  After  consideration,  and  plan  fixed :

"  Monday,  20th  March,  Sir  Chaloner,  with  broadsides,  sweeps
away  some  small  defences  which  lie  to  left  of  Boca-Chica  [to
our  left,  to  Boca-Chica's  right,  if  anybody  cares  to  be  par-
ticular]. Whereupon  the  Troops  land,  some  of  them  that
same  evening;  and,  within  the  next  two  days,  are  all  ashore,
implements,  Negroes  and  the  rest ;  building  batteries,  felling
wood ;  intent  to  capture  Boca-Chica  Castle,  and  demolish  the
War-Ships,  Booms,  and  fry  of  Fascine  and  other  Batteries ;
and  thereby  to  get  in  upon  Don  Bias,  and  have  a  stroke  at

VOL. VII.  31

482  FIEST SILE5IAN WAR.  Boos  XH.

April-May,  1741.

his  Interior  Castles  and  Carthagena  itself.  Till  April  5th,
here  are  sixteen  days  of  furious  intricate  work  ;  not  ill  done  :  —
the  physical  labor  itself,  the  building  of  batteries,  with  Boca-
Chica  firing  on  you  over  the  woods,  is  scarcely  do-able  by  Eu-
ropeans in  that  season ;  and  the  Xegroes  who  are  able  for  it,
'  fling  down  their  burdens,  and  scamper,  whenever  a  gun  goes
off.'  Furious  fighting,  too,  there  was,  by  seamen  and  lands-
men ;  not  ill  done,  considering  circumstances.

"  On  the  sixteenth  day,  April  5th  [King  Eriedrich  hurrying
from  the  Mountains  that  same  day,  towards  Steinau,  which
took  fire  with  him  at  night],  Boca-Chica  Castle  and  the  intri-
cate War-Ships,  Booms,  and  Castles  thereabouts  (Don  Bias  run-
ning off  when  the  push  became  intense),  are  at  last  got.  So
that  now,  through  Boca-Chica,  we  enter  the  Interior  Harbor
or  Harbors.  'Harbors'  which  are  of  wide  extent,  and  deep
enough :  being  in  fact  a  Lake,  or  rather  Pair  of  Lakes,  with
Castles  (Castillo  Grande,  'Castle  Grand,'  the  chief  of  them),
with  War-Ships  sunk  or  afloat,  and  miscellaneous  obstruc-
tions :  beyond  all  which,  at  the  farther  shore,  some  five  miles
off,  Carthagena  itself  does  at  last  lie  potentially  accessible ;
and  we  hope  to  get  in  upon  Don  Bias  and  it.  There  ensue  five
days  of  intricate  sea-work ;  not  much  of  broadsiding,  mainly
tugging  out  of  sunk  War-Ships,  and  the  like,  to  get  alongside
of  Castle  Grand,  which  is  the  chief  obstruction.

"  April  10,  Castle  Grand  itself  is  got ;  nobody  found  in  it
when  we  storm.  Don  Bias  and  the  Spaniards  seem  much  in
terror ;  burning  any  Ships  they  still  have,  near  Carthagena ;
as  if  there  were  no  chance  now  left."  This  is  the  very  day
of  Mollwitz  Battle  ;  near  about  the  hour  when  Schwerin  broke
into  field-music,  and  advanced  with  thunderous  glitter  against
the  evening  sun !  "  Carthagena  Expedition  is,  at  length,
fairly  in  contact  with  its  Problem,  —  the  question  rising,
'  Do  you  understand  it  then  ?  '

"  Up  to  this  point,  mistakes  of  management  had  been  made
good  by  obstinate  energy  of  execution ;  clear  victory  had
gone  on  so  far,  the  Capture  of  Carthagena  now  seemingly  at
hand.  One  thing  was  unfortunate  :  '  the  able  Mr.  Moor  [meri-

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 483

1741.

torious  Captain  of  Foot,  who,  by  accident,  had  spent  some
study  on  his  business],  the  one  real  Engineer  we  had/  got
killed  in  that  Boca-Chica  struggle :  an  end  to  poor  Moor  !  So
that  the  Siege  of  Carthagena  will  have  to  go  on  without  Engi-
neer science  henceforth.  May  be  important,  that,  —  who
knows  ?  Another  thing  was  still  more  palpably  important :
Sea-General  Vernon  had  an  undisguised  contempt  for  Land-
General  Wentworth.  '  A  mere  blockhead,  whose  Brother  has
a  Borough,'  thinks  Vernon  (himself  an  Opposition  Member,
of  high-sniffing,  angry,  not  too  magnanimous  turn) ;  —  and
withdraws  now  to  his  Ships  •,  intimating :  '  Do  your  Prob-
lem, then  ;  I  have  set  you  down  beside  it,  which  was  my  part
of  the  affair ! '  —  Let  us  give  the  attack  of  Fort  Lazar,  and
end  this  sad  business.

"  Sunday,  16th  April,  Wentworth,  once  master  of  the  Upper-
most Lake  or  Harbor  (what  the  Natives  call  the  Surgidero,
or  Anchorage  Proper),  had  disembarked,  high  up  to  the  right,
a  good  way  south  of  Carthagena ;  meaning  to  attack  there-
from a  certain  Fort  Lazar,  which  stands  on  a  Hill  between
Carthagena  and  him :  this  Hill  and  Fort  once  his,  he  has  Car-
thagena under  his  cannon;  Carthagena  in  his  pocket,  as  it
were.  'Fort  not  to  be  had  without  batteries,'  thinks  Went-
worth ;  though  the  sickly  rainy  season  has  set  in.  '  Batteries  ?
Scaling-ladders,  you  mean ! '  answers  Vernon,  with  undis-
guised contempt.  For  the  two  are,  by  this  time,  almost  in
open  quarrel.  Wentworth  starts  building  batteries,  in  spite
of  the  rain-deluges ;  then  stops  building ;  —  decides  to  do  it
by  scalade,  after  all.  And,  at  two  in  the  morning  of  this
Sunday,  April  16th,  sets  forth,  in  certain  columns, — by  roads
ill-known,  with  arrangements  that  do  not  fit  like  clock-work,  —
to  storm  said  Hill  and  Fort.  The  English  are  an  obstinate
people  ;  and  strenuous  execution  will  sometimes  amend  de-
fects of  plan,  —  sometimes  not.

"  The  obstinate  English,  nothing  in  them  but  sullen  fire  of
valor,  which  has  to  burn  tmluminous,  did,  after  mistake  on
mistake,  climb  the  rocks  or  heights  of  Lazar  Hill,  in  spite  of
the  world  and  Don  Bias's  cannonading ;  but  found,  when  atop,
That  Fort  Lazar,  raining  cannon-shot,  was  still  divided  from

484  FIRST SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

them  by  chasms ;  that  the  scaling-ladders  had  not  come
(never  did  come,  owing  to  indiscipline  somewhere),  —  and
that,  without  wings  as  of  eagles,  they  could  not  reach  Fort
Lazar  at  all !  For  about  four  hours,  they  struggled  with  a
desperate  doggedness,  to  overcome  the  chasms,  to  wrench
aside  the  Laws  of  Nature,  and  do  something  useful  for  them-
selves ;  patiently,  though  sulkily  ;  regardless  of  the  storm  of
shot  which  killed  600  of  them,  the  while.  At  length,  find-
ing the  Laws  of  Nature  too  strong  for  them,  they  descended
gloomily :  '  in  gloomy  silence '  marched  home  to  their  tents
again,  —  in  a  humor  too  deep  for  words.

"  Yes ;  and  we  find  they  fell  sick  in  multitudes,  that  night ;
and,  'in  two  days  more,  were  reduced  from  6,645  to  3,200
effective ; '  Vernon,  from  the  sea,  looking  disdainfully  on :  —
and  it  became  evident  that  the  big  Project  had  gone  to  water  ;
and  that  nothing  would  remain  but  to  return  straightway  to
Jamaica,  in  bankrupt  condition.  Which  accordingly  was  set
about.  And  ten  days  hence  (April  26th),  the  final  party  of
them  did  get  on  board,  —  punctual  to  take  '  three  tents,'  their
last  rag  of  Siege-furniture,  along  with  them  ;  '  lest  Don  Bias
have  trophies,'  thinks  poor  Wentworth.  And  sailed  away,
with  their  sad  Siege  finished  in  such  fashion.  Strenuous
Siege  ;  which,  had  the  War-Sciences  been  foolishness,  and  the
Laws  of  Nature  and  the  rigors  of  Arithmetic  and  Geometry
been  stretchable  entities,  might  have  succeeded  better!"1

"  Evening  of  April  26th :  "  —  I  perceive  it  was  in  the  very
hours  while  Belleisle  arrived  in  Friedrich's  Camp  at  Moll-
witz,-  eve  of  that  Siege  of  Brieg,  which  we  saw  performing
itself  with  punctual  regard  to  said  Laws  and  rigors,  and
issuing  in  so  different  a  manner!  Nothing  that  my  Con-
stitutional Historian  has  said  equals  in  pungent  enormity
the  matter-of-fact  Picture,  left  by  Tobias  Smollett,  of  the  sick
and  wounded,  in  the  interim  which  followed  that  attempt  on
Fort  Lazar  and  the  Laws  of  Nature  :  —

1  Smollett's  Account,  Miscellaneous  Works  (Edinburgh,  1806),  iv.  445-469,  is
that  of  a  highly  intelligent  Eye-witness,  credible  and  intelligible  in  every  par-
ticular.

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 485

1741.

"  As  for  the  sick  and  wounded,"  says  Tobias,  "  they  were,
next  day,  sent  on  board  of  the  transports  and  vessels  called
hospital-ships ;  where  they  languished  in  want  of  every  neces-
sary comfort  and  accommodation.  They  were  destitute  of
surgeons,  nurses,  cooks  and  proper  provision;  they  were  pent
up  between  decks  in  small  vessels,  where  they  had  not  room
to  sit  upright ;  they  wallowed  in  filth ;  myriads  of  maggots
were  hatched  in  the  putrefaction  of  their  sores,  which  had
no  other  dressing  than  that  of  being  washed  by  themselves
with  their  own  allowance  of  brandy ;  and  nothing  was  heard
but  groans,  lamentations  and  the  language  of  despair,  invoking
death  to  deliver  them  from  their  miseries.  What  served  to
encourage  this  despondence,  was  the  prospect  of  those  poor
wretches  who  had  strength  and  opportunity  to  look  around
them ;  for  there  they  beheld  the  naked  bodies  of  their  fellow-
soldiers  and  comrades  floating  up  and  down  the  harbor,  afford-
ing prey  to  the  carrion-crows  and  sharks,  which  tore  them  in
pieces  without  interruption,  and  contributing  by  their  stench
to  the  mortality  that  prevailed.

"This  picture  cannot  fail  to  be  shocking  to  the  humane
reader,  especially  when  he  is  informed,  that  while  those  mis-
erable objects  cried  in  vain  for  assistance,  and  actually  per-
ished for  want  of  proper  attendance,  every  ship  of  war  in  the
fleet  could  have  spared  a  couple  of  surgeons  for  their  relief;
and  many  young  gentlemen  of  that  profession  solicited  their
captains  in  vain  for  leave  to  go  and  administer  help  to  the
sick  and  wounded.  The  necessities  of  the  poor  people  were
well  known ;  the  remedy  was  easy  and  apparent ;  but  the  dis-
cord between  the  chiefs  was  inflamed  to  such  a  degree  of  dia-
bolical rancor,  that  the  one  chose  rather  to  see  his  men  perish
than  ask  help  of  the  other,  who  disdained  to  offer  his  assist-
ance unasked,  though  it  might  have  saved  the  lives  of  his
fellow-subjects." l

In  such  an  amazing  condition  is  the  English  Fighting  Ap-
paratus under  Walpole,  being  important for  England's self
only; while  the  Talking  Apparatus,  important  for  Walpole,
is  in  such  excellent  gearing,  so  well  kept  in  repair  and  oil !
1  Smollett,  ibid.  (Anderson's  Edition),  iv.  466.

486  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAE.  BOOK  XII.

April-May,  1741.

By  Wentworth's  blame,  who  had  no  knowledge  of  war;  by
Vernon's,  who  sat  famous  on  the  Opposition  side,  yet  wanted
loyalty  of  mind ;  by  one's  blame  and  another's,  whose  it  is  idle
arguing,  here  is  how  your  Fighting  Apparatus  performs  in  the
hour  when  needed.  Unfortunate  General,  or  General's  Cocked-
Hat  (a  brave  heart  too,  they  say,  though  of  brain  too  vacant,
too  opaque)  ;  unfortunate  Admiral  (much  blown  away  by  van-
ity, ill-nature  and  Parliamentary  wind)  ;  —  doubly  unfortunate
Nation,  that  employs  such  to  lead  its  armaments !  How  the
English  Nation  took  it  ?  The  English  Nation  has  had  much
of  this  kind  to  take,  first  and  last ;  and  apparently  will  yet
have.  "Gloomy  silence,"  like  that  of  the  poor  men  going
home  to  their  tents,  is  our  only  dialect  towards  it.

This  is  a  dreadful  business,  this  of  the  wrecked  Carthagena

Expedition ;  such  a  force  of  war-munitions  in  every  kind,

including  the  rare  kind,  human  Courage  and  force  of  heart,
only  not  human  Captaincy,  the  rarest  kind,  —  as  could  have
swallowed  South  America  at  discretion,  had  there  been  Cap-
tains over  it.  Has  gone  blundering  down  into  Orcus  and  the
shark's  belly,  in  that  unutterable  manner.  Might  have  been
didactic  to  England,  more  than  it  was ;  England's  skin  being
very  thick  against  lessons  of  that  nature.  Might  have  broken
the  heart  of  a  little  Sovereign  Gentleman,  Curator  of  England,
had  he  gone  hypochondriacally  into  it ;  which  he  was  far  from
doing,  brisk  little  Gentleman ;  looking  out  else-whither,  with
those  eyes  a  fleur  de  tete,  and  nothing  of  insoluble  admitted
into  the  brain  that  dwelt  inside.

What  became  subsequently  of  the  Spanish  War,  we  in  vain
inquire  of  History-Books.  The  War  did  not  die  for  many
years  to  come,  but  neither  did  it  publicly  live  ;  it  disappears
at  this  point :  a  Eiver  Niger,  seen  once  flowing  broad  enough ;
but  issuing  —  Does  it  issue  nowhere,  then?  Where  does  it
issue?  Except  for  my  Constitutional  Historian,  still  unpub-
lished, I  should  never  have  known  where.  —  By  the  time  these
disastrous  Carthagena  tidings  reached  England,  his  Britannic
Majesty  was  in  Hanover ;  involved,  he,  and  all  his  State  doc-

CHAP.  XII. SORROWS  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY. 487

1741.

tors,  English  and  Hanoverian,  in  awful  contemplation  on  Prag-
matic Sanction,  Kaiserwahl,  Celestial  Balance,  and  the  saving
of  Nature's  Keystone,  should  this  still  prove  possible  to  human
effort  and  contrivance.  In  which  Imminency  of  Doomsday
itself,  the  small  English-Spanish  matter,  which  the  Official
people,  and  his  Majesty  as  much  as  any,  had  bitterly  disliked,
was  quite  let  go,  and  dropped  out  of  view.  Forgotten  by
Official  people ;  left  to  the  dumb  English  Nation,  whose  con-
cern it  was,  to  administer  as  it  could.

Anson  —  with  his  three  ships  gone  to  two,  gone  ultimately
to  one  —  is  henceforth  what  Spanish  War  there  officially  is.
Anson  could  not  meet  those  Vernon-Wentworth  gentlemen
"from  the  other  side  of  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,"  the  gentle-
men, with  their  Enterprise,  being  already  bankrupt  and  away.
Anson,  with  three  inconsiderable  ships,  which  rotted  gradually
into  one,  could  not  himself  settle  the  Spanish  War:  but  he
did,  on  his  own  score,  a  series  of  things,  ending  in  beautiful
finis  of  the  Acapulco  Ship,  which  were  of  considerable  detri-
ment, and  of  highly  considerable  disgrace,  to  Spain ;  —  and
were,  and  are  long  likely  to  be,  memorable  among  the  Sea-
heroisms  of  the  world.  Giving  proof  that  real  Captains,  taci-
turn Sons  of  Anak,  are  still  born  in  England ;  and  Sea-kings,
equal  to  any  that  were.  Luckily,  too,  he  had  some  chaplain
or  ship's-surgeon  on  board,  who  saw  good  to  write  account  of
that  memorable  Voyage  of  his ;  and  did  it,  in  brief,  perspicuous
terms,  wise  and  credible :  a  real  Poem  in  its  kind,  or  Romance
all  Fact ;  one  of  the  pleasantest  little  Books  in  the  World's
Library  at  this  date.  Anson  sheds  some  tincture  of  heroic
beauty  over  that  otherwise  altogether  hideous  puddle  of  mis-
management, platitude,  disaster ;  and  vindicates,  in  a  patheti-
cally potential  way,  the  honor  of  his  poor  Nation  a  little.

Apart  from  Official  Anson,  the  Spanish  War  fell  mainly,
we  may  say,  into  the  hands  of  —  of  Mr.  Jenkins  himself,  and
such  Friends  of  his,  at  Wapping,  Bristol  and  the  Seaports,
as  might  be  disposed  to  go  privateering.  In  which  course,
after  some  crosses  at  first,  and  great  complaints  of  losses  to
Spanish  Privateers,  Wapping  and  Bristol  did  at  length  emi-
nently get  the  upper  hand ;  and  thus  carried  on  this  Spanish

488  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

April- Alay,  1741.

War  (or  Spanish-French,  Spain  and  France  having  got  into
one  boat),  for  long  years  coming,  in  an  entirely  inarticulate,
but  by  no  means  quite  ineffectual  manner,  —  indeed,  to  the
ultimate  clearance  of  the  Seas  from  both  French  and  Spaniard,
•within  the  next  twenty  years.  Readers  shall  take  this  little
Excerpt,  dated  Three  Years  hence,  and  set  it  twinkling  in  the
night  of  their  imaginations :  —

Bristol,  Monday,  21st  (lQth)  September,  1744.  .  .  .  "Nothing
is  to  be  seen  here  but  rejoicings  for  the  number  of  French
prizes  brought  into  this  port.  Our  Sailors  are  in  high  spirits,
and  full  of  money;  and  while  on  shore,  spend  their  whole
time  in  carousing,  visiting  their  mistresses,  going  to  plays,
serenading,  &c.,  dressed  out  with  laced  hats,  tossels  (sic),
swords  with  sword-knots,  and  every  other  way  of  spending
their  money."  x

Carthagena,  Walpole,  Yiners  :  here  are  Sorrows  for  a  Bri-
tannic Majesty ;  —  and  these  are  nothing  like  all.  But  poor
readers  should  have  some  respite ;  brief  breathing-time,  were
it  only  to  use  their  pocket-handkerchiefs,  and  summon  new
courage !

CHAPTER  XIII.

SMALL-WAR : FIEST EMERGENCE OF ZIETHEN THE HUSSAR
GENERAL INTO NOTICE.

AFTER  Brieg,  Friedrich  undertook  nothing  military,  except
strict  vigilance  of  Neipperg,  for  a  couple  of  months  or  more.
Military,  especially  offensive  operations,  are  not  the  methods
just  now.  Eest  on  your  oars ;  see  how  this  seething  Ocean
of  European  Politics,  and  Peace  or  War,  will  settle  itself
into  currents,  into  set  winds ;  by  which  of  them  a  man  may
steer,  who  happens  to  have  a  fixed  port  in  view.  Neipperg,
too,  is  glad  to  be  quiescent ;  "  my  Infantry  hopelessly  infe-
rior," he  writes  to  head-quarters  :  "  Could  not  one  hire  10,000
1  Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Bristol,  in  Gentleman's  Magazine,  xiv.  504.

{fthMayni74i ZIETHEN  THE  HUSSAR  GENEEAL.  489

Saxons,  think  you/'  —  or  do  several  other  chimerical  things,
for  help?  Except  with  his  Pandour  people,  working  what
mischief  they  can,  Neipperg  does  nothing.  But  this  Hun-
garian rabble  is  extensively  industrious,  scouring  the  coun-
try far  and  wide ;  and  gives  a  great  deal  of  trouble  both  to
Friedrich  and  the  peaceable  inhabitants.  So  that  there  is
plenty  of  Small  War  always  going  on:  —  not  mentionable
here,  any  passage  of  it,  except  perhaps  one,  at  a  place  called
Eothschloss;  which  concerns  a  remarkable  Prussian  Hussar
Major,  their  famed  Ziethen,  and  is  still  remembered  by  the
Prussian  public.

We  have  heard  of  Captain,  now  Major  Ziethen,  how  Fried-
rich  Wilhelm  sent  him  to  the  Khine  Campaign,  six  years
ago,  to  learn  the  Hussar  Art  from  the  Austrians  there.  One
Baronay  (Baroniay,  or  even  Baranyai,  as  others  write  him),
an  excellent  hand,  taught  him  the  Art ;  —  and  how  well  he
has  learned,  Baronay  now  sadly  experiences.  The  Affair  of
Eothschloss  (in  abridged  form)  befell  as  follows  : —

"  In  these  Small-War  businesses,  Baronay,  Austrian  Major-
General  of  Hussars,  had  been  exceedingly  mischievous  hitherto.
It  was  but  the  other  day,  a  Prussian  regular  party  had  to  go
out  upon  him,  just  in  time;  and  to  re-wrench  ' sixty  cart-loads
of  meal,'  wrenched  by  him  from  suffering  individuals ;  with
which  he  was  making  off  to  Neisse,  when  the  Prussians  [from
their  Camp  of  Mollwitz,  where  they  still  are]  came  in  sight.

"And  now  again  (May  16th)  news  is,  That  Baronay,  and
1,400  Hussars  with  him,  has  another  considerable  set  of  meal-
carts, —  in  the  Village  of  Eothschloss,  about  twenty  miles
southward,  Frankenstein  way ;  and  means  to  march  with
them  Neisse-ward  to-morrow.  Two  marches  or  so  will  bring
him  home ;  if  Prussian  diligence  prevent  not.  '  Go  instantly,'
orders  Friedrich,  —  appointing  Winterfeld  to  do  it:  Winterfeld
with  300  dragoons,  with  Ziethen  and  Hussars  to  the  amount
of  600 ;  which  is  more  than  one  to  two  of  Austrians.

"  Winterfeld  and  Ziethen  march  that  same  day ;  are  in  the
neighborhood  of  Eothschloss  by  nightfall;  and  take  their
measures,  —  block  the  road  to  Neisse,  and  do  other  necessary
things.  And  go  in  upon  Baronay  next  morning,  at  the  due

490  FIRST  SILESIAN  WAR.  BOOK  XII.

17th  May,  1741.

rate,  fiery  men  both,  of  them ;  sweep  poor  Baronay  away,
minus  the  meal;  who  finds  even  his  road  blocked  (bridge
bursting  into  cannon-shot  upon  him,  at  one  point),  instead  of
bridge,  a  stream,  or  slow  current  of  quagmire  for  him,  —  and
is  in  imminent  hazard.  Ziethen's  behavior  was  superlative
(details  of  it  unintelligible  off  the  ground)  ;  and  Baronay  fled
totally  in  wreck; — his  own  horse  shot,  and  at  the  moment
no  other  to  be  had ;  swam  the  quagmire,  or  swashed  through
it,  '  by  help  of  a  tree ; '  and  had  a  near  miss  of  capture.
Eecovering  himself  on  the  other  side,  Baronay,  we  can  fancy,
gave  a  grin  of  various  expression,  as  he  got  into  saddle  again :
'  The  arrow  so  near  killing  was  feathered  from  one's  own  wing,
too ! '  —  And  indeed,  a  day  or  two  after,  he  wrote  Ziethen  a
handsome  Letter  to  that  effect." 1

Ziethen,  for  minor  good  feats,  had  been  made  Lieutenant-
Colonel,  the  very  day  he  marched ;  his  Commission  dates
May  16th,  1741 ;  and  on  the  morrow  he  handsels  it  in  this
pretty  manner.  He  is  now  forty -two ;  much  held  down
hitherto;  being  a  man  of  inarticulate  turn,  hot  and  abrupt
in  his  ways,  —  liable  always  to  multifarious  obstruction,  and
unjust  contradiction  from  his  fellow-creatures.  But  Wiuter-
feld's  report  on  this  occasion  was  emphatic ;  and  Ziethen
shoots  rapidly  up  henceforth ;  Colonel  within  the  year,  Gen-
eral in  1744 ;  and  more  and  more  esteemed  by  Friedrich  during
their  subsequent  long  life  together.

Though  perhaps  the  two  most  opposite  men  in  Nature,  and
standing  so  far  apart,  they  fully  recognized  one  another  in
their  several  spheres.  For  Ziethen  too  had  good  eyesight,
though  in  abstruse  sort :  —  rugged  simple  son  of  the  moor-
lands ;  nourished,  body  and  soul,  on  orthodox  frugal  oatmeal
(so  to  speak),  with  a  large  sprinkling  of  fire  and  iron  thrown
in  !  A  man  born  poor :  son  of  some  poor  Squirelet  in  the
Euppin  Country;  —  "used  to  walk  five  miles  into  Kuppin  on
Saturday  nights,"  in  early  life,  "  and  have  his  hair  done  into

1  Helden-Geschichte,  i.  927  ;  Orlich,  i.  120.  The  Life  of  General  de  Zieten
(English  Translation,  very  ill  printed,  Berlin,  1803),  by  Frau  von  Blumenthal
(a  vaguish  eloquent  Lady,  but  with  access  to  information,  being  a  connection
of  Z.'s),  p.  84.

CHAP  XIII. ZIETHEN  THE  HUSSAR  GENERAL.  491

17th  May,  1741.

club,  which  had  to  last  him  till  the  week  following."1  A
big-headed,  thick-lipped,  decidedly  ugly  little  man.  And  yet
so  beautiful  in  his  ugliness :  wise,  resolute,  true,  with  a  dash
of  high  uncomplaining  sorrow  in  him  ;  —  not  the  "  bleached
nigger  "  at  all,  as  Print-Collectors  sometimes  call  him !  No ;
but  (on  those  oatmeal  terms)  the  Socrates-Odysseus,  the  valiant
pious  Stoic,  and  much-enduring  man.  One  of  the  best  Hussar
Captains  ever  built.  By  degrees  King  Friedrich  and  he  grew
to  be,  —  with  considerable  tiffs  now  and  then,  and  intervals
of  gloom  and  eclipse,  —  what  we  might  call  sworn  friends.
On  which  and  on  general  grounds,  Ziethen  has  become,  like
Friedrich  himself,  a  kind  of  mythical  person  with  the  soldiery
and  common  people ;  more  of  a  denii-god  than  any  other  of
Friedrich's  Captains.

Friedrich  is  always  eagerly  in  quest  of  men  like  Ziethen ;
specially  so  at  this  time.  He  has  meditated  much  on  the  bad
figure  his  Cavalry  made  at  Mollwitz ;  and  is  already  drilling
them  anew  in  multiplex  ways,  during  those  leisure  days  he
now  has,  —  with  evident  success  on  the  next  trial,  this  very
Summer.  And,  as  his  wont  is,  will  not  rest  satisfied  there.
But  strives  incessantly,  for  a  series  of  summers  and  years  to
come,  till  he  bring  them  to  perfection ;  or  to  the  likeness  of
his  own  thought,  which  probably  was  not  far  from  that.  Till
at  length  it  can  be  said  his  success  became  world-famous  ;  and
he  had  such  Seidlitzes  and  Ziethens  as  were  not  seen  before
or  since.

1  Militair-Lexikon,  iv.  310.

University  Pi-ess  :  John  Wilson  &  Son,  Cambridge.

The  New  York  Public  Libraiy

The  Branch  Libraries
MID-MANHATTAN  LIBRARY
History  &  Social  Sciences  Dept.
455  Fifth  Avenue
New  York,  NY  10016

MM
HSS
