niesates

rahe hinde

sada rabale dyes si Wl ove Sirewiate tide les an yivieleds

tein

tf

te

ree the
“lefelptetets:
oh Titel

a estat tags Sate eta:

Site

e a _ Sets
rae I 5 ?-" . ‘7
a a
yt poe)
S Set £5)

i

My, i, =. fur a ’ .
Md : i he) s * fi
T ’ ° a oo, ae LE | :
i * 6 re | ’ | ee
. y ary Z

With BLU CD stares

7

THE LETTERS AND SPEECHES OF
OLIVER CROMWELL

VOL. II.

ene eee
= =

fO @HHOAANe GVA CON ETAL AE

TISHWHROWM) s#AVIGO

af akoyv

ss WITH ELUCIDATIONS
i THOMAS CARLYLE
EDITED IN THREE VOLUMES

WITH NOTES, SUPPLEMENT AND ENLARGED INDEX
BY

a S. C. LOMAS

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
Cc. H. FIRTH, M.A.

VOL. II.

METHUEN & CO.
36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
LONDON
1904 =

"Fe 5

, 5 d
7e

_ -) ']

= ’ ey) U ¢

eVOVPAGIDULY ATI

HUY THAD GAMOHT

SAW? NARA “ZL worried

ASQAL (UHDHAI“S GAA 14S Nhe SRO WEP

¥u

PANO. .O .2

YH MOTE MIIOATHY “AA Wey

AM ATHY we

Il sov

Ole 4 UE Shee
OM CARTS KARA OE
“Odd

‘ ye ees . Ki Bs Py la
TUK WMOHO SVE moe

'

a — s
ull

Sad
=

iy

{
k
4
“i
4

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II

PART V

CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND, 1650

DECLARATION OF THE LorD LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND FOR THE

UNDECEIVING OF DELUDED PEOPLE . P '

LETTER CXIX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Castletown, 15th February

”

1649-50. ‘
New Campaign: Reduction of many places i in ‘Tipperary and the
Southwest.

CXX. To the Governor of Cahir Castle: vane se oe
16
Scineen to Cahir.

CXXI. To President Bradshaw: Cashel, 5th March 1649-50 .
Progress of the Campaign: Cahir taken.

CXXII. To the Governor of mp i Before Bais

22d March 1649-50
Summons to Kilkenny.

CXXIII. To the same: Before Kilkenny, 25th March 1650
Same subject: this and the Five following.

CXXIV. To the same: Before Kilkenny, 26th March 1650

CXXV. To the Mayor of thee Before ae 26th
March 1650 . .

CXXVI. To the same: Before scnpitad 26th March 1650

CXXVII. To the Governor of tance Before BE pevogy f
26th March 1650. :

CXXVIII. To the same: Before Kilkenny, 27th March 1650 .

CXXIX. To the Dublin Commissioners: Carrick-on-Suir, rst

April 1650. : . :
Disposal of Cork House.
CXXX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Carrick, 2d April 1650 . .

Kilkenny taken; Col. Hewson.

PAGE

30

31

— Or a Be ee

oat ———To |,

Lerrer CXXXI. To R. Mayor, Esq.: Carrick, 2d April 1650. +52 q

Reflections on the Mercies in Ireland.

CXXXII. To R. Cromwell, Esq. : Carrick, 2d April 1650 ee SS
Fatherly Advices: Raleigh’s History.

”

PART VI

Wak WITH SCOTLAND. 1650-51

WAR WITH SCOTLAND . ‘ = ‘ - F ‘ B : ek

LretTer CXXXIII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: London, 2oth June 1650 . 67
On behalf of Alderman Hooke of Bristol.

CXXXIV. To R. Mayor, Esq.: Alnwick, 17th July 1650 we OQ

Concerning his Son and Daughter-in-law.
CXXXV. To President Bradshaw: Musselburgh, 30th July
1650. ; : : 5 ‘ ; . « Seay
Appearance before Edinburgh: Lesley within his Lines.

CXXXVL. To Scots Committee of Estates: Musselburgh, 3d

August 1650 . : : ‘ y : : ; 77
Remonstrates on their dangerous Courses, on their unchristian
Conduct towards him. :
»  CXXXVII. To Gen. Lesley: Camp at Pentland Hills, 14th
August 1650. ‘ : b 3 ‘ ‘ 5.89
Answer to Lesley’s Message and Declaration.
»  CXXXVIII. To the Council of State: Musselburgh, 30th
August 1650. . ‘ : ° : F . + <i
Progress of the Scotch Campaign: Skirmish on the Stirling
oad, no Battle; Retreat to the eastward again. .

BATTLE OF DUNBAR . ae ANS : . a1 dja spa j

LeTTeER CXXXIX. To Sir A. Haselrig: Dunbar, 2d September 1650 . 9
Day before Dunbar Battle.

PROCLAMATION: The Wounded onthe Field . - + + + OE

LetTrEeR CXL. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Dunbar, 4th September 1650 . 102
Of Dunbar Battle :—This Letter and the next Five.

CXLI. To Sir A. Haselrig : same date .  . gees. a AO
CXLII. To President Bradshaw: same date . a : . “22

CXLIII. To Mrs. Cromwell: same date. . + + ie

CONTENTS

ae CXLIV. To R. Mayor, Esq, : Dunbar, 4th September, 1650
~ CXLV. To Lieut.-Gen. Ireton: same date. vee &.

- CXLVI. To Lord Wharton: same date . ‘ i ‘ .
Wharton’s Doubts again.

CXLVII. To Governor Dundas: Edinburgh, 9th September
1650 .
Has offered to let the Ministers in Edinburgh Castle preach
in the City : Rebuke for their Refusal.

CXLVIII. To the same: Edinburgh, 12th September 1650.

Second more deliberate Rebuke, with Queries.

e"

”

QUERIES - e . : ‘ P . ‘ . ° . .
PROCLAMATION: Inhabitants have free Leave to come and go.

LetTer CXLIX. To President Bradshaw: Edinburgh, 25th ni

tember 1650.
Has marched towards Stirling, but been obliged to ‘return,

CL. To Scots Committee of Estates: Linlithgow, 9th October

1650.
Remonstrates again with ‘tent concerning ‘the folly and im-
piety of this War.

CLI. To Col. Strahan: Edinburgh, 25th October 1650 . ;
On the foregoing Letter; desires a Friendly Debate.

”

PROCLAMATION: Mosstroopers . F é 3 2 ; ,
Letrer CLII. To Governor of Borthwick Castle: Edinburgh, 18th
November 1650 . 4 : . Te ‘ ;
Summons.
» CLIIIl. To Hon, W. Lenthall: Edinburgh, 4th December
1650 . ‘ °

Progress of Scotch Affairs ; Ker and Strahan.

CLIV. To Governor Dundas: Edinburgh, 12th December

[Fin en Pat Pion
CLV. To the same: same date ; : : ‘ : ‘
»  CLVI. To the same: Edinburgh, 13th December 1650...
»  CLVII. To the same: Edinburgh, 14th December 1650 . 3
»  CLVIII. To the same: same date . i ; : é :
* CLIX. To the same: Edinburgh, 18th December 1650 . ‘
a CLX., To the same: same date “ - ‘ F ; ;

122

viii CONTENTS

PROCLAMATION . \ a : , ‘ i 4 - . ;
Letrer CLXI. To Hon. W. Lenthall: realidad ibis Dycemeer
1650 .

Edinburgh Castle surrendered.
CLXII. To Col. Hacker: Edinburgh, 25th December 1650

Captain Empson’s Commission cannot be revoked. Censures
a phrase of Hacker's.

» CLXIII. To Gen. Lesley: Rabie: 17th January 1650-1

Provost Jaffray, Rev. Messrs. Waugh and Carstairs.

”

ns CLXIV. To Scots Committee of Estates: Edinburgh, 17th
January 1650-1 : : ° ‘
Augustin the German Mosstrooper.

»  CLXV. To Committee of Army: ae ” —
1650-1 .
Symonds, and the Medal for Dunbar Battle.

5 CLXVI. To Rev. Dr. Greenwood: Edinburgh, 4th wiatigngs
1650-1 .
Has been elected Chancellor of Oxford University.

», CLXVII. To the same: Edinburgh, 14th February 1650-1
Waterhouse: For an Oxford Degree.

“f CLXVIII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Edinburgh, 8th March
1650-1 . : : ‘ F ‘
Intercedes for Col. Robert Lilburn.

- CLXIX. To the same: Edinburgh, 11th March 1650-1

Durham University.

»  CLXX. To President Bradshaw: Edinburgh, 24th March
1650-1
sora ge dangerously unwell; ‘thanks for their inquiring after
im

5 CLXXI. To Mrs. Cromwell: Edinburgh, 12th Apr 1651 ;
Domestic. The Lord Herbert. Richard and the other Child-
ren.

»  CLXXII. To Hon. A, Johnston: Edinburgh, rath April 1651 .
Public Registers of Scotland.

SEconpD VISIT TO GLASGOW ‘ F A 4 ‘ P

Letrer CLXXIII. To Mrs. Cromwell: Edinburgh, 3d May 1651
Domestic. Regards to his mother.

», CLXXIV. To President Bradshaw: Edinburgh, 3d June
1651 ; .
Dangerous Relapse; now recovering : Drs. Wright and Bates.

». CLXXV. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Linlithgow, 21st July 1651 .
Inverkeithing Fight.

173

175

179

182

183

185

188

189

192
194
199
201

203

—= ee =, . = rine ee

CONTENTS ix

LetTeER CLXXVI. To President Bradshaw: Dundas, 24th July 1651 . 205
Gone over to Fife.

CLXXVII. To the same: Leith, 26th July 1651. ; - 206

Inchgarvie surrendered.
CLXXVIII. To R. Mayor, Esq. : 28th July 1651. [Sheet should
be 28th June] 209
Rebukes his Son Richard for excess in expenditure.

CLXXIX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Burntisland, 29th July 1651 211
Burntisland. Army mostly in Fife.

CLXXX. To the same: Leith, 4th August 1651. > Ae y
St. Johnston’s taken: the ‘Enemy suddenly gone southward.

~ CLXXXI. To Lord Wharton: Stratford-on-Avon, 27th
August 1651. ° : , ‘ . . + 288
Wharton’s Doubts once more.

BATTLE OF WORCESTER . . : ‘ : ; - F « 2G
LetTer CLXXXII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: near Worcester, 3d Sep-
tember 1651 . : . F ‘ ” - “, aa

Battle of Worcester.

» CLXXXIII. To the same: Worcester, 4th September 1651 . 224
The same.

PART VII
THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT. 1651-53

THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT . d ; : , é , ‘ + » 233
LetTEeR CLXXXIV. To Rev. J. Cotton: London, 2d October 1651 . 238

wer on Public Affairs: what Prophecies are now ful-
ing

» CLXXXV. To Mr. Hungerford: London, 30th July 1652 . 249

Note on Private Business.

» CLXXXVI. To A. Hungerford, Esq.: Cockpit, roth De-
cember 1652. > a : - 256
Not at Home when "Hungerford ‘called.

» CLXXXVII. To Lieut.-Gen. Fleetwood: Cockpit, TO52. -. ga N
Domestic-Devotional. Difference between Love and Fear in
matters of Religion.

» CLXXXVIIT. To Major Packer: Whitehall, 23d April 1653 . 266
Riot in the Fen-Country.

SUMMONS. . ‘ - ‘ R . P P . . 269
VOL. n—b

a ee,

x CONTENTS

PAGE

SpEeEcH I. Opening of the Little Parliament, 4th July 1653 . 2 . 270
Retrospective: aim of all these Wars and Struggles; chief
events of them; especially dismissal of the Long Parlia-
ment. Prospective: dayspring of divine Prophecy and
Hope, to be struggled towards, though with difficulty.
Demits his authority into their hands.

LetTER CLXXXIX. To Lieut.-Gen. Fleetwood: Cockpit, 22d August

Pe 3 5 . ; : " | * X
Complains; heart-weary of the strife of Parties: Moses and

the Two Hebrews.

397

CXC. To Committee of Customs: Cockpit, October 1653 . 309
In remonstrance for a poor Suitor to them.

CXCI. To H. Weston, Esq.: London, 16th November 1653 . 310
Excuse for an Oversight: Speldhurst Living.

PART VIII
First PROTECTORATE PARLIAMENT. 1654

-LetTeR CXCII. To R. Mayor, Esq.: Whitehall, 4th May 1654 . ey |

Dare not undertake the Purchase recommended.

CXCIII. To Lord Fleetwood: Whitehall, 16th May 1654 «| 49
To dismiss Col, Alured.

CXCIV. To Col. Alured: Whitehall, 16th May 1654 . . 330
Official Order to the Colonel.

CXCV. To Sir T. Vyner: Whitehall, 5th July 1654 x i 983
A City Preacher.

SPEECH II. Meeting of the First Protectorate Parliament, 4th Sep-

tember 1654 . 3 ‘ . : A : ;
Goodwin's Sermon, On the Deliverance out of Egypt, and
Pilgrimage towards Canaan through the Wilderness. Our m
difficulties: Antichrist; Levellers, Fifth-Monarchists, “/“?-*
Jesuits. Our attainments: Some Reform of Law; Reform
of Church; Peace, with almost all Nations. Finance;
necessity of Concord.

SpeEcH III. To the First Protectorate Parliament, r2th September
1654. R . : * , . 5 ‘ .
Cannot have the Foundations of Government submitted to
debate in this Assembly, A free Parliament they; but he
also, in virtue of whom they sit, must be an unquestioned
Protector. His history since he entered on these Public
Struggles: Dismis: t; Abdication..¥ 6 ?
C7u of the.Li t; Protectorship, on what founded,
~ © “ By whom acknowledged. To proceed no farther, till they
acknowledge it.

”
9

29

336

362

CONTENTS

Letter CXCVI. To R. Bennet, Esq.: Whitehall, r2th January 1654-5
Virginia and Maryland.

CXCVII. To Captain Crook: Whitehall, zoth January 1654-5.
To watch Adjutant-Gen. Allen.

”

SPEECH IV. Dissolution of the First Protectorate Parliament, 22d
January 1654-5

Regrets that they have not cortimunicated ‘with him: he was
not unconcerned with them; has been struggling and en-
deavouring for them, keeping Peace round them ;—does
not know, on their part, whether they have been alive or
dead. Of trees that foster only things poisonous under
their shadow. Of disturbances, once well asleep, awakened
into new perilous activity during these debates. Neces-
sary that they be dissolved.

PART IX
THE Major-GENERALS, 1655-56

CHRONOLOGICAL ,. : F P i ‘

LETTER CXCVIII. To Gen. Blake: Whitehall, 13th June 1655
The Dey of Tunis. Instructions.

CXCIX. To Lord Fleetwood: Whitehall, 22d June 1655
By the Rev. Mr. Brewster. Henry Cromwell gone to ireland.
Private feelings.

» CC. To Mr. Secretary Thurloe: Whitehall, 28th July 1655
A Scholar for the Charterhouse.

i CCI. To Gen. Blake: Whitehall 30th July ROSS. 4 “
Instructions, Not yet to divide the Fleet oe for Lisbon.

CoMPLIMENT, Swedish Ambassador . . =

Letrer CCII. To Gen. Blake: Whitehall, 13th wot 1655.
Plate Fleet.

»  CCIII. To Maryland Commissioners: Whitehall, 26th Sep-

tember 1655 . P F
Virginia and Maryland.

JAMAICA . “ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . F 4

Letter CCIV. To Vice-Admiral Goodson: Whitehall, October 1655 .
Of Jamaica:—This and the Two following.

» CCV. To D. Serle, Esq. (but should be to Luke vbr moe):
Whitehall, October 1655 é

xi

PAGE
397

398

402

433

| a
Py

i, it Letter CCVI. To Major-Gen. Fortescue; Whitehall, October 1655. a.
en . 5, CCVII. To Henry Cromwell: Whitehall, 21st November 1655 479
i” , S The Disaffected in Ireland. ug A
Bay ,  CCVIII. To the same: Whitehall, 2rst April 1656. . . 484
te Fatherly Advices and Encouragements. ; ; tc.

4, CCIX. To Generals Blake and Montague: Whitehall, 28th
¥ April 1656. 487
By Captain Lloyd. " Suggestions: Cadiz, Puntal, Gibraltar.
», CCX. To the same: Whitehall, 6th May 1656 . 489
Claims on Portugal,
» CCXI. To Gresham Committee: Whitehall, gth May 1656 . 493
Geometry Professor.
CCXII. To Richard Cromwell: Whitehall, 29th May 1656 . 494

CONTENTS

Can sell Newhall.

CCXIII. To Henry Cromwell: Whitehall, 26th August 1656 . 499

Dangers in Ireland.

CCXIV. To Generals Blake and Montague: bag sant —

August 1656 . . :
Montague to come home and advise. , ,

593

SPEECH V. Meeting of the Second Protectorate a 17th Sep-.

tember 1656 .

Our difficulties: Spain, and why we have ¢ ne: ti

Spain; Papists, - Cavaliers, Levellers,

—the need there was of Major-Generals. Our remedies:
To prosecute the War with vi ook to maintain steadily
the aim of = these struggles, of Conscience End
a pure Gospel Ministry; to Selocta » Law:—to reform

Manners; that will be the grand remedy ofall. Finance.

fifth Psalm. —

5°7

rom ih =f

Exhortation; Divine socguragement ae hope: Highty-

Afar uf

VIODA an

Trad

ee

OLIVER CROMWELL’S
LETTERS AND SPEECHES

PART V (continued)

CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND
1650
DECLARATION

OF THE LORD LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND, FOR THE
UNDECEIVING OF DELUDED PEOPLE

Here is a kind of Epistle General, in a quite other tone, in-
tended to give ‘satisfaction’ to a quite other class, if they are
capable of it.

The ‘ Supreme Council of Kilkenny,’ still more the Occult ‘ Irish
Hierarchy’ which was a main element thereof, remains, and is
like to remain, a very dark entity in History: little other, after
all one’s reading, than a featureless gaunt shadow ; extinct, and
the emblem to us of huge noises that are also extinct. History
can know that it had features once :—of fierce dark-visaged Irish
Noblemen and Gentlemen ; dark-visaged Abbases O’Teague, and
an Occult Papist Hierarchy ; earnestly planning, perorating, ex-
communicating, in a high Irish tone of voice: alas, with general
result which Nature found untrue. Let there be noble pity for
them in the hearts of the noble. Alas, there was withal some
glow of real Irish Patriotism, some light of real human valour, in
those old hearts: but it had parted company with Fact ; came
forth enveloped in such huge embodiment of headlong ferocity,
of violence, hatred, noise, and general unveracity and incoherency,
as—-as brought a Cromwell upon it at last! These reflections
might lead us far.—

What we have to say here is, that in the present expiring con-

voL. 11.—l

2 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1650.

dition of the Irish Rebellion, nearly trodden to destruction now, it
has been judged very fitting, That there be an end of excommuni-
cation for the present, and a real attempt at union instead. For
which object there has, with much industry, been brought-about
a ‘Conventicle,’ or general Meeting of the Occult Hierarchy, at
a place called Clonmacnoise, in the month of December last.
Clonmacnoise, ‘Seven Churches of Clonmacnoise ;’ some kind of
Abbey then; now a melancholy tract of ruins, “on some bare
gravelly hills,’ among the dreary swamps of the Shannon ; nothing
there but wrecks and death,—for the bones of the Irish Kings
lie there, and burial there was considered to have unspeakable
advantages once :—a Ruin now, and dreary Golgotha among the
bogs of the Shannon; but an Abbey then, and fit for a Con-
venticle of the Occult Hierarchy, ‘which met on the 4th of
December 1649, for the purpose above-said. There, of a cer-
tainty, in the cold days of December 1649, did the Occult
Hierarchy meet,—warmed, we hope, by good log-fires and abund-
ant turf,—and ‘for somewhat less than three weeks’ hold con-
sultation. The real issue of which has now, after Two-hundred
years, come to be very different from the then apparent one 1

The then apparent issue was a ‘ Union ;’ worthless ‘ superficial
Union,’ as Carte! calls it; skin-deep, which was broken again
within the month, and is of no interest to us here. But it
chanced also that, to usher-in this worthless ‘ Union,’ the Occult
Hierarchy published in print a Manifesto, or general Injunction
and Proclamation to the Irish People ; which Manifesto coming
under the eye of the Lord Lieutenant, provoked an Answer from
him. And this Answer, now resuscitated, and still fit to be read
by certain earnest men, Irish and other: this we may define as
the real issue for us, such as it is. One of the remarkablest
State-Papers ever issued by any Lord Lieutenant; which, if we
could all completely read it, as an earnest Editor has had to try
if he could do, till it became completely luminous again, and
glowed with its old veracity and sacred zeal and fire again, might
do us all some good perhaps !—

The Clonmacnoise Manifesto exists also, as a small brown
Pamphlet of six leaves, ‘printed at Kilkenny and reprinted at
London in January 1649;’? but is by no means worth inserting

1 Life of Ormond, ii. 105-110.

2 King's Pamphlets, large 4to, no. 43, § 5; [E. 534] the London Reprint, or the
day of purchasing it by the old Collector, is dated with the pen ‘31st January’
1649-50. [It is often difficult tosay whether Thomason’s dates mean the day of the
issue of the pamphlet or of his purchase of it. Probably the two often coincided,

1650.] DECLARATION 3

here. It is written in a very smooth, indeed vague and faint
style, the deeply discrepant humours at Clonmacnoise not ad-
mitting of any other for their ‘superficial Union ;’ and remains,
in the perusal, mostly insignificant, and as if obliterated into
dim-gray,—till once, in the Lord Lieutenant's fiery illumination,
some traits of it do come forth again. Here is our short abstract
of it, more than sufficient for present purposes.

‘The Kilkenny Pamphlet starts by a preamble, in the form
‘of Public Declaration ; setting forth, with some brevity, That
‘whereas various differences had existed in the Catholic Party,
‘said differences do now and shall, blessed be Heaven, all recon-
‘cile themselves into a real “ Union ;” real Union now, by these
‘ presents, established, decreed, and bound to exist and continue :
‘—signed duly by all the Occult Hierarchy, twenty Bishops more
‘or less, Antonius Clonmacnosensis among the rest. This is the
‘first part of the Clonmacnoise Manifesto: this is to be read in
‘every Church for certain Sundays ; and do what good it can.—
‘Follows next, similarly signed, a short set of “ Acts,” special
‘Orders to Priests and People at large, as to what they are to do
‘by way of furthering said Union, and bringing good success to
‘the Cause. Among which Orders we recognise one for masses,
‘universal prayers (not wholly by machinery, we hope); and,
‘with still more satisfaction, another for decisively putting down,
‘or at least in every way discountenancing, those bands called
‘“ Tdle-Boys” (ancestors of Captain Rock, one perceives), who
‘much infest the country at present.

‘Our Manifesto then, thirdly, winds up with an earnest admon-
‘ition, or Exhortation General, to the People of Ireland high
‘and low, Not to be deceived with any show of clemency, or
‘“ moderate usage,” exercised upon them hitherto; inasmuch as
‘it is the known intention of the English Parliament to exter-
‘minate the whole of them; partly by slaughter, partly by
‘banishment “to the Tobacco Islands” and hot West-India
‘localities, whither many have already been sent. Known in-
‘tention ; as can be deduced by the discerning mind from clear
‘symptoms, chiefly from these two: First, that they, the English
‘Parliament, have passed an “Act of Subscription,” already
‘disposing of Irishmen’s estates to English Money-lenders : and
‘then second, That they have decided to extirpate the Catholic
‘Religion,—which latter fact, not to speak of their old Scotch
‘Covenant and the rest, may be seen with eyes, even from this
‘Lord Lieutenant’s own expressions in his Letter to the Governor

4 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1650.

‘of Ross;! which are quoted. To extirpate the Catholic Religion:
‘how can they effect this but by extirpating the professors thereof?
‘Let all Irishmen high and low, therefore, beware ; and stand
‘upon their guard, and adhere to the superficial Union: slaughter,
‘or else banishment to the Tobacco Islands, being what they
‘have to expect.’ It is by this ¢hird or concluding portion of
the Clonmacnoise Manifesto that the Lord Lieutenant’s wrath
has been chiefly kindled: but indeed he blazes athwart the whole
Document, athwart it and along it, as we shall see, like a destroy-
ing sword, and slashes in pieces it and its inferences, and noxious
delusions and deludings, in a very characteristic style.

What perhaps will most strike the careless modern reader, in
the Clonmacnoise Manifesto with its ‘inferences’ of general ex-
termination, is that ‘show of moderate usage at present ;’? and
the total absence of those ‘many Inhabitants’ butchered at
Drogheda lately : total absence of those ; and also of the ‘Two-
hundred Women in the Marketplace of Wexford,’ who in modern
times have even grown ‘Two-hundred beautiful Women’ (all
young, and in their Sunday clothes for the occasion), and figure
still, in the Irish Imagination, in a very horrid manner. They
are known to Abbé Macgeohegan, these interesting Martyrs,
more or less; to Philopater Ireneus, to my Lord Clarendon,
Jacobite Carte, and other parties divided by wide spaces and long
centuries from them ; but not to this Occult Hierarchy sitting
deliberative close at hand, and doing their best in the massacre
way, who are rather concerned to guard us against shows of
clemency exercised hitherto! This circumstance, and still more
what Cromwell himself says on the subject of ‘massacring,’ will
strike the modern reader ; and the ‘Two-hundred Women,’ and
some other things, | persuade myself, will profitably vanish from
the Marketplace henceforth !

So soon as convenient, that wretched chimera will do well to
vanish ;—and also, I think, a certain terrible fact, which the
Irish Imagination pretends to treat sometimes as a chimera, might
profitably return, and reassert itself there. The Massacre of 1641
was not, we will believe, premeditated by the Leaders of the
Rebellion ; but it is an awful truth, written in sun-clear evidence,
that it did happen ;—and the noble-minded among the men of

1 Antea, vol. i. p. 493.

2[Dr. Gardiner writes, ‘‘ Carlyle imagined that these words showed that the prel-
ates did not believe in the massacre of civilians at Drogheda and Wexford. The
sentence however clearly refers to property only.” Commonwealth and Protectorate,
i. 162.]

— Z
ré

1650.] DECLARATION 5

Ireland are called to admit it, and to mourn for it, and to learn
from it! To the ear of History those ‘ghosts’ still shriek from
the Bridge of Portnadown,! if not now for just vengeance on
their murderers, yet for pity on them, for horror at them: and
no just man, whatever his new feelings may be, but will share
more or less the Lord Lieutenant Cromwell’s old feelings on that
matter. It must not be denied, it requires to be admitted! As
an act of blind hysterical fury, very blind and very weak and
mad, and at once quite miserable and quite detestable, it remains
on the face of Irish history ; and will have to remain till Ireland
cease, much more generally than it has yet done, to mistake loud
bluster for inspired wisdom, and spasmodic frenzy for strength ;
—till, let us say, Ireland do an equal act of magnanimous forbear-
ance, of valour in the silent kind! Of which also we have by
no means lost hope. No :—and if among the true hearts of Ire-
land there chanced to be found one who, across the opaque
angry whirlwind in which all Cromwell matters are enveloped
for him, could recognise, in this thunderclad figure of a Lord
Lieutenant now about to speak to him, the veritable Heaven’s
Messenger clad in thunder ; and accept the stern true message he
brings—!— Who knows? That too, we believe, is coming ; and
with it many hopeful things. But to our Declaration, however
that may be.”

A Declaration of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, For the Undeceiv-
ing of Deluded and Seduced People ; which may be satisfactory
to all that do not wilfully shut their eyes against the light. In
answer to certain late Declarations and Acts, framed by the Irish
Popish Prelates and Clergy, in a Conventicle at Clonmacnoise.

Havine lately perused a Book printed at Kilkenny in the year
1649, containing divers Declarations and Acts of the Popish Prel-
ates and Clergy, framed in a late Conventicle at Clonmacnoise,

1 Affidavits, taken in 1641-44 ; in Sir John Temple's History of the Irish Massacre
and Rebellion (Maseres's edition, London, 1812), pp. 85-123; May’s History of the
Long Parliament, and the contemporary Books gassim. [On this subject, see Sir
John Gilbert’s remarks in Zighth Report of the Hist. MSS. Commissioners, p. 572;
Miss M. Hickson's /re/and in the Seventeenth Century, and Mr. Dunlop's criticisms
in the English Historical Review, vol. i. p. 740.]

2(On the 16th of January—probably before the issue of his own Declaration, as
he does not mention it—Cromwell wrote to the Speaker on the subject of the
Clonmacnoise Manifesto, See Supplement, No. 53. ]

~~ — “eT eo ee

6 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 1650.

the 4th day of December in the year aforesaid,—I thought fit to
give a brief Answer unto the same.

And first to the first ;—which is a Declaration, wherein (having
premised the reconciliation of some differences among themselves,
‘and the hearty “Union” they have now attained to’) they
come to state ‘the reasons of’ their War, ‘grounding it’ upon
the interest of their Church, of his Majesty and the Nation, and
their resolution to prosecute the same with unity. All which
will deserve a particular survey.

The Meeting of the Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates
at Clonmacnoise is by them said to be proprio motu. By which
term they would have the world believe that the Secular Power
hath nothing to do to appoint, or superintend, their Spiritual
Conventions, as they call them ;—although in the said meetings
they take upon them to intermeddle in all Secular Affairs ; as by
the sequel appears.

And first for their Union, they so much boast of. If any
wise man shall seriously consider what they pretend the grounds
of the differences to have been, and the way and course they
have taken to reconcile the same; and their expressions there-
about, and the ends for which, and their resolutions how to carry
on their great Design declared for ; he must needs think slightly
of their said union.!_ And also for this, that they resolve all other
men’s consents ‘and reconciliation’ into their own ; without con-
sulting them at all.

The subject of this reconciliation was (as they say) the clergy
and laity. The discontent and division itself was grounded on
the late difference of opinion happening amongst the prelates
and laity. I wonder not at differences in opinion, at discontents
and divisions, where so Antichristian and dividing a term as
clergy and laity is given and received; a term unknown to any
save to the Antichristian Church, and such as derive themselves
from her: ab initio non fuit sic. The most pure and primitive

lit’ in orig.

1650.] DECLARATION 7

times, as they best knew what true union was, so in all addresses
to the several Churches they wrote unto, not one word of this.
The members of the Churches are styled brethren, and Saints of
the same household of Faith: ‘and’ although they had orders
and distinctions amongst them for administration of ordinances
(of a far different use and character with yours), yet it nowhere
occasioned them to say, contemptim, and by way of lessening in
contradistinguishing, laity to clergy. It was your pride that
begat this expression ; and it is for filthy lucre’s sake that you
keep it up: that by making the people believe that they are not
so holy as yourselves, they might for their penny purchase some
sanctity from you; and that you might bridle, saddle and ride
them at your pleasure; and do (which is most true of you) as
the Scribes and Pharisees of old did by their laity,—keep the
knowledge of the Law from them, and then be able in their
pride to say, “this people, that know not the Law, are cursed.”

And no wonder (to speak more nearly to your differences and
union) if it lie in the Prelates’ power to make the clergy and
the laity go together by the ears when they please, but that they
may as easily make a simple and senseless reconciliation, which
will last until the next Nuncio comes from Rome with super-
mandatory advices; and then this Gordian knot must be cut,
and the poor Laity forced to dance to a new tune.

I say not this as being troubled at it. By the grace of God,
we fear not, we care not for your union. Your covenant, ‘if
you understood it,’ is with Death and Hell! Your union is like
that of Simeon and Levi: Associate yourselves, and you shall
be broken in pieces ; take counsel together, and it shall come to
naught.—For though it becomes us to be humble in respect of
ourselves, yet we can say to you: God is not with you. You
say, your union is against a common enemy: and to this, if you
will be talking of union, I will give you some wormwood to
bite on; by which it will appear God is not with you.

Who is it that created this common enemy? I suppose you
mean Englishmen. The English. Remember, ye hypocrites,

8 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND _6s0.

Ireland was once united to England. ‘That was the original
“union.” ’ Englishmen had good inheritances which many of
them purchased with their money ; they or their ancestors, from
many of you and your ancestors. They had good leases from
Irishmen, for long time to come ; great stocks thereupon ; houses
and plantations erected at their cost and charge. They lived
peaceably and honestly amongst you. You had generally equal
benefit of the protection of England with them ; and equal justice
from the laws,—saving what was necessary for the State (out of
reasons of State) to put upon some few people, apt to rebel upon
the instigation of such as you. You broke this union! You,
unprovoked, put the English to the most unheard-of and most
barbarous massacre (without respect of sex or age) that ever the
sun beheld. And at a time when Ireland was in perfect peace,
and when, through the example of the English industry, through
commerce and traffic, that which was in the natives’ hands was
better to them than if all Ireland had been in their possession,
and not an Englishman in it. And yet then, I say, was this
unheard-of villany perpetrated by your instigation, who boast of
peace-making and union against this common enemy. What
think you: by this time, is not my assertion true? Is God, will
God be, with you? I am confident He will not!}

1[** As a contribution to Irish history, nothing could be more ludicrously beside
the mark than these burning words. ‘The idyllic picture drawn of Irishmen and
Englishmen living together in peace till wicked priests stirred up the sleeping
passions of the Irish has no foundation in the domain of fact. Cromwell knows
nothing of the mingled chicanery and violence which made the Ulster Plantation
hateful in the eyes of every Irishman. He knows nothing of lands filched away, of
the injustice of legal tribunals by which judgments were delivered in an alien
speech in accordance with an alien law, of the bitterness caused by the proscription
of a religion clung to all the more fondly because it was not the religion of the
English oppressor. Nevertheless, as an explanation of Cromwell's own conduct in
Ireland, this Declaration is of supreme importance. Granted his honest belief in
the view of Irish history which he here puts forth, it becomes impossible to convict
him of anything worse than ignorance in ordering the slaughter of Drogheda. If
the collective priesthood of Ireland had hounded on a peaceful people to outrage
and massacre, every priest taken deserved to be knocked on the head. If Irish, or,
still worse, English soldiers stoud to arms to defend a system based on outrage and
massacre they deserved all that the cruel law of war of that age allowed to the
captors of a besieged fortress. Poisonous as in this case was the fruit which grew
upon the tree of error, the error was not Cromwell’s only. He said no more than
was said by every writer in England who touched on Irish affairs (cf May's History

ai
|

+ 1650.] DECLARATION 9

And though you would comprehend Old English, New English,
Scotch, or who else you will, in the bosom of your catholic
‘charity, yet shall not this save you from breaking. I tell you
and them, you will fare the worse for their sakes, because I can-
not but believe some of them go against, some stifle, their
consciences. And it is not the figleaf of pretence that they
fight for their King, will serve their turn ; when really they fight
in protection of men of so much prodigious ‘ guiltiness of’ blood ;
and with men who have declared the ground of their union and
fighting (as you have stated it in ‘this’ your Declaration) to be
Bellum Preelaticum et Religiosum, in the first and primary intention
of it. Especially when they shall consider your principles : ‘and ’
that except what fear makes you comply with,—viz. that alone
without their concurrence you are not able to carry on your work
‘of War,’—you are ready, whenever you shall get the power into
your hands, to kick them off too, as some late experiences have
sufficiently manifested !—And thus we come to the design, you
being thus wholesomely united ‘which is’ intended to be prose-
cuted by you.

Your words are these: “That all and every of us the above
“Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates, are now, by the blessing
“of God, as one body united. And that we will, as becometh
“charity and our pastoral charge, stand all of us as one entire
“body, for the interests and immunities of the Church, and of
“every the Prelates and Bishops thereof; and for the honour,
“dignity, estate, right and possessions of all and every of the
“said Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates. And we will,
“fas one entire and united body, forward by our counsels, actions
of the Long Parliament, ii. 4). . . . For the rest, Cromwell's intentions were as
benevolent to the mass of the Irish people as Strafford’s had been.” Commonwealth
and Protectorate, i. 164. Moreover, not only was Cromwell not behind the other
men of his day, but he and they were ail immeasurably in advance of their pre-
decessors of a generation or two before; as may be seen by studying the letters
of the rulers of Ireland at the end of Elizabeth’s reign; with their triumphant
relations of the ‘good killings’? not only of men, but of women and little
children; their cold-blooded proposals for subduing the country by absolute

Starvation ; their utter callousness in fact, as regards the sufferings or the lives of
the Irish people. ]

=

10 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND _[1650.

“and devices, the advancement of his Majesty’s rights, and the
“good of this nation, in general and in particular occasions, to
“our power. And that none of us, in any occasion whatsoever
“ concerning the Catholic religion, or the good of this Kingdom
“of Ireland, will in any respect single himself; or be or seem
“opposite to the rest of us; but will hold firm and entire in one
“sense, as aforesaid, &c.”

And ‘now, if there were no other quarrel against you but this,
which you make to be the principal and first ground of your
quarrel :—to wit, as so standing for the rights of your Church
(falsely so called) and for,the rights of your Archbishops, Bishops
and Prelates, as to engage people and nations into blood there-
for :—this alone would be your confusion. I ask you, Is it for
the lay-fee (so you call it), or ‘for the’ revenue belonging to
your Church, that you will after this manner contend? Or is it
your jurisdiction, or the exercise of your ecclesiastical authority ?
Or is it the Faith of your Church? Let me tell you, not for all
nor any of these is it lawful for the ministers of Christ, as you
would be thought to be, thus to contend. And therefore we
will consider them apart.

For the first, if it were St. Peter’s Patrimony, as you term it,
that is somewhat that you lawfully came by, although I must
tell you, your predecessors cheated poor seduced men in their
weakness on their deathbeds ; or otherwise unlawfully came by
most of this you pretend to. ‘Not St. Peter's Patrimony, there-
fore, whosesoever it may be!’ Yet Peter, though he was some-
what too forward to draw the sword in a better cause,—if that
weapon, not being proper to the business in hand, was to be put
up in that case,—he must not, nor would he, have drawn it in
this. And that blessed Apostle Paul, who said the labourer was
worthy of his hire, chose rather to make tents than be burden-
some to the Churches. I would you had either of those good
men’s spirits, on the condition your revenues were doubled to
what the best times ever made them to your predecessors !—The
same answer may be given to that of your power and jurisdiction ;

=. a ————

1650.] DECLARATION 11

and to that preeminency of prelacy you so dearly love. Only
consider what the Master of the same Apostles said to them:
“So it shall not be amongst you. Whoever will be chief shall
be servant of all!’’ For He himself came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister. And by this he that runs may read of
what tribe you are.

And ‘now’ surely if these, that are outward things, may not
thus be contended for; how much less may the doctrines of
Faith (which are the works of Grace and the Spirit) be en-
deavoured by so unsuitable means! He that bids us contend
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, tells us that we should
do it by avoiding the spirit of Cain, Corah, and Balaam ; and by
building up ourselves on the most holy Faith, not pinning it upon
other men’s sleeves. Praying in the Holy Ghost, not mumbling
over Matins ; keeping ourselves in the love of God, not destroying
men because they will not be of our Faith ; waiting for the mercy
of Jesus Christ ; not cruel, but merciful !—But, alas, why is this
said? Why are these pearls cast before you? You are resolved
not to be charmed from using the instrument of a foolish shep-
herd! You are a part of Antichrist, whose Kingdom the
Scripture so expressly speaks should be laid in blood ; yea ‘in the
blood of the Saints. You have shed great store of it already :—
and ere it be long, you must all of you have blood to drink ;
even the dregs of the cup of the fury and the wrath of God,
which will be poured out unto you !’ 1—

In the next place, you state the interest of his Majesty, as
you say, ‘for a ground of this War.’ And this you hope will
draw some English and Scots to your party. But what Majesty
is it you mean? Is it France, or Spain, or Scotland? Speak
plainly! You have some of you lately been harping (or else we
are misinformed) upon his Majesty of Spain to be your Protector.
Was it because his Majesty of Scotland is too little a Majesty for
your purpose? We know you love great Majesties. Or is it

1 Read in your Bibles, and consider that!

i2 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 1660.

because he is not fully come over to you in point of religion?
If he be short in that, you will quickly find out, upon that score,
another Majesty. His Father, who complied with you too
much, you rejected ; and now would make the world believe you
would make the Son’s interest a great part of the state of your
quarrel.—How can we but think there is some reserve in this,
and that the Son is agreed to do somewhat more for you than
ever his Father did. Or else tell us, Whence this new zeal is ?
That the Father did too much for you, in all Protestant judg-
ments,—instead of many instances let ‘this’ be considered: what
one of your own doctors, Dr. Enos of Dublin ‘says ;’ who (writing
against the Agreement made between the Lord of Ormond and
the Irish Catholics) finds fault with it, and says it was nothing so
good as that ‘which’ the Earl of Glamorgan had warrant from
the King to make; but exceeding far short of what the Lord
George Digby had warrant to agree ‘to,’ with the Pope himself
at Rome, in favour of the Irish Catholics.!

I intend not this to you; but to such Protestants as may in-
cline to you, and join with you upon this single account, which
is the only appearing inducement to them, ‘To them I intend it,’
seeing there is so much probability of ill in this abstracted ;—
and so much certainty of ill in fighting for the Romish religion
against the Protestant ; and fighting ‘along’ with men under the
guilt of so horrid a massacre. From participating in which guilt,
whilst they take part with them, they will never be able to assoil
themselves, either before God or good men.

In the last place, you are pleased,—having, after your usual
manner, remembered yourselves first, and his Majesty (as you
call him), next; like a man of your tribe, with his Ego et Rex
meus,—you are pleased to take the people into consideration,
lest they should seem to be forgotten ; or rather that you might
make me believe they are much in your thoughts. Indeed I
think they are! Alas, poor laity! That you and your King

1 Antea, vol. i. p. 241.

1650.] DECLARATION 13

might ride them, and jade them, as your Church hath done, and
as your King hath done by your means, almost in all ages !—But
it would not be hard to prophesy, that the beasts being stung
and kicking, this world will not last always. Arbitrary power
‘is a thing’ men begin to be weary of, in Kings and Churchmen ;
their juggle between them mutually to uphold civil and ecclesi-
astical tyranny begins to be transparent. Some have cast off
both ; and hope by the grace of God to keep so. Others are at
it! Many thoughts are laid up about it, which will have their
issue and vent.!. This principle, that people are for Kings and
Churches, and Saints for the Pope or Churchmen (as you call
them), begins to be exploded ;—and therefore I wonder not to
see the fraternity to be so much enraged. I wish the People wiser
than to be troubled at you, or solicitous for what you say or do.

But it seems, notwithstanding all this, you would fain have
them believe it is their good you seek. And to cozen them, in
deed and in truth, is the scope of your whole Declaration, and of
your acts and decrees in your foresaid printed book. Therefore
to discover and unveil those falsities, and to let them, ‘the
people,’ know what they are to trust to from me, is the principal
end of this my Declaration. That if I be not able to do good
upon them, which I most desire (and yet in that I shall not
seek to gain them by flattery ; but tell them the worst, in plain-
ness, and that which I am sure will not be acceptable to you) ;
and if I cannot gain them, ‘I say,’ I shall have comfort in this,
that I have freed my own soul from the guilt of the evil that
shall ensue. And on this subject I hope to leave nothing un-
answered in all your said Declarations and Decrees at Clonmac-
noise.

And because you carry on your matter somewhat confusedly,
I shall therefore bring all that you have said into some order ;
that so we may the better discern what everything signifies, and
give answer thereunto.

1 Paris City A.D, 1789-95 !

14 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1650.

You forewarn the people of their danger; which you make
to consist: First, in the extirpation of the Catholic Religion ;
Secondly, in the destruction of their lives ; Thirdly, in the ruin
of their fortunes.—To avoid all which evils you forewarn them :
First, That they be not deceived by the Commander-in-Chief of
the Parliament Forces: And in the next place (having stated
‘the ground of’ your war, as aforesaid), you give them your
positive advice and counsel to engage in blood: And ‘then’
lastly ‘you’ bestow upon them a small collation in four ecclesi-
astical Decrees or Orders,—which will signify as little, being
performed by your spirit, as if you had said nothing. And the
obligation ‘that lay on you’ to all this you make to be your
pastoral relation to them, over your flocks.

To which last a word or two.! I wonder how this relation
was brought about! If they be flocks, and you ambitious of the
relative term, ‘ Yes,’ you are pastors: but it is by an antiphrasis,
—a minime pascendo! You either teach them not at all, or else
you do it, as some of you came to this conventicle who were sent
by others, fanquam Procuratores, or as your manner is, by sending
a company of silly ignorant priests, who can but say the mass,
and scarcely that intelligibly ; or with such stuff as these your
senseless Declarations and edicts !—But how dare you assume to
call these men your flocks, whom you have plunged into so horrid
a rebellion, by which you have made them and the country
almost a ruinous heap, and whom you have fleeced and polled
and peeled hitherto, and make it your business to do so still.
You cannot feed them! You poison them with your false,
abominable and antichristian doctrine and practices. You keep
the Word of God from them; and instead thereof give them
your senseless orders and traditions. You teach them implicit
belief :—he that goes amongst them may find many that do not
understand anything in the matters of your religion. I have had
few better answers from any since I came into Ireland that are

1 The Lord Lieutenant is very impatient with ‘ this last ;' flies at it 7rs?.

1650.] DECLARATION 15

of your flocks than this, that indeed they did not trouble them-
selves about matters of religion but left that to the Church.
Thus are your flocks fed; and such credit have you of them.
But they must take heed of losing their religion. Alas, poor
creatures, what have they to lose ?

Concerning this, ‘of losing their Religion,’ is your grand caveat
‘however ;’ and to back this, you tell them of Resolutions and
Covenants to extirpate the Catholic Religion out of all his
Majesty’s dominions. And you instance in Cromwell’s Letter
of the 19th October 1649, to the then Governor of Ross,! repeat-
ing his words, which are as followeth, viz. “For that which you
“mention concerning liberty of conscience,? I meddle not with
“any man’s conscience. But if by liberty of conscience, you
“mean a liberty to exercise the Mass, I judge it best to use plain
“ dealing, and to let you know, Where the Parliament of England
“have power, that will not be allowed of.’’ And this you call a
tryannical resolution ; which you say hath been put in execution
in Wexford, Ross and Tredah.

Now let us consider. First, you say That the design is, to
extirpate the Catholic Religion. Let us see your honesty herein.
Your word extirpate is as ill collected from these grounds, and
as senseless as the word Catholic, ordinarily used by you when
you mention Catholic Roman Church. The word extirpate sup-
poses a thing to be already rooted and established: which word
‘is’ made good by the proof of Covenants, ‘by’ your Letter—which
expresses the non-toleration of the Mass wherein, it seems, you
place all the Catholic Religion (and therein you show some
ingenuity),°—and ‘by’ your instance of what was practised in
the three towns aforementioned: do these prove, either con-
sidered apart or all together, the extirpation of the Catholic
religion ?

By what law was the Mass ‘ever rooted, or’ exercised in these
places, or in any the Dominions of England or Ireland, or King-

1 Antea, vol. i. p. 493. 2[‘‘ religion” in pamphlets. ]
3 Means ‘ ingenuousness,’ as usual,

16 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1650.

dom of Scotland? You were intruders, you were herein open
violaters of the known laws! And yet you will call the Covenant,
‘and’ that ‘refusal’ in the Letter, and these practices ‘ at Wexford,
Ross and Tredah,’ extirpations of the Catholic Religion,—‘ which
had’ thus again ‘been’ set on foot by you, by the advantage of
your rebellion, and shaking-off the just authority of the State
of England over you! Whereas, I dare be confident to say-
you durst not own the saying of one mass, ‘for’ above these
eighty years in Ireland. And ‘only’ through the troubles you
made, and; ‘through’ the miseries you brought on this nation
and the poor people thereof (your numbers, which is very ominous,
increasing with the ‘numbers of the’ wolves, through the desola-
tions you made in the Country) ; ‘only by all this’ you recovered
again the public exercises of your Mass! And for the maintenance
of this, thus gained, you would make the poor people believe that
it is ghostly counsel, and given in love to them as your flocks,
that they should run into wars, and venture lives, and all upon
such a ground as this! But if God be pleased to unveil you of
your sheeps-clothing, that they ‘the People;’ may see how they
have been deluded, and by whom, I shall exceedingly rejoice ;
and indeed for their sakes only have I given you these competent
characters (if God shall so bless it) for their good.

And now for them, ‘the People of Ireland,’ I do particularly
declare what they may expect at my hands in this point ; wherein
you will easily perceive that, as I neither have ‘flattered’ nor
shall flatter you, so shall I neither go about to delude them with
specious pretences, as you have ever done.

First, therefore: I shall not, where I have power, and the
Lord is pleased to bless me, suffer the exercise of the Mass,
where I can take notice of it,! ‘No,’ nor ‘in any way’ suffer you

1[‘* For Cromwell to pretend that he was not ‘meddling with any man’s con-
science’ when he prohibited the central rite of the Catholics, and all the ministrations
by the clergy on those occasions of life where conscience, under awful penalties,
demanded them, was as idle as if the Catholics had pretended that they did not

meddle with conscience if they forbade the possession or use of the Bible, or hunted
Puritan preachers out of all the pulpits.” Morley's Cromwell, p. 308. ]

1650.] DECLARATION 17

that are Papists, where I can find you seducing the People, or
by any overt act violating the Laws established ; but if you come
in my hands, I shall cause to be inflicted the punishments ap-
pointed by the laws (to use your own terms), secundum gravitatem
delictt,} upon you; and ‘shall try’ to reduce things to their
former state on this behalf.2 As for the people, what thoughts
they have in matters of religion in their own breasts I cannot
reach ; but ‘shall’ think it my duty, if they walk honestly and
peaceably, not to cause them in the least to suffer for the same,
but shall endeavour to walk patiently and in love towards them,
to see if at any time it shall please God to give them another
or a better mind. And all men under the power of England,
within this dominion, are hereby required and enjoined strictly
and religiously to do the same.

To the second ‘danger threatened ;’ which is the destruction
of the lives of the Inhabitants of this Nation : —to make it good
that this is designed, they*® give not one reason. Which is
either because they have none to give; or else for that they
believe the People will receive everything for truth they say,—
which they have too well taught them, and God knows the
People are too apt, todo. But I will a little help them. They
speak indeed of rooting out the Common-People ; and also, by
way of consequent, that the extirpating the Catholic Religion is
not to be effected without the massacring, destroying or banishing
the Catholic Inhabitants. Which how analogical* an argument
this is, I shall easily make appear by and by.

Alas, the generality of the Inhabitants are poor Laity (as you
call them) and ignorant of the grounds of the Catholic Religion.
Are these then so interwoven with your Church Interest as that
the absence of them makes your Catholic Religion fall to the
ground? We know you think not so. You reckon yourselves

1A phrase in their Pamphlet. 2No cozening here !

31s now addressing the People; has unconsciously turned away from the Priests,
and put them into the third person.

4(Perhaps this should be ‘‘ an illogical.’]

5 Unimportant they, to the vigour or decline of it.

VOL. 11.—2

18 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (1650.

(and yourselves only) the pillars and supporters thereof; and
these ‘useful’ as far as they have the exercise of club-law, and,
like the ass you ride on, obey your commands. But concerning
these [in?] relation ‘of’ your Religion, ‘and your right to practise
it,’ enough has been spoken in another place ;—only you love to
mix things for your advantage.

But ‘now’ to your logic. Here is your argument: The de-
sign is to extirpate the Catholic religion; but this is not to be
done but by the massacring, banishing or otherwise destroying
the Catholic inhabitants: ergo it is designed to massacre, banish
and destroy the Catholic Inhabitants.—To try this no-concluding
argument,—‘ nothing-concluding ’ (but yet well enough agreeing
with your learning), I give you this dilemma; by which it will
appear That, whether your religion be true or false, this will not
follow :

If your religion be the true religion, yet if a nation may de-
generate from the true religion, and apostatise (as too many
have ‘evidently’ done) through the seducements of your Roman
Church, ‘say we, —then it will not follow that men must be
massacred, banished or otherwise destroyed, necessarily ; no, not
as to the change of the true religion in a nation or country! +
Only, this argument doth wonderfully well agree with your
principles and practice ; you having chiefly made use of fire and
sword, in all the changes in religion that you have made in the
world. ‘But I say,’ if it be change of your Catholic religion so-
called, it will not follow: because there may be found out
another means than massacring, destruction and banishment ;
to wit, the Word of God; which is able to convert (a means
which you as little know as practise ; which indeed you deprive
the people of.) ‘That means may be found,’ together with

1A subtle ‘dilemma,’ and very Oliverian; seems to eat itself like a Serpent-of-
eternity, and be very circudar reasoning; yet grounds itself, if examined, upon
sharp just insight, and has real logical validity. ‘Call your Religion true, men ave
‘changed from it without being massacred: admit it to be false, will you say they
‘need massacring? Whatever Religion you may have, I think you have not much
‘ Logic to spare !’—

=
—

1650.] DECLARATION 19

humanity, good life, equal and honest dealing with men of a
different opinion ;—which we desire to exercise towards this poor
people, if you, by your wicked counsel, make them not incapable
to receive it, by putting them into blood !

And therefore, by this also ‘which you talk of massacring,’
your false and twisted dealing may be a little discovered. But
well; your words are, “massacre, destroy and banish.’—Good
now : give us an instance of one man since my coming into Ireland,
not in arms, massacred, destroyed or banished ; concerning the
massacre or the destruction of whom justice hath not been done, or
endeavoured to be done.| But for the other of banishment, I must
now speak unto the People, whom you would delude, and whom
this most concerns ; that they may know in this also what to
expect at my hands.

The question is of the destruction of life; or of that which is
but little inferior to it, to wit, banishment. ‘Now First ;’ I shall
not willingly take or suffer to be taken away the life of any man
not in arms, but by the trial to which the people of this nation
are subject by law, for offences against the same. And ‘Secondly,’
as for the banishment, it hath not hitherto been inflicted on any
but such who, being in arms, upon the terms they were taken
‘under,’ might justly have been put to death:—as ‘might’
those ‘who are’ instanced in your Declaration to be sent to the
Tobacco Islands. And therefore I do declare, that if the people
be ready to run to arms by the instigation of their clergy or
otherwise, such as God by His providence shall give into my
hands may expect that or worse measure from me; but not
otherwise.

Thirdly, as to that of the ruin of their fortune. You instance
in the Act of Subscription,? whereby the estates of the inhabi-

1* Concerning the first two of which,’ in ov7g. The italics, in this passage, are
mine; and can be removed so soon as Macgeohegan, Carte, Clarendon and
Company, have got to be well understood.

2 At the first breaking-out of the:Irish Rebellion into an Irish Massacre, the
King’s Exchequer being void, and the case like a case of conflagration, an act was

passed, engaging the Public Faith, That whoever would ‘ subscribe’ money towards
suppressing the said Rebellion in Ireland, and detestable and horrible Massacre of,

20 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (1650.

tants of this nation are sold, so as there remaineth now no more
but to put the purchasers in possession; and that for this cause
are the forces drawn out of England. And that you might carry
the interest far, ‘so as’ to engage the common sort of people
with you, you further say to them, that the moderate usage
‘hitherto’ exercised to them is to no other end but to our private
advantage, and for the better support of our army ; ‘we’ intend-
ing at the close of our conquest (as you term it) to root out the
commons also, and to plant the land with colonies to be brought
hither out of England. This, consisting of divers parts, will ask
distinct answers.

And first, to the Act of Subscription. It’s true there is such
an Act ;—and it was a just one. For when, by your execrable
massacre and rebellion, you had not only raised a bloody war
to justify the same; and thereby occasioned the exhausting of
the treasure of England in the prosecution of so just a war
against you,—was it not a wise and just act in the State to raise
-money by escheating the lands of those who had a hand in the
rebellion? Was it not fit to make their estates to defray the
charge, who had caused the trouble? The best therefore that
lies in this argument is this (and that only reaching to them
who have been in arms, for further it goes not): you have forfeited
your estates, and it is likely they will be escheated to make satis-
faction ; and therefore you had better fight it out than repent or
give-off now, or ‘else,’ see what mercy you may find from the
State of England. And seeing Holy Church is engaged in it, we
will, by one means or other, hook-in the commons, and make
them sensible that they are as much concerned as you, though
they were never in arms, or came quickly off.—And for this

Protestants there, should, with liberal interest, be repaid from the forfeited Estates
of the Rebels,—so soon as they were got. This is the ‘ Act of Subscription’ spoken
of here. His Majesty said; ‘t How will that answer? It is like selling the bear's
skin before you have caught your bear.” A bargain, nevertheless, which hundreds
and thousands entered into, with free purse and overflowing heart ; ‘ above a Quarter
of a Million’ raised by it; generous emotion, and tragic terror and pity, lending
sanction to doubtful profit-and-loss. A very wise and just Act of Parliament, the
Lord Lieutenant thinks; which did also fulfil its engagements by and by.

1650.] _ DECLARATION 21

cause doubtless are these two coupled together; by which your
honest dealing is manifest enough. .

But what? Was the English army brought over for this
purpose, as you allege? Do you think that the State of England
will be at five or six millions charge merely to procure purchasers
to be invested in that for which they did disburse little above a
quarter of a million? Although there be a justice in that also,
which ought, and I trust will be seasonably performed to them.—
No, I can give you a better reason for the army’s coming over
than this. England hath had experience of the blessing of God

in prosecuting just and righteous causes, whatever the cost and

hazard be.! And if ever men were engaged in a righteous
cause in the world, this will be scarce a second to it. We are
come to ask an account of the innocent blood that hath been
shed ; and to endeavour to bring them to an account (by the
blessing and presence of the Almighty, in whom alone is our
hope and strength), who, by appearing in arms, seek to justify

the same. We come to break the power of a company of lawless

rebels, who having cast off the authority of England, live as

—)

}
_

enemies to human society ; whose principles (the world hath >

experience of) are, to destroy and subjugate all men not comply-~,

ing with them. We come (by the assistance of God) to hold
forth and maintain the lustre and glory of English liberty? in a
nation where we have an undoubted right to do it ;—wherein

the people of Ireland (if they listen not to such seducers as you |

are) may equally participate in all benefits, to use liberty and
fortune equally with Englishmen, if they keep out of arms.

And therefore, having said this to you, I have a word to them ;
that in this point, which concerns them in their estates and

1 Hear this Lord Lieutenant !

2‘ Liberty,’ here, which much astonishes our Irish friends, is very far from mean-
ing what in most modern dialects it now does. ‘Liberty,’ with this Lord Lieutenant,
means ‘rigorous settled Obedience to Laws that are just.’ Which it is very noble
indeed to settle, ‘and hold forth and maintain’ against all men. Laws grounded
on the eternal Fact of Things,—which is a much preferable ‘ ground’ to the tem-
porary Fiction of Things, as set forth at any Clonmacnoise, Kilkenny, or other
Supreme Centre-of-Jargon, there or elsewhere, that has been or that can be !

22 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1650.

fortunes, they may know what to trust to. Such as have been
formerly and are not now in arms, may (submitting themselves)
have their cases presented to the State of England ;—where no
doubt the State will be ready to take into consideration the
nature and quality of their actings, and deal mercifully with
them. For those that are now in arms, and shall come in, and
submit, and give engagements for their future quiet and honest
carriage, and submission to the State of England, I doubt not
but they will find like merciful consideration ;—excepting only
the leading persons and principal contrivers of this rebellion,
whom I am confident they will reserve to make examples of
justice, whatsoever hazards they incur thereby.—And for such
Private soldiers as lay down their arms, and shall live peaceably
and honestly at their several homes, they shall be permitted so
to do.—And, ‘in general,’ for the first two sorts, ‘for such as
have been or as now are in arms and shall submit,’ I shall humbly
and effectually represent their cases to the Parliament, as far as
becomes the duty and place I bear. But as for those who, not-
withstanding all this, persist and continue in arms, they must
expect what the Providence of God (in that which is falsely
called the chance of war) will cast upon them.

For such of the nobility, gentry and commons of Ireland as
have not been actors in this rebellion, they shall and may expect
the protection in their goods, liberties and lives which the law
gives them; and in their husbandry, merchandising, manufactures
and other trading whatsoever, the same. They behaving them-
selves as becomes honest and peaceable men; testifying their

good affections, upon all occasions, to the service of the State of -

England, equal justice shall be done them with the English.
They shall bear proportionably with them in taxes. And if the
soldiery be insolent upon them, upon complaint and proof, it
shall be punished with utmost severity, and they protected equally
with Englishmen.

And having said this, and purposing honestly to perform it,—
if this people shall headily run on after the counsels of their prel-

1650.] LETTERS CXIX—CXXI 23

ates and clergy and other leaders, I hope to be free from the
misery and desolation, blood and ruin that shall befall them ; and
shall rejoice to exercise utmost severity against them.
‘Ouiver CroMweELt,’ *
‘Given at Youghal,—January 1649.’

This Declaration, as appears here, does not date or even ex-
pressly sign itself: but by search, chiefly in a certain Manuscript
Fragment, which will by and by concern us farther,! we find that
it was drawn up at Youghal after the 15th, and came forth
printed at Cork before the 29th of January; on which latter
day the Army took the field again. And so we leave this
Declaration ;—one of the remarkablest State-Papers ever pub-
lished in Ireland since Strongbow, or even since St. Patrick, first
appeared there.”

LETTERS CXIX—CXXI

Tue Speaker’s Letter of Recall has never yet reached Ireland ;
and the rumour of it already has ; which, as we intimated, sets the
Enemy on fresh schemes, whereof advantage might be taken.
The unwearied Lord Lieutenant, besides his labours known to
us, has been rehabilitating Courts of Justice in Dublin, settling
contributions, and doing much other work ; and now, the February
or even January weather being unusually good, he takes the field

* Declaration, &c. as above given. Licensed by the Secretary of the Army.
Printed at Cork: and now reprinted at London, by E. Griffin, and are to be soldin
the Old Bailey; March 21, 1650. King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 462, § 6. [E.
596.] In Ayscough MSS., no. 4769 (a Fragment of an anonymous Contem-
porary Narrative, which will by and by be more specially referred to), are some
two pages of this Declaration, transcribed from the Cork Edition: the concluding
words are not, ‘exercise utmost severity against them,’ but ‘act severity against
them,’ which probably is the true reading.

1 Ayscough MSS., no. 4769 (Fragment of a Narrative, referred to in the previous
Note), pp. 100 ef segq.

2[‘* This has been called by our great transcendental eulogist one of the most
remarkable state papers ever published in Ireland since Strongbow or even since
St. Patrick. Perhaps it is, for it combines in a unique degree profound ignorance
of the Irish past with a profound miscalculation of the Irish future.” It is easy to
see that the prelates were ‘‘from the Irish point of view hitting the nail upon the
head, while Oliver goes to work with a want of insight and knowledge that puts
his Irish statesmanship far below Strafford’s.” Morley’s Cromwe//, p. 306.]

24 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [15 Feb.

again, in hopes of perhaps soon finishing. The unhappy Irish are
again about excommunicating one another ; the Supreme Council
of Kilkenny is again one wide howl; and Ormond is writing to
the King to recall him. Now is the Lieutenant’s time; the
February weather being good!

LETTER CXIX

Here is another small excerpt from Bulstrode, which we may
take along with us; a small speck of dark Ireland and its affairs
rendered luminous for an instant. To which there is reference
in this Letter. We saw Enniscorthy taken on the last day of
September, the ‘Castle and Village of Enniscorthy,’ ‘ which be-
longs to Mr. Robert Wallop ;’ a Garrison was settled there ; and
this in some three months time is what becomes of it.

Oth January 1649, Letters reach Bulstrode, perhaps a fort-
night after date, ‘That the Enemy surprised Enniscorthy Castle
‘in this manner: Some Irish Gentlemen feasted the Garrison
‘Soldiers ; and sent in women to sell them strong-water, of which
‘they drank too much ; and then the Irish fell upon them, took
‘the Garrison, and put all the Officers and Soldiers to the sword.’
Sharp practice on the part of the Irish Gentlemen ; and not well
advised! Which constrained the Lord Lieutenant, when he
heard of it, to order ‘that the Irish,’ Papist or suspected Irish,
‘should be put out of such Garrisons as were in the power of
Parliament,’ |—sent to seek quarters elsewhere.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England: These

Castletown, 15th Feb. 1649.
Mr. SPEAKER,
Having refreshed our men for some short

time in our winter-quarters,? and health being pretty well re-
covered, we thought fit to take the field, and to attempt such
things as God by His providence should lead us to upon the
enemy.

1 Whitlocke, p. 421. 2 Youghal had been the head-quarter.

1650.) LETTER CXIX., CASTLETOWN 25

Our resolution was to fall into the enemy’s quarters two ways.
The one party, being about fifteen or sixteen troops of horse
and dragoons and about two-thousand foot, were ordered to go
up by the way of Carrick into the county of Kilkenny under the
command of Colonel Reynolds, whom Major-General Ireton was
to follow with a reserve. I myself was to go by the way of
Mallow,! over the Blackwater, towards the county of Limerick
and the county of Tipperary, with about twelve troops of horse,
and three troops of dragoons, and between two and three hundred
foot.

I began to march upon Tuesday the 29th January, from
Youghal: and upon Thursday the 31st, I possessed a castle
called Kilbenny, upon the edge of the county of Limerick ;
where I left thirty foot. From thence I marched to a strong
house belonging to Sir Richard Everard (called Clogheen),? who
is one of the Supreme Council, where I left a troop of horse and
some dragoons. From thence I marched to Raghill Castle, which
was possessed by some Ulster foot, and a party of the enemy's
horse; which upon summons (I having taken the captain of
_ horse prisoner before) was rendered to me. These places being
thus possessed gave us much command (together with some other
holds we have) of the White-Knight’s* and Roche’s Country, and
of all the land from Mallow to the Suir-side ;‘—especially by
another Castle, taken by my Lord of Broghil, called Old Castle-
town,’ since my march, which I sent to his Lordship to endeavour ;
as also a castle of Sir Edward Fitzharris, over the mountains in

1* Muyallo’ he writes and ‘ Mayallo.’

2*Cloghern’ in the old Newspaper ; but it seems to be misprinted, as almost all
these names are. [Cromwell himself writes it so.] ‘Roghill’ I find nowhere now
extant. [Cromwell writes it Raghill. It is now Rehill, and lies nine miles south-
west of Cahir. For the identification of this and the other places here named, see
Murphy's Cromwell in Ireland, pp. 252, 253. ]

’[The White-Knight was the title given to certain chiefs of the Clan Gibbon, a
branch of the Munster Fitzgeralds. The last who bore the title was Maurice Fitz-
gerald, who died /emp., Charles I. Roche's country lay about Fermoy, which gave
Lord Roche his title, Baron of Fermoy. |
stank in orig.]
5| Near Kildorrery, co. Cork. Fitzharris’ Castle was probably that spoken of by
Castlehaven as ‘‘ Cloughnosty,” Murphy, pp. 252, 253. ]

26 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [15 Feb.

the county of Limerick; I having left his Lordship at Mallow,
with about six or seven hundred horse, and four or five hundred
foot, to protect those parts, and your interest in Munster ; lest
whilst we were abroad, Inchiquin, whose forces lay about Limerick
and the county of Kerry, should fall in behind us. His Lordship
drew two cannon to the aforesaid castle ; which having summoned,
they refused. His Lordship, having bestowed about ten shot
upon it, which made their stomachs come down, he gave all the
soldiers quarter for life; and shot all the officers (being six in
number) to death. Since the taking of these garrisons, the
Irish have sent their commissioners to compound for their con-
tribution as far as the walls of Limerick.

I marched from Raghill Castle over the Suir, with very much
difficulty ; and from thence to Fethard, almost in the heart of
the county of Tipperary, where was a garrison of the enemy.
The town is most pleasantly seated, having a very good wall
with round and square bulwarks, after the old manner of for-
tification. We came thither in the night, and indeed were
very much distressed by sore and tempestuous wind and rain.
After a long march, we knew not well how to dispose of our-
selves ; but finding an old Abbey in the suburbs, and some
cabins and poor houses, we got into them, and had opportunity
to send them a summons. They shot at my trumpet, and would
not listen to him, for an hour’s space: but having some officers
in our party which they knew, I sent them, to let them know
that we were there with a good part of the army. We shot not
a shot at them, but they were very angry, and fired very earnestly
upon us; telling us, it was not a time of night to send a summons.
But yet in the end, the governor was willing to send out two
commissioners, I think rather to see whether there was a force
sufficient to force him, than to any other end. After almost a
whole night spent in treaty, the town was delivered to me the
next morning, upon terms which we usually call honourable ;
which I was the willinger to give, because I had little above two-
hundred foot, and neither ladders nor guns, nor any thing else to

—_—s

ee

1650.} LETTER CXIX., CASTLETOWN 27

force them.! That night, there being about seventeen companies
of the Ulster foot in Cashel, about five miles from thence, they
quit it in some disorder ; and the sovereign and the Aldermen
since sent to me a petition, desiring that I would protect them.
Which I have also made a quarter.

From thence I marched towards Callan, hearing that Colonel
Reynolds was there, with the party before mentioned. When I
came thither, I found he had fallen upon the enemy’s horse, and
routed them (being about a hundred), with his forlorn ; took my
Lord of Ossory’s Captain-Lieutenant, and another Lieutenant of
horse prisoners, and one of those who betrayed our Garrison of
Enniscorthy ; whom we hanged. The enemy had possessed three
castles in the town; one of them belonging to one Butler, very
considerable ; the other two had about a hundred or hundred-
and-twenty men in them,—which he attempted; and they,
refusing conditions seasonably offered, were put all to the sword.
Indeed some of your soldiers did attempt very notably in this
service : I do not hear there were six men of ours lost. Butler's
castle was delivered upon conditions, for all to march away, leav-
ing their arms behind them; wherein I have placed a company
of foot, and a troop of horse, under the command of my Lord
Colvill; the place being six miles from Kilkenny. From hence
Colonel Reynolds was sent with his regiment to remove a garrison
of the enemy’s from Knocktofer (being the way of our communi-
cation to Ross); which accordingly he did.

We marched back with the rest of the body to Fethard? and
Cashel, where we are now quartered, having good plenty both
of horse meat and man’s meat for a time ; and being indeed, we
may say, even almost in the heart and bowels of the enemy,
ready to attempt what God shall next direct. And blessed be
His name only for this good success, and for this ‘also,’ that
we do not find that our men are at all considerably sick upon

1[See Governor’s letter, and Articles, Supplement No. 55. ]

2 Letter, ‘Fethard, 9th February,’ to Colonel Phayr, Governor of Cork, for rein-

forcements: Appendix, No. 18. [And Feb. ro, probably to the commander at
Clonmel, concerning the exchange of prisoners, Supplement No. 54 (2). ]

28 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [15 Feb.

this expedition, though indeed it hath been very blustering
weather.

I had almost forgot one business : The Major-General was very
desirous to gain a pass over the Suir, where indeed we had none
but by boat, or when the weather served. Wherefore, on
Saturday in the evening, he marched with a party of horse and
foot to Arfinom [Ardfinnan]; where was a bridge, and at the
foot of it a strong castle ; which he, about four o’clock the next
morning, attempted, killed about thirteen of the enemy’s out-
guard, lost but two men, and eight or ten wounded: the enemy
yielded the place to him, and we are possessed of it, being a very
considerable pass, and the nearest to our pass at Cappoquin over
the Blackwater, whither we can bring guns, ammunition, or other
things from Youghal by water, and over this pass to the army. The
county of Tipperary have submitted to 1,500/. a-month contribu-
tion, although they have six or seven of the enemy’s garrisons yet
upon them.

Sir, I desire the charge of England as to this war may be
abated as much as may be, and as we know you do desire, out
of your care to the Commonwealth. But if you expect your
work to be done, (if the marching army be not constantly paid,
and the course taken that hath been humbly represented), in-
deed it will not be for the thrift of England, as far as England
is concerned in the speedy reduction of Ireland. The money we
raise upon the counties maintains the garrison forces, and hardly
that. Ifthe active force be not maintained, and all contingencies
defrayed, how can you expect but to have a lingering business of
it? Surely we desire not to spend a shilling of your treasury,
wherein our consciences do not prompt us. We serve you ; we are
willing to be out of! our trade of war, and shall hasten (by God’s
assistance and grace) to the end of our work, as the labourer doth
to be at his rest. This makes us bold to be earnest with you for
necessary supplies: that of money is one. And there be some

1to have done with.

1650.) LETTER CXIX., CASTLETOWN 29

other things, which indeed I do not think for your service to
speak of publicly, which I shall humbly represent to the Council
of State, wherewith I desire we may be accommodated.

Sir, the Lord, who doth all these things, gives hopes of a
speedy issue to this business; and, I am persuaded, will gra-
ciously appear in it. And truly there is no fear of the strength
and combination of enemies round about, nor of slanderous
tongues at home. God hath hitherto fenced you against all
those, to wonder and amazement; they are tokens of your
prosperity and success: only it will be good for you, and us
that serve you, to fear the Lord; to fear unbelief, self-seeking,
confidence in an arm of flesh, and opinion of any instruments
that they are other than as dry bones. That God be merciful
in these things, and bless you, is the humble prayer of, Sir,

Your most humble servant,
OLtverR CROMWELL.*

Commons Journals, 25th February 1649 50: ‘A Letter from the
‘Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, from Castletown, 15° Februarii
‘1649, was this day read; and ordered to be forthwith printed
‘and published. Ordered, That a Letter of Thanks be sent to
‘the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland ; and that Mr. Scott do prepare
‘the Letter; and that Mr. Speaker do sign the same. Resolved,
‘That the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland have the use of the Lodg-
‘ings called the Cockpit, of the Spring Garden and St, James’s
‘ House, and the command of St. James’s Park.’

This Letter of Thanks, and very handsome Resolution did, as
we shall find, come duly to hand. The Cockpit was then and
long afterwards a sumptuous Royal ‘Lodging’ in Whitehall ;
Henry the Eighth’s place of cock-fighting :—stood till not very
long ago, say the Topographers, where the present Privy-Council
Office is. The Cromwell Family hereupon prepared to remove
thither; not without reluctance on Mrs. Cromwell’s part, as
Ludlow intimates.

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 77); see also Commons Journals, 25th
February 1649-50. [Now printed from the original, Zazner MSS., lvi. 168. The
Signature only is in Cromwell's hand. ]

30 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND | [24 Feb.

LETTER CXX

Deep sunk among the Paper-Masses of the British Museum is
an anonymous Fragment of a Narrative of Oliver's Campaign in
Ireland ; Fragment copied, as would seem, several generations
ago, from an earlier Original, the beginning and end which were
already lost,—torn off by careless hands, and consumed as waste
paper. The Copyist, with due hopeful punctuality, has left
blank leaves at the beginning and end: but to no purpose ;
they are and continue blank leaves. In this mutilated obscure
state, it lies among the Manuscripts of the British Museum ;—
will perhaps be printed by some Dryasdust Society, in time.! It
is by no means a Narrative of much merit: entirely anonymous,
as we say, without specific date or outward indication of any
kind ; but written as if by a contemporary or even a fellow-actor,
in a flat, diffuse, but authentic and exact manner. In obscure
cases, as we have already found, it is worth consulting here and
there ;—contains, in particular, the following and some other
unimportant Cromwell Letters, not found elsewhere, which we
make a duty of preserving.

For the Governor of Cahir Castle :* These .

‘ Before Cahir,’ 24th February 1649.
Sir,

Having brought the army and my cannon near
this place, according to my usual manner in summoning places,
I thought fit to offer you terms, honourable for soldiers: That
you may march away, with your baggage, arms and colours, free
from injury or violence. But if I be necessitated to bend my

1Jt is already printed, and has been for a hundred years,—though the sleepy
Catalogues give no sign! As Appendix to the Reprint of [Borlaces’s] History of
the Irish Rebellion (Dublin, 1743), the Piece is given entire, with ‘Mr. Cliffe,
Ireton’s Secretary,’ specified as Author. The Museum Copy ‘wants only some
three lines at one end and fifteen at the other;' and has ‘ insignificant verbal
variations’ from the Printed Copy, where they have been collated. Our sole
authority here is still the Manuscript. (Vote to Third Edition.)

2(The governor was Captain George Matthews. The articles of surrender will
be found in the Supplement, No. 56.]

1650.] LETTER CXXI., CASHEL 31

cannon upon you, you must expect the extremity usual in such
cases.
To avoid blood, this is offered to you by,
Your servant,
Outver CroMwELL.*

What became of Cahir Castle, of it and of others, will appear
in the next Letter.

LETTER CXXI

‘ For the Honourable John Bradshaw, Esquire, President 0,
the Council of State: These’

Cashel, 5th March 1649.
‘Sir,’

* %* * It pleaseth God still to enlarge your
interest here. The Castle of Cahir, very considerable, built upon
a rock, and seated in an island in the midst of Suir, was lately
rendered to me. It cost the Earl of Essex, as I am informed,
about eight weeks siege with his army and artillery.!_ It is now

* Narrative Fragment (in Ayscough MSS. no. 4769, [Add. MSS. 4769 4] cited
above).

1JIn 1599 (Camden ; in Kennet, ii. 614); but the ‘eight weeks’ are by no means
mentioned in Camden! [Cromwell's informant was mistaken. On May 24, Essex
wrote that Cahir’s wife and brethren were consulting how to defend the Castle,
‘* which is accounted the strongest place in Ireland,” but that he did not believe
they would dispute it, knowing that he had his cannon with him. On Whitsun Day
(May 27) he conveyed a cannon and culverin thither and began to batter the castle,
and on the Tuesday, according to one account, or on ‘‘ the fourth day,” according
to another, he entered, slaying such of the garrison as did not make their escape
across the river. It was of the taking of Cahir that Elizabeth wrote so scornfully to
Essex: ‘‘ Full well do we know that you would long since have scorned to have
allowed it for any great matter in others to have taken an Irish hold from a rabble
of rogues, with such force as you had and with the help of the cannon, which was
always able in Ireland to make his (s7c) passage where it pleased.” See Cal. S. P.
Ireland, 1599-1600, pp. 42, 57, 98, 134. In less than a year, by either the care-
lessness or treachery of the garrison (Sir George Carew suspected the latter) it was
retaken by Lord Cahir's brother, who, with less than sixty men, scaled the walls
and was in the hall before the sentry knew of the presence of an enemy (Cai.
S. P. Ireland, 1600, p. 247). Lord Cahir, however, who had ‘‘come in”
to the Lord President, soon obtained possession of it and held it for the Queen. ]
The Castle, a rather extensive building, overlooking from its rock ‘the left bank of

32 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [22 March.

yours without the loss of one man. So also is the castle of
Kiltinan!; a very large and strong castle of the Lord of Dun-
boyne’s ; this latter I took-in with my cannon, without the loss
of a man.

We have taken the castle of Golden Bridge, another pass upon
the Suir; as also the castle of Dundrum, at which we lost about
six men, Colonel Sanchy, who commanded the party, being shot
through the hand. We have placed another strong garrison at
Ballenskally [Ballynakill],2 upon the edge of the King’s and
Queen’s Counties. We have divers garrisons in the county of
Limerick ; and by these we take away the enemy’s subsistence,
and diminish their contributions. By which in time, I hope they
will sink.

* * *
Ouiver CrRoMWELL.*

LETTERS CXXII—CXXXII

Henry Cromwe t, ‘Colonel Henry,’ and the Lord Broghil are busy
with Inchiquin in Limerick County, to good purpose ;° as other
Colonels are with other rebels elsewhere, everywhere ; and our
Enemies will not stand, but have marched to Kilkenny. Kil-
kenny once taken, ‘it is not thought they will be able to recruit
their Army, or take the field again this summer. On Friday
22d March, the Lord Lieutenant comes in view of Kilkenny :
here, out of dim old pamphlets and repositories, readjusted into
some degree of clearness, is sufficient record of what befel there.
The first Summons goes on Friday evening :

the main stream of the River,’ is now a barrack for soldiers. Anciently, and still,
a chief place of the Bud/er Family.

1[Six miles north of Clonmell. Three of its four round towers still standing,
showing the breeches made by Cromwell's guns. Murphy, p. 271.

2[The castle of Goldenbridge (five miles west of Cashel) is still standing, and
portions of Ballynakill. Murphy, p. 272.]

3[Ireton also was there. Seea letter to him dated March 18. Supplement, No.
57:]

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 77): see also Commons Journals (vi. 381),
rath March 1649-50. [There is an old MS. copy in Tanner MS., li. 190.]}

1650] LETTER CXXII, KILKENNY 33

LETTER CXXII

To the Governor, and Mayor and Aldermen, of the City of Kilkenny :
These

Before Kilkenny, 22 March 1649.
GENTLEMEN,

My coming hither is to endeavour, if God
so please to bless me, the reduction of the city of Kilkenny to
their obedience to the State of England ;—from which, by an
unheard-of massacre of the innocent English, you have endea-
voured to rend yourselves. And as God hath begun to judge
you with His sore plague, so will He follow you until He hath
destroyed you, if you repent not. Your cause hath been judged
already in England upon them who did abet your evils :! what
may the principals then expect ?>—

By this free dealing, you see I entice you not to a compliance.
You may have terms ‘such as’ may save you in your lives,
liberties and estates, according to what will be fitting for me to
grant and you to receive. If you choose for the worst, blame
yourselves. In confidence of the gracious blessing and presence
of God with His own cause, which this is, by many testimonies,
I shall hope for a good issue upon my endeavours.

Expecting a return from you, I rest,

Your servant,
Ouiver CROMWELL.*

In Kilkenny are two military Governors, one of the City, one
of the Castle ; a Mayor with his Citizens and civic Functionaries ;
not to speak of Priests, miscellaneous clerical or other wreck of

1Connor, Lord Macguire (State Trials, iv. 654-754, 7th Feb. 1644-5), he and
others have had public trial, doom and death, long since, for that: by the Law of
England, well ascertained, known, and acted on, this long while, it is death to have
been concerned in that.

* Narrative Fragment (in Ayscough MSS. no. 4769): found likewise, with date
23d March, in King’s Pamphiets, sm. 4to, no. 464 [E. 598] art. 2; where the rest
of these Kilkenny Letters are. [It appears to be dated 23rd in both the texts, but
Cromwell says he sent it on Friday evening, which was the 22nd. ]

VOL.. u.—$

34 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [23 March.

the once Supreme Council of Kilkenny, now hastily exploded :
all of whom this Letter of Friday evening throws into the natural
agitation,—into the necessity of some swift resolution conjunct
or several. On the morrow morning, Butler, ‘Sir Walter Butler,’
Governor of the City, answers with lion heart, or at least with
lion voice and face, laconically in the name of all:

“ For General Cromwell
“ Kilkenny, 23 Martii 1649.

“ Sir,—Your letter I have received; and in answer thereof :
“Tam commanded to maintain this city for his Majesty ; which,
“by the power of God, I am resolved to do.—Sir,—your servant,

“Wa: BurTLer.”

So that we have nothing for it but to ‘take the best view we
can where to plant our batteries ;’—send in the mean while
another Letter with more precise explanation of our terms,—
Letter now lost,—which probably occupies the Governor and
Civie Authorities during Saturday and Sunday ; and on Monday
morning, by which time our batteries too are about ready pro-
duces from the Governor new emphatic refusal :

“ For General Cromwell
“ Kilkenny, 25 Martii 1649 should be 1650.]*

“ Sir,—Your last letter I received, and in answer: I have
“such confidence in God to maintain this place as I will not lose
“it upon such terms as you offer, but will sooner lose my life
“and the lives of all that are here rather than submit to such
“ dishonourable conditions. So I rest,—Sir,—your servant,

“Wa: BuTLer.”
Whereupon, ‘on Monday the 25th, our batteries,’ unhappily

only consisting of three guns, will have to open; and for the
lion-voiced Governor there goes off this Answer:

1[It és 1650.]

1650.) LETTER CXXIII, KILKENNY 35

LETTER CXXIII
For the Governor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 25th March 1650,
Sir,

If you had been as clear ‘as’ I was in my last,!
I might perhaps have understood you so as to give you some
farther answer: but, you expressing nothing particularly what
you except-against in mine, I have nothing more to return save
this, That for some reasons I cannot let your trumpeter suddenly
come back, but have sent you this by a drummer of my own.

I rest,
Your servant,
OLiveR CroMWELL.*

Your Trumpeter cannot suddenly come back, ‘ for some reasons,’
chiefly for this,—that our poor batteries are about to begin to
play, and that in fact we have a thought of storming you.—
Governor Butler, hearing the batteries begin to play, makes haste
to specify his conditions ; which still seem rather high :

“ For General Cromwell
* Kilkenny, 25 Martii 1650.

“ Srr,—Yours of this instant I received ; the particulars which
“you would have me express are these :

“That the Mayor and citizens and all other the inhabitants
“and others now resident in this city and liberties thereof, with
“their servants, shall be secured of their lives, liberties, estates
“and goods, and live in their own habitations with all freedom:
“ And that our clergymen and all others here residing, of what
“degree, condition or quality soever, that shall be minded to
“depart, shall be permitted to depart safely hence with their
“goods and whatsoever they have, to what place soever they
“please within this realm, and in their departure shall be safely
“convoyed: And that the said inhabitants shall have free trade

1Second Letter, now lost.
* King's Pamphlets, no. 464, art 2, p. 13. [E. 598].

4 9

36 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [25 March.

“and traffic with all places under the Parliament of England’s
“command and elsewhere: And that the foresaid inhabitants
“shall have their arms, ammunition and artillery for their own
“defence, the town and liberties thereof paying such reasonable
“contribution as shall be agreed upon, and not to be otherwise
“charged: And that the governors, commanders, officers and
“soldiers, both horse and foot, now garrisoned as well in the
“castle as in the city, without exception of any of them, shall
“safely march hence, with their arms, ammunition, artillery, bag
“and baggage, and whatsoever else belongs to them ; with their
“drums beating, colours flying, matches burning, and bullet in
“ bouch”’ (musketeer’s ‘bouch,’ bouche or cheek, in which at this
epoch he keeps his bullets for immediate use); “and that they
“shall have a competent time for their departure and carrying
“away their goods, with a sufficient and safe convoy. And that
“Major Nicholas Wall, and all others Commanders, Officers and
“Soldiers who came out of the English Quarters, now residing
“here, shall have the benefit of this Agreement. Without which,
“JT am resolved to maintain this place, with God’s help.

“Thus expecting your answer to this letter, and that during
“this treaty there shall be a cessation of arms, and all other acts
“of hostility of both sides, I rest,—Sir,—your servant,

“Wa: Butter.”

These terms are still somewhat lion-voiced ; but our batteries,
such as they are, continue playing ; the tone, before next morn-
ing, abates a little, and this other Note has gone; accompanied
by one from the Mayor, which is now lost,! but of which we can
still guess the purport.

1[The Mayor's letter, although overlooked by Carlyle, is with the others in the
old pamphlet. It ran as follows:

To the Right Honourable the Lord Cromwell

RIGHT HONOURABLE,—We know by experience, and have it by your Honour's
letters, that you desire not the spilling of blood, nor the spoiling of cities and towns.
And though I doubt not but your Honour would easily agree to good and profitable
conditions for the city and citizens yet we having a governor of the city and another
of the castle, who commands us also, if befitting honourable conditions be not given
unto the military part, the city and citizens do stand in danger of ruin, as well from
our own party as from that of your Honour’s; this, in the name of the city and
citizens, I humbly offer to your Honour’s gracious, wise consideration, and desire
your favourable remedy therein, and rest Sir, your servant,

JA: ARCHDEKIN, Mayor of Kilkenny.

Gilbert dates this letter March 23—but there is no date in the pamphlet, and it
was pretty certainly sent out with the Governor's (first) letter of the 25th. The de-
mand for honourable conditions to be given to the soldiers shows that it is the letter
answered by Cromwell on the 26th. }

‘
és
z

1650.} LETTER CXXIV., KILKENNY 37

“* For General Cromwell
“ Kilkenny, 25 Martii 1650,

“ Sirn,—Although I may not doubt, with God’s help, to maintain
“this place, as I have formerly written,—yet I do send the bearer
“to let you know that I am content to treat with you of Proposi-
“tions to be made of either side, so there be a cessation of arms
“and all acts of hostility during that treaty. So, expecting your
“answer, I rest,—your servant,

“Wa: Burtier.” !

Meanwhile, having spent ‘about a hundred shot’ upon it, a
breach discloses itself, which we hope is stormable. Storming
party, on Tuesday the 26th, is accordingly drawn out, waiting
the signal ; and on another side of the City, ‘Colonel Ewer with
1,000 men’ is to assault the quarter called the Irish Town. These
Answers go, to their respective destinations :

LETTER CXXIV
For the Governor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 26th March 1650.
Sir,

Except the conditions were much bettered, and
we in a worse posture and capacity to reduce you than before the
last letters I sent you, I cannot imagine whence these high de-
mands of yours arise. I hope in God, before it be long you may
have occasion to think other thoughts ; to which I leave you.

I shall not so much as treat with you upon these propositions.
You desire some articles for honour’s sake ; which out of honesty,
I do deny: viz. that of marching in the equipage you mention,
‘muskets loaded, matches burning, &c.’ I tell you my business
is to reduce you from arms, and the country to quietness and
their due subjection ; to put an end to War, and not to lengthen
it; wishing (if it may stand with the will of God) this people

1[This letter, though printed with the date Mar. 35, is placed in the old pamphlet
amongst the letters of the 26th, and was probably sent on the Tuesday morning. ]

38 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [26 March.

may live as happily as they did before the bloody massacre and
their troubles, and better too. If you and the company with
you be of those who resolve to continue to hinder this, we know
who is able to reach you, and, I believe, will.

For the inhabitants of the Town, of whom you seem to have
a care, you know your retreat! to be better than theirs; and
therefore it’s not impoliticly done to speak for them, and to en-
gage them to keep us as long from you as they can. If they
be willing to expose themselves to ruin for you, you are much
beholding unto them.

As for your clergymen (as you call them), in case you agree
for a surrender, they shall march away safely, with their goods
and what belongs to them: but if they fall otherwise into my
hands, I believe they know what to expect from me. If upon
what I proposed formerly, with this addition concerning them,
you expect things to be cleared, I am content to have Commis-
sioners for that purpose. I rest, Sir,

Your servant,
OLIvER CROMWELL.*

LETTER CXXV
To the Mayor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 26th March 1650.
Sir,
Though I could have wished you and the

citizens had been indeed more sensible of your own interests and
concernments, yet since you are minded to involve it so much
with that of soldiers, 1 am glad to understand you, which will
be some direction to me what to think and what to do. I rest,
Your friend,
OutiveR CrRoMWELL.+

1 means of surety and withdrawal.
* King’s Pamphlets, no. 464 (E. 598], art. 2, pp. 17, 18. + /bid. p. 14.

1650.) LETTER CXXVI., KILKENNY 39

On signal given, the storming party at the breach, and Colonel
Ewer at the Irish Town fall on: Colonel Ewer with good success ;
the storming party with indifferent or bad,—finding, after the
breach is got, interior retrenchments, counterworks, palisadoes,
hot fire ; and drawing back, with the loss of ‘Captain Frewen,
and 20 or 30 men.’ Ewer, however, is master of the Irish Town;
the breach is still there,—more stormable than Tredah was, it
may be hoped! Here in the interim is new anxious response
from the Mayor:

“ For the Right Honourable General Cromwell
‘Kilkenny, 26th March 1650.

“Richt Honourasie,—I received your Honour’s letter in
“answer to mine, which I wrote unto your Honour in pursuance
“of the propositions sent by our governor unto your Honour, for
“obtaining of the said conditions, which seemed unto us almost
“befitting to be granted ; the military part having exposed them-
“selves for our defence ; which obligeth us not to accept of any
“conditions but such as may be befitting them. I desire your
“ Honour to grant a cessation of arms, and that hostages on both
“sides be sent, and Commissioners appointed to treat of the con-
“ditions. I rest, your Honour’s servant,

“Ja: ARCHDEKIN, Mayor of Kilkenny.”

To which we answer:

LETTER CXXVI
For the Mayor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 26th March 1650.
Sir,

Those whom God hath brought to a sense of
His hand upon them, and to amend, submitting ‘themselves’
thereto and to the Power to which He hath subjected them, I
cannot but pity and tender: and so far as that effect appears in
you and your fellow-citizens, I shall be ready, without capitula-
tion, to do more and better for you and them upon that ground,

40 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [26 March.

than upon the high demands of your governor, or his capitulations
for you.

I suppose he hath acquainted you with what I briefly offered
yesterday, in relation to yourself and the inhabitants ; otherwise
he hath done you the more wrong, and hath the more to answer
for to God and man. And notwithstanding the advantages (as
to the commanding and entering the town) which God hath
given us since that offer, more than we were possessed of before,
yet I am still willing, upon ‘your’ surrender, to make good the
same to the city, and that with advantage.

Now in regard of that temper which appears amongst you
by your letters, though I shall not engage for more upon the
governor's demands for you, whose power I conceive is now
greater to prejudice and endanger the city than to protect it;
‘nevertheless,’ to save it from plunder and pillage, I ‘have’
promised the soldiery that, if we should take it by storm, the
inhabitants shall give them a reasonable gratuity in money, in
lieu of the pillages ; and so made it death for any man to plunder.
Which I shall still keep them to, by God’s help (although we
should be put to make an entry by force), unless I shall find the
inhabitants engaging still with the Governor and soldiery to
make resistance. You may see also the way I chose for reducing
the place was such as tended most to save the inhabitants from
pillage, and from perishing promiscuously (the innocent with the
guilty), viz :—by attempting places which being possessed might
bring it to a surrender, rather than to enter the city itself by force.

If what is here expressed may beget resolution in you which
would occasion your safety and be consistent with the end of my
coming hither, I shall be glad; and rest,

Your friend,
O.tver CromwELL.*

Urged by the Mayor, by Colonel Ewer, and the course of
destiny, the Governor’s lion-voice has abated; he writes:

* King’s Pamphlets, no. 464, (E. 598], art. 2, pp. 15, 16.

1650.} LETTER CXXVII, KILKENNY 41

“ For General Cromwell

“ Kilkenny, 26 Martii 1650.

“ Sir,—In answer of your letter :—If you be pleased to appoint
“ officers for a treaty for the surrender of the castle and city upon
“soldierlike conditions, I will also appoint officers of such quality
“as are in the garrison ;—provided that hostages of equality be
“sent on both sides, and a cessation of arms be also granted during
“the treaty. Assuring a performance, on my side, of all that will
“be agreed upon, I rest,—Sir,—your servant,

“Wa. ButTer.

“P.S. I desire to know what’s become of my trumpeter I em-
“ ployed two days ago.”

LETTER CXXVII
For the Governor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 26th March 1650.
Sir,
That no extremity may happen for want of
a right understanding, I am content that Commissioners on each
side do meet, in the leaguer at the south side of the city ; author-
ised to treat and conclude. For which purpose, if you shall
speedily send me the names and qualities of the Commissioners
you will send out, I shall appoint the like number on my part,
authorised as aforesaid, to meet with them; and shall send-in a
safe-conduct for the coming out and return of yours: As for
hostages, I conceive it needless and dilatory. I expect that the
treaty begin by 8 of the clock this evening, and end by 12; during
which time only will I grant a cessation. Expecting your speedy
answer, I rest,
Your servant,
Otiver CroMWELL.*

* King’s Pamphiets, no. 464, (E. 598], art. 2, pp. 18, to.

nal — a. ae

42 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [27 March.

Governor answers, at a late hour: Time is too short; impos-
sible to end so soon ; ‘ your Trumpeter did not arrive till nine : ’"—
Commissioners are ‘Major John Comerford, Captain David Turn-
‘ball, James Cowley Esq. Recorder of this City, and Edward
‘Rothe, Merchant ;’ these will meet yours, where specified, at
six tomorrow morning,—‘so as Hostages be sent for their safe
‘return ; for without Hostages the Gentlemen will not go.’

LETTER CXXVIII

To the Governor of Kilkenny

‘ Before Kilkenny,’ 27th March 1650.

Sir,

The reason of the so late coming of my answer
was because my trumpeter was refused to be received at the
north end of the town; and where he was admitted, was kept
long upon the guard.

I have sent you a safe-conduct for the four Commissioners
named by you; and if they be such as are unwilling to take my
word, I shall not, to humour them, agree to hostages. I am
willing to a treaty for four hours, provided it begin by 12 of the
clock this morning: but for a cessation, the time last appointed
being past, I shall not agree unto it, to hinder my own proceed-
ings. ;

Your servant,
OtiveR CRoMWELL.*

After which straightway, with official Warrant, signed both by
the City Governor and by the Castle one (‘Ja. Welsh’), come the
Four Commissioners; and then speedily the Treaty perfects itself:
City and Garrison surrender wholly ; City to pay ransom of 2,000/.
at specified short dates, Recorder Cowley and Merchant Rothe re-
maining ‘hostages till it be paid:’ Soldiers to march out, ‘bullet
in bouch,’ with all the honours of war; but at the end of two

* King's Pamphlets, no. 464 [E 598], art. 2, pp. 19,20. [The Articles are
printed by Gilbert (ii. 382) and Murphy, p. 307. |

1650.) LETTER CXXIX., CARRICK 43

miles to put bullet out of bouch, arms and war-honours wholly
down, and, ‘except 100 muskets and 100 pikes allowed them
for defence against the Tories,’ go off in an entirely pacific form.
Thus go they ;—and the Siege of Kilkenny, happily for all parties,
for us here among others, terminates.

LETTER CXXIX

A rouGu brief Note, on accidental business, ‘concerning Cork
House ;’ more interesting to the Boyle Genealogists and Dublin
Antiquaries than to us.

The ‘Commissioners at Dublin’ are Parliamentary Commis-
sioners, of whom there have been various successive sets, the last
set just appointed,! for various administrative objects,—chiefly, just
now, for ‘ Advancement of the Gospel’ by ‘ Sale of Dean-and-Chap-
ter Lands,’ to pay fit Preachers with, and provide right Churches
for them. ‘Cork House’ is not Lismore, but the Family Mansion
in Dublin; it stood on Cork Hill then, and has quite vanished
now: the ‘ Dean at Dublin’ has or had some interest in it, which
might advance the Gospel if bestowed well.

‘To the Commissioners at Dublin : These’

‘ Carrick-on-Suir,’ rst April 1650.
GENTLEMEN,
Being desired by the Countess of Cork that

nothing may be done by way of disposal of such part of Cork

House as is holden of the Dean in Dublin (in case my Lord of
Cork’s interest be determined therein); and that my Lord of
Cork may have the refusal thereof before any other, in regard
his father has been at great charge in building thereof, and some
part of the same House is? my Lord’s inheritance, and in that
respect the other part would not be so convenient for any other:

18th March 1649-so (Commons Journals, vi. 379): ‘Colonel John Hewson
*Governor of Dublin, Sir Robert King, William Hawkins, Daniel Hutchinson,
‘William Lawrence, Esqrs., or any three of them, with the consent of the Lord
‘ Lieutenant.’

2* being’ in orig.

44 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND | [2 April.

Which motion I conceive to be very reasonable. And therefore
I desire you not to dispose of any part of the said House to any
person whatsoever, until you hear further from me; my Lady
having undertaken, in a short time, as soon as she can come at
the sight of her writings, to be satisfied what interest my Lord
of Cork hath yet to come therein, my Lord will renew his term
in the said House, or give full resolution therein. I rest,
Your loving friend,
O.tveR CroMWELL.*

‘My Lady of Cork,’ the second Earl’s Wife, Lord Broghil’s
sister-in-law,! has good access to the Lord Lieutenant at present :
—will find her business drag, nevertheless.”

LETTER CXXX

OrriciaL Despatch, briefly recapitulating that affair of Kilkenny
and some others ;—points also towards return to England.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These

Carrick, 2d April 1650.
Mr. SPEAKER,

I think the last letter I troubled you with,
was about the taking of Cahir, since which time there was taken,
by beating-up their quarters, two Colonels, a Lieutenant-Colonel,
Major, and divers Captains, all of horse: Colonel Johnson,*

* Old Copy, ‘ The Coppie of my Lord Lieutenant's Letter to the Commissioners
at Dublin concerninge Corke House,’ now in the possession of Sir W. Betham,
Ulster King of Arms.

1[That is, Richard, Earl of Cork, and Roger, Lord Broghill, were brothers.
Elizabeth, Countess of Cork, was the daughter and heiress of Henry Clifford, Earl
of Cumberland. ]

2 Commons Journals, vi. 434; Lodge's Peerage (Archdall’s), i. 170; &c.

’The other Colonel, Randall Clayton, was tried and condemned with the
others ; but pardoned. See Letter in Appendix, No. a0; and Whitlocke. (WVo/e
of 1857.)

1650.] LETTER CXXX., CARRICK 45

Lieutenant-Colonel Loughorn [Laughern], and Major Simes,
were shot to death, as having served under the Parliament, but
now taken up arms with the enemy.

Hearing that Castlehaven and Lieutenant-General Farrald
[O’Ferrall] were about Kilkenny, with their army lying there
quartered, and about Carlow and Leighlin Bridge ; and hearing
also that Colonel Hewson, with a good party from Dublin, was
come as far as Ballisannon,! and had taken it, we thought fit to
send an express to him, to march up towards us for a conjunction.
And because we doubted the sufficiency of his party to march
with that security that were to be wished, Colonel Shilbourn
was ordered to go with some troops of horse out of the county of
Wexford (which was his station) to meet him. And because the
enemy was possessed of the fittest places upon the Barrow for
our conjunction, we sent a party of seven or eight hundred horse
and dragoons, and about five-hundred foot, to attempt upon
Castlehaven in the rear, if he should have endeavoured to have
defended the places against Colonel Hewson.

Our party, being a light nimble party, was at the Barrow-side
before Colonel Hewson could be heard of ; and possessed a house
by the Graigue : they marched towards Leighlin, and faced Castle-
haven at a pretty distance; but he showed no forwardness to
engage. Our party not being able to hear of Colonel Hewson,
came back as far as Thomastown, a small walled Town, and a
pass upon the Nore, between Kilkenny and Ross, which our men
attempting to take, the enemy made no great resistance, but, by
the advantage of the bridge, quitted the town, and fled to a castle
about half a mile distant off,? which they had formerly possessed.
That night the President of Munster * and myself came up to the
party. We summoned the said castle, and, after two days, it was
surrendered to us; the enemy leaving their arms, drums, colours

1See Whitlocke, p. 430; Carte, ii. 113. [Now Ballyshannon, four miles south-
west of Kilcullenbridge. The castle belonged to Pierce Fitzgerald. Murphy,

p. 282.
2[Father Murphy thinks this was probably Grenan Castle, which is still standing. ]
3 Treton (Commons Journals, 4th December 1649).

ae ae ee ee

46 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 2 April.

and ammunition behind them, and engaging never to bear arms
more against the Parliament of England.

We lay still after this about two or three days. The President
went back to Fethard, to bring up some great guns, with a
purpose to attempt upon the Granny,! and some castles there-
abouts, for the better blocking-up of Waterford ; and to cause
to advance up to us some more of our foot. In the end we had
advertisement that Colonel Hewson was come to Leighlin, where
was a very strong castle and pass over the Barrow. I sent him
word that he should attempt it, which he did, and, after some
dispute, reduced it; by which means we have a good pass over
the Barrow, and intercourse between Munster and Leinster. I
sent Colonel Hewson word that he should march up to me, and
we, advancing likewise with our party, met near by Gowran, a
populous town, where the enemy had a very strong castle, under
the command of Colonel Hammond, a Kentishman, who was a
principal actor in the Kentish Insurrection,? and did manage the
Lord Capel’s business at his trial. I sent him a civil invitation to
deliver up the castle unto me, to which he returned me a very
resolute answer, and full of height. We planted our artillery,
and before we had made a breach considerable, the enemy beat
a parley for a treaty; which I (having offered so fairly before
to him), refused ; but sent him in positive conditions, that the
soldiers should have their lives, and the commission officers to
be disposed of as should be thought fit, which in the end was
submitted to. The next day, the Colonel, the Major, and the
rest of the commission officers were shot to death,’ all but one,
who, being a very earnest instrument to have the castle delivered,
was pardoned, In the same castle also we took a Popish Priest,
who was chaplain to the Catholics in this regiment; who was

1 Now a ruin near Waterford ; he spells it ‘Granno.’

2JIn 1648. None of our Hammonds.

3(Castlehaven complained of Cromwell's conduct in shooting these officers,
because when he had taken the garrison of Athy, a little time before, he had
sent the men as a present to Cromwell, asking him to do the like on occasion.
Memoirs, p. 123. |

1650. ] LETTER CXXX., CARRICK 47

caused to be hanged. I trouble you with this the rather, because
this regiment was the Lord of Ormond’s own regiment. In this
castle was good store of provisions for the Army.

After the taking of this Castle, it was agreed amongst us to
march to the city of Kilkenny, which we did upon Friday the 22d
of March ; and coming with our body within a mile of the town,
we advanced with some horse very near unto it ; and that evening
I sent Sir Walter Butler and the Corporation a letter a copy
whereof is here enclosed. From whom next day I received this
answer.! We took the best view we could where to plant our
batteries ; and upon Monday the 25th, our batteries, consisting
of three guns, began to play. After near a hundred shot, we
made a breach, as we hoped stormable. Our men were drawn
out ready for the attempt; and Colonel Ewer ordered, with
about one-thousand foot, to endeavour to possess the Irish town,
much about the time of our storming, which he accordingly did,
with the loss of not above three or four men. Our men upon
the signal fell on upon the breach: which indeed was not per-
formed with usual courage nor success, for they were beaten off,
with the loss of one captain, and about twenty or thirty men
killed and wounded. The enemy had made two retrenchments
or counterworks, which they had strongly palisadoed, and both
of them did so command our breach, that indeed it was a mercy
to us we did not farther contend for an entrance there ; it being
probable that, if we had, it would have cost us very dear.

Having possessed the Irish town, and there being another
walled town on the other side of the river, eight companies of
foot were sent over the river to possess that, which accordingly
was effected, and not above the like number lost that were in
possessing the Irish town. The officer that commanded this
party in chief attempted to pass over the bridge into the city,
and to fire the gate, which indeed was done with good resolution ;
but, lying too open to the enemy’s shot, he had forty or fifty men

1[See pp. 33, 34 above. ]

48 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [2 April.

killed and wounded, which was a sore blow to us. We made our
preparations for a second battery, which was well near perfected :
the enemy, seeing himself thus begirt, sent for a treaty, and had
it; and, in some hours, agreed to deliver up the Castle upon the
Articles enclosed, which we received upon Thursday the 28th
of March. We find the Castle exceeding well fortified by the
industry of the enemy, being also very capacious: so that if we
had taken the town, we must have had a new work for the Castle,
which might have cost much blood and time. So that, we hope,
the Lord hath provided better for us; and we look at it as a
gracious mercy that we have the place for you upon these terms."

Whilst these affairs were transacting, a Lieutenant-Colonel,
three Majors, eight Captains, being English, Welsh and Scotch,
with others, possessed of Cantwell Castle, a very strong Castle,
situated in a bog, well furnished with provisions of corn,—were
ordered by Sir Walter Butler to come to strengthen the garri-
son of Kilkenny. But they sent two officers to me, to offer me
the place, and their service, and that they might have passes to
go beyond sea to serve foreign states, with some money to bear
their charges: the last whereof I consented to, they promising

1[A pamphlet of the time gives a newsletter from Cork, with the following
account: ‘‘So soon as our battery upon the Irish town (a kind of suburbs, but
well walled) made way to enter, Col. Hewson and Col. Ewers, with their regiments,
fell on, and beat the enemy as far as the main guard ; where the enemy, perceiving
that our horse could not enter the breach, rallied to a head, and by a desperate
charge, forced us toa retreat, but without much loss... . Howbeit, towards the
Bridge the dispute was hottest, for attempting to petard the gate, we lost forty of
Col. Gifford’s men; the castle flanked them so clearly and fired so hotly. .. . The
enemy beating a parley, my Lord Lieutenant was ‘the more willing to grant them
conditions, in regard the plague was and had been long in the city, and indeed the
goodness of God was exceedingly manifested in preventing the plunder of the place,
which must needs have hazarded the army by infection.” 4 Brief Relation &c.
(E. 598, 6). A letter from Dublin, printed in this same pamphlet, states that
‘above all things this is observable, that though the plague hath been exceeding
rife, both there [in Kilkenny] and Gowran, and in all the Irish quarters, yet not
one of our men hath had it, though they lie in their sick beds; this is the Lord’s
own doing, and is marvellous in our eyes.” The old History of the Irish Rebellion,
states, however, that in consequence of the sickness, Cromwell left only a small
garrison under Axtell, and carried his army away as quickly as possible.
(Appendix 20).]

2* Cantwell,’ still known among the peasantry by that name, is now called
Sandford’s Court; close upon Kilkenny: ‘ Donkill’ seems to be Donhill, a ruined
Strength not far from Waterford. Of Pulkerry and Ballopoin, [séc] in this para-
graph, I can hear no tidings.

c-
i

; f
i hee

1650] LETTER CXXX., CARRICK 49

to do nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament of England.
Colonel Abbot also attempted Ennisnag:! where were gotten a
company of rogues which ‘had’ revolted from Colonel Jones.?
The soldiers capitulated for life, and their two officers were
hanged for revolting.? Adjutant-General Sadler was commanded
with two guns to attempt some castles in the county of Tip-
perary and Kilkenny; which being reduced ‘would’ exceed-
ingly tend to the blocking-up of two considerable Towns. He
summoned Polkerry,* a garrison under Clonmel. battered it ;
they refusing to come out, stormed it; put thirty or forty of
them to the sword, and the rest remaining obstinate were fired
in the castle. He took Ballo Doin,® the Enemy marching away,
leaving their arms behind them. He took also the Granny and
Donkill,® two very considerable places to Waterford, upon the
same terms. We have advanced our quarters towards the
enemy, a considerable way above Kilkenny, where we hope,
by the gaining of ground, to get subsistence ; and still to grow
upon the enemy, as the Lord shall bless us.

Sir, I may not be wanting to tell you, and renew it again,
that our hardships are not a few; that I think in my conscience,
if moneys be not supplied, we shall not be able to carry on your
work. I would not say this to you, if I did not reckon it my
duty so todo. But if it be supplied, and that speedily, I hope,
through the good hand of the Lord, it will not be long before
England will be at an end of this charge; for the saving of
which, I beseech you help us as soon as you can. Sir, our
horse have not had one month’s pay of five. We strain what
we can that the foot may be paid, or else they would starve.
Those towns that are to be reduced, especially one or two of
them, if we should proceed by the rules of other states, would

1[In the county of Kilkenny, between Kells and Gowran; some parts of the
walls still standing. Murphy, p. 320.]

2 The late Michael Jones.
ates Supplement, No. 57.] ;
4|In the county of Tipperary, five miles east of Clonmel. Murphy, p. 320.]

5|Ballydoyne, midway between Carrick and Clonmel. /did., p. 321.]
6{Donhill, four miles north of Waterford, on the Thomastown road. /bid.]

VoL. 11.—4

50 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 2 April.

cost you more money than this army hath had since we came
over. I hope, through the blessing of God, they will come
cheaper to you: but how we should be able to proceed in our
attempts without reasonable supply, is humbly submitted and
represented to you. I think I need not say, that a speedy
period put to this work will break the expectation of all your
enemies. And seeing the Lord is not wanting to you, I most
humbly beg it, that you would not be wanting to yourselves. »

In the last place, it cannot be thought but the taking of
these places, and keeping but what is necessary of them, it must
needs swallow up our Foot ; and I may humbly repeat it again,
that I do not know of much above two-thousand of your five-
thousand recruits come to us. Having given you this account
concerning your affairs, I am now obliged to give you an ac-
count concerning myself, which I shall do with all clearness and
honesty.

I have received divers private intimations of your pleasure to
have me come in person to wait upon you in England, as also
copies of the votes of the Parliament to that purpose. But con-
sidering the way they came to me were but private intimations,
and the votes did refer to a letter to be signed by the Speaker,
I thought it would have been too much forwardness in me to
have left my charge here, until the said letter came ; it being
not fit for me to prophesy whether the letter would be an abso-
lute command, or having limitations with a liberty left by the
Parliament to me, to consider in what way to yield my obedience.
Your letter came to my hands upon Friday the 22d of March,
the same day that I came before the city of Kilkenny, and when
I was near the same. And ‘I’ understood by Dr. Cartwright, who
delivered it to me, that by reason of cross winds, and the want
of shipping in the West of England where he was, hindered him
from coming with it sooner ; it bearing date the 8th of January,
and not coming to my hands until the 22d of March.’

1[Dr. Cartwright’s (or Carteret’s) pass was dated January 14. See SP;
Interregnum, 1. 63, p. 517-]

——

1650.] LETTER CXXX., CARRICK 51

The letter supposed your army in winter-quarters, and the
time of the year not suitable for present action, making this as
the reason of your command. And your forces having been in
action ever since the 29th of January; and your letter, which
was to be the rule of my obedience, coming to my hands after
our having been so long in action,—with respect had to the reasons
you were pleased to use therein,! and having received a letter
signed by yourself, of the 26th February,? which mentions not
one word of the continuance of your pleasure concerning my
coming over ;—I did humbly conceive it much consisting with
my duty, humbly to beg a positive signification what your will is ;
professing (as before the Lord) that I am most ready to obey
your commands herein with all alacrity; rejoicing only to be
about that work which I am called to by those ‘whom’ God
hath set over me, which I acknowledge you to be; and fearing
only in obeying you, to disobey you.

I most humbly and earnestly beseech you to judge for me,
whether your letter doth not naturally allow me the liberty of
begging a more clear expression of your command and pleasure,
which, when vouchsafed unto me, will find most ready and
cheerful observance from,

Sir,
Your most humble servant,
O.iverR CROMWELL.*

1[Carlyle here inserted ‘‘ I knew not what to do,” but the sentence reads quite
clearly without it.]
2 Antea, p. 29.

* King’s Pamphlets, no. 464 [E. 598], art. 2; Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp.
78-81). Printed, this Letter with the others on Kilkenny, by order of Parliament ;
messenger, ‘Richard Lehunt’ (Colonel Lehunt, I believe, avea, vol. i. p. 322)
gets 50/. (Commons Journals, vi. 397, 13th April 1650).

?

Ls Pll

52 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [2 April.

\
)

LETTER CXXXI

Here, of the same date, is a Letter to Mayor; and then a
Letter to Richard ; which concludes what we have in Ireland.

For my very loving Brother, Richard Mayor, Esquire, at
Hursley in Hampshire: These

Carrick, 2d April 1650.

Dear BrotTuer, |

For me to write unto you the state of our |
affairs here were more than indeed I have leisure well to do, and |
therefore I hope you do not expect it from me; seeing when I
write to the Parliament I usually am (as becomes me) very particu- |
lar with them, and usually from thence the knowledge thereof is |
spread.

Only this let me say (which is the best intelligence to friends
that are truly Christian): The Lord is pleased still to vouchsafe us
His presence, and to prosper His own work in our hands ; which
to us is the more eminent because truly we are a company of
poor, weak and worthless creatures. Truly our work is neither
from our own brains nor from our courage and strength, but we |
follow the Lord who goeth before, and gather what He scattereth,
that so all may appear to be from Him. .

The taking of the city of Kilkenny hath been one of our last
works; which indeed I believe hath been a great discomposing |
of the enemy, it’s so much in their bowels. We have taken ,
many considerable places lately, without much loss, What can |
we say to these things. If God be for us, who can be against

us? Who can fight against the Lord and prosper? Who can
resist His will? The Lord keep us in His love. :

I desire your prayers; your family is often in mine. I rejoice f
to hear how it hath pleased the Lord to deal with my daughter.’

1In a hopeful way I conclude! Richard's first child, according to Noble's {

registers, was not born till 3d November 1652 (Noble, i. 189); a boy, who died
within three weeks. Noble's registers, as we shall soon see, are very defective.

¢

4
»
>

1650.] LETTER CXXXII., CARRICK 53

The Lord bless her, and sanctify all His dispensations to them
and us. I have committed my son to you; I pray counsel him.
Some letters I have lately had from him have a good savour : the
Lord treasure up grace there, that out of that treasury He may
bring forth good things.

Sir, I desire my very entire affection my be presented to my
dear sister, my Cousin Ann and the rest of my cousins, and to
idle Dick Norton when you see him. Sir, I rest,

Your most loving brother,
OxtveR CroMWELL.*

LETTER CXXXII

For my beloved Son Richard Cromwell, Esquire, at Hursley in
Hampshire : These

Carrick, 2d April 1650.

Dick CroMwELL,

I take your letters kindly: I like expressions
when they come plainly from the heart, and are not strained nor
affected.

I am persuaded it’s the Lord’s mercy to place you where you
are: I wish you may own it and be thankful, fulfilling all relations
to the glory of God. Seek the Lord and His face continually :
let this be the business of your life and strength, and let all things
be subservient and in order to this. You cannot find nor behold

[‘‘ Noble’s registers” appear to be quite accurate. He gives the date of the birth of

Richard’s first child—a daughter—as March 26, 1650. It is the first son (not the

es ~~“ who, he says, was born on November 3, 1652. See also note on p. 69
low.

* Harris, p. 512. [One of the Pusey letters, ‘‘No. 16,” Holograph. In the
Morrison Collection. To this letter Harris adds the following note, ‘‘ this direc-

- tion isin a woman's hand. Underneath is written in Mr. Mayor’s hand these words

15 May, I wrote in behalf of Mr. Bonny of Dorset.’” The direction is in an ordinary’

clerk’s hand. It does not look at all like a woman’s writing. ‘‘ Bonny” is possibly

correct, but the word is more probably ‘‘ Berry.” The letter is sealed with the

ca and endorsed by Mayor, “‘ Ld. L[ieut.] Cromwell, 2 April 1650 from
aricke.”’

=

54 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [2 April.

the face of God but in Christ ; therefore labour to know God in
Christ, which the Scripture makes to be the sum of all, even life
eternal. Because the true knowledge is not literal or speculative,
but inward, transforming the mind to it. It’s uniting to, and
participating of, the Divine Nature (2 Peter, i. 4): It’s such a
knowledge as Paul speaks of (Philippians the 3d, 8, 9, 10).}
How little of this knowledge of Christ is there among us. My
weak prayers shall be for you.

Take heed of an unactive vain spirit. Recreate yourself with
Sir Walter Ralegh’s? History: it’s a body of History, and will
add much more to your understanding than fragments of story.
—Intend* to understand the estate I have settled: it’s your
concernment to know it all, and how it stands. I have heretofore
suffered much by too much trusting others. 1 know my Brother
Maior will be helpful to you in all this.

You will think (perhaps) I need not advise you to love your
wife. The Lord teach you how to do it, or else it will be done
ill-favouredly. Though marriage be no instituted Sacrament,
yet where the undefiled bed is, and love, this union aptly re-
sembles Christ and His Church. If you can truly love your wife,
what ‘love’ doth Christ bear to His Church and every poor soul
therein, who gave Himself for it and to it. Commend me to your
wife ; tell her I entirely love her, and rejoice in the goodness of
the Lord to her. I wish her everyway fruitful. I thank her for
her loving letter.

1‘ That by these ye might be partakers of the divine Nature, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust.” (2 Peteri. 4). ‘‘ Yea, doubt-
less, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung that I may win Christ and be found in Him,—not having my own
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by faith, that I may know Him, and the power
of His resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings being made conformable
unto his death.” (Philippians iii. 8. 10). These sentences,—well known to Oliver ;
familiar to him in their phraseology, and in their sense too ; and never to be finally
forgotten by the earnest-hearted of the Sons of Men,—are not quoted in the Original,
but merely indicated. [Carlyle interpolated them in the letter.]

2[** Raughleye,”’ Cromwell spells the name. }

3 Old word for ‘ endeavour.’

1650.] LETTER CXXXII, CARRICK 55

I have presented my love to my sister and Cousin Ann, &c. in
my letter to my Brother Maior. I would not have him alter his
affairs because of my debt. My purse is as his: my present
thoughts are but to lodge such a sum for my two little Girls;
it’s in his hand as well as anywhere. I shall not be wanting to
accommodate him to his mind ; I would not have him solicitous.
Dick, the Lord bless you every way. I rest,

Your loving Father,
O.tiveR CRoMWELL.*

In the end of this month, ‘the President Frigate,’ President
Bradshaw Frigate, sails from Milford Haven ‘to attend his Ex-
cellency’s pleasure,’ and bring him home if he see good to come.
He has still one storm to do there first ; that of Clonmel, where
‘Two-thousand foot, all Ulster men,’ are gathered for a last
struggle ;—the death-agony of this War, after which it will fairly
die, and be buried. A very fierce storm, and fire-whirlwind of
last agony; whereof take this solid account by an eye-witness
and hand-actor ; and so leave this part of our subject. The date
is 10th May 1650; ‘a Letter from Clonmel in Ireland :’

“ Worthy Sir,—Yesterday,’’ Thursday 9th May, “we stormed
“Clonmel: in which work both officers and soldiers did as much
“and more than could be expected. We had, with our guns,
“made a breach in their works; where, after an hot fight, we
“gave back a while; but presently charged up to the same
“ground again. But the Enemy had made themselves exceeding
‘strong, by double-works and traverse, which were worse to enter
“than the breach ; when we came up to it, they had cross-works,
“and were strongly flanked from the houses within their works.
“The Enemy defended themselves against us that day, until to-
“wards the evening, our men all the while keeping up close to

* Memoirs of the Protector Oliver Cromwell, by Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, a
Descendant of the Family (London, 1822), i. 369. An incorrect, dull, insignificant
Book ; contains this Letter, and one or two others, ‘in possession of the Cromwell
Family.’ [But now printed from the original. This letter, holograph, as those
to his own family are, almost without exception, seems to have gone through
several hands. At one time it was in possession of a member of the Incorporated
Law Society (see Catalogue of Autograph Letters, kc. B. M. 11903, bbb. 22.) It
is now in the Morrison Collection.] Another Descendant, Thomas Cromwell
Esquire’s Oliver Cromwell and his Times (London, 1821), is of a vaporous, gesti-
culative, dull-aéria/, still more insignificant character; and contains nothing that
is not common elsewhere.

56 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [May.

“their breach ; and many on both sides were slain.’”” The fierce
death-wrestle, in the breaches here, lasted four hours: so many
hours of hot storm and continuous tug of war, “and many men
“were slain.” “At night, the Enemy drew out, on the other
*‘side, and marched away undiscovered to us ; and the inhabitants
“of Clonmel sent out for a parley. Upon which, Articles were
“agreed on, before we knew the Enemy was gone. After signing
“of the Conditions, we discovered the Enemy to be gone ; and,
“very early this morning, pursued them ; and fell upon their rear
“of stragglers, and killed above 200,—besides those we slew in
“the storm. . . . We entered Clonmel this morning, and have
“kept our Conditions with them. The place is considerable ;
“and very advantageous to the reducing ot these parts wholly to
“the Parliament of England.” 1 Whitlocke has heard by other
Letters, ‘That they found in Clonmel the stoutest Enemy that
‘ever was found by the army, in Ireland; and that there never
‘was seen so hot a storm of so long continuance, and so gallantly
‘defended, neither in England or Ireland.’ 2

The Irish Commander here was Hugh O'Neil, a kinsman of
Owen Roe’s: vain he too, this new brave O'Neil! It is a lost
Cause. It is a Cause he has not yet seen into the secret of, and
cannot prosper in. Fiery fighting cannot prosper in it; no, there
needs something other first, which has never yet been done! Let
the O’Neil go elsewhither, with his fighting talent ; here it avails
nothing, and less. To the surrendered Irish Officers the Lord
Lieutenant granted numerous permissions to embody regiments,
and go abroad with them into any country not at war with Eng-
land. Some ‘Five-and-forty Thousand’ Kurisees, or whatever
name they had, went in this way to France, to Spain, and fought
there far off; and their own land had peace.

The Lord Lieutenant would fain have seen Waterford sur-
render before he went: but new Letters arrive from the Parlia-
ment ; affairs in Scotland threaten to become pressing. He

1 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 81).

2 Whitlocke, p. 441. [Sir Lewis Dyves, writing of the attack on Clonmel, says
that O'Neale behaved ‘‘so discreetly and gallantly in defending it that Cromwell
lost near upon 2,500 men before it, and had, notwithstanding, gone away without
it, if they within had had store of powder.” His figures are probably exaggerated,
but there is no doubt that Cromwell's loss was exceedingly heavy. M‘Geoghegan
and Borlase give about the same numbers, Carte and Ware almost as many. See
also Aphorismical Discovery, ed. Gilbert, vol. ii., p. 76. For an adequate account
of this Clonmel business, see Murphy, p. 327 e¢ seg.]

aa oe er ee

1650] RETURN TO ENGLAND 57

appoints Ireton his Deputy, to finish the business here ; rapidly
makes what survey of Munster, what adjustment of Ireland, mili-
tary and civil, is possible ;'—steps on board the President Frigate,
in the last days of May, and spreads sail for England. He has
been some nine months in Ireland ; leaves a very handsome spell
of work done there.

At Bristol, after a rough passage, the Lord Lieutenant is re-
ceived with all the honours and acclamations, ‘the great guns
firing thrice ;’ hastens up to London, where, on Friday 31st May,
all the world is out to welcome him. Fairfax, and chief Officers,
and Members of Parliament, with solemn salutation, on Hounslow
Heath: from Hounslow Heath to Hyde Park, where are Train-
bands and Lord Mayors ; on to Whitehall and the Cockpit, where
are better than these,—it is one wide tumult of salutation, con-
gratulation, artillery-volleying, human shouting ;—- Hero-worship
after a sort, not the best sort. It was on this occasion that
Oliver said, or is reported to have said, when some sycophantic
person observed, “‘ What a crowd come out to see your Lordship’s
triumph !””—“ Yes, but if it were to see me hanged, how many
more would there be !”” ?—

Such is what the Irish common people still call the “Curse of
Cromwell ;” this is the summary of his work in that country.
The remains of the War were finished out by Ireton, by Ludlow:
Ireton died of fever, at Limerick, in the end of the second year ; *
and solid Ludlow, who had been with him for some ten months,
succeeded. The ulterior arrangements for Ireland were those of
the Commonwealth Parliament and the proper Official Persons ;
not specially Oliver’s arrangements, though of course he remained
a chief authority in that matter, and nothing could well be done
which he with any emphasis deliberately condemned.

There goes a wild story, which owes its first place in History
to Clarendon, I think, who is the author of many such: How the
Parliament at one time had decided to ‘ exterminate’ all the Irish

1[Other letters and papers of Cromwell's, written before leaving Ireland, will be
found in the Supplement, Nos. 58-60. ]

2 Newspapers (in Kiméer, p. 148); Whitlocke, p. 441. [Burnet, however, states
upon Ingoldsby’s authority, that this speech was made to Lambert during the
march down into Scotland, near Northampton, where—the people shouting and
wishing them success—Lambert said ‘‘ he was glad to see they had the nation on
their side’’. Cromwell answered, ‘‘do not trust to that; for these very persons
would shout as much if you and I were going to be hanged”. Aistory of My
Own Time, i, 154, ed. Airy.]

826th November 1651 (Wood zz voce): Ludlow had arrived in January of the
same year (Memoirs, i. 322, 332, &c.).

58 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [May.

population ; and then, finding this would not quite answer, had
contented itself with packing them all off into the Province of
Connaught, there to live upon the moorlands ; and so had pacified
the Sister Island. Strange rumours no doubt were afloat in the
Council of Kilkenny, in the Conventicle of Clonmacnoise, and
other such quarters, and were kept up for very obvious purposes
in those days; and my Lord of Clarendon at an after date, see-
ing Puritanism hung on the gallows and tumbled in heaps in St.
Margaret’s, thought it safe to write with considerable latitude
respecting its procedure. My Lord had, in fact, the story all his
own way for about a hundred-and-fifty years; and, during that
time, has set afloat through vague heads a great many things.
His authority is rapidly sinking; and will now probably sink
deeper than even it deserves.

The real procedure of the Puritan Commonwealth towards
Ireland is not a matter of conjecture, or of report by Lord Claren-
don; the documentary basis and scheme of it still stands in
black-on-white, and can be read by all persons.” _In this Document
the reader will find, set forth in authentic business-form, a Scheme
of Settlement somewhat different from that of ‘extermination ;’
which, if he be curious in that matter, he ought to consult. _ First,
it appears by this Document, ‘all husbandmen, ploughmen,
labourers, artificers and others of the meaner sort’ of the Irish
nation are to be,—not exterminated ; no, but rendered exempt
from punishment and question, as to these Eight Years of blood
and misery now ended; which is a very considerable exception
from the Clarendon Scheme! Next, as to the Ringleaders, the
rebellious Landlords, and Papist Aristocracy ; as to these also,
there is a carefully graduated scale of punishments established,
that punishment and guilt may in some measure correspond. All
that can be proved to have been concerned in the Massacre of
Forty-one ; for these, and for certain other persons of the turncoat
species, whose names are given, there shall be no pardon :—
‘extermination,’ actual death on the gallows, or perpetual banish-
ment and confiscation for these ; but not without legal inquiry and
due trial first had, for these, or for any one. Then certain others,
who have been in arms at certain dates against the Parliament,
but not concerned in the Massacre: these are declared to have
forfeited their estates ; but lands to the value of one-third of the

1 Continuation of Clarendon’s Life (Oxford, 1761), pp. 119, &c. &e.
2 Scobell, Part ii. p. 197 (12th August 1652); see also p. 317 (27th June 1656).

——————— eC! a

1650.] RETURN TO ENGLAND 59

same, as a modicum to live upon, shall be assigned them, where
the Parliament thinks safest,—in the moorlands of Connaught,
as it turned out. Then another class, who are open Papists and
have not manifested their good affection to the Parliament: these
are to forfeit one-third of their estates; and continue quiet at
their peril. Such is the Document; which was regularly acted
on ; fulfilled with as much exactness as the case, now in the hands
of very exact men, admitted of. The Catholic Aristocracy of
Ireland have to undergo this fate, for their share in the late
miseries ; this and no other: and as for all ‘ ploughmen, husband-
men, artificers and people of the meaner sort,’ they are to live
quiet where they are, and have no questions asked.!

In this way, not in the way of ‘extermination,’ was Ireland
settled by the Puritans. Five-and-forty thousand armed ‘ kurisees’
are fighting, not without utility we hope, far off in foreign parts.
Incurably turbulent ringleaders of revolt are sent to the moorlands
of Connaught. Men ofthe Massacre, where they can be convicted,
of which some instances occur, are hanged. The mass of the Irish
Nation lives quiet under a new Land Aristocracy ; new, and in
several particulars very much improved indeed : under these lives
now the mass of the Irish Nation; ploughing, delving, hammering ;
with their wages punctually paid them; with the truth spoken
to them, and the truth done to them, so as they had never before
seen it since they were a Nation! Clarendon himself admits that
Ireland flourished, to an unexampled extent, under this arrange-
ment. One can very well believe it. What is to hinder poor
Ireland from flourishing, if you will do the truth to it and speak
the truth, instead of doing the falsity and speaking the falsity ?

Ireland, under this arrangement, would have grown up gradually
into a sober diligent drabcoloured population ; developing itself,
most probably, in some form of Calvinistic Protestantism. For
there was hereby a Protestant Church of Ireland, of the most
irrefragable nature, preaching daily in all its actions and procedure
a real Gospel of veracity, of piety, of fair dealing and good order,
to all men ; and certain other ‘ Protestant Churches of Ireland,’
and unblessed real-imaginary Entities, of which the human soul
is getting weary, would of a surety never have found footing
there! But the Ever-blessed Restoration came upon us. All

[But the Transportation was a much more serious matter than Carlyle would
seem to imply. See Prendergast’s Cromwedllian Settlement of Ireland, and Dr.
Gardiner’s article on the ‘‘ Transportation to Connaught,’’ in vol. xiv. of the
English Historical Review.]

CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND

that arrangement was torn up by the roots; and Ireland was
appointed to develop itself as we have seen. Not in the drab-
coloured Puritan way ;—in what other way is still a terrible
dubiety, to itself and to us! It will be by some Gospel of
Veracity, I think, when the Heavens are pleased to send such.
This ‘Curse of Cromwell,’ so-called, is the only Gospel of that
kind I can yet discover to have ever been fairly afoot there.

1[** Carlyle draws a picture of Ireland as it might have been if the ‘ ever-blessed
restoration’ had not torn up Cromwell's system by the roots. . . . It isa baseless
dream. Even in Cromwell's lifetime it was evident that his scheme for the con-
version of the Irish was doomed to failure. After his death, the proscription of
Catholicism and the hopeless attempt to force Protestantism on a reluctant people
were still continued, nor were they abandoned till 1829. . . . So the Cromwellian land
settlement survived its author, to be his most permanent monument, and to be also,
as Mr. Lecky writes ‘The foundation of that deep and lasting division between
the proprietary and the tenants which is the chief cause of the political and social
evils of Ireland.’” Firth’s Oliver Cromwell, p. 274.]

 _» Geel) Bete et Se eee

PART VI
WAR WITH SCOTLAND

1650-1651

Ps

WAR WITH SCOTLAND

Tue Scotch People, the first beginners of this grand Puritan
Revolt, which we may define as an attempt to bring the Divine
Law of the Bible into actual practice in men’s affairs on the
Earth, are still one and all resolute for that object ; but they are
getting into sad difficulties as to realising it. Not easy to realise
such a thing: besides true will, there need heroic gifts, the
highest that Heaven gives, for realising it! Gifts which have
not been vouchsafed the Scotch People at present. The letter
of their Covenant presses heavy on these men ; traditions, form-
ulas, dead letters of many things press heavy on them. On
the whole, they too are but what we call Pedants in conduct,
not Poets: the sheepskin record failing them, and old use-and-
wont ending, they cannot farther ; they look into a sea of troubles,
shoreless, starless, on which there seems no navigation possible.
The faults or misfortunes of the Scotch People, in their Puritan
business, are many: but properly their grand fault is this, That
they have produced for it no sufficiently heroic man among them.
No man that has an eye to see beyond the letter and the rubric ;
to discern, across many consecrated rubrics of the Past, the inar-
ticulate divineness too of the Present and the Future, and dare
all perils in the faith of that! With Oliver Cromwell born a
Scotchman ; with a Hero King and a unanimous Hero Nation
at his back, it might have been far otherwise. With Oliver born
Scotch, one sees not but the whole world might have become
Puritan ; might have struggled, yet a long while, to fashion itself
(61)

—

——— os oer —“ Oe

TN i ee a

62 WAR WITH SCOTLAND (1650.

according to that divine Hebrew Gospel,—to the exclusion of _
other Gospels not Hebrew, which also are divine, and will have
their share of fulfilment here !—But of such issue there is no
danger. Instead of inspired Olivers, glowing with direct insight
and noble daring, we have Argyles, Loudons, and narrow, more
or less opaque persons of the Pedant species. Committees of
Estates, Committees of Kirks, much tied up in formulas, both of
them: a bigoted Theocracy without the Inspiration; which is a
very hopeless phenomenon indeed! The Scotch People are all
willing, eager of heart ; asking, Whitherward? But the Leaders
stand aghast at the new forms of danger; and in a vehement
discrepant manner some calling, Halt! others calling, Backward !
others, Forward !—huge confusion ensues. Confusion which will
need an Oliver to repress it ; to bind it up in tight manacles, if
not otherwise ; and say, “There, sit there and consider thyself
a little !”—

The meaning of the Scotch Covenant was, That God’s divine
Law of the Bible should be put in practice in these Nations ;
verily 24, and not the Four Surplices at Allhallowtide, or any
Formula of cloth or sheepskin here or elsewhere which merely
pretended to be it. But then the Covenant says expressly, there
is to be a Stuart King in the business: we cannot do without
our Stuart King! Given a divine Law of the Bible on one hand,
and a Stuart King, Charles First or Charles Second, on the other !
alas, did History ever present a more irreducible case of equa-
tions in this world? I pity the poor Scotch Pedant Governors ;
still more the poor Scotch People, who had no other to follow!
Nay, as for that, the People did get through, in the end; such
was their indomitable pious constancy, and other worth and
fortune: and Presbytery became a Fact among them, to the
whole length possible for it: not without endless results. But
for the poor Governors this irreducible case proved, as it were,
fatal! They have never since, if we will look narrowly at it,
governed Scotland, or even well known that they were there to
attempt governing it. Once they lay on Dunse Hill, ‘each Earl
with his Regiment of Tenants round him, For Christ's Crown
and Covenant ; and never since had they any noble National act
which it was given them to do. Growing desperate of Christ’s
Crown and Covenant, they, in the next generation when our
Annus Mirabilis arrived, hurried up to Court, looking out for
other Crowns and Covenants; deserted Scotland and her Cause,
somewhat basely ; took to booing and booing for Causes of their

aS

1650.] WAR WITH SCOTLAND 63

own, unhappy mortals ;—and Scotland and all Causes that were
Scotland’s have had to go on very much without them ever since !
Which is a very fatal issue indeed, as I reckon ;—and the time
for settlement of accounts about it, which could not fail always,
and seems now fast drawing nigh, looks very ominous to me.
For in fact there is no creature more fatal than your Pedant ;
safe as he esteems himself, the terriblest issues spring from him.
Human crimes are many: but the crime of being deaf to the
God’s Voice, of being blind to all but parchments and antiquarian
rubrics when the Divine Handwriting is abroad on the sky,—
certainly there is no crime which the Supreme Powers do more
terribly avenge !

But leaving all that,—the poor Scotch Governors, we remark,
in that old crisis of theirs, have come upon the desperate expe-
dient of getting Charles Second to adopt the Covenant the best he
can. Whereby our parchment formula is indeed saved ; but the
divine fact has gone terribly to the wall! The Scotch Governors
hope otherwise. By treaties at Jersey, treaties at Breda, they and
the hard Law of Want together have constrained this poor young
Stuart to their detested Covenant ; as the Frenchman said, they
have ‘compelled him to adopt it voluntarily.’ A fearful crime,
thinks Oliver, and think we. How dare you enact such mummery
under High Heaven! exclaims he. You will prosecute Malig-
nants ; and, with the aid of some poor varnish, transparent even
to yourselves, you adopt into your bosom the Chief Malignant ?
My soul come not into your secret; mine honour be not united
unto you !—

In fact, his. new Sacred Majesty is actually under way for the
Scotch court ; will become a Covenanted King there. Of himself
a likely enough young man ;—very unfortunate he too. Satisfac-
torily descended from the Steward of Scotland and Elizabeth
Muir'of Caldwell (whom some have called an improper female) ;!
satisfactory in this respect, but in others most unsatisfactory. A
somewhat loose young man; has Buckingham, Wilmot and
Company, at one hand of him, and painful Mr. Livingston and
Presbyterian ruling-elders at the other; is hastening now, as a
Covenanted King, towards such a Theocracy as we described.
Perhaps the most anomalous phenomenon ever produced by
Nature and Art working together in this World !—He had sent

‘Horseloads of Jacobite, Anti-Jacobite Pamphlets; Goodall, Father Innes, &c.
&c. How it was settled, I do not recollect.

a

64 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [1650.

Montrose before him, poor young man, to try if war and force
could effect nothing; whom instantly the Scotch Nation took,
and tragically hanged.1_ They now, winking hard at that tran-
saction, proffer the poor young man their Covenant; compel
him to sign it voluntarily, and be Covenanted King over
them.

The result of all which for the English Commonwealth cannot
be doubtful. What Declarations, Papers, Protocols, passed on the
occasion,—numerous, flying thick between Edinburgh and London
in late months,—shall remain unknown to us. The Common-
wealth has brought Cromwell home from Ireland ; and got forces
ready for him: that is the practical outcome of it. The Scotch
also have got forces ready; will either invade us, or (which we
decide to be preferable) be invaded by us.2_ Cromwell must now
take up the Scotch coil of troubles, as he did the Irish, and deal
with that too. Fairfax, as we heard, was unwilling to go; Crom-
well, urging the Council of State to second him, would fain per-
suade Fairfax ; gets him still nominated Commander-in-Chief ; but
cannot persuade him ;—will himself have to be Commander-in-
Chief, and go.

In Whitlocke and Ludlow ? there is record of earnest interces-
sions, solemn conference held with Fairfax in Whitehall, duly

1 Details of the business, in Balfour, iv. 9-22.

2 Commons Journals, 26th June 1650. [To this view of the question, Fairfax did
not assent. If the Scots invaded England, he said, he would be ready to lay down
his life in opposing them, but he would not invade Scotland. Cromwell, on the
other hand, was strongly in favour of this latter course. His speeches to Fairfax,
given by Whitelocke, are not quoted by Carlyle, who had but a mean opinion of the
veracity of the ‘‘ learned Bulstrode’s” reports, but they are probably true in sub-
stance. ‘‘I think,” argued Cromwell, ‘‘ we have a most just cause to begin or
rather to return and requite their [the Scots] hostility first begun upon us, and
thereby to free our country—if God shall be pleased to assist us, and I doubt not
but He will—from the great misery and calamity of having an army of Scots within
our country. . . . Your Excellency will soon determine whether it is better to have
this war in the bowels of another country or of our own, and that it will be in one
of them I think it without scruple.”

The army officers were eager for Scotland to be invaded without delay. Early
in the spring, Col. Duckenfield, Governor of Chester, wrote, ‘‘It would be very
advantageous for our state to haste an army into Scotland. Thereby we may on
equal terms fight the Scots before their new harvest, till when they cannot hurt us
much, they wanting money and other necessaries,” and in May, Lieut.-Colonel
Hobson, at Newcastle, says, ‘‘ We much admire [7.e. are astonished] at the army’s
not marching, especially now the agreement between the King and Scots is fully
confirmed.”  A/ist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr. Leyborne-Popham's
MSS., pp. 59; 73+] ,

3 Whitlocke, pp. 444-6 (25th June 1650); Ludlow, i. 317. [i. 243 ed. Firth. }

eo

1650.] WAR WITH SCOTLAND 65

prefaced by prayer to Heaven; intended on Cromwell’s part to
persuade Fairfax that it is his duty again to accept the chief com-
mand, and lead us into Scotland.'! Fairfax, urged by his Wife, a
Vere of the fighting Veres, and given to Presbyterianism, dare
not and will not go ;—sends ‘Mr. Rushworth, his Secretary,’ on
the morrow, to give up his Commission,? that Cromwell himself
may be named General-in-Chief. In this preliminary business,
says Ludlow, ‘Cromwell acted his part so to the life that I really
thought he wished Fairfax to go.’ Wooden-headed that I was,
I had reason to alter that notion by and by!

Wooden Ludlow gives note of another very singular interview
he himself had with Cromwell, ‘a little after,’ in those same days
or hours. Cromwell whispered him in the House ; they agreed
‘to meet that afternoon in the Council of State’ in Whitehall, and
there withdraw into a private room to have a little talk together.
Oliver had cast his eye on Ludlow as a fit man for Ireland, to go
and second Ireton there ; he took him, as by appointment, into a
private room, ‘the Queen’s Guard-chamber’ to wit; and there
very largely expressed himself. He testified the great value he
had for me, Ludlow ; combatted my objections to Ireland ; spake
somewhat against Lawyers, what a tortuous ungodly jungle Eng-
lish Law was; spake of the good that might be done by a good
and brave man ;*—spake of the great Providences of God now
abroad on the Earth; in particular ‘talked for almost an hour
upon the Hundred-and-tenth Psalm ;’ which to me, in my solid
wooden head, seemed extremely singular ! ¢

Modern readers, not in the case of Ludlow, will find this fact
illustrative of Oliver. Before setting out on the Scotch Expedi-
tion, and just on the eve of doing it, we too will read that Psalm
of Hebrew David's, which had become English Oliver’s: we will
fancy in our minds, not without reflections and emotions, the
largest soul in England looking at this God’s World with prophet’s
earnestness through that Hebrew Word,—two Divine Phenomena
accurately correspondent for Oliver ; the one accurately the pro-

1[Of Cromwell's reluctance to take Fairfax’s place a letter sent to Mazarin on
June 17-27 says ‘‘Il s'est montré si esloigné d’en vouloir et d’endeurer, que depuis
son retour, il n’en a plus esté parlé.” Quoted in History of the Commonwealth and
Protectorate, i. 288. ]

2 Commons Journals, ubi supra.

3{'* There was always a vein of shrewdness mingled with Cromwell's most fervid
enthusiasm, and it is not impossible that he urged Ludlow to go to Ireland be-
cause he feared that he might give trouble in England.’’ Commonwealth and
Protectorate, i. 298. |

4Ludlow, i. 319. [i. 245-8, ed. Firth.]

VOL. 11.—5

66 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ [20 June.

phetic symbol and articulate interpretation of the other. As it
the Silences had at length found utterance, and this was their
Voice from out of old Eternity:

‘The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou at my right hand
‘until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord shall send
‘the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of
‘thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
‘power ; in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morn-
‘ing: thou hast the dew of thy youth. The Lord hath sworn,
‘and will not repent, Thou art a priest forever after the order of
‘Melchizedek. The Lord, at thy right hand, shall strike through
‘Kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the
‘Heathen; he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he
‘shall wound the heads over many countries. He shall drink
‘of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up ‘the
‘head.’

In such spirit goes Oliver Cromwell to the Wars. ‘A god-
intoxicated man,’ as Novalis elsewhere phrases it. I have asked
myself, If anywhere in Modern European History, or even in
Ancient Asiatic, there was found a man practising this mean
World’s affairs with a heart more filled by the Idea of the Highest ?
Bathed in the Eternal Splendours,—it is so he walks our dim
Earth: this man is one of few. He is projected with a terrible
force out of the Eternities, and in the Times and their arenas
there is nothing that can withstand him. It is great ;—to us it
is tragic; a thing that should strike us dumb! My brave one,
thy old noble Prophecy is divine; older than Hebrew David ;
old as the Origin of Man ;—and shall, though in wider ways than
thou supposest, be fulfilled !—

LETTERS CXXXIII—CXXXVIIT

Hooke and his small business, in rapid public times, will not
detain us. Humphrey Hooke, Alderman of Bristol, was elected
to the Long Parliament for that City in 1640; but being found
to have had concern in ‘ Monopolies,’ was, like a number of
others, expelled, and sent home again under a cloud. The
‘service’ he did at Bristol Storm, though somewhat needing
‘concealment, ought to rehabilitate him a little in the charity,

pol mame a hah

1650.) LETTER CXXXIII, LONDON 67

at least in the pity, of the Well-affected mind. At all events,
the conditions made with him must be kept ;—and we doubt not,
were!

LETTER CXXXIII

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England : These?

London, 2oth June 1650.
Mr. SPEAKER,
When we lay before Bristol in the year 1645,

we considered the season of the year, the strength of the place,
and of what importance the reducement thereof would be to the
good of the Commonwealth, and accordingly applied ourselves to
all possible means for the accomplishment of the same; which
received its answerable effect. At which time, for something
considerable done in order to that end, by Humphrey Hooke,
Alderman of that place (which, for many reasons, is desired to be
concealed), his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax and myself
gave him an engagement under our hands and seals, that he
should be secured and protected, by the authority of the Parlia-
ment, in the enjoyment of his life, liberty and estate, as freely as
in former times, and as any other person under the obedience of

1[Hooke's own account of the matter is that being in Bristol when it was held
for Parliament, he lent 250/. to the governors, Colonels Fiennes and Essex, and
supplied powder etc., value go/. not paid for, and large sums on exchange. When
it was reduced by the King's forces, he helped to defend it against Parliament, and
was there at the surrender to Fairfax. He then submitted and paid all contribu-
tions, a large sum towards the 6000/. paid to Fairfax and his soldiers, and his one-
twentieth. Wherefore, in February, 1647, he begged to compound on Bristol
Articles. Jealousies between the Somerset County Committee and the local
Bristol Committee delayed the affair, but in July, 1649, in spite of an appeal to the
Relief Committee, the sequestration of his estate was ordered by the Committee for
Compounding. After further delays, he was admitted to compound at one-fifth, in
December, 1649. It is against the fine so set that Cromwell appears to protest.

1 His remonstrance does not seem to have produced any effect, for in 1651 the
commissioners for County Somerset are again ordered to sequester his estate. See
Calendar of Committee for Compounding, p. 1629; also pp. 144, 511. ]

[As Cary did not print the address of this and some other letters (now given
from the originals in the Tanner MSS.) Carlyle supplied it ‘‘ To the Honourable
William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.” But this form
of address was never used after the abolition of the House of Lords. ]

Ss ssl el es h:,hCU CT

68 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [20 June.

the Parliament, notwithstanding any past acts of hostility, or
other thing done by him, in opposition to the Parliament or
assistance of the enemy. Which engagement, with a certificate
of divers godly persons of that city, concerning the performance
of his part thereof, is ready to be produced.

I understand, that lately an order is issued out to sequester
him, whereby he is called to composition. I thought it meet
therefore to give the honourable Parliament this account, that
he may be preserved from anything of that nature. For the
performance of which, in order to the good of the Common-
wealth, we stand engaged in our faith and honour. I leave it to
you, and remain,

Sir,
Your most humble servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

On Wednesday 26th June 1650, the Act appointing ‘That
‘Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, be constituted Captain-General and
‘Commander-in-Chief of all the Forces raised or to be raised by
‘authority of Parliament within the Commonwealth of England,’ !
was passed. ‘Whereupon,’ says Whitlocke, ‘great ceremonies
‘and congratulations of the new General were made to him from
‘all sorts of people ; and he went on roundly with his business.’
Roundly, rapidly ; for in three days more, on Saturday the 29th,
‘the Lord General Cromwell went out of London towards the
‘North: and the news of him marching northward much startled
‘the Scots.’ ?

He has Lambert for Major-General, Cousin Whalley for Com-
missary-General ;* and among his Colonels are Overton, whom
we knew at Hull; Pride, whom we have seen in Westminster
Hall; and a taciturn man, much given to chewing tobacco, whom
we have transiently seen in various places, Colonel George Monk
by name.* An excellent officer; listens to what you say, answers
often by a splash of brown juice merely, but punctually does what

* Tanner MSS. [lvi. 212] (in Cary, ii. 222). [The concluding words only and
the date in Cromwell's own hand. }

1 Commons Journals, in die. 2Whitlocke, pp. 446, 7.
3[Fleetwood being his Lieutenant-General.]
4 Life of Monk, by Gumble, his Chaplain,

1650.) LETTER CXXXIV., ALNWICK 69

is doable of it.1 Pudding-headed Hodgson the Yorkshire Captain
is also there ; from whom perhaps we may glean a rough lucent-
point or two. The Army, as my Lord General attracts it gradu-
ally from the right and left on his march northward, amounts at
Tweedside to some Sixteen-thousand horse and foot.?, Rushworth
goes with him as Secretary ; historical John; having now done
with Fairfax :—but, alas, his Papers for this Period are all lost to
us: it was not safe to print them with the others ; and they are
lost! The Historical Collections, with their infinite rubbish and
their modicum of jewels, cease at the Trial of the King; leaving
us, fallen into far worse hands, to repent of our impatience, and
regret the useful John!

The following Letters, without commentary, which stingy
space will not permit, must note the Lord General’s progress for
us as they can; and illuminate with here and there a rude gleam
of direct light at first-hand, an old scene very obsolete, confused,
unexplored and dim for us.

LETTER CXXXIV

Dorotuy CroMWELL, we are happy to find, has a ‘little brat ;’
—but the poor little thing must have died soon: in Noble’s in-
exact lists there is no trace of its ever having lived. The Lord
General has got into Northumberland. He has a good excuse
for being ‘silent this way, —the way of Letters.

For my very loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at his House
at Hursley : These

Alnwick, 17th July 1650.
Dear Broruer,
The exceeding crowd of business I had at
London is the best excuse I can make for my silence this way.

1(The regiment which Cromwell designed for Monck showed itself unwilling to
accept him, therefore a new regiment was formed from companies serving under
Hesilrige and Fenwick, the governors of Newcastle and Berwick. See Mackinnon,
History of the Coldstream Guards, vol. i. p. 4.]

2 Train, 690; horse, 5,415 ; foot, 10,249; in toto, 16,354 (Cromwelliana, p. 85).

(Carlyle has been misled by Noble’s following the very usual plan of putting
the sons first. The daughters are all there, over the leaf. The ‘little brat” was
Elizabeth, born March 26, 1650. See p. 53 above. So far from dying young, she
lived to be eighty-two.]

—

70 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [iv July.

Indeed, Sir, my heart beareth me witness I want no affection to
you or yours; you are all often in my poor prayers.

I should be glad to hear how the little brat doth. I could
chide both father and mother for their neglects of me: I know
my son is idle, but I had better thoughts of Doll. I doubt now
her husband hath spoiled her ; I pray, tell her so from me. If 1
had as good leisure as they, I should write sometimes. If my
daughter be breeding, I will excuse her ; but not for her nursery.
The Lord bless them. I hope you give my son good counsel ; I
believe he needs it. He is in the dangerous time of his age, and
it’s a very vain world. O, how good it is to close with Christ
betimes ; there is nothing else worth the looking after. I be-
seech you call upon him; I hope you will discharge my duty
and your own love: you see how I am employed. I need pity.
I know what I feel. Great place and business in the world is
not worth the looking after; I should have no comfort in mine
but that my hope is in the Lord’s presence. I have not sought
these things; truly I have been called unto them by the Lord,
and therefore am not without some assurance that He will enable
His poor worm and weak servant to do His will, and to fulfil my
generation. In this I beg your prayers. Desiring to be lovingly
remembered to my dear sister, to our son and daughter, to my
Cousin Ann and the good family, I rest,

Your very affectionate brother,
O.tver CRoMWELL.*

On Monday 22d July, the Army, after due rendezvousing and
reviewing, passed through Berwick ; and encamped at Mordington
across the Border, where a fresh stay of two days is still necessary.
Scotland is bare of resources for us. That night ‘the Scotch
‘beacons were all set on fire; the men fled, and drove away
‘their cattle.’ Mr. Bret, his Excellency’s Trumpeter, returns
from Edinburgh without symptom of pacification. ‘The Clergy
represent us to the people as if we were monsters of the world.’

* Harris, p. 513: one of the Pusey stock. [‘' No, 17.” Holograph. Seal of
arms. In the Morrison Collection. ]

rs. Po ae a Fr ee ee a So) = —-— . ~ ea ei Sa ee — a =—S_ . oe Ps. @

1650.) LETTER CXXXIV., ALNWICK 71

“ Army of Sectaries and Blasphemers,” is the received term for
us among the Scots.!

Already on the march hitherward, and now by Mr. Bret in an
official way, have due Manifestos been promulgated : Declaration
; To all that are Saints and Partakers of the Faith of God's Elect in
i Scotland, and Proclamation T’o the People of Scotland in general.
Asking of the mistaken People, in mild terms, Did you not see us,
and try us, what kind of men we were, when we came among you
two years ago? Did you find us plunderers, murderers, monsters -
of the world? ‘Whose ox have we stolen?’ To the mistaken
Sainis of God in Scotland, again, the Declaration testifies and
argues, in a grand earnest way, That in Charles Stuart and his
party there can be no salvation ; that we seek the real substance
of the Covenant, which it is perilous to desert for the mere outer
form thereof ;—on the whole that we are not sectaries and blas-
phemers ; and that it goes against our heart to hurt a hair of any
sincere servant of God.—Very earnest Documents; signed by
John Rushworth in the name of General and Officers; often
printed and reprinted.?. They bear Oliver’s sense in every feature
of them ; but are not distinctly of his composition : wherefore, as
space grows more and more precious, and Oliver's sense will else-
where sufficiently appear, we omit them.

‘The Scots,’ says Whitlocke,’ ‘are all gone with their goods

towards Edinburgh, by command of the Estates of Scotland,
‘upon penalty if they did not remove; so that mostly all the
‘men are gone. But the wives stay behind; and some of them
‘do bake and brew, to provide bread and drink for the English
; ‘Army. The public functionaries ‘have told the people, “That

‘the English Army intends to put all the men to the sword, and

‘to thrust hot irons through the women’s breasts ;’’—which much

‘terrified them, till once the General’s Proclamations were pub-
4 ‘lished.’ And now the wives do stay behind, and brew and
bake,—poor wives !

That Monday night while we lay at Mordington, with hard
accommodation out of doors and in,—my puddingheaded friend
informs me of a thing. The General has made a large Discourse

1 Balfour, iv. 97, 100, &c. : ‘Cromwell the Blasphemer'’ (ib. 88.)

2 Newspapers (in Parl. Hist. xix. 298, 310); Commons Journals, 19th July,
6
Bee Fp 450.
4[The third ‘‘ Declaration” was called forth by this statement, and assured the
Scotch people of protection so long as they remained peaceable. (E. 608, No 5.)]

72 WAR WITH SCOTLAND {30 July.

to the Officers and Army, now that we are across ; speaks to them
“as a Christian and a Soldier, To be doubly and trebly diligent,
to be wary and worthy, for sure enough we have work before us !
But have we not had God’s blessing hitherto? Let us go on
faithfully, and hope for the like still!’’! The Army answered
‘with acclamations, still audible to me.—Yorkshire Hodgson
continues :

‘Well; that night we pitched at Mordington, about the House.
‘Our Officers, General and Staff Officers, ‘hearing a great shout
‘among the soldiers, looked out of window. They spied a soldier
‘with a Scotch firm’ (churn) ‘on his head. Some of them had
‘been purveying abroad, and had found a vessel filled with Scotch
‘cream: bringing the reversion of it to their tents, some got
‘dishfuls, and some hatfuls ; and the cream being now low in the
‘vessel, one fellow would have a modest drink, and so lifts the
‘kirn to his mouth: but another canting it up, it falls over his
‘head; and the man is lost in it, all the cream trickles down his
‘apparel, and his head fast in the tub! This was a merriment to
‘the Officers ; as Oliver loved an innocent jest.’

A week after, we find the General very serious; writing thus
to the Lord President Bradshaw.

LETTER CXXXV

‘CoprerspaTH, of which the General here speaks, is the country
pronunciation of Cockburnspath ; name of a wild rock-and-river
chasm, through which the great road goes, some miles to the
eastward of Dunbar. Of which we shall hear again. A very
wild road at that time, as may still be seen. The ravine is now
spanned by a beautiful Bridge, called Pease Bridge, or Path’s
Bridge, which pleasure-parties go to visit—-The date of this
Letter, in all the old Newspapers, is ‘30th July ;’ and doubtless
in the Original too ;? but the real day, as appears by the context,
is Wednesday 31st.

1 Hodgson, p. 130; Whitlocke, p. 450.
2* Letter from the General dated 30° Julii’ (Commons Journals, iv. 451).

baal yn eet

re

1650.) LETTER CXXXV., MUSSELBURGH 73

To the Right Honourable the Lord President of the Council of State :
These
Musselburgh, 30th July 1650.

My Lorp,
We marched from Berwick upon Monday,

being the 22d of July, and lay at my Lord Mordington’s house,
Monday night, Tuesday, and Wednesday. On Thursday we
marched to Copperspath ;! on Friday to Dunbar, where we got
some small pittance from our ships ; from whence we marched to
Haddington.

On the Lord’s day, hearing that the Scottish army meant to
meet us at Gladsmoor, we laboured to possess the moor before
them ; and beat our drums very early in the morning; but when
we came there, no considerable body of the army appeared.
Whereupon fourteen-hundred horse, under the command of
Major-General Lambert and Colonel Whalley, were sent as a
vanguard to Musselburgh, to see likewise if they could find out
and attempt any thing upon the enemy ; I marching in the heel
of them with the residue of the army. Our party encountered
with some of their horse, but they could not abide us. We lay
at Musselburgh, encamped close, that night ; the enemy’s army
lying between Edinburgh and Leith, about four miles from us,
entrenched by a line flankered from Edinburgh to Leith; the
guns also from Leith scouring most part of the line, so that they
lay very strong.

Upon Monday 29th instant, we were resolved to draw up to
them, to see if they would fight with us. And when we came
upon the place, we resolved to get our cannons as near them as
we could; hoping thereby to annoy them. We likewise per-
ceived that they had some force upon a hill that overlooks Edin-
burgh, from whence we might be annoyed ; ‘and’ did resolve to
send up a party to possess the said hill; which prevailed :? but,

1(From Copperspath, on the Friday, before marching, Cromwell wrote to Sir
Harry Vane. See Supplement, No. 61.]

2[For rile see Mr. W. S. Douglas's Cromwell's Scotch Campaigns,
P. 43, e¢ seg.

= eee

74 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ [80 July.

upon the whole, we did find that their army were not easily to
be attempted, whereupon we lay still all the same day; which
proved to be so sore a day and night of rain as I have seldom
seen, and greatly to our disadvantage; the enemy having
enough to cover them, and we nothing at all considerable.!| Our
soldiers did abide this difficulty with great courage and resolu-
tion, hoping they should speedily come to fight. In the morn-
ing, the ground being very wet, ‘and’ our provisions scarce, we
resolved to draw back to our quarters at Musselburgh, there to
refresh and revictual.

The enemy, when we drew off, fell upon our rear and put
them into some little disorder, but our bodies of horse being in
some readiness, came to a grabble with them; where indeed
there was a gallant and hot dispute ; the Major-General? and
Colonel Whalley being in the rear and the enemy drawing out
great bodies to second their first affront. Our men charged them
up to the very trenches, and beat them in. The Major-General’s
horse was shot in the neck and head; himself run through the
arm with a lance, and run into another place of his body, was
taken prisoner by the enemy, but rescued immediately by Lieu-
tenant Empson of my regiment. Colonel Whalley, who was
then nearest to the Major-General, did charge very resolutely
and repulsed the enemy, and killed divers of them upon the
place and took some prisoners, without any considerable loss,
which indeed did so amaze and quiet them, that we marched
off to Musselburgh, but they dared not send out a man to trouble
us. We heard their young King looked on upon all this, but
was very ill satisfied to see their men do no better,

We came to Musselburgh that night; so tired and wearied
for want of sleep, and so dirty by reason of the wetness of the
weather, that we expected the enemy would make an infall
upon us, which accordingly they did, between three and four

1‘Near a little village named, I think, Lichnagarie,,—means, Lang Niddery
(Hodgson, p. 132); the Viddery near Duddingston, still deservedly called Lang by

the people, though map-makers append the epithet elsewhere.
2 Lambert.

1650.} LETTER CXXXV., MUSSELBURGH 75

of the clock this morning with fifteen of their most select
troops, under the command of Major-General Montgomery and
Strahan, two champions of the Church: upon which business
there was great hope and expectation laid. The enemy came
on with a great deal of resolution; beat in our guards, and put
a regiment of horse in some disorder: but our men, speedily
taking the alarm, charged the enemy; routed them, took many
prisoners, killed a great many of them; did execution ‘to’
within a quarter of a mile of Edinburgh; and, I am informed,
Strahan ! was killed there, besides divers other officers of quality.
We took the major to Strahan’s regiment, Major Hamilton; a
lieutenant-colonel, and divers other officers and persons of quality,
whom yet we know not. Indeed this is a sweet beginning of
your business, or rather the Lord’s; and I believe is not very
satisfactory to the enemy, especially to the Kirk party.2 We
did not lose any in this business, so far as I hear, but a cornet ;
I do not hear of four men more. The Major-General will, I
believe, within few days be well to take the field. And I trust
this work, which is the Lord’s, will prosper in the hands of His
servants.

I do not think advisable to attempt upon the enemy, lying
as he doth: but surely it would sufficiently provoke him to fight
if he had a mind to it. I do not think he is less than six or
seven thousand horse, and fourteen or fifteen thousand foot.*
The reason, I hear, that they give out to their people why they
do not fight us, is, because they expect many bodies of men
more out of the North of Scotland; which when they come,

1 We shall hear of Strahan again, not ‘killed.’ This Montgomery is the Earl of
Eglinton’s son Robert, of whom we heard before (Letter LXXVIII.); neither is he
‘slain,’ as will be seen by and by.

2[ ‘In his despatch to Westminster, Cromwell naturally made the most of th
enemy's failures, but, for all that, the advantage was on Leslie's side. For the
Scottish commander, fighting in his own country, it was enough that he had not
been defeated.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, i. 306.]

5[He probably had more; about 18,000 foot and 7,000 or 8,000 horse. See in-
tercepted letter in Nickoll’s Original Letters and Papers of State, p. 13. On the
numbers of the opposing armies, see Mr. Firth’s paper on the Battle of Dunbar,
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1900.

Pe teeta TI

=r. =”

a ST ——— ——— EE —

76 WAR-WITH SCOTLAND _ [30 July.

they give out they will then engage. But I believe they would
rather tempt us to attempt them in their fastness, within which
they are entrenched ; or else hoping we shall famish for want of
provisions ; which is very likely to be, if we be not timely and
fully supplied. I remain,
My Lord,
Your most humble servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ I understand since writing of this letter, that Major-
General Montgomery is slain.*

Cautious David Lesley lies thus within his Line ‘flankered’
from Leith shore to the Calton Hill, with guns to ‘scour’ it;
with outposts or flying parties, as we see, stationed on the back
slope of Salisbury Crags or Arthur’s Seat; with all Edinburgh
safe behind him, and indeed all Scotland safe behind him for
supplies : and nothing can tempt him to come out. The factions
and distractions of Scotland, and its Kirk Committees and State
Committees, and poor Covenanted King and Courtiers, are many,!
but Lesley, standing steadily to his guns, persists here. His
Army, it appears, is no great things of an Army: ‘altogether
governed by the Committee of Estates and Kirk, snarls an
angry Uncovenanted Courtier, whom the said Committee has
just ordered to take himself away again; ‘altogether governed
‘by the Committee of Estates and Kirk,’ snarls he, ‘and they
‘took especial care in their levies not to admit ‘any Malignants or
‘ Engagers’ (who had been in Hamilton’s Engagement) ; ‘ placing
‘in command, for most part, Ministers’ Sons, Clerks and other
‘sanctified creatures, who hardly ever saw or heard of any sword

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp. 85, 6) [and old Parl. History, xix. 317.]

1[There is an interesting allusion to the conflicting views of the King’s sup-
porters in the letter from Lieut.-Colonel Hobson already quoted. ‘‘ The old malig-
nants,” he writes, ‘‘are very much taken off from siding with the King upon the
Scotch interest, there being two or three come from thence who were in the last party
that was routed with Montrose, and declare to the malignants their sad usage by
the Scotch Presbyterians, and withal declare how much the heart of Montrose was
broken before the fight in the very thoughts that the King and Scots would agree,
and withal protest that Charles the Second, in joining with the Scots, had as really
betrayed a kingly interest and the interest of all royalists, as ever any sectary of
England, and that 'twas as lawful to fight for a jack-in-a-box as for a King locked
in a Scotch saddle.’’]

“cs. °° - - ~~ —— — = ~ - —_——e

1650.) LETTER CXXXVI, MUSSELBURGH 77

‘but that of the spirit!’! The more reason for Lesley to lie
steadily within his Line here. Lodged in ‘Bruchton Village,’
which means Broughton, now a part of Edinburgh New Town;
there in a cautious solid manner lies Lesley ; and lets Cromwell
attempt upon him. It is his history, the military history of these
two, for a month to come.

Meanwhile the General Assembly have not been backward
with their Answer to the Cromwell Manifesto, or ‘ Declaration of
the English Army to all the Saints in Scotland,’ spoken of above.
Nay, already while he lay at Berwick, they had drawn up an
eloquent Counter-Declaration, and sent it to him; which he,
again, has got ‘some godly Ministers’ of his to declare against
and reply to: the whole of which Declarations, Replies and Re-
replies shall, like the primary Document itself, remain suppressed
on the present occasion.? But along with this ‘Reply by some
godly Ministers,’ the Lord General sends a Letter of his own,
which is here:

LETTER CXXXVI

To the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland ; or, in case of
their not sitting, To the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland :
These

Musselburgh, 3d August 1650.
Sirs,

Your Answer to the Declaration of the Army we
have seen. Some godly ministers with us did, at Berwick, com-
pose this Reply ;* which I thought fit to send you.

That you or we, in these great transactions, answer the will
and mind of God, it is only from His grace and mercy to us.

1Sir Edward Walker : Historical Discourses (London, 1705), p. 162. [See also
Balfour, iv. 89, and Loudoun to Charles II., Aug. 12, Charles //. and Scotland,

. 130.
Titles of them, copies of several of them, in [old] Parliamentary History, xix.
The Scotch ‘Answer’ which ‘ we have seen,’ dated Edinburgh, 22d July 1650,
‘Answer unto the Declaration of the Army;’ and then this English ‘ Reply’ to it
now sent, entitled ‘ Vindication of the Declaration of the Army:’ in King’s Pam-
Phlets, small 4to, no. 475, § 15 [E. 609] (Printed, London, 16th Aug. 1650).

78 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 Aug.

And :therefore, having said as in our papers, we commit the issue
thereof to Him who disposeth all things, assuring you that we
have light and comfort increasing upon us, day by day, and are
persuaded that, before it be long, the Lord will manifest His
good pleasure, so that all shall see Him, and His people shall
say, “This is the Lord’s work, and it is marvellous in our eyes :
this is the day that the Lord hath made; we will be glad and
rejoice therein.”

Only give me leave to say, ina word: You take upon you to
judge us in the things of our God, though you know us not ; though
in the things we have said unto you, in that which is entitled the
Army’s Declaration, we have spoken our hearts as in the sight of
the Lord who hath tried us. And by your hard and subtle words
you have begotten prejudice in those who do too much (in matters
of conscience, wherein every soul is to answer for itself to God)
depend upon you. So that some have already followed you, to
the breathing-out of their souls:! ‘and’ others continue still in
the way wherein they are led by you (we fear) to their own ruin.

And no marvel if you deal thus with us, when indeed you can
find in your hearts to conceal the papers we have sent you from
your own people ; who might ‘thereby’ see and understand the
bowels of our affections to them, especially ‘to’ such among
them as fear the Lord. Send as many of your papers as you
please amongst ours ;? they have a free passage. I fear them
not. What is of God in them, would it might be embraced and
received. One of them lately sent, directed T’o the Under-Officers
and Soldiers in the English Army, hath begotten from them this
enclosed Answer ;° which they desired me to send you: nota

1In the Musselburgh Skirmish, &c. 2 Our people.

3The Scotch Paper ‘To the Under-Officers,’ &c., received on the last day of
July ; and close following on it, this ‘Answer’ which it ‘hath begotten from them,’
addressed Yo the People of Scotland (especially those among them that know and
fear the Lord) from whom yesterday we received a Paper directed to the Under-Officers,
&c. ; of date ‘ Musselburgh, rst August 1650:’ in Azug’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no.
475, § 10 [E. 609] (Printed, London, 12th August 1650).-This Answer ‘by the
Under-Officers,’ a very pious and zealous Piece, seems to have found favour among
the pious Scotch, and to have circulated among them in Manuscript Copies. A most
mutilated unintelligible Fragment, printed in Anad/ecta Scotica (Edinburgh, 1834),

1650.)] LETTER CXXXVI., MUSSELBURGH 7 9

crafty politic one, but a plain simple spiritual one; such as it is
God knoweth, and God also will in due time make manifest.

And do we multiply these things,! as men; or do we them for
the Lord Christ and His people’s sake? Indeed we are not,
through the grace of God, afraid of your numbers, nor confident
in ourselves. We could (I pray God you do not think we boast)
meet your army, or what you have to bring against us. We have
given (humbly we speak it before our God, in whom all our hope
is) some proof that thoughts of that kind prevail not upon us.
The Lord hath not hid His face from us since our approach so
near unto you.

Your own guilt is too much for you to bear: bring not therefore
upon yourselves the*blood of innocent men, deceived with pre-
tences of King and Covenant, from whose eyes you hide a better
knowledge. I am persuaded that divers of you, who lead the
people, have laboured to build yourselves in these things wherein
you have censured others, and established yourselves upon the
Word of God. Is it therefore infallibly agreeable to the Word
of God, all that you say? I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ,
think it possible you may be mistaken. Precept may be upon
precept, line may be upon line, and yet the Word of the Lord
may be to some a Word of judgment, that they may fall backward,
and be broken and be snared and be taken.2 There may be a
spiritual fulness, which the world may call drunkenness ;* as in
the second chapter of the Acts. There may be, as well, a carnal
confidence upon misunderstood and misapplied precepts, which
may be called spiritual drunkenness. There may be a Covenant
made with death and hell.? I will not say yours was so. But
judge if such things have a politic aim: to avoid the overflowing

ii. 271, as ‘a Proclamation by Oliver Cromwell,’ turns out to be in reality a fraction
of “his ‘Answer by the Under-Officers :'—printed there from a ‘Copy evidently
made at the time,’ evidently a most ruinous Copy, ‘and now in the possession of
James Macknight, Esq.’

1 Papers and Declarations.
2 Bible phrases [all from the chapter in Isaiah mentioned below].
3 As you now do of us; while it is rather you that are *‘ drunk.”

80 WAR WITH SCOTLAND (3 Aug.

scourge ; or to accomplish worldly interests. And if therein
we! have confederated with wicked and carnal men, and have
respect for them, or otherwise ‘have’ drawn them in to associate
with us, Whether this be a Covenant of God and spiritual, be-
think yourselves ; we hope we do.

I pray you read the twenty-eighth of Isaiah, from the fifth
to the fifteenth ‘verse.’ And do not scorn to know that it is the
Spirit that quickens and giveth life.

The Lord give you and us understanding to do that which
is well-pleasing in His sight. Committing you to the grace
of God, I rest,

Your humble servant,
Outver CROMWELL.*

Here is the passage from Isaiah: I know not whether the
General Assembly read it and laid it well to heart, or not, but
it was worth their while,—and is worth our while too:

‘In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of glory,
‘and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of His people. And
‘for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for
‘strength to them that turn the battle to the gate. ;

‘But they also have erred through wine, and through strong
‘drink are out of the way! The Priest and the Prophet have
‘erred through strong drink; they are swallowed up of wine ;
‘they are out of the way through strong drink. They err in
‘vision, they stumble injudgment. For all tables are full of vomit
‘and filthiness ; so that there is no place clean.

‘Whom shall He teach knowledge? Whom shall He make to
‘understand doctrine? Them that are weaned from the milk,
‘and drawn from the breasts. For precept must be upon pre-
‘cept, precept upon precept ; line upon line, line upon line ; here
‘a little and there a little. For with stammering lips and another
‘tongue will He speak to this people. To whom He said, This is
‘the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is
‘the refreshment ;—yet they would not hear. No, ‘The Word

1z.e, you.

* Newspapers (in Parliamentary History, xix. 320-333),

a a
= ee Be

Ls — Ss. = 7 iis ial

1650.) LETTER CXXXVI., MUSSELBURGH 81

‘of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, line upon line,
‘here a little and there a little, That they might go, and fall
‘backward, and be broken and snared and taken !—Wherefore
‘hear ye the Word of the Lord, ye scornful men that rule this
‘people which is in Jerusalem !’!

Yes, hear it, and not with the outward ear only, ye Kirk Com-
mittees, and Prophesying and Governing Persons everywhere : it
may be important to you! If God have said it, if the Eternal
Truth of things have said it, will it not need to be done, think
you? Or will the doing some distracted shadow of it, some
Covenanted Charles Stuart of it, suffice >—The Kirk Committee
seems in a bad way.

David Lesley, however, what as yet is in their favour, continues
within his Line ; stands steadily to his guns ;—and the weather is
wet; Oliver’s provision is failing. This Letter to the Kirk was
written on Saturday : on the Monday following, ‘about the 6th of
August,’ as Major Hodgson dates it, the tempestuous state of the
weather not permitting ship-stores to be landed at Musselburgh,
Cromwell has to march his Army back to Dunbar, and there pro-
vision it. Great joy in the Kirk-and-Estates Committee thereupon:
Lesley steadily continues in his place.—

The famine among the Scots themselves, at Dunbar, is great ;
picking our horses’ beans, eating our soldiers’ leavings: ‘they are
much enslaved to their Lords,’ poor creatures ; almost destitute
of private capital,—and ignorant of soap to a terrible extent ! 8
Cromwell distributes among them ‘peas and wheat to the value
of 240/.’ On the 12th he returns to Musselburgh; finds, as
heavy Bulstrode spells it in good Scotch, with a friskiness we
hardly looked for in him, that Lesley has commanded ‘The
‘gude women should awe come away with their gear, and not
‘stay to brew or bake, any of them, for the English ;’—which
makes it a place more forlorn than before.* Oliver decides to
encamp on the Pentland Hills, which lie on the other side of
Edinburgh, overlooking the Fife and Stirling roads; and to try
whether he cannot force Lesley to fight, by cutting off his

1[Carlyle omits verse 15, which seems to have been above all in Cromwell's
mind: ‘‘ because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with
hell are we at agreement: When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge and under falsehood have
we hid ourselves.’’]

2 Balfour, iv. 89. 3 Whitlocke, p. 452. 4 [bid., p. 453.

VoL. 11.—6

=

39 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 Aug.

supplies. Here, in the mean time, is a Letter from Lesley
himself; written in ‘Broughton Village,’ precisely while Oliver
is on march towards the Pentlands :

“ For his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell
** Bruchton, 13th August 1650.

“My Lorp,—I am commanded by the Committee of Estates |
“of this Kingdom, and desired by the Commissioners of the |
“ General Assembly, to send unto your Excellency this enclosed ;
“* Declaration, as that which containeth the State of the Quarrel ; |
“ wherein we are resolved, by the Lord’s assistance, to fight your
“ Army, when the Lord shall be pleased to call us thereunto.
“ And as you have professed you will not conceal any of our
“ Papers, I do desire that this Declaration may be made known
“to all the Officers of your Army. And so I rest,—your Excel-
“Jency’s most humble servant,

—————

“Davin Lestey.” !

This Declaration, done by the Kirk, and endorsed by the
Estates, we shall not on the present occasion make known, even
though it is brief. The reader shall fancy it a brief emphatic
disclaimer, on the part of Kirk and State, of their having any-
thing to do with Malignants ;—disclaimer in emphatic words,
while the emphatic facts continue as they were. Distinct hope,
however, is held out that the Covenanted King will testify openly
his sorrow for his Father's Malignancies, and his own resolution
for a quite other course. To which Oliver, from the slope of the
Pentlands,? returns this answer :

1 Newspapers (in Parliamentary History, xix. 330).

2* About Colinton’ (Balfour, iv. 90). [On the Braid Hills; probably with out-
posts on Blackford Hill. Colinton House was occupied on the 18th. See Common-
wealth and Protectorate, i. 309, 312, and Cromwell's Scotch Campaigns, pp. 54-57-]

ot . ser ee! See” Cre lle ee ee ee

1650.) LETTER CXXXVIL, PENTLANDS 83

LETTER CXXXVII

For the Right Honourable David Lesley, Lieutenant-General of the
Scots Army: These}

From the Camp at Pentland Hills,
14th August 1650.

Sir, s

I received yours of the 13th instant, with the
paper you mentioned therein, enclosed; which I caused to be
read in the presence of so many officers as could well be gotten
together on a sudden ;? to which your trumpet can witness. We
return you this answer, by which I hope, in the Lord, it will
appear that we continue the same which we have professed our-
selves to the honest people of Scotland, wishing to them as to
our own souls; it being no part of our business to hinder any of
them from worshipping God in that way they are satisfied in
their consciences by the Word of God they ought (though
different from us), but shall therein be ready to perform what
obligation lies upon us by the Covenant.’

But that under pretence of the Covenant, mistaken, and wrested
from the most native intent and equity thereof, a King should be
taken in by you, to be imposed upon us; and this called the cause
of God and of the Kingdom ; and this done to the satisfaction of
God’s people in both nations, as is alleged, together with the
disowning of malignants, although he* who is the head of them,
in whom all their hope and comfort lies, be received; who, at
this very instant, hath a Popish army fighting for and under him

1[There are three texts for this letter: that given in the old Parliamentary
History (used by Carlyle); a copy printed in the Clarendon State-Papers, ii. 547,
stated to be made by Mr. Nicholas; and an old MS. copy amongst the papers of
the Duke of Atholl, printed in the 12th Report of the Hist. MSS. Commissioners,
App. 8, p. 30. Where variants occur, the letter is here printed according to the
two texts which agree ; the variant in the third being given in a footnote. ]
2[“ on a sudden” is omitted in Par/. Hist.]
i 3 Ungrammatical, but intelligible and characteristic.
4 Charles Stuart.

es ee eS ce eS

84 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [14 Ang.

in Ireland; hath Prince Rupert, a man who hath had his hand
very deep! in the blood of many innocent men? in England,
now in the head of our ships, stolen from us upon a malignant
account ; hath * the French and Irish ships daily making depre-
dations on our coasts ; and strong combinations by the malignants
in England, to raise Arms‘ in our bowels, by virtue of his
commissions, he having® of late issued out very many to that
purpose: and how the interest you pretend you have received
him upon, and the malignant Interest in the ends and conse-
quences centering® in this man, can be severed,’ we cannot
discern! And how we should believe, that whilst known and
notorious malignants fighting* and plotting against us on the
one hand, and you® declaring for him on the other, should not
be an espousing of a malignant party quarrel or interest; but be
a mere fighting upon former grounds and principles, and in
defence of the cause of God and of the Kingdom, as hath been
these twelve years last past, as you say, for the security and
satisfaction of the people of God in both nations ; or the opposing
which should render us enemies to the Godly with you, we cannot
understand, especially considering that all malignants take their
confidence and encouragement from the late transactions of your
Kirk and State with your King. For as we have already said, so
we tell you again, It is but satisfying security to those that
employ us, and are concerned in that we seek, which we conceive
will not be by a few formal and feigned submissions, from a person
that could not otherwise tell how to accomplish his malignant
ends, and ‘is’ therefore counselled to this compliance, by them
who assisted his Father, and have hitherto actuated him ' in his
most evil and desperate designs; and ‘designs which’ are now

1[‘* deep” (only) in Parl. Hist. ; ‘‘ dipped” in Clar. S. P.]

2[‘‘ people” in AzholZ MS.] 3[‘‘ who hath,” zd2d.]

4[‘ Armies,” Parl, Hist.] 5[‘* who hath,” zdzd. }

8[** centred,’’ Atholl MS.)

*|‘‘secured,”’ Parl. Hist., probably merely a misprint. ]

8[*‘are fighting,” zézd.], 9[“ yours,’ Atholl MS.)

10[** acted him,” A¢hol/ MS. and Clar. S.P. ; but meaning as above, and so given
in Parl. Hist.}

:

1650.) LETTER CXXXVII., PENTLANDS = 85

again! set on foot. Against which, how you will be able, in the
way you are in, to secure us or yourselves is (for as much as
concerns ourselves), our duty to look after.

If the state of your quarrel be thus, upon which, as you say,
you resolve to fight our army, you will have opportunity to do
that ; else what means our abode here? And if our hope be not
in the Lord, it will be ill with us.2 We commit both you and
ourselves to Him who knows the heart and tries the reins ;* with
whom are all our ways; who is able to do for us and you above
what we know: Which we desire may be in much mercy to His
poor people, and to the glory of His great name.

And having performed your desire, in making your papers so
public as is before expressed, I desire you to do the like, by
letting the State, Kirk, and Army have the knowledge thereof.
To which end I* have sent you enclosed two copies ‘of this
Letter ;’ and rest,

Your humble servant,
O.iver CroMWELL.*

The encampment on Pentland Hills, ‘some of our tents within
sight of Edinburgh Castle and City,’ threatens to cut off Lesley’s
supplies ; but will not induce him to fight. ‘The gude wives fly
with their bairns and gear’ in great terror of us, poor gude wives ;
and ‘ when we set fire to furze-bushes, report that we are burning
their houses.’® Great terror of us; but no other result. Lesley
brings over his guns to the western side of Edinburgh, and awaits,
steady within his fastnesses there.

Hopes have arisen that the Godly Party in Scotland, seeing
now by these Letters and Papers what our real meaning is, may
perhaps quit a Malignant King’s Interest, and make bloodless

1[“ by them’’ added in Par/. Hist.] 2(‘* for us,” Atholl MS.)

5|‘*tries the heart and searches the reins,” A/¢hol/ WS, Neither is an exact
quotation from any passage in the Bible. ]

4[‘* We” in Atholl MS.)

5 Narrative of Farther Proceedings, dated ‘From the Camp in Musselburgh
Fields, 16th August 1650 ;’ read in the Parliament 22d August (Commons Journals) ;
reprinted in Parliamentary History (xix. 327) as a ‘ Narrative by General Crom-
well ;’ though it is clearly enough not General Cromwell's, but John Rushworth’s,

* Newspapers (in Parliamentary History, xix. 331-333).

STs aS eT? SOF Ce fe ee

86 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [14 Aug.

peace with us, ‘which were the best of all.’ The King boggles
about signing that open Testimony, that Declaration against his
Father's sins which was expected of him. ‘A great Commander
of the Enemy’s, Colonel Gibby Carre’ (Colonel Gilbert Ker, of
whom we shall hear farther), solicits an interview with some of
ours, and has it ; and other interviews and free communings take
place, upon the Burrow-Moor and open fields that lie between us.
Gibby Ker, and also Colonel Strahan who was thought to be
slain:! these and some minority of others are clear against
Malignancy in every form; and if the Covenanted Stuart King
will not sign this Declaration—!—Whereupon the Covenanted
Stuart King does sign it ; signs this too *—what will he not sign ?
—and these hopes of accommodation vanish.

Neither still will they risk a Battle ; though in their interviews
upon the Burrow-Moor, they said they longed to do it. Vain
that we draw out in battalia; they lie within their fastnesses.
We march, with defiant circumstances of war, round all accessible
sides of Edinburgh ; encamp on the Pentlands, return to Mussel-
burgh for provisions; go to the Pentlands again,—enjoy one of
the beautifullest prospects, over deep-blue seas, over yellow corn-
fields, dusky Highland mountains, from Ben Lomond round to
the Bass again; but can get no Battle. And the weather is
broken, and the season is advancing,—equinox within ten days,
by the modern Almanac. Our men fall sick; the service is
harassing ;—and it depends on wind and tide whether even
biscuit can be landed for us nearer than Dunbar.® Here is the
Lord General’s own Letter ‘to a Member of the Council of State,’
—we might guess this or the other, but cannot with the least
certainty know which.*

1 Letter CKXXV.

2At our Court at Dumfermline this 16th day of August 1650 (Sir Edward
Walker, pp. 170-6; by whom the melancholy Document is, with due loyal indigna-
tion, given at large there).

3[‘* Cromwell, in fact, had been thoroughly out-generalled. Partly perhaps
through the difficulty of carrying provisions so far from his ships, partly through
his desire to avoid bringing his conflict with brother Protestants to the arbitrament
of battle, he had shown himself, for once in his career, halting and irresolute,
whilst Leslie had on every occasion known his own mind and had carried out his
designs with promptness and resolution.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, iY

314- : “i

4[It might certainly be supposed to be the despatch to the President, if it were
not that it begins ‘‘ Sir,” and after the formation of the Second Council of State,
Cromwell appears always to have addressed Bradshaw as ‘‘ my Lord,’’]

a

i a

1650.] LETTER CXXXVIIL,, MUSSELBURGH 87

LETTER CXXXVIII

‘To Council of State in Whitehall : These’
Musselburgh, 30th August 1650.1
Sir,

Since my last, we seeing the enemy not
willing to engage, and yet very apt to take exceptions against
speeches of that kind spoken in our army, which occasioned
some of them to come to parley with our officers, to let them
know that they would fight us, they lying still in or near their
fastnesses, on the west side of Edinburgh, we resolved, the Lord
assisting, to draw near to them once more, to try if we could
fight them. And indeed one hour’s advantage gained might
probably, we think, have given us an oppprtunity.”

To which purpose, upon Tuesday the 27th instant we marched
westward of Edinburgh towards Stirling; which the enemy per-
ceiving, marched with as great expedition as was possible to
prevent us, and the vanguards of both the armies came to skir-
mish, upon a place where bogs and passes made the access of
each army to the other difficult. We, being ignorant of the
place, drew up, hoping to have engaged, but found no way feas-
ible, by reason of the bogs and other difficulties.

We drew up our cannon, and did that day discharge two or
three hundred great shot upon them; a considerable number
they likewise returned to us, and this was all that passed from
each to other. Wherein we had near twenty killed and wounded,
but not one commissioned officer. The enemy, as we are in-
formed, had about eighty killed, and some considerable officers.
Seeing they would keep their ground, from which we could not

1[In the original printed copy of the letter, issued under Scobell’s auspices,
(Several Letters from Scotland, E, 612, 8), the date is August 31; and two other
letters, printed (and no doubt sent) with it, are dated the same day; that is on the
Saturday. Harris also gives this date. But even thus, it is possible that Cromwell
dated it August 30, for in writing to Lenthall, he speaks of ‘‘ Saturday, the 3oth”’

(see p. 103 below). ]
2 Had we come one hour sooner :—but we did not.

4
~~» 2a ew

88 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [80 Aug.

remove them, and our bread being spent, we were necessitated
to go for a new supply: and so marched off about ten or eleven
o'clock on Wednesday morning. The enemy perceiving it, and
as we conceive, fearing we might interpose between them and
Edinburgh, though it was not our intention, albeit it seemed so
by our march, retreated back again, with all haste; having a bog
and passes between them and us; there being no considerable
action, saving the skirmishing of the van of our horse with theirs,
near to Edinburgh, without any considerable loss to either part,
saving that we got two or three of their horses.

That ‘Wednesday’ night we quartered within a mile of Edin-
burgh, and of the enemy. It was a most tempestuous night
and wet morning. The enemy marched in the night between
Leith and Edinburgh, to interpose between us and our victual,
they knowing that it was spent; but the Lord in mercy pre-
vented it; which we perceiving in the morning, got, time enough,
through the goodness of the Lord, to the sea-side, to re-victual ;
the enemy being drawn up upon the hill near Arthur's Seat,
looking upon us, but not attempting any thing.

And thus you have an account of the present occurrences.

Your most humble servant,
OLivER CROMWELL.*

The scene of this Tuesday’s skirmish, and cannonade across
bogs, has not been investigated ; though an antiquarian Topogra-
pher might find worse work for himself. Rough Hodgson, very
uncertain in his spellings, calls it Gawger Field, which will
evidently take us to Gogar on the western road there. The
Scotch Editor of Hodgson says farther, ‘The Water of Leith lay
between the two Armies;’ which can be believed or not ;—

1'We drew towards our old Camp, one of our old Camps, that Wednesday ;
and off to Musselburgh ‘for a new supply’ next morning. Old Camp, or Bi-
vouack, ‘on Pentland Hills,’ says vague Hodgson (p. 142); ‘within a mile of
Edinburgh,’ says Cromwell in this Letter, who of course knows well. [The Braid
and Blackford Hills were considered as belonging to the Pentlands. On the slope
of Blackford Hill, the outposts would only be about a mile from Edinburgh. ]

* Newspapers (in [old] Parliamentary History, xix. 339). [Reprinted from the
tract E. 612, 8.]

1650.] LETTER CX XX VIII., MUSSELBURGH 89

which indeed turns out to be unbelievable. Yorkshire Hodg-
son’s troop received an ugly cannon-shot while they stood at
prayers; just with the word Amen, came the ugly cannon-shot
singing, but it hurt neither horse nor man. We also ‘gave them
an English shout’ at one time, along the whole line,? making
their Castle-rocks and Pentlands ring again; but could get no
Battle out of them, for the bogs.

Here, in reference to those matters, is an Excerpt which, in
spite of imperfections, may be worth transcribing. ‘The English
‘Army lay’ at first ‘near Musselburgh, about Stony Hill. But
‘shortly after, they marched up to Braid House,’ to Braid Hills,
to Pentland Hills, Colinton and various other Hills and Houses
in succession ; ‘and the Scots Army, being put in some readiness,
‘marched up to Corstorphine Hill. But because the English
‘feared it was too near the Castle of Edinburgh, they would not
‘hazard battle there. Wherefore both Armies marched to Gogar,
‘Tuesday August 27th; and played each upon other with their
‘great guns: but because of Gogar Burn (Brook) and other
‘ditches betwixt the Armies, they could not join battle. Next
‘day, about midday,’ more precisely Wednesday about ten or
eleven o'clock, ‘the English began to retire; and went first to
‘their Leaguer at Braid Hills,’ within a mile of Edinburgh as
their General says. ‘The English removing, the Scots followed
‘by Corstorphine the long gate’ (roundabout road),3—which is
hard ground, and out of shot-range. ‘The English,’ some of
them, ‘marched near to Musselburgh; and, in the mid night,
‘planted some guns in Niddry: the Scots having marched about
‘the Hill of Arthur’s Seat, towards Craigmillar, there planted
‘some guns against those in Niddry ;’ #—and in fact, as we have
seen, were drawn up on Arthur's Seat on the morrow morning,
looking on amid the rain, and not attempting anything.

The Lord General writes this Letter at Musselburgh on Friday
the 30th ® the morrow after his return: and directly on the heel
of it there is a Council of War held, and an important resolution

1(See Cromwell's Scotch Campaigns, p. 83, note; also map in Commonwealth
and Protectorate, p. 305. ]

2 Hodgson, p. 141.

’[Mr. Douglas explains that the Scots took the direct route; ‘‘ the lang gait”
being the old name for the road. ]

4Collections by a Private Hand, at Edinburgh, from 1650 to 1661 ( Woodrow
MSS.), printed in Historical Fragments on Scotch Affairs from 1635 to 1664
(Edinburgh, 1832), Part i. pp. 27-8.

5[Or on Saturday the 31st. See note on p, 87 above. ]

90 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [2 Sept.

taken. With sickness, and the wild weather coming on us,
rendering even victual uncertain, and no Battle to be had, we
clearly cannot continue here. Dunbar, which has a harbour, we
might fortify for a kind of citadel and winter-quarter; let us
retire at least to Dunbar, to be near our sole friends in this
country, our Ships. On the morrow evening, Saturday the 31st,
the Lord General fired his huts, and marched towards Dunbar.
At sight whereof Lesley rushes out upon him; has his vanguard
in Prestonpans before our rear got away. Saturday night through
Haddington, and all Sunday to Dunbar, Lesley hangs, close and
heavy, on Cromwell's rear; on Sunday night bends southward to
the hills that overlook Dunbar, and hems him in there. As will
be more specially related in the next fascicle of Letters.

LETTERS CXXXIX—CXLVI
BATTLE OF DUNBAR

Tue small Town of Dunbar stands, high and windy, looking down
over its herring-boats, over its grim old Castle now much honey-
combed,—on one of those projecting rock-promontories with
which that shore of the Frith of Forth is niched and vandyked,
as far as the eye can reach. A beautiful sea; good land too,
now that the plougher understands his trade; a grim niched
barrier of whinstone sheltering it from the chafings and tumblings
of the big blue German Ocean. Seaward St. Abb’s Head, of
whinstone, bounds your horizon to the east, not very far off;
west, close by, is the deep bay, and fishy little village of Belhaven :
the gloomy Bass and other rock-islets, and farther the Hills of
Fife, and foreshadows of the Highlands, are visible as you look
seaward. From the bottom of Belhaven bay to that of the next
seabight St. Abb’s-ward, the Town and its environs form a
peninsula. Along the base of which peninsula, ‘not much above
a mile and a half from sea to sea,’ Oliver Cromwell's Army, on
Monday 2d of September 1650, stands ranked, with its tents and
Town behind it,—in very forlorn circumstances, This now is all
the ground that Oliver is lord of in Scotland. His Ships lie in
the offing, with biscuit and transport for him; but,,visible else-
where in the Earth no help.

Landward as you look from the Town of Dunbar there rises,

1650.| LETTER CXXXIX., DUNBAR 91

some short mile off, a dusky continent of barren heath Hills; the
Lammermoor, where only mountain-sheep can be at home. The
crossing of which, by any of its boggy passes, and brawling stream-
courses, no Army, hardly a solitary Scotch Packman could attempt,
in such weather. To the edge of these Lammermoor Heights,
David Lesley has betaken himself; lies now along the outmost
spur of them,—a long Hill of considerable height, which the
Dunbar people call the Dun, Doon, or sometimes for fashion’s
sake the Down, adding to it the Teutonic Hi/l likewise, though
Dun itself in old Celtie signifies Hill. On this Doon Hill lies
David Lesley with the victorious Scotch Army, upwards of
Twenty-thousand strong; with the Committees of Kirk and
Estates, the chief Dignitaries of the Country, and in fact the
flower of what the pure Covenant in this the Twelfth year of its
existence can still bring forth. There lies he since Sunday
night, on the top and slope of this Doon Hill, with the impass-
able heath-continents behind him ; embraces, as within outspread
tiger-claws, the base-line of Oliver’s Dunbar peninsula; waiting
what Oliver will do. Cockburnspath with its ravines has been
seized on Oliver's left, and made impassable ; behind Oliver is
the sea; in front of him Lesley, Doon Hill, and the heath-
continent of Lammermoor. Lesley’s force is of Three-and-
twenty-thousand,! in spirits as of men chasing, Oliver’s about

half as many, in spirits as of men chased.?, What is to become
of Oliver ?

LETTER CXXXIX

HAaseELrIG, as we know, is Governor of Newcastle. Oliver on
Monday writes this Note; means to send it off, I suppose, by
sea. Making no complaint for himself, the remarkable Oliver ;
doing, with grave brevity, in the hour the business of the hour.
He was a strong man, so intimates Charles Harvey, who knew
him: ‘in the dark perils of war, in the high places of the field,
hope shone in him like a pillar of fire, when it had gone out in

127,000 say the English Pamphlets; 16,000 foot and 7,000 horse, says Sir
Edward Walker (p. 182), who has access to know.

2[But Cromwell’s men were ‘‘ war-worn veterans under trusted leaders, whereas
the Scots were not only for the most part new to war, but were split asunder in
heart and mind by the wedge of faction.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, i. 316,]

92 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [2 Sept.

all the others.’! A genuine King among men, Mr. Harvey. The
divinest sight this world sees,—when it is privileged to see such,
and not be sickened with the unholy apery of such! He is just
pari upon an ‘engagement,’ or complicated concern, ‘very diffi-
cult.’

To the Honourable Sir Arthur Haselridge at Newcastle or elsewhere :
These. Haste, haste

‘ Dunbar,’ 2nd September 1650.

Dear Sir,

We are upon an Engagement very difficult.
The Enemy hath blocked up our way at the Pass at Copperspath,
through which we cannot get without almost a miracle. He
lieth so upon the Hills that we know not how to come that way
without great difficulty ; and our lying here daily consumeth our
men, who fall sick beyond imagination.

I perceive your forces are not in a'capacity for present relief.?
wherefore (whatever becomes of us) it will be well for you to
get what forces you can together; and the South to help what
they can. The business nearly concerneth all good people. If
your forces had been in a readiness to have fallen upon the back
of Copperspath, it might have occasioned supplies to have come
to us; but the only wise God knows what is best. All shall
work for good. Our spirits® are comfortable (praised be the
Lord), though our present condition be as it is. And indeed we
have much hope in the Lord; of whose mercy we have had large
experience.*

Indeed do you get together what forces you can against them.

1 Passages in his Highness’s last Sickness, already referred to. [Carlyle gives
these words as a quotation, but they are his own, not Harvey’s. The passage he

had in his mind is on pp. 8, 9, of the pamphlet].
2[Carlyle altered this to ‘‘release,” but Cromwell evidently means; able to

relieve us, by falling upon the back of Copperspath. ]

3 minds.

4[‘* History possesses no finer picture of the fortitude of the man of action, with
eyes courageously open to dark facts closing round him, yet with alacrity, vigilance,
and a kind of cheerful hope, taking thought for every detail of the business of the
day.” Morley’s Cromwe/li, p. 318.

=) ee TI

1650. | DUNBAR BATTLE 93

Send to friends in the south to help with more. Let H. Vane
know what I write. I would not make it public, lest danger
should accrue thereby. You know what use to make hereof.
Let me hear from you. I rest,
Your servant,
OuiverR CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ It’s difficult for me to send to you. Let me hear from
‘ you’ after ‘ you receive this.’*

The base of Oliver’s ‘ Dunbar Peninsula,’ as we have called it
(or Dunbar Pinfold where he is now hemmed in, upon ‘an en-
tanglement very difficult’), extends from Belhaven Bay on his
right, to Brocksmouth House on his left; ‘about a mile and a
half from sea to sea.’ Brocksmouth House, the Earl (now Duke)
of Roxburgh’s mansion, which still stands there, his soldiers now
occupy as their extreme post on the left. As its name indicates,
it is the mouth or issue of a small Rivulet, or Burn, called Brock,
Brocksburn ; which, springing from the Lammermoor, and skirt-
ing David Lesley’s Doon Hill, finds its egress here into the sea.
The reader who would form an image to himself of the great
Tuesday 3d of September 1650, at Dunbar, must note well this
little Burn. It runs in a deep grassy glen, which the South-
country Officers in those old Pamphlets describe as a ‘ deep ditch,

* Communicated by John Hare, Esquire, Rosemount Cottage, Clifton. The
MS. at Clifton isa Copy, without date; but has this title in an old hand; ‘ Copy of
‘an original Letter of Oliver Cromwell, written with his own hand, the day before
‘the Battle of Dunbarr, to Sir A. Haselridge.’— —WNote to Second Edition. Found
since (1846), with the Postscript, printed from the Original, in Brand’s History of
Newcastle (London, 1789), ii. 479.——Note to Third Edition. Autograph-
Original found now (May 1847) ; in the possession of R. Ormston, Esq., Newcastle-
on-Tyne. See fostea, p. 113, and Appendix, No. 18. [The present editor is in-
debted to R. Welford, Esq., of Newcastle-on-Tyne for the following information
concerning this and the three later letters to Hesilrige. ‘‘The letters from Oliver
Cromwell were published in a booklet bearing the following title: ‘Four Letters
from Oliver Cromwell to Sir Arthur Heselridge, Governor of Newcastle-upon-
Tyne. From the original letters in the possession of Robert Ormston, Newcastle-
on-Tyne. Printed at the Courant Office, Pilgrim Street, by J. Blackwell and Co.,
1847.’ In my copy, after the word Ormston, some one has written, ‘ now of Sir
A. G. Hazlerig, Bart.,’ indicating that the originals had been handed over to the
family by Mr. Ormston, who was a land agent, and represented the family in the
north of England. In a sort of preface we are told: ‘The first of these letters,
dated September 2, is rightly described in the endorsement as written entirely by
Oliver Cromwell. In the other three letters the signatures and the words ‘‘ My
service to the dear lady” are the only words in his writing.’ ”]

94 “WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 Sopt.

forty feet in depth, and about as many in width,’—ditch dug out
by the little Brook itself, and carpeted with greensward, in the
course of long thousands of years. It runs pretty close by the
foot of Doon Hill; forms, from this point to the sea, the bound-
ary of Oliver’s position: his force is arranged in battle-order
along the left bank of this Brocksburn, and its grassy glen; he
is busied all Monday, he and his Officers, in ranking them there.
‘ Before sunrise on Monday’ Lesley sent down his horse from the
Hill-top, to occupy the other side of this Brook ; ‘about four in
the afternoon’ his train came down, his whole Army gradually
came down; and they now are ranking themselves on the
opposite side of Brocksburn,—on rather narrow ground ; corn-
fields, but swiftly sloping upwards to the steep of Doon Hill.
This goes on, in the wild showers and winds of Monday 2d
September 1650, on both sides of the Rivulet of Brock. Who-
ever will begin the attack, must get across this Brook and its
glen first ; a thing of much disadvantage.

Behind Oliver's ranks, between him and Dunbar, stand his
tents; sprinkled up and down, by battalions, over the face of
this ‘Peninsula ;’ which is a low though very uneven tract of
ground ; now in our time all yellow with wheat and barley in
the autumn season, but at that date only partially tilled,—
describable by Yorkshire Hodgson as a place of plashes ‘and
rough bent-grass; terribly beaten by showery winds that day,

so that your tent will hardly stand. There was then but one _

Farm-house on this tract, where now are not a few: thither
were Oliver’s Cannon sent this morning ; they had at first been
lodged ‘in the Church,’ an edifice standing then as now some-
what apart, ‘at the south end of Dunbar.’ We have notice of
only one other ‘small house,’ belike some poor shepherd’s
homestead, in Oliver’s tract of ground: it stands close by the
Brock Rivulet itself, and in the bottom of the little glen; ata
place where the banks of it flatten themselves out into a slope
passable for carts:! this of course, as the one ‘pass’ in that
quarter, it is highly important to seize. Pride and Lambert
lodged ‘six horse and fifteen foot’ in this poor hut early in the
morning: Lesley’s horse came across, and drove them out;
killing some and ‘ taking three prisoners ; ’—and so got possession
of this pass and hut; but did not keep it. Among the three

1[See the old picture plan, reproduced in Mr. Firth’s paper on Dunbar and his
argument that the ‘‘small house” stood not on the Dunbar but on the Berwick
side of the stream (p. 33, ote). Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1900.]

1650. } DUNBAR BATTLE 95

prisoners was one musketeer, ‘a very stout man, though he has
but a wooden arm,’ and some iron hook at the end of it, poor
fellow. He ‘fired thrice,’ not without effect, with his wooden
arm ; and was not taken without difficulty: a handfast stubborn
man; they carried him across to General Lesley to give some
account of himself. In several of the old Pamphlets, which agree
in all the details of it, this is what we read :

‘General David Lesley (old Leven,’ the other Lesley, ‘ being
‘in the Castle of Edinburgh, as they relate !), asked this man, If
‘the Enemy did intend to fight? He replied, “What do you
‘think we come here for? We come for nothing else !’””—
‘Soldier,’ says Lesley, “how will you fight, when you have
‘shipped half of your men, and all your great guns?” The
‘Soldier replied, “Sir, if you please to draw down your men, you
‘shall find both men and great guns too!” ’—-A most dogged
handfast man, this with the wooden arm, and iron hook on it!
‘ One of the Officers asked, How he durst answer the General so
‘saucily? He said, “I only answer the question put to me!”’
Lesley sent him across, free again, by a trumpet: he made his
way to-Cromwell ; reported what had passed, and added doggedly,
He for one had lost twenty shillings by the business,—plundered
from him in this action. ‘The Lord General gave him there-
upon two pieces, which I think are forty shillings; and sent
him away rejoicing.’—This is the adventure at the ‘pass’ by the
shepherd’s hut in the bottom of the glen, close by Brocksburn
itself.

And now farther, on the great scale, we are to remark very
specially that there is just one other ‘pass’ across the Brocks-
burn ; and this is precisely where the London road now crosses
it; about a mile east from the former pass, and perhaps two
gunshots west from Brocksmouth House. There the great road
then as now crosses the Burn of Brock; the steep grassy glen,
or ‘broad ditch forty feet deep,’ flattening itself out here once
more into a passable slope: passable, but still steep on the
southern or Lesley side, still mounting up there, with consider-

1 Old Leven is 4ere, if the Pamphlet knew ; but only as a volunteer and without
command, though nominally still General-in-chief.

2 Cadwell the Army’s Messenger’s Narrative to the Parliament (in Carte’s
Ormond Papers, i. 382). Given also, with other details, in King's Pamphlets,
small 4to, no. 478, §§ 9, 7, 10; no. 479, § 1; &e. &c. [E. 612, 613.)

- ge oe

96 WAR WITH SCOTLAND 13 Sept.

able acclivity, into a high table-ground, out of which the Doon
Hill, as outskirt of the Lammermoor, a short mile to your right,
gradually gathers itself. There, at this ‘pass,’ on and about the
present London road, as you discover after long dreary dim
examining, took place the brunt or essential agony of the Battle
of Dunbar long ago.! Read in the extinct old Pamphlets, and
ever again obstinately read, till some light rise in them, look even
with unmilitary eyes at the ground as it now is, you do at last
obtain small glimmerings of distinct features here and there,—
which gradually coalesce into a kind of image for you; and some
spectrum of the Fact becomes visible ; rises veritable, face to
face, on you, grim and sad in the depths of the old dead Time.
Yes, my travelling friends, vehiculating in gigs or otherwise over
that piece of London road, you may say to yourselves, Here
without monument is the grave of a valiant thing which was
done under the Sun; the footprint of a Hero, not yet quite
undistinguishable, is here !—

‘The Lord General about four o’clock,’ says the old Pamphlets,
‘went into the Town to take some refreshments,’ a hasty late
dinner, or early supper, whichever we may call it; ‘and very
soon returned back, —having written Sir Arthur’s Letter, I think,
in the interim.? Coursing about the field, with enough of things
to order; walking at last with Lambert in the Park or Garden
of Brocksmouth House, he discerns that Lesley is astir on the
Hill-side ; altering. his position somewhat. That Lesley in fact
is coming wholly down to the basis of the Hill, where his horse
had been since sunrise : coming wholly down to the edge of the
Brook and glen, among the sloping harvest-fields there ; and also
is bringing up his left wing of horse, most part of it, towards his
right ; edging himself, ‘ shogging,’ as Oliver calls it, his whole line
more and more to the right!? His meaning is, to get hold of

1[But see note 3 below. }

2{Dr. Gardiner thinks that it must have been written early in the morning, as
there is no hint in it of Leslie’s movement down the hill, but when Cromwell sent it
off, enclosed in another letter written on the 4th, he speaks of it as written on “‘ the
2nd of this month, which was the evening before the fight.” Possibly however he
uses the word in the sense of the ‘‘ eve of the fight,” z.e., the day before. (See Letter
CXLI. below. )]

3[Mr. Firth, by the help of the picture plan of the battle before mentioned (found
amongst the Clarke WSS.) has come definitely to the conclusion that as Leslie
descended the northern face of Doon Hill, he did actually ‘‘ shogg” his horse more
and more to the right, z.¢., to the east, and that his lines ran facing the sea and at
right angles to the burn. ‘Thus Cromwell’s main attack would be made, not at the
pass over the stream, but by passing in front of the Scotch forces, where the road

—C—— —- .

1650.] DUNBAR BATTLE 97

Brocksmouth House and the pass of the Brook there ;! after
which it will be free to him to attack us when he will !—Lesley
in fact considers, or at least the Committee of Estates and Kirk
consider, that Oliver is lost; that, on the whole, he must not be
left to retreat, but must be attacked and annihilated here. A
vague story, due to Bishop Burnet, the watery source of many
such, still circulates about the world, That it was the Kirk
Committee who forced Lesley down against his will; that
Oliver, at sight of it, exclaimed, “The Lord hath delivered”
&ec.: which nobody is in the least bound to believe.? It appears,
from other quarters, that Lesley was advised or sanctioned in
this attempt by the Committee of Estates and Kirk, but also that
he was by no means hard to advise; that, in fact, lying on the
top of Doon Hill, shelterless in such weather, was no operation
to spin out beyond necessity ;—and that if anybody pressed too
much upon him with advice to come down and fight, it was
likeliest to be Royalist Civil Dignitaries, who had plagued him
with their cavillings at his cunctations, at his ‘secret fellow-
feeling for the Sectarians and Regicides,’ ever since this War
began. The poor Scotch Clergy have enough of their own to
answer for in this business; let every back bear the burden that
belongs to it. Ina word, Lesley descends, has been descending
all day, and ‘shogs’ himself to the right,—urged, I believe, by
manifold counsel, and by the nature of the case; and, what is
equally important for us, Oliver sees him, and sees through him,
in this movement of his.

At sight of this movement, Oliver suggests to Lambert standing
by him, Does it not give us an advantage, if we, instead of him,

runs to Berwick. See the plan of the battle in Mr. Firth’s Oliver Cromwedi, and his
paper on ‘‘ Dunbar” in the 7ransactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1900.
Dr. Gardiner has adopted the same view with some slight variation. See Common-
wealth and Protectorate, vol. i., p. 322, note, Third edition. ]

1Baillie’s Letters, iii, 111.

2[Mr. Hill Burton (A7zs¢. Scot. vii. 24, note 2) shows that Burnet is confirmed by
Baillie, who states that after the ‘‘ woeful rout at Dunbar” it was vehemently pressed
to have Leslie laid aside, but that nothing was found against him ‘‘ but the removal
of the army from the hill the night before the rout, which yet was a consequence of
the Committee’s order, contrary to his mind, to stop the enemy’s retreat” (Letters
and Journals, iii. 111). Burnet goes on to say that many thought that the advice
was treacherously given, but he is persuaded that this was not so; ‘‘ only Warriston
was too hot and Leslie was too cold, and yielded too easily to their humours, which
he ought not to have done.” See also Cromwell's own statement in Letter CXLIL.,
that ‘‘the clergy’s counsel prevailed”. It is difficult to say whom Carlyle means
by the ‘‘ Royalist Civil Dignitaries” to whom he inclines to ascribe the advice. ]

VoL. u.—7

ee ~
' = oo

98 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [8 Sept.

like to begin the attack?! Here is the Enemy’s right wing
coming out to the open space, free to be attacked on any side;
and the main-battle hampered in narrow sloping ground between
Doon Hill and the Brook, has no room to manceuvre or assist : 2
beat this right wing where it now stands; take it in flank and
front with an overpowering force,—it is driven upon its own
main-battle, the whole Army is beaten? Lambert eagerly assents,
“had meant to say the same thing.” Monk, who comes up at
the moment, likewise assents; as the other Officers do, when the
case is set before them. It is the plan resolved upon for battle.
The attack shall begin tomorrow before dawn.

And so the soldiers stand to their arms, or lie within instant
reach of their arms, all night; being upon an engagement very
difficult indeed. The night is wild and wet ;—2d of September
means 12th by our calendar: the Harvest Moon wades deep
among clouds of sleet and hail. Whoever has a heart for prayer, |
let him pray now, for the wrestle of death is at hand. Pray,— |
and withal keep his powder dry! And be ready for extremities, |
and quit himself like a man !—Thus they pass the night; making
that Dunbar Peninsula and Brock Rivulet long memorable to me.
We English have some tents; the Scots have none. The hoarse
sea moans bodeful, swinging low and heavy against these whin-
stone bays; the sea and the tempests are abroad, all else asleep
but we,—and there is One that rides on the wings of the
wind.

Towards three in the morning the Scotch foot, by order of a
Major-General say some,’ extinguish their matches, all but two
in a company; cower under the corn-shocks, seeking some
imperfect shelter and sleep.4 Be wakeful, ye English; watch,
and pray, and keep your powder dry. About four o’clock comes
order to my puddingheaded Yorkshire friend, that his regiment
must mount and march straightway ; his and various other regi-
ments march, pouring swiftly to the left to Brocksmouth House,
to the Pass over the Brock. With overpowering force let us

—s

1[This is probably the speech to which Burnet alludes. It would be quite
natural for Oliver to ascribe the advantage to God's special working on their behalf. ]

2 Hodgson.

3 * Major-General Holburn’ (he that escorted Cromwell into Edinburgh in 1648),
says Walker, p. 180.

4[Their officers seem to have retired to their tents on the hill side.

‘*Tt was our own laziness,” Leslie said afterwards ; ‘‘I take God to witness that
we might have as easily beaten them as we did James Graham at Philiphaugh, if
the officers had stayed by their troops and regiments,”’]

1650.] DUNBAR BATTLE 99

storm the Scots right wing there; beat that, and all is beaten.
Major Hodgson riding along, heard, he says, ‘a Cornet praying
in the night ;’ a company of poor men, I think, making worship
there, under the void Heaven, before battle joined: Major
Hodgson, giving his charge to a brother Officer, turned aside
to listen for a minute, and worship and pray along with them;
haply his last prayer on this Earth, as it might prove to be.
But no: this Cornet prayed with such effusion as was wonderful ;
and imparted strength to my Yorkshire friend, who strengthened
his men by telling them of it. And the Heavens, in their mercy,
I think, have opened us a way of deliverance !—The Moon gleams
out, hard and blue, riding among hail-clouds ; and over St. Abb’s
Head, a streak of dawn is rising.

And now is the hour when the attack should be, and no Lam-
bert is yet here, he is ordering the line far to the right yet ; and
Oliver occasionally, in Hodgson’s hearing, is impatient for him.
The Scots too, on this wing, are awake ; thinking to surprise us ;
there is their trumpet sounding, we heard it once ; and Lambert,
who was to lead the attack, is not here. The Lord General is
impatient ;— behold Lambert at last! The trumpets peal,
shattering with fierce clangour Night’s silence; the cannons
awaken along all the Line: “The Lord of Hosts! The Lord of
Hosts!’’ On, my brave ones, on !—

The dispute ‘on this right wing was hot and stiff, for three
quarters of an hour.’ Plenty of fire, from fieldpieces, snaphances,
matchlocks, entertains the Scotch main-battle across the Brock ;
—poor stiffened men, roused from the corn-shocks with their
matches all out! But here on the right, their horse, ‘with
lancers in the front rank,’ charge desperately; drive us back
across the hollow of the Rivulet ;—back a little; but the Lord
gives us courage, and we storm home again, horse and foot, upon
them, with a shock like tornado tempests; break them, beat
them, drive them all adrift. ‘Some fled towards Copperspath,
but most across their own foot.’ Their own poor foot, whose
matches were hardly well alight yet! Poor men, it was a
terrible awakening for them: fieldpieces and charge of foot
across the Brocksburn ; and now here is their own horse in mad
panic trampling them to death. Above Three-thousand killed
upon the place: ‘1 never saw such a charge of foot and horse,’
says one;/ nor did I. Oliver was still near to Yorkshire

?Rushworth’s Letter to the Speaker (in Parliamentary History, xix. 341).

Ee

100 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 Sept.

Hodgson when the shock succeeded ; Hodgson heard him say,
“They run! 1 profess they run!’’ And over St. Abb’s Head
and the German Ocean, just then, bursts the first gleam of the
level Sun upon us, ‘and I heard Nol say, in the words of the
Psalmist, “ Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered,” ’—or in
Rous’s metre.

Let God arise, and scattered
Let all his enemies be;

And let all those that do him hate
Before his presence flee!

Even so. The Scotch Army is shivered to utter ruin; rushes
in tumultuous wreck, hither, thither; to Belhaven, or, in their
distraction, even to Dunbar, the chase goes as far as Haddington ;
led by Hacker. ‘The Lord General made a halt,’ says Hodgson,
‘and sang the Hundred-and-seventeenth Psalm,’ till our horse
could gather for the chase. Hundred-and-seventeenth Psalm, at
the foot of the Doon Hill; there we uplift it, to the tune of
Bangor, or some still higher score, and roll it strong and great
against the sky :

O give ye praise unto the Lord,
All nati-ons that be ;

Likewise ye people all, accord
His name to magnify !

For great to-us-ward ever are
His lovingkindnesses ;

His truth endures forevermore :
The Lord O do ye bless !

And now, to the chase again.

The prisoners are Ten-thousand,—all the foot in a mass.
Many Dignitaries are taken; not a few are slain; of whom see
Printed Lists,—full of blunders. Provost Jaffray of Aberdeen,
Member of the Scots Parliament, one of the Committee of
Estates, was very nearly slain: a trooper’s sword was in the air
to sever him, but one cried, He is a man of consequence ; he can
ransom himself !—and the trooper kept him prisoner.!_ The first
of the Scots Quakers, by and by; and an official person much
reconciled to Oliver. Ministers also of the Kirk Committee

1 Diary of Alexander Jaffray (London, 1834 ;—unhappily relating almost all to
the inner man of Jaffray).

1650.} PROCLAMATION, DUNBAR 101

were slain; two Ministérs I find taken, poor Carstairs of Glas-
gow, poor Waugh of some other place,—of whom we shall
transiently hear again. ;

General David Lesley, vigorous for flight as for other things,
got to Edinburgh by nine o'clock ; poor old Leven, not so light of
movement, did not get till two. Tragical enough. What a
change since January 1644, when we marched out of this same
Dunbar up to the knees in snow! It was to help and save these
very men that we then marched; with the Covenant in all our
hearts. We have stood by the letter of the Covenant; fought
for our Covenanted Stuart King as we could ;—they again,
they stand by the substance of it, and have trampled us and
the letter of it into this ruinous state !—Yes, my poor friends ;
—and now be wise, be taught! The letter of your Covenant,
in fact, will never rally again in this world. The spirit and
substance of it, please God, will never die in this or in any
world !

Such is Dunbar Battle; which might also be called Dunbar
Drove, for it was a frightful rout. Brought on by miscalculation ;
misunderstanding of the difference between substances and
semblances ;—by mismanagement, and the chance of war. My
Lord General’s next seven Letters, all written on the morrow,
will now be intelligible to the reader. First, however, take the
following

PROCLAMATION

Forasmucu as I understand there are several Soldiers of the
Enemy’s Army yet abiding in the Field, who by reason of their
wounds could not march from thence :

These are therefore to give notice to the Inhabitants of this
Nation That they may and ‘hereby’ have! free liberty to repair
to the Field aforesaid, and, with their carts or ‘in’ any other
peaceable way, to carry away the said Soldiers to such places as
they shall think fit: provided they meddle not ‘ with,’ or take

1 ste,

102 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _[4 Sept.

away, any the Arms there. And all Officers and Soldiers are to
take notice that the same is permitted.
Given under my hand, at Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

Outver CROMWELL.

To be proclaimed by beat of drum.*

LETTER CXL

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

Sir,

I hope it’s not ill taken, that I make no more
frequent addresses to the Parliament. Things that are of trouble,
in point of provision for your army, and of ordinary direction,
I have, as I could, often presented to the Council of State, to-
gether with such occurrences as have happened ; who, I am sure,
as they have not been wanting in their extraordinary care and
provision for us, so neither ‘in’ what they judge fit and necessary
to represent the same to you. And this I thought to be a suffi-
cient discharge of my duty on that behalf.

It hath now pleased God to bestow a mercy upon you, worthy
your knowledge, and of the utmost praise and thanks of all that
fear and love His name; yea, the mercy is far above all praise,
which that you may the better perceive, I shall take the boldness
to tender unto you some circumstances accompanying this great
business, which will manifest the greatness and seasonableness
of this mercy.

We having tried what we could to engage the enemy, three

* Old Newspapers, Several Proceedings in Parliament, no. 50 (5th-rath Sept.
Also ‘‘a true

1650): in Burney Newspapers (British Museum), vol. xxxiv.
relation of the routing the Scotish army,” E. 612. No. 9.]

1650.) LETTER CXL., DUNBAR 103

or four miles west of Edinburgh; that proving ineffectual, and
our victual failing, we marched towards our ships for a recruit
of our want. The enemy did not at all trouble us in our rear ;
but marched the direct way towards Edinburgh, and partly in
the night and morning slips-through his whole army, and quarters
himself in a posture easy to interpose between us and our victual.
But the Lord made him to lose the opportunity, and the morning
proving exceeding wet and dark, we recovered, by that time it
was light, into a ground where they could not hinder us from our
victual: which was a high act of the Lord’s Providence to us.
We being come into the said ground, the enemy marched into
the ground we were last upon; having no mind either to strive
to interpose between us and our victuals, or to fight; being
indeed upon this lock,\—hoping that the sickness of your army
would render their work more easy by the gaining of time;
whereupon we marched to Musselburgh, to victual, and to ship
away our sick men; where we sent abroad near five-hundred
sick and wounded soldiers, and upon serious consideration,
finding our weakness so to increase, and the enemy lying upon
his advantage, at a general council it was thought fit to march
to Dunbar, and there to fortify the town, which (we thought), if
anything, would provoke them to engage, as also, that the having
of a garrison there would furnish us with accommodation for our
sick men, would be a good place for a magazine (which we
exceedingly wanted) ; being put to depend upon the uncertainty
of weather, for landing provisions, which many times cannot be
done though the being of the whole army lay upon it (all the
coasts from Berwick to Leith not having one good harbour), as
also, to lie more conveniently to receive our recruits of horse and
foot from Berwick.

Having these considerations, upon Saturday the 30th? of

1[Nares gives ‘‘ to be at his old lock” as meaning ‘‘ to follow his old practices,”
and Cromwell uses this phrase in Letter CLXXVII. Carlyle altered it to ‘‘ upon
this aim of reducing us to a lock” ; but the letter is now printed from the original,
so that there can be no doubt as to what Cromwell actually wrote. ]

2 sic: but Saturday is 31st.

104 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept. |

August we marched from Musselburgh to Haddington, where,
by that time we had got the van-brigade of our horse, and our |
foot and train, into their quarters, the enemy was marched with |
that exceeding expedition that they fell upon the rear-forlorn of
our horse, and put it into some disorder ; and indeed had like to
have engaged our rear-brigade of horse with their whole army,
had not the Lord by His good Providence put a cloud over the
moon, thereby giving us opportunity to draw off those horse to
the rest of the army, which accordingly was done without any |
loss, save of three or four of our aforementioned forlorn ; where- |
in the enemy (as we believe) received more loss. |

The army being put into a reasonable secure posture, towards
midnight the enemy attempted our quarters, on the west end of
Haddington: but through the goodness of God we repulsed
them. The next morning we drew into an open field, on the
south side of Haddington ; we not judging it safe for us to draw
to the Enemy upon his own ground, he being prepossessed
thereof; but rather drew back, to give him way to come to us,
if he had so thought fit; and having waited about the space of
four or five hours, to see if he would come to us; and not finding
any inclination in the enemy so to do, we resolved to go, accord-
ing to our first intendment, to Dunbar.

By that time we had marched three or four miles, we saw
some bodies of the enemy’s horse draw out of their quarters ;
and by that time our carriages were gotten near Dunbar, their
whole army was upon their march after us; and indeed, our
drawing back in this manner, with the addition of three new
regiments added to them, did much heighten their confidence,
if not presumption and arrogancy. The enemy, that night, we
perceived, gathered towards the hills; labouring to make a
perfect interposition between us and Berwick, and having in this
posture a great advantage, through his better knowledge of the
country ; which he effected by sending a considerable party to
the strait Pass at Copperspeth; where ten men to hinder are
better than forty to make their way; and truly this was an

1650.] LETTER CXL., DUNBAR 105

exigent to us,! wherewith the enemy reproached us with that
condition the Parliament’s army was in when it made its hard
conditions with the King in Cornwall.? By some reports that
have come to us, they had disposed of us, and of their business, in
sufficient revenge and wrath towards our persons, and had swal-
lowed up the poor interest of England; believing that their
army and their King would have marched to London without
any interruption ; it being told us (we know not how truly) by a
prisoner we took the night before the fight, that their King was
very suddenly to come amongst them, with those English they
allowed to be about him.* But in what they were thus lifted up,
the Lord was above them.

The enemy lying in the posture before mentioned, having
those advantages; we lay very near him, being sensible of our
disadvantages, having some weakness of flesh, but yet consola-
tion and support from the Lord himself to our poor weak faith,
wherein I believe not a few amongst us shared: that because of
their numbers, because of their advantages, because of their con-
fidence, because of our weakness, because of our strait, we were
in the Mount, and in the Mount the Lord would be seen; and
that He would find out a way of deliverance and salvation for
us :—and indeed we had our consolations and our hopes.

Upon Monday evening, the enemy, whose numbers were very
great; as we heard, about six-thousand horse, and sixteen-
thousand foot at least; ours drawn down, as to sound men, to
about seven-thousand five-hundred foot, and three-thousand five-
hundred horse, the enemy drew down to their right wing about
two-thirds of their left wing of horse, to the right wing, shogging
also their foot and train much to the right, causing their right
wing of horse to edge down towards the sea. We could not

1A disgraceful summons of caption to us; ‘exigent’ is a law-writ issued
against a fugitive.—such as we knew long since, in our young days, about
Lincoln's Inn !

2 Essex’s Army six years ago, in Autumn 1644, when the King had impounded
it among the Hills there (see anéea, vol. i. p. 183).

’ (Buckingham (who had played into Argyll’s hands) seems to have been about
the only one of the King’s friends allowed to remain with him. ]

IY, Sir hae
vr : y 1.

106 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

well imagine but that the enemy intended to attempt upon us,
or to place themselves in a more exact condition of interposition.
‘The’ Major-General and myself coming to the Earl Roxburgh’s
House, and observing this posture, I told him I thought it did
give us an opportunity and advantage to attempt upon the
enemy, to which he immediately replied, that he had thought to
have said the same thing to me. So that it pleased the Lord to
set this apprehension upon both of our hearts, at the same
instant. We called for Colonel Monk, and showed him the
thing: and coming to our quarter at night, and demonstrating
our apprehensions to some of the colonels, they also cheerfully
concurred.

We resolved therefore to put our business into this posture :
That six regiments of horse, and three regiments and an half of
foot should march in the van; and that the Major-General, the
Lieutenant-General of the horse, and the Commissary-General,'
and Colonel Monk to command the brigade of foot, should lead
on the business ; and that Colonel Pride’s brigade, Colonel Over-
ton’s brigade, and the remaining two regiments of horse should
bring up the cannon and rear; the time of falling-on to be by
break of day: but through some delays it proved not to be so
till six o’clock in the morning.?

The Enemy’s word was, The Covenant ; which it had been for
divers days. Ours, Zhe Lord of Hosts. The Major-General,
Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, and Commissary-General Whal-
ley, and Colonel Twisleton’s gave the onset; the enemy being
in a very good posture to receive them, having the advantage
of their cannon and foot against our horse. Before our foot
could come up, the enemy made a gallant resistance, and there
was a very hot dispute at sword’s point between our horse and

1 Lambert, Fleetwood, Whalley.

2[Dr. Gardiner notes that on Sept. ;%, the sun rises at 5.33; that Cadwell jn
his account speaks of fighting by moonlight, and that Cromwell's well-known
words ‘‘ Let God arise,” etc., spoken after the tide of battle turned, coincided with
sunrise. .Mr. Firth thinks that the preliminary fighting began about four or five,
and the real battle an hour or more later.]

1650.] LETTER CXL., DUNBAR 107

theirs. Our first foot, after they had discharged their duty
(being overpowered with the enemy), received some repulse,
which they soon recovered. But my own regiment, under the
command of Lieutenant-Colonel Goffe and my Major, White,
did come seasonably in; and, at the push of pike, did repel the
stoutest regiment the enemy had there, merely with the courage
the Lord was pleased to give, which proved a great amazement
to the residue of their foot ; this being the first action between
the foot. The horse in the mean time did, with a great deal
of courage and spirit, beat back all opposition ; charging through
the bodies of the enemy’s horse, and their foot ; who were, after
the first repulse given, made by the Lord of Hosts as stubble to
their swords. Indeed, I believe I may speak it without parti-
ality: both your chief commanders and others in their several
places, and soldiers also, were acted! with as much courage as
ever hath been seen in any action since this war. I know they
look not to be named ; and therefore I forbear particulars.?

The best of the enemy’s horse and foot being broken through
and through in less than an hour’s dispute, their whole army
being put into confusion, it became a total rout ; our men having
the chase and execution of them near eight miles. We believe
that upon the place and near about it were about three-thousand
slain; prisoners taken of their officers, you have this enclosed
list ; of private soldiers near ten-thousand. The whole baggage
and train taken, wherein was good store of match, powder and
bullet ; all their artillery, great and small, thirty guns. We are
confident they have left behind them not less than fifteen-
thousand arms. I have already brought-in to me near two-
hundred colours, which I herewith send you. What officers ot

1 ‘actuated,’ as we now write it.

2[*‘ Cromwell's Gazette,” Mr. Morley says, ‘‘ was peculiar ; perhaps not without
a moral for later days”’.]

3 They hung long in Westminster Hall; beside the Preston ones, and still others
that came. Colonel Pride has been heard to wish, and almost to hope, That the

' Lawyers’ gowns might all be hung up beside the Scots colours yet,—and the

Lawyers’ selves, except some very small and most select needful remnant, be
ordered peremptorily to disappear from those localities, and seek an honest trade

108 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

quality of theirs are killed, we yet cannot learn, but yet surely
divers are, and many men of quality are mortally wounded, as
Colonel Lumsden,'the Lord Liberton and others. And, that
which is no small addition, I do not believe we have lost twenty
men. Not one commissioned officer slain that I hear of, save one
cornet and Major Rookesby, since dead of his wounds; and
not many mortally wounded: Colonel Whalley only cut in the
handwrist, and his horse (twice shot) killed under him; but
he well recovered another horse, and went on in the chase.

Thus you have the prospect of one of the most signal mercies
God hath done for England and His people, this war.

And now may it please you to give me the leave of a few words.
It is easy to say, the Lord hath done this. It would do you good
to see and hear our poor foot go up and down making their boast of
God. But, Sir, it is in your hands, and by these eminent mercies
God puts it more into your hands, to give glory to Him; to im-
prove your power, and His blessings, to His praise. We that
serve you beg of you not to own us, but God alone; we pray you
own His people more and. more, for they are the chariots and
horsemen of Israel. Disown yourselves, but own your authority,
and improve it to curb the proud and the insolent, such as would
disturb the tranquillity of England, though under what specious
pretences soever ; relieve the oppressed, hear the groans of poor
prisoners in England; be pleased to reform the abuses of all
professions ; and if there be any one that makes many poor to
make a few rich,! that suits not a Commonwealth. If He that

elsewhere! (Walker's History of Jndependency.) [The mottoes on the Scottish
flags or ‘‘cornets” as those of the troops of horse were called, are rather a curious
study. At Dunse Law, as we have seen, all bore the words, ‘‘ For Christs Crown
and Covenant” (the modern form of the possessive is not in Baz/lie’s MS. although
it is in the published edition of it), But at Prestonand Dunbar, the most common
motto was ‘‘ Covenant for religion, King and Kingdoms,” a banner divided into
four triangular spaces by the Cross of St. Andrew. Next in favour, though a
good way behind, was ‘‘ For Covenant, Religion, King and Kingdom.” There
is a volume of coloured drawings of these flags at the British Museum (Har/ey
MS. 1460) compiled ‘‘ by FF, his Highness’ historiographer.” This, no doubt, is
Fitzpayne Fisher. ]

1* Many of them hada pees at Lawyers generally’ (says learned Bulstrode in
these months,—appealing to posterity, almost with tears in his big dull eyes !).

1650.] LETTER CXL., DUNBAR 109

strengthens your servants to fight, pleases to give you hearts to
set upon these things, in order to His glory, and the glory of
your Commonwealth, besides the benefit England shall feel there-
by, you shall shine forth to other nations, who shall emulate the
glory of such a pattern, and through the power of God turn into
the like.

These are our desires; and that you may have liberty and
opportunity to do these things, and not be hindered, we have
been and shall be (by God’s assistance) willing to venture our
lives, and not desire you should be precipitated by importunities,
from your care of safety and preservation ; but that the doing of
these good things may have their place amongst those which
concern wellbeing,! and so be wrought in their time and order.

Since we came in Scotland, it hath been our desire and long-
ing to have avoided blood in this business, by reason that God
hath a people here fearing His name, though deceived ; and to
that end have we offered much love unto such, in the bowels of
Christ, and concerning the truth of our hearts therein, have we
appealed unto the Lord. The ministers of Scotland have
hindered the passage of these things to the hearts of those to
whom we intended them, and now we hear, that not only the
deceived people, but some of the ministers are also fallen in this
battle. This is the great hand of the Lord, and worthy of the
consideration of all those who take? into their hands the instru-
ments of a foolish shepherd, to wit, meddling with worldly
policies, and mixtures of earthly power, to set up that which they
eall the kingdom of Christ, which is neither it, nor, if it were it,
would such means be found effectual to that end; and neglect,
or trust not to, the Word of God, the sword of the Spirit, which
is alone powerful and able for the setting up of that kingdom,
and, when trusted to, will be found effectually able to that end,
and will also do it. This is humbly offered for their sakes who
have? lately too much turned aside: that they might return

l We as yet struggle for 4e/ng ; which is preliminary, and still more essential.
2‘ taking” in orzg.] 3[‘‘ having” in orig.]

110 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

again to preach Jesus Christ, according to the simplicity of the
Gospel; and then no doubt they will discern and find your
protection and encouragement.

Beseeching you to pardon this length, I humbly take leave
and rest,

Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
O.iver CROMWELL.*

Industrious dull Bulstrode, coming home from the Council of
State towards Chelsea on Saturday afternoon, is accosted on the
streets, ‘near Charing Cross,’ by a dusty individual, who declares
himself bearer of this Letter from my Lord General ; and imparts
a rapid outline of the probable contents to Bulstrode’s mind, which
naturally kindles with a certain slow solid satisfaction on receipt
thereof

LETTER CXLI

Letrer CXXXIX., for Sir Arthur, did not go on Monday night ;
and finds now an unexpected conveyance !—Brand, Historian of
Newcastle, got sight of that Letter, and of this new one enclosing
it, in the hands of an old Steward of the Haselrigs, grandfather
of the present possessor of those Documents, some half-century

* Newspapers (in Cryomwelliana, pp. 87-91). [‘‘ A letter from the Lord General”
E. 612, 11. But now printed from the original at Welbeck. It is endorsed, ‘‘ Recd.
ro Sept. 1650.’"]

1 Whitlocke (2d edition), p. 470 (7th Sept.). [It would almost appear from
Whitelocke that Cromwell had sent off hurried letters ky this messenger, and that
the longer account followed. Whitelocke says, Sept. 7, ‘‘ Letters from Cromwell
to the Speaker and to the Council of State of a great victory against the Scots at
Dunbar; the particulars were not then certified, but left to the relation of the
messenger, who was an eye-witness of the action; who made his narrative to this
effect [recited]. The Council of State ordered the narrative made by the Lord
General his messenger to be read in all churches in London to-morrow.” ‘There
does not seem any reason, if Cromwell’s own narrative had come, why it should
not have been read in the churches, instead of the narrative of the messenger. On
Tuesday the roth, Whitelocke notes ‘‘ Letters from the General of the Parliament
of the particulars of the battle of Dunbar.’’ This agrees with the endorsement
of the above letter. ]

1650.] LETTER CXLI, DUNBAR 111

ago; and happily took copies. Letter CXX XIX. was autograph,
‘folded up hastily before the ink was quite ;—sealed with
red wax:’ of this there is nothing autograph but the signature ;
and the sealing-wax 1s black.

For the Honourable Sir Arthur Haselrige, at Newcastle or elsewhere :
These. Haste, haste

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

Sir,

You will see by my enclosed of the 2d of this
month, which was the evening before the fight, the condition we
were in at that time, which I thought fit on purpose to send you,
that you might see how great and how seasonable our deliverance
and mercy is, by such aggravation.

Having said my thoughts thereupon to the Parliament, I shall
only give you the narrative of this exceeding mercy ;! believing
the Lord will enlarge your heart to a thankful consideration
thereupon. The least of this mercy lies not in the advantageous
consequences which I hope it may produce, of glory to God and
good to His people, in the prosecution of that which remains,
unto which this great work hath opened so fair a way. We have
no cause to doubt but, if it shall please the Lord to prosper our
endeavours, we may find opportunities both upon Edinburgh and
Leith, Stirling-Bridge, and other such places as the Lord shall
lead unto, even far above our thoughts; as this late and other
experiences gives good encouragements.

Wherefore, that we may not be wanting, I desire you, with
such forces as you have, immediately to march to me to Dunbar ;
leaving behind you such of your new levies as will prevent lesser
incursions: for surely their rout and ruin is so total that they
will not be provided for any thing that is very considerable ; or
rather, which I more incline unto, that you would send Thomlinson?

1Means the bare statement. In the next sentence, ‘ The least lies not,’ is for
The not least lies.
2[Colonel Matthew Thomlinson. }

ite a © ii

112 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

with the forces you have ready, and that with all possible ex-
pedition; and that you will go on with the remainder of the
reserve, which, upon better thoughts, I do not think can well be
done without you.

Sir, let no time nor opportunity be lost. Surely it’s probable
the Kirk has done their do.! I believe their King will set up
upon his own score now, wherein he will find many friends.
Taking opportunity offered, it’s our great advantage, through
God. I need say no more to you on this behalf, but rest,

Your humble servant,
OLiveR CROMWELL.

My service to your good Lady. I think it will be very fit
that you should bake hard-bread again, considering you increase
our numbers. I pray you do so. Sir, I desire you to procure
about three or four score masons, and ship them to us with all
speed, for we expect that God will suddenly put some places
into our hands, which we shall have occasion to fortify.*

LETTER CXLII
To the Lord President of the Council of State: These

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.
My Lorp,

I have sent the Major-General, with six
regiments of horse and one of foot, towards Edinburgh; pur-
posing (God willing) to follow after, tomorrow, with what con-
venience I may.

We are put to exceeding trouble, though it be an effect of
abundant mercy, with the numerousness of our prisoners ; having

1‘ doo’ in orig.

* Brand's History of Newcastle, ii. 479. In Brand's Book there follow Excerpts
from two other Letters to Sir Arthur ; of which, on inquiry, the present Baronet of
Nosely Hall unluckily knows nothing farther, The Excerpts, with their dates,
shall be given presently. =

{
1

1650.] LETTER CXLII, DUNBAR 113

so few hands, so many of our men sick, so little conveniency of
disposing of them ;! and not, by attendance thereupon, to omit
the seasonableness of the prosecution of this mercy as Providence
shall direct. We have been constrained, even out of Christianity,
humanity, and the forementioned necessity, to dismiss between
four and five thousand prisoners, almost starved, sick and wounded ;
the remainder, which are the like, or a greater number, I am fain
to send by a convoy of four troops of Colonel Hacker's to Berwick,
and so on to Newcastle, southwards.”

I think fit to acquaint your Lordship with two or three observa-
tions. Some of the honestest in the army amongst the Scots
did profess before the fight, that they did not believe their King
in his Declaration ;* and it’s most evident he did sign it with as
much reluctancy and so much against his heart as could be: and
yet they venture their lives for him upon this account; and
publish this ‘ Declaration’ to the world, to be believed as the act
of a person converted, when in their hearts they know he
abhorred the doing of it, and meant it not.

I hear, when the enemy marched last up to us, the ministers
pressed their army to interpose between us and home; the
chief officers desiring rather that we might have way made,
though it were by a golden bridge. But the clergy’s counsel
prevailed ; to their no great comfort, through the goodness of
God.

1 The Prisoners :—sentence ungrammatical, but intelligible.

® Here are Brand’s Excerpts from the two other Letters to Sir Arthur, spoken of
in the former Note: ‘ Dunéar, 5th Sept. 1650. . . . After much deliberation, we
‘can find no way how to dispose of these prisoners that will be consisting with those
“two ends (to wit, the not losing them and the not starving them, neither of which
“would we willingly incur), but by sending them into England.’ (Brand, ii. 48r).
— —‘ Edinburgh, 9th Sept. 1650. . . . I hope your northern guests are come to
‘you by this time. I pray you let humanity be exercised towards them: I am
‘ persuaded it will be comely. Let the officers be kept at Newcastle, some sent to
‘Lynn, some to Chester.’ (/ééd. p. 480).— —(Note to Third Edition), Letters
complete, Appendix, No. 19.

A frightful account of what became of those poor ‘ northern guests’ as they pro-
ceeded ‘southwards ;’ how, for sheer hunger, they ate raw cabbages in the ‘ walled
garden at Morpeth,’ and lay in unspeakable imprisonment in Durham Cathedral,
and died as of swift pestilence there: In Sir Arthur Haselrig’s Letter to the Council
of State (reprinted, from the old Pamphlets, in Parliamentary History, xix. 417).

%Open Testimony against the sins of his Father, see antea, p. 86,

VoL, 1.—8

114 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

The enemy took a gentleman of Major Brown's troop prisoner,
that night we came to Haddington ; and he had quarter through
Lieutenant-General David Lesley’s means; who, finding him a
man of courage and parts, laboured with him to take up arms.
But the man expressing constancy and resolution to this side, the
Lieutenant-General caused him to be mounted, and with two
troopers to ride about to view their gallant army; using that as
an argument to persuade him to their side, and, when this was
done, dismissed him to us in a bravery. And indeed the day
before we fought, they did express so much insolency and
contempt of us, to some soldiers they took, as was beyond
apprehension.

Your Lordship’s most humble servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

Wuicu high officialities being ended, here are certain glad
domestic Letters of the same date.

LETTER CXLIII

For my beloved Wife Elizabeth Crommell, at the Cockpit: These

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.
My Dearest,

I have not leisure to write much. But I
could chide thee that in many of thy letters thou writest to me,
that I should not be unmindful of thee and thy little ones.
Truly, if I love you not too well, I think I err not on the other
hand much. Thou art dearer to me than any creature ; let that
suffice.

The Lord hath showed us an exceeding mercy: who can tell
how great it is. My weak faith hath been upheld. I have
been in my inward man marvellously supported ; though I assure
thee, I grow an old man, and feel infirmities of age marvellously
stealing upon me. Would my corruptions did as fast decrease.

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 91).

_ ao a

)

1650.) LETTER CXLIV., DUNBAR 115

Pray on my behalf in the latter respect. The particulars of our
late success Harry Vane or Gil: Pickering will impart to thee.

My love to all dear friends. I rest thine,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

LETTER CXLIV

For my loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley :
These. In Hantshire, near Winchester
Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

Dear Brotuer,

Having so good an occasion as the imparting
so great a mercy as the Lord hath vouchsafed unto us in Scotland,
I would not omit the imparting thereof to you though I be full
of business.

Upon Wednesday! we fought the Scottish army. They were
in number, according to all computation, about twenty-thousand ;
we hardly eleven-thousand, having great sicknesses upon our
army. After much appealing to God, the fight lasted about an
hour. We killed (as most think) three-thousand ; took near ten-
thousand prisoners, all their train, about thirty guns great and
small, besides bullet, match and powder, very considerable officers,
about two-hundred colours, above ten-thousand arms; lost not
thirty men. This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our
eyes. Good Sir, give God all the glory; stir up all yours, and
all about you, todo so. Pray for

Your affectionate brother and servant,
O.tver CRoMWELL,
*Copied from the Original by John Hare, Esq., Rosemont Cottage, Clifton.
Collated with the old Copy in British Museum, Co/e MSS., no. 5834, p. 38 [z.e.
Add. MSS. 5834. Cole 33]. ‘The Original was purchased at Strawberry-Hill

‘Sale’ (Horace Walpole’s), ‘30th April 1842, for Twenty-one guineas.’ [There is
also an old copy amongst the Marquis of Bath’s MSS. ]

1‘ Wednesd.’ in the Original. A curious proof of the haste and confusion
Cromwell was in. The Battle was on Tuesday,—yesterday, 3d September 1650 ;
indisputably Tuesday ; and he is now writing on Wednesday !—{Cromwell wrote
Tuesday in the first instance, then crossed it out and wrote Wednesday above. }

-. Tl Py =

a.

116 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

I desire my love may be presented to my dear sister, and to
all your family. I pray tell Doll I do not forget her nor her little
brat. She writes very cunningly and complimentally to me; I
expect a letter of plain dealing from her. She is too modest to
tell me whether she breeds or no, I wish a blessing upon her
and her husband. The Lord make them fruitful im all that’s
good. They are at leisure to write often—but indeed they are
both idle, and worthy of blame.*

LETTER CXLV

A pious Word, shot off to Ireland, for Son Ireton and the
‘dear Friends’ fighting for the same Cause there. That they
may rejoice with us, as we have done with them: none knows
but they may have ‘need’ again ‘of mutual experiences for
refreshment.’

‘To Lieutenant-General Ireton, Deputy-Lieutenant of Ireland :
These

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

Sir,

Though I hear not often from you, yet I know
you forget me not. Think so of me ‘too,’ for I often remember
you at the Throne of Grace. I heard of the Lord’s good hand
with you in reducing Waterford, Duncannon, and Catherlogh :1
His Name be praised.

We have been engaged upon a service the fullest of trial ever
poor creatures were upon. We made great professions of love ;
knowing we were to deal with many who were Godly, and pre-
tended to be stumbled at our invasion: indeed, our bowels were
pierced again and again; the Lord helped us to sweet words, and

* Harris, p. 5133 one of the Pusey stock, the last now but three. [‘‘No. 18.”
Holograph. Seal ofarms. In the Morrison Collection. ]

1‘ Catherlogh’ is Carlow: Narrative of these captures (roth August 1650) in a
Letter from Ireton to the Speaker (Parliamentary History, xix. 334-7).

1650.) | LETTER CXLV., DUNBAR 117

in sincerity to mean them. We were rejected again and again,
yet still we begged to be believed that we loved them as our own
souls ; they often returned evil for good. We prayed for security : }
they would not hear or answer a word to that. We made often
appeals to God ; they appealed also.?- We were near engagements
three or four times, but they lay upon advantages. A heavy flux
fell upon our Army ; brought it very low, from fourteen to eleven
thousand : three-thousand five-hundred horse, and seven-thousand
five-hundred foot. The enemy sixteen-thousand foot, and six-
thousand horse.

The Enemy prosecuted the advantage. We were necessitated ;
and upon September ? the 3d, by six in the morning, we attempted
their army: after a hot dispute for about an hour, we routed their
whole army ; killed near three-thousand ; and took, as the Marshal
informs me, ten-thousand prisoners ; their whole train, being about
thirty pieces, great and small; good store of powder, match and
bullet ; near two-hundred colours; I am persuaded near fifteen-
thousand arms left upon the ground. And I believe, though
many of ours be wounded, we lost not above thirty men. Before
the fight, our condition was made very sad, the enemy greatly
insulted and menaced ‘us ;’ but the Lord upheld us with comfort
in Himself, beyond ordinary experience.

? Begged of them some security against Charles Stuart's designs upon England.

[There is a remarkable letter from St. John to Cromwell, written after hearing
of the victory at Dunbar, printed in Nickoll’s Original Letters (p. 24). ‘*‘ Those you
have had formerly to deal withal,” he writes, ‘‘ had the visible characters of God’s
displeasure upon them . . . but those you have had now to deal withal . . . are
the people by and for whom these great deliverances are to be wrought, as God's
peculiar, excluded on the one hand from papists and atheists, and from sectaries
on the other. And further, many of them are children indeed whose angels con-
tinually in heaven behold the face of their father.” Both sides, he goes on to say,
have solemnly appealed to God to judge between them, and he has taken the
*‘umpirage’’ upon him and has determined the cause. And signal was his judg-
ment, for never was victory obtained with so little loss, ‘ but chiefly herein, that this
heavy judgment seems to be given only against the party there that pretended most
to God, to his cause and glory, the King of Scotland and his friends not being
admitted unto, but, as we hear, forbidden their army.’’ For the rest St. John
offers Cromwell religious exhortations quite in the latter’s own vein. On one point
he speaks very strongly. He has heard that some of the weak and sickly Scots
prisoners, sent to Newcastle, not being able to travel, have been killed by their
conductors, This must be looked into, that if it prove true, the offenders may be

ior oar ge if false, ‘‘ something be published for clearing of the army.”
‘7ber’ he writes.

118 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

I knowing the acquainting you with this great handiwork of
the Lord would stir up your minds to praise and rejoicing, and
not knowing but your condition may require mutual experiences
for refreshment, and knowing also that the news we had of your
successes was matter of help to our faith in our distress, and
matter of praise also, I thought fit (though in the midst of much
business) to give you this account of the unspeakable goodness of
the Lord, who hath thus appeared, to the glory of His great
Name, and the refreshment of His Saints.

The Lord bless you, and us, to return praises ; to live them all
our days. Salute all our dear friends with you, as if I named
them. I have no more, but rest,

Your loving father and true friend,
Outver CRoMWELL.*

We observe there are no regards to Bridget Ireton, no news or
notice of her, in this Letter. Bridget Ireton is at London, safe
from these wild scenes; far from her Husband, far from her
Father :—will never see her brave Husband more.!

LETTER CXLVI

Dusrratinc Wharton must not let ‘success’ too much sway
him ; yet it were fit he took notice of these things: he, and idle
Norton whom we know, and Montague of Hinchinbrook, and
others. The Lord General, for his own share, has a better ground
than ‘success ;’ has the direct insight of his own soul, such as
suffices him,—such as all souls to which ‘the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth understanding, are or may be capable of, one
would think !

* Russell's Life of Cromwell (Edinburgh, 1829; forming vols. 46, 47 of Con-
stable’s Miscellany), ii. 317-19. Does not say whence ;—Letter undoubtedly
genuine.

1[This is a mistake. ‘‘ The Lady Ireton” went to Ireland, to her husband, in
January, 1651. See Ludlow’s Memoirs, ed. Firth, i. 259.)

1650.] LETTER CXLVI., DUNBAR 119

For the Right Honourable the Lord Wharton: These

Dunbar, 4th September 1650.

My pear Lorn,

I, poor I, love you! Love you the Lord: take
heed of disputing. I was untoward when I spake last with you
in St. James’s Park. I spake cross in stating ‘my’ grounds:
I spake to my judgings of you; which was: That you,—shall I
name others ?—Henry Lawrence, Robert Hammond, &c., had
ensnared yourselves with disputes.

I believe you desired to be satisfied, and tried and doubted
your ‘own’ sincerities. T’was well. But uprightness (if it be
not purely of God), may be, nay is, commonly deceived. The
Lord persuade you, and all my dear friends.

The results of your thoughts concerning late transactions I
know are your mistakes by a better argument than success. Let
not your engaging too far upon your own judgments be your
temptation or snare: much less ‘let’ success,—lest you should
be thought to return upon less noble arguments.!_ It is ‘in’ my
heart to write the same things to Norton, Montague and others :
I pray you read or communicate these foolish lines to them. I
have known my folly do good, when affection has overcome? my
reason. I pray you judge me sincere, lest a prejudice should be
put upon after advantages.

How gracious has the Lord been in this great business. Lord,
hide not Thy mercies from our eyes !

My service to the dear Lady. I rest,

Your humble servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

1 Decide as the essence of the matter zs; neither persist nor ‘return’ upon
fallacious, superficial, or external considerations.
2 outrun.

* Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1814), Ixxxiv. 419. Does not say whence or
how. [But now printed from the original at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.
The letter is holograph, with seal of arms, and is endorsed ‘‘ 4 Sept., 1650, from
my Lord General, from Dunbar,”’]

——=— ee ee eee

120 WAR WITH SCOTLAND (Sept.

LETTERS CXLVII—CXLIX

Or these Letters, the first Two, with their Replies and Adjuncts,
Six Missives in all, form a Pamphlet published at Edinburgh in
1650, with the Title: Several Letters and Passages between his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell and the Governor of Edinburgh
Castle. They have been reprinted in various quarters: we copy
the Cromwell part of them from Thurioe ; and fancy they will
not much need any preface. Here are some words, written else-
where on the occasion, some time ago.

‘These Letters of Cromwell to the Edinburgh Clergy, treating
‘of obsolete theologies and polities, are very dull to modern men :
‘but they deserve a steady perusal by all such as will understand
‘the strange meaning (for the present, alas, as good as obsolete in
‘all forms of it) that possessed the mind of Cromwell in these
‘hazardous operations of his. Dryasdust, carrying his learned
‘eye over these and the like Letters, finds them, of course, full
‘of “hypocrisy,” &c. &c.—Unfortunate Dryasdust, they are corus-
‘cations, terrible as lightning, and beautiful as lightning, from
‘the innermost temple of the Human Soul ;—intimations, still
‘credible, of what a Human Soul does mean when it believes in
‘the Highest; a thing poor Dryasdust never did nor will do.
‘The hapless generation that now reads these words ought to
‘hold its peace when it has read them, and sink into unutterable
‘reflections,—not unmixed with tears, and some substitute for
“sackcloth and ashes,” if it liked. In its poor canting sniffing
‘flimsy vocabulary there is no word that can make any response
‘to them. This man has a living god-inspired soul in him, not
‘an enchanted artificial “substitute for salt,’ as our fashion is,
‘They that have human eyes can look upon him; they that have
‘only owl-eyes need not.’

Here also are some sentences on a favourite topic, lightning and
light. ‘ As lightning is to light, so is a Cromwell to a Shakspeare.
‘The light is beautifuller. Ah, yes; but until, by lightning and
‘other fierce labour, your foul Chaos has become a World, you
‘cannot have any light, or the smallest chance for any! Honour
‘the Amphion whose music makes the stones, rocks, and big
‘blocks, dance into figures, into domed cities, with temples and
‘habitations :—yet know him too; how, as Volker’s in the old
‘ Nibelungen, oftentimes his “fiddlebow” has to be of “sharp
‘steel,’ and to play a tune very rough to rebellious ears! The

1650.] LETTERS CXLVII—CXLIX 121

‘melodious Speaker is great, but the melodious Worker is greater
‘than he. “Our Time,” says a certain author, “cannot speak at
‘ all, but only cant and sneer, and argumentatively jargon, and recite
‘the multiplication-table. Neither as yet can it work, except at
‘mere railroads and cotton-spinning. It will, apparently, return to
‘Chaos soon ; and then more lightnings will be needed, lightning
‘enough, to which Cromwell’s was but a mild matter ;—to be
‘followed by light, we may hope!” ’—

The following Letter from Whalley, with the Answer to it,
will introduce this series. The date is Monday ; the Lord General
observing yesterday that the poor Edinburgh people were sadly
short of Sermon, has ordered the Commissary-General to communi-
cate as follows :

“ For the Honourable the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh
‘* Edinburgh, 9th September 1650.

“Sir,—I received command from my Lord General to desire
“you to let the ministers of Edinburgh, now in the Castle with
“you, know, That they have free liberty granted them, if they
“please to take the pains, to preach in their several churches ;
“and that my Lord hath given special command both to officers
“‘and soldiers that they shall not in the least be molested. _ Sir,
“I am, your most humble servant,

“ Epwarp WHALLEY.”

To which straightway there is this Answer from Governor
Dundas :

“€ To Commissary-General Whalley’
““*Edinburgh Castle, gth September 1650.

“Sir,—I have communicated the desire of your letter to such
“of the ministers of Edinburgh as are with me, who have desired
“me to return this for answer :

“That though they are ready to be spent in their Master's
“service, and to refuse no suffering so they may fulfill their ministry
“with joy ; yet perceiving the persecution to be personal, by the
“practice of your party! upon the ministers of Christ in England

1Sectarian Party, of Independents,

os

122 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [9 Sept.

“and Ireland, and im the kingdom of Scotland since your unjust
“invasion thereof; and finding nothing expressed in yours where-
“upon to build any security for their persons while they are there,
“and for their return hither, they are resolved to reserve them-
“selves for better times, and to wait upon Him who hath hidden
“ His face for a while from the sons of Jacob.

“ This is all I have to say, but that I am, Sir, your most humble
“ servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

To which somewhat sulky response, Oliver makes Answer in
this notable manner :

LETTER CXLVII

For the Honourable the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh :
These

Edinburgh, 9th September 1650.
Sir,

The kindness offered to the ministers with
you was done with ingenuity,! thinking it might have met with
the like: but I am satisfied to tell those with you, that if their
‘Master's service (as they call it) were chiefly in their eye, imagina-
tion of suffering? would not have caused such a return; much
less ‘ would’ the practice of our party, as they are pleased to say,
upon the ministers of Christ in England, have been an argument
of personal persecution.

The ministers in England are supported, and have liberty to
preach the Gospel, though not to rail, nor, under pretence thereof *®
to overtop the civil power, or debase it as they please. No man
hath been troubled in England or Ireland for preaching the
Gospel, nor has any minister been molested in Scotland since the
coming of the army hither. The speaking truth becomes the
ministers of Christ.

1 Means always ingenuously. ? Fear of personal damage.
5 Of preaching the Gospel.

1650.} LETTER CXLVII., EDINBURGH 123

When ministers pretend to a glorious Reformation, and lay the
foundations thereof in getting to themselves worldly power, and
can make worldly mixtures to accomplish the same, such as their
late agreement with their king; and hope by him to carry on
their design, ‘they’ may know that the Sion promised will not
be built with such untempered mortar.

As for the unjust invasion they mention, time was! when an
army of Scotland came into England, not called by the supreme
authority. We have said, in our papers, with what hearts, and
upon what account, we came ; and the Lord hath heard us,? though
you would not, upon as solemn an appeal as any experience can
parallel.

And although they seem to comfort themselves with being
sons of Jacob, from whom (they say) God hath hid His face for
a time; yet it’s no wonder—when the Lord hath lifted up His
hand so eminently against a family as He hath done so often
against this,? and the men will not see His hand,—if the Lord
hide His face from such; putting them to shame both for it and
their hatred of His people, as it is this day. When they purely
trust to the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God, which
is powerful to bring down strongholds and every imagination that
exalts itself, which alone is able to square and fit the stones for
the new Jerusalem ; then and not before, and by that means and
no other, shall Jerusalem, which is to be the praise of the whole
Earth, the city of the Lord, be built ; the Sion of the Holy One
of Israel.

I have nothing to say to you but that I am,

Sir,
Your humble servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

The Scotch Clergy never got such a reprimand since they first

11648, Duke Hamilton’s time ; to say nothing of 1640 and other times.
* At Dunbar, six days ago. ° Of the Stuarts.

* Thurloe, i. 159; Pamphlet at Edinburgh.

124 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [9 Sept.

took ordination! A very dangerous radiance blazes through these
eyes of my Lord General’s,—destructive to the owl-dominion, in
Edinburgh Castle and elsewhere !

Let Dundas and Company reflect on it. Here is their ready
Answer: still of the same day.

“<To the Right Honourable the Lord Crommell, Commander-in-Chief
of the English Army’

‘« «Edinburgh Castle,’ 9th September 1650.

‘““My Lorp,—Yours I have communicated to those with me
““whom it concerned, who desire me to return this answer :

“ That their ingenuity in prosecuting the ends of the Covenant,
“according to their vocation and place, and in adhering to their
“ first principles, is well known ; and one of their greatest regrets
“is that they have not been met with the like. That when
‘ministers of the Gospel have been imprisoned, deprived of their
“benefices, sequestrated, forced to flee from their dwellings, and
“bitterly threatened, for their faithful declaring the will of God
“against the godless and wicked proceedings of men, that it
“cannot be accounted ‘an imaginary fear of suffering’ in such
“as are resolved to follow the like freedom and faithfulness
“in discharge of their Master's message. That it savours not
“of ingenuity to promise liberty of preaching the Gospel, and
“to limit the preachers thereof, that they must not speak against
“the sins and enormities of civil powers ; since their commission
“carrieth them to speak the Word of the Lord unto, and to
“reprove the sins of, persons of all ranks, from the highest to
“the lowest. That to impose the name of ‘railing’ upon such
“faithful freedom was the old practice of malignants against the
“ministers of the Gospel, who laid open to people the wickedness
“ of their ways, that they should not be ensnared thereby.

“That their consciences bear them record, and all their hearers
“do know, that they meddle not with civil affairs, farther than
“to hold forth the rule of the Word, by which the straightness
“and crookedness of men’s actions are made evident. But they
“are sorry that they have just cause to regret that men of mere
“civil place and employment should usurp the calling and em-
“ ployment of the ministry:! to the scandal of the Reformed

1 Certain of our Soldiers and Officers preach ; very many of them can preach,—
and greatly to the purpose too !

1650.| LETTER CXLVIII, EDINBURGH 125

‘“‘ Kirks; and, particularly in Scotland, contrary to the government
“and discipline therein established, to the maintenance whereof
“you are bound, by the Solemn League and Covenant.

“ Thus far they have thought fit to vindicate their return to the
“ offer in Colonel Whalley’s letter. The other part of yours, which
“concerns the public as well as them, they conceive hath all been
“answered sufficiently in the public papers of the State and Kirk.
“Only to that of the success upon your solemn appeal, they say
“again what was said to it before, That they have not so learned
“Christ as to hang the equity of their cause upon events ; but
“* desire to have their hearts established in the love of the truth,
‘in all the tribulations that befall them.

‘“«T only do add that I am, my Lord, your most humble servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

On Thursday follows Oliver’s Answer,—‘ very inferior in com-
position,’ says Dryasdust ;—composition not being quite the trade
of Oliver! In other respects, sufficiently superior.

LETTER CXLVIII

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle; These

Edinburgh, 12th September, 1650.

Sir,

Because I am at some reasonable good leisure,
I cannot let such gross mistakes and inconsequential reasonings
pass without some notice taken of them.

And first, their ingenuity in relation to the Covenant, for which
they commend themselves, doth no more justify their want of
ingenuity in answer to Colonel Whalley’s Christian offer, con-
cerning which my letter charged them with guiltiness ‘and’
deficiency, than their bearing witness to themselves of their
adhering to their first principles, and ingenuity in prosecuting
the ends of the Covenant, justifies them so to have done merely
because they sayso. They must give more leave henceforwards ;

—— a

126 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 Sept.

for Christ will have it so, will they, nill they, and they must
have patience to have the truth of their doctrines and sayings
tried by the sure touchstone of the Word of God. And if there
be a liberty and duty of trial, there is a liberty of judgment also
for them that may and ought to try: which being! so, they must
give others leave to think and say that they can appeal to equal
judges, who have been the truest fulfillers of the most real and
equitable ends of the Covenant.

But if these gentlemen do? assume to themselves to be the
infallible expositors of the Covenant, as they do too much to
their auditories ‘to be the infallible expositors’ of the Scriptures,
counting a different sense and judgment from theirs breach of
covenant and heresy,—no marvel they judge of others so authori-
tatively and severely. But we have not so learned Christ. We |
look at ministers as helpers of, not lords over, God’s people. I |
appeal to their consciences, whether any ‘person’ trying their
doctrines, and dissenting, shall not incur the censure of sectary ?
And what is this but to deny Christians the liberty, and assume
the infallible chair? What doth he whom we would not be likened
unto ® do more than this ?

In the second place, it is affirmed that the ministers of the
Gospel have been imprisoned, deprived of their benefices,
sequestered, forced to fly from their dwellings, and bitterly
threatened, for their faithful declaring of the will of God; and
that they have been limited that they might not speak against
the sins and enormities of the civil powers ; that to impose the
name of railing upon such faithful freedom was the old practice
of malignants against the preachers of the Gospel, &c. If the
civil authority, or that part of it which continued faithful to their
trust,* ‘and’ true to the ends of the Covenant, did, in answer to
their consciences, turn out a tyrant, in a way which the Christians
in aftertimes will mention with honour, and all tyrants in the

1 ‘if’ in the original.
3 ‘which do’ in the original ; de/e ‘ which.’
3 The Pope. 4 When Pride purged them.

1650.) LETTER CXLVIII, EDINBURGH 127

world look at with fear ;! and ‘if’ while many thousands of saints
in England rejoice to think of it, and have received from the
hand of God a liberty from the fear of like usurpations, and have
cast off him” who trod in his father’s steps, doing mischief as far
as he was able (whom you have received like fire into your bosom,
—of which God will, I trust, in time make you sensible): if, ‘I
say, ministers railing at the civil power, and calling them
murderers and the like for doing these things, have been dealt
with as you mention,—will this be found a personal persecution ?
Or is sin so, because they say so?® They that acted this great
business * have given a reason of their faith in the action; and
some here ° are ready further to do it against all gainsayers.

But it will be found that these reprovers do not only make
themselves the judges and determiners of sin, that so they may
reprove ; but they also took liberty® to stir up the people to
blood and arms; and would have brought a war upon England,
as hath been upon Scotland, had not God prevented it. And if
such severity as hath been expressed towards them be worthy of
the name of personal persecution, let all uninterested men judge :
‘and’ whether the calling of this practice ‘‘railing’’ be to be
paralleled with the malignants’ imputation upon the ministers
for speaking against the Popish innovations in the Prelates’ times,’
and the ‘other’ tyrannical and wicked practices then on foot,
let your own consciences mind you! The Roman Emperors, in
Christ’s and His Apostles’ times, were usurpers and intruders
upon the Jewish State ; yet what footstep ® have ye either of our
blessed Saviour’s so much as willingness to the dividing of an
inheritance, or their® ‘ever’ meddling in that kind? This was

1[(Mr. Goldwin Smith, in his Three English Statesmen, p. 59, states that Crom-
well never touches on the King’s death, either in his letters or speeches. This is
not the only time, as he alluded to it also in his speeches of March 23, 1648-9, and of
May 20, 1653. See Supplement, Nos. 42, 78. See also p. 13 above and p. 275 below. ]

2 Your Charles II., as you call him.

3 Because you call it so. 4 Of judging Charles First.

51 for one. 6 In 1648.

70 Oliver, my Lord General, the Lindley-Murray composition here is dreadful ;
the meaning struggling, like a strong swimmer, in an element very viscous !

8 Vestige. ® The Apostles’.

Se en oe
. kd

128 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 Sept.

not practised by the Church since our Saviour’s time, till Antichrist,
assuming the infallible chair, and all that he called church to be
under him, practised this authoritatively over civil governors.
The way to fulfil your ministry with joy is to preach the Gospel ;
which I wish some who take pleasure in reproofs at a venture,
do not forget too much to do.

Thirdly, you say, You have just cause to regret that men of
civil employments should usurp the calling and employment of
the ministry ; to the scandal of the Reformed Kirks. Are you
troubled that Christ is preached? Is preaching so exclusively
your function?! Doth it scandalise the Reformed Kirks, and
Scotland in particular? Is it against the Covenant? Away with
the Covenant, if this be so! I thought, the Covenant and these
‘professors of it’ could have been willing that any should speak
good of the name of Christ: if not, it is no Covenant of God's
approving; nor are these Kirks you mention in so much? the
Spouse of Christ. Where do you find in the Scripture a ground
to warrant such an assertion, That preaching is exclusively * your
function? Though an approbation from men hath order in it,
and may do well, yet he that hath not a better warrant than that,
hath none at all. I hope He that ascended up on high may give
His gifts to whom He pleases: and if those gifts be the seal of
mission, be not ‘ you’ envious though Eldad and Medad prophesy.
You know who bids us covet earnestly the best gifts, but chiefly
that me may prophesy ; which the Apostle explains there to be
a speaking to instruction and edification and comfort, which
‘speaking, the instructed, the edified and comforted can best
tell the energy and effect oft If such evidence be, I say again,
take heed you envy not for your own sakes ; lest you be guilty
of a greater fault than Moses reproved in Joshua for envying for
his sake.

Indeed you err through mistaking of the Scriptures. Appro-

1‘ so inclusive in your function,’ means that.
2So far as their notion of the Covenant goes,

5(‘* is included in,” in Thurloe.] . ;
4[Carlyle here inserted ‘‘ and say whether it is genuine.’

1650.} LETTER CXLVIII., EDINBURGH 129

bation! is an act of conveniency in respect of order; not of
necessity, to give faculty to preach the Gospel. Your pretended
fear lest error should step in, is like the man who would keep
all the wine out the country lest men should be drunk. It will
be found an unjust and unwise jealousy, to deny a man the
liberty he has by nature upon a supposition he may abuse it.
When he doth abuse it, judge. If aman speak foolishly, ye suffer
him gladly? because ye are wise; if erroneously, the truth more
appears by your conviction. Stop such a man’s mouth with sound
words that cannot be gainsayed. If ‘he speak’ blasphemously,
or to the disturbance of the public peace, let the civil magistrate
punish him: if truly, rejoice in the truth. And if you will call
our speakings together since we came into Scotland, to provoke
one another to Jove and good. works, to faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and repentance from dead works; ‘and’ to charity and
love towards you, to pray and mourn for you, and for the bitter
returns to, and incredulity of, our professions of love to you, of
the truth of which we have made our solemn and humble appeals
to the Lord our God, which He hath heard and borne witness
too: if these things be scandalous to the Kirk, and against the
Covenant, because done by men of civil callings,—we rejoice in
them, notwithstanding what you say.

For a conclusion: In answer to the witness of God upon our
solemn appeal,® you say you have not so learned Christ ‘as’ to
hang the equity of your cause upon events. We could wish
blindness have not been upon your eyes to all those marvellous _
dispensations which God hath wrought lately in England. But did —
not you solemnly appeal and pray? Did not wedosotoo? And
ought not you and we to think, with fear and trembling, of the
hand of the Great God in this mighty and strange appearance of
His ; instead of slightly calling it an “event!” * Were not both
your and our expectations renewed from time to time, whilst we

1 Or say ‘ Ordination,’ Solemn Approbation and Appointment by men.
2 With a patient victorious feeling. 8 At Dunbar.
4* but can slightly call it an event,’ zz orig,

voL, u.—9

7) = 1 o ee
= T

130 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 Sept.

waited upon God, to see which way He would manifest Himself
upon our appeals? And shall we, after all these our prayers,
fastings, tears, expectations and solemn appeals, call these bare
“events?” The Lord pity you.!

Surely we, ‘for our part,’ fear; because it hath been a merci-
ful and gracious deliverance to us. I beseech you in the bowels
of Christ, search after the mind of the Lord in it towards you;
and we shall help you by our prayers, that you may find it out:
for yet (if we know our hearts at all) our bowels do, in Christ
Jesus, yearn after the godly in Scotland. We know there are
stumbling-blocks which hinder you: the personal prejudices you
have taken up against us? and our ways, wherein we cannot but
think some occasion has been given,’ and for which we mourn:
the apprehension you have that we have hindered the glorious
Reformation you think you were upon: I am persuaded these |
and such like bind you up from an understanding, and yielding
to, the mind of God, in this great day of His power and visita-
tion. And, if I be rightly informed, the late blow you received |
is attributed to profane counsels and conduct, and mixtures * in |
your army, and such like. The natural man will not find out |
the cause. Look up to the Lord, that he may tell it you. Which ]
that He would do, shall be the fervent prayer of,

Your loving friend and servant,
OttveR CROMWELL.

‘PS.’ These ‘following’ queries are sent not to reproach
you, but in the love of Christ laying them before you; we being

1[‘* They were not ordinary armies, but two politico-religious sects which now
encountered each other, Their quarrel was not about faith and doctrine, for both
were alike zealous Protestants, but about the constitution in Church and State—
whether there should be a king or not, whether there should be a ruling Church or
not, this was the question in suspense between them. Both entertained an equally
sure conviction of the immediate interference of the Deity in human affairs: their
existence as sects depended on their being anxious to render themselves as worthy
as possible of the divine support.” Ranke's History of England, iii. 47 (Clar. Press
ed

.).]

2Me, Oliver Cromwell.

3] have often, in Parliament and elsewhere, been crabbed towards your hide-
bound Presbyterian Formula ; and given it many a fillip, not thinking sufficiently
what good withal was in it.

4 Admission of Engagers and ungodly people.

1650.] QUERIES 131

persuaded in the Lord that there is a truth in them, which we
earnestly desire may not be laid aside unsought after, by any
prejudice either against the things themselves, or the unworthi-
ness or weakness of the person that offers them. If you turn at
the Lord’s reproofs, He will pour out His Spirit upon you, and
you shall understand His words, and they will guide you to a
blessed Reformation indeed,! even to one according to the Word,
and such as the people of God wait for: wherein you will find us
and all saints ready to rejoice, and serve you to the utmost in our
places and callings.*

Enctosep is the Paper of Queries ; to which the Editor, anxious
to bring out my Lord General’s sense, will take the great liberty
to intercalate a word or two of Commentary as we read.

QUERIES

1. Whether the Lord’s controversy be not both against the '
ministers in Scotland and in England, for their wresting, strain-_
ing, and employing? the Covenant against the Godly and Saints |
in England (of the same faith with them in every fundamental) |
even to a bitter persecution; and so making that which, in the!
main intention, was spiritual, to serve politics and carnal ends,
even in that part especially which was spiritual, and did look to
the glory of God, and the comfort of His People ?

The meaning of your Covenant was, that God’s glory should be
promoted: and yet how many zealous Preachers, unpresbyterian
but real promoters of God’s glory, have you, by wresting and
straining of the verbal phrases of the Covenant, found means to
menace, eject, afflict and in every way discourage !—

1‘ glorious Reformation,’ ‘ blessed Reformation,’ &c. are phrases loud and current
everywhere, especially among the Scotch, for ten years past.
2*improving’ in the original.

* Thurloe, i. 158-62.

132 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 Sept.

2. Whether the Lord’s controversy be not for your and the
ministers in England’s sullenness at ‘God’s great providences,’
and ‘your’ darkening and not beholding the glory of God’s
wonderful dispensations in this series of His providences in Eng-
land, Scotland and Ireland, both now and formerly, through
envy at instruments, and because the things did not work forth
your platform, and the great God did not come down to your
minds and thoughts.

This is well worth your attention. Perhaps the Great God
means something other and farther than you yet imagine. Per-
haps, in His infinite Thought, and Scheme that reaches through
Eternities, there may be elements which the Westminster As-
sembly has not jotted down? Perhaps these reverend learned
persons, debating at Four shillings and sixpence a day, did not
get to the bottom of the Bottomless, after all? Perhaps this
Universe was not entirely built according to the Westminster
Shorter Catechism, but by other ground-plans withal, not yet
entirely brought to paper anywhere, in Westminster or out of it,
that I hear of? O my reverend Scotch friends !—

3, Whether your carrying on a Reformation, so much by
you spoken of, have not probably been subject to some mistakes
in your own judgments about some parts of the same,—laying
so much stress thereupon as hath been a temptation to you even
to break the Law of Love, the greatest of all laws, towards your
brethren, and those ‘whom’ Christ hath regenerated; even to
the reviling and persecuting of them, and to stirring-up of wicked
men to do the same, for your form’s sake, or but ‘ for’ some parts
of it.

A helpless lumbering sentence, but with a noble meaning in it.

4. Whether if your Reformation be so perfect and so spiritual,
be indeed the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, it will need such carnal
policies, such fleshly mixtures, such unsincere actings as} to

1[Carlyle here inserted ‘‘ some of these are"’ and a full stop. ]

1650.] QUERIES 133

pretend to cry down all malignants, and yet to receive and set
up the Head of them and so act for the Kingdom of Christ in
his name,! and upon advantage thereof? And to publish so false
a paper,” so full of special pretences to piety, as the fruit and
effect of his repentance, to deceive the minds of all the godly in
England, Ireland and Scotland; you, in your own consciences,
knowing with what regret he did it, and with what importunities
and threats he was brought to do it, and how much to this very
day he is against it? And whether this be not a high provocation
of the Lord, in so grossly dissembling with Him and His people ? *

Yes, you can consider that, my Friends; and think, on the
whole, what kind of course you are probably getting into; steer-
ing towards a Kingdom of Jesus Christ with Charles Stuart and
Mrs. Barlow at the helm!

The Scotch Clergy reply, through Governor Dundas, still in a
sulky unrepentant manner, that they stick by their old opinions ;
that the Lord General’s arguments, which would not be hard to
answer a second time, have already been answered amply, by
anticipation, in the public Manifestos of the Scottish Nation and
Kirk ;—that, in short, he hath a longer sword than they for the
present, and the Scripture says, ‘There is one event to the
righteous and the wicked,’ which may probably account for
Dunbar, and some other phenomena. Here the correspondence
closes; his Excellency on the morrow morning (Friday 13th
September 1650) finding no ‘reasonable good leisure’ to unfold
himself farther, in the way of paper and ink, to these men.
There remain other ways; the way of cannon-batteries, and
Derbyshire miners. It is likely his Excellency will subdue the
bodies of these men; and the unconquerable mind will then
follow if it can.

1Charles Stuart’s: a very questionable ‘name’ for any Kingdom of Christ to
act upon !
2The Declaration, or testimony against his Father's sins.

* Thurloe, i. 158-162.

—— Se eee ee

134 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [14 Sept.

PROCLAMATION

Wuereas it has pleased God, by His gracious providence and
goodness, to put the city of Edinburgh and the town of Leith
under my power: And although I have put forth several pro-
clamations, since my coming into this country, to the like effect
with this present: Yet for further satisfaction to all those whom
it may concern, I do hereby again publish and declare,

That all the inhabitants of the country, not now being or
continuing in arms, shall have free leave and liberty to come to
the army, and to the city and town aforesaid, with their cattle,
corn, horse, or other commodities or goods whatsoever ; and shall
there have free and open markets for the same; and shall be
protected in their persons and goods, in coming and returning
as aforesaid, from any injury or violence of the soldiery under my
command ; and shall also be protected in their respective houses.
And the citizens and inhabitants of the said city and town shall
and hereby likewise have! free leave to vend and sell their wares
and commodities ; and shall be protected from the plunder and
violence of the soldiers.

And I do hereby require all officers and soldiers of the army
under my command to take due notice hereof, and to yield
obedience hereto, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost
peril.

Given under my hand at Edinburgh, the 14th of September

1650.
O.iverR CROMWELL.

To be proclaimed in Leith and Edinburgh, by sound of trumpet
and beat of drum.*

Listen and be reassured, ye ancient Populations, though your
Clergy sit obstinate on their Castle-rock, and your Stuart King

1 Grammar irremediable !

* King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 479, [E. 613] art. 16 (‘The Lord General
Cromweil his march to Stirling: being a Diary of’ &c. ‘ Published by Authority’).

1650.| LETTER CXLIX., EDINBURGH 135

has vanished !—While this comfortable Oyez-oyez goes sounding
through the ancient streets, my Lord General is himself just
getting on march again; as the next Letter will testify.

LETTER CXLIX

Tue Lord General, leaving the Clergy to meditate the Queries
in the seclusion of their Castle-rock, sets off westward, on the
second day after, to see whether he cannot at once dislodge the
Governing Committee-men and Covenanted King; and get pos-
session of Stirling, where they are busily endeavouring to rally.
This, he finds, will not answer, for the moment.

To ‘the Right Honourable the Lord President of’ the Council of
State: These

Edinburgh, 25th September 1650.

* %* * On Saturday the 14th instant, we
marched six miles towards Stirling, and, by reason of the bad-
ness of the ways, were forced to send back two pieces of our
greatest artillery. The day following, we marched to Linlith-
gow, not being able to go further by reason of much rain that
fell that day. On the 16th, we marched to Falkirk, and the
next day following, within cannon-shot of Stirling ; where, upon
Wednesday the 18th, our army was drawn forth, and all things
in readiness to storm the town.

But finding the work very difficult; they having in the town
two-thousand horse and more foot, and the place standing upon
a river not navigable for shipping to relieve the same, ‘so that’
we could not, with safety, make it a Garrison, if God should have
given it into our hands: upon this, and other considerations, it
was not thought a fit time to storm. But such was the un-
animous resolution and courage both of our officers and soldiers,
that greater could not be (as to outward appearance) in men.

On Thursday the 19th, we returned from thence to Linlithgow,
and at night we were informed that, at Stirling, they shot off

136 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [25 Sept,

their great guns for joy their King was come thither. On Friday
the 20th, three Irish soldiers came from them to us, to whom we
gave entertainment in the army; they say, great fears possessed
the soldiers when they expected us to storm; that they know
not whether old Leven be their General or not, the report being
various ; but that Sir John Browne, a Colonel of their army, was
laid aside ; that they are endeavouring to raise all the forces they
can, in the north; that many of the soldiers, since our victory,
are offended at their ministers; that Colonel Gilbert Carr and
Colonel Strachan are gone with shattered forces to Glasgow, to
levy soldiers there. As yet we hear not of any of the old
Cavaliers being entertained as officers among them; the ex-
pectation of which occasions differences betwixt their ministers
and the officers of the Army.

The same day, we came to Edinburgh ‘again,’ where we abide
without disturbance, saving that about ten at night, and before
day in the morning, they sometimes fire three or four great guns
at us; and if any of our men come within musket-shot, they fire
at them from the Castle. But, blessed be God, they have done
us no harm, except one soldier shot (but not to the danger of his
life), that I can be informed of. There are some few of the
inhabitants of Edinburgh returned home, who, perceiving our
civility, and ‘our’ paying for what we receive of them, they
repent their departure; open their shops, and bring provisions
to the market. It’s reported they have in the Castle provisions
for fifteen months ; some say, for a longer time. Generally the
people! acknowledge that our carriage to them is better than that
of their own army, and ‘that’ had they who are gone away
known so much, they would have stayed at home. They say,
one chief reason wherefore so many are gone was, they feared
we would have imposed upon them some oath wherewith they
could not have dispensed.

I am in great hopes, through God’s mercy, we shall be able

1[Carlyle altered to ‘‘ poor”. }

1650.) LETTER CXLIX., EDINBURGH = 137

this winter to give the people such an understanding of the
justness of our cause, and our desires for the just liberties of the
people, that the better sort of them will be satisfied therewith ;
although, I must confess, hitherto they continue obstinate. I
thought I should have found in Scotland a conscientious people,
and a barren country : about Edinburgh, it is as fertile for corn
as any part of England, but the people generally given to the
most impudent lying, and frequent swearing, as is incredible to
be believed.!

I am,
‘Your most humble servant,’
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

What to do with Scotland, in these mixed circumstances, is a
question. We have friends among them, a distinct coincidence
with them in the great heart of their National Purpose, could
they understand us aright ; and we have all degrees of enemies
among them, up to the bitterest figure of Malignancy itself.
What to do? For one thing, Edinburgh Castle ought to be
reduced. ‘We have put forces into Linlithgow, and our Train
‘is lodged in Leith,’ Lesley’s old citadel there ; ‘the wet being
‘so great that we cannot march with our Train.’ Do we try
Edinburgh Castle with a few responsive shots from the Calton
Hill; or from what point? My Scotch Antiquarian friends have
not informed me. We decide on reducing it by mines.

‘Sunday 29th September 1650. Resolution being taken for the
‘ springing of mines in order to the reducing of Edinburgh Castle ;
‘and our men beginning their galleries last night, the Enemy
‘fired five pieces of ordnance, with several volleys of shot, from
‘the Castle ; but did no execution. We hope this work will take
‘effect ; notwithstanding the height, rockiness, and strength of
‘the place.—His Excellency with his Officers met this day in the
‘High Church of Edinburgh, forenoon and afternoon ; where was
‘a great concourse of people.’ Mr. Stapylton, who did the

1[Compare an unsigned letter printed in Charles 1/. and Scotland, p. 134. ‘‘Itis
usual for the Scots,”’ says the writer, ‘‘ to talk religiously and with a great show of piety
and devotion for a time, and the very next moment to lie, curse and swear.”]

* Newspapers (in Parliamentary History, xix. 404). [Two short letters in the
supplement (Nos. 62 and 63, come between this and the next one ; dated respectively
Sept. 27 and Oct. 2, and written in fayour of Apothecary General Webb and Col.
George Gill. ]

«

a ew PS ae pas . =
: o cia ol Unley.
——-;

138 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [Oct.

Hursley Marriage-treaty, and is otherwise transiently known to
mankind,—he, as was above intimated, occupies the pulpit there ;
the Scots Clergy still sitting sulky in their Castle, with Derby
miners now operating on them. ‘Many Scots expressed much
‘affection at the doctrine preached by Mr. Stapylton, in their
‘usual way of groans, —Hum-m-mrrh!—‘and it’s hoped a good
‘work is wrought in some of their hearts.’! I am sure I hope so.
But to think of brother worshippers, partakers in a Gospel of this
kind, cutting one another’s throats for a Covenanted Charles
Stuart,—Hum-m-mrrh !

LETTERS CL—CLXI

Haste and other considerations forbid us to do more than glance,
timidly from the brink, into that sea of confusions in which the
poor Scotch people have involved themselves by soldering Christ’s
Crown to Charles Stuart’s! Poor men, they have got a Cove-
nanted King; but he is, so to speak, a Solecism Incarnate: good
cannot come of him, or of those that follow him in this course ;
only inextricability, futility, disaster and discomfiture can come.
There is nothing sadder than to see such a Purpose of a Nation
led on by such a set of persons; staggering into ever deeper
confusion, down, down, till it fall prostrate into utter wreck.
Were not Oliver here to gather up the fragments of it, the Cause
of Scotland might now die; Oliver, little as the Scots dream of
it, is Scotland’s Friend too, as he was Ireland’s: what would
become of Scotch Puritanism, the one great feat hitherto achieved
by Scotland, if Oliver were not now there! Oliver’s Letters out
of Scotland, what will elucidate Oliver’s footsteps and utterances
there, shall alone concern us at present. For sufficing which
object, the main features of these Scotch confusions may become
conceivable without much detail of ours.

The first Scotch Army, now annihilated at Dunbar, had been
sedulously cleared of all Hamilton Engagers and other Malignant
or Quasi-Malignant Persons, according to a scheme painfully laid
down in what was called the Act of Classes,—a General-Assembly
Act, defining and classifying such men as shall not be allowed to
fight on this occasion, lest a curse overtake the Cause on their
account. Something other than a blessing has overtaken the

1 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 92).

1650.] LETTERS CL—CLXI 139

Cause :—and now, on rallying at Stirling, with unbroken purpose
of struggle, there arise in the Committee of Estates and Kirk,
and over the Nation generally, earnest considerations as to the
methods of farther struggle ; huge discrepancies as to the ground
and figure it ought henceforth to take. As was natural to the
case, Three Parties now develop themselves: a middle one, and
two extremes. The Official Party, Argyle and the Official Per-
sons, especially the secular portion of them, think that the old
ground should as much as possible be adhered to: Let us fill up
our old ranks with new men, and fight and resist with the
Covenanted Charles Stuart at the head of us, as we did before.
This is the middle or Official opinion.

No, answers an extreme Party, Let us have no more to do with
your covenanting pedantries ; let us sign your Covenant one good
time for all, and have done with it; but prosecute the King’s
Interest, and call on all men to join us in that. An almost
openly declared Malignant Party this; at the head of which
Lieutenant-General Middleton, the Marquis of Huntly and other
Royalist Persons are raising forces, publishing manifestos, in the
Highlands near by. Against whom David Lesley himself at last
has to march. This is the one extreme ; the Malignant or Royalist
extreme. The amount of whose exploits was this: They invited
the poor King to run off from Perth and his Church-and-State
Officials, and join them ; which he did,—rode out as if to hawk,
one afternoon, softly across the South Inch of Perth, then galloped
some forty miles; found the appointed place,—a villainous hut
among the Grampian Hills, without soldiers, resources, or ac-
comodations, ‘with nothing but a turf pillow to sleep on:’ and
was easily persuaded back, the day after ;! making his peace by
a few more—what shall we call them ?—poetic figments ; which
the Official Persons, with an effort, swallowed. Shortly after,
by official persuasion and military coercion, this first extreme
Party was suppressed, reunited to the main body ; and need not
concern us farther.

But now, quite opposite to this, there is another extreme
Party ; which has its seat in the ‘ Western Shires,’ from Renfrew
down to Dumfries ;—which is, in fact, I think, the old Whigga-
more Raid of 1648 under a new figure; these Western Shires
being always given that way. They have now got a ‘ Western
Army, with Colonel Ker and Colonel Strahan to command it ;

1 4th-6th October, Balfour, iv, 113-15. [See also Gardiner’s Commonwealth and
Protectorate, i., 375, 6.]

140 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _{9 0et.

and most of the Earls, Lairds, and Ministers in those parts have
joined. Very strong for the Covenant ; very strong against all
shams of the Covenant. Colonel Ker is the ‘famed Commander
Gibby Carre,’ who came to commune with us in the Burrow- Moor,
when we lay on Pentland Hills: Colonel Strahan is likewise a
famed Commander, who was thought to be slain at Musselburgh
once, but is alive here still; an old acquaintance of my Lord
General Cromwell’s, and always suspected of a leaning to Sec-
tarian courses. These Colonels and Gentry having, by sanction
of the Committee of Estates, raised a Western Army of some five-
thousand, and had much consideration with themselves; and
seen, especially by the flight into the Grampians, what way his
Majesty’s real inclinations are tending,—decide, or threaten to
decide, that they will not serve under his Majesty or his General
Lesley with their Army, till they see new light ; that in fact they
dare not ; being apprehensive he is no genuine Covenanted King,
but only the sham of one, whom it is terribly dangerous to follow !
On this Party Cromwell has his eye; and they on him. What
becomes of them we shall, before long, learn.

Meanwhile here is a Letter to the Official Authorities ; which,
however, produces small effect upon them.

LETTER CL

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Estates of Scotland, at

Stirling, or elsewhere: These

Linlithgow, 9th October 1650.
Rient HonouraBLe,

The grounds and ends of the army’s entering
Scotland have been heretofore often and clearly made known
unto you, and how much we have desired the same might be
accomplished without blood. But according to what returns we
have received, it is evident your hearts had not that love to us as
we can truly say we had towards you; and we are persuaded those
difficulties in which you have involved yourselves by espousing
your King’s interest and taking into your bosom that person, in
whom (notwithstanding what hath ‘been’ or may be said to the
contrary) that which is really malignancy and all malignants do

1650.1] LETTER CL., LINLITHGOW 141

centre; against whose family the Lord hath so eminently wit-
nessed for bloodguiltiness, not to be done away with by such
hypocritical and formal shows of repentance as are expressed in
his late Declaration ; and your strange prejudices against us as
men of heretical opinions (which, through the great goodness of
God to us, have been unjustly charged upon us), have occasioned
your rejecting of those Overtures which with a Christian affection
were offered to you before any blood was spilt, or your people
had suffered damage by us.

The daily sense we have of the calamity of war lying upon the
poor people of this nation, and the sad consequences of blood and
famine likely to come upon them; the advantage given to the
malignant, profane, and popish party by this war ; and that reality
of affection which we have so often professed to you, and concern-
ing the truth of which we have so solemnly appealed, doth again
constrain us to send unto you, to let you know, that if the
contending for that person be not by you preferred to the peace
and welfare of your country, the blood of your people, the love of
men of the same faith with you, and, which is above all, the
honour of that God we serve,—Then give the State of England
that satisfaction and security for their peaceable and quiet living
by you, which may in justice be demanded from a nation giving
so just ground to ask the same from those who have (as you)
taken their enemy into their bosom, whilst he was in hostility
against them: ‘do this ;’ and it will be made good to you, that
you may have a lasting and durable peace with them, and the
wish of a blessing upon you in all religious and civil things.

If this be refused by you, we are persuaded that God, who
hath once borne His testimony, will do it again on the behalf of
us His poor servants, who do appeal to Him whether their desires
flow from sincerity of heart or not. I rest,

Your Lordships’ humble servant,
Otiver CRoMWELL.*

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p 93). [Also Clarendon State-Papers, ii. 550,
‘*a copy by Mr. Nicholas,” and Mercurius Politicus, E. 615, 10. ]

142 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [9 Oct.

The Committee of Estates at Stirling or elsewhere debated
about an Answer to this Letter; but sent none, except of civility
merely, and after considerable delays. A copy of the Letter
was likewise forwarded to Colonels Ker and Strahan and their
Western Army, by whom it was taken into consideration ; and
some Correspondence, Cromwell’s part of which is not yet alto-
gether lost, followed upon it there; and indeed Cromwell, as we
dimly discover in the old Books, set forth towards Glasgow
directly on the back of it, in hopes of a closer communication
with these Western Colonels and their Party.

. While Ker and Strahan are busy ‘at Dumfries,’ says Baillie,
‘Cromwell with the whole body of his Army and cannon comes
‘peaceably by way of Kilsyth to Glasgow.’ It is Friday evening,
18th October 1650.1 ‘The Ministers and Magistrates flee all
‘away. I got to the Isle of Cumbrae with my Lady Montgomery ;
‘but left all my family and goods to Cromwell’s courtesy,—
‘which indeed was great; for he took such a course with his
‘soldiers that they did less displeasure at Glasgow nor if they
‘had been in London; though Mr. Zachary Boyd,’ a fantastic
old gentleman still known in Glasgow and Scotland, ‘railed
‘on them all, to their very face, in the High Church ;’? calling
them Sectaries and Blasphemers, the fantastic old gentleman !
‘Glasgow, though not so big or rich as Edinburgh, is a much
‘sweeter place; the completest town we have yet seen here,
and one of their choicest Universities.’ The people were much
afraid of us till they saw how we treated them. ‘Captain Covel
‘of the Lord General’s regiment of horse was cashiered here,
‘for holding some blasphemous opinions.’ 3—This is Cromwell's
first visit to Glasgow: he made two others, of which on occasion
notice shall be taken. In Pinkerton’s Correspondence are certain
‘anecdotes of Cromwell at Glasgow ;’ which, like many others
on Cromwell, need not be repeated anywhere except in the
nursery.

Cromwell entered Glasgow on Friday evening ; over Sunday,
was patient with Zachary Boyd: but got no result out of Ker

1[When Cromwell wrote the above letter, he was already on his way to Glasgow,
which he reached, not on the r8th but the 11th. On the r4th, he started on his
return to Edinburgh. }

2 Baillie, iii. r19; Whitlocke, p. 459.

3 Whitlocke, p. 459; Cromwedliana, pp. 92, 3. [But not really a quotation from
either. On the cashiering of Capt. Covell and its cause, see Firth’s Cromwell's
Army, Pp. 347-]

1650.} LETTER CLI, EDINBURGH 143

and Strahan. Ker and Strahan, at Dumfries on the Thursday!
have perfected and signed? their Remonstrance of the Western
Army ;* a Document of much fame in the old Scotch Books,
‘Expressing many sad truths,’ says the Kirk Committee. Ex-
pressing, in fact, the apprehension of Ker and Strahan that the
Covenanted King may probably be a Solecism Incarnate, under
whom it will not be good to fight longer for the Cause of Christ
and Scotland ;—expressing meanwhile considerable reluctancy
as to the English Sectaries; and deciding on the whole to
fight them still, though on a footing of our own. Not a very
hopeful enterprise! Of which we shall see the issue by and by.
Meanwhile news come that this Western Army is aiming towards
Edinburgh, to get hold of the Castle there. Whereupon Crom-
well, in all haste, on Monday, sets off thitherward ; ‘lodges the
first night in a poor cottage fourteen miles from Glasgow ;’
arrives safe, to prevent all alarms. His first visit to Glasgow
was but of two days.

LETTER CLI

Tue Western Colonels have given-in their Remonstrance to
the Committee of Estates ; and sat in deliberation on their copy
of Cromwell’s Expostulatory Letter to that Body, the Letter we
have just read,—in which these two words, ‘security’ and
‘satisfaction’ are somewhat abstruse to the Western Colonels.
They decide that it will not be convenient to return any public
Answer; but they have forwarded a private Letter of acknow-
ledgment with ‘Six Queries:’ Letter lost to us; Six Queries
still surviving. To which, directly after his return to Edinburgh,
here is Cromwell’s Answer. The Six Queries, being very brief,
may be transcribed; the Letter of acknowledgment can be
conceived without transcribing :—

‘Query 1. Why is “satisfaction” demanded? 2. What is the
‘satisfaction demanded? 3. For what is the “security” de-
«manded? 4. What is the security ye would have? 5. From
«whom is the security required? 6. To whom is the security to

1(That is, the Thursday /o//owing Cromwell's visit. ]
‘i 2(But Mr. Douglas states that no names are appended in any copy which he
as seen.
3 Dated 17th October ; given in Balfour, iv. 141-60.

ae

144 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [25 Oct.

‘be given?’ 1—Queries which, I think, do not much look like real
despatch-of-business in the present intricate conjuncture !

This Letter, it appears, is, if not accompanied, directly followed
by ‘Mr. Alexander Jaffray’ Provost of Aberdeen, and a ‘Reverend
Mr. Carstairs’ of Glasgow, two Prisoners of Oliver’s ever since
Dunbar Drove, who are to ‘agent’ the same.?

To Colonel Strahan, ‘nith the Western Army: These’
Edinburgh, 25th October 1650. :

Sir,

I have considered of the letter and the queries ;
and, having advised with some Christian friends about the same,
think fit to return an answer as followeth :

‘That’ we bear unto the godly of Scotland the same Christian
affection we have all along professed in our papers ; being ready,
through the grace of God, upon all occasions, to give such proof
and testimony thereof as the Divine Providence shall minister
opportunity to us to do. That nothing would be more acceptable
to us to see than the Lord removing offences, and inclining the
hearts of His people in Scotland to meet us with the same affec-
tion. That we do verily apprehend, with much comfort, that
there is some stirring of your bowels by the Lord, giving some
hope of His good pleasure tending hereunto: which we are most
willing to comply with, and not to be wanting in anything on our
part which may further the same.

And having seen the heads of two Remonstrances, the one of
the ministers of Glasgow, and the other of the officers and gen-
tlemen of the West,? we do from thence hope that the Lord hath
cleared unto you some things that were formerly hidden, and
which we hope may lead to a better understanding. Neverthe-
less, we cannot but take notice, that from some expressions in
the same papers, we have too much cause to note that there is

Oh TR, Oe

1 Balfour, iv. 135. 2 Baillie, iii. t20.
8 Remonstrance of the Western Army is this latter; [Peterkin’s Records, 604]
the other, very conceivable as a kind of codicil to this, is not known to me except
at secondhand, from Baillie’s eager, earnest, very headlong and perplexed account
of that Business (iv. 120, 122 e¢ segq.).

1650.} LETTER CLI., EDINBURGH 145

still so great a difference betwixt us as we are looked upon and
accounted as enemies.

And although we hope that the six queries sent by you to
us to be answered were intended to clear doubts and remove the
remaining obstructions, which we shall be most ready to do:
yet, considering the many misconstructions which may arise
from the clearest pen (where men are not all of one mind), and
the difficulties at this distance to resolve doubts and rectify
mistakes, we conceive our answer in writing may not so effectually
reach that end, as a friendly and Christian conference by equal
persons.

And we doubt not we can with ingenuity and clearness give
a satisfactory account of those general things held forth in the
letter sent by us to the Committee of Estates,) and in our
former declarations and papers; which we shall be ready to do
by a friendly debate, when and where our answer to these
particulars may probably tend to the better and more clear
understanding betwixt the godly party of both nations.

To speak plainly in a few words: If those who sincerely love
and fear the Lord amongst you are sensible that matters have
been and are carried by your State so as that therewith God is
not well pleased, but the interest of His people ‘is’ hazarded,
in Scotland and England, to malignants, to papists, and to the
profane, we can (through Grace) be willing to lay our bones in
the dust for your sakes; and can, as heretofore we have ‘said,’
still continue to say, that, not to impose upon you in religious
or civil interests, not dominion nor any worldly advantage, but
the obtaining of a just security to ourselves,? were the motives,
and satisfactions to our consciences, in this undertaking ; which
we believe by this time you may think we had cause to be
sensible was more than endangered by the carriage of affairs
with your King. And it is not success, and more visible clear-
ness to our consciences arising out of the discoveries God hath

1 Letter CL. 2‘ securing ourselves’ zm orig.
voL. 11.—10

146 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [5 Nov.

made of the hypocrisies of men, that hath altered our principles
or demands, but we take from thence humble encouragement to
follow the Lord’s providence in serving His cause and people;
not doubting but He will give such an issue to this business as
will be to His glory and your comfort.
I rest,
Your affectionate friend and servant,
O.iver CroMWELL.*

There followed no ‘Friendly Debate’ upon this Letter; nothing
followed upon it except new noise in the Western Army, and a
straitlaced case of conscience more perplexing than ever. Jaffray
and Carstairs had to come back on parole again ; Strahan at length
withdrew from the concern : the Western Army went its own sepa-
rate middle road,—to what issue we shall see.

Here is another trait of the old time ; not without illumination
for us. ‘One Watt, a tenant of the Earl of Tweedale’s, being
‘sore oppressed by the English, took to himself some of his own
‘degree; and, by daily incursions and infalls on the English
‘Garrisons and Parties in Lothian, killed and took of them above
‘Four-hundred,’ or say the half or quarter of so many, ‘and en-
‘riched himself by their spoils.’ The like ‘did one Augustin, a
‘High-German,’ not a Dutchman, ‘ being purged out of the Army
‘before Dunbar Drove, —of whom we shall hear farther. In fact,
the class called Mosstroopers begins to abound ; the only class
that can flourish in such a state of affairs. Whereupon comes
out this

PROCLAMATION

I rinpinc that divers of the army under my command are
not only spoiled and robbed, but also sometimes barbarously
and inhumanly butchered and slain, by a sort of outlaws and
robbers, not under the discipline of any army ; and finding that
all our tenderness to the country produceth no other effect than

* Clarendon State-Papers (Oxford, 1773), ii. 551-2 [‘‘a copy by Mr. Nicholas.”

'

1650.} LETTER CLIL, EDINBURGH 147

their compliance with, and protection of, such persons ; and con-
sidering that it is in the power of the country to detect and
discover them (many of them being inhabitants of those places
where commonly the outrage is committed); and perceiving
that their motion is ordinarily by the invitation, and according
to intelligence given them by countrymen :

I do therefore declare, that wheresoever any under my com-
mand shall be hereafter robbed or spoiled by such parties, I will
require life for life, and a plenary satisfaction for their goods, of
those parishes and places where the fact shall be committed ;
unless they shall discover and produce the offender. And this
I wish all persons to take notice of, that none may plead ignor-
ance.

Given under my hand at Edinburgh, the 5th of November
1650.

Otiver CRoMWELL.*

LETTER CLII

One nest of Mosstroopers, not far off, in the Dalkeith region,
ought specially to be abated.

To the Governor of Borthnick Castle : These

Edinburgh, 18th November 1650.
Sir,

{ thought fit to send this trumpet to you, to
let you know, that if you please to walk away with your com-
pany, and deliver the house to such as | shall send to receive
it, you shall have liberty to carry off your arms and goods, and
such other necessaries as you have.

You have harboured such parties in your house as have basely
and inhumanly murdered our men: if you necessitate me to bend

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 94).

148 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Dec.

my cannon against you, you may expect what I doubt you will not
be pleased with. I expect your present answer, and rest,
Your servant,
OxtveR CroMWELL.*

The Governor of Borthwick Castle, Lord Borthwick of that
Ilk, did as he was bidden ; ‘ walked away,’ with movable goods,
with wife and child, and had ‘fifteen days’ allowed him to pack :
whereby the Dalkeith region and Carlisle Road is a little quieter
henceforth.

LETTER CLIII

Co.onets Ker and Strahan with their Remonstrance have filled
all Scotland with a fresh figure of dissension. The Kirk finds
‘many sad truths’ in it; knows not what to do with it. In the
Estates themselves there is division of opinion. Men of worship,
the Minister in Kirkcaldy among others, are heard to say strange
things: “That a Hypocrite,’ or Solecism Incarnate, ‘‘ ought not
“to reign over us; that we ought to treat with Cromwell, and
“give him security not to trouble England with a King; and
“who marred this Treaty, the blood of the slain in this quarrel
“should be on their head!” Which are ‘strange words,’ says
Baillie, ‘if true.’ Scotland is in a hopeful way. The extreme
party of Malignants in the North is not yet quite extinct; and
here is another extreme party of Remonstrants in the West,—to
whom all the conscientious rash men of Scotland, in Kirkcaldy
and elsewhere, seem as if they would join themselves! Nothing
but remonstrating, protesting, treatying and mistreatying from
sea to sea.

To have taken up such a Remonstrance at first, and stood by
it, before the War began, had been very wise: but to take it up
now, and attempt not to make a Peace by it, but to continue
the War with it, looks mad enough! Such nevertheless is
Colonel Gibby Ker’s project,—not Strahan’s, it would seem :?

* Russell's Life of Cromwell, ii. 95 (from Statistical Account of Scotland).

1[Strahan had already fallen under suspicion, and had been forbidden to go to
his regiment. Some would even have “‘ laid him fast” for fear of his going to the
enemy. (Baillie, iii, 122). He gave his help in trying to rally the troops after

—————

'
‘
+

1650.) LETTER CLIII., EDINBURGH 149

men’s projects strangely cross one another in this time of be-
wilderment ; and only perhaps in doing nothing could a man in
such a scene act wisely. Lambert, however, is gone into the
West with Three-thousand horse to deal with Ker and his pro-
jects; the Lord General has himself been in the West: the end
of Ker’s projects is succinctly shadowed forth in the following
Letter. From Baillie? we learn that Ker, with his Western
Army, was lying at a place called Carmunnock, when he made
this infall upon Lambert ; that the time of it was ‘four in the
morning of Sunday Ist December 1650;’ and the scene of it
Hamilton Town, and the streets and ditches thereabouts: a
dark sad business, of an ancient Winter morning ;—sufficiently
luminous for our purpose with it here.

The ‘treaties among the Enemy’ means Ker and Strahan’s
confused remonstratings and treatyings ; the ‘result,’ or general
upshot, of which is this scene in the ditches at four in the
morning.”

To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the Parlia-
ment of England : These

Edinburgh, 4th December 1650.
Sir,

I have now sent you the results of some

treaties amongst the enemy, which came to my hand this day.
The Major-General and Commissary-General Whalley marched
a few days ago towards Glasgow. The enemy attempted his
quarters in Hamilton; were entered the town: but by the
blessing of God, by a very gracious hand of Providence, without
the loss of six men as I hear of, he beat them out; killed about
an hundred ; took also about the same number, amongst whom
are some prisoners of quality, and near an hundred horse, as I
am informed; the Major-General being in the chase of them;
Ker’s defeat, but failing in this, surrendered himself to Lambert. As early as
November 1, one of Cromwell's intelligencers had reported that there was ‘ much

talk’ that he would join with the English. See H7zst. 1ZSS. Commissioners’ Report
on Mr. Leyborne-Popham’s MSS., p. 77.]

liij. 125.

2 See also Whitlocke, 16th December 1650. [But Cromwell's opening sentence

would seem rather to refer to documents just come to his hands and now sent up
by him.]

150 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Dee.

to whom also I have since sent the addition of a fresh party.
Colonel Ker (as my messenger, this night, tells me) is taken;
his lieutenant-colonel and one that was sometimes major to
Colonel Strahan and Ker’s captain-lieutenant. The whole party
is shattered, And give me leave to say it, If God had not brought
them upon us, we might have marched three-thousand horse to
death, and not have lighted on them. And truly it was a strange
Providence brought them upon him. For I marched from
Edinburgh on the north side of Clyde; ‘and had’ appointed
the Major-General to march from Peebles to Hamilton, on the
south side of Clyde. I came thither by the time expected ;
tarried the remainder of the day, and until near seven o'clock
the next morning,—apprehending ‘then that’ the Major-General
would not come, by reason of the waters.! I being retreated,
the enemy took encouragment; marched all that night, and
came upon the Major-General’s quarters about two hours before
day; where it pleased the Lord to order as you have heard.

The Major-General and Commissary-General (as he sent me
word) were still gone on in the prosecution of them ; and ‘he’
saith that, except an hundred-and-fifty horse in one body, he
hears they are fled, by sixteen or eighteen in a company, all the
country over. Robert Montgomery was come out of Stirling,
with four or five regiments of horse and dragoons,” but was put
to a stand when he heard of the issue of this business. Strahan
and some other officers had quitted some three weeks or a month

1[This is mentioned in other letters from Edinburgh: ‘‘ My last told you that
we were then upon a sudden march. We were out two days and two nights. It
was a sad, cold and very tedious march. We foiled many of our horses and tired
the men exceedingly, and the Major-General not meeting us according to appoint-
ment we were enforced to draw back to our several quarters” Aercurius Politicus,
No. 27 (E., 619). ‘‘ This last week hath produced nothing but an hard march to
Hamilton, which gave us afar off a sight of two or three troops, which we had pur-
sued, but they retreated to a bridge, and the water not being fordable and night
coming on, there was no pursuing. . . . In this march the foot could not go far,
by reason of the extraordinary tempests”. Zerc. Pol., No. 28 (E. 620).]

2For the purpose of rallying to him these Western forces, or such of them as
would follow the official Authorities and him; and leading them to Stirling, to the
main Army (Baillie, 42 supra). Poor Ker thought it might be useful to do a feat
on his own footing first : and here is the conclusion of him! Colonel ‘ Robin Mont-
gomery’ is the Earl of Eglinton’s Son, whom we have repeatedly seen before.

et eee ree cy hee ee

1650.) LETTER CLIIL, EDINBURGH 151

before this business; so that Ker commanded this whole party
in chief.

It is given out that the malignants will be all (almost) received,
and rise unanimously and expeditiously. I can assure you, that
those that serve you here find more satisfaction in having to
deal with men of this stamp than ‘with’ others; and it is our
comfort that the Lord hath hitherto made it the matter of our
prayers, and of our endeavours (if it might have been the will of
God), to have had a Christian understanding between those that
fear God in this land and ourselves. And yet we hope it hath
not been carried on with a willing failing of our duty to those
that trust us, and I am persuaded the Lord hath looked favour-
ably upon our sincerity herein, and will still do so; and upon
you also, whilst you make the interest of God’s people yours.

Those religious people of Scotland that fall in this cause, we
cannot but pity and mourn for them, and we pray that all good
men may do so too. Indeed there is at this time a very great
distraction, and mighty workings of God upon the hearts of
divers, both ministers and people; much of it tending to the
justification of your cause. And although some are as bitter and
as bad as ever, making it their business to shuffle hypocritically
with their consciences and the Covenant, to make it ‘seem’ law-
ful to join with malignants, which now they do,—as well as they
might long before, having taken in the head ‘malignant’ of
them: yet truly others are startled at it, and some have been
constrained by the work of God upon their consciences, to make
sad and solemn accusations of themselves, and lamentations in
the face of their supreme authority; charging themselves as
guilty of the blood shed in this war, by having a hand in the
Treaty at Breda, and by bringing the King in amongst them.
This lately did a Lord of the Session; and withdrew ‘from the
Committee of Estates.’ And lately Mr. James Leviston, a man
as highly esteemed as any for piety and learning, who was a
Commissioner for the Kirk at the said Treaty, charged himself
with the guilt of the blood of this war, before their Assembly,
and withdrew from them, and is retired to his own house.

152 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Dec.

It will be very necessary, to encourage victuallers to come to
us, that you take off customs and excise from all things brought
hither for the use of the army.

I beg your prayers, and rest,

Your humble servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

This then is the end of Ker’s fighting project ; a very mad one,
at this state of the business. The Remonstrance continued long
to be the symbol of the Extreme-Covenant or Whiggamore Party
among the Scots; but its practical operation ceased here. Ker
lies lamed, dangerously wounded ; and, I think, will fight no
more.! Strahan and some others, voted traitorous by the native
Authorities, went openly over to Cromwell ;—Strahan soon after
died. As for the Western Army, it straightway dispersed itself;
part towards Stirling and the Authorities ; the much greater part
to their civil callings again, wishing they had never quitted them.
‘The miscarriage of affairs in the West by a few unhappy men,’
says Baillie, ‘put us all under the foot of the Enemy. They
‘presently ran over all the country without any stop destroying
‘cattle and corns; putting Glasgow and all others under grievous
‘contributions. This makes me,’ for my part, ‘yet to stick at
‘Perth; not daring to go where the Enemy is master, as now he
‘is of all Scotland beyond Forth.’ ?

It only remains to be added, that the two Extreme Parties being
broken, the Middle or Official one rose supreme, and widened its
borders by the admission, as Oliver anticipated, ‘of the Malignants
almost all ;’ a set of ‘Public Resolutions ’ so-called being passed
in the Scotch Parliament to that end, and ultimately got carried
through the Kirk Assembly too. Official majority of ‘ Resolu-
tioners,’ with a zealous party of ‘Remonstrants,’ who are also
called ‘Protesters:’ in Kirk and State, these long continue to
afflict and worry one another, sad fruit of a Covenanted Charles
Stuart ; but shall not farther concern us here. It is a great
comfort to the Lord General that he has now mainly real Malig-
nants for enemies in this country; and so can smite without
reluctance. Unhappy ‘ Resolutioners,’ if they cou/d subdue Crom-

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, pp. 94, 5).

1Qther notice of him, and of his unsubduable stiffness of neck, in Thurloe, iv.

480 (Dec. 1655), &c.
2 Letters and Journals, iii. 125 (date, 2d January 1650-1).

1650.} LETTER CLIV., EDINBURGH 153

well, what would become of them at the hands of their own
Malignants! They have admitted the Chief Malignant, ‘in
whom all Malignity does centre,’ into their bosom; and have an
Incarnate Solecism presiding over them. Satisfactorily descended
from Elizabeth Muir of Caldwell, but in all other respects most
unsatisfactory !|—

The ‘ Lord of the Session,’ who felt startled at this condition of
things, and ‘withdrew’ from it, I take to have been Sir James
Hope of Craighall,! of whom, and. whose scruples, and the cen-
sures they got, there is frequent mention in these months. But
the Laird of Swinton, another of the same, went still further in
the same course ; and indeed, soon after this defeat of Ker, went
openly over to Cromwell. ‘There is very great distraction, there
‘are mighty workings upon the hearts of divers.’ ‘Mr. James
‘Livingstone,’ the Minister of Ancrum, has left a curious Life of
himself :—he is still represented by a distinguished family in
America.

LETTER CLIV

Tue next affair is that of Edinburgh Castle. Our Derbyshire
miners found the rock very hard, and made small way in it: but
now the Lord General has got his batteries ready; and, on
Thursday 12th December, after three months blockade, salutes
the place with his ‘guns and mortars,’ and the following set of
Summonses ; which prove effectual.

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle : These

Edinburgh, t2th December 1650.
Sir,
We are now resolved (by God’s assistance) to

make use of such means as He hath put into our hands towards
the reducing of Edinburgh Castle, I thought fit to send you this
summons.

What [are] the grounds of our relation to the glory of God and
the common interest of His people, we have often expressed in
our papers tendered to public view, to which though credit hath
not been given by men, yet the Lord hath been pleased to bear

1 Balfour, iv, 173, 235.

154 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ [12 Dec.

a gracious and favourable testimony ; and hath not only kept us
constant to our professions, and in our affections to such as fear
the Lord in this nation, but hath unmasked others of their pre-
tences, as appears by the present transactions at St. Johnstons,’
Let the Lord dispose your resolutions as seemeth good to Him:
my sense of duty presseth me, for the ends aforesaid, and to avoid
the effusion of more blood, to demand the rendering of this place
to me upon fit conditions.
To which expecting your answer this day, I rest,
Sir, your servant,
O.tveR CROMWELL.

The Governor’s Answer to my Lord General’s Letter is this :
“ For his Excellency the General of the English Forces
‘“‘ Edinburgh Castle, 12th December 1650.

“My Lorp,—I am intrusted by the Estates of Scotland with
“this place ; and being sworn not to deliver it to any without
“their warrant, I have no power to dispose thereof by myself, I
“do therefore desire the space of ten days, wherein I may conven-
“iently acquaint the said Estates, and receive their answer.
« And for this effect, your safe-conduct for them employed in the
“message. Upon the receipt of their answer, you shall have the
“resolution of, my Lord, your most humble servant,

«'W. Dunpas.”

The Lord General’s Reply to Governor Walter Dundas :
LETTER CLV

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle : These

Edinburgh, 12th December 1650.
Sir,
It concerns not me to know your obligations

to those that trust you. I make no question the apprehensions

1 Readmission ‘of the Malignants almost all;’ Earl of Calendar, Duke of
Hamilton, &c. (Balfour, iv. 179-203); by the Parliament at Perth,—at ‘St. John-
ston,’ as the old name is. [St. Johnston is of course correct, but it was much
more commonly written St. Johnstons. ] °

1650.} LETTER CLV., EDINBURGH 155

you have of your abilities to resist those impressions which shall
be made upon you,! are the natural and equitable rules of all
men’s judgments and consciences in your condition ; except you
had taken an oath beyond a possibility. I leave that to your
consideration, and shall not seek to contest with your thoughts :
only I think it may become me to let you know, You may have
honourable terms for yourself and those with you, and both your-
self and the soldiers have satisfaction to all your reasonable
desires; and those that have other employments, liberty and
protection in the exercise of them. But to deal plainly with
you, I will not give liberty to you to consult your Committee of
Estates, because I hear, those that are honest amongst them
enjoy not satisfaction, and the rest are now discovered to seek
another interest than they have formerly pretended to. And if
you desire to be informed of this, you may, by them you dare
trust, at a nearer distance than St. Johnstons.
Expecting your present answer, I rest,
Sir, your servant,
H Oxiver CRoMWELL.

The Governor's Reply, No. 2, arrives on the morrow, Friday :

“ For his Excellency the Lord General of the English Forces in
*¢ Scotland

** Edinburgh Castle, 13th December 1650.

“My Lorp,—It much concerneth me to consider my obliga-
“tions to be found faithful in the trust committed tome. And
“therefore, in the fear of the living God, and of His great Name,
“called upon in the accepting of my trust, I do again press the
“liberty of acquainting the Estates. The time is but short; and
“J do expect it as answerable to your profession of affection to
“those that fear the Lord. In the mean time I am willing to
“hear information of late proceedings from such as he dare
“trust who is, my Lord, your humble servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

1 By my cannons and mortars.

oS : + — A
—— 4 —— “Cc

ee

156 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [13 Dee.

The Lord General’s Reply, No. 2.
LETTER CLVI

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle : These

Edinburgh, 13th December 1650.
Sir,
Because of your strict and solemn adjuration of

me, in the fear and name of the living God, that I give you time
to send to the Committee of Estates,! to whom you undertook
the keeping of this place under the obligation of an oath, as you
affirm, I cannot but hope that it is your conscience, and not
policy, carrying you to that desire, the granting of which, if it
be prejudicial to our affairs, 1 am as much obliged in conscience
not to do, as you can pretend cause for your conscience’ sake to
desire it.

Now considering our merciful and wise God binds not His
people to actions so cross one to another; but that our bands
may be,’ as I am persuaded they are, through our mistakes and
darkness, not only in the question about the surrendering this
Castle, but also in all the present differences :—I have so much
reason to believe that, by a Conference, you may be so well
satisfied, in point of fact, of your estates! (to whom you say you
are obliged) carrying on an interest destructive and contrary to
what they professed when they committed that trust to you;
having made to depart from them many honest men through
fear of their own safety,’ and making way for the reception of
professed malignants, both into their Parliament and Army ; 4—
also ‘that you’ may have laid before you such grounds of our
ends and aims to the preservation of the interest of honest men
in Scotland as well as England, as will (if God vouchsafe to
appear in them) give your conscience satisfaction,—which if
you refuse, I hope you will not have cause to say that we are

1[“ States” zz orig.) 2our perplexities are caused.

3 Swinton, Strahan, Hope of Craighall, &c.
4[‘‘ but” 2 orig.)

aati

1650} LETTER CLVI., EDINBURGH 157

either unmindful of the great Name of the Lord which you have
mentioned, nor that we are wanting to answer our profession of
affection to those that fear the Lord ;—{that] I am willing to
cease hostility, for some hours, or convenient time to so good an
end as information of judgment, and satisfaction of conscience ; }
although I may not give liberty for the time desired, to send to
the Committee of Estates and at all stay the prosecution of my
attempt.
Expecting your sudden answer, I rest,
Your servant,
O.iveR CroMWELL.*

The Governor's Reply, No. 3, comes out on Saturday :

“ For his Excellency the Lord General of the English Forces in
“Scotland : These

“Edinburgh Castle, 14th December ? 1650.

“My Lorp,—What I pressed, in my last, proceeded from con-
“science and not from policy: and I conceived that the few days
“desired could not be of such prejudice to your affairs, as to bar
“the desired expression of professed affection towards those that
“fear the Lord. And I expected that a small delay of our
“own ® affairs should not have preponderated the satisfaction of a
“desire pressed in so serious and solemn a manner for satisfying
** conscience.

“ But if you will needs persist in denial, I shall desire to hear

1[This copy is signed by Cromwell's own hand, but the letter was either care-
lessly written or carelessly copied, and the sense is obscured by one of the long
parentheses of which Cromwell is so fond. The meaning evidently is: ‘‘I have so
much reason to believe that a Conference (with some whom you trust) will satisfy
you that the estates have taken up an interest contrary to their former professions,
and also will show you our desires for the good of honest men in Scotland, that I
ae ear to give time for this, though not for sending to the Committee of

States,”

2[Mr. Douglas suggests that this letter would rather appear to have been written
a day earlier (Cromwell's Scotch Campaigns, p. 204, note); but the letter is now
printed from the original, and the date is clear. It may, however, have been
written early in the morning, before the attack began. ]

3* our own,’ one’s own.

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 97). [But now printed from the papers
actually sent up to London by Cromwell (that is, the originals of the governor’s
letters and copies of his own), preserved at Welbeck. There are old copies of these
letters in the Baker MSS., vol. 35.]

‘>

158 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [14 Dee.

“the information of late proceedings from such as I dare trust
“and ‘as’ have had occasion to know the certainty of things.
“Such I hope you will permit to come alongst at the first con-
“venience ; and during that time all acts of hostility, and pro-
“secution of attempts, be forborne on both sides. I am, my
“Lord, your humble servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

The Lord General’s Reply, No. 3:
LETTER CLVII

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle: These

Edinburgh, 14th December 1560.

Sir,

You will give me leave to be sensible of delays
out of conscience of duty ‘too.’

If you please to name any you would speak with now in town,
they shall have liberty to come and speak with you for one hour, if
they will, provided you send presently. I expect there be no loss
of time. I rest,

Your servant,
O.iver CRoMWELL.*

Governor Dundas applies hereupon for Mr. Alexander Jaffray
and the Reverend John Carstairs to be sent to him: two official
persons, whom we saw made captive in Dunbar Drove, who have
ever since been Prisoners-on-parole with his Excellency ; doing
now and then an occasional message for him; much meditating
on him and his ways. Who very naturally decline to be con-
cerned with so delicate an operation as this now on hand,—in
the following characteristic Note, enclosed in his Excellency’s
Reply, No. 4:

* Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 97). [But now from the Welbeck Papers.
See note on p. 157, above. ]

1650..| LETTER CLVIIL, EDINBURGH 159

LETTER CLVIII

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle: These

Edinburgh, 14th December 1650.
Sir
: Having acquainted the gentlemen with your
desire to speak with them, and they making some difficulty of
it, ‘they’ have desired me to send you this enclosed. I rest,
Sir, your servant,
OtiveR CROMWELL.*

Here is ‘this enclosed :’
“ For the Right Honourable the Governor of Edinburgh Castle
“ Edinburgh, 14th December 1650.

“Richt Honouraste,—We now hearing that you was desirous
“to speak with us for your information of the posture of affairs,
“we would be glad, and we think you make no doubt of it, to be
“refreshing or useful to you in anything; but the matter is of so
“huge concernment, especially since it may be you will lean!
“somewhat upon our information in managing that important
“trust put upon you, that we dare not take upon us to meddle :
“ye may therefore do as ye find yourselves clear and in capacity,
“and the Lord be with you. We are, Sir, your honour’s humble
“servants and wellwishers in the Lord,

“ AL, JAFFRAY.
“ Jo. Cusrairs.”’ (sic)

So that, for this Saturday, nothing can be done. On Sunday,
we suppose, Mr. Stapylton, in black, teaches in St. Giles’s; and
other qualified persons, some of them in red with belts, teach in
other Kirks ; the Scots, much taken with the doctrine, ‘ answering
in their usual way of groans,’ Hum-m-mrrh !—and on Monday, it
is like, the cannons and mortar-pieces begin to teach again,? or
indicate that they can at once begin. Wherefore, on Wednesday,
here is a new Note from Governor Dundas; which we shall call
Reply No. 4, from that much-straitened Gentleman :

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 98). [See note, p. 157.]

of learn” in the copy sent up, but no doubt the emendation is right. ]

2(A letter from Edinburgh, written on Tuesday, the 17th, says: ‘‘ Yesterday
the snow that fell hid the Castle from us, so that little was done; this morning the
battery is vigorously renewed”. Several Proceedings in Parliament, E. 781, (14). |

eR ae oe os a

160 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [18 Dee.

‘* Edinburgh Castle, r8th December 1650.

“ My Lorp,—I expected that conscience, which you pretended
“to be your motive that did induce you to summon this house
“before you did attempt anything against it, should also have
“moved you to have expected my answer to your demand of the
“house; which I could not, out of conscience, suddenly give
“without mature deliberation, it being a business of such high
“importance ; you having refused that little time, which I did
“demand to the effect I might receive the commands of them
“that did intrust me with this place. And yet not daring to
“ fulfil your desire, I do demand such a competent time as may
“be condescended upon betwixt us, within which if no relief
“come, I shall surrender this place upon such honourable con-
“ ditions as can be agreed upon by capitulation ; and during which
“time all acts of hostility and prosecution of attempts on both
“sides may be forborne. I am, my Lord, your humble servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

The Lord General’s Reply, No. 5:
LETTER CLIX

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle : These

Edinburgh, 18th December 1650,
Sir,
All that I have to say is shortly this: that if

you will send out commissioners by eleven o'clock this night,
thoroughly instructed and authorised to treat and conclude, you
may have terms, honourable and safe to you, and those whose
interests are concerned in the things that are with you. I shall
give a safe-conduct to such whose names you shall send within
the time limited, and order to forbear shooting at their coming
forth and going in.
To this I expect your answer within one hour, and rest,
Sir, your servant,
O.iver CROMWELL.*

1[Carlyle altered the division of the preceding sentences, but the original punctua-
tion makes good sense. ]

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 98). [See note, p. 157.]

|
:
.
:

1650.} LETTER CLX., EDINBURGH 161
The Governor’s Reply, No. 5:

‘Edinburgh Castle, 18th December 1650.

“My Lorp,—I have thought upon these two Gentlemen whose
“names are here mentioned ; to wit, Major Andrew Abernathie
“and Captain Robert Henderson; whom I purpose to send out
“instructed, in order to the carrying-on the capitulation, there-
“fore expect a safe-conduct for them with this bearer. I rest,
“my Lord, your humble servant,

“W. Dunpas.”

The Lord General’s Reply, No. 6:
LETTER CLX

For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle: These

Edinburgh, 18th December 1650.
Sir,

I have, here enclosed, sent you a safe-conduct
for the coming forth and return of the gentlemen you desire ;
and have appointed and authorised Colonel Monck and Lieu-
tenant-Colonel White to meet with your Commissioners, at the
house in the safe-conduct mentioned : there to treat and conclude
of the capitulation on my part. I rest,

Sir, your servant,
Ouiver CromweELt.*

Here is his Excellency’s Pass or safe-conduct for them :
PASS
To all Officers and Soldiers under my Command

You are on sight hereof to suffer Major Andrew Abernathie
and Captain Robert Henderson to come forth of Edinburgh
Castle, to the house of Mr.— Wallace in Edinburgh, and to

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 98). [See note, p. 157. ]
vot. 1.—11

162 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ [19 Dee.

return back into the said Castle, without any trouble or moles-
tation.
Given under my hand, the 18th December 1650.
O.iver CRoMWELL.*

By tomorrow morning, in Mr. Wallace’s House, Colonel Monk
and the other Three have agreed upon handsome terms; of
which, except what indicates itself in the following Proclamation,
published by beat of drum the same day, we need say nothing.
All was handsome, just and honourable, as the case permitted ;
my Lord General being extremely anxious to gain this place,
and conciliate the Godly People of the Nation. By one of the
conditions, the Public Registers, now deposited in the Castle, are
to be accurately bundled up by authorised persons, and carried
to Stirling, or whither the Authorities please ; concerning which
some question afterwards accidentally rises.

PROCLAMATION

To be proclaimed by the Marshal-general, by beat of drum, in
Edinburgh and Leith

Wuereas there is an agreement of articles by treaty concluded
betwixt myself and Colonel Walter Dundas, Governor of the
Castle of Edinburgh, which doth give free liberty to all inhabi-
tants adjacent, and all other persons who have any goods in the
said Castle, to fetch forth the same from thence :

These are therefore to declare, that all such people before
mentioned who have any goods in the Castle, as is before ex-
pressed, shall have free liberty between this present Thursday the
19th instant and Tuesday the 24th, To repair to the Castle, and
to fetch away their goods, without let or molestation, And I
do hereby further declare and require all officers and soldiers of
this army, That they take strict care, that no violation be done

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 99). [See note, p. 157. ]

2 ell i

f
,

1650.] PROCLAMATION 163

to any person or persons fetching away their goods, and carrying
them to such place or places as to them seemeth fit. And if it
shall so fall out that any soldier shall be found willingly or wil-
fully to do anything contrary hereunto, he shall suffer death for
the same. And if it shall appear that any officer shall, either

through connivance or otherwise, do or suffer ‘to be done’ any-

thing contrary to and against the said Proclamation, wherein it
might lie in his power to prevent or hinder the same, he the said
officer shall likewise suffer death.
Given under my hand the 19th of December 1650.
Outver CroMWELL.*

It is now Thursday : we gain admittance to the Castle on the
Tuesday following, and the Scotch forces march away,—in a
somewhat confused manner, I conceive. For Governor Dundas
and the other parties implicated are considered little better than
traitors, at Stirling: in fact, they are, openly or secretly, of the
Remonstrant or Protester species ; and may as well come over to
Cromwell ;—which at once or gradually the most of them do.
What became of the Clergy, let us not enquire: Remonstrants or
Resolutioners, confuse! times await them! Of which here and
there a glimpse may turn up as we proceed. The Lord General
has now done with Scotch Treaties ; the Malignants and Quasi-
Malignants are ranked in one definite body; and he may smite
without reluctance. Here is his Letter to the Speaker on this
business. After which, we may hope, the rest of his Scotch
Letters may be given in a mass; sufficiently legible without
commentary of ours.

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 99). [A curious little bit of historic irony
is to be found amongst the C/arke Pagers at Littlecote. On the back of a copy or
draft of this proclamation, written by William Clarke in shorthand, Clarke himself
oo acting as secretary to Cromwell at Edinburgh), has drafted a petition for a
riend of his to King Charles II., praying for the release of her husband, as a sweet
pledge of his Majesty’s gracious and auspicious reign, on the happy day of his
Coronation, which would engage the petitioner ‘‘ever to pray for your Majesty's
long and glorious reign over us”. Hist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr.
Leyborne-Popham’s MSS., p. 81.]

Se ee

ee a

164 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [24 Dee.

LETTER CLXI

‘For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England; These’

Edinburgh, 24th Dec. 1650.
Sir,
It hath pleased God to cause the Castle of

Edinburgh to be surrendered into our hands, this day about
eleven o'clock. I thought fit to give you such account thereof
as I could, and the shortness of time would permit.

I sent a summons to the Castle upon the 12th instant ; which
occasioned several exchanges of returns-and replies, which, for
their unusualness, I also thought fit humbly to present to you.!
Indeed the mercy is very great and seasonable. I think, I need
say little of the strength of the place, which, if it had not come as
it did, would have cost very much blood to have attained, if at
all to be attained, and did tie up your army to that inconvenience,
that little or nothing could have been attempted whilst this was
in design, or little fruit had of anything brought into your power
by your army hitherto, without it. I must needs say, not any
skill or wisdom of ours, but the good hand of God hath given
you this place.

I believe all Scotland hath not in it so much brass ordnance
as this place. I send you here enclosed a list thereof,? and of
the arms and ammunition, so well as they could be taken on a
sudden. Not having more at present to trouble you with, I take
leave, and rest,

Sir,
Your most humble servant,
Ouiver CromweELL.*
1 We have already read them.
2 Drakes, minions, murderers, monkeys, of brass and iron,—not interesting to

us, except it be ‘the great iron murderer called Muckle-Meg,’ already in existence,
and still held in some confused remembrance in those Northern parts.

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 99). [Now printed from the original at
Welbeck. Signed only by Cromwell. ]

~~

1650.] LETTERS CLXII—CLXXXI 165

LETTERS CLXII—CLXXXI

Tue Lord General is now settled at Edinburgh till the season
for campaigning return. Tradition still reports him as lodged,
as in 1648, in that same spacious and sumptuous ‘ Earl of Murrie’s
House in the Cannigate;’ credible enough; though Tradition
does not in this instance produce any written voucher hitherto.!
The Lord General, as we shall find by and by, falls dangerously
sick here ; worn down by over-work and the rugged climate.

The Scots lie entrenched at Stirling, diligently raising new
levies ; parliamenting and committee-ing diligently at Perth ;—
crown their King at Scone Kirk, on the First of January,? in
token that they have now all ‘complied’ with him. The Lord
General is virtually master of all Scotland south of the Forth ;—
fortifies, before long, a Garrison as far west as ‘ Newark,’ ? which
we now call Port Glasgow, on the Clyde. How his forces had to
occupy themselves, reducing detached Castles; coercing Moss-
troopers; and, in detail, bringing the Country to obedience,
the old Books at great length say, and the reader here shall
fancy in his mind. Take the following two little traits from
Whitlocke, and spread them out to the due expansion and re-
duplication :

‘ February 3d, 1650. Letters that Colonel Fenwick summoned
‘Hume Castle to be surrendered to General Cromwell. The
‘Governor answered, “I know not Cromwell; and as for my
‘Castle, it is built on a rock.” Whereupon Colonel Fenwick
played upon ‘him’ a little ‘with the great guns.’ But the
Governor still would not yield; nay sent a Letter couched in
these singular terms :

‘I, William of the Wastle,
Am now in my Castle;
And aw the dogs in the town
Shanna gar4 me gang down.”

So there remained nothing but opening the mortars upon this

1Yes,in fine : Memorie of the Somervilles (Edinburgh, 1815), ii. 423, gives ‘ my
Lady Home's Lodging,’ which is known to signify that same House, (Note of
1857.)

2 Minute description of the ceremony, in Somers Tracts, vi. 117.

3 Milton State-Papers, p. 84.

**Shand garre,’ is Whitlocke’s reading.

eee ee, ee oe

166 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ [25 Dec.

William of the Wastle; which did gar him gang down,—more
fool than he went up.!

We also read how Colonel Hacker and others rooted out bodies
of Mosstroopers from Strength after Strength ; and ‘took much
oatmeal, which must have been very useful there. But this
little Entry, a few days subsequent to that of Willie Wastle,
affected us most: ‘Letters that the Scots in a Village called
‘Geddard rose, and armed themselves; and set upon Captain
‘Dawson as he returned from pursuing some Mosstroopers ;—
‘killed his guide and trumpet; and took Dawson and eight of
‘his party, and after having given them quarter, killed them all
‘in cold blood.’2 In which ‘Village called Geddard,’ do not
some readers recognise a known place, Jeddari or Jedburgh,
friendly enough to Mosstroopers; and in the transaction itself,
a notable example of what is called ‘Jeddart Justice, —killing
a man whom you have a pique at; killing him first, to make sure,
and then judging him !—However there come Letters too, ‘That
the English soldiers married divers of the Scots Women ;’ * which
was an excellent movement on their part ;—and may serve as
the concluding feature here.

LETTER CLXII

Tue ‘Empson’ of this Letter, who is now to have a Company
in Hacker’s regiment, was transiently visible to us once already,
as ‘Lieutenant Empson of my regiment,’ in the Skirmish at
Musselburgh, four months ago. Hacker is the well-known

1[Fenwick sent a despatch up to London with an account of the taking of the
castle, and copies of his own and the governor’s letters. The latter has
the passage: ‘‘I know not Cromwell,” etc., but not the old rhyme. Perhaps
Fenwick purposely omitted it. It is evident that the governor was driven to
surrender by his own garrison. Fenwick states that, in consequence of what the
defenders had said to his men, he went up to the castle and called for the governor,
‘upon which the soldiers not being willing to hold it any longer,” the place
surrendered. JZercurius Politicus, No. 37 (E. 625, 1).]

2z4th February 1650 (Whitlocke, p. 464). [See Cromwedl’s Scotch C ampaigns,

. 229 note.

P3 [“ Our English lads and Scotch lassies begin to mingle geer very orderly, so that
there is scarce a day but the bagpipes are heard at a marriage ; some private
soldiers have married knights’ and lairds' daughters, and others of them marry
maid servants . . . so that we are like to stock ourselves of a new generation”
Mercurius Politicus, 5-12 December (E. 619). }

4Letter CKXXV. [See 7he Later History of the lronsides, p. 11.]

a a

—

A EG M09 Hs ele © ae

1650] LETTER CLXIL, EDINBURGH 167

Colonel Francis Hacker, who attended the King on the scaffold ;
having a signed Warrant, which we have read, addressed to him
and two other Officers to that effect. The most conspicuous, but
by no means the most approved, of his military services to this
Country! For which one indeed, in overbalance to many others,
he was rewarded with death after the Restoration. A Rutland-
shire man ; a Captain from the beginning of the War ; and rather
favourably visible, from time to time, all along. Of whoma kind
of continuous Outline of a Biography, considerably different from
Caulfield’s and other inane Accounts of him,! might still be
gathered, did it much concern us here. To all appearance, a
somewhat taciturn, somewhat indignant, very swift, resolute and
valiant man. He died for his share in the Regicide; but did
not profess to repent of it; intimated, in his taciturn way, that
he was willing to accept the results of it, and answer for it in a
much higher Court than the Westminster one. We are indeed
to understand generally, in spite of the light phrase which Crom-
well reprimands in this Letter, that Hacker was a religious man ;
and in his regicides and other operations, did not act without
some warrant that was very satisfactory to him. For the present
he has much to do with Mosstroopers ; very active upon them;
—for which ‘ Peebles’ is a good locality. He continues visible
as a Republican to the last; is appointed ‘to raise a regiment’
for the expiring Cause in 1659,—in which, what a little
concerns us, this same ‘Hubbert’ here in question is to be
his Major.”

For Francis Hacker, at Peebles or elsewhere: These

‘Edinburgh,’ 25th December 1650.
Sir,

I have (made erased] the best consideration I
ean, for the present, in this business; and although I believe
Captain Hubbert is a worthy man, and heard so much, yet, as
the case stands, I cannot, with satisfaction to myself and some
others, revoke the commission I had given to Captain Empson,

1 Caulfield’s High Court of Justice, pp. 83-7; Trials of the Regicides; &c. [His
life is in the Dictionary of National Biography.)
2 Commons Journals, vii. 669, 675, 824.

168 WAR WITH SCOTLAND _ {27 Dee.

without offence to them, and reflection upon my own judg-
ment.

I pray let Captain Hubbert know I shall not be unmindful of
him, and that no disrespect is intended to him. But indeed I
was not satisfied with your last speech to me about Empson,
That he was a better preacher than a fighter or soldier, or words
to that effect. Truly I think he that prays and preaches best
will fight best. I know nothing ‘that’ will give like courage
and confidence as the knowledge of God in Christ will; and I
bless God to see any in this army able and willing to impart
the knowledge they have, for the good of others. And I expect
it be encouraged, by all chief officers in this army especially ; and
I hope you will do so. I pray receive Captain Empson lovingly ;
I dare assure you he is a good man and a good officer; I would
we had no worse. I rest,

Your loving friend,
O.tver CroMwELL.*

LETTER CLXIII

Letrer Hundred-and-sixty-third relates to the exchange of
three Prisoners whom we saw taken in Dunbar Drove, and have
had an occasional glimpse of since. Before reading it, let us read
another Letter, which is quite unconnected with this ; but which
lies, as we may see, on the Lord General’s table in Moray House
in the Canongate while he writes this ;—and indeed is a unique
of its kind: A Letter from the Lord General’s Wife.

‘My Lord Chief Justice’ is Oliver St. John, known to us this
long while; ‘President’ is Bradshaw ; ‘Speaker’ is Lenthall :
high official persons ; to whom it were better if the Lord General
took his Wife’s advice, and wrote occasionally.

* Harris, p. 516; Lansdowne MSS., 1236, fol. 105, contains the address, which
Harris has omitted. [The letter in the Lansdowne MSS. is the original. There
is a copy in Add. MS. 6015,* f. 24.]

1650.| LETTER CLXIIL, EDINBURGH 169

“The Lady Elizabeth Crommell to her Hushand the Lord General at
“ Edinburgh

‘*** Cockpit, London,’ 27th December 1650.

“ My Dearest,—I wonder you should blame me for writing no
“oftener, when I have sent three for one: I cannot but think
“they are miscarried. Truly if I know my own heart, I should
“as soon neglect myself as to ‘omit’! the least thought towards
“you, who in doing it, I must do it to myself. But when I do
“write, my Dear, I seldom have any satisfactory answer, which
“makes me think my writing is slighted, as well it may, but I
“cannot but think your love covers my weakness and infirmities.

“I should rejoice to hear your desire in seeing me, but I de-
“sire to submit to the Providence of God; hoping the Lord, who
“hath separated us, and hath often brought us together again,
“will in His good time bring us again, to the praise of His name.
“Truly my life is but half a life in your absence, did not the Lord
“make it up in Himself, which I must acknowledge to the praise
‘of His grace.

“I would you would think to write sometimes to your dear
“friend, my Lord Chief Justice, of whom I have often put you in
“mind. And truly, my Dear, if you would think of what I put
“youin mind of some, it might be to as much purpose as others ; 2
“writing sometimes a Letter to the President, and sometimes to
“the Speaker. Indeed, my Dear, you cannot think the wrong
“you do yourself in the want of a Letter, though it were but sel-
“dom. I pray think on;* and so rest, yours in all faithfulness,

“ ELIZABETH CROMWELL.” *

This Letter, in the original, is frightfully spelt ; but otherwise
exactly as here the only Letter extant of this Heroine; and not
unworthy of a glance from us. It is given in Harris too, and in
Noble very incorrectly.°

And now for the Letter concerning Provost Jaffray and his two
fellow-prisoners from Dunbar Drove.

1 Word left out.

2The grammar bad; the meaning evident or discoverable,—and the bad
grammar a part of that!

‘think of’ is the Lady's old phrase. [Probably a word omitted—“ think of
this’’ she may have meant to say. ]

4 Milton State-Papers, p. 40.
} ae we have not got the original; and so cannot tell which is the true ver-
sion,

170 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [17 Jan.

For the Right Honourable Lieutenant-General David Lesley: These

Edinburgh, 17th January 1650.

Sir,

I perceive by your last Letter you had not
met with Mr. Carstairs! and Mr. Waugh, who were to apply
themselves to you about Provost Jaffray’s and their release, ‘in
exchange’ for the seamen and officers. But I understood, by a
paper since shown me by them under your hand, that you were
contented to release the said seamen and officers for those three
persons, who have had their discharges accordingly.

I am contented also to discharge the lieutenant, ‘in exchange’
for the four troopers at Stirling, who hath solicited me to that
purpose.

I have, here enclosed, sent you a letter,? which I desire you to
cause to be conveyed to the Committee of Estates; and that such
return shall be sent back to me as they shall please to give.

I remain, Sir,
Your humble servant,
OLIVER CROMWELL.*

Here is a notice from Balfour :? At Perth, ‘22d November 1650
(eege presente, the King being present, as usually after that
Flight to the Grampian Hills he is allowed to be), ‘ the Committee
‘of Estates remits to the Committee of Quarterings the exchange of
‘Prisoners anent Mr. Alexander Jaffray and Mr. John Carstairs,
‘Minister, with some English Prisoners in the Castle of Dum-
‘barton.’ Nevertheless at this date, six or seven weeks after, the
business is not yet perfected.

Alexander Jaffray, as we know already, is Provost of Aberdeen ;
a leading man for the Covenant from of old; and generally the
Member for his Burgh in the Scotch Parliaments of these years.
In particular, he sits as Commissioner for Aberdeen in the Parlia-
ment that met 4th January 1649 ;4 under which this disastrous
Quarrel with the English began. He was famed afterwards (infa-

1 Custaires. 2 The next Letter.
Siv. 168, 4 Balfour, iii. 382.

* Thurloe, i. 172. Laigh Parliament House.

2
,
4
4
+

a

1651.) LETTER CLXIIL, EDINBURGH 171

mous it then meant) as among the first of the Scotch Quakers ;
he, with Barclay of Urie, and other lesser Fallen-Stars. Personal
intercourse with Cromwell, the Sectary and Blasphemer, had much
altered the notions of Mr. Alexander Jaffray. Baillie informed
us, three months ago, he and Carstairs, then Prisoners-on-parole,
were sent Westward by Cromwell ‘to agent the Remonstrance, —
to guide towards some good issue the Ker-and-Strahan Negotia-
tion ; which, alas, could only be guided headlong into the ditches
at Hamilton before daybreak, as we saw !|—Jaffray sat afterwards
in the Little Parliament ; was an official person in Scotland,! and
one of Cromwell's leading men there.

Carstairs, we have to say or repeat, is one of the Ministers of
Glasgow ; deep in the confused Remonstrant-Resolutioner Con-
troversies of that day; though on which side precisely one does
not altogether know, perhaps he himself hardly altogether knew.
From Baillie, who has frequent notices of him, it is clear he tends
strongly towards the Cromwell view in many things ; yet with re-
pugnancies, anti-sectary and other, difficult for frail human nature.
How he managed his life-pilotage in these circumstances shall
concern himself mainly. His Son, I believe, is the ‘ Principal
Carstairs, who became very celebrated among the Scotch Whigs
in King William’s time. He gets home to Glasgow now, where
perhaps we shall see some glimpses of him again.

John Waugh (whom they spell Vauch and Wauch, and other-
wise distort) was the painful Minister of Borrowstounness, in the
Shire of Linlithgow. A man of many troubles, now and after-
wards. Captive in the Dunbar Drove ; still deaf he to the tempt-
ings of Sectary Cromwell; deafer than ever. In this month of
January 1651, we perceive he gets his deliverance ; returns with
painfully increased experience, but little change of view derived
from it, to his painful Ministry ; where new tribulations await him.
From Baillie * I gather that the painful Waugh’s invincible tend-
ency was to the Resolutioner or Quasi-Malignant side; and too
strong withal ;—no level sailing, or smooth pilotage, possible for
poor Waugh! For as the Remonstrant, Protester, or Ker-and-
Strahan Party, having joined itself to the Cromwellean, came

1 Ousted our friend Scotstarvet,—most unjustly, thinks he of the Staggering State
(p- ms ). There wanted only that to make the Homily on Life’s Nothingness com-
plete !

2 Biog. Britann. in voce ; somewhat indistinct. [The Life of the son, William
Carstares, is in the Dictionary of National Biography, preceded by a short notice
of the father. }

Siii, 248,

— O_o

172 WAR WITH SCOTLAND - [17 Jan.

ultimately to be dominant in Scotland, there ensued for straitlaced
clerical individuals who would cling too desperately to the opposite
Resolutioner or Quasi-Malignant side, very bad times. There
ensued in the first place, very naturally, this, That the straitlaced
individual, who would not cease to pray publicly against the now
Governing Powers, was put out of his living: this ; and if he grew
still more desperate, worse than this.

Of both which destinies our poor straitlaced Waugh may
serve to us as an emblem here. Some three years hence we find
that the Cromwellean Government has, in Waugh’s, as in various
other cases, ejected the straitlaced Resolutioner, and inducted
a looselaced Protester into his Kirk ;—leaving poor Waugh the
straitlaced to preach ‘in a barn hard by.’ And though the loose-
laced ‘have but fifteen,’ and the straitlaced ‘all the Parish,’ it
matters not ;! the stipend and the Kirk go with him whose lacing
is loose: one has nothing but one’s barn left, and sad reflections.
Nay in Waugh’s case, the very barn, proving as is likely an arena
of too vehement discourse, was taken away from him; and he,
Waugh, was lodged in Prison, in the Castle of Edinburgh.? For
Waugh ‘named the King in his prayers, he and ‘Mr. Robert

Knox’ even went that length! In Baillie, under date 11th ©

November 1653, is a most doleful inflexible Letter from Waugh’s
own hand: “brought to the top of this rock,” as his ultimate
lodging-place ; “having my habitation among the owls of the desert,
“because of my very great uselessness and fruitlessness among
“the sons of men.” Yet he is right well satisfied, conscience
yielding him a good &c. &c.—Poor Waugh, I wish he would re-
consider himself. Whether it be absolutely indispensable to
Christ’s Kirk to have a Nell-Gwynn Defender set over it, even
though descended from Elizabeth Muir ; and if no other, not the
bravest and devoutest of all British men, will do for that? O
Waugh, it is a strange camera-obscura, the head of man !—

1[It was not Waugh but one Mr. Archibald Inglish of Douglas, who was left,
with his whole congregation, including the Marquis of Douglas and the Earl of
Angus, ‘‘in the fields or a barn,” whilst an interloper (with his ‘‘ twelve or sixteen
followers’’), enjoyed the Church and the stipend. ]

2 Baillie, ili, 248, 253, 228.

3[What Waugh says is that he 4ad desired to lurk among the owls of the desert,
but that he had been so far from attaining to this his ‘‘ desire of lurking” that he
had been brought, &c. ]

ae eo

a a te te

—

ee e~ Se o

1651.) LETTER CLXIV., EDINBURGH 173

LETTER CLXIV

We have heard of many Mosstroopers: we heard once of a
certain Watt, a Tenant of the Earl of Tweedale’s, who being ruined-
out by the War, distinguished himself in this new course ; and
contemporary with him, of ‘one Augustin a High-German.’ To
which latter some more special momentary notice now falls due.

Read Balfour’s record, and then Cromwell’s Letter. ‘One
‘ Augustin, a High-German, being purged out of the Army before
‘Dunbar Drove, but a stout and resolute young man, and lover
‘ of the Scots Nation,—imitating Watt,—in October and November
‘this year, annoyed the Enemy very much; killing many of his
‘stragglers ; and made nightly infalls upon their quarters, taking
‘and killing sometimes twenty, and sometimes thirty, and more
‘or less of them: whereby he both enriched himself and his
‘ followers, and greatly damnified the Enemy. His chief abode
‘was about and in the Mountains of Pentland and Soutra..—And
again, from Perth, 19th December 1650: ‘Memorandum, That
‘Augustin departed from Fife with a party of Six-score horse ;
‘crossed at Blackness on Friday the 13 of December; forced
‘Cromwell’s guards; killed eighty men to the Enemy; put-in
‘thirty-six men to Edinburgh Castle, with all sorts of spices, and
‘some other things; took thirty-five horses and five prisoners,
‘which he sent to Perth the 19th! of this instant.’ Which feat,
with the spices and thirty-six men, could not indeed save Edin-
burgh Castle from surrendering, as we saw, next week ; but did
procure Captain Augustin thanks from the Lord Chancellor and
Parliament in his Majesty's name, and good outlooks for pro-
motion in that quarter.?

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Estates of the

Kingdom of Scotland ; These

Edinburgh, 17th January 1650.
My Lorps,

Having been informed of divers barbarous
murders and inhumane acts, perpetrated upon our men by one
Augustine, a German in employment under you, and one Ross, a

‘(Carlyle printed r4th, but Balfour says roth, and mentions the warrant to the

magistrates of Perth for their committal as issued on this day. ]
Balfour, iv. 165, 209, 214.

174 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [17 Jan.

Lieutenant, I did send to Lieutenant-General David Lesley,
desiring justice against the said persons. And to the end I might
make good the fact upon them, I was either willing by commis-
sioners on both parts, or in any other equal way, to have the
charge proved.

The Lieutenant-General was pleased to allege a want of power
from public authority to enable him herein, which occasions me
to desire your Lordships that this business may be put into such
a way as may give satisfaction; whereby I may understand what
rules your Lordships will hold during this sad contest between
the two nations, which may evidence the war to stand upon other
pretences at least than the allowing of such actions will suppose.

Desiring your Lordships’ answer, I rest,

My Lords,
Your humble servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

_ No effect whatever seems to have been produced by this Letter.
The Scotch Quasi-Malignant Authorities have ‘thanked’ Augustin,
and are determined to have all the benefit they can of him,—which
cannot be much, one would think! In the following June accord-
ingly we find him become ‘ Colonel Augustin,’ probably Major or
Lieutenant-Colonel ; quartered with Robin Montgomery ‘at Dum-
fries ;’ giving ‘an alarm to Carlisle,’ but by no means taking it ;—
‘falling in,’ on another occasion, ‘ with Two-hundred picked men,’
but very glad to fall out again, ‘nearly all cut off.’ In strong
practical Remonstrance against which, the learned Bulstrode has
Letters in November, vague but satisfactory, ‘That the Scots
‘themselves rose against Augustin, killed some of his men, and
‘drove away the rest ;’ entirely disapproving of such courses and
personages. And then finally in January following, ‘ Letters that
‘ Augustin the great robber in Scotland,—upon disbanding of the
‘Marquis of Huntly’s forces,’ the last remnant of Scotch Malig-
nancy for the present,—‘ went into the Orcades, and their took
‘ship for Norway.’! Fair wind and full sea to him!

* Thurloe, i. 171. Laigh Parliament House.

1 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 104); Whitlocke, 234 November 1651; 7.
14th January 1651-2.

— —

1651.} LETTER CLXV., EDINBURGH 175

LETTER CLXV

An Official Medallist has arrived from London to take the
Effigies of the Lord General, for a Medal commemorative of the
Victory at Dunbar. The Effigies, Portrait, or ‘Statue’ as they
sometimes call it, of the Lord General appears to be in a state of
forwardness ; but he would fain waive such a piece of vanity.
The ‘Gratuity to the Army’ is a solid thing: but this of the
Effigies, or Stamp of my poor transient unbeautiful Face—?—
However, the Authorities, as we may surmise, have made up their
mind.

For the Honourable the Committee of the Army ‘at London :’ These

Edinburgh, 4th February 1650.
GENTLEMEN,

It was not a little wonder to me to see that
you should send Mr. Symonds so great a journey, about a busi-
ness importing so little, as far as it relates to me; whereas, if
my poor opinion may not be rejected by you, I have to offer to
that! which I think the most noble end, to wit, the commemo-
ration of that great mercy at Dunbar, and the gratuity to the
army, which might better be expressed upon the medal, by
engraving, as on the one side the Parliament, which I hear was
intended and will do singularly well, so on the other side an
army, with this inscription over the head of it, The Lord of
Hosts, which was our Word that day. Wherefore, if I may beg
it as a favour from you, I most earnestly beseech you, if I may
do it without offence, that it may be so. And if you think not
fit to have it as I offer, you may alter it as you see cause; only I
do think I may truly say, it will be very thankfully acknowledged
by me, if you will spare the having my effigies in it.

The Gentleman’s pains and trouble hither have been very
great ; and I shall make it my second suit unto you that you will
please to confer upon him that employment in your service which
Nicholas Briot had before him: indeed the man is ingenious, and

1] should vote exclusively for that,

176 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Feb.

worthy of encouragement. I may not presume much, but if, at
my request, and for my sake, he may obtain this favour, I shall
put it upon the account of my obligations, which are not a few ;
and, I hope, shall be found ready to acknowledge ‘it,’ and to

approve myself,
Gentlemen,

Your most real servant,
Outver CroMWELL.*

Of ‘Nicholas Briot’ and ‘Mr. Symonds,’ since they have the
honour of a passing relation to the Lord General, and still enjoy,
or suffer, a kind of ghost-existence in the Dilettante memory,
we may subjoin, rather than cancel, the following authentic par-
ticulars. In the Commons Journals of 20th August 1642, it is:
‘ Ordered, That the Earl of Warwick,’ now Admiral of our Fleet,
‘be desired that Monsieur Bryatt may have delivery of his wear-
‘ing apparel; and all his other goods stayed at Scarborough, not
‘belonging to Minting and Coining of Moneys.’—This Nicholas
Bryatt, or Briot, then, must have been Chief Engraver for the
Mint at the beginning of the Civil Wars. We perceive, he has
gone to the King northward ; but is here stopt at Scarborough,
with all his baggage, by Warwick the Lord High Admiral: and
is to get away. What became of him afterwards, or what was his
history before, no man and hardly any Dilettante knows.!

* Harris, p. 519. [Stated by him to be in the possession of James Lamb, Esq.,
of Fairford in Gloucestershire. It is also printed from the original by Gough (in
his edition of Vertue’s Works of Thomas Simon, ed. 1780, p. 74*), who states that the
name of Nicholas Briot has been inserted by another hand. There is a full ex-
planation of the matter in Mr. Henfrey’s Numismata Cromwelliana. Mr. Henfrey
says that Cromwell’s suggestions were all carried out, with the exception that the
Parliament were resolved to have his bust upon the medal. ‘‘ The House of Com-
mons sitting, a view of the army in the battle, with the word of the day, The Lord
of Hosts, are all there, in addition to a life-like portrait of the General. His re-
commendation of Simon to the place of Briot was also adopted.” Mr. Henfrey
gives engravings of the three varieties of the medal, with a list of other books in
which they may be found. There are specimens in the British Museum. ]

1[Nicholas Briot, according to his own statement, came to England about 1624,
and in 1626 was employed ‘‘ to make the great seal of England in silver, according
to a model presented him by the King.” He proposed many new schemes con-
cerning the coinage, and in 1630 the King ordered that he should have lodgings in
the Tower, for himself, his instruments and his workmen. The officers of the Mint
objected, on the ground that he was not of their ‘‘ body or corporation,” but steps were
taken to remedy this, and in 1633, if not earlier, he was made one of the King’s chief
engravers, Sir Robert Harley being then Master of the Mint. In 1638 he urged the
employment of mills and presses, instead of the ‘‘ ancient way of the hammer” for

;
Fi
%
2
=
i»
Fe
fi

seals —— ts

1651.) LETTER CLXV., EDINBURGH 177

Symonds, Symons, or as the moderns call him, Simon, is still
known as an approved Medal-maker. In the Commons Journals
of 17th December 1651, we find: ‘ Ordered, That it be referred to
‘the Council of State to take order that the sum of 300/. be paid
‘unto Thomas Symonds, which was agreed by the Committee ap-
‘pointed for that purpose to be paid unto him, for the Two Great
‘Seals made by him, and the materials thereof: And that the said
‘Council do take consideration of what farther recompense is fit
‘to be given unto him for his extraordinary pains therein; and
‘give order for the payment of such sum of money as they shall
‘think fit in respect thereof.’

An earlier entry, which still more concerns us here, is an
Order, in favour of one whose name has not reached the Clerk,
and is now indicated only by stars, That the Council of State
shall pay him for ‘making the Statue of the General,’—doubt-
less this Medal or Effigies of the General; the name indicated
by stars being again that of Symonds. The Order, we observe,
has the same date as the present Letter.!_ The Medal of Crom-
well, executed on this occasion, still exists, and is said to be a
good likeness.2 The Committee-men had not taken my Lord
General’s advice about the Parliament, about the Army with
the Lord of Hosts, and the total omitting of his own Effigies.
Vertue published Engravings of all these Medals of Simon (as he
spells him) in the year 1753.8

The ‘Two Great Seals,’ mentioned in the Excerpt above, are
also worth a word from us. There had a good few Great Seals
to be made in the course of this War; all by Symonds: of whom,
with reference thereto, we find, in authentic quarters, various
notices, of years long prior and posterior to this. The frst of all
the ‘new Great Seals’ was the one made, after infinite debates and
hesitations, in 1643, when Lord Keeper Lyttleton ran away with
the original : Symonds was the maker of this, as other entries of
the same Rhadamanthine Commons Journals instruct us: On the

the coinage of money, desire to save the revenue having evidently got the better of
his artistic instincts. In the summer of 1642, he was summoned by Sir Edward
Nicholas to join the King at York, and was told to bring with him all his instru-
ments for coining money. From the entry in the Commons’ Journal, quoted above,
he would appear to have gone by sea and to have been stayed at Scarborough,
where his professional apparatus was confiscated. Sir Robert Harley says that
Briot left England at this time, which is probably true, as his name is no more
found amongst the Szate Pagers. ]

1 Commons Journals, 4th February 1650-1. 2 Harris, p. 518,
%[Reproduced in Mr. Firth’s Oliver Cromwell, p. 278.]

VoL. 1.—12

178 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Feb.

11th July 1643, Henry Marten is to bring ‘the man’ that will
make the new Great Seal, and let us see him ‘ tomorrow ;’ which
man it turns out, at sight of him, not ‘tomorrow,’ but a week
after, on the 19th July, is ‘Mr. Simonds,’ !|—who, we find farther,
is to have 100/. for his work ; 40/. in hand, 30/. so soon as his work
is done, and the other 30/. one knows not when. Symonds made
the Seal duly; but as for his payment, we fear it was not very
duly made. Of course when the Commonwealth and Council of
State began, a couple of new Great Seals were needed ; and these
too, as we see above, Symonds made ; and is to be paid for them,
and for the General’s Statue ;—which we hope he was, but are
not sure !

Other new Seals, Great and Not-so-great, in the subsequent
mutations, were needed ; and assiduous Symonds made them all.
Nevertheless, in 1659, when the Protectorate under Richard was
staggering towards ruin, we find ‘Mr. Thomas Symonds Chief
Graver of the Mint and Seals,’ repeatedly turning up with new
Seals, new order for payment, and new indication that the order
was but incompletely complied with.2 May 14th, 1659, he has
made a new and newest Great Seal; he is to be paid for that,
and ‘for the former, for which he yet remains unsatisfied.’ Also
on the 24th May 1659, the Council of State get a new Seal from
him. Then on the 22d August, on the Rump Parliament’s re-
assembling, he makes a ‘new Parliament Seal ;’ and presents *
modest Petition to have his money paid him: order is granted
very promptly to that end; ‘his debt to be paid for this Seal, and
for all former work done by him ;’—we hope, with complete effect.

The Restoration soon followed, and Symonds continued still in
the Mint under Charles II. ; when it is not very likely his claims
were much better attended to; the brave Hollar, and other brave
Artists, having their own difficulties to get life kept-in, during
those rare times, Mr. Rigmarole !—Symonds, we see, did get the
place of Nicholas Briot; and found it, like other brave men’s
places, full of hard work and short rations. Enough now of
Symonds and the Seal, and Effigies.

1 Commons Journals, iii. 162, 174.

2 Tbid, vii. 654. 3 Jbid. vii. 663.

4 /bid. vii. 654, 663, 765. [In October, 1659, he made two more seals; for
Scotland and Ireland; and these, at any rate, he was paid for, the warrants—for
300/. on account and a further 200/. a few months later—being amongst the Save
Papers. See Cal. S. P. Dom. Commonwealth, 1659-60, pp. 587, 592, 598. ]

=

1651] LETTER CLXVIL, EDINBURGH 179

LETTER CLXVI

Aone with Symonds, various English strangers, we perceive,
are arriving or arrived, on miscellaneous business with the Lord
General in his Winter-quarters. Part of the Oxford Caput is
here in Edinburgh, with ‘a very high testimony of respect ;’
whom, in those same hours, the Lord General dismisses honour-
ably with their Answer.

We are to premise that Oxford University, which at the end of
the First Civil War had been found in a most broken, Malignant,
altogether waste and ruinous condition, was afterwards, not with-
out difficulty, and immense patience on the part of the Parliament
Commissioners, radically reformed. Philip Earl of Pembroke, he
of the loud voice, who dined once with Bulstrode in the Guildhall ; !
he, as Chancellor of the University, had at last to go down in
person, in the Spring of 1648 ;—put the intemperate Dr. Fell,
incorrigible otherwise, under lock and key ; left the incorrigible
Mrs. Dr. Fell, ‘whom the soldiers had to carry out in her chair,’
‘sitting in the quadrangle ;’ appointed a new Vice-Chancellor,
new Heads where needful,—and, on the whole, swept the Uni-
versity clean of much loud Nonsense, and left some Piety and
Sense, the best he could meet with, at work there in its stead.”
At work, with earnest diligence and good success, as it has since
continued actually to be,—for the contemporary clamours and
Querelas about Vandalism, Destruction of Learning, and so forth,
prove on examination to be mere agonised shrieks, and unmelo-
dious hysterical wind, forgettable by all creatures. Not easily
before or since could the Two Universities give such account of
themselves to mankind, under all categories, human and divine,
as during those Puritan years.

But now Philip of Pembroke, the loud-voiced Chancellor of
Oxford, is dead ; and the reformed University, after due consulta-
tion, has elected the Lord General in his stead; to which ‘high
testimony’ here is his response.—‘ Dr. Greenwood, who I think

1 Antea, vol. i., p. 443.

? Act and Visitors’ names in Scobell, i. 116 (rst May 1647): see Commons
Journals, v. 83-142 (toth February—zsth April 1647): 8th March 1647-8, Chan-
cellor Pembroke is to go (Neal, ii. 307; Walker, i. 133); makes report, and is
thanked, 21st April 1648 (Commons Journals, v. 538). Copious history of the
proceedings, from the Puritan side, in Neal, ii. 290-314; and from the Royalist
side, in Walker’s Sufferings of the Clergy, i. 124-142, which latter, amid its tem-
pestuous froth, has many entertaining traits.

180 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Feb.

has some cast about his eyes, is otherwise a most recommendable
man: ‘Bachelor, then Doctor of Divinity, sometimes Fellow of
‘Brasenose College, says Royalist Anthony,! ‘and lately made
‘Principal of the said College by the Committee and Parliamen-
‘tary Visitors; a severe and good Governor, as well in his Vice-
‘Chancellorship as Principality ; continued till the King’s return,
‘and then ’—

To the Reverend Dr. Greenwood, Vice-Chancellor of the University
of Oxford, and other Members of the Convocation

Edinburgh, 4th Feb. 1650.

Honourep GENTLEMEN,

I have received, by the hands of those worthy
persons of your University sent by you into Scotland, a testimony
of very high respect and honour, in ‘ your’ choosing me to be
your Chancellor, which deserves a fuller return, of deep resent-
ment, value and acknowledgment, than I am any ways able to
make. Only give me leave a little to expostulate, on your and
my own behalf. I confess it was in your freedom to elect, and it
would be very uningenious in me to reflect upon your action ;
only (though somewhat late) let me advise you of my unfitness to
answer the ends of so great a service and obligation, with some
things very obvious.

I suppose a principal aim in such elections hath not only re-
spected abilities and interest to serve you, but freedom ‘as’ to
opportunities of time and place. As the first may not be well
supposed, so the want of the latter may well become me to re-
present to you. You know where Providence hath placed me for
the present; and to what I am related if this call were off,’ I
being tied to attendance in another land as much out of the way
of serving you as this, for some certain time yet to come appointed
by the Parliament. The known esteem and honour of this place
is such, that I should wrong it and your favour very much, and

1 Wood's Fas?i, ii. 157 (in Athena, iv.), of July 1649.
2 Lord Lieutenant of Ireland ‘for three years to come’ (Commons Journals, Vi.
239), 22d June 1649. :

——— —
a s.
? :

1651.] LETTER CLXVI., EDINBURGH 181

your freedom in choosing me, if, either by pretended modesty or
in any unbenign way, I should dispute the acceptance of it.
Only I hope it will not be imputed to me as a neglect towards
you, that I cannot serve you in the measure I desire.

I offer these exceptions with all candour and clearness to you,
as ‘leaving you’ most free to mend your choice in case you think
them reasonable ; and shall not reckon myself the less obliged to
do all good offices for the University. But if these prevail not,
and that I must continue this honour,—until I can personally
serve you, you shall not want my prayers that that seed and stock
of piety and learning, so marvellously springing up amongst you,
may be useful to that great and glorious Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ ; of the approach of which so plentiful an effusion of
the Spirit upon those hopeful plants is one of the best presages,
And in all other things I shall, by the Divine assistance, improve
my poor abilities and interests in manifesting myself, to the Uni-
versity and yourselves,

Your most cordial friend and servant,
O.iveR CRoMWELL.*

On the same Tuesday, 4th February 1650-1, while the Lord
General is writing this and the former Letter, his Army, issuing
from its Leith Citadel and other Winter-quarters, has marched
westward towards Stirling ; he himself follows on the morrow.
His Army on Tuesday got to Linlithgow ; the Lord General over-
took them at Falkirk on Wednesday. Two such days of wind,
hail, snow and rain as made our soldiers very uncomfortable indeed.
On Friday,' the morning proving fair, we set out again; got to
Kilsyth ;—but the hail-reservoirs also opened on us again: we
found it impossible to get along ; and so returned, by the road we
came ; back to Edinburgh on Saturday,?—coated with white sleet,

x *From the Archives of Oxford University; communicated by the Rev. Dr.
liss.

1(This should be Thursday. Cromwell joined them on Wednesday. ‘The next
morning promising fair we marched towards Kilsyth, . . . that afternoon was as
bad or worse than the former, so the next morning, v7z., Friday the 7, the army
marched back.” Perfect Diurnal (E. 784, 10).

2 Perfect Diurnal (in Cromwelliana, p. 100).

182 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [14 Feb.

but endeavouring not to be discouraged. We hope we much
terrified the Scots at Stirling; but the hail-reservoirs proved
friendly to them.

LETTER CLXVII

Tue Oxford Convocation has received the foregoing Letter,
‘canting Letter sent thereunto,’ as crabbed Anthony designates
it, ‘dated at Edinburgh on the 4th of February, and now at
length made public in print; they have ‘read it in Convocation,’
continues Anthony, ‘whereat the Members made the House re-
‘sound with their cheerful acclamations ;’ !—and the Lord General
is and continues their Chancellor; encouraging and helping for-
ward them and their work, in many ways, amid his weighty affairs,
in a really faithful manner. As begins to be credible without
much proof of ours, and might still be abundantly proved if
needful.

Here however, in the first blush of the business, comes Mr.
Waterhouse, with a small recommendation from the Lord General ;
‘ John Waterhouse of Great Greenford in Middlesex, son of Francis
‘Waterhouse by Bridget his wife,’ if anybody want to know him
better ; 2—‘a student heretofore for eighteen years in Trinity
College, Cambridge,’ a meritorious Man and Healer since ; whom
one may well decorate with a Degree, or decorate a Degree with,
by the next opportunity.

To my very worthy Friend Dr. Greenwood, Vice-Chancellor of the
University of Oxford

Edinburgh, 14th February 1650.

Sir,
This gentleman, Mr. Waterhouse, went over
into Ireland as physician to the army there ; of whose diligence,
fidelity and abilities I had much experience. Whilst I was there,

1 Fasti, ii. 159. -
2 /bid. 163 : ‘created Doctor of Physic by virtue of the Letters of Oliver Cromwell,
General’ (12th March 1650-1). [There are two or three notices of him, as Dr.
Joseph (sic) Waterhouse, in the State Papers of this year. He was perhaps re-
lated to the Nathaniel Waterhouse who is spoken of as Cromwell’s ‘‘ Steward”
about this time. ]

1651.] LETTER CLXVIII, EDINBURGH 183

he constantly attended the army: and having, to my own know-
ledge, done very much good to the officers and soldiers, by his
skill and industry ; and being upon urgent occasion lately come
into England, ‘he’ hath desired me to,recommend him for the
obtaining of the degree of Doctor in that science. Wherefore I
earnestly desire you that, when he shall repair to you, you! will
give him your best assistance for the obtaining of the said degree ;
he being shortly to return back to his charge in Ireland.

By doing whereof, as you will encourage one who is willing
and ready to serve the public, so you will also lay a very great
obligation upon,

Sir, your affectionate servant,
Ouiver CRoMWELL.*

LETTER CLXVIII

CotoneL Ropert LixBurn, a stout impetuous soldier, as both
his Brothers were, and steady to his side as neither of them was,
had the honour, at a critical time, in the Summer of 1648, while
Duke Hamilton and his Scots were about invading us, to do the
State good service, as we transiently saw ;*—to beat down,
namely, and quite suppress, in Lancashire * a certain Sir Richard
Tempest and his hot levyings of ‘ 1000 horse,’ and indeed there-
by to suppress all such levyings on behalf of the said Duke, in
those Northern parts. An important, and at the time most
welcome service. Letter of thanks, in consequence ; reward of
1000/. in consequence,—reward voted, never yet paid, nor, as
would seem, likely soon to be. Colonel Robert will take Delin-
quents’ lands for his 1000/. ; will buy Bear Park, with it and with
other debentures or moneys: Bear Park, once Beaurepaire, a
pleasant manor near native Durham, belongs to the Cathedral
land ; and might answer both parties, would the Committee of
Obstructions move.

1‘that you’ in the hasty original. [The repetition was very usual. }
? Antea, vol. i. p. 318. [See his life in the Dictionary of National Biography.]
3[In Northumberland. See Rushworth, vii., 1177.]

* From the Archives of Oxford University ; communicated by Rev. Dr. Bliss.

a

184 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [8 Mareh.

To the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England ; These

Edinburgh, 8th March 1650.
Sir,

I am informed that Colonel Robert Lilburn
is like to be damnified very much, in relation to his purchase of
the manor of Beare Park in the county of Durham, by being
employed in the service of the Commonwealth in! Scotland :—
which business (as I understand), upon his petition to the Par-
liament, was referred to the Committee of Obstructions, and a
report thereof hath lain ready in the hands of Mr. John Corbet,?
a long time, unreported.

I do therefore humbly desire that the House may be moved
to take the said report into speedy consideration, that so Colonel
Lilburn may have redress therein, according as you shall think fit ;
and that his readiness and willingness to return to his charge
here, and leave his own affairs to serve the public, may not turn
to his disadvantage. I doubt not but those services he hath done
in England and here will be a sufficient motive to gratify him
herein ; which shall be acknowledged by,

Sir,

Your most humble servant,

Oxiver CroMweELL.*

Committee of Obstructions, ‘a Committee for removing Obstruc-
tions to the Sale of Dean-and-Chapter Lands,’ does accordingly
bestir itself; and on Tuesday 18th March, the due order is given.®
To which, we doubt not, as the matter then drops, effect was
given,—till the Restoration came, and ousted Colonel Robert
and some others. Whether the Colonel personally ever lived
at Bear Park, or has left any trace of his presence there, the
County Histories and other accessible records do not say.

1 ‘of’ in orig. 2[Chairman of the Committee of Petitions. ]
3 Commons Journals, vi. 492 (7th November 1650), his ‘ Petition,’ referred to in
this Letter; 2d. 549 (18th March 1650), due ‘ redress’ to him.

* Baker MSS. (Cambridge), xxxv. 79. [Nowcollated with the original, which
is at Welbeck. Signed and sealed.]

iceman ail a
7 = - 4 -

ed ita ll

1651] LETTER CLXIX., EDINBURGH 185

LETTER CLXIX

Here next, from another quarter, is a new University matter,
—Project of a College at Durham; emerging incidentally like
a green fruitful islet from amid the dim storms of War ; agreeably
arresting the eye for a moment.

Concerning which read in the Commons Journals of May last :
‘A Letter from the Sheriff and Gentlemen of the County of
‘ Duresme, dated 24th April 1650; with a Paper’ or Petition of
the same date, ‘ “ delivered-in by the Grand Jury at the Sessions
‘of the Peace holden at Duresme the 24th of April 1650, To be
‘presented to the Honourable Parliament of this Nation,”—were
‘this day read. Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee
‘of Obstructions for Sale of Dean-and-Chapter Lands, to consider
‘these Desires of the Gentlemen and others of that County,
‘touching the converting some of the Buildings at Duresme
‘called the “College,” which were the Houses of the late Dean
‘and Chapter, into some College or School of Literature ; to state
‘the business, to’ 1—in short, to get on with it if possible.

This was some ten months ago, but still there is no visible way
made; and now in the wild Spring weather here has been, I
suppose, some Deputation of the Northern Gentry riding through
the wild mountains, with humane intent, to represent the matter
to the Lord General at Edinburgh ; from whom, if he pleased to
help it forward, a word might be very furthersome. The Lord
General is prompt with his word ;—writes this Letter, as I find,
this and the foregoing, in some interval of a painful fit of sickness
he has been labouring under.?

1 Commons Journals, vi. 410 (8th May 1650).

2[There are many allusions to Cromwell's health in the news-letters about this
time. A letter written on the 4th says that since his sickness he had been to Leith,
but ‘‘came back not well again,” but God be blessed, pretty cheerful though loath
to venture abroad until he is stronger for fear of taking cold. Several Proceedings (E.
784 (23)). The General’s wife appears to have been kept informed of her husband’s
state of health bya gentleman in attendance upon him. Writing ‘‘ by an extraordin-
ary post,” on March 7, he says, ‘‘ Truly, Madam, my lord took his rest very well
on Tuesday night last, and so (blessed be God) he hath done every night since,
and sometimes in the daytime also, so that he is better sensible both in Dr.
Goddard's opinion and also in his own; hath a better stomach, and grows
stronger.” The writer ends by promising to send a further account on the morrow
4 rm post, which also took up Cromwell's letter above. Perfect Passages (E. 784
25)).

186 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [11 March.

For the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England: These
Edinburgh, 11th March 1650.

Sir,
Having received information from the Mayor

and citizens of Durham, and some Gentlemen of the Northern
Counties, That upon their Petition to the Parliament, that the
Houses of the late Dean and Chapter of the City of Durham
might be converted into a College or School of Literature, the
Parliament was pleased in May last to refer the same to the
Committee for removing Obstructions in the sale of Dean-and-
Chapter Lands, to consider thereof, and to report their opinion
therein to the House:! Which said Committee (as I am also
informed) have so far approved thereof as that they are of an
opinion That the said Houses will be a fit place to erect a College
or School for all the Sciences and Literature, and that it will be
a pious and laudable work and of great use to the Northern parts,
and have ordered Sir Arthur Haselrig to make report thereof to
the House accordingly: And the said Citizens and Gentlemen
having made some address to me to contribute my assistance to
them therein: to which, in so good and pious a work, I could
not but willingly and heartily concur ; and not knowing wherein
I might better serve them, or answer their desires, than by re-
commending of the same to the Parliament by, Sir, yourself
their Speaker, I do make it my humble and earnest request that
the House may be moved, as speedily as conveniently may be,
To hear the Report of the said Committee concerning the said
Business, from Sir Arthur Haselrig; that so the House, taking
the same into consideration, may do therein what shall seem
meet for the good of those poor Countries.

Truly it seems tome a matter of great concernment and
importance, as that which, by the blessing of God, may much
conduce to the promoting of learning and piety in those poor
rude and ignorant parts; there being also many concurring

1 Commons Journals, ubi supra,

— Se es ST ll ee io -7 — ——
.

1651.] LETTER CLXIX., EDINBURGH 187

advantages to this Place, as pleasantness and aptness of situation,
healthful air, and plenty of provisions, which seem to favour and
plead for their desires therein. And besides the good (so obvious
to us) those Northern Counties may reap thereby, who knows
but the setting on foot of this work at this time may suit with
God’s present dispensations ; and may (if due care and circum-
spection be used in the right constituting and carrying on the
same) tend to, and (by the blessing of God) produce, such happy
and glorious fruits as are scarce thought on or foreseen !

Sir, not doubting of your readiness and zeal to promote so
good and public a work, I crave pardon for this boldness ; and
rest, Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Ottver CromWweELL.*

Whereupon the Committee for removing Obstructions does
bestir itself; manages, in three months hence (for we do nothing
rashly), to report! by ‘Sir Arthur Haselrig, touching Duresme
‘College-Buildings to be converted to a College or School for all
‘the Sciences of Literature : That ’—that—And, in brief, History
itself has to report that the pious Project, thanks mainly to fur-
therance by the Lord General, whose power to further it increased
by and by, did actually, some seven years hence, take effect ;?—
actually began giving Lessons of human Grammar, human Geo-
graphy, Geometry, and other divine Knowledge, to the vacant
human mind,—in those once sleepy Edifices, dark heretofore, or
illuminated mainly by Dr. Cosin’s Papistical waxlights or the
like:* and so continued, in spite of opposition, till the Blessed
Restoration put a stop to it, and to some other things. In late
years there is again some kind of Durham College giving
Lessons,—I hope, with good success.*

* Baker MSS, xxviii. 455: printed also in Hutchinson’s History of Durham; and
elsewhere. [Contemporaneous MS. copy at Welbeck.]

1 Commons Journals (vi. 589), 18th June 1651.

2Protector’s Letters-Patent of 15th May 1657, following up his Ordinance in
Council of the previous Year: Hutchinson’s Azstory of the County Palatine of Dur-
ham (Newcastle, 1785), i. 514-30. See Cooper’s Annals of Cambridge, iii. 473
ponte hg Petition against it: 18th April 1659). ‘ Throve apace,’ says Hutchin-
son, ‘till’ &c.

3[The buildings referred to were the private houses of the Dean and Chapter in
the Cathedral Close of Durham, which is called the College. ]

4[Durham University was refounded in 1831.]

188 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [24 March.

? LETTER CLXX

By that tempestuous sleety expedition in the beginning of
February, my Lord General caught a dangerous illness, which
hung about him, reappearing in three successive relapses, till June
next ; and greatly alarmed the Commonwealth and the Authorities.
As this to Bradshaw, and various other Letters still indicate.

To the Right Honourable the Lord President of the Council of State :
These

Edinburgh, 24th March 1650.
My Lorp,
I do with all humble thankfulness acknowledge

your high favour, and tender respect of me, expressed in your
letter, and the express sent therewith to inquire after one so un-
worthy as myself.”

Indeed, my Lord, your service needs not me: I am a poor
creature, and have been a dry bone, and am stil] an unprofitable
servant to my Master and you. I thought I should have died of
this fit of sickness, but the Lord seemeth to dispose otherwise.
But truly, my Lord, I desire not to live, unless I may obtain

1[He was now, however, much better. See next page, which is a quotation
from the Perfect Diurnal (E. 784, 34).]

2[The letter from the Council, dated March 17, is partly printed in the Calendar
of S. P. Dom., 1651, p. 91. Mr. Jenkin Floyd or Lloyd was sent to Scotland to
carry the letter and to inquire concerning the General’s health, and hastened
back with such speed that he had reached London with Cromwell’s letter on the
28th. ‘‘A messenger which was sent express to understand the state of the health
of the Lord General,” the Council wrote to the ambassadors in Holland on that
date, ‘‘ hath brought to the Councila letter from the Lord General, signed with his
own hand. Upon conference with the said messenger, we are informed that the
health of the Lord General both by his own judgment and that of his physicians,
is as good as it hath been at any time in his life.” ‘The following day, a reply was
sent to the General himself. ‘‘ We received yesternight your Lordship’s letter,’’ it
begins, ‘‘by Mr. Lloyd, whom we had sent expressly to... bring us true
information of the state of your health, whose diligence in so speedy a return was
very acceptable to us, especially in regard of the good news he brought of your
Lordship’s so happy recovery . . . we doubt not but God will still continue you an
instrument in His hand for settling the peace of this nation, and of His displeasure
against those who will not see when His hand is lifted up.’’ S.P. /nterregnum,

I. 96, pp. 48, 88, 89.]

1651.) LETTER CLXXI., EDINBURGH 189

mercy from the Lord to approve my heart and life to Him in
more faithfulness and thankfulness, and ‘to’ those I serve in
more profitableness and diligence. And I pray God, your Lord-
ship, and all in public trust, may improve all those unparalleled
experiences of the Lord’s wonderful workings in your sight, with
singleness of heart to His glory, and the refreshment of His
people, who are to Him as the apple of His eye ; and upon whom
your enemies, both former and latter, who have fallen before you
did split themselves.
This shall be the unfeigned prayer of,
My Lord, your most humble servant,
O.tver CROoMWELL.*

From Edinburgh, of date 18th March, by special Express we
have this comfortable intelligence: ‘The Lord General is now
‘well recovered: he was in his dining-room today with his
‘Officers, and was very cheerful and pleasant.’ And the
symptoms, we see, continue good and better on the 24th. ‘So
‘that there is not any fear, by the blessing of God, but our
‘General will be enabled to take the field when the Provisions
‘arrive. ‘Dr. Goddard’ is attending him.! Before the end
of the month he is on foot again; sieging Blackness, sieging
the Island of Inchgarvie, or giving Colonel Monk directions to
that end.

LETTER CLXXI
Tue following Letter brings its own commentary :
For my beloved Wife Elizabeth Cromwell, at the Cockpit : These
‘Edinburgh,’ rath April 1651.

My Dearest,
I praise the Lord I am increased in strength

in my outward man: but that will not satisfy me except I get

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 101).

1 Newspapers (in Cromwel/iana, pp. 100, 1), [In June Dr. Goddard was ordered
too/. and recommended to the Universities’ Committee to be made Master of a
college ‘‘ for his care and pains with the Lord General in his sickness." Cad. S.P.
Dom., 1651, p. 251. He was made Warden of Merton College, Oxford, in the fol-
lowing December. } ‘

eee en eee ee
\ z

I ae a
— :
a
|

190 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 April.

a heart to love and serve my heavenly Father better; and get
more of the light of His countenance, which is better than life,
and more power over my corruptions: in these hopes I wait,
and am not without expectation of a gracious return. Pray for
me; truly I do daily for thee, and the dear family; and God
Almighty bless you all with His spiritual blessings.

Mind poor Bettie of the Lord’s great mercy. Oh, I desire
her not only to seek the Lord in her necessity, but in deed and
in truth to turn to the Lord; and to keep close to Him; and to
take heed of a departing heart, and of being cozened with worldly
vanities and worldly company, which I doubt she is too subject
to. I earnestly and frequently pray for her and for him. Truly
they are dear to me, very dear; and I am in fear lest Satan
should deceive them,—knowing how weak our hearts are, and
how subtle the adversary is, and what way the deceitfulness of
our hearts and the vain world make for his temptations. The |
Lord give them truth of heart to Him. Let them seek Him in |
truth, and they shall find Him.

My love to the dear little ones; I pray for grace for them.
I thank them for their Letters ; let me have them often.

Beware of my Lord Harbert his resort to your house. If he
do so, ‘it’ may occasion scandal, as if I were bargaining with
him. Indeed, be wise, you know my meaning. Mind Sir Hen:
Vane of the business of my estate. Mr. Floyd knows my whole
mind in this matter.

If Dick Cromwell and his wife be with you, my dear love
to them. I pray for them: they shall, God willing, hear from
me. I love them very dearly. Truly I am not able as yet to
write much. I am wearied; and rest,

Thine,
Otiver CRoMWELL.*

‘ Bettie’ and ‘he’ are Elizabeth Claypole and her Husband ; of
whom, for the curious, there is a longwinded intricate account

* Cole MS. xxxiii. 37 [Add. MS. 5834]: a Copy ; Copies are frequent.

1651.) LETTER CLXXI, EDINBURGH 191

by Noble,! but very little discoverable in it. They lived at Nor-
borough, which is near Market Deeping, but in Northamptonshire ;
where, as already intimated, the Lady Protectress, Widow Eliza-
beth Cromwell, after the Restoration, found aretreat. ‘They had
at least three sons and daughters.’ Claypole became ‘ Master of
the Horse’ to Oliver ; sat in Parliament ; made an elegant appear-
ance in the world :—but dwindled sadly after his widowership; his
second marriage ending in ‘separation,’ in a third quasi-marriage,
and other confusions, poor man! But as yet the Lady Claypole
lives; bright and brave. ‘Truly they are dear to me, very dear.’

‘Dick Cromwell and his Wife’ seem to be up in Town on a
visit ;—living much at their ease in the Cockpit, they. Brother
Henry, in these same days, is out ‘in the King’s County’ in
Ireland ; doing hard duty at ‘ Ballybawn,’ and elsewhere,2—the
distinguished Colonel Cromwell. And Deputy Ireton, with his
labours, is wearing himself to death. In the same house, one
works, another goes idle.

‘The Lord Herbert’ is Henry Somerset, eldest son of the now
Marquis of Worcester,—of the Lord Glamorgan whom we knew
slightly at Ragland, in underhand ‘Irish Treaties’ and such like;
whose Century of Inventions is still slighty known to here and
there a reader of Old Books. ‘This Lord Herbert,’ it seems,
‘became Duke of Beaufort after the Restoration.’ For obvious
reasons, you are to ‘ beware of his resort to your house at present.’
A kind of professed Protestant he, but come of rank Papists and
Malignants ; which may give rise to commentaries. One stupid
Annotator on a certain Copy of this Letter says, ‘his Lordship had
an intrigue with Mrs. Claypole ;’—which is evidently downright
stupor and falsehood, like so much else.®

1ii, 375, &c. 2 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 102).

3[Cole, the annotator in question, goes on to say that ‘‘ by this means he made an
easy composition with Oliver for his estate.” This is nonsense, as compositions
were not made withthe Lord General. The great Worcester estates had been
confiscated long ago, some of them, as we have seen, being assigned to Cromwell ;
but Lord Herbert himself appears to have been unmolested until December,
1650, when a charge of delinquency was exhibited against him in the Committee
for Compounding, vzz.  ‘‘ that he rode in Oxford with a sword when it was a King’s
garrison, and was with his father at Newent at the siege of Gloucester, riding in a
troop of horse.” Nothing much seems to have come of the charge at the time,
and in April, 1651, he appears rather as plaintiff than defendant in a business re-
lating to the Worcester lands in Cromwell’s hands, as on April 23 Parliament ap-
pointed a Committee upon Lord Herbert's petition, to consider what interest he
had in any of the lands lately settled on the Lord General, and if they find he has a
good title, to except out of ‘‘sale by the Act” lands of like value. The date of
this order is two days later than Cromwell's letter to his wife, and his mention

192 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 April.

LETTER CLXXII

Upon the Surrender of Edinburgh Castle, due provision had
been made for conveyance of the Public Writs and Registers to
what quarter the Scotch Authorities might direct ; and ‘ Passes,’
under the Lord General’s hand, duly granted for that end.
Archibald Johnston, Lord Register, we conclude, had superin-
tended the operation ; had, after much labour, bundled the Public
Writs properly together into masses, packages ; and put them on
shipboard, considering this the eligiblest mode of transport to-
wards Stirling and the Scotch head-quarters at present. But now
it has fallen out, in the middle of last month, that the said ship
has been taken, as many ships and shallops on both sides now
are; and the Public Writs are in jeopardy: whereupon ensues
correspondence ; and this fair Answer from my Lord General :

‘To the Honourable Archibald Johnston, Lord Register of Scotland :
These’
Edinburgh, 12th April 1651.

My Lorp,
Upon the perusal of the passes formerly given

for the safe passing of the public writs and registers of the
Kingdom of Scotland, I do think they! ought to be restored:
and they shall be so, to such persons as you shall appoint to re-
ceive them, with passes for persons and vessels, to carry them to
such place as shall be appointed: so that it be done within one
month next following.

I herewith send you a pass for your Servant to go into Fife,
and to return with the other clerks ; and rest,

Your servant,
Ottver CRoMWELL.*

of ‘‘ bargaining” apparently refers to this business. The same Parliament order
directs the Committee for Compounding to report concerning Lord Herbert's de-
linquency, an order which is repeated a month later, but no further proceedings in
the case are recorded. See Ca/. of Committee for Compounding, pp. 435, 1706.]

1The Writs and Registers.

* Thurloe, i. 177. Records of the Laigh Parliament House. [In these Records
Cromwell’s spelling is altered to the Scotch fashion. Probably the entries were
made from dictation. ]

a os
— Pes

1651.] LETTER CLXXII., EDINBURGH 193

Warriston’s answer, written on Monday, the 12th being Satur-
day, is given also in T’hurloe. The Lord General’s phrase, ‘ perusal
of the Passes,’ we now find is prospective, and means ‘ reperusal,’
new sight of them by the Lord General; which, Archibald
earnestly urges, is impossible ;1 the original Passes being now
far off in the hands of the Authorities, and the Writs in a state
of imminent danger, lying in aship at Leith, as Archibald obscurely
intimates, which the English Governor has got his claws over,
and keeps shut up in dock ; with a considerable leak in her, too:
very bad stowage for such goods.2, Which obscure intimation of
Archibald’s becomes lucid to us, as to the Lord General it already
was, when we read this sentence of Bulstrode’s, under date 22d
March 1650-1: ‘ Letters that the Books and Goods belonging to
‘the’ Scotch ‘ King and Register were taken by the Parliament’s
‘ships ; and another ship, laden with oats, meal, and other pro-
‘visions, going to Fife: twenty-two prisoners.’? For captures
and small sea-surprisals abound in the Frith at present ; the Par-
liament-ships busy on one hand; and the ‘ Captain of the Bass,’
the ‘Shippers of Wemyss,’ and the like active persons doing
their duty on the other,—whereby infinite ‘biscuit,’ and such
small ware, is from time to time realised.*

Without doubt the Public Writs were all redelivered, according
to the justice of the case ;° and the term of ‘one month’ which
Archibald pleads hard to get lengthened, was made into two, or
the necessary time. Archibald’s tone towards the Lord General
is anxiously respectful, nay submissive and subject. In fact,
Archibald belongs, if not by profession, yet by invincible tendency,
to the Remonstrant Ker-and-Strahan Party; and looks dimly

1/One would rather judge from Warriston’s letter that Cromwell’s meaning is—
that upon perusal of certain of the passes (entrusted to Warriston for this purpose),
he thinks the ‘‘ Writs” should be restored, and that they shall be so, to persons
properly appointed and armed with the orders or passes originally given out at
Edinburgh. To which Warriston replies that this being a redelivery, he fears
whether he shall be able to get at the original passes, but will do his best, if the
General insists. ]

2 Thurloe, i., 177. 3 Whitlocke, p. 490.

4 Balfour, iv. 204, 241, 251, &c.

5[They reached Stirling Castle, it is true, but made no long stay there, for upon
its surrender in August they were seized, and by advice of the Council of State,
Parliament made order ‘‘ that all the records, with the regalia and insignia,’’ were
to be brought to England and placed in the Tower; where they duly arrived, and
were no doubt joyfully received by William Ryley, the zealous Keeper of the Records
there. He was allowed so/, to defray charges and for his trouble in the matter. In
1653 the Protector ordered their restoration, but unfortunately many were lost in
a storm at sea, on their way home. }

voL. 1.—13

“eS

194 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [12 April.

forward to a near time when there will be no refuge for him, and
the like of him, but Cromwell. Strahan, in the month of
January last, is already ‘excommunicated, and solemnly delivered
to the Devil, in the Church of Perth.’! This is what you have
to look for, from a Quasi-Malignant set of men!

This Archibald, as is well known, sat afterwards in Cromwell's
Parliaments ; became ‘ one of Cromwell’s Lords ;’ and ultimately
lost his life for these dangerous services. Archibald Johnston of
Warriston ; loose-flowing Bishop Burnet’s uncle by the Mother's
side : a Lord Register of whom all the world has heard. Redactor
of the Covenanters’ protests, in 1637, and onwards ; redactor per-
haps of the Covenant itself; canny lynx-eyed Lawyer, and austere
Presbyterian Zealot ; full of fire, of heavy energy and gloom: in
fact, a very notable character ;—of whom our Scotch friends might
do well to give us farther elucidations. Certain of his Letters
edited by Lord Hailes,? a man of fine intelligence, though at
that time ignorant of this subject, have proved well worth their
paper and ink, Many more, it appears, still lie in the Edinburgh
Archives. A good selection and edition of them were desirable.
But, alas, will any human soul ever again dove poor Warriston, and
take pious pains with him, in this world? Properly it turns all]
upon that ; and the chance seems rather dubious !—

SECOND VISIT TO GLASGOW

Tuat Note to Warriston, and the Letter to Elizabeth Cromwell,
as may have been observed, are written on the same day, Saturday
12th April 1651. Directly after which, on Wednesday the 16th,
there is a grand Muster of the Army on Musselburgh Links ;
preparatory to new operations. Blackness Fort has surrendered ;
Inchgarvie Island is beset by gunboats: Colonel Monk, we per-
ceive, who has charge of these services, is to be made Lieutenant-
General of the Ordnance: and now there is to be an attack on
Burntisland with gunboats, which also, one hopes, may succeed.
As for the Army, it is to go westward this same afternoon ; try
whether cautious Lesley, straitened or assaulted from both west
and east, will not come out of his Stirling fastness, so that some

1 Balfour, iv. 240. ,
2 Memorials and Letters in the reign of Charles I. (Glasgow, 1766).

1651.) SECOND VISIT TO GLASGOW 195

good may be done upon him. The Muster is held on Mussel-
burgh Links ; whereat the Lord General, making his appearance,
is received ‘with shouts and acclamations,’ the sight of him in-
finitely comfortable to us.1_ The Lord General’s health is some-
what re-established, though he has had relapses, and still tends a
little towards ague. ‘About three in the afternoon’ all is on
march towards Hamilton; quarters ‘mostly in the field there.’
Where the Lord General himself arrives, on Friday night, late,
and on the morrow afternoon we see Glasgow again.

Concerning which here are two notices from opposite points
of the compass, curiously corroborative of one another ; which we
must not withhold. Face-to-face glimpses into the old dead
actualities ; worth rescuing with a Cromwell in the centre of
them.

The first is from Baillie ;? shows us a glance of our old friend
Carstairs withal. Read this fraction of a Letter: “Reverend and
“beloved Brother,—For preventing of mistakes,” lest you should
think us looselaced, Remonstrant, sectarian individuals, “we
“have thought meet to advertise you that Cromwell having come
“to Hamilton on Friday late, and to Glasgow on Saturday with
“a body of his Army, sooner than with safety we could well have
“retired ourselves, ’—there was nothing for it but to stay and
abide him here! “On Sunday forenoon he came unexpectedly
“to the High Inner Kirk; where quietly he heard Mr. Robert
“Ramsay,” unknown to common readers, “preach a very good,
“honest sermon, pertinent to his’? Cromwell’s “case. In the
“afternoon he came, as unexpectedly, to the High Outer Kirk ;
“where he heard Mr. John Carstairs,” our old friend, “lecture
“and” a “Mr. James Durham preach,—graciously, and weel to
“the times as could have been desired.’ So that you see we
are not of the looselaced species, we! And “generally all who
“preached that day in the Town gave a fair enough testimony
“ against the Sectaries.”—-Whereupon, next day, Cromwell sent
for us to confer with him in a friendly manner. “ All of us did
meet to advise,” for the case was grave: however, we have de-
cided to go; nay are just going ;—but, most unfortunately, do
not write any record of our interview! Nothing, except some
transient assertion elsewhere that “we had no disadvantage in
the thing.” °—So that now, from the opposite point of the com-

1 Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 102),
*(Glasgow, 22d April 1651) iii, 165. 3 Baillie, iii, 168.

._— i i a |
f i
*

196 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [19 April.

pass, the old London Newspaper must come in; curiously con-
firmatory :

“ Sir, —We came hither” to Glasgow “on Saturday last, April
“19th. The Ministers and Townsmen generally stayed at home,
“and did not quit their habitations as formerly. The Ministers
“that are here are those that have deserted from the proceedings
“ beyond the Water,” at Perth,—and are in fact given to Remon-
strant ways, though Mr. Baillie denies it: “yet they are equally
“ dissatisfied with us. And though they:preach against us in the
“pulpit to our faces,! yet we permit them without disturbance,
“as willing to gain them by love.

“ My Lord General sent to them to give us a friendly Christian
“meeting, To discourse of those things which they rail against
“us for; that if possible, all misunderstandings between us may
“be taken away ; which accordingly they gave us on Wednesday
“last. There was no bitterness nor passion vented on either
«side; all was with moderation and tenderness. My Lord
«General and Major-General Lambert, for the most part, main-
“tained the discourse; and, on their part, Mr. James Guthry
“and Mr, Patrick Gillespie.2 We know not what satisfaction
“they have received. Sure I am, there was no such weight in
“their arguments as might in the least discourage us from what
“we have undertaken ; the chiefest thing on which they insisted
“being our Invasion into Scotland.” ®

The Army quitted Glasgow after some ten days; rather hastily,
on Wednesday 30th April; pressing news, some false alarm of
movements about Stirling, having arrived by express from the
East. They marched again for Edinburgh ;—quenched some
foolish Town Riot, which had broken out among the Glasgow
Baillies themselves, on some quarrel of their own; and was now
tugging and wriggling, in a most unseemly manner, on the open
streets, and likely to enlist the population generally, had not
Cromwell’s soldiers charitably scattered it asunder before they
went. In three days they were in Edinburgh again.

1[‘* to our forces ” in the old tract. ]

2*Gelaspy’ the Sectarian spells; in all particulars of facts he coincides with
Baillie. Guthry and Gillespie, noted men in that time, published a ‘Sum’ of this
Interview (Baillie, iii. 168), but nobody now knows it. [Patrick Gilaspy was one
of the Scottish ministers sent for by Cromwell in 1654. See Supplement No. 86.)

3 Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 102).

4“ Ane Information concerning the late Tumult in Glasgow, Wednesday, April
goth, at the very time of Cromwell's Removal” (in Baillie, iii. 161). [As the riot
was in consequence of an attempt by the magistrates to stop the proceedings of a

|

}

ee ———

a eee es

1651.} SECOND VISIT TO GLASGOW 197

When a luminous body, such as Oliver Cromwell, happens to
be crossing a dark Country, a dark Century, who knows what he
will not disclose to us! For example: On the Western edge of
Lanarkshire, in the desolate uplands of the Kirk of Shotts, there
dwelt at that time a worshipful Family of Scotch Lairds, of the
name of Stewart, at a House called Allertoun,—a lean turreted
angry-looking old Stone House, I take it ; standing in some green
place, in the alluvial hollows of the Auchter Burn or its tribu-
taries: most obscure ; standing lean and grim, like a thousand
such ; entirely unnoticeable by History,—had not Oliver chanced
to pass in that direction, and make a call there! Here is an
account of that event : unfortunately very vague, not written till
the second generation after; indeed, palpably incorrect in some
of its details; but indubitable as to the main fact; and too
curious to be omitted here. The date, not given or hinted at
in the original, seems to fix itself as Thursday Ist May 1651.
On that day Auchter Burn, rushing idly on as usual, the grim
old turreted Stone House, and rigorous Presbyterian inmates,
and desolate uplands of the Kirk of Shotts in general,—saw
Cromwell’s face, and have become memorable to us. Here is
the record given as we find it.

‘There was a fifth Son’ of Sir Walter Stewart, Laird of Aller-
toun: ‘James; who in his younger years was called “the Captain
‘of Allertoun,’—from this incident: Oliver Cromwell, Captain-
‘General of the English Sectarian Army, after taking Edinburgh
‘Castle, was making a Progress through the West of Scotland ;
‘and came down towards the River Clyde near Lanark, and was
‘on his march back, against King Charles the Second’s Army,
‘then with the King at Stirling. Being informed of a near way
‘through Auchtermuir, he came with some General Officers to
‘reconnoitre; and had a Guide along. Sir Walter, being a
‘Royalist and Covenanter, had absconded. As he’ Cromwell
‘passed, he called in at Allertoun for a further Guide; but no
‘men were to be found, save one valetudinary Gentleman, Sir
‘Walter’s Son,’—properly a poor valetudinary Boy, as appears,
who of course could do nothing for him.

‘He found the road not practicable for carriages; and upon
‘his return he called in at Sir Walter’s House. There was none

committee appointed by the citizens to collect and hand over the ‘‘ cess” demanded
by the English garrison at Hamilton, it was a case in which the English troops
would naturally interfere. }

1 Coltness Collections, published by the Maitland Club (Glasgow, 1842), p. 9.

a%

198 WAR WITH SCOTLAND

‘to entertain him but the Lady and Sir Walter's sickly Son. The
‘good Woman was as much for the King and Royal Family as
‘her Husband: but she offered the General the civilities of her
‘House; and a glass of canary was presented. The General ob-
‘served the forms of these times (I have it from good authority),
‘and he asked a blessing in a long pathetic grace before the cup
‘went round;—he drank his good wishes? for the family, and
‘asked for Sir Walter; and was pleased to say, His Mother was
‘a Stewart’s Daughter, and he had a relation to the name. All
‘passed easy; and our James, being a lad of ten years, came so
‘near as to handle the hilt of one of the swords: upon which
‘Oliver stroked his head, saying, “ You are my little Captain ;”
‘and this was all the Commission our Captain of Allertoun ever
‘had.

‘The General called for some of his own wines for himself and
‘other Officers,? and would have the Lady try his wine; and was
‘so humane, When he saw the young Gentleman so maigre and
‘indisposed, he said, Changing the climate might do good, and
‘the South of France, Montpellier, was the place.

‘Amidst all this humanity and politeness he omitted not, in
‘person, to return thanks to God in a pointed grace after his
‘repast; and after this hasted on his return to join the Army.
‘The Lady had been a strenuous Royalist, and her Son a Captain
‘in command at Dunbar; yet upon this interview with the
‘General she abated much of her zeal. She said she was sure
‘Cromwell was one who feared God, and had that fear in him,
‘and the true interest of Religion at heart. A story of this kind
‘is no idle digression; it has some small connexion with the
‘Family concerns, and shows some little of the genius of these
‘ distracted times.’—And so we leave it; vague, but indubitable ;
standing on such basis as it has.*

[19 April.

1 Certainly incorrect. 2Tmaginary.

3(Of this story, Mr. Douglas remarks that Allertoun should be Allenton; that
the incident ought possibly to be assigned to Cromwell's homeward march after his
first visit to Glasgow, and that, judging from the “ Memorie of the Somervilles,”
Sir Walter Stewart's royalism was not above suspicion. (See Cromwell's Scotch
Campaigns, p. 148 note. )]

1651.) LETTER CLXXIII., EDINBURGH 199

LETTER CLXXIII

‘For my beloved Wife Elizabeth Cromwell, at the Cockpit :
These’
Edinburgh, 3d May 1651.

My Dearest,

I could not satisfy myself to omit this post,
although I have not much to write; yet indeed I love to write to
my dear, who is very much in my heart. It joys me to hear thy
soul prospereth: the Lord increase His favours to thee more and
more. The great good thy soul can wish is, That the Lord lift
upon thee the light of His countenance, which is better than life.
The Lord bless all thy good counsel and example to all those
about thee, and hear all thy prayers, and accept thee always.

I am glad to hear thy son and daughter are with thee. I
hope thou wilt have some good opportunity of good advice to
him. Present my duty to my Mother, my love to all the family.
Still pray for

Thine,
O.tveR CROMWELL.*

Written the day after his return to Edinburgh. ‘Thy Son and
Daughter’ are, to all appearance, Richard and his Wife, who pro-
long their visit at the Cockpit. The good old ‘ Mother’, is still
spared with us, to have ‘my duty’ presented to her. A pale
venerable Figure; who has lived to see strange things in this
world ;—can piously, in her good old tremulous heart, rejoice in
such a Son.!

* Harris, p. 517. [Same date, Appendix 20.*]

1[Between this letter and the next is one to Hammond, dated May 13. See
Supplement, No. 65.

Cromwell wrote other letters at this time of which we find traces amongst the
papers of the Council of State, although the letters themselves have not been pre-
served, viz. :-—

April x (about), to Sir Henry Vane, concerning draught horses, a further
supply of hay, etc. Referred, on April 7, to the Irish and Scotch Committee.

April 5. Evidently a further request for supplies. Referred, on April xo, to the
same committee, ‘‘ who are to confer with the navy victuallers concerning it.”

April 8. ‘‘Concerning commissioners to be sent to Scotland.” Referred by
Parliament to the Council of State on April 15.

May 3 (probably). Desiring an establishment for Edinburgh Castle and Leith

200 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 May.

Precisely in these days, a small ship driven by stress of weather
into Ayr Harbour, and seized and searched by Cromwell’s Garrison
there, discloses a matter highly interesting to the Commonwealth,
A Plot, namely, on the part of the English Presbyterian- Royalists,
English Royalists Proper, and all manner of Malignant Interests
in England, to unite with the Scots and their King: in which
certain of the London Presbyterian Clergy, Christopher Love
among others, are deeply involved. The little ship was bound
for the Isle of Man, with tidings to the Earl of Derby concerning
the affair; and now we have caught her within the Bars of Ayr;
and the whole matter is made manifest !1 Reverend Christopher
Love is laid hold of, 7th May; he and others: and the Council
of State is busy. It is the same Christopher who preached at
Uxbridge Treaty long since, That ‘Heaven might as well think
of uniting with Hell.’ Were a new High Court of Justice once
constituted, it will go hard with Christopher.

As for the Lord General, this march to Glasgow has thrown
him into a new relapse, which his Doctor counts as the third since
March last. The disease is now ague ; comes and goes, till, in
the end of this month, the Council of State, as ordered by Parlia-
ment, requests him to return, in the mean while, to England for
milder air ;? and despatches two London Doctors to him ; whom
the Lord Fairfax is kind enough to ‘send in his own coach ;’ who
arrive in Edinburgh on the 30th of May, ‘and are affectionately
entertained by my Lord.’ The two Doctors are Bates and
Wright. Bates, in his loose-tongued History of the Troubles, re-
dacted in aftertimes, observes strict silence as to this Visit. Here
is the Lord General’s Answer ; indicating with much thankfulness
that he will not now need to return.

(ordered, May 8, to be reported to the House) ; also particulars of ordnance,
colours, etc., needed (referred to the Ordnance Committee) and, at the same time, a
letter to Sir Harry Vane ‘‘ of the particulars wanting,” referred to the Irish and
Scotch Committee.

May ro (about). Desiring a supply of medicaments and surgeons. Referred, on
May 15, to the Irish and Scotch Committee, who are to send the persons and com-
modities mentioned to Scotland. See Ca/. S. P. Dom., 1651, pp. 134, 140, 147,
184, 201, 203. ]

1 Bates: History of the late Troubles in England (Translation of the Elenchus
Motuum; London, 1685), Part ii. 115.
? Whitlocke, p. 476; Commons Journals (vi. 579), 27th May 1651.

5 Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, Pp. 103).

es

eS se
;

1651.) LETTER CLXXIV., EDINBURGH 201

LETTER CLXXIV

‘To the Lord President of the Council of State: These’

Edinburgh, 3d June 1651.

My Lorp,

I have received yours of the 27th of May,
with an order of Parliament for my liberty to return into England
for change of air, that thereby I might the better recover my
health ; all which came unto me whilst Dr. Wright and Dr. Bates,
whom your Lordship sent down, were with me.

I shall not need to recite the extremity of my last sickness:
it was so violent that indeed my nature was not able to bear the
weight thereof. But the Lord was pleased to deliver me, beyond
expectation, and to give me cause to say once more, “He hath
plucked me out of the grave!” 1—My Lord, the indulgence of
the Parliament expressed by their order is a very high and un-
deserved favour, of which although it be fit I keep a thankful
remembrance, yet I judge it would be too much presumption in
me to? return a particular acknowledgment. I beseech you give
me the boldness to return my humble thankfulness to the Coun-
cil for sending two such worthy persons, so great a journey, to
visit me; from whom I have received much encouragement, and
good direction for recovery of health and strength, which I find
by the goodness of God, growing to such a state as may yet, if it
be His good will, render me useful according to my poor ability,
in the station wherein He hath set me.

I wish more steadiness in your affairs here than to depend,
in the least degree, upon so frail a thing as 1am. Indeed they
do not, nor on any instrument. This Cause is of God and it
must prosper. Oh, that all that have any hand therein, being

1 Psalm xxx. 3, ‘hast brought up my soul from the grave;’ or, Ixxxvi. 13,
‘delivered my soul from :’ but ‘ plucked’ is not in any of the texts.
2*not to’ in orig. ,—dele ‘ not.’

~~ a Ae

ee a oe

202 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 June.

so persuaded, would gird up the loins of their minds, and en-
deavour in all things to walk worthy of the Lord! So prays,
My Lord,
Your most humble servant,
Otiver CRoMWELL.*

The Lord General’s case was somewhat grave ; at one time, it
seemed hopeless for this summer. ‘My Lord is not sensible that
he is grown an old man.’ The Officers were to proceed without
him ; directed by him from the distance. Here, however, is an
improvement ; and two days after, on the 5th of June, the Lord
General is seen abroad in his coach again; shakes his ailments
and infirmities of age away, and takes the field in person once
more. The Campaign is now vigorously begun; though as yet
no great result follows from it.

On the 25th of June, the Army from all quarters reassembled
‘in its old Camp on the Pentland Hills ;’ marched westward ; left
Linlithgow July 2d, ever westward, with a view to force the
Enemy from his strong ground about Stirling. Much pickeering,
vapouring, and transient skirmishing ensues; but the Enemy,
strongly entrenched at Torwood, secured by bogs and brooks,
cannot be forced out. We take Calendar House, and do other
insults, before their eyes ; they will not come out. Cannonadings
there are ‘from opposite Hills;’ but not till it please the Enemy
can there be any battle. David Lesley, second in rank, but real
leader of the operations, is at his old trade again. The Problem
is becoming difficult. We decide to get across into Fife ; to take
them in flank, and at least cut off an important part of their
supplies.

Here is the Lord General’s Letter on the result of that enter-
prise. Farther details of the Battle, which is briefly spoken of
here,—still remembered in those parts as the Battle of Inverkeith-
ing,—may be found in Lambert’s own Letter concerning it.” ‘ Sir

* Kimber’s (anonymous) Life of Oliver Cromwell (London, 1724), p. 201 ; does
not say whence derived. [Perfect Politician, 1660. Also in Several Proceedings in
Parliament, p. 1354, E. 785, 49.]

1[On June 17 Cromwell wrote to the Council of State concerning Fleetwood and

Whalley. See Supplement, No. 66. And Letter CLXXVIIL., which Carlyle printed ©

as written in July, was really written on June 28, and should come in here. ]
2 North Ferry, 22d July 1651 (Whitlocke, p. 472): the Battle was on Sunday the
zoth. See also Balfour, iv. 313.

ee SS ee Se

1651.) LETTER CLXXV., LINLITHGOW 203

John Browne, their Major-General,’ ! was once a zealous Parlia-
menteer ; ‘Governor of Abingdon’ and much else ; but the King
gained him, growls Ludlow, ‘by the gift of a pair of silk stockings,’
—poor wretch! Besides Browne, there are Massey, and various
Englishmen of mark with this Malignant Army. Massey’s Brother,
a subaltern person in London, is one of the conspirators with
Christopher Love.—The Lord General has in the interim made his
Third Visit to Glasgow ; concerning which there are no details
worth giving here.?_ Christopher Love, on the 5th of this month,
was condemned to die.®

LETTER CLXXV

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the Par-
hiament of England : These
Linlithgow, 21st July 1651.

Sir,

After our waiting upon the Lord, and not
knowing what course to take, for indeed we know nothing but
what God pleaseth to teach us, of His great mercy we were
directed to send a party to get us a landing ‘on the Fife coast’
by our boats, whilst we marched towards Glasgow.

On Thursday morning last, Colonel Overton, with about
one-thousand four-hundred foot and some horse and dragoons,
landed at the North Ferry in Fife; we with the army lying
near the enemy (a small river parting us and them) had con-
sultations to attempt the enemy within his fortifications: but
the Lord was not pleased to give way to that counsel, proposing
a better way for us. Major-General Lambert marched, on
Thursday night, with two regiments of horse and two regiments
of foot, for better securing the place; and to attempt upon the
enemy as occasion should serve. He getting over, and finding
a considerable body of the enemy there (who would probably
have beaten our men from the place if he had not come), drew

1[Carlyle confuses Sir John Browne of Fordell, a Scot, with Major-General
Richard Browne. ]

2 Whitlocke p. 471; Milton State-Papers, p. 84 {11th July 1651).

> Wood, iii. 278, &c.

Ce TS a gt eg ek a ee ae ae

204 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [ai July.

out and fought them; he being two regiments of horse, and
about four-hundred of horse and dragoons more, and three
regiments of foot; the enemy five regiments of foot, and about
four or five regiments of horse. They came to a close charge
and in the end totally routed the enemy; having taken about
forty or fifty colours,! killed near two-thousand, some say more ;
have taken Sir John Browne, their Major-General, who com-
manded in chief, and other Colonels and considerable Officers
killed and taken, and about five or six Hundred prisoners.?
The enemy is removed from their ground with their whole
army; but whither we know not certainly.

This is an unspeakable mercy. I trust the Lord will follow it
until He hath perfected peace and truth. We can truly say, we
were gone as far as we could in our counsel and action, and we
did say one to another, we knew not what to do. Wherefore it’s
sealed upon our hearts, that this, as all the rest, is from the
Lord’s goodness, and not from man. I hope it becometh me to
pray that we may walk humbly and self-denyingly before the
Lord, and believingly also; that you whom we serve, as the
authority over us, may do the work committed to you, with up-
rightness and faithfulness, and thoroughly, as to the Lord; that
you may not suffer anything to remain that offends the eyes of
His jealousy; that the common weal may more and more be
sought, and justice done impartially. For the eyes of the Lord
run to and fro; and as He finds out His enemies here, to be
avenged on them, so will He not spare them for whom He doth
good, if by His lovingkindness they become not good. I shall
take the humble boldness to represent this engagement in the
words of David in the 119th Psalm, 134th verse, Deliver me from
the oppression of man, so will I keep Thy precepts.

I take leave, and rest,

Sir, your most humble servant,
O.tvER CROMWELL.

1 Farther account of these in Appendix, No. 22.

2[In a letter written next day Cromwell corrects this statement, having learnt
that between fifteen and sixteen hundred prisoners had been taken. See Supple-
ment, No. 67. ]

— ee
ae <

1651.) LETTER CLXXVI., DUNDAS 205

P.S. The carriage of the Major-General, as in all other things
so in this, is worthy of your taking notice of; as also the Colonels
Okey, Overton, Daniel, West, Lydcot, Syler, and the rest of the
Officers.*

Matters now speedily take another turn. At the Castle of
‘Dundas’ we are still on the South side of the Frith; in front
of the Scotch lines, though distant: but Inchgarvie, often tried
with gunboats, now surrenders; Burntisland, by force of gun-
boats and dispiritment, surrenders: the Lord General himself
goes across into Fife. The following Letters speak for them-
selves,

LETTER CLXXVI

‘To the Right Honourable the Lord President of the Council of
State: These’
Dundas, 24th July 1651.

My Lorp,
It hath pleased God to put your affairs here

in some hopeful way, since the last defeat given to the enemy.

I marched with the army very near to Stirling, hoping there-
by to get the pass; and went myself with General Deane, and
some others, up to Bannockburn ; hearing that the enemy were
marched on the other side towards our forces in Fife. Indeed
they went four or five miles on towards them, but hearing of my
advance, in all haste they retreated back, and possessed the Park,
and their other works ; which we viewed, and finding them not
advisable to attempt, resolved to march to Queensferry, and there
to ship over so much of the army as might hopefully be master
of the field in Fife. Which accordingly we have almost per-
fected ; and have left, on this side, somewhat better than four
regiments of horse, and as many of foot.

I hear now the enemy’s great expectation is to supply them-
selves in the West with recruits of men, and what victual they

* Newspapers (in Par/, Hist, xix. 494; and Cromwelliana, p. 105).

ee eS eee

206 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [26 July.

can get: for they may expect none out of the North, when once
our army shall interpose between them and St. Johnstons. To
prevent their prevalency in the West, and making incursions
into the Borders of England, . * *1

OLIveR CRoMWELL.*

LETTER CLXXVII

Or this Letter Sir Harry Vane and the Council of State judge
it improper to publish anything in the Newspapers, except a
rough abstract, in words of their own, of the first two paragraphs
and the concluding one. In which state it presents itself in the
Old Pamphlets.2 The Letter copied in full lies among the
Tanner Manuscripts ;—gives us a glimpse into the private wants,
and old furnitures, of the Cromwell Army. ‘ Pots’ are cavalry
helmets; ‘backs-and-breasts’ are still seen on cuirassier regi-
ments ; ‘snaphances’ (German schnapphahn, snapcock) are a new
wonderful invention, giving fire by flint-and-steel ;—promising,
were they not so terribly expensive, to supersede the old slow
matchlock in field-service! But, I believe, they wind up like a
watch before the trigger acts ;3 and come very high !—

For the Right Honourable the Lord President of the Council of
State: These

‘ Leith,’ 4 26th July 1651.
My Lorp,
I am able to give you no more account than

what you have by my last, only we have now in Fife about

1Sir Harry Vane, who reads the Letter in Parliament, judges it prudent to stop
here (Commons Journals, vi. 614).

2In Parliamentary History, xix. 498.

3Grose’s Military Antiquities. [Carlyle confuses the two sorts of firelock
muskets, the wheellock and the snaphanse or flintlock. For the difference between
them, see Cromwell's Army, p. 87.

4[Carlyle dated this letter from Linlithgow ; but a letter written at Leith on
this very day says: ‘‘ My Lord General is here at Leith for a week, to take physic
and refresh himself, if the armies drawing near together do not call him away.”
Mercurius Politicus, No. 61 (E. 640, 2). The writer of this letter took a more
sanguine view of the state of affairs than his General. ‘*We have 20,000 men
on Fifeside,” he wrote, ‘‘so that the enemy will be hard put to it, and their late
projects of delay be utterly spoiled and prevented.”’]

* Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 107).

1651.] LETTER CLXXVII, LEITH* 207

thirteen or fourteen thousand horse and foot. The enemy is
at his old lock,! and lieth in and near Stirling, where we cannot
come to fight him, except he please, or we go upon too-too mani-
fest hazards; he having very strongly laid himself, and having
a very great advantage there. Whither we hear he hath lately
gotten great provisions of meal, and reinforcement of his strength
out of the North under Marquis Huntly. It is our business still
to wait upon God, to show us our way how to deal with this
subtle enemy; which I hope He will.

Our forces on this side the river? are not very many: where-
fore I have sent for Colonel Rich’s, and shall appoint them, with
the forces under Colonel Sanders, to embody close upon the
Borders, and to be in readiness to join with those left on this
side the Frith, or to be for the security of England, as occasion
shall offer ;* there being little use of them where they lie, as we
know.

Your soldiers begin to fall sick, through the wet weather
which has lately been. It is desired, therefore, that the recruits
of foot determined ‘on,’ may rather come sooner in time than
usually ; and may be sure to be full in numbers, according to
your appointment, whereof great failing have lately been. For
the way of raising them, it is wholly submitted to your pleasure ;

1[ See p. 103 above. ] 2 Means ‘ Frith’ always.

5[A letter from Leith shows what Cromwell means, stating that the Lord General
is reserving a body of horse and foot, together with Colonel Rich’s horse in Notting-
hamshire and those left by Major-General Harrison in Northumberland and
Cumberland, which he has sent for, to lie upon the borders, where they ‘‘ will be
in a capacity, through God’s assistance, to engage or at least impede their [the
Scots] march, if they attempt that way.” Army's [ntelligencer (E. 638, 15). See
also another letter in Jlercurius Politicus (E. 640, 2), and yet another written on
the 29th. This last says that the enemy ‘‘ havea wistly look towards England, and
‘tis thought they will endeavour to play that game”’ (/ézd.). The letters from the
North in this number of MJercurius Politicus are preceded by the following news
from Paris: ‘‘ Aug. 9 [z.e. July 30]. Yesterday, very early in the morning, the
little Queen [Henrietta Maria], imparted unto the Ambassador of Savoy . . . that
General Cromwell had been altogether routed in a fight wherein, she said, her son
behaved himself gallantly, and came off victoriously, with his arms bloody by slaying
his enemies ; after which he had prosecuted his victory almost to the very gates of
London.” ‘The editor continues: ‘‘ Now you have seen what the royal news is
abroad, pray let us see in the next place what our friends say in Scotland,” and
proceeds to describe the surrender of Burntisland without a shot fired. |

208 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [26 July.

and we hearing you rather choose to send us volunteers than
pressed-men, shall be very glad you go that way.

Our spades are spent to a very small number: we desire,
therefore, that of the five-thousand tools we lately sent for, at
the least three-thousand of them may be spades, they wearing
most away in our works, and being most useful. Our horse-
arms, especially our pots, are come to a very small number: it
is desired we may have a thousand backs-and-breasts, and fif-
teen-hundred pots. We have left us in store but four-hundred
pair of pistols, two-hundred saddles, six-hundred pikes, two-
thousand and thirty muskets, whereof thirty snaphances. These
are our present stores: and not knowing what you have sent us
by this fleet that is coming, we desire we may be considered
therein. Our cheese and butter is our lowest store of victual.

We were necessitated to pay the soldiery moneys now at
their going over into Fife, whereby the treasury is much ex-
hausted, although we desire to husband it what we can. This
being the principal time of action, we desire your Lordship to
take a principal care that money may be supplied us with all
possible speed, and these other things herewith mentioned ; your
affairs so necessarily requiring the same.

The Castle of Ennes-garvy [Inchgarvie], which lieth in the river,
almost in the midway between the North and South Ferry,
commonly called Queen’s Ferry, was delivered to us on Thursday
last. They marched away with their swords and baggage only ;
leaving us sixteen cannon, and all their other arms and ammunition.
I rest,

My Lord,
Your lordship’s most humble servant,
O.iver CromWELL.*

* Tanner MSS., in Cary, ii. 288-90. [Now printed from the original, Tanner,
liv. r20, Only the concluding words, date and signature are in Cromwell's hand.]

1651.] LETTER CLXXVIII 209

LETTER CLXXVIII!

‘To my very loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley :
These’

28th June 1651.

Dear Brotuer,

I was glad to receive a letter from you, for
indeed anything that comes from you is very welcome to me. I
believe your expectation of my Son’s coming is deferred. I wish
he may see a happy delivery of his Wife first,? for whom I fre-
quently pray.

I hear my Son hath exceeded his allowance, and is in debt.
Truly I cannot commend him therein; wisdom requiring his
living within compass, and calling for it ‘at’ his hands, And in
my judgment, the reputation arising from thence would have
been more real honour than what is attained the other way. I
believe vain men will speak well of him that does ill.

I desire to be understood that I grudge him not laudable
recreations, nor an honourable carriage of himself in them; nor
is any matter of charge, like to fall to my share, a stick*® with
me. Truly I can find in my heart to allow him not only a sufficiency
but more, for his good. But if pleasure and self-satisfaction be
made the business of a man’s life, so much cost laid out upon it,
so much time spent in it, as rather answers appetite than the will
of God, or is comely before His Saints, I scruple to feed this
humour ; and God forbid that his being my son should be his
allowance to live not pleasingly to our Heavenly Father, who
hath raised me out of the dust to what I am!

1[This letter should be CLXXV., as it is dated on June 28. Carlyle printed it
July 28 by mistake. It was, therefore, written, not from Burntisland, as he sup-
posed, but from somewhere between Edinburgh and Linlithgow.]

2 Noble’s registers are very defective! These Letters, too, were before the poor
man’s eyes. [The birth of the child is given by Noble quite accurately—Anne, the
second daughter, born on July 15; three weeks, nearly, after this letter was written.
See note, p. 69 above. ]

3 stop.

voL. 11.—14

210 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [28 June.

I desire your faithfulness (he being also your concernment as_
well as mine) to advise him to approve himself to the Lord in
his course of life; and to search His statutes for a rule to con-
science, and to seek grace from Christ to enable ‘him’ to walk
therein. This hath life in it, and will come to somewhat : what
is a poor creature without this? This will not abridge of lawful
pleasures ; but teach such an use of them as will have the peace
of a good conscience going along with it. Sir, I write what is
in my heart; I pray you communicate my mind herein to my
Son, and be his remembrancer in these things. Truly I love
him, he is dear to me; so is his Wife; and for their sakes do I
thus write. They shall not want comfort nor encouragement
from me, so far as I may afford it. But indeed I cannot think
I do well to feed a voluptuous humour in my Son, if he should
make pleasures the business of his life, in a time when some
precious Saints are bleeding, and breathing out their last, for
the safety of the rest. Memorable is the speech of Urijah to
David (2nd Chron., xi, 11).

Sir, I beseech you believe I here say not this to save my
purse ; for I shall willingly do what is convenient to satisfy his
occasions, as I have opportunity. But as I pray he may not
walk in a course not pleasing to the Lord, so ‘I’ think it lieth
upon me to give him (in love) the best counsel I may ; and know
not how better to convey it to him than by so good a hand as
yours. Sir, I pray you acquaint him with these thoughts of
mine, And remember my love to my daughter; for whose sake
I shall be induced to do any reasonable thing. I pray for her
happy deliverance, frequently and earnestly.

I am sorry to hear my bailiff? in Hantshire should do to my
son as is intimated by your Letter. I assure you I shall not

1[Carlyle altered to 2nd Samuel which is, of course, right, but Cromwell wrote
‘end Chron.”] ‘And Uriah said unto David, The Ark, and Israel, ‘and Judah
‘ abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in
‘ the open fields: shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie
‘with my wife? As thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.’

2° Baylye.’

1651.) LETTER CLXXIX., BURNTISLAND 211

allow any such thing. If there be any suspicion of his abuse of
the wood, I desire it may be looked after, and inquired into;
that so, if things appear true, he may be removed; although
indeed I must needs say he had the repute of a godly man, by
divers that knew him when I placed him there.

Sir, I desire my hearty affection may be presented to my
sister, my Cousin Ann, and her husband though unknown. I
praise the Lord I have obtained much mercy in respect of my
health ; the Lord give me a truly thankful heart. I desire your
prayers ; and rest,

Your very affectionate brother and servant,
O.tver CromweELL.*

My Cousin Ann, then, is wedded! ‘Her Husband though un-
known’ is John Dunch; who, on his Father’s decease, became
John Dunch of Pusey ;—to whom we owe this Letter, among the
others.

LETTER CLXXIX

To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England: These
Burntisland, 29th July 1651.
Sir,

The greatest part of the army is in Fife,
waiting what way God will farther lead us. It hath pleased
God to give us in Burntisland ;! which is indeed very conducing
to the carrying-on of our affairs. The town is well seated;
pretty strong; but marvellous capable of further improvement
in that respect, without great charge. The harbour, at a high
spring, is near a fathom deeper than at Leith, and doth not lie
commanded by any ground without the town. We took three

* Harris, p. 513. [Pusey letters, ‘‘No. 19.” Holograph. In the Morrison
Collection. ]

1‘ Brunt Island’ ix orig,

212 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [29 July.

or four small men-of-war in it, and I believe thirty or forty
guns.

Commissary-General Whalley marched along the sea-side in
Fife, having some ships to go along the coast; and hath taken
great store of great artillery, and divers ships. The enemy's
affairs are in some discomposure, as we hear. Surely the Lord
will blow upon them.

‘T rest,’
Your most humble servant,
OLtver CRoMWELL.*

LETTER CLXXX

In effect, the crisis has now arrived.1. The Scotch King and
Army, finding their supplies cut off, and their defences rendered
unavailing, by this flank-movement,—break up suddenly from
Stirling ;? march direct towards England,—for a stroke at the
heart of the Commonwealth itself. Their game now is, All or
nothing. A desperate kind of play. Royalists, Presbyterian-
Royalists and the large miscellany of Discontented Interests
may perhaps join them there ;—perhaps also not! They march
by Biggar; enter England by Carlisle,3 on Wednesday 6th of
August 1651. ‘At Girthhead, in the Parish of Wamphray, in
Annandale, human Tradition, very faintly indeed, indicates

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, p. 107).

1[After taking Burntisland Cromwell advanced to Perth, thus placing his army
between Leslie and his hoped-for reinforcements in the North. Perth surrendered on
August 2nd, and the news having now come that the Scots had started for England
Cromwell set off in pursuit of them. In this next letter he defends himself from ex-
pected criticism for having left the way to England open to the enemy, explaining
that otherwise it would have been impossible to move him from his strong position,
and that the English army would have been ruined by a lingering, costly winter’s
war. The letters from the newspapers, quoted in the notes above, show that this
was no mere excuse after the event, but his deliberate decision, as the probable
movements of the Scots had been foreseen more than a week before. No better
defence of Cromwell's conduct can be found than Hamilton’s bitter words on the
ridiculousness of their situation, who ‘‘ have quit Scotland, being scarce able to
maintain it,” and yet grasp at all. ‘I confess,” he adds, “ I cannot tell whether
our hopes or fears are greatest, but we have one stout argument, dispair.” Cary’s
Memorials of the Civil War, ii. 305.]

2* Last day of July’ (Bates, ii. 120). 3 Whitlocke, p. 474.

OO ~

1651.] LETTER CLXXX., LEITH 213

some Roman Stones or Mile-stones, by the wayside, as the
place where his Sacred Majesty passed the Tuesday night ;—
which are not quite so venerable now as formerly.!

For the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England : These

Leith, 4th August 1651,
Sir,

In pursuance of the Providence of God, and
that blessing lately given to your forces in Fife, and finding
that the enemy, being masters of the pass at Sterling, could not
be gotten out there, without hindering his provisions at St.
Johnstons,—we, by general advice, thought fit to attempt St.
Johnstons; knowing that that would necessitate him to quit
his pass. Wherefore, leaving with Major-General Harrison
about three-thousand horse and dragoons, besides those which
are with Colonel Rich, Colonel Sanders, and Colonel Barton
upon the borders, we marched to St. Johnstons ;? and lying
one day before it, we had it surrendered to us;* during which
time we had some intelligence of the enemy’s marching south-
ward, though with some contradictions, as if it had not been so.
But doubting it might be true, we (leaving a garrison in St.
Johnstons, and sending Lieutenant-General Monck with about
five or six thousand to Stirling to reduce that place, and by it
to put your affairs into a good posture in Scotland) we marched,
with all possible expedition, back again; and had passed our
foot and many of our horse over the Frith this day, resolving to
make what speed we can up to the enemy, who, in his despera-
tion and fear, and out of inevitable necessity, is run to try what
he can do this way.‘

1 Nicholas Carlisle’s Zofographical Dict. of Scotland, § Wamphray.

22d August 1651 (Balfour, iv. 313) : ‘St. Johnston,’ as we know, is Perth.

’[For Cromwell's summons to Perth, see Supplement, No. 68.]

4|Many of the news letters of this date speak of the demoralization of the Scots
forces. ‘‘ Wheresoever our army marcheth, they find the country full of the Scots
runaways. Argile is gone melancholy from Stirling, and the Lord Roxborough
with many other of the Scots nobility, have left the noise and tumult of the war

214 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Aug.

I do apprehend that if he goes for England, being some few
days march before us, it will trouble some men’s thoughts, and
may occasion some inconveniences ;—of which I hope we are as
deeply sensible, and have ‘been,’ and I trust shall be, as diligent
to prevent, as any; and indeed this is our comfort, That in
simplicity of heart as to God, we have done to the best of our
judgments; knowing that if some issue were not put to this
business, it would occasion another winter’s war, to the ruin of
your soldiery, for whom the Scots are too hard in respect of
enduring the winter difficulties of this country, and been under
the endless expense of the treasure of England in prosecuting
this war. It may be supposed we might have kept the enemy
from this, by interposing between him and England ; which truly
I believe we might: but how to remove him out of this place,
without doing what we have done, unless we had had a com-
manding army on both sides of the river of Forth, is not clear
to us; or how to answer the inconveniences aforementioned, we
understand not.

We pray therefore that (seeing there is a possibility for the
enemy to put you to some trouble) you would, with the same
courage (grounded upon a confidence in God) wherein you have
been supported to the great things God hath used you in hitherto,
you would improve, the best you can, such forces as you have in
readiness, or may on the sudden be gathered together, To give
the enemy some check,! until we shall be able to reach up to
him, which we trust in the Lord we shall do our utmost endeavour
in. And indeed we have this comfortable experience from the
Lord, that this enemy is heart-smitten by God, and whenever
the Lord shall bring us up to them, we believe the Lord will

for places of safety and retiredness."” Weekly Jntelligencer (E. 640(4)). ‘‘ That
which this week is most remarkable is the Scots King, with about eleven thousand,
desperately abandoning Scotland and distractedly running into England” (/é2d.).
“Through all the country in Scotland we find their runaways. In a word,
nothing was left them but a desperate cure or a desperate ruin.” George Downing

to the Council (E. 640(5)).]
1fIn Cromwell's hand, over ‘' delay,” erased, |

|
.
1

Og eg ee. e — ™ ~~
-. ve. . Jj
- f
'

1651] | LETTER CLXXX., LEITH 215

make the desperateness of this counsel of theirs to appear, and
the folly of it also.1 When England was much more-unsteady
than now, and when a much more considerable army of theirs,
unfoiled, invaded you, and we had but a weak force to make
resistance at Preston,—upon deliberate advice, we chose rather
to put ourselves between their army and Scotland: and how
God succeeded that, is not well to be forgotten. This is not
out of choice on our part, but by some kind of necessity ; and,
it’s to be hoped, will have the like issue, together with a hopeful
end of your work; in which it’s good to wait upon the Lord,
upon the earnest of former experiences, and hope of His presence,
which only is the life of your Cause.

Major-General Harrison, with the horse and dragoons under
him, and Colonel Rich and the rest in those parts, shall attend
the motion of the enemy, and endeavour the keeping of them
together, as also to impede his march, and will be ready to be
in conjunction with what forces shall gather together for this
service : to whom orders have been speeded to that purpose, as
this enclosed to Major-General Harrison will show. Major-
General Lambert,’ this day, marched with a very considerable
body of horse, up towards the enemy’s rear. With the rest of
the horse, and nine regiments of foot (most of them of your old
foot and horse), I am hasting up; and shall, by the Lord’s help,
use utmost diligence. I hope I have left a commanding force
under Lieutenant-General Monck in Scotland.

This account I thought my duty to speed to you, and
rest,

Your most humble servant,
Otiver CRoMWELL.*

1[(Cf. Harrison’s letter to Bradshaw: ‘‘ The Lord hath now tempted out the
enemy from his trenches, fastnesses and advantages, and we doubt not but He
will very speedily discomfort them and cut this work short in righteousness.”
Cary'’s Memorials of the Civil War, ii., p. 302.

2[In Cromwell's hand. It was originally ‘‘ the Major-General."

* Newspapers (in Cromwe/liana, pp. 107-8). [Now printed from the original,
signed and corrected by Cromwell. Tanner MSS., liv. 3130. ]

er)

y eis

216 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Ang,

The Scots found no Presbyterian-Royalists, no Royalists Proper
to speak of, nor any Discontented Interest in England disposed
to join them in present circumstances. They marched, under
rigorous discipline, weary and uncheered, south through Lanca-
shire ; had to dispute their old friend the Bridge of Warrington
with Lambert and Harrison, who attended them with horse-troops
on the left ; Cromwell with the main Army steadily advancing
behind. They carried the Bridge at Warrington ; they summoned
various Towns, but none yielded ; proclaimed their King with all
force of lungs and heraldry, but none cried, God bless him.
Summoning Shrewsbury, with the usual negative response, they
quitted the London road ; bent southward towards Worcester, a
City of slight Garrison and loyal Mayor ; there to entrench them-
selves, and repose a little.

Poor Earl Derby, a distinguished Royalist Proper, had hastened
over from the Isle of Man, to kiss his Majesty's hand in passing.
He then raised some force in Lancashire, and was in hopes to
kindle that country again, and go to Worcester in triumph :—
but Lilburn, Colonel Robert, whom we have known here before,
fell upon him at Wigan; cut his force in pieces:1 the poor Earl
had to go to Worcester in a wounded and wrecked condition.
To Worcester,—and, alas, to the scaffold by and by, for that
business. The Scots at Worcester have a loyal Mayor, some very
few adventurous loyal Gentry in the neighbourhood ; and excitable
Wales, perhaps again excitable, lying in the rear: but for the
present, except in their own poor Fourteen-thousand right-hands ?
no outlook. And Cromwell is advancing steadily ; by York,® by
Nottingham, by Coventry and Stratford ; ‘raising all the County
Militias, who muster with singular alacrity ;—flowing towards
Worcester like the Ocean-tide; begirdling it with ‘upwards of
Thirty-thousand men.’ His Majesty’s royal summons to the

1 Lilburn’s two Letters, in Cary, ii. 338-45. [This was on August 25, three days
after Charles reached Worcester. |

2[Their numbers, when they entered England, were more probably about
twenty thousand; see Commonwealth and Protectorate, i. 431, note, although
there were not more than sixteen thousand, if so many, at Worcester fight—only
about half the numbers of Cromwell’s army. When the news of their starting for
England reached Cromwell's army, it was believed they were only about eleven
thousand. (See note on p. 214 above. Also Downing’s letter there quoted). See
Cromwell's Letter CLX XXIII. below. ]

3 See Appendix, No 21.

4 [** Cromwell’s march from Perth to Worcester and the combinations incident to
it have excited the warm admiration of the military critics of our own time. The
precision of his operations would be deemed remarkable even in the days of the

1651] LETTER CLXXX., LEITH 217

Corporation of London is burnt there by the hands of the common
hangman ; Speaker Lenthall and the Mayor have a copy of it
burnt by that functionary at the head of every regiment, at a
review of the Trainbands in Moorfields! London, England
generally, seems to have made up its mind.

At London on the 22d of August, a rigorous thing was done:
Reverend Christopher Love, eloquent zealous Minister of St.
Lawrence in the Jewry, was, after repeated respites and negotia-
tions, beheaded on Tower Hill. To the unspeakable emotion of
men. Nay the very Heavens seemed to testify a feeling of it,—
by a thunderclap, by two thunderclaps. When the Parliament
passed their vote on the 4th of July, That he should die according
to the sentence of the Court, there was then a terrible thunder-
clap, and darkening of daylight. And now when he actually dies,
‘directly after his beheading,’ arises thunderstorm that threatens
the dissolution of Nature! Nature, as we see, survived it.

The old Newspaper says, It was on the 22d August 1642, that
Charles late King erected his Standard at Nottingham: and now
on the same day, 22d August 1651, Charles Pretender erects his
at Worcester; and the Reverend Christopher dies. Men may
make their reflections.—There goes a story, due to Carrion Heath
or some such party, That Cromwell being earnestly solicited for
mercy to this poor Christopher, did, while yet in Scotland, send
a Letter to the Parliament, recommending it; which Letter,
however, was seized by some roving outriders of the Scottish
Worcester Army; who reading it, and remembering Uxbridge
Sermon, tore it, saying, “No, let the villian die!”—after the
manner of Heath. Which could be proved, if time and paper
were of no value, to be, like a hundred other very wooden myths
of the same Period, without truth. Guarda e passa. Glance at
it here for the last time, and never repeat it more !|—

Charles’s Standard, it would seem then, was erected at Worcester
on Friday the 22d, the day of poor Christopher’s death. On
which same Friday, about sunrise, ‘our Messenger’ (the Parlia-
ment’s) ‘left the Lord General at Mr. Pierpoint’s House,’—
William Pierpoint, of the Kingston Family, much his friend,—the

telegraph, and their success testifies to Cromwell’s extraordinary sureness in all that
concerned the movements of horse, as well as to the extraordinary military talent of
oe on which he knew that he could safely reckon.” Morley’s Cromwe//,
p. 328.

1Bates, ii. 122 ; Whitlocke, p, 492; see also Commons Journals, vii. 6 (23d
August 1651).

218 WAR WITH SCOTLAND 227 Aug.

House called Thoresby, ‘near Mansfield ;’ just starting for Not-
tingham, to arrive there that night. From Nottingham, by
Coventry, by Stratford and Evesham, to ‘the southeast side of
Worcester,’ rallying Country forces as we go, will take till Thursday
next. Here at Stratford on the Wednesday, eve of that, is a
Letter accidentally preserved.

LETTER CLXXXI

Dusitatinc Wharton, he also might help to rally forces; his
name, from ‘Upper Winchington in Bucks,’ or wherever he may
be, might do something. Give him, at any rate, a last chance.—
‘Tom Westrow, here accidentally named; once a well-known
man, familiar to the Lord General and to men of worth and
quality ; now, as near as may be, swallowed forever in the Night-
Empires ;—is still visible, strangely enough, through one small
chink, and recoverable into daylight as far as needful. A Kentish
man, a Parliament Soldier once, named in military Kent Com-
mittees ; sat in Parliament too, ‘recruiter’ for Hythe, though at
present in abeyance owing to scruples. Above all, he was the
Friend of poor George Wither, stepson of the Muses; to whom
in his undeserved distresses he lent beneficent princely sums; and
who, in poor splayfooted doggrel,—very poor, but very grateful,
pious, true, and on the whole noble,—preserves some adequate
memory of him for the curious.'_ By this chink Tom Westrow
and the ancient figure of his Life, is still recoverable if needed.

Westrow, we find by good evidence, did return to his place in
Parliament ;?—quitted it too, as Wither informs us, foreseeing the
great Catastrophe ; and retired to country quiet, up the River at
Teddington. Westrow and the others returned: Wharton con-
tinued to dubitate ;—and we shall here take leave of him. ‘ Poor
foolish Mall,’ young Mary Cromwell, one of ‘my two little
Wenches,’ has been on a visit at Winchington, I think ;—‘ thanks
to you and the dear Lady’ for her.

1 Westrow Revived: a Funeral Poem without Fiction, composed by George
Wither, Esq. ; that God may be glorified in His Saints, and that—&e. &c. (Ki ing’s
Pamphlets, t2mo (No. 390): London, 1653-4, dated with the pen ‘3d January’):
unadulterated doggerel; but really says something, and even something just ;—by
no means your insupportablest ‘ poetic’ reading, as times go!

2* Admitted to sit;’ means, readmitted after Pride’s Purge: Commons Journals
(vii. 27, 29), roth October 1651.

ee aT se

woe

1651] LETTER CLXXXI, STRATFORD 219
For my honoured Lord Wharton : These

Stratford-on-Avon, 27th August 1651.
My Lorp,
I know I write to my friend, therefore give

‘me’ leave to ‘say’ one bold word.

In my very heart: Your Lordship, Dick Norton, Tom Westrowe:
Robert Hammond! (though not intentionally) have helped one
another to stumble at the dispensations of God, and to reason
yourselves out of His service, &c.

Now ‘again’ you have an opportunity to associate with His
people, in His work ; and to manifest your willingness and desire
to serve the Lord against His and His people’s enemies. Would
you be blessed out of Zion, and see the good of His people, and
rejoice with His inheritance, I advise you all in the bowels of love,
Let it appear you offer yourselves willingly to His work. Wherein
to be accepted, is more honour from the Lord than the world
can give or hath. I am persuaded it needs you not, save as our
Lord and Master needed the ass’s colt, to show His humility,
meekness and condescension: but you need it, to declare your
submission to, and owning yourself the Lord’s and His people’s.?

If you can break through old disputes, I shall rejoice if you help
others to do ‘so’ also. Do not say, you are now satisfied because
it is the old Quarrel ; as if it had not been so, all this while.

I have no leisure, but a great deal of entire affection to you
and yours, and those named ‘here,—which I thus plainly ex-
press. Thanks to you and the dear Lady, for all loves,—and
for poor foolish Mall. I am in good earnest ‘thankful ;’ and so

also
Your Lordship’s

Faithful friend and most humble servant,
Ottver CRoMWELL.*
1(Compare the letter to Hammond in the Supplement, No. 65.]

2Grammar, in this last clause, lost in the haste: ‘ Ass’s Colt’ is ‘ Beast’ zz
orig.

* Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1814), Ixxxiv. p. 419. [Fitzwilliam Museum.
Holograph.]—In Appendix, No. 26, there is now (1857) another Letter to his
Lordship.

220 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [3 Sept.

Charles’s Standard has been floating over Worcester some six
days; and now on Thursday 28th of August, comes in sight
Cromwell’s also; from the Evesham side; with upwards of
Thirty-thousand men now near him; and some say, upwards of
Kighty-thousand rising in the distance to join him if need were.

LETTERS CLXXXII, CLXXXIII

BATTLE OF WORCESTER

Tue Battle of Worcester was fought on the evening of Wednes-
day 3d September 1651; anniversary of that at Dunbar last year.
It could well have but one issue; defeat for the Scots and their
Cause ;—either swift and complete; or else incomplete, ending
in slow sieges, partial revolts, and much new misery and blood.
The swift issue was the one appointed ; and complete enough ;
severing the neck of the Controversy now at last, as with one
effectual stroke, no need to strike a second time.

The Battle was fought on both sides of the Severn; part of
Cromwell’s forces having crossed to the Western bank, by Upton
Bridge, some miles below Worcester, the night before. About a
week ago, Massey understood himself to have ruined this Bridge
at Upton ; but Lambert’s men ‘ straddled across by the parapet, —
a dangerous kind of saddle for such riding, I think !—and hastily
repaired it ; hastily got hold of Upton Church, and maintained
themselves there ; driving Massey back with a bad wound in the
hand. This was on Thursday night last, the very night of the
Lord General’s arrival in those parts; and they have held this
post ever since. Fleetwood crosses here with a good part of
Cromwell’s Army, on the evening of Tuesday September 2d;
shall, on the morrow, attack the Scotch posts on the Southwest,
about the Suburb of St. John’s, across the River; while Crom-
well, in person, on this side, plies them from the Southeast. St.
John’s Suburb lies at some distance from Worcester; west, or
southwest as we say, on the Herefordshire Road; and connects
itself with the City by Severn Bridge. Southeast of the City,
again, near the then and present London Road, is ‘ Fort Royal,’
an entrenchment of the Scots: on this side Cromwell is to at-
tempt the Enemy, and second Fleetwood, as occasion may serve.

1651.] BATTLE OF WORCESTER 221

Worcester City itself is on Cromwell’s side of the River; stands
high, surmounted by its high Cathedral; close on the left or
eastern margin of the Severn; surrounded by fruitful fields, and
hedges unfit for cavalry-fighting. This is the posture of affairs
on the eve of Wednesday 3d September 1651.

But now, for Wednesday itself, we are to remark that between
Fleetwood at Upton, and the Enemy’s outposts at St. John’s on
the west side of Severn, there runs still a River Teme; a western
tributary of the Severn, into which it falls about a mile below the
City. This River Teme Fleetwood hopes to cross, if not by the
Bridge at Powick which the Enemy possesses, then by a Bridge
of Boats which he is himself to prepare lower down, close by the
mouth of Teme. At this point also, or ‘ within pistol-shot of it,’
there is to be a Bridge of Boats laid across the Severn itself, that
so both ends of the Army may communicate. Boats, boatmen,
carpenters, aquatic and terrestrial artificers and implements, in
great abundance, contributed by the neighbouring Towns, lie
ready on the River, about Upton, for this service. Does the
reader now understand the ground a little?

Fleetwood, at Upton, was astir with the dawn September 3d.
But it was towards ‘three in the afternoon’ before the boatmen
were got up; must have been towards five before those Bridges
were got built, and Fleetwood set fairly across the Teme to begin
business. The King of Scots and his Council of War, ‘on the top
of the Cathedral,’ have been anxiously viewing him all afternoon ;
have seen him build his Bridges of Boats ; see him now in great
force got across Teme River, attacking the Scotch on the South,
fighting them from hedge to hedge towards the Suburb of St.
John’s. In great force: for new regiments, horse and foot, now
stream across the Severn Bridge of Boats to assist Fleetwood :
nay, if the Scots knew it, my Lord General himself is come
across, ‘did lead the van in person, and was the first that set foot
‘on the Enemy’s ground. —The Scots, obstinately struggling, are
gradually beaten there; driven from hedge to hedge. But the
King of Scots and his War-Council decide that most part of
Cromwell’s Army must now be over in that quarter, on the West
side of the River, engaged among the hedges ;—decide that they,
for their part, will storm out, and offer him battle on their own
East side, now while he is weak there. The Council of War
comes down from the top of the Cathedral; their trumpets
sound : Cromwell also is soon back, across the Severn Bridge of
Boats again ; and the deadliest tug of war begins.

Ae

222 WAR WITH SCOTLAND {3 Sept.

Fort Royal is still known at Worcester, and Sudbury Gate at
the southeast end of the City is known, and those other localities
here specified ; after much study of which and of the old dead
Pamphlets, this Battle will at last become conceivable. Besides
Cromwell’s Two Letters, there are plentiful details, questionable
and unquestionable, in Bates and elsewhere, as indicated below.!
The fighting of the Scots was fierce and desperate. ‘My Lord
‘General did exceedingly hazard himself, riding up and down in
‘the midst of the fire; riding, himself in person, to the Enemy’s
‘foot to offer them quarter, whereto they returned no answer but
‘shot.’ The small Scotch Army, begirdled with overpowering
force, and cut off from help or reasonable hope, storms forth in
fiery pulses, horse and foot; charges now on this side of the
River, now on that ;—can on no side prevail. Cromwell recoils a
little ; but only to rally, and return irresistible. The small Scotch
Army is, on every side, driven in again. Its fiery pulsings are
but the struggles of death: agonies as of a lion coiled in the
folds of a boa!

‘ As stiff a contest, for four or five hours, as ever I have seen.’
But it avails not. Through Sudbury Gate, on Cromwell’s side,
through St. John’s Suburb, and over Severn Bridge on Fleet-
wood’s, the Scots are driven-in again to Worcester Streets; des-
perately struggling and recoiling, are driven through Worcester
Streets, to the North end of the City,—and terminate there. A
distracted mass of ruin: the foot all killed or taken; the horse
all scattered on flight, and their place of refuge very far! His
sacred Majesty escaped, by royal oaks and other miraculous ap-
pliances well known to mankind: but Fourteen-thousand other
men, sacred too after a sort though not majesties, did not escape.
One could weep at such a death for brave men in such a Cause !
But let us now read Cromwell’s Letters.

1Bates, Part ii, 124-7. King’s Pamphlets; small 4to, no. 507, § 12 [E. 641]
(given mostly in Cromwelliana, pp. 114, 15); large 4to, no. 54, §$ 15,18. [E.
787.] Letter from Stapylton the Chaplain, in Cromwed/iana, p. 112.

1651] LETTER CLXXXII, WORCESTER 223

LETTER CLXXXII

For the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England: These haste,
haste, post haste for the special service of the State

Near Worcester, 3d September 1651,
(zo at night).
Sir,

Being so weary, and scarce able to write, yet
I thought it my duty to let you know thus much; that upon
this day, being the 3d of September (remarkable for a mercy
vouchsafed to your forces on this day twelvemonth in Scotland),
we built a bridge of boats over Severn, between it and Tame,
about half a mile from Worcester; and another over Tame,
within pistol-shot of our other Bridge. Lieutenant-General
Fleetwood and Major-General Deane marched from Upton on
the southwest side of Severn up to Poyick, a town which was a
pass the enemy kept. We passed over some horse and foot,
and were in conjunction with the Lieutenant-General’s forces.
We beat the enemy from hedge to hedge till we beat him into
Worcester.

The enemy then drew all his forces on the other side the
town, all but what he lost ; and made a very considerable fight
with us, for three hours space: but in the end we beat him
totally, and pursued him up to his Royal Fort, which we took,
—and indeed have beaten his whole army. When we took the
fort, we turned his own guns upon him. The enemy hath had
great loss, and certainly is scattered, and run several ways. We
are in pursuit of him, and have laid forces in several places, that
we hope will gather him up.

Indeed this hath been a very glorious mercy, and as stiff a
contest, for four or five hours, as ever I have seen. Both your
old forces and those new-raised have behaved themselves with
very great courage; and He that made them come out, made

224 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

them willing to fight for you. The Lord God Almighty frame
our hearts to real thankfulness for this, which is alone His doing.
I hope I shall within a day or two give you a more perfect
account.
In the mean time I hope you will pardon, Sir,
Your most humble servant,
Outver CroMWELL.* |

On Saturday the 6th comes a farther Letter from my Lord
General ; ‘the effect whereof speaketh thus :’

LETTER CLXXXIII

For the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England : These

Worcester, 4th September 1651.

Sir,

I am not able yet to give you an exact account
of the great things the Lord hath wrought for this Common-
wealth and for His people, and yet I am unwilling to be silent,
but, according to my duty, shall represent it to you as it comes
to hand.

This battle was fought witb various successes for some hours,
but still hopeful on your part; and in the end became an absol-
ute victory, and so full an one as proved a total defeat and ruin
of the enemy’s army; a possession of the town (our men
entering at the enemy’s heels, and fighting with them in the
streets with very great courage); and of all their baggage and
artillery. What the slain are, I can give you no account, |
because we have not taken an exact view, but they are very
many ; and must needs be so, because the dispute was long and
very near at hand, and often at push of pike, and from one defence

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 113); Tanner MSS. (Cary, ii. 355)
[Tanner, lv. 31. Signed only by Cromwell. Signed by him on the outside ale}

a ie el! ale rs ti el de, i ele ell
4 nig . -

tJ

1651.) LETTER CLXXXIIIL, WORCESTER 225

to another. There are about six or seven thousand prisoners
taken here, and many officers and noblemen of very great
quality: Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Rothes, and divers other
noblemen,—I hear, the Earl of Loutherdale; many officers of
great quality ; and some that will be fit subjects of your justice.

We have sent very considerable parties after the flying enemy ;
I hear they have taken considerable numbers of prisoners, and
are very close in the pursuit. Indeed, I hear the country riseth
upon them everywhere, and I believe the forces that lay, through
Providence, at Bewdley, and in Shropshire and Staffordshire, and
those with Colonel Lilborne, were in a condition, as if this had
been foreseen, to intercept what should return.

A more particular account than this will be prepared for you
as we are able. I hear they had not many more than a thousand
horse in their body that fled, and I believe you have near four-
thousand forces following, and interposing between them and
home; what fish they will catch, time will declare.1 Their army
was about sixteen-thousand strong, and fought ours on the
Worcester side of Severn almost with their whole, whilst we
had engaged about half our army on the other side but with
parties of theirs. Indeed it was a stiff business; yet I do not
think we lost two-hundred men. Your new-raised forces did
perform singular good service; for which they deserve a very
high estimation and acknowledgment, as also for their willingness
thereunto, forasmuch as the same hath added so much to the
reputation of your affairs.?_ They are all despatched home again ;
which I hope will be much for the ease and satisfaction of the
country ; which is a great fruit of the success.

The dimensions of this mercy are above my thoughts. It is,

1Phrase omitted in the Newspaper. /x orig., an official hand has written on
the margin ‘ omitt this.’ [The allusion is, no doubt, to the young King. ]

2[‘«In this and in nothing else lay the significance of Worcester. The military
critic finds little to say about it ; but it stands out as the first combat since the day
on which Waller’s levies poured home after the fight at Copredy Bridge, in which
other than professional soldiers took part. It is probable that nearly if not quite
a third of the victorious army consisted of local militia regiments.” Commonwealth
and Protectorate, i. 445.]

VoL. 1.—15

tere

226 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [4 Sept.

| } for aught I know, a crowning mercy. Surely, if it be not, such

a one we shall have, if this provoke those that are concerned in
it to thankfulness, and the Parliament to do the will of Him
who hath done His will for it, and for the nation; whose good
pleasure it is to establish the nation and the change of the
government, by making the people so willing to the defence
thereof, and so signally to bless the endeavours of your servants
in this late great work. I am bold humbly to beg, that all
thoughts may tend to the promoting of His honour who hath
wrought so great salvation, and that the fatness of these continued
mercies may not occasion pride and wantonness, as formerly the
like hath done to a chosen nation;! but that the fear of the
Lord, even for His mercies, may keep an authority and a people
so prospered, and blessed, and witnessed unto, humble and faith-
ful; and that justice and righteousness, mercy and truth may
flow from you, as a thankful return to our gracious God. This
shall be the prayer of,
Sir,
Your most humble and obedient servant,
Ouiver CRoMWELL.

Your officers behaved themselves with much honour in this
service; and the person? who is the bearer hereof was equal,
in the performance of his duty, to most that served you that
day.*

‘On Lord’s day next, by order of Parliament,’ these Letters
are read from all London Pulpits, amid the general thanksgiving
of men. At Worcester, the while, thousands of Prisoners are
getting ranked, ‘ penned up in the Cathedral,’ with sad outlooks :
carcasses of horses, corpses of men, frightful to sense and mind,

1*But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked :—(and thou art waxen fat, thou art
‘ grown thick, thou art covered with fatness :) then he forsook God which made
‘him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation’ (Deuteronomy, xxxii. 15).

2Major [John] Cobbet, ‘who makes a relation,’ and gets 100/. (Commons
Journals, Vii. 12, 13).

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp. 113, 114); Tanner MSS. (in Cary, ii.
359-62). (Tanner, lv. 29. Signed only by Cromwell, and sealed. ]

om

1651.] AFTER WORCESTER 227

encumber the streets of Worcester; ‘we are plucking Lords,
Knights and Gentlemen from their lurking-holes,’ into the un-
welcome light.'_ Lords very numerous; a Peerage sore slashed.
The Duke of Hamilton has got his thigh broken; dies on the
fourth day. The Earl of Derby, also wounded, is caught, and
tried for Treason against the State ; lays down his head at Bolton,
where he had once carried it too high.2 Lauderdale and others
are put in the Tower; have to lie there, in heavy dormancy, for
long years. The Earls of Cleveland and Lauderdale came to
Town together, about a fortnight hence. ‘As they passed along
‘Cornhill in their coaches with a guard of horse, the Earl of
‘Lauderdale’s coach made a stand near the Conduit: where a
‘Carman gave his Lordship a visit, saying, “Oh, my Lord, you are
‘welcome to London! I protest, off goes your head,j as round
‘as a hoop!” But his Lordship passed off the fatal compliment
‘only with a laughter, and so fared along to the Tower.’ His
Lordship’s big red head has yet other work to do in this world.
Having, at the Ever-blessed Restoration, managed, not without
difficulty, ‘to get a new suit of clothes,’ + he knelt before his now
triumphant Sacred Majesty on that glorious Thirtieth of May ;
learned from his Majesty, that “Presbytery was no religion for
a gentleman ;” gave it up, not without pangs ; and resolutely
set himself to introduce the exploded Tulchan Apparatus into
Scotland again, by thumbikins, by bootikins, by any and every
method, since it was the will of his Sacred Majesty ;—failed in
the Tulchan Apparatus, as is well known; earned for himself new
plentiful clothes-suits, Dukedoms and promotions, from the Sacred
Majesty ; and from the Scotch People deep-toned universal sound
of curses, not yet become inaudible ; and shall, in this place, and
we hope elsewhere, concern us no more.

On Friday the 12th of September the Lord General arrived in
Town. Four dignified Members, of whom Bulstrode was one,
specially missioned by vote of Parliament,® had met him the day
before with congratulations, on the other side Aylesbury ; whom
he received ‘ with all kindness and respect ; and after salutations

1 Original Commission, signed ‘O. Cromwell,’ and dated 8th September 1651,
appointing ‘ Collonel John James’ Governor of Worcester, is now among the MSS,
of Trin. Coll. Cambridge (copy penes me).

2[Salvetti wrote that Cromwell was doing all that he could to save Lord Derby.
See Commonwealth and Protectorate, i, 463, note.]

5 King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 507, § 18 [E. 641, 18].

4 Roger Coke's Detection of the Court and State of England.

5 Commons Journals, vii. 13 (9th Sept. 1651).

228 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [Sept.

‘and ceremonies passed, he rode with them across the fields ;—
‘where Mr. Winwood (the Member for Windsor’s) hawks met
‘them ;’ and the Lord General, with the other Gentlemen, ‘ went
‘a little out of the way a-hawking.’ They came that night to
Aylesbury ; where they had much discourse ; especially my Lord
Chief Justice St. John, the dark Shipmoney Lawyer, now Chief
Justice, as they supped together. To me Bulstrode, and to each
of the others, he gave a horse and two Scotch prisoners: the
horse I kept for carrying me; the two Scots, unlucky gentlemen
of that country, I handsomely sent home again without any
ransom whatever.! And so on Friday we arrive in Town, in very
great solemnity and triumph: Speaker and Parliament, Lord
President and Council of State, Sheriffs, Mayors, and an innumer-
able multitude, of quality and not of quality, eagerly attending
us ; once more splitting the welkin with their human shoutings,
and volleys of great shot and small: in the midst of which my

Lord General ‘carried himself with great affability ; and in all

‘his discourses about the business of Worcester, would seldom
‘mention anything of himself,’ mentioned others only ; ‘and gave,
‘as was due, all the glory of the action unto God.’ Hugh Peters,
however, being of loose-spoken, somewhat sibylline turn of mind,
discerns a certain inward exultation and irrepressible irradiation
in my Lord General, and whispers to himself, “This man will be
King of England yet.” Which, unless Kings are entirely super-
fluous in England, I should think very possible, O Peters! To
wooden Ludlow Mr. Peters confessed so much, long afterwards ;
and the wooden head drew its inferences therefrom.*

This, then, is the last of my Lord General’s Battles and Victo-
ries, technically so called. Of course his Life, to the very end of
it, continues, as from the beginning it had always been, a battle,

1 Whitlocke, p. 484; see also 2d edit. p. 509. [Ludlow declared that ‘‘ the
General after this action, which he called the crowning victory, took upon him a
more stately behaviour and chose new friends,” and that, ‘‘instead of acknow-
ledging the services of those who came from all parts to assist against the common
enemy, though he knew they had deserved as much honour as himself and the
standing army, he frowned upon. them, and the very next day after the fight
dismissed and sent them home, well knowing that a useful and experienced militia
was more likely to obstruct than to second him in his ambitious designs” (vol. i.
p. 282, ed. Firth). This does not at all agree with what Cromwell wrote in the letter
above. As to the sending of the militia home again, the militia would be only too
anxious to go. They had been gathered together for a special purpose, and their
work being done it would be both for their ‘‘ ease and satisfaction” to be allowed
to disperse. Hugh Peter's story is told twice by Ludlow (vol. i. p. 344, and vol.
ii. p. 9, ed. Firth). ]

2 Whitlocke, p. 485. 3 Ludlow.

1651.) AFTER WORCESTER 229

and a dangerous and strenuous one, with due modicum of victory
assigned now and then; but it will be with other than the steel
weapons henceforth. He here sheaths his war-sword ; with that,
it is not his Order from the Great Captain that he fight any more.1

The distracted Scheme of the Scotch Governors to accomplish
their Covenant by this Charles-Stuart method has here ended.
By and by they shall have their Charles Stuart back, as a general
Nell-Gwynn Defender of the Faith to us all ;—and shall see how
they will like him! But as Covenanted King he is off upon his
travels, and will never return more. Worcester Battle has cut
the heart of that affair in two: and Monk, an assiduous Lieutenant
to the Lord General in his Scotch affairs, is busy suppressing the
details.

On Monday the Ist of September, two days before the Battle
of Worcester, Lieutenant-General Monk had stormed Dundee, the
last stronghold of Scotland ; where much wealth, as in a place of
safety, had been laid up. Governor Lumsden would not yield
on summons: Lieutenant-General Monk stormed him ; the Town
took fire in the business ; there was once more a grim scene, of
flame and blood, and rage and despair, transacted in this Earth :
and taciturn General Monk, his choler all up, was become surly
as the Russian bear; nothing but negatory growls to be got out
of him: nay, to one clerical dignitary of the place he not only
gave his “No!” but audibly threatened a slap with the fist to
back it,—‘ ordered him, Not to speak one word, or he would scobe
‘his mouth for him !’?

1[ “This was the climax of his glory. Nine years had gone since conscience,
duty, his country, the cause of civil freedom, the cause of sacred truth and of the
divine purpose had all, as he believed, summoned him to arms. With miraculous
constancy victory had crowned his standards. Unlike Condé or Turenne or
almost any general that has ever lived, he had in all these years of incessant war-
fare never suffered a defeat. The rustic captain of horse was lord general of the
army that he had brought to be the best disciplined force in Europe. It was now
to be seen whether the same genius and the same fortune would mark his handling
of civil affairs and the ship of state plunging among the breakers. It was certain
that he would be as active and indefatigable in peace as he had proved himself in
war ; that energy would never fail, even if depth of counsel often failed ; that
strenuous watchfulness would never relax even though calculations went again and
again amiss ; that it would still be true of him to the end that ‘he wasa strong man,
and in the deep perils of war, in the high places of the field, hope shone in him like

a pillar of fire when it had gone out in all others.’ . . . Whether he had the other
a of a aT ruler in a desperate pass, only time could show.” Morley’s Crom-
well, p. 332.

? Balfour, iv. 316.

=." ,rt—“ eCU!:CUhUCh

230 WAR WITH SCOTLAND [Sept.

Ten days before, some Shadow of a new Committee of Estates
attempting to sit at Alyth on the border of Angus, with intent to
concert some measures for the relief of this same Dundee, had
been, by a swift Colonel of Monk’s, laid hold of; and the
members were now all shipped to the Tower. It was a snuffing-
out of the Government-light in Scotland. Except some triumph
come from Worcester to rekindle it :—and, alas, no triumph came
from Worcester, as we see; nothing but ruin and defeat from
Worcester! The Government-light of Scotland remains snuffed
out.—Active Colonel Alured, a swift devout man, somewhat
given to Anabaptist notions, of whom we shall hear again, was
he that did this feat at Alyth; a kind of feather in his cap.
Among the Captured in that poor Committee or Shadow of
Committee was poor old General Leven, time-honoured Lesley,
who went to the Tower with the others; his last appearance in
Public History. He got out again, on intercession from Queen
Christina of Sweden; retired to his native fields of Fife; and
slept soon and still sleeps in Balgony Kirk under his stone of
honour,—the excellent ‘ crooked little Feldtmarshal’ that he was.
Excellent, though unfortunate. He bearded the grim Wallenstein
at Stralsund once, and rolled him back from the bulwarks there,
after long tough wrestle ;—and in fact did a thing or two in his
time. Farewell to him.!

But with the light of Government snuffed out in Scotland,
and no rekindling of it from the Worcester side, resistance in
Scotland has ended. Lambert, next summer, marched through
the Highlands, pacificating them.? There rose afterwards
rebellion in the Highlands, rebellion of Glencairn, of Middleton,
with much mosstroopery and horsestealing ; but Monk, who had
now again the command there, by energy and vigilance, by
patience, punctuality, and slow methodic strength, put it down,
and kept it down. A taciturn man; speaks little ; thinks more
or less ;—does whatever is doable here and elsewhere.

Scotland therefore, like Ireland, has fallen to Cromwell to be
administered. He had to do it under great difficulties; the
Governing Classes, especially the Clergy or Teaching Class,
continuing for most part obstinately indisposed to him, so baleful

1 Scotch Peerages ; Férster’s Wallenstein als Feldherr (Potsdam, 1834), p. 124.
Granger (Biographic History of England) has some nonsense about Leven,—in his
usual neat style. [See Life of Alexander Leslie, Earl of Leven, by C. S. Terry. ]

2 Whitlocke, p. 514.

1651.] AFTER WORCESTER 231

to their formulas had he been. With Monk for an assiduous
Lieutenant in secular matters, he kept the country in peace ;—
it appears on all sides, he did otherwise what was possible for
him. He sent new Judges to Scotland; ‘a pack of kinless
loons,’ who minded no claim but that of fair play. He favoured,
as was natural, the Remonstrant Ker-and-Strahan Party in the
Church ;—favoured, above all things, the Christian-Gospel Party,
who had some good message in them for the soul of man.
Within wide limits he tolerated the Lesolutioner Party; and
beyond these limits would not tolerate them ;—would not suffer
their General Assembly to sit ; marched the Assembly out bodily
to Bruntisfield Links, and sent it home again, when it tried such
a thing.' He united Scotland to England by act of Parliament ;
tried in all ways to unite it by still deeper methods. He kept
peace and order in the country ; was a little heavy with taxes:
—on the whole, did what he could; and proved, as there is good
evidence, a highly beneficial though unwelcome phenomenon
there.

Alas, may we not say, In circuitous ways he proved the Doer
of what this poor Scotch Nation really wished and willed, could
it have known so much at sight of him! The true Governor of
this poor Scotch Nation; accomplishing their Covenant mithout
the Charles Stuart, since mith the Charles Stuart it was a flat
impossibility. But they knew him not; and with their stiff-
necked ways obstructed him as they could. How seldom can a
Nation, can even an individual man, understand what at heart
his own real will is: such masses of superficial bewilderment, of
respectable hearsay, of fantasy and pedantry, and old and new
cobwebbery, overlie our poor will; much hiding i from us, for
most part! So that if we can once get eye on it, and walk
resolutely towards fulfilment of it, the battle is as good as
gained !|—

For example, who, of all Scotch or other men, is he that verily
understands the ‘real ends of the Covenant,’ and discriminates
them well from the superficial forms thereof; and with pious
valour does them,—and continually struggles to see them done?
I should say, this Cromwell, whom we call Sectary and Blas-
phemer! The Scotch Clergy, persisting in their own most
hidebound formula of a Covenanted Charles Stuart, bear clear

1 Whitlocke, 2sth July 1653; Life of Robert Blair (Edinburgh, 1754), pp. 118,
19; Blencowe’s Szdney Papers, pp. 153-5.

= 2

2932 WAR WITH SCOTLAND

testimony, that at no time did Christ’s Gospel so flourish in —
Scotland as now under Cromwell the Usurper. ‘These bitter
‘waters,’ say they, ‘were sweetened by the Lord’s remarkably
‘blessing the labours of His faithful servants. A great door and
‘an effectual was opened to many.’! Not otherwise in matters
civil. ‘Scotland, thus testifies a competent eye-witness, ‘ was
‘kept in great order. Some Castles in the Highlands had
‘Garrisons put into them, which were so careful of their dis-
‘cipline, and so exact to their rules,’ the wild Highlanders
were wonderfully tamed thereby. Cromwell built three Citadels,
Leith, Ayr and Inverness, besides many little Forts, over
Scotland. Seven or Eight thousand men, well paid, and paying
well; of the strictest habits, military, spiritual and moral: these
it was everywhere a kind of Practical Sermon to take note of!
‘There was good justice done; and vice was suppressed and
‘punished. So that we always reckon those Eight years of
‘Usurpation a time of great peace and prosperity,’ °—though
we needed to be twice beaten, and to have our foolish Governors
flung into the Tower, before we would accept the same. We, -
and mankind generally, are an extremely wise set of creatures.

1 Life of Robert Blair, p. 120; Livingston's Life of Himself (Glasgow, 1754);

PP. 54, 5, &c. &e. b , } ones :
2 Bishop Burnet's History of his own Time, book i. [i., 109, ed. Airy].

[Sept

PART VII
THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT

1651-1653

LETTERS CLXXXIV.—CLXXX VIII
THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT

BrtweEen Worcester Battle on the 3d of September 1651, and the
Dismissal of the Long Parliament on the 20th of April 1653, are
Nineteen very important months in the History of Oliver, which,
in all our Books and Historical rubbish-records, lie as nearly as
possible dark and vacant for us. Poor Dryasdust has emitted,
and still emits, volumes of confused noise on the subject; but
in the way of information or illumination, of light in regard to
any fact, physiognomic feature, event or fraction of an event, as
good as nothing whatever. Indeed, onwards from this point
where Oliver’s own Letters begin to fail us, the whole History
of Oliver, and of England under him, becomes very dim ;—swim-
ming most indistinct in the huge Tomes of Thurloe and the like,
as in shoreless lakes of ditchwater and bilgewater; a stagnancy,
a torpor, and confused horror to the human soul! No historical
genius, not even a Rushworth’s, now presides over the matter:
nothing but bilgewater Correspondences ; vague jottings of a dull
fat Bulstrode ; vague printed babblements of this and the other
Carrion Heath or Flunkey Pamphleteer of the Blessed-Restoration
Period, writing from ignorant rumour and for ignorant rumour,
from the winds and to the winds. After long reading in very
many Books, of very unspeakable quality, earning for yourself only
incredibility, inconceivability, and darkness visible, you begin to
(233)

—e eel
4

SS = 4

234 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT (1651.

perceive that in the Speeches of Oliver himself once well read,
such as they are, some shadowy outlines, authentic prefigurements
of what the real History of the Time may have been, do first, in the
huge inane night, begin to loom forth for you,—credible, conceiv-
able in some measure, there for the first time. My reader’s patience
is henceforth to be still more severely tried: there is unluckily no
help for it, as matters stand.

Great lakes of watery Correspondence relating to the History of
this Period, as we intimate, survive in print; and new are occa-
sionally issued upon mankind :! but the essence of them has never
yet in the smallest been elaborated by any man ;—will require a
succession and assiduous series of many men to elaborate it. To
pluck up the great History of Oliver from it, like drowned Honour
by the locks; and show it to much-wondering and, in the end,
right-thankful England! The richest and noblest thing England
hitherto has. The basis England will have to start from again, if
England is ever to struggle Godward again, instead of struggling
Devilward, and Mammonward merely. Serene element of Cant
has been tried now for two Centuries ; and fails. Serene element,
general completed life-atmosphere, of Cant religious, Cant moral,
Cant political, Cant universal, where England vainly hoped to live
in a serene soft-spoken manner,—England now finds herself on the
point of choking there ; large masses of her People no longer able
to get even potatoes in that serene element. England will have to
come out of that ; England, too terribly awakened at last, is every-
where preparing to come out of that. England, her Amazon-eyes
once more flashing strange Heaven’s-light, like Phoebus Apollo’s
fatal to the Pythian mud-serpents, will lift her hand, I think, and
her heart, and swear “ By the Eternal, I will not die in that! I
had once men who knew better than that!”

But with regard to the History of Oliver, as we were saying, for
those Nineteen months there is almost no light to be communi-
cated at present. Of Oliver’s own uttering, I have found only Five
Letters, short, insignificant, connected with no phasis of Public
Transactions :? there are Two Dialogues recorded by Whitlocke, of
dubious authenticity ; certain small splinters of Occurrences not
pointing very decisively anywhither, sprinkling like dust of stars

1 Thurloe’s State-Papers, Milton’s, Clarendon's, Ormond’s, Sidney’s, &c. &c. are
old and very watery. [It is, of course, quite unnecessary to controvert statements
such as this.] New and still waterier are Vaughan’s Protectorate, and others
not even worth naming here.

2{Several other short letters have turned up for this period (see Supplement, Nos.
69-76), but none of any importance. }

a

1651.] THE RUMP 235

the dark vacancy : these, and Dryasdust’s vociferous commentaries
new and old ;—and of discovered or discoverable, nothing more.
Oliver's own Speech, which the reader is by and by to hear, casts
backwards some straggling gleams; well accordant, as is usual,
with whatever else we know; and worthy to be well believed and
meditated, by Historical readers, among others. Out of these poor
elements the candid imagination must endeavour to shape some
not inconceivable scheme and genesis of this very indubitable Fact,
the Dismissal of the Long Parliament, as best it may. Perhaps if
Dryasdust were once well gagged, and his vociferous commentaries
all well forgotten, such a feat might not be very impossible for
mankind !—

Concerning this Residue, Fag-end, or ‘Rump’ as it had now
got nicknamed, of the Long Parliament, into whose hands the
Government of England had been put, we have hitherto, ever
since the King’s Death-Warrant, said almost nothing: and in
fact there was not much to be said. ‘Statesmen of the Common-
wealth’ so-called: there wanted not among them men of real
mark ; brave men, of much talent, of true resolution, and noble-
ness of aim: but though their title was chief in this Common-
wealth, all men may see their real function in it has been
subaltern all along. Not in St. Stephen’s and its votings and
debatings, but in the battle-field, in Oliver Cromwell's fightings,
has the destiny of this Commonwealth decided itself. One
unsuccessful Battle, at Preston or at any time since, had probably
wrecked it ;—one stray bullet hitting the life of a certain man
had soon ended this Commonwealth. Parliament, Council of
State, they sat like diligent Committees of Ways and Means, in
a very wise and provident manner: but the soul of the Common-
wealth was at Dunbar, at Worcester, at Tredah: Destiny, there
questioned, “Life or Death for this Commonwealth?” has
answered, “Life yet for a time!”—That is a fact which the
candid imagination will have to keep steadily in view.

And now if we practically ask ourselves, What is to become of
this small junto of men, somewhat above a Hundred in all,
hardly above Half-a-hundred the active part of them, who
now sit in the chair of authority ? the shaping-out of any answer
will give rise to considerations. These men have been raised
thither by miraculous interpositions of Providence ; they may be

1 One notices division-numbers as high as 121, and occasionally lower than even
4°. Godwin (iii. rer), ‘by careful scrutiny of the Journals,’ has found that the
utmost number of all that had still the right to come ‘could not be less than 150.’

_— . pS ee ee

236 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT (1651.

said to sit there only by a continuance of the like. They cannot
sit there forever. They are not Kings by birth, these men ; nor
in any of them have I discovered qualities as of a very indisput-
able King by attainment. Of dull Bulstrode, with his lumbering
law-pedantries, and stagnant official self-satisfactions, I do not
speak ; nor of dusky tough St. John, whose abstruse fanaticisms,
crabbed logics, and dark ambitions, issue all, as was very natural,
in ‘decided avarice’ at last :—not of these. Harry Marten is a
tight little fellow, though of somewhat loose life : his witty words
pierce yet, as light-arrows, through the thick oblivious torpor of
the generations ; testifying to us very clearly, Here was a right
hard-headed, stout-hearted little man, full of sharp fire and
cheerful light ; sworn foe of Cant in all its figures, an indomit-
able little Roman Pagan if no better; but Harry is not quite
one’s King either; it would have been difficult to be altogether
loyal to Harry! Doubtful too, I think, whether without great
effort you could have worshipped even the Younger Vane. A
man of endless virtues, says Dryasdust, who is much taken with
him, and of endless intellect ;—but you must not very specially
ask, How or Where? Vane was the Friend of Milton: that is
almost the only answer that can now be given. A man, one
rather finds, of light fibre, this Sir Harry Vane. Grant all
manner of purity and elevation; subtle high discourse; much
intellectual and practical dexterity: there is an amiable, de-
voutly zealous, very pretty man ;—but not a royal man; alas, no!
On the whole rather a thin man. Whom it is even important
to keep strictly subaltern. Whose tendency towards the
Abstract, or Temporary-Theoretic, is irresistible; whose hold of
the Concrete, in which lies always the Perennial, is by no means
that of a giant, or born Practical King ;—whose ‘astonishing
subtlety of intellect’ conducts him not to new clearness, but to
ever new abstruseness, wheel within wheel, depth under depth ;
marvellous temporary empire of the air,—wholly vanished now,
and without meaning to any mortal.! My erudite friend, the
astonishing intellect that occupies itself in splitting hairs, and
not in twisting some kind of cordage and effectual draught-tackle
to take the road with, is not to me the most astonishing of
intellects! And if, as is probable, it get into narrow fanaticisms ;
become irrecognisant of the Perennial because not dressed in the
fashionable Temporary; become self-secluded, atrabiliar, and

1[This by no means does justice to Vane's vigorous and successful administration
of the affairs of the Navy. ]

1651.} THE RUMP 237

perhaps shrill-voiced and spasmodic,—what can you do but get
away from it, with a prayer, “The Lord deliver me from thee !”’
I cannot do with thee. I want twisted cordage, steady pulling,
and a peaceable bass tone of voice: not split hairs, hysterical
spasmodics, and treble! Thou amiable, subtle, elevated indi-
vidual, the Lord deliver me from thee !

These men cannot continue Kings forever; nor in fact did
they in the least design such a thing; only they find a terrible
difficulty in getting abdicated. Difficulty very conceivable to us.
Some weeks after Pride’s Purge, which may be called the
constituting of this remnant of members into a Parliament and
Authority, there had been presented to it, by Fairfax and the
Army, what we should now call a Bentham-Sieyes Constitution,
what was then called an ‘Agreement of the People,’ ! which
might well be imperative on honourable members sitting there ;
whereby it was stipulated for one thing, That this present
Parliament should dissolve itself, and give place to another
‘equal Representative of the People,—in some three months
hence; on the 30th of April, namely. The last day of April
1649: this Parliament was then to have its work finished, and
go its ways, giving place to another. Such was our hope.

They did accordingly pass a vote to that effect ; fully intending
to fulfil the same: but, alas, it was found impossible. How sum-
mon a new Parliament, while the Commonwealth is still fighting
for its existence? All we can do is to resolve ourselves into
Grand Committee, and consider about it. After much considera-
tion, all we can decide is, That we shall go weekly into Grand
Committee, and consider farther. Duly every Wednesday we
consider, for the space of eleven months and odd; find, more and
more, that it is a thing of some considerableness! In brief, when
my Lord General returns to us from Worcester, on the 16th of
September 1651, no advance whatever towards a dissolution of
ourselves has yet been made. The Wednesday Grand Committees
had become a thing like the meeting of Roman augurs, difficult
to go through with complete gravity ; and so, after the eleventh
month, have silently fallen into desuetude. We sit here very
immovable. We are scornfully called the Rump of a Parliament
by certain people ; but we have an invincible Oliver to fight for
us: we can afford to wait here, and consider to all lengths ; and
by one name we shall smell as sweet as by another.

1 Commons Journals, 2oth:January 1648-9: some six weeks after the Purge; ten
days before the King’s Death,

238 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT _ {2 Oct.

I have only to add at present, that on the morrow of my Lord
General’s reappearance in Parliament, this sleeping question was
resuscitated ;! new activity infused into it; some show of progress
made ; nay, at the end of three months, after much labour and
struggle, it was got decided, by a neck-and-neck division,’ That
the present is a fit time for fixing a limit beyond which this Par-
liament shall not sit. Fix a limit therefore ; give us the non-plus-
ultra of you. Next Parliament-day we do fix a limit, Three years
hence, 3d November 1654; three years of rope still left us: a
somewhat wide limit; which, under conceivable contingencies,
may perhaps be tightened a little. My honourable friends, you
ought really to get on with despatch of this business ; and know
of a surety that not being, any of you, Kings by birth, nor very
indubitably by attainment, you will actually have to go, and even
in case of extremity to be shoved and sent!

LETTER CLXXXIV ®

Ar this point the law of dates requires that we introduce Letter
Hundred and-eighty-fourth ; though it is as a mere mathematical
point, marking its own whereabouts in Oliver’s History; and
imparts little or nothing that is new to us.

Reverend John Cotton is a man still held in some remembrance
among our New-England friends. He had been minister of
Boston in Lincolnshire ; carried the name across the Ocean with
him ; fixed it upon a new small Home he had found there,—
which has become a large one since; the big busy Capital of
Massachusetts, Boston, so called. John Cotton his Mark, very
curiously stamped on the face of this Planet ; likely to continue
for some time !4——-For the rest, a painful Preacher, oracular of

1 Commons Journals, 17th September 1651.

249 to 47; Commons Journals, 14th November 1651: ‘Lord General and Lord
Chief Justice,’ Cromwell and St. John, are Tellers for the Yea.

- 3[Before this letter comes one in the Supplement—No. 69—concerning the reduc-

tion of the Isle of Man.

4[In one of the King’s Pamphlets (E. 598) is a treatise Of the holiness of Church
Members, addressed by Cotton to his old congregation in Lincolnshire, in 1650,
prefaced by a letter recalling his twenty years’ work amongst them, and gratefully
acknowledging the love which had caused them to support him in his ministry and
had led many of them, ‘‘in that hour of darkness,” when the High Commission
Court had stretched out its arm against him, to follow him into the “ howling
wilderness.” His old flock had evidently written urging him to return to them, but
this he says he cannot do, both his work and his infirmities forbidding it. }

1651.| LETTER CLXXXIV., LONDON — 239

high Gospels to New England; who in his day was well seen to
be connected with the Supreme Powers of this Universe, the word
of him being as a live-coal to the hearts of many. He died some
years afterwards ;—was thought, especially on his deathbed, to
have manifested gifts even of Prophecy,!—a thing not inconceiv-
able to the human mind that well considers Prophecy and John
Cotton.

We should say farther, that the Parliament, that Oliver among
and before them, had taken solemn anxious thought concerning
Propagating of the Gospel in New England; and, among other
measures, passed an Act to that end ;? not unworthy of attention,
were our hurry less. In fact, there are traceable various small
threads of relation, interesting reciprocities and mutualities, con-
necting the poor young Infant, New England, with its old Puritan
Mother and her affairs, in those years. Which ought to be dis-
entangled, to be made conspicuous and beautiful, by the Infant
herself now that she has grown big; the busy old Mother having
had to shove them, with so much else of the like, hastily out of
her way for the present !—However, it is not in reference to this
of Propagating the Gospel in New England; it is in congratulation
on the late high Actings, and glorious Appearances of Providence
in Old England, that Cotton has been addressing Oliver: intro-
duced to him, as appears, by some small mediate or direct ac-
quaintanceship, old or new ;—founding too on their genera]
relationship as Soldier of the Gospel and Priest of the Gospel,
high brother and humble one ; appointed, both of them, to fight
for it to the death, each with such weapons as were given him.
The Letter of Cotton, with due details, is to be seen in
Hutchinson’s Collection. The date is ‘Boston in New England,
28th of Fifth’ (Fifth Month, or July), «1651:’ the substance, full
of piety and loyalty, like that of hundreds of others, must not
concern us here,—except these few interesting words, upon certain
of our poor old Dunbar friends: ‘The Scots whom God delivered
‘into your hands at Dunbar,’ says Cotton, ‘and whereof sundry
‘were sent hither,—we have been desirous, as we could, to make
‘their yoke easy. Such as were sick of the scurvy, or other
‘diseases, have not wanted physic and chirurgery. They have
‘not been sold for Slaves, to perpetual servitude; but for six, or
“seven, or eight years, as we do our own. And he that bought

? Thurloe, i. 565 ;—in 1653. 2 Scobell (27th July 1649), ii. 66.
5 Papers relative to the History of Massachusetts (Boston, 1769), p. 233,

~~
7

240 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT _ [2 Oot.

‘the most of them, I hear, buildeth Houses for them, for every
‘Four a House ; and layeth some acres of ground thereto, which
‘he giveth them as their own, requiring them three days in
‘the week to work for him by turns, and four days for themselves ;
‘and promiseth, as soon as they can repay him the money he laid
‘out for them, he will set them at liberty.’ Which really is a
mild arrangement, much preferable to Durham Cathedral and the
raw cabbages at Morpeth; and may turn to good for the poor
fellows, if they can behave themselves !—

For my esteemed Friend Mr. Cotton, Pastor to the Church at Boston
in New England; These

‘London,’ 2d October 1651.

Wortuy Sir, AnD MY CurisTIAN FRIEND,
I received yours a few days sithence. It was
welcome to me because signed by you, whom I love and honour
in the Lord: but more ‘so’ to see some of the same grounds of
our actings stirring in you that have in us, to quiet us to our
work, and support us therein; which hath had ‘the’ greatest
difficulty in our engagement in Scotland; by reason we have
had to do with some who were (I verily think) godly, but,
through weakness and the subtlety of Satan, ‘were’ involved in
interest against the Lord and His people.
With what tenderness we have proceeded with such, and
that in sincerity, our papers (which I suppose you have seen)
will in part manifest; and I give you some comfortable assur-
ance of ‘the same.’ The Lord hath marvellously appeared even
against them.'! And now again when all the power was devolved
into the Scottish King and the malignant Party, they invading
England, the Lord rained upon them such snares as the enclosed ?
will show. Only the narrative in short is this, that of their whole
army, when the narrative was framed, not five men ‘were’ re-
turned,
1 From Preston downward.
* Doubtless the Oficial Narrative of Worcester Battle; published about a week

ago, as Preamble to the Act appointing a Day of Thanksgiving; 26th September
1651; reprinted in Parliamentary History, xx. 59-65. t

1651.]| CONFERENCE AT LENTHALL’S 241

Surely, Sir, the Lord is greatly to be feared, as to be praised!
We need your prayers in this as much as ever. How shall we
behave ourselves after such mercies? What is the Lord a-doing?
What prophecies are now fulfilling?! Who is a God like ours?
To know His will, to do His will, are both of Him.

I took this liberty from business, to salute you thus in a word.
Truly I am ready to serve you and the rest of our brethren
and the Churches with you. I am a poor weak creature, and
not worthy the name of a worm; yet accepted to serve the Lord
and His people. Indeed, my dear friend, between you and me,
you know not me, my weaknesses, my inordinate passions, my
unskilfulness and everyway unfitness to my work. Yet, yet the
Lord, who will have merey on whom He will, does as you see.
Pray forme. Salute all Christian friends though unknown.

I rest,
Your affectionate friend to serve you,
Ottver CroMWELL.*

About this time, for there is no date to it but an evidently
vague and erroneous one, was held the famous Conference of
Grandees, called by request of Cromwell; of which Bulstrode has
given record. Conference held ‘one day’ at Speaker Lenthall’s
house in Chancery Lane, to decide among the leading Grandees
of the Parliament and Army, How this Nation is to be settled,—
the Long Parliament having now resolved on actually dismissing
itself by and by. The question is really complex: one would
gladly know what the leading Grandees did think of it ; even what
they found good to say upon it! Unhappily our learned Bul-
strode’s report of this Conference is very dim, very languid: nay
Bulstrode, as we have found elsewhere, has a kind of drama-
turgic turn in him, indeed an occasional poetic friskiness ; most
unexpected, as if the hippopotamus should show a tendency to
dance ;—which painfully deducts from one’s confidence in Bul-
strode’s entire accuracy on such occasions! Here and there the
multitudinous Paper Masses of learned Bulstrode do seem to

1See Psalm Hundred-and-tenth.

* Harris, p. 518; Birch’s Original,—copied in Additional MS., no. 4156, § 2.
vol. 11.—16

——= a

242 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT f1os1..

smack a little of the date when he redacted them,—posterior to
the Ever-blessed Restoration, not prior to it. We shall, neverthe-
less, excerpt this dramaturgic Report of Conference: the reader
will be willing to examine, with his own eyes, even as in a glass
darkly, any feature of that time; and he can remember always
that a learned Bulstrode’s fat terrene mind, imaging a heroic
Cromwell and his affairs, is a very dark glass indeed!

The Speakers in this Conference,—Desborow, Oliver's Brother-
in-law ; Whalley, Oliver's Cousin; fanatical Harrison, tough St.
Johu, my learned Lord Keeper or Commissioner Whitlocke himself,
—are mostly known tous. Learned Widdrington, the mellifluous
orator, once Lord Commissioner too, and like to be again, though
at present ‘excused from it owing to scruples, will by and by
become better known to us. A mellifluous, unhealthy, seemingly
somewhat scrupulous and timorous man.' He is of the race of
that Widdrington whom we still lament in doleful dumps,—but
does not fight upon the stumps like him. There were ‘many
other Gentlemen’ who merely listened.

‘Upon the defeat at Worcester, says Bulstrode vaguely,”
‘Cromwell desired a Meeting with divers Members of Parliament,
‘and some chief Officers of the Army, at the Speaker's house.
‘And a great many being there, he proposed to them, That now
‘the old King being dead, and his Son being defeated, he held it
‘necessary to come to a Settlement of the Nation. And in order
‘thereunto, had requested this Meeting; that they together
‘might consider and advise, What was fit to be done, and to be
‘presented to the Parliament.

‘Speaker. My Lord, this Company were very ready to attend
‘your Excellence, and the business you are pleased to propound
‘to us is very necessary to be considered. God hath given
‘marvellous success to our Forces under your command; and
‘if we do not improve these mercies to some Settlement, such
‘as may be to God’s honour, and the good of this Commonwealth,
‘ we shall be very much blameworthy.

‘Harrison. I think that which my Lord General hath pro-

1 Wood, in voce,

2Whitlocke, p. 491; the date, roth December 1651, is that of the Paper merely,
and as applied to the Conference itself cannot be correct. [Whitlocke distinctly
puts this meeting under date of Dec. 10, and it is difficult to see what he can mean,
except that it actually took place on that day. The words, ‘‘ upon the defeat at
Worcester,” would simply mean in consequence of it. Dr. Gardiner thinks that
only the leading Zawyers in Parliament were invited to confer with the officers.
At any rate no other members are mentioned as speaking. }

<2

1651.1 CONFERENCE AT LENTHALL’S 243

‘ pounded, is, To advise as to a Settlement both of our Civil and
‘Spiritual Liberties; and so that the mercies which the Lord
‘hath given-in to us may not be cast away. How this may be
‘done is the great question.

‘Wuittocke. It is a great question indeed, and not suddenly
‘to be resolved! Yet it were pity that a meeting of so many
‘able and worthy persons as I see here, should be fruitless.—I
‘should humbly offer, in the first place, Whether it be not re-
‘quisite to be understood in what way this Settlement is desired ?
‘Whether of an absolute Republic, or with any mixture of
* Monarchy.

‘CromweLt. My Lord Commissioner Whitlocke hath put us
‘upon the right point: and indeed it is my meaning, that we
‘should consider, Whether a Republic, or a mixed Monarchical
‘Government will be best to be settled? And if anything
‘Monarchical, then, In whom that power shall be placed?

‘Srr Tuomas Wipprineton. I think a mixed Monarchical
‘Government will be most suitable to the Laws and People of
‘this Nation. And if any Monarchical, I suppose we shall hold
‘it most just to place that power in one of the Sons of the late
‘ King.

‘ioe boom, FLeetwoop. I think that the question, Whether an
‘absolute Republic, or a mixed Monarchy, be best to be settled
‘in this Nation, will not be very easy to be determined !

‘Lorp Cuier-Justice Str. Joun. It will be found, that the
‘Government of this Nation, without something of Monarchical
‘ power, will be very difficult to be so settled as not to shake the
‘foundation of our Laws, and the Liberties of the People.

‘Speaker. It will breed a strange confusion to settle a
‘Government of this Nation without something of Monarchy.

‘CotoneL Desporow. I beseech you, my Lord, why may not
‘this, as well as other Nations, be governed in the way of a
‘ Republic ?

‘Wuirttocke. The Laws of England are so interwoven with
‘the power and practice of Monarchy, that to settle a Govern-
‘ment without something of Monarchy in it, would make so
‘great an alteration in the Proceedings of our Law, that you
‘ will” have searce time ! to rectify “it,” nor can we well foresee
‘the inconveniences which will arise thereby.

‘Coronet Wuatiey. I do not well understand matters of

1 Between this and November 1654.

244 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT _ [1651.

‘Law: but it seems to me the best way, Not to have anything
‘of Monarchical power in the Settlement of our Government.
‘And if we should resolve upon any, whom have we to pitch
‘upon? The King’s Eldest Son hath been in arms against us,
‘and his Second Son! likewise is our enemy.

‘Sm Tuomas Wipprineron. But the late King’s Third Son,
‘the Duke of Gloucester, is still among us; and too young to
‘have been in arms against us, or infected with the principles of
‘our enemies.

‘Wurrtocke. There may bea day given for the King’s Eldest
‘Son,? or for the Duke of York his Brother, to come in to the
‘Parliament. And upon such terms as shall be thought fit, and
‘agreeable both to our Civil and Spiritual liberties, a Settlement
‘may be made with them.

‘CromweLt. That will be a business of more than ordinary
‘difficulty! But really I think, if it may be done with safety,
‘and preservation of our Rights, both as Englishmen and as
‘Christians, That a Settlement with somewhat of Monarchical
‘power in it would be very effectual.’

Much other discourse there was, says my learned friend ;—
but amounting to little. The Lawyers all for a mixed Govern-
ment, with something of Monarchy in it; tending to call in one
of the King’s Sons,—I especially tending that way ; secretly
loyal in the worst of times. The Soldiers again were all fora
Republic ; thinking they had had enough of the King and his
Sons. My Lord General always checked that secret-loyalty of
mine, and put off the discussion of the King’s Son; yet did not
declare himself for a Republic either ;—was indeed, as my
terrene fat mind came at length to image him, merely ‘fishing
for men’s opinions,’ and for provender to himself and his appetites,
as I in the like case should have been doing !—The Conference
proke up, with what of ‘fish’ in this kind my Lord General had
taken, and no other result arrived at.

Many Conferences held by my Lord General have broken up
so. Four years ago, he ended one in King Street by playfully
‘flinging a cushion’ at a certain solid head of our acquaintance,

1 James; who has fled to the Continent some time ago, ‘in women’s clothes,
with one Colonel Bamfield, and is getting fast into Papistry and other confusions.

2 Charles Stuart: ‘a day’ for him, upon whose /ead there was, not many weeks
ago, a Reward of 1ooo/.? Did you actually say this, my learned friend? Or
merely strive to think, and redact, at an after-period, that you had said it,—that
you had thought it, meant to say it, which was virtually all the same, in a case of
difficulty !

1651.] DEATH OF IRETON 245

and running down stairs.'_ Here too it became ultimately clear
to the solid head that he had been ‘fishing.’ Alas, a Lord
General has many Conferences to hold; and in terrene minds,
ligneous, oleaginous, and other, images himself in a very strange
manner ! The candid imagination, busy to shape out some
conceivable Oliver in these Nineteen months, will accept thank-
fully the following small indubitabilities, or glimpses of definite
events.

December 8th, 1651. In the beginning of December (Whitlocke
dates it 8th December) came heavy tidings over from Ireland,
dark and heavy in the house of Oliver especially: that Deputy
Ireton, worn out with sleepless Irish services, had caught an
inflammatory fever, and suddenly died. Fell sick on the 16th
of November 1651; died, at Limerick, on the 26th.2 The
reader remembers Bridget Ireton, the young wife at Cornbury : *
she is now Widow Ireton; a sorrowful bereaved woman. One
brave heart and subtle-working brain has ended: to the regret
of all the brave. A man able with his pen and his sword ; ‘ very
stiff in his ways.’

Dryasdust, who much loves the brave Ireton in a rather blind
way, intimates that Ireton’s ‘stern virtue’ would probably have
held Cromwell in awe ; that had Ireton lived, there had probably
been no sacrilege against the Constitution on Oliver’s part. A
probability of almost no weight, my erudite friend. The ‘stern
virtue’ of Ireton was not sterner on occasion than that of Oliver ;
the probabilities of Ireton’s disapproving what Oliver did, in the
case alluded to, are very small, resting on solid Ludlow mainly ;
and as to those of Ireton’s holding Cromwell ‘in awe,’ in this or
in any matter he had himself decided to do, I think we may
safely reckon them at zero, my erudite friend !

Lambert, now in Scotland, was appointed Deputy in Ireton’s
room; and meant to go; but did not. Some say the Widow
Ireton, irritated that the beautiful and showy Lady Lambert
should already ‘take precedence of her in St. James’s Park,’
frustrated the scheme: what we find certain is, That Lambert
did not go, that Fleetwood went; and farther, that the Widow

1 Ludlow, i. 240.
- 2 Wood, iii. 300; Whitlocke, p. 491.—Letter (Oliver to his Sister) in Appendix
No. 23.

5 Letter XLI. 246; and azéea, p. 118.

er

ee a a, a a es

246 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT s[16sa.

Ireton in due time became Wife of the Widower Fleetwood :!
the rest hangs vague in the head of zealous Mrs. Hutchinson,
solid Ludlow, and empty Rumour.? Ludlow, already on the
spot, does the Irish duties in the interim. Ireton has solemn
Public Funeral in England; copious moneys settled on his
Widow and Family; all honours paid to him, for his own sake
and his Father-in-law’s.

March 25th, 1652. Above two years ago, when this Rump Par-
liament was in the flush of youthful vigour, it decided on reform-
ing the Laws of England, and appointed a working Committee
for that object, our learned friend Bulstrode one of them. Which
working Committee finding the job heavy, gradually languished ;
and after some Acts for having Law-proceedings transacted in the
English tongue, and for other improvements of the like magnitude,
died into comfortable sleep. On my Lord General's return from
Worcester, it had been poked up again; and, now rubbing its
eyes, set to work in good earnest; got a subsidiary Committee
appointed, of Twenty-one persons not members of this House at
all, To say and suggest what improvements were really wanted :
such improvements they the working Committee would then, with
all the readiness in life, effectuate and introduce in the shape of
specific Acts. Accordingly, on March 25th, first day of the new
year 1652, learned Bulstrode, in the name of this working Com-
mittee, reports that the subsidiary Committee has suggested a
variety of things : among others, some improvement in our method
of Transferring Property,—of enabling poor John Doe, who finds
at present a terrible difficulty in doing it, to inform Richard Roe,
“JT John Doe do, in very fact, sell to thee Richard Roe, such and
“such a Property,—according to the usual human meaning of the
“word sell ; and it is hereby, let me again assure thee, indisput-
“ably sop to thee Richard, by me John:” which, my learned
friend thinks, might really be an improvement. To which end
he will introduce an Act: nay there shall farther be an Act for
the ‘Registry of Deeds in each County,’—if it please Heaven.
‘Neglect to register your Sale of Land in this promised County-
‘ Register within a given time,’ enacts the learned Bulstrode, ‘such
‘Sale should be void. Be exact in registering it, the Land shall
‘not be subject to any incumbrance.’ Incumbrance: yes, but

1[Fleetwood’s first wife was buried on November 24, two days before Ireton
died. Mrs. Ireton married Fleetwood on June 8 of the following year, as is proved
by a newsletter of June 12, found by Mr. Firth amongst the Clarke WSS. }

2 Hutchinson's Memoirs (London, 1806), p. 195; Ludlow, pp. 414, 449, 450, &c.

1652.] DUTCH WAR 247

what is ‘incumbrance?’ asks all the working Committee, with
wide eyes, when they come actually to sit upon this Bill of
Registry, and to hatch it into some kind of perfection: What
is ‘incumbrance?’ Nomortalcantell. They sit debating it, pain-
fully sifting it, ‘for three months ;’! three months by Booker’s
Almanac, and the Zodiac Horologe: March violets have become
June roses ; and still they debate what ‘incumbrance’ is ;—and
indeed, I think, could never fix it at all; and are perhaps debat-
ing it, if so doomed, in some twilight foggy section of Dante’s
Nether World, to all Eternity, at this hour !—Are not these a set
of men likely to reform English Law? Likely these to strip
the accumulated owl-droppings and foul guano-mountains from
your rock-island, and lay the reality bare,—in the course of
Eternities! The wish waxes livelier in Colonel Pride that he
could see a certain addition made to the Scots Colours hung in
Westminster Hall yonder.

I add only, for the sake of Chronology, that on the fourth day
after this appearance of Bulstrode as a Law-reformer, occurred
the famous Black Monday ; fearfullest eclipse of the Sun ever seen
by mankind. Came on about nine in the morning; darker and
darker: ploughmen unyoked their teems, stars came out, birds
sorrowfully chirping took to roost, men in amazement to prayers :
a day of much obscurity ; Black Monday, or Mirk Monday, 29th
March 1652.2, Much noised of by Lilly, Booker, and the buzzard
Astrologer tribe. Betokening somewhat? Belike that Bulstrode
and this Parliament will, in the way of Law-reform and otherwise,
make a Practical Gospel, or real Reign of God, in this England ?>—

July 9th, 1652. A great external fact which, no doubt, has its
effect on all internal movements, is the War with the Dutch. The
Dutch, ever since our Death- Warrant to Charles First, have looked
askance at this New Commonwealth, which wished to stand well
with them; and have accumulated offence on offence against it.
Ambassador Dorislaus was assassinated in their country ; Charles
Second was entertained there ; evasive slow answers were given
to tough St. John, who went over as new Ambassador: to which
St. John responding with great directness, in a proud, brief and
very emphatic manner, took his leave, and came home again.
Came home again; and passed the celebrated Navigation Act,®

1 Ludlow, i. 430; Parliamentary History, xx. 84; Commons Journals, vii. 67,
t10, &c.

2 Balfour, iv. 349; Law's Memorials, p. 6.
3 Introduced, 5th August 1651; passed, 9th October 1651: given in Scobell, ii.
176.

SE
<-

es a ee ee ee

248 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT (1682.

forbidding that any goods should be imported into England except
either in English ships or in ships of the country where the goods
were produced. Thereby terribly maiming the ‘ Carrying Trade of
the Dutch ;’ and indeed, as the issue proved, depressing the Dutch
Maritime Interest not a little, and proportionally elevating that
of England. Embassies in consequence, from their irritated High
Mightinesses ; sea-fightings in consequence ; and much negotiat-
ing, apologising, and bickering mounting ever higher ;—which at
length, at the date above given, issues in declared War. Dutch
War : cannonadings and fierce sea-fights in the narrow seas ; land-
soldiers drafted to fight on shipboard; and land-officers, Blake,
Dean, Monk, who became very famous sea-officers ; Blake a thrice-
famous one ;—poor Dean lost his life in this business. They
doggedly beat the Dutch, and again beat them: their best Van
Tromps and De Ruyters could not stand these terrible Puritan
Sailors and Gunners. The Dutch gradually grew tame. The public
mind, occupied with sea-fights and sea-victories, finds again that
the New Representative must be patiently waited for; that this
is not a time for turning out the old Representative, which has so
many affairs on its hands.

But the Dutch War brings another consequence in the train
of it: renewed severity against Delinquents. The necessities of
cash for this War are great : indeed the grand business of Parlia-
ment at present seems to be that of Finance,—finding of sinews
for such a War. Any remnants of Royal lands, of Dean-and-Chap-
ter lands,—sell them by rigorous auction; the very lead of the
Cathedrals one is tempted to sell; nay almost the Cathedrals
themselves, if any one would buy them. The necessities of the
Finance Department are extreme. Money, money: our Blakes
and Monks, in deadly wrestle with the Dutch, must have money !

Estates of Delinquents, one of the readiest resources from of
old, cannot, in these circumstances, be forgotten. Search out De-
linquents : in every County make stringent inquest after them!
Many, in past years, have made light settlements with lax Com-
mittee-men; neighbours, not without pity for them. Many of
minor sort have been overlooked altogether. Bring them up,
every Delinquent of them; up hither to the Rhadamanthus-bar
of Goldsmiths’ Hall and Haberdashers’ Hall; sift them, search
them; riddle the last due sixpence out of them. The Commons
Journals of these months have formidable ell-long Lists of Delin-

1 Parliamentary History, XX. 90.

1652] LETTER CLXXXV., LONDON 249

quents ; List after List; who shall, on rigorous terms, be ordered
to compound.’ Poor unknown Royalist Squires, from various quar-
ters of England ; whose names and surnames excite now no notion
in us except that of No. 1 and No. 2: my Lord General has seen
them ‘ crowding by thirties and forties in a morning ’? about these
Haberdasher-Grocer Halls of Doom, with haggard expression of
countenance ; soliciting, from what austere official person they can
get a word of, if not mercy, yet at least swift judgment. Ina
way which affected my Lord General’s feelings. We have now
the third year of Peace in our borders: is this what you call
Settlement of the Nation?

LETTER CLXXXV3

Tue following Letter ‘to my honoured Friend Mr. Hungerford
the Elder,’ which at any rate by order of time introduces itself
here, has probably some reference to these Committee businesses :
—at all events, there hangs by it a little tale.

1[There was no fresh sequestration of delinquents at this time, but only a new
Act of Sale relating to the lands of delinquents already sequestrated, who had
either refused to compound or neglected to pay their fines. The first Act of Sale
was in July, 1651, when the estates of seventy-three of these men—estates ‘‘ forfeited
to the Commonwealth for treason "—were ordered to be sold, and were placed in the
hands of seven trustees, to dispose of to the best advantage. A second act was
now passed, August 4, 1652, ordering that twenty-nine more of these forfeited estates
should be made over to the same trustees and sold for the use of the Navy. The
bill for this was under discussion as early as April, and therefore was not brought
in in consequence of the Dutch War, but no doubt the need for money expedited
proceedings. ‘‘ Our Council is much divided about Holland,” Carew Raleigh wrote
to Lord Conway on June 26, ‘‘and nothing yet determined, but we provide for
war in manning our ships and caring for money, in order to which the Lord
Craven's estates and Mr. Cooke's are voted to be sold.” The original list included
twenty-eight names, but two of them were found to have been inserted in the first act,
reducing the number to twenty-six. Four more were added next day, so that the
actual number of estates to be sold was thirty. The ‘‘ell-long lists” relate to the third
Act of Sale, in November of this same year, but so far from being ordered to com-
pound, as a rule these old offenders at first were not allowed to do so. Their
names were sent up by the County Committees, and their lands were given over
to the Treason Trustees for sale. The market, however, was not active, buyers
being shy of a purchase which the possible event of a Restoration might snatch
from them, and after a while the owners of the confiscated lands were allowed to
compound for them, but at a very high rate.]
‘Speech, Zostea.
alas the last letter and this one come three short notes ; Supplement, Nos,
79, 71.

(Aro tee) a

250 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT 130 July.

Some six miles from Bath, in the direction towards Salisbury,
are to be seen, ‘on the northeast slope of a rocky height called
Farley Hill,’ the ruins of an old Castle, once well known by the
name of Farley Montfort, or Farley Hungerford : Mansion once of
the honourable Family of Hungerfords, while there was such a
Family. The Hungerfords are extinct above a century ago; and
their Mansion stands there as a Ruin, knowing little of them any
more. But it chanced, long since, before the Ruin became quite
roofless, some Land-Steward or Agent of a new Family, tapping
and poking among the melancholy lumber there,—found ‘an old
loose Chest’ shoved loosely ‘under the old Chapel-altar;’ and
bethought him of opening the same. Masses of ,damp dust;
unclean accumulation of beetle-and-spider exuvie, to the con-
ceivable amount: under these certain bundles of rubbish-papers,
extinct lease-records, marriage-contracts, all extinct now,—among
which, however, were Two Letters bearing Oliver Cromwell's sig-
nature. These Two the Land-Steward carefully copied, thanks
to him ;—and here, out of Collinson’s History of Somersetshire,
the first of them now is. Very dark to the Land-Steward, to
Collinson, and to us. For the Hungerfords are extinct ; their
Name and Family, like their old Mansion, a mouldering ruin,—
almost our chief light in regard to it, the Two little bits of Paper,
rescued from the old Chest under the Chapel-altar, in that
romantic manner !—

There were three Hungerfords in Parliament ; all for Wiltshire
constituencies. Sir Edward, ‘Knight of the Bath,’ Puritan origi-
nal Member for Chippenham ; Lord of this Mansion of Farley, as
we find:! then Henry, Esgq., ‘recruiter’ for Bedwin since 1646 ;
probably a cadet of the House, perhaps heir to it: both these are
now ‘secluded Members ;’ purged away by Pride; nay it seems
Sir Edward was already dead, about the time of Pride’s Purge.
The third, Anthony Hungerford, original Member for Malmes-
bury, declared for the King in 1642; was of course disabled, cast
into the Tower when caught ;—made his composition, by repent-
ance and due fine, ‘fine of 2,532/.,’ in 1646,? when the First Civil
War ended ; and has lived ever since a quiet repentant man. He
is of ‘ Blackbourton in Oxfordshire,’ this Anthony ; but I judge by
his Parliamentary connexion and other circumstances, likewise a

1 Collinson (iii. 357 .) gives his Epitaph copied from the old Chapel; but is
very dark and even self-contradictory in what he says farther.

2 Commons Journals, iv. 565 (5th June 1646) ; 2d. iii, 526, &e. [And Calendar 0)
Committee for Compounding, p. 867.

ay ee at ny fet yO

1652) LETTER CLXXXV., LONDON 251

cadet of the House of Farley. Of him by and by, when we arrive
at the next Letter.

For the present, with regard to Sir Edward, lord of the Farley
Mansion, we have to report, by tremulous but authentic lights,
that he stood true for the Parliament; had controversies, almost
duels, in behalf of it ; among other services, lent it 500/. Further-
more, that he is now dead, ‘died in 1648 ;’ and that his Widow
cannot yet get payment of that 500/.; that she is yet only
struggling to get a Committee to sit upon it.1_ One might guess,
but nobody can know, that this Note was addressed to Henry
Hungerford, in reference to that business of Sir Edward’s Widow.
Or possibly it may be Anthony Hungerford, the repentant
Royalist, that is now the ‘Elder Hungerford ;’ a man with
whom the Lord General is not without relations? Unimportant
to us, either way. A hasty Note, on some ‘business’ now un-
known,’ about which an unknown ‘ gentleman’ has been making
inquiry and negotiation; for the answer to which an unknown
‘servant ’ of some ‘ Mr. Hungerford the Elder’ is waiting in the
hall of Oliver’s House,—the Cockpit, I believe, at this date :—in
such faintly luminous state, revealing little save its own existence,
must this small Document be left.

For my honoured Friend Mr. Hungerford ‘the Elder, at his House :
These

‘London,’ 30th July 1652.
Sir,
I am very sorry why occasions will not permit

me to return® to you as I would. 1 have not yet fully spoken
with the gentleman I sent to wait upon you; when I shall do
it, I shall be enabled to be more particular. Being unwilling
to detain your servant any longer, with my service to your lady
and family, I take leave, and rest,
Your affectionate servant,
O.iveR CroMWELL.*

1Committee got, 18th February 1652-3, ‘the Lord General’ Cromwell in it
(Commons Journals, vii. 260); Danger of Duel (2d, ii. 928, 981 ; iii, 185, January—
June 1643). See zd. iv. 162, v. 618, &c.

2[See note, p. 256 below. ] 3 reply.

*Collinson’s History of Somersetshire (Bath, 1791), iii. 357 (Note). [Gentle-
man’s Magazine, vol. \x. p. 1186. Original in the collection of Sir R. Tangye. |—
See Appendix, No. 25.

OO ee eee

252 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [30 July.

It is a sad reflection with my Lord General, in this Hunger-
ford and other businesses, that the mere justice of any matter
will so little avail a man in Parliament: you can make no way
till you have got up some party on the subject there !! In fact,
red-tape has, to a lamentable extent, tied up the souls of men in
this Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. They are
becoming hacks of office; a savour of Godliness still on their lips,
but seemingly not much deeper with some of them. I begin to
have a suspicion they are no Parliament! If the Commonwealth
of England had not still her Army Parliament, rigorous devout
Council of Officers, men in right life-and-death earnest, who have
spent their blood in this Cause, who in case of need can assemble
and act again,—what would become of the Commonwealth of
England? Earnest persons, from this quarter and that, make
petition to the Lord General and Officers, That they would be
pleased to take the matter in hand, and see right done. To
which the Lord General and Officers answer always: Wait, be
patient ; the Parliament itself will yet do it.

What the ‘state of the Gospel in Wales’ is, in Wales or else-
where, I cannot with any accuracy ascertain; but see well that
this Parliament has shown no zeal that way ; has shackled rather,
and tied-up with its sorrowful red-tape the movements of men
that had any zeal.2 Lamentable enough. The light of the
Everlasting Truth was kindled; and you do not fan the sacred
flame, you consider it a thing which may be left to itself!
Unhappy: and for what did we fight then, and wrestle with our
souls and our bodies as in strong agony ; besieging Heaven with
our prayers, and Earth and its Strengths, from Naseby on to
Worcester, with our pikes and cannon? Was it to put an
Official Junto of some Threescore Persons into the high saddle
in England; and say, Ride ye? They would need to be Three-
score beautifuller men! Our blood shed like water, our brethren’s
bones whitening a hundred fields; Tredah Storm, Dunbar death-
agony, and God’s voice from the battle whirlwind: did they
mean no more but you!—My Lord General urges us always to
be patient: Patience, the Parliament itself will yet do it. That
is what we shall see !—

On the whole, it must be seriously owned by every reader, this
present Fag-end of a Parliament of England has failed altogether
to realise the high dream of those old Puritan hearts. ‘Incum-

1 Speech, Zostea, 2 [bid,

\
‘=.

1652.] THE RUMP 253

brance,’ it appears, cannot in the abstract be defined: but if you
would know in the concrete what it is, look there! The thing we
fought for, and gained as if by miracle, it is ours this long while,
and yet not ours; within grasp of us, it lies there unattainable,
enchanted under Parliamentary formulas. Enemies are swept
away ; extinguished as in the brightness of the Lord: and no
Divine Kingdom, and no clear incipiency of such, has yet in any
measure come !—These are sorrowful reflections.

For, alas, such high dream is difficult to realise! Not the
Stuart Dynasty alone that opposes it; all the Dynasties of the
Devil, the whole perversions of this poor Earth, without us and
within us, oppose it.—Yea, answers with a sigh the heart of my
Lord General: Yea, it is difficult, and thrice difficult ;—and yet
woe to us, if we do not with our whole soul try it, make some
clear beginning of it; if we sit defining ‘incumbrances,’ instead
of bending every muscle to the wheel that is encumbered! Who
art thou that standest still; that having put-to thy hand, turnest
back? In these years of miracle in England, were there not
great things, as if by divine voices, audibly promised? ‘The
Lord said unto my Lord!’—And is it all to end here? In
Juntos of Threescore ; in Grocers-Hall Committees,! in red-tape,
and official shakings of the head >—

My Lord General, are there no voices, dumb voices from the
depths of poor England’s heart, that address themselves to you,
even you? My Lord General hears voices; and would fain dis-
tinguish and discriminate them. Which, in all these, is the
God’s voice? That were the one to follow. My Lord General,
I think, has many meditations, of a very mixed, and some of a
very abstruse nature, in these months.

August 13th, 1652. This day came a ‘Petition from the
Officers of my Lord General’s Army,’ which a little alarmed us.
Petition craving for some real reform of the Law ; some real
attempt towards setting up a Gospel Ministry in England; real
and general ousting of scandalous, incompetent and _ plainly
diabolic persons from all offices of Church and State ; real begin-
ning, in short, of a Reign of Gospel Truth in this England ;—

1[It is not very evident what Carlyle conceived the Grocers’ Hall Committee to

. As a matter of fact, it was a very useful and unobtrusive committee composed
of ‘‘ Adventurers for Ireland” (partly members of Parliament, partly citizens of
London), and its work was to levy assessments and furnish arms and provisions
for the army in Ireland. Another Irish Committee also sat sometimes at Grocers’
Hall, but the Committee for Compounding never went there. }

——_— ee ee ee

254 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [14 Sept.

and for one thing, a swift progress in that most slow-going Bill
for a New Representative ; an actual ending of this present Fag-
end of a Parliament, which has now sat very long! So, in most
respectful language, prays this Petition! of the Officers. Petition
prefaced, they say, with earnest prayer to God: that was the
preface or prologue they gave it ;—what kind of epilogue they
might be prepared to give it, one does not learn: but the men
carry swords at their sides; and we have known them !—‘ Many
‘thought this kind of Petition dangerous; and counselled my
‘Lord General to put a stop to the like: but he seemed to make
‘light of it,’ says Bulstrode. In fact, my Lord General does not
disapprove of it: my Lord General, after much abstruse medita-
tion, has decided on putting himself at the head of it. He, and
a serious minority in Parliament, and in England at large, think
with themselves, once more, If it were not for this Army Parlia-
ment, what would become of us ?—Speaker Lenthall ‘ thanked’
these Officers, with a smile which I think must have been of the
grimmest, like that produced in certain animals by the act of
eating thistles.

September 14th, 1652. The somnolent slow-going Bill for a
New Representative, which has slept much, and now and then
pretended to move a little, for long years past, is resuscitated by
this Petition; comes out, rubbing its eyes, disposed for decided
activity ;—and in fact sleeps no more ; cannot think of sleep any
more, the noise round it waxing ever louder. Settle how your
Representative shall be ; for be it now actually must !

This Bill, which has slept and waked so long, does not sleep
again: but, How to settle the conditions of the New Representa-
tive >—there is a question! My Lord General will have good
security against ‘the Presbyterial Party’ that they come not
into power again ; good security against the red-tape Party, that
they sit not for three months defining an incumbrance again.
How shall we settle the New Representative ;—on the whole,
what or how shall we do? For the old stagnancy is verily
broken up: these petitioning Army Officers, with all the earnest
armed and unarmed men of England in the rear of them, have

1 Whitlocke, p. 516. [The original form of the last clause was a demand for an
immediate dissolution. Cromwell did not sign, probably, Dr. Gardiner thinks,
disapproving of this. By his mediation it was altered to a request that ‘‘ for public
satisfaction of the good people of this land, speedy consideration may be had of
such qualification for future and successive parliaments as” might secure ‘‘ the
election only of such as are,pious and faithful in the interests of the Commonwealth,
Commonwealth and Protectorate, ii. 168.]

1652.] THE RUMP 255

verily torn us from our moorings; and we do go adrift,—with
questionable havens, on starboard and larboard, very difficult of
entrance; with Mahlstroms and Niagaras very patent right
ahead! We are become to mankind a Rump Parliament; sit
here we cannot much longer ; and we know not what to do!

‘During the month of October, some ten or twelve conferences
took place,’—private conferences between the Army Officers and
the Leaders of the Parliament: wherein nothing could be agreed
upon.’ Difficult to settle the New Representative ; impossible
for this Old Misrepresentative or Rump to continue! What
shall or can be done? Summon, without popular intervention,
by earnest selection on your and our part, a Body of godly wise
Men, the Best and Wisest we can find in England; to them
entrust the whole question; and do you abdicate, and depart
straightway, say the Officers. Forty good Men, or a Hundred-
and-forty ; choose them well,—they will define an incumbrance
in less than three months, we may hope, and tell us what to do!
Such is the notion of the Army Officers, and my Lord General;
a kind of Puritan ‘Convention of the Notables,’ so the French
would call it; to which the Parliament Party see insuperable
objections. What other remedy, then? The Parliament Party
mournfully insinuate that there is no remedy, except,—except
continuance of the present Rump! ?

November 7th, 1652. ‘ About this time,’ prior or posterior to it,
while such conferences and abstruse considerations are in progress,
my Lord General, walking once in St. James’s Park, beckons the
learned Bulstrode, who is also there ; strolls gradually aside with
him, and begins one of the most important Dialogues. Whereof
learned Bulstrode has preserved some record; which is unfortu-
nately much dimmed by just suspicion of dramaturgy on the part
of Bulstrode ; and shall not be excerpted by us here. It tends
conspicuously to show, first, how Cromwell already entertained
most alarming notions of ‘making oneself a King,’ and even wore
them pinned on his sleeve, for the inspection of the learned ; and
secondly, how Bulstrode, a secret-royalist in the worst of times,
advised him by no means to think of that, but to call in Charles

1["T believe,” said Cromwell afterwards, ‘‘ we had at least ten or twelve meet-
ings [with the members], most humbly begging and beseeching of them that by
their own means they would bring forth those good things which had been
promised and expected ; that so it might appear they did not do them by any
Suggestion from the army, but from their own ingenuity; so tender were we to
preserve them in the reputation of the people.” See Speech I., p. 279 below. ]

2Speech, postea.

ee

256 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [10 Dec.

Stuart,—who had an immense popularity among the Powerful in
England just then!! ‘My Lord General did not in words express
‘any anger, but only by looks and carriage; and turned aside
‘from me to other company, —as this Editor, in quest of certainty

and insight, and not of doubt and fat drowsy pedantry, will now
also do !

LETTER CLXXXVI?

Here, from the old Chest of Farley Castle, is the other Hunger-
ford Letter; and a dim glance into the domesticities again.
Anthony Hungerford, as we saw, was the Royalist Hungerford, of
Blackbourton in Oxfordshire; once Member for Malmesbury ;
who has been living these six or seven years past in a repentant
wholesomely secluded state. ‘Cousin Dunch’ is young Mrs.
Dunch of Pusey, once Ann Mayor of Hursley; she lives within
visiting distance of Blackbourton, when at Pusey; does not for-
get old neighbours while in Town,—and occasionally hears gloomy
observations from them. “ Your Lord General is become a great
man now!”—From the Answer to which we gather at least one
thing: That the ‘offer of a very great Proposition’ as to Son
Richard’s marriage, which we once obscurely heard of, was, to
all appearance, made by this Anthony Hungerford,—perhaps in
behalf of his kinsman Sir Edward, who, as he had no Son,‘ might
have a Daughter that would be a very great Proposition to a young
man. Unluckily ‘there was not that assurance of Godliness’
that seemed to warrant it: however, the nobleness of the Over-
ture is never to be forgotten.®

1[Of this narrative of Bulstrode, Dr. Gardiner says: ‘‘ Without relying upon the
accuracy of every word, I accept the report as substantially correct, and probably
founded on notes taken at the time. To invent it would require dramatic powers
which Whitelocke never showed any signs of possessing. Even the passage about
the recall of Charles Stuart, which has been most suspected, contains touches such
as: ‘this prince being now . . . reduced to a very low condition,’ and, ‘ he and
all about him cannot but be very inclinable to any terms,’ which would hardly have
been inserted after the Restoration, when we should rather expect some flourish
about loyalty. There is, infact, not a single phrase in any way flattering to Charles.
Moreover, the time to which the conversation is assigned is most appropriate, being
that when the conferences which began in October showed no sign of producing a
satisfactory result.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, ii. 175. |

2[Before this letter, see three notes in behalf respectively of Governor Searle of
Barbados; of Lord Vaux, and of one John Cave, Supplement, Nos. 72-74. ]

3 Antea, vol. 1. p. 293. 4 Epitaph in Collinson’s Somersetshzre.

5[ Perhaps the overture is for Henry. Cf letter CLXXXV. and Appendix 26.]

1652.) LETTER CLXXXVII, COCKPIT 257

For my honoured Friend Anthony Hungerford, Esquire: These

Cockpit, roth December 1652.

Sir,

I understand, by my Cousin Dunch, of so
much trouble of yours, and so much unhandsomeness (at least
seeming so) on my part, as doth not a little afflict me, until I
give you this account of my innocency.

She was pleased to tell my wife of your often resorts to my
house to visit me, and of your disappointments. Truly, Sir, had
I but once known of your being there, and had concealed myself,
it had been an action so below a gentleman or an honest man, so
full of ingratitude for your civilities I have received from you,
as would have rendered me unworthy of human society. Believe
me, Sir, I am much ashamed that the least colour of the appear-
ance of such a thing should have happened ; and ‘I’ could not
take satisfaction but by this plain-dealing for my justification,
which I ingenuously offer you. And although Providence did not
dispose other matters to our mutual satisfaction, yet your noble-
ness in that overture obligeth me, and I hope ever shall whilst I
live, to study upon all occasions to approve myself your family’s
and your

Most affectionate and humble servant,

OLIVER CROMWELL.

My Wife and I desire our service be presented to your Lady
and family.*

LETTER CLXXXVII

SremincLy belonging to the same neighbourhood is the follow-
ing altogether domestic Letter to Fleetwood ; which still survives
in Autograph ; but has no date whatever, and no indication that

* Oliver Cromwell's AMlemoirs of the Protector (3d edition, London, 1822), ii.
488; see Collinson’s History of Somersetshire, iii. 357 (Note),
vot. 1.—17

ae eee oe

ee ee a ee? ee ee ee? ee fs 7 .* ie

258 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT 1682.

will enable us to fix its place with perfect exactness. Fleetwood’s
Commission for Ireland is dated 10th July 1652 ;1 the precise date
of his marriage with Bridget Ireton,? of his departure for Ireland,
or of any ulterior proceedings of his, is not recoverable, in those
months. Of Henry Cromwell, too, we know only that he sat in
the Little Parliament ; and, indisputably therefore, was home from
Ireland before summer next. From the total silence as to Public
Affairs, in this Letter, it may be inferred that nothing decisive -
had yet been done or resolved upon ;—that through this strange
old Autograph, as through a dim Horn-Gate (not of Dreams but
of Realities), we are looking into the interior of the Cromwell
Lodging, and the Cromwell heart, in the Winter of 1652.

For the Right Honourable Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, Commander-
in-Chief of the Forces in Ireland : These

‘ Cockpit, —_—1652.’

Dear CHARLES,

I thank you for your loving letter. The same
hopes and desires, upon your planting into my family, were much
the same in me that you express in yours tome. However, the
dispensation of the Lord is, to have it otherwise for the present ;
and therein I desire to acquiesce; not being out of hope but
that it may lie in His good pleasure, in His time, to give us the
mutual comfort of our relation, the want whereof He is able
abundantly to supply by His own presence; which indeed
makes up all defects, and is the comfort of all our comforts and
enjoyments.

Salute your dear wife from me. Bid her beware of a bondage
spirit. Fear is the natural issue of such a spirit; the antidote
is, Love. The voice of fear is (If I had done this; if I had
avoided that, how well it had been with me !)—I know this hath
been her vain reasoning: ‘ poor Biddy !’

Love argueth on this wise: What a Christ have I; what a

1 Thurloe, i, 212.

2[Marriage, June 8. See noteon p. 246 above. He went to Ireland in September. ]

8 A Secretary has written hitherto; the Lord General now begins, himself, with
a new pen,

1652.) LETTER CLXXXVII., COCKPIT 259

Father in and through Him! What a name hath my Father:
Merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth ;
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. What a nature hath my
Father: He is Love ;—free in it, unchangeable, infinite. What
a Covenant between Him and Christ, for all the seed, for every
one : wherein He undertakes all, and the poor soul nothing. The
new Covenant is grace, to or upon the soul ; to which it, ‘ the soul,’
is passive and receptive : I do away their sins; I'll write my law,
&e.; [ll put it in their hearts: they shall never depart from
me, &c.!

This commends the love of God: it’s Christ dying for men
without strength, for men whilst sinners, whilst enemies. And
shall we seek for the root of our comforts within us, what God
hath done, what He is to us in Christ, is the root of our comfort :
in this is stability ; in us is weakness. Acts of obedience are not
perfect, and therefore yield not perfect peace.? Faith, as an act,
yields-it not; but ‘only’ as it carries us into Him, who is our
perfect rest and peace ; in whom we are accounted of, and received
by, the Father, even as Christ Himself. This is our high calling.
Rest we here, and here only.®

Commend me to Harry Cromwell: I pray for him, that he may
thrive, and improve in the knowledge and love of Christ. Com-
mend me to all the officers. My prayers indeed are daily for
them. Wish them to beware of bitterness of spirit, and of all
things uncomely for the gospel. The Lord give you abundance
of wisdom, and faith and patience. Take heed also of your natural
inclination to compliance.

Pray for me. I commit you to the Lord; and rest,

Your loving father,
O.iver CroMweELL.*

1 Has been crowding, for the last line or two, very close upon the bottom of the
page; finds now that it will not do; and takes to the margin.
Carlyle printed this ‘‘ grace.”]
3 Even so, my noble one! The noble soul will, one day, again come to under-
stand these old words of yours.
4 Has exhausted the long broad margin; inverts now, and writes atop,

—- > * = =—"T Ss 7° = =e

260 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT __ [1652.

The Boy and Bettie are very well.1_ Show what kindness you
well may to Colonel Clayton, to my nephew Gregory, to Claypole’s
Brother.*

And so the miraculous Horn-Gate, not of Dreams but of Reali-
ties and old dim Domesticities, closes again, into totally opaque ;
—and we return to matters public.

December 1652—March 1653. The Dutch War prospers and has
prospered, Blake and Monk beating the Dutch in tough seafights ;?
Delinquents, monthly Assessments, and the lead of Cathedrals
furnishing the sinews: the Dutch are about sending Ambassadors
to treat of Peace. With home affairs, again, it goes not so well.
Through winter, through spring, that Bill for a New Representa-
tive goes along in its slow gestation ; reappearing Wednesday after
Wednesday ; painfully struggling to take a shape that shall fit both
parties, Parliament Grandees and Army Grandees both at once.
A thing difficult; a thing impossible! Parliament Grandees,
now become a contemptible Rump, wish they could grow into a
Reputable Full Parliament again, and have the Government and
the Governing Persons go on as they are now doing ; this naturally
is their wish. Naturally too the Army Party’s wish is the reverse
of this: that a Full free Parliament, with safety to the Godly
Interests, and due subordination of the Presbyterian and other
factions, should assemble; but also that the present Governing
Persons, with their red-tape habits unable to define an incumbrance
in three months, should for most part be out of it. Impossible to
shape a Bill that will fit both of these Parties: Tom Thumb and

1[Probably the little Iretons, but possibly the children of Fleetwood by his first
wife. Both Ireton and Fleetwood had adaughter Elizabeth. There is an allusion
to little Betty Ireton in a letter from St. John, written in January, 1649-50. ‘‘ Tell
my cousin Ireton,” he writes, ‘‘ that his wife breeds Betty up in the Popish religion,
to worship images, and that she now worships, teaches her to frown.” He perhaps
means a doll, a ‘‘ baby” as it would then be called; or possibly, her father's
portrait. In the same letter, St. John speaks of Vane by the nickname which
Cromwell often gave him, ‘‘ Brother Herne.” Nickolls’ Original Letters, etc., p. 48
—where, however, it is misplaced a year.]

2[A young relative (probably of Mrs. Cromwell's) in February, 1653, got
Cromwell to write to Admiral Penn for permission to serve under him. See
Supplement, No. 76.]

* Add. MS. No. 4165, f. 1. On the inner or blank leaf of this curious old
Sheet are neatly pasted two square tiny bits of Paper; on one of them, ‘ T. Fairfax’
in autograph ; on the other these words : ‘ God blesse the now Lord Protector ;’
and crosswise, ‘ Marquis Worcester writt it ;’—concerning which Marquis, once
‘Lord Herbert,’ see aztea, p. 191.

1653.) THE RUMP 261

the Irish Giant, you cannot, by the art of Parliamentary tailoring,
clip out a coat that will fit them both! We can fancy ‘con-
ferences, considerations deep and almost awful ; my Lord General
looking forward to possibilities that fill even him with fear.!
Puritan Notables they will not have; these present Governing
men are clear against that: not Puritan Notables ;—and if they
themselves, by this new Bill or otherwise, insist on staying there,
what is to become of them?

Dryasdust laments that this invaluable Bill, now in process of
gestation, is altogether lost to Posterity ; no copy even of itself,
much less any record of the conferences, debates, or contempo-
raneous considerations on it, attainable even in fractions by man-
kind. Much is lost, my erudite friend ;—and we must console
ourselves! The substantial essence of the Bill came out afterwards
into full practice, in Oliver’s own Parliaments. The present form
of the Bill, I do clearly perceive, had one clause, That all the
Members of this present Rump should continue to sit without
re-election; and still better, another, That they should be a
general Election Committee, and have power to say to every
new Member, “Thou art dangerous, thou shalt not enter; go!”
This clearly in the Bill: and not less clearly that the Lord
General and Army Party would in no wise have a Bill with this
in it,—or indeed have any Bill that was to be the old story over
again under a new name. So much, on good evidence, is very
clear to me ;—the rest, which is all obliterated, becomes not
inconceivable. Cost what it may cost, this Rump Parliament,
which has by its conduct abundantly ‘defined what an incum-
brance is,’ shall go about its business. Terrible Voices, supernal
and other, have said it, awfully enough, in the hearts of some
men! Neither under its own shabby figure, nor under another
more plausible, shall 7 guide the Divine Mercies and Miraculous
Affairs of this Nation any farther.

The last of all the conferences was held at my Lord General’s
house in Whitehall, on Tuesday evening, 19th of April 1653.
Above twenty leading Members of Parliament present, and many
Officers. Conference of which we shall have some passing
glimpse, from a sure hand, by and by.2 Conference which came

1[Dr, Gardiner is inclined to assign to about February Cromwell's words as given
by Ludlow. ‘‘ He was pushed on,” he is reported to have said, ‘‘ by two parties to
do that, the consideration of the issue whereof made his hair to stand on end.”
Ludlow’s Memoirs, ed. Firth, i. 346.]

2Speech, fostea ; see also Whitlocke, p. 529. [At this conference Cromwell
proposed as a compromise that Parliament itself should appoint a limited body of

_—a*-., ~~ a » —— ee eee oe Oe Fe ee ee eee .

a eS tt at ty te

262 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT __ [1653.

to nothing, as all the others had done. Your Bill, with these
clauses and visible tendencies in it, cannot pass, says the one
party: Your Scheme of Puritan Notables seems full of danger,
says the other. What remedy? “No remedy except,—except
that you leave us to sit as we are, for a while yet!” suggest the
Official persons.—“In no wise!” answer the Officers, with a
vehemence of look and tone, which my Lord General, seemingly
anxious to do it, cannot repress.' You must not, and cannot sit

men, fearing God and of approved integrity, as a temporary expedient for carrying
on the government, until the people, understanding their true interests, were fit and
ready to have Parliamentary government restored. A news-letter in the Clarke
Papers says: ‘‘ The General and officers met this day in Council [with the Parlia-
ment leaders] and partly concluded of dissolving this government and also of
constituting another (by consent of parliament if possible) till another representative
shall be chosen. Tomorrow they meet again upon it.”]

1[In the Anglish Historical Review for 1893 (p. 526) Mr. Firth printed some
news-letters from the Clarke A/SS. and the Clarendon Papers, showing that so far
from the origin of the revolution of 1653 being due to Cromwell, he steadily opposed
the demands of the officers up to the very eve of the expulsion of the Parliament,
when he either found the tide of opposition too strong for him to resist, or, as he
himself consistently declared, was stung into action by the Parliament’s breach of
the compromise agreed upon with the officers.

On March 18, one of these news-letters reports: ‘‘ The preaching people...
are now very violent against this Parliament, and [this day sennight] the Council
of Officers at St. James had resolved to turn them out, and to have shut up the house
doors, had not the General and Col. Desborough interceded, who asked them, if
they destroyed that Parliament, what they should call themselves, a state they
could not be; they answered that they would call a new Parliament; then, says
the General, the Parliament is not the supreme power, but that is the supreme
power that calls it, and, besides, the House is now endeavouring a treaty with
Holland (which is the only way that we have left for the destroying of the combina-
tions of our enemies both at home and beyond sea), and if we destroy them, neither
Holland nor any other Prince or State will enter into a treaty with us.”

April 1. ‘‘ Our soldiers resolve to have speedily a new Representative, and the
Parliament resolve the contrary ; the General sticks close to the House [z.e., upholds
it, for another news-letter, under date of April 9, says that he has not been either
to Council or Parliament for three weeks or a month], which causeth him to be daily
railed on by the preaching party, who say they must have both a new Parliament
and General before the work be done, and that these are not the people that are
appointed for perfecting of that great work of God which they have begun.”

April 8. ‘‘ We hear no talk now of our new Representative, the heat of the soldiers
being somewhat abated by the General's sticking close to the House, and sending
some of the maddest of them [the troops] into Scotland.”

Dr. Gardiner states that on April 15 Cromwell reappeared in the House, ‘“‘to
plead earnestly for the substitution of a general election in place of a mere scheme
for the filling up of vacancies. It is high time, replied one of the leaders—possibl
Vane or Marten—to his demand for a new Parliament, to choose a new General.
Angry words were interchanged, and order was only restored by the intervention
of the House. .. . Cromwell, taking his critics at their word, offered his resignation.
No officer was found bold enough to accept the succession, and Cromwell remained
at the head of the force which he alone could wield.” Commonwealth and Pro-
tectorate, ii. 201.]

— i i a a a a ek oe a ee ——— ee eT ee ee a ee
=| . + vr -

1653.] THE RUMP 263

longer, say the Officers ;—and their look says even, Shall not!
Bulstrode went home to Chelsea, very late, with the tears in his
big dull eyes, at thought of the courses men were getting into.
Bulstrode and Widdrington were the most eager for sitting ;
Chief-Justice St. John, strange thing in a Constitutional gentle-
man, declared that there could be no sitting for us any longer.
We parted, able to settle on nothing, except the engagement to
meet here again tomorrow morning, and to leave the Bill asleep
till something were settled on. ‘A leading person,’ Sir Harry
Vane or another, undertook that nothing should be done in it
till then.

Wednesday, 20th April 1653. My Lord General accordingly is
in his reception-room this morning, ‘in plain black clothes and
gray worsted stockings ;’ he, with many Officers : but few Members
have yet come, though punctual Bulstrode and certain others are
there. Some waiting there is ; some impatience that the Members
would come. The Members do not come: instead of Members,
comes a notice that they are busy getting on with their Bill in the
House, hurrying it double-quick through all the stages. Possible ?
New message that it will be Law in a little while, if no interposi-
tion take place! Bulstrode hastens off to the House: my Lord
General, at first incredulous, does now also hasten off,—nay
orders that a Company of Musketeers of his own regiment attend
him. Hastens off, with a very high expression of countenance, I
think ;—saying or feeling: Who would have believed it of them ?
“It is not honest; yea, it is contrary to common honesty!”
—My Lord General, the big hour is come!

Young Colonel Sidney, the celebrated Algernon, sat in the
House this morning ; a House of some Fifty-three.t Algernon
has left distinct note of the affair; less distinct we have from
Bulstrode, who was also there, who seems in some points to be
even wilfully wrong. Solid Ludlow was far off in Ireland, but
gathered many details in after years; and faithfully wrote them
down, in the unappeasable indignation of his heart. Combining
these three originals, we have, after various perusals and collations
and considerations, obtained the following authentic, moderately
conceivable account :* :

‘The Parliament sitting as usual, and being in debate upon the

1That is Cromwell's number; Ludlow, far distant, and not credible on this
occasion, says ‘ Eighty or a Hundred.’

2Blencowe’s Szdney Papers (London 1825), pp. 139-41; Whitlocke, p. 529;
Ludlow, ii. 456 ;—the last two are reprinted in Parliamentary History, xx. 128,

—=— = eh

264 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT 20 April.

‘Bill with the amendments, which it was thought would have
‘been passed that day, the Lord General Cromwell came into the
‘House, clad in plain black clothes and gray worstea stockings,
‘and sat down, as he used to do, in an ordinary place.’ For some
time he listens to this interesting debate on the Bill; beckoning
once to Harrison, who came over to him, and answered dubitat-
ingly. Whereupon the Lord General sat still, for about a quarter
of an hour longer. But now the question being to be put, That
this Bill do now pass, he beckons again to Harrison, says, “‘ This
‘is the time; I must do it!’ ’’—and so ‘rose up, put off his hat,
‘and spake. At the first, and for a good while, he spake to the
‘commendation of the Parliament for their pains and care of the
‘ public good ; but afterwards he changed his style, told them of
‘their injustice, delays of justice, self-interest, and other faults,’
—rising higher and higher, into a very aggravated style indeed.
An honourable Member, Sir Peter Wentworth by name, not
known to my readers, and by me better known than trusted,
rises to order, as we phrase it; says, “It is a strange language
this ; unusual within the walls of Parliament this! And from a
trusted servant too; and one whom we have so highly honoured ;
and one ’”’—‘ ‘Come, come!’” exclaims my Lord General in a
very high key, “ we have had enough of this,”—and in fact my
Lord Genera] now blazing all up into clear conflagration, exclaims,
«JT will put an end to your prating,’”’ and steps forth into the
floor of the House, and ‘clapping on his hat,’ and occasionally
‘stamping the floor with his feet,’ begins a discourse which no
man can report! He says—Heavens! he is heard saying: “‘It
is not fit that you should sit here any longer!’ You have sat
too long here for any good you have been doing lately. ‘You
shall now give place to better men !—Call them in!’” adds he
briefly, to Harrison, in word of command : and ‘some twenty or
thirty’ grim musketeers enter, with bullets in their snaphances ;
grimly prompt for orders; and stand in some attitude of Carry-
arms there. Veteran men: men of might and men of war, their
faces are as the faces of lions, and their feet are swift as the roes
upon the mountains ;—not beautiful to honourable gentlemen at
this moment !

“You call yourselves a Parliament,” continues my Lord
General in clear blaze of conflagration: “ ‘ You are no Parliament ;
I say you are no Parliament! Some of you are drunkards,’” and
his eye flashes on poor Mr. Chaloner, an official man of some
value, addicted to the bottle; “‘some of you are——’” and he

My

1653.) DISMISSAL OF THE RUMP 265

glares into Harry Marten, and the poor Sir Peter who rose to
order, lewd livers both; “living in open contempt of God’s Com-
mandments. Following your own greedy appetites, and the
Devil’s Commandments. ‘Corrupt unjust persons,” and here I
think he glanced ‘at Sir Bulstrode Whitlocke, one of the
‘Commissioners of the Great Seal, giving him and others very
‘sharp language, though he named them not :’ “ ‘Corrupt unjust
persons ; scandalous to the profession of the Gospel:’ how can
you be a Parliament for God’s People? Depart, I say; and let
us have done with you. In the name of God,—go!”’

The House is of course all on its feet,—uncertain almost
whether not on its head: such a scene as was never seen before
in any House of Commons. History reports with a shudder that
my Lord General, lifting the sacred Mace itself, said, “‘ What
shall we do with this bauble? Take it away !’”’—and gave it to
a musketeer. And now,—“Fetch him down!”’ says he to
Harrison, flashing on the Speaker. Speaker Lenthall, more an
ancient Roman than anything else, declares, He will not come
till forced. “Sir,” said Harrison, “I will lend you a hand ;” on
which Speaker Lenthall came down, and gloomily vanished.
They all vanished ; flooding gloomily, clamorously out, to their
ulterior businesses, and respective places of abode: the Long
Parliament is dissolved! “It’s you that have forced me to
‘this,’ exclaims my Lord General: “‘I have sought the Lord
‘night and day, that He would rather slay me than put me upon
‘the doing of this work.’” ‘At their going out, some say the
‘Lord General said to young Sir Harry Vane, calling him by his
‘name, That he might have prevented this; but that he was a
‘juggler, and had not common honesty.’ “‘O Sir Harry Vane,
thou with thy subtle casuistries and abstruse hair-splittings, thou
art other than a good one, I think! ‘The Lord deliver me from
‘thee, Sir Harry Vane!’” ‘All being gone out, the door of the
‘ House was locked, and the Key with the Mace, as I heard, was
‘carried away by Colonel Otley ;’—and it is all over, and the
unspeakable Catastrophe has come, and remains.!

1[In one of the news-letters amongst the Clarke MSS. is an account of this
expulsion of the Parliament in which, Mr. Firth remarks, ‘‘ there is an obvious
attempt to soften and tone down the violence and illegality of the General’s pro-
ceedings. Cromwell’s denunciatory speech is merely alluded to as ‘something said
by the General ;’ the Speaker is described as ‘modestly pulled’ out of the chair,
and Parliament as ‘dissolved with as little noise as can be imagined.’” See
Clarke Papers, vol. iii. pp. vii., 1, 2.]

—_ ee

ee a ae OSS nae? eee es
A Mi PE aR AN oe oe ie fe A a ee a Ge ED —,

266 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [23 April.

Such was the destructive wrath of my Lord General Cromwell
against the Nominal Rump Parliament of England. Wrath which
innumerable mortals since have accounted extremely diabolic ;
which some now begin to account partly divine. Divine or dia-
bolic, it is an indisputable fact ; left for the commentaries of men.
The Rump Parliament has gone its ways ;—and truly, except it
be in their own, | know not in what eyes are tears at their
departure. They went very softly, softly as a Dream, say all
witnesses. “We did not hear a dog bark at their going!”
asserts my Lord General elsewhere.

It is said, my Lord General did not, on his entrance into the
House, contemplate quite as a certainty this strong measure ;
but it came upon him like an irresistible impulse, or inspiration,
as he heard their Parliamentary eloquence proceed. “ Perceiving
the spirit of God so strong upon me, I would no longer consult
flesh and blood.”! He has done it, at all events; and is
responsible for the results it may have. A responsibility which
he, as well as most of us, knows to be awful: but he fancies it
was in answer to the English Nation, and to the Maker of the
English Nation and of him; and he will do the best he may
with it.?

LETTER CLXXXVIII

WE have to add here an Official Letter, of small significance
in itself, but curious for its date, the Saturday after this great
Transaction, and for the other indications it gives. Except the

1Godwin, iii. 456 (who cites Echard; not much of an authority in such
matters).

2[In the afternoon Cromwell dismissed the Council, at the same time telling
them that Parliament was dissolved. ‘‘ Sir,” replied Bradshaw, ‘‘ we have heard
what you did at the House this morning, and before many hours all England will
hear of it; but you are mistaken to think that the Parliament is dissolved, for no
power under heaven can dissolve them but themselves; therefore take you notice
of that.” Of this, Mr. Firth says, ‘‘ Bradshaw was right. ‘The ideal of constitu-
tional government which the Long Parliament represented would prove stronger in
the end than Cromwell's red-coats. That Parliament had all the faults with which
Cromwell charged it, but for Englishmen it meant inherited rights, ‘freedom
broadening slowly down,’ and all that survived of the supremacy of law. With its
expulsion, the army flung away the one shred of legality with which it had hitherto
covered its actions, . . . Henceforth, Cromwell's life was a vain attempt to clothe
that [the military] force in constitutional forms, and to make it seem something
else, so that it might become something else.” Firth’s Cromwell, p. 324.]

1653.) LETTER CLX XXVIII, WHITEHALL 267

Lord General, ‘Commander-in-Chief of all the Forces raised and
to be raised,’ there is for the moment no Authority very clearly
on foot in England;—though Judges, and all manner of
Authorities whatsoever do, after some little preliminary parleying,
consent to go on as before.

The Draining of the Fens had been resumed under better
auspices when the War ended ;! and a new Company of Adven-
turers, among whom Oliver himself is one, are vigorously proceed-
ing with a New Bedford Level,—the same that yet continues.
A ‘ Petition’ of theirs, addressed ‘ To the Lord General,’ in these
hasty hours, sets forth that upon the ‘ 20th of this instant April’
(exactly while Oliver was turning out the Parliament), ‘about a
Hundred-and-fifty persons,’ from the Towns of Swaffham and
Botsham,—which Towns had petitioned about certain rights
of theirs, and got clear promise of redress in fit time,—did
‘tumultuously assemble,’ to seek redress for themselves; did ‘ by
force expel your Petitioners’ workmen from their diking and
working in the said Fens ;’? did tumble-in again ‘the dikes by
them made ;’ and in fine did peremptorily signify that if they
or any other came again to dike in these Fens, it would be
worse for them. ‘The evil effects of which ’—are very apparent
indeed. Whereupon this Official Letter, or Warrant; written
doubtless in the press of much other business.

‘To Mr. Packer, Major of the General’s own Regiment’

‘ Whitehall,’ 23d April 1653.
Mr. Packer,

I hear some unruly persons have lately com-
mitted great outrages in Cambridgeshire, about Swaffham and
Botsham, in throwing down the works making by the adventurers,
and menacing those they employ thereabout. Wherefore I desire
you to send one of my troops, with a captain, who may by all
means persuade the people to quiet, by letting them know, They
must not riotously do anything, for that must not be suffered :
but if there be any wrong done by the adventurers,—upon

1 Act for that object (Scobell, ii. 33), 2gth May 1649.
2[This reads almost like a parody on Cromwell’s proceedings at West-
minster, ]

ee A ge N,N, oy wi ge MR

268 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [23 April.

complaint, such course shall be taken as appertains to justice,
and right will be done. I rest,

Your loving friend,

O.tver CroMWELL.*

The Declaration of the Lord General and his Council of Officers,
which came out on the Friday following the grand Catastrophe,
does not seem to be of Oliver’s composition : it is a Narrative of
calm pious tone, of considerable length; promises, as a second
Declaration still more explicitly does,? a Real Assembly of the
Puritan Notables ;—and on the whole can be imagined by the
reader ; nay we shall hear the entire substance of it from Oliver's
own mouth, before long. ‘These Declarations and other details
we omit.? Conceive that all manner of Authorities, with or
without some little preambling, agree to go on as heretofore;
that adherences arrive from Land-Generals and Sea-Generals by
return of post; that the old Council of State having vanished
with its Mother, a new Interim Council of State, with ‘ Oliver
Cromwell Captain General’ at the head of it, answers equally
well; in a word, that all people are looking eagerly forward to
those same ‘ Known Persons, Men fearing God, and of approved
Integrity,’ who are now to be got together from all quarters of
England, to say what shall be done with this Commonwealth,—
whom there is now no Fag-end of a corrupt Parliament to prevent
just men from choosing with their best ability. Conceive all
this ; and read the following

* From the Records of the Fen Office, in Serjeants’ Inn, London ; communicated,
with other Papers relating thereto, by Samuel Wells, Esq. [Carlyle read this name
Parker, and addressed the letter: ‘ Zo Mr. Parker, Agent for the Company of
Adventurers for Draining the Great Level of the fens’; but the inverted commas
show that this address was supplied by himself, and it is impossible to believe that
Cromwell would authorise a civilian to give orders to his troops. ‘The letter is
manifestly written to an officer (presumably the Major) of his own regiment, and
as Major at that time was Packer, there is no doubt that it was addressed to
him.

1ged April, Cromwelliana, p. 120. 2 30th April, /ézd., p. 122.
3(On May 20, certain aldermen, etc., brought a petition for the reinstatement of —
the old Parliament, and Cromwell made a speech, for a brief summary of which |
see Supplement, No. 78. See also letter to Commissioners in Wales, No. 77.]}

) . | = he ;
o q ~ or oe
OS tha ON et TS et ee as |

1653.] SUMMONS 269

SUMMONS
To

Foras mucH as, upon the dissolution of the late Parliament, it
became necessary, that the peace, safety and good government
of this Commonwealth should be provided for: And in order
thereunto, divers persons fearing God, and of approved fidelity
and honesty, are, by myself with the advice of my Council of
Officers, nominated ; to whom the great charge and trust of so
weighty affairs is to be committed: And having good assurance
of your love to, and courage for, God and the interest of His
Cause, and of the good of the people of this commonwealth :

I, Oliver Cromwell, Captain General and Commander-in-Chief
of all the Armies and Forces raised and to be raised within this
Commonwealth, do hereby summon and require You, ;
(being one of the Persons nominated) personally to be and appear
at the Council-Chamber, commonly known or called by the name
of the Council-Chamber in Whitehall, within the City of West-
minster, upon the fourth day of July next ensuing the date
hereof; Then and there to take upon you the said trust; unto
which you are hereby called, and appointed to serve as a member
for the county of And hereof you are not to fail.

Given under my hand and seal the 6th day of June 1653.

OLIveR CROMWELL.*

* Newspapers (in Cromwellzana, p. 125). [The original summons to Gervase
Piggott, M.P. for the County of Nottingham, signed and sealed, is in the Lansdowne
MSS, 1236f. 107. Underwritten is a note by Piggott, ‘‘ I rather chose to be made
a sacrifice than to yield obedience to these commands. GER. PIGOTT,” and a
second note by Peck the antiquary, ‘‘I was told by the Gent. who gave me
this original (and who is a person of credit and worth) that these words written by
Ger. Pigott were all a flourish, written after the Restoration; the said G. P. com-
plying before as much as anybody. F. PECK.” The summons to Jacob Caley,
Esq., County Suffolk, is in Sir R. Tangye’s Collection. ]

Soe eae Ss ee oe ee * a J

270 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT (4July.

SPEECH FIRST

A HUNDRED-AND-FoRTY of these Summonses were issued ; and of
all the Parties so summoned, ‘ only two’ did not attend.! Discon-
solate Bulstrode says, ‘Many of this Assembly being persons of
‘fortune and knowledge, it was much wondered-at by some that
‘they would, at this Summons, and from such hands, take upon
‘them the Supreme Authority of this Nation: considering how
‘little right Cromwell and his Officers had to give it, or those
‘Gentlemen to take it.’? My disconsolate friend, it is a sign that
Puritan England in general accepts this action of Cromwell and
his Officers, and thanks them for it, in such a case of extremity ;
saying as audibly as the means permitted: Yea, we did wish it
so! Rather mournful to the disconsolate official mind !—Lord
Clarendon again, writing with much latitude, has characterised
this Convention as containing in it, ‘divers Gentlemen who had
estates, and such a proportion of credit’ in the world as might
give some colour to the business ; but consisting on the whole of
a very miserable beggarly sort of persons, acquainted with nothing
but the art of praying ; ‘artificers of the meanest trades,’ if they
even had any trade :—all which the reader shall, if he please, add
to the general guano-mountains, and pass on not regarding.

The undeniable fact is, these men were, as Whitlocke intimates,
a quite reputable Assembly ; got together by anxious ‘consultation
of the godly Clergy’ and chief Puritan lights in their respective
Counties ; not without much earnest revision, and solemn con-
sideration in all kinds, on the part of men adequate enough for
such a work, and desirous enough to do it well. The List of the
Assembly exists ;3 not yet entirely gone dark for mankind. A fair
proportion of them still recognisable to mankind. Actual Peers
one or two: founders of Peerage Families, two or three, which still
exist among us,—Colonel Edward Montague, Colonel Charles
Howard, Anthony Ashley Cooper. And better than King’s Peers,
certain Peers of Nature ; whom if not the King and his pasteboard
Norroys have had the luck to make Peers of, the living heart of

1[Dr. Gardiner says, ‘‘I believe the usual statement that two, and only two,
members absented themselves, to be founded on a mistake. ‘Two on the list first
made up by the officers were not on the final list. I take these to have been Fair-
fax and another.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, ii. 235 note.}

2 Whitlocke, p. 534. 3 Somers Tracts, i, 216.

ole ne

1653.] SPEECH I 271

land has since raised to the Peerage, and means to keep there,
—Colonel Robert Blake the Sea-King, for one. ‘ Known persons,’
I do think ; ‘of approved integrity, men fearing God ;’ and perhaps
not entirely destitute of sense any one of them! Truly it seems
rather a distinguished Parliament,—even though Mr. Praisegod
Barbone, ‘the Leather-merchant in Fleet-street,’ be, as all mortals
must admit, a member of it. The fault, I hope, is forgivable ?
Praisegod, though he deals in leather, and has a name which can
be misspelt, one discerns to be the son of pious parents; to be
himself a man of piety, of understanding and weight,—and even of
considerable private capital, my witty flunkey friends! We will
leave Praisegod to do the best he can, I think.—And old Francis
Rouse is there from Devonshire ; once member for Truro ; Provost
of Eton College ; whom by and by they make Speaker ;—whose
Psalms the Northern Kirks still sing. Richard Mayor of Hursley
is there, and even idle Dick Norton; Alexander Jaffray of Aber-
deen, Laird Swinton of the College of Justice in Edinburgh ;
Alderman Ireton, brother of the late Lord Deputy, colleague of
Praisegod in London. In fact, a real Assembly of the Notables in
Puritan England; a Parliament, Parliamentum, or real Speaking-
Apparatus for the now dominant Interest in England, as exact as
could well be got,—much more exact, I suppose, than any ballot-
box, free hustings or ale-barrel election usually yields.

Such is the Assembly called the Little Parliament, and wittily
Barebones’s Parliament ; which meets on the 4th of July. Their
witty name survives; but their history is gone all dark; and no
man, for the present, has in his head or in his heart the faintest
intimation of what they did, or what they aimed to do. They
are very dark to us; and will never be illuminated much! Here
is one glance of them face to face ; here in this Speech of Oliver’s,
— if we can read it, and listen along with them to it. There is
this one glance; and for six generations, we may say, in the
English mind there has not been another.

Listening from a distance of two Centuries, across the Death-
chasms, and howling kingdoms of Decay, it is not easy to catch
everything! But let us faithfully do the best we can. Having
once packed Dryasdust, and his unedifying cries of “ Nonsense !
Mere hypocrisy! Ambitious dupery!” &c. &c. about his business ;
closed him safe under hatches, and got silence established,—we
shall perhaps hear a word or two; have a real glimpse or two of
things long vanished ; and see for moments this fabulous Bare-
- bones’s Parliament itself, standing dim in the heart of the extinct

— 7)

_— .

272 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 duly.

Centuries, as a recognisable fact, once flesh and blood, now air and
memory ; not untragical to us !

Read this first, from the old Newspapers ; and then the Speech
itself, which a laborious Editor has, with all industry, copied and
corrected from Two Contemporaneous Reports by different hands,
and various editions of these. Note, however: The Jtalic sen-
tences in brackets, most part of which, and yet perhaps not enough
of which I have suppressed, are evidently by an altogether modern
hand !

‘ July 4th, 1653. This being the day appointed by the Letters
‘of Summons from his Excellency the Lord General, for the
‘meeting of the Persons called to the Supreme Authority, there
‘eame about a Hundred-and-twenty of them to the Council
‘Chamber in Whitehall. After each person had given-in a Ticket
‘of his Name, they all entered the room, and sat down in chairs
‘appointed for them, round about the table. Then his Excellency
‘the Lord General, standing by the window opposite to the middle
‘of the table, and as many of the Officers of the Army as the
‘room could well contain, some on his right hand and others on
‘his left, and about him,—made the following Speech to the
‘ Assembly :’}

GENTLEMEN,

I suppose the summons that hath been instru-
mental to bring you hither gives you well to understand the
occasion? of your being here. Howbeit, I have something
‘farther’ to impart to you, which is an Instrument drawn up by
the consent and advice of the principal officers of the army ;

1[For this speech we have, first the copy found amongst Milton’s official papers,
and printed in the Le/ters and Papers of State, edited by John Nickolls (referred to
in the following pages, for the sake of brevity, as M/z/fon), which Carlyle takes as
the basis of his text (see note on p. 303 below); secondly, the version in the O/d
Parliamentary History, stated to be taken from ‘“‘the original edition printed by
W. Dugard and H. Hills”; and, thirdly, a pamphlet printed in 1654, and stated
to be ‘‘a true copy, published for information and to avoid mistakes,” E. 813, 13,
of which many copies are extant. The text in the Parliamentary History is much
more accurately printed, and there are probably some slight emendations by the
editor (which we generally find, although to a small extent and judiciously done,
in those volumes) ; but allowing for these, it appears likely that the 1654 pamphlet
is ‘‘ the original edition” from which it is printed, and this view is strengthened by
the fact that they both stop at the same point. Therefore, although both texts
have been collated, it has not been needful, as a rule, to distinguish them in the
notes. For the treatment of the speeches in the present edition, see ‘‘ Editor's
Note,” vol. i.]
2[** cause,” pamphlet. |

1653.) SPEECH I 273

which is a little (as we conceive) more significant than the letter of
summons.! We have that here to tender you; and somewhat
likewise to say farther for our own exoneration ;? which we hope
may be somewhat farther to your satisfaction. ‘And’ therefore
seeing you sit here somewhat uneasily by reason of the scantness
of the room, and heat of the weather, I shall contract myself with
respect thereunto.

We® have not thought it amiss a little to remind you of+* the
series of Providences wherein the Lord hath appeared, dispensing
wonderful things to these nations from the beginning of our
troubles to this very day.

If I should look much backward, we might remind you of®
the state of affairs as they were before the Short, and that was
the last, Parliament,—in what posture the things ® of this nation
‘then’ stood: but they do so well, I presume, occur to all your
memories and knowledge, that I shall not need to look so far
backward, Nor yet to the beginning of those hostile occasions
that were between the King that was, and the then Parliament.’
And indeed should I begin much later,’ those things that would
fall very necessarily® before you, would rather be fit!® for a
History than for a verbal discourse at this present.

But thus far we may look back. You very well know, after
divers turnings of affairs, it pleased God, much about the midst
of this war, to winnow (if I may so say) the forces of this nation ; !!
and to put them into the hands of other men of other principles
than those that did engage at the first. By what ways and
means that was brought about, would ask more time than is
allotted me to mind you of ‘it.’ Indeed there are stories that
do recite those transactions, and give you narratives of matters

1[‘‘that other summons,” samphlet.]

2*exoneration’ does not here mean ‘excuse’ or ‘ shifting-away of blame,’ but
mere laying down of office with due form.

3[ 1,” pamphlet. | 4[‘‘to mind to you,” AMzlton.]
5[** remember,” Zamphilet.] 8[“' affairs,’’ Mzlton.]
7 The Long Parliament. 8\** this labour,” pamphlet. ]

®[‘ very maturely ” (probably misprint for ‘‘ very naturally”), 1Zz/ton.]
10(Omitted in Adz/ton.]
1 Self-denying Ordinance ; beginning of 1645: see vol. i. p. 182 ef seg.

VoL. u.—18

274 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT £4 duly.

of fact: but those things wherein the life and power of them lay ;
those strange windings and turnings of Providence; those very
great appearances of God, in crossing and thwarting the purposes
of men, that He might raise up a poor and contemptible company
of men,! neither versed in military affairs, nor having much
natural propensity to them, even through the owning of a principle
of godliness and of religion ; which so soon as it came to be owned,
and the state of affairs put upon the foot of that account,? how
God blessed them, furthering all undertakings, yet using the
most improbable and the most contemptible and despicable
means ° (for that we shall ever own): you very well know.
What the several successes and issues have been, is not fit to
mention at this time neither ;—though I confess I thought to
have enlarged myself upon that subject ; forasmuch as considering
the works of God, and the operations of His hands, is a principal
part of our duty ; and a great encouragement to the strengthening
of our hands and of our faith, for that which is behind * those
marvellous dispensations which have been given us. Among
other ends that’s a principal end, which ought to be minded by
us. /
‘Certainly ’ in this revolution of affairs, as the issue of those
successes that God was pleased to give to this army,® and ‘to’
the authority that then stood, there were very great things
brought about ;—besides those dints that came upon the nations‘
and places where the war itself was, very great things in civil
matters too, ‘As first,’ the bringing of offenders to justice,—
and the greatest of them. Bringing® of the State of this

1 Fairfax’s Army. 2 upon that footing,

3[‘* blessed them, even all undertakings by his using of the most improbable,” etc. ,
Milton , ‘‘ blessed them and all undertakings by the raising of that most improbable,
despicable, contemptible means,” pamphlet. |

4 still to come.

5[‘‘ and then having given us those marvellous dispensations amongst other ends,
for that was a most principal end, as to us,” pamphlet. ]

6[** this nation,” zd2zd. ] 7 England, Ireland, Scotland.

8[‘* besides those [things] that were upon the nation in those places where the
war was carried on, even in the civil affairs, to bring offenders to justice (the greatest)
to the bringing,” Z¢/ton ; ‘‘ besides those dints that were upon these nations and

eT ay, Mate

——S— ‘yi ies = vr ‘a A . _e = —_—— ie

1653.] SPEECH I 275

Government to the name (at least) of a Commonwealth. Search-
ing and sifting of all persons and places. The King removed, and
brought to justice ; and many great ones with him. The House
of Peers laid aside. The House of Commons itself, the represen-
tative of the people of England, sifted, winnowed, and brought
to a handful; as you very well remember.

And truly God would not rest there :—for by the way,
although it’s fit for us to ascribe! our failings and miscarriages
to ourselves, yet the gloriousness of the work may well be
attributed to God Himself, and may be called His strange work.
You remember well that at the change of the government there
was not an end of our troubles,” [No /|—although in that year
were such high things transacted as indeed made it to be the
most memorable year (I mean the year 1648) that ever this
nation saw. So many insurrections,’ invasions, secret designs,
open and public attempts, ‘all’ quashed in so short a time, and
this by the very signal appearance of God Himself; which, I
hope, we shall never forget !—You know also, as I said before,
that, as the ‘ first’ effect of that memorable year of 1648 was to
lay a foundation, by bringing offenders to punishment, so it
brought us likewise to the change of Government : —although
it were worth the time ‘ perhaps, if one had time,’ to speak of the
carriages of some in ‘ places of’ trust, in most eminent ‘places
of’ trust, which were such as would have frustrated us of the
hopes ofall our undertakings (had not God miraculously appeared) ,®
I mean by the closure of the treaty that was endeavoured with
the King ;° whereby they would have put into his hands all that
we had engaged for, and ‘all’ our security should have only been

places where they were carried on, even in the civil affairs, to the bringing offenders
to justice, even the greatest, to the bringing,’’ pamph/et. |

1‘ intitle’ zx orig. 2[‘‘ your troubles,” Jz/ton.

3 Kent, St. Neot’s, Colchester, Welsh Poyer at Pembroke, Scotch Hamilton at
Preston, &c. &c.

4[‘‘ the foundations of bringing offenders to punishment, soit was of the change
of government,” doth texts. |

5[prevented, pamphlet. |

6 Treaty of the Isle of Wight, again and again endeavoured.

276 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT (4 July.

in a little paper!+- That thing going off, you very well know
how it kept this nation still in broils at sea and land.2- And yet
what God wrought in Ireland and Scotland you likewise know;
until He had finished all the troubles, upon the matter,? by His
marvellous salvation wrought at Worcester.

I confess to you, ‘that’ I am very much troubled in my own
spirit that the necessity of affairs requires I should be so short in
those things: because, as I told you, this is the Jeanest part of the
transactions, this mere historical narrative of them ;* there being
in every particular; in the King’s first going from the Parliament,
in the pulling-down of the Bishops, the House of Peers, in every
step towards that change of the government, ‘I say’ there is not
any ‘one’ of these ‘ things,’ thus removed and reformed, but there
is an ‘evident’ print of Providence set upon it, so that he who
runs may read it. I am sorry I have not opportunity to be more
particular ® in these things, which I principally designed, this
day ; thereby to stir up your hearts and mine to gratitude and
confidence.

I shall now begin a little to remember to you the passages that
have been transacted since Worcester. From whence, coming
with the rest of my fellow officers and soldiers, we expected, and
had some reasonable confidence that our expectations should not be
frustrated,’ that, having such an history to look back unto, such a

1|‘* whereby we should have put into his hands all that cause and interest we had
opposed, and had nothing to have secured us but a little piece of paper,” AamphZet.]

2[** But things going on, how it pleased the Lord to keep this nation in exercise
both at sea and land,” zézd.]

3 Means ‘so to speak ;’ a common phrase of those times ; a”perpetual one with
Clarendon, for instance.

4[‘* the lowest historical narration,’’ JZz/éon , ‘‘ to wit, an historical narration,”
pamphlet. |

5 (‘in every particular, whether in taking off the King, the House of Peers, the
pulling down of the Bishops, changing the government,” A/z/ton ; ‘‘ There being i in
every dispensation (whether the King’s going from the Parliament, the pulling down
the Bishops, purging the House at that time by their going away to assist the King,
or change of Government) ; whatever it was, not any of these things but hath a re-
mnarkaiie point of providence set upon it,” ibid. ]

‘‘T am heartily sorry that in point of time I cannot be particular,” 2d¢d. ]
if that the Authority that then was, having such a history to look back unto,

such a God that appeared for them so eminently, so visibly, that even our enemies

? 4 + /
as ee

vers) a? va fee tT -”)6hUcF le . to.

1653.] SPEECH I 277

God, so eminently visible, even our enemies confessing that God
Himself was certainly engaged against them, else they should
never have been disappointed in every engagement,—and that
may be used by the way, that if we had but miscarried in the
least,! all our former mercies were in danger to be lost :—I say,
having some confidence (coming up then), ‘that’ the mercies God
had shown, and the expectations which were upon our hearts,
and ‘upon’ the hearts of all good men, would have prompted
those who were in authority to have done those good things
which might, by honest men, have been judged fit for such a
God, and worthy of such mercies ; and indeed ‘ been’ a discharge
of duty from those ? for whom all these mercies had been shown,
for the true interest of this nation.’ [Yes /|—If I should now
labour to be particular in enumerating how businesses have * been
transacted from that time to the dissolution of the late Parlia-
ment, indeed I should be upon a theme which would be trouble- ,
some to myself. For I think I may say for myself and my
fellow officers, that we have rather desired and studied healing |
and looking-forward* than to rake into sores and to look back-
ward,—to give things forth® in those colours that would not be/
very pleasing to any good eye to look upon. Only this we shall |
say for our own vindication, as pointing out the ground for that
unavoidable necessity, nay even that duty’ that was incumbent
upon us, to make this last great change—I think it will not be
amiss to offer a word or two to that. [Hear, hear!| As I said

many times confessed that God was engaged against them, or they should never
have been brought so low, nor disappointed in every undertaking, For that may
be said (by the way) had we miscarried but once, where had we been? I say we did
think, and had some reasonable confidence that coming up then,” pampA/e?. |

llost one battle of these many. 2[‘*to those,” pamphlet. ]
. 3 L* that is the interest of the three nations ; the true interest of the three nations,’
ibid. |

4[‘« some businesses that have,” zdzd.]

5[‘* and prospiciency,” Ad@z/ton. These two words omitted in pamphlet. |

8(‘*to render things,” doth texts.]

7[“ our own vindication, laying the foundation for that unavoidable necessity,
nay even a duty,” A/z/¢on ; ‘‘ our own exoneration, and as thereby laying some foun-
dation for the making evident the necessity and duty,” pamphlet. |

= 7 wT a i ae fk 4 |

278 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

before, we are loath to rake into businesses, were there not a
necessity so to do.

Indeed we may say! that, ever since the coming-up of myself
and those gentlemen who have been engaged in the military
part, it hath been full? in our hearts and thoughts, to desire and
use all the fair and lawful means we could to have had the nation
reap the fruit of all the blood and treasure that had been spent
in this cause: and we have had many desires, and thirstings in
our spirits, to find out ways and means wherein we might be
anywise instrumental to help it forward. We were very tender;
for a long time, so much as to petition.? For some of the offi-
cers being members ; and others having very good acquaintance
with, and some relations to, divers members of Parliament,—we
did, from time to time, solicit them ; thinking if there should be
nobody else to prompt them, nor call upon them, these solicitations
would have been listened to, out of ingenuity? and integrity in
them that had opportunity to have answered our expectations.

Truly when we saw nothing would be done, we did, as we
thought according to our duty, a little, to remind them by a
petition ; which I suppose you have seen: it was delivered, as I
remember, in August last.° What effect that had, is likewise
very well known. The truth is, we had no return at all for our
satisfaction,—a few words given us ; the things presented to them
‘by us,’ or the most of them, we were told, were under considera-
tion: and those that were not ‘ presented by us’ had very little
or no consideration at all. Finding the people dissatisfied in
every corner of the nation, and ‘all men’ laying at our doors the
non-performance of these things, which had been promised, and
were of duty to be performed,—truly we did then think ourselves

1[‘‘ without commending ourselves,” added in pamphiet. }

2{'*we came fully bent,” 2dzd.]

3[‘« Till August last, or thereabouts, we never offered to petition,” added,
zbid. |

4 ingenuousness.

5 Antea, p. 253; Commons Journals, vii. 164 (13th August 1652) [‘‘ which we
delivered either in July or August last,” pamphlet].

1653.] SPEECH I 279

concerned, if we would (as becomes honest men) keep up! the
reputation of honest men in the world. And therefore we, divers
times, endeavoured to obtain meetings with divers members of
Parliament ;—and we did not begin those till about October last.
And in these meetings we did, with all faithfulness and sincerity,
beseech them that they would be mindful of their duty to God
and men, in the discharge of the trust reposed in them.? I
believe (as there are many gentlemen here know) we had at
least ten or twelve meetings; most humbly begging and _ be-
seeching of them, that by their own means they would bring
forth those good things that had been promised and expected ;
that so it might appear they did not do them by any suggestion
from the army, but from their own ingenuity: so tender were
we to preserve them in the reputation of the people. Having
had very many of those meetings, and declaring plainly that the
issue would be the displeasure and judgment of God, the dissatis-
faction of the people, the putting of ‘all’ things into a confusion,
yet how little we prevailed, we very well know, and we believe
it’s not unknown to you.

At last, when indeed we saw that things would not be laid to
heart, we had a very serious consideration among ourselves what
other ways to have recourse unto [{ Yea, that is the question !|; and
when we grew to more closer considerations, then they ‘the
Parliament men’ began to take the Act for a Representative * to
heart, and seemed exceeding willing to put it on. And had it
been done with integrity, there could nothing have happened
more welcome to our judgments than that. But plainly the
intention was, not to give the people right of choice (it would
have been but a seeming right) ; the ‘semblance of’ giving them
a choice was only to recruit the House,° the better to perpetuate

1[‘‘ we endeavoured, as became honest men, to keep up,” pamphlet. ]

2(‘‘ and of the discharge of their trust to God and man,” zézd. |

af reputation and opinion of the people to the uttermost,” zdzd. }

4For a New Parliament and Method of Election.

5[‘*the which, had it been done with that integrity, with that caution, that

would have saved this cause and the interest we have been so long engaged in, there
could nothing have happened, to our judgment, more welcome than that would

oad

so ee ee

280 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

themselves ; and truly, having been, divers of us, spoken unto to
give way hereunto, to which we made perpetual aversions, indeed
abominating the thoughts of it,—we declared our judgments
against it, and our dissatisfaction ‘ with it.’ And yet they that
would not hear of a representative before, when it lay three years
before them, without proceeding in one line, or making any con-
siderable progress in it,—I say, those that would not hear of this
Bill before, when they saw us falling into more close considerations,!
then instead of protracting the Bill, did make as much preposter-
ous haste ‘ with it’ on the other hand, and run into that ‘ opposite’
extremity.

Finding that this spirit was not according to God; and that
the whole weight of this cause,—which must needs be very dear
unto us who had so often adventured our lives for it, and we be-
lieve it was so to you,—did hang upon this business ‘ now in hand ;’
and when we saw plainly that there was not so much as any?
consideration to assert it,—‘this cause,’—or provide security for
it, but ‘only’ to cross the troublesome people of the army, who
by this time were high enough in their displeasures : truly, I say,
when we saw ‘all’ this, having power in our hands, ‘ we could not
resolve’ to let such monstrous proceedings to go on, and so to
throw away all our liberties into the hands of those against whom
we had fought [ Presbyterian-Royalists ; at Preston and elsewhere,—
“ fought against,” yea and beaten to ruin, your Excellency might add !] ;
we came, first, to this conclusion among ourselves,t That if we
have been. But finding plainly that the intendment of it was not to give the people
that right of choice [although it had been but a seeming right, zzserted in 1654

pamphlet, but very carelessly printed]; but the seeming to give the people that choice
was intended and designed only to recruit the House,” Pari. Hist. ]

1[‘* but yet they would not hear of a new representative till it had lain three
years before them, without proceeding with one line considerably in it; nay, they
could not endure to hear of it. Then, when we came to our close considerations,”
Parl. Hist.)
sf was not so much consideration,” pamphlet. ]
3|**to cross those that they reckoned the most troublesome people they had
to deal with, which was the army,” zézd. |

4[“T say, when we that had the power in our hands, saw that to let the business
go tosuch an issue as this was to throw back the cause into the hands of them we
first fought with, we came to this first conclusion amongst ourselves,’”’ Parl. Hist.
This is clearer than the J/z/ton version and needs no additional words to make
sense. ]

ee ee a ee ee

“oo ee ae 5) ee “ 7 orn a a el

1653.] SPEECH I 281

had been fought out of our liberties and rights, necessity would
have taught us patience ; but that to deliver them ‘sluggishly ’
up would render us the basest people in the world, and worthy
to be accounted haters of God and of His people. When it
pleased God to lay this close to our hearts; and indeed to show
us! that the interest of His people was grown cheap, ‘that i
was’ not at all laid to heart, but that if things came? to real com-
petition, the cause, even among themselves, would also 3 in every-
thing go to the ground : indeed this did add more considerations to
us, that there was a duty incumbent upon us, ‘even upon us.’ And,
—I speak here, in the presence of some that was at the closure of
our consultations,‘ ‘and’ as before the Lord,—the thinking of an
act of violence was to us worse than any engagement ° that ever
we were in, or that could be, to the utmost hazard of our lives
[Hear him !|: so willing were we, even very tender and desirous
if possible ‘that’ these men might quit their places with honour.

I am the longer upon this ;° because it hath been in our own
hearts and consciences, justifying us, and hath never been yet
thoroughly imparted to any;’ and we had rather begin with
you than have done it before ;—and do think indeed that this
Transaction is more proper for a verbal communication than to
have put it into writing. I doubt, he whose pen is most gentle
in England, in recording that * would, whether he would or no,
have been tempted to dip it deep in anger and wrath. [Stifled
cries from Dryasdust.|—But affairs being at this posture, that
we saw plainly, even® in some critical cases,!° that the cause of
the people of God was a despised thing ;—truly we did believe
then that the hands of other men ‘than these’ must be the

1[*‘ to find,” Mziton ,; ‘‘ that we found,” pamphlet.)
2(‘*if we came,” J/zlton and zdid. 3[‘‘ almost,” zdzd.]
4! ‘« the close consultations,” zézd.

5[ Carlyle altered to ‘‘ battle.”]

6|‘* And truly this I am the longer upon,” pamphiez. |

7(‘*in our hearts and consciences our justification, and hath never yet been
mparted thoroughly to the nation,” zézd.]

8[‘‘in England to have carried on that,” JZi/ton ; in the Zamphi/et¢ the sentence is
abridged. ]

9['* plainly and evidently,” pamphlet, | 10‘ things’ zz orig.

282 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

hands to be used for the work. And we thought then, it was
very high time to look about us, and to be sensible of our
duty. [Oliver's voice somewhat rising ; Major-General Harrison and
the others looking rather animated !|

If, I say, I should take up your time to tell you what instances !
we have to satisfy our judgments and consciences that these are
not vain imaginations, nor things fictitious,’ but that fell within
the compass of our own certain knowledge, it would bring me,
I say, to the things I would avoid, to rake into these things
too much.? Only this. If anybody were in competition for
any place of real and signal trust,‘ ‘if any really public interest
was at stake in that Parliament,’ how hard and difficult a thing
it was to get anything to be carried without making parties,°>—
without practices ° indeed unworthy of a Parliament! And when
things must be carried so in a supreme authority, indeed I think
it is not as it ought to be, to say no worse’ {Nor do I|!—But
when we came to other trials, as in that case of Wales, ‘of
establishing a preaching ministry in Wales,’ which, I must confess
for my own part, I set myself upon,—if I should relate * what
discountenance that business of the poor people of God there
had, (who had men ® watching over them like so many wolves,
ready to catch the lamb as soon as it was brought out into the
world) ; how signally that business was trodden under foot ‘in
Parliament,’ to the discountenancing of the honest people,!® and

1[* innocence,” AZz/zon. ]

2('* that were petitioned for,” pamphlet (instead of ‘‘ things fictitious’’).]

3[The last seven words omitted in AZz/¢on.] 4[** justice,” AZz/ton. ]

5/** parties and friends, etc., things indeed unworthy,” J/¢on.]

8‘ things’ zx orig.

7[ things were carried so in the supreme authority, I think it was not as it ought
to be, to say no worse,” J@z/ton. Carlyle here follows the samphiet (in Parl.
History), except the last four words, added from AZz/ton. |

8[‘inform” in pamphlet. In Milton the passage runs: ‘‘ which, I confess, for
my part, I set my rest upon it, when there was a discountenancing that business of
the people of God there, where they watched over them as wolves over so many
lambs, ready to catch the lambs as soon as they are,” etc. ]

» Clergymen so-called.

10([** how they trod them under foot, to the discontent of all the good people of
the nation,” MZz/ton ; ‘‘ how signally they threw that business under foot, to the
discountenancing of the honest people,” samph/et. |

1653.] SPEECH I 283
the countenancing of the malignant party, of this Common-
wealth—! I need but say it was so. For many of you know,

and by sad experience have felt it to be so, ‘ And’ some ‘body’

I hope will, at leisure, better impart to you the state of this
business ‘of Wales ;’ which really, to myself and officers, was as
plain a trial of their spirits, ‘the Parliament’s spirits,’ as anything,
—it being known to many of us that God did kindle a seed there
[Such is the metaphor] indeed hardly to be paralleled since the
primitive time.—

[I would these had been all the instances ‘ we had!’ but]! find-
ing which way the spirits of men went, and finding that good
was never intended to the people of God,—I mean, when I say
the people of God, I mean the large comprehension of them,
under the several forms of godliness in this nation ; when we saw,

I say, that all tenderness was forgotten to the good people
(though it was by their hands and their means, by the blessing
of God, that those sat where they did),’—we thought this very
bad? requital! I will not say, they were come to an utter —
inability of working reformation,*—although [I could say that in |
‘regard to’ one thing]! the reformation® of the law, so much
groaned under in the posture it now is in. [Hear, hear!] It _
was a thing we had many good words spoken for ; but we know
that many months together were not enough to pass [over]! one
word, called “incumbrances” [Three calendar months! A grim
smile on some faces|,—lI say, finding that this was the spirit and
complexion of men,®—although these were faults that no man
should lift up his hand against the superior magistrate for ; ‘ not’
[simply for these faults and failings]!,—yet when we saw ‘that’

1(Omitted in Miiton. ]

2|‘* and affairs (not to speak it boastingly) had been instrumentally brought to
that issue they were brought to, by the hands of those poor creatures” added in
pamphlet. The tract has ‘‘ affrays,” a misprint for ‘‘ affairs,” but it is correctly
printed in Parl. History. ]
afi evil,” pamphlet. |
4|‘*T will not say that they were at the (uttermost, Jamphiet] pitch of Reforma-
tion,” doth texts.)

5[“ regulation,” pamphlet. 5['* them,” zézd.]

284 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

this ‘New Representative of theirs’ was ‘meant’ to perpetuate
themselves and such men’s spirits ; and that we had it from their
own mouths, that they could not endure to hear of the dissolution
of this Parliament: we thought this! an high breach of trust.
If they had been a Parliament never violence was upon,? sitting
as free and clear as any in former ages, it was thought, this, to be
a breach ® of trust, ‘such’ as a greater could not be.

[And we did not go by guess in this.]* And that we might not
be in doubt in this matter; having had that conference among
ourselves which I have given you an account of, we did desire
once more, —and indeed it was the night before the dissolution ;
it had been desired two or three nights before: we did desire
that we might speak with some of the principal persons of the
House, that we might with ingenuity open our hearts to them ;
to the end that we might be [either] convinced of the certainty
of their intentions,’ or else that they would be pleased to hear
our [offer or]* expedients to prevent these inconveniences. And
indeed we could not attain our desires’ until the night before the
dissolution. There is a touch of this in our declaration.* As I
said before, at that time we had often desired it, and at that
time we obtained it: where about twenty of them were [who
were members|‘, not of the least ‘in’ consideration for ‘their’
interest and ability; with whom we desired to discourse upon
these things; and had it. And it pleased these gentlemen, who
are here, the officers of the army, to desire me to offer their
sense to them, which I did, and it was shortly carried thus:
We told them “the reason of our desire [to wait upon them]*

1[“* we saw their intendment was to perpetuate themselves and men of this spirit,
for some had it from their own mouths, from their own designs, who could not
endure to hear of being dissolved ; this was,” amphiet. |

2Had no Pride’s Purge, Apprentice-riot, or the like, ever come upon them
[‘‘ never violated,” pamphle?].

3[** as clear as ever any sat in England, yet if they would go about to perpetu-
ate themselves, we did think this to be so high a breach,” pampAdet. ]

4[Omitted in AZzZton.]

5[** convinced of the ground of their principles and intentions to the good of the
nation, or if we could not be convinced,” pamphlet. }

6[*« this mischief,” zdzd. ]
ifs could not prevail for two or three days,” zdzd.]
%Of April 22d ; referred to, not given, at p. 268.

1653.] SPEECH I 285

“© now’ was, that we might know from them, what security lay in
“the way of their proceeding, so hastened,! for their [new]? repre-
“sentative ; wherein they had made a few qualifications, such as
“they were: and how the whole business should, ‘in actual
“practice, be executed : of which we had ‘as yet’ no account
“of; and having [which we desired them to give us|? our interest,
“our lives, estates and families therein concerned; and, we
“thought likewise the honest people had interest in us: ‘How
“all this was to be?’ ‘That ‘so,’ if it did appear they meant to
“appear in such honest and just ways as might be security to the
“honest interest, we might therein acquiesce: or else that they
“would hear what we had to offer.” Indeed, when this desire
was made,’ the answer was, “that nothing would do good for this
nation but the continuance of this Parliament!” We wondered
we should have such a return. We said little to that: but,
seeing they would not give us satisfaction that their ways were
honourable * and safe we desired them to give us leave to make
our objections. We then told them, that the way they were
going in would be impracticable ; ‘that’ we could not tell how
to send out an Act with such qualifications ‘as’ to be a rule for
electing and ‘for being’ elected, until we first knew who the
persons were that should be admitted to elect, and then,° ‘ above

1 fe hastily,” pamphlet. | 2[Omitted in MWi/ton. ]
3[‘*we thought we had an interest in our lives, estates and families, as well
as the worst [frobadly should be ‘‘ honest’’] people of the nation, and that we migh
be bold to ask satisfaction in that and if they did proceed in honest ways, as might
be safe to the nation we might acquiesce therein. When we pressed them to give
satisfaction in this,” Aamphlet, |

4[‘*honest,”’ zézd. |

5[‘*and not know who shall elect,” A/zlion. The Parl. Hist. here has ‘‘and
not to know who should execute this ; desired to know whether the next Parliament
were not like to consist of all Presbyterians? Whether those qualifications would
hinder them or neuters. And though it be our desire to value and esteem persons
of that judgment; only, they having as we know deserted this cause and interest
upon the king’s account, and on that closure between them and the neighbour
nation, we do think we must confess we had as good have delivered up our cause
into the hands of any as into the hands of interested and biassed men; for it is one
thing to live friendly and brotherly, to bear with and love a person of another
judgment in religion; another thing to have any so far set into the saddle upon that
account as that it should be in them to have all the rest of their brethren at mercy.”
In the last words Carlyle follows this version; J/z/ton having ‘‘so far set in the
saddle as to command all the rest of his brethren up against him.’’]

i

a a

286 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

all, whether any ‘of the’ qualifications reached ‘so far as to
include’ the Presbyterian party.! And we were bold to tell them,
that none of that judgment who had deserted this cause and
interest? should have any power therein. We did think we
should profess it, ‘that’ we had as good deliver up our cause into
the hands of any as into the hands of such as had deserted us,
or ‘who’ were as neuters! For it’s one thing to love a brother,
to bear with and love a person of another judgment in matters of
religion ; and another thing to have anybody so far set in the
saddle ‘on that account,’ as to have all the rest of their brethren

_at mercy.

Truly, gentlemen, having this discourse concerning the im-
practicableness of the thing, the bringing-in of neuters, and such
as had deserted this cause, whom we very well knew ; likewise #
objecting from the danger of it in the drawing of the concourse
of people in ‘ the’ several counties (every person that was within
the qualification or without); [by] which ‘it’ did fall obvious to
us that the power would be put into the hands of men that had
very little affection to this cause: the answer again was made,
and that by very eminent persons, “that nothing would save? the
nation but the continuance of this Parliament.” This being so,
we humbly proposed,—when neither our counsels, ‘our’ objections
to their ‘ way of’ proceedings, nor their answers to justify them,
did give us satisfaction ; nor did we think they ever intended to
give ‘us’ any, as ‘indeed’ some of them have since declared ‘to
be the fact,—-when, I say, we saw this, we proposed to them our
expedient ; which was indeed this: that the government of the
nation being in that condition it was, and things being under so
much ill sense abroad, and likely to end in confusion ¢ ‘if we so pro-

1‘Presbytery ' zz orig.

2None of your Royalists, Hamilton-Invasion Presbyterians.

3[‘* objecting to the danger of it, in drawing the concourse of all people to arraign
every individual person, which indeed did fall obviously in (and the issue would
certainly have been the putting it into the hands of men that had little affection to
this cause); it was confessed by some that these objections did lie, but answer was
made by a very eminent person at the same time as before,” samphiet. ]

4[‘ bring destruction,” AZz/ton. ]

1653.] SPEECH I 287

ceeded, —we desired they would devolve the power and trust over
to some well-affected men, such as had an interest in the nation,
and ‘were’ known to be of good affection to the commonwealth.
Which, we told them, was no new thing when this land was
under the like hurlyburlies [and distractions ; and it was confessed
by them it had been no new thing|.!_ And we had been labouring
to get precedents ‘out of history’ to convince them of it. [And
we told them that]! these things we offered out of the deep
sense we had of [the good of the nation and]! the cause of Christ ;
and being answered so as I told you, that nothing would save this
nation but the continuance of that Parliament. ‘The continuance:’
though they would not ‘be brought to’ say the perpetuating of
it, at that time; yet finding their endeavours did directly tend
that way ; [for]! they gave us this answer, “that the thing we
“ offered was of a very high nature and of tender consideration,”
“for how should money be raised?”—and made some other
objections. We told them ‘how;’ and ‘that’ we ‘here’ offered
an expedient five times better than that ‘of theirs,’ which no
reason was given of, nor ‘we thought’ could be ‘given’ [Why
should the fag-end of this poor old Parliament, now fallen impotent
except to raise money for itself, continue ? No reason is given, nor we
think can be, that will convince mankind] ;—and desired them that
they would lay things seriously to heart! They told us, they
would take time for the consideration of these things till tomorrow ;
that they would sleep upon them [and consult with some friends ;
‘some friends,’ though, as I said, there was about twenty of
them there’], and not above fifty-three in the House.? And at
parting, two or three of the chief of them, one of the chief [O
Sir Harry Vane !), and two or three more, did tell us, that they
would endeavour to suspend farther proceedings about the bill
for a new representative until they had a further conference

1[Omitted in A/z/¢on.]

2( of a tender and very weighty consideration,” pamphiet.]

5[‘‘ there was scarce any day that there sat above 50, 52 or 53, and the preceding
words in brackets omitted, ibid. |

=v a ee ee eee re

288 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.
together ‘ with us... And upon this we had great satisfaction ;
and had hope, if our expedient would receive a loving debate,
that the next day we should have some such issue ‘thereof’ as
would have given satisfaction to all, ‘And herewith’ they
went away, ‘it’ being late at night.

The next morning, we considering how to order that which we
had farther to offer to them in the evening, word was brought us
that the House was proceeding with all speed? upon the New
Representative! We could not believe it, that such persons would
be so unworthy ; staying till a second and third messenger came,
and informed us that the House was ‘really’ upon that business,
and had brought it near to the issue,—and with that height * as was
never before exercised ; leaving out all things relating to the due
exercise of the qualifications (which had appeared all along ‘in it
till now’) ; and, as we had heard, [since resolved] ¢ to pass it only in
paper, without engrossing it, for the quicker despatch of it. Thus,
as we apprehended, would have been thrown away the liberties

of the nation into the hands of those who had never fought for

it. And upon this we thought it our duty not to suffer it. [No /]
And upon this the House was dissolved [even when the Speaker
was going to put the last question. [Le¢ ur éravel, at any rate !)

I have too much troubled you with this],° but we have made
this relation, that you might know that that which hath been
done in the dissolution of the Parliament was as necessary to be
done as the preservation of this cause. And that necessity which
led us to do that, hath brought us to this ‘present’ issue, of
exercising an extraordinary way and course to draw together
yourselves ‘here ;’ upon this account, that you are men who know

1* hoping by conference to have satisfaction to all’ zw orig. [z.e., in Milton, but
as in the text in pamphlet. ] ;

2[** with all the eagerness they could,” zézd.]

3 violence, height of temper. ee pamphiet has “haste,” which from the
context would appear to be correct.
4[Omitted in JZz/ton.] 2
shi for the more haste in their proceedings,” J@z/ton ; ‘‘ to make it a paper bill,
not to engross it, that they might make the quicker despatch of it,” pamphlet. }

6(Omitted in zdzd.]

;

es

1653,] SPEECH I 289

the Lord, and have made observations of His marvellous dispensa-
tions ; and may be trusted [as far as men may be trusted]! with
this cause.

It remains now for me to acquaint you ‘a little’ farther with
that which relates to your taking upon you this ‘ great’ business.
‘ But indeed’ that is contained ? in this paper * ‘here’ in my hand,
which will be offered presently to you to read.* ‘But’ having
done that that we have done [Dissolving of the Parliament ;
which cannot be repented of, and need not be boasted of !| upon this
ground of necessity which we have ‘now’ declared, which was
not 5 a feigned necessity but real [and true],°—‘ it did behove us,’
[to the end that the government might not be at a loss ;]7 to the
end that we might manifest to the world the singleness of our
hearts and our integrity who did these things, not to grasp at the
power ourselves, ‘or’ to keep it in military hands, no not for a
day ; but, as far as God enabled us with strength and ability, to
put it into the hands of those ‘proper persons’ that might be
called from the several parts of the nation. This necessity, I say,
and I hope we may say for ourselves, this integrity of labouring §
to divest the sword of the power and Authority in the civil
administration,®—hath been that that hath moved us to put you
to this trouble !° ‘of coming hither :’ and having done this, truly
we think we cannot, with the discharge of our own consciences,

1[Omitted in pamphlet. }

2{** for I shall not acquaint you farther . . . that being contained,” zé¢d.]

3 An Indenture or Instrument of Government, some account of which can be
found, if any one is curious about it, in Parliamentary History, xx. 175.

4 Considerable discrepancies in the Two Reports throughout this paragraph ;
indicating some embarrassment and intricacy in the Speaker. Which with our best
industry we endeavour to reconcile; to elicit from them what the real utterance, or
thought and attempted utterance, of the Speaker may have been. The two Reporters
being faithful according to their ability, and the Speaker faithful according to his,
all discrepancies ought to dissolve themselves in clearer insight and conviction ; as
we hope they do. [The discrepancies are given in the notes below ; but they are
by no means so many as in some other parts of the speech. ]

5[* necessity, which we know was not,” pamphéet.]

6[Omitted in A/iZZon. }

7[The words in brackets were omitted by Carlyle, but are in doth fexts.]

8{Carlyle altered to ‘‘ concluding,” but as above in doth texés.]

®['* divest the sword of the power and Authority of the Civil Magistrate,” JZ/on.]

10[** hath moved us to conclude of this course,” pamphlet. ]

vot. u.—19

So ca pele

290 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

but offer somewhat to you, as I said before, ‘on the devolving of

the burden on your shoulders.’! It hath been the practice of
others who have, voluntarily and out of a sense of duty, divested
themselves [of power],? and devolved the government into the
hands of others; I say, it hath been the practice of those that
have done so; it hath been practised, and is very consonant
[to reason]? together with the authority to lay a charge ‘how to
employ it’? (in such a way as I hope we do), and to press to the
duty ‘of employing it well :’ ‘concerning’ which we have a word
cr two to offer you.

Truly God hath called you to this work by, I think, as wonder-
ful providences as ever passed upon the sons of men in so short a
time. And truly I think, taking the argument of necessity, for
the government must not fall ; taking the appearance of the hand
of God‘ in this thing,—I am sure you would have been loath it
should have been resigned into the hands of wicked men and
enemies! Iam sure, God would not have it so. It’s come, there-
fore, to you by the way of necessity ; by the way of the wise Provid-
ence of God,—though through weak hands. And therefore, I
think, coming through our hands, though such as we are, it may
not be ill taken if we do offer somewhat (as I said before) as to the
discharge of the trust which is ‘now’ incumbent upon you. [Cer-
tainly not !} And although I seem to speak of that which may
have the face and interpretation of a charge, it’s a very humble
one: and if he that means to be a servant to you, who hath now
called you® to the exercise of the supreme authority, discharge
that which he conceives to be a duty to you,® we hope you will
take it in good part.

And truly I shall not hold you long in it; because I hope it’s

1*for our own exoneration’ ix orig. 2(Omitted in pamphlet.]

3 He seems embarrassed lest he be thought to have some authority over this new
Little Parliament, and to treat them as if he were their King. The dissolving of the
old Parliament has also its embarrassment, though not so prominent here ; and both
together make an intricate paragraph. Our Two Reports, from this point, virtually
coincide again. swe

4['* Will of God,” panzphlet.} 5[** to you who are called,” zé7d.]

of. in his own and his fellows’ names" added, 767d. ]

Ta es eee ae

a eee eS ee ee eC Te a

1653.] SPEECH I 291

written in your hearts to approve yourselves to God. Only this
Scripture I shall remember to you, which hath been much upon
my spirit: in Hosea, xi. 12, “Judah yet ruleth with God, and is
“faithful with the Saints.” It’s said before, that “Ephraim
“ compassed God about with lies, and the house of Israel with
“deceit.” How God hath been compassed about by fastings and
thanksgivings,} and other exercises and transactions, I think we
have all cause to lament. Truly you are called by God, ‘as Judah
-was,’ to rule with Him, and for Him. And you are called to be
faithful with the Saints who have been somewhat instrumental
to your call, ‘Again,’ Second Samuel, xxi. 3, “He that ruleth
“over men,” the Scripture saith, “must be just, ruling in the
“fear of God.” [Groans from Dryasdust. Patience, my friend !
Really, does not all this seem an incredibility ;—a palpable hypocrisy,
since it is not the mouth of an imbecile that speaks it? My estimable,
timberheaded, leadenhearted friend, can there be any doubt of it !)
And truly it’s better for [us] to pray for you than to counsel
you in that matter, that you may exercise the judgment of mercy
and truth! It’s better, I say, to pray for you than counsel you ;
to ask wisdom from Heaven for you; which I am confident many
thousands of saints do this day, and have done, and will do, through
the permission of God and His assistance. I say it’s better to
pray than advise: yet truly I think of another Scripture, which
is very useful, though it seems to be for a common application to
every man as a Christian,—wherein he is counselled to ask
wisdom ;? and he is told what that wisdom is that’s from

1There was a Monthly Fast, the Last Wednesday of every Month, held duly
for about Seven Years ; till, after the King’s Death, we abolished it. Immense
preaching and howling, all over the country, there has been on these stated
Wednesdays; sincere and insincere. Not to speak of due Thanksgivings for
victories and felicities innumerable ; all ending in this infelicitous condition! His
Excellency thinks we ought to restrain such habits; not to imitate Ephraim, or the
Long Parliament, in such. The rest of this Discourse is properly a Sermon of his;
and one conceived in a different style.

2*But the Wisdom that is from Above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and
‘easy to be entreated ; full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
‘hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
‘peace’ (/ames, iii. 17, 18).

292 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

above.! It’s “pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full
“of mercy and good fruits;” it’s “ without partiality and without
“hypocrisy.” Truly my thoughts run much upon this place, that
to the execution of judgment (the judgment of truth, for that’s
the judgment) you must have wisdom from above; and that’s
pure. That will teach you to exercise the judgment of truth;
it’s without partiality. Purity, impartiality, sincerity: these are
the effects of wisdom, and these will help you to execute the judg-
ment of truth. And then if God give you hearts to be easy to
be entreated, to be peaceably spirited, to be full of good fruits,
bearing good fruits to the nation, to men as men, to the people
of God, to all in their several stations,—/his will teach you to
execute the judgment of mercy and truth. [ Yes, if thou understand
at; still yes,—and nothing else will!] And I have little more to
say to this. I shall rather bend my prayers for you in that behalf,
as I said; and many others will.

Truly the judgment of truth, it will teach you to be as just
towaids an unbeliever as towards a believer; and it’s our duty to
do so. I confess I have said sometimes, foolishly it may be,? I
had rather miscarry to® a believer than an unbeliever.4 This
may seem a paradox :—but let’s take heed of doing that which is
evil to either! ‘Oh’ if God fill your hearts > with such a spirit
as Moses had, and as Paul had,—which was not a spirit for be-
lievers only, but for the whole people! Moses, he could die for
them; wish himself blotted out of God’s book :® Paul could wish
himself “accursed for his countrymen after the flesh” [Let us
never forget that, in Moses and Paul.—Are not these amazing
sentiments, on their part, my estimable, timberheaded, leadenhearted

1[Both texts run thus, although in J//fon the word ‘‘ wisdom” is omitted.
Carlyle altered it to ‘‘he is told what that is. That's from above," and so had to
insert ‘‘ we are told” to make sense. |

2[‘* I confess I have said sometimes, as I thought foolishly,” JZz/ton ; ‘‘I confess —
I have often said it foolishly,” pamphlet. ]

3[** before an unbeliever,” A/z/ton. If this is correct, Cromwell’s meaning would
be—‘‘ I would rather be seen doing wrong by a believer,” etc. ]

4Do wrong to a good than to a bad man; a remarkable sentiment.

5[‘ our hearts,” pamphlet.) 4
6 Exodus, xxxii. 32. 7 Romans, ix. 3.

1653.] SPEECH I 293

Jriend ?| : so full of affection were their spirits unto all. And
truly this would help you to execute the judgment of truth, and
of mercy also.

A second thing is, To desire you would be faithful with the
Saints ; to be touched with them.! And I hope, whatever others
may think, it may be a matter to us all of rejoicing to have our
hearts touched (to speak with reverence) as Christ, being full of
the spirit, was “touched with our infirmities,” that He might be
merciful. So should we be; we should be pitiful. Truly, this
calls us to be very much touched with the infirmities of the
Saints ; that we may have a respect unto ‘all,’ and be pitiful and
tender towards all, though of different judgments.?_ And if I did
seem to speak something that reflected on those of the Presby-
terial judgment,—truly I think if we have® not an interest of
love for them ‘too,’ we shall * hardly answer this of being faith-
ful 5 to the Saints.

In my pilgrimage, and in some exercises I have had abroad, I
did read that Scripture often, forty-first of Isaiah, 19; where God
gave me, and some of my fellows, encouragement ‘as to’ what
He would do there and elsewhere ; which He ‘hath’ performed
for us. He said, He would plant in the wilderness the cedar,
the shittah-tree, and the myrtle and the oil-tree ; and He would
set in the desert the fir-tree, and the pine-tree, and the box-tree
together. For what end will the Lord do all this? That they
may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that
the hand of the Lord hath done this and the Holy One of Israel
hath created it ;—that it is He ‘who’ hath wrought all the
salvations and deliverances we have received. For what end!
To see, and know, and understand together, that He hath done

1[The last five words omitted in pamphlet. ]
af I think this Assembly thus called is very much troubled with the common
infirmity of the saints, and I hope that will teach you to pity others, that so saints
of one sort may not be our interest, that we may have respect unto all, though of
different judgments,” 2ézd.]

3[‘* you have,” 2d#d.]

4¢ will’ iz orig. [‘ you will” in Parl, Hist.),

5[‘‘this of faithfulness,” in doth texts.)

294: THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT

and wrought all this for the good of the whole flock. [Kven so.
For ‘Saints’ read ‘Good Men ;’ and it is true to the end of the
world,| Therefore, I beseech you,—but I think I need not,—
have a care of the whole flock! Love the sheep, love the lambs ;
(/ love all, tender all, cherish and countenance all, in all things that
are good, And if the poorest Christian, the most mistaken Chris-
tian, shall desire to live peaceably and quietly under you,—I say,
if any shall desire but to lead a life in godliness and honesty, let
him be protected.

I think I need not advise, much less press you, to endeavour’
the Promoting of the Gospel ;! to encourage the Ministry ;? such
a Ministry and such Ministers as be faithful in the Land; upon
whom the true character is. Men that have received the Spirit,
which Christians will be able to discover,’ and do ‘the will of;’
men that have received gifts* from Him that is ascended up on
high, that hath led captivity captive, to give gifts to men, ‘even’
for the ‘same’ work of the Ministry! And truly the Apostle,
speaking in another place, in the twelfth of the Romans, when
he has summed up all the mercies of God, and the goodness of
God ; and discoursed, ‘in the former chapters,’ of the foundations
of the Gospel, and of those things that are the subject of those
first eleven chapters,—he beseecheth them to present their
bodies a living sacrifice. [Note that !] He beseecheth them that
they would not esteem highly of themselves, but be humble and
sober-minded, and not stretch themselves beyond their line ; ‘and’
that they would also have a care of those that had received gifts
to those uses there mentioned. I speak not,—I thank God it is
far from my heart,—for a Ministry deriving itself from the
Papacy, and pretending to that which is so much insisted on,
“succession.” [“ Hear, hear!” from the Puseyites.| The true

[4 July.

3 C concerning the propagation of the Gospel,” psamphlet.]
2 Preaching Clergy.

3[‘* able to discern and do,” A/i/ton ; ‘‘ received the spirit for such a use which
Christians will be well able to discover and do,” pamphlet]

4[‘* for the work before mentioned ” added, 76é¢.]

5 Ephesians, iv. 8,

1653.] SPEECH I 295

succession is through the Spirit—[J should say so !|—given in its
measure, The Spirit is given for that use, ‘to make proper
speakers-forth of God’s eternal truth ;’ and that’s right succes-
sion. But I need not discourse of these things to you; who, I
am persuaded, are taught of God, much more and in a greater
measure than myself, concerning these things.

Indeed I have but one word more to say to you; though in
that perhaps I shall show my weakness: it’s by way of en-
ecouragement to go on in this work. ‘And’ give me leave to
begin thus. I confess I never looked to see such a day as this,
—it may be nor you neither,—when Jesus Christ should be so
owned as He is, at this day, and in this work.! Jesus Christ is
owned this day by your call ;? and you own Him, by your willing-
ness to appear for Him. And you manifest this, as far as poor
creatures can do, to be a day of the power of Christ. I know
you well remember that Scripture, in Psalm cx. 3, He makes
His people willing in the day of His power. God manifests it
to be the day of the power of Christ; having, through so much
blood, and so much trial as hath been upon this nation [made
this to be one of the great issues thereof]. He makes this one
of the greatest mercies next to His own Son to have His
people called to the supreme authority. [A thing, I confess,
worth striving for; and the one thing worth striving for !| God
hath owned his Son; and He hath owned you, and made you to
own Him. I confess I never looked to have seen such a day ;°

1[" world,” pamphlet. ] 2[** by you all,” 2d¢¢.]
3{‘‘ in appearing here,” zdzd.]

Psalm cx. 3, a favourite Psalm of Oliver’s,—as we know already, and solid
Ludlow knows. [The ‘‘ Authorised Version” of James I., from which Cromwell
appears always to quote, has, ‘‘ thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power,”
and it is so given in Parl, /fistory. The Prayer-book (Miles Coverdale) wording
is = i spats nor does Cromwell ever except once seem to quote from this
version.

5[‘*to have a people called to the supreme authority upon such an avowed
account ; God hath owned his Son by this, and you by your willingness do own Jesus
Christ ; and therefore for my part I did never Jook to see such a sight," Zamphlet.
Carlyle here follows A/i/ton, but the words in square brackets are inserted from
Parl. History, and are probably redundant, as the word ‘‘issues” there would
appear to be that rendered ‘‘ mercies” in J/2é/o7z.]

296 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

I did not. Perhaps you are not known to one another's face +

‘indeed’ I am confident you are strangers, coming from all parts

of the nation as you do: but we shall tell you that indeed we-

have not allowed ourselves in the choice of one person in whom
we had not this good hope, that there was ‘in him’ love; that
there was faith in Jesus Christ, and love towards His people and’
saints. [What a Parliament ; unexampled before and since in this
world !}

Thus God hath owned you in the eyes of the world; and thus,.

by coming hither, you own Him: and, as it is in Isaiah, xliii. 21,.

—it’s an high expression ; and look to your own hearts whether,

now or hereafter, God shall apply it to you: “This people,”
saith God, “I have formed for Myself, that they may show forth
my praise.” I say, it’s a memorable passage ;! and, I hope, not
unfitly applied: the Lord apply it to each of your hearts! I
shall not descant upon the words; they are plain: indeed you
are as like the forming of God as ever people were. If a man
should tender a Book to you ‘to swear you upon,’ I dare appeal
to all your consciences, neither directly nor indirectly did you

seek for your coming hither.?- You have been passive in coming:

hither; being called,—and ‘indeed’ that’s an active work,—

‘though not on your part!’ This people have J formed : consider:

the circumstances by which you are called hither;* through

wT a

what strivings [4 Marston Moor, at Naseby, Dunbar and elsewhere],

through what blood you are come hither,—where neither you
nor I, nor no man living, three months ago, had a thought to
have seen such a company taking upon them, or rather being
called to take, the supreme authority of this nation! Therefore,
own your call!* Indeed, 1 think it may be truly said that never
was there a supreme authority consisting of so numerous a body

1[** place” in doth texts, but means as above. |

2[‘« If any man should ask you one by one, and should tender a book to you,
you would dare to swear that neither directly, nor indirectly did you seek to come:
thither,” pamphiet.]

3[‘‘ through what difficulties ” added in 267d. ]

4|‘* Therefore, knowing your calling,” 4/z/tfov.]

1653.] SPEECH I 297

as you are, above one-hundred-and-forty, I believe ;! ‘never suclr
a body’ who were ever in the supreme authority ‘before,’ under
such a notion ‘as this’ in such a way of owning God, and being
owned by Him. And therefore I may say also, never ‘such’ a
people so formed, for such a purpose, ‘were’ so called ‘before.’
[These are lucent considerations ; lucent, nay radiant !]

If it were ‘a’ time to compare your standing with ‘that of’
those that have been called by the suffrages of the people—[ He
does not say whal the result would be|—which who can tell how
soon God may fit the people for such a thing, and none can
desire it more than I! Would all the Lord’s people ; as it was
said, would all the Lord’s people were prophets. [Jl to sit in
Parliament and make Laws; alas, hitherto but few of them can
“ prophesy !’"| I would all were fit to be called. It ought to be
the longing of our hearts to see men brought to own? the
interest of Jesus Christ. And give me leave to say that, if I
know anything in the world, what is there [more] like to win
the people to the interest of Jesus Christ, to the love of godliness.
(nay what stronger duty lies upon you, being thus called), but
an humble and godly conversation? So that they may see ‘that’
you love them; ‘that’ you lay out yourselves, time and spirits,
forthem! Is not this the likeliest way to bring them to their
liberties? [To make them free by being servants of God ; free, and
fit to elect for Parliament !|_ And do not you, by this, put it upon
God to find out times and seasons for you ; ‘fit seasons’ by putting
forth His Spirit? At least by convincing them that, as men
fearing God have fought them out of their thraldom and bondage
under the regal power, so men fearing God do now rule them in
the fear of God, and take care to administer good unto them.—_
But this is some digression. I say, own your call; for indeed,

1[This follows the Jamphlet. The numbers are omitted in AZz/ton.]

2[‘* And who would desire anything more in the world but that it might be so.
I would all the Lord’s people were prophets, I would they were fit to be called and
fit to call; and it is the longing of our hearts to see them once own,” pamphlet.]

8[This is from the Jamphlet. Miltonhas: ‘at least to convince them as being
men fought out of bondage, and brought to be ruled by men in favour and love.’’}.

298 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

it is marvellous, and it is of God! and it hath been unprojected,
unthought of by you and us.!_ And indeed it hath been the way
God hath dealt with us all along, to keep things from our eyes,
‘so’ that we have seen nothing, in all His dispensations, long
beforehand :? which is also a witness, in some measure, to our
integrity. [“ Integrity!” from Dryasdust,—Husht, my friend, ul is
incredible! A flat impossibility, how can it be believed? To the
human Ovl, living in his perennial London Fog, in his Twilight of all
imaginable corrupt Exkaiations, and with his poor head, too, overspun
to such extent with red-tape, parliamentary eloquence, force of public
opinion and such like, how shall the Azure Firmaments and Everlasting
Stars become credible? They are and remain incredible. From his
shut sense all light-rays are victoriously repelled ; no light shall get
admittance there. In no Heaven’s-light will he for his part ever
believe ;—till at last, as ts the necessity withal, it come to him as
lightning | Then he will believe it.|—I say, you are called with an
high ealling. And why should we be afraid to say or think, that
this may be the door to usher-in the things that God has
promised ; which have been prophesied of ; which He has set the
hearts of His people to wait for and expect?? We know who
they are that shall war with the Lamb, against his enemies:
they shall be a people called, and chosen and faithful. And God
hath, in a military way,—we may speak it without flattering our
selves, and I believe you know it,—He hath appeared with them,
‘with that same “ people,” ’ and for them ; and now in these civil
powers and authorities ‘does not He appear?’ These are not
ill prognostications of that good we wait for. Indeed I do think
somewhat is at the door: we are at the threshold ; and therefore
it becomes us to lift up our heads, and encourage ourselves in the
Lord. And we have some of us thought, That it is our duties to

1[‘ own your call, for it isof God. It’s not long since either you or we came to
know of it,” AZi/ton.]

2[** what we have acted, we have seen nothing before us," pampiilet.]
a Ser etiyemrandstonte Psalm, and other Scriptures, are known to Ludlow and

4[Carlyle altered to ‘‘ the God," but both texts have ‘‘ good,” and it fits better
into the argument. }

a.

1653.] SPEECH I 299

endeavour this way ; not vainly ! to look at that prophecy in Daniel,
“and the kingdom shall not be delivered to another people,”
‘and passively wait.’ Truly God hath brought this to your
hands; by the owning of your call; blessing the military power.
The Lord hath directed their [ow]? hearts to be instrumental to
call you ; and to set it upon our hearts to deliver over the power
to another people. [Therefore “we” are not the persons prophesied
of ?}—But I may appear to be beyond my line ‘here;’ these
things are dark. But, as I desire my thoughts * to be exercised
in these things, so I hope are yours.*

Truly, seeing things are thus, that you are at the edge of the
promises and prophecies—[ Does not say what results|—At least,
if there were neither promise nor prophecy, yet you are carrying
on the best things,® you are endeavouring after the best things ;
and, as I have said elsewhere,® if I were to choose any servant,
the meanest officer for the Army or the Commonwealth, I would
choose a godly man that hath principles, especially where a trust
is to be committed, because I know where to have a man that

shath principles. I believe if any man of you should choose a

servant, you would do so. And I would all our magistrates were
so chosen :—this may be done; there may be good effects of this!
«Surely ’ it’s our duty to choose men that fear? the Lord, and
will praise the Lord: such hath the Lord “formed for Himself ;”
and He expects no praises from other ‘than such.’ [O Secretary
of the Home Department, my right honourable friend !|

1/Carlyle altered to ‘‘ merely,” but both texts have as above. ]

2{‘' their” (z.e,, the hearts of the army) is probably correct. ]

3‘senses' in orig.

4[‘*‘and this hath been set upon our hearts and upon all the faithful of the land;
it may be that it is not our duty to deliver it over to any other people, and that
Scripture may be fulfilling now to us; but I may be beyond my line. But I thank
God I have my hopes exercised in these things and so I am persuaded are yours,”
pamphiet. ‘This is probably the more correct version of the two. }

5[{** covet the best things,” gawphle?. The argument appears to be: “ you are
on the verge of the fulfilment of the promises, etc., but even if these did not exist, you
would still be endeavouring after the best things."’]

§ In some Speech now lost :—probably in many Speeches ; certainly in all manner
of Practice and Action. [‘‘ as I had formerly opportunity to say,” 4/i/ton.}

7[* know,” AZz/¢on.)}

300 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

This being so, truly it puts me in mind of another Scripture,
that famous Psalm, sixty-eighth Psalm;! which indeed is a.
glorious prophecy, I am persuaded, of the Gospel churches,—it
may be, of the Jews also. There it prophesies that He will bring
His people again from the depths of the sea, as once He led
“Tsrael through the Red Sea.”” And it may be, as some think,.
God will bring the Jews home to their station from the isles of
the sea, and answer their expectations as from the depths of the
sea. But, ‘at all events,’ sure I am, when the Lord shall set up
the glory of the Gospel Church, it shall be a gathering ‘of”
people as out of deep waters, out of the multitude of waters:
such are His people, drawn out of the multitudes of the nations
and people of this world.—And truly that Psalm is very glorious
in many other parts of it: when He gave the word,? great was
the company of them that published it. Kings of armies did
flee apace, and she® that tarried at home divided the spoil
[ Consider Charles Stuart, First and Second ; and what we see this
day !|; and “ Although ye have lain among the pots, yet shall ye
“be as the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her feathers
“with yellow gold.” [Hah !] And indeed the triumph of that
Psalm is exceeding high and great ; and God is accomplishing it.

1 We remember it ever since Dunbar morning; let us read a passage or two of
it again: His Excellency and the Little Parliament will perhaps wait a moment ;
and it may do us good! ,

‘ Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered : let them also that hate Him flee
‘before Him. As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as wax melteth
‘before the fire, so let the wicked perish before the presence of God.’ The un-
ha !

But let the righteous be glad : let them rejoice before God, yea let them rejoice
‘exceedingly. Sing unto God, sing praises to Hisname. A father of the fatherless,
‘and a judge of the widows, is God in His holy habitation. —

‘O God, when Thou wentest forth before Thy People,——the Earth shool:, the-
‘Heavens also dropped. Kings of Armies did flee apace; and she that tarried
‘at home divided the spoil." Ye poor and brave, be ye of courage! ‘Though ye
‘have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove, covered with.
‘silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

‘The Hill of God is as the Hill of Bashan; an high Hill as the Hill of Bashan.’
Inexpugnable, that! ‘ Why leap ye, ye high Hills? This is the Hill of God which:
‘God desireth to dwell in: yea the Lord will dwell in it forever. The chariots of
‘God are twenty-thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord is among them,
“as in Sinai in the holy place.’

(‘when He gathers them,” Milton.) 3['‘ they,” zdzd.]}

}

s

g

*
3

1653.] SPEECH I 301

And for the close of it,—that closeth with my heart, and I
am persuaded with yours also, ‘The Lord shakes the hills and
mountains, and they reel.” } And God hath a hill too; “an high
“hill as the hill of Bashan: and the chariots of God are twenty-
“thousand, even thousands of Angels,” and God will dwell upon
this Hill forever !—[Procut prorani! The man is without a soul
that looks into this Great Soul of a man, radiant with the splendours
of very Heaven, and sees nothing there but the shadow of his own
mean darkness. Ape of the Dead Sea, peering asquint into the Holy
of Holies, let us have done with tuHy commentaries! Thou canst not
fathom it.)

I am sorry I have troubled you, in such a place of heat as this
is solong. All I have to say, in my own name, and that of my
fellow officers who have joined with me in this work, is: that we
shall commend you to the grace of God, to the guidance of His
Spirit: ‘that’ having thus far served you, or rather our Lord
Jesus Christ ‘in regard to you,’ we shall be? ready in our
‘stations, according as the Providence of God shall lead us, to be
subservient to the ‘farther’ work of God, and to that authority
which we shall reckon God hath set over us. And though we
have no formal thing to present you with, to which the hands,
or visible expressions, of the officers and soldiers of the three
mations of England, Scotland and Ireland are set; yet we may
say for them, and we may say also with confidence for our
brethren at sea,—with whom neither in Scotland, Ireland,
nor at sea, hath there been any artifice used to persuade their
-consents * to this work,—yet we can say that their consents [and
affections]> have flowed in to us from all parts, beyond our
expectations: and [we are confident]° we may say with all confi-
dence, that as we have had their approbation and full consent

1[‘*and makes them leap,” AZi/ton.]

2[‘‘or rather our Lord Jesus Christ in it, we are, as we hope, and shall be,”
pamphlet.) oe. }

3[‘the hands and the outward visible expressions of the hearts of the officers
of the three nations are set,” zdzd. |

4[** approbations,” 47d. ] 5[ Omitted in A/z/ton.]

302. THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

[unsought indeed]+ to the other work, so [that]! you have their
hearts and affections unto this.?, And not only theirs, but we have
very many papers from the Churches of Christ throughout the
nation ; wonderfully both approving what hath been done in re-
moving ‘of’ obstacles, and approving what we have done in this
very thing. And having said this, we shall trouble you no more.
But if you will be pleased that this Instrument* may be read to
you, which I have signed by the advice of the* Council of
Oficers,—we shall then leave you to your own thoughts and the
guidance of God; to dispose of yourselves for a farther meeting,>
as you shall see cause.®

I have only this to say further. That the affairs of this
nation laying on our hands to be taken care of; and ‘ we’ knowing
that both the affairs at sea, the armies in Ireland and Scotland,
and the providing of things for the preventing of inconveniences,
and the answering of all emergencies, did require that there should
be no interruption, but that care ought to be taken for these
things; and foreseeing likewise that before you could digest
yourselves into such a method [as you may think best],’ both
for place, time and other circumstances, in the way you shall
purpose to proceed in, would ask some time,—which the Common-
wealth would not bear in respect of the managing of things: I
have, within a week ‘ past,’ set up a Council of State, to whom
the managing of affairs is committed. Who, I may say, very
voluntarily and freely, before they see how the issue of things
would be, ‘have’ engaged themselves in [the] business; eight or
nine of them being members of the House that late was.—I say
I did exercise that power that, I thought, was devolved upon me

1[Omitted in AZZz/ton.]

2*other work’ delicately means dissolving the old Parliament, ‘this’ is as-
sembling of you, ‘this very thing,’

3 The Instrument is to be found among the Old Pamphlets; but being of a much
lower strain, mere constitutionalities, &c., in phrase and purport alike leaden, we
do not read it.

4" my Council,” AZz/ton.j

5{** to order and dispose of yourselves for further meetings,” pamphiet.]

6 Report in Parliamentary History, and the common Pamphlets, ends here.
7{Omitted by Carlyle.]

1653.] SPEECH I 303

at that time; to the end that affairs might not have any interval
‘or interruption.. And now when you are met, it will ask
some time for the settling of your affairs and your way. And,
‘on the other hand,’ a day cannot be lost, ‘or left vacant,’ but
they must be! in continual council till such time as you shall take
farther order. So that the whole matter of their considerations
are also at your disposal, as you shall see cause. And therefore¥
I thought it my duty to acquaint you with thus much, that you
may not be distracted in your way: that things have been thus /
ordered ; that your affairs will ‘not stop, but’ go on, ‘in the |
meanwhile,’—till you see cause to alter this Council ; they |
having no authority, nor longer to sit, than until you shall take
farther order.* |

The reader has now struggled through this First Speech of my
Lord General’s ; not without astonishment to find that he has
some understanding of it. The Editor has had his difficulties :
but the Editor too is astonished to consider how such a Speech
should have lain so leng before the English Nation, asking, “ Is
there no meaning whatever in me, then?”—with negatory
response from almost all persons. Incompetent Reporters ;—
still more the obscene droppings of an extensive Owl-population,
the accumulated gvano of Human Stupor in the course of ages,
do render Speeches unintelligible! It eught to be added, tiat
my Lord General always spoke extempore ; ready to speak, if
his mind were full of meaning ; very careless about the words he
put it into. And never, except in one instance, which we shall
by and by come upon, does he seem to have taken any charge as
to what Report might be published of it. One of his Parliaments

1[** but to be,” AZiZton.]

* Milton State-Papers, pp. 106-114: and Parliamentary Histor}, XK. 153-175;
which iatter is identical with Harlezan Miscellany (London, 1810), vi. 331-344.
Our Report, in some cramp passages, which could not always be indicated without
confusion, is a fertium guid between these two. Generally throughout we adhere to
Ali/ton’s, whieh is the more concise, inteltigible and everyway better Report. [The
Parliamentary History goes on to say (quoting the old tract from which the speech
is taken): ‘‘that when the Lord General Cromwell had ended this very grave, Christian
and seasonable speech, his Excellency produced an instrument under his own hand
and seal, whereby he did, with the advice of his officers, devolve and intrust the
at authority and government of this Commonwealth unto the persons then
met.”

304 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [4 July.

once asks him for a correct Report of a certain Speech, spoken
some days before: he declares, “‘ He cannot remembe four lines
of it.’! It appears also that his meaning, much as Dryasdust
may wonder, was generally very well understood by his audience :
—it was not till next generation, when the owl-droppings already
Jay thick, and Human Stupor had decidedly set in, that the cry of
Unintelligibility was much heard of. Tones and looks do much ;
—yes, and the having a meaning in you is also a great help!
Indeed, I fancy he must have been an opaque man to whom
these utterances of such a man, all ina blaze with such a con-
viction of heart, had remained altogether dark.

The printed state of this Speech, and still more of some others,
-will impose hard duties on an Editor; which kind readers must
take their share of. In the present case, it is surprising how little
change has been needed, beyond the mere punctuation, and cor-
rect division into sentences. Not the slightest change of meaning
has, of course, anywhere seemed, or shall anywhere seem, permis-
sible ; nor indeed the twentieth part of that kind of liberty which
a skilful Newspaper Reporter takes with every speech he commits
to print in our day.

A certain Critic, whom I sometimes cite from, but seldom with-
out some reluctance, winds up his multifarious Commentaries on
the present Speech in the following extraordinary way :

‘Intelligent readers,’ says he, ‘have found intelligibility in this
«Speech of Oliver's: but to one who has had to read it as a pain-
‘ful Editor, reading every fibre of it with magnifying-glasses, has
“to do,—it becomes all glowing with intelligibility, with cred-
‘ibility; with the splendour of genuine Veracity and heroic
‘Depth and Manfulness ;—and seems in fact, as Oliver’s Speeches
‘generally do, to an altogether singular degree, the express image
‘of the soul it came from !—Is not this the end of all speaking,
‘and wagging of the tongue in every conceivable sort, except the
‘false and accursed sorts? Shall we call Oliver a bad Speaker,
‘then ; shall we not, in a very fundamental sense, call him a good
4 Speaker ?>—

‘Art of Speech? Art of Speech? The Art of Speech, I take
‘it, will first of all be the art of having something genuine to
‘speak! Into what strange regions has it carried us, that same
‘sublime “ Art,” taken up otherwise! One of the saddest bewil-
“derments, when I look at all the bearings of it, nay properly the

1Burton’s Diary. Postea, Speech XVII.

——~ SEs. ee
“Se
7 _

.

1653.) SPEECH I 305

‘fountain of all the sad bewilderments, under which poor mortals
‘ painfully somnambulate in these generations. ‘I have made an
“excellent Speech about it, written an excellent Book about it,”—
‘and there an end. How much better, hadst thou done a mode-
“rately good deed about it, and not had anything to speak at
“all! He who is about doing some mute veracity has a right to be
“heard speaking, and consulting of the doing of it ; and properly
‘no other has, The light of a man shining all as a paltry phos-
*phorescence on the surface of him, leaving the interior dark,
‘ chaotic, sordid, dead-alive,—was once regarded as amost mournful
‘ phenomenon !

‘False Speech is probably capable of being the falsest and
“most accursed of all things. False Speech; so false that it has
‘not even the veracity to know that it is false,—as the poor com-
‘monplace liar still does! I have heard Speakers who gave rise
‘to thoughts in me they were little dreaming of suggesting! Is
‘man then no longer an “ Incarnate Word,” as Novalis calls him,
‘sent into this world to utter out of him, and by all means to
‘make audible and visible what of God’s-Message he has; sent
‘hither and made alive even for that, and for no other definable
‘object? Is there no sacredness, then, any longer, in the miracu-
‘lous tongue of man? Is his head become a wretched cracked
‘pitcher, on which you jingle to frighten crows, and make bees
‘hive? He fills me with terror, this two-legged Rhetorical Phan-
‘tasm! I could long for an Oliver without Rhetoric at all. I
‘could long for a Mahomet, whose persuasive-eloquence, with wild-
‘flashing heart and scimitar, is: “‘ Wretched mortal, give up that ;
‘or by the Eternal, thy Maker and mine, I will kill thee! Thou
‘blasphemous scandalous Misbirth of Nature, is not even that the
‘kindest thing I can do for thee, if thou repent not and alter, in
‘the name of Allah?” ’—1

1[‘* Even such sonorous oracles as these do not altogether escape the guilt of
rhetoric. As if, after all, there might not be just as much of shain, phantasm,
emptiness and lies, in action as in rhetoric. . . . It is nota question between action
and rhetoric, but the far profounder question alike in word and in deed, between
just 7" unjust, rational and short-sighted, cruel and humane.’’ Morley's Cromwed/,
297:

vot. 1.—20

= ie a lle “+3

306 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [22 Aug.

LETTERS CLXXXIX.—CXCI

ConcERNING this Puritan Convention of the Notables, which in
English History is called the Lrttle Parliament, and derisively
Barebones’s Parliament, we have not much more to say. They
are, if by no means the remarkablest Assembly, yet the Assembly
for the remarkablest purpose who have ever met in the Modern
World. The business is, No less than introducing of the Christian
Religion into real practice in the Social Affairs of this Nation.
Christian Religion, Scriptures of the Old and New Testament :
such, for many hundred years, has been the universal solemnly
recognised Theory of all men’s Affairs ; Theory sent down out of
Heaven itself: but the question is now that of reducing it to
Practice in said Affairs ;—a most noble, surely, and most necessary
attempt ; which should not have been put off so long in this Nation !
We have conquered the Enemies of Christ ; let us now, in real
practical earnest, set about doing the Commandments of Christ,
now that there is free room for us! Such was the purpose of this
Puritan Assembly of the Notables, which History calls the Little
Parliament, or derisively Barebones’'s Parliament.

It is well known they failed: to us, alas, it is too evident they
could not but fail. Fearful impediments lay against that effort
of theirs: the sluggishness, the slavish half-and-halfness, the
greediness, the cowardice, and general opacity and falsity of some
ten million men against it ;—alas, the whole world, and what we
call the Devil and all his angels, against it! Considerable angels,
human and other: most extensive arrangements, investments, to
be sold off at a tremendous sacrifice ;—in general the entire set
of luggage-traps and very extensive stock of merchant-goods and
real and floating property, amassed by that assiduous Entity
above-mentioned, for a thousand years or more! For these, and
also for other obstructions, it could not take effect at that time ;
—and the Little Parliament became a Barebones’s Parliament, and
had to go its ways again.

Read these three Letters, two of them of small or no sig-
nificance as to it or its affairs; and then let us hasten to the
catastrophe.!

1[See also letters in Supplement, Nos 80-82. ]

1653.) LETTER CLXXXIX., COCKPIT 307

LETTER CLXXXIX

Tue Little Parliament has now sat some seven weeks ; the dim
old world of England, then in huge travail-throes, and somewhat
of the Lord General’s sad and great reflections thereon, may be
dimly read here.

‘For the Right Honourable Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, Commander-
in-Chief of the Forces in Ireland ; These’

‘ Cockpit,’ 22d August 1653.

Dear CHARLES,

Although I do not so often as is desired by me
acquaint you how it is with me, yet I doubt not of your prayers
in my behalf, that, in all things, I may walk as becometh the
Gospel.

Truly I never more needed all helps from my Christian friends
than now! Fain would I have my service accepted of the saints
(if the Lord will), but it is not so. Being of different judgments,
and of each sort most seeking to propagate their own, that spirit
of kindness that is! to them all, is hardly accepted ofany. I hope
I-can say it, my life has been a willing sacrifice, and I hope,—*
for them all, Yet it much falls out as when the two Hebrews
were rebuked: you know upon whom they turned their dis-
pleasure.®

But the Lord is wise, and will, I trust, make manifest that I
am no enemy. Oh, how easy is mercy to be abused: Persuade
friends with you to be very sober. Ifthe day of the Lord be so
near (as some say), how should our moderation appear. If every
one (instead of contending) would justify his form ‘of judgment’
by love and meekness, Wisdom would be justified of her children,

1¢in me’ modestly suppressed. 2 [Word omitted, a space left.]

3* And he,’ the wrongdoer of the Two, ‘said unto Moses, ‘‘ Who made thee
‘a Prince and a Judge over us? Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the
‘Egyptian!"’ (A£xodus, ii, 14.)

308 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [22 Aug.

But, alas, I am, in my temptation, ready to say, Oh, would I had
wings like a dove, then would 1, &c.:! but this, I fear, is my
haste. I bless the Lord I have somewhat keeps me alive, some
sparks of the light of His countenance, and some sincerity above
man’s judgment. Excuse me thus unbowelling myself to you:
pray for me, and desire my friends to do so also. My love to thy
dear Wife, whom indeed I entirely love, both naturally, and upon
the best account ; and my blessing (if it be worth anything)
upon thy little babe.

Sir George Ayscough having occasions with you, desired my
letters to you on his behalf: if he come or send, I pray you
show him what favour you can. Indeed his services have been
considerable for the State, and I doubt he hath not been answered
with suitable respect. Therefore again I desire you and the
Commissioners to take him into a very particular care, and help
him so far as justice and reason will anyways afford.

Remember my hearty affections to all the officers. The Lord
bless you all. So prayeth

Your truly loving father,
O.iver CroMWELL.

‘PS.’ All here love you, and are in health, your children
and all.*

1*then would I fly away and be at rest. Lo, then would I wander far off,
‘and remain in the wilderness. I would hasten my escape from the windy storm
‘and tempest!’ (Psalm lv. 6, 7, 8.)

* Harleian MSS. no. 7502, f.13 [Add. MSS. 5015*, f. 27]: ‘ Copyed from the
“Original in ye hands of Mrs. Cook (Grandaughter to Lieutenant-General Fleetwood)
* of Newington, Midsex: Nov'5,1759. By A. Gifford.’ Printed, without reference,
incorrectly, in Annual Register for 1761, p. 49; in Gentleman's Magazine, &e.—
Appendix, No, 27.

1653.] LETTER CXC., COCKPIT 309

LETTER CXC!

_In the Commons Journals,” while this Little Parliament sat, we
find that, among other good services, the arrangement of the
Customs Department was new-modelled ; that instead of Farmers
of the Customs, there was a ‘Committee’ of the Parliament ap-
pointed to regulate and levy that impost: Committee appointed
on the 23d of September 1653: among whom we recognise
‘ Alderman Ireton,’ the deceased General’s Brother ; ‘ Mr. Mayor,’
of Hursley, Richard Cromwell’s Father-in-Law ; ‘ Alderman Titch-
borne ;’ ‘Colonel Montague,’ afterwards Earl of Sandwich; and
others. It is to this Committee that Oliver’s Letter is addressed.
It has no date of time: but as the Little Parliament ended, in
Self-dissolution and Protectorship, on the 12th of December, the
date of the Letter lies between the 23d September and that
other limit. My Lord General,—who is himself a Member of
the Parliament, he and his chief Officers having been forthwith
invited to sit,—feels evidently that his recommendations, when
grounded in justice, ought to be attended to.

For my honoured Friends, the Committee for Regulating the Customs :
These present
‘Cockpit, October 1653.’

GENTLEMEN,

I am sorry after recommendation of a friend of
mine the bearer hereof,—considering him in relation to his poor
parents an object of pity and commiseration, yet well deserving
and no less qualified for employment,—he should find such cold
success amongst you.

His great necessity and my love once more invites me to
write unto you, in his behalf, to bestow on him (if it may not
be in this city by reason of multiplicity of suitors) a place in the

i[Just at this time Bulstrode Whitelocke was sent on his Swedish embassy (see
p. 327 below; also Appendix, No. 27 (4). In his journal of his embassy,
Whitelocke narrates a conversation held with Cromwell on September 13, when the
latter, with many complimentary phrases, urged him to accept the post. Carlyle
does not notice this (though, as appears from p. 327, he knew the journal), probably
because he had little faith in the accuracy of Whitelocke’s reports, especially when

they concerned himself. }
* vii, 323, 23d September 1653.

310 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [16 Nov.

out-ports: and I doubt not but his utmost abilities will be im-
proved to the faithful discharging of such trust as you shall
impose in him, for the good of the Commonwealth. And thereby
you will engage him who remains,
Your affectionate friend,
Otiver CromweEL..*

LETTER CXCl

Tuts ‘Henry Weston,’ otherwise unknown to all Editors, is a
Gentleman of Surrey; his ‘House at Ockham,’ not Oakham, is
in the neighbourhood of Guildford in that County.!_ So much,
strangely enough, an old stone Tablet still legible in Ockham
Church, which a beneficent hand has pointed out, enables me to
say ;—an authentic dim old Stone in Surrey, curiously reflecting
light on a dim old Piece of Paper which has fluttered far about
the world before it reached us here! ‘Brother Ford,’ I find by
the same authority, is of knightly rank in Sussex: and Henr
Weston’s Father ‘lieth buried in the Chancel of Speldhurst
Church’ in Kent; his Uncle, a childless man, resting here at
Ockham, ‘since the 8th day of July 1638, in the clymacteric of
his age, 63.’ 2—‘ Reverend Mr. Draper’ has not elsewhere come
across me.? Happily we can hepe he officiates well in Kent;
and read this Letter without other light.

For my honoured Friend Henry Weston, Esquire, at his House in
Ockham: These

‘ London,’ 16th Nov. 1653.
Sir, MY NOBLE Frienp,

Your Brother Ford was lately with me, ac-
quainting me with my presumption in moving for, and your civility

* Letter genuine, /este me, reference unfortunately lost. [The reference is
Harley MS., 4165, f. 25.J

1{He was appointed a member of the ‘‘classis" of Guildford when the county
was divided into six ‘classical Presbyteries” in February 1648. See Dr. W. A.
Shaw's History of the English Church during the Civil Wars, etc., ii. 484.]

2 Copy of the Inscription penes me,

8[Dr. Calamy mentions Draper as expelled from Speldhurst after the Restora-
tion. (Nonconformists’ Memorial, eA. Palmer, ii. 335)-]

1653.] ~ COUNCIL OF STATE 311

in granting, the advowson of Speldhurst to one Mr. Draper, who is
now incumbent there, and who, it seems, was there for three or
four years before the death of the old incumbent, by virtue of a
sequestration,

Sir, I had almost forgot upon what account I made thus bold
with you, but now have fully recollected. I understand the
person is very able and honest, well approved of by most of the
good ministers thereabout, and much desired by the honest
people who are in a religious association in those parts.' Where-
fore I now most heartily own and thank you for your favour
showed Mr. Draper for my sake; beseeching the continuance of
your respects to the gentleman, who shall be very much tied to
pay you all service ; and so shall, in what lieth in his power,

Your affectionate friend to serve you,
OLiveR CRoMWELL.*

And now to Parliament affairs again,—to the catastrophe now
nigh.

‘On the whole, we have to say of this Little Parliament, that
it sat for five months and odd days, very earnestly striving ;
earnestly, nobly,—and by no means unwisely, as the ignorant
Histories teach. But the farther it advanced towards real
Christianism in human affairs, the louder grew the shrieks of
Sham-Christianism everywhere profitably lodged there ;—and
prudent persons, responsible for the issue, discovered that of a
truth, for one reason or another, for reasons evident and for
reasons not evident, there could be no success according to that
method, We said, the History of this Little Parliament lay all
buried very deep in the torpors of Human Stupidity, and was
not likely ever to be brought into daylight in this werld. In
their five months time they passed various good Acts; chose,
with good insight, a new Council of State; took wise charge of
the needful Supplies ; did all the routine business of a Parliament

1 Has crossed out ‘ thereabouts ;’ and written ‘in those parts,’ as preferable,

* Additional Ayscough AZSS. no, 12,098. Original, in good preservation; with
this endorsement in a newer hand: ‘ The Generell Cromwell’s letter about Spelderst
living ;’ and this Note appended : ‘ In an old Bible I had from England with other
Books, March 1726.’ Some Transatlantic Puritan, to all appearance.

312 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT 1653.

in a quite unexceptionable, or even in a superior manner. Con-
cerning their Council of State, I find this Note; which, thougl:
the Council had soon to alter itself, and take new figures, may
be worth appending here.!

Routine business done altogether well by this Little Parliament.
But, alas, they had decided on abolishing Tithes, on supporting a
Christian Ministry by some other method than Tithes ;—nay far
worse, they had decided on abolishing the Court of Chancery !
Finding grievances greater than could be borne; finding, for one
thing, ‘ Twenty-three thousand Causes of from five to thirty years.
continuance’ lying undetermined in Chancery, it seemed to the
Little Parliament that some Court ought to be contrived which
would actually determine these and the like Causes ;—and that,
on the whole, Chancery would be better for abolition. Vote to
that effect stands registered in the Commons Journals ;? but still,.
for near two-hundred years now, only expects fulfilment.—So far
as one can discover in the huge twilight of Dryasdust, it was
mainly by this attack on the Lawyers, and attempt to abolish
Chancery, that the Little Parliament perished.* Tithes helped,
no doubt ; and the clamours of a safely-settled Ministry, Presby-
terian-Royalist many of them. But the Lawyers exclaimed =
“Chancery ? Law of the Bible? Do you mean to bring-in the
Mosaic Dispensation, then ; and deprive men of their properties >
Deprive men of their properties ; and us of our learned wigs, and
lucrative longwindednesses,—with your search for ‘Simple Justice,’

1Council of State elected,—Tuesday rst November 1653 (Commons Journals,
vii. 344). The Election is by ballot, 113 Members present ; ‘Colonel Montague’
(Sandwich), ‘Colonel Cromwell’ (Henry), and ‘Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper,’ are
three of the Four Scrutineers. Among the Names reported as chosen, here are some,
with the Numbers voting for them: Lord General Cromwell (113, one and all);
Sir Gilbert Pickering (Poet Dryden’s Cousin and Patron,—110); Desborow (74);
Harrison (58); Mayor (of Hursley,—57); Colonel Montague (59); Ashley Cooper
(60); Lord Viscount Lisle (Algernon Sidney’s Brother,—58); Colonel Norton (idle
Dick, recovered from the Pride's Purge again, but liable to relapse again,—57).
The Council is of Thirty-one; Sixteen of the Old or Interim Council (above referred
to in Cromwell's Speech) are to continue; Fifteen new: these mentioned here are
all among the Old, whom the Lord General and his Officers had already nominated.

2 vii. 296; 5th August 1653.

3(But a greater power than ‘‘ the lawyers” was at work. ‘‘ Cromwell was dis-
satisfied and alarmed at the conduct of the Little Parliament and its consequences.
Instead of promoting the Gospel, they had threatened to deprive its ministers of
the means of subsistence. Instead of allaying sectarian strife, their policy had
embittered it. His own persistent attempts to reconcile religious animosities met
with little success.” Firth's Cromwell, p 333. Cromwell’s views on this point are
sufficiently shown in the letter to Fleetwood (p. 307 above). He shrank from dis-
missing another Parliament by force. The alternative was to persuade it to
abdicate, and this, after negotiation with the army officers, it agreed to do.]

1653.} LITTLE PARLIAMENT RESIGNS 313

and ‘God’s Law,’ instead of Learned-Sergeant’s Law ?”’—There
was immense ‘carousing in the Temple’ when this Parliament
ended ; as great tremors had been in the like quarters while it
continued.!

But in brief, on Friday the 2d of December 1653, there came
a ‘Report from the Tithes-Committee,’ recommending that
Ministers of an incompetent, simoniacal, loose, or otherwise
scandalous nature, plainly unfit to preach any Gospel to immortal
creatures, should have a Travelling Commission of chosen Puritan
Persons appointed, to travel into all Counties, and straightway
inspect them, and eject them, and clear Christ’s Church of them :
—whereupon there ensued high debatings: Accept the Report,
or Not accept it? High debatings, for the space of ten days ;
with Parliamentary manceuverings, not necessary to specify here.
Which rose ever higher; and on Saturday the 10th, had got so
high that, as I am credibly informed, certain leading persons
went about colleaguing and consulting, stead of attending
Public Worship on the Lord’s Day :—and so, on Monday morn-
ing early, while the extreme Gospel Party had not yet assembled
in the House, it was surreptitiously moved and carried, old
Speaker Rouse somewhat treacherously assenting to it, ‘That
‘the sitting of this Parliament any longer, as now constituted,
‘ will not be for the good of the Commonwealth ; and that there-
‘ fore it is requisite to deliver up unto the Lord General Cromwell
‘the Powers which we received from him!’ Whereupon, adds
the same Rhadamantine Record, ‘the House rose; and the
‘Speaker, with many of the Members of the House, departed
‘out of the House to Whitehall: where they, being the greater
‘number of the Members sitting in Parliament, did, by a Writing,’
hastily redacted in the waiting-room there, and signed on
separate bits of paper hastily watered together, ‘resign unto his
‘Excellency their said Powers. And Mr. Speaker, attended by
‘the Members, did present the same unto his Excellency accord-
‘ingly, —and retired into private life again.”

1 Exact Relation of the Transactions of the late Parliament, by a Member of the
same (London, 1654): reprinted in Somers Tracts, vi. 266-84.

2 Commons Journals, vii. 363; Exact Relation, 2dz supra; Whitlocke, p. 551,
&c. [There is an interesting account of these proceedings amongst the Clarke MSS.
When the major part of the House--about eighty—had gone to Whitehall, ‘ the
smaller part, being about twenty-seven, remained in the House, where Colonel
Gough presently came, and with all meekness told them that he was fearful their
Stay there might prove prejudicial to the Commonwealth, and probably to them-
selves (they being no house); they desired to know if he had any power, which he
denied, but sweetly argued it with them, but they refusing to hear he opened the

314 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [16 Dec.

The Lord General Cromwell testified much emotion and sur-
prise at this result ;—emotion and surprise which Dryasdust knows
well how to interpret. In fact the Lord General is responsible to
England and Heaven for this result ; and it is one of some moment !
He and the established Council of State, ‘Council of Officers and’
non-established ‘ Persons of Interest in the Nation,’ must consider
what they will now do!

Clearly enough to them, and to us, there can only one thing be
/ done: search be made, Whether there is any King, Kénning, Can-

| ning, or Supremely Able-Man that you ean fall-in with, to take

| charge of these conflicting and colliding elements, drifting towards
| swift wreck otherwise ;—any ‘ Parish Constable,’ as Oliver himself

defines it, to bid good men keep the peace to one another. To
your unspeakable good-luck, such Supremely Able-Man, King,
Constable, or by whatever name you will call him, is already found,
—known to all persons for years past: your Puritan Interest is
not yet necessarily a wreck ; but may still float, and do what farther
is in it, while he can float!

From Monday onwards, the excitement of the public mind in
old London and whithersoever the news went, in those winter
days, must have been great. The ‘ Lord General called a Council
of Officers and other Persons of Interest in the Nation,’ as we said ;
and there was ‘much seeking of God by prayer,’ and abstruse
advising of this matter,—the matter being really great, and to some
of usevenawful! The dialogues, conferences, and abstruse advis-
ings are all lost ; the result we know for certain. Monday was 12th
of December ; on Friday 16th, the result became manifest to all
the world: that the ablest of Englishmen, Oliver Cromwell, was

door, and presently entered one file of musketeers, upon whose appearance the re-
maining part of the House withdrew.” Clarke Pagers, iii. 10. The sweetness and
meekness disappear in some other accounts of the incident. The army, said
Vavasor Powel in a meeting at Blackfriars, had protected ‘ antichristian clergy-
men” and tithes, and when the House would not uphold them, ‘‘ they were thrust
out—I mean the few honest men of them that were then present—by violence. .. .
This is true, and we must speak it out for our mouths shall not be stopped with
paper proclamations. I saw one in print to-day which says this last Parliament
dissolved themselves and resigned up their powers and authorities; but I take it to
be alibel; . . . they were broken by force and it was a business plotted by the
great army men, clergymen and their party together, Lord,” continued this very
energetic speaker, ‘‘ have our army men all apostatised from their principles! What
is become of all their declarations, protestations and professions! Are they choked
with lands, parks and manors? Let us go home and pray, and say, ‘ Lord, wilt
thou have Oliver Cromwell or Christ to reign over us?" . . . I'll tell you a common
proverb that we had among us of the General, that in the field he was the
graciousest and most gallant man in the world, but out of the field, and when he
came home again to government, the worst." Cad. S. P. Dom., 1653-54, p .306.]

re
Z

2

1653.] PROTECTOR 315

henceforth to be recognised for Supremely Able; and that the
Title of him was to be Lorp Prorecror or THE COMMONWEALTH OF
ENGLAND, ScoTLAND AND IRELAND, with ‘Instrument of Govern-
ment,’ ‘Council of Fifteen or of Twenty-one,’ and other necessary
less important circumstances, of the like conceivable nature.

The Instrument of Government, a carefully constitutional piece
in Forty-two Articles ; the Ceremony of Installation, transacted
with due simplicity and much modest aignity, ‘in the Chancery
Court in Westminster Hall,’ that Friday afternoon ;—the chair of
state, the Judges in their robes, Lord Mayors with caps of main-
tenance; the state-coaches, outriders, outrunners, and ‘ great
shoutings of the people ;’ the procession from and to Whitehall,
and ‘ Mr. Lockier the Chaplain’s Exhortation’ to us there : these,
with the inevitable adjuncts of the case, shall be conceived by in-
genious readers, or read in innumerable Pamphlets and Books,!
and omitted here. ‘His Highness was in a rich but plain suit ;
‘black velvet, with cloak of the same: about his hat a broad band
‘of gold.’ Does the reader see him? A rather likely figure, I
think. Stands some five feet ten or more ; a man of strong solid
stature, and dignified, now partly military carriage: the expression
of him valour and devout intelligence,—energy and delicacy on a
basis of simplicity. Fifty-four years old, gone April last ; ruddy-
fair complexion, bronzed by toil and age; light-brown hair and
moustache are getting streaked with gray. A figure of sufficient
impressiveness ;—not lovely to the man-milliner species, nor pre-
tending tobe so. Massive stature ; big massive head, of somewhat
leonine aspect, ‘evident workshop and storehouse of a vast trea-
sury of natural parts.’ Wart above the right eyebrow; nose of
considerable blunt-aquiline proportions ; strict yet copious lips, full
of all tremulous sensibilities, and also if need were, of all fierce-
nesses and rigours ; deep loving eyes, call them grave, call them
stern, looking from under those craggy brows, as if in lifelong sor-
row, and yet not thinking it sorrow, thinking it only labour and
endeavour :—on the whole, a right noble lion-face and hero-face ;
and to me royal enough.” The reader, in his mind, shall conceive
this event and its figures.

Conceived too, or read elsewhere than here, shall Dryasdust’s
multifarious unmelodious commentaries be,—and likewise Anti-

vs

1Whitlocke, pp. 552-61; Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p, 131, in Parlia-
mentary History, xx.); &c. &c.

* Maidston’s Letter to Winthrop, in Thurloe, i, 763-8; Cooper’s Portraits;
Mask of Cromwell’s Face (in the Statuaries’ Shops).

316 THE LITTLE PARLIAMENT [16 Dec.

Dryasdust’s ; the two together cancelling one another; and
amounting pretty well, by this time, to zero for us. ‘ Love of
power,’ as flunkeys love it, remains the one credibility for Dryas-
dust ; and will forever remain. To the valet-soul how will you
demonstrate that, in this world, there is or was anything heroic ?
You cannot do it; you need not try to do it.—I cite with some
reluctance from a Manuscript Author, often enough referred to
here, the following detached sentences, and so close this Seventh
Part.

‘ Dryasdust knows not the value of a King,’ exclaims he; ‘the
‘bewildered mortal has forgotten it. Finding Kings’-cloaks so
‘cheap, hung out on every hedge, and paltry as beggars’ gabar-
‘dines, he says, “ What use is ina King? This King’s-cloak, if
‘this be your King, is naught !””—

‘Power? Love of power? Does “power” mean the faculty
‘of giving places, of having newspaper paragraphs, of being waited
‘on by sycophants? To ride in gilt coaches, escorted by the
‘flunkeyisms and most sweet voices,—I assure thee, it is not the
‘Heaven of all, but only of many! Some born Kings I myself
‘have known, of stout natural limbs, who, in shoes of moderately
‘ good fit, found quiet walking handier ; and crowned themselves,
‘almost too sufficiently, by putting on their own private hat, with
‘some spoken or speechless, ‘God enable me to be King of what
‘lies under this! For Eternities lie under it, and Infinitudes, and
‘Heaven also and Hell. And it is as big as the Universe, this
‘Kingdom ; and I am to conquer it, or be forever conquered by
‘it, now while it is called Today !”—

‘The love of “ power,” if thou understand what to the manful
‘heart “power” signifies, is a very noble and indispensable love.
‘ And here and there, in the outer world too, there is a due throne
‘for the noble man ;—which let him see well that he seize, and
‘valiantly defend against all men and things. God gives it him ;
‘let no Devil take it away. Thou also art called by the God’s-
‘message: This, if thou canst read the Heavenly omens and dare
‘do them, this work is thine. Voiceless, or with no articulate
‘voice, Occasion, god-sent, rushes storming on, amid the world’s
‘events ; swift, perilous ; like a whirlwind, like a fleet lightning-
‘steed: manfully thou shalt clutch it by the mane, and vault
‘into thy seat on it, and ride and guide there, thou! Wreck and
‘ignominious overthrow, if thou have dared when the Occasion
‘was not thine: everlasting scorn to thee if thou dare not when
‘it is;—if the cackling of Roman geese and Constitutional

vs

‘ganders, if the clack of hoses igues and leading-articles, if 7.
‘the steel of armies and the crack of Doom deter thee when the oe S-

= “voice was God’s !|—Yes, this too is in the law for a man, my poor nae
& ‘quack-ridden, bewildered Constitutional friends; and we ought ee
ee ‘to remember this withal. Thou shalt is written upon Life in : |
| “characters as terrible as Thou shalt not,—though poor Dryasdust ae

‘reads almost nothing but the latter hitherto.’ “

And so we close Part Seventh; and proceed to trace with all

piety, what faint authentic vestiges of Oliver's Protectorate the a
envious Stupidities have not obliterated for us, Bs:
a
|
:
2

:
|

PART VUI
FIRST PROTECTORATE PARLIAMENT

1654

LETTERS CXCI.—CXCV

Tue 3d of September ever since Worcester Battle has been kept
asa Day of Thanksgiving ; commemorative of the mercy at Dunbar
in 1650, and of the erowning-mercy which followed next year ;—
a memorable day for the Commonwealth of England. By Article
Seventh of the Instrument of Government, it is now farther pro-
vided that the Parliament shall meet on that auspicious Anniversar

when it next comes round. September 3d, 1654, then shall the
First Protectorate Parliament meet ;! successive Parliaments, one at
least every Three years, are to follow, but this shall be the First.
Not to be dissolved, or prorogued, for at least Five months. Free
Parliament of Four-hundred; for England Three-hundred-and
forty, for Scotland Thirty, for Ireland Thirty; fairly chosen by
election of the People, according to rules anxiously constitutional,
laid down in that same Instrument,—which we do not dwell upon
here, Smaller Boroughs are excluded ; among Counties and larger
Boroughs is a more equable division of representatives according
to their population: nobody to vote that has not some clearly
visible property to the value of Two-hundred Pounds ; but all that
have can vote, and can be voted for,—except, of course, ail such as
have appeared against the Parliament in any of these Wars ‘since

1[Hobbes, in his Behemoth, says: ‘‘I believe he was a little superstitious in
the choice of September 3, because it was lucky to him in 1650 and 1651, at Dun-
bar and Worcester ; but,” he continues, ‘‘ he knew not how lucky the same would
be to the nation in 1658, at Whitehall” (A¢asere's Tracts, ii. 632).]

«Mies eee
, q

: .

7

320 FIRST PARLIAMENT [18 Dee.

the First of January 1642,’ and ‘not since given signal testimony ’
of their repenting that step. To appearance, a very reasonable
Reform Bill ;—understood to be substantially the same with that
invaluable measure once nearly completed by the Rump: only
with this essential difference, That the Rump Members are not
now to sit by nature and without election; not now to decide,
they, in case of extremity, Thou shalt sit, Thou shalt not sit :—
others than they will now decide that, in cases of extremity. How
this Parliament, in its Five-months Session, will welcome the new
Protector and Protectorate is naturally the grand question during
those Nine or Ten Months that intervene.

A question for all Englishmen ; and most of all for Oliver Pro-
tector ;—who however, as we can perceive, does not allow it to
_overawe him very much ; but diligently doing this day the day’s
duties, hopes he may find, as God has often favoured him to do,
some good solution for the morrow, whatsoever the morrow please
to be. A man much apt to be overawed by any question that is
smaller than Eternity, or by any danger that is lower than God’s
Displeasure, would not suit well in Oliver's place at present! Per-
haps no more perilous place, that I know clearly of, was ever
deliberately accepted bya man. ‘The post of honour, —the post
of terror and of danger and forlorn-hope: this man has all along
been used to occupy such.

To see a little what kind of England it was, and what kind of
incipient Protectorate it was, take, as usual, the following small
and few fractions of Authenticity, of various complexion, fished
from the doubtful slumber-lakes and dust-vortexes, and hang them
out at their places in the void night of things. They are not very
luminous ; but if they were well let alone, and the positively tene-
brific were well forgotten, they might assist our imaginations in
some slight measure.

Sunday, 18th December 1653. A certain loud-tongued, loud-
minded Mr. Feak, of Anabaptist-Leveller persuasion, with a
Colleague, seemingly Welsh, named Powel,! have a Preaching-
Establishment, this good while past, in Blackfriars ; a Preaching-
Establishment every Sunday, which on Monday Evening becomes
a National-Charter Convention as we should now call it: there
Feak, Powel and Company are in the habit of vomiting forth from
their own inner-man, into other inner-men greedy of such pabulum,

1[Vavasor Powel was certainly a Welshman; one of the ‘‘intruded clergy”
put in by the Propagators of the Gospel. ] :

7
7

1653] § | ANABAPTISTRY 321

a very flamy fuliginous set of doctrines,—such as the human mind,
superadding Anabaptistry to Sansculottism, can make some at-
tempt to conceive. Sunday the 18th, which is two days after the
Lord Protector’s Installation, this Feak-Powel Meeting was un-
usually large; the Feak-Powel inner-man unusually charged.
Elements of soot and fire really copious ; fuliginous-flamy in a
very high degree! At atime, too, when all Doctrine does not
satisfy itself with spouting, but longs to become instant Action.
‘Go and tell your Protector,’ said the Anabaptist Prophet, That he
has deceived the Lord’s People ; ‘that he is a perjured villain, —
‘will not reign long,’ or I am deceived ; ‘ will end worse than the
last Protector did, Protector Somerset who died on the scaffold,
or the tyrant Crooked Richard himself! Say, I said it !—A very
foul chimney indeed, here got on fire. And ‘ Major-General Har-
‘rison, the most eminent man of the Anabaptist Party, being
‘consulted whether he would own the New Protectoral Govern-
‘ment, answered frankly, No ;’—was thereupon ordered to retire
home to Staffordshire, and keep quiet.!

Does the reader bethink him of those old Leveller Corporals at
Burford, and diggers at St. George’s Hill five years ago ; of Quaker-
isms, Calvinistic Sansculottisms, and one of the strangest Spiritual
Developments ever seen in any country? The reader sees here
one foul chimney on fire, the Feak-Powel chimney in Blackfriars ;
and must consider for himself what masses of combustible material,
noble fuel and base soot and smoky explosive fire-damp, in the
general English Household it communicates with! Republicans
Proper, of the Long Parliament; Republican Fifth-Monarchists
of the Little Parliament ; the solid Ludlows, the fervent Harri-
sons: from Harry Vane down to Christopher Feak, all manner of
Republicans find Cromwell unforgivable. To the Harrison-and-
Feak species Kingship in every sort, and government of man by
man, is carnal, expressly contrary to various Gospel Scriptures.
Very horrible for a man to think of governing men ;—whether he
ought even to govern cattle, and drive them to field and to need-
ful penfold, ‘except in the way of love and persuasion, seems
doubtful to me! But fancy a Reign of Christ and his Saints ;
Christ and his Saints just about to come,—had not Oliver Cromwell
stept in and prevented it! The reader discerns combustibilities
enough ; conflagrations, plots, stubborn disaffections and confu-
sions, on the Republican and Republican- Anabaptist side of things.

1 Thurloe, i, 641 ;—442, 591, 621.
VoL. 11.—2]

322 FIRST PARLIAMENT [14 Feb.

It is the first Plot-department, which my Lord Protector will
have to deal with, all his life long. This he must wisely damp
down, as he may. Wisely: for he knows what is noble in the
matter, and what is base in it; and would not sweep the fuel and
the soot both out of doors at once.!

Tuesday, 14th February 1653-4. ‘ At the Ship-Tavern in the Old
Bailey, kept by Mr. Thomas Amps,’ we come upon the second
lifelong Plot-department: Eleven truculent, rather threadbare
persons, sitting over small drink there, on the Tuesday night,
considering how the Protector might be assassinated. Poor broken
Royalist men; payless Old-Captains, most of them, or such like ;
with their steeple-hats worn very brown, and jackboots slit,— and
projects that cannot be executed. Mr. Amps knows nothing of
them, except that they came to him to drink ; nordo we. Probe
them with questions ; clap them in the Tower for a while :? Guilty,
poor knaves ; but not worth hanging :—disappear again into the
general mass of Royalist Plotting, and ferment there.

The Royalists have lain quiet ever since Worcester; waiting
what issue matters would take. Dangerous to meddle with a
Rump Parliament, or other steadily regimented thing; safer if
you can find it fallen out of rank ; hopefullest of all, when it col-
lects itself into a Single Head. The Royalists judge, with some
reason, that if they could kill Oliver Protector, this Common-
wealth were much endangered. In these Easter weeks, too, or
Whitsun weeks, there comes ‘from our Court’ (Charles Stuart’s
Court) ‘at Paris,’ great encouragement to all men of spirit in
straitened circumstances. A Royal Proclamation “ By the King,”
drawn up, say some, by Secretary Clarendon ; setting forth that
‘Whereas a certain base mechanic fellow, by name Oliver Crom-
‘well, has usurped our throne,’ much to our and other people’s
inconvenience, whosoever will kill the said mechanic fellow ‘by
sword, pistol or poison,’ shall have 500/. a-year settled upon him,
with colonelcies in our Army, and other rewards suitable, and be a
made man,—‘ on the word and faith of a Christian King.’® A Pro-
clamation which cannot be circulated except in secret ; but is well
worth reading by all loyal men. And so Royalist Plots also

1[January 3, Note to the Spanish Ambassador ; January 5, Speech to the French
ministers in London. Supplement, Nos. 84, 85. ]

2 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 135). [E. 730, (1). Thurloe, ii. 59, 114. ]

3Thurloe, ii. 248. ‘Given at Paris, 34 May (23 April by old style), 1654.’
{Dr. Gardiner says that ‘‘if internal evidence be worth anything, that proclama-
tion was never issued by Charles ’’ and believes it to have been probably drawn
up by Sir Edward Herbert. See Commonwealth and Protectorate, ii. 458.

1654.] ROYALIST PLOTTING . $38

succeed one another, thick and threefold through Oliver’s whole
life ;—but cannot take effect. Vain for a Christian King and his
cunningest Chancellors to summon all the Sinners of the Earth,
and whatsoever of necessitous Truculent-Flunkeyism there may be,
and to bid, in the name of Heaven and of Another place, for the
Head of Oliver Cromwell: once for all, they cannot have it, that
Head of Cromwell ;—not till he has entirely done with it, and can
make them welcome to their benefit from it! We shall come upon
these Royalist Plots, Rebellion Plots and Assassin Plots, in the
order of time ; and have to mention them, though with brevity.
Oliver Protector, I suppose, understands and understood his Pro-
tectorship moderately well, and what Plots and other Hydra-coils
were inseparable from it ; and contrives to deal with these too,
like a conscientious man, and not like a hungry slave.

Secretary Thurloe, once St. John’s Secretary in Holland, has
come now, ever since the Little-Parliament time, into decided
action as Oliver's Secretary, or the State Secretary ; one of the
expertest Secretaries, in the real meaning of the word Secretary,
any State or working King could have. He deals with all these
Plots; it is part of his function, supervised by his Chief. Mr.
John Milton, we all lament to know, has fallen blind in the
Public Service ; lives now in Bird-cage Walk, still doing a little
when called upon ; bating no jot of heart or hope. Mr. Milton’s
notion is, That this Protectorate of his Highness Oliver was a
thing called for by the Necessities and the Everlasting Laws ;
and that his Highness ought now to quit himself like a Christian
Hero in it, as in other smaller things he has been used to do.!

March 20th, 1653-4. By the Instrument of Government, the
Lord Protector with his Council,? till once the First Parliament

1 4s bi Secunda.

2Fifteen in number, which he may enlarge to Twenty-one, if he see good.
Not removable any of them, except by himself with advice of the rest. A very
remarkable Majesty’s Ministry :—of which, for its own sake and the Majesty’s,
take this List, as it stood in 1654:

Philip Viscount Lisle (Algernon Sidney’s Brother); Fleetwood; Lambert ;
Montague (of Hinchinbrook); Desborow (Protector’s Brother-in-law) ; Ashley
Cooper (Earl of Shaftesbury afterwards); Walter Strickland (Member for Mine-
head in the Long Parliament, once Ambassador in Holland); Colonel Henry
Lawrence (for Westmoreland in the Long Parliament, of whom we have transiently
heard,—became President of the Council); Mayor (of Hursley); Francis Rouse
your old friend) ; pious old Major-General Skippon; Colonels Philip Jones and
ydenham, Sirs Gilbert Pickering and Charles Wolseley, of whom my readers do
not know much. Fifteen Councillors in all. To whom Nathaniel Fiennes (son
of Lord Say and Sele) was afterwards added ; with the Earl of Mulgrave; and
another, Colonel Mackworth, who soon died (Thurloe, iii. 581). Thurloe is
Secretary ; and blind Milton, now with assistants, is Latin Secretary.

eee

ee a a

324 FIRST PARLIAMENT [20 March.

were got together, was empowered not only to raise moneys for
the needful supplies, but also ‘to make Laws and Ordinances for
the peace and welfare of these Nations ;’ which latter faculty he
is by no means slack to exercise. Of his ‘Sixty Ordinances’!
passed in this manner before the Parliament met, which are
well approved of by good judges, we cannot here afford to say
much: but there is one bearing date as above, which must not
be omitted. First Ordinance relating to the Settlement of a
Gospel Ministry in this Nation; Ordinance of immense interest
to Puritan England at that time. An object which has long
been on the anvil, this same ‘Settlement ;’ much laboured at,
and striven for, ever since the Long Parliament began: and still,
as all confess, no tolerable result has been attained. Yet is it
not the greatest object ; properly the soul of all these struggles
and confused wrestlings and battlings, since we first met here ?
For the thing men are taught, or get to believe, that is the thing
they will infallibly do ; the kind of ‘Gospel’ you settle, kind of
‘Ministry’ you settle, or do not settle, the root of all is there!
Let us see what the Lord Protector can accomplish in thi
business.
Episcopacy being put down, and Presbytery not set up, and
Church-Government for years past being all a Church-Anarchy,
the business is somewhat difficult to deal with. The Lord Pro-
tector, as we find, takes it up in simplicity and integrity, intent
upon the real heart or practical outcome of it; and makes a
rather satisfactory arrangement. Thirty-eight chosen Men, the
acknowledged Flower of English Puritanism, are nominated by
this Ordinance of the 20th of March,? nominated a Supreme
Commission for the Trial of Public Preachers. Any person
pretending to hold a Church-living, or levy tithes or clergy-dues
in England, has first to be tried and approved by these men.®
Thirty-eight, as Scobell teaches us: nine are Laymen, our friend
old Francis Rouse at the head of them ; twenty-nine are Clergy.
His Highness, we find, has not much inquired of what Sect they
are; has known them to be Independents, to be Presbyterians,

1[Scobell gives Eighty-two. ] 2Scobell, ii. 279, 80.

3[See History of the English Church during the Civil Wars, etc., ii. 284.
Dr. Shaw draws attention to a pamphlet called /nyuisitio Anglicana, which, he
says, although written from a strongly royalist point of view, throws a strong
light ‘‘upon the method of certifying ministers to the Commissioners, on the
process of personal examination pursued by the latter, their captious questions,
unreasonable delays and subterfuges, and—last but greatest of all—upon the active
though secret interference of Cromwell with the work of the Commissioners.’’]

1654. CHURCH GOVERNMENT 325

one or two of them to be even Anabaptists ;—has been careful
only of one characteristic, That they were men of wisdom, and
had the root of the matter in them. Owen, Goodwin, Sterry,
Marshall, Manton, and others not yet quite unknown to men,
were among these Clerical 7’riers : the acknowledged Flower of
Spiritual England at that time; and intent, as Oliver himself
was, with an awful earnestness, on actually having the Gospel
taught to England.

This is the First branch or limb of Oliver’s scheme for
Church-Government, this Ordinance of the 20th March 1653-4.
A Second, which completes what little he could do in the
matter at present, developed itself in August following. By
this August Ordinance,! a Body of Commissioners, distinguished
Puritan Gentry, distinguished Puritan Clergy, are nominated in
all Counties of England, from Fifteen to Thirty in each County ;
who are to inquire into ‘scandalous, ignorant, insufficient, and
otherwise deleterious alarming Ministers of the Gospel; to be a
tribunal for judging, for detecting, ejecting them (only in case of
ejection, if they have wives, let some small modicum of living be
allowed them) : and to sit there, judging and sifting, till gradu-
ally all is sifted clean, and can be kept clean. This is the
Second branch of Oliver's form of Church-Government : this,
with the other Ordinance, makes at last a kind of practicable
Ecclesiastical Arrangement for England.

A very republican arrangement, such as could be made on the
sudden ; contains in it, however, the germ or essence of all con-
ceivable arrangements, that of worthy men to judge of the worth
of men ;—and was found in practice to work well. As indeed,
any arrangement will work well, when the men in it have the
root of the matter at heart ; and, alas, all arrangements, when
the men in them have not, work ill and not well! Of the Lay
Commissioners, from fifteen to thirty in each County, it is remarked
that not a few are political enemies of Oliver’s: friends or enemies
of his, Oliver hopes they are men of pious probity, and friends to
the Gospel in England. My Lord General Fairfax, the Presby-
terian; Thomas Scott, of the Long Parliament, the fanatical
Republican; Lords Wharton, Say, Sir Arthur Haselrig, Colonel
Robert Blake, Mayor of Hursley, Dunch of Pusey, Montague of
Hinchinbrook, and other persons known to us,—are of these
Commissioners. Richard Baxter, who seldom sat, is one of the

128th August 1654 (Scobell, ii. 335-47).

a Oe

326 FIRST PARLIAMENT (14 April.

Clergy for his County: he testifies, not in the willingest manner,
being no friend to Oliver, That these Commissioners, of one sort
and the other, with many faults, did sift out the deleterious
alarming Ministers of the Gospel, and put-in the salutary in their
stead, with very considerable success,—giving us ‘able, serious
‘ Preachers who lived a godly life, of what tolerable opinion soever
they were ;’ so that ‘many thousands of souls blessed God’ for
what they had done ; and grieved sore when, with the return of
the Nell-Gwynn Defender, and his Four Surplices or what re-
mained of them, it was undone again.!_ And so with these Tiers
and these Expurgators both busy, and a faithful eye to watch
their procedure, we will hope the Spiritual Teaching-Apparatus
of England stood now on a better footing than usual, and actually
succeeded in teaching somewhat.

Of the Lord Protector’s other Ordinances; Ordinance ‘ de-
claring the Law of Treason,’ Ordinances of finance, of Amnesty
for Scotland, of Union with Scotland, and other important matters,
we must say nothing. One elaborate Ordinance, ‘in sixty-seven
Articles, for ‘Reforming the Court of Chancery,’ will be after-
wards alluded to with satisfaction, by the Lord Protector himself.
Elaborate Ordinance ; containing essential improvements, say
some ;—which has perhaps saved the Court of Chancery from
abolition for a while longer! For the rest, ‘not above Two-
hundred Hackney-coaches’ shall henceforth be allowed to ply in
this Metropolis and six miles round it ; the ever-increasing number
of them, blocking up our thoroughfares, threatens to become
insupportable.?

April 14th, 1654, This day, let it be noted for the sake of poor
Editors concerned with undated Letters, and others, his Highness
removed from his old Lodging in the Cockpit, into new properly
Royal Apartments in Whitehall, now ready for him, and lived
there henceforth, usually going out to Hampton Court on the
Saturday afternoon. He has ‘assumed somewhat of the state of
a King ;’ due ceremonial, decent observance beseeming the Pro-
tector of the Commonwealth of England; life-guards, ushers,
state-coaches,—in which my erudite friend knows well what
delight this Lord Protector had! Better still, the Lord Protector
has concluded good Treaties ; received congratulatory Embassies,
—France, Spain itself have sent Embassies. Treaty with the

1 Baxter's Life, part i. 72.
2 Scobell, ii. 313 ; Newspapers (iz Cromwelliana, p. 139).
® Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 139).

1654) LETTER CXCIL, WHITEHALL 327

Dutch, with Denmark, Sweden, Portugal :! all much to our satis-
faction. Of the Portuguese Treaty there will perhaps another
word be said. As for the Swedish, this, it is well known, was
managed by our learned friend Bulstrode at Upsal itself ; whose
Narrative of that formidable Embassy exists, a really curious life-
picture by our Pedant friend; whose qualities are always fat and
good ;—whose parting from poor Mrs. Whitlocke at Chelsea, in
those interesting circumstances, may be said to resemble that of
Hector from Andromache, in some points.”

And now for our Four small Letters,’ for our First Protectorate
Parliament, without waste of another word !

LETTER CXCII

For my loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley, in
Hampshire : These

‘Whitehall,’ 4th May 1654.
Dear BROTHER,

I received your loving letter; for which I
thank you, and surely were it fit to proceed in that business, you
should not in the least have been put upon anything but the
trouble ; for indeed the land in Essex, with some money in my
hand and some other remnants should have gone towards it.

But indeed I am so unwilling to be a seeker after the world,

1 Dutch Treaty signed, 5th April 1654; Swedish, 28th April; Portuguese, 10th
July ; Danish Claims settled, 31st July (Godwin, iv. 49-56).

[April 18, his Highness received a deputation from Guildford in Surrey, consisting
of the Mayor and four Aldermen, who presented a declaration of their conviction
that the Protector had ‘‘ of constraint” taken the government and that he would
uphold religion and justice; and also a petition to be allowed to choose their own
minister for the parishes of ‘‘ Trinity and Maries.” To which his Highness replied :
‘* Gentlemen, I have read your paper, wherein what you there express touching my
taking of the government upon me, you say what is truth. I did not desire it, nor
have I, I amsure, told youso. I believe God put it into your hearts; I shall desire
your prayers that I may do as you have expressed, for God is my bottom, and in
him only do I trust. As for your desire of a minister, I think I have not granted
the living away, and upon your making choice of such ‘an one as your paper
mentions, I shall take order that you shall have your suit.” Several Proceedings,
Clee, April 20-27, 1654, Burney Newspapers, 46 and E. 227, 27.

3[Two other short letters written in March, Supplement Nos, 86, 87. |

OS ee ee oe

328 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 May.

having had so much favour from the Lord in giving me so much
without seeking ; and so unwilling that men should think me so,
which they will though you only appear in it (for they will, by
one means or other, know it),—that indeed I dare not meddle
nor proceed therein. Thus I have told you my plain thoughts.
My hearty Jove I present to you and my sister, my blessing
and love to dear Doll and the little one, with love to all.
I rest,
Your loving brother,
Outver P.*

A ‘business’ seemingly of making an advantageous purchase
of land for Richard ; which Mayor will take all the trouble of,
and even advance the money for; but which Oliver P., for good
reasons given, ‘dare not meddle with.’ No man can now guess
what land it was,—nor need much. In the Pamphletary dust-
mountains is a confused story of Cornet Joyce’s,! concerning
Fawley Park in Hampshire; which, as the dim dateless indica-
tions point to the previous winter or summer, and to the ‘ Lord
General Cromwell’ as looking towards that property for his Son
Richard,—may be the place, for aught we know! The story sets
forth, with the usual bewildered vivacity of Joyce: How Joyce,
the same who took the King at Holmby, and is grown now a
noisy Anabaptist and Lieutenant-Colonel,—how Joyce, I say,
was partly minded and fully entitled to purchase Fawley Park,
and Richard Cromwell was minded and not fully entitled: how
Richard’s Father thereupon dealt treacherously with the said
Joyce ; spake softly to him, then quarrelled with him, menaced
him (owing to Fawley Park); nay ended by flinging him into
prison, and almost reducing him to his needle and thimble again,
—greatly to the enragement and distraction of the said Joyce.

* Noble, i. 330; Harris, p. 515 :—one of the Pusey Letters. [‘' No 20.” Holo-
graph. In the Morrison Collection. }

1True Narrative of the Causes of the Lord General Cromwell’s anger and
indignation against Lieutenant-Colonel George Joyce: reprinted (without date) in
Harleian Miscellany, v. 557, &c.—Joyce ‘is zm jail,’ 19th Sept. 1653 (Thurloe, i.
470). [The 7rue Narrative was issued in 1659. It is amongst the B. Museum
pamphlets (669, f. 21 (50)), and is dated by Thomason, June 15, 1659. A news-
paper of the time stated that Joyce was cashiered for saying that he wished that
the pistol aimed at Cromwell on Triploe Heath had gone off. See Commonwealth
and Protectorate, ii, 255.]

ee . ae

1654.) LETTER CXCIIIL, WHITEHALL = 329

All owing to Fawley Park, thinks Joyce and prints ;—so that my
Lord Protector, if this Park be the place, is yery wise ‘not to
meddle or proceed therein.’ And so we leave it.

LETTER CXCIII

Monk, in these summer months, has a desultory kind of Re-
bellion in the Highlands, Glencairn’s or Middleton’s Rebellion,
to deal with; and is vigorously coercing and strangling it.
Colonel Alured, an able officer, but given to Anabaptist notions,
has been sent into Ulster to bring over certain forces to assist
Monk. His loose tongue, we find, has disclosed designs or
dispositions in him which seem questionable. The Lord Pro-
tector sees good to revoke his Commission to Alured, and order
him up to Town.

‘To the Lord Fleetwood, Lord Deputy of Ireland: These’

‘Whitehall,’ 16th May 1654.

Sir,

By the letter I received from you, and by the
information of the captain you sent to me, I am sufficiently
satisfied of the evil intentions of Colonel Alured ; and by some
other considerations amongst ourselves, tending to the making
up a just suspicion,—by the advice of friends here, I do think fit
to revoke Colonel Alured from that employment.

Wherefore I desire you to send for him to return to you to
Dublin, and that you cause him to deliver up the instructions
and authorities into your hands, which he hath in reference to
that service ; as also such moneys and accounts concerning the
same, according to the letter, herein enclosed, directed to him,
which I entreat you to deliver when he comes to you.

I desire ‘ you’ also, to the end the service may not be neglected,
nor ‘for’ one day to stand, it being of so great concernment to
hasten it, to employ some able officer to assist in Colonel Alured’s
room, until the men be shipped off for their design. We purpose

we ee ee ee ees Ve ee ee

330 FIRST PARLIAMENT [16 May.

also, God willing, to send one very speedily who, we trust, shall
meet them at the place, to command in chief. As for provision
of victual and other necessaries, we shall hasten them away ;
desiring that these forces may by no means stay in Ireland, .
because we purpose they shall meet their provision in the place
they are designed ‘ for.’ .

If any farther discovery be with you about any other passages
on Colonel Alured’s part, I pray examine them, and speed them
to us, and send Colonel Alured over hither with the first oppor-
tunity. Not having more upon this subject at present,

I rest,
Your loving father,
Ouiver P.

/ ‘P.S.’ I desire you that the officer, whom you appoint to
assist the shipping of the forces, may have the money in Colonel
Alured’s hands, for carrying on the service ; and also that he
may leave what remains at Carrickfergus for the Commander-
in-chief, who shall call there for it.*

This is the Enclosure, above spoken of :

LETTER CXCIV
‘To Colonel Alured : These’

‘Whitehall,’ 16th May 1654.
Sir,
I desire you to deliver-up into the hands of
c Lieutenant-General Fleetwood such authorities and instructions
as you had for the prosecution of the business of the Highlands
in Scotland, and ‘that’ you do forthwith repair to me to London ;

* Thurloe, ii. 285. [In the handwriting of Secretary Thurloe. This appears to
be in answer to the letter from Fleetwood printed by Thurloe on page 294, which
is there dated May 18; but in the original appears to be 7 erased and 8 sub-
stituted for it. The captain sent to the Protector was Kingdon. |

1654.) LETTER CXCIV., WHITEHALL — 331

the reason whereof you shall know when you come hither, which
I would have you do with all speed. I would have you also
give an account to the Lieutenant-General, before you come
away, how far you have proceeded in this service, and what
money you have in your hands, which you are to leave with
him.
I rest,
Your loving friend,
O iver P. *

This Colonel Alured is one of several Yorkshire Alureds some-
what conspicuous in these wars; whom we take to be Nephews
or Sons of the valuable Mr. Alured or Ald’red who wrote ‘to old
Mr. Chamberlain,’—in the last generation, one morning, during
the Parliament of 1628, when certain honourable Gentlemen
held their Speaker down,—a Letter which we thankfully read.}
One of them, John, was Member in this Long Parliament; a
Colonel too, and King’s Judge; who is now dead. Here is
another, Colonel Matthew Alured, a distinguished soldier and
republican ; who is not dead; but whose career of usefulness is
here ended. ‘ Repairing forthwith to London,’ to the vigilant
Lord Protector, he gives what account he can of himself; none
that will hold water, I perceive ; lingers long under a kind of
arrest ‘at the Mews’ or elsewhere ;? soliciting either freedom and
renewed favour, or a fair trial and punishment; gets at length
committal to the Tower, trial by Court Martial,—dismissal from
the service.* A fate like that of several others in a similar case
to his.—Poor Alured! But what could be done with him? He

* Thurloe, ii. 286. [In the handwriting of Secretary Thurloe and signed by the
Protector.’’]

1Vol. i. p. 53 e¢ seg.

2[Alured was not imprisoned until November 1654, when he, together with
Cols. Okey and Saunders, was arrested and tried for signing a petition, drawn up
by Wildman, protesting against the powers given to the Protector and praying for
a free Parliament. He was kept in the Tower for twelve months, and deprived of
his command in the army, not serving again until the Rump made him captain of
their life-guard in 1659. Okey also was dismissed, but Saunders, on submission,
retained his command for some time longer. See Mr. Firth’s article in the Ang.
Hist. Review, 1888, p. 329. Also articles on Okey and Overton in the Dictionary
of National Biography.

’ Whitlocke, pp. 499, 510; Thurloe, ii. 294, 313, 414; Burton’s Diary (London,
1828), ili, 46; Commons Journals, vii. 678. [Case of Col. Alured, E. 983, 25. ]

Ce ee ee ee ee ee 4

332 FIRST PARLIAMENT [16 May.

had Republican Anabaptist notions ; he had discontents, enthusi-
asms, which might even ripen into tendencies to correspond with
Charles Stuart. Who knows if putting him in a stone waistcoat,
and general strait-waistcoat of a mild form, was not the merci-
fullest course that could be taken with him?

He must stand here as the representative to us of one of the
fatallest elements in the new Lord Protector’s position: the
Republican discontents and tendencies to plot, fermenting in his
own Army. Of which we shall perhaps find elsewhere room to
say another word. Republican Overton, Milton’s friend, whom
we have known at Hull and elsewhere ; Okey, the fierce dragoon
Colonel and zealous Anabaptist; Alured, whom we see here;
Ludlow, sitting sulky in Ireland : all these are already summoned
up, or about being summoned, to give account of themselves.
Honourable, brave and faithful men: it is, as Oliver often says,
the saddest thought of his heart that he must have old friends
like them for enemies! But he cannot help it; they will have
it so. They must go their way, he his.} *

Much need of vigilance in this Protector! Directly on the
back of these Republican commotions, come out Royalist ones ;
with which however the Protector is less straitened to deal. Lord
Deputy Fleetwood has not yet received his Letter at Dublin,
when here in London emerges a Royalist Plot ; the first of any
gravity ; known in the old Books and State-Trials as Vowel and
Gerard’s Plot, or Somerset Fox's Plot. Plot for assassinating the
Protector, as usual, Easy to do it, as he goes to Hampton Court
ona Saturday,—Saturday the 20th of May, for example. Provide
thirty stout men; and do it then. Gerard, a young Royalist
Gentleman, connected with Royalist Colonels afterwards Earls
of Macclesfield,—he will provide Five-and-twenty ; some Major
Henshaw, Colonel Finch, or I know not who, shall bring the
other Five. ‘Vowel a Schoolmaster at Islington, who taught
many young gentlemen,’ strong for Church and King, cannot act
in the way of shooting ; busies himself consulting, and providing
arms. ‘Billingsley the Butcher in Smithfield,’ he, aided by
Vowel, could easily ‘seize the Troopers’ horses grazing in Islington

1[But Carlyle fails to see, as Cromwell himself failed to see, that the acknow-
ledgment by these sturdy Republicans of the Protector’s supreme power— of
‘‘government by a single person’’—involved the abandonment of all their
strongest convictions; the convictions for which they—and he—had struggled
and fought. They kept in the old way. He trod a new path, along which they
dared not follow him. ]

eT) ee

1654.) LETTER CXCV., WHITEHALL = 333

fields ;’ while others of us unawares fall upon the soldiers at the
Mews? Easy then to proclaim King Charles in the City ; after
which Prince Rupert arriving with ‘Ten-thousand Irish, English
and French,’ and all the Royalists rising,—the King should have
his own again, and we were all made men; and Oliver once well
killed, the Commonwealth itself were as good as dead! Saturday
the 20th of May; then, say our Paris expresses, then !—

Alas, in the very birthtime of the hour, ‘five of the Conspira-
tors are seized in their beds ;’ Gerard, Vowel, all the leaders are
seized ; Somerset Fox confesses for his life; whosoever is guilty
can be seized: and the Plot is like water spilt upon the ground !1
A High Court of Justice must decide upon it; and with Gerard
and Vowel it will probably go hard.

LETTER CXCV

Rerers to a small private or civic matter: the Vicarage of
Christ-Church, Newgate Street, the patronage of which belongs
to ‘the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London as Governors
of the Royal Hospital of St. Bartholomew’ ever since Henry the
Eighth’s time.?__ The former Incumbent, it would seem, had been
removed by the Council of State ; some Presbyterian probably,
who was, not without cause, offensive to them. If now the
Electors and the State could both agree on Mr. Turner,—it
would ‘silence’ several questions, thinks the Lord Protector.
Whether they did agree? Who ‘Mr. Turner,’ of such ‘repute
for piety and learning,’ was? These are questions.

To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Vyner, Knight,
Lord Mayor of London: These
‘Whitehall,’ 5th July 1654.
My Lorp Mayor,
It is not my custom, nor shall be (without
some special cause moving), to interpose anything to the hindrance
of any in the free course of their presenting persons to serve in

1 French Le Bas dismissed for his share in it: Appendix, No. 30.
2Elmes’s Topographical Dictionary of London, in voce.

334 FIRST PARLIAMENT [5 July.

the public ministry. But, well considering how much it concerns
the public peace, and what an opportunity may be had of pro-
moting the interest of the Gospel, if some eminent and fit person
of a pious and peaceable spirit and conversation were placed in
Christ-Church,—and though I am not ignorant what interest the
State may justly challenge to supply that place, which by an
order of State is become void, notwithstanding any resignation
that is made: yet forasmuch as your Lordship and the rest of
the Governors of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital are about to present
thereunto, and have a person of known nobility and integrity
before you, namely Mr. Turner, I am contented, if you think
good so to improve the present opportunity as to present him
to the place, to have all other questions silenced ; which will
not alone be the fruit thereof, but I believe also the true good
and union of the parish therein concerned will be thereby much
furthered. I rest,
Your assured friend,
Outver P.

‘P.S.’ I can assure you few men of his time in England have
a better repute for piety and learning than Mr. Turner.*

I am apt to think the Mr. Turner in question may have been
Jerom Turner, of whom there is record in Wood :! a Somerset-
shire man, distinguished among the Puritans; who takes refuge
in Southampton, and preaches with zeal, learning, piety and
general approbation during the Wars there. He afterwards
removed ‘to Neitherbury, a great country Parish in Dorsetshire,’
and continued there, ‘doing good in his zealous way.’ If this
were he, the Election did not take effect according to Oliver's
program ;—perhaps Jerom himself declined it? He died, still
at Neitherbury, next year; hardly yet past middle age. ‘He
had a strong memory, which he maintained good to the last by
temperance,’ says old Antony: ‘He was well skilled in Greek
‘and Hebrew, was a fluent preacher, but too much addicted to

* Lansdowne MSS, 1236, fol. 111. The Signature alone of the Letter is Oliver's ;
but he has added the Postscript in his own hand.

1 Athena, iii. 404.

_

1654.) LETTER CXCV., WHITEHALL — 335

Calvinism,—which is to be regretted. ‘ Pastor vigilantissimus,
doctrind et pietate insignis :’ so has his Medical Man characterised
him; one ‘Dr. Loss of Dorsetshire,’ who kept a Note-book in
those days. Requiescat, requiescant.'

The High Court of Justice has sat upon Vowel and Gerard ;
found them both guilty of High Treason ; they lie under sentence
of death, while this Letter is a-writing ; are executed five days
hence, 10th July 1654; and make an edifying end.? Vowel was
hanged at Charing Cross in the morning ; strong for Church and
King. The poor young Gerard, being of gentle blood and a
soldier, petitioned to have beheading; and had it, the same
evening, in the Tower. So ends Plot First. Other Royalists,
Plotters or suspect of Plotting,—Ashburnham, who rode with
poor Charles First to the Isle of Wight on a past occasion; Sir
Richard Willis, who, I think, will be useful to Oliver by and by,
—these and a list of others* were imprisoned ; were questioned,
dismissed ; and the Assassin Project is rather cowed down for a
while.

Writs for the New Parliament are out, and much electioneering
interest over England: but there is still an anecdote connected
with this poor Gerard and the 10th of July, detailed at great length
in the old Books, which requires to be mentioned here. About
an hour after Gerard, there died, in the same place, by the same
judicial axe, a Portuguese Nobleman, Don Pantaleon Sa, whose
story, before this tragic end of it, was already somewhat twisted
up with Gerard’s. To wit, on the 23d of November last, this
same young Major Gerard was walking in the crowd of Exeter
‘Change, where Don Pantaleon, Brother of the Portuguese Am-

1[The next day, July 6, Bulstrode Whitelocke was received by the Protector on
his return from his Swedish embassy, when he made a long speech, and the Pro-
tector replied to the effect that he and his Council had heard the report of his
journey and negotiation with much contentment and satisfaction, and that they
thanked God for his safe return and his success, and testified to the faithfulness,
diligence and prudence with which he had discharged his trust; that it was in the
hearts of them all that his services should prove of advantage to him and his; that
the Lord had showed extraordinary mercy to him and to his company in deliver-
ing them from danger [of shipwreck], and supporting them under their hardships ;
that the Treaty brought by him should be carefully considered ; and that they bid
him a hearty welcome home. Whitelocke, as his manner is, gives the speech set
out at length, as if he had reported it at the time, which he certainly could not
have done, The Protector also spoke kindly to the ambassador’s retinue. See
Journal of the Swedish Embassy, ed. Reeve, ii. 453.]

2 State Trials (London, 1810), v. 516-39.

° Newspapers, tst-8th June 1654 (in Cromwedliana, p. 143). [Two short letters
in the Supplement (Nos. 89, 90) come in here. ]

336 _ FIRST PARLIAMENT [3 Sept.

bassador, chanced.also to be. Some jostling of words, followed
by drawing of rapiers, took place between them; wherein as
Don Pantaleon had rather the worse, he hurried home to the
Portuguese Embassy; armed some twenty of his followers, in
headpieces, breastpieces, with sword and pistol, and returned to
seek revenge. Gerard was gone; but another man, whom they
took for him, these rash Portugals slew there; and had to be
repressed, after much other riot, and laid in custody, by the watch
or soldiery. Assize-trial, in consequence, for Don Pantaleon ;
clear Trial in the ‘Upper Bench Court,’ jury half foreigners ;
and rigorous sentence of death;—much to Don Pantaleon’s
amazement, who pleaded and got his Brother to plead the
rights of Ambassadors, all manners of rights and considerations ;
all to no purpose. The Lord Protector would not and could not
step between a murderer and the Law: poor Don Pantaleon
perished on the same block with Gerard; two Tragedies, once
already in contact, had their fifth-act together. Don Pantaleon’s
Brother, all sorrow and solicitation being fruitless, signed the
Portuguese Treaty that very day, and instantly departed for
his own country, with such thoughts as we may figure.'

SPEECH II

But now the New Parliament has got itself elected ; not without
much interest :—the first Election there has been in England for
fourteen years past. Parliament of Four-hundred, thirty Scotch,
thirty Irish; freely chosen according to the Instrument, accord-
ing to the Bill that was in progress when the Rump disappeared.
What it will say to these late inarticulate births of Providence,
and high transactions? Something edifying, one may hope.
Open Malignants, as we know, could not vote or be voted for,
to this Parliament; only active Puritans or quiet Neutrals, who
had clear property to the value of 200/. Probably as fair a Re-
presentative as, by the rude method of counting heads, could
well be got in England. The bulk of it, I suppose, consists of
constitutional Presbyterians and use-and-wont Neutrals; it well
represents the arithmetical account of heads in England: whether
the real divine and human value of thinking-souls in England,—

1 Whitlocke, pp. 550, 577:

je ee eee

1654.] SPEECH II 337

that,is a much deeper question; upon which the Protector and
this First Parliament of his may much disagree. It is the
question of questions, nevertheless; and he that can answer it
best will come best off in the long-run. It was not a successful
Parliament this, as we shall find. The Lord Protector and it
differed widely in certain fundamental notions they had !—

We recognise old faces, in fair proportion, among those Four-
hundred ;—many new withal, who never become known to us.
Learned Bulstrode, now safe home from perils in Hyperborean
countries, is here; elected for several places, the truly valuable
man, Old-Speaker Lenthall sits,.old Major-General Skippon, old
Sir William Masham, old Sir Francis Rouse. My Lord Herbert
(Earl of Worcester’s son) is here ; Owen, Doctor of Divinity, for
Oxford University ;—a certain not entirely useless Guibon God-
dard, for the Town of Lynn, to whom we owe some Notes of the
procedure. Leading Officers and high Official persons have been
extensively elected ; several of them twice and thrice: Fleetwood,
Lambert, the Claypoles, Dunches, both the young Cromwells ;
Montague for his County, Ashley Cooper for his. On the other
hand, my Lord Fairfax is here; nay Bradshaw, Haselrig, Robert
Wallop, Wildman, and Republicans are here. Old Sir Harry
Vane; not young Sir Harry, who sits meditative in the North.
Of Scotch Members we mention only Laird Swinton, and the Earl
of Hartfell; of the Irish, Lord Broghil and Commissary-General
Reynolds, whom we once saw fighting well in that country.2—
And now hear the authentic Bulstrode; and then the Protector
himself.

‘ September 3d, 1654.—The Lord’s day, yet the day of the Par-
‘liament’s meeting. The Members met in the afternoon at ser-
‘mon, in the Abbey Church at Westminster: after sermon they
‘attended the Protector in the Painted Chamber; who made a
‘Speech to them of the cause of their summons,’ Speech unre-
ported ;* ‘after which, they went to the House, and adjourned
‘to the next morning.

1[Printed by Mr. Rutt, with Burton’s Diary.]

2 Letter CVII.

3 [After the sermon they went to the Parliament House, and debated about the
choice of a Speaker, Bradshaw and Lenthall being both put in nomination. Also
some members objected to sitting on the Lord’s Day and wished to adjourn im-
mediately, but just then Lambert came in to summon them to the Protector’s
presence, ‘‘and the House (though some cried ‘ sit still’) went to attend his High-
ness pleasure.” (Goddard, in Burton, i. xviii.)

The cries to ‘‘sit still” are explained in a despatch by Bordeaux, the French
ambassador, who wrote that ‘‘dix ou douze, qui estoient membres du vieux

VOL. 0.—22

338 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

‘Monday, September 4th—The Protector rode in state from
‘Whitehall to the Abbey Church in Westminster. Some hun-
‘dreds of Gentlemen and Officers went before him bare; with
‘the Life-guard; and next before the coach, his pages and
‘laqueys richly clothed. On the one side of his coach went
‘Strickland, one of his Council, and Captain of his Guard, with
‘the Master of the Ceremonies; both on foot. On the other
‘side went Howard,! Captain of the Life-guard. In the coach
‘with him were his son Henry, and Lambert; both sat bare.
‘ After him came Claypole, Master of the Horse; with a gallant
‘led horse richly trapped. Next came the Commissioners of the
‘Great Seal,’ Lisle, Widdrington, and I; ‘Commissioners of the
‘Treasury, and divers of the Council in coaches ; last the ordinary
‘ Guards.

‘He alighting at the Abbey Church door,’ and entering, ‘the
‘Officers of the Army and the Gentlemen went first ; next them
‘four maces; then the Commissioners of the Seal, Whitlocke
‘carrying the Purse; after, Lambert carrying the Sword bare:
‘the rest followed. His Highness was seated over against the
‘Pulpit ; the Members of the Parliament on both sides.

‘ After the sermon, which was preached by Mr. Thomas Good-
‘win, his Highness went, in the same equipage, to the Painted
‘Chamber. Where he took seat in a chair of state set upon
‘steps,’ raised chair with a canopy over it, under which his High-
ness sat covered, ‘and the Members upon benches round about
‘sat all bare. All being silent, his Highness,’ rising, ‘ put off his
‘hat, and made a large and subtle speech to them.’ ”

Parlement, . . . déclaroient haultement que l’authorité entiére estant entre leurs
mains, ils n’avoient que faire d’aller trouver M. le Protecteur, et mesmes ne
suivirent point les autres,” Bordeaux to Brienne, Sept. 7-17, Record Office Tran-
scripts.

Another account of the proceeding tells us that after half an hour’s debate about
the Speakership, ‘‘ his Migines sent for them into the Painted Chamber, where
they all retired by way of congratulation, being about 300 in number; and im-
mediately upon their entering in, his Highness rose out of the Chair of State and
saluted them with a most excellent (but short) speech, declaring that he desired
the spirit of union might go along with them and that the work of the Lord might
be effectually carried on, for the peace and tranquillity of all the Saints in Sion,
Withal, he gave them to understand that he would attend them between 8 and 9
of the clock, the next morning in the Parliament House "—Goddard says he desired
them to ‘‘ meet him first at a sermon in the Abbey Church and after that in the
Painted-Chamber” which was what was done—‘‘ and so he withdrew, and went in
his barge to Whitehall.” (Fazthful Scout, No. 195, p. 1554. E. 233, 24).]

1 Colonel Charles, ancestor to the Earl of Carlisle.
2Whitlocke, p. 582.

bi er Mer i

=

1654.] SPEECH II 339

Here is a Report of the Speech, ‘taken by one who stood very
near, and ‘ published! to prevent mistakes.’ As we, again, stand
at some distance,—two centuries with their chasms and ruins,—
our hearing is nothing like so good! To help a little, I have,
with reluctance, admitted from the latest of the Commentators a
few annotations ; and intercalated them the best I could ; sup-
pressing very many. Let us listen well; and again we shall
understand somewhat.

GENTLEMEN,

You are met here on the greatest occasion
that, I believe, England ever saw; having upon your shoulders
the interests of three great nations with the territories belonging
to them ;—and truly, I believe I may say it without any hyper-
bole, you have upon your shoulders the interest of all the Christian
people in the world. And the expectation is, that I should let
you know (as far as I have cognisance of it), the occasion of your
assembling together at this time.

It hath been very well hinted to you this day,? that you come
hither to settle the interests before mentioned: for your work
here, in the issue and consequences of it, ni// extend so far,®
‘even to all Christian people.’ In the way and manner of my
speaking to you, I shall study plainness; and to speak to you
what is truth, and what is upon my heart, and what will in some
measure reach to these ‘ great’ concernments.

1By G. Sawbridge, at the Bid/e on Ludgate Hill, London, 1654. [It is
amongst the Azng’s Pamphlets (E. 812, 11) and may be said to be the only text we
have, the report in the Old Parliamentary History being copied from it. But there
are various summaries of it extant, both in tracts and in the newspapers of the day,
all very much alike, and perhaps officially ‘‘ communicated.” One tract, The dast
Speech of His Highness the Lord Protector to the Parliament on Tuesday in the Painted
Chamber, being the 12 of this instant September (E. 234, i.) states at any rate that
it is ‘‘published according to order,” but this seems a little doubtful in face of the
fact that the speech recorded is not that of the 12th at all, but of the 4th. This
summary is almost verbatim the same with that in the newspapers. A news letter,
writing of this speech and the next, says, ‘‘ His Highness the Protector’s speeches
are this day extant, containing in both of them eleven sheets of paper. It is said they
were both of them taken by a gentleman who being most skilful in ‘ Bracygraphie,’
stood very near him at the time he did deliver them to the Parliament.” (E. 813, 3.)]

2in the Sermon we have just heard.

3[‘‘ for it will be made of so large extension in the issue and consequence of it,”
pamphlet.)

' 7 “a ‘tk, 7S er a CUO ee ee
Sot. eee ee i itd = -{_ oe SN ta

340 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

After so many changes and turnings, which this nation hath
laboured under,—to have such a day of hope as this is, and
such a door of hope opened by God to us, truly I believe, some
months since, would have been above all our thoughts !—I con-
fess it would have been worthy of such a meeting as this is, to
have remembered! that which was the rise ‘of,’ and gave the
first beginning to, all those turnings and tossings? which have
been upon these nations: and to have given you a series of the
transactions,—not of men, but of the Providence of God, all along
unto our late changes: as also the ground of our first undertaking
to oppose that usurpation and tyranny® that was upon us, both
in civils and spirituals; and the several grounds particularly ap-
plicable to the several changes that have been. But I have two
or three reasons which divert me from such a way of proceeding
at this time.

If I should have gone in that way, that which is upon my
heart to have said ‘as to these things’ (which is ‘so’ written there
that if I would blot it out I could not) would ‘itself’ have spent
this day: the providences and dispensations of God have been
so stupendous. As David said in the like case (Psalm xl. 5,) #
“ Many, O Lord My God, are thy wonderful works which thou
“hast done, and thy thoughts which are to-us-ward: they can-
‘not be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and
“speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.”—Truly,
another reason, new to me, you had today in the Sermon:?
‘you had’ much recapitulation of Providence ; much allusion to a
state and dispensation in respect of discipline and correction, of
mercies and deliverances, ‘to a state and dispensation similar to
ours,—to, in truth,’ the only parallel of God’s dealing with us

1commemorated.

2[Carlyle altered ‘‘ turnings and tossings” into ‘‘ troubles.”’]

3 of Charles, Wentworth, Laud and Company.

4[The references, in the pamphlet, are in the margin only. }

5 This Sermon of Goodwin's is not in the collected Edition of his Works; not
among the King’s Pamphlets ; not in the Bodleian Library. We gather what the
subject was, from this Speech, and know nothing of it otherwise. [An exhortation
on submission to the powers established by God, Bordeaux, the French Ambassador,

P says. |

1654.] SPEECH II 341

that I know in the world, which was largely and wisely held
forth to you this day: ‘to’ Israel’s bringing-out of Egypt through
a wilderness, by many signs and wonders, towards a place of
rest,—I say towards it.1 And that having been so well remon-
strated to you this day, is another argument why I shall not
trouble you with a recapitulation of those things ;—though they
are things that I hope will never be forgotten, because written
in better books than those of paper ;—I am persuaded, written
in the heart of every good man!

‘But’ the third reason was this: that which I judge to be the
end of your meeting, the great end, which was likewise re-
membered to you this day ;? to wit, Healing and Settling. And
the remembering ‘of’ transactions too particularly, perhaps
instead of healing,—at least in the hearts of many of you,—may
set the wound fresh a-bleeding. ‘And’ I must profess this unto
you, whatever thoughts pass upon me: that if this day,—that is
this meeting,—prove not healing, what shall we do! But, as I
said before, I trust it is in the minds of you all, and much more
in the mind of God, to cause healing.* It must be first in His
mind :—and He being pleased to put it into yours, it will be a
day indeed, and such a day as generations to come will bless you
for !—I say, for this and the other reasons, | have forborne to
make a particular remembrance and enumeration of things, and
of the manner of the Lord’s bringing us through so many
changes and turnings as have passed upon us.

Howbeit, I think it will be more than necessary ‘ to let you
know (at the least so well as I may), in what condition this
‘nation,’ nay, these nations were, when this ‘ present’ Govern-

1not yet at it; ofa dene. 2in the Sermon.

5[‘* But, as I said before, seeing (I trust) it (¢.e., that), is in the minds of you all
and much more in the mind of God, which must cause healing,” pamphlet. The
line of thought evidently runs, ‘‘ My 3rd reason for not recalling the past is that it
might set old wounds bleeding, whereas the main end of your meeting is healing,
and if this meeting does not prove healing what shall we do. But, as I said before
(seeing that you have in your minds what wdé// cause healing) I say, for this and
other reasons,” &c. ]

4|The ‘‘than” here does not seem to be needed. The summary of the speech
(E. 234 (z)) has ‘‘ necessary rather.’’}

342 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

ment! was undertaken. ‘And’ for order's sake : It’s very natural
for us to consider what our condition was, in civils; ‘and then
also’ in spirituals.

What was our condition? Every man’s hand (almost) was
against his brother ;—at least his heart ‘was ;’ little regarding
anything that should cement, and might have a tendency in it to
cause us to grow into one. All the dispensations of God; His
terrible ones, He having met us in the way of His judgment?
in a ten-years Civil War, a very sharp one; ‘and’ His merciful
dispensations : they did not, they did not work upon us!? ‘No.’
But we had our humours and interests ;—and indeed I fear our
humours were more ‘with us’ than ‘even’ our interests. And |
certainly, as it fell out, in such cases our passions were more than [
our judgments.—Was not everything (almost) grown arbitrary? |
_ Who ‘of us’ knew where or how to have right ‘done him,’ without
_ some obstruction or other intervening? Indeed we were almost }
grown arbitrary in everything.

What was the face that was upon our affairs as to the In-
terest of the nation ; ‘as’ to the authority of the nation; to the
magistracy ; to the ranks and orders of men,—whereby England
hath been known for hundreds of years? [The Levellers !] A
nobleman, a gentleman, a yeoman; ‘the distinction of these :’
that is a good interest of the nation, and a great one!4 The
‘natural’ magistracy of the nation, was it not almost trampled
under foot, under despite and contempt, by men of Levelling
principles?°® I beseech you, for the orders of men and ranks of
men, did not that Levelling principle tend to the reducing all
to an equality? Did it ‘consciously’ think to do so; or did it
‘only unconsciously’ practise towards it for property ® and in-

1 Protectorate. 2 punishment for our sins.

3 Reiteration of the word is not an uncommon mode of emphasis with Oliver.

*[This is rather aptly taken up by the author of an answer to part of this speech
(see note on p. 346 below), who suggests that kingship is as good and great an
interest in England as the other three, yet no one had been more instrumental in
razing it than Cromwell himself. ]

5[‘The summary has here: ‘‘ Every man’s hand was upon his loins, and said,

we see nothing that bears sway or rule.’’ |
8[‘‘ propriety’ in the pamphlet, but meaning as here. ]

1654.] SPEECH II 343

terest? ‘At all events,’ what was the purport of it but to
make! the tenant as liberal a fortune as the landlord? Which,
I think, if obtained, would not have lasted long! The men
of that principle, after they had served their own turns, would
have cried up interest and property then fast enough !—This
instance is instead of many. And that? this thing did ‘and might
well’ extend far, is manifest; because it was a pleasing voice
to all Poor Men, and truly not unwelcome to all Bad Men.
[Far-extended classes, these two both !| To my thinking, it is
a consideration that, in your endeavours after settlement, you
will be so well minded of, that I might well have spared this :
but let that pass.—

‘Now as to Spirituals.’ Indeed in spiritual things the case
was more sad and deplorable ‘still ;’—and that was told to
you this day eminently. The prodigious blasphemies ; contempt
of God and Christ, denying of Him, contempt of Him and His
ordinances, and of the Scriptures: a spirit visibly acting ® those
things foretold by Peter and Jude; yea those things spoken of
by Paul to Timothy! Paul declaring some things* to be worse
than the Antichristian state (of which he had spoken in the First
to Timothy, Chapter fourth, verses first and second, ‘under the
title of the Latter times’), tells them what should be the lot and
portion of the ast times; and says (Second to Timothy, Chapter
third, verses second, third, fourth), “In the last days perilous
“times should come; for men should be lovers of their own
“selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
“parents, unthankful,’ and so on. But in speaking of the Anti-
christian state, he told us® (First to Timothy, Chapter fourth,
verses first and second), that “in the /atter days”’ that state shall
come in; ‘not the dast days but the latter, —wherein “there shall

1 fe What was the design but to make,” pamphlet. ]

2/** that it may appear that,” zdzd. ]

8a general temper visibly bringing out in practice.

4[‘* Things spoken of by Paul to Timothy, who, when he would remember some
things,” pamphlet, ]

5[** And when he remembers that of the Anti-Christian state, he tells them,”
pamphlet.)

Ms

344 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

“be a departing from the faith, and a giving heed to seducing
“spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy,’ and
soon. This is only his description of the /atter times, or those of
Antichrist ;! and we are given to understand that there are Jast
times coming, which will be worse ! ?—And surely it may well be
feared, these are our times. For when men forget all rules of
law and nature, and break all the bonds that fallen man hath
on him ; ‘obscuring’ the remainder of the image of God in his
nature, which he cannot blot out, and yet shall endeavour to
blot out, “having a form of godliness without the power,’—
‘surely’ these are sad tokens of the last times !

And indeed the character wherewith this spirit and principle
is described in that place ‘of Scripture,’ is so legible and visible,
that he who runs may read it to be amongst us. For by such
“the grace of God is turned into wantonness,” and Christ and
the Spirit of God made the cloak of all villany and spurious ap-
prehensions. [Threatening to go a strange course, those Anti-
nomian, Levelling, day-dreaming Delusionists of ours!| And
although these things will not be owned publicly as to practice
(they being so abominable and odious); yet ‘the consideration ’
how this principle extends itself, and whence it had its rise,
makes me to think of a second sort of men, ‘tending in the same

1 There is no express mention of Antichrist either here or elsewhere in the Text
of Timothy at all; but, I conclude, a full conviction on the part of Cromwell and
all sound Commentators that Antichrist is indubitably shadowed forth there.
Antichrist means, with them and him, the Pope; to whom Laud, &c., with his
‘four surplices at Allhallowtide’ and other clothweb and cobweb furniture, are of
kindred. ‘‘ We have got rid of Antichrist,” he seems to intimate, ‘‘ we have got
pretty well done with Antichrist: and are we now coming to something worse ?
To the Levellers, namely! The Latter times are over, then; and we are coming
now into the Zas¢ times?” It is on this contrast of comparative and superlative,
Latter and Last, that Oliver's logic seems to ground itself: Paul says nothing of
Antichrist, nor anything directly of the one time being worse or better than the
other; only the one time is ‘latter,’ the other is ‘last..—This paragraph is not
important; but to gain any meaning from it whatever, some small changes have
been necessary. I do not encumber the reader with double samples of what at best
is grown obsolete to him: such as wish to see the original unadulterated unin-
telligibility, will find it, in clear print, p. 321, vol. xx. of Parliamentary History,
and satisfy themselves whether I have read well or ill.

2[‘* By which description he makes the state of the last times worse than that
under Anti-Christ,” pamphlet. |

1654.] SPEECH II 345

direction,’ who, it’s true, as I said, will not practise nor own
these things, yet can tell the magistrate that he hath nothing to
do with men thus holding ‘such notions :’ for these, ‘ forsooth,’ are
matters of conscience and opinion: they are matters of religion;
what hath the Magistrate to do with these things? He is to
look to the outward man, but not to meddle with the inward,
—‘and so forth.’ And truly it so happens that though these
things do break out visibly to all, yet the principle wherewith
these things are carried on so forbids the magistrate to meddle
with them, as it hath hitherto kept the offenders from punish-
ment.!

Such considerations, and pretensions of liberty ‘of conscience,
what are they leading us towards!’ liberty of conscience, and
liberty of ‘the’ subjects,—two as glorious things to be contended
for, as any God hath given us; yet both these also abused for
the patronising of villanies; insomuch as that it hath been an
ordinary thing to say, and in dispute to affirm, that it, ‘the
restraining of such pernicious notions,’ was not in the magistrate’s
power ; he had nothing to do with it. Not so much as ‘with’ the
printing of a Bible in? the nation for the use of the people, ‘was
competent to the magistrate,’ lest it ‘should’ be imposed upon the
consciences of men, for they must receive the same traditionally
and implicitly from the power of the magistrate, if ‘it were’ thus
received! The afore-mentioned abominations did thus swell to
this height among us.

‘So likewise’ the axe was laid to the root of the ministry.’
It was Antichristian, it was Babylonish, ‘said they.’ It suffered
under such a judgment, that the truth of it is, as the extremity

1The latest of the Commentators says: ‘This drossy paragraph has not
‘much Political Philosophy in it, according to our modern established Litany of
‘**toleration,’’ ‘freedom of opinion,” ‘‘no man responsible for what opinions he
‘may form,” &c. &c. ; but it has some honest human sagacity in it, of a much more
‘perennial and valuable character. Worth looking back upon, worth looking up
‘towards,—as the blue skies and stars might be, if through the great deep element
‘of ‘‘ temporary London Fog” there were any chance of seeing them !—Strange
‘exhalations have risen upon us, and the Fog is very deep: nevertheless very in-
‘ dubitably the stars still ave.’

2[ to,” pamphlet. | 3 Preaching Clergy.

ee,

346 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

was great according to the former system,! I wish it prove not as
great on this hand. The ‘former’ extremity ‘ we suffered under’
was, that no man, though he had never so good a testimony,
though he had received gifts from Christ,? might preach, unless
ordained. So now ‘I think we are at the other extremity, when’
many affirm,’ on the other hand, that he who is ordained hath a
nullity, or Antichristianism, stamped ‘thereby’ upon his calling ;
so that he ought not to preach, or not be heard.—I wish it may
not too, too justly be said, that there was severity and sharpness ;
‘in our old system!’ yea, too much of an imposing spirit in
matter of conscience ; a spirit Unchristian enough in any times,
most unfit for these ;—denying liberty ‘of conscience’ to those
who have earned it with their blood; who have gained civil
liberty, and religious also, for those [Stifled murmurs from the
Presbyterian Sect} who would thus impose upon them !—

We may reckon among these our Spiritual evils, an evil that hath
more refinedness in it, and more colour for it, and hath deceived
more people of integrity than the rest have done ;—for few have
been catched with the former mistakes but such as have aposta-
tised from their holy profession, such as being corrupt in their
consciences have been forsaken by God, and left to such noisome
opinions. But, I say, there is another error of more refined sort ;
‘which’ many honest people whose hearts are sincere, many ot
them belonging to God, ‘have fallen into:’ and that is the mis-
taken notion of the Fifth Monarchy.—*

[Yes, your Highness !—But will his Highness and the old Par-
liament be pleased here to pause a little, tilla faithful Editor take
the great liberty of explaining somewhat to the modern part of

1‘on that’ in orig. He alludes to the Presbyterian system. [‘‘ As the extremity
was great on that, I wish it prove not so on this hand,” pamphlet. |

2[‘* That no man having a good testimony, having received gifts from Christ,
might preach if not ordained,” zdzd..]
3[‘‘are” in 2ézd., but ‘‘ affirm” in Parl, History.]
sf But I say there are others more refined, many honest people whose hearts
are sincere, many of them belonging to God, and that is the mistaken notion of
the Fifth Monarchy,” Zamphlet. This part of the speech was answered by John
Spittiehouse, in a tract called ‘‘ 4x Answer to one part of the Lord Protector’s
speech ; or a vindication of the Fifth Monarchy men" (E. 813, 19).]

ee ee eee ee eee eT lUemr Ce .OS ll
7

1654.] SPEECH II 347

the audience? Here is a Note saved from destruction; not
without difficulty. To his Highness and the old Parliament it
will be inaudible; to them, standing very impassive,—serene,
immovable in the fixedness of the old Eternities,—it will be no
hardship to wait a little! And to us who still live and listen, it
may have its uses.

‘The common mode of treating Universal History,’ says our
latest impatient Commentator, ‘not yet entirely fallen obsolete in
‘this country, though it has been abandoned with much ridicule
‘everywhere else for half a century now, was to group the Aggre-
‘gate Transactions of the Human Species into Four Monarchies :
‘the Assyrian Monarchy of Nebuchadnezzar and Company ; the
‘ Persian of Cyrus and ditto; the Greek of Alexander ; and lastly
‘the Roman. These I think were they, but am no great authority
‘on the subject. Under the dregs of this last, or Roman Empire,
‘which is maintained yet by express name in Germany, Das heilige
‘ Rimische Reich, we poor moderns still live. But now say Major-
‘General Harrison and a number of men, founding on Bible
‘ Prophecies, Now shall be a Fifth Monarchy, by far the blessed-
‘est and the only real one,—the Monarchy of Jesus Christ, his
‘Saints reigning for Him here on Earth,—if not He himself, which
‘is probable or possible,—for a thousand years, &c. &e,— —
‘O Heavens, there are tears for human destiny; and immortal
‘Hope itself is beautiful because it is steeped in Sorrow, and
‘foolish Desire lies vanquished under its feet! They who merely
‘laugh at Harrison take but a small portion of his meaning with
‘them. Thou, with some tear for the valiant Harrison, if with
‘any thought of him at all, tend thou also valiantly, in thy day
‘and generation, whither he was tending ; and know that, in far
‘ wider and diviner figure than that of Harrison, the Prophecy is
‘very sure,—that it shall be sure while one brave man survives
‘among the dim bewildered populations of this world. Good
‘shall reign on this Earth: has not the Most High said it? To
‘approve Harrison, to justify Harrison, will avail little for thee ;
‘go and do likenise. Go and do better, thou that disapprovest
‘him. Spend thou thy life for the Eternal: we will call thee
‘also brave, and remember thee for a while!’

So much for ‘that mistaken notion of the Fifth Monarchy :’
and now his Highness, tragically audible across the Centuries,
continues again :]

—Fifth Monarchy. A thing pretending more spirituality than

an pte i 6

Fer ee Se 8 ee ee eee

348 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

anything else. A notion I hope we all honour, wait, and hope
for ‘the fulfilment of:’ That Jesus Christ mz// have a time to set
up His reign in our hearts; by subduing those corruptions and
lusts and evils that are there; which reign now more in the
world than, I hope, in due time they shall do. And when more
fulness of the Spirit is poured forth to subdue iniquity, and bring-
in everlasting righteousness, then will the approach of that glory
be. [Most true ;—and not till then!| The carnal divisions and
contentions among Christians, so common, are not the symptoms
of that Kingdom! But for men to entitle themselves, on this
principle, that they are the only men to rule kingdoms, govern
nations, and give laws to people; to determine of property and
liberty and everything else, upon such a pretence as this is:
truly they had need give clear manifestations of God’s presence
with them, before wise men will receive or submit to their con-
clusions! Nevertheless, as many of these men! have good
meanings, as I hope in my soul they have, it will be the
wisdom of all knowing and experienced Christians to do as Jude
saith, ‘Jude,’ when he had reckoned up those horrible things,
done upon pretences, and haply by some upon mistakes: “Of
some,” says he, “have compassion, making a difference ; others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.”? I fear they will
give opportunity too often for this exercise. And I hope the
same will be for their good. If men do but ‘so much as’ pretend
for justice and righteousness, and be of peaceable spirits, and
will manifest this, let them be the subjects of the magistrate’s
encouragement. And if the magistrate, by punishing visible
miscarriages, save them by that discipline, God having ordained
him for that end,—I hope it will evidence /ove and no hatred,
‘so’ to punish where there is cause. [Hear !]

Indeed this is that which doth most declare the danger? of
that spirit. For if these were but notions,—I mean the instances

1[‘* Besides, certainly, though many of these men,” pamphlet. }

2 Jude, 22, 23. A passage his Highness frequently refers to.

’This fact, that they come so often to ‘ visible miscarriages,’ these Fifth-
Monarchists and Speculative Levellers, who ‘have good meanings.’ .

1654.) SPEECH IT 349

that I have given you ‘of dangerous doctrines’ both of Civil
‘things’ and Spiritual ;'|—if, I say, they were but notions, they
were ‘best’ to be let alone. Notions will hurt none but them that
have them. But when they come to such practices as to tell us,
‘for instance,’ That liberty and property are not the badges of the
Kingdom of Christ ; when they tell us, not that we are to regu-
late law, but that law is to be abrogated, indeed subverted ;
and perhaps wish to bring in the Judaical law—?

[Latest Commentator loquitur : ‘This, as we observed, was the
‘ery that Westminster raised when the Little Parliament set
‘about reforming Chancery. What countenance this of the
‘Mosaic Law might have had from Harrison and his minority,
‘one does not know. Probably they did find the Mosaic Law,
‘in some of its enactments, more cognate to Eternal Justice and
‘“the mind of God” than Westminster-Hall Law was; and so
‘might reproachfully or admonitorily appeal to it on occasion,
‘as they had the clearest title and call to do: but the clamour
‘itself, as significant of any practical intention, on the part of
‘that Parliament, or of any considerable Sect in England, to
‘bring in the Mosaic Law, is very clearly a long-wigged one,
‘rising from the Chancery regions, and is descriptive of nothing
‘but of the humour that prevailed there. His Highness alludes
‘to it in passing; and from him it was hardly worth even that
‘ allusion.’ |

—Judaical law ; instead of our known laws settled among us :
this is worthy of every magistrate’s consideration. Especially
where every stone is turned to bring ‘in’ confusion. I think, I
say, this will be worthy of the magistrate’s consideration. [Shall
he step beyond his province, then, your Highness ? And interfere mith
Sreedom of opinion ?—* I think, I say, it will be worth his while to
consider about it !”’|

Whilst these things were in the midst of us; and ‘whilst’ the
nation ‘was’ rent and torn in spirit and principle from one end

1[**T mean the instances that I have given you, both of civil considerations and
spiritual,” pamphlet. |

2(‘‘and tell us that instead of regulating laws, laws are to be abrogated, indeed
subverted, and perhaps would bring in the Judaical law,” 27d. ]

- 350 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

to another, after this sort and manner I have now told you;
family against family, husband against wife, parents against
children; and nothing in the hearts and minds of men but
“ Overturn, overturn, overturn!’’! (a Scripture ‘phrase’ very
much abused, and applied to justify unpeaceable practices by all
men of discontented spirits),—the common enemy sleeps not :
our adversaries” in civil and spiritual respects did take advantage
at these divisions and distractions, and did practise accordingly in
the three nations of England, Scotland and Ireland. We know
very well that emissaries of the Jesuits never came in those
swarms as they have done since these things* were set on foot.
And I tell you that divers gentlemen here can bear witness with
me how that they, ‘the Jesuits, have had a consistory abroad
that rules all the affairs of things [“ Affairs of things :” rough and
ready !| in England, from an Archbishop down to the other #
dependents upon him, And they had fixed in England,—of
which we are able to produce the particular instruments—
in most of the limits of the cathedrals® an episcopal power
[Regular Episcopacy of their own !), with archdeacons, &c., and
had persons authorised to exercise and distribute those things
[J begin to love that rough-and-ready method, in comparison with
some others !|; who pervert and deceive the people. And all
this, while we were in this sad, and as I said deplorable con-
dition.

‘And’ in the mean time all endeavours possible were used to
hinder the work ‘of God’ in Ireland, and the progress of the
work of God in Scotland; by continual intelligences and corre-
spondences, both at home and abroad, from hence into Ireland,

1[ Overturning”’ in pamphlet, but as above in Parl. History.)

2{** Thecommon adversary, in the mean time, he sleeps not, and our adversaries,”
pamphlet. |

3 Speculations of the Levellers, Fifth-Monarchists, &c. &c.

4[** Archbishop, with other,” 2dzd., but as above in Parl. History. ]

5{Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ their Cathedrals ‘or pretended Dioceses,’’’ but the
Roman Catholics had no cathedrals then in England. The summary has “‘ having —
their Sorters abroad to rule all the affairs of England and the dependencies
thereof.”

*

1654. | SPEECH II 351

and from hence into Scotland.! Persons were stirred up and
encouraged, from these divisions and discomposure of affairs, to do
all they could to encourage and ferment the War in both these
places. To add yet to our misery, whilst we were in this
condition, we were in ‘a foreign’ war, deeply engaged ‘in a war,
with the Portugal ;? whereby our trade ceased, and the evil con-
sequences by that war were manifest and very considerable. And
not only this, but we had a war with Holland ; consuming our
treasure, occasioning a vast burden upon the people; a war
that cost this nation full as much as the ‘whole’ taxes came unto;
the Navy being a hundred-and-sixty Ships, which cost this nation
above 100,000/. a-month; besides the contingencies, which
would make it 120,000/. a month. That very one war (sic) did
engage us to so great a charge.—At the same time also we were
in a war with France. [A Bickering and Skirmishing and Liability
to War ;*—Mazarin as yet thinking our side the weaker.| The
advantages that were taken at the discontents and divisions
among ourselves did also foment * that war, and at least hinder
us of an honourable peace ; every man being confident we could
not hold out long. And surely they did not calculate amiss, if
the Lord had not been exceedingly gracious to us! I say, at the
same time we had a war with France. [ Yes, your Highness said
so,—and we admit it !| And besides the sufferings in respect to
the trade of the nation, it’s most evident that the purse of the
nation had not been possibly able ‘much’ longer to bear it,—by
reason of the advantages taken by other States to improve their
own, and spoil our manufacture of cloth, and hinder the vent
thereof; which is the great staple commodity of this nation.
[And has continued to be !] This was our condition: spoiled in
our trade, and we at this vast expense; thus dissettled at home,
and having these engagements abroad.

1 Middleton-Glencairn Revolts, and what not.

2 Who protected Rupert in his quasi-piracies, and did require chastisement from

"3 See Appendix, No. 28.
4[Carlyle printed ‘‘ ferment,” but probably this was only an accidental mistake.
The summary has, ‘‘ and all this fomented by the divisions amongst us.”’]

us

352 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

These things being thus—as I am persuaded it is not hard to con-
vince every person here they were thus,—what a heap of confusions
were upon these poor nations! And either things must have
been left to sink | into the miseries these premises would suppose,
or ‘else’ a remedy must be applied. [Apparently !] A remedy
hath been applied: that hath been this Government ;? a thing
I shall say very little unto. The thing is open and visible to be
seen and read by all men; and therefore let it speak for itself.
[ Even so, your Highness ; there is a silence prouder and nobler than
any speech one is used to hear.) Only let me say this,—because I
can speak it with comfort and confidence before a Greater than
you all, that is before the Lord: that in the intention of it, as to
the approving our hearts to God (let men judge as they please),
it is calculated ‘with our best wisdom’ for the interest of the
People. For the interest of the People alone, and for their
good, without respect had to any other interest. And if that
be not true | With animation !|, I shall be bold to say again, let it
speak for itself. Truly I may,—I hope, humbly before God, and
modestly before you,—say somewhat on the behalf of the Govern-
ment. [Recite a little what it “ speaks for itself,’ after all?| Not
that I would discourse * of the particular heads of it, ‘but’ to
acquaint you a little with the effects of it; and that not for
ostentation’s sake, but to the end I may deal at this time faith-
fully with you; by acquainting you with the state of things, and
what proceedings have been entered-into by * this Government,
that so you may know the state of our affairs. This is the main
end of my putting you to this trouble.

It—‘the Government ’—hath had some things in desire ; and
it hath done some things actually. It hath desired to reform
the laws. ‘I say’ to reform them [Hear /]|: and for that end

1[‘*must have been left to have sunk,” pamphlet.

2 He means, and his hearers understand him to mean, ‘ Horm of Government’ -

mainly; but he diverges now and then into our modern acceptation of the word

* Government,’—Administration or Supreme Authority. [He means the “ Instru-

ment of Government,” which was usually spoken of as “‘ the Government.’”’]
3[‘* That is, not to discourse,” pamphlet. |
4*been upon’ zz orig.

a ae

1654.] SPEECH II 353

it hath called together persons, without offence be it spoken,!
of as great ability and as great integrity as are in these nations,?
to. consider how the laws might be made plain and short, and less
chargeable to the people ; how to lessen expense, for the good
of the nation. And those things are in preparation, and Bills
prepared; which in due time, I make no question, will be
tendered to you. ‘In the mean while’ there hath been care
taken to put the administration of the laws into the hands of
just men [Matthew Hale, for instance]; men of the most known
integrity and ability. The Chancery hath been reformed—

[From the Moprerns: ‘Only to a very small extent and in a
‘very temporary manner, your Highness! His Highness returns
‘upon the Law, on subsequent occasions, and finds the reform of
‘it still a very pressing matter. Difficult to sweep the intricate
‘ foul chimneys of Law his Highness found it,—as we atter two
‘centuries of new soot and accumulation now acknowledge on
‘all hands, with a sort of silent despair, a silent wonder each
‘one of us to himself, “ What, in God’s name, is to become of
‘all that ?”’’ ]

—hath been reformed ; and I hope, to the just satisfaction of all
good men: and ‘as’ to the things, ‘ or causes,’ depending there,
which made the burden and work of the honourable persons
intrusted in those services too heavy for® their ability, it* hath
referred many of them to those places where Englishmen love to
have their rights tried, the Courts of Law at Westminster.

It—‘ this Government ’—hath, ‘further, endeavoured to put
a stop to that heady way (touched of likewise ‘in our sermon’
this day) of every man making himself a minister and preacher.
[Commission of Triers; Yea!| It hath endeavoured to settle a
method for the approving and sanctioning of men of piety and
ability to discharge that work.° And I think I may say it hath}

1[ ‘* without reflection,” pamphlet. |

2 Ordinance for the Reform of Chancery: amntea, p. 326.

3[‘* services beyond their ability,” pamphlet, but meaning as above. ]

4'The Government.

5[‘It hath endeavoured to settle a way for the approbation of men of piety and
ability for the discharge of that work,” pamphlet.]

VOL. 11.—23

~

354 FIRST PARLIAMENT [afep.

committed that work to the trust of persons, both of the
Presbyterian and Independent judgments, men of as known ability,
piety and integrity, as, I believe, any this nation hath, And I
believe also that, in that care they have taken, they have laboured
to approve themselves to Christ, the nation and their own F
consciences. And indeed I think, if there be anything of Fs
quarrel against them,—though I am not here to justify the
proceedings of any,—I say it is that they, ‘in fact,’ go upon
such a character as the Scripture warrants, to put men into that
great employment, and to approve men for it, who are men that
have received gifts from Him that ascended up on high, and
gave gifts for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying of
the Body of Christ. The Government hath also taken care,!
we hope, for the expulsion [Commission of Expurgation, too,} of all
those who may be judged any way unfit for this work ; who are
scandalous, and who are the common scorn and contempt of
that function.?

One thing more this Government hath done: it hath been ,
instrumental to call a free Parliament ;—which, blessed be God, ‘
we see here this day! I say, a free Parliament. [Mark the ;
iteration /| And that it may continue so,I hope is in the heart
and spirit of every good man in England,—save such discon-
tented persons as I have formerly mentioned. It’s that which
as I have desired above my life, ‘so’ I shall desire to keep it so,
above my life. [Verily ?]}—

I did before mention to you the plunges we were in, in respect
of Foreign States; by the war with Portugal, France, with the
Dutch, the Dane,—and the little assurance we had from any of
our neighbours round about. I perhaps forgot it, but indeed it
was a caution upon my mind, and I desire that it might be so
understood, That if any good hath been done, it was the Lord,
not we His poor instruments.—

[Pity if this pass entirely for ‘cant,’ my esteemed modern
friends! It is not cant, nor ought to be. O Higginbotham,

1[«It hath taken care,” pamphlet. ] 2[‘* administration,” 2déd.]

1654. } SPEECH II — 355

there is a Selbstiddiung, a killing of Self, as my friend Novalis
calls it, which is, was, and forever will be, ‘the beginning of all
morality,’ of all real work and worth for man under this Sun. ]

—I did instance in the wars; which did exhaust your treasure,
and put you into such a condition that you must have sunk
therein, if it had continued but a few months longer: this I can
affirm, if strong probability may be a fit ground.’ You have
now (though it be not the first in time), peace with Swedeland ;
an honourable peace; through the endeavours of an honourable
person here present as the instrument. [ Whitlocke seen blushing !]
I say you have an honourable peace with a kingdom that, not
many years since, was much a friend to France, and lately perhaps
inclinable enough to the Spaniard. And I believe you expect
not very much good from any of your Catholic neighbours [No ;
we are not exactly their darlings !|; nor yet that they would be
very willing you should have a good understanding with your
Protestant friends. Yet, thanks be to God, that peace is con-
cluded ; and as I said before, it is an honourable peace.

You have a peace with the Dane,—a State that lay contiguous
to that part of this Island which hath given us the most trouble.
[Your Montroses, Middeltons came always, with their Mosstroopers
and Harpy hosts, out of the Danish quarter.| And certainly if your
enemies abroad be able to annoy you, it is likely they will take
their advantage (where it best lies) to give you trouble there.
But you have a peace there, and an honourable one. Satisfaction
for your merchants’ ships; not only to their content, but to their
rejoicing.” I believe you will easily know it is so,—‘ an honour-
able peace.’ You have the Sound open; which was obstructed.
| That which was and is the strength of this nation, the shipping,
; will now be supplied thence. And, whereas you were glad to

= a

ee ee ee —

?[“ This I dare affirm, if strong probability can give me a ground,” samphlet. |
2* Danish claims settled,’ as was already said somewhere, ‘on the 31st of July :’
Dutch and English Commissioners did it, in Goldsmiths’ Hall; met on the 27th of
) June; if the business were not done when August began, they were then to be
; ‘shut-up without fire, candle, meat or drink,’—and to do it out very speedily !

They allowed our Merchants 98,o00/. for damages against the Danes, (Godwin,
Iv. 49,—who cites Dumont, 7 raité 24.)

~~.

356 FIRST PARLIAMENT (4 Sept,

have anything of that kind! at the secondhand, you have now all
manner of commerce, and at as much freedom as the Dutch
themselves there, ‘who used to be the carriers and vendors of it
to us;’ and at the same rates and toll ;—and I think I may say by
that peace, the said rates now fixed-upon cannot be raised to you
‘in future ’.?

You have a peace with the Dutch : a peace unto which I shall
say little, because ‘it is’ so well known in the benefit and con-
sequences of it. And I think it was as desirable, and as accept-
able to the spirit of this nation, as any one thing that lay before
us. And, as I believe nothing so much gratified our enemies as
to see us at odds ‘with that Commonwealth ;’ so I persuade
myself nothing is of more terror nor trouble to them than to
see us thus reconciled. ‘Truly’ as a Peace with the Protestant
States hath much security in it, so it hath as much of honour
and of assurance to the Protestant interest abroad; without
which no assistance can be given thereunto. I wish it may be
written upon our hearts to be zealous for that interest! For if
ever it were like to come under a condition of suffering, it is
now. In all the Emperor's patrimonial territories, the endeavour
is to drive them, ‘the Protestant part of the people,’ out, as fast
as they can; and they are necessitated to run to Protestant
States to seek their bread. And by this conjunction of interests,
I hope you will be in a more fit capacity to help them. And it
begets some reviving of their spirits, that you will help them as
opportunity shall serve. [We will !]

You have a peace likewise with the Crown of Portugal ; which
peace, though it hung long in hand, yet is lately concluded. It
is a peace that, your merchants make us believe, is of good con-
cernment to their trade; their assurance being greater, and so
their profit in trade thither,’ than to other places. And this ‘one
thing’ hath been obtained in that treaty, which never ‘ before’

1 Baltic Produce, namely.

2(** they cannot raise the same upon you,” pamphlet.)

3f** assurance,” z.e., security. Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ the rate of insurance to
that Country having been higher, and so the profit which could bear such rate,

1654.] SPEECH II 357

was, since the Inquisition was set up there: That our people
which trade thither have liberty of conscience,—‘liberty to
worship in chapels of their own.’ !

Indeed peace is, as you were well told today, desirable with
all men, as far as it may be had with conscience and honour !
We are upon a Treaty with France. And we may say this, |
That if God give us honour in the eyes of the nations about us, |
we have reason to bless Him for it, and so to own it. And I |
dare say that there is not a nation in Europe but they are very
willing to ask a good understanding with you.

I am sorry I am thus tedious: but I did judge that it was
somewhat necessary to acquaint you with these things. And
things being thus, I hope you will be willing to hear a little
again of the sharp as well as ‘of’ the sweet! And I should not
be faithful to you, nor to the interest of these nations which you
and I serve, if I do not let you know ail.

As I said before, when this government was undertaken, we
were in the midst of those ‘domestic’ divisions and animosities
and scatterings ; also thus engaged with these ‘ foreign’ enemies
round about us, at such a vast charge,—120,000/. a-month for the
very Fleet,—which ‘sum’ was the very utmost penny of your
assessments. Ay; and then all your treasure was exhausted and
spent, when this Government was undertaken : all accidental ways
of bringing in treasure ‘were,’ to a very inconsiderable sum, con-
sumed ;—That is to say, the ‘ forfeited’ lands are sold, the sums
on hand spent;? rents, fee-farms, King’s, Queen’s, Prince’s,
Bishops’, Dean-and-Chapters’, delinquents’ lands, sold. These
were spent when this Government was undertaken. I think it’s
my duty to let you know so much. And that’s the reason why

than to other places”; but it does not seem possible that this was Cromwell's
meaning. ]

1[Here followed a reference to the futile attempts at a like negotiation with the
King of Spain. (See Bordeaux’ letter, below). A great deal of this speech must
be omitted, for Bordeaux wrote that it took ‘‘ pres de trois heures”’ to deliver,
whereas the report is no longer than that of the next speech, which only took an
hour and a half.]

2([‘* the treasures spent,” Aamphiet. }

i Ar SR at Nae

eee

358 FIRST PARLIAMENT [4 Sept.

the taxes do yet lie so heavy upon the people ; of which we have —
abated 30,000/. a-month for the next three months. Truly I
thought it my duty to let you know, that though God hath dealt
thus ‘bountifully’ with you,! yet these are but entrances and
doors of hope, wherein, through the blessing of God, you may
enter into rest and peace. But you are not yet entered! [Look-
ing up, with a mournful toss of the head, I think.—“ Ah, no, your
Highness ; not yet !”’|

You were told, today, of a people brought out of Egypt
towards the land of Canaan; but through unbelief, murmuring,
repining, and other temptations and sins wherewith God was
provoked, they were fain to come back again, and linger many
years in the wilderness before they came to the place of rest.

We are thus far, through the mercy of God. We have cause
to take notice of it, that we are not brought into misery, ‘not
totally wrecked ;’ but ‘have,’ as I said before, a door of hope
open, And I may say this to you: ifthe Lord’s blessing and
His presence go along with the management of affairs at this
meeting, you will be enabled to put the topstone to this work,
and make the nation happy. But this must be by knowing the
true state of affairs; [Hear /] that you are yet, like the people
under circumcision, but raw.2 Your peaces are but newly
made. And it’s a maxim not to be despised, “Though peace
be made, yet it’s interest that keeps peace ;”—and I hope you
will trust it no further than you see interest upon it. ‘But all
settlement grows stronger by mere continuance.’ And there-
fore I wish that you may go forward, and not backward ; and
‘in brief’ that you may have the blessings of God upon your
endeavours! It’s one of the great ends of calling this Parlia-
ment, that this Ship of the Commonwealth may be brought into
a safe harbour; which, 1 assure you, it will not well be, without
your counsel and advice.

1 In regard to our Successes and Treaties, &c., enumerated above. ‘
2See in Joshua, v. 2-8, the whole Jewish Nation circumcised at once. So, too, —
your Settlements of Discord are yet but indifferently cicatrised. ‘2

1654.) SPEECH II 359

You have great works upon your hands. You have Ireland
to look unto. There is not much done towards the planting of
it, though some things leading and preparing for it are. It is a
great business to settle the Government of that nation upon fit
terms, such as will bear that work! through.—You have had
likewise laid before you the considerations, intimating your
peace with some foreign States. But yet you have not made
peace with a/l. And if they should see we do not manage our
affairs with that wisdom which becomes us, truly we may sink
under disadvantages, for all that’s done. [Truly, your Highness !]
And our enemies will have their eyes open, and be revived, if
they see animosities amongst us; which indeed will be their
great advantage.

I do therefore persuade you to a sweet, gracious and holy
understanding of one another, and of your business, [Alas /]
concerning which you had so good counsel this day; which
indeed as it rejoiced my heart to hear it, so I hope the Lord will
imprint it upon your spirits,—wherein you shall have my prayers,
(Prayers, your Highness ?—If this be not “ cant,” what a noble thing
is it, O reader! Worth thinking of, for a moment.]

Having said this, and perhaps omitted many other material
things through the frailty of my memory, I shall exercise plain-
ness and freeness with you; in telling you, that I have not spoken
these things as one that assumes to himself dominion over you ;
but as one that doth resolve to be a fellow-servant with you to
the interest of these great affairs, and of the people of these
nations. I shall therefore trouble you no longer; but desire
you to repair to your House, and to exercise your own liberty in
the choice of a Speaker, that so you may lose no time in carrying
on your work.*

1 Of planting Ireland with persons that will plough and pray, instead of quarrel
and blarney !

*Old Pamphlet cited above: [E. 812, 11] reprinted in Par/iamentary History,
Xx. 318-33. [Bordeaux, the French ambassador, wrote an account of this speech
to Brienne, a translation of which is printed in Thurloe. His report of that part
of it relating to foreign affairs is very interesting. After mentioning Cromwell's

360 FIRST'PARLIAMENT _ 4 Sept.

At this Speech, say the old Newspapers, ‘all generally seemed
‘abundantly to rejoice, by extraordinary expressions and hums at
‘the conclusion, —Hum-m-m!! His Highness withdrew into the

criticisms of ‘‘ Levellers, Independents (szc) and Anabaptists” he goes on: ‘‘ After
that he had admonished them to have a care of such men, and that they should
not believe that Christ would come and reign bodily here on earth but in our
hearts, he afterwards urged them to think,of the preservation of the purity of
religion, and of these that are persecuted for their religion, pointing at those of
Germany and Austria, who are driven out of their countries, and forced to beg
their living out of other nations. This point was followed by an exaggeration of
foreign wars and treaties of peace, which have been lately made with Holland,
Denmark, Portugal, where liberty of conscience is established, and Sweden, ai-
though the King of France had a minister there, giving to understand that he
had, as it were, loosened this last Crown from our interest ; that, notwithstanding,
they did offer presently to conclude a treaty with his ambassador; and that there
was great cause of giving God thanks that France, which seemed to be the most
powerful, should seek the amity of England. He did not speak of Spain but did
point at it, how that he had demanded liberty of conscience, and suppression of
the Inquisition, without having any other answer given him than that it was to ask
the right eye of them. [This passage is not in the speech as printed, but Oliver
quotes the saying in rather a different form in speech V. See p. 515 below.] And
he ended this matter by demonstrating that England had nothing to fear, but from
France, Sweden and Denmark; and that these three states not being able to
undertake anything without the States-General, this Commonwealth had great
cause to maintain them, and to hinder the faction of the Prince of Orange from
suppressing their liberty. . . . He ended by exhorting them not to imitate the
children of Israel, when they rather desired to eat the onions of Egypt than to
pursue their journey. He prayed God to bless them, and then presently he with-
drew.” After narrating the disputes concerning the choice of a Speaker, Bordeaux
goes on to say, ‘‘ By this beginning, one may judge what the authority of the Lord
Protector will bein this Parliament. However, it was observed, that as often as
he spoke in his speech of liberty and religion, that the members did make acclama-
tions of joy.’’ Bordeaux to Brienne Sept. 4-14, Thurloe, ii. 588, but corrected
from the French of Bordeaux’s despatch, amongst the Record Office Transcripts,
where, however, it is wrongly dated Sept. [3-] 13 instead of [4-] 14. The same
day he wrote to Mazarin: ‘‘M. le Protecteur semble avoir voulu persuader au
Parlement une guerre contre la maison d’autriche, en exagerant les persecutions
que souffrent les Protestants. . .. Il a aussi affecté de vouloir travailler a la
réunion de toutes les sectes; mais comme la religion, luy a toujours servy de
prétexte, l’on ne peut pas prendre aucun mesure certain sur toutes ces propositions,
qui ont pour véritable but l’établissement de son authorité”’ (zézd.). The Dutch
Ambassadors writing to the States-General on Sept. 15-25, allude to an account
already sent of ‘‘the speech his Highness made in the Painted Chamber to the
members that appeared there, adding withal that the first deliberations were to
this purpose, that in the first place they should particularly examine the Govern-
ment of the Commonwealth concluded the 16th day of December last.”” Thurloe ii.
606. This sentence also was omitted from the printed Speech—‘‘ After the ex-
periment had turned out badly,” as Dr. Gardiner remarks. |

1 Cromwelliana, p. 147; see also Guibon Goddard, Member for Lynn (in Burton,
i, Introd. p. xviii.). [Guibon Goddard’s account of this speech is as follows : ‘‘ After
sermon we met, according to former appointment, in the Painted Chamber, where
the Lord Protector, in a full discourse, set forth the condition of the nation, both
in civil and ecclesiastical concernments, before this last change of the government ;
what had been done and effected since, and what more may be desired to be done,

1654. ] SPEECH II 361

‘old House of Lords, and the Members of Parliament into the Par-
‘liament House. His Highness, so soon as the Parliament were
‘gone to their House, went back to Whitehall, privately in his
‘barge, by water.’

This Report of Speech Second, ‘taken by one that stood near,’
and ‘ published to prevent mistakes,’ may be considered as exact
enough in respect of matter, but in manner and style it is probably
not so close to the Original Deliverance as the foregoing Speech
was. He ‘who stood near’ on this occasion seems to have had
some conceit in his abilities as a Reporter; has pared off excres-
cences, peculiarities,—somewhat desirous to present the Portrait
of his Highness without the warts. He, or his Parliamentary-
History Editor and he, have, for one thing, very arbitrarily divided
the Discourse into little fractional paragraphs ; which a good deal
obstruct the sense here and there; and have accordingly been
disregarded in our Transcript. Our changes, which, as before,
have been insignificant, are indicated wherever they seem to have
importance or physiognomic character,—indicated too often
perhaps for the reader’s convenience. As to the meaning, I
have not anywhere remained in doubt, after due study. The rough
Speech when read faithfully becomes transparent, every word of
it; credible, calculated to produce conviction, every word of it ;—
and that I suppose is, or should be, as our impatient Commentator
says, ‘the definition of a good Speech. Other ‘ good speeches,” ’
continues he, ‘ought to be spoken in Bedlam ;—unless, indeed,
‘ you will concede them Drury Lane, and admittance one shilling.
‘Spoken in other localities than these, without belief on the
‘speaker’s part, or hope or chance of producing belief on the
‘hearer’s—Ye Heavens, as if the good-speeching individual were
‘some frightful Wood-and-leather Man, made at Niirnberg, and
‘tenanted by a Devil ; set to increase the Sum of Human Madness,
‘instead of lessening it—! ’—But we here cut short our impatient
Commentator.—The Reporter of Cromwell, we may say for our-
selves, like the painter of him, has not to suppress the warts, the
natural rugged physiognomy of the man; which only very poor
tastes would exchange for any other. He has to wash the natural

in order to a firm and settled foundation of future establishment, which, he plainly
intimated, could not be expected or hoped for, either from the Levellers, who would
introduce a party in civils, nor from the sectaries, who would cry down all order
and government in spirituals ; and concluded with some gracious expressions, which
gave satisfaction and applause, in general. (/¢voduction to Burton's Diary, p. xix.)

Whitelocke says, ‘‘ His Highness made a large and subtle speech,” of which he
gives a very good summary. (dZemorials, p. 599, ed. 1732.)]

362 FIRST PARLIAMENT _[12 Sept:

face clean, however ; that men may see it, and not the opaque mass
of mere soot and featureless confusions which, in two Centuries of
considerable Stupidity in regard to that matter, have settled there.

SPEECH III

Turs First Protectorate Parliament, we said, was not successful. i
It chose, judiciously enough, old Lenthall for Speaker; appointed, q
judiciously enough, a Day of general Fasting :—but took, directly a
after that, into constitutional debate about Sanctioning the Form
of Government (which nobody was specially asking it to ‘sanc-
tion’);1 about Parliament and Single Person; powers of Single j
Person and of Parliament; Coérdination, Subordination; and 4
other bottomless subjects ;—in which getting always the deeper — |
the more it puddled in them, inquiry or intimation of inquiry
rose not obscurely in the distance, Whether this Government
should be by a Parliament and Single Person? These things the
honourable gentlemen, with true industry, debated in Grand
Committee, ‘from eight in the morning till eight at night, with
‘an hour for refreshment about noon,’ debates waxing ever
hotter, question ever more abstruse,—through Friday, Saturday,
Monday ; ready, if Heaven spared them, to debate it further for
unlimited days. Constitutional Presbyterian persons, Use-and-
wont Neuters; not without a spicing of sour Republicans, as
Bradshaw, Haselrig, Scott, to keep the batch in leaven.

1[The report of the Dutch ambassadors quoted above shows that Cromwell had
distinctly asked Parliament to sanction the ‘‘ Government.” Bordeaux says much
the same. Hesilrige bad proposed that Religion should first be considered, but
this was opposed ‘‘par la faction du Protector, qui prétendirent que l’on
debvoit auparavant que d’entrer en aucune matiére reigler le Gouvernement.”
Bordeaux to Brienne, Sept. 7-17. Goddard, too, states that they ‘‘ from Court—
z.é., the Protector’s Court—especially, and from the soldiery and lawyers, pressed
hard that the Government or Instrument of Government might be speedily taken
into consideration, and some return made to my Lord Protector of thankfulness
for his late speech.” Burton, i. xvi. But what the Protector did zot meanthem
to do was to discuss the fundamental point of his own authority. Bordeaux wrote
to Brienne that many of the members had testified their disapproval of the power —
being given into the hands of one man, and a subject, after so much blood had ~
been spent to place it in those of the people. Matters, he said, had reached a
dilemma. If authority did not reside in the people, those concerned in the
death of the King were murderers, If it did so reside, those who wished
snatch it from them were traitors to their country (4-14 Sept. Aecord Of
Transcripts). ] ; a

i
é
t

1654.] SPEECH III 363

His Highness naturally perceived that this would never do,
not this ;—sent therefore to the Lord Mayor, late on Monday
night I think, to look after the peace of the City; to Speaker
Lenthall, that he must bring his people to the Painted Chamber
before going farther: and early on Tuesday morning, poor Mr.
Guibon Goddard, Member for Lynn, just about to proceed again,
from the Eastern parts, towards his sublime constitutional day’s-
work, is overwhelmed by rumours, ‘That the Parliament is dis-
‘solved; that, for certain, the Council of State, and a Council of
‘War, had sat together all the Sabbath-day before, and had then
‘contrived this Dissolution !’

‘Notwithstanding,’ continues Guibon, ‘I was resolved to go to
‘Westminster, to satisfy myself of the truth; and to take my
‘share of what I should see or learn there. Going by water to
‘Westminster, I was told that the Parliament-doors were locked
‘up, and guarded with soldiers, and that the Barges were to at-
‘tend the Protector to the Painted Chamber. As I went, I saw
‘two Barges at the Privy Stairs.’ River and City in considerable
emotion. ‘Being come to the Hall, I was confirmed in what I
‘had heard. Nevertheless 1 did purpose not to take things
‘merely upon trust ; but would receive an actual repulse, to con-
‘firm my faith. Accordingly, I attempted up the Parliament
‘stairs; but there was a guard of Soldiers who told me, “There
‘was no passage that way; that the House was locked up, and
‘command given to give no admittance to any; that if I were a
‘Member, I might go into the Painted Chamber, where the
‘ Protector would presently be.’ The Mace was taken away by
‘Commissary-General Whalley. The Speaker and all the Mem-
‘bers were walking up and down the Hall, the Court of Requests,
‘and the Painted Chamber; expecting the Protector’s coming.
‘The passages there being likewise guarded with soldiers.’ +

No doubt about it, therefore, my honourable friend! Dissolu-
tion, or something, is not far. Between nine and ten, the Pro-
tector arrived, with due escort of Officers, halberts, Life-guards ;
took his place, covered, under ‘the state’ as before, we all sitting
bareheaded on our benches as before: and with fit salutation
spake to us ;—as follows. ‘Speech of an hour and a half long ;’
taken in characters by the former individual who ‘stood near ;’

1 Ayscough [Add.| MSS., printed in Burton's Diary, i. Introd. p. xxxiii. [Five
or six hundred had been sent there, Bordeaux says, as many cavalry as infantry.
Bordeaux’s account reads almost as if the Protector were a little alarmed for his
own safety. He went by water to Westminster. ]

hot oe ~*~

a. i ‘
Br ee Oe eee)

Fe a

364 FIRST PARLIAMENT (12 Sept.

audible still to modern men. Tuesday morning 12th September
1654; a week and a day since the last Speech here.!

In this remarkable Speech, the occasion of which and the
Speaker of which are very extraordinary, an assiduous reader, or
‘modern hearer,’ will find Historical indications, significant
shadowings-forth both of the Protectorate and the Protector ;
which, considering whence they come, he will not fail to regard
as documentary in those matters. Nay perhaps, here for the
first time, if he read with real industry, there may begin to paint
itself for him, on the void Dryasdust Abyss, hitherto called
History of Oliver, some dim adumbration of How this business
of Assuming the Protectorate may actually have been. It was,
many years ago, in reading these Speeches, with a feeling that
they must have been credible when spoken, and with a strenuous
endeavour to find what their meaning was, and try to believe it,
that to the present Editor the Commonwealth, and Puritan
Rebellion generally, first began to be conceivable. Such was his
experience.—

But certainly the Lord Protector’s place, that September
Tuesday, 1654, is not a bed of roses! His painful asseverations,
appeals and assurances have made the Modern part of his
audience look, more than once, with questioning eyes. On this
point, take from a certain Commentator sometimes above cited
from, and far oftener suppressed, the following rough words :

‘« Divers persons who do know whether I lie in that,” says
‘the Lord Protector. What a position for a hero, to be reduced
‘continually to say He does not lie !—Consider well, nevertheless,
‘What else could Oliver do? To get on with this new Parliament —
‘was clearly his one chance of governing peaceably. To wrap
‘himself up in stern pride, and refuse to give any explanation :
‘would that have been the wise plan of dealing with them? Or
‘the stately and not-so-wise plan? Alas, the mise plan, when all

1[Whitelocke says that ‘‘ Oliver being acquainted that the debates of the Parlia-
ment grew high, touching the new government, and entertaining a jealousy (to
which he was much addicted) that this Parliament would either too far invade it
or endeavour to overthrow it, he sent for the members,” &c.—Here follows an
abstract of the speech. Memorials, p. 605.

Ludlow is more bitter. ‘‘ Cromwell,” he says ‘‘ being informed of these tran-
sactions by his creatures, and fearing to have that great question put, lest he should
be deposed by a vote of this assembly from the throne which he had usurped,
caused a guard to be set,” &c. AJemotirs, ed. Firth, i. 391. Bordeaux believed
that the Protector’s power was in great danger, and that he probably saved
it by this sudden movement. Bordeaux to Brienne, Sept. 14-24. Record Office
Transcripts. |

, a

1654.] SPEECH III 365

‘lay yet as in experiment, with so dread issues in it to yourself
‘and the whole world, was not very discoverable. Perhaps not
‘quite reconcileable with the stately plan, even if it had been
‘ discovered !’

And again, with regard to the scheme of the Protectorship,
which his Highness says was done by “the Gentlemen that
undertook to frame this Government,” after divers days con-
sulting, and without the least privity of his: ‘You never guessed
‘what they were doing, your Highness? Alas, his Highness
‘guessed it,—and yet must not say, or think, he guessed it.
‘There is something sad in a brave man’s being reduced to
‘explain himself from a barrel-head in this manner! Yet what,
‘on the whole, will he do? Coriolanus curled his lip, and scowled
‘ proudly enough on the sweet voices: but Coriolanus had likewise
‘to go over to the Volscians ; Coriolanus had not the slightest
‘chance to govern by a free Parliament in Rome! Oliver was
‘not prepared for these extremities ; if less would serve. Perhaps
‘in Oliver there is something of better than “silent pride?”
‘Oliver will have to explain himself before God Most High, ere
‘long ;—and it will not stead him there, that he went wrong
‘because his pride, his “ personal dignity,” his &c. &c. were con-
‘cerned.— —Who would govern men! ‘Oh, it were better to
‘be a poor fisherman,” exclaimed Danton, “than to meddle with
‘governing of men!” “I would rather keep a flock of sheep!”
‘said Oliver. And who but a Flunkey would not, if his real
‘trade lay in keeping sheep ?’—

On the whole, concludes our Commentator: ‘ As good an ex-
‘planation as the case admits of,—from a barrel-head, or “ raised
‘platform under a state.” Where so much that is true cannot
‘be said; and yet nothing that is false shall be said,—under
‘penalties forgotten in our Time! With regard to those as-
‘severations and reiterated appeals, note this also: An oath
‘was an oath then; not a solemn piece of blasphemous cant, as
‘too often since. No contemporary that I have met with, who
‘had any opportunity to judge, disbelieved Oliver in these
‘protestations; though many believed that he was unconsciously
‘deceiving himself. Which, of course, we too, where needful,
‘must ever remember that he was liable to do; nay, if you will,
‘that he was continually doing. But to this Commentator, at
‘this stage in the development of things, “Apology” seems
‘not the word for Oliver Cromwell ;—not that, but a far other
‘word! The Modern part of his Highness’s audience can listen

366 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

‘now, I think, across the Time-gulfs, in a different mood ;—with
‘candour, with human brotherhood, with reverence and grateful
‘love. Such as the noble never claim in vain from those that
‘have any nobleness. This of tasking a great soul continually
‘to prove to us that he was not a liar, is too unwashed a way of
‘welcoming a Great Man! Scrubby Apprentices of tender years,
‘to them it might seem suitable ;—still more readily to Apes by
‘the Dead Sea!’ Let us have done with it, my friend; and
listen to the Speech itself, of date, Painted Chamber, 12th
September 1654, the best we can!!

GENTLEMEN,

It is not long since I met you in this place,
upon an occasion which gave me much more content and com-
fort than this doth. That which I have to say to you now will
need no preamble, to let me into my discourse: for the occasion
of this meeting is plain enough. I could have wished with al
my heart there had been no cause for it. ?

At our former® meeting I did acquaint you what the first rise
was of this Government, which hath called you hither, and in

| the authority of which you came hither. Among other things

| that I told you of then, I said, you were a free Parliament, and

‘truly’ so you are, whilst you own the Government and authority
‘that called you hither. For certainly that word ‘ free Parliament’
implied a reciprocity,‘ or it implied nothing at all! Indeed
there was a reciprocity implied and expressed; and 1 think your
actions and carriages ought to be suitable! But I see it will be
necessary for me now a little to magnify my office, which I have
not been apt to do. I have been of this mind, I have been

1[Of this speech, as of the last, we have no text but the old pamphlet (E. 812),
but, as before said, it would appear to be a much fuller report, as this s
took only an hour and a half in delivery. A summary of the speech is found
in the newspapers and also in a tract ‘‘ A declaration of the Proceedings of His
Highness the Lord Protector.” (E. 811 (6)).} :

2[‘* More than any other speech of his, the words which Oliver now addressed
to them revealed the inner workings of his mind. There was no lon necessity,
as there had been a week before, to fit his language to the prejudices of hisaudience.
There was no hesitation now, and the involved sayings of his former effort gave —
place to the majestic roll of his pleading or his indignation.” Gardiner’s Common- —
wealth and Protectorate, iii. 25. > e
3[* At that meeting,” pamphlet.) 4‘ reciprocation ’ in orig.

1654.) SPEECH III 367

always of this mind, since first I entered upon it, that if God will
not bear it up, let it sink! [Yea/] But ifa duty be incumbent
upon me to bear my testimony unto it (which in modesty I have
hitherto forborne), I am in some measure now necessitated there-
unto. And therefore that will be the prologue to my discourse.

I called not myself to this place. I say again, I called not
myself to this place! Of that God is witness :—and I have many
witnesses who, I do believe, could readily lay down their lives to
bear witness to the truth of that. That is to say, that | called
not myself to this place! [His Highness is growing emphatic.]
And being in it, I bear not witness to myself ‘or my office ;’ but
God and the people of these nations have borne testimony to it
‘and me’ also. Jf my calling be from God, and my testimony
from the people,—God and the people shall take it from me, else
I will not part with it. [Do you mark that, and the air and manner
of it, my honourable friends !| 1 should be false to the trust that
God hath placed in me, and to the interest of the people of these
nations, if I should. |

“That I called not myself to this place,” is my first assertion.
“ That I bear not witness to myself, but have many witnesses,” is my
second. These are the two things I shall take the liberty to
speak more fully to you of.—To make plain and clear that which
I have ‘here’ said, I must take liberty to look ‘a little’ back.

I was by birth a gentleman; living neither in any considerable
height, nor yet in obscurity. I have been called to several em-
ployments in the nation: to serve in Parliaments, ‘and others ;’
and (because I would not be over-tedious), I did endeavour to dis-
charge the duty of an honest man in those services, to God and His
people's interest and [that] of the Commonwealth ; having, when
time was, 2 competent acceptation in the hearts of men, and some
evidences thereof. I resolve, not to recite the times and occasions
and opportunities, that have been appointed me by God to serve
Him in; nor the presence and blessings of God bearing therein !
testimony to me. [W’ell said, and well forborne to be said !|

(‘bearing then,” pamphlet.)

ee ee ee

368 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

I, having had some occasions to see (together with my brethren
and countrymen), a happy period put to our sharp wars and con-
tests with the then common enemy, hoped, in a private capacity,
to have reaped the fruit and benefit, together with my brethren,
of our hard labours and hazards: to wit, the enjoyment of peace
and liberty, and the privileges of a Christian and of a man, in
some equality with others, according as it should please the Lord
to dispense unto me. And when, I say, God had put an end to
our wars, ‘or’ at least brought them to a very hopeful issue, very
near an end (after Worcester Fight), I came up to London to pay
my service and duty to the Parliament that then sat, and hoping
that all minds would have been disposed to answer that which
seemed to be the mind of God, namely, to give peace and rest to

- His people, and especially to those who had bled more than
others in the carrying on of the military affairs,—I was much
disappointed of my expectation. For the issue did not prove so.
[Suppressed murmurs from Bradshaw and Company.| Whatever
may be boasted or misrepresented, it was not so, not so!! i

I can say, in the simplicity of my soul, I love not, I love not
—I declined it in my former speech,?—I say, I love not to rake ;
into sores, or to discover nakedness! That which I drive at is
this: I say to you, I hoped to have had leave, ‘ for my own part,’
to have retired to a private life. I begged to be dismissed of my
charge ; I begged it again and again ;—and God be Judge be-
tween me and all men if I lie in this matter! [Groans from
Dryasdust, scarcely audible, in the deep silence.| That I lie not in
matter of fact is known to very many [“ Hum-m-m!”’ Look of
“Yea!” from the Military Party|: but whether I tell a lie in my
heart, as labouring to represent to you that which was not upon
my heart, I say, the Lord be Judge.’ Let uncharitable men, that
measure others by themselves, judge as they please. As to the
matter of fact, I say, It istrue. As to the ingenuity and integrity

1[‘* not so, nor so," pamphlet.)
2 Antea, Speech I., p. 277 above.
* He: Believe you about that as you see good.

—° -

1654.] SPEECH III 369

of my heart in that desire, I do appeal as before upon the truth of
that also! But I could not obtain ‘ what I desired,’ what my soul
longed for. And the plain truth is, I did afterwards apprehend
some were of opinion (such the difference of their judgment from
mine), that it could not well be.!

I confess I am in some strait to say what I could say, and
what is true, of what then followed. I pressed the Parliament,
as a member, to period themselves; once and again, and again,
and ten, and twenty times over. I told them (for I knew it
better than any one man in the Parliament could know it; be-
cause of my manner of life, which had led me everywhere up
and down the nation,? thereby giving me to see and know the
temper and spirits of all men, ‘and of’ the best of men), that
the nation loathed their sitting. [Haselrig, Scott and others look-
ing very grim.| I knew it. And, so far as I could discern, when
they were dissolved, there was not so much as the barking of a
dog, or any general and visible repining at it! [How astonishing
there should not have been !] You are not a few here present that
can assert this as well as myself.

And that there was high cause for their dissolving, is most
evident : not only in regard there was a just fear of the Parlia-
ment’s perpetuating themselves, but because it ‘actually’ was
their design. ‘Yes;’ and had not their heels been trod upon
by importunities from abroad, even to threats, I believe there
would never have been ‘any’ thoughts of rising, or of going out
of that room, to the world’s end. I myself was sounded, and,
by no mean persons [O Sir Harry Vane !], tempted ; and addresses
were made me to that very end: That the Parliament * might have
been thus perpetuated ; that the vacant places might be supplied
by new elections ; and so continue from generation to generation.

1 That I could not be spared from my post. [The ‘‘ original” has, ‘‘I did after-
wards apprehend that some did think, my judgment not suiting with theirs, that it
could not well be. But this, I say to you, was between God and my soul ; between
me and that Assembly,” pamphlet. }

2 While soldiering, &c. : the Original has, ‘which was to run up and down the
Nation [and so might see and know.’]

8* it” in orig.

VOL. 11,—24

~e

ed Oenee

370 FIRST'PARLIAMENT _ 12. Sept,

I have declined, I have declined very much, to open these
things to you. [What noble man would not, your Highness ?|
Yet, having proceeded thus far, I must tell you ‘this also:’
that poor men, under this arbitrary power, were driven, like
flocks of sheep, by forty in a morning; to the confiscation of
goods and estates ; without any man being able to give a reason
that two of them had deserved to forfeit a shilling!! I tell you
the truth. And my soul, and many persons’ whose faces I see
in this place, were exceedingly grieved at these things; and
knew not which way to help it, but by their mournings, and
giving their negatives when occasions served.—I have given you
but a taste of miscarriages ‘that then were.’ I am confident
you have had opportunities to hear much more of them; for
nothing is more obvious. ‘It’s true this will be said, that there
was a remedy endeavoured: To put an end to this perpetual
Parliament, by giving us* a future Representative. How that
was gotten, by what importunities that was obtained, and how
unwillingly yielded unto, is well known.

‘But’ what was this remedy? It was a seeming willingness
to give us® successive Parliaments. ‘ ‘And’ what was ‘the nature
of’ that succession? It was, that when one Parliament had
left its seat, another was to ‘sit down immediately in the room
thereof, without any caution to avoid that which was the ‘real’
danger, namely, perpetuating of the same ‘men in’ Parliaments.
Which is a sore, now, that will ever be running, so long as men
are ambitious and troublesome, if a due remedy be not found.

Nay, at best what will such a remedy amount to? It is a
conversion of a Parliament * that should have been and was per-
petual, to a Legislative Power always sitting! [Which, however,
consists of different men, your Highness !| | And so the liberties and
interests and lives of people not judged by any certain known
laws and power, but by an arbitrary power; which is incident

1 Antea, p. 249. 2('‘ having,” pamphlet. ]
3 (i: have,” isid.]

41**So then, what was the business? It was a conversion from a Parliament,”
ibid.

ae we eae eee hl;
= , -

1654.] SPEECH IIT 371

and necessary to Parliaments. [So/] By an arbitrary power,
I say:! to make men’s estates liable to confiscation, and their
persons to imprisonment, sometimes ‘even’ by laws made after
the fact committed; often by ‘the Parliament’s’ taking the
judgment both in capital and criminal things to themselves,
who in former times were not known to exercise such a judica-
ture.2. This, I suppose, was the case ‘then before us.’ And,
in my opinion, the remedy was fitted to the disease, especially
coming in the rear of a Parliament so exercising the power and
authority as this ‘ Parliament’ had done but immediately before.

Truly I confess, upon these grounds, and with the satisfac-
tion of divers other persons, seeing nothing could be had other-
wise, that Parliament was dissolved: {Not a@ doubt of it !| ‘and’
we, desiring to see if a few might have been called together for
some short time who might put the nation into some way of
certain settlement, did call those gentlemen [7'he Little Parlia-
ment ; we remember them !| out of the several parts of the nation
for that purpose. And as I have appealed to God before you
already,’—though it be a tender thing to make appeals to God,
yet in such exigences as these I trust it will not offend His
Majesty; especially to make them before persons that know
God, and know what conscience is, and what it is to “lie before
the Lord!” I say, that as a principal end in calling that
Assembly was the settlement of the nation, so a chief end to

1 Such as the Long Parliament did continually exert.

2 Intricate paragraphs, this and the foregoing ; treating of a subject complex in
itself, and very delicate to handle before such an audience. His Highness’s logic
perhaps hobbles somewhat : but this strain of argument, which to us has fallen
so dim and obsolete, was very familiar to the audience he was now addressing, —
the staple indeed of what their debates for the last three days had been (Burton, i,
Introd. pp. 25-33; Whitlocke, p. 587, &c.). ‘Perpetuating of the same men in
Parliament :’ that clearly is intolerable, says the first Paragraph. But not only so,
says the second Paragraph, ‘a Legislative Assembly always sitting,’ though it con-
sist of new men, is likewise intolerable: any Parliament, as the Long Parliament
has too fatally taught us, if left to itself, is, by its nature, arbitrary, of unlimited
power, liable to grow tyrannous ;—ought therefoie only to sit at due intervals, and
to have other Powers (Protectorate, for example) ready to check it on occasion.
All this the ancient audience understands very well; and the modern needs only
to understand that they understood it.

3*T know, and I hope I may say it,’ follows 7” orig.,—deleted here, for light’s
sake, though characteristic.

372 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Spi.

myself was that I might have opportunity to lay down the power
which was in my hands. [Hum-m-m/] I say to you again, in
the presence of that God who hath blessed, and been with me
in all my adversities and successes: that was, as to myself, my
greatest end! [Your Highness—?—And “God” with you ancients
is not a fabulous polite Hearsay, but a tremendous all-irradiating Fact
of Facts not to be “lied before” without consequences ?| A desire
perhaps, and I am afraid, sinful enough, to be quit of the Power
God had most clearly by His Providence! put into my hand,
before He called me to lay it down,? and before those honest
ends of our fighting were attained and settled. I say, the
authority I had in my hand being so boundless as it was,—for
by Act of Parliament, I was General of all the Forces in the
three nations of England, Scotland and Ireland—in which un-
limited condition I did not desire to live a day,—we called that
meeting ° for the ends before expressed.

What the event and issue of that meeting was, we may sadly
remember. It hath much teaching in it, and I hope will make
us all wiser for the future! But, ‘in short,’ this meeting ‘not’
succeeding, as I have formerly said to you, and giving such a
disappointment to our hopes, I shall not now make any repetition
thereof: only the result > was, that they came and brought to me
a parchment, signed by very much the major part of them;
expressing their resigning and re-delivery of the power and
authority that was committed to them back again into my hands.
And I can say it, in the presence of divers persons here, that do
know whether I lie in that [Hum-m-m !], that I did not know one
tittle of that resignation ‘of theirs,’ until they all came and
brought it, and delivered it into my hands. Of this there are

1‘ most providentially’ zz orig.: has not the modern meaning; means only as
in the Text.

21** before he called for it,” pamphiet.]

3["T, being by act-of Parliament general of all the forces in the three nations
of England, Scotland and Ireland (in which unlimited condition I did not desire to
live a day) did call that meeting,’’ zdzd.]

4 Warning us not to quarrel, and get into insoluble theories, as they did.

5[*‘ effect,” pamphlet. ]

ee ee ee

-—

1654. | SPEECH III 373

also in this presence many witnesses. [ Yes, many are convinced
of it,—some not.] I received this resignation ; having formerly
used my endeavours and persuasions to keep them together.
Observing their differences, I ‘had’ thought it my duty to give
advices to them, that so I might prevail with them for union.
But it had the effect that I told you; and I had my disappoint-
ment. ;

When this proved! so, we were exceedingly to seek how to !
settle things for the future. My ‘own’ power again, by this
resignation, was ‘ become’ as boundless and unlimited as before ;
all things being subjected to arbitrariness, and ‘myself, the only
constituted authority that was left,’ a person? having power over
the three nations, without bound or limit set ;* and upon the
matter, all Government, ‘being’ dissolved ; all civz/ administra-
tions at an end,‘ as will presently be made appear. [4 grave
situation : but who brought us to it?” murmur my Lord Bradshaw
and others. |

The Gentlemen that undertook to frame this Government ®
did consult divers days together (they being of known integrity
and ability), how to frame somewhat that might give us settle-
ment. They did consult,® and that I was not privy to their
councils they know it. [Alas !] When they had finished their
model in some measure, or made a very good preparation of it,
it became communicative.’ [Hum-m-m!| They told me that
except I would undertake the Government, they thought things
would hardly come to a composure and settlement, but blood
and confusion would break in upon us. [A plain truth they told.)
I refused ® it again and again, as God and those persons know ;°

ate was so,” pamphlet.) 2[z.e. a single person. ]

‘‘boundlessly and unlimited,” pamphiet. |

4 Civil Office-bearers feeling their commission to be ended.
5 Plan or Model of Government.
6[‘* And they did so,” pamphlet, Probably means “‘ they did frame something.’’]
rt Cariyie altered ‘‘it” to ‘‘they” thus giving a much more modern sense to the
word ‘‘communicative’; a sense so uncommon at that date that this [supposed]
instance is noticed in Dr. Murray’s New English Dictionary.]

8['* denied,” pamphlet. |
%[‘'as . . . know,” omitted by Carlyle. ]

374 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sop,

not complimentingly, as they also know, and as God knows! I
confess, after many arguments,—they urging on me,! that I did
not ‘hereby’ receive anything that put me into any higher
capacity than I was in before ; but that it limited me, and bound
my hands to act nothing to the prejudice of the nations 2 without
‘the’ consent of a Council, until the Parliament, and then limited
‘me’ by the Parliament, as the Act of Government expresseth,
—I did accept it. I might repeat this again to you, if it were
needful, but I think it hardly is: I was arbitrary in power;
having the Armies in the three nations under my command ;
and truly not very ill beloved by them, nor very ill beloved then
by the people; by the good people. And I believe I should
have been more beloved if they had known the truth, as things
were, before God and in themselves, and ‘also’ before divers of
these Gentlemen whom I but now mentioned unto you. [His
Highness is rallying ; getting out of the Unutterable into the Utter-
able !| I did, at the entreaty of divers persons of honour and
quality, at the entreaty of very many of the chief officers of the
Army then present,—‘at their entreaty’ and at their request, I
did accept of the place and title of Prorecror: and was, in the
presence of the Commissioners of the ‘Great’ Seal, the Judges,
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, the
Soldiery, divers Gentlemen, Citizens, and divers other people
and persons of quality, and so forth,—accompanied to West-
minster Hall; where I took my Oath to this Government.
[Indisputably : draw your own inferences from it!| This was not
done in a corner: it was open and public!—This Government
hath been exercised by a Council;4 with a desire to be faithful
in all things :—and, amongst all other trusts, to be faithful in
calling this Parliament.

1[** after many arguments, and after the letting of me know,” samphiet.]

2[ These last six words were omitted by Carlyle, perhaps because they make the
sentence somewhat confused, but the sense evidently is that the need of gaining
the consent of the Council would be a safeguard against the Protector’s doing
anything to the prejudice of the nations. ]

3[‘* think I need not,” pampflet. }
4 According to the ‘ Instrument’ or Program of it.

.
|

1654.) SPEECH Il 375

And thus I have given you a very bare and lean discourse ;1
which truly I have been necessitated unto—and contracted in
‘the doing of, because of the unexpectedness of the occasion,
and because I would not quite weary you nor myself. But this
is a narrative that discovers to you the series of Providences and
of transactions leading me into this condition wherein I now
stand. The next thing I promised ‘to demonstrate to’ you,
wherein, I hope, I shall be briefer—though I am sure the
occasion does require plainness and freedom !—‘ But as to this
first thing,’ ? that I brought not myself into this condition: surely
in my own apprehension I did not! And whether I did not, the
things being true which I have told you, I shall submit to your
judgment. And there shall I leave it. Let God do what He
pleaseth.

The other thing, I say, that I am to speak of to you is,
“that I have not ‘borne,’ and do not bear, witness to myself.”
I am far from alluding to Him that said so!* Yet truth, con-
cerning a member of His, He will own, though men do not.—
But I think, if I mistake not,I have a cloud of witnesses. I
think so; let men be as froward as they will. [My honourable

1 Narration.

2This paragraph is characteristic... One of Oliver's warts. His Highness, in
haste to be through, is for breaking-off into the ‘ next thing,’ with hope of greater
‘brevity ;’ but then suddenly bethinks him that he has not yet quite completely
winded-off the ‘ /7s¢ thing,’ and so returns to that. The paragraph, stark nonsense
in the original (where they that are patient of such can read it, Parliamentary
History, Xx. 357), indicates, on intense inspection, that this is the purport of it.
A glimpse afforded us, through one of Oliver’s confused regurgitations, and in-
condite mzsutterances of speech, into'the real inner man of him. Of which’ there
will be other instances as we proceed. [Carlyle seems himself to have got confused.
The words of the pamphlet, allowing for the long parenthesis (which Cromwell so
often uses), do not read like stark nonsense at all--'* The next thing I promised
you, wherein I hope I shall not be so long (though I,am»sure this occasion does
require plainness and freedom) is that, as I brought not myself into this condition
(as in my own apprehension I did not, and that I did not—the things being true
which I have told you—I submit it to your judgments, and there shall I leave it ;
let God do what he pleaseth) ; the other thing, I say, that I am to speak to you of
is that I have not, nor do not bear witness to myself,’ 7.e.), as firstly I brought not
myself into this condition, so secondly I do not bear witness of myself. }

’*’Phen answered Jesus, and said unto them,——If I. bear witness of myself,
‘my ap is not true. There is Another that beareth witness of me.’ (/ohz, v.
31; 32

376 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

friends !| I have witness within,—without,—and above! But I
shall speak of my witnesses without,! having fully spoken before
of the Witness ‘who is’ above, and ‘the witness’ in my own
conscience under the other head ;? because that subject had
more obscurity in it, and I in some sort needed appeals; and, I
trust, might lawfully make them (as lawfully * as take an oath),
where ‘the’ things were not so apt to be made evident ‘other-
wise.’ [In such circumstances, Yea!|—I shall enumerate my
witnesses as well as I can.

When I had consented to accept of the Government, there
was some solemnity to be performed. And that was accom-
panied with some persons of considerableness in all respects:
who were the persons before mentioned to you;* who accom-
panied me, at the time of my entering upon this Government,
to Westminster Hall to take my oath.5 There was an express ®
consent ‘on the part’ of ‘these and other’ interested persons,
and ‘there was also’ an implied consent of many; showing
their good liking and approbation thereof. And, gentlemen,
I do not think you are altogether strangers to it in your
countries. Some did not nauseate it; very many did approve
it.

I had the approbation of the officers of the Army, in the
three nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland. I say, of the
officers: I had that by their ‘express’ Remonstrances,’ and
under signature. ‘But’ there went along® with that express
consent ‘of theirs,’ an implied consent ‘also of a body’ of
persons that had ‘had’ somewhat to do in the world; that

1[‘*of them that are without, " pamphlet.)
3, upon the other account’ zz orig.
“well” pamphlet.) 4* before expressed’ zx orig.
5(Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ to receive my oath,” but Cromwell's argument is that
those who accompanied him, gave consent by their presence to what he did when
he took the oath.

6* Explicit’ and ‘ implicit’ in the original; but we must say ‘express’ and
‘implied,’—the word ‘implicit’ having now got itself tacked to ‘faith’ (¢mp/iczt-
faith), and become thereby hopelessly degraded from any independent meaning.

7 Means ‘ Public Letters of Adherence.’

8[‘* was went along,” samphlet, |

a — =

a

‘ ;
j

1654. ] SPEECH III 377

had been instrumental, by God, to fight down the enemies of
God and ‘of’ His people in the three nations. [The Soldiery of
the Commonwealth. Persons of “ some considerableness,” these too !)
And truly, until my hands were bound, and I ‘was’ limited (to
my own great satisfaction,! as many can bear me witness); when
I had in my hands so great a power and arbitrariness, the
Soldiery were a very considerable part of the nations, especially
all Government being dissolved. I say, when all Government
was thus dissolved, and nothing to keep things in order but the
sword! And yet they,—which many histories will not parallel,
—even they were desirous that things might come to a consist-
ency ; and arbitrariness might be taken away ; and the Govern-
ment ‘ be’ put into ‘the hands of’ a person (limited and bounded,
asin the Act of Settlement), whom they distrusted the least,
and loved not the worst. [Hear/] This was another evidence
‘of consent, implied if not express.’

I would not forget the honourable and civil entertainment,
with the approbation I found in the great City of London ;?—
which the City knows whether I directly or indirectly sought.
And truly I do not think it is folly to remember this, for it
was very great and high, and very public; and ‘included’ as
numerous a body of those that are known by names and titles,—
the several Corporations and Societies of Citizens in this City,—
as hath been at any time seen in England, and not without some
appearance of satisfaction also. ‘And’ I had not only this witness
but I have had from the greatest county in England, and from
many cities and boroughs and many counties, express approba-
tions, ‘express approbations’ not of those gathered here and
there, but from the county [of York and city of York and other
counties and places, assembled in their public and]? general-
Assizes ; the grand jury, in the name of the noblemen, gentlemen,

aby, wherein I took full contentment,” pamphlet. }
? Dinner, with all manner of gala, in the common Royal Style; 8th February
1653-4 (Whitlocke, 2d edition, p. 581).

[The words in square brackets were omitted by Carlyle, perhaps by accident. ]

ntwe of

378 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

yeomen and Inhabitants of that county, giving very great thanks
to me for undertaking this heavy burden at such a time; and
giving very great approbation and encouragement to me to go
through with it.! These are plain; I have them to show, and
by these, in some measure, it will appear I do not bear witness
to myself.

This is not all. The Judges,—and truly I had almost for-
gotten it [Another little window into his Highness !|,—they thinking
that there had now come? a dissolution of ‘all’ Government,
met and consulted; and did declare one to another, that they
could not administer justice to the satisfaction of their con-
sciences, until they had received commissions from me. And
they did receive commissions from me; and by virtue of those
commissions they have acted: and all the Justices of the Peace
that have acted have acted by virtue of like commissions, which
was a little more than an implied approbation! And I believe
all the Justice administered in the nation hath been by this au-
thority. Which also I lay before you; desiring you to think,
whether all these persons now mentioned must not come to you ®
for an Act of Oblivion and General Pardon, who have acted
under and testified to this Government, if it be disowned by
you!

‘And’ I have two or three witnesses more,—equivalent to all
these I have ‘ yet’ mentioned‘ if I be not mistaken, and greatly
mistaken! If I should say, All you that are here are my wit-
nesses, I should say no untruth! I know ‘that’ you are the
same persons here that you were in your countries.°—But I will
reserve this for a little ; this will be the issue, ‘the general out-

1‘ Humble Petition and Representation of the Grand Jury at the Assizes held
at York, March 1653 (1654), in name of,” &c. &c. : Newspapers ; Pezfect Diurnal,
3d-roth April 1654 (King’s Pamphlets, large 4to, no. 82, § 12), and others.—
Similar recognition ‘by the Mayor,’ &c. &c. ‘of the ancient City of York’ (24d.).
2[** thinking that there was,” pamphlet.)

3[* persons before mentioned must not come before you,” 7zd.]
4[‘*reckoned,”’ zdid.]

5 Where you had to acknowledge me before election, he means, but does not
yet see good to say.

1654. ] SPEECH III 379

come and climax,’ of my Proof.! [Another little window :—almost
a half-soliloquy ; you see the Speech getting ready in the interior of
his Highness.| I say I have two or three witnesses, ‘of still’
more ‘weight’ than all I have counted? and reckoned yet. All
the people in England are my witnesses; and many in Ireland
and Scotland! All the Sheriffs in England are my witnesses :
and all that came in upon the process issued out by the Sheriffs
are my witnesses. [My honourable friends, how did you come in ?}
Yea, the returns of the elections to the Clerk of the Crown,—
not a thing to be blown away with a breath,—the returns on the
behalf of the inhabitants in the counties, cities and boroughs, all
are my witnesses of approbation to the condition and place I
stand in.

And I shall now make you my last witnesses ; [Here comes it,
“the issue of my Proof !’’| and ‘shall’ ask you, whether you
came not hither by my writs directed to the several Sheriffs ‘ of
counties,’ and so ‘through the Sheriffs’ to other officers in cities
and liberties? To which ‘writs’ the people gave obedience ;
having also had the Act of Government communicated to them
—to which end great numbers of copies ‘thereof’ were sent
down on purpose to be communicated to them. And the
Government ® ‘ was’ also required to be distinctly read unto the
people at the place of elections, to avoid surprises, ‘or mislead-
ings of them through their ignorance ;’—where also they signed
the Indenture, with proviso, That the persons so chosen shall
not have power to alter the Government as it is now settled
in one single person and a Parliament! [My honourable
Sriends—?|—And thus I have made good my second assertion :
That I bear not witness to myself; but ‘that’ the good people
of England, and you all are my witnesses.

Yea, surely !—And ‘now’ this being so,—though I told you
in my last Speech that you were a Free Parliament, yet I thought

1[‘* that you were in thecountry. But I will reserve to speak to this at the last;
for this will be the issue of my speech,” pamphlet. |

2[‘ more than ail I have accounted and reckoned before,” zzd. ]
3 Act or Instrument of Government, 4 Writ of Return.

CN ee ee ee ee

380 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

it was understood ‘withal’ that I was the Protector, and the
Authority that called you, and that I was in possession of the
Government by a good right from God and men! And I believe
if the learnedest men in this nation were called to show a prece-
dent, equally clear, of a Government so many ways approved
of,! they would not in all their search find it.—I did not in my
other Speech to you take upon me to justify the ‘Act of’ Go-
vernment in every particular; and I told you the reason of it,
which was plain: It was public, and had long been published,
and it might be under the most serious inspection of all that
pleased to peruse it.

This is what I had to say at present for approving? myself to
God and my conscience in my actions throughout this under-
taking ; and for giving cause* of approving myself to every one
of your consciences in the sight of God.—‘ And’ if it, ‘ the fact,’ be
so, why should we sport with it, with a business so serious !
May not this character, this stamp [Stamp put upon a man by the
Most High and His providences|, bear equal poise with any heredi-
tary interest that could furnish, or hath furnished,* in the Common
Law or ‘elsewhere, matters of dispute and trial of learning.
Wherein many have exercised more wit, and spilt more blood,
than I hope ever to live to see or hear of ‘again’ in this nation !
[Red and White Roses, for example ; Henry of Bolingbroke, and the
last ‘ Protector."|—I say, I do not know why I may not balance
this Providence, as in the sight of God, with any hereditary in-
terest [Nor do I/|; as being less subject to those cracks and
flaws ‘which’ they are commonly incident unto ;° the disputing

1[‘*to show a precedent so clear, so many ways approving of a government,”
pamphlet. |

2* By what I have said, I have approved,’ &c. zz orig. but rhetorical charity
required the change.

3[‘*and in this undertaking ; and I have given cause," pamph/et.]

4(‘* which may have and hath had,’ zdzd.
5[When a few weeks later the King of France wished to address ‘‘To the
Republic of the three Kingdoms and the Protector,”” Bordeaux protested strongly
against putting the name of the parliament first. ‘‘ Soit avec justice ou sans raison,”
he wrote, ‘‘ le Protecteur ne prétend pas moins tirer son authorité de Dieu que tous
les autres souverains, comme ses déclarations publiques font assez connoistre, se
fondant sur ceste maxime, que toutes les puissances viennent du ciel.” Bordeaux
to Brienne, Dec. 2-30, 1654, Record Office Transcripts.) ‘

1654.] SPEECH III 381

of which has cost! more blood in former times in this nation
than we have leisure to speak of now!

Now, if this be thus, and I am deriving a title from God and
men upon such accounts as these are; although some men be
forward, yet that your judgments (that are persons sent from all
parts of the nation under the notion of approving this Govern-
ment ”) ;—[His Highness, bursting with meaning, completes neither
of these sentences ; but pours himself, like an irregular torrent, through
other orifices and openings|—for you to disown or not to own it:
for you to act ‘with’ Parliamentary authority especially in the
disowning of it, contrary to the very fundamental things, yea
against the very root itself of this Establishment: to sit and not
own the authority by which you sit,—is that that I believe
astonisheth more men than myself; and doth as dangerously
disappoint and discompose the nation as any thing ‘that’ could
have been invented by the greatest enemy to our peace and
welfare, or ‘that’ could well have happened. [Sorrow, anger,
and reproach on his Highness’s countenance ; the voice risen somewhat
into ALT, and rolling with a kind of rough music in the tones of it !]

It is true, there are some things in the Establishment that are
fundamental, and ‘there are’ some things ‘ which’ are not so, but
are circumstantial. Of such, no question but I shall easily agree
to vary or leave out, ‘according’ as I shall be convinced by
reason, ‘But’ some things are fundamentals; about which I
shall deal plainly with you: they may not be parted with; but
will, I trust, be delivered over to posterity, as being the fruits
of our blood and travail. The Government by a Single Person
and a Parliament is a fundamental! It is the esse, it is con-
stitutive. And ‘as’ for the person,—though I may seem to
plead for myself, yet I do not: no, nor can any reasonable man
say it. But if the things throughout this speech be true, I
plead for this nation, and ‘for’ all honest men therein who have
borne their testimony as aforesaid, and not for myself! And if

1 te which titles have cost,” pamphlet. |
2[** the notion of acceptance of the government,” zdzd.}

—— 2 a ee
= - -

382 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

things should do otherwise than well—which I would not fear,——
and the common enemy and discontented persons take advantage
of these distractions, the issue will be put up before God: let
Him own it, or let Him disown it, as He please !—

In every government there must be somewhat fundamental
[Will speak now of Fundamentals|, somewhat like a Magna Charta,
that should be standing and be unalterable. Where there is a
stipulation on one part, and that fully accepted, as appears by
what hath been said,—surely a return! ought to be; else what
does that stipulation signify? If I have, upon the terms afore-
said, undertaken this great trust, and exercised it ; and by it called
you,—surely it ought ‘ by you’ to be owned.—That Parliaments
should not make themselves perpetual is a fundamental. [ Yea ;
all know it: taught by the example of the Rump !| Of what
assurance is a Law to prevent so great an evil, if it lie in one or
the same Legislature? to wnlaw it again? [Must have a single
Person to check your Parliament.| Is ‘such a Law as’ this like to
be lasting? It will be like a rope of sand; it will give no
security ; for the same men may unbuild what they have built.

‘ Again,’ is not liberty of conscience in religion a fundamental ?
So long as there is liberty of conscience for the Supreme
Magistrate to exercise his conscience in erecting what form of
church-government he is satisfied he should set up [“ HE is to
decide on the Form of Church-Government, then ?’’ The Moderns,
especially the Voluntary Principle, stare],—why should he not give it,
‘the like liberty,’ to others ?* Liberty of conscience is a natural
right ; and he that would have it, ought to give it; having ‘ him-
self’ liberty to settle what he likes for the public. [‘ Where
then are the limits ef Dissent?” An abstruse question, my Voluntary

lreciprocal engagement.

2[‘‘legislator,” pamphlet, z.e., ‘‘ what assurance is there in a law if the law-_
maker can unlaw it again,’’ but perhaps should be as above. ]

3[This argument is not sound. The liberty which the Protector claims for him-
self is not only an utterly different thing from that which he would give to others,
but antagonistic to it. If the Supreme Magistrate is to have liberty to exercise his
conscience in erecting what form of Church Government he pleases, then King
Charles had a right to impose the Liturgy upon Scotland. ]

lillie lal ida oa a Ms) ie” i) ad ta Sie aed

1654. } SPEECH III 383

friends ; especially with a Gospel really Beiievep!| Indeed that
hath been one of the vanities of our contests. Every sect saith :
‘Oh, give me liberty!’ But give him it, and to his power he
will not yield it to anybody else. Where is our ingenuousness ? }
‘Liberty of conscience ’—truly that’s a thing ought to be very
reciprocal! The magistrate hath his supremacy, and he may
settle Religion, ‘that is, church-government,’ according to his
conscience. And ‘as for the People’—I may say it to you, I
can say it: All the money of this nation would not have tempted
men to fight upon such an account as they have ‘here been’
engaged in, if they had not had hopes of liberty ‘ of conscience ’
better than they had from Episcopacy, or than would have been |
afforded them from a Scottish Presbytery,—or an English either, |
if it had made such steps, or been as sharp and rigid, as it
threatened when it was first set up!? This, 1 say, is a funda-
mental. It ought to be so. It is for us and the generations to
come. And if there be an absoluteness in the imposer [ds you
seem to argue|, without fitting allowances and exceptions from
the rule [‘ Fitting:” that is a mide word !|,—we shall have
our people driven into wildernesses, as they were, when those poor
and afflicted people, that forsook their estates and inheritances
here, where they lived plentifully and comfortably, for the
enjoyment of their liberty, were necessitated to go into a
waste ® howling wilderness in New England ;—where they have,
for liberty’s sake, stript themselves of all their comfort and the
full enjoyment they had, embracing rather loss of friends and
want than be so ensnared and in bondage. [Yea /]

Another ‘fundamental’ which I had forgotten is the Militia.
That is judged a fundamental if anything be so. That zt should
be well and equally placed is very necessary. For, put the ab-

1[‘* ingenuity,” pamphlet. ]

? Liberty of Conscience must not be refused to a People who have fought and
conquered ‘upon such an account’ as ours was! For more of Oliver’s notions
concerning the Magistrate’s power in Church matters, see his Letter to the Scotch

ar ck Letter CXLVIII.
8

“vast,” pamphlet.)
e

erent

384 FIRST PARLIAMENT _[112 Sept.

solute power of the Militia into ‘the hands of’ one ‘person, —
without a check, what doth it ‘serve’? ‘On the other hand,’ I
pray you, what check is there upon your perpetual Parliaments,
if the government be wholly stript of this of the Militia?! ‘This
as we now have it’ is? equally placed, and ‘men’s’ desires were
to have it so;—namely, in one person, and ‘in’ the Parliament
‘along with him’ while the Parliament sits.? What signifies a
provision against perpetuating of Parliaments, if this ‘ power of
the Militia’ be solely in them? Whether without a check, the
Parliament have it not in their power‘ to alter the frame of
government ‘altogether,—to Aristocracy, to Democracy, to
Anarchy, to anything, if this ‘of the Militia’ be fully in them!
Yea, into all confusion ; and that without remedy! And if this
one thing be placed in one ‘ party,’ that one, be it Parliament, be
it Supreme Governor, they or he hath power to make what they
please of all the rest. [‘ Hum-m-m!” from the old Parliament.]
—Therefore if you would have a balance at all; and ‘if you
agree’ that some fundamentals must stand, which may be worthy
to be delivered over to posterity,—truly I think it is not unreason-
ably urged that ‘this power of’ the Militia should be disposed as
it is laid down in the ‘Act of’ Government: and that it should be
so equally placed that ‘no’ one person neither in Parliament nor
out of Parliament should have the power of ordering it.° ‘Well;’
—the Council are the Trustees of the Commonwealth, in all
intervals of Parliaments ; who have as absolute a negative upon
the Supreme Officer in the said intervals, as the Parliament
hath whilst it is sitting. [So that we are safe—or safeish your

1[**T pray you, what doth your check put upon your continual parliaments, if it be
wholly stript of this,” pamphlet, 7.e., ‘* Of what use is yout check upon perpetual
parliaments, if your power to check them be stript of this—the only means of
enforcing it.’"]

2‘ Itis’ in orig. 3[‘* sitting the Parliament,” 2dzd.]

4[‘* have not liberty,’’ 2dzd.]

5[The summary of this speech mentioned above puts the argument about the
militia as follows: ‘‘ The militia was not to be trusted in any one hand or power,
but so to be disposed that as the Parliament ought to have a check upon the
Protector to prevent excesses in him, so on the other hand the Protector ought to

have a check upon the Parliament in the business of the militia, to prevent excesses
in them.”]

1654.] SPEECH III 385

Highness? No one party has power of the Militia at any time.]
It—‘the power of the Militia’—cannot be made use of; not a
man can be raised, nor a penny charged upon the people;
nothing ‘can be’ done, without consent of Parliament ; and in
the intervals of Parliament, without consent of the Council it is
not to be exercised. Give me leave to say, that there is very
little power, none but what is codrdinate, ‘placed’ in the
Supreme Officer; and yet enough in him that hath the Chief
Government in that particular: He is bound in strictness by
the Parliament, ‘and’ out of Parliament by the Council, that
do as absolutely bind him as the Parliament, when the Parlia-
ment is sitting.—!

‘As’ for that of Money—I told you some things are circum-
stantials ; [Comes to the Circumstantials|—‘ as, for example, this is’ :
To have 200,000/. to defray Civil Officers,—to pay the Judges
and other Officers ; to defray the charges of the Council in send-
ing their embassies, in keeping intelligence, and doing that that’s
necessary ; and for supporting the Governor in Chief:? All this
is, by the Instrument, supposed and intended. But it is not of
the esse so much ; nor ‘is it’ limited ‘so strictly’ as ‘even’ the
number of soldiers is,2—20,000 Foot and 10,000 Horse. [Guard
even afar off against any sinking below the minimum in that !] ‘Yet’
if the spirits of men be composed, 5,000 Horse and 10,000 Foot
may serve. These things are ‘circumstanial, are’ between the
Chief Officer and the Parliament, to be moderated, ‘regulated,’
as occasion shall offer.

Of this sort * there are many other circumstantial things, which
are not like the laws of the Medes and Persians. But the things

1[‘* It speaks volumes for Oliver’s power of seeing into the heart of a situation,
that whilst the Instrument of Government, with its many artificial devices for
stemming the tide of Parliamentary supremacy, perished without leaving its mark on
the Constitution, his four fundamentals have been accepted by the nation, and are
at this day as firmly rooted in its conscience as Parliamentary supremacy itself.”
—Gardiner’s Commonwealth and Protectorate, iii. 31.]

2TInstrument of Government, Art. 27 (Somers Tracts, vi. 294).

3[‘* But it is not of the esse so much and so limited as so many soldiers,
20,000,” pamphlet. |

4[**so,” 22d. ]
voL, 1.—25

— ea ee —_ ————————

et OLN

386 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

which shall be necessary to deliver over to posterity, these should
be unalterable. Else every succeeding Parliament will be disput-
ing to change and alter the Government; and we shall be as
often brought into confusion as we have Parliaments, and so
make our remedy our disease. The Lord’s Providence, evil
‘effects’ appearing, and good appearing,! and better judgment
‘in ourselves,’ will give occasion for the ordering of things for
the best interest of the people. And those ‘circumstantial’
things are the matter of consideration between you and me.

I have indeed almost tired myself. That that I have farther
to say is this [Does not yet say it]—l would it had not been
needful for me to have called you hither to have expostulated
these things with you, and in such a manner as this is! But
Necessity hath no law, Feigned necessities, imaginary neces-
sities, —‘ certainly these’ are the greatest cozenage that men can
put upon the Providence of God, and make pretences to break
known rules by. ‘Yes,’ but it is as legal, ‘ contrary to God’s free
Grace,’ and as carnal, and as stupid [A tone of anger], to think that
there are no necessities that are manifest ‘and real’ necessities,
because necessities may be abused or feigned! And truly that
were my case? if I should think so ‘here ;’ and I hope none of
you think so, I ‘have to’ say [Says it now]: that the wilful
throwing away of this Government, such as it is, so owned by
God, so approved by men, so testified to (in the fundamentals of
it) as is before mentioned, ‘were a thing which,—and that in

| relation ‘not to my good, but’ to the good of these Nations and
‘of’ Posterity,—I can sooner be willing to be rolled into my
/ grave and buried with infamy, than I can give my consent unto!

[Never !—Do you catch the tone of that voice, reverberating, like
thunder from the roof of the Painted Chamber, over the heads of
Bradshaw, Haselrig, Scott and Company ; the aspect of that face,
with its lion-mouth, and mournful eyes,—kindled now and radiant
all of it, with sorrow, with rebuke, and wrathful defiance ?—Brad-

1[‘* The Lord’s Providence, appearing evils, appearing good,” pamphlet.)
' ibid.)

2'To be legal, and carnal and stupid. [‘ Truly I should be so,

1654.] SPEECH III 387

shaw and Company look on it unblanched ; but will be careful not
to provoke such a one. There lie penalties in him !]

You have been called hither together to save a nation,—nations.
You had the best people, indeed, in the Christian world ‘ put’ in
your trust, when you came hither. You had the affairs of these
nations ! delivered over to you in peace and quietness ; you were,
and we all were, put into an undisturbed possession, nobody
making title to us. Through the blessing of God, our enemies
were hopeless and scattered. We had peace at home; peace
almost with all ‘our’ neighbours round about, apt? ‘ otherwise ’
to take advantages where God did administer them. ‘These
things we had, few days ago, when you came hither. And
now ?’—To have our peace and interest, whereof those were
our hopes ® the other day, thus shaken, and ‘ put’ under such a
confusion; and we [Chiefly “I”]| rendered hereby almost the
scorn and contempt of those strangers [Dutch Ambassadors and
the like| that are amongst us to negotiate their masters’ affairs ,
to give them opportunity to see our nakedness as they do, a
people that have been unhinged this twelve-years day,* and
‘are’ unhinged still,—as if scattering, division and confusion
should come upon us like things we desired:° ‘these,’ which
are the greatest plagues ‘that’ God ordinarily lays upon nations
for sin !—I would be loath to say they are matters of our desire,®
but if not, ‘then’ why not the matter of our care, as wisely as
by our utmost endeavours we might, to avoid them!’ Nay if8
by such actings as these ‘now’ are, these poor nations shall be
thrown into heaps of confusion, through blood, and ruin, and
trouble® ‘and’ upon the saddest account that ever was; if

1[‘* you had affairs and these nations,” pamphlet. } 2[** fit,” zb¢d.]
3{‘* that had those hopes,” 7dzd.] 4An old phrase ; ‘ day’ emphatic.
5|‘*as if it were desired,” pamphlet.]

§ Politely oblique for ‘your desire,’ [but both pamphlet and Parl. Hist. have
not ‘‘desire” but ‘' delight.""]

7[ so wisely as we ought by uttermost endeavours to avoid,” pamphlet.]

8[‘* when,” zdzd. ]

%*what shall we then say?’ his Highness means, but does not complete the
sentence,—as is sometimes his habit. [But he does finish it. ‘‘ If by such actings

388 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

breaking ‘and confusion’ should come upon us ;—and all because
we would not settle when we might, when God put it into our
hands (your affairs now almost settled everywhere): and to have
all recoil upon us; and! we ourselves ‘to be’ shaken in our affec-
tions, loosened from all known and public interests :—as I said
before, who shall answer for these things to God ?

Who can answer for these things to God, or to men? ‘To
men’—to the people that sent you hither; who looked for
refreshment from you; who looked for nothing but peace and
quietness, and rest and settlement? And when we shall come
to give an account to them, we shall be able to say, “Oh, we
“ have quarrelled for and we contested for the Liberty of England ;

“¢and went to confusion, for that!’—‘ Now,’ Wherein, for-
“ sooth, for the Liberty of the people?” I appeal to the Lord,
that the desires and endeavours ‘ we have had — —Nay’ and the

things themselves will speak for themselves—that the Liberty
of England, the Liberty of the people; the avoiding of tyrannous
impositions either upon men as men, or Christians as Christians ;
—is made so safe by this Act of Settlement, that it will speak
sufficiently for itself. And when it shall appear ‘to the world’
what ‘really’ hath been said and done ‘by all of us,’ and what
our ‘real’ transactions have been—for God can discover; and
‘no privilege [What ! Not even Privilege of Parliament ?} will
hinder the Lord from discovering; no privilege, or condition
of men can hide from the Lord: He can and will make all
manifest, if He see it for His glory !?—and when these ‘things,
as I say,’ shall by the Providence of God be manifested ; and the
people shall come and say, “ Gentlemen, what condition are we
“in? We hoped for light; and behold darkness, obscure dark-
“ness! We hoped for rest after ten-years Civil Wars, we are
“plunged into deep confusion again!”—Ay; we know these
as these are, these poor nations shall be thrown into heaps of confusion . . . who
shall answer for these things to God ?”’]

1[**as I have mentioned to you,” pamphlet.)
2* Privilege’ of Parliament, in those days, strenuously forbids reporting ; but it
will not serve in the case referred to!

1654.) SPEECH III 389

consequences will come upon us, if God Almighty shall not find
out some way to prevent them.
| had this thought within myself, that it had not been dis-
honest nor dishonourable, nor against true Liberty, no not ‘the
liberty’ of Parliaments,—when a Parliament was so chosen ‘as
you have been,’ in pursuance of, in comformity to, and with such an
approbation and consent to the ‘Instrument of’ Government so
that he that runs might read by what Authority you came hither—
that an owning of your call and of the authority bringing you
hither, might have been required before your entrance into the
House. [Deep Silence in the audience.| But this was declined,
and hath not been done, because I am persuaded scarce any man
could doubt you came with contrary minds. And I have reason
to believe the people that sent you least doubted thereof at all.
And therefore I must deal plainly with you: What I forbore
upon a just confidence at first, you necessitate me unto now ;
[Paleness on some faces] that seeing the authority which called
you ! is so little valued, and so much slighted,—till some ‘such’
assurance be given and made known, that the fundamental
interest be settled and approved according to the proviso of the
Government contained in the ‘ writ of’ return, and such a consent
testified as will make it appear that the same is accepted—I
HAVE CAUSED A STOP TO BE PUT TO YOUR ENTRANCE INTO THE Par ia-
MENT House. [ You understand that, my honourable friends ?|

I am sorry, I am sorry, and I could be sorry to the death, that
there is cause for this! But there is cause: and if things be not
satisfied that are reasonably demanded, I, for my part, shall do
that which becomes me, seeking my counsel from God.—There
is therefore somewhat [A bit of written Parchment !] to be offered
to you that, I hope, will ‘answer,’ being understood with the
qualifications that I have told you of,—‘namely, of’ reforming
‘as to’ circumstantials, and agreeing in the substance and
fundamentals, that is to say, in the Form of the Government

1[** calling you,” pamphlet.)

— ae aS ee

390 FIRST PARLIAMENT [12 Sept.

‘now’ settled, as it is expressly stipulated in the indenture
“not to be altered.” 1 The making of your minds known in that
by giving your assent and subscription to it, is that ‘means’ that
will let you in, to act those things as a Parliament which are for
the good of the people. And this thing [he Parchment !),
‘when once it is’ shown to you and signed as aforesaid, doth
determine the controversy ; and may give a happy progress and
issue to this Parliament. [Honourable gentlemen look in one another's
Saces,—find general blank. |

The place where you may come thus and sign, as many as God
shall make free thereunto, is in the Lobby without the Parlia-
ment Door. [My honourable friends, you know the way, don’t
you ?|— —

The ‘Instrument of’ Government doth declare that you have
a legislative power without a negative from me. As the Govern-
ment doth express ‘it,’ you may make any laws; and if I give
not my consent, within twenty days, to the passing ‘of’ your laws,
they are ipso facto laws, whether I consent or no,—if not contrary
to the ‘Frame of’ Government. You have an absolute legisla-
tive power in all things that can possibly concern the good and
interest of the public; and I think you may make these nations
happy by this settlement. And I, for my part, shall be willing
to be bound more than I am, in anything that I may be convinced
of ‘that it’ may be for the good of the people, in preservation of
the Cause and Interest so long contended for.*

1[** fundamentals (which is the Government settled as it is expressed in the
Indenture) not to be altered,” pamphlet. The indentures meant, are those included
in the returns tc the writs sent to the sheriffs. See p. 379 above. ]

* Old Pamphlet, brother to the foregoing (E. 812 (11)), reprinted in Parliamen-
tary History, xx. 349-69. (Goddard gives a summary of this speech, which ends
as follows: (The Protector told us) ‘‘ that those pitiful forwardnesses and peevish-
nesses which were abroad he valued no more than the motes in the sun; but that
the Parliament should now dispute his office under whose authority we were then
met, was a great astonishment to him. That he was unwilling to break privileges,
but necessity had no law. He told us he had ordered the Parliament doors to
be locked up and guarded, and had appointed an officer to take subscriptions to a
recognition of his authority, which, being done, might give us entrance” (Burton, i.
xxxiv. ).

Sie short report of this speech was as follows: ‘‘ Le Protecteur. . .

1654.] SPEECH III 391

Go your ways, my honourable friends, and sign, so many of
you as God hath made free thereunto! The place, I tell you, is
in the Lobby without the Parliament Door. The ‘Thing,’ as you
will find there, is a bit of Parchment with these words engrossed
on it: ‘1 do hereby freely promise, and engage myself, to be true and
‘ faithful to the Lord Protector and the Commonwealth of England,
‘Scotland and Ireland ; and shall not (according to the tenor of the
‘ Indenture whereby I am returned to serve in this present Parliament)
‘ propose, or give my consent, to alter the Government as it is settled
‘tn a Single Person and a Parliament.’ Sign that, or go home
again to your countries.

Let honourable gentlemen therefore consider what they will
do!—‘ About a Hundred signed directly, within an hour.’
Guibon Goddard and all the Norfolk Members (except one, who
was among the direct Hundred) went and ‘had dinner together,’
to talk the matter over ;—mostly thought it would be better to
sign; and did sign, all but some two. The number who have

parlant a eux en la mesme maniére que le premier jour de la Assemblée, mais en
de termes bien differends, aprés une exageration de ses services; des offres qu'il
avoit souvent faictes de se retirer . . . de la mauvoise conduite du précédent
Parlement ; des desseigns qu'il avoit de se rendre perpetuel ; du préjugé qu'un tel
Gouvernement apporteroit au peuple, comme aussy des grands advantages que ses
soings et ceux du Conseil avoient apportez a l’Angleterre—déclara qu’ayant esté
convié par beaucoup de gens de bien, dont mesmes quelques uns faisoient parti de
ce corps, de prendre le gouvernement des affaires . . . tous lesquelz consentements
lui donnoient un tiltre plus légitime que n’estoit le droit des succession des royz:
il estoit resolu de conserver jusqu’au tombeau son authorité, qui lui estoit plus
chére que sa vie, et de ne point souffrir qu'elle feust affoiblie par ceux qui, soubz un
prétexte de religion et de liberté, ne scngoient qu'a leur grandeur particuliére, et a
plonger la nation dans de nouveaux troubles, designant les Presbyteriens : n'y que
le Parlement touchast au présent Gouvernement en la forme qu'il est estably, a la
milice a la religion, et se perpétuast, n'y qu’aucun deputé y prist séance devant
que d’avoir soubscript l’Acte qui leur seroit presente; les assurant d’une entieére
liberté dans leures autres desliberatinns,"”" These concluding words throw light on
the last phrase of Oliver's speech. Having ended, the Protector retired, Bordeaux
says, before any one had time to make a reply. (Bordeaux to Brienne, Sept., 14-24,
Record Office Transcripts.)

Pell, writing from Switzerland, says that he has caused the information he has
received concerning the Protector’s speech ‘‘ to be sent to several persons in High
Dutch, to dash the false news written from Cologne, of violence and disorder then
used.” Lansdowne MS., 745, f. 23 b. In another letter, he writes, that he hears
from England ‘‘ that if my Lord Protector’s speech be printed, some passages
shall be left out, as not fit to be seen by the eyes of all the world, though very con-
venient for the ears of the Parliament.’’]

1 Whitlocke, p. 587. [All that was asked by this, as Dr. Gardiner points out,
was ‘‘that the representatives should take upon themselves personally the engage-
ment which had been taken for them by their constituencies at the time of their
election."’ Commonwealth and Protectorate, iii. 33.)

392 FIRST PARLIAMENT _[12 Sept.

signed this first day, we hear, is a Hundred-and-twenty, a
Hundred-and-thirty, nay a Hundred-and-forty.! Blank faces
of honourable gentlemen begin to take meaning again,—some
mild, some grim. Tomorrow being Fastday, there is an ad-
journment. The recusants are treated ‘with all tenderness ;’
most of them come in by degrees: ‘Three-hundred before the
month ends,’ 2

Deep Republicans, Bradshaw, Haselrig, Thomas Scott and the
like, would not come in; still less would shallow noisy ones, as
Major Wildman ;—went home to their countries again, their blank
faces settling into permanent grim. My Lord Protector molested
no man for his recusancy ; did indeed take that absence as a
comparative favour from the parties. Harrison and other suspect
persons are a little looked after: the Parliament resumes its
function as if little had happened. With a singular acquiescence
on the part of the Public, write our correspondents, Dutch and
other. The Public, which I have known rebel against crowned
Kings for twitching the tippet of a Parliament, permits this Lord
Protector to smite it on the cheek, and say, “Have a care, wilt
thou!” Perhaps this Lord Protector is believed to mean better
than the King did? There is a difference in the objects of men,
as the Public understands ;—a difference in the men too for
rebelling against! At any rate, here is singular submission
everywhere ; and my Lord Protector getting ready a powerful
Sea-Armament, neither his Parliament nor any other creature can
yet guess for what.®

1 Goddard, Whitlocke, Letter in Thurloe.

°([The Dutch ambassadors writing on Sept. $8, after narrating the views of
the Parliament, go on to say, ‘‘ But these considerations being made known unto
his Highness, they were no wise pleasing unto him, tending to the unsettlement of
the present government; and in a few days, the deliberations fell into extremes,
and in the meantime it is said that another party, called the Anabaptists, under
the direction of Harrison, was busy to get the hands to a petition to present to the
Parliament; so that his Highness was moved thereby to secure Harrison at his
house in the country, and to remedy what was acting in the Parliament and to
send for the members,” &c. Some 145, the ambassadors say, ‘‘ signed presently,
and the next day [Next day but one, they mean—‘ next day’ was Fastday] some
50 more. There are others, without doubt, who after some consideration, will do
as the rest have done, sign and sit in parliament, as they ought; and not stand
without at the door and be laughed at.” Thurloe, ii. 606.

Whitlocke writing on Oct. 6, says 300; but on Oct. 27 Thurloe wrote to Pell
that not above 30 in the whole 460 had refused. (Lansdowne MS., 751, f. 205.).]

3 Dutch Ambassadors, French, &c., in Thurloe, ii. 606, 613, 638 (15th, 18th
Sept. ; 9th Oct.).—See also Appendix, No. 30. [A correspondent of Mazarin's
writes on this same 33 September, that the Protector in the Parliament has been
declared ‘‘to have sole power of our armies, both by sea and land, to the end

1654. ] SPEECH III 393

Goddard’s report of this Parliament is distinct enough ; briet,
and not without some points of interest; ‘the misfortune is,’
says one Commentator, ‘he does not give us names.’ Alas, a
much greater misfortune is, the Parliament itself is hardly worth
naming! It did not prove a successful Parliament ;—it held on
by mere Constitution-building ; and effected, so to speak, nothing.
Respectable Pedant persons; never doubting but the Ancient
sacred Sheepskins would serve for the New Time, which also has
its sacredness ; thinking, full surely, constitutional logic was the
thing England now needed of them! Their History shall remain
blank, to the end of the world. I have read their Debates, and
counsel no other man to do it. Wholly upon the ‘ Institution of
Government, modelling, new-modelling of that: endless anxious
spider-webs of constitutional logic ; vigilant checks, constitutional
jealousies, &c. &c. To be forgotten by all creatures.!

They had a Committee of Godly Ministers sitting in the Jeru-
salem Chamber ; a kind of miniature Assembly of Divines ; intent
upon ‘Scandalous Ministers and Schoolmasters,’ upon tender
consciences, and the like objects: but there were only Twenty
in this Assembly ; they could hardly ever get fairly under way
at all ;—and have left in English History no trace that I could
see of their existence, except a very reasonable Petition, noted in
the Record, That the Parliament would be pleased to advance
them a little money towards the purchase of fire and candle,—in
these cold dark months. The Parliament, I hope, allowed them
coals and a few tallow-lights ; but neither they nor it could ac-
complish anything towards the Settling of a Godly Ministry in
England: my Lord Protector and /zs Commissions will have to
settle that too; an object dear to all good men. The Parlia-
ment spent its time in constitutional jangling, in vigilant con-
trivance of balances, checks, and that species of entities. With
difficulty could, at rare intervals, a hasty stingy vote, not for the
indispensable Supplies, but for some promise of them, be wrung
from it. An unprofitable Parliament.

his designs may be kept secret. They are still raising of men here for the fleet, whose
design none knows but his Highness; the Parliament itself is not acquainted with
it: a very strangething! Our kings have submitted to the Parliament; at present
no such thing ; his enterprises are only known to himself; he doth in this as he did
with his business in Scotland and Ireland ; he did his work, and spoke afterwards.”
Thurloe, ii. 606.]

1{Many interesting notices of this Parliament are to be found in Bordeaux's
despatches, especially in relation to the question of the succession and the attitude
of the Protector’s family and friends. ]

394 FIRST PARLIAMENT _12 Sept.

For the rest, they had Biddle the Socinian before them ; a poor
Gloucester Schoolmaster once, now a very conspicuous Heresiarch,
apparently of mild but entirely obstinate manners,—poor devil :
him they put into the Gatehouse ; him and various others of that
kidney. Especially ‘Theauro John, who laid about him with a
drawn sword at the door of the Parliament House one day,’ !—a
man clearly needed to be confined. ‘Theauro John:’ his name
had originally been John Davy, if I recollect ;? but the Spirit, in
some preternatural hour, revealed to him that it ought to be as
above. Poor Davy: his labours, life-adventures, financial arrange-
ments, painful biography in general, are all unknown to us; till,
on this ‘Saturday 30th December 1654,’ he very clearly ‘knocks
loud at the door of the Parliament House,’ as much as to say,
“ What is this you are upon?” and ‘lays about him with a drawn
sword ;’—after which all again becomes unknown. Seemingly a
kind of Quaker. Does the reader know James Nayler, and the
devout women worshipping him? George Fox, in his suit of
leather, independent of mankind, looks down into the soft Vale
of Belvoir, native ‘Vale of Bever:’ Do not the whispering winds
and green fields, do not the still smoke-pillars from these poor
cottages under the eternal firmaments, say in one’s heart, “‘ George,
canst thou do nothing for us? George, wilt thou not help us
from the wrath to come?’ George finds in the Vale of Bever
‘a very tender people.’ In fact, most singular Quakerisms,
frightful Socinianisms, and other portents, are springing up rife
in England.

Oliver objected, now and always, to any very harsh punishment
of Biddle and Company, much as he abhorred their doctrines.
Why burn, or brand, or otherwise torment them, poor souls?
They, wandering as we all do, seeking for a door of hope into the
Eternities, have, being tempted of the Devil as we all likewise
are, missed the door of hope ; and gone tumbling into dangerous
gulfs,—dangerous, but not yet beyond the mercy of God, Do
not burn them. They meant, some of them, well; bear, visibly
to me, the scars of stern true battle against the Enemy of Man.
Do not burn them ;—lock them up, that they may not mislead
others. On frugal wholesome diet in Pendennis Castle, or

1 Whitlocke, p. 592. See Goddard (in Burton, i. Introd. exxvi.).
2(His name was John Tawney. See A Perfect Account, No. 209 (E. 823 (4))
‘formerly a goldsmith near Temple Bar, and known by the name of John Tawney.”
Also Mercurius Fumigosus, No, 32 [idid (3) ‘‘ A plot, a plot, old Nickisdead; John
Tawney did him kill."}

ae

1654. } SPEECH III 395

Elizabeth Castle in Jersey, or here in the Clink Prison at London,
they will not cost you much, and may arrive at some composure.
Branding and burning is an ugly business ;—as little of that as
you can,

Friday, 29th September 1654. His Highness, say the old Lum-
ber-Books, went into Hyde Park; made a small picnic dinner
under the trees, with Secretary Thurloe, attended by a few ser-
vants ;—was, in fact, making a small pleasure excursion, having in
mind to try a fine team of horses, which the Earl or Duke of
Oldenburg had lately sent him. Dinner done, his Highness him-
self determined to drive,—two in hand I think, with a postilion
driving other two. The horses, beautiful animals, tasting of the
whip, became unruly ; galloped, would not be checked, but took
to plunging ; plunged the postilion down; plunged or shook his
Highness down, ‘dragging him by the foot for some time,’ so that
‘a pistol went off in his pocket,’ tothe amazement of men. Where-
upon? Whereupon—his Highness got up again, little the worse ;
was let blood ; and went about his affairs much as usual!! Small
anecdote, that figures, larger than life, in all the Books and Bio-
graphies. I have known men thrown from their horses on oc-
casion, and less noise made about it, my erudite friend! But the
essential point was, his Highness wore a pistol.—Yes, his Highness
is prepared to defend himself; has men, and has also truculent-
flunkeys, and devils and devil’s-servants of various kinds, to defend
himself against ;—and wears pistols, and what other furniture
outward and inward may be necessary for the object. Such of
you as have an eye that way can take notice of it |—

Thursday, 16th November 1654, On the other hand, what a
glimpse into the interior domesticities of the Protector Household
have we in the following brief Note! Amid the darkness and
buzzard dimness, one light-beam, clear, radiant, mournfully
beautiful, like the gleam of a sudden star, disclosing for a moment
many things tous! On Friday, Secretary Thurloe writes incident-
ally : ‘My Lord Protector’s Mother, of Ninety-four years old, died

1Thurloe, i. 652, 3; Ludlow, ii. 508. [On this incident, see Mr. Firth’s article on
‘*Cromwell’s views on Sport” in Macmillan's Magazine, October 1894. Also
Bordeaux’s letter of Oct. 2-12 (Record Office Transcrip~is) and the satirical verses
printed in the Azst, MSS. Commissioners’ Report on the Portland MSS., vol. i. p. 678.
Bordeaux says that the Protector had taken the coachman’s place ‘‘ pour mieux re-
scognoitre les jeunes chevaulx.” He ends his narrative: ‘‘ de tout cet accident, il ne
luy reste que quelques meurtrissures a l'estomac, qui l’ont obligé de se faire saigner,
et de garder sa chambre." It proved, however, that there was also a wound in the
leg ; and it was many days before the Protector could leave his room. ]

396 FIRST PARLIAMENT (26 Dec.

‘the last night, and a little before her death gave my Lord her
‘blessing, in these words: “The Lord cause His face to shine
‘upon you; and comfort you in all your adversities ; and enable
‘you to do great things for the glory of the Most High God, and
‘to be a relief unto His People. My dear Son, I leave my heart
‘with thee. A good night!’’’1—and therewith sank into her
long sleep. Even so. Words of ours are but idle. Thou brave
one, Mother of a Hero, farewell !—Ninety-four years old,? the
royalties of Whitehall, says Ludlow very credibly, were of small
moment to her: ‘at the sound of a musket she would often be
‘afraid her Son was shot ; and could not be satisfied unless she
‘saw him once a day at least.’"* She, old, weak, wearied one, she
cannot help him with his refractory Pedant Parliaments, with his
Anabaptist plotters, Royalist assassins, and world-wide con-
fusions ; but she bids him, Be strong, be comforted in God. And
so Good night! And in the still Eternities and divine Silences
—Well, are they not divine ?>—*

December 26th, 1654.° The refractory Parliament and other
dim confusions still going on, we mark as a public event of some
significance, the sailing of his Highness’s Sea-Armament. It
has long been getting ready on the Southern Coast ; sea-forces,
land-forces; sails from Portsmouth on Christmas morrow, as
above marked.°—None yet able to divine whither. bound; not
even the Generals, Venables and Penn, till they reach a certain
latitude. Many are much interested to divine! Our Brussels
Correspondent writes long since, ‘The Lord Protector’s Govern-

1 Thurloe to Pell, 17th November 1654: [signed with the alias ‘‘ Adrian Peters”
Lansdowne MS. 751, f. 213] in Vaughan's Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell
(London, 1839), i. 81.

2[Mrs. Cromwell’s real age when she died appears to have been 89. See
Chester’s Registers of Westminster Abbey, 521, note 3; and an epitaph at the
British Museum, signed J. L., and printed in 1655. (669 f. 19, No. 41).]

3 Ludlow, ii. 488.

4[All through this autumn, negotiations were going on in relation toa treaty
with France. A speech of the Protector’s to Bordeaux, narrated by the ambassador
at some length, will be found in the Supplement, No 93. Four other letters come
in here, one on behalf of the town of Marlborough, devastated by a great fire,
and three to Admiral Penn, then making ready for the Hispaniola expedition
(Supplement, Nos. 91, 94-96). Also a speech to the Committee for Retrenching
the Forces (No. 92). ‘There is a fourth letter to Penn, written a few weeks later

No. 97). |

) 5[On December 23, Augustine Garland ‘‘moved to have my Lord Protector
crowned, which motion was seconded by Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Mr. Hen.
Cromwell and others, but waived—nothing was done in it more." (Newsletter,
Clarke Papers, vol iii. 16.).]

6 Penn's Narrative, in Thurloe, iv. 28.

1654.) LETTER CXCVI, WHITEHALL 397

‘ment makes England more formidable and considerable to all
‘ Nations than ever it has been in my days.’ !

LETTERS CXCVI., CXCVII

Here are Two small Letters, harmlessly reminding us of far
interests and of near ;—otherwise yielding no new light; but
capable of being read without commentary. Read them; and
let us hasten to dissolve the poor Constitutioning Parliament,
which ought not to linger on these pages, or on any page.

LETTER CXCVI
To Richard Bennet, Esq., Governor of Virginia: These

Whitehall, r2th January 1654.

Sir,

Whereas the differences betwixt the Lord
Baltimore and the inhabitants of Virginia, concerning the bounds
by them respectively claimed, are depending before us and our
Council, and yet undetermined ; and that as we are credibly in-
formed, you have, notwithstanding, lately gone into his plantation
in Maryland, and countenanced some people there in opposing
the Lord Baltimore’s officers; [whereby, and with other forces
from Virginia, you have much disturbed that Colony and people,
to the endangering of tumults and a great deal of bloodshed there,
if not timely prevented :

Therefore, at the request of the Lord Baltimore, and divers
other persons of quality here, who are engaged by great ad-
ventures in his interest there],? for preventing of disturbances or
tumults, we do will and require you, and all others deriving any
authority from you, to forbear disturbing the Lord Baltimore,
or his officers or people in Maryland; and to permit all things
to remain as they were there before any disturbance or alteration

'Thurloe, i. [ii.] 160 (11th March 1653-4).

_ 2[The words in brackets underlined, apparently for deletion, and the following
six words, preceded by ‘‘ Therefore,” entered in margin, |

~athet Mate i

~—— aT *

398 FIRST PARLIAMENT (12 Jan.

made by you, or ‘by’ any other upon pretence of any authority
from you, till the said Differences above mentioned be determined
by us here, and that we give farther order therein.
We rest your loving friend,
Oxiver P.*

Commissioners, it would appear, went out to settle the busi-
ness; got it, we have no doubt, with due difficulty settled. See
Letter CCIII.,—26th September 1655, ‘To the Commissioners of
Maryland.’

LETTER CXCVII

Here again, while the Pedant Parliament keeps arguing and
constitutioning, are discontents in the Army that threaten to
develop themselves. Dangerous fermentings of Fifth-Monarchy
and other bad ingredients, in the Army and out of it ; encouraged
by the Parliamentary height of temperature. Charles Stuart, on
the word of a Christian King, is extensively bestirring himself.
Royalist preparations, provisions of arms; Anabaptist Petitions :
abroad and at home very dangerous designs on foot: but we
have our eye upon them.

The Scotch Army seems, at present, the questionablest. ‘The
pay of the men is thirty weeks in arrears,’ for one thing; the
Anabaptist humour needs not that addition! Colonel Alured,
we saw, had to be dismissed the Service, last year; Overton
and others were questioned, and not dismissed. But now some
desperate scheme has risen among the Forces in Scotland, of
deposing General Monk, of making Republican Overton Com-
mander,—and so marching off, all but the indispensable Garrison-
troops, south into England there to seek pay and other redress.!
This Parliament, now in its Fourth Month, supplies no money ;
nothing but constitutional debatings. My Lord Protector had
need be watchful! He again, in this December, summons
Overton from Scotland; again questions him ;—sees good, this

*Thurloe, i. 724. The Signature only is Oliver's; signature, and sense.
Thurloe has jotted on the back of this: ‘A duplicate also hereof was writ, signed
by his Highness.’ [Draft, much corrected. Signature not Oliver's. ]

1 Postea, Speech IV.; and Thurloe, iii, rro, &c. [See letter to Wilks;
Supplement No. 98. ]

1655.) LETTER CXCVIL, WHITEHALL 399

time, to commit him to the Tower,! and end his military services.
The Army, in Scotland and elsewhere, with no settlement yet to
its vague fermenting humours, and not even money to pay its
arrears, is dangerous enough.

Of Adjutant-General Allen whom this Letter concerns, it may
be proper to say that Ludlow in mentioning him has mistaken his
man. ‘The reader recollects, a good while ago, Three Troopers,
notable at the moment, who appeared once before the Long Par-
liament, with a Petition from the Army, in the year Forty-seven ?
Their names were Allen, Sexby, Sheppard : Ludlow will have it,
the Trooper Allen was this Adjutant-General Allen ;? which is a
mistake of Ludlow’s.2 Trooper Sexby we did since see, as Captain
Sexby, after Preston Fight ; and shall again, in sad circumstances
see: but of Trooper Allen there is no farther vestige anywhere
except this imaginary one; of Trooper Sheppard not even an
imaginary vestige. They have vanished, these two ; and Adjutant-
General Allen, vindicating his identity such as it is, enters here
on his own footing. A resolute devout man, whom we have seen
before ; the same who was deep in the Prayer-Meeting at Windsor
years ago ;* this is his third, and we hope his last appearance on
the stage of things.

Allen has been in Ireland, since that Prayer-Meeting ; in Ire-
land and elsewhere, resolutely fighting, earnestly praying, as from
of old; has had many darkenings of mind; expects, for almost a
year past, ‘little good from the Governments of this world,’ one
or the other. He has honoured, and still would fain honour, ‘ the
Person now in chief place,’ having seen in him much ‘upright-
heartedness to the Lord ;’ must confess, however, ‘the late Change
hath more stumbled me than any ever did ;’—and on the whole
knows not what he will resolve upon. We find he has resolved
on quitting Ireland, for one thing ; has come over to ‘ his Father-

116th January 1654-5 (Overton’s Letter, Thurloe, iii. 110).

? Ludlow, i. 189: ‘ Edward Sexby,’ ‘William Allen;’ but in the name of
the third Trooper, which is not ‘ Philips’ but Skepfard, he is mistaken (Commons
Journals, 30th April 1647); and as to ‘ Adjutant-General Allen’ and the impossi-
bility of his identity with this William Allen, see vol. i. pp. 252, 307.

3[The balance of evidence, however, is entirely in favour of the correctness of

Ludlow's statement. See a discussion of the question by Mr. Firth in the Clarke —

Papers (vol. i. p. 432). The name on p, 252 proves nothing. Carlyle prints it

“Adjutant” Allen, but the original, in Cromwell's own writing, has only ‘‘ Mr.”]
#Vol. i. p. 307.

yee intercepted Letters of Allen’s (Thurloe, ii. 214, 5), ‘Dublin, 6th April

1654.

400 FIRST PARLIAMENT (20 Jan.

in-law Mr. Huish’s in Devonshire :’—and, to all appearance, is not
building established-churches there! ‘Captain Unton Crook,’ of
whom we shall hear afterwards, is an active man, son of a learned
Lawyer ;! very zealous for the Protector’s interest ;—zealous for
his own and his Father’s promotion, growls Ludlow. Desborow,
who fitted out the late mysterious Sea-Armament on the Southern
Coast (not too judiciously, I doubt), is Commander-in-chief in
those parts.

‘ For Captain Unton Crook, at Exeter: These’

Whitehall, 2oth January 1654.
Sir,
Being informed by a letter of yours and
General Disbrowe, also by a letter from the High Sheriff of
Devon, that Adjutant-General Allen doth very ill offices by
multiplying dissatisfactions in the minds of men with the present
Government, I desire you and the High Sheriff to make diligent
inquiry after him, and try to the uttermost what can be made
out of his practicing in this kind, and to give me speedy notice
thereof. Not doubting of your care herein, I rest,
Your loving friend,
Ouiver P.

If he be gone out of the country, learn whither he is gone,
and send me word by the next post.*

Allen was not gone out of the Country ; he was seized by Crook
‘in his Father-in-law Mr. Huish’s house,’ on the 31st of January
1654-5 ; his papers searched, and himself ordered to be and con-
tinue prisoner, at a place agreed upon,—Sand in Somersetshire,—
‘under his note of hand.’ So much we learn from the imbroglios
of Thurloe ;? where also are authentic Depositions concerning
Allen, ‘by Captains John Copleston and the said Unton Crook ;’

1 Made Sergeant Crook in 1655 (Heath, p. 693). [Grandson of a very learned
lawyer indeed—Sir John Crook, Recorder of London, Speaker of the House of
Commons, Justice of Common Pleas. }

2 ili. 143; see pp. 140, TI.

_ .* Lansdowne MSS. 1236, fol. 109. Superscription torn off ;—only the Signature
is in Oliver's hand: Address supplied here by inference,

1655.) LETTER CXCVIL, WHITEHALL 401

and two Letters of Allen’s own,—one to the Protector ; and one to
‘Colonel Daniel Axtel’ (the Regicide Axtel), ‘ Dr. Philip Carteret,
or either of them,’ enclosing that other Letter, and leaving it to
them to present it or not, he himself thinking earnestly that they
should. Both of these Letters, as well as Unton Crook’s to the
Protector, and the authentic Deposition of Copleston and Crook
against Allen, are dated February 7th, 1654-5.

The witnesses depose,! That he has bragged to one ‘ Sir John
Davis Baronet, of an interview he had with the Protector not
long since,—wherein he, Allen, told the Protector a bit of his
mind ; and left him in a kind of huff, and even at a nonplus;
and so came off to the West Country in a triumphant manner.
Farther he talks questionable things of Ireland, of discontents
there, and in laud of Lieutenant-General Ludlow; says, There is
plenty of discontent in Ireland; he himself means to be there
in February, but will first go to London again. The Country
rings with rumour of his questionable speeches. He goes to
‘meetings’ about Bristol, whither many persons convene,—for
Anabaptist or other purposes. Such meetings are often on
week-days. Questionabler still, he rides thither ‘with a vizard
or mask over his face ;’ ‘with glasses over his eyes, —barnacles,
so to speak! Nay, questionablest of all, riding, ‘on Friday the
5th of last month,’ month of January 1054-5, ‘to a meeting at
Luppit near Honiton, Devon,’ there rode also (but not I think
to the same place!) a Mr. Hugh Courtenay, once a flaming
Royalist Officer in Ireland, and still a flaming zealot to the lost
Cause ; who spake nothing all that afternoon but mere treason,
of Anabaptists that would rise in London, of &c. &c. Allen, as
we say, on the last morning of January was awoke from sleep
in his Father-in-law Mr. Huish’s, by the entrance of two armed
troopers ; who informed him that Captain Crook and the High
Sheriff were below, and that he would have to put on his clothes,
and come down.

Allen’s Letter to the Lord Protector, from Sand in Somerset-
shire, we rather reluctantly withhold, for want of room. A
stubborn, sad, stingily respectful piece of writing: Wife and
baby terribly ill off at Sand ; desires to be resigned to the Lord,
‘before whom both of us shall ere long nakedly appear ;’—
petitions that at least he might be allowed ‘to attend ordin-
ances ;’ which surely would be reasonable! Are there not good

1Thurloe, iii. 40.
VOL. 11.—26

TO Sel ae en eee

.

402 FIRST PARLIAMENT (22 Jan.

horses that require to be ridden with a dexterous bridle-hand,—

delicate, and yet hard and strong? Clearly a strenuous Ana-
baptist, this Allen ; a rugged, true-hearted, not easily governable
man; given to Fifth-Monarchy and other notions, though with a
strong head to control them. Fancy him duly cashiered from
the Army, duly admonished and dismissed into private life.
Then add the Colonel Overtons and Colonel Alureds, and
General Ludlows and Major-General Harrisons, and also the
Charles Stuarts and Christian Kings ;—and reflect once more j
what kind of task this of my Lord Protector’s is, and whether
he needs refractory Pedant Parliaments to worsen it for him!?

SPEECH IV

eS

Finpine this Parliament was equal to nothing in the Spiritual
way but tormenting of poor Heretics, receiving Petitions for a
small advance towards coal and candle; and nothing in the
Temporal, but constitutional air-fabrics and vigilant checkings
and balancings,—under which operations such precious fruits
at home and abroad were ripening,—Oliver’s esteem for this 1
Parliament gradually sank to a marked degree. Check, check, ;
—like maladroit ship-carpenters hammering, adzing, sawing at
the Ship of the State, instead of diligently caulking and paying
it; idly gauging and computing, nay, recklessly tearing up and
remodelling ;—when the poor ship could hardly keep the water
as yet, and the Pirates and Sea-Krakens were gathering round!
All which most dangerous, not to say half-frantic operations, the
Lord Protector discerning well, and swallowing in silence as
his hest was,—had for a good while kept his eye upon the
Almanac, with more and more impatience for the arrival of the
Third of February. That will be the first deliverance of the
poor labouring Commonwealth, when at the end of Five Months
we send these Parliament philosophers home to their countries
again. Five Months by the Instrument they have to sit ;—O
fly, lazy Time; it is yet but Four Months and— — Somebody

1[For the position and views of the Fifth Monarchy men, in regard to Oliver
and his government, see Spittlehouse’s pamphlet, mentioned p 346 above; a letter
from Thurloe to Monck, Clarke Papers, ii. 242, and also two other letters, 2d7d.,
Introduction, xxxii., xxxiv. And for Cromwell's lament over the divisions amongst
godly men, and the discontents in Scotland, see Supplement, No. 98. ]

1655. ] SPEECH IV 403

suggested, Is not the Soldier-month counted by Four Weeks?
Eight-and-twenty days are a Soldier's Month: they have, in
a sense, already sat five months, these vigilant Honourable
Gentlemen! !

Oliver Protector, on Monday morning, 22d of January 1654-5,
surprises the Constitutioning Parliament with a message to at-
tend him in the Painted Chamber, and leave ‘Settling of the
Government’ for a while. They have yet voted no Supplies ;
nor meant to vote any. They thought themselves very safe till
February 3d, at soonest. But my Lord Protector, from his high
place, speaks, and dissolves.?

Speech Fourth, ‘ printed by Henry Hills, Printer to his High-
ness the Lord Protector,’ is the only one of these Speeches, con-
cerning the reporting, printing or publishing of which there is
any visible charge or notice taken by the Government of the
time. It is ordered in this instance, by the Council of State,
That nobody except Henry Hills or those appointed by him
shall presume to print or reprint the present Speech, or any
part of it. Perhaps an official precaution considered needful ;
perhaps also only a matter of copyright; for the Order is so
worded as not to indicate which.? At all events, there is no
trace of the Report having been anywhere interfered with;

1(See A Perfect Account (E. 823, 4) and Mercurius Politicus (E. 823, 5). The
latter states that if the Bill of the government is not approved the Parliament will
rise ‘‘at the time limited in the Almanack account,” z.e., ‘‘the 3rd of February
next, or by the month the 2oth of January instant.’” This last date, counting from
Monday to Monday, should be January the 22; but perhaps the writer took it
that when the House rose on Saturday the 20, it would have sat twenty entire
weeks.

2(** Before he dissolved them,” Thurloe wrote to Pell, ‘‘ he declared at large,
in a speech of two hours long, the reasons of his so doing, wherein he gave so
great satisfaction that most men are contented with it. The truth is, there was
so little consistency and agreement amongst themselves, and so violent and strong
parties contradicting each other, that it was scarce possible for them to come to
any resolution among themselves that might be for public good. In all the time
they sat, they prepared not any one act to present to his Highness, nor not so
much as for raising money for paying the army, which they suffered to go upon
free quarter, to the discontenting of all the people.” (Vaughan’s Protectorate, i.
118). Inalater letter, Thurloe maintains that ‘‘ their death was not untimely and
violent, but natural,” and declares that in most things they and the Protector were
well agreed, their great fault being ‘‘ their slowness and dilatoriness, which the
present constitution of the nation could not bear”’ (2d7d. , 125).]

5[‘* Published to prevent mistakes and false copies,” the title-page of the pamphlet
says. It was issued under Cromwell's own auspices. An item in a news-letter
from George Downing mentions that ‘‘ His Highness not having time to peruse
his speech and correct it is the reason why it is not yet published.” Clarke Papers,
vol. iii. p. 2x. Downing also gives two summaries of the ‘‘ very excellent speech,
ibid., pp. 19, 20

404. FIRST PARLIAMENT

which seems altogether a spontaneous one; probably the pro-
duct of Rushworth or some such artist.

The Speech, if read with due intensity, can be understood ;
and what is equally important, be believed; nay, be found to
contain in it a manful, great and valiant meaning,—in tone and
manner very resolute, yet very conciliatory; intrinsically not
ignoble but noble. For the rest, it is, as usual, sufficiently in-
condite in phrase and conception; the hasty outpouring of a
mind which is ful of such meanings. Somewhat difficult to
read, Practical Heroes, unfortunately, as we once said, do not
speak in blank-verse ; their trade does not altogether admit of
that! Useless to look here for a Greek Temple with its porticoes
and entablatures, and styles. But the Alp Mountain, with its
chasms and cataracts and shaggy pine-forests, and huge granite
masses rooted in the Heart of the World: this too is worth
looking at, to some. I can give the reader little help; but will
advise him to try.?

{22 Jan.

GENTLEMEN,

I perceive you are here as the House of
Parliament, by your Speaker whom I see here, and by your
faces which are in a great measure known to me. [Doubtless
we are here, your Highness. ]

When I first met you in this room, it was to my apprehension
the hopefullest day that ever mine eyes saw, as to considera-
tions of this world. For I did look at, as wrapt up in you
together with myself, the hopes and the happiness of,—though
not of the greatest,—yet a very great and the best people in the
world. And truly and unfeignedly I thought so: as a people
that have the highest and clearest profession amongst them of
the greatest glory, to wit Religion: as a people that have been,
like other nations, sometimes up and sometimes down in our
honour in the world, but yet never so low but we might measure
with other nations: and a people that have had a stamp upon
them from God [Hah !]; God having, as it were, summed up

1See Burton’s Diary.

2[As Cromwell corrected this himself, it has here been restored to its original
form. Carlyle did not know that Cromwell had revised it, but he evidently felt
its superiority to most of the others, for he altered it much less than the rest. }

1655.1 SPEECH IV 405

all our former honour and glory in the things that are of glory
to nations, in an epitome, within these ten or twelve years last
past! So that we knew one another at home, and are well
known abroad.

And if I be not very much mistaken, we were arrived,—as I,
and truly as I believe many others, did think,—at a very safe
port; where we might sit down and contemplate the dispensa-
tions of God, and our mercies; and might know our mercies
not to have been like to those of the ancients,—who did make
out their peace and prosperity, as they thought, by their own
endeavours ; who could not say, as we, that all ours were let
down to us from God Himself; whose appearances and _ provi-
dences amongst us are not to be outmatched by any story.
[Deep silence ; from the old Parliament, and from us.| Truly this
was our condition. And I know nothing else we had to do, save
as Israel was commanded in that most excellent Psalm of David :}
“The things which we have heard and known, and our fathers
“have told us, we will not hide them from their children 3
“showing to the generation to come the praise of the Lord, and
“His strength, and His wonderful works which He hath done.
“For He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a
“Law in Israel; which He commanded our fathers that they
“should make known to their children; that the generation to
“come might know them, even the children which should be
“born, who should arise and declare them to ¢heir children:
“that they might set their hope in God, and not forget the
“works of God, but keep His commandments.”

This I thought had been a song and a work worthy of England,
whereunto you might have happily invited them, had you had
hearts unto it. [A/as !] You had this opportunity fairly delivered
unto you. And if a history shall be written of these times and
transactions, it will be said, it will not be denied, but that these
things that I have spoken are true, [No response from the

! Psalm Ixxviii. 3-7.

406 FIRST PARLIAMENT (22 Jan.

Moderns : mere silence, stupor, not without sadness.] This talent was
put into your hands. And I shall recur to that which I said at
first: I came with very great joy and contentment and comfort,
the first time I met you in this place. But we and these nations
are, for the present, under some disappointment. If I had pur-
posed to have played the orator, which I never did affect, nor do,
nor I hope shall [Hear /], I doubt not but upon easy suppositions,
which I am persuaded every one among you will grant, we did
meet upon such hopes as these.

I met you a second time here: and I confess, at that meeting
I had much abatement of my hopes ; though not a total frustra-
tion. I confess that that which damped my hopes so soon was
somewhat that did look like a parricide. It is obvious enough
unto you that the management of affairs did savour of a not
owning,—too-too much savour, I say, of a not owning of the
authority that called you hither. But God left us not without
an expedient that gave a second possibility—shall I say a possi-
bility? it seemed to me a probability,—of recovering out of
that dissatisfied condition we were all then in, towards some
mutuality of satisfaction. And therefore by that Recognition
[The Parchment we had to sign: Hum-m !}, suiting with the Inden-
ture that returned you hither, to which afterwards also was
added your own Declaration,! conformable to, and in acceptance
of, that expedient :—whereby,? you had, though with a little
check, another opportunity renewed unto you to have made this
nation as happy as it could have been, if everything had smoothly
run on from that first hour of your meeting. And indeed,—you
will give me liberty of my thoughts and hopes,—I did think, as
I have formerly found in that way that I have been engaged as
a soldier, that some affronts put upon us, some disasters at the
first, have made way for great and happy successes ;* and I did
not at all despond but the stop put upon you would, in like

1 Commons Journals (vii. 368), 14th Sept. 1654.
2[** whereby” here has the force of ‘‘ thereby.’’]
3 Characteristic sentence, and sentiment ;—not to be meddled with.

ee oe

1655.] SPEECH IV 407

manner, have made way for a blessing from God ; that interrup-
tion being, as I thought, necessary to divert you from destructive
and violent proceedings to give time for better deliberations ;
whereby leaving the Government as you found it, you might
have proceeded to have made those good and wholesome laws
which the people expected from you, and might have answered
the grievances, and settled those other things proper to you as a
Parliament : for which you would have had thanks from all that
entrusted you. [Doubtful “ Hum-m-m!” from the Old Parlia-
ment. |

What hath happened since that time I have not taken public
notice of, as declining to intrench on Parliament privileges. For
sure I am you will all bear me witness, that from your entering into
the House upon the Recognition, to this very day, you have had
no manner of interruption or hindrance of mine in proceeding
to that blessed issue [that] the heart of a good man could propose
to himself, to this very day. You see you have me very much
locked up, as to what you have transacted among yourselves,
from that time to this. [‘ None dare report us, or whisper what
we do.” | But something I shall take liberty to speak of to you.

As I may not take notice what you have been doing, so I
think I have a very great liberty to tell you that I do not know
what you have been doing! [With a certain tone; as one may
hear !| I do not know whether you have been alive or dead.
I have not once heard from you all this time; I have not: and
that you all know.! If that be a fault that I have not, surely it

1[This was not strictly true, for more than one deputation had gone to him
from Parliament. For instance, on Nov. 15, it was reported in the House of
Commons that a sub-committee had been sent to the Protector on the question of
the abatement of the forces, but that his Highness’s answer had not yet been
received. (Commons Journals, vii. 385.) Also, on Nov. 17, ‘‘a Report was made
from the Committee which was appointed to advise with the Protector about an
expedient upon those articles of religion which refer to Indemnity and toleration :
the substance whereof was to this purpose, that the Lord Protector was wholly
dissatisfied with the thing, and had no propensity or inclination to it: and that the
Parliament had already taken the Government abroad (in pieces was meant) and
had altered and changed it in the other articles as they pleased, without his advice :
and therefore it would not become him to give any advice at all singly and apart
as to this article, But he commended the work, wished well to it, and told them

—— i Li i ee eee Gael

408 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

hath not been mine! If I have had any melancholy thoughts,
and have sat down by them, why might it not have been very
lawful for me to think that I was a person judged unconcerned
in all these businesses?! I can assure you I have not ‘so’ reckoned
myself; nor did I reckon myself unconcerned in you. And so
long as any just patience could support my expectation, I would
have waited to the uttermost to have received from you the issues
of your consultations and resolutions. I have been careful of
your safety, and the safety of those that you represent, to whom
I reckon myself a servant. $

But what messages have I disturbed you withal ? What injury
or indignity hath been done, or offered, either to your persons or
to any privileges of Parliament, since you sat? I looked at my-
self as strictly obliged by my oath,—since your recognising the
Government in the authority of which you were called hither
and sat,—to give you all possible security, and to keep you from
any unparliamentary interruption. Think you I could not say
more upon this subject, if I listed to expatiate thereupon? But
because my actions plead for me, I shall say no more of this.
[Old Parliament dubiously rolls its eyes.| 1 say, I have been caring
for you, ‘for’ your quiet sitting; caring for your privileges, as I
said before, that they might not be interrupted; have been
seeking of God, from the great God, a blessing upon you, and
a blessing upon these nations. I have been consulting, if possibly
I might in anything promote, in my place, the real good of this
Parliament, of the hopefulness of which I have said so much unto
you. And I did think it to be my business rather to see the
utmost issue, and what God would produce by you, than un-
seasonably to intermeddle with you.

But, as I said before, I have been caring for you, and for
the peace and quiet of these nations: indeed I have; and that

that the sooner they could despatch the whole, it would be the better for the
service, or to that effect.’’ (Burton, i. lxxix.).]

1[**although I knew more about them than you did,” Bordeaux puts in here, —
See his report, p. 430 below, zofe.]

1655.] SPEECH IV 409

I shall a little presently manifest unto you. And it leadeth
me to let you know somewhat, that I fear, I fear, will be,
through some interpretation, a little too justly put upon you;
whilst you have been employed as you have been, and,—in all
that time expressed in the Government, in that Government, I
say in that Government,—‘have’ brought forth nothing that you
yourselves say can be taken notice of without infringement of
your privileges!! I will tell you somewhat, that, if it be not
news to you, I wish you had taken very serious consideration of.
If it be news, I wish I had acquainted you with it sooner. And
yet if any man will ask me why I did it not, the reason is given
already: because I did make it my business to give you no
interruption.

There be some trees that will not grow under the shadow of
other trees: There be some that choose,—a man may say so by
way of allusion,—to thrive under the shadow of other trees. I
will tell you what hath thriven, I will not say what you have
cherished, under your shadow; that were too hard. Instead
of peace and settlement, instead of mercy and truth being
brought together, righteousness and peace kissing each other,
by reconciling the honest people of these nations, and settling
the woful distempers that are amongst us ;—which had been
glorious things and worthy of Christians to have proposed,—
weeds and nettles, briers and thorns, have thriven under your
shadow! Dissettlement and division, discontent and dissatis-
faction, together with real dangers to the whole, has been more
multiplied within these five months of your sitting, than in some
years before! Foundations have also been laid for the future
renewing the troubles of these nations by all the enemies of
them? abroad and at home. Let not these words seem too

1 An embarrassed sentence; characteristic of his Highness. ‘‘ You have done
‘nothing noticeable upon this ‘Somewhat’ that I am about to speak of,—nor,
‘‘indeed, it seems upon azy Somewhat ;—and ¢his was one you may, without
‘“much ‘interpretation,’ be blamed for doing nothing upon.” ‘Government’
means /nstrument of Government : ‘the time expressed’ therein is Five Months,—
now, by my way of calculating it, expired! Which may account for the embar-
rassed iteration of the phrase, on his Highness'’s part,

2[' it,” pamphlet. |

o

sere etree ttaetaeeee athe

410 FIRST PARLIAMENT

sharp: for they are true as any mathematical demonstrations
are, or can be. I say, the enemies of the peace of these nations
abroad and at home, the discontented humours throughout these
nations,—which I think no man will grudge to call by that
name, or to make to allude to briers and thorns,—they have
nourished themselves under your shadow! [Old Parliament
looks still more uneasy. |

And that I may clearly be understood: they have taken the
opportunities from your sitting, from the hopes they had, which
with easy conjecture they might take up and conclude that there
would be no settlement ; and therefore they have framed their
designs, preparing for the execution of them accordingly. Now
whether,—which appertains not to me to judge of, on their
behalf,—they had any occasion ministered for this, and from
whence they had it, I list not to make any scrutiny or search.
But I will say this: I think they had it! not from me. I am
sure they had not. From whence they had it, is not my business
now to discourse: but that they had, is obvious to every man’s
sense. What preparations they have made, to execute in such
a season as they thought fit to take their opportunity from:
that I know, not as men know things by conjecture, but by
certain demonstrable knowledge, that they have been for
some time past furnishing themselves with arms ; nothing
doubting but that they should have a day for it; and verily
believing that, whatsoever their former disappointments were,
they should have more done for them by and from our own
divisions, than they were able to do for themselves. I have?
not, and I desire to be understood so, that, in all I have to say
of this subject, you will take it that I have no reservation in my
mind,—to mingle things of guess and suspicion with things of
fact: but the things I am telling of are fact ; things of evident
demonstration.

[22 Jan.

These weeds, briers and thorns, they have been preparing, q

1[ them,” pampAled. | 2[‘' do,” id2d.}

1655.] SPEECH IV 411

and have brought their designs to some maturity, by the ad-
vantages given to them, as aforesaid, from your sittings and
proceedings. [‘ Hum-m-m!”] But by the waking eye that
watched over that Cause that God will bless, they have been,
and yet are, disappointed. [Yea/] And having mentioned
that Cause, I say, that slighted Cause,—let me speak a few
words in behalf thereof; though it may seem too long a digres-
sion. Whosoever despiseth it, and will say, It is non causa pro
causd, the all-searching eye before mentioned will find out that
man; and will judge him, as one that regardeth not the works
of God nor the operations of his hands; [Moderns look astonished]
for which God hath threatened that He will cast men down, and
not build them up. [He] that because he can dispute, will tell
us he knew not where the Cause began, nor where it is, but
modelleth it according to his own intellect, and submits not to
the appearances of God in the world; therefore he lifts up his
heel against God, and mocketh at all His providences, laughing
at the observations, made up not without reason and the
Scriptures, but by the quickening and teaching Spirit which
gives life to the other; calling such observations “ enthusiasms :”’
such men, I say, no wonder if they “stumble and fall backwards,
and be broken and snared and taken,” by the things of which
they are so maliciously and wilfully ignorant! The Scriptures
say, the Rod has a voice,? and He will make Himself known by
the judgments which He executeth.? And do we not think He
will, and does, by the providences of mercy and kindness which
He hath for His people and for their just liberties ; “‘ whom He
loves as the apple of His eye?’’ Doth He not by them manifest
Himself? And is He not thereby also seen giving kingdoms for
them, “ giving men for them, and people for their lives,” —as it is

l[saiah xxviii. 13. A text that had made a great impression upon Oliver: see
Letter to the General Assembly, p. 79, above.

2[z.e., God speaks by His chastisements. But this is not an exact quotation of
any verse of Scripture. Probably Oliver was thinking of the words in Micah vi.
g. ‘*The Lord’s voice crieth unto the city . . . hear ye the rod, and who hath

appointed it.’’]
[Psalm ix. 16. ]

Oe *,
” '
”

&

412 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

in the forty-third of Isaiah?! Is not this as fair a lecture and as
clear speaking, as anything our dark reason, left to the letter of
the Scriptures, can collect from them? By this voice has God
spoken very loud on the behalf of His people, by judging their
enemies in the late war, and restoring them a liberty to worship,
with the freedom of their consciences, and freedom in their
estates and persons when they do so. And thus we have found
the Cause of God by the works of God, which are the testimony
of God, upon which rock whosoever splits shall suffer shipwreck.

But it is your? glory,—and it is mine, if I have any in the world
concerning the interest of those that have an interest in a better
world,—it is my glory that I know a Cause which yet we have
not lost ; but do hope we shall take a little pleasure rather to
lose our lives than lose! [Hah /] But you will excuse this long
disgression.

I say unto you, whilst you have been in the midst of these
transactions, that party, that Cavalier party,—I could wish some
of them had thrust-in here, to have heard what I say,—the
Cavalier party have been designing and preparing to put this
nation in blood again, with a witness. But because I am confident
there are none of that sort here, therefore I shall say the less to
that. Only this I must tell you: they have been making great .
preparations of arms; and I do believe ‘it’ will be made evident &
to you that they have raked out many thousands of arms, even
all that this City could afford, for divers months last past. But
it will be said, “ may we not arm ourselves for the defence of our
houses? Will anybody find fault for that?” Not® for that.
‘But’ the reason for their doing so hath been as explicit, and
under as clear proof, as the fact of doing so. For which I hope,
by the justice of the land, some will, in the face of the nation,
answer it with their lives: and then the business will be pretty
well out of doubt. Banks of money have been framing, for

1Jsaiah xliii. 3, 4: Another prophecy of awful moment to his Highness: see
Speech I., p. 296, above. xu
2T‘our,” pamphlet. } 3[' no,” ¢dzd.]

1655.] SPEECH IV 413

these and other such like uses. Letters have been issued with
privy-seals, to as great persons as most are in the nation, for
the advance of moneys,—which have been discovered to us by
the persons themselves. Commissions for regiments of horse and
foot, and command of castles, have been likewise given from
Charles Stuart, since your sitting. And what the general
insolences of that party have been, the honest people have been
sensible of, and can very well testify.

It hath not been only thus. But as in a quinsy or pleurisy,
where the humour fixeth in one part, give it scope, it will gather
to that place, to the hazarding of the whole: and it is natural to
do so till it destroy nature in that person on whomsoever this
befalls, so likewise will those diseases take accidental causes of
aggravation of their distemper. And this was that which I did
assert, that they have taken accidental causes for the growing
and increasing of those distempers, as much as would have been
in the natural body if timely remedy were not applied. And
indeed things were come to that pass,—in respect of which I
shall give you a particular account,—that no mortal physician,
if the Great Physician had not stepped in, could have cured the
distemper. Shall I lay this upon your account, or my own? I[
am sure I can lay it upon God’s account that if He had not
stepped in, the disease had been mortal and destructive !

And what is all this? Truly I must needs say: A company
of men still like briers and thorns; and worse, if worse can be,
of another sort than those before mentioned to you, have been
and yet are endeavouring to put us into blood and into con-
fusion; more desperate and dangerous confusion than England
ever yet saw. [Anabaptist Levellers.| And I must say, as when
Gideon commanded his son to fall upon Zeba and Zalmunna and
slay them, they thought it more noble to die by the hand of a
man than of a stripling, which shows there is some contentment
in the hand by which a man falls: so is it some satisfaction, if a
Commonwealth must perish, that it perish by men, and not by

| the hands of persons differing little from beasts! That if it

———-. > 4 eee

414 FIRST PARLIAMENT (22 Jan.

must needs suffer, it should rather suffer from rich men than ~
from poor men, who, as Solomon says, “ when they oppress, leave
nothing behind them, but are as a sweeping rain.” 1 Now such
as these also are grown up under your shadow. But it will be
asked, what have they done? I hope, though they pretend
Commonwealth’s interest, they have had no encouragement from
you; but that, as before, ‘have’ rather taken it than that you
have administered any cause unto them for so doing, from delays,
from hopes that this Parliament would not settle, from pamphlets
mentioning strange votes and resolves of yours; which I hope
did abuse you! Thus you see that, whatever the grounds were,
these have been the effects. And thus I have laid these things
before you; and you and others will be easily able to judge how
far you are concerned.

And what have these men done? They have also laboured
to pervert, where they could, and as they could, the honest-
meaning people of the nation. They have laboured to engage
some in the army :—and I doubt that not only they, but some
others also, very well known to you, have helped in this work
of debauching and dividing the Army. They have, they have!
[Overton, Allen and Company, your Highness?| I would be loath
to say who, where, and how? much more loath to say they were
any of your own number; but I can say: endeavours have been
‘made’ to put the Army into a distemper, and to feed that which
is the worst humour in the Army, which, though it was not a
mastering humour, yet these took their advantage from delay of
the Settlement, and the practices before mentioned, and stopping
the pay of the Army, to run us into free-quarter, and to bring
us into the inconveniences most to be feared and avoided.” What
if I am able to make it appear in fact, That some amongst you
have run into the City of London, to persuade to Petitions and
Addresses to you for reversing your own votes that you have

1[Proverbs xxviii. 3.]

2[ Bordeaux has ‘‘ the pay of the militia was curtailed on purpose only to bring

about confusion and disorder in the State, by obliging the soldiers to take free
quarters.” See note, p. 431 below. }

1656. ] SPEECH IV 415

passed?! Whether these practices were in favour of your
liberties, or tended to beget hopes of peace and settlement
from you; and whether debauching the Army in England, as is
before expressed, and starving it, and putting it upon free-
quarter, and occasioning and necessitating the greatest part
thereof in Scotland to march into England, leaving the remainder
thereof to have their throats cut there; and kindling by the
rest a fire in our own bosoms, were for the advantage of affairs
here, let the world judge ! ?

This I tell you also: That the correspondency held with the
interest of the Cavaliers, by that party of men called Levellers,
and who call themselves Commonwealth’s-men,—whose Declara-
tions were framed to that purpose, and ready to be published at
the time of their common rising ; whereof we are possessed, and
for which we have the confession of themselves now in custody,
who confess also they built their hopes upon the assurance they
had of the Parliament's not agreeing ‘to’ a settlement :—whether
these humours have not nourished themselves under your boughs,
is the subject of my present discourse ; and I think I shall say
not amiss, if I affirm it to beso. [His Highness looks animated !)
And I must say it again, that that which hath been their ad-
vantage, thus to raise disturbance, hath been by the loss of those

1[In a letter concerning the Fifth Monarchy men, found by Mr. Firth amongst
the Thurloe MSS., is a passage which explains this allusion. ‘‘A petition I under-
stand is prepared in the Common Council of this City to encourage the Parliament
about settling Church government, etc. And I have it from a good hand that O. P.
sent for a certain citizen, desiring a sight of that petition; which having read, he
said, ‘I think we must labour to have Col, Pride’s Common Council again, for
these will undo all.’ One answered, ‘You, my Lord, called that a Levfellijng
Common Council, but we shall never have so good again.’ He replied, ‘ Where
shall we have men of a universal spirit? Every one desires to have liberty, but
none will give it.’” Clarke Papers, ii. xxxv.]

2[‘' This seems to point to a connexion in Oliver’s mind between the want of
pay in the army in Scotland, and the scheme of sending 3,000 men under Overton
into England. With respect to the delay of voting sapplies, the fact cannot be
denied. In this case, however, it would have been easy to borrow money on so
good a security, so that the army need not have suffered much.” As to the further
question of whether Parliament held back supplies to assure the confirmation of its

constitutional bill, Dr. Gardiner believes ‘‘ that every member of the House was ~

perfectly aware that the consequence of a refusal of supplies would be—not sur-
render, but dissolution.” Commonwealth and Protectorate, iii. 97.]

—.
ee

es

416 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

golden opportunities which God had put into your hands for
settlement. Judge you whether these things were thus, or no,
when you first sat down. I am sure things were not thus!
There was a very great peace and sedateness throughout these
nations ; and great expectations of a happy settlement, which I
remembered to you at the beginning of my Speech and hoped
that you would have entered on your business as you found it.
[“‘ Hum-m-m! We had a Constitution to make !’’}

There was a Government in the possession of the people,—I
say a Government in the possession of the people, for many months.
It hath now been exercised near fifteen months: and if it were
needful that I should tell you how it came into their possession,
and how willingly they received it; how all Law and Justice
were distributed from it, in every respect, as to life, liberty and
estate ; how it was owned by God, as being the dispensation of
His providence after twelve years war; and sealed and witnessed
unto by the people,—I should but repeat what I said in my last
Speech made unto you in this place: and therefore I forbear.

When you were entered upon this Government, ravelling ! into
it, you know I took no notice what you were doing. [Nor will
now, your Highness ; let the Sentence drop !| If you had gone upon
that foot of account, to have made such good and wholesome
provisions for the good of the people of these nations, for the
settling of such matters in things of Religion as would have up-
held and given countenance to a godly ministry, and yet would
have given a just liberty to godly men of different judgments,—
men of the same faith with them that you call the orthodox
ministry in England, as it is well known the Independents are,
and many under the form of Baptism, who are sound in the faith,
only may perhaps be different in judgment in some lesser matters,
yet, as true Christians, both looking to? salvation only by faith in
the blood of Christ, men professing the fear of God, and having
recourse to the name of God as to a strong tower,—I say you

1 [Perhaps should be ‘‘ really.’’] 2\"‘ at,” pamphiet. |

1655.] SPEECH IV 417

might have had opportunity to have settled peace and quietness
amongst all professing godliness ; and might have been instru-
mental, if not to have healed the breaches, yet to have kept the
godly of all judgments from running one upon another; and by
keeping them from being overrun by a common enemy, ‘have’
rendered them and these nations both secure, happy and well
satisfied. [And the Constitution? Hum-m-m !|

Are these things done; or anything towards them? Is there
not yet upon the spirits of men a strange itch? Nothing will
satisfy them unless they can put their finger upon their brethren’s
consciences, to pinch them there. To do this was no part of the
contest we had with the common adversary. For Religion was
not the thing at first contested for,! but God brought it to that
issue at last; and gave it unto us by way of redundancy ; and at
last it proved that which was most dear to us. And wherein
consisted this more than in obtaining that liberty from the tyranny
of the Bishops to all species of Protestants to worship God accord-
ing to their own light and consciences, for want of which many
of our brethren forsook their native countries to seek their bread
from strangers, and to live in howling wildernesses [Our poor
Brethren of New England !|; and for which also many that re-
mained here were imprisoned and otherwise abused, and made the
scorn of the nation. Those that were sound in the faith, how
proper was it for them to labour for liberty, for a just liberty, that
men should not be trampled upon for their consciences! Had not
they laboured, but lately, under the weight of persecutions? And
was it fit for them to sit heavy upon others? Is it ingenuous to .
ask liberty, and not to give it? What greater hypocrisy than for
those who were oppressed by the Bishops to become the greatest
oppressors themselves, so soon as their yoke was removed? I
could wish that they who call for liberty now also had not too much
of that spirit, if the power were in their hands! As for profane
persons, blasphemers, such as preach sedition; the contentious

1 Power of the Militia was the point upon which the actual War began. A
statement not false; yet truer in form than it is in essence,

VOL. 11.—27

418 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan,

railers, evil-speakers, who seek by evil words to corrupt good
manners ; persons of loose conversation,—punishment from the civil
magistrate ought to meet with them. Because, if these pretend
conscience, yet walking disorderly and not according but contrary
to the Gospel, and even to natural light, they are judged of all,
and their sins being open, make them subjects of the Magistrate’s
sword, who ought not to bear it in vain. The discipline of the
Army was such, that a man would not be suffered to remain
there, of whom we could take notice he was guilty of such
practices as these.

And therefore how happy would England have been, and you
and I, if the Lord had led you on to have settled upon such good
accounts as these are, and to have discountenanced such practices
as the other, and left men in disputable things free to their own
consciences ; which was well provided for by the ‘ Instrument of’
Government; and liberty left to provide against what was
apparently evil. Judge you, whether the contesting for things
that were provided for by this Government hath been profit-
able expense of time, for the good of these nations; by means
whereof you may see you have wholly elapsed your time, and
done just nothing !—I will say this to you, in behalf of the Long
Parliament: that, had such an expedient as this Government
been proposed to them ; and that they could have seen the Cause
of God thus provided for ; and had by debates been enlightened
in the grounds by which the difficulties might have been cleared
and the reason of the whole enforced—the circumstances of
time and persons, with the temper and disposition of the people,
and affairs both abroad and at home when it was undertaken
well weighed—as well as they were thought to love their seats,
1 think in my conscience, that they would have proceeded in
another manner than you have done, and not have exposed things
to those difficulties and hazards they now are at; nor given oc-
casion to leave the people so dissettled as now they are, who,
I dare say, in the soberest and most judicious part of them, did
expect, ‘not a questioning, but a doing of things in pursuance

>" \. - fh pee Se eS a P a al
j
j

1655. ] SPEECH IV 419

of the Government. And if I be not misinformed, very many
of you came up with this satisfaction; having had time enough
to weigh and consider the same.

And when I say “such an expedient as this Government is’
—wherein I dare assert there is a just liberty to the people of
God, and the just rights of the people in these nations provided
for,—I can put the issue thereof upon the clearest reason, what-
soever any go about to suggest to the contrary, but this not being
the time and place of such an averment. For satisfaction’s sake
herein, enough is said in a book entituled ‘4 True State of the
Case of the Commonwealth, published in January 1653.1. And for
myself, I desire not to keep it an hour longer than I may
preserve England in its just rights, and may protect the people
of God in such a just liberty of their consciences as I have
already mentioned. And therefore if this Parliament have

judged things to be otherwise than as I have stated them, it had
- been huge friendliness between persons who had such a reciproca-
tion, and in so great concernments to the public, for them to
have convinced me in what particulars therein my error lay!
Of which I never yet had a word from you! But if, instead
thereof, your time has been spent in setting up somewhat else,
upon another bottom than this stands ‘upon,’—that looks as if a
laying grounds for a quarrel had rather been designed than to
give the People settlement. If it be thus, it’s well your labours
have not arrived to any maturity at all! [Old Parliament looks
agitated ; agitated, yet constant ! |

This Government called you hither; the constitution whereof
being so limited,—a Single Person and a Parliament. And _ this
was thought most agreeable to the general sense of the nation ;
—having had experience enough by trial of other conclusions ;

2

1 Read it he who wants satisfaction : ‘ Printed by Thomas Newcomb, London,
1653-4.. [King’s Pamphlets, (E. 728(5)). It was written by Marchmont Nedham,
but Dr. Gardiner calls it ‘‘an Oliverian pamphlet,’’ and it was strongly in favour
of the Protector]—wrote with great spirit of language and subtilty of argument,’
says the Parliamentary History (xx. 419). [Which says also ‘‘ from many passages
therein, it seems highly probable that Cromwell was not a little concerned in the
penning it.’’]

— ee awe eae. Se SU fe

we oe — e ee ee ee ee ee

420 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

judging this most likely to avoid the extremes of Monarchy on
the one hand, and of Democracy on the other ;—and yet not
to found Dominium in Gratid. [Your Highness does not claim to
be here as Kings do, By Grace, then? No!)| And if so, then
certainly to make it more than a notion, it was requisite that it
should be as it is in the ‘Frame of’ Government; which puts
it upon a true and equal balance. It has been already submitted
to the judicious, honest people of this nation, whether the
balance be not equal. And what their judgment is, is visible
by submission to it; by acting upon it; by restraining their
Trustees from meddling with it. And it neither asks nor needs
any better ratification! »[Hear/] But when Trustees in Parlia-
ment shall, by experience, find any evil in any parts of the
‘Frame of’ Government, referred by the Government itself to
the consideration of the Protector and Parliament,—of which
‘evil or evils’ Time itself will be the best discoverer :—how can
it be reasonably imagined that a person or persons, coming in
by election, and standing under such obligations, and so limited,
and so necessitated by oath to govern for the people’s good, and
to make their love, under God, the best underpropping and his
best interest to him[self]:—how can it, I say, be imagined that
the present or succeeding Protectors will refuse to agree to alter
any such thing in the Government that may be found to be for
the good of the people, or to recede from anything which he
might be convinced casts the balance too much to the Single
Person? And although, for the present, the keeping-up and
having in his power the Militia seems the most hard, yet if it
should be yielded up at such a time as this, when there is as
much need to keep this Cause by it (which is most evident [ly] at
this time impugned by all the enemies of it), as there was to get
it—what would become of all! Or if it should not be equally
placed in him and the Parliament, but yielded up at any time,!—
it determines his power either for doing the good he ought, or

1[7.e., if the power is to be determined at the end of five years. ]

i

1655.] SPEECH IV 421

hindering Parliaments from perpetuating themselves, or from im-
posing what Religions they please on the consciences of men, or
what Government they please upon the nation, thereby subjecting
us to dissettlement in every Parliament, and to the desperate
consequences thereof. And if the nation shall happen to fall
into a blessed peace, how easily and certainly will their charge
be taken off, and their forces be disbanded! And then where will
the danger be to have the Militia thus stated >—What if I should
say: if there should be a disproportion, or disequality as to the
power, it is on the other hand!!

And if this be so, wherein have you had cause to quarrel ?
What demonstrations have you held forth to settle me to your
opinion? ‘I’ would you had made me so happy as to let me
have known your grounds! I have made a free and ingenuous
confession of my faith to you, and I could have wished it had
been in your hearts to have agreed that some friendly and
cordial debates might have been toward mutual conviction.
Was there none amongst you to move such a thing; no fitness
to listen to it; no desire of a right understanding? If it be not
folly in me to listen to town-talk, such things have been pro-
posed, and rejected, with stiffness and severity, once and again.
Was it not likely to have been more advantageous to the good of
this nation? I will say this to you for myself;—and to that |
have my conscience as a thousand witnesses, and I have my
comfort and contentment in it; and I have the witness of divers
here, that I think truly ‘would’ scorn to own me in a lie :—that
I would not have been averse to any alteration, of the good of
which I might have been convinced, although I could not have
agreed to the taking it off the foundation on which it stands ;~
namely, the acceptation and consent of the people. [* Our sanc-
tion not needed, then!” |

I will not presage what you have been about, or doing, all

1[‘*In other words, Cromwell did not in his heart believe that any Parliament
was to be trusted. He may have been right, but then this meant a deadlock.”
Morley’s Cromwell, p. 396.]

2
+,

~ placed in my family hereditarily, I would have rejected it ;? and

“with a most unworthy person, yet, as to the future, it might be

422 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

this time, nor do I love to make conjectures. But I must tell
you this: that as I undertook this Government in the simplicity
of my heart and as before God, and to do the part of an honest
man, and to be true to the interest which in my conscience ‘I
think’ is dear to many of you ;—though it is not always under-
stood what God in His wisdom may hide from us, as to peace
and settlement :—so I can say that no particular interest, either
of myself, estate, honour, or family, are, or have been, prevalent
with me to this undertaking. For if you had, upon the old
Government,! offered to me this one, this one thing,—I speak as
thus advised, and before God, as having been to this day of this
opinion ; and this hath been my constant judgment, well known
to many who hear me speak :—if, this one thing had been inserted,
that one thing, that this Government should have been and

I could have done no other according to my present conscience
and light. I will tell you my reason ;—though I cannot tell
what God will do with me, nor you, nor the nation, for throwing
away precious opportunities committed to us—This hath been my
principle ; and I liked it, when this Government came first to be
proposed to me, that it puts us off that hereditary way. Well
looking that as God had declared what Government He had
delivered over to the Jews, and placed it upon such persons as
had been instrumental for the conduct and deliverance of His
people ; and considering that promise in Jsaiah, “ that God would
give Rulers as at the first, and Judges as at the beginning,” * I
did not know but that God might begin, and, though, at present

after this manner; and I thought this might usher it in! [4
noble thought, your Highness !|_ 1 am speaking as to my judgment

1Means ‘the existing Instrument of Government’ without a of |
yours. ; ae
2The matter in debate, running very high at this juncture, in the Parliament,
was with regard to the Single Person’s being Aereditary. Hence partly the —
Protector’s emphasis here. ~
5 [Isaiah i. 26, ]

, ®

- ‘ 2s a
' i Pes as ha: *
4 — . , , mn

1655.] SPEECH IV 423

against making it hereditary: to have men chosen, for their love
to God, and to Truth and Justice ; and not to have it hereditary.
For as it is in Ecclesiastes: “Who knoweth whether he may
beget a fool or wise ?””! Honest or not, whatever they be, ‘they’
must come in, upon that account ; because the Government is
made a patrimony. And this I do perhaps declare with too
much earnestness, as being my own concernment; and know
not what place it may have in your hearts, and ‘in those’ of the
good people in the nation. But however it be, I have comfort
in this my truth and plainness.

I have thus told you my thoughts ; which truly I have declared
to you in the fear of God, as knowing He will not be mocked ;
and in the strength of God, as knowing and rejoicing that I am
kept in my speaking ; especially when I do not form or frame
things without the compass of integrity and honesty ; ‘so’ that
my own conscience gives me not the lie to what I say. And
then in what I say, I can rejoice.

Now to speak a word or two to you of that I must profess in
the name of the same Lord and wish that there had been no
cause that I should have thus spoken to you! And though I have
told you that 1 came with joy the first time ; with some regret
the second ; yet? now I speak with most regret at all! I look
upon you as having among you many persons that I could lay
down my life individually for. I could, through the grace of
God, desire to lay down my life for you, so far am I from having
an unkind or unchristian heart towards you in your particular
capacities! Ihave that indeed as a work most incumbent upon
me ; I consulted what might be my duty in such a day as this ;
casting up all considerations. I must confess, as I told you, that I
did think occasionally, this nation had suffered extremely in the
respects mentioned ; as also in the disappointments of their ex-
pectations of that justice which was due to them by your sitting

[Ecclesiastes ii. 19. Possibly Oliver here altered his original words. Bor-
deaux’s report has ‘‘ often the children of great men have not the fear of God
before their eyes.’’]

2('*that,” pamphlet. |

424 FIRST PARLIAMENT (22 Jan.

thus long. And what have you brought forth? I did not nor
cannot comprehend what it is. I would be loath to call it a Fate ;
that were too paganish a word. But there is something in it,
that we have not our expectations.

I did think also, for myself, that I am like to meet with
difficulties ; and that this nation will not, as it is fit it should not,
be deluded with pretexts of necessity in that great business of
raising of money ; and were it not that I can make some dilemmas
upon which to resolve some things of my conscience, judgment
and actions, I should sink at the very prospect of my encounters.
Some of them are general, some are more special. [Hear the
“dilemmas.” | Supposing this Cause or this business must be
carried on, either it is of God or of man. If it be of man, I
would I had never touched it with a finger. [Hear!] If I had
not had a hope fixed in me that this Cause and this business is
of God, I would many years ago have run from it. If it be of
God, He will bear it up. [Yea /] If it be of man, it will tumble ;
as everything that hath been of man since the world began hath
done. And what are all our Histories, and other traditions of
actions in former times, but God manifesting Himself, that He
hath shaken, and tumbled down, and trampled upon, everything
that He had not planted? [ Yes, your Highness ; such is, was and
forever will be, the History of Man, deeply as we poor Moderns have
now forgotten it: and the Bible of every Nation is its Own History ;
if it have, or had, any real Bible!| And as this is, so ‘let’ the
All-wise God deal with it. If this be of human structure and
invention, and ‘if’ it be an old plotting and contrivance to bring
things to this issue, and that they are not the births of Providence,
—then they will tumble. But if the Lord take pleasure in
England, and if He will do us good, He is able to bear us up!
Let the difficulties be whatsoever they will, we shall in His
strength be able to encounter with them. And I bless God I
have been inured to difficulties; and I never found God failing
when I trusted in Him. I can laugh and sing, in my heart, when
I speak of these things to you or elsewhere. And though some

1655.] SPEECH IV 425

may think it is an hard thing without Parliamentary authority to
raise money upon this nation; yet I have another argument to
the good people of this nation, if they would be safe, and have
no better principle : whether they prefer the having of their will
though it be their destruction, rather than comply with things of
necessity?! That will excuse me. But I should wrong my native
country to suppose this, for I look at the people of these nations
as the blessing of the Lord: and they are a people blessed by
God. They have been so; and they will be so, by reason of that
immortal seed which hath been, and is, among them: those
regenerated ones in the land, of several judgments ; who are all
the flock of Christ, and lambs of Christ, though perhaps under
many unruly passions, and troubles of spirit, whereby they give
disquiet to themselves and others: yet they are not so to God
astous. Heisa God of other patience, and He will own the least
of truth in the hearts of His people. And the people being the
blessing of God, they will not be so angry but they will prefer
their safety to their passions, and their real security to forms, when
necessity calls for supplies. Had they not well been acquainted
with this principle, they had never seen this day of Gospel
liberty.

But if any man shall object, “It is an easy thing to talk of
necessities when men create necessities: would not the Lord
Protector make himself great and his family great? Doth not
he make these necessities? And then he will come upon the
people with this argument of necessity !’’—This were something
hard indeed. But I have not yet known what it is to make
necessities, whatsoever the judgments or thoughts of men are.
And I say this, not only to this Assembly, but to the world,
that man liveth not that can come to me and charge me with

1[(One wonders if no echoes from the past years sounded in Oliver's ears as he
spoke. Heclaimed the right to levy money without consent of Parliament; he
claimed the right to control the Militia. And yet he had sat in the House and
heard Eliot's burning words in support of the Petition of Right—that later Magna
Carta which declared that no man should be taxed without consent of Parliament

—and in this very speech he alludes to the struggle over the Militia which pre-
cipitated the Civil War. ]

426 FIRST PARLIAMENT [29 Jan.

having, in these great Revolutions, made necessities. I challenge
even all that fear God. And as God hath said, “ My glory I will
not give unto another,’ ! let men take heed and be twice advised a
how they call His Revolutions, the things of God, and His working x
- of things from one period to another,—how, I say, they call them
necessities of men’s creation! For by so doing, they do vilify
and lessen the works of God, and rob Him of His glory ; which

He hath said He will not give unto another, nor suffer to be taken
from Him! We know what God did to Herod, when he was
applauded and did not acknowledge God. And God knoweth
what He will do with men, when they shall call His Revolutions
human designs, and so detract from His glory ; when they have
not been forecast, but sudden Providences in things, whereby
carnal and worldly men are enraged ; and under and at which,
many, ‘and’ I fear some good ‘men,’ have murmured and re-
pined, because disappointed of their mistaken fancies. But still
all these things? have been the wise disposings of the Almighty ;
though instruments have had their passions and frailties. And I
think it is an honour to God to acknowledge the necessities to
have been of God’s imposing, when truly they have been so, as
indeed they have, when we take our sin in our actings to our-
selves ; and much more safe than ‘to’ judge things so contingent,
as if there were not a God that ruled the Earth!

We know the Lord hath poured this nation from vessel to
vessel, till He poured it into your lap, when you came first to-
gether. Iam confident it came so into your hands, ‘and’ was
not judged by you to be from counterfeited or feigned necessity, ;
but by Divine Providence and Dispensation. And this I speak _
with more earnestness, because I speak for God and not for men, —
I would have any man to come and tell of the transactions that
have been, and of those periods of time wherein God hath made
these Revolutions, and find where they can fix a feigned necessity ‘
I could recite particulars, if either my strength would serve me

F “_
2[** but still they,” pamphiet, i HS

1[Isaiah xlii. 8.]

——————— lle € aie ee ie A _ -_ ‘ee ht ee Ts el i
= Pd :

é :

ps

-

1655. ] SPEECH IV 427

to speak, or yours to hear. If that you would revolve the great
Hand of God in His great Dispensations, you would find that
there is scarce a man that fell off, at any period of time when
God had any work to do, that can give God or His work at this
day a good word.

“Tt was,” say some, “the cunning of the Lord Protector,’—
I take it to myself,—“it was the craft of such a man, and his
plot, that brought it about!’’ And, as they say in other countries,
“There are five or six cunning men in England that have skill ;
they doall these things.’’ Oh, what blasphemy is this! Because
men that are without God in the world, and walk not with Him,
know! not what it is to pray or believe, and to receive returns
from God, and to be spoken unto by the Spirit of God, who
speaks without a written Word sometimes, yet according to it!
God hath spoken heretofore in divers manners. Let Him speak
as He pleaseth. Hath He not given us liberty, nay is it not our
duty to go to the Law and to the Testimonies? And there we
shall find that there have been impressions, in extraordinary cases,
as well without the written Word as with it. And therefore
there is no difference in the thing thus asserted from truths
generally received,—except we will exclude the spirit ; without
whose concurrence all other teachings are ineffectual. [ Yea,
your Highness ; the true God’s-Voice, Voice of the Eternal, is in the
heart of every Man ;—there, wherever else it be.| He doth speak
to the hearts and consciences of men; and leadeth them to His
Law and Testimonies, and there He speaks to them: and so
gives them double teachings. According to that of Job: “God
speaketh once, yea twice;”’ and to that of David?: “God hath
spoken once, yea twice have I heard this.’’ These men that live
upon their mumpsimus and sumpsimus ® { Bulstrode looks astonished],

ate and know,” pamphlet. | 2(Job xxxiii. 14; Psalm lxii. 11.]

°{Cromwell’s allusion is to the old tale of an ignorant priest who, in reciting his
breviary, always said mumpsimus instead of sumpsimus, and when corrected, declared
that he would not change his old mwmpsignus for their new sumpsimus. Henry
VIII., referred to the same story in his speech to his last Parliament: ‘‘I see and
hear daily that you of the clergy preach one against another, teach one contrary to

roms ~*

Te

ee eee | ae Se Ob ee

~

428 FIRST PARLIAMENT

their Masses and Service-books, their dead and carnal worship,—
no marvel if they be strangers to God, and to the works of
God, and to spiritual dispensations. And because they say and
believe thus, must we do so too? We, in this land, have been
otherwise instructed ; even by the word, and works, and Spirit
of God.

To say that men bring forth these things when God doth
them,—judge you if God will bear this? I wish that every
sober heart, though he hath had temptations upon him of desert-
ing this cause of God, yet may take heed how he provokes and
falls into the hands of the living God by such blasphemies as
these, according to the tenth of the Hebrews: “If we sin
“wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
“truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.” It was spoken
to the Jews that, having professed Christ, apostatised from Him.
What then? Nothing but a fearful “falling into the hands of
“the Living God!”—They that shall attribute to this or that
person the contrivances and production of those mighty things
God hath wrought in the midst of us; and ‘fancy’ that they a
have not been the Revolutions of Christ Himself, upon whose
shoulders the government is laid,—they speak against God, and
they fall under His hand without a Mediator. That is, if we
deny the Spirit of Jesus Christ the glory of all His works in the
world ; by which He rules kingdoms, and doth administer, and is
the rod of His strength,|\—we provoke the Mediator: and He may
say: I will leave you to God, I will not intercede for you; let
Him tear you to pieces! I will leave thee to fall into God’s

° hands; thou deniest me my sovereignty and power committed —
to me; I will not intercede nor mediate for thee; thou fallest

[22 Jan.

another, inveigh one against another, without charity or discretion. Some be too
stiff in their old mumpsimus, others be too busy and curious in their new sump-
simus."’ Hall’s Chronicle, p 865, ed. 1809. ]

1[z.e., the sceptre of His power. Oliver is apparently thinking of the rroth
Psalm: ‘‘ The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of —
Zion ; rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the _ ,
day of thy power.”’] A

j=

eal Beas» ~ ee a, ee : an ‘id ‘
aes ee) Cite Se ee ee eee ee OO ee ee

1655.] SPEECH IV 429

into the hands of the Living God !—Therefore whatsoever you
may judge men for, and say, “this man is cunning, and politic,
“and subtle,” take heed again, I say, how you judge of His
Revolutions as the product of men’s inventions! I may be
thought to press too much upon this theme. But I pray God it
may stick upon your hearts and mine. The worldly-minded man
knows nothing of this, but is a stranger to it; and because of
this, his atheism, and murmurings at instruments, yea repining
at God Himself. And no wonder; considering the Lord hath
done such things amongst us as have not been known in the
world these thousand years, and yet notwithstanding is not
owned by us!

There is another necessity, which you have put upon us and
we have not sought,—I appeal to God, Angels and men,—if I
shall raise money according to the Article of the Government
which had power to call you thither; and did ;—and instead of
seasonable providing for the Army, you have laboured to over-
throw the Government, and the Army is now upon free-quarter !
And you would never so much as let me hear a tittle from you
concerning it. Where is the fault? Has it not been as if you
had had a purpose to put this extremity upon us and the nation ?
I hope this was not in your minds. I am not willing to judge
so: but such is the state unto which we are reduced. By the
designs of some in the Army who are now in custody, it was
designed to get as many of them as [they] could,—through dis-
content for want of money, the Army being in a barren country,
near thirty weeks behind in pay, and upon other specious pre-
tences,—to march for England out of Scotland; and, in
discontent, to seize their General there [General Monk], a faith-
ful and honest man, that so another [Colonel Overton] might head
the Army. And all this opportunity taken from your delays.
Whether will this be a thing of feigned necessity? What could
it signify, but that the Army are in discontent already ; and we
will make them live upon stones; and we will make them cast
off their governors and discipline? What can be said to this?

13 5
ae oe <a >

eee ee ee es Sa J Ro
ae me J > ; = 7 et ‘. 9
Vat eal

2

Pea.

: UF an ie hy i (i a To. ‘
NS cia a af a, 2g OS el rash

430 FIRST PARLIAMENT [22 Jan.

I list not to unsaddle myself, and put the fault upon others’
backs. Whether it hath been for the good of England, whilst
men have been talking of this thing or the other [Building Con-
stitutions], and pretending liberty and a many good words,—
whether it has been as it should have been? I am confident
you cannot think it has. The nation will not think so. And if
the worst should be made of things, I know not what the Cornish
men nor the Lincolnshire men may think, or other counties ; but
I believe they will all think they are not safe. A temporary
suspension of caring for the greatest liberties and privileges (if
it were so, which is denied) would not have been of that damage
that the not providing against free-quarter hath run the nation
upon. And if it be my liberty to walk abroad in the fields, or to
take a journey, yet it is not my wisdom to do so when my house
is on fire!

I have troubled you with a long Speech; and I believe it
may not have the same resentment ! with all that it hath with
some. But because that is unknown to me, I shall leave it
to God ; and conclude with that: that I think myself bound,—
in my duty to God and the people of these nations, to their
safety and good in every respect,—I think it my duty to tell you
that it is not for the profit of these nations, nor fit for the com-
mon and public good, for you to continue here any longer. And
therefore I do declare unto you, That I do dissolve this Parlia-
ment.*

1 Means ‘ sense excited by it.” [Or, more generally, acceptation. ]

* Old Pamphlet [E. 826 (22)] reprinted in Parliamentary History, xx. 404-431.
[According to Bordeaux, the ending of the speech was not so abrupt as this. The
following is his report of it to Brienne: ‘‘ Il leur a reproché le peu de fruit que
le peuple avoit receu de leur séance, depuis cinq mois, le -mépris qu’ils avoient
faict de sa personne, ne luy donnant aucune part des affaires, quoy qu'il en feust
mieux informé qu’eux. II s'est aussy plaint de ce que, au lieu de suivre le chemin
qu'il leur avoit tracé dés le commencement, la plupart d’entre eux en avoient pris
d’autre escarté, et n’avoient travaillé qu’a la division : mesme que soubz leurombre
il s’estoit formés de nouvelles conspirations dans toutes les provinces d’Angleterre,
contre le gouvernement et sa propre personne: que la pluspart d’entre eux, —
Presbytériens, n’avoient aucunement considéré les intérestz des Indépendans et
consciences tendres qui ont rendu de si grands services 4 la Republique, pendant

a)

me bu
4
o<

ar a whe.

1655. ] SPEECH IV 431

So ends the first Protectorate Parliament ; suddenly, very un-
successfully. A most poor hidebound Pedant Parliament ; which
reckoned itself careful of the Liberties of England; and was
careful only of the Sheepskin Formulas of these ; very blind to
the Realities of these! Regardless of the facts and clamorous
necessities of the Present, this Parliament considered that its one
duty was to tie up the hands of the Lord Protector well ; to give
him no supplies, no power; to make him and keep him the
bound vassal and errand-man of this and succeeding Parliaments.
This once well done, they thought all was done :—Oliver thought
far otherwise. Their painful new-modelling and rebuilding of the
Instrument of Government, with an eye to this sublime object,
was pointing towards completion, little now but the key-stones
to be let in:—when Oliver suddenly withdrew the centres!
Constitutional arch and ashlar-stones, scaffolding, workmen,
mortar-troughs and scaffold-poles sink in swift confusion ; and

ces derniers temps, et que la solde de la milice avoit esté retranchée a dessein,
seulement de faire naistre une confusion et désordre dans |’Estat en nécessitant
les soldatz 4 prendre des quartiers, faute de payer. II s‘est aussy défendu d’avoir
jamais eu pensée d’establir la succession dans sa famille, protestant que quand le
Parlement l’auroit résolu, qu'il n’y eust jamais donné les mains, scachant que
souvent les enfans des plus grandz personnages n'ont pas la crainte de Dieu devant
les yeux. Et enfin, aprés s’estre emporté aux larmes, comme pour la cause de
Dieu contre les Léveleurs, de la faction desquels sont tous les officiers de l'armée
qui disapprouvent son gouvernement, avoir tesmoigné que son plus grand regret
estoit de se voir obligé 4 faire des levées sur le peuple sans la consentement du
Parlement et s’en estre aussy tost consolé par l’espérance que les gens de bien
lapprouveroient, protestant néantmoins que quand ils y trouveroient a redire son
dessein estoit de les sauver malgré eux: il a declaré aux dicts députéz que le
Parlement estoit résolu, la séance ne devant estre que de cing mois, suivant la style
d’Angleterre, qui les faict de quatre semaines chacun: que si quelqu’un des
membres avoit des raisons a dire contre le gouvernement estably, il estoit prest a
le convaincre.

‘* Mais tous se sont retirez sans répliquer, et quoy que par ceste action, le peuple
sé voye soubz un gouvernement extraordinaire, néantmoins il ne paroist aucune
esmotion ; ce qui n’est pas étrange, partie de l’armée estant entrée dans Londres
soubz la pretexte de la conspiration découverte.

Mais beaucoup s’étonnent de la rupture du Parlement et de ce que le P. n’a pas
préferé une puissance rendu légitime par son approbation 4a celle qu'il exercera
désormais contre les loix, et le consentement du peuple, qui ne peut voir qu’avec
regrét ses privileges et sa liberté renversé. La puissance de l'armée estouffera
présentement son ressentiment, et sans doubte pour l'adoucir, ce Régime taschera
de luy procurer d'autres avantages par l’establissement de la Paix avec les voisins.”

On the same day he wrote to Mazarin :-—

‘* Tl n’est pas si facile de pénétrer dans les motifs de ceste dissolution, le Parle-
ment n’ayant point plus limité sa puissance que l'acte de l’armée. Quelques uns
croyent que l'article qui déclare le gouvernement electif le choquoit ; et d'autres
que la derniere déliberation de ce corp qui avoit ordonné que son acte seroit grossoyé
devant que de lui estre présenté estoit plus injurieuse, en ce qu'elle establissoit une
independence dans le Parlement de son authorité.” Record Offce Transcripts. |

> aS
_ aes 7 a * ee ee |

432 FIRST PARLIAMENT —[22Jan._

disappear, regretted or remembered by no person,—not by this
Editor for one.!

By the arithmetical account of heads in England, the Lord
Protector may surmise that he has lost his Enterprise. But by
the real divine and human worth of thinking-souls in England, —
he still believes that he has it; by this, and by a higher mission
too ;—and “will take a little pleasure to lose his life” before he
loses it! He is not here altogether, to count heads, or to count
costs, this Lord Protector ; he is in the breach of battle; placed
there, as he understands, by his Great Commander: whatsoever
his difficulties be, he must fight them, cannot quit them; must
fight there till he die. This is the law of his position, in the
eye of God, and also of men. There is no return for him out of
this Protectorship he has got into! Called to this post as I e
have been, placed in it as I am, “To quit it, is what I will be
willing to be rolled into my grave, and buried with infamy, be-
fore I will consent unto !”—

1[This is what the ‘‘ Sea King” (as Carlyle calls him), Blake, had to say on the
subject. ‘‘ You inform me of the dissolution of the Parliament, with the grounds and
consequents of it. I was not much surprised with the intelligence; the slow pro-
ceedings and awkward motions of that assembly giving great cause to suspect it
would come to some such period; and I cannot but exceedingly wonder that there
should yet remain so strong a spirit of prejudice and animosity in the minds of
men who profess themselves most affectionate patriots as to postpose (séc) the
necessary ways and means for preservation of the commonwealth, especially in
such a time of concurrence of the mischievous plots and designs, both of old and
new enemies, tending all to the destruction of the same.” Blake to Thurloe, March
14, 1654-5. (Thurloe, iii. 232.).]

——<—<_ a Ss

PART IX
THE MAJOR-GENERALS

1655-1656

CHRONOLOGICAL

Tue Plots and perils to the Commonwealth which my Lord
Protector spoke of to his honourable Members, were not an
imagination, but a very tragic reality. Under the shadow of
this Constitutioning Parliament strange things had been ripen-
ing : ~without some other eye than the Parliament’s, Constitution
and Commonwealth in general had been, by this time, in a bad
way! A universal rising of Royalists combined with Anabaptists
is in a real state of progress. Dim meetings there have been of
Royalist Gentlemen, on nocturnal moors, in this quarter and in
that, ‘with cart-loads of arms, —terrified at their own jingle, and
rapidly dispersing again till the grand hour come. Anabaptist
Levellers have had dim meetings, dim communications ; will prefer
Charles Stuart himself to the traitor Oliver, who has dared to at-
tempt actual ‘governing’ of men, Charles Stuart has come down
to Middleburg, on the Dutch coast, to be in readiness ; ‘ Hyde is
cock-sure.’! From the dreary old Thurloes, and rubbish-continents,
of Spy Letters, Intercepted Letters, Letters of Intelligence ;
where, scattered at huge intervals, the History of England for
those years still lies entombed, it is manifest enough what a
winter and spring this was in England. A Protector left with-
out supplies, obliged to cut his Parliament adrift, and front the
matter alone; England, from end to end of it, ripe for an

1 Manning’s Letter, in Thurloe, iii. 384.
VOL. 11.—28

a kk lh ie ee al

434 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [12 Feb.

explosion ; for a universal blazing-up of all the heterogeneous
combustibilities it had; the Sacred Majesty waiting at Middle-
burg, and Hyde cock-sure !!

Nevertheless it came all to nothing ;—there being a Protector
in it. The Protector, in defect of Parliaments, issued his own
Ordinance, the best he could, for payment of old rates and
taxes;2 which as the necessity was evident, and the sum fixed
upon was low, rather lower than had been expected, the Country
quietly complied with. Indispensable supply was obtained : and
as for the Plots, the Protector had long had his eye on them,
had long had his nooses around them ;—the Protector strangled
them everywhere at the moment suitablest for him, and lodged
the ringleaders of them in the Tower. Let us, as usual, try
to extricate a few small elucidative facts from the hideous old
Pamphletary Imbroglio, where facts and figments, ten thousand
facts of no importance to one fact of some, lie mingled, like the
living with the dead, in noisome darkness all of them: once ex-
tricated, they may assist the reader's fancy a little. Of Oliver's
own in reference to this period, too characteristic a period to be
omitted, there is little or nothing left us: a few detached Letters,
hardly two of them very significant of Oliver; which cannot avail
us much, but shall be inserted at their due places.®

1[In an article which appeared in the Quarterly Review of April 1886, Mr.
[now Sir] Reginald Palgrave contended that the insurrection of March 1655 was a
bogus one, got up by Cromwell to serve his own ends. For the arguments against
this theory, see Mr, Firth’s articles in the English Historical Review for 1888 (p.
323) and 1889 (pp. 313, 525).]

2[A news-letter by Downing dated Feb. 13, 1654-5, says, ‘* Sithence my last, the
enclosed order and declaration for the next three months assessment was published.
His Highness, by not makingit an ordinance, hath modestly denied to assume the
legislature of the nation, though satisfied by many able judges and lawyers he
may legally do it.” Clarke Papers, iii. 22.]

5[For a letter to Ireland, dated January 24 see Supplement, No. 99.
There is a short utterance of Cromwell's just at this time, preserved amongst the
Clarke MSS. On Wednesday, February 8, ‘‘ The members that served in the late
Parliament for Scotland, came to take their leaves of his Highness, and laying down
the heavy grievance of that nation by reason of a very numerous army, his Highness
told them that the reason thereof was because the ministry did preach up the
interest of Charles Stuart and did much inveigh against the present authority, so that
there was a necessity of their continuance, but if they could propose any expedient
with a salvo to the security of that nation, he was willing to answer their desires
therein. Whereupon the said members are now considering of an expedient.”
Clarke Papers, vol. iii. p. 22.

There are also a few other brief notices of the Protector :—

‘‘Westminster, February 13. By this time the last design of the Cavaliers
was come to a ripeness, for yesterday they intended to have taken away the
life of his Highness, this day to rise in all the western parts, to-morrow in all
the northern parts of the nation, Hereupon his Highness dispersed all officers in

glial _ ——s

1655.] CHRONOLOGICAL 435

February 12th, 1654-5. News came this afternoon that Major
John Wildman, chief of the frantic Anabaptist Party, upon whom
the Authorities have had their eye of late, has been seized at
Exton, near Marlborough, in Wilts ; ‘by a party of Major Butler’s
horse.’ In his furnished lodging ; ‘ in a room up stairs ;’ his door
stood open: stepping softly up, the troopers found him leaning
on his elbow, dictating to his clerk ‘A Declaration of the free
‘and well-affected People of England now in Arms’ (or shortly to
be in Arms) ‘against the Tyrant Oliver Cromwell’ :’ a forcible
piece, which still can be read, but only as a fragment, the zealous
Major never having had occasion to finish it. They carried him
to Chepstow Castle; locked him up there: and the free and
well-affected People of England never got to Arms against the
Tyrant, but were only in hopes of getting. Wildman was in the
last Parliament ; but could not sign the Recognition ; went away
in virtuous indignation, to act against the Tyrant by stratagem
henceforth. He has been the centre of an extensive world of
Plots this winter, as his wont from of old was: the mainspring
of Royalist Anabaptistry, what we call the frantic form of Re-
publicanism, which hopes to attain its object by assisting even
Charles Stuart against the Tyrant Oliver. A stirring man; very
flamy and very fuliginous: perhaps, since Freeborn John was
sealed up in Jersey, the noisiest man in England. The turning
of the key on him in Chepstow will be a deliverance to us hence-
forth.

We take his capture as the termination of the Anabaptist-
Royalist department of the Insurrection. Thurloe has now got
all the threads of this Wildman business in his hand: the ring-

town to their commands abroad, called in hither the forces that came lately out of
Ireland, tripled the guards and scoured the city and four miles round with horse,
and secured the last night most of the horse in the city and suburbs, until their
owners give a good account of themselves. . . . This day his Highness made a
large and satisfactory speech to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and many of the
Common Council, of the real ground of this new intended war, and afterwards
read Charles Stuart’s letter and many material depositions for proving thereof,
as also Major Wildman’s draft of a declaration (shewing the grounds of the same)
when he was taken Saturday last." See also Whitlocke’s Memorials, ed. 1732, p.
18.

‘‘February 24. His Highness and several of his Council went Thursday last
to Hampton Court to celebrate the nuptials of one of his nieces [Robina Sewster]
married to Judge Lockhart of Scotland.”

“‘March 31. Yesternight Mr. Oates [army plotter] was with his Highness, who

ve him only a sharp reproof for his folly upon promise of his faithful deportment
or the future.” Clarke Papers vol. iii. p. 22, 23, 31.]

. 1 Whitlocke, p. 599; Cromwedliana, p. 151.

436 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [11 Mareh.

leaders are laid in prison, Harrison, Lord Grey of Groby and
various others ; kept there out of harm’s way; dealt with in a
rigorous, yet gentle, and what we must call great and manful
manner. It is remarked of Oliver that none of this Party was
ever brought to trial: his hope and wish was always. that they
might yet be reconciled to him. Colonel Sexby, once Captain
Sexby, Trooper Sexby, our old acquaintance, one of Wildman’s
people,—has escaped on this occasion: better for himself had he
been captured now, and saved from still madder courses he got
into.!

Sunday, March 11th, 1654-5, in the City of Salisbury, about
midnight, there occurs a thing worth noting. What may be
called the general outcome of the Royalist department of the
Insurrection. This too over England generally has, in all quarters
where it showed itself, found some ‘Major Butler’ with due
‘troops of horse’ to seize it, to trample it out, and lay the ring-
leaders under lock and key. Hardly anywhere could it get the
length of fighting: too happy if it could but gallop and hide. In
Yorkshire, there was some appearance, and a few shots fired ; but
to no effect: poor Sir Henry Slingsby, and a Lord Malevrier,?
and others were laid hold of here ; of whom the Lord escaped by
stratagem ; and poor Sir Henry lies prisoner in Hull,—where it
will well behove him to keep quiet ifhe can! . But on the Sunday
night above mentioned, peaceful Salisbury is awakened from its
slumbers by a real advent of Cavaliers. Sir Joseph Wagstaff,
‘a jolly knight’ of those parts, once a Royalist Colonel ; he with
Squire or Colonel Penruddock, ‘a gentleman of fair fortune,’
Squire or Major Grove, also of some fortune,’ and about Two-
hundred others, did actually rendezvous in arms about the big
Steeple, that Sunday night, and ring a loud alarm in those parts.

It was Assize-time; the Judges had arrived the day before.*
Wagstaff seizes the Judges in their beds, seizes the High Sheriff,
and otherwise makes night hideous ;—proposes on the morrow to

1[For the Protector’s letters and instructions to Cols. Crowne, Desborow, Philip
Jones and Berry, see Supplement, No. 100 (1-4).]

2(This was Sir Richard Mauleverer. ]

2[Grove probably had but little fortune. He compounded with the Wiltshire
committee, but only for his personalty, having no real estate. Col. Penruddock
and his father, Sir John, had compounded also; the son’s fine being fixed at tooo/.
and the father’s at 890/. ; afterwards reduced to 750/. and 490/. respectively. The
father obtained better terms as being included in the articles of Oxford. (See Ca/.
of Committee for Compounding, pp. 77, 1054.).]

4[The judges were Chief Justice Rolle and Baron Nicholas. The High Sherift
was fohn Dove. }

1655.) CHRONOLOGICAL 437

hang the Judges, as a useful warning, which Mr. Hyde thinks it
would have been; but is overruled by Penruddock and the rest.
He orders the High Sheriff to proclaim King Charles; High
Sheriff will not, not though you hang him ; Town-crier will not,
not even he though you hang him. The Insurrection does not
speed in Salisbury, it would seem. The Insurrection quits Salisbury
on Monday night, hearing that troopers are on foot ; marches
with all speed towards Cornwall, hoping for better luck there.
Marches ;—but Captain Unton Crook,! whom we once saw before,
marches also in the rear of it ; marches swiftly, fiercely ; overtakes
it at South Molton in Devonshire ‘on Wednesday about ten at
night,’ and there in few minutes puts an end to it. ‘They fired
out of windows on us,’ but could make nothing out of it. We
took Penruddock, Grove, and long lists of others:? Wagstaff
unluckily escaped.* The unfortunate men were tried, at Exeter,
by a regular assize and jury ;* were found guilty, some of High
Treason, some of ‘Horse-stealing:’ Penruddock and Grove,
stanch Royalists both and gallant men, were beheaded ; several
were hanged; a great many ‘sent to Barbadoes;’—and this
Royalist conflagration too, which should have blazed all over
England, is entirely damped out, having amounted to smoke
merely, whereby many eyes are bleared! Indeed so prompt and
complete is the extinction, thankless people begin to say there
had never been anything considerable to extinguish. Had they
stood in the middle of it,—had they seen the nocturnal rendezvous
at Marston Moor, seen what Shrewsbury, what Rufford Abbey,
what North Wales in general, would have grown to on the
morrow,—in that case, thinks the Lord Protector not without
some indignation, they had known!® Wagstaff has escaped, and
Wilmot Earl of Rochester so-called ; right glad to be beyond seas

1(Of Berry’s regiment. He was at Exeter, with his troop. ]

?('Thurloe gives a list of the prisoners taken (iii. 306). See also Hatsel’s letter
from Exeter, Ca/. S. P. Dom., 1655, p. 99. ]

3 Crook’s Letter, ‘South Molton, 15th March 1654, two or three in the morning’
(King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, No. 637, § 15) [E. 830]. State Trials, v. 767 et seqg. ;
Whitlocke, p. 601 ; Thurloe, iii. 365, 384, 391, 445; Cromwelliana, pp. 152-3.—
Official Letters in reference to this Plot, Appendix, No. 28 (4).

4[It was however not very easy to get together juries that could be trusted to
convict the prisoners. ‘‘I resolve,” wrote Sheriff Dove to Thurloe, ‘‘ that not one
man shall be returned in the one or other juries but such as may be confided in,
and of the honest, well-affected party to his Highness and the present government,
if there be but enough to be found of them throughout the whole county, which I
hope there is." » (Thurloe, iii. 318. ).]

5 Postea, Speech V.

BEAR,

438 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [11 March.

again ; and will look twice at an Insurrection before they embark
in it in time coming.

A terrible Protector this; no getting of him overset! He has
the ringleaders all in his hand, in prison or still at large ;—as they
love their estates and their life, let them be quiet. He can take
your estate :—is there not proof enough to take your head, if he
pleases? He dislikes shedding blood ; but is very apt ‘to barba-
does’ an unruly man,—has sent and sends us by hundreds to Bar-
badoes, so that we have made an active verb of it: ‘ Barbadoes
you.’! Safest to let this Protector alone! Charles Stuart with-
draws from Middleburg into the interior obscurities ; and Mr.
Hyde will not be so cock-sure another time. Mr. Hyde, much
pondering how his secret could have been let out, finds that it is
an underling of his, one Mr. Manning, a gentleman by birth, ‘ fond
of fine clothes,’ and in very straitened circumstances at present,
who has been playing the traitor. Indisputably a traitor: where-
fore the King in Council has him doomed to death ; has him shot,
in winter following, ‘in the Duke of Neuburg’s territory.’? Dili-
gent Thurloe finds others to take his place.*

1Intercepted Letters, Thurloe, iii. [The shipping of prisoners to Barbados was
not a device of the Commonwealth alone. Mr. Firth remarks that it was ‘‘a method
of treating criminals much in favour during the seventeenth century. Condemned
felons and vagrants were from the time of James I, frequently sent to serve for a fixed
space of time in the American or West Indian Colonies. . . . Succeeding govern-
ments adopted the same expedient. After the suppression of the rising in Scotland
in 1666 a number of the rebels were sentenced to transportation ; 841 persons who
had taken part in Monmouth’s insurrection and 638 of the Jacobite prisoners of
1715 were similarly punished (Eng. Hist, Review, 1889, p. 335): Their lot in many
cases was a very hard one, for the fact that they were bound only for a certain
time, made their masters work them harder than if they had been slaves. But
apparently, if they had money to do so, they could redeem themselves upon landing
in the island. In June 1655, Governor Searle wrote thanking the Protector for
orders sent in response to his complaint that hitherto, ‘‘ notorious delinquents and
offenders. . . have gone off this place and returned back into their own countries”
without his being able to stop them; for some were able, by payment (to those
who had ‘‘ farmed” them), to free themselves entirely from their term of service,
whilst others, having served their time, had now freedom to stay or depart ‘‘ by
the laws and customs of the place.” The Protector had now, it appears from
Searle's letter, sent orders by which dangerous persons were to be prevented from
leaving the island. ]

2 Clarendon, iii. 752; Whitlocke, p. 618 (Dec. 1655); Ludlow, ii. 608.

3[Mr. Firth mentions three sources of intelligence possessed by Cromwell; spies,
his own officials, and the statements of prisoners. Intercepted letters are, no doubt,
included in the second of these. —Manning’s own correspondence with Thurloe did
not begin until March 1655. A long letter from him, giving the names of theeas
principal royalists engaged in the rising, is printed in Thurloe (vol. iii. p. 338). See
also ue series of letters amongst the State Papers calendared in the volume for
1655.

1655.] CHRONOLOGICAL 439

May 28th, 1655.1 Desborow, who commands the Regular
Troops in that insurrectionary Southwest region, is, by Commission
bearing date this day, appointed Major-General of the Militia-
forces likewise, and of all manner of civic and military forces at
the disposal of the Commonwealth in those parts. Major-General
over six counties specified in this Document ; with power some-
what enlarged, and not easy to specify,—power in fact to look
after the peace of the Commonwealth there, and do what the
Council of State shall order him.? He coerces Royalists ; questions,
commits to custody suspected persons; keeps down disturbance
by such methods as, on the spot, he finds wisest. A scheme
found to answer well. The beginning of a universal Scheme of
Masor-GeneraLs, which develops itself into full maturity in the
autumn of this year; the Lord Protector and his Council of State
having well considered it in the interim, and found it the
feasiblest ; if not good, yet best.

By this Scheme, which we may as well describe here as after-
wards, All England is divided into Districts ;* Ten Districts, a
Major-General for each ; let him be a man most carefully chosen,
a man of real wisdom, valour and veracity, a man fearing God
and hating covetousness; for his powers are great. He looks
after the Good of the Commonwealth, spiritual and temporal, as
he finds wisest. jects, or aids in ejecting, scandalous ministers ;
summons disaffected, suspected persons before him ; demands an
account of them; sends them to prison, failing an account that
satisfies him ;4—and there is no appeal except to the Protector
in Council. His force is the Militia of his Counties; horse and
foot,° levied and kept in readiness for the occasion; especially
troops of horse. Involving, of course, new expense ;—which we
decide that the Plotting Royalists, who occasion it, shall pay. On
all Royalist disaffected Persons the Major-General therefore, as

1[Before this, come several letters in the Supplement, Nos. ror-105.]

2 Thurloe, iii. 486.

3[Ten in the original list, named on August 9; but an eleventh was subsequently
added to it.]

4fOn June 27, Berry sends an account from Lincoln of what he has done. If
it falls short of what his Highness expects, he can only say that the counties are
large and his helpers very few. But ‘‘the hearts of the enemy are fallen, and a
word commands them, and all would be well here, had we a few honest men to bear
rule and lead the people. Our ministers are bad, our magistrates idle and the
people all asleep, only these present actings have a little wakened (them).” Thurloe,
iii,

590. ]
5 (They were all horse, except 200 foot at Norwich, See S. P. Dom., [nterregnum,
I. 76, p. 613.]

440 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [28 May.

his first duty, is to lay an Income-tax of Ten per-cent. ; let them
pay it quietly, or it may be worse for them. They pay it very
quietly.! Strange as it may seem, the Country submits very
quietly to this arrangement ;—the Major-Generals being men
carefully chosen. “It is an arbitrary Government!” murmur
many. Yes; arbitrary, but beneficial. These are powers un-
known to the English Constitution, I believe ; but they are very
necessary for the Puritan English Nation at this time. With
men of real wisdom, who do fear God and hate covetousness,
when you can find such men, you may to some purpose entrust
considerable powers ! #

It is in this way that Oliver Protector coerces the unruly ele-
ments of England; says to them: “ Peace, ye! With the aid of
Parliament and venerable Parchment, if so may be ; without it,
if so may not be,—I, called hither by a very good Authority,
will hold you down. Quiet shall you, for your part, keep your-
selves ; or be ‘ barbadoesed,’ and worse. Mark it; not while I
live shall you have dominion, you nor the Master of you!’”—
Cock-matches, Horse-races and other loose assemblages are, for
limited times, forbidden ; over England generally, or in Districts
where it may be thought somewhat is a-brewing. Without cock-
fighting we can do; but not without Peace, and the absence of
Charles Stuart and his Copartneries. It is a Government of
some arbitrariness.

And yet singular, observes my learned friend, how popular it
seems to grow. These considerable infringements of the con-
stitutional fabric, prohibition of cockfights, amercings of Royalists,
taxing without consent in Parliament, seem not to awaken the
indignation of England; rather almost the gratitude and confi-
dence of England. Next year, we have ‘ Letters of great appear-
‘ances of the Country at the Assizes; and how the Gentlemen

1[Not so very quietly ; witness the number of petitions and appeals against it
amongst the papers of the Committee for Compounding. In fact it probably
greatly increased the feeling of insecurity on the part of the Royalist gentry and
made them more eager for a change. On their voluntary composition, they had
been promised freedom for the future. Now—and this seemed to them especially
hard—the ‘‘ particulars of estates’’ given in by themselves, were used as the basis
of this new assessment. Naturally, the decimation tax was popular with the other

side. ‘‘The business of taxing the cavalier party is of wonderful acceptation
* to all the Parliament party,”’ as Thurloe wrote to Henry Cromwell. (Thurloe,
iv. 321.).]

2(For an account of the Major-Generals, see Mr. Rannie’s article in the Eng.
Hist. Review, 1895 (p. 471). Also Gardiner’'s Commonwealth and Protectorate,

iii. 172 ef seq. ]

ee

1655.] CHRONOLOGICAL 441

‘of the greatest quality served on Grand Juries; which is fit to
‘ be observed.’ !

We mention, but cannot dwell upon it, another trait belonging
to those Spring Months of 1655: the quarrel my Lord Protector
had in regard to his Ordinance for the Reform of Chancery.
Ordinance passed merely by the Protector in Council; never
confirmed by any Parliament ; which nevertheless he insists upon
having obeyed. How our learned Bulstrode, learned Widdring-
ton, two of the Keepers of the Great Seal, durst not obey; and
Lisle the other Keeper durst ;—and Old-Speaker Lenthall, Master
of the Rolls, “would be hanged at the Rolls Gate before he
would obey.” What profound consults there were among us;
buzz in the Profession, in the Public generally. And then how
Oliver Protector, with delicate patient bridle-hand and yet with
resolute spur, made us all obey, or else go out of that,—which
latter step Bulstrode and Widdrington, with a sublime conscien-
tious feeling, preferred to take, the big heart saying to itself, “I
have lost a thousand pounds a-year!” And Lenthall, for all his
’ bragging, was not hanged at the Rolls Gate; but kept his skin
whole, and his salary whole, and did as he was bidden. The
buzz in the Profession, notwithstanding much abatement of fees,
had to compose itself again.?—Bulstrode adds, some two months
hence, ‘The Protector being good-natured, and sensible of his
harsh proceeding against Whitlocke and Widdrington,' made
them Commissioners of the Treasury, which was a kind of com-
pensation. There, with Montague and Sydenham, they had a
moderately good time of it; but saw, not without a sigh, the
Great Seal remain with Lisle who durst obey, and for colleague
to him a certain well-known Nathaniel Fiennes, a shrewd man,
Lord Say and Sele’s son,—who knew nothing of that business,
says Bulstrode, nay Lisle himself knew nothing of it till he learned
it from us. Console thyself, big heart. How seldom is sublime
virtue rewarded in this world !

June 3d, 1655. This day come sad news out of Piedmont ;#

1 Whitlocke, p. 624 (April 1656).

2 [bid., pp. 602-8. 3 [bid., p. 608.

4[Carlyle forgets that Bordeaux dated New Style, and that June 3 would be
May 24 English style ; but as the commissioners mentioned the matter to the French
ambassador on May 16, the first news must have reached England before that day.
Dr. Gardiner believes that it arrived not laterthan May 12th. The Piedmont business
was bad enough, but not quite so bad as represented here, for the Protestants had
pushed down from the mountain valleys to which alone their toleration applied ;
had settled in Lucerna and other towns, and in 1650 had, Dr, Gardiner says, ‘‘no

See ATE ee ee ae ee ae h
ar Arise ee A 24a ~~ ‘
2 ‘ . 1 Sa fe

442 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [3 June.

confirmation of bad rumours there had been, which deeply
affects all pious English hearts, and the Protector’s most of all.
It appears the Duke of Savoy had, not long since, decided on
having certain poor Protestant subjects of his converted at last
to the Catholic Religion. Poor Protestant people, who dwell
in the obscure Valleys ‘of Lucerna, of Perosa and St Martin,’
among the feeders of the Po, in the Savoy Alps: they are
thought to be descendents of the old Waldenses; a pious
inoffensive people; dear to the hearts and imaginations of all
Protestant men. These, it would appear, the Duke of Savoy,
in the past year, undertook to himself to get converted; for
which object he sent friars to preach among them. The friars
could convert nobody; one of the friars, on the contrary, was
found assassinated,—signal to the rest that they had better take
themselves away. The Duke thereupon sent other missionaries:
six regiments of Catholic soldiers; and an order to the People
of the Valleys either to be converted straightway, or quit the
country at once. They could not be converted all at once:
neither could they quit the country well; the month was
December; among the Alps; and it was their home for im-
memorial years! Six regiments, however, say they must; six
Catholic regiments ;—and three of them are Irish, made of the
banished Kurisees we knew long since; whose humour, on such
an occasion, we can guess at! It is admitted they behaved ‘with
little ceremony ;’ it is not to be denied they behaved with much
bluster and violence: ferocities, atrocities, to the conceivable
amount, still stand in authentic black-on-white against them.
The Protestants of the Valleys were violently driven out of
house and home, not without slaughters and tortures by the
road ;—had to seek shelter in French Dauphiné or where they
could; and, in mute or spoken supplication, appeal to all generous
hearts of men. The saddest confirmation of the actual banish-
ment, the actual violences done, arrives at Whitehall this day,
3d June 1655.3

Pity is perennial : “ Ye have compassion on one another, ’—is it

less than eleven temples—as their places of worship were styled—in places where
they were forbidden even to take up their abode.”” When the Duke, or rather his
mother, the Duchess Christina, determined to enforce the law, and ordered the
reformed families back to their hill valleys, the Protestants made sufficient show _
of resistance to give the Duchess an excuse for sending troops against them, and
then the massacre began. For an account of it, see Commonwealth and Protectorate,
iii. 406 e¢ seg. | oy

1 Letter of the French Ambassador (in Thurloe, iii. 470).

1655.] CHRONOLOGICAL 443

not notable, beautiful? In our days too, there are Polish Balls
and such like: but the pity of the Lord Protector and Puritan
England for these poor Protestants among the Alps is not to be
measured by ours. The Lord Protector is melted into tears, and
roused into sacred fire. This day the French Treaty, not unim-
portant to him, was to be signed :! this day he refuses to sign it
till the King and Cardinal undertake to assist him in getting
right done in those poor Valleys.2. He sends the poor exiles
2,000/. from his own purse ; appoints a Day of Humiliation and a
general Collection over England for that object ;—has, in short,
decided that he will bring help to these poor men; that Eng-
land and he will see them helped and righted. How Envoys
were sent; how blind Milton wrote Letters to all Protestant
States, calling on them for codperation; how the French Car-
dinal was shy to meddle, and yet had to meddle, and compel
the Duke of Savoy, much astonished at the business, to do
justice and not what he liked with his own: all this, recorded in
the unreadablest stagnant deluges of old Official Correspondence,’
is very certain, and ought to be fished therefrom and made more
apparent.

In all which, as we can well believe, it was felt that the Lord
Protector had been the Captain of England, and had truly ex-
pressed the heart and done the will of England ;—in this, as in
some other things. Milton’s Sonnet and Six Latin Letters are
still readable; the Protector’s Act otherwise remains mute
hitherto. Small damage to the Protector, if no other suffer
thereby! Let it stand here as a symbol to us of his Foreign
Policy in general; which had this one object, testified in all

1(That is, May 24 old style. All that Thurloe told Bordeaux was that the
Protector ‘‘had resolved first, before he would sign, to send an express to the
King” of France on behalf of the Vaudois, knowing the influence he had over the
Duke of Savoy. Sam. Morland was sent to King Louis, who promised to intercede,
but would not threaten, and indeed the Protector asked no more, ‘‘ for,” as Dr.
Gardiner remarks, ‘‘ the doctrine that each prince was responsible to no external
power for his treatment of religious questions arising in his own dominions.. .
was even accepted by Oliver himself, who would not have hesitated to give a
sharp answer to any foreign ambassador who ventured to question his right to deal
at his own pleasure with the Irish Catholics.’’ The Duchess defended her con-
duct, and at first declined to concede anything. ‘‘ Her position was simply that
the Vaudois, by refusing to obey legal orders to depart from the places in which
the edicts had forbidden them to settle, had committed an act of rebellion which
had been legitimately punished.” But she afterwards yielded, and an amnesty
was proclaimed. See Commonwealth and Protectorate, iii. 418.]

2Thurloe, bi supra.

3 Jéid, (much of vol. iii.); Vaughan’s Protectorate, etc.

444 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [13 June.

manner of negotiations and endeavours, noticed by us and not
noticed, To make England Queen of the Protestant world; her,
if there were no worthier Queen. To unite the Protestant world
of struggling Light against the Papist world of potent Darkness.
To stand upon God’s Gospel, as the actual intrinsic Fact of this
Practical Earth ; and defy all potency of Devil’s Gospels on the
strength of that. Wherein, again Puritan England felt gradually
that this Oliver was her Captain; and in heart could not but
say, Long life to him; as we do now.

Let us note one other small private trait of Oliver in these
months; and then hasten to the few Letters we have. Dull
Bulstrode has jotted down: ‘The Protector feasted the Commis-
sioners for Approbation of Ministers.’! Means the Commission of
Triers ;2, whom he has to dinner with him in Whitehall. Old Sir
Francis, Dr. Owen and the rest. ‘He sat at table with them;
and was cheerful and familiar in their company :’ Hope you are
getting on, my friends: how this is, and how that is? ‘ By such
kind of little caresses,’ adds Bulstrode, ‘he gained much upon
many persons.’ Me, as a piece of nearly matchless law-learning
and general wisdom, I doubt he never sufficiently respected ;
though he knew my fat qualities too, and was willing to use and
recognise them !—

LETTERS CXCVIII.—CCIII

Six Letters of somewhat miscellaneous character ;? which we
must take in mass, and with no word of Commentary that can be
spared. Straggling accidental lightbeams, accidentally preserved
to us, and still transiently illuminating this feature or that of the
Protector and his business,—let them be welcome in the darkness
for what they are.

LETTER CXCVIII

BesipEs the great Sea-Armament that sailed from Portsmouth
last December, and went Westward, with sealed orders, which

1Whitlocke, April 1655. 2 Antea, p. 324.
5 {For two other short letters written about this time, see Supplement, Nos,

106, 107. |

1655.) LETTER CXCVIIL, WHITEHALL 445

men begin to guess were for the Spanish West Indies,—the Pro-
tector had another Fleet fitted out under Blake, already famous
as a Sea-General; which has been in the Mediterranean, during
these late months ;! exacting reparation for damages, old or recent,
done to the English Nation or to individuals of it, by the Duke
of Florence or by others; keeping an eye on Spain too, and its
Plate Fleets, apparently with still ulterior objects.

The Duke of Florence has handsomely done justice ;? the Dey
of Tunis was not so well advised, and has repented of it. There
are Letters, dated March last ° though they do not come till June :
‘Letters that General Blake demanding at Tunis reparation for
‘the losses of the English from Turkish Pirates, the Dey answered
‘him with scorn, and bade him behold his Castles.’ Blake did be-
hold them ; ‘sailed into the Harbour within musket-shot of them ;
‘and though the shore was planted with great guns, he set upon
‘the Turkish ships, fired nine of them,’ and brought the Dey to
reason, we apprehend.*

To General Blake, ‘at Sea’

Whitehall, 13th June 1655.
Sir,
I have received yours of the 25th of March,°
which gives an account of the late transactions between yourself

1 [The fleet had gone out in the autumn of 1654, and in the spring of this present
year Blake had succeeded in freeing many Christian slaves at Algiers. A copy of
the Protector’s Instructions to him in relation to this matter was made by Nicholas
after the Restoration and is amongst the Algiers State Papers. The date is given
as July 1656, but this is manifestly incorrect, and should no doubt be 1654. An-
other copy, apparently taken from this one, and with the same mistake of date, is
to be found in one of the Charles II. entry books (No. 4, p. 17). ]

2[Carlyle gives this probably on Ludlow’s authority, but Prof. Laughton says
that the assertion is ‘‘ entirely unsupported by exact evidence, and is virtually con-
tradicted by Blake’s silence in his extant letters from Leghorn.” (Dictionary of
Neitgy Biography, art. ‘‘Robert Blake.”) See also Ang. Hist. Review, 1899,
Pp. Tog.

3 [But see note 5, below. ]

4 Whitlocke, p. 608 (8th June 1655).

5[This date is puzzling. On March 14, Blake sent a despatch to Thurloe, in
which he states that they dare not at present attack the fleet at Tunis (partly be-
cause they are short of supplies), and so have withdrawn, but intend to return as
soon as possible and put an end to the business. On April 18-28 he wrote again,
speaking of the letter of March rq, as his last (there having been no opportunity of
sending to England since), and giving an account of the firing of the ships. The
attack was resolved upon on April 3, and carried out on April 4. It is to this latter
ve that Cromwell must refer. Both are printed in Thurloe (vol. iii. pp. 232,
399). ;

f

446 | THE MAJOR-GENERALS [13 June.

and the Governors of Tunis, concerning the losses which the
English have sustained by the piracies of that place; and ‘of’
the success it hath pleased God to give in the attempt you made
upon their shipping, after their positive refusal to give you satis-
faction upon your just demands. And as we have great cause to
acknowledge the good hand of God towards us in this action,
who, in all the circumstances thereof (as they have been repre-
sented by you), was pleased to appear very signally with you; so
I think myself obliged to take notice of your courage and good
conduct therein, and do esteem that you have done therein a
very considerable service to this Commonwealth.

I hope you have received the former despatches which were
sent unto you by the way of Legorne, for your coming into
Cadiz Bay with the fleet, as also those which were sent by a
ketch immediately from hence ; whereby you had also notice of
three-months provisions then preparing to be sent, and ‘ which’
have since been sent away, under the convoy of the frigates the
Centurion and Dragon ;1 and ‘1’ hope they are safely arrived
with you, they sailing from hence about the 28th of April.

With this comes further Instructions concerning your disposing
of the Fleet for the future, whereunto we do refer you. Besides
which, we, having taken into consideration the present design
we have in the West Indies, have judged it necessary, That not
only the King of Spain’s fleets coming from thence be intercepted
(which as well your former Instructions as those now sent unto
you authorise and require you to do), but that we endeavour also,
as much as in us lies, to hinder him from sending any relief or
assistance thither. You are therefore, during your abode with
the Fleet in those seas, to inform yourself, by the best means you
can, concerning the going of the King of Spain’s fleet for the
West Indies; and shall, according to such information as you
can gain, use your best endeavours to intercept at sea, and fight
with and take them, or otherwise to fire and sink them; as also

1[See Cal. S. P. Dom., 1655, pp. 55, 76, 462. ]

tr:
a.

1655.) LETTER CXCVIIL, WHITEHALL 447

any other of his ships which you shall understand to be bound
for the West Indies with provisions of war, for the aid and as-
sistance of his subjects there ; carrying yourself towards other of
his ships and people as you are directed by your general Instruc-

tions.
‘I rest,
‘ Your loving friend,
‘Ottver P.’ *

The Sea-Armament was for the West Indies, then : good news
of it were welcome !

Here is a short Letter of Blake’s to the Protector, dated just
the day before; in cipher ;—which the reader, having never
perhaps seen another Letter of Blake’s, will not be displeased
with. Unimportant; but bringing the old Seas, with their
Puritan Sea-kings, with their ‘Plate Fleets,’ and vanished
populations and traffics, bodily before us for moments.

* George, 12th June 1655.

«* May IT PLEASE Your Hieuness,—The secret Instructions sent
“by your Highness, referring me to a former Instruction, touch-
“ing the Silver Fleet of Spain coming from America, I have
“received ; and shall carefully observe the same. We had in-
“formation at Cadiz that the Fleet was expected about a month
“or five weeks hence. We are now off Cape Mary’s, intending
“to spread with our Fleet what we can, and to range this sea,
“ according to the wind and the information we can get ; plying
“ over likewise towards Cape Sprat, it being their most likely and
“usual course. They of Cadiz are very distrustful of us; and
“there being four galeons designed for the Mediterranean, and
“six for New Spain, it is doubtful how they may be employed.

“We shall use our best endeavours to put the Instructions in
“execution, as God shall afford us an opportunity ; desiring your
“ Highness to rest assured of our diligence, and of the integrity
«‘ of,—your most humble and faithful servant,

* Ropert Brake.” }

* Thurloe, iii. 547. [The answer to this letter is in the same volume (p. 611).
Same day, letter to Poet Waller, Appendix, No. 28, 7.]

1 /bid., iii, 541.

448 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [29 June.

June 13th is Wednesday. On the morrow is universal Fast-
Day, Humiliation and Prayer, and public Collection of Money for
the Protestants of Piedmont. A day of much pious emotion in
England ; and of liberal contribution, which continued on the a
following days. ‘Clerks come to every man’s house,’ says a dis-
affected witness ; ‘come with their papers, and you are forced to
contribute.’ The exact amount realised I never could very au-
thentically learn.! The Dutch Ambassador says 100,000/. The ;
disaffected witness says, ‘ London City itself gave half-a-million,’
—or seemed as it would give. ‘The Ministers played their part
to the full,’—the Ministers and the People and their Ruler. No
French Treaty signed or signable till this thing be managed.
At length the French were obliged to manage it; 9th Septem-
ber of this same year the thing was got managed ;*—and by and
by was got improved and still better managed, the Protector
continuing all his days to watch over it, and over other similar
things as they occurred, and to insist on seeing justice done re-
specting them.’

ae

:
ie
+

LETTER CXCIX

Tue scheme of Major-Generals for England is not yet come to
maturity ; but it is coming: new occasional arrests and barbadoes-
ings continue, as the threads of old Plots are traced farther and
farther. Monk keeps Scotland quiet; the hydra is for the
present well under foot. P

Meanwhile Henry Cromwell is despatched for Ireland, to see
with his own eyes how matters stand there. A reverend godly

1[The amount subscribed was 38,232/. After expending all that seemed neces-
sary, 17,872/. remained, which was put out at interest to provide pensions or meet
any other like demands. (hee Dr. W. A. Shaw’s article in the Auglish Historical
Review, Oct. 1894, p. 662.)]

2See Thurloe, iii. 549, 623, 745, &c.

3 [But ‘‘ though Oliver had to some extent got his way, he was far from satisfied
either with the extent of the concessions or with the way in which they had been
made. On September 10, he ordered Downing (whom he had sent to support
Morland) to return home to give an account of the situation, resolving at the same
time to hold back from the negotiation with Bordeaux till this matter had been
cleared up. A little further consideration, however,’convinced him that it was use-
less to protest further against a settlement which had been accepted by the Vaudois
themselves,” and on September 19, a hint was given to Bordeaux that if he de-
manded it, the discussion on the treaty would be resumed. Commonwealth and
Protectorate, iii. 421.]

1655.) LETTER CXCIX., WHITEHALL 449

Mr. Brewster, hardly known to us otherwise, is also proceeding
thither ; with whom the Lord Protector thinks good to salute his
Son-in-law, Fleetwood, the Lord Deputy, Ireton’s successor in
Ireland. Henry Cromwell was there once before, on a some-
what similar mission, and acquitted himself well.! His title,
this second time, is Major-General of the Army in Ireland. He
is to command the forces in Ireland; one easily believes farther,
he is to observe well and report faithfully how affairs are ; and
do his best to assist in rectifying them. Lord Deputy Fleetwood
is by some thought to be of too lax temper for his place: he,
with his Ludlows, Axtels and discontented Republicans, not to
speak of other businesses, would need energy, if he have it not.
Rumour has even arisen that Henry Cromwell is now sent to
supersede him; which, however, the Protector expressly contra-
dicts.?

The rumour nevertheless proved, if not true, yet prophetic of
the truth. Henry Cromwell acquitted himself well this second
time also; being, as we judge, a man of real insight, veracity and
resolution ; very fit for such a service. Many of his Letters, all
creditable to him, are in Thurloe: ‘ Petitions’ from certain Irish
parties come likewise to view there, That he might be appointed
Deputy ; which Petitions are, for the present, carefully ‘sup-
pressed,’ yet have in the end to be complied with ;—they and
the nature of the case, we suppose, require compliance. Some
fifteen months hence, Henry is appointed Lord Deputy ;* Fleet-
wood, in some handsome way, recalled. In which situation
Henry continues till the end of the Protectorate, making really
an honourable figure; and then, the scene having altogether
changed, retires from it into total obscurity, still in a very man-
ful, simple and noble way.*

‘My dear Biddy,’ in this Letter, is Bridget Fleetwood, whom

1 March 1653-54 (Thurloe, ii. 149).

2(It was probably understood pretty well that it was to be so, although not by
Cromwell's wishes ; or yet definitely stated. But Fleetwood, writing to Thurloe on
July rz, after Henry Cromwell’s arrival, speaks of certain things to be settled before
he leaves, as if he did not expect to return. From this letter, it would appear that
Oliver’s injunction to his daughter to ‘‘be cheerful” is partly in allusion to the
state of her health. (See Thurloe, iii. 632.) Dr. Gardiner says that this letter
testified to the Protector’s embarrassment. ‘‘ Though he had no wish to deprive
his son-in-law of his high dignity as Lord Deputy, he would be glad if he would
voluntarily abandon the personal fulfilment of its duties.” Commonwealth and
Protectorate, iii. 338.]

3 21st November 1657 (Thurloe, vi. 632).

4His Letter to Clarendon, in Thurloe, i. 763; see also Tanner MSS., li. 71, a
prior Letter to Speaker Lenthall,

VoL. 11.—29

A.

450 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [22 June.

we once saw as Bridget Ireton ;! who,for her religious and other
worth, is ‘a joy to my heart.’ Of‘ Mr. Brewster,’ and the other
reverend persons, Spiritual Fathers, held in such regard by the
Lord Protector as is due to Spiritual Fatherhood, and pious noble-
ness of Intellect under whatever guise, I can say nothing; they
are Spiritual Great-grand-fathers of ours, and we have had to for-
get them! Some slight notices of Brewster, who I think was a_
Norfolk man, and more of Cradock, who was Welsh,—zealous
Preachers both,—are in the Milton State-Papers ; * they prove the
fervent zeal, faith and fearlessness of these worthies ;—not
necessary to extract in this place. Cradock writes to Cromwell
in 1652 that his heart overflows with prayers and praise to God
for sending such a man ; that he has often stept aside to pray for
him, in some thicket or ditch by the wayside, while travelling
along, and thinking of him ;—which Dryasdust Nicols, the Editor
of these Milton State-Papers, considers a very ludicrous proceed-
ing. Godly ‘ Mr. Tillinghurst,’ so noble a phenomenon to Oliver
and Fleetwood, is to us fallen altogether silent :—seemingly some
godly Preacher, of very modest nature; who, in his old days,
being brought once before the Lord Protector, cried it was a
‘shame’ to trouble any Lord Protector, or Sovereign Person, with
the like of him! The venerable hoary man. And godly Mr.
Troughton‘ or ‘Throughton,’ too, was there. O Tillinghurst, O
Troughton, how much lies buried !°

1 Vol. i. p.

2pp. 85, 158, etc. [A letter from Brewster to Thurloe, dated Alby, June 18th, is
in Thurloe (iii. 559). He asks if the recommendation be yet made to the Deputy of
Ireland ‘‘ which his Highness intended,” as he means to ‘‘ hasten after my Lord
Henry ” before he sails, and therefore the readiness of his ‘‘ advance money’’ and
the Protector’s recommendation would be a great furtherence to him. ‘‘ Our
troops,’’ he concludes, ‘‘are in great forwardness and like to be suddenly in a
posture ; the contributions for the Protestants have been cheerfully managed in
these parts.” In the orders of Council on June 6th there is mention of a paper
received from Brewster and other ‘‘ ministers going for Ireland,” and also of their
certificates. (Cal. S. P. Dom., 1655, p. 199.) On July 18th Brewster announces
that he overtook the Lord Henry at Chester and has got safely with him to
Dublin. ]

3[He does not say so. ]

4[{Mr. Troughton is perhaps the William Troughton, minister at Salisbury,
mentioned in Dr. W. A. Shaw's History of the English Church, etc., 1640-1660, ii.

oi

: 5 Buried but indisputable traces of this Tillinghurst, certain authentic, still
legible entries concerning him, in one of which Brewster too is named, have been
detected by a friendly eye in the Record-Book of the Independent Church at Great
Yarmouth; where Tillinghurst, it clearly enough appears, was Minister from 165r
to 1654, and much followed and valued as a Preacher and Spiritual Guide in those —
parts. Brewster, likewise an Independent, was of Alby in the same neighbour-
hood. MMs, Excerpts penes me. (Note to the Third Edition).

1655.) LETTER CXCIX., WHITEHALL 451

‘ To the Lord Fleetwood, Lord Deputy of Ireland’

‘ Whitehall,’ 22d June 1655.

Dear CHARLEs,

I write not often: at once I desire thee to
know I most dearly love thee, and indeed my heart is plain to
thee as thy heart can well desire: let nothing shake thee in this.
The wretched jealousies that are amongst us, and the spirit of
calumny, turns all into gall and wormwood. My heart is for the
people of God : that the Lord knows, and I trust will in due time
manifest ; yet thence are my wounds; which though it grieves
me, yet through the grace of God doth not discourage me totally.
Many good men are repining at everything ; though indeed very
many good ‘are’ well satisfied, and satisfying daily. The will
of the Lord will bring forth good in due time.

It’s reported that you are to be sent for, and Harry to be
Deputy, which truly never entered into my heart. The Lord
knows, my desire was for him and his brother to have lived
private lives in the country: and Harry knows this very well,
and how difficultly I was persuaded to give him his commission
for his present place. This I say as from a simple and sincere
heart. The noise of my being crowned &c. are like! malicious
figments.

Use this bearer, Mr. Brewster, kindly. Let him be near you:
indeed he is a very able holy man ; trust me you will find him
so. He was a bosom-friend of Mr. Tillinghurst; ask him of
him; you will thereby know Mr. Tillingburst’s spirit. This
gentleman brought him to me a little before he died, and Mr.
Cradock ;—Mr. Throughton, a godly minister being by, with ‘ Mr.
Tillinghurst ’ himself, who cried “shame !”

Dear Charles, my dear love to thee ; ‘and’ to my dear Biddy,
who is a joy to my heart, for what I hear of the Lord in her.
Bid her be cheerful, and rejoice in the Lord once and again: if

1 [Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ similar."]

a ~ os — —a Oe ae a oe

452 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [22 June.

she knows the Covenant thoroughly,! she cannot but do ‘so.’
For that transaction is without her; sure and stedfast, between
the Father and the Mediator in His blood: therefore, leaning
upon the Son, or looking to Him, thirsting after Him, embracing
Him, we are His seed ; and the Covenant is sure to all the seed.
The compact is for the seed: God is bound in faithfulness to
Christ, and in Him to us: the Covenant is without us; a transac-
tion between God and Christ.?, Look up to it. God engageth
in it to pardon us; to write His law in our heart; to plant His
fear ‘so’ that we shall never depart from Him. We, under all
our sins and infirmities, can daily offer a perfect Christ ; and thus
we have peace and safety, and apprehension of love, from a
Father in Covenant, who cannot deny Himself. And truly in this
is all my salvation ; and this helps me to bear my great burdens.

If you have a mind to come over with your dear wife &c.,
take the best opportunity for the good of the public and your
own convenience. The Lord bless you all. Pray for me, that
the Lord will direct, and keep me His servant. I bless the
Lord I am not my own; but my condition to flesh and bloed is
very hard. Pray for me; I do for you all. Commend me to

all friends.
I rest,

Your loving father,
Ottver P.*

Courage, my brave Oliver! Thou hast but some three years
more of it, and then the coils and puddles of this Earth, and of
its poor unthankful doggery of a population, are all behind thee ;
and Carrion Heath, and Chancellor Hyde, and Charles Stuart
the Christian King, can work their will; for thou hast done with
it, thou art above it in the serene azure forevermore !

Fleetwood, I observe, did come over: in January next we find
the ‘Lord Deputy’ busy here in London with Bulstrode, and

1 Covenant of Grace; much expounded, and insisted on, by Dr. Owen, among
others ; and ever most fundamental of God’s Arrangement, according to the theory
of Oliver.

2 The reader who discerns no spiritual meaning in all this, shall try it again, if
I may advise him.

* Thurloe, iii. 572.

1655.] LETTER CC., WHITEHALL 453

others of the Treasury, on high matters of State.! He did not
return to Ireland; got into Major-Generalings, into matters of
State, on this side the Channel; and so ended his Deputyship ;
—dropping without violence, like fruit fully ripe; the manage-
ment of Ireland having gradually all shifted into Henry Cromwell's
hand in the interim.

LETTER CC?

Heng, fluttering loose on the dim confines of Limbo and the
Night-realm, is a small Note of Oliver's, issuing one knows not
whence, but recognisable as his, which we must snatch and
save. A private and thrice-private Note, for Secretary Thurloe ;
curiously disclosing to us, as one or two other traits elsewhere
do, that, with all his natural courtesies, noble simplicities and
affabilities, this Lord Protector knew on occasion the word-of-
command too, and what the meaning of a Lord Protector, King,
or Chief Magistrate in the Commonwealth of England was.

‘Margery Beacham,’ Wife of William Beacham, Mariner, lives,
the somnolent Editors do not apprise us where,—probably in
London or some of the Out Ports; certainly in considerable
indigence at present. Her poor Husband, in the course of
‘many services to the Commonwealth by sea and land,’ has quite
lost the use of his right arm; has a poor ‘Pension of Forty
shillings allowed him from Chatham;’ has Margery, and one
poor Boy Randolph, ‘tractable to learn,’ but who can get no
schooling out of such an income. Wherefore, as seems but
reasonable, Margery petitions his Highness that the said Randolph
might be admitted ‘a Scholar of Sutton’s Hospital, commonly
called the Charterhouse,’ in London.?

His Highness, who knows the services of William Beacham,
and even ‘a secret service’ of his not mentioned in the Petition
or Certificates, straightway decides that the Boy Beacham is

1 Whitlocke, p. 618 (7th Jan. 1655-6).

2[See also letter to Monck, July 26th (on the reduction of the forces in Scotland)
and two other short letters, Supplement, Nos. 108-110. ]

3[It is extremely doubtful whether the letter zs Cromwell's. Carlyle evidently
could only accept it by cutting out what he calls ‘‘impertinent interpolations.”’
He says these are in all the copies ‘‘ exactly indicated,” (see note below), but
neither by Howard, Scatcherd or in 7he Annual Register are they indicated at all.
Mr. Firth believes it to be an eighteenth century forgery. See his paper in the
Academy, Nov. 12, 1892.

4 Her Petition printed, without date, in Scatcherd, &c. ui infra,

=e

i ee 8 C > t . a

454 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [28 July.

clearly a case for Sutton’s Bounty, and that the Commissioners
of the same shall give it him. But now it seems the Chief
Commissioner, whose name in this Note stands —— Blank Blank,
is not so prompt in the thing ; will consider it, will &c. Consider
it? His Highness dockets the Petition, ‘We refer this to the
Commissioners for Sutton’s Hospital: 28th July 1655;’ and
instructs Thurloe to inform Blank Blank that he had much
better not consider it, but do it! Which there is no doubt
Blank Blank now saw at once to be the real method of the
business.

‘To Mr. Secretary Thurloe’

‘Whitehall,’ 28th July 1655.

You receive from me, this 28th instant, a

petition of Margery Beacham, desiring the admission of her son
into the Charterhouse ; whose Husband! was employed one day
in an important secret service, which he did effectually, to our
great benefit and the Commonwealth's.
I have wrote under it a common reference to the Commis-
sioners; but I mean a great deal more: That it shall be done,
without their debate or consideration of the matter. And so do
you privately hint to . I have not the particular
shining bauble [or feather in my cap] for crowds to gaze at or
kneel to, but [I have power and resolution for foes to tremble at]
To be short, I know how to deny petitions; and, whatever I
think proper, for outward form, to refer to any officer or office,
I expect that such my compliance with custom shall be [also]
looked upon as an indication of my will and pleasure to have the
thing done. [See therefore that the boy is admitted. }
Thy true friend,

Otiver P.*

[The Petition is a brief relation of a fact without any flattery. |?

1* who’ in the hasty Original, as if Margery’ s self or Son were meant. [The
‘‘ original” has ‘‘ I know the man, who.”
2(The passages in square brackets were omitted by Carlyle. ]

*Scatcherd’s History of Morley (Leeds, 1830), p. 332. Printed there, and in —
Annual Register (for 1758, p. 268), and elsewhere; without commentary, or indi-
cation Whence or How,—with several im mpespent interpolations which are excluded
here, Inthe Annual Register, vague reference is made to a Book called Collection —

1655.) LETTER CCI., WHITEHALL 455

LETTER CCI

We fear there is little chance of the Plate Fleet this year;
bad rumours come from the West Indies too, of our grand Arma-
ment and Expedition thither. The Puritan Sea-king mean-
while keeps the waters; watches the coasts of Spain ;—which,
however, are growing formidable at present.

The ‘ Person bound for Lisbon’ is Mr. Meadows, one of Secre-
tary Thurloe’s Under-secretaries ; concerning whom and whose
business there will be farther speech by and by. Of the ‘Com-
missioners of the Admiralty’ we name only Colonel Montague
of Hinchinbrook, who is getting very deep in these matters,
and may himself be Admiral one day.

To the General of the Fleet, ‘General Blake, at Sea’

‘Whitehall,’ 30th July 1655.
Sir,
We have received yours of the 4th, as also

that of the 6th instant,? both at once; the latter signifying the
great preparations which are making against you.

of Letters &c. ‘compiled by Leonard Howard, D.D.,’ who seems to be the first
publisher of this Note; author, I suppose, of the impertinent interpolations, which
vary in different copies, but being exactly indicated in all, are easily thrown out
again as here. In Howard’s Book (a disorganic Quarto, London, 1753; one
volume published, a second promised but nowhere discoverable), which is credibly
described to me as ‘one of the most confused farragos ever printed,’ search for
this Note has been made, twice, to no purpose; and with little hope of elucidation
there, had the Note been found. By internal evidence a genuine Note [sc]; and
legible as we have it.

{Carlyle’s agent apparently only looked at the first edition of Dr. Howard’s
Collection, of which there is only an imperfect copy at the British Museum. ‘The
letter will be found in the second edition (B.M. press mark G. 15341). The two
volumes were duly published, and although the book (like so many others of that
time) has no index, it has a table of contents, which enables the reader easily to
find what he wants.]_-

1(The person bound for Lisbon was Thomas Maynard. See Blake's letter of
August 31 (Thurloe, iii. 752) and Ca/. S. P. Dom., 1655, pp. 329, 512. In this last
entry he is expressly stated to have sailed in the Nantwich. Maynard was after-
wards English consul at Lisbon, appointed by the merchants and confirmed by
Cromwell, but (as Lord Clarendon stated), ‘‘ by his Majesty’s leave and direction,
therefore nothing upon that account ought to be a reproach to him.” It was,
however, made very much a reproach by a rival candidate, who endeavoured to
get him dismissed, but did not succeed. See Hist. WSS. Commissioners’ Report
on the Heathcote MSS. (pp. 24, 66). A great many of Maynard’s letters are still
extant, partly amongst the Heathcote (z.¢., Fanshaw) papers and partly amongst
the Portugal State Papers at the Public Record Office.)

2(Both printed in Thurloe (iii. pp. 611, 620).]

456 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [30 July.

Some intelligence of that nature is also come to us from an-
other hand, which hath occasioned us to send away this de-
spatch unto you, immediately upon the receipt of yours, to let
you know That we do not judge it safe for you, whilst things
are in this condition, to send away any part of the Fleet, as you
were directed by our Instructions of the 13th of June;! and
therefore, notwithstanding those orders, you are to keep the
whole Fleet with you, until you have executed the Secret
Instructions,’ or find the opportunity is over for the doing
thereof.

We think it likewise requisite that you keep with you the
two frigates which conveyed the victuals to you; as also the
Nantwich, which was sent to you with a person bound for Lis-
bon with our instructions to that King. And for the defects of
the Fleet, the Commissioners of the Admiralty shall take care
thereof; and be you confident that nothing shall be omitted
which can be done here for your supply and encouragement.

I beseech the Lord to be present with you. I rest,

Your very loving friend,
Outver P.*

Copied ‘in Secretary Thurloe’s hand ;’ who has added the fol-
lowing Note: ‘With this Letter was sent the intelligence of the
‘twenty ships coming across the Straits, and of the thirty-one
‘ships and eight fire-ships . . . in Cadiz ;’—dangerous ships and
fire-ships, which belong all now to the vanished generations:
and have sailed, one knows not whence, one knows not whither !

COMPLIMENT

PrecisELY in those same summer days there has come a
brilliant Swedish gentleman, as Extraordinary Ambassador to

1 Antea, Letter CXCVIIL.
2In Blake's Letter, aztea ;—they concern the ‘Silver Fleet’ most likely.

* Thurloe, iii. 688.

1655.] COMPLIMENT 457

this Country from the King of Swedeland.! A hot, high-
tempered, clear-shining man; something fierce, metallic, in the
lustre of him. Whose negotiations, festivities, impatiences, and
sudden heats of temper, occupy our friend Bulstrode almost
exclusively for a twelvemonth. We will say only, He has come
hither to negotiate a still stricter league of amity between the
two Countries ; in which welcome enterprise the Lord Protector
seems rather to complicate him by endeavouring to include the
Dutch in it, the Prussians and Danes in it,—to make it in fact
a general League, or basis for a League, of Protestants against
the Power of Rome, and Antichristian Babylon at large ;? which
in these days, under certain Austrian Kaisers, Spanish Kings,
Italian Popes, whose names it may be interesting not to remem-
ber, is waxing very formidable. It was an object the Protector
never ceased endeavouring after; though in this; as in other
instances, with only partial, never with entire success.

Observe however, as all Old London observes, on the night of
Saturday, July 28th, 1655, the far-shining Procession by torch-
light. Procession ‘from Tower-wharf to the late Sir Abraham
Williams’s in Westminster ;’ this brilliant Swedish Gentleman
with numerous gilt coaches and innumerable outriders and on-
lookers, making his advent then and thus ; Whitlocke, Montague,
Strickland (for we love to be particular) officially escorting him.
Observe next how he was nobly entertained three days in that
Williams House, at the Protector’s charges; and on the third
day had his audience of the Protector; in a style of dignity
worth noting by Bulstrode. Sir Oliver Fleming ; ‘ galleries full
of ladies,’ ‘Lifeguards in their gray frock-coats with velvet
welts ;’ lanes of gentlemen, seas of general public: conceive it
all; truly dignified, decorous ; scene ‘the Banqueting House of
Whitehall, hung with arras:’ and how at the upper end of the
room the Lord Protector was seen standing ‘on a footpace and
carpet, with a chair of state behind him;’ and how the Am-
bassador saluted thrice as he advanced, thrice lifting his noble
hat and feathers, as the Protector thrice lifted his; and then—
Bulstrode shall give the rest :

1[This was Mons, De Bonde. But before this, Sweden had sent an envoy, M.
Coyet, who landed in England on March 7. On June 15, during an audience
given to Coyet, Oliver ‘‘ burst forth into a eulogy of the great Gustavus Adolphus,
relating how he had welcomed the news of his successes with tears of joy in his
eyes, and how he had mourned for his death as if he had been himself a Swede.”
Commonwealth and Protectorate, iii. 431.]

2[For an account of Oliver’s views, as expressed to Bonde, see Commonwealth
and Protectorate, iii. 434.]

_< . . he — so A) Aa tay Tl he

458 - THE MAJOR-GENERALS [81 July.

‘After a little pause, the Ambassador put off his hat, and
‘began to speak, and then put it on again: and whensoever, in
‘his speech, he named the King his master, or Sweden, or the
‘Protector, or England, he moved his hat: especially if he
‘mentioned anything of God, or the good of Christendom, he
‘ put off his hat very low; and the Protector still answered him
‘in the like postures of civility. The Ambassador spake in the
‘Swedish language ; and after he had done, being but short, his
‘Secretary Berkman did interpret it in Latin to this effect ’"— —
Conceivable, without repetition, to ingenious readers. A stately,
far-shining speech, done into Latin; ‘being but short.’

And now ‘after his Interpreter had done, the Protector stood
‘still a pretty while ; and, putting off his hat to the Ambassador,
‘with a carriage full of gravity and state, he answered him in
‘English to this effect :’

My Lord Ambassador, I have great reason to acknowledge,
with thankfulness, the respects and good affection of the King
your master towards this Commonwealth, and towards myself
in particular. Whereof I shall always retain a very grateful
memory ; and shall be ready upon all occasions to manifest the
high sense and value I have of his Majesty’s friendship and
alliance.

My Lord, you are welcome into England ; and during your
abode here, you shall find all due regard and respect to be given
to your person, and to the business about which you come. 1
am very willing to enter into a nearer and more strict alliance
and friendship with the King of Swedeland, as that which, in
my judgment, will tend much to the honour and commodity of
both Nations, and to the general advantage of the Protestant
Interest. I shall nominate some Persons to meet and treat with
your Lordship, upon such particulars as you shall communicate
to them.

After which, Letters were presented, efceleras were transacted, ,
and then with a carriage full of gravity and state, they all with- —
drew to their ulterior employments, and the scene vanishes.1

1 Whitlocke, pp. 609, ro.

ee a ee Pe eo ee ae ae a
a - j

1655.) LETTER CCII, WHITEHALL 459

LETTER CCII?

Ir is too sad a truth, the Expedition to the West Indies has
failed! Sea-General Penn, Land-General Venables have them-
selves come home, one after the other, with the disgraceful
news ; and are lodged in the Tower, a fortnight ago, for quitting
their post without orders. Of all which we shall have some
word to say anon. But take first these glimpses into other
matters, foreign and domestic, on sea and land,—as the Oblivions
have chanced to leave them visible for us. ‘Cascais Bay’ is at
the mouth of the Tagus: General Blake seems still king of the
waters in those parts.

‘To General Blake, at Sea’

Whitehall, 13th September 1655.
Sir,

We have received yours from Cascais Bay, of
the 30th of August,’ and were very sensible of the wants of the
Fleet as they were represented by your last before; and had
given directions for three-months provisions,—which were all
prepared, and sent from Portsmouth, some time since, under the
convoy of the Bristol Frigate. But the Commissioners of the
Admiralty have had letters of yesterday that they are forced back

1[Two short notes, August 22 and 31, are in the Supplement, Nos, 111, 112. ]

2[The letter of August 30 has apparently not been preserved, but is alluded to
in a short note written by Blake on the following day, and printed in Thurloe
(iii. 752). The ‘‘last before” is evidently that written in the last days of August
(Thurloe, iii. 718). Blake’s picture of the state of the fleet is indeed a gloomy one.
‘* Our condition,” he writes, ‘‘ is dark and sad, and (without special mercy) like to
be very miserable ; our ships extreme foul, winter drawing on, our victuals expiring,
all stores failing, our men falling sick through the badness of drink and eating their
victuals boiled in salt water for two months space, the coming of a supply uncer-
tain. . . . We have no place or friend, our recruits here slow and our mariners
(which I most apprehend) apt to fall into discontents, through their long keeping
abroad. Our only comfort is that we have a God to lean upon, although we
walk in darkness and see no light. I shall not trouble your Highness with any
complaints of myself, of the indisposition of my body or troubles of my mind; my
many infirmities will one day, I doubt not, sufficiently plead for me or against me,
so that I may be free of so great a burden,”

The same letter gives a long account of the movements of the ships as regards
the Spanish fleet, which he finally decided not to attack, as having no authority to

do 4 ile rather the contrary. This Cromwell answers in the latter part of his
letter.

460 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [13 Sept.

into Plymouth by contrary winds, and are there now attending
for the first slack of wind, to go to sea again. And the Com-
missioners! of the Admiralty are required to quicken them by
an express; although it is become very doubtful whether those
provisions can come in time for supplying of your wants.

And for what concerns the fighting of the Fleet of Spain,
whereof your said letter makes mention, we judge it of great
consequence, and much for the service of the Commonwealth,
that it were fought; as well in order to the executing your
former Instructions, as for the preservation of our ships and
interest in the West Indies: and our meaning was, by our
former order, and still is, that the Fleet which shall come for
the guarding of the Plate Fleet, as we conceive this doth, should
be attempted, But in respect we have not certain knowledge
of the strength of the Spanish Fleet, nor of the condition of
your Fleet, which may alter every day,—we think it reasonable,
at this distance, not to oblige you by any positive order to
engage ; but must, as we do hereby, leave it to you, who are
upon the place, and know the state of those things, to handle
the rein as you shall find your opportunity and the ability of the
Fleet to be 2—as we also do for your coming home, either for
want of provisions or in respect of the season of the year, at
such time as you shall judge it to be for the safety of the Fleet.
And we trust the Lord will guide and be with you in the
management of this thing.

Your very loving friend,
Otiver P.

1“ commands’ in Thurloe.

2[** The Protector’s reply was a model of the considerate treatment due to a
faithful servant of his government. . . . How great was Oliver’s disappointment at
Blake's avoidance of an action may be gauged from the very date of his letter. On
September 13, Penn and Venables were already before the Council, and the whole
miserable story of the failure of the attack on San Domingo was publicly known.
It would have been something to have been able to set off against that disaster
a victory over a Spanish fleet, however profitless that victory might have been.
When, therefore, Blake, having come to the conclusion that it would be ruinous
to keep the sea longer, anchored in the Downs on October 6, the talk in London
was that he would find his way to the Tower. Those who spread the rumour had
httle knowledge of Oliver's skill in the judgment of men.” Gardiner’s Common-
wealth and Protectorate, iii. 396.]

all
— oe

1655.) LETTER CCIIL, WHITEHALL 461

‘P.S.’ In case your return should be so soon as that you
should not make use of the provisions now sent you, or but little
thereof, we desire you will cause them to be preserved, that they
may be applied to other uses.*

LETTER CCIII
‘To the Commissioners of Maryland’

Whitehall, 26th September 1655.
Sirs,

It seems to us by yours of the 29th of June,
and by the relation we received by Colonel Bennet, that some
mistake or scruple hath arisen concerning the sense of our letters
of the 12th of January last,!—as if, by our letters, we had in-
timated that we would have a stop put to the proceedings of
those Commissioners who were authorised to settle the Civil
Government of Maryland, which was not at all intended by us ;
nor so much as proposed to us by those who made addresses to
us to obtain our said letter: but our intention (as our said letter
doth plainly import) was only, to prevent and forbid any force or
violence to be offered by either of the Plantations of Virginia or
Maryland, from one to the other, upon the differences concern-
ing their bounds: the said differences being then under the
consideration of Ourself and Council here. Which, for your
more full satisfaction, we have thought fit to signify to you; and

rest,
Your loving friend,

‘Oliver P.’ +

A very obscure American Transaction ; sufficiently lucid for
our Cisatlantic purposes ; nay shedding a kind of light or twilight

* Thurloe, i. 724, in cipher [deciphered]; and seemingly of Thurloe’s composi-
tion. pre by Oliver. if af z 4
+ Lhd +» IV. 55
? Antea, p. 397,

462 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [26 Sept.

into extensive dim regions of Oblivion on the other side of the
Ocean. Bancroft, and the other American authorities, who have
or have not noticed this Letter, will with great copiousness
explain the business to the curious.

The Major-Generals are now all on foot, openly since the
middle of August last ;! and an Official Declaration published on
the subject. Ten military Major-Generals, Ten or finally Twelve?
with militia-forces, horse and foot, at their beck ; coercing Royalist
Revolt, and other Anarchy ; ‘decimating’ it, that is, levying Ten
per-cent. upon the Income of it ; summoning it, cross-questioning
it,—peremptorily signifying to it that it will not be allowed here,
that it had better cease in this Country. They have to deal with
Quakers also, with Anabaptists, Scandalous Ministers, and other
forms of Anarchy. The powers of these men are great: much
need that they be just men and wise, men fearing God and
hating covetousness ;—all turns on that! They will be support-
able, nay welcome and beneficial, if so. Insupportable enough,
if not so :—as indeed what official person, or man under any form,
except the form of a slave well-collared and driven by whips, is
or ought to be supportable ‘if not so?’ We subjoin a list of
their names, as historically worthy, known or unknown to the
reader, here.®

1 Order-Book of the Council of State; cited in Godwin (iv. 228).

2[Carlyle counts Dawkins as one of them. There were only eleven.] ~~

3 General Desborow has the Counties: Gloucester, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset,
Devon, Cornwall.

Colonel Kelsey: Kent and Surrey.

Colonel Goffe: Sussex, Hants, Berks.

Major-General Skippon : London.

Colonel Barkstead (Governor of the Tower): Middlesex and Westminster.

Lord Deputy Fleetwood (who never returns to Ireland) : Oxford, Bucks, Herts;
Cambridge, Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk,—for these last four he can appoint a
substitute (Colonel Haynes).

General Whalley ; Lincoln, Notts, Derby, Warwick, Leicester.

Major Butler ; Northampton, Bedford, Rutland, Huntingdon.

Colonel Berry (Richard Baxter's friend, once a Clerk in the Ironworks): Here-
ford, Salop, North Wales.

General (Sea-General) Dawkins : Monmouth and South Wales.

Colonel Worsley : Cheshire, Lancashire, Staffordshire.

The Lord Lambert: York, Durham, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Northum-
berland,—can appoint substitutes (Co/omel Robert Lilburn, Colonel Charles
Howard),

[Fleetwood, like Lambert, had two deputies, the reason no doubt being —

that as members of the Council of State their presence was needed in London,

and their time much occupied, The deputy for the Eastern Counties was, as 4
mentioned above, Major Hezekiah Haynes, appointed in October 1655. The

1655.] GEORGE FOX 463

Soon after this Letter, ‘in the month of October 1655,’ there
was seen a strange sight at Bristol in the West. A Procession of
Eight Persons; one, a man on _ horseback, riding single; the
others, men and women, partly riding double, partly on foot, in
the muddiest highway, in the wettest weather ; singing, all but
the single-rider, at whose bridle splash and walk two women:
*Hosannah! Holy, holy! Lord God of Sabaoth!” and other
things, ‘in a buzzing tone,’ which the impartial hearer could not
make out. The single-rider is a rawboned male figure, ‘ with lank
hair reaching below his cheeks ;’ hat drawn close over his brows ;
‘nose rising slightly in the middle ;’ of abstruse ‘down look,’
and large dangerous jaws strictly closed ; he sings not ; sits there
covered, and is sung-to by the others bare. Amid pouring deluges,
and mud knee-deep: ‘so that the rain ran in at their necks, and
they vented it at their hose and breeches:’ a spectacle to the
West of England and Posterity! Singing as above; answering
no question except in song. From Bedminster to Ratcliff Gate,
along the streets, to the High Cross of Bristol: at the High Cross
they are laid hold of by the Authorities ;—turn out to be James
Nayler and Company. James Nayler, ‘from Andersloe’ or
Ardsley ‘in Yorkshire,’ heretofore a Trooper under Lambert ;
now a Quaker and something more. Infatuated Nayler and
Company ; given up to Enthusiasm,—to Animal-Magnetism, to
Chaos and Bedlam in one shape or other! Who will need to be
coerced by the Major-Generals, I think ;—to be forwarded to
London, and there sifted and cross-questioned.! Is not the
Spiritualism of England developing itself in strange forms? The
Hydra, royalist and sansculottic, has many heads.

George Fox, some time before this, had made his way to the
Protector himself; to represent to him the undeserved sufferings
of Friends,—and what a faithful people they were, though sans-
culottic, or wearing suits sometimes merely of perennial leather.

second, Major Wm. Packer, was not appointed until Feb. 6, 1665-6. He was to
act as deputy in cos. Oxford and Herts, and jointly with Col. George Fleetwood
in co, Bucks (See Cad. S, P. Dom., 1655-6, p. 164, and 1656-7, p. 153). Berry had
co. Worcester, as well as those mentioned above. At first, no appointment seems
to have been made for South Wales and Monmouth, but in January 1655-6 they
were added to Berry's already large district, but with Colonel Rowland Dawkins and
Lieut.-Col, John Nicholas as his deputies (See Cad, S. P. Dom., 1655-6, p. 102).
Dawkins was never himself a Major-General, but the deputies were sometimes
loosely called so, and probably he had a very free hand. He had been for some
years governor of Carmarthen, and is sometimes styled governor of Tenby and
Cardiff also. Nicholas was governor of Chepstow. ]

1 Examination of them (in Harleian Miscellany, vi. 424-39).

464 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [Oct.

George’s huge Journal, to our regret, has no dates; but his
Interview with the Protector, once in these late months, is
authentic, still visible to the mind.!_ George, being seized in
Leicestershire, ‘ carried up to the Mews,’ and otherwise tribulated
by subaltern authorities, contrived to make the Protector hear
some direct voice of him, appoint some hour to see him. ‘It
was on a morning:’ George went; was admitted to the Protec-
tor’s bedchamber, ‘where one Harvey, who had been a little
among Friends,’ but had not proved entirely obedient,—the
Harvey who will write us a very valuable little Pamphlet one day,’
—was dressing him. “Peace be in this House!” George Fox
*was moved to say.’ Peace,O George. ‘I exhorted him,’ writes
George ‘to keep in the fear of God, whereby he might ‘ receive
Wisdom from God,’ which would be a useful guidance for any
Sovereign Person. In fact, I had ‘much discourse’ with him ;
explaining what I and Friends had been led to think ‘ concern-
ing Christ and His Apostles’ of old time, and His Priests and
Ministers of new; concerning Life and concerning Death ;—con-
cerning this unfathomable Universe in general, and the Light in it
that is from Above, and the Darkness in it that is from Below: to
all which the Protector ‘carried himself with much moderation.’
Yes, George ; this Protector has a sympathy with the Perennial ;
and feels it across the Temporary: no hulls, leathern or other,
can entirely hide it from the sense of him. ‘As I spake, he several
‘times said, “That is very good,” and, “That is true” ’—Other
persons coming in, persons of quality so-called, I drew back ;
lingered ; and then was for retiring: ‘he caught me by the hand,’
and with moist-beaming eyes, ‘said: “Come again to my house!
‘If thou and I were but an hour of the day together, we should
‘be nearer one tothe other. I wish no more harm to thee than I
‘do to my own soul.” ’—“ Hearken to God’s voice !” said George in
conclusion: “ Whosoever hearkens to zt, his heart is not. hardened ;””
his heart remains true, open to the Wisdoms, to the Noblenesses ;
with him it shall be well !—‘ Captain Drury’ wished me to stay
among the Lifeguard gentlemen, and dine with them; but I
declined, not being free thereunto.’

1[Dr. Gardiner puts this interview to Feb. 26, 1655. For his arguments in
support of this date, see Commonwealth and Protectorate, \ii. 111, note.]

2 Passages in his Highness’s Last Sickness,

3 Fox’s Journal (Leeds, 1836), i. 265,

eS —

_—

i A ee ee —

1655.] JAMAICA 465

LETTERS CCIV.—CCVI
JAMAICA

We said already the grand Sea-Armament, which sailed from
Portsmouth at Christmas 1654, had proved unsuccessful. It went
westward ; opened its Sealed Instructions at a certain latitude :
found that they were instructions to attack Hispaniola, to attack
the Spanish Power in the West Indies : it did attack Hispaniola,
and lamentably failed; attacked the Spanish Power in the West
Indies, and has hitherto realised almost nothing,—a mere waste
Island of Jamaica, to all appearance little worth the keeping at
such cost. It is hitherto the unsuccessfulest enterprise Oliver
Cromwell ever had concern with. Desborow fitted it out at Ports«
mouth, while the Lord Protector was busy with his First refractory
Pedant Parliament; there are faults imputed to Desborow: but
the grand fault the Lord Protector imputes to himself, That he
chose, or sanctioned the choice of, Generals improper to command
it. Sea-General Penn, Land-General Venables, they were un-
fortunate, they were incompetent ; fell into disagreements, into
distempers of the bowels; had critical Civil Commissioners with
them, too, who did not mend the matter. Venables lay ‘six
weeks in bed,’ very ill of sad West-India maladies ; for the rest,
a covetous lazy dog, who cared nothing for the business, but
wanted to be home at his Irish Government again. Penn is Father
of Penn the Pennsylvanian Quaker; a man somewhat quick of
temper, ‘like to break his heart’ when affairs went wrong; unfit
to right them again. As we said, the two Generals came
voluntarily home, in the end of last August, leaving the wreck of
their forces in Jamaica; and were straightway lodged in the
Tower for quitting their post.

A great Armament of Thirty, nay of sixty Ships; of Four-
thousand soldiers, two regiments of whom were veterans, the rest
a somewhat sad miscellany of broken Royalists, unruly Levellers,
and the like, who would volunteer,—whom Venables augmented
at Barbadoes, with a still more unruly set, to Nine-thousand : this
great Armament the Lord Protector has strenuously hurled, as a
sudden fiery bolt, into the dark Domdaniel of Spanish Iniquity in
the far West ; and it has exploded there, almost without effect.
The Armament saw Hispaniola, and Hispaniola with fear and
wonder saw it, on the 14th of April 1655: but the Armament, a

VOL. 11.—30

—— a ae

ee” ae a ee ore

466 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [14 April.

sad miscellany of distempered unruly persons, durst not land
‘where Drake had landed,’ and at once take the Town and Island :
the Armament hovered hither and thither; and at last agreed to
land some sixty miles off; marched therefrom through thick-
tangled woods, under tropical heats, till it was nearly dead with
mere marching ; was then set upon by ambuscadoes ; fought miser-
ably ill, the unruly persons of it, or would not fight at all ; fled back
to its ships a mass of miserable disorganic ruin ; and ‘ dying there at
the rate of two-hundred a day,’ made for Jamaica,!

Jamaica, a poor unpopulous Island, was quickly taken, as rich
Hispaniola might have been, and the Spaniards were driven away :
but to men in biliary humour it seemed hardly worth the taking
or the keeping. ‘Immense droves of wild cattle, cows and horses,
run about Jamaica ;’ dusky Spaniards dwell in haios, in unswept
shealings ; ‘80,000 hogs are killed every year for the sake of their
lard, which is sold under the name of hog’ s-butter at Carthagena :’
but what can we do with all that! The poor Armament continu-
ing to die as if by murrain, and all things looking worse and worse
to poor biliary Generals, Sea-General Penn set sail for home,
whom Land-General Venables swiftly followed; leaving ‘ Vice-
Admiral Goodson,’ ‘ Major-General Fortescue,’ or almost whoso-
ever liked, to manage in their absence, and their ruined moribund
forces to die as they could ;—and are now lodged in the Tower,
as they deserved tobe. The Lord Protector, and virtually England
with him, had hoped to see the dark empire of bloody Antichristian
Spain a little shaken in the West; some reparation got for its
inhuman massacrings and long-continued tyrannies,—massacrings,
exterminations of us, ‘at St. Kitts in 1629, at Tortuga in 1637, at
Santa Cruz in 1650 ;’ so, in the name of England, had this Lord
Protector hoped ; and he has now to take his disappointment.

The ulterior history of these Western Affairs, of this new
Jamaica under Cromwell, lies far dislocated, drowned deep, in the
Slumber-Lakes of 7'hurloe and Company ; in a most dark, stupefied,
and altogether dismal condition. A history, indeed, which, as you
painfully fish it up and by degrees reawaken it to life, is in itself
sufficiently dismal. Not much to be intermeddled with here. The
English left in Jamaica, the English successfully sent thither, pro-
sper as ill as need be; still die, soldiers and settlers of them, at

1 Journal of the English Army in the West Indies: by an Eye-witness (in Har.
Miscell. vi. 372-390). A lucid and reasonable Narrative. [And see Venables’ own
narrative and other documents relating to the expedition edited by Mr. Firth for
the Royal Historical Society, 1900. ]

3
|
|
:
|

1655.] JAMAICA 467

a frightful rate per day; languish, for most part, astonished in
their strange new sultry element ; and cannot be brought to front
with right manhood the deadly inextricable jungle of tropical con-
fusions, outer and inner, in which they find themselves. Brave
Governors, Fortescue, Sedgwick, Brayne, one after the other, die
rapidly, of the climate and of broken heart ; their life-fire all spent
there, in that dark chaos, and as yet no result visible. It is pain-
ful to read what misbehavour there is, what difficulties there are.!
Almost the one steady light-point in the business is the Pro-
tector’s own spirit of determination. If England have now a
‘ West-India Interest,’ and Jamaica be an Island worth something,
- itis to this Protector mainly that we owe it. Here too, as in former
darknesses, ‘ Hope shines in him, like a pillar of fire, when it has
gone out in all the others.’ Having put his hand to this work, he
will not for any discouragement turn back. Jamaica shall yet be
a colony ; Spain and its dark Domdaniel shall yet be smitten to
the heart,—the enemies of God and His Gospel, by the soldiers
and servants of God. It must, and it shall. We have failed in
the West, but not wholly ; in the West and in the East, by sea and
by land, as occasion shall be ministered, we will try it again and
again. ,
On the 28th of November 1655, the Treaty with France is
‘proclaimed by heralds and trumpets,’ say the Old Newspapers.?
Alliance with France, and Declaration against Spain,—within the
tropics where there is never Peace, and without the tropics where
Peace yet is, there shall now be War with Spain. Penn and Vena-
bles, cross-questioned till no light farther could be had from them,
are dismissed ; in Penn’s stead, Montagué is made Admiral. We
will maintain Jamaica, send reinforcement after reinforcement to
it; we will try yet for the Spanish Plate Fleets ; we will hurl yet
bolt after bolt into the dark Domdaniel, and have no Peace with
Spain. In all which, as I understand, the spirit of England, mind-
ful of Armadas, and wedded once for all to blessed Gospel Light
and Progress, and not to accursed Papal Jesuitry and Stagnancy,
coéperates well with this Protector of the Commonwealth of Eng-
land. Land-fighting too we shall by and by come upon; in all

1 Thurloe, iii. iv.,—in very many places, all in a most unedited, confused con-
dition. Luminous Notices too in Carte’s Ormond Papers, ii. Long’s History of
Jamaica (London, 1774), i. 221 et segg., gives in a vague but tolerably correct way
some of the results of Thurloe; which Bryan Edwards has abridged. Godwin (iv.
192-200) is exact, so far as he goes.

2In Cromwelliana, p. 134. 3 Jan. 1655-6 (Thurloe, iv. 338).

468 {THE MAJOR-GENERALS [14 April

ways, a resolute prosecution of hostilities against Spain. Con-
cerning the ‘ policy’ of which, and real wisdom and unwisdom of
which, no reader need consult the current Sceptical Red-tape
Histories of that Period, for they are much misinformed on the
matter.—

Here are Three Official Letters, or Draughts of Letters, con-
cerning the business of Jamaica; which have come to us in a very
obscure, unedited condition, Thomas Birch having been a little
idle. Very obscure; and now likely to remain so, they and the
others,—unless indeed Jamaica should produce a Poet of its own,
pious towards the Hero-Founder of Jamaica, and courageous to
venture into the Stygian Quagmires of T’hurloe and the others,
and vanquish them on his and its behalf!

Apparently these Official Letters are First-draughts, in the
hand of Thurloe or some underling of his; dictated to him, as is
like, by the Protector: they would afterwards be copied-fair,
dated, and duly despatched; and only the rough originals,
unhappily without date, are now left us. Birch has put them
down without much criticism; the arrangement of some is
palpably wrong. By the spelling and punctuation we judge
them to be of Thurloe’s handwriting ; but the sense is clearly
Oliver’s, and probably, with some superficial polishings, the com-
position, They cannot, after much inquiry, be dated except
approximately ; the originals are gone with Birch,! who has not
even told us in whose handwriting they were,? much less has
tried to make any sense of them for himself, the idle ineffectual
Editor! In fact, Z’hurloe in regard to these Jamaica businesses
has had to go without editing ; lies widespread, dislocated, dark ;
and, in this passage, read by Birch’s light, is mere darkness
visible. One of the Letters, we at length find, is even mis-
addressed,—seemingly by idle Birch, at random. Happily it is
with the sense alone that we are much concerned; and that is
in good part legible. Fancy Penn and Venables dismissed, after
some light got out of them by cross-questioning ; fancy ‘ Vice-
‘Admiral Goodson, Major-General Fortescue, Daniel Serle

1[There are about sixty volumes of the originals of the Thurloe Papers at the
Bodleian (Rawlinson MSS. A.). This magnificent collection was found in the
reign of William and Mary, hidden in the false ceiling of a garret in the chambers
which had once been Thurloe’s, in Lincoln’s Inn. It changed hands several times,
but was finally bequeathed to the Bodleian by Richard Rawlinson in 1755. Birch’s
great work had appeared some twelve years earlier. ]

2[The first two are fair copies, the third a draft, all in Thurloe’s hand. ]

1655.) LETTER CCIV., WHITEHALL = 469

‘Governor of Barbadoes,! and Major-General Sedgwick’ new
from England, made Commissioners, with Instructions,? with full
power over Jamaica,—and then read.

LETTER CCIV

Vice-ApmiraL Goopson, as his title indicates, went out as
second under Penn; whose place he now fills as chief. Letters
of his in Thurloe indicate a thick blunt stout-hearted sailor
character, not nearly so stupid as he looks ; whose rough piety,
sense, stoicism, and general manfulness grow luminous to us at
last. The Protector hopes ‘the Lord may have blessed Goodson
to have lighted upon some of the Enemy’s vessels, and burnt
them ;’—which is a hope fulfilled: for Goodson has already
been at St. Martha on the Spanish Main, and burnt it; but got
few ‘ships, nor any right load of plunder either; the people
having had him in sight for six hours before landing, and run
away with everything to the woods. He got ‘thirty brass guns
and two bases,’ whatever these are. The rest of the plunder,
being ‘accurately sold at the mast of each ship’ by public auction,
yielded just 471/. sterling, which was a very poor return. At
the Rio de Hacha (‘Rio de hatch’ as we here write it) ‘the bay
was so shoal’ no great ships could get near; and our ‘ hoys’ and
small craft, on trying it, saw nothing feasible ; wherefore we had
drawn back again. Santa Martha, and plunder sold by auction
to the amount above stated, was all we could get.®

To Vice-Admiral Goodson, at Jamaica

Whitehall, ‘ October [30] 1655.’ 4
Sir,

I have written to Major-General Fortescue
divers advertisements of our purpose and resolution, the Lord

1[In Serle’s case, it was a re-appointment, as he had been one of the former
Commissioners. ]

2 Given in Thurloe, iv. 634. 5 Goodson’s Letter, in zdid., iv. 159 ef seg.

4[This letter is dated by Vice-Admiral Goodson’s despatch of April 13 (Thurloe,
iv. 694) which speaks of the Protector’s letters of October 30, received by the
Marston Moor. Compare also Goodson and Sedgwick’s letter of Jan. 24 (Thurloe,
iv. 455) in which they allude to Oliver's exhortation to the Sea and Land forces to
prosecute their affairs with brotherly kindness. In this same letter they reply to
the Protector’s letter to Major-General Fortescue (now dead) as regards fortifica-
tion, raising of horse, and a possible attempt upon Cuba. ]

470 THE MAJOR-GENERALS __ [30 Oct.

assisting, to prosecute this business ; and you shall neither want
bodies of men nor yet anything in our power for the carrying-on
of your work. I have also given divers hints unto him of things
which may probably be attempted, and should ! be very diligently
looked after by you both, but are left to your better judgments
upon the place ; wherein I desire you would consult together
how to prosecute your affairs with that brotherly kindness that
upon no colour whatsoever any divisions and distractions should
be amongst you, but that you may have one shoulder for the
work ; which will be very pleasing to the Lord, and not un-
necessary, considering what an enemy you are like to have to
deal withal.

We hope that you have, with? some of those ships which
came last, near twenty men-of-war ; which I desire you to keep
equipt, and to make yourselves as strong as you can to beat the
Spaniard, who will doubtless send a good force into the Indies.
I hope, by this time the Lord may have blessed you to have
light upon some of their vessels, whether by burning them in
their harbours or otherwise. And it will be worthy of you to
improve your strength, what you can, both to weaken them
by parcels, and to engage them as you have opportunity, which,
at such a distance I may probably guess, would be best ‘ managed’
by not suffering, if you can help it, the new Fleet, which comes
from Spain, to go unfought, before they join with the ships that
are to the leeward of you.

We are sending to you, with all possible speed, seven more
stout men-of-war, some of them of forty guns, and the rest none
under thirty, for your assistance. This ship? is sent before, with
instructions, to encourage you to go on with the work ; as also
with instructions to Nevis, and the other Windward Islands, to
~ bring so many of the Plantations off as are free to come, ‘that
they may settle with you at Jamaica,’ And I desire you, with

1‘ would’ ix orig.
[Carlyle here inserted ‘‘ you’’ but the sense is good without it. ]
3[7.e,, the Marston Moor frigate. |

-e-!

ep ia a ae

1655.) LETTER CCIV., WHITEHALL 471

your lesser merchant-ships or such others as you can spare, to
give them all possible assistance for their removal and trans-
plantation, from time to time, as also all due encouragement
to remove.

You will see by the enclosed what I have writ to Major-
General Fortescue. And I hope your counsels will centre in
that which may be for the glory of God and good of this
nation, It is not to be denied but the Lord hath greatly humbled
us in that sad loss sustained at Hispaniola; no doubt but we
have provoked the Lord, and it is good for us to know so, and to
be abased for the same. But yet certainly His name is con-
cerned in this work ; and therefore though we should, and we hope
we do, lay our mouths in the dust, yet He would not have us
despond, but I trust gives us leave to make mention of His name
and of His righteousness, when we cannot make mention of our
own. You are left there; and I pray you set up your banners
in the name of Christ, for undoubtedly it is His cause. And
let the reproach and shame that hath been for our sins, and
through (also may we say) the misguidance of some, work up
your hearts to a confidence in the Lord, and for the redemption of
His honour from the hands of men who attribute their successes
to their Idols, the work of their own hands. And though He
hath torn us, yet He will heal us; though He hath smitten us,
yet He will bind us up; after two days He will revive! us, in
the third day He will raise us up, and we shall live in His sight.?
The Lord Himself hath a controversy with your Enemies, even
with that Roman Babylon, of which the Spaniard is the great
underpropper. In that respect you fight the Lord’s battles ;
and in this the Scriptures are most plain. The Lord therefore
strengthen you with faith, and cleanse you from all evil: and
doubt not but He is able, and I trust as willing, to give you as
signal successes as He gave your enemies against you. Only
the Covenant-fear of the Lord be upon you.?

1[Mis-printed “ ruin” in ‘Thurloe.] 2 Hosea, vi. 1, 2.
3 No other fear; nor is there need of any other hope or strength !

472 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [3000

If we send you not by this, yet I trust we shall by the next,
our Declaration setting forth the justness of this war.
I remain,
Your loving friend,
Ottver P.*

The Declaration here alluded to, of War with Spain, came out
on Tuesday, 23d October 1655 ;! which with sufficient approxima-
tion dates this Letter for us.2 By obscure intimations, allusions
to events, and even by recurrence of phrases, the following Letter
seems to have the same or a closely subsequent date ; but no sense
could be made of it till the Address, ‘Major-General Fortescue,
at Jamaica’ (which, being nonsense, we have to impute to Birch),
was erased,—was altered, by dim lights* and guessings still a
little uncertain, as below.

* Thurloe, iv. 130. [Now printed from Thurloe’s MS. copy at the Bodleian. ]

1 Jéid., iv. 117; Godwin, iv. 217; Antea, p. 467. [Carlyle has been misled,
as to this date, by a letter from Nieupoort, the Dutch ambassador, printed in
Thurloe and there dated Nov. 3 (z.e., October 24 old style). But this date is
manifestly too early, as the contents of Nieupoort’s letter show. The MS. trans-
cript, at the British Museum, is (no doubt correctly) dated Nov. [2]-r2. In this
letter, Nieupoort says that the Spanish ambassador left for Gravesend on Monday
last (z.e., October 29 old style) and that the declaration was published next day
z.e., Tuesday, the 30th. As a matter of fact, the ambassador left London on
Saturday, October 27, as is shown by his own letters (Szmancas Transcripts at
the Public Record Office) but perhaps remained in the neighbourhood until Monday,
as he did not reach Dover until the Tuesday. The Declaration (not of war, but,
as Cromwell says above, ‘‘ setting forth the justice of the war”) was approved and
ordered to be printed on October 26 (Ca/. S. P. Dom. 1655, p. 400) but its publica-
tion was probably purposely delayed until after Cardenas’s departure. It is printed
in one of the King’s Pamphlets (E. 1065, 1). All these letters and declarations
were sent out, as the West Indian correspondence shows, by the J/arston Moor
frigate, which, after many delays, set out at the beginning of December, reached
Barbados on the last day of the year, and Jamaica on the 15th of January. ]

2[For the date see note, p. 469 above. ]

3 Thurloe, iv. 633, &c. &c. [But see note on next page. ]

1655.) LETTER CCV., WHITEHALL 473

LETTER CCV

‘To Daniel Serle, Esquire, Governor of Barbadoes’ +
[But should be ‘To Luke Stokes, Esquire, Governor of Nevis’]

‘Whitehall, October 1655.’

Sir,
Those are first to let you know that myself

and this Government reckon ourselves beholding to you for the
ready expressions of your love in giving assistance to our late
design,? which indeed, though it hath miscarried in what we
hoped for, through the disposing hand of God, for reasons best
known to Himself, and, as we may justly conceive, for our sins,
yet is not this Cause the less His, but will be owned by Him, as
I verily believe: and therefore we dare not relinquish it,? but
shall, the Lord assisting, prosecute it with what strength we can,
hoping for a blessing for His name’s sake. ,

You will herewith receive some Instructions,* with encourage-
ments to remove your people thither, whereto I refer you: only
let me tell you, that if you shall think to desire some other things
which are not mentioned in those Instructions, ‘you may’ rest
upon my word that we shall be most ready to supply what they
may be defective in and you may reasonably demand, when once

1[There can be no doubt that this letter was written to Stokes, not to Searle. It
is very improbable that Cromwell would suggest to Searle to give up so important
a post as the government of Barbados, where he had his hands quite full with
managing transported delinquents, ordering a militia, etc. Moreover, Searle was
already a Commissioner—the only one left of the original four appointed in
December 1654, and again, when acknowledging the receipt of the declaration to
be read concerning transplantation to Jamaica, he definitely says that he has
received no orders or commands from his Highness on the subject (Thurloe, iv.
400). Stokes, on the other hand, fits the situation in every respect. He had
shown ready love and assistance to the design, he actually did remove himself
with his people (see Correspondence in Thurloe during 1655, 1656), he was made
a Commissioner (zézd., vi. 110), he thanks the Protector for honouring him with
his ‘‘lines of godly humility’’ by the Marston Moor (ibid., v. 66), and he writes
to Major Sedgwick of the ‘‘ undeserved and unexpected favours” of his Highness
to himself (zézd., iv. 603).]

2 Hispaniola: to which Searle, at Barbadoes, had given due furtherance, as the
Expedition passed. [But see note above. ]

*No!

4Thurloe, iv, 633-7; worth reading, though in great want of editing,

474 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [Oct.

you are upon the place,—where certainly you may be better able
to judge what may tend more to your accommodation than at a
distance. Surely the sooner you remove thither,! you will have
the more time to strengthen yourself, in such place or upon such
port as you shall like of. And for your own part, I have named
you one of the Commissioners there for managing of the whole
affair; whereby you will have your vote and interest in that
Government.

Having said this, I think fit to let you know that we have
twenty men-of-war already there, and are sending eight more,
many whereof have forty guns and upwards, and the rest above
thirty.2. We hope the Plantation is not lacking in anything ;
having at the least seven-thousand fighting-men upon the place :®
and we are providing to supply them constantly with fresh men,
and we trust they are furnished with a twelve-month’s victuals ;
and I think, if we have it in England, they shall not want.

We have also sent to the Colonies of New England like offers
with yours,‘ to remove thither; our resolution being to people
and plant that Island. And indeed we have very good reason to
expect considerable numbers from thence, forasmuch as the last
winter was very destructive, and the summer hath proved so very
sickly.

I pray God direct you; and rest,

Your loving friend,
‘Ouiver P.’*

1 Will mean, if our Addressing of this Letter is correct, that it had at one time
been intended and decided to send Searle of Barbadoes, an experienced man, the
ablest and principal English Governor in the West Indies, to take charge of
Jamaica himself. Which however, in the quick succession of new lights and
occurrences, never came to pass. [But see note on page 473 above. ]

— 2Same phrase in the preceding Letter.

Wt olen. — peed tLe, 3[The Protector no doubt believed this when he wrote, but it was much too

sanguine an estimate. In the January following, Sedgwick and Goodson plainly
told him that they had not 3,000 men, and of these many were sick and weak, and
dying at the rate of fifty a week; ‘‘which is much,” they add sadly, ‘‘ considering
our small numbers.” At the same time, Sedgwick wrote to Thurloe saying that
they seemed to think that he had 7,000 men, but he hoped they now understood
that the army, far from assisting in any design, was hardly in a capacity to main-
tain the Island. Thurloe iv. 454, 455. ]

4 Encouragements to them, as to ‘ your’ Colony, to emigrate thither.

* Thurloe, iv. 130. [Now printed from Thurloe's MS. copy at the Bodleian.]

7

$< 7". el lh ee =a. oe a eS ee  .. *  e,

1655.) LETTER CCVI, WHITEHALL 475

Undoubtedly to ‘Daniel Serle,’ or else to ‘ Major-General
Sedgwick,’ the other of the Four new Commissioners, this Letter
must have been addressed. With either of which Addresses it
remains historically somewhat obscure ; but is legible enough for
our purposes with it here. The next seems to be of slightly later
date.

LETTER CCVI

To Major-General Fortescue, ‘at Jamaica’

‘ Whitehall, October 30 (?) 1655.”!

Sir,

You will herewith receive Instructions for the
better carrying-on of your business, which is not of small account
here, although our discouragements have been many ; for which
we desire to humble ourselves before the Lord, who hath very
sorely chastened us. I do commend, in the midst of others’
miscarriages, your constancy and faithfulness to your trust in
remaining? where you are, and taking care of a company of
poor sheep left by their shepherd:* and be assured that, as
that which you have done hath been good in itself, and be-
coming an honest man, so it hath a very good savour here with
all good Christians and all true Englishmen, and will not be for-
gotten by me as opportunity shall serve.

I hope you have long before this time received that good
supply which went from hence in July last,t whereby you will
perceive that you have not been forgotten here. I hope also the
ships sent for New England are, before this time, with you : °—
and let me tell you, as an encouragement to you and those with
you to improve your utmost diligence, and to excite your courage

1[(Carlyle dated this ‘ November’ but Cromwell’s allusion to it in the letter to
Goodson (see p. 469 above) shows that it was written not later than October 30. ]

2[Mis-read ‘‘ every” by Birch. ]

3 Fortescue’s own expression : in a Letter of arst July 1655 (Thurloe, iii. 675).

4Vaughan, i. 303; Thurloe, iv. 4.

>Thurloe, iv. 157; one, the first of them, did arrive, Nov, 1st: ‘sent from
Jamaica to New England for provisions,’

—_—

a

a Oe ee

476 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [30 Oct.

in this business, though not to occasion any negligence in pro-
secuting | that affair, nor to give occasion to slacken any improve-
ment of what the place may afford, that you will be followed with
what necessary supplies, as well for your comfortable subsistence
as for your security against the Spaniard, this place may afford,
or you want.

And therefore study first your security by fortifying: and al-
though you have not moneys, for the present, to do it in such
quantities as were to be wished, yet, your case being as that of
a marching army, wherein every soldier, out of principles of
nature, and according to the practice of all discipline, ought to
be at the pains to secure the common quarters,—we hope no man
amongst you will be so wanting to himself, considering food is
provided for you, as not to be willing to help to the uttermost
therein. And therefore I require you and all with you, for the
safety of the whole, that this be made your most principal inten-
tion. The doing of this will require that you be very careful
not to scatter, till you have begun a security in some one place.
Next I desire you that you would consider how to form such a
body of good Horse as may, if the Spaniard shall attempt upon
you at the next coming into the Indies with his galeons, be in a
readiness to march to hinder his landing; ‘who’ will hardly
land upon a body of horse ; and if he shall land, be in a posture
to keep the provisions of the country from him, or him from
his provisions, if he shall endeavour to march towards you.

[We trust we shall furnish you with bridles, saddles and horse-
shoes, and other things necessary for that work, desiring you to
improve to the utmost what you have already of those sorts.
Should it be known that you had five hundred horse well ap-
pointed, ready to march upon all occasions in that island, even
that alone might deter the Spaniard from attempting anything
upon you. |? :

We have sent a Commissioner and Instructions into New Eng-

1[ Printed ‘‘ presenting ” in Thurloe. ]
2[The passage in square brackets was omitted by Carlyle.]

1655.) LETTER CCVIL, WHITEHALL 477

land, to try what people may be drawn thence.!_ We have done
the like to the Windward English Islands ; and both in England
and Scotland and Ireland, you will have what men and women
we can well transport.

We think, and it is much designed amongst us, to strive with
the Spaniard for the mastery of all those seas : and therefore we
could heartily wish that the Island of Providence were in our
hands again ; believing that it lies so advantageously in reference
to the Main, and especially for the hindrance of the Peru trade
and Cartagena, that you would not only have great advantage
thereby of intelligence and surprise, but ‘might’ even block up
Cartagena.” It is discoursed here that, if the Spaniard do at-
tempt ‘upon’ you, it is most likely it will be on the East end of
the Island, towards Cuba; as also that Cuba, upon Cuba, is a
place * easily attempted, and hath in it a very rich copper-mine.
It would be good, for the first, as you have opportunity, to inform
yourself, and if there be need, to make a good work thereupon,
to prevent them. And for the other, and all things of that kind,
we must leave them to your judgment upon the place, to do
therein as you shall see cause,

To conclude: As we have cause to be humbled for the reproof
God gave us at St. Domingo, upon the account of our own sins
as well as others’, so, truly, upon the reports brought hither to
us of the extreme avarice, pride and confidence, disorders and
debauchedness, profaneness and wickedness, commonly practised
in that Army, we cannot only bewail the same, but desire
that all with you may do so, and that a very special regard may
be had so to govern, for time to come, as that all manner of vice

1 Long Correspondences about it, and details, from assiduous Mr. Gookin, chief
of those Commissioners, in Thurloe, iv. [He was the only one.]

2*the same,’ 27 orig,

3[Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ Cuba, in its chief town is a place,” with a note,
‘** Cuba upon Cuba is a place’ as the original hasit. The first ‘Cuba’ here must,
of course, mean Cuba 7owz, now Havanna.”’ But it is more probably a mistake
or mis-reading for St. Iago upon Cuba; for the Generals, in their reply, say,
*‘ We had long since attempted St. Iago de Cuba, could our army have afforded
us but soomen,” etc. (Thurloe, iv. 457.).]

MS NSF e a

478 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [30 Oct.

may be thoroughly discountenanced, and severely punished ; and
that such a frame of government may be exercised that virtue
and godliness may receive due encouragement.
‘I rest,
‘ Your loving friend,
‘Ottver P.’*

The brave Fortescue never received this Letter ; he already
lay in his grave when it was written; had died in October last,
a speedy victim of the bad climate and desperate situation.
Brave Sedgwick, his Partner and Successor, soon died also :? a
very brave, zealous and pious man, whose Letters in Thurloe are
of all others the best worth reading on this subject. Other brave
men followed, and soon died ; spending heroically their remnant
of life-fire there,—as heroes do, ‘making paths through the im-
passable.’ But we must leave the heroisms of Oliver Protector
and his Puritans, in this Jamaica Business, to the reader’s fancy
henceforth,—till perhaps some Jamaica Poet rise to resuscitate
and extricate them. Reinforcement went on the back of rein-
forcement, during this Protector’s lifetime: ‘a Thousand Irish
Girls’ went ; not to speak of the rogue-and-vagabond species from
Scotland,—‘ we can help you’ at any time ‘to two or three
hundred of these.’? And so at length a West-India Interest
did take root ; and bears spices and poisons, and other produce,
to this day.

LETTERS CCVII.—CCXIV

Take the following Letters in mass ; and make some dim History
of Eleven Months from them, as best may be.

} * Thurloe, iv. 633. [Now printed from Thurloe’s draft at the Bodleian. ]

1 Jbid., iv. 153.

224th June 1656 (Long’s History of Jamaica, i. 257).

3 Long, i. 244; Thurloe, iv. 692, 5:—new Admonitions and Instructions from
the Protector, of Thurloe’s writing, 17th June 1656 (Thurloe, v. 129-131) ; etc.
[There was a proposal (and a great deal of correspondence with Henry Cromwell
on the subject), to send ‘‘ young wenches and youths” from Ireland. The Com-
mittee of Council voted that ‘‘a thousand girls and as many youths be taken up for
that purpose” (Thurloe iv. 75, 87), but it does not appear that they were ever

sent.
4[See also Supplement, Nos. 113-115. ]

1655.) LETTER CCVIL, WHITEHALL 479

LETTER CCVII

Henry Cromwe ti has no Major-Generals in Ireland, but has
his anarchies there also to deal with. Let him listen to this good
advice on the subject.

For my Son Henry Cromwell, at Dublin, Ireland

‘ Whitehall,’ 21st November 1655.

Son,

I have seen your letter writ unto Mr. Secretary
Thurloe, and do find thereby that you are very apprehensive of
the carriage of some persons with you, towards yourself and the
public affairs.

I do believe there may be some particular persons who are
not very well pleased with the present condition of things, and
may be apt to show their discontents as they have opportunity :
but this should not make too great impressions in you. Time
and patience may work them to a better frame of spirit, and
bring them to see that which, for the present, seems to be hid
from them ; especially if they shall see your moderation and love
towards them, whilst they are found in other ways towards you,
which I earnestly desire you to study and endeavour, all that
lies in you. Whereof both you and I too shall have the comfort,
whatsoever the issue and event thereof be.

For what you write of more help, I have long endeavoured it,
and shall not be wanting to send you some farther addition to
the Council, as soon as men can be found out who are fit for
that trust. I am also thinking of sending over to you a fit person
who may command the North of Ireland ; which I believe stands
in great need of one; and I am of your opinion that Trevor,
Ards, Audley Mervin,! &c. are very dangerous persons, and may
be made the heads of a new rebellion. And therefore I would
have you move the Council that they be secured in some very

1[Over ‘‘ Morgan,” crossed out. ]

480 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [22 Nov.

safe place, and the farther out of their own countries the better.
I commend you to the Lord ; and rest,

Your affectionate father,
Outver P.*

‘The Letter writ unto Mr. Secretary Thurloe,’ which is re-
sponded-to in this wise and magnanimous manner, does not ap-
pear in Thurloe or elsewhere. November 14th, a week before
the date of this, Henry writing to Thurloe excuses his present
brevity, his last Letter having been so very copious: that copious
Letter, now lost, is probably the one in question here.!

‘ November 22d,’ the day after this Letter, ‘came several ac-
‘counts from the Major-Generals out of divers Counties. Out
‘of Norfolk it was certified that Cleveland the Poet and one
‘Sherland a wild Parson? were apprehended’ at Norwich ‘by
Colonel Haynes,’ *® the Lord Fleetwood’s Substitute in those
regions. This is John Cleveland the famed Cantab Scholar,
Royalist Judge-Advocate, and thrice-illustrious Satirist and son
of the Muses; who ‘had gone through eleven editions’ in those
times, far transcending all Miltons and all mortals,—and does
not now need any twelfth edition, that we hear of. Still recog-
nisable for a man of lively parts, and brilliant petulant character ;
directed, alas, almost wholly to the worship of clothes,—which is
by nature a transient one! His good fortune quitted him, I
think, nine years ago, when David Lesley took him prisoner in
Newark. A stinging satire against the Scots had led Cleveland
to expect at least martyrdom on this occasion ; but Lesley merely
said, “ Let the poor knave go and sell his ballads ;”* and dis-
missed him,—towards thin diet, and a darkness which has been
deepening ever since. Very low, now at Norwich, where he is

* Thurloe, i. 725. [Original in possession of the Cromwell family. ]

1(The ‘‘last letter” is probably that answered by Thurloe on Noy. 13 (iv.
190), and stated by him to have been written on October 31, and to contain papers
of ‘‘ very ill-complexion.”” Its contents can be pretty well gathered from Thurloe’s
and the Protector’s replies. On Nov. 28, Henry Cromwell wrote again, sending
further information concerning those who without provocation slandered him
behind his back, and who, he believed, were ‘‘ stark madd.” (/ézd., p. 254.).]

2[His name was Sherman, and Haynes wrote that he was ‘‘of a sober life, yet
of most destructive principles to the government.’ Thurloe iv. 216.]

3 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 154); Thurloe, iv. 184. . /

4 Biog. Britan. (2d edit.), iii. 531 :—very ignorantly told there. [His life is in
the Dictionary of National Biography.)

‘ = 7
a 7 ioe «Oe ee

1655.] THE JEWS 481

picked up by Colonel Haynes : ‘ Thirty pounds a year;’! ‘lives
with a gentleman to whom he is giving some instruction ;’—
unfortunate son of the Muses. He indites a highflown magnani-
mous epistle to Cromwell, on this new misfortune ; who likewise
magnanimously dismisses him,? to ‘sell his ballads’ at what little
they will bring.

Wednesday, December 12th, 1655. This day ‘in a withdrawing-
room at Whitehall,’ presided over by his Highness, who is much
interested in the matter, was held ‘a Conference concerning the
Jews ;’ 3—of which the modern reader too may have heard some-
thing. Conference, one of Four Conferences, publicly held,
which filled all England with rumour in those old December
days; but must now contract themselves into a point for us.
Highest official Persons, with Lord Chief Barons, Lord Chief
Justices, and chosen Clergy have met here to advise, by reason,
Law-learning, Scripture-prophecy, and every source of light for
the human mind, concerning the proposal of admitting Jews,
with certain privileges as of alien-citizens, to reside in England.
They were banished near Four-hundred years ago: shall they
now be allowed to reside and trade again? The Proposer is
‘Manasseh Ben Israel,’ a learned Portuguese Jew of Amsterdam ;
who, being stirred up of late years by the great things doing in
England, has petitioned one and the other, Long Parliament and
Little Parliament, for this object; but could never, till his
Highness came into power, get the matter brought to a hearing.
And so they debate and solemnly consider; and his Highness
spake ;—and says one witness, “1 never heard a man speak so
well.” 4 His Highness was eager for the scheme, if so might be.
But the Scripture-prophecies, Law-learnings, and lights of the
human mind seemed to point another way; zealous Manasseh
went home again; the Jews could not settle here except by

1(This should be so/. Major Haynes’ argument appears to be that as he
‘liveth in a genteel garb"’ and yet confesses to having only so/. a year, he must
be receiving moneys in other ways; 7.¢., as a Royalist agent.

2 Life of Cleveland, prefixed to his Poems.

3 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 154).

4Sir Paul Rycaut (in Spence’s Anecdotes, p. 77 ;—as cited by Godwin, iv. 299).

5[‘* We have had very many disputations concerning the admittance of the Jews
to dwell in this Commonwealth,” Thurloe wrote to Henry Cromwell on Dec. x 5.
‘The point of conscience hath been only controverted yet; viz. whether it be
lawful to admit the Jews now out of England to return again into it... . The
matter is debated with great candour and ingenuity, and without any heat. What
the issue thereof will be I am not able to tell you, but am apt to think that nothing
will be done therein.” (Thurloe, iv, 321.).]

voL. 11.—31

TO ee a ee”
f

482 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [12 Dec.

private sufferance of his Highness ;—and the matter contracts
itself into a point for us.}

This same Jew-Wednesday, Wednesday the 12th, as a labori-
ous unimportant computation shows, was the ‘evening’ when
Republican Ludlow had the first interview with his Highness
and certain of his Council ‘in the Protector’s bed-chamber.’ ?
Solid Ludlow has been in Ireland; dreadfully sulky ever since
this Protectorate began. Solid Ludlow never would acknowledge
any Single Person, never he; not though the Single Person
‘were his own father.” He has nevertheless, by certain written
‘engagements,’ contrived to get across from Ireland, with much
trouble by the road; but will not now give any promise satis-
factory to his Highness. “He will be peaceable; yes, so long
“as he sees no chance otherwise: but if he see a chance— !—
«Should like, notwithstanding, to breathe a little air in his own
“country; that is all he is wanting for the present!” In fact,
our solid friend is firm as brass, or oak-timber; altogether
obstinate indeed, not to say dogged and mulish. The Protector,
who has a respect for the solid man, and whose course is con-
ciliation in such cases, permits him to reside in Essex; keeping
his eye upon him.

We might speak also of the famed ‘Committee of Trade,
which has now begun its sessions ‘in the Old House of Lords.’
An Assemblage of Dignitaries, Chief Merchants, Political Econo-
mists, convened by summons of His Highness;* consulting
zealously how the Trade of this country may be improved. A
great concernment of the Commonwealth, ‘which his Highness
is eagerly set upon.’ They consulted of ‘Swedish Copperas,’ and
such like; doing faithfully what they could.

Of these things we might speak; but prefer to end the year
by this small interesting fraction of Domestic Gossip, coming to
us in a small flute-voice across the loud Disturbances, which are
fallen silent now, more silent now than even it! Sorry only
that nobody can inform us who this blameworthy ‘person’ in
the Lord Henry Cromwell’s house is, or what her misdoings are :

1 Godwin, iv. 243-9.—To ‘ Manasseth Ben Israel, a Pension of too/. per annum,
payable quarterly, and commencing 20th February 1656’ (1657): Privy-Seals of
Oliver ; in Fifth Report of the Deputy Keeper of the Public Records (London,
1844), Appendix ii. p. 263.

(For the history of the Jews in England at this time, see Mr. Lucien Wolf's
nr Ben Israel, Resettlement of the Jews, and Crypto-Jews under the Common-
wealth,

2 Ludlow, ii. 551 e¢ segg.

3 Whitlocke, p. 618 (2d Nov. 1655).

1655.) LADY MARY 483

but the reader, skilled in perennial human nature, can sufficiently
supply these, and listen to the ancient small flute-voice with
intelligence :

The Lady Mary Cromwell to Henry Cromwell, Major-General of
the Army in Ireland.

‘** Hampton-Court,’ 7th December 1655.

“Dear Brotuer,—lI cannot be any longer without begging an
“excuse for my so long silence. You cannot but hear of my Sis-
“ter’s illness ; which indeed has been the only cause of it. You
“ might justly take it ill otherwise, and think there were want of
“that affection I owe unto you.

“Indeed, dear Brother, it was a great deal of trouble to me to
“think I should give you any occasion to think amiss of me: for
“T can truly say it, you are very dear to me; and it is a great
“trouble to me to think of the distance we are from one another ;
“and would be more, if I did not think you are doing the Lord’s
“service ;—and truly that ought to satisfy us, for while we are
“here, we cannot expect but that we must be separated. Dear
“ Brother, the Lord direct you in His ways, and keep your heart
“close unto Himself. And I am sure, therein you will have true
‘comfort; and that that will last when all this world shall pass
“away.

“IT cannot but give you some item of One that is with you,
“which, ‘it’ is so much feared by your friends that love you, is
“some dishonour to you and my dear Sister, if you have not a
“great care. For it is reported here, that she rules much in your
“Family ; and truly it is feared that she is a discountenancer of
“the Godly People. Therefore, dear Brother, take it not ill, that
“I give you an item of her: for, truly, if I did not dearly love you
“both and your honour, I would not give you notice of her.
“ Therefore I hope you will not take it ill, that I have dealt thus
“plainly with you. I suppose you know who it is I mean, there-
“fore I desire to be excused for not naming her. I desire not to
“ be seen in it; and therefore desire you that you would not take
“the least notice of my writing to you about it: because I was
‘desired not to speak of it ;—nor should I, but that I know you
“will not take it amiss from your poor Sister that loves you.

“ Dear Brother, I take leave to rest—your sister and servant,

* Mary CroMWELL.

ee ee ere ee eS ee ee er

— ae = _ te! aw ae

484 THE MAJOR-GENERALS _ [21 April.

« Her Highness! desires to have her love to you and my Sister ;
“and my Sister Franke her respects to you both.” ?

‘My Sister Franke’ and the Lady Mary, these are my ‘two
little wenches,’ grown now to be women; with dress-caps, fresh
blossoming hearts, musical glib tongues,—not uninteresting to
men! Anthony Ashley Cooper, I am told, is looking towards this
Lady Mary ; now turned of Eighteen,’ and a desirable match for
any youth of ambition,—but not attainable I doubt by Ashley.

LETTER CCVIII +

He that builds by the wayside has many masters! Henry
Cromwell, we perceive by all symptoms,® has no holiday task of
it ; needs energy, vigilance, intelligence,—needs almost unlimited
patience first of all. With a hot proud temper of his own to strive
against, too ; and is not nine-and-twenty yet : a young man whose
carriage hitherto merits high praise. Anabaptist Colonels ‘preach’
against him; Fleetwood, at headquarters, has perhaps a tendency
to favour Anabaptist Colonels, and send them over hither to us?
Colonel Hewson, here in Ireland, he, with a leaning that way,
has had correspondences, has even had an ‘ Answer’ from the
Lord Protector (now lost),° whereupon have risen petitionings,

1 our Mother.’
2Thurloe, iv. 293. [‘‘In the possession of the right honourable the Earl of
Shelburn.”’]
3'Vol.i. p.63.
4[Before this letter, see letter to Desborow, Jan. 29, and Speech to the Lord
Mayor, &c., on March 11, Supplement Nos. 116, 117.
5 See his Letters to Thurloe: Thurloe, iv. 254-676 (Letters from Nov. 1655 to
April 1656).
6[On Dec. 2, 1655, Hewson had petitioned the Protector to send the Lord Deputy
back to Ireland. Oliver's letter (first mentioned by H. Cromwell on Dec. 19) was
probably an answer to this. Of it, Thomas Harrison, one of the ministers sent over
with ‘‘the Lord Harry” to Ireland, writes : ‘‘ His Highness’ letter to Col. Hewson
and his reply to the same are boasted of, even by the meanest persons of that party,
with no little reflection upon my Lord [Henry]. They say it is evident by that from
his Highness that my Lord was sent over to be commanded, not to command ; to
serve and not to rule” (Thurloe, iv. pp. 276, 327, 349). It says much for the
Protector’s impartiality that he received so calmly what was covertly a complaint
against hisson. Indeed Henry evidently thought his father /oo impartial, and his
own place in danger. ‘‘ Let his Highness do with me as he pleases,’’ he wrote to
Thurloe; ‘‘send me into a Welsh cottage if it be for his service.” On Hewson's
reply to the Protector, see H. Cromwell's letter of December 26 (2d¢d., p. 348).
Thurloe excuses the Protector’s letter to Hewson on the ground that it was

1656.]} LETTER CCVIIL, WHITEHALL 485

colloquies, caballings,—much loud unreason to absorb into one-
self, and convert at least into silence! ‘Be not troubled with
that Business ; we understand the men :’ no ;—and on the whole,
read, and be encouraged, and go on your way.

For my Son Harry Cromwell

‘Whitehall,’ 2rst April 1656.

Harry,

I have received your letters, and have also
seen some from you to others, and am sufficiently satisfied of
your burden, and that if the Lord be not with you, to enable
you to bear it, you are in a very sad condition.

I am glad to hear what I have heard of your carriage: study
still to be innocent, and to answer every occasion, roll yourself
upon God,! which to do needs much grace. Cry to the Lord to
give you a plain single heart. Take heed of being over-jealous,
lest your apprehensions of others cause you to offend. Know
that uprightness will preserve you; in this be confident against
men.

I think the Anabaptists are to blame in not being pleased
with you. That’s their fault. It will not reach you, whilst
you with singleness of heart make the glory of the Lord your
aim. Take heed of professing religion without the power: that
will teach you to love all who are after the similitude of Christ.

necessary in consequence of the ‘‘ dissatisfaction’’ shown by him and others, but
declares that the letter contained nothing that any one can make evil use of, and
was written in ‘‘ much plainness and sincerity of heart’’; and that any one ‘‘im-
proving” it to the disadvantage of the Lord Henry will very ill requite his
Highness, and ‘‘ wrest his words to a meaning which hath no place in his own
heart” (zézd., p. 373). When Cols. Cooper and Sankey went over to Ireland in
January, the Protector wrote again to Hewson. It may be gathered from Hewson’s
reply (Thurloe, iv. 422) that he ‘‘ took notice” of Hewson’s affection for the Lord
Deputy, alluded to certain petitions sent from Ireland, urged Hewson to do what he
could to heal differences, and told him that he who could readily call persons and
forms Antichristian because they differed from himself, made a breach and made
reconciliation impracticable. ]

1[Unfortunately, the editor’s endeavours to discover what has become of this
letter have been fruitless. The expression ‘‘roll yourself upon God,” is very
curious. It might be surmised that the true text is ‘‘Call upon God,” and that
the transcriber having written ‘' roll,’’ Carlyle inserted ‘‘ yourself”? to make the
phrase a little more possible. }

was

.

486 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [21 April.

Take care of making it a business to be too hard for the men
who contest with you. Being over-concerned may train you
into a snare. I have to do with those poor men, and am not
without my exercise. I know they are weak, because they are
so peremptory in judging others. I quarrel not with them but
in their seeking to supplant others, which is done by some, first
by branding them with antichristianism, and then taking away
their maintenance.

Be not troubled with the late business: we understand the
men. Do not fear the sending of any over to you but such as
will be considering men, loving all godly interests, and men ‘ that’
will be friends to justice. Lastly, take heed of studying to lay
for yourself the foundation of a great estate. It will be a snare
to you: they will watch you; bad men will be confirmed in
covetousness. The thing is an evil which God abhors, I pray
you think of me in this.

If the Lord did not sustain me, I were undone: but I live,
and I shall live, to the good pleasure of His grace ; I find mercy
at need. The God of all grace keep you. I rest,

Your loving father,
OLiver P.

My love to my dear Daughter (whom I frequently pray for)
and to all friends.*

Such a Letter, like a staff dipped in honeycomb and brought
to one’s lips, is enough to enlighten the eyes of a wearied Sub-
Deputy ; and cheer him, a little, on his way! To prove that you
can conquer every opponent, to found a great estate: not these,
or the like of these, be your aims, Son Harry. ‘I pray you think
of me in this.’ And on the whole, heed not the foolish noises,
the fatuous lights; heed the eternal Loadstars and celestial
Silences,—and vigilantly march: so shall you too perhaps ‘find
mercy at need.’

* Autograph in the possession of Sir W. Betham (Ulster King of Arms), Dublin.
[When Oliver wrote this, he would not yet have heard of the birth of his grandson,
announced by a letter from Henry Cromwell written on April 18; intelligence
which, as a news-letter states, did ‘‘ very much rejoice the Lord Protector.’’ The
child was named after its grandfather. (Thurloe, iv. 742, 757-).]

1656.) LETTER CCIX., WHITEHALL = 487

LETTER CCIX

New Sea-Armaments, and ever new, are fitted out against the
Spaniards and their Papist Domdaniel.! Penn being dismissed,
Councillor Colonel Montague, already in the Admiralty, was
made Sea-General last January in his stead; and now Blake
and he have their flags flying somewhere off Cadiz Bay it would
appear.

To Generals Blake and Montague, at Sea

Whitehall, 28th April 1656.
My Lovine Frienps,

You have, as I verily believe and am per-
suaded, a plentiful stock of prayers going ‘on’ for you daily,
sent up by the soberest and most approved ministers and Chris-
tians in this nation; and, notwithstanding some discouragements,
very much wrestling of faith for you: which are to us, and I trust
will be to you, matter of great encouragement. But notwith-
standing all this, it will be good for you and us to deliver up
ourselves and all our affairs to the disposition of our All-wise
Father; who, not only out of prerogative, but because of His
wisdom, goodness and truth, ought to be resigned-unto by His
creatures, and most especially by those who are children of His
begetting through the Spirit. We have been lately taught ? that
it is not-in man to direct his way. Indeed all the dispensations
of God, whether adverse or prosperous, do fully read that lesson.
We can no more turn away the Evil, as we call it, than attain
the Good: And therefore Solomon’s counsel, of doing what we
have to do with all our might, ‘and’ getting our hearts wholly
submitted, if not to rejoicing, at least to contentation with what-
soever shall be dispensed by Him to whom alone the issues of all
things do belong, is worthy to be received by us.®

1[And fresh troops to be sent to Jamaica. See Supplement 118 (1, 2).]
21In the affair of Hispaniola, &c.

3Yes, I should say so;—as indeed the whole Universe, since it first had any
glimmerings of intelligence in it, has said !

——— see

488 THE MAJOR-GENERALS _ [28 April.

Wherefore we have thought fit to send this honest man,
Captain Lloyd,! who is known to us to be a person of integrity,
to convey to you some thoughts, wherein we do only offer to
you such things as do arise to us, partly upon intelligence, and
partly upon such a measure as at such a distance we take of that
great affair wherein you are engaged; desiring to give no rule
to you, but building much more, under God, upon your judg-
ments on the place than our own; forasmuch as our intelligences,
coming much upon the examinations of merchants ships and
such ways, may not be true oftentimes in matter of fact. And
therefore we do offer what we have to say rather as queries than
as resolutions.

We are informed that not many of the Plate Fleet are come
home ; viz. two Galeons and two Pataches;? and we hear they
are not so rich as they give out. We are informed also that the
Spaniards’ fleet in Cadiz is in no preparation to come out; and
some think they will not come forth, but delay you upon the
coast, until your victuals are spent, and you forced to come
home. We apprehend that, when General Blake was there
last year, they could not have told how to have manned-out a
fleet, if the merchants there and gentlemen interested had not
(principally for their own interest in the return of their ‘ Plate’
fleet) done it.

We are informed that they sent what men they could well
spare, by those six or seven ships* which they sent to the West
Indies in March last. We know also that it hath ever been
accounted that the Spaniards’ great want is men, as well as
money at this time. What numbers are in and about Cadiz
you best know. We only discourse probabilities: Whether now
it might not be worthy to be weighed by you and your council
of war, whether this fleet of theirs now in Cadiz might not be

1[For Captain Lloyd’s mission to the fleet, see Carte, Original Letters, ii. 102,
IIS. ‘
2 Galeone, in the Spanish Dictionary, is defined as an ‘Armed ship of burden
used for trade in time of war;’ Patache as ‘a Tender, or smaller ship to wait
upon the Ga/eone.’

3[‘*6 or 27” in Thurloe’s draft. ]

1656] LETTER CCX., WHITEHALL 489

burnt or otherwise destroyed? Whether Pontall and the Forts
are so considerably stronger as to discourage from such an at-
tempt? Whether Cadiz itself be unattemptable ; or the Island
on which it stands be noways to be separated from relieving the
town by the bridge,! the Island being so narrow in some parts
of it? Whether any other place be attemptable ; especially that
of the town and castle of Gibraltar,—which if possessed and
made tenable by us,? would it not be both an advantage to our
trade and an annoyance to the Spaniard ; and enable us, without
keeping so great a fleet on that coast, with six nimble frigates
lodged there to do the Spaniard more harm than by a fleet, and
ease our own charge ?

You may discourse freely with the bearer concerning anything
contained in this letter, to whom the whole was communicated,
that so he might be able to bring back to us a more particular
account of things. The Lord guide you to do that which may
be pleasing in His sight.

I remain,
Your very loving friend,
Ouiver P.*

LETTER CCX

Capiz could not be attempted. Here, eight days later, is an-
other message to the same parties, concerning another business.
‘The Portugal,’ it appears, has been behaving in a very paltry
fashion; and now ‘Mr. Meadows, one of Thurloe’s Under-
Secretaries, is gone out to him; whose remonstrances, the Fleet
lending them its emphasis, will probably be effectual !

1 Means ‘noways to be separated from the Mainland, by ruining its Bridge: ’
Cadiz were thus in reality zsolated.
2 Hear, hear!

*Thurloe, iv. 744. [Draft. In the handwriting of Sec. Thurloe. The in-
structions to Capt. Lloyd are also there. |

2) J:

— > os Pe ee ee ee a ee

490 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [6 May.

To Generals Blake and Montague, at Sea

Whitehall, 6th May 1656.
GENTLEMEN,

You will perceive, by the Instructions! here-
with sent you, what is expected by myself and the Council at
your hands. And although we are satisfied that you will believe
we have sufficient grounds to give you these directions, yet we
have thought fit, for the farther strengthening you unto this
action, to give you a short knowledge of the true state of the
difference between us and the King of Portugal.

You very well know that it is very near two years since we
and the Ambassador of Portugal did agree a Treaty, they having
wronged us and our merchants, and took part with the late King
against us. When the Articles were fully agreed by the Ambas-
sador, who had full power and authority to conclude with us, we
on our part ratified and confirmed the same, and sent it to the
King of Portugal to be ratified and executed also by him. He,
delaying to do it according to the first Agreement, in which
there were some preliminaries to be performed by him before
we would enter upon the whole body of a Treaty,—not only
refused to give us satisfaction therein, but instead thereof sent
us a pretended ratification of a Treaty, so different from what
was agreed by his Ambassador that it was quite another thing.
In some essential Articles, it was proposed that if we would
condescend to some amendments, the King of Portugal would
agree to confirm the whole.

Whereupon we sent Mr. Maynard to have the Treaty con-
summated: but finding by his return? that there was little
reality, and nothing but delays intended, we could not satisfy

1Thurloe, iv. 769: brief ‘instructions,’ To seize the Portugal's ships, fleets,
almost the Portugal's self, if he will not do justice. ’

2[Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ by the answer he gave us,” but Cromwell means
exactly what he says. It was Maynard’s abrupt dismissal by the King which
showed that Portugal meant to yield nothing. See note on p. 455 above.

Of the new negotiations, Sec. Nicholas wrote from Cologne: ‘‘ Meadows is
sent to Lisbon for the King of Portugal's last resolution about ratifying his treaty

with Cromwell, who has left out the article about religion, rather than not have — iM
the liberty of the ports in Portugal,” (See Ca/. S. P. Dom., 1655-56, p. 236.).]

1656.) LETTER CCX., WHITEHALL 491

ourselves without sending another person, fully instructed, and
authorised by us to take away all scruples by yielding to their
own amendments ; thereby to discern whether they were sincere !
or not. But, contrary to all expectation, we find, by the account
the said person hath now given us, that we are put upon it to
recede from all those things that were provisional, either for
the good of the State or of our Merchants, or else we must have
no Peace with them.?

In one of the Articles agreed with the Ambassador, it was
expressed, that the merchants should enjoy liberty of conscience,
in the worship of God in their own houses and aboard their
ships ; enjoying also the use of English Bibles, and other good
books ; taking care that they did not exceed this liberty. Now,
upon the sending of Mr. Meadow,—unless we will agree to
submit this Article to the determination of the Pope, we cannot
have it: whereby he would bring us to an owning of the Pope,
which, we hope, whatever befall us, we shall not, by the grace of
God, be brought unto. And upon the same issue is that Article
put whereby it is provided and agreed by his Ambassador, that
any ships coming to that harbour, any of their* company, if they
shall run away from their said ships, shall be brought back again
by the Magistrate ; and the Commanders of the said ships ‘shall’
not ‘be’ required to pay the said runaways their wages, upon
pretence ‘that’ they are turned Catholics,—which may be a
colour for any knave to leave his duty, or for the Roman Catho-
lies to seduce our men; which was thought necessary to be pro-
vided against. Yet to this also, as I said before, they would
not consent without the approbation of the Pope, although it
was agreed also by their Ambassador.

Upon the whole matter, we find them very false to us, who
intended nothing but what was simply honest. And truly we
cannot believe that Article that was for our good, was really
intended by them. And we may now plainly see what the

1‘ real’ in orig. 2 Let them have a care!
3No! 4[** whose’’ in Thurloe. }

492 THE MAJOR-GENERALS {6 May.

effect is like to be of any treaty had or made with people or
states guided by such principles, who, when they have agreed,
have such an evasion as these people have manifestly held forth
in their dealing with us. Wherefore we pray you to be very
exact in the prosecution of your Instructions; which truly I
hope do not arise from the hope of gain, but from a sense of
duty, that, seeing we cannot secure our people in their lives,
liberties and estates, by a pretence of a treaty; nor yet answer
the just demands this nation hath for wrongs done them ; but
must in some sort be guilty of bringing our People as it were
into a net, by such specious shows which have nothing but
falseness and rottenness in them ;—we are necessitated, having
amongst ourselves found out no possible expedient, though we
have industriously sought it, to salve these things; [and] have
concluded out of necessity and not out of choice, to go in this way.

You will receive herewith the copy of an Instruction given
and sent to Mr. Meadows, wherein is a time limited for the
King’s answer, and we desire that this may not be made use
of by the King to delay or deceive us: nor that you, upon the
first sight hereof, delay to take the best course you can to effect
your Instructions, or that the Portugal should get his Fleet
home before you get between him and home, and so the birds
be flown. We know not what your affairs are at the present, but
are confident that nothing will be wanting on your part for the
effectual accomplishment of this service. But knowing that all
ways, and works, and ourselves, are ever at the perfect dis-
position of the Lord and His providence, and that our times are
in His hands, we therefore recommend you to the grace and
guidance of our good God, who, we hope, hath thoughts of
mercy towards us: and that He would guide and bless you is

the prayer of,
Your loving friend,

‘Outver P.’

We desire in this business that your aim be, if the providence
of God gives opportunity, to take that from them which is con-

1656.) LETTER CCXI,, WHITEHALL 493

siderable, or else not to make known your instructions, nor to
make a breach upon them.*

In Thurloe’s handwriting ; but very evidently Oliver's com-
position every sentence of it. There will clearly be no living for
the Portugal, unless he decide to throw away his jockeyings and
jesuitries, and do what is fair and square !

LETTER CCXI

A sMALL vestige, it is presumable, of this Protector’s solicitude
for the encouragement of Learning and Learned Men. Which
is a feature of his character very conceivable to us, and well
demonstrated otherwise by testimony of facts and persons. Such
we shall presume the purport of this small Civic Message to be:

For Our worthy Friends the Committee of the City of London
Sor Gresham College : These

Whitehall, gth May 1656.
GENTLEMEN,
We understanding that you have appointed

an election this afternoon of a Geometry Professor in Gresham
College, We desire you to suspend the same for some time, till
We shall have an opportunity to speak with some of you in
order to that business. I rest,
Your loving friend,
Ottver P.+

Historical Neal says zealously, ‘If there was a man in England
‘who excelled in any faculty or science, the Protector would find
‘him out, and reward him according to his merit.’ The renowned
Dr. Cudworth in Cambridge, I have likewise expressly read, had
commission to mark among the ingenuous youths of that Uni-
versity such as he deemed apt for Public Employment, and to
make the Protector aware of them. Which high and indeed
sacred function we find the Doctor, as occasion offers, intent to
discharge.!_ The choice this Protector made of men,—‘ in nothing
‘was his good understanding better discovered ;’ ‘which gave a

* Thurloe, iv. 768. [But postscript omitted.]
+ Original, with Oliver's Signature, in the Guildhall Library, London.

1 Thurloe, ili. 614; v. 522; &c,

we ee 2

ee

rw

494 THE MAJOR-GENERALS — [29 May.

‘general satisfaction to the Public,’ say the Histories. As we
can very well believe! He who is himself a true man, has a
chance to know the truth of men when he sees them; he who
is not, has none: and as for the poor Public and its satisfactions,
—alas, is not the kind of ‘man’ you set upon it the liveliest
symbol of its, and your, veracity and victory and blessedness, or
unveracity and misery and cursedness; the general summation,
and practical outcome, of all else whatsoever in the Public, and
in you?

LETTER CCXII

ANOTHER small Note still extant; relating to very small,
altogether domestic matters.

‘For my loving Son Richard Cromwell, Esquire, at Hursley:
These’
‘ Whitehall,’ 29th May 1656.
Son,
You know there hath often been a desire

to sell Newhall, because in these four years last past it hath
yielded very little or no profit at all, nor ever did I hear you
ever liked it for a seat.

It seems there may be a chapman had, who will give 18,000/.
It shall be either laid out where you shall desire, at Mr. Wallop’s
or elsewhere, and the money put into feoffees’ hands in trust to
be so disposed: or I shall settle Burleigh; which yields near
1,3001.2 per annum, besides the woods. Waterhouse will give
you farther information.

I rest,
Your loving father,
Outver P.

My love to your Father and Mother,’ and your dear Wife.*
1 Burnet, in Neal, ii. 514; 2b. ii. 461, 494.
2 Written above is ‘ 1,260/.’ Mr. and Mrs. Mayor of Hursley.

* Original in the possession of Henry William Field, Esq., of the Royal Mint.
[Now in the possession of Sir Richard Tangye, and reproduced in his ‘‘ Two
Protectors.” Holograph.}

i i ee Oe a a 77 ¢'F

1656.) LETTER CCXIL, WHITEHALL 495

Newhall is the House and Estate in Essex which had once
belonged to the great Duke of Buckingham. Burleigh I guess
to be Burleigh on the Hill, near Oakham, another House of the
great Duke’s, which Oliver in the beginning of his military
services had known well: he took it by assault in 1643. Of
Oliver's Lands, or even of his Public Lands granted by the
Parliament, much more of the successive phases his Estate
assumed by new purchase and exchange, there is, as we once
observed already, no exact knowledge now anywhere to be had.
Obscure incidental notices flit through the Commons Journals
and other records ; but the sum of the matter alike with the
details of it are sunk in antique Law-Parchments, in obliterated
Committee-Papers, far beyond human sounding. Of the Lands
he died possessed of, there is a List extant, more or less accurate 3
which is worth looking at here. On quitting the Protectorship
in 1659, Richard Cromwell, with the hope of having his debts
paid and some fixed revenue allowed him, gave-in a Schedule
of his Liabilities and of his Properties, the latter all in Land;
which Schedule poor Noble has found somewhere ;1 and copied,
probably with blunders. Subjoined is his List of the Properties,
some of them misspelt, most likely ; the exact localities of which,
no indication being given or sought by Noble, may be a problem
for persons learned in such matters.? To us, only Burleigh and
Newhall are of importance here.

1 Not where he says he did, ‘in Commons Journals, 14th May 1659’ (Noble, i.
333, 4). [Noble does not say so, His entry is headed ‘The schedule of the
Protector’s debts as delivered unto the Parliament ; copied from the Journals of
the House of Commons. The schedule of debts, May 14, 1659, &c. &c.” This is
absolutely correct. But the schedule, so dated, was not read in the House until
May 25, and is therefore printed under that date. Noble mentions (without
endorsing) Morant's statement that Cromwell gave Newhall up in part payment
for Hampton Court. This is certainly a mistake. It was settled as stated below,
for security of the Lady Frances’ portion, who made an attempt, though an un-
successful one, to keep it at the Restoration (See Hist. MSS. Commissioners’
Report on the Frankland-Russell-Astley Papers, p. 25). It was, as is well known,
granted to the Duke of Albemarle. }

2 REAL EstTATE IN 1659.

rom asa settled on my Brother Henry Cromwell £989 Z
Souk upon marriage: wortha-year . : bi ae

Newhall with woods, settled for security of 15,000/. for a
Portion for my Sister Frances . ; A

; : 1200 0 Oo

Sonica : } : : é : : ; : : 549 7 3
: F : ; : ; F ; : : 448 0 0
Tydenham ; f ; : : j R ; P 3121 6
Woolaston ; F : 4 664 16 6

[Footnote continued on next page.

eee oo ee

~~‘ — e, ee ee ee eee

496 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [23 June.

Newhall, we can observe, was not sold on the occasion of this
Letter, nor at all sold; for it still stands in the List of 1659;
and with some indication, too, as to what the cause of now
trying to sell it may have been. ‘For a Portion to my Sister
Frances, namely. Noble’s citations from Morant’s History of
Essex ; his and Morant’s blunderings and somnambulancies, in
regard to this matter of Newhall, seem almost to approach the
sublime.!

Leaving these, let us attend a little to the ‘Portion for my
Sister Frances ;’ concerning which and whom a few lines of
musical domestic gossip, interesting to the mind, are once more
audible, from the same flute-voice above listened to. ‘ Mr. Rich,’
we should premise, is the Lord Rich’s Son, the Earl of Warwick’s
Grandson ; heir-apparent, though he did not live to be heir :—
pious old Earl of Warwick, whom we have seen heretofore as
Admiral in the Long-Parliament time ; the poor Earl of Holland’s
Brother. Here are affairs of the heart, romances of reality, such
as have to go on in all times, under all dialects and fashions of
dress-caps, Puritan-Protectoral and other.

Chaulton, with woods. ‘ : 2 b 2 “ 500 0 O
Burleigh . : ; : ; - - : ; : 1236 12 8
Okham . : . : z : : ~ : ; 326 14 II
Egelton . ; , ; ; ; ; : : ‘ 79 11 6

These are all the Lands at this date in the possession of the Oliver Family. The
five names printed here in italics are still recognisable: Villiers (Duke of Buck-
ingham) Properties all of these; the first two in Leicestershire, the last three
contiguous to one another in Rutlandshire: of the others I at present (A.D. 1845)
know nothing. As to poor Richard's finance-budget, encumbered ‘with 2,000/.
yearly to my Mother,’ ‘ with 3,o00/. of debt contracted in my Father's lifetime,’
and plentifully otherwise,—it shall not concern us farther.

(Note of 1857.) The other Properties have now also been discovered: Lands,
these, of the confiscated Marquis of Worcester ; all of them in the South-Wales or
Ragland quarter. ‘Gower’ is in Glamorgan, not far from Swansea; ‘ Chepstall’
is Chepstow ; ‘Tydenham,’ 7idenham, in the same neighbourhood ; ‘ Woolaston’
is in Gloucestershire, four miles from Chepstow; ‘Chaulton,’ one of the Char/tons
in the same county ; ‘ Magore,’ JZagor (St. Mary's) in Monmouthshire. For Gower,
Tidenham, Magor, and their connection with Cromwell, there is still direct proof ;
for the others, which are all Ragland manors too, there is thus presumption to the
verge of proof. So that all these Properties, in Richard’s Schedule, are either
Buckingham or else Worcester ones,—grants by the Nation ;—and of ‘ my ould
land’ (now settled otherwise, or indeed not concerned in this question) there is no
mention here. (Newspaper called Motes and Queries, Nos. 21-28; London, 23rd
March-r1th May 1850.) \

1 Noble, i. 334, 5-

1656.] LADY MARY 497

The Lady Mary Crommell to Henry Cromwell, Major-General of
the Forces in Ireland

‘*¢ Hampton Court,’ 23d June 1656.

“ Dear Broruer,—Your kind Letters do so much engage my
“ heart towards you, that I can never tell how to express in writ-
“ing the true affection and value I have of you,—who, truly I
“think, none that knows you but you may justly claim it from.!

“JT must confess myself in a great fault in the omitting to
“write to you and your dear Wife so long a time, but I suppose
“you cannot be ignorant of the reason, which truly has been the
“only cause; which is this business of my Sister Frances and
“Mr. Rich. Truly I can truly say it, for these three months I
“think our Family, and myself in particular, have been ‘in’ the
“ greatest confusion and trouble as ever poor Family can be in.
“The Lord tell us His ‘mind’? in it; and settle us, and make
“us what He would have us to be! I suppose you heard of the
“ breaking-off of the business ; and, according to your desire in
“your last Letter, as well as I can, I shall give you a full account
‘‘of it, which is this:

« After a quarter of a year’s admittance, my Father and my
“Lord Warwick began to treat about the Estate; and it seems
“my Lord did not offer that that my Father expected. I need
“not name particulars: for I suppose you have had it from better
“hands: but if I may say the truth, I think it was not so much
“estate, as some private reasons, that my Father discovered to
“none but to my Sister Frances and his own Family ;—which
“was a dislike to the young person, which he had from some re-
“ports of his being a vicious man, given to play and such-like
“things ; which office was done by some who had a mind to
“break-off the match. My Sister, hearing these things, was
“resolved to know the truth of it;? and truly did find all the
“reports to be false that were raised of him. And to tell you
“the truth, they were so much engaged in affection before this,
“that she could not think of breaking it off, so that my Sister
“engaged me and all the friends she had, who truly were very
“few, to speak in her behalf to my Father, which we did; but
“could not be heard to any purpose: only this my Father pro-
“mised, that if he were satisfied as to the report, the estate
“should not break it off; which she was satisfied with.

1 Young-Lady’s grammar ! 2 Word omitted. 3 Poor little Frances !
VOL. 11.—32

ee ea ee ee NS Ee yy ee ee etre re
RS RE gh ert Ramee en een ee a a

~

iy

498 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [23 June.

«But after this, there was a second Treaty; and my Lord
“« Warwick desired my Father to name what it was he demanded
“more ; and to his utmost he would satisfy him. So my Father
“upon this made new propositions, which my Lord Warwick has
«answered as much as he can; but it seems there is five-hundred
‘pounds a year in my Lord Rich’s hands, which he has power
“ to sell, and there are some people, that persuade his Highness,
“that it would be dishonourable for him to conclude of it with-
“out these 500/ a year be settled upon Mr. Rich, after his
“father’s death. And my Lord Rich having no esteem at all of
“his son, because he is not so bad as himself, will not agree to
“it; and these people upon this persuade my Father it would be
“a dishonour to him to yield upon these terms; it would show,
“that he was made a fool on by my Lord Rich. Which the
“truth is, how it should be, I can’t understand, nor very few
“else ;} and truly I must tell you privately, that they are so far
“engaged, as the match cannot be broken off! She acquainted
“none of her friends with her resolution, when she did it.

“Dear Brother, this is, as far as I can tell, the state of the
“business. The Lord direct them what to do. And all, I think,
“ought to beg of God to pardon her in her doing of this thing ;
«__which I must say truly she was put upon by the ‘course’?
“of things. Dear, let me beg my excuses to my Sister for not
“writing. My best respects to her. Pardon this trouble ; and
“believe me that I shall ever strive to approve myself, dear
« Brother, your affectionate sister and servant,

“Mary CroMwELL.” ?

Poor little Fanny Cromwell was not yet much turned of
Seventeen, when she had these complex things to do, with her
friends, ‘who truly were very few.’ What ‘people’ they were
that put, or strove to put, such notions into his Highness’s head,
with intent to frustrate the decidedly eligible Mr. Rich, none
knows.‘ I could suspect Ashley Cooper, or some such hand, if
his date of favour still lasted. But it is gone, long months ago.

1Good little Mary ! 2 Blank space. >
3 Thurloe, v. 146. [‘‘In the possession of the Honourable the Earl of Shel-
burn.”]

4{She was called Franke, not Fanny, at home. Probably the Protector’s
greatest objection to young Rich was the very delicate state of his health. See —
letters in the Hist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on the Frankiand-Russell-Astley
Papers, pp. 21, 22.] an

*

a a a Ri i ph A oe

ee eae a ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee

1656.) LETTER CCXIIL, WHITEHALL 499

Ashley is himself frustrated ; cannot obtain this musical glib-
tongued Lady Mary, says Ludlow;! goes over to opposition in
consequence ; is dismissed from His Highness’s Council of State ;
and has to climb in this world by another ladder. Poor Fanny’s
marriage did nevertheless take effect. Both Mary and she were
duly wedded, Fanny to Rich, Mary to Lord F auconberg, in
November next year, within about a week of each other :? our
friends, ‘who truly were very few,’ and our destinies, and our
own lively wits, brought all right in the end.

LETTER CCXIII

Ir was last Spring Assizes, as we saw, that the ‘great appear-
ances of country gentlemen and persons of the highest quality’
took place; leading to the inference generally that this Pro-
tectorate Government is found worth acknowledging by England.
Certainly a somewhat successful Government hitherto; in spite
of difficulties great and many. It carries eternal Gospel in the
one hand, temporal drawn Sword in the other. Actually it has
compressed the turbulent humours of this Country, and encouraged
the better tendencies thereof, hitherto; it has set its foot reso-
lutely on the neck of English Anarchy, and points with its armed
hand to noble onward and upward paths, All which, England,

1 Here is the passage, not hitherto printed ; one of several ‘ Suppressed-passages
from Ludlow’s Memoirs,’ which still exist in the handwriting of John Locke (now
in the possession of Lord Lovelace), having been duly copied out by Locke for his
own poor L2fe of the Earl of Shaftesbury, to whom they all relate :

‘Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, who was first for the King, then for the Parlia-
‘ment ; then, in Cromwell’s first Assembly,’ the little Parliament, was ‘for the
‘reformation; and afterwards for Cromwell against that reformation. Now’
again, ‘ being denied Cromwell's Daughter Mary in marriage, he appears against
‘ Cromwell's design in the last Assembly,’ the constitutioning Parliament, where
his behaviour was none of the best; ‘and is therefore dismissed the Council, Crom-
‘well being resolved to act there as the chief juggler himself; and one Colonel
‘ Mackworth, a Lawyer about. Shrewsbury, a person fit for his purpose, is chosen
‘in his room.’—Mackworth was a soldier as well as Lawyer ; the same who, as
Governor of Shrewsbury, gave negative response to Charles Second, when he sum-
moned him on the road to Worcester, once upon a time. Mackworth was in the
Council, and had even died, and entirely left the Council, before Anthony Ashley
left it (Thurloe, iii. 581 ; and Godwin, iv. 288). My solid friend, absent in Ireland,
sulkily breathing the air in Essex, falls into some errors! Court-rumour, this of
his ; truth in the heart of it, details rather vague ;—not much worth verifying or
rectifying here. (The above passage is in Firth’s ZudJow, vol. i. xxi.]

2 Vol. i. p. 63.

500 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [26 Aug.

thankful at lowest for peace and order, by degrees recognises ;
with acquiescence, not without some slow satisfactory feeling.
England is in peace at home ; stands as the Queen of Protestant-
ism abroad ; defies Spain and Antichrist,! protects poor Piedmont
Protestants and servants of Christ ;—has taken, all men admit,
a nobler attitude than it ever had before.

Nor has the task been easy hitherto; nor is it like to be. No
holiday work, governing such an England as this of Oliver Pro-
tector’s ; with strong Papistry abroad, and a Hydra of Anarchies
at home! The domestic Hydra is not slain; cannot, by the
nature of it, be slain; can only be scotched and mowed down,
head after head, as it successively protrudes itself ;—till, by the
aid of Time, it slowly die. As yet, on any hint of foreign en-
couragement it revives again, requires to be scotched and mowed
down again. His exiled Majesty Charles Stuart has got a new
lever in hand, by means of this War with Spain.

Seven years ago his exiled Majesty’s ‘Embassy to Spain,’ em-
bassy managed by Chancellor Hyde and another, proved rather
a hungry affair ; and ended, I think, in little, except the murder
of poor Ascham, the then Parliament’s Envoy at Madrid ; whom,
like Dutch Dorislaus, as ‘an accursed regicide or abettor of regi-
cides,’ certain cut-throat servants of the said hungry Embassy
broke-in upon, one afternoon, and slew. For which violent deed
no full satisfaction could be got from Spain,—the murderers
having taken ‘sanctuary,’ as was pleaded.? With that rather
sorry result, and no other noticeable, Chancellor Hyde’s Embassy
took itself away again; Spain ordering it to go. But now, this
fierce Protestant Protector breathing nothing but war, Spain
finds that the English domestic Hydra, if well operated upon by
Charles Stuart, might be a useful thing; and grants Charles
Stuart some encouragements for that. His poor Majesty is
coming to the seashore again; is to have ‘Seven-thousand
Spaniards’ to invade England,—if the domestic Hydra will stir
with effect. The domestic Hydra, I think, had better lie quiet
for a while! This Letter to Henry Cromwell is to bid him too,
for his part, be awake in Ireland to these things.

For the Hydra is not dead ; and its heads are legion. Major

1[See letter to the Commanders in Jamaica, Supplement, No. 119. ‘‘ We could
not satisfy ourselves to desert this cause . . . but are resolved in His [God’s] fear
to prosecute the same.”’] : ;
2 Clarendon, iii. 498-509; Process and Pleadings in the Court of Spain upon
the Death of Anthony Ascham (in Har/, Miscell., vi. 236-47).

> peel ae
oe ee er et ie ee eT

i i et el

1656.) LETTER CCXIIIl, WHITEHALL 501

Wildman, for example, sits safe in Chepstow: but Sexby, the
Anabaptist Colonel, whom we could not take on that occasion,
is still busy ; has been ‘trying to seduce the Fleet,’ trying to do
this and that; is now fairly gone to Spain, to treat with Anti-
christ himself for the purpose of bringing-in a Reign of Christ,—
the truly desperate Anabaptist Colonel!! It is a Hydra like
few. Spiritual and Practical: Muggletonians, mad Quakers
riding into Bristol, Fifth-Monarchists, Hungry Flunkeys: ever
scheming, plotting with or without hope, to ‘seduce the Pro-
tector’s Guard,’ ‘to blow up the Protector in his bed-room,’ and
do “other little fiddling things,” as the Protector calls them,—
which one cannot waste time in specifying! Only the slow course
of nature can kill that Hydra: till a Colonel Sexby die, how can
you keep him quiet >—

But what doubtless gives new vitality to plotting, in these
weeks, is the fact that a General Election to Parliament is going
on. There is to be a new Parliament ;—in which may lie who
knows what contentions. The Protector lost it last time, by the
arithmetical account of heads ; will he gain it thistime ? Account
of heads is not exactly the Protector’s basis; but he hopes he
may now gain it evenso. At all events, this wide foreign and
domestic Spanish War cannot be carried on without supplies ;
he will first try it so—then otherwise if not so.?

‘To Henry Cromwell, Major-General of the Army in Ireland’

* Whitehall,’ 26th August 1656.
Son Harry,

We are informed, from several hands, that the
old enemy are forming designs to invade Ireland, as well as other
parts of the Commonwealth ; and that he and Spain have very
great correspondence with some chief men in that nation, for
raising a sudden rebellion there.

Wherefore we judge it very necessary that you take all possi-
ble care to put the Forces into such a condition as may answer

1 Clarendon, iii. 852; Thurloe, iv. 698, etc.

2(Bordeaux did not believe that the Protector’s aim was so much to obtain the
supplies necessary to carry on the war, as to augment his power, ‘‘qui ne peut
estre légitimé jusques 4 ce que le peuple representé par ce corps l'ayt recogneu par
Office] authentique.’’ Bordeaux to Brienne, French Transcripts, Public Record
Office.

_—  —~ = >=

oe

i
PT.

502

‘Colonel Cowper’ commands the Forces in Ulster. Plenty of
details about him in Thurloe’s Fourth Volume :—our readers can
sufficiently conceive him without details. We are more interested
to state, from a Letter of Thurloe’s which goes along with this,
that there are ‘ Fourteen Spanish ships plying about the Isle of
Islay,’ doubtless with an eye to Carrickfergus ; that we hope, and
indeed believe, my Lord Henry will be on the alert. For the
rest, the Elections are going well; all ‘ for peace and settlement,’
as we hear, ‘and great friends to the Government. Ashley

* Sloane MSS., 4157, f. 209; [Now f. 88. Draft in Thurloe’s hand] and (with
insignificant variations) Thurloe, v. 348. [There were several small misprints in
Carlyle’s text of this letter. The most noticeable was that he printed ‘‘ looking to
instead of ‘‘ looking to his charge,’’ in the last line. ]

”

this danger

1[Bordeaux says a good deal concerning the arrangements for the elections,
but his statements, being those of a foreigner, must always be received with some
caution. His information appears to have been chiefly obtained from a member
of parliament ‘‘ very powerful with the republican party,’’ and (as he tells us later)
a connexion of the leader who would fain step into Cromwell’s place (ze.
Lambert). Writing to Brienne on August 20-30, he says that the Protector is
taking all possible precautions in the choice of members: ‘‘ceux de Londres,”
he continues, ‘‘ sont de differentes factions ; le peuple de Westminster n’a pas esté
si complaisant qu'il n’ayt fallu mestre des soldatz avec les Bourgeois, pour
appuyer ses amis et esclore ses ennemis. L’on ne peut encore s¢avoir ]’eslection
des autres villes et provinces, mais les dispositions n’en etoient pas favorables, et
le Conseil d’Etat s’est occupé tous ces jours a exhorter ceux qui avoient esté —

THE MAJOR-GENERALS _ [26 Aug.

anything which may fall out of this kind, and to that end, that
you contract the Garrisons in Ireland, as much as may be; and
get a considerable marching army into the field, in two or three
bodies, to be laid in the most proper and advantageous places for
service, as occasion shall require. Taking also, in all other
things, the best care you can to break and prevent the designs
and combinations of the enemy ;—and a very particular regard is
to be had to the North, where, without question, busy and dis-
contented persons are working towards new disturbances. I do
not doubt but you will communicate these things to Colonel
Cowper, to the end he may be the more watchful and diligent
in looking to his charge. I rest, your loving father,

Outver P.*

mandez.’’ On Sept. 1-11, he announces that the greater number of the members

appear well disposed towards the government, but that “‘ce n’a pas été sans
quelque obstacle et mesme sans combat que les Majors-Généraux et Baillifs de
province ont faict faire cet election. II y eust en quelque lieu du monde de tuez,

—————— LL -—- —_ - i  .~. a
i eo ee ee ee ee a EE

1656.) LETTER CCXIV., WHITEHALL 503

Cooper, indeed, has been chosen for Wilts: but, on the other
hand, Bradshaw has missed in Cheshire; Sir Henry Vane has
tried in three places and missed in all.!_ This is of date 26th
August 1656; poor England universally sifting itself; trying
what the arithmetical account of heads will do for it, once more.

LETTER CCXIV

Tue Portugal has done justice ; reluctantly aware at last that
jesuitries would not serve him.?, The Spaniards, again, cower
close within their harbours ; patient of every insult ; no ship will
venture out, and no Plate Fleet will come in: and as for ‘ attempt-
ing Cadiz or Gibraltar,’ the Sea-Generals, after mature survey,
decide that without other force it cannot prudently be done.
This is what Montague, with his clear eyes, has had to report to
Secretary Thurloe on the latter enterprise: “I perceive much
“desire that Gibraltar should be taken. My thoughts as to that
“are, in short, these: That the likeliest way to get it is, By land-
“ing on the sand, and quickly cutting it off between sea and sea,
“or so to secure our men there as that they may hinder the
“intercourse of the Town with the Main; frigates lying near,
“too, to assist them :—and it is well known that Spain never
“victualleth any place for one month. This will want Four or
“Five thousand men, well formed and officered.—This is my own
“only thought which I submit, at present.” *

Whereupon the Lord Protector sends the following Orders ; one
other Sea Letter of his which we happen to have left. Mainly of
Thurloe’s composition, I perceive ; but worth preserving on various
accounts,

en d’autres le peuple professe un publicq mépris des personnes qui lui estoient
recommandées ; mais beaucoup de villes ont usé de déférance, et si ceux qui
passent pour amis du Protecteur demeurent fermes dans ses interésts, leurs voix
prévauldront sur celles de ses ennemis, qui ne doivent pas néantmoins estre
négligez”. French Transcripts, Public Record Office. ]

1 Thurloe to Henry Cromwell, date 26th Aug. {v. 349).

2 Meadows to Blake and Montague, 13th May 1656: Thurloe, v. 14 ;—see 70.
69, 116, and 118 (the Portugal’s Letter to Oliver, 24th June 1656. N.S.)

3 Montague to Thurloe, in cipher, zoth April to 29th May 1656 (Thurloe, v. 67-
70), ‘received by Captain Lloyd, who arrived here 11th July, —and has brought
other Letters, joint Letters from the Generals, of somewhat later date, as we shall
perceive.

fie

504 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [28 Aug.

To Generals Blake and Montague, at Sea

Whitehall, 28th August 1656,
GENTLEMEN,
We have received your letters of the 19th

of June brought to us by Captain Lloyd, who arrived here the
11th of July.

By those letters, and by what Captain Lloyd related by
word of mouth, which is not contradicted by yours of the Ist
and 3rd of July, received by the Squadron of ten Ships (which
are all safely arrived in the Channel), nor by any other intelli-
gence received by other hands, we find that the Spaniard keeps
his ports, and doth not yet prepare any considerable fleet to
come to Sea; and that, in the condition you and they were
then in, they were not to be attempted in their harbours. And
as for any design upon Gibraltar, we see by General Montague’s
letter to the Secretary, that nothing therein was feasible without
a good body of landmen. So that, upon the whole, there
remains nothing to be done in those seas for the present which
should require the whole Fleet now with you to remain there,
besides that the great ships cannot, without great danger, be
kept out, the winter-time, upon that coast.

Upon these grounds we are of opinion, with you, that a good
squadron of frigates will, in this season, be sufficient to answer
any opportunity of service which may present itself. And there-
fore we have resolved that about the number of twenty ships,
such as you shall judge most proper and fit for that purpose, be
kept in those seas, and the rest be sent home, with the first
opportunity of wind and weather; and desire that you will give
order therein accordingly. And in respect it will be necessary
that we advise with one of you at least, upon this whole affair ;
and it being also very inconvenient that you should be both from
the head of the fleet which remains behind, the management
whereof being of so great consequence to the Commonwealth,—
we would have General Blake to stay with the fleet, and General
Montague to return with the squadron which comes home.

1656.) LETTER CCXIV., WHITEHALL 505

For the service which these ships ‘that stay’ should be
applied to, we need say nothing therein; but refer you to the
former Instructions. That which we believe the enemy will
most intend will be the carrying-on his Trade of the West Indies,
which if he can effectually do, he will not much care for what
else is done upon him. And our intelligence is, that at this
time he is fitting out some ships of war, and others, to send from
Cadiz into those parts; the certainty whereof we suppose you
may know. And therefore that which is most to be endeavoured
is the spoiling him in that trade, by intercepting his fleets either
going to or coming from those parts, and as much as may be
to destroy his correspondencies thither. It will be of great use
also to prevent the coming of any materials for shipping, and
other contraband goods into Cadiz or any of his ports: which you
can have an eye to; and, as much as may be, prejudice his
trade and correspondence with Flanders.

Besides these things, and what other damage you may have
opportunity to do to the enemy, we, in our keeping the said fleet
in those Seas, had an eye to the preservation of the trade of
this Commonwealth in the Straits and to Portugal:? which we
suppose could not be driven on without a very good countenance
and strength, in respect the enemy would otherwise be able
with a few ships to obstruct this trade wholly, and to take all
that passed either to or from the one place or the other. But
our intention is not to reckon up every particular wherein this
fleet may be useful, but only to let you know our general scope ;
and to leave the management and improvement thereof to the
prudence and direction of him who is to abide upon the place.
Whom we beseech the Lord to be present with; and to guide
him to that which may be for the good of this Commonwealth,
and according to His own will.

These have been our thoughts, and the considerations we

1‘thence’ zz orig.
2 Here, I think, at the beginning of this Paragraph, the Protector himself has
more decidedly struck in.

i ‘ Pe: beri

1 ee arg

506 THE MAJOR-GENERALS 228 Aug.

have had upon this affair. If anything else doth occur to you
different from what is here expressed, either as to the number of
ships to remain in those seas, or the way and manner of weaken-
ing the enemy and managing the war against him, we desire
to understand your sense and advice thereupon, with all possible
speed; sooner, if it may be, than the return of the aforesaid
squadron. And in the mean time we are not willing to tie you
up positively to the number of twenty ships to remain on that
coast ; but give you a latitude to keep a lesser or greater num-
ber there, for answering the ends aforesaid, and as you shall find
the occasion to require, which possibly may be very much
varied since the last we had from you. For what concerns the
provisions of victuals and other things which the fleet will stand
in need of, the Commissioners of the Admiralty have direction
to write at large to you, unto whose Letters we refer you;
and desire you and the whole fleet to rest assured that nothing
shall be omitted to be done, here, for your supply and encourage-

ment upon all occasions.
Your loving friend,

‘Outver P.’ *

About a fortnight ago, August 13th, learned Bulstrode went
with the Swedish Ambassador to dine with a famed Sea-General,
Sir George Ayscough, of whom we have occasionally heard ; who
lives for the present, retired from service, ‘At his house in
Surrey :’ House not known to me ;! which by the aid of ‘ ponds,
moats,’ and hydraulic contrivances, he has made to stand en-
vironed in water like a ship at sea,—very charming indeed ; and
says he has ‘cast anchor’ here. Our entertainment was superb.
The brilliant Swedish Ambassador and Sir George spake much
about frigates, their rates of sailing, their capabilities of fighting,
and other technical topics; which a learned mind might, without
much tedium, listen to. ‘After dinner, the Ambassador came
round by Hampton Court, to take his leave of the Lady Claypole — ,

*Thurloe, v. 363. [Draft, corrected by Thurloe. Endorsed ‘‘] Sent to Pipl
mouth, To be sent to the Generals by Captain Hatsell.”’

1[The house was Ham Haw, in Chertsey parish. See Dict. Nat. bere .
art. ‘‘ Ayscue, Sir George.” ]

1656. ] SPEECH V 507

and her Sisters ;’!—which latter small fact, in the ancient
Autumn afternoon, one rather loves to remember! As for this
Swedish Ambassador, he is just about quitting England, the
high-tempered, clear-glancing man; having settled ‘ copperas,’
‘contrabanda,’ and many other things, to mutual satisfaction :—
nay it is surmised he has thoughts of inviting Ayscough into
Sweden to teach them seamanship there ; which, however, shall
not concern us on this occasion.?

SPEECH V

But the new Parliament is now about assembling ;* wherein we
shall see what conclusions will be tried! A momentous question
for his Highness and the Council of State ; who have been, with
interest enough, perusing and pondering the List of Names
returned. On the whole, a hopeful Parliament, as Thurloe had
expected : Official persons, these and others known as friends to

this Government, are copiously elected: the great body of the ©

Parliament seems to consist of men well-affected to his Highness,
and even loyal to him; who, witnessing the course he follows,
wish him heartily God-speed thereon. Certain others there are,
and in considerable number, of stiff Republican ways, or given to
turbulence in general,—a Haselrig, a Thomas Scott, an Ashley
Cooper : these, as a mass of leaven which might leaven the whole
lump, and produce one knows not what in the way of fermentation,
are clearly very dangerous. But for these also his Highness and
the Council of State, in the present anomalous condition of the

1 Whitlocke, pp. 638, 9. 2 Biog. Britan., § Ayscough.

3[About ten days before Parliament met, Major Ralph Knight wrote to General
Monck, ‘‘ This day (Sept. 6) most of the officers that were appointed to wait on his
Highness met at Whitehall, where his Highness hinted to us the cause of our now
meeting ; which was that Charles Stuart had 8,o00 men in Flanders ready to ship,
and had writ to his friends here not to stir till he was upon the coast, and that
Colonel Sexby had promised the King of Spain to betray a considerable garrison
in England to him, and that many here would join with him, as also how the
Fifth Monarchy men and others did endeavour to rout us into blood, with other
things.” Clarke Papers, iii. 71. Bordeaux (Sept. 11-21) mentions this same
meeting. The Protector, he says, ‘‘manda Samedi les officiers de l'armée, et leur
dit que le roi d’Ecosse faisoit de grandz préparatifs contre l'Angleterre; que
celuy d’Espagne lui donnoit un corps de 10,000 hommes et qu’ encore que ses
forces ne fussent pas a craindre, ils se doibvent tenir sur leurs gardes et adviser
ensemble aux moyens de se garantir tant contre les ennemis estrangers que
domestiques.” French Transcripts.)

508 THE MAJOR-GENERALS __ [17 Sept.

Nation, have silently provided an expedient. Which we hope
may be of service. On the whole, we trust this Parliament may
prove a better thaii the last.

At all events, on Wednesday 17th September 1656, Parliament,
Protector, all in due state, do assemble at the Abbey Church ; and,
with reverence and credence, hear Doctor Owen, Vice-Chancellor
of Oxford, very pertinently preach to them from these old words
of Isaiah,—old and yet always new,and true: What shall one then
answer to the Messengers of the “Nation? That the Lord hath
founded Zion, and the Poor of His People shall trust init.) After
which, all having removed, still in due state, to the Painted
Chamber, and there adjusted themselves, the Protector, rising
in his elevated place and taking off his hat, now speaks. The
Speech, reported by one knows not whom, lies in old Manuscript
in the British Museum ; and printed in late years in the Book
called Burton’s Diary;? here and there in a very dreary, be-
smeared, unintelligible condition; from which, as heretofore, a
pious Editor strives to rescue it. Sufficiently studied, it becomes
intelligible, nay luminous. Let the reader too read with piety,
with a real endeavour to understand.

GENTLEMEN,
When I came hither, I did think that a

duty was incumbent upon me a little to pity myself; because
(this being a very extraordinary occasion), I thought I had very
many things to say unto you, ‘and was somewhat burdened and
straitened thereby.’ But truly now, seeing you in such a condi-
tion as you are,’ I think I must turn off ‘my pity’ in this, as

1 Isaiah xiv. 32. [‘‘ Un sermon,” Bordeaux wrote, ‘‘ dont la fin éstoit de prouver
que comme le peuple d’Angleterre estoit esleu de Dieu, et le gouvernement estoit
aussy establiz de sa main, qu’ils s’y devoient soumettre et demeurer unis, pour
travailler avec plus de succez a la gloire de Dieu et utilité publicq.’’]

2[The old manuscript here alluded to (Add. WS. 6125), is asmall quarto volume,
the second of what must have been a set of three, containing a collection of the
Protector’s speeches. They cannot have been written down at the actual time that
they were spoken, as Speech XII. comes before Speech V. &c., but they appear to
have been carefully copied, and generally from a good text.

The editor of Burton’s Dzary printed the 14S. on the whole very correctly,
although he gave mis-readings here and there and made some small alterations.
The wording in the following notes is taken in every case from the JS. itself, but
the variations in the text are mostly due to Carlyle. There is a summary of this
speech in a newsletter amongst the Clarke MSS. See Clarke Papers, iii. 72.]

3 Place crowded, weather hot.

1656. ] SPEECH V 509

I hope I shall in everything else ;—and consider! [you] as
certainly not being able long to bear that condition and heat that
you are ‘now’ in.——‘ So far as possible, on this large subject,
let us be brief; not studying the Art of Rhetoricians.’ Rhetoricians,
whom I do not pretend to ‘much concern with ;’ neither with
them, nor with what they use to deal in: Words! ?

Truly our business is to speak Things! The dispensations of
God that are upon us do require it ; and that subject upon which
we shall make our discourse is somewhat of very great interest
and concernment, both for the glory of God, and with reference
to His Interest in the world. I mean His peculiar, His most
peculiar Interest, ‘His Church, the Communion of the faithful
Followers of Christ ;’—and that will not teach ® any of us to ex-
clude His general Interest, which is the concernment of the
Living People, ‘not as Christians but as human creatures,’ within
these three Nations, ‘and’ with all the dependencies thereupon.
I ‘have’ told you I should speak to things ; things that concern
these Interests: The Glory of God, and His Peculiar Interest in
the world,—which ‘ latter’ is more extensive, I say more extensive,
than the People of all these three Nations with their appurten-
ances, or the countries and places belonging unto them.+*

The first thing, therefore, that I shall speak to is That that is
the first lesson of Nature, which is Being and Preservation.
[Begin at the basis: How are we to get continued at all as a Nation,
not trampled under foot by Invaders, Anarchies, and reduced to
wreck ?| As to that of Being, I do think I do not ill style it the
Jirst consideration that Nature teacheth the Sons of Adam :—and
then I think ® we shall enter into a field large enough when we

1[** reflect upon,’’ JZS.]
2{** Rhetoricians, to whom I do not pretend, neither to them nor to the things

they use to speak, words.”’ Jdzd.

3[Printed ‘‘ leave” by Carlyle, following a mis-reading in Burton. ]

4* more extensive :’ more important would have better suited what went before ;
yet ‘extensive’ is in all likelihood the word, for his Highness is here branching out
into a second idea, which he goes on to blend with the primary one, of ‘ the con-
cernment of the general mass of the People.’

5[‘* hope,” A4S.]

Cat ("1 Prec nes

Ot Ril 2 4.

2 ae te — hee ie ee ee
~ 5 *

510 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

come to consider that ‘of’ Well-being. But if Being itself be
not first well laid, I think the other will hardly follow!

Now in order to this, to the Being and Subsistence of these
Nations with all their Dependencies : The conservation of that,
‘namely of our National Being, is first to be viewed with respect
to those who seek to undo it, and so make it not to be ; and then
very naturally we shall come to the consideration of what will
make it be,? ‘of what’ will keep its being and its subsistence.
[His Highness’s heads of method. |

‘Now’ that which plainly seeks the destruction of the Being of
these Nations ® is, out of doubt: The endeavour and design of all
the common Enemies of them. I think, truly, it will not be hard
to find out who those Enemies are; nor what hath made them
so! I think, They are all the wicked men of the world, whether
abroad or at home, that are the Enemies to the very Being of
these Nations ;*—and that upon a common account, from that
very enmity that’s in them ‘to all such things ;’ whatsoever ®
should serve the glory of God and the interest of His People,—
which they see to be more eminently, yea more® eminently
patronised and professed in this Nation (we will not speak it with
vanity) than in’ all the Nations in the world: this is the common
ground of the common enmity entertained § against the prosperity
of these Nations, against the very Being of them.—But we shall
not, I think, take up much time, in contemplating who these
Enemies are, ‘and’ what they are, in the general notion : we will
labour to specificate our Enemies ; to know what persons and bodies
of persons they practically are® that seek the very destruction
and !° Being of these Three Nations.

1[‘‘and if that first be not well laid, I think the rest will hardly follow,” JZS.]
2/'«« The conservation of that is either with a respect to be had to them that seek
to undo it, and to make it not to be, and then with a very natural consideration to
what will make it to be,” zdzd.]

3[‘ This nation . . . enemies of it,” zdzd.]
4(‘‘this nation,”’ 2dzd.] 5[** yet whatsoever,” iid.
8{** most,” zdzd.] 7[‘* above,” zdid.] 8(**had,” zdid.]

vy, but to labour to specificate our enemies, to know who they be and are,”
tbid.
10 “of the’ would be more grammatical ; but much less Oliverian.

1656.] SPEECH V 511

And truly I would not have laid this foundation but to this
end : that I might very particularly communicate with you ‘ about
that same matter.’ For which end ‘above others, I think,’ you
are called thither at this time :—That I might particularly com-
municate with you of the many dangers that these Nations! stand
in, in respect of Enemies both abroad and at home; and also to
advise with you about the remedies and means to obviate these
dangers. ‘Dangers’ which, say I,—and I shall leave it to you
whether you will join with me or no,—strike at the very Being
and ‘vital’ interest of these Nations. And therefore, coming to
particulars, I will shortly represent? to you the estate of your
affairs in that respect: in respect ‘namely’ of the Enemies you
are engaged with ; and how you come to be engaged with those
Enemies, and how they come to be, as heartily, I believe, engaged
against you. [His Highness’s utterance is terribly rusty hitherto ;
creaky, uncertain, difficult! He nill gather strength by going.
Wait till the aales get warm a little !)

Why, truly, your great Enemy is the Spaniard. He is. He

is a natural enemy. He is naturally so; he is naturally so
throughout, by reason of that enmity that is in him against
whatsoever is of God. ‘Whatsoever is of God’ which is in you,
or which may be in you,® contrary to that that /is blindness
and darkness, led on by superstition, and the implicitness of his
faith in submitting to the See of Rome, actuate * him unto !—
With this King and State, I say, you are at this present in
hostility. We put you into this hostility. You will give us
leave to tell you how. [By sending out your Hispaniola Fleet,
Christmas gone a year,—which has issued rather sorrily, your
Highness [| ‘ For’ as we are ready to excuse ‘this and’ most of

shee Seri nation,” J1ZS.]
2[‘‘ strike at the very being and interest of these nations in the general, especially
at the interest of the people of God in these nations; and therefore that I may be
particular, I shall shortly represent,” 2dzd.]
5[‘* As I said before, throughout, all your enemies, through that enmity that is
in him against all that is of God that is in you or that which may be in you,” zd7d. |
4° acts’ i orig., now as always.

512 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 sept

our actions,—aye, and to justify them ‘too,’ as well as to excuse
them,—upon the grounds of Necessity; the grounds of Neces-
sity ‘for justifying of men’s actions’ being above all considera-
tions of justification, of instituted Law; and if this or any other
State would go about,—as I know they never will,—to make
Laws against ‘events, against’ what may happen, ‘then’ I think
it is obvious to any man, they will be making Laws against
Providence ;! events, and issues of things, being from God
alone, to whom all issues belong.

The Spaniard? is your enemy; and is your enemy (as I told
you), naturally, by that antipathy that is in him ‘and also’
providentially,? and that in divers respects. You could not, you
could not have an honest nor honourable Peace with him: it was
sought by the Long Parliament ; it was not attained. It could
not be attained with honour and honesty. I say, it could not be
obtained with honour and honesty. And truly when I say that,
‘I do but say,’ He is naturally throughout an enemy ; an enmity
is put into him by God. “I will put an enmity between thy
seed and her seed ;” °—which goes but for little among states-
men, but it is more considerable than all things! [Yea, your
Highness ; it is !—Listen to what his Highness himself says of his
reasons for going to war with Spain. ‘ Statesmen”’ too, if they can
separate therein what is transitory from what is perennial and eternal,
may find it still very worthy of attention. He who has in him, who
manifests in the ways of him, an “enmity to God,” and goes about
patronising unveracities, rotten delusions, brazen falsities, pestilent
injustices,—mnith him, whatever his seeming extent of money-capital
and worldly prosperity may be, I would advise no nation nor statesman
nor man to be prompt in clapping up an alliance. He will not come
to good, I think ; not he, for one. Bad security in his firm; have

1(‘‘to make laws against what may happen, against Providence, I think it is
obvious to any man that they will make law against all events,” J7S.]

2[** This state,” zdzd. ]

3 Means, not ‘luckily’ as now, but simply ‘ by special ordering of Providence.’

4[The sense here would rather appear to be ‘‘truly when I say that he is

naturally an enemy {I mean that] an enmity is put, etc.’’]
5 Genesis iii. 15. P

1656.] SPEECH V 513

no trade with him. With him your only fit trade is, Duel to the
death, when the time comes for that !| And he that considers not
such natural enmity, the providential enmity, as well as the
accidental, I think he is not well acquainted with Scripture and
the things of God. And the Spaniard is not only our enemy
accidentally, but he is providentially so; God having in His
wisdom disposed it so to be, when we made a breach with the
Spanish Nation, ‘long ago.’ !

No sooner did this Nation reform that which is called (un-
worthily) the Reformed Religion [Jt was not half reformed !] after
the death of Queen Mary, by the Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory,—we need not be ashamed to call her? so! [No, your
Highness ; the royal court-phrase expresses in this case an exact truth.
She was, and is, “of famous memory” |—but the Spaniard’s design
became,’ by all unworthy, unnatural means, to destroy that
Person, and to seek the ruin and destruction of these Kingdoms.
And for me to instance in particulars upon that account, were
to trouble you at a very unseasonable time : there is a Declaration
extant [The Council's “ Declaration,’ in October last}, which very
fully hath in it the origin‘ of the Spaniard’s venting him ‘self’
upon this Nation ; and a series of it® from those very beginnings
to this present day. But his enmity was partly upon that general
account which all are agreed ‘about.’ The French, all the
Protestants in Germany, ‘all’ have agreed, That his design was
the empire of the whole Christian World, if not more ;—and upon
that ground he looks, ‘and hath looked, at this Nation as his
greatest obstacle. And ‘as to’ what his attempts were to that
end,—I refer you to that Declaration, and to the observations of

1[‘* And he that considers not the providential and accidental enmity, I think he
is not well acquainted with Scripture and the things of God. And he is not only
so upon that account, but he is providentially so, God having in His wisdom dis-
posed it to be so when we made a breach with him, when we made an attempt
upon him. I shall tell you when. No sooner &c," M/S.]

ad so,” zbzd.] 3[** but his designs were,” zdzd. ]

41‘ original,” idéd.] 5 Of ‘his ventings,’ namely.

8[** A series of it, from those very grounds, to this present day. But it was so,
partly upon that general account which all have agreed,” AZS.]
VOL. Il,

514 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

men who read History. It would not be difficult to call to mind!
the several Assassinations designed upon that Lady, that great
Queen: the attempts upon Ireland, the Spaniards’ invading
of it ;? the designs of the same nature upon ¢his Nation,—public
designs, private designs, all manner of designs, to accomplish this
great and general end. Truly King James made a Peace; but
whether this Nation, and the interest of all Protestant Christians,
suffered not more by that Peace, than ever by Spain’s hostility, I
refer to your consideration ! *

So that a State that you can neither have peace with nor
reason from,—is that State with whom you have enmity at this
time, and against whom you are engaged. And give me leave
to say this unto you, because it is truth, and most men know it,
That the Long Parliament did endeavour, but could not obtain
satisfaction ‘from the Spaniard’ all the time they sat: for their
Messenger [Poor Ascham !] was murdered: and when they asked
satisfaction for the blood of your poor people unjustly shed in
the West Indies [Yes, at Tortuga, at St. Kitt’s ; in many a place
and time /), and for the wrongs done elsewhere ; when they asked
liberty of conscience for your people that traded thither,—
satisfaction in none of these things would be given, but was
denied.* I say, they denied satisfaction to be given either for
your Messenger that was murdered, or ‘for’ the blood that was
shed, or the damages that were done in the West Indies. No
satisfaction at all; nor any reason given why there should not be
liberty ‘of conscience’ given to your people that traded thither ;
whose trade was very considerable there, and drew many of your
people thither ; and begot an apprehension in ws ‘ as to their treat-
ment there,’'—whether in you or no, let God judge between you
and Himself. I prejudge not: but all of us know that the

af. would not be ill to remember,”’ 1ZS.]

2[‘*thrice invading it,” zdzd.] f

3[‘‘ And truly, it is true King James made a peace; but whether this Nation,

or any interest of all the Protestant Christians suffered not more by that peace

than ever by his hostility, I refer to your consideration,” 2dzd.]
4[‘‘ satisfaction would not be given but denied,” 2dzd.]

1656. ] SPEECH V 515

people that went! thither to manage the trade there, were
imprisoned there. We desired ‘ but’ such a liberty as ‘that’ they
might keep ‘their’ Bibles in their pockets, to exercise their
liberty of religion to themselves, and not to be under restraint.
But there is not liberty of conscience to be had ‘from the
Spaniard ;’ neither ‘is there’ satisfaction for injuries, nor for
blood, but when these ‘two’ things were desired, the Ambassador
told us, “ It was to ask his Master’s two eyes ;” ? to ask both his
eyes, to ask these things of him !—

Now if this be so, why truly then there is some little founda-
tion laid to justify the War that has been entered-upon* with
the Spaniard! And not only so: but the plain truth of it ‘is,’
Make any peace with any State that is Popish and subjected to
the determination of Rome and ‘of the’ Pope himself,—you are
bound, and they are loose. It is in the pleasure of the Pope at
any time to tell you, That though the man be murdered [Poor
Ascham, for example !|, yet his murderer * has got into the sanctu-
ary! And it is as true, and it hath been found by common and
constant experience, That Peace is but to be kept so long as the
Pope saith Amen to it. [What is to be done with such a set of
people ?|—° We have not ‘now’ to do with any Popish State except
France: and it is certain® ‘that’ they do not think themselves
under such a tie to the Pope; but think themselves at liberty
to perform honesty with nations with whom they are agreed,
and protest’ against the obligation of such a thing as that is,—
‘of breaking your word at the Pope’s bidding.’ They are able
to give us an explicit answer to anything reasonably demanded
of them: and there is no ‘other Popish’ State we can speak of,

1[‘* were,” MS.]

2*these two things :’ Exemption to our traders from injury in the West Indies,
and Liberty to have Bibles and worship :—See Thurloe (i. 760, 1); Bryan Edwards
(i. 141-3); &c. [Cf Bordeaux’ statement, p. 360 7. above. ]

3 ‘that was had,’ in orig. 4["*he,” 17S.)

5[‘* And truly if I should tell you that that will determine it without any further
question at all,” omitted in Burton and therefore by Carlyle. ]
8(‘‘and that it is true,” 47S.]
7[ “ profest,” zézd., but corrected in Burton. ]

.

at) a ee

516 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

save this ‘only,’ but will break their promise or keep it as they
please upon these grounds,—being under the lash of the Pope,
to be by him determined, ‘and made to decide.’ +

In the time when Philip the Second was married to Queen
Mary, and since that time, through that ‘Spanish’ power and
instigation, Twenty-thousand Protestants were massacred in Ire-
land. We thought, being denied just things,—we thought it our
duty to get that by the sword which was not to be had other-
wise. And this hath been the spirit of Englishmen ; and if so,
certain it is, and ought to be, the spirits of men that have higher
spirits! [ Yes, your Highness; “ Men that are Englishmen and more,
— Believers in God's Gospel, namely !”—Very clumsily said ; but
not at all clumsily meant, and the very helplessness of the expression
adding something of English and Olwerian character to it.|—With
this State you are engaged. And it is a great and powerful
State :—though I may say that also with all other States; with
all other Christian States you are at peace, and all these ‘ your
other’ engagements were upon you before this Government was
undertaken: which was War with France, Denmark,—and, upon
the matter, War, ‘or as good as War,’ with Spain ‘itself’ I
could instance how it was said ‘in the Long-Parliament time,’
“We will have a war in the Indies, though we fight them not
at home.” I say, we are at peace with all other Nations, and
have only a war with Spain. I shall say somewhat ‘ farther’ to
you, which will let you see our clearness ‘as’ to that thing, by
and by.

Having thus ‘said, we are’ engaged with Spain,—‘ that is the
root of the matter ;’ it is that party that brings a// your enemies
before you. [Coming now to the Home Malignants.|_ It doth:
for it is so now, that Spain hath espoused that Interest which

_ you have all along hitherto been conflicting with,—Charles

Stuart’s Interest. And I would but meet that gentleman? upon

1[‘‘save this, which is under the lash of the Pope, to be determined, but will
break it or keep it when they please, upon these grounds,”’ /S.]

2[‘‘ which we could not otherwise do,” 2dzd.]

3[** general,” zdéd., but evidently should be as emended by Carlyle. |

1656.] SPEECH V 517

a fair discourse that’s willing that that Person should come back
again !—but I dare not believe any in this room is. [ Heavens,
no; not one of us!| ‘And’ I say, it doth not detract at all from
your Cause, nor yet from your ability to make defence! of it,
That God by His providence hath so disposed that the King of
Spain hath espoused that Person. ‘And’ I say ‘farther’ [His
Highness’s spirit gets somewhat tumultuous here, and blazes up with
several ideas at once,—producing results of “ some inextricableness,” as
he himself might phrase it}, No man but might be very well satisfied 2
that it is not for the aversion of that Person [Not for his sake that
we have gone to war nith Spain :—the Cavaliers talk loudly so, and
it ts not so|—! And choosing out (as was said to-day)® “a Captain
to lead us back again into Egypt,’ ‘what honest man has not an
aversion to that?’—if there be such a place? 1 mean meta-

phorically and allegorically so; ‘if there be,’ that is to say, ‘A’ >

returning ‘on the part of some’ to all those things that we think
we have been fighting against, and ‘a’ destroying of all that
good (as we had some hints to-day) ‘which’ we have attained
unto—?—I am sure my Speech ‘and defence of the Spanish
War’ will signify very little, if such grounds [Grounds indicated,
in this composite “blaze of ideas,”
Highness ; but too simultaneous for being very distinct to strangers !)
go not for good! Nay, I will say this to you: Not a man in
England, that is disposed to comply with Papists and Cavaliers,
but to him my Speech here is the greatest parable, the absurdest
discourse! And in a word, we could wish ‘ they were all where
Charles Stuart is, all that declare | By their cavilling at Spanish Wars
and so on:” his Highness looks animated !| that they are of that
spirit. I do, with all my heart ; aye, and I would help them to
a boat to carry them over, that are of that mind! Yea, and if

which is luminous enough, your

1[‘* make resistances,” J/S.]
2[** No person but would be wonderfully well satisfied,” zdd.]

%In Owen’s Sermon.

4(‘*And I must say this to you, that there’s not a man in England that’s apt
to comply with Papists and Cavaliers, but to them is the greatest parable and
absurdest discourse, and therefore we could wish,” JS. |

518 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

you shallfthink it a duty to drive them over by arms, I will help
in that also!— —

You are engaged with this Enemy; ‘a foreign enemy, who
hath such allies among ourselves :’—and this last said hath a
* little vehemency in it [His Highness repents him of blazing up into
unseemly heat|: but it is ‘well’ worth your consideration.

Though I seem to be, all this while, upon the justice of this
business, yet my desire is to let you see the dangers ‘and grand
crisis’ that this Nation stands in ‘thereby,’ and all the honest
interest; yea, all interests of the Protestants, in Germany,
Denmark, Helvetia ‘and’ the Cantons, and all the interests in
Christendom, is the same as yours. If you succeed, ‘if you suc-
ceed’ well and act well, and be convinced what is God’s Interest,
and but prosecute it, you will find that you act for a very great
many that’s God’s own. Therefore I say that—as your danger
is from the Common Enemy abroad, who is the head of the
Papal Interest, the head of that Antichristian Interest, that is
so described in Scripture, so forespoken of, and so fully is that
characteral name ‘of Antichrist’ given him by the Apostle in
the Epistle to the Thessalonians, and also expressed throughout
the Revelations ; which are such sure and plain things; except
_ you will deny the truth of the Scriptures, you must needs see
that that State is so described in Scripture to be Papal and Anti-
christian—[ Who would not go to war with it!| I say, with this
Enemy, and upon this account, you have the quarrel with the
Spaniard.

And truly he hath an interest in your bowels;! he hath so.
The Papists in England,—they have been accounted, ever since
I was born, Spaniolised. There is not a man among us can
hold up a face against it. [The justifying of the Spanish War is
a great point mith his Highness !| They never regarded France ;
they never regarded any other Popish State where any ‘hostile’
Interest was ‘but Spain only.’ Spain was their patron. It was

1 Old phrase for ‘ the interior of your own country.’

1656.] SPEECH V 519

so in England, Ireland and Scotland: no man can doubt of it.
Therefore I must needs say, this ‘Spanish’ Interest at home is
a great piece of your danger. It is, and it is evidently so; and
will be more so,—upon that account that I told you of: He hath
espoused Charles Stuart! With whom he is fully at agreement ;
for whom he hath raised Seven or Eight Thousand men, that are
now quartered at Bruges,! to whom Don John of Austria hath °
promised ‘that, as soon as the campaign is ended, which ‘it’ is
conceived will be in about five or six weeks, he shall have Four
or Five Thousand ‘added.’ And the Duke of ‘ Neuburg,’ ? who
is a Popish prince,® hath promised good assistance according to
his power ; and other Popish States the like. In this condition
you are with that State ‘of Spain :’ and in this condition through
unavoidable necessity ; because your enemy was naturally so, and
is become so providentially ‘too.’ [Always, by the law of his being,
as Antichristian to Christian, a viRTUAL enemy ; and now Providence,
nith beneficent wisdom, has developed him into an acruay one.—“ That
was his Highness’s fundamental reason for rushing at him in the
West Indies? Because he was Antichrist ?”’ ask some Moderns.—
Why yes, it-might help, my red-tape Friends! I know well, if I
could fall-in with Antichrist anywhere, with Supreme Quack and
Damnability anywhere, I should be right happy to have a stroke at
him if there seemed any chance !}

And now farther,‘—as there is a complication of these Inter-
ests ‘abroad,’ so there is a complication ‘of them’ here. Can we
think that Papists and Cavaliers shake not hands in England?
It is unworthy, unchristian, un-Englishlike,® ‘say you.’ Yes;
but it doth serve to let you see, and for that end I tell it you
that you may see, your danger, and the source thereof.6 ‘Nay’

1[‘* Bridges,” JZS.]

2[Blank left for name in AZS,, but inserted in Burton. Popularly called so at
that time, but his true title was the Count Palatine of Newlions +

3[** State,” AZS.] 4[‘* This being so, that,” 2dzd.]

5'To combine with Papists, even for Royalists to do so.

8[‘* They will not tell you so, nor in being cozened by unworthy compliances

of individuals in this nation or any general compliance, it[s] unworthy, unchristian,

un-Englishlike. Therefore, I say, it doth serve to let you see your danger and the
rise of it,” AZS.]

520 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

it is not only thus, that we stand in this condition ‘of hostility,’
towards Spain ; ‘and’ towards all that Interest that would make
void and frustrate everything that has been doing for you;
namely, towards! the Popish Interest, Papists and Cavaliers ;—
but it is also— —[His Highness finds this sentence will not do, and
so tries it another way|—That is to say, your danger is so great, if
you ‘will’ be sensible of it, from Persons that pretend other
things! [Coming now to the great Miscellany of Anabaptists,
Republicans, Levellers ; your Allens, Sexbys, Overtons.| ‘ Pretend,
I say; yea who (though perhaps they do not all suit in their
hearts with the said ‘ Popish’ Interest—) [Sentence left ruinous ;
sense gradually becomes visible|—yet all men know, and must
know, that discontented parties are among us somewhere! They
must expect backing and support somewhere.? They must end
at the Interest of the Cavalier at the long-run. That must be
their support !—I could have reckoned this in another® ‘head’
[Half soliloquising, us Highness ; giving us a glimpse into the strange
seething, simmering inner-man of him|—But I shall give you an
account of things as they arise to me‘ for that I desire to clear
them to you! Not discoursively, ‘in the oratorie way ;’ but to
let you see ‘the’ matter of fact, and to let you see how the state
of your affairs stands. [Well, your Highness ; that certainly is the
grand object of speaking tous. To show mE what THov seest, what
is in THEE: why else should one human being dare to wag his tongue
to another? It is frightful othernise. One almost loves this incondite
half-articulation of his Highness in comparison. ]

Certain it is® there was, not long since, an endeavour to make
an insurrection in England. [Penruddock at Salisbury ;—we heard
of Wagstaff and him !}_ It was so for some time before it broke
out. It was so before the last Parliament sat, the last. ‘ Nay,’

1[** All that are doing for you in respect of,” JZS.]

2(**that discontented spirits end somewhere. ‘They must expect back[ing] and
support somewhere. And truly those discontentments are another piece of your
dangers,” zbzd.]

3[‘* upon other [account],” 2dzd.] 4[‘* appear to be,” 2dzd.]

spi. It is true,” zd¢d. }

4
*
%

1656.] SPEECH V 521

it was so from the time not only of the undertaking of this
Government ; but the spirit and principle of it did work in the
Long-Parliament ‘time.’ From that time till to this hath there
been nothing but enterprising and designing against you. And
its no strange nor new thing to tell you: Because its true and
certain that the Papists, the Priests and Jesuits, have a great

influence upon the Cavalier Party ; they and the Cavalier ‘ party’ .

upon ‘the’ discontented spirits of the Nation,—who are not all
so apt to see where the dangers lie, nor to what the management
of affairs tend. Those ‘ Papists and Cavaliers’ do foment! all
things that tend to disservice; to propagate discontentments
upon the minds of men. And if we would instance in particulars
those that have manifested this, we could tell you that Priests
and Jesuits have insinuated themselves into the society of men ;
pretending the same things that they have pretended ;—whose
ends, have been that out of doubt which I have told you. [Dark
spectres of Jesuits ; knitting up Charles Stuart, the Spaniard, and all
manner of Levellers and discontented persons, into one Antichristian
mass, to overwhelm us therewith !|

We had that Insurrection. It was intended first to the assass-
ination of my person ;—which I would not remember as any-
thing at all considerable, to myself or to you [Very well, your
Highness !|: for they must ‘have’ cut throats beyond human
calculation before they had been able to effect their design.
But you know that very well, ‘ this of the assassination ;’ —it is no
fable. For persons were arraigned for it before the Parliament
‘sat’; and tried, and upon proof condemned [Gerard and Vowel ;
we remember them !|—for their designs and endeavours to cut the
throats of myself, and three or four more that they ‘had’ singled
out as being a little more than ordinary industrious to preserve
the peace of the Nation.2_ And did think to make a very good
af It is these to whom they do foment,” J/S. ] : j j

Mrs. Hutchinson says that the Cavaliers ‘‘ had not patience to stay till things
ripened of themselves, but were every day forming designs and plotting for the

murder of Cromwell, and other insurrections, which, being contrived in drink and
managed by false and cowardly fellows, were still revealed to Cromwell, who had

522 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

issue ‘in that way,’ to the accomplishment of their designs! 1
say, this was made good upon the Trial. Before the Parliament
sat, all the time the Parliament sat, they were about it. We did
hint these things to them—‘ the Parliament people ’"—by several
persons, that acquainted them therewith. But what fame! we
lay under I know not! [Suspicious of us in that Parliament /| It
was conceived, it seems, we had things? that rather intended to
persuade agreement and consent, and ‘bring’ money out of the
people’s purses, or I know not what :—in short? nothing was
believed [Very beautifully rebutted, your Highness ; without even
anger at it; as the Lion walks quietly on through cobwebs. We
had “ things” which rather intended to &c. &c. What most articulate
rhetoric could match this half-articulate,—articulate enough for the
occasion !|; though there was a series of these things distinctly
and plainly communicated to many Members.

The Parliament rose about the middle of January. By the
12th of March after, they, ‘the people’ were in arms. But
these were a company of mean fellows,—(alas !)—not a lord, nor
a gentleman, nor a man of fortune, nor this nor that, amongst
them: but it was a poor headstrong people, a company of rash
fellows that were at the undertaking of this,—and that was all!
And by such things [His Highness’s face indicates that he means
“ no-things,” “ babblements” | have men ‘once well-affected’ lost
their consciences and honours, by complying, ‘coming to agree-
ment with Malignants,’ upon such notions as these are !—Give
me leave to tell you, We know it ; we are able to prove it. And
I refer you to that Declaration* which was for guarding against
Cavaliers (as I did before to that other ‘ Declaration’ which set
down the grounds of our war with Spain), Whether these things
most excellent intelligence of all things that passed, even in the King’s closet; .. .
while to speak truth, Cromwell's personal courage and magnanimity upheld him

" against all enemies and malcontents.” A/emoirs of Col. Hutchinson, ed. Firth, vol.
ii., Pp. 205. ]
1[‘‘ fate,” AZS.]
2 Means ‘ we made statements ;
3[‘* but,” JZS.]
4Can be read in Parliamentary History, xx. 434 et seqq.

very Oliverian expression,

1656.] SPEECH V 523

were true or no?! If men will not believe,—we are satisfied, we
do our duty [A suspicious people, your Highness: nay not suspicious,
so much as incredulous, obstinate, dreadfully thick of skin and sense,
—and unused to such phenomena as your Highness /|—If we let you
know things and the ground of them, it is satisfaction enough to
us; But to see how men can reason themselves out of their
honours and consciences in their compliance with those sort of
people—!—Which, truly I must needs say, some men had com-
pliance with, that I thought never would for all the world: I
must tell you so.—

These men rise in March. And that it was a general Design,
I think all the world must know and acknowledge.? For it is
as evident as the day, that the King [We may call him “ King’’]
sent Sir Joseph Wagstaff and another, the Earl of Rochester, to
the North. And that it was general, we had not by suspicion
or imagination ; but we know individuals! We are able to make
appear, That persons that carried themselves the most demurely -
and fairly of any men in England were engaged in this business.
And he that gave us our intelligence‘ lost his life for it in
[Neuburg] ° Country [ Yes, Manning was shot there ; he had told us
Hyde was cock-sure] ;—I think I may now speak of it, because he
is dead :—but he did discover, from time to time, a full intelli-
gence of these things. Therefore, How men of wicked spirits

1[‘* And I refer you to that Declaration which is for provision against Cavaliers
(as I did you to the other that sets down the grounds of our war with Spain)
whether these things were so or no,” 1/S.]

2[This view is supported by the letters and other papers of the Royalists them-
selves. Heath, in his Chronicle (p. 678, ed. 1663) says, ‘‘ All the gentlemen in
England of that party were one way or other engaged, or at least were made
acquainted with it; but the snatching of the principal of them up throughout the
kingdom, a little before the execution of it, frustrated the most probable effects of
that rising.'’]

& ste the King of Scots. He was recognised as such after the Coronation at
cone.

4[‘* instructions,” JZS. ‘‘ Cromwell here simply claims that he possessed full
intelligence as to the persons actually implicated in the conspiracy, however
discreet their actions might have been. This is exactly the information which the
letters of Manning, to whom he refers, did contain.” Mr. Firth, in Eng. Hist.
Review, 1888, p. 339.

®(A blank in 47S. The Elector Bishop of Cologne refused to allow Manning’s
execution in his own jurisdiction, so he was taken across into the Duchy of Juliers,
belonging to the Count Palatine of Neuburg. ]

~_—r

. he may shame uws,—and a man of contrivance, and wisdom, and

524 THE MAJOR-GENERALS _ [17 Sept.

may traduce us in that matter; or, notwithstanding all that hath
been done, may still continue! their compliances ‘with the
Malignants ;’—I leave it. [ Yes, let ruem look to that.) I think
England cannot be safe unless Malignants be carried far away !
2[We did [z.e. acted] upon account as we are ready to give to all
the world, and that done to them was truly honest, aye, to them
all and upon undeniable grounds of justice and equity, knowing
that [z.e. what] they were in the eye and judgment of all the
counties of England and all honest men in separating themselves
for such a work, all the land over .]?

There was never any design on foot but we could hear of it
out of the Tower. He who commanded there * would give us an
account, that within a fortnight or such athing+ there would be
some stirrings ; for a great concourse of people were coming to
them, and they had® very great elevations of spirit. [Vigilant
Barkstead !| ‘ And’ it was not only there; but in all the Counties
of England. We have had informations that they were upon de-
signs all over ‘England’ besides some particular places which
came to our particular assurance, and knowledge we had, as
from persons in the several Counties of England.°

And if this be so, then, as long as commotions can be held on
foot, you are in danger by your War with Spain; with whom all
the Papal Interest is joined. This Pope’ is a person all the world
knows to be a person of zeal for his Religion,—wherein perhaps

policy ; and his Designs are known all over to be nothing else
but Endeavours to unite all the Popish Interests in all the Chris-

1[‘ hold,” AZS.] 2[This paragraph omitted by Carlyle. ]

3 Barkstead, a Goldsmith once, a severe vigilant Colonel now; who has seen
much service. [‘‘ He that watched over that,’’ JZS.]

4‘time’ might be the word; but I am getting to love this ‘ thing.’

5[**for there was a great concourse of people came to them, and that they
had,” AZS.]

6[‘*and knowledge we had, as from persons we had from the several counties
in England,” zdzd. } :

7One Chigi by natural name, called Alexander VII. as Pope; an ‘Anti- —
jansenist Pope,’ say the Books. With whom, beyond the indispensable, let us —
crave not to be acquainted, e ‘

1656. ] SPEECH V 525

tian world, against this Nation above any, and against all the
Protestant Interest in the world.—If this be so, and if you will
take a measure of these things ; and [if] we must still hold our
esteem that we have had ‘for Spaniards,’ and be ready to shake
hands with them and the Cavaliers,—what doth this differ from
the Bishop of Canterbury [Poor old Laud, and his Surplices !)
‘striving’ to reconcile matters of religion ; if this temper be upon
us to unite with these ‘ Popish’ men in Civil Things? Give me
leave to say, and speak what I know! [Really I think ‘if’ this
nation cannot be happy upon the score of generals &c. without
we have this shaking of hands;]! if this be men’s mind,? I
tell you plainly,—I hope I need not—that I wish all the Cavaliers
in England, and all the Papists, heard me declare it, and many
here besides yourselves ‘have heard me’: I tell you there are
a company of poor men that are ready to spend their blood
against such compliance! [Right so, your Highness ; that is the
grand cardinal certainty ! An irrevocable Act of Legislature passed
in one’s own heart. In spite of all clamours and jargons, and
constitutional debatings in Parliament and out of it, there is a man or
two will have himself cut in pieces before that “ shaking of hands”
take place. In fact, I think Christ and Antichrist had better not try
shaking of hands ; no good will come of it !—Does not his Highness
look uncommonly animated ?|—and I am persuaded the same
things of you!

If this be our condition,—with respect had to this, truly let
us go a little farther. For I would lay open the danger, where-
in, I think in my conscience, we stand ; and if God give not you
hearts to see and discern that which is obvious, we shall sink,
and the house will fall about our ears,—upon ‘even what are
called’ such sordid attempts as these are! Truly there are a
great many people in this Nation, that would not reckon up
every pitiful thing that may be, ‘ perhaps’ like a mouse nibbling
at the heel; but only considerable dangers! I will tell you

1[(The passage in square brackets omitted by Carlyle. ]
2“ if this be so,”’ JZS.]

he

ee a ee oe
—

526 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

plainly ‘ what to me seems dangerous ;’—for it is not a time for
compliments nor rhetorical speeches.—I have none, truly ;—but
to tell you how we jind things.!

There is a generation of men in this Nation that cry up nothing
but righteousness and justice and liberty [Coming now to the Level-
lers and “ Commonwealth’s-men”’| ; and these are diversified in ‘to’
several sects, and sorts of men ; and though they may be contempt-
ible in respect they are many,? and so not like to make a solid
vow to do you mischief,—yet they are apt to agree in aliquo
tertio. They are known (yea, well enough) to shake hands with,3—
I should be loath to say with Cavaliers,—but with all the scum
. and dirt of this Nation, [Not loath to say that, your Highness ?] to
put you to trouble. And, therefore, when I shall come to speak
to the Remedies, I shall tell you what are the most apt and
proper remedies in all these respects. I speak now‘ of the very
time when there was an Insurrection at Salisbury, ‘your Wag-
staffs and Penruddocks openly in arms’— —[Sudden prick or
anger stings his Highness at the thought of that great Peril, and how
it was treated and scouted by the incredulous Thickskinned ; and he
plunges in this manner|——I doubt whether it be believed there
ever was any rising in North Wales ‘at the same time; at’
Shrewsbury ; ‘at’ Rufford Abbey, where were about Five-hundred
horse ; or at Marston Moor; or in Northumberland, and the
other places,°—when all these Insurrections were,—at that very
time. [Truly it is difficult to keep one’s temper: sluggish mortals
saved from destruction ; and won't so much as admit it !| there
was a Party which was very proper and apt to come between the
Papists and Cavaliers ; and that Levelling Party hath some access
lately, that goes under a finer name or notion! I think they

1 Paragraph irretrievably misreported ; or undecipherable for want of the tones
and looks accompanying it ;—in a dim uncertain manner, displays the above as a
kind of meaning.

2[z.e., divided into many sects. } 8[‘*together,’’ JZS.] ‘

4[**tell you,’’ 22d. Probably ‘‘I tell you, at the very time,” is the true meaning. ]
5[‘*I doubt whether it be believed, whether ever there was any rising in North
Wales, Shrewsbury, Rufford Abbey, where there was about 500 horses, Marston
Moor, Northumberland, etc.’’]

.
|
.

1656. ] SPEECH V 527

>

would ‘now’ be called “Commonwealth’s-men ;’’ who perhaps
have right to it little enough. And its strange that men of
fortune and great estates [Lord Grey of Groby; he is in the
Tower ; he and others] should join with such a people. But if
the fact be so, there need no stretch of wit to make it evident,?
it being so by demonstration. [His Highness still harps on the
incredulity of a thickskinned public, naturally very provoking to him
in these perilous, abstruse and necessarily secRET operations of his.}

I say, this people at that very time, they were pretty numerous,
—and do not despise them !—(this people), at that time ‘when’ the
Cavaliers were risen, this very Party had prepared a Declaration
against all the things that had been transacted ‘by us ;’ and called
them I know ‘not’ by what ‘names,’ tyranny, oppression, things
against the liberty of the subject ; and cried out for justice, and
righteousness, and liberty :—and what was all this business for,
but to join with the Cavaliers to carry on that Design? And
these are things,—not words! That Declaration we got; and
the Penner of it we got [Locked him fast in Chepstow ; the unruly
Wildman !|: and we have got intelligence also how the business
was laid and contrived ;—which was hatched in the time of the
Sitting of that Parliament. I do not accuse anybody: but I say
that was the time of it ;—an unhappy time! And a plausible
Petition was penned, that must come to me, forsooth [Through
that obtuse Constitutioning Parliament, I fancy !|, “To consider of
these things, and to give redress and remedies.” And this was
so.—

Now indeed I must tell you plainly, we suspected a great deal
of violence then; and we did hunt it out. I will not tell you
these as high things [Call them “low” if you like ; mice nibbling
at one’s heel/|: but at that time that the Cavaliers were to rise,
a Party was to seize upon General Monk in Scotland, and to
commit him to Edinburgh Castle, upon this pretence of liberty :
and when they had seized upon him, and clapped him by the

abe have reason little enough,’’ 1S. ]
2[*there needs no great reasons to discover it to be so,”’ zdzd.]

Ee SS ee a eee, ee Se ee. ee

528 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

heels, ‘him’ and some other true and faithful Officers, they were
resolved upon a number at the same time to march away for
London; and to leave a party behind them,—to have their
throats cut by the Scots! Though I will not say they would
have ‘purposely’ done it; yet it cannot be thought otherwise,
but that a considerable ‘ part of the’ Army would have followed
them ‘hither’ at the heels——And not only thus: but this
same spirit and principle designed some little fiddling things
_ upon some of your Officers, to an assassination ;1 and an Officer
was engaged, that was upon the Guard, to seize me in my bed.
This was true. And other foolish designs there were,—as, To
get into a room, to get gunpowder laid in it, and to blow up the
room wherein I lay. And this, we can tell you, is truth. These
are Persons not worthy naming; but the things are really érue.
And this is the state wherein we have stood in, and with which
we have conflicted, since the last Parliament. And upon this
account, and in this combination,? it is that I say to you, That
the ringleaders to all this are none but your old enemies the
Papists and Cavaliers. We have some ‘of them’ in prison for
these things.

Now we would be loath to tell you of notions more seraphi-
cal! [His Highness elevating his brows ; face assuming a look of
irony, of rough banter.| These are poor and low conceits. We
have had very seraphical notions! We have had endeavours to
deal between two Interests ;—one some section of that Common-
wealth Interest; and another which was a notion of a Fifth-
Monarchy Interest! [A “Notion;” mot even worth calling a_
“ SECTION” or “PARTY , —such moonshine was it.|—Which ‘strange
operation’ I do not recite, nor what condition it is in, as thinking
it not worthy our trouble. But de facto it hath been so, That

1Means: ‘they attempted to persuade some of your Officers to that ‘“‘little
fiddling thing.’’’

2 Identity of time and attempt.

3[‘* We have had endeavours to heal between two interests ; one that was part of
the Commonwealth's interest, and another that was a notion of a fifth monarchy

interest, whom I do not Tepeat nor whose condition I do not repeat, as thinking it
not worth your trouble,” J/S.]

——. ee Oa ee

1656. ] SPEECH V 29

there hath been endeavours ;—as there was endeavours to make
a reconciliation between Herod and Pilate that Christ might be
put to death, so there hath been endeavours of reconciliation
between the Fifth-Monarchy ‘ men’ and the Commonwealth’s men
that there might be union in order to an end,—no end being so
bad as that of Herod’s ‘ was, —but in order to end in blood and
confusion! And, that you may know, ‘to tell you candidly,’ I
profess I do not believe ‘of’ these two last, that of Common-
wealth’s men and Fifth-Monarchy men, ‘but’ that ‘they’ have
stood at a distance, ‘aloof from Charles Stuart.’ [Zhe Overtons,
the Harrisons, are far above such a thing.| 1 think they did not
participate. I would be so charitable, I would be, That they did
not. But this I’ll tell you, That for the others, they did not only
set these things on work ; but sent a fellow, [Sexby, the miserable
outcast /| a wretched creature, an apostate from religion and all
honesty,—they sent him to Madrid to advise with the King of _
Spain to land! Forces to invade this Nation, promising satisfac-
tion, that ? they would comply and concur with him, to have both
men and moneys; undertaking both to engage the Fleet to
mutiny, and also your Army to gain a garrison ‘on the coast ;’
to raise a party, ‘so’ that if the Spaniard would say where he
would land, they would be ready to assist him !—This person
was sometimes * a Colonel in the Army. He went with Letters
to the Archduke Leopoldus and Don John. That was an Am-
bassador ;—and gave promises of much moneys and came back
again: and hath been soliciting, and did obtain moneys that he
sent ‘hither’ by Bills of Exchange :—and God, by His Providence,
we being exceeding poor, directed that we light‘ ed’ on some of
them, and some of the moneys! [Keep hold of them, your High-
ness !| Now if they be payable, let them be called for! [Won't
call, I believe !|—If the House shall think fit to order any, they
may have an inspection into these things.

We think it our duty to tell you of these things; and we can

1[*lend,” MZS.] 2( “if,” 22d.)
3 Means ‘at one time;’ as almost all know.
VOL. 11.—34

,

_ —_ ee ee p_ ee eee) a oe

530 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

make them good. Here is your danger; that is it! And here
is a poor Nation that hath wallowed in its blood ;—though,
thanks be to God, we have had Peace these four or five years :
yet here is the condition we stand in. And I think I should be
false to you, if I did not give you this true representation of it.

I am to tell you, by the way, a word to justify a Thing [Coming
to the Major-Generals| that, I hear, is much spoken of. When
we knew all these Designs before mentioned ; when we found
that the Cavaliers would not be quiet——No quiet; there is
“no peace to the wicked,” saith the Scriptures, the Fifty-seventh
of Isaiah: “They are like the troubled sea, that cannot rest ;
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.” ! They cannot rest,—they
have no Peace with God and Jesus Christ in the remission of
sins! They do not know what belongs to it [My brave one !];
therefore they know not how to be at rest; therefore they can
no more cease from their actions than they can cease to be,—
nor so easily neither !— —Truly when this Insurrection was, and
we saw it in all the roots and grounds of it, we did find out a
little poor Invention, which I hear has been much regretted.
[That was, we were resolved that those men that put the
honest and peaceably minded people ‘to trouble’; that
would not comply with such things as these are.]? I say,
there was a little thing invented; which was, the erecting of
your Major-Generals [Yes /]: To have a little inspection upon
the People thus divided, thus discontented, thus dissatisfied,
‘split’ in ‘to’ divers interests,—by ‘the workings of’ the Popish
Party! ‘Workings of’ the Lord Taaff and others ;* the most
consisting of Natural-Irish rebels, and all those men we have

1Tsaiah lvii. 20, 21.

2[The words in brackets were omitted by Carlyle. Cromwell apparently begins
to tell about the decimation of the Royalists, as the reason for appointing the
Major-Generals, but stops, or perhaps this sentence and the next should be trans-
Por Fis Highness suddenly breaks off after new quarry on mention of this Party.
The Lord Taaff is even now very busy, at Antwerp (Thurloe, v.), with Chancellor
Hyde, ‘‘ throwing up mire and dirt’’ of the insurrection kind. He was in trouble
long ago, at the beginning of the Long Parliament, on the score of the Irish
Massacre ; sat some time in the Tower (Clarendon, ii. 216) with Lord Dillon and

others; a generation ‘“‘ who can no more cease from their practices than they can
cease to live, nor so easily neither! ’’

1656.] SPEECH V 531

fought against in Ireland, and ‘have’ expulsed from thence, as
having had a hand in that bloody Massacre ;—‘of him and’ of
those that were under his power; who should have joined in
this excellent business of Insurrection !—

And upon such a Rising as that was,—truly I think if ever
anything were justifiable as to Necessity, and honest in every
respect, this was.1 And I could as soon venture my life with it
as ‘with’ anything I ever undertook! [His Highness looks ani-
mated.| We did find out,—I mean myself and the Council
‘ did,’—That,? if there were need to have greater forces to carry

on this work, it was a most righteous thing to put the charge _

upon that Party which was the cause of it. [Yea/] Andifthere
be any man that hath a face looking averse to this, I dare pro-
nounce him to be a man against the Interest of England. Upon
this account, and upon this ground of necessity ; when we saw
what game they were upon, and knew individual persons, and of
the greatest rank, not a few, engaged in this business (I knew
one man that laid down his life for it) [‘‘ Name?” He must go
unnamed, this one /|; and ‘had it’ by Letters intercepted which
made it as clear as the day ;—we did think it our duty To make
that class of persons who, as evident as anything in the world, were
in the combination ‘of the insurrectionists,’ bear their shares of
the charge. ‘ Bear their share,’ one with another,® for the raising
of the Forces that were so necessary to defend us against those
Designs! And truly if any man be angry at it,—I am plain, and
shall use an homely expression: Let him turn the buckle of his
girdle behind him/* If this were to be done again, I would do it.

1[“ And to the end that this nation upon such a rise as that was, so justifiable
to necessity, so honest in every respect, truly if ever—I think—anything were
honest this was, as anything that ever I knew,”’ J/S.]

2[‘* That it was necessary to put that people who had occasioned all this trouble
if there were need,” zdzd.]

3[‘* To make them that were in the combination of men, as evident[ly] as any-
thing in the world, equally to bear their shares of the charge, one with another.”’]

4The Proverb is in Ray; but without commentary. Various friendly Cor-
respondents, who have found it in Shakspeare (Much Ado about Nothing, Act
v. Scene i.) and elsewhere, point out to me that the meaning is, ‘ Let him bring

his sword-hilt round, then;’ ready for drawing; round to the front, where the
‘buckle’ of his belt or ‘ girdle’ now is,

532 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

How the Major-Generals have behaved themselves in that
work? I hope they are men, as to their persons, of known in-
tegrity and fidelity ; and men that have freely adventured their
blood and lives for that good Cause,—if it ‘still’ be thought
such, and it was well stated, ‘this morning,’ against all the
‘new’ humours and fancies of men !— —And truly England doth
yet receive one day more of Lengthening-out its tranquillity, by
that same service of theirs,1— —

Well; your danger is as you have seen. And truly I am
sorry itis so great. ‘But’ I wish it might cause no despondency;
—as truly, I think, it will not : because we are Englishmen ; that
is one good account. And if God give a Nation the property ? of
valour and courage, it is honour and ‘a’ mercy ‘from Him,
[Yes, it is a great thing, your Highness !] and much more ‘than
English!’ Because you all, I hope, are Christian Men, Christian
men that know Jesus Christ [Yea /], and know that Cause that
hath been mentioned to you this day.

Having declared to you my sense and my knowledge,—pardon
me if I say so, my knowledge, of the condition of these poor
Nations, for it hath an influence upon them all, it concerns
them all very palpably; I should be to blame if I should not a
little offer to you the Remedies. [Second head of method: the
Remedies.| 1 would comprehend them under two considerations.
They are both * somewhat general. The one is, Considering. all
things that may be done, and ought to be done, in order to
Security ; that’s one. And truly the other is a common head,
‘a general, nay a universal consideration, —the other is, Doing
all things that ought to be done in order to Reformation: and

1* that occasion’ in orig. td If it be thought so, which in my conscience is so,
and it was well stated against all the humours and fancies of men, and truly
England doth yet receive one day more of lengthening out its tranquillity by that
occasion and action; they do that it doth manifest a year, [perhaps means, that
they do so has been manifest for a year] for it is near so much time as that, they
have been exercised in that service.”

2[** propriety,” JZS. ; but meaning as here. ]

3[** bound,” AZS.]

4
|
|
;
4
;
.
|
|

1656. ] SPEECH V 533

with that I shall close my Discourse. And all that first hath
been hinted-at was but to give you a sense of the danger that
‘truly’ is most material and significant; for which you are
principally called hither to advise of the remedies.—I do put
them, ‘the remedies,’ into this ‘ twofold’ method, not but ‘ that’
I think they are scarcely distinct. I do believe, truly, upon
serious and deliberate consideration: That a true Reformation,
as it may, and will through God’s acceptance, and ‘by’ the en-
deavours of His poor servants, be,—That that, ‘I say,’ will be
pleasing in His sight; and that which will be not only that
which shall avert the present danger, but be a worthy return for
all the blessings and mercies which you have received. So, in
my conscience, if I were put to show it, this hour, Where the
security of these Nations will lie,—forces, arms, watchings,
posts,! strength; your being and freedom; be as politic and
diligent, and as vigilant as you can be, I would say in my very
conscience, and as before Almighty God I speak it: I think your

Reformation, if it be honest and thorough and just, it will be °

your best security! [Hear him; Hear, hear !|

First, ‘however, for that of Security ‘outwardly considered.’
We shall speak a little distinctly to that. [* Be ye wise as
serpents withal !”’| | You see where your War is. It is with the
Spaniard. You have Peace with all ‘other’ Nations, or the
most of them; Swede, Dane, Dutch. At present, I say, it is
well; it is at present so. And so ‘likewise’ with the Portugal,
‘with’ France,—the Mediterranean Sea. Both those States,
both Christian and Profane ; the Mahometans ;—you have Peace
with them all. Only with Spain, I say, you have a difference,
you have a War. I pray consider it. Do I come to tell you
that I would te you to this War? No. ‘According’ as you
shall find your spirits and reasons grounded in what hath been
said, so let you and me join in the prosecution of that War,—
‘according’ as we are satisfied, and as the cause will appear

1[* parts,” A/S. ]

‘

534 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

to our consciences in the sight of the Lord. But if you can come
" to prosecute it, prosecute it vigorously, or do not do it at all !—
Truly I shall speak a very great word,—one may ask a very
great question: “ Unde ; Whence shall ‘ the means of’ it come?”
Our Nation is overwhelmed in debts! But I think it my duty
to deal plainly; I shall speak to that which Nature teacheth
us. If we engage ina business,—a recoiling man may haply re-
cover of his enemy: but the courage of an enemy surely will be
in the keeping of his ground! Therefore it is that which I
would advise you, That we might join together to prosecute it
vigorously. In the second place, I would advise you that you
would deal effectually,—seeing there is such a complication of
interests, ‘as some keep objecting.’ If you believe that there is
such a complication of interests,—why, then, in the name of
God, that excites you the more to do it! Give me leave to tell
you, that I do not believe that in any war that ever was in
former times, nor ‘in’ any engagements that you have had with
others, this Nation had more obligations upon them to look
to itself,—to forbear waste! of time, precious time ; needlessly
to mind things that are not essential; to be quibbling about
‘ words, and comparatively ? about things of no moment ; and in
the mean time,—being in such a case as I suppose you know we
are,—to suffer ourselves to be wanting to a just defence against
the ‘common’ Enemies abroad, or not to be thoroughly sensible
of the Distempers that are at home *—!—I know, perhaps there
are many considerations that may teach you, that may incline +
you, to keep your ‘own’ hands tender from men of one Religion
‘with ourselves,’ ° and of such an Interest as is so spread and
rooted in the Nation. However,® if they seek the eradication of
the Nation; if they are active as you have seen, and ‘as’ it hath

1[* expense,”’ JZS.] 2[“compactively,” zdzd.]

3 Original sentence incomplete ; or tacked with radical incoherency to the fore-
going: the sense, on either hypothesis, is very visible.

4[‘‘ induce,” JZS.]

5 Royalists, and other Discontented ; Protestants, though Plotters.

8[‘« hence,” J/S.]

1656.] SPEECH V 535

been made manifest so as may not be denied, to the carrying-on
of their Designs ; if England must be eradicated by persons com-
plicated with the Spaniard ; if this must be brought in through
distempers and falseness of men among themselves,—then the
question is no more but this: Whether any consideration what-
soever shall lead us, for fear of eradicating of distempers, to suffer
all the honest Interests of this Nation to be eradicated? There-
fore speak but generally of any of their distempers, ‘which are’ of
all sorts, and when a member cannot be cured, the rule is plain,
Ense rescindendum est immedicabile vulnus. And I think it such
an advantage as that nothing could ever be more properly put
in practice |! since this or any Nation ‘first’ was.

As to those lesser Distempers of people that pretend Re-
ligion, yet, from the whole consideration of Religion, which
would fall under as one of the heads of Reformation, I had
rather put it under this head ;? and I shall the less speak to it,
because you have been so well spoken-to this day already ‘else-
where.’ I will tell you the truth: Our practice since the last
Parliament hath been, To let all this Nation see that whatever
pretensions to Religion would continue quiet, peaceable, they
should enjoy conscience and liberty to themselves ;3—and not
make Religion a pretence for arms and blood, truly we have
suffered them, and that cheerfully, so to enjoy their own liberties.
Whatsoever is contrary, ‘and not peaceable,’ let the pretence be
never so specious,—if it tend to combination, to interests and
factions, we shall not care, by the grace of God, whom we meet
withal, though never so specious, though never so quiet! And
truly I am against all liberty of conscience repugnant to this. 1
am. If men will profess,—be they those under Baptism, be they

1* used’ in orig.

2 Of ‘doing all we can for Security ;’ they will stand better under /hzs, thinks
his Highness. His Highness half-soliloquising, suddenly bethinking himself,
again shows us a glimpse of his Speech in a state of genesis.

3(‘* That that which hath been our practice since the last Parliament hath been

to let all this nation see that whatever pretensions be to religion, if quiet, peaceable,
if [they] enjoyed conscience and liberty to themselves.”’]

536 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept

those of the Independent judgment simply, and of the Presby-
terian judgment,—in the name of God, encourage them, counten-
_ ance them; so long as they do plainly continue! to be thankful

to God, and to make use of the liberty given them to enjoy
their own consciences! For, as it was said to-day, undoubtedly
this is the peculiar Interest all this while contested for. [An ex-
cellent “ Interest ;” very indispensable in a state of genuine Protest-
antism, which latter has itself for some time been indispensable
enough.| That men that believe in Jesus Christ—that’s the Form
- that gives the being to true religion, Faith in Christ and walk-
ing in a profession answerable to that Faith ;—men that believe
the remission of sins through the blood of Christ, and free justi-
fication by the blood of Christ, and live upon the grace of God :
that those men that are certain they are so [Faith of assurance],—
‘they’ are members of Jesus Christ, and are to Him as the apple
of His eye. Whoever hath this Faith, let his Form be what it
will; he walking peaceably, without the prejudicing of others
under another Form :—it is a debt due to God and Christ ; and
He will require it, if he ‘that Christian’ may not enjoy this
liberty. [True Tolerance ; a noble thing : Patience, indifference as
to the Unessential ; liveliest impatience, inexorable INTOLERANCE for
the Want of the Essential !)

If a man of one form will be trampling upon the heels of
another form; if an Independent, for example, will despise him
‘who is’ under Baptism, and will revile him, and reproach and
provoke him,—I will not suffer it in him. If, on the other side,
those on the Anabaptists ‘judgment’ shall be censuring the Godly
Ministers of the Nation that profess under that of Independency ;
or those that profess under Presbytery, shall be reproaching or
speaking evil of them, traducing and censuring of them,—as I
would not be willing to see the day on which England shall be in
the power of the Presbytery to impose upon the consciences of
others that profess faith in Christ,—so I will not endure any to

1“ while they do plainly hold forth,” 4/S.]

\

1656. ] SPEECH V 537

reproach them. But God give us hearts and spirits to keep
things equal. Which, truly I must profess to you, hath been my
temper. I have had boxes! and rebukes,—on one hand and on
the other; some censuring? me for Presbytery ; others ‘as’ an
inletter to all the Sects and Heresies in the Nation. I have
borne my reproach: but I have, through God’s mercy, not been
unhappy in preventing any one Religion to impose upon another.
And truly I must needs say (I speak it experimentally) :3 I have
found it, I have, that those of the Presbyterian judgment—[“ Do
themselves partly approve my plan,” he means to say ; but starting off
into broken sentences, as he is liable to do, never says it]— —I speak
it knowingly, as having received from very many Counties—I
have had Petitions, and acknowledgments and professions, from
whole Counties ; as from Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, and other
Counties ; acknowledgments that they, ‘the Presbyterians there,’
do but desire they may have liberty and protection in the worship- f
ping of God according to their own judgments ; for the purging
of their congregations, and the labouring to attain more purity of
faith and repentance ;—‘and’ that, in their outward profession,
they will not strain themselves beyond their own line. I have
had those ‘ Petitions’; I have them to show. And I confess I
look at that as the blessedest thing which hath been since the
adventuring upon this Government, ‘or’ that these times pro-
duce. And I hope I gave them fair and honest answers. And if
it shall be found to be the care of the Civil Magistrate to keep
thus all the professing Christians in this relation to one another ;
and not to suffer any to say or do what will justly provoke the
others 4 :—I think he that would have more liberty than this, is
not worthy of any.

This therefore I think verily, if it may be thus under consider-
ation for Reformation :—‘I say,’ if it please God to give you and

1[Carlyle altered to ‘‘some boxes on the ear,’’ but it is much more likely that
Cromwell used the word in its sense of buffets. }
21*‘envying me,”’ A/S. ] 3[z.e., from experience. |
afc and not to suffer all things said or done to provoke others,’’ 1/5. ]

>

Re Bt AS
Sey. - he | os aes | 4!

_ were very treacherous if I should take away Tithes, till I see the

"maintenance, —another way,—if the State will provide it. [Sen-

538 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

me hearts to keep this straight,! ‘it may be a great means’ in
giving countenance to ‘just’ Ministers,—[In such semi-articulate
uneasy way does his Highness hustle himself over into the discussion
of a new Topic]—countenancing a just maintenance to them,
whether by tithes or otherwise.—For my part I should think I

Legislative Power to settle Maintenance to them another way.
But whoever they be that shall contend to destroy Tithes,? that
doth as really cut their, ‘the Ministers,’ throats as it is a drift to
take Tithes away before a way of Reparation ® or other ‘ mode of’
maintenance be had. Truly I think all such practices and pro-
ceedings should‘ be discountenanced. I have heard it from as
gracious a Minister as any is in England ; I have had it professed :
That it would be a far greater satisfaction to them to have it,—

sation among the Voluntaries |— —His Highness proceeds no further
in that direction at present. The next sentence suddenly drawing 1t-
self up into a heap ; comprising both ideas, “ TITHES” and “EQUALITY,”
and in free-flowing half-articulate manner uttering them both at once,
must be given precisely as it stands,—Grammar yielding place to
something still need fuller, to TRANSPARENCY Of Speech mith or with-
out grammar,|— —Therefore I think, for the keeping of the
Church and people of God and Professors in their several forms
in this liberty,—I think as it, ‘this of tithes, or some other main-
tenance, hath been a thing that’s the root of visible Profession
[No public maintenance no regular priest], the upholding this—I
think you will find a blessing in it :—If God keep your hearts to
keep things in this posture and balance, which is so honest and
so necessary. [Better keep up Tithes, till we see !]

Truly, there might be some other things offered to you, in the
point of Reformation: to wit, a Reformation of Manners— —

1[‘* even,’ JZS.] 2[ them,” 22d. ]

3(The writer of the JZS. has begun to write ‘‘ reparation,’’ and then crossed it
out and put “‘ preparation,” but no doubt the former is right. ]

4[** would,” 1ZS.]

1656. ] SPEECH V 539

But I had forgot one thing that I must remember! It is the
Church’s work,! you know, in some measure: yet give me leave
to say, and I appeal unto your consciences, Whether or no there
hath not been an honest care taken for the ejecting of Scandal-
ous Ministers, ‘and’ for the bringing-in of them that have passed
an Approbation ? [Our two Commissions of T'riers and Expurgators. |
I dare say, such an one as never passed in England before! And
give me leave to say, It hath been with this difference ‘ from the
old practice,’ that neither Mr. Doctor nor Parson in the Uni-
versity hath been reckoned stamp enough by those that made
these Approbations:* though, I can say so, they have a great
esteem of learning, and look at Grace as most useful when it
falls unto men mith it rather than without it, and wish, with all
their hearts, the flourishing of all those Institutions of Learning,
as much as any, [yet I must say it hath been ‘ counted’ nothing
with them that have passed the best with them or me.]* I think
there hath been a conscience exercised, both by myself and the
Ministers, towards them that have been approved; I may say,
such an one, as I truly believe was never known in England, ‘ in
regard to this matter.’ And I do verily believe that God hath,
for the Ministry, a very great seed in the youth ‘now’ in the
Universities ; who* instead of studying Books, study their own
hearts. I do believe, as God hath made a very great and
flourishing seed to that purpose; so, I believe, this Ministry of
England—that I think in my very conscience God will bless
and favour ‘that’; and hath blessed it, to the gaining of very many
souls—it was never so upon the thriving hand since England was,
as it is at this day. Therefore I say, in these things, ‘in these
arrangements made by us,’ that tend to the profession of the
Gospel and Public Ministry, ‘I think’ you will be so far from
hindering, that you will further it. And I shall be willing to
join with you.

1(*their work,’ JZS. ]
“ have satisfied those that have made their approbations,”’ zbid. |
3{Omitted by Carlyle. ] £[**and,” J

540 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

I did hint to you my thoughts about the Reformation of
Manners, and those abuses that are in this Nation through dis-
order, is a thing which should be much in your hearts. It is
that, that I am confident is a description and character of that
Interest you have been engaged against [and pressing to as any
other, }! ‘the Cavalier Interest :’ against the badge and character
of countenancing Profaneness, Disorder and Wickedness in all
places,—[4 horrible “ character,’ your Highness ; not undeserved
hitherto: and under our new Defender of the Faith (if you could see
into futurity) what a height of evidence mill it rise to !| [and what-
ever is next of kin to that, and most agrees with that which is
Popery, and ‘with’ the profane Nobility and Gentry of this
Nation !]2 In my conscience, it was a shame to be a Christian,
within these fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years, in this Nation,
either ‘in Cesar’s house, or elsewhere! It was a shame, it was a
reproach to a man; and the badge of Puritan was put upon it.—
We would keep up [He bethinks him of the above word “profane’’)
the Nobility and Gentry :—and the way to keep them up is, Not
' to suffer them to be patronisers nor countenancers of debauchery
or disorders! And you will hereby be as labourers in the work
‘of keeping them up.’ And a man may tell as plainly as can be
what becomes of us, if we grow indifferent and lukewarm? ‘in
repressing evil,’ under I know not what weak pretensions. [ Yes,
your Highness ; even so,—were you and I in a minority of Two
upon it! “ Merry Monarchs” of the Nell-Gnynn Defender kind,
and the gallantest Sir Charles Sedleys in their tavern-balcony in Bow
Street, are and remain a most mournful phenomenon to me ; mourn-
fuller than Death ;—equal to Death with a Grimaldi mask clapt on
it/] If it lives in us, therefore; I say, if it be in the general
‘heart of the Nation,’ it is a thing I am confident our liberty and
prosperity 4 depends upon,—Reformation. To make it a shame

1fomitted by Carlyle. ] :

2[ This passage is transposed (by Carlyle) from after the words “ badge of Puritan
was put upon it,” delow.
3[** by our indifference or lukewarmness,” J/S.] e
sfe I am confident that the liberty and profaneness (séc) of this nation,” 22d. ]

—— 2s.

1656.] SPEECH V 541

to see men to be bold in sin and profaneness,—and God will |

bless you. You will be a blessing to the Nation; and by this,
‘will’ be more repairers of breaches than ‘by’ anything in the
world, ‘Truly these things do respect the souls of men, and the
spirits,—which are the men. The mind is the man. If that be
kept pure, a man signifies somewhat; if not, I would very fain
see what difference there is betwixt him and a beast. He hath

only some activity to do some more mischief. [A real “ Head of

the Church,” this “ King” ; not an imaginary one !]

There are some things which respect the Estates of men;
and there is one general Grievance in the Nation. It is the
Law. [‘ Hear, hear!” from all quarters of the Nation.) Not
that the Laws are ‘a’ grievance ; but there are Laws that are a
grievance; and the great grievance lies in the execution and
administration. I think I may say it, I have as eminent Judges
in this land as have been had, or that the Nation has had, for
these many years. [Hale and others ; yea !|—Truly I could be
particular! as to the executive part ‘of it,’ to administration
‘of the Law ;’ but that would trouble you. But the truth of
it is, There are wicked ‘and’ abominable Laws, that ‘it’ will be

in your power to alter. To hang a man for Six pence, thirteen -

pence, I know not what; to hang for a trifle, and pardon murder,—
is in the ministration of the Law, through the ill-framing of it.
I have known in my experience abominable murders ‘ ac’ quitted.
And to come and see men lose their lives for petty matters : this
is a thing that God will reckon for. {Your Highness actually says
so, believes so?| And I wish it may not lie upon this Nation a
day longer than you have an opportunity to give a remedy ; and
I hope I shall cheerfully join with you init. This hath been a
great grief to many honest hearts and conscientious people ; and
I hope it is all in your hearts to rectify it.

I have little more to say to you, being very weary; and I
know you are so‘too.’ Truly I did begin with that that I

1[** Truly to be particular I could be,’’ JZS.]

a. —- = | a ee

542 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

thought was ‘the means’ to carry on this War (if you will carry
it on), That we may join together in that vigorously. And I
did promise an answer to an objection: “But what will you
prosecute it with?’ The State is hugely in debt; I believe it
comes to— —[Reporter cannot hear ; on his Paper is mere Blank ;

—nay I think his Highness stutters, does not clearly articulate any
sum. |—The Peekstine! of the State is wasted. We shall not be
an enemy to your inspection; but desire it,—that you would
inspect the Treasury, and how moneys have been expended.
And we are not afraid to look the Nation in the face upon this
account. Aud therefore we will say negatively, first, No man
can say we have ‘mis’employed the Treasure of this Nation, and
embezzled it to particular and private uses.

It may be we have not,—as the world terms it,—been so
fortunate in all our successes, ‘ in the issues of all our attempts ?’
[Hispaniola was a terrible affair, your Highness ; and Jamaica is yet
—a load to crush any but a Man of Hope!| Truly if we are of
mind that God may not decide for us in these things, I think we

_ shall be quarrelling with what God ‘ Himself’ will answer ‘ for.’
And we hope we are able,—it may be weakly, I do not doubt,
—but to give an answer to God, and to give an answer to every
man’s conscience in the sight of God, of the reason of things.
But we shall tell you, that it—[“ It,” the principal “reason” we
could give, was the Plotting of the Cavaliers ; whereat his Highness
bursts into sudden spontaneous combustion again!| hath been a
piece of that artifice? that hath been in this your time;
where ‘in’ there are flames good store, fire enough ;—and it
will be your wisdom and skill, and God's blessing upon you,
to quench them both here and elsewhere! I say it again, the
endeavours have been by those that have been appointed,
by those that have been Major-Generals; I can repeat it®

1[‘* Truly if we have that mind that God may not determine us in these things,
I think we should quarrel at that which God will answer.” ZS.

2[z.e., firework. Carlyle printed ‘‘arch-fire,” following a mis-reading in
Burton. }

3[‘‘them,” JZS.]

ie Pe a the a ae ee Tee) > ee SS a

1656.] SPEECH V 543

with comfort, that it hath been effectual for the Preserva-
tion of your Peace; [What worlds of old terror, rage, and
endeavour, all dead now ; what continents of extinct fire, of life-
volcanoes once blazing, now sunk in eternal darkness, do we discern,
with emotion, through this chance crevice in his Highness !|_ It hath
been more effectual towards the discountenancing of Vice and |
settling Religion, than anything done these fifty years: I will
abide ‘by’ it, notwithstanding the envy and slander of foolish
men! [Poor Oliver, noble Oliver!| But I say there was a
Design'—I confess I speak that to you with a little vehemency—
But you had not had peace two months together, ‘ nothing but
plot after plot;’ I profess I believe it as much as ever I did
anything in the world: and how instrumental they, ‘these Major-
Generals,’ have been to your peace and for your preservation, by
such means,—which, we say, was Necessity! [and I can rather
act with comfort and simplicity on necessity]? than from all
instituted things in the world !— —If you would make laws against
the things that God may ‘ please to’ dispose, ‘laws’ to meet with
everything that may happen,—you* make a law in the face of
God, and you tell God you will meet with all His dispensations,
and you will stay things whether He will or no!4 But if you make
laws of good Government, that men may know how to obey and do
for Government, you may make laws that have frailty and weak-
ness; ay, and ‘yet’ good laws ‘to be’ observed. But if nothing
should ‘ ever’ be done but what is according to Law, the throat of
the Nation may be cut while we send for some to make a Law!
[Lhe Tyrant’s plea ?—Yes, and the true Governor's, my friend ; for
extremes meet.| Therefore certainly it is a pitiful beastly notion
to think, that though it be for ordinary Government to live by

1[* that hath been a design,'’ JS. }

2( This phrase omitted in Burton and therefore by Carlyle. ]

3[‘* yea,” MZS.]

4* Laws against events,’ insisted on before, p. 512. The ‘event’ there could be
no law against beforehand, was the universal rising of the cutthroat Cavaliers; a
thing not believed-in by the thickskinned, but too well known to his Highness as a
terrible verity,—which the thickest skin would have got acquainted with, moreover,
had it not been for him! Evidently a most provoking topic.

544 | THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

law and rule, yet I think him !—‘ if a Government in extraordinary
‘circumstances go beyond the law even for self-preservation, it
‘is’ yet to be clamoured-at, and blottered-at. [His Highness still
extremely animated ; wants as if more tongues than one to speak all
he feels!|| When matters of Necessity come inviolably, then
‘without guilt’ extraordinary remedies may not be applied?
Who can be so pitiful a person !—

I confess, if Necessity be pretended, there is so much the more
sin, by laying the irregularity of men’s actions upon ‘God as if it
were He’ who sent the Necessity ;—who doth indeed send a
Necessity! But to anticipate these? For as to an appeal to God,
I own it, ‘own this Necessity,’ conscientiously to God; and the
principle of Nature dictates the thing :—‘ But’ if there be a sup-
position, | say, of a Necessity® which is not, every act ‘so done’
at that time hath ‘in it’ the more sin. This ‘whether in a
given case, there is a Necessity or not,’ perhaps is rather to be
disputed than otherwise: But I must say I do not know one
action ‘of this Government,’ no not one, but it hath been in order
_ to ‘the’ peace, and safety of the Nation. And the keeping of
some in prison [Lilburn, Wildman, Overton, Grey of Groby,
Willoughby of Parham, occasionally Harrison and others: a fair
stock of Prisoners up and down !| hath been upon such clear and
just grounds that no man can except against it. I know there
are some imprisoned in the Isle of Wight, ‘in’ Cornwall and
elsewhere ; and the cause of their imprisonment was, They were
all found acting things that tended to the disturbance of the
Peace of the Nation. Now these principles made us say to them :
“ Pray live quietly in your own countries: you shall not be urged
“with bonds or engagements, or to subscribe to the Government.”
- Yet they would not so much as say, “ We will promise to live
“peaceably.” If others be imprisoned, it is because they have

1A small hiatus in the J/S. (Burton, p. clxxii.), which imagination can easily
fill. [Margin of J/S., ‘‘ blanks for two lines.’’]

2[** send a necessity,but to prevent the end,” 4/S.]

3‘ of that,” 7zdzd.]

1656.] SPEECH V 545

done such things. And if other particulars stick,! we know what
to say,—as having endeavoured to walk as those that would not
only give an account to God of their actings in Authority, but
had withal to give an account of them to men.? [ Anticlimaz ;
—better than some climaxes ; full of simplicity and discretion. ]

I confess I have digressed much, [to let you know that you
would (z.e., should) not be discouraged if you judge it? truly
necessary, that you cannot avoid it].4 [ Yes, your Highness ; it
has been a very loose-flowing Discourse ; like a big tide on shallow
shores, with few banks or barriers !|—I would not have you be dis-
couraged if you think the State is exceeding poor. Give me
leave to tell you, we have managed the Treasury not unthriftily,
nor to private uses; but for the use of the Nation and Govern-
ment ;—and shall give you this short account. When the Long
Parliament sat,> this Nation owed 700,000/. We examined it;
it was brought unto that,—in that short Meeting ‘of the Little
Parliament,’ that was within half a year after the Government
came to our hands. I believe there was rather more than less.
They ‘the Long-Parliament people’ had 120,000/. a-month ;
they had the King’s, Queen’s, Prince’s, Bishops’ Lands ; all De-
linquents’ Estates, and the Deans-and-Chapters’ Lands ;—which
was a very rich Treasure. As soon as ever we came to the
Government, we abated 30,000/. the first half-year, and 60,0001.
after. We had no benefits of those Estates, at all considerable.
[Only the merest fractions of them remaining now unsold]; I do not
think, the fiftieth part of what they had :—and give me leave to

tell you, You are not in so much debt as we found you. We know

it hath been maliciously dispersed, as if we had set the Nation

1 Means ‘ give offence.’ [Carlyle printed ‘‘ strike,” the word being mis-read by
the editor of Burton. ‘‘ Stick" in the sense of being a stumbling-block, or creating
a difficulty, was a favourite word with Cromwell. ]

2[** as those that would not only give an account to God, as another magistrate,
but as to give an account to men,” J/S,]

3[z.e., our expenses ; probably thinking particularly of the expenses of the war. |

4|The words in square brackets were omitted by Carlyle. ]

5 Polite for ‘ ceased to sit.’ 8 Anted, p. 542

VOL. 11.—35

j |
‘
:
;
;

546 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

into 2,500,000. of debt: but I tell you, you are not so much in
debt, by some thousands,—I think I may say, by some hundreds
of thousands! This is true that I tell you. We have honestly,—
it may be not so wisely as some others would have done,—
but with honest and plain hearts, laboured and endeavoured
the disposal of Treasure to Public Uses; and laboured to pull
‘off the common charge, as you see 60,000/. a-month. And
if we had continued that charge that was left upon the Nation,
perhaps we could have had as much money ‘in hand,’ as now we
are in debt.—These things being thus, I did think it my duty
to give you this account,—though it be wearisomeness to your-
selves and me.

Now if I had the tongue of an Angel; if I was so certainly
inspired as the holy Men of God have been, I could rejoice, for
your sakes, and for these Nations’ sakes, and for the sake of God,
and of this Cause that we have been engaged in, that I could
move affections in you to that which, if you do it, will save this
Nation! If xot,—you plunge it, in all human appearance, ‘it’
and all Interests, yea and all the Protestants in the world, ‘in’to
irrecoverable ruin !—

Therefore I pray, aye and beseech you, in the name of Christ,
Show yourselves to be men ; “ quit yourselves like men!” It doth
not infer any reproach if you do show yourselves men: Christian
men,—which mill only make you “quit yourselves.” I do not
think that, to this work you have in hand, a neutral spirit will do
it. That is a Laodicean spirit ; and we know what God said of
that Church : it was “lukewarm,” and therefore He would “spew
it out of His mouth!” It is not a neutral spirit that is incum-
bent upon you. And if not a neutral spirit, it is much less a
stupefied ‘spirit,’ inclining you, in the least disposition, the wrong
way! Men are, in their private consciences, every day making
shipwreck? and it’s no wonder if these can shake hands with

afi. It” in MS, Probably ‘‘ yt” in original notes. ]
inclining you, in the least disposition, the wrong way, though perhaps not
maliciously, Some men are certainly maliciously disposed the wrong way; they

are, in their private consciences, every day making shipwreck,” J/S.]

1656. ] SPEECH V 547

men of reprobate Interests :—such, give me leave to think, are
the Popish Interests. For! the Apostle brands them so, “ Having
seared consciences.” Though I do not judge every man :—but
the ringleaders? are such. The Scriptures foretold they should
be such. It is not such a spirit will carry the work on! It is
men ‘in a Christian state’ that have works with faith ; that know
how to lay hold on Christ for remission ‘of sins,’ till a man be
brought to glory in hope. Such an hope kindled in men’s
spirits will act‘uate’ them to such ends as you are tending to: and
so many as are partakers of this, and ‘do’ own your standings,*
wherein the Providence of God hath set and called you to this
work, ‘so many’ will carry it on.

If men, through scruples, be opposite, you cannot take them
by the hand to carry them ‘along with you,’—because it were
absurd : for if a man be scrupling the plain truth before him, it is
in vain to meddle with him. He hath placed another business in
his mind ; he is saying, “Oh, if we could but exercise wisdom to
gain Civil Liberty,—Religion would follow!”® [His Highness
thinks Religion will precepE,—as I hope thou also, in a sense, em-
phatically thinkest. His Highness does not much affect Constitution-
builders, Oceana Harringtons, and Members of the Rota Club. Here,
however, he has his eye principally upon the late Parliament, with its
Constitution-pedantries and parchments.| Certainly there are such
men, who are not maliciously blind, whom God, for some causes,
exercises. [ Yes, your Highness ; we poor Moderns have had whole
shoals of them, and still have,—in the later sections of that same
“work” you are engaged in.| It cannot be expected that they
should do anything: [Profound silence.| These men,—they
must demonstrate that they are in bonds.——Could we have

1[** because,” JZS.]

2 Of the Insurrectionary persons, and the general Miscellany who favour the
Popish Interests ; it is on these more than on Papists proper that his Highness is
now again coming to glance.

3[‘* for remission of a Christian state,” 1ZS.]

4 Present official positions.

5[‘* He hath placed another image of the business in his own mind ; and to say

Oh, if we could but exercise wisdom to gain civil liberty, religion would follow.
That’s as common as can be in the world,” J/S.]

548 THE MAJOR-GENERALS __ [17 Sept.

carried it thus far, if we had sat disputing in that manner?! I
must profess I reckon that difficulty more than all the wrestling
with flesh and blood. [What could so try one as that Pedant
Parliament did ; disputing, doling out pennyweights of distilled
constitution ; and Penruddock, Charles Stuart and the Spaniards mait-
ing momentarily to come in, with Ate and the Scarlet Woman in their
rear?| Doubting, hesitating men, they are not fit for your work.
You must not expect that men of hesitating spirits, under the
bondage of scruples, will be able to carry on this work, much
less such as are mere‘ ly’ carnal, natural; and such as having an
outward profession of Godliness, which the Apostle speaks of
‘so’often, and are the enemies to the cross of Christ ; whose god
is their belly and whose glory is their shame ; who mind earthly
things. [A really frightful kind of character ;—and not yet obsolete,
though its dialect is changed !| Do you think these men will rise to
such a spiritual heat for the Nation as shall carry you a Cause like
this ; as will meet ‘ and defy’ all the oppositions? that the Devil and
wicked men can make? [Not to BE expected, your Highness ; not
at all, And yet we, two hundred years later, how do we go on expect-
ing it,—by the aid of Ballot-boxes, Reform-Club Attorneys, §c. &c. !|

Give me leave to tell you,—those that are called to this work,
it will not depend ‘for them’ upon formalities, nor notions, nor
speeches! [A certain truculency on his Highness’s visage.| 1 do not
look the work should be done by these. ‘No;’ but by men of
honest hearts, engaged to God; strengthened by Providence ;
enlightened in His words, to know His Word,—to which He
hath set His Seal, sealed with the blood of His Son, in the
blood of His Servants: that is such a spirit as will carry on this
work. [Scant in the Pedant Parliament, scant in the Rota Club:
not to be found in the Reform-Club Attorney, or his Ballot-box, at
all.]

Therefore I beseech you, I beseech you, do not dispute of un-

1[‘* carried it hitherto if we had disputed these things,” J/S.]
2[**that shall carry you such a thing as this, that will meet with all the opposi-
tions,” 2dzd,]

1656.] SPEECH V 549

necessary and unprofitable things that may divert you from

carrying on of so glorious a work as this is. I think every ob- ~

jection that ariseth is not to be answered; nor have I time for
it. I say, Look up to God; have peace among yourselves.
Know assuredly that if I have interest,! I am by the voice of
the People the Supreme Magistrate ; [We mill have no disputing
about that,—you are aware !) and, it may be, ‘do’ know somewhat
that may satisfy my conscience, if I stood in doubt! But it is an
union, really it is an union, ‘this’ between you and me : and both
of us united in faith and love to Jesus Christ, and to His peculiar
Interest in the world,—that must ground this work. And in
that, if I have any peculiar Interest that’s personal to myself,
that is not subservient to the Public end,—it were no extrava-
gant thing for me to curse myself: because | know God will
curse me, if I have! [Look in that countenance of his Highness !]
And I have learned too much ? of God, not to dally with Him,
and to be bold with Him, in these things. And I never was and
I hope I never shall be bold with Him ;—though I can be bold
with men, if Christ be pleased to assist !—

I say if there be love between us, ‘so’ that the Nations? may
say, “ These are knit together in one bond, to promote the glory
“of God against the Common Enemy ; to suppress everything
“that is Evil, and encourage whatsoever is of Godliness,” —yea,
the Nation will bless you! And really, really, that and nothing
else will work-off these Disaffections from the minds of men;
which are as great,—if not greater—than all the ‘other’ opposi-
tions you can meet with. I do know what I say. When I
speak of these things, I speak my heart before God ;—and, as
I said before, I dare not be bold before Him. I have a little
faith: I have a little lived by faith, and therein I may be
“bold.” If I spoke other than the affections * and secrets of my
heart, I know He would not bear it at my hands! [Deep silence ;

1 Means ‘ if you see me in power.’
[Perhaps it should be ‘‘ so much.’’] 3’The Three Nations.
4[‘‘If I should not speak the affections,” 4/S.]

~»

550 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

his Highness’s voice, in sonorous bass, alone audible in the Painted
Chamber.| Therefore in the fear and name of God: Go on,
with love and integrity, against whatever arises contrary to
these ends which you have known and been told of; and the
blessing of God go with you,—the blessing of God will go with
you ! [Amen !}

I have but this one thing to say more. I know it is trouble-
some :—But | did read a Psalm yesterday; which truly may
not unbecome both me to tell you of, and you to observe. It
is the Eighty-fifth Psalm,! that’s very instructive and very
significant : and though I do but a little touch upon it, I desire
your perusal at your pleasure. [We will many of us read it, this
night ; almost all of us, mith one view or the other ;—and some of us
may sing a part of it at evening worship.)

It begins: “ Lord, Thou hast been very favourable unto Thy
“Land; Thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob. Thou
“hast forgiven the iniquity of Thy People; Thou hast covered
“all their sins. Thou hast taken away all (the fierceness of)
“Thy wrath: Thou hast turned Thyself from the fierceness of
“Thine anger. Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause
“ Thine anger toward us to cease. Wilt Thou be angry with us
“ forever; wilt Thou draw out Thine anger to all generations?
“ Wilt thou not revive us again, that Thy People may rejoice in
“Thee?” Then he calls upon God as “the God of his salva-
“tion,” 2 and then saith he: “I will hear what God the Lord will
“speak : for He will speak ‘ peace’ unto His People, and to His
“Saints; but let them not turn again to folly. Surely His
“salvation is nigh them that fear Him ;” Oh—* that glory may
“dwell in our land! Mercy and Truth are met together ;
“ Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. Truth shall
“spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down

1 Historical: Tuesday, 16th Sept. 1656; Oliver Protector reading the Eighty-
fifth Psalm in Whitehall. We too might read it; but as his Highness recites it
all here except one short verse, it is not so necessary. 4

2 Verse 7, ‘Show us Thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us Thy salvation.’

a.

1656.] SPEECH V 551

“from Heaven. Yea the Lord shall give that which is good,
“and our Land shall yield its increase. Righteousness shall go
“before Him, and shall set us in the way of His steps.” [What
a vision of celestial hope is this: vista into Lands of Light, God's
Will done on Earth ; this poor English Earth an Emblem of Heaven ;
where God's Blessing reigns supreme ; where ghastly Falsity and
brutal Greed and Baseness, and Cruelty and Cowardice, and Sin and
Fear, and all the Helldogs of Gehenna shall lie chained under our
feet; and Man, august in divine manhood, shall step victorious over
them, heavenward, like a god! O Oliver, I could weep,—and yet it
steads not. Do not I too look into “ Psalms,” into a kind of Eternal
Psalm, unalterable as adamant,—which the whole world yet mill look
into? Courage, my brave one !}

Truly I wish that this Psalm, as it is written in the Book,
might be better written in our hearts, that we might say as
David, ‘“‘ Thou hast done this,’ and “Thou hast done that ;”
“Thou hast pardoned our sins; Thou hast taken away our ini-
“quities!’’ Whither can we go to a better God? For “He
“hath done it.” It is to Him any Nation may come in their
extremity, for the taking away of His wrath. How did He do
it? By pardoning their sins, and taking away their iniquities !
If we can but cry unto Him, He will turn and take away our
sins.—Then let us listen to Him, and then ‘let us’ consult, and
meet in Parliament; and ask Him counsel, and hear what He
saith, for He will speak peace ‘un’to His People. If you be
the People of God [and be for the people of God,|! He will
speak peace ;—and we will not again return to folly.

“ Folly:” which is* a great deal of grudging in the Nation that
we cannot have our horse-races, cock-fightings, and the like!
[ Abolished, suspended, for good reasons !] I do not think these are
lawful, except to make them recreations. That we will not en--°
dure ‘for necessary ends’ [For preventing Royalist Plots, and such
like] to be abridged of them: Till God hath brought us to an-

1[These last seven words omitted in Burton and therefore by Carlyle, ]
2[probably should be ‘‘ there is,’’}

——, - eo? eae oo

552 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

other spirit than this, He will not bear with us.'. Ay, “but He
bears with them in France ;” “they ‘in France’ are so and so !””—
Have they the Gospel as we have? They have seen the sun but
a little; we have great lights— —If God give you a spirit of
Reformation, you will preserve this Nation from “turning again”
to those fooleries:—and what will the end be? Comfort and
blessing. Then “ Mercy and Truth shall meet together.” Here
is a great deal of “truth” among professors, but very little
“mercy!” They are ready to cut the throats of one another.
But when we are brought into the right way, we shall be merci-
Jul as well as orthodox: and we know who it is that saith, If
a man could speak with the tongues of men and angels, and
yet want that, he is but sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal !—
Therefore I beseech you in the name of God, set your hearts
to this ‘work.’ And if you set your hearts to it, then you will
sing Luther’s Psalm.? That’s a rare Psalm for a Christian !—and
if he set his heart open, and can approve it to God, we shall
hear him say, “ God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in ‘time of’ trouble.” If Pope and Spaniard, and Devil and
all, set themselves against us,—though they should “ compass us

1[“I do not think these are unlawful; but to make them recreations that they
will not endure to be abridged of them ; till God hath brought us to this spirit, He
will not bear with us,’’ 1/.$.—Oliver’s meaning apparently is, ‘‘ I do not think these
are unlawful, unless the people make of them recreations which they will not endure
to be deprived of. Until God has brought us to such a spirit that we are wi/ling
to be deprived of them, He will not bear with us.’’]

2 Psalm Forty-sixth; of which Luther's Paraphrase, Hin feste Burg ist unser
Gott, is still very celebrated. Here is the original Psalm;

‘God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble; therefore we
‘ will not fear,—though the Earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried
‘into the midst of the sea; though the waters roar and be troubled ; though the
‘ mountains shake with the swelling thereof !

‘ There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God, the Holy
‘ Place of the Tabernacles of the Most High. God is in the midst of her; she shall
‘not be moved : God shall help her, and that right early. The Heathen raged,
‘the Kingdoms were moved: He uttered His voice, the Earth melted. The Lord
‘of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.

‘Come behold the works of the Lord, what desolations He hath made in the
‘Earth! He maketh wars to cease unto the ends of the Earth; He breaketh the
‘bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariot in the fire :—Be
‘still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be
‘exalted in the Earth! The Lord of Hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our
‘ refuge.’

1656.] SPEECH V 553

about like bees,” as it is in the [Hundreth-and-]Jeighteenth Psalm,
—yet in the name of the Lord we should destroy them! And,
as it is in this Psalm of Luther’s: “ We will not fear, though the
‘Earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into
“the middle of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and be
“troubled; though the mountains shake with the swelling
“thereof.” [A terrible scene indeed :—but there is something in the
Heart of Man, then, greater than any “ scene ;’’ which, in the Name
of the Highest, can defy any “ scene” or terror whatsoever 2‘ Yea,”
answers the Hebrew David ; “ Yea,” answers the German Luther ;
“ Yea,” the English Cromwell. The Ages responsive to one another ;
soul hailing soul across the dead Abysses ; deep calling unto deep.]
“There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City
“of God. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved.”
[No /|} Then he repeats two or three times, “The Lord of Hosts
is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.” [What are the King
of Spain, Charles Stuart, Joseph Wagstaff, Chancellor Hyde, and
your triple-hatted Chimera at Rome? What is the Devil in General,
Sor that matter,—the still very extensive Entity called “ Devil,” with
all the force he can raise ?|
I have done. All that I have to say is, To pray God that He
will bless you with His presence ; that He that hath your hearts
and mind would show His presence in the midst of us.
I desire you will go together, and choose your Speaker.*

*Burton’s Dzary, i., Introd. pp. cxlviii.-clxxix. (from Additional MSS, no.
6125) [pp. 231-283]. ,

[The speech, it is stated in a letter amongst the State Papers, took almost three
hours to deliver (see Ca/. S. P. Dom., 1656, p. 113), but this is perhaps an exaggera-
tion. Bordeaux, after describing the procession and mentioning the sermon (see note
p. 508 above) goes on: ‘‘ Aprés cette cérémonie, M. le Protecteur et tous les Deputez
sans ordre passerent dans une chambre, ou, la teste nue, il leur fit un discours de
deux heures, dont le commencement représentoit l’estat des affaires d’ Angleterre, tant
au-dedans qu’au dehors : les raisons qui l’avoient obligé de rompre avec |’ Espagne,
l'ancienne ennemi d’Angleterre et de la religion ; les préparatifs que faisoit le roy
d’Angleterre, auquel le roi d’Espagne donnoit 5000 hommes et le Duc de Neuburg
4000 ; la necessité qu’il y avoit de demeurer unis pour arrester le progrez de ces forces
et de trouver un fonds pour la subsistence de celles d’Angleterre, I] parla ensuite de
la religion, tesmoignant bien du regréz de toutes les divisions qui s'y trouvaient, sans
néantmoins faire cognoistre precisement quels sont ses sentimens sur ce sujet, n’y ~
penetrer plus du costé des Presbytériens que des Independans. De la il passa aux
Royalistes, et 4 la conduite des malaffectionez au gouvernement, dont il avait esté

554 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

The latest of the Commentators expresses himself in reference
to this Speech in the following singular way :

‘No Royal Speech like this was ever delivered elsewhere in the
‘world! It is,—with all its prudence, and it is very prudent, sa-
* gacious, courteous, right royal in spirit,—perhaps the most art-
‘less transparent piece of Public Speaking this Editor has ever
‘studied. Rude, massive, genuine ; like a block of unbeaten gold.
‘A speech not so fit for Drury Lane, as for Valhalla, and the
‘Sanhedrim of the Gods. The man himself, and the England he
‘presided over, there and then, are to a singular degree visible
‘in it; open to our eyes, to our sympathies. He who would see
‘ Oliver, will find more of him here than in most of the history-
‘books yet written about him.

‘On the whole, the cursory modern Englishman cannot be
‘expected to read this Speech :—and yet it is pity; the Speech
‘might do him good, if he understood it. We shall not again
‘hear a Supreme Governor talk in this strain: the dialect of it is
‘very obsolete ; much more than the grammar and diction, for-
‘ever obsolete,—not to my regret the dialect of it. But the spirit
‘of it is a thing that should never have grown obsolete, The
‘spirit of it will have to revive itself again ; and shine out in new
‘dialect and vesture, in infinitely wider compass, wide as God’s
‘known Universe now is,—if it please Heaven! Since that spirit
‘went obsolete, and men took to “dallying’’ with the Highest,

obligé d’arrester quelques uns et d'exclure a d'autres l’entrée du Parlement ; et
finit par conviant ce corps de vouloir concourir avec luy a l’establissement du repos
publicq, et d’aviser aux moyens de se garantir de la mauvoise volonté des ennemis
de dehors et de dedans.”" This harangue ‘‘ ornée de beaucoup de passages de la
Sainte Ecriture’”’ being ended, and all who had not the Protector’s tickets being
excluded, the House elected their Speaker ‘‘ dont le choix ne peut qu’estre agréable
parsque c’est l'un des grands trésoriers"’ [Widdrington]. Bordeaux thought it doubt-
ful whether the House would submit to the exclusion of their fellows, and if they got
in, the Protector’s enemies would prevail, and he would have to tréat this parliament
as he had done the preceding ones ; but his Highness has taken precautions, by his
fresh levies and by raising the pay of his troops [of this last statement there is no
confirmation whatever in contemporary documents or writings], and it may be that
they will be all the more united to his interests because the people are against him,
most of the officers being persuaded that their conservation depends on his. This
was to Brienne. On the same day Bordeaux wrote to Mazarin, that to what he
had said to M. de Brienne, he would add: ‘‘ que M. le Protecteur s’est beaucoup
. estendu contre l’'Espagne, exagérant toutes les enterprises qu'elle a faict autrefois
contre l'Angleterre et les motifs qui l’ont obligé a la rupture . . . Il a aussy
persuadé que l’Espagne et le Duc de Neuburg donnaient au roi d'Angleterre gooo
hommes pour passer en Angleterre. Comme peu d’advis confirment ceste nouvelle,
beaucoup croyent qu'elle est advancée pour donner |’alarme et tenir l’armée plus
unie, ce qui est fort necessaire dans la present conjoncture.” He expresses this
same view in other letters. vench Transcripts, Public Record Office.

1656.] SPEECH V 555

‘to “being bold’”’ with the Highest, and not “bold with men”
‘(only Belial, and not “ Christ’’ in any shape, assisting them), we
‘ have had but sorry times, in Parliament and out of it. There
‘has not been a Supreme Governor worth the meal upon his
‘ periwig, in comparison.—since this spirit fell obsolete. How
‘could there? Belial is a desperately bad sleeping-partner in
‘any concern whatever! Cant did not ever yet, that I know of,
‘turn ultimately to a good account, for any man or thing. May
‘the Devil swiftly be compelled to call-in large masses of our
‘current stock of Cant, and withdraw it from circulation! Let
‘the people “run for gold,’ as the Chartists say; demand
. ‘Veracity, Performance, instead of mealy-mouthed Speaking ;

‘and' force him to recall his Cant. Thank Heaven, stern Destiny,
‘merciful were it even to death, does now compel them verily
‘to “run for gold:” Cant in all directions is swiftly ebbing into
‘the Bank it was issued by.’ —

Speech being ended, the Honourable Members ‘ went to the
House,’ says Bulstrode ;! and in the Lobby, with considerable
crowding I think, ‘ received, from the Chancery Clerk, Certificates
in this form, —for instance :

‘County or Bucks. These are to certify that’ Sir Bulstrode
Whitlocke ‘is returned by Indenture one of the Knights to serve in
‘this present Parliament for the said County, and approved by his
‘ Highness’s Council, Natu. Tayier, Clerk of the Commonwealth
‘in Chancery.’

Mr. Tayler has received Four-hundred ‘Indentures’ from
Honourable Gentlemen ; but he does not give out Four-hundred
‘Certificates, he only gives Three-hundred and odd. Near .
One-hundred Honourable Gentlemen can get no Certificate from
Mr. Tayler,—none provided for you ;—and without Certificate
there is no admittance. Soldiers stand ranked at the door; no
man enters without his Certificate! Astonishing to see. Hasel-
rig, Scott and the stiff Republicans, Ashley Cooper and the
turbulent persons, who might have leavened this Parliament
into strange fermentation, cannot, it appears, get in! No admit-
tance here: saw Honourable Gentlemen ever the like ?>—

The most flagrant violation of the Privileges of Parliament
that was ever known! exclaim they. A sore blow to Privilege
indeed. With which the Honourable House, shorn of certain

1 Whitlocke, p. 639.

556 THE MAJOR-GENERALS [17 Sept.

limbs in this rude way, knows not well what to do. The Clerk
of the Commonwealth, being summoned, answers what he can ;
Nathaniel Fiennes, for the Council of State, answers what he
can: the Honourable House, actually intent on Settling the
Nation, has to reflect that in real truth this will be a great
furtherance thereto; that matters do stand in an anomalous
posture at present ; that the Nation should and must be settled.
The Honourable House, with an effort, swallows this injury ;
directs the petitioning Excluded Members ‘to apply to the
Council.’! The Excluded Members, or some one Excluded
Member, redacts an indignant Protest, with all the names
“appended ;? prints it, privately circulates it, ‘in boxes sent by
carriers, a thousand copies in a box :’—and there it rests; his
Highness saying nothing to it; the Honourable House and the
Nation saying nothing. In this Parliament, different from the
last, we trace a real desire for Settlement.®

As the power of the Major-Generals, ‘in about two months
hence,’* or three months hence, was, on hint of his Highness
himself, to the joy of Constitutional England, withdrawn, we
may here close Part Ninth. Note first, however, as contemporary
with this event, the glorious news we have from Blake and
Montague at sea; who, in good hour, have at last got hold of a
Spanish Fleet, and in a tragic manner burnt it, and taken end-
less silver therein.® News of the fact comes in the beginning of
October :® in the beginning of November comes, as it were, the

1 Commons Journals, vii. 424, 5, 6 (Sept. 18th-22d),

2 Copy of it and them in Whitlocke, pp. 641-3; see also Thurloe, v. 456, 490.

3[See ; short speech made by the Protector on November 27. Supplement,
No. 113.

4 Kimber, p. 211. The real date and circumstances may be seen in Burton's
Diary, i. 310 (7th Jan. 1656-7), Commons Journals, vii. 483 (29th Jan.); compared
with Ludlow, li. 581, 2. See Godwin, iv. 328.

5 Captain Stayner’s Letter (gth Sept. 1656, Thurloe, v. 399); General Mon-
tague’s Letter (2d. p. 433); Whitlocke, p. 643; &c.

8(The first news arrived on Oct. 1. ‘Thurloe wrote to Pell on Oct. 2 that
Parliament had ‘‘ yesterday” declared their approval of the war with Spain, and
that two or three hours after the passing of the vote an express had arrived with
news of the victory (Lansdowne A/S. 753, f. 383). The universal joy was (according
to Bordeaux) not shared by the London merchants, who feared the loss of their
trade with the West Indies and therefore disliked the war with Spain. On Oct. 19
Bordeaux offered his congratulations to the Protector, who received him with a
smiling face, professed his desire to employ for the service of France the mercies
which Heaven had given him, testified his satisfaction at the success of the French
King’s arms in Italy and at the state of his affairs in Flanders (on which point
Bordeaux found his Highness very well informed) and declared that-he would have
offered help in money if the treasure said to be swallowed up in the earthquake at
Lima had come into his hands, To the ambassador's assurances of the French

1656.] SPEECH V 557

fact itself—some Eight-and-thirty wagonloads of real silver:
triumphantly jingling up from Portsmouth, across London pave-
ments to the Tower, to be coined into current English money
there.! The Antichrist King of Spain has lost Lima by an
earthquake, and infinite silver there also. Heaven’s vengeance
seems awakening. ‘Never,’ say the old Newspapers,” ‘never
‘was there a more terrible visible Hand of God in judgment
‘upon any People, since the time of Sodom and Gomorrah!
‘Great is the Lord; marvellous are His doings, and to be had
‘in reverence of all the Nations.’ England holds universal
Thanksgiving Day; sees Eight-and-thirty wagonloads of silver,
sees hope of Settlement, sees Major-Generals abolished ; and
piously blesses Heaven.

King’s joy at the deference of Parliament and their resolution to carry on the war,
Oliver rather dryly replied that this could not but be agreeable, as his Majesty
believed he should gain advantage thereby. ]

1[**A hundred and sixty-five chests of fine silver, and sixty chests more of
coarser silver, which being weighed were valued at rooo/. per chest, besides the
cochineal, which was valued at 20,000/, more,” was the report made by Lieut.-
Colonel White to the House, when he had safely escorted it to the Tower. (See
Newsletter in Clarke Papers, iii. 82.]

26th October (in Cromwelliana, p. 160).

Enp or Vot. II.

THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED

~ ae anki. ' a
i tiutio. lds Ye Wiens cose vasidde bare lat ae ae 08 a
yey COHAOD euro dh? etgn"l PROT, Th astitgaly lined Bh =a
Cres neify OM. depot alent beni oo adiod he te) wal, ot pein ey
7 wil ag beng To antl tert ito dk ay ‘ove
: . hh voyEins atin here yo ange
: teva? Sutin Wit “AOS
ti on sewe?
Sh orgie ua a
*! Ayre
wet Tevos ge?
urself

sof Ve 3 aS tess...
\ ae Bee

speeches of

The letters and

Oliver Cromwell

Cromwell, Oliver, 1599-1658.

ses eeseets
seer

Teo z
ateterenete?
