CHATHAM COLLEGE LIBRARY

Cromwell

942..06/)
C88

ITHOR

tters & speeches

TLE

ma ed. (4)

LIBRARY

__ eee |
942.064
688

CHATHAM COLLEGE

Gift Taylor Collection

i in

—  eEeeeEeeeEeEeEeeeee

Date Due

OCT ie. 71 er 5

SEP 10 1008
We \\--tbe

SEP 12 1929

Sot W195
fet p Nel
Peet 1 —\ 4,

D5Apri33
WV43 8:80
WV 44 9:89
5 Sag

Fi

barisse oxy

FO eHow O*A 299TR SAT
nn . dns

i |

cae RIM aMVRIO

i ov

Per , 1599-1658,
'THE LETTERS AND SPEECHES
OF OLIVER CROMWELL.,

WITH ELUCIDATIONS

THOMAS CARLYLE

EDITED IN THREE VOLUMES

WITH NOTES, SUPPLEMENT AND ENLARGED INDEX
BY

Ss. C. LOMAS

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

C. H. FIRTH, M.A.

VOL. I.

New York: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
Lonnon: METHUEN & CO.

1904

re Efe Sao ye
‘ETM

—ee

ul On ays

a HL OLE CRO] ca AE FE cn
aS MOET” ie
a i ; Be “usennt a caDRE 7

ANE NOTA Gea TAO aNy era

= a7 <

CRED 4 24 ee

: ; + Scie se
ey, ty Sitter) 4 ee 7 . a
“143m th CP FAS éi A UE Fis

Ree LA BPE a eee

4 '

i
At é :
Po ®
P
a ' Aw
<) i
i's “J om, all “ -
‘ — ’ -
4 hy >
7 Load Sess
¥
; BYE
-_ 2
~ «
: ¥
~ meee fh
a oH
; - te
: CF
<. ee
‘ >a >
) A ie —
~~ A RY
g's

| | p te , a Bf LG bs ot ef amet
ae, Vid 8 a ee ba ane
va Y ! |

.
ae

‘
v
ror

be ie 6

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

HE First Edition of this Work! having, contrary to
expectation, spread itself abroad with some degree of
impetus, has, as in that case was partly natural, brought
me into correspondence with various possessors and collectors
of Cromwell Letters; has brought obliging contributions,
and indications true and fallacious, from far sources and
from near; and, on the whole, has disinterred from their
widespread slumber a variety of Letters not before known
to me, or not before remembered by me. With which new
Letters it became a rather complex question what was now
to be done.

They were not, in general, of much, or almost of any, in-
trinsic importance ; might here and there have saved some
ugly labour and research, had they been known in time ;
but did not now, as it turned out, tend to modify, in any
essential particular, what had already been set down, and
sent forth to the world as a kind of continuous connected
Book. It is true, all clearly authentic Letters of Cromwell,
never so unimportant, do claim to be preserved; and in
this Book, by the title of it, are naturally to be looked for.
But, on the other hand, how introduce them now? To
unhoop your cask again, and try to insert new staves, when
the old staves, better or worse, do already hang together,
is what no cooper will recommend! Not to say, that your
Set of Cromwell Letters can never, in this Second or in

any other Edition, be considered as complete : an uncounted
handful of needles to be picked from an unmeasured con-

1 December 1845.

vi PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

tinent of hay,—how can you ever assure yourself that you
have them all ?

After deliberation, the law of the case seemed to be
somewhat as follows: First, that whatever Letters would
easily fit themselves into the Book as it stood,—easily, or
even with labour if that were all,—should be duly admitted.
Secondly, that for such Letters as tended to bring into
better relief any feature of the Man or his Work,—much
more, had they tended to correct or alter in any respect
any feature I had assigned to him or to it: that for these
an effort should be made, if needful; even a considerable
effort ; effort, in fact, to be limited only by this considera-
tion, not to damage by it to a still greater degree the
already extant, and so by one’s effort accomplish only loss.
Thirdly, that for such Cromwell Letters as did not fall
under either of these descriptions, but were nevertheless
clearly of his composition, there should be an Appendix
provided. In which, without pretension to commentary,
and not needing to be read along with the Text, but only
apart from it if at all, they might at least stand correctly
printed :—they, and certain other Pieces of more doubtful
claim ; for most part Letters too, but of half, or in some
cases of wholly, official character ;—if by chance they were
elucidative, brief, and not easily attainable elsewhere. Into
which Appendix also, as into a loose back-room or lumber-
room, not bound to be organic or habitable, bound only
to be maintained in a reasonably swept condition, any still
new gone of Cromwell might without ceremony be dis-
posed.

Upon these principles this Second Edition has been pro-
duced. New Letters intercalated into the Text, and Letters
lying in loose rank in the Appendix, all that I had, or
could hear of or get any trace of hitherto, are here given.

For purchasers of the First Edition, the new matter has
been detached, printed as a Supplement, which’ the Book-
seller undertakes to sell at prime cost—And now, having
twice escaped alive from these detestable Dust-Abysses, let
me beg to be allowed to consider this my small act of
Homage to the Memory of a Hero as _ finished ;—this

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION vii

Second Edition of Oliver’s Letters and Speeches as the final
one. New Letters, should such still turn up, I will not,
except they contradict some statement, or fibre of a state-
ment, in the Text, undertake to introduce there; but
deposit them without ceremony in the loose lumber-room,
in a more or less swept condition.

T. CARLYLE.

Lonpon, 11th May, 1846.

TO THE THIRD EDITION

HE small leakage of new Cromwell matter that has
oozed in upon me from the whole world, since the
date of that Second Edition, has been disposed of according
to the principles there laid down. Some small half-dozen
of Authentic new Letters, pleasantly enough testifying (once
they were cleared into legibility) how every new fact fits
into perfect preéstablished correspondence with all old
facts, but not otherwise either pleasant or important, have
come to me; one or two of these, claiming more favour,
or offering more facility, have been inserted into the Text ;
the rest, as was my bargain in regard to all of them, have
been sent to the Appendix. In Text or Appendix there
they stand, duly in their places; they, and what other
smallest of authentic glimmerings of additional light (few
in number, infinitesimally small in moment) came to me
from any quarter : all new acquisitions have been punctually
inserted ;—generally indicated as new, where they occur ;
too insignificant for enumerating here, or indeed almost
for indicating at all.

On the whole, I have to say that the new Contributions
to this Third Edition are altogether slight and insignificant,
properly of no real moment whatever. Nay on looking
back, it may be said that the new Contributions to any
Edition have been slight; that, for learning intelligibly
what the Life of Cromwell was, the First Edition is still
perhaps as recommendable a Book as either of its followers.

Exposed, since that, to the influx of new Cromwell
matter from all the world, one finds it worth observing how
little of the smallest real importance has come in; what
of effort has had to expend itself, not in improving the

oe

x TO THE THIRD EDITION

Book as a practical Representation of Cromwell’s Existence
in this world, but in hindering it from being injured as such,
—from being swollen out of shape by superfluous details,
defaced with dilettante antiquarianisms, nugatory tagrags ;
and in short, turned away from its real uses, instead of
furthered towards them. An ungrateful kind of effort, and
growing ever more so, the longer it lasts ;—but one to
which the Biographer of Cromwell by this method has to
submit, as to a clear law of nature, with what cheerfulness
he can.

Certain Dictionary Lists, not immediately connected with
Oliver, but useful for students of this Historical Period, a
List of the Long Parliament, and Lists of the Association
Committees ; farther a certain Contribution called The Squire
Papers, which is for the present, and must for a long time
remain, of doubtful authenticity to the world: these I
have subjoined to the Second Volume, which offered space
for such a purpose!; but have been careful, in Text,
Appendix, Index, to make no reference to them, to maintain
a perfect separation between all parts of the Book and
them, and to signify that these are not even an Appendix,
or thing hooked-on, but rather a mere Adjacency, or thing
in some kind of contact,—kind of contact which can at any
moment be completely dissolved, by the very Bookbinder
if he so please.

And in general, for the reader’s sake, let me again say
plainly that all these Appendixes and Adjuncts are in-
significant ; that the Life of Cromwell lies in the Text ;
and that a serious reader, if he take advice of mine, will
not readily stir from that on any call of the Appendixes
&c., which can only be a call towards things unessential,
intrinsically superfluous, if extrinsically necessary here, and
worthy only of a later and more cursory attention, if of any
whatever, from him.

4 EE Yi

Lonpon, 16th October, 1849.

1[These are now omitted. The Returns of the Members of Parliament obviate

the need for the first; the second is too imperfect and confused to be useful,
and with regard to Zhe Squire Papers, see Mr. Firth’s Introduction.]

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I

PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION

INTRODUCTION BY MR. FIRTH

Epitor’s NOTE, 1904 . F . ; : f : :
904

INTRODUCTION

CuapTerR I, Anti-Dryasdust ,

II, Of the Biographies of Oliver

III, Of the Cromwell Kindred

IV. Events in Oliver’s Biography : : % - 4
V. Of Oliver’s Letters and Speeches

PART I

To THE BEGINNING OF THE CivIL WAR. 1636-42

Lerrer I. To Mr. Storie: St. Ives, 11th January 1635-6

”

Lectureship in Huntingdonshire.

II. To Mrs. St. John: Ely, 13th October 1638

Personal Affairs.

Two YEARS .

Lerrer III, To Mr. Willingham : London, February 1640-1

The Scots Demands,

In THE LONG PARLIAMENT . . 5 s ‘ , 3 : =

liii

75
83

92
96

98

CONTENTS

X11
PART II
To THE END oF THE FirsT Civit War. 1642-46
PRELIMINARY ’ - : : . A . ‘ 5 : .

Letter IV. To R, Barnard, Esq.: Huntingdon, 23d January 1642-3 .

A Domiciliary Visit.

CAMBRIDGE . 4 é 5 ss : 5 4 : ; ;

Com. Canr. (‘‘ Cambridgeshire to wit ”’)

Contribution at Fen Drayton.

LETTER V. To Suffolk Committee : Cambridge, roth March 1642-3

Captain Nelson: Money wanted. _

LOWESTOFT . . - : 5 A : : . . : .
Letter VI. To the Mayor of Colchester: ae ee ax. March

”

1642-3 .
Captain ‘Dodsworth: Money and more ‘Men.

VII. To Sir J. Burgoyne: Huntingdon, roth April 1643 . :

To assist against the Camdeners.

VIII, To R. Barnard, Esq.: Huntingdon, 17th April 1643

Barnard may return.

IX. To Lincoln Committee: Lincolnshire, 3d May 1643 .

Rendezvous for Newark.

X. To Sir Miles Hobart: Grantham, 13th May 1643
Skirmish at Grantham.

XI. To the Mayor of Colchester: Lincolnshire, 28th May
TO43 sor, : > = . : 5
Wants more Men.

XII. To Suffolk Committee: Huntingdon, 31st July 1643.
Action at Gainsborough.

XIII. Unknown : Huntingdon, 2d August 1643
Help from Young Men and Maids.

XIV. To Cambridge Commissioners : ee eh 6th wt
1643 :

Lincoln lost: To rendezvous instantlyy:

XV. To the same: Peterborough, 8th August 1643 .
Urgent for Men and Money.

XVI. To Suffolk Committee: Cambridge, September 1643
Mr, Margery recommended.

XVII. To O. St. John, Esq.: Eastern SE RRENT, rith Bg
tember 1643. 5
Much Want of Money: the. Ironsides.

PAGE
103

115

117

118
120
I2I
126
128
129
131

134

136

140

145

146

148

153

55

CONTENTS xii

PAGE
LETTER XVIII. To Suffolk Committee: Holland, Lincolnshire 28th
September 1643. : 4 A : os . 158
Malignants’ Horses,
Wincesy FicuT . : : : : : > - 5 3 - 163
LETTER XIX. To Rev. Mr. Hitch: Ely, roth January 1643-4. . 167
Ely Cathedral.
» XX. To Major-General Crawford: Cambridge, roth March
1643-4 . ° . C 6 C . “ < 7. £09
Admonition in behalf of Packer.
»  XXI, To Col. Walton: York, 5th July 1644. ; : . 174
Marston Moor.
7 XXII. To Ely Committee: Lincoln, rst September 1644 me l79

Prisoners unduly discharged. Affairs of the Isle.

» . XXIII, To Col. Walton: Sleaford, 6th or 5th September 1644 180

Essex in Cornwall.
THREE FRAGMENTS oF SPEECHES. Self-denying Ordinance. . 182

LETTER XXIV, To Sir T, Fairfax: Salisbury, 9th April 1645 6 . 189

Proceedings in the West: Goring, Greenvil, Rupert.

» XXV. To Committee of Both Kingdoms: Bletchington, 25th

April 1645. i 192
Action at Islip Bridge.
» XXXVI. To Governor R. Burgess: Farringdon, 29th April
1645 . F 6 5 5 4 ‘ ‘ : - 194
Attack on Farringdon Garrison. (Action at Bampton the day
before.)
»  XXVII. Tothe same: same date . - 4 “ 5 » 195
Same Subject.
»  XXVIIL To Sir T. Fairfax: Huntingdon, 4th June 1645 . 196
Affairs at Ely,
By Express. : : : 4 . ‘ : : R . 198

LETTER XXIX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Harborough, 14th June 1645 . 200
Battle of Naseby.

» XXX. To Sir T. Fairfax: Shaftesbury, 4th August 1645 . . 206
The Clubmen,

x XXXI. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Bristol, 14th September 1645 . 211
Storm of Bristol.

oF XXXII. To the same: Winchester, 6th October 1645 220
Taking of Winchester.

»  XXXIII. To the same: Basingstoke, 14th October 1645 . a 222
Basing House stormed,

XIV

CONTENTS

LETTER XXXIV. To Sir T. Fairfax: Wallop, 16th October 1645.

Marching to the West.

XXXV. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Salisbury, 17th October 1645 .
Surrender of Langford House.

PART III

BETWEEN THE Two CiviL Wars. 1646-48

LETTER XXXVI. To T. Knyvett, Esq.: London, 27th July 1646 .

9

”

Army MANIFESTO . : 5 ‘ AB 4 : :

Parishioners of Hapton.

XXXVII. To Sir T. Fairfax: London, 31st July 1646
Adjutant Fleming.

XXXVIII. To the same: London, roth August 1646

News: Commissioners to the King and Scotch Army have re-
turned.

XXXIX. To J. Rushworth, Esq.: London, 26th August 1646 .
On behalf of Major Henry Lilburn.

XL. To Sir T. Fairfax : London, 6th October 1646 .

Staffordshire Committee-men.

XLI. To Mrs. Ireton: London, 25th October 1646 . . :
Fatherly Advice.

XLII. To Sir T, Fairfax: London, 21st December 1646 . -
News, b y Skippon: Agreement with the Scots concluded; City
disaffected to Army.

XLIII, To the same: London, r1th March 1646-7 . .
Army-matters; City still more disaffected.

XLIV. To the same: London, roth March 1646-7 .

Encloses an Order to the Army, Not to come within Twenty-
five miles of London.

LETTER XLV. To Archbishop of York: Putney, 1st September 1647

Williams in Conway Castle.

XLVI. To Col. Jones: Putney, r4th September 1647
Congratulates on the Victory at Dungan Hill,

XLVII. To Sir T. Fairfax: Putney, 13th October 1647 .
Capt. Middleton, Court-Martial.

XLVIII. To the same: Putney, 22d October 1647 .

Col. Overton for Hull Garrison.

XLIX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Hampton Font 11th No-
vember 1647 . ‘ 9 . ‘
King’s Escape from Hampton Court.

PAGE
228

230

236
238

ae

243
244
245

247

252
253
255
274
276
278

280

282

CONTENTS XV

Letter L. To Col. Whalley ; Putney, November 1647 : 5 . 284

The same.

ay LI. To Dr. T, Hill: Windsor, 23rd December 1647 é 72280

Interceding for a Young Gentleman.

x LI. To Col. Hammond: London, 3rd January 1647-8 . yeeOry
Concerning the King in the Isle of Wight.
» LIII. To Col. Norton: London, 25th February 1647-8 . 201
On Richard Cromwell’s Marriage.
A. LIV. To Sir T. Fairfax: London, 7th March 1647-8 : e205
Has been dangerously ill.
FREE OFFER. “ . ; é c A . 5 4 5 S06
Letter LV. To Col. Norton: Farnham, 28th March 1648 . : ZOH
: Richard Cromwell’s Marriage.
es LVI. To the same: London, 3rd April 1648 . r 5 «+ - 299
The same.
a LVII. To Col. Hammond: London, 6th April 1648 5 eesO2
Isle-of-Wight Business; King intends Escape.
es LVIII. To Col. Kenrick : London, 18th April 1648 . : . 304
Recommends the Bearer for Employment. ;
PRAYER MEETING. : : - 5 : 4 : : . 05
PART IV

SECOND Civit War. 1648

Letter LIX. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Pembroke, 16th June 1648 5 ope
Besieging Pembroke.
as LX. To Major Saunders: Pembroke, 17th June 1648 RES
To seize Sheriff Morgan and Sir Trevor Williams, two Rebel
Welshmen.
»  LXI. To Lord (late Sir Thomas) Fairfax: Pembroke, 28th
June, 1648 . é : ; C 5 ‘ ‘ a Sy
Siege of Pembroke.
LXII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Pembroke, r1th July 1648 » 324

‘ Surrender of Pembroke.

PRESTON BATTLE. 4 c 5 ‘ : : 6 : : r325

LeTTer LXIII. To Lancashire Committee: Preston, 17th August 1648 329
Battle of Preston.

VOL. 1.—0

XVi CONTENTS

LeTrrerR LXIV. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Warrington, 20th August 1648
Battle of Preston.

3 LXV. To Sir H. Cholmley and Sir Edw. Rodes: eee
2oth August 1648 . ° : :
To pursue the Scots.

Ae LXVI. To York Committee : Wigan, 23d August 1648 . A
The same.
ae LXVII. To O. St. John, Esq. : gee ee Ist bane!
1648

is Preston Battle: the Handful ‘of Grass:

5 LXVIII. To Lord Wharton: Knaresborough, 2d September

1648 ¥
Religious Reflections ; Congratulations on public events and
private.
DECLARATION . . . “ : = :

Letter LXIX. To Lord Fairfax: Alnwick, 11th September 1648 :
Col. Cowell’s Widow.

a LXX. To the Governor of Berwick: Alnwick, og eS
1648 . 2 5

Summons.

" LXXI. To Marquis Argyle, and the Well-affected Lords
now in arms in Scotland: near Berwick, 16th Sep-
tember 1648 . a , 5 .
Announces Messengers coming to them.

PA LXXII. To Scots Committee of Estates: near Berwick, 16th
September 1648 ,
His Reasons for entering Scotland.

A LXXIII. To Earl Loudon: Cheswick, 18th September 1648
Intentions and Proceedings as to Scotland.

PROCLAMATION ; 3 . 4 : . . . . =
LreTTER LXXIV. To Scots Committee of Estates: Norham, 2tst ote
tember 1648 .
In excuse for some disorder by the Durbem arena in n Scotland.

Pi LXXV. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Berwick, 2d October 1648

Surrender of Berwick and Carlisle.

- LXXVI. To Lord Fairfax: Berwick, 2d October 1648
To have Sir Arthur Haselrig take care of Berwick.

» LUXXVII. To Scots Committee of Estates: Edinburgh, 5th
October 1648 : : ; 5 5 5
His Demands concerning Scotland:

PAGE

331

345

346

349

35!

355
356

357

358

360

362

366

367

369

372

375

CONTENTS
LETTER LXXVIII. To Hon; W. Lenthall: Dalhousie, 8th October
1648
Colonel R. Montgomery: “For Two thousand of the Preston
Captives.

_ LXXIX. To the same: Dalhousie, oth October 1648
Account of his Proceedings in Scotland.

ae LXXX. To Governor Morris: Pontefract, gth November 1648

Summons to Pontefract Castle.

rf LXXXI. To Derby-House Committee: wernetigh a near
Pontefract, 15th November 1648 . :
What will ‘be necessary for the Siege of Pontefract.

rs LXXXII. To Jenner and Ashe: Knottingley, 20th gerne
1648,
Rebuke for their Order concerning Col. Owen.

5 LXXXIII. To Lord Fairfax : SE 20th November
1648 A 6 ; ,
With certain Petitions from the Army.

LXXXIV. To T. St. Nicholas, Egle Knottingley, 25th No-
vember 1648 . P = 5 ( : :
Wants of Hull Garrison.

LXXXV. To Col. Hammond: senoctingley, 25th November
1648 :
Eahoridon and Advice concerning the Business of the King.

LXXXVI. To Master and Fellows of Trinity Hall, Cam-
bridge: London, 18th December 1648 . :

Dorislaus: For a Room i in Doctors Commions.

”

DEATH WARRANT,

PART V
CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND. 1649

Letrer LXXXVII. To Rev. Mr. Robinson: London, 1st February
1648-9
this. letter and the Three following relate ‘to Richard
Cromwell's Marriage.

Pass. é é A ‘ 2 ; é : - C ' :

LETTER LXXXVIII. To R. ee ire London, 12th February
1648-9 . : : < : ; 5
ORDER . . . . . . ; ‘ . . . . .

XVll

PAGE

378

379

382

383

386

39°

391

393

403

404

4II

413

414
416

XVill CONTENTS

Letrer LXXXIX. To R. Mayor, Esq.: London, 26th February 1648-9
re XC. To the same: London, 8th March 1648-9
os XCI. To Dr. Love: London, 14th March 1648-9

Recommends a Suitor to him.

i XCII. To R. Mayor, Esq.: London, 14th March 1648-9 . -
This and the Four following relate to Richard Cromwell’s
Marriage.

» XCIII. To the same: London, 25th March 1649

» XCIV. To the same: London, 30th March 1649

» &CV. To the same: London, 6th April 1649

», XS&CVI. To the same: London, 15th April 1649
THE LEVELLERS . : . : :

LETTER XCVII. To Sir J. Harrington: London, goth July 1649
Earl of Thomond’s Petition.

»,  X&CVIII. To Hon. W, Lenthall: London, roth July 1649

Recommends Mr. Lowry, his fellow Member.

is XCIX. To R. Mayor, Esq. : Bristol, rgth July 1649 Fi
’ In answer to a Recommendation.
» C. To the same: Milford Haven, 13th August 1649

News received from Ireland: Jones’s Defeat of Ormond at
Bagatrath.

% CI. To Mrs. Richard Cromwell: Milford Haven, 13th August
TO40) | 4 S 5 . 7 :
Religious Advices.
5 CII. To Hon. W. Lenthall : Dublin, 22d August 1649
Vice-Admiral Ayscough’s Lease.

A DECLARATION BY THE LoRD LIEUTENANT OF IRELAND.

Ir1IsH WAR . : : 5 : 4 . P

LetTrer CIII. To the Chief Officer in Dundalk: Tredah, rath eee
tember 1649 . : : 5 j
Summons to Dundalk.
» CIV. To President Bradshaw: Dublin, 16th September 1649 .
Storm of Drogheda.

» CV. To Hon, W, Lenthall: Dublin, 17th September 1649
Storm of Drogheda.

» CVI. To the same: Dublin, 27th September 1649
Venables in Ulster: Supplies.

. . .

PAGE
418

419

422
424
427
430
431
432

435
444

446
448

450

452
454

455
457

474

CONTENTS

Letter CVII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Wexford, 14th October 1649 .

”

March to Wexford: Capture of Wexford.
CVIII. To Governor Taaff: Ross, 17th October 1649.

Ross summoned,

.

CIX. To the same: Before Ross, 19th October 1649 : Z

Terms for Ross.

CX. To the same: same date . A § ;
Same Subject.

CXI. To the same: same date.
Same Subject.

CXII. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Ross, 25th October 1649 . e
Account of the Gaining of Ross.

CXIII. To R. Mayor, Esq.: Ross, 13th November 1649 .
Irish News, and Family Affairs,

CXIV. To Hon. T. Scott: Ross, 14th November 1649 .
The Vote of Lands to Lieut.-Gen. Jones: Lord Broghil.

CXV. To Hon. W. Lenthall: Ross, 14th November 1649
Proceedings in Munster; Cork, Youghal, Baltimore, Castle-
haven; other Mercies.

CXVI. To the same: Waterford, November 1649 . : -
Reynolds takes Carrick-on-Suir; defends it gallantly: Reflec-
tions.

CXVII. To the same : Cork, 19th December 1649 . : :
Waterford not taken; Death of Lieut.-Gen. Michael Jones;
Repulse of the Enemy at Passage.

CXVIII. To Lord Wharton: Cork, 1st January 1649-50 .
Wharton's Doubts.

x1x
PAGE
476

490
491
492
494
495
497

499

500

597

513

520

INTRODUCTION

\ ] HEN a biography has become a classic it is time to
study the history of its composition. Such an en-
quiry not only satisfies the natural curiosity of the reader,
but is indispensable to the right understanding of the work
itself. We need to know why the author conceived the idea
of writing the book, what the conception was which he sought
to realise, under what conditions he wrote, and how far cir-
cumstances hindered or furthered the fulfilment of his design.
Our first business therefore is to examine into the origin of
Carlyle’s Cromwell and to follow its progress. :

One of Carlyle’s earliest literary projects was to write a
book upon Cromwell’s times. In March 1822 he was reading
Clarendon’s History of the Rebellion, Ludlow’s Memoirs,
Milton’s prose works, and other authorities for the history
of the period, and by the end of April his vague interest in
the subject had taken a more definite shape. ‘ Within the
last month,” he wrote to his brother Alexander on 27th April,
“JT have well-nigh fixed upon atopic. My purpose . . . 1s to
come out with a kind of Essay on the Civil Wars [and] the
Commonwealth of England—not to write a history of them—
but to exhibit, if I can, some features of the national character
as it was then displayed, supporting my remarks by mental
portraits drawn with my best ability, of Cromwell, Laud,
George Fox, Milton, Hyde, etc., the most distinguished of
the actors in that great scene.” In another letter, written
to Miss Welsh in January 1823, he explained more fully the
kind of treatment he intended to adopt in the projected book.
“Thad a splendid plan of treating the history of England
during the Commonwealth in a new style—not by way of
regular narrative—for which I felt too well my inequality,

(xxi)

XXll INTRODUCTION

but by grouping together the most singular manifestations
of mind that occurred then under distinct heads—selecting
some remarkable person as the representative of each class,
and trying to illustrate their excellences and defects, all that
was curious in their fortunes as individuals, or in their forma-
tion as members of the human family, by the most striking
methods I could devise. Already my characters were fixed
upon—Laud, Fox, Clarendon, Cromwell, Milton, Hampden ;
already I was busied in the study of their works.” ?

An engagement to translate Legendre’s Elements 9f Geom-
etry interrupted his studies, and then followed translations
from the German, essays on German literature, and other
engagements which occupied his mind and his time. It was
not till about 1838 that he took up his seventeenth century
project again, and then it was partly due to an accident.
John Stuart Mill asked Carlyle to write an article on Crom-
well for the London and Westminster Review. Carlyle
agreed to the proposal, and began to work upon the subject.
Meanwhile Mill went abroad leaving the Review to be edited
in his absence by John Robertson. Robertson, “a rude
Aberdeen Longear,” as Carlyle terms him, coolly informed
Carlyle that he “meant to do Cromwell himself,” which very
naturally much incensed his eminent contributor. In his
wrath Carlyle severed all connection with the Review, and
determining to write something more to his mind than articles
in reviews, took up his old project of a book on Cromwell
and his times.? He began his task in January 1839. “I
have my face turned partly towards Oliver Cromwell and the
Covenant time in England and Scotland, and am reading
books and meaning to read more for the matter, for it is
large and full of meaning. But what I shall make of it, or
whether I shall make anything at all, it would be premature

1C, E. Norton, Barly Letters of Thomas Carlyle, ii. 56, 170. Cf. Froude,
Thomas Carlyle, a History of the First Forty Years of his Life, i. chap. ix.; A.
Carlyle, Historical Sketches, preface, v.

2 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 149. Mr. Froude exaggerates the import-
ance of the incident as determining Carlyle’s choice of a subject, and makes no
reference to his early attraction to the subject. For an account of Robertson, see
Espinasse, Literary Recollections, p. 124. Robertson's article was published in
October 1839.

INTRODUCTION XXill

to say as yet.”! This was to his brother, and he announced
his plan to Emerson in the same doubting fashion.?

All through 1839 Carlyle read about Cromwell and the
history of his period, though he found considerable difficulty
in procuring the books he needed.* As his reading pro-

ressed his conception of Cromwell’s character became clearer.
‘Cromwell! ” he wrote in his journal in October 1839, “ How
on earth could he be treated? Begin to see him at times in
some measure, even to like him and pity him.”* The more he
studied the man the more his liking and his admiration in-
creased. “I have got within this last twelve months,” he
wrote in September 1840, “actually as it were to see that
this Cromwell was one of the greatest souls ever born of
English kin.”* ‘The first fruit of these seventeenth century
studies, the first revelation to the world of Carlyle’s estimate
of Cromwell, was contained in the sixth of the lectures on
hero-worship, delivered at the Royal Institution on 22nd May,
1840. ‘Few Puritans of note but find their apologists some-
where,” declared Carlyle, “and have a certain reverence paid
them by earnest men.” Eliot, Pym, Hampden and others
were all admitted to be a kind of heroes. “One Puritan,
and almost he alone, our poor Cromwell, seems to hang yet
on the gibbet and find no hearty apologist anywhere. Him
neither saint nor sinner will acquit of great wickedness.” °
Carlyle’s new presentation of Cromwell’s character was well
received. “The good people,” he told his brother, “sate

1Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 150.

2 Norton, Correspondence of Carlyle and Emerson, i. 215.

3 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 151. 4 [bid., i. 176, 197.

5 Norton, Correspondence of Carlyle and Emerson, i. 304. Mr. Espinasse quotes
from Carlyle’s Wotton Reinfred, a fragment written probably about 1830, the follow-
ing character of Cromwell supposed to be suggested by a portrait. It seems to show
that at that date Carlyle still regarded Cromwell as half a hero and half a hypocrite.
“‘This is the man whose words none could interpret, but whose thoughts were
clearest wisdom, who spoke in laborious folly, in voluntary or involuntary enigmas,
but saw and acted unerringly his fate. Confusion, ineptitude, dishonesty, are pictured
on his countenance, but through these there shines a fiery strength, nay, a grandeur
as of a true hero. You see there he was fearless, resolute as a Scanderbeg, yet
cunning and double withal, like some paltry pettifogger. He is your true en-
thusiastic hypocrite, at once crackbrained and inspired ; a knave and a demigod, in
brief, old Noll as he looked and lived.” Espinasse, Literary Recollections, p, 127.
“Wotton Reinfred” was first printed in The New Review, Jan.-March, 1892, and
was republished in the same year in Last Words of Thomas Carlyle.

8 Hero-worship, p. 1915 people's edition.

XXIV INTRODUCTION

breathless, or broke out into all kinds of testimonies of good-
will ; seemed to like very much indeed the huge ragged image
I gave them of a believing Calvinistic soldier and reformer.” *

Yet though Carlyle felt that he had solved the problem of
Cromwell’s character it was not easy to embody his discovery
in a history of Cromwell and his times. His difficulties grew
greater rather than less. Upon a nearer acquaintance he
did not like the period as much as he had expected. He
pronounced it “far inferior in interest” to the French Revol-
ution. “Not a tenth part such a subject as the French
Revolution.” At first sight none of the actors attracted him
excepting Cromwell and Montrose. The authorities he was
obliged to study were equally uninteresting. “One dreadful
circumstance is that the books, without exception, the docu-
ments, etc., one has to read, are of a dulness to threaten
locked jaw. I never read such jumbling, drowsy, endless
stupidities.” ?

In the introduction to the Letters and Speeches Carlyle
repeats his general verdict on the authorities, and proceeds to
criticise them individually. He had read the Memorials of
Bulstrode Whitelocke and the Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow,
but the “fat terrene mind” of Whitelocke, and the honest,
dull, wooden head of Ludlow were incapable of compre-
hending the hero whom they had seen face to face. There
were some intelligent contemporary writers. Thomas Fuller
was “a perfectly veracious and intelligent person,” Robert
Baillie a man “ with a living heart, a seeing pair of eyes, above
all, clearly a veracious man.”* But unluckily they knew
little of Cromwell personally. Of all the professed biogra-
phers of Cromwell the only one Carlyle felt able to praise was
John Forster. As to the great collections of contemporary
documents, those unwieldy and badly indexed folios wearied
and disgusted him. He styled Rushworth’s Collection “an

1¥Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 183. For an account of the lecture, by
Caroline Fox, see Alemories of old Friends, ed. 1883, p. 125.

2Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 153, 199.

3 Letters and Speeches, i. 10-16; ii. 242; Atscellanies, vi. 213.

4“Forster had finished his Life of CromwelZ when Carlyle was beginning his
seventeenth century studies, and their unpublished correspondence is full of applica-

tions made at one time by Carlyle for the loan of books on the period, and of
queries to be answered by Forster.” Espinasse, Literary Recollections, p. 118.

INTRODUCTION XXV

inarticulate rubbish continent,” and described Thurloe’s seven
volumes of State Papers as “shoreless lakes of ditchwater and
bilgewater.”’ From these distasteful sources Carlyle laboured
to extract the truth about Cromwell. “I say to myself, a
great man does lie buried under this waste continent of
cinders, and a great action. Canst thou not unbury them,
present them visible, and so help, as it were, in the creation
of them?” ?

Carlyle’s method of working has been described by himself.
The systematic steady jogtrot of the professional historian or
man of letters was not possible to him. He could not, like
Scott, say to himself that he would write so many hours before
breakfast, or like Macaulay that he would compose so many
pages per diem. he history of Carlyle’s Cromwell falls
naturally into two stages; first of all a prolonged struggle
to understand the subject, and lastly a shorter and more
violent struggle—almost a convulsion of nature—to set forth
the result for the world. According to him the essence of
literary art consisted simply in “blazing radiant insight into
the fact,” and “blazing burning interest about it.” This
he said was the soul of Shakespeare’s and Homer's “art,”
and of his own art, if he had anything of the kind. “My
first and last secret . . . is to get a thorough intelligence of
the fact to be painted, represented, or, in whatever way, set
forth—the fact deep as Hades, high as heaven, and written
so, as to the visual face of it on our poor earth. This once
blazing within me, if it will ever get to blaze, and bursting
to be out, one has to take the whole dexterity of adaptation
one is master of, and with tremendous struggling, really
frightful struggling, contrive to exhibit it, one way or the .
other.” ®

In order to realise the facts of Cromwell’s life the better,
and so to be more able to make them real to his readers,
Carlyle went to see the places where Cromwell lived and the
fields where he fought. In May 1842 he visited Naseby in
company with Dr. Arnold, and walked over the uplands where
nearly two hundred years earlier the fate of England was

1 Letters and Speeches, i. 8; ii. 223. - ope
2Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i, 199. 3 [bid., i, 231.

XXVi INTRODUCTION

decided. “They are not properly hills at all,” he writes,
“but broad, blunt, clayey masses swelling towards and from
each other like indolent waves of the sea, sometimes of miles
in extent.” Unluckily Carlyle and Arnold, misled by an
obelisk which the owner of the property had set up on the
highest part of the field, mistook the actual site of the battle,
as Edward Fitzgerald, the owner’s son, told him a few months
later. Fitzgerald, by examining the ground and opening what
local tradition pointed to as the graves of the slain, discovered
the spot where the crisis of the battle took place, and
Carlyle after some hesitation accepted his view. “Clearly
enough,” he wrote to him, “you are upon the very battle
ground ;—and I, it is clear, have only looked up towards it
from the slope of Mill Hill. The opening of that burial heap
blazes strangely in my thoughts; these are the very jawbones
that were clenched together in deadly rage, on this very
ground, 197 years ago. It brings the matter home to one,
with a strange veracity, —as if for the first time one saw it to
be no fable and theory but a dire fact.” ?

In September 1842 Carlyle undertook a longer tour, hired
a horse, which turned out “a heavy-footed beast,” and set
out on a three days’ ride into “Cromwelldom.” He went
first to Ely, where Cromwell lived from 1636 to 1647, and
found his house “though in a somewhat frail state still stand-
ing.” Lying by the door was “a huge horseblock ” on which
Carlyle sat and meditatively smoked a cigar; he brought
away a chip of the block in his pocket. In the evening he
visited the cathedral and “as the heaving bellows blew and
the yellow sunshine streamed in through the high windows,”
he dreamt of the Reverend Mr. Hitch who refused to abandon
his choral services, and of Cromwell’s short way with Mr.

1 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 255.

2 Wright, Letters and Literary Remains of Edward Fitzgerald, 1889, i. 103-114.
Carlyle proposed that a new monument should be erected at Naseby marking the
actual spot where the crisis of the struggle took place. He wrote an inscription
for the ‘‘ Naseby Pillar,” as he termed it. But the property changed hands before
the scheme could be carried out, and the new owner refused his consent to its
erection. The old obelisk, therefore, still remains to delude visitors to the field.
“It might as well stand at Charing Cross: the blockhead that is,” said Carlyle.
See one the same collection of Le¢ters, i. 105, 109, 236-8, 333, 339, 353, 359, 363,
475) 495.

INTRODUCTION XXVil

Hitch. “I almost wept to stand upon the very flagstones
under the setting sun, where he ordered the refractory parson,
‘Leave off your fooling and come out, sir’.”}

On the second day Carlyle rode to St. Ives, where Crom-
well lived from 1631 to 1636. ‘The lands he rented are still
there, recognisable to the tourist: gross boggy lands, fringed
with willow trees, at the east end of the small town.” In one
of the fields which had been Cromwell’s Carlyle sat down,
smoked another cigar, and meditated for a time. “Here of
a certainty,” he said, “Oliver did walk and look about him
habitually during those five years. . . . His cattle grazed
here, his ploughs tilled here, the heavenly skies and infernal
abysses overarched and underarched him here.”? Leaving St.
Ives, Carlyle next proceeded to Huntingdon, where he found
that the house in which Cromwell was born had been twice
rebuilt since, and was now “a solid yellow brick-house, . . .
occupied by some townsman of the wealthier sort.” He then
visited Hinchinbrook, once the house of Cromwell’s grand-
father, but now the seat of the Earls of Sandwich. “A
stately pleasant house amongst its shady lawns and expanses
on the left bank of the Ouse river, a short half-mile west of
Huntingdon—still stands pretty much as Oliver Cromwell’s
grandfather left it; rather kept good and defended from the
inroads of time and accident than substantially altered.” He
had now finished his day’s work, and mounting once more the
“heavy-footed beast,” he “rode with terrible determination
to Cambridge the same evening.” #

On the morning of the third day Carlyle perambulated
‘Cambridge, looked diligently at all the colleges within reach,
and saw the famous portrait of Cromwell at Sidney Sussex
College. What he thought of that portrait neither his letters
nor his journals say, but memories of it inspire the word-
pictures of Cromwell given in the Historical Sketches and
m the Letters and Speeches. The sight of this portrait was
in reality the most important event of Carlyle’s tour. It left

1Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 275-278. See also the preface to the
second letter in Letters and Speeches.

2 Letters and Speeches, i. 77.

5 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 276.

4 Historical Sketches, pp. 312, 344; Letters and Speeches, ii. 315.

XXVIil INTRODUCTION

an ineffaceable impression upon his mind and permanently
shaped his conception of Cromwell’s character. For it was
one of Carlyle’s first principles that in forming an estimate of
any historical character the impression produced by an
authentic portrait of the person was evidence of the highest
authority for a biographer. “I have to tell you,” he says,
“as a fact of personal experience that in all my poor histori-
cal investigations it has been, and always is, one of the most
primary wants to procure a bodily likeness of the personage
inquired after; a good portrait if such exists; failing that,
even an indifferent if sincere one. In short, any representa-
tion made by a faithful human creature, of that face and
figure, which he saw with his eyes, and which I can never see
with mine, is now valuable to me, and much better than none
at all. This, which is my own deep experience, I believe to
be, in a deeper or less deep degree the universal one; and
that every student and reader of history, who strives earnestly
to conceive for himself what manner of fact or man this or
the other vague historical name can have been, will, as the
first and directest indication of all, search eagerly for a por-
trait, for all the reasonable portraits there are; and never
rest till he have made out, if possible, what the man’s
natural face was like. Often I have found a portrait superior
in real instruction to half a dozen written ‘biographies,’ as
biographies are written ;—or rather, let me say, I have found
that the portrait was as a small lighted candle by which the
biographies could for the first time be read, and some human
interpretation be made of them; the biographied personage
no longer an empty impossible phantasm, or distracting
aggregate of inconsistent rumours . . . but yielding at last
some features which one could admit to be human,” !

1 Letter to David Laing, 3rd May, 1854, on the ‘“‘ Project ofa National Exhibition
of Scottish Portraits.” dZzscedlanies, people's edition, vii. 129.

Whenever Carlyle describes an historical personage he endeavours to realise the
external man himself to make his readers see him. In describing the man’s face it
is always the predominant traits of the character, as expressed in the features, that
he seeks to bring out. The posthumous A7storical Sketches are of special interest
in this respect for students of the Letters and Speeches. In them Carlyle describes
James I. (p. 43), Anne of Denmark (p. 129), Charles I. (p. 262), Laud (pp. 245,
306), Strafford (p. 324), Pym (p. 166), Hampden (p. 340), Hyde (p. 329), and
others some briefly, others at full length.

INTRODUCTION Xxix

With a clearer understanding of Cromwell’s character, and
with a definite conception of his environment during his early
life, Carlyle returned to his books. From time to time he
resumed his pilgrimages to Cromwellian battlefields. In Jul
1843 he paid a hasty visit to Worcester. On 3rd September,
1843, the anniversary of the battle, he saw the field of
Dunbar. “TI found the battle ground,” he says, “much more
recognisable than any I had yet seen; indeed altogether
what one would call clear. It is at the foot and further
eastward along the slope of the hill they call the Doun that
the Scots stood, Cromwell at Broxmouth (Duke of Rox-
burghe’s place) where he ‘saw the sun rise over the sea’ and
quoted a certain psalm. I had the conviction that I stood
on the very ground.” !

Meanwhile 1842 had passed and 1843 was drawing to its
close, yet Carlyle seemed to be no nearer the completion of
his book. From the very outset of his enterprise its diffi-
culty had oppressed him. “My reading goes on,” he wrote
in November 1840; “my stupidity seems to increase with
it more and more. I get to see that no history in the strict
sense can be made of that unspeakable puddle of a time.” 2

Neither his reminiscences of Cromwell’s battlefields nor the
tangible relics of battle which he brought home from them
supplied the inspiration Carlyle needed. Throughout, his
conception of Cromwell’s character remained clear. But it
seemed impossible for him to mould the stubborn facts into
shape, and to embody his conception of that character in a
history of Cromwell and his times. In July 1842 he an-
swered Emerson’s inquiries with a cry of despair “You ask
after Cromwell—Ask not of him; he is like to drive me mad.
There he lies shining clear enough to me, nay, glowing, or
painfully burning ; but far down; sunk under two hundred
years of cant, oblivion, unbelief, and triviality of every kind ;
through all which and to the top of all which, what’ mortal
industry or energy will avail to raise him ?”®

1Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 314, 326.

2/bid., i. 199. A month later Carlyle was writing: ‘‘In our whole English
history there is surely nothing as great. If one can delineate anything of England,
then this thing.” /dzd., i, 202.

3 Norton, Correspondence of Carlyle and Emerson, ii. 6.

XXX INTRODUCTION

The cause of this dead-lock was partly the natural difficulty
of the subject. It is hard for any man to realise unfamiliar
conditions, and to put together from defective materials a
coherent account of a complicated period, and a life-like
picture of a great man. It was harder for Carlyle than for
most historians because he could never surrender his mind to
his subject ; because he was continually summoned from the
past by the importunate problems of the present; because
he was a prophet and a poet by nature and a historian only
by accident. The condition of England weighed upon him.
The misery of the poor; the apathy of the rich ; the indiffer-
ence of the rulers were always before his eyes. ‘“ Ought I,”
said he, “to write now of Oliver Cromwell? . . . Again and
again of late I ask myself in whispers, Is it the duty of a
citizen to be silent, to paint mere heroisms, Cromwells, ete. ?
. . . The look of the world is really quite oppressive to me.
Eleven thousand souls in Paisley alone living on three-half-
pence a day, and the governors of the land all busy shooting
partridges, and passing corn-laws the while! . . . My heart
is sick to look at the things now going on in this England ;
and the two millions of men sitting in poor-law Bastilles
seem to ask of every English soul, ‘ Hast thou no word to say
for us?’”}

Night and day these thoughts passed through his mind,
and till he had delivered his message about them he could not
rest. “I found I could not go on with Cromwell, or with
anything else, till I had disburdened my heart somewhat in
regard to all that.” The result was the writing and the
publication in April 1843 of Past and Present. After this
digression Carlyle returned to his task, and finally deter-
mined on a complete alteration in his plan.

One day in December 1843 while Mrs. Carlyle was “ peace-
fully darning his stockings ” her husband rushed into the room
and threw a pile of manuscript into the fire. “It was up
the chimney in a fine blaze before I knew what he was |
burning,” said Mrs. Carlyle. “This life of Oliver Cromwell
looks to me as if it were never going to get itself written,

1Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 223, 285, 286.

INTRODUCTION XXX

work at it as he may.”} Carlyle himself, however, felt that
at last he was on the right track. “ My book,” he told his
mother, “occasions great difficulty. I not long ago fairly
cast a great mass of it into the fire, not in any sudden rage
at it, but after quiet deliberation, and deciding on this as
the best that I could do. I am now trying the business
on another side with hopes of better prosperity there.”
Instead of writing a consecutive history of the Civil Wars
and the Commonwealth he resolved to attempt something
much simpler—he would collect the authentic utterances of
Cromwell and confine himself to a detailed commentary upon
them.? :

At last in August 1845 he announced the completion of
his task to his friend Emerson.

“ About four days ago I wrote my last word on Cromwell’s
Letters and Speeches. The book is nearly printed: two big
volumes ; about a half of it, I think, my own ; the real utter-
ances of the man Oliver Cromwell once more legible to earnest
men. Legible really to an unexpected extent: for the book
took quite an unexpected figure in my hands; and is now a
kind of life of Oliver, the best that circumstances will permit
me to do :—whether I or England shall be, in my time, fit for
a better, remains submitted to the destinies at present. I
have tied up the whole Puritan Paper-Litter (considerable
masses of it still unburnt) with tight strings, and hidden it
at the bottom of my deepest repositories; there shall it, if
Heaven please, lie dormant for a time and times. Such an
element as I have been in, no human tongue can give account
of. ‘The disgust of my soul has been very great, a really
pious labour: worth very little when I have done it, but the
best I could do; and that is quite enough. I feel the liveliest
gratitude to the gods that I have got out of it alive. The
Book is very dull, but it is actually legible: all the ingenious
faculty I had, and ten times as much would have been useful
there, has been employed in elucidation; in saying, and

1 New Letters of Jane Welsh Carlyle, i. 135; 30th December, 1843. Fitzgerald
says that Carlyle told him that he had burnt ‘‘at least six attempts at Cromwell's
life.” Letters and Literary Remains of Edward Fitzgerald, i. 373,

2¥Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 331-5, 339.

VOL.’ I.—c

XXxXli INTRODUCTION

chiefly—in forbearing to say,—in annihilating continents of
brutal wreck and dung: Ach Gott.”?

Carlyle’s Cromwell was published about October 1845, and
few historical works have attained more immediate success.
A second edition was called for in 1846 and a third appeared
in 1849. Neither Carlyle nor his publishers had expected so
large a circulation. It is credibly stated that the publishers
had undertaken to publish the Letters and Speeches with
considerable reluctance, and only upon the understanding
that Carlyle would afterwards give them a complete biog-
raphy of Cromwell.? Carlyle confessed that he was not
prepared for the popularity of the book. “The lively interest
the people have taken in that heavy book—the numbers
that read and in some good measure understand something of
it .. . is really surprising to me.”® What gratified him more
than popular success was the sense that he had not written
in vain, and that he had taught the world to see that the
Protector was an honest man. Critics who reviewed the
book generally declined to accept his estimate of Cromwell’s
career without great reservation, but his estimate of Cromwell’s
character exerted ‘a wide and an increasing influence.* It
influenced all subsequent biographers and historians. Hitherto
whatever party an historian belonged to, whether he was
a Tory, a Whig or a Radical, Cromwell had incurred the
same condemnation. It was much if they conceded that he
might be an honest fanatic. Hume termed him a fanatical
hypocrite, but admitted that his enthusiasm and his script-
ural language were not all assumed. “He was at bottom
as frantic an enthusiast as the worst of them, and in order to

1 Norton, Correspondence of Carlyle and Emerson, ii. 94. ‘The unburnt portion
was published in 1898 under the title of Azstorical Sketches of Notable Persons and
Events in the Reigns of James I, and Charles I. by Thomas Carlyle. Carlyle’s
friend John Chorley transcribed the original MS. about 1850, and added some
notes and references; Mr, Alexander Carlyle completed the task, and published
the book.

2 Mr. Espinasse states this on the authority of Mrs. Carlyle. Lzterary Recollec-
tions, Pp. 74.

3 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 377.

4The most favourable contemporary criticism was an article in the Westminster
Review, xlvi. 432. For hostile criticisms see Blackwood, |xi, 393, and J. B. Mozley's
article in the Christian Remembrancer for April 1849, reprinted in his Essays
Historical and Theological, 1884.

INTRODUCTION XXxill

obtain their confidence, needed but to display those vulgar
and ridiculous habits which he had early acquired, and on
which he set so high a value.”! Hallam, writing in 1827,
compared Cromwell and Napoleon. The comparison is
singularly superficial. A couple of sentences show its tone.
“Tn civil government there can be no adequate parallel
between one who had sucked only the dregs of a besotted
fanaticism, and one to whom the stores of reason and philos-
ophy were open. But it must here be added that Cromwell,
far unlike his antitype, never showed any signs of a legis-
lative mind, or any desire to fix his renown on that noblest
basis, the amelioration of social institutions.”2 The first
sentence is pure prejudice, the second pure ignorance. The |
force of Whiggery could no further go.

Now to take an instance of the change effected by Carlyle.
In 1839 John Forster had published a careful two volume
life of Cromwell, representing him in the usual republican
fashion as a patriot in the first part of his career, and an
apostate and a tyrant in the last part.

In 1856 Forster published in the Edinburgh Review? an
article on Guizot’s Cromwell and the English Commonwealth,
which proves that his own estimate of Cromwell had been
entirely altered by Carlyle’s work.

“This we hold to have been finally established by Mr.
Carlyle, and to constitute the peculiar value of his labours in
connection with the subject. To collect and arrange in
chronological succession, and with elucidatory comment, every
authentic letter and speech left by Cromwell, was to subject
him to a test from which falsehood could hardly escape ; and
the result has been to show, we think conclusively and beyond
further dispute, that through all these speeches and letters
one mind runs consistently. Whatever a man’s former pre-
possessions may have been, he cannot accompany the utterer
of these speeches, the writer of these letters, from their first

1 History of England. 2 Constitutional History, ii. 264, ed. 1863.

3 The essay is reprinted in Forster's Biographical Studies, Carlyle’s comments
on Guizot’s book and on Forster’s article are given by Mr. Espinasse, Zzterary
Recollections, p. 85. Seealso a striking article in The Z%mes for 4th January, 1855,
on Carlyle and Guizot, apparently by Professor Goldwin Smith, judging from its
resemblance to the lecture on Cromwell in his 7%ree English Statesmen, 1868,

XXXIV INTRODUCTION

pages to the last, travelling with him from his grazing lands
at St. Ives up to his Protector’s throne ; watching him in the
tenderest intercourse with those dearest to him; observing
him in affairs of state or in the ordinary business of the world,
in offices of friendship or in conference with sovereigns and
senates ; listening to him as he comforts a persecuted preacher,
or threatens a persecuting prince; and remain at last with
any other conviction than that in all conditions, and on every
occasion, Cromwell’s tone is substantially the same, and that
in the passionate fervour of his religious feeling, under its
different and varying modifications, the true secret of his life
must be sought, and will be found.” Forster concludes that
“to all practical intents, Cromwell was as far removed on the
one hand from fanaticism, as on the other, from hypocrisy.” ?
Forster was a convert worth making, for he was better quali-
fied than any other contemporary historian to estimate the
permanent value of Carlyle’s contribution to the history of
the period, and what he thought many others came to think.
Carlyle had set out to prove that Cromwell was “the soul of
the Puritan Revolt” and “not a man of falsehoods, but a man
of truths.” He believed that his collection of Cromwell’s
Letters and Speeches would make “the heart of that grand
Puritan business once again visible,” and then “the heart of
this matter, and the heart of serious men once again brought
into approximation, to write some History of it may be a
little easier.” ? This he triumphantly achieved, and the impulse
which his book gave to the study of that part of seventeenth
century history has not yet died away. The view which
subsequent historians have taken of Cromwell’s character is
substantially that set forth by Carlyle, though they naturally
foes very widely from Carlyle in their estimate of his
olicy.
: Still greater and more immediate was the influence exerted
by Carlyle’s book upon the reading public in general. It
changed the popular conception of Cromwell’s character, and '
restored him to his proper place amongst English worthies.
One sign of the change was that people began to talk of

1 Biographical Studies, p. 32. 2 Letters and Speeches, i, 11.

INTRODUCTION XXXV

erecting statues to Cromwell. This was not one of the
results Carlyle had aimed at producing, nor was it a mode of
showing admiration for great men which he commended.
There were too many ugly statues of undeserving people about
England as it was. “I think,” he growled, “ they ought to
leave Cromwell alone of their memorials, and try to honour
him in some more profitable way—by learning to be honest
men like him, for example.”! But he made an exception in
favour of localities with which Cromwell’s life was intimately
associated. When he was asked to help in promoting the
erection of a statue of Cromwell at St. Ives he blessed the
project in a most emphatic fashion. His letter to one of the
promoters has been preserved.”

“In the Birmingham newspaper, some ten days ago, a blaz-
ing article was sent me about a general ‘ People’s Statue’ for
Oliver, to be set up at London, Huntingdon, or, failing both
these, at St. Ives, or in Naseby Field. Some considerable
notion, I find otherwise, has gone abroad of commemorating
Cromwell in the public statue way. To all which I have
hitherto made little answer or none at all.

“My private suspicion I confess is that the present genera-
tion of Englishmen—who have filled their towns with such a
set of ‘public statues’ as were never before erected by any
people, ugly brazen images (to mere commonplace adventurers
with titles on them, and even sometimes to mere paltry
scoundrels, worthy of immediate oblivion only), and who have
winded up their enterprises in the statue or memorial line
by subscribing £25,000 to a memorial for King Hudson—
are not likely to do themselves or anybody much good by
setting up statues to Oliver Cromwell. I fear they have
forfeited the right to remember Cromwell in a public manner.
Cromwell’s divine memory, sad, stern and earnest as the gods,
says virtually to them ‘Forget me and pass on, ye unhappy
Canaille—carry your offerings to King Hudson and strive to
emulate him!’ Nevertheless I have privately resolved, if
such a thing do go on, to subscribe my little mite to it on

1Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 451.
2 Addressed to the Rev. I. K. Holland, and dated 16th April, 1849. Printed
in the Hunts County News, 26th October, 1901, and also separately.

XXxvi INTRODUCTION

occasion, and to wish privately that it may prosper much
better than I can with any assurance hope. I think it will
be very difficult to avoid the introduction of such an ocean of
flummery and mere idle balderdash into the affair (if the
public are fairly awoken to it) as will be very distressing to
any one who feels how a Cromwell ought to be honoured by
the nation that produced him.

“With regard to you and your townsmen, however, I per-
ceive that, so far, you have sure ground to stand upon ; ground
that is sure, and will carry such an enterprise in all times,
even in the Hudson, Dundas, and Brazen Duke of York times.
St. Ives wishes to claim authentically for itself the honour of
having once been Oliver Cromwell’s place of abode, an honour
that is likely to last it, and be its most peculiar one for a
thousand years to come. E

“ Proper, good every way, and right on the part of St. Ives:
while you keep within these limits, the soul of Oliver himself,
if he looked down upon you, could not disapprove. Not to
do Cromwell honour—that, owing to Hudson, etc., we un-
fortunately cannot at present pretend to try; not to do him
honour, but to claim publicly our own property in him, and
do honour to ourselves and our town—that we can pretend
to, and will! So far I say your enterprise is founded on the
rock; and however much further it may go, I think you
should take care to maintain that particular foundation, and
let nothing shift you from it. Namely, that your enterprise
is to point out Oliver Cromwell’s indisputable connexion with
you, and to claim this publicly, and assert it in brass or stone
for the coming ages and all persons that may forget or do
not know it.”

Carlyle ended by recommending the market-place of St.
Ives as the most suitable spot for the erection of the proposed
memorial, and it was there that in October 1901 the statue
of Cromwell was at last set up.

But it is time to leave the question of the effect produced
by Carlyle’s book and to discuss the question of its permanent
historical value. In reality it belongs rather to the domain
of literature than to the domain of history. It might almost
be considered a prose epic, telling the story of Cromwell’s life,

INTRODUCTION XXXVii

and Carlyle sometimes spoke of it as a “Cromwelliad.”+ At
times, too, he doubted whether prose was the right vehicle
for conveying his ideas, or the fittest instrument for pro-
ducing the desired effect. “I wish often,” he said, “I
could write rhyme. A new form from centre to surface,
unlike what I find anywhere in myself or others, would
alone be appropriate for .. . this subject.”? Yet the wish
was needless, for his own prose had all the epic and dramatic
qualities which the subject required; no poet has drawn a
more vivid battle picture than Carlyle’s Dunbar, and no
tragedy has a nobler closing scene than his description of
the death of Cromwell.

Nevertheless, regarded simply as the biography of a great
statesman and soldier Carlyle’s book is fragmentary and in-
complete. It follows the letters and speeches too closely, and
where Cromwell says nothing Carlyle is silent. The turning-
points in Cromwell’s career and life are left in comparative
darkness. You will search in vain through Carlyles pages
for any adequate account of Cromwell’s share in the struggle
between Army and Parliament in 1647 and 1648, or for any
exact estimate of his part in bringing Charles I. to the scaffold.
His account of the Protector’s government is in clearness and
fulness much inferior to that contained in Godwin’s history of
the Commonwealth published nearly twenty years earlier.’

Besides these omissions there are a certain number of errors.
Carlyle took great pains to be exact in his facts and his de-
scriptions * and as a rule he is very accurate about dates and
minor details. But sometimes he nodded, and made strange
blunders. For instance he places the Uxbridge treaty be-
tween the King and the Parliament in the spring of 1644
instead of in February 1645, and his account of the move-
ments of Cromwell and the New Model Army after their
victory at Naseby is strangely full of errors.

The obvious explanation of these defects and omissions is

1 Letters and Speeches, i, 10. 2¥Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 279.

3 History of the Commonwealth of England, by William Godwin, 4 vols., 1824-8.

4 See for example the trouble taken by him to compare Cromwell's portrait with
the death-mask, and to fix the proper position of the famous wart. Vide Mr.
Anderson’s article in the Lnglish [llustrated Magazine, November 1896, and the
letters of Carlyle and Woolner on the subject therein printed.

XXXVill INTRODUCTION

that the book was intended to be not a life of Cromwell but
a commentary on Cromwell’s letters and speeches. Apart
from the conception of Cromwell’s character presented in its
pages, it is a collection of materials brought together for
the use of those who wish to study Cromwell’s life for them-
selves! However, considered merely as a collection of docu-
ments it has also some serious defects.

Carlyle was a very laborious editor but much too arbitrary.
He took great trouble to make Cromwell’s speeches intelligible
by supplying missing words, explaining allusions, breaking up

ong-winded sentences, adding commas, dashes, brackets and
other typographical aids. For this labour he deserves sincere
gratitude. Onthe other hand he modernized the speeches too
much, allowed himself too great licence in the way of emenda-
tion, and did not always compare with sufficient care the
different versions of the same speech or find out the best text
of a letter.

But Carlyle’s greatest fault as an editor is the perpetual
interpolation of his own comments in the text. His chorus
of “ Ha’s” and “ Hum’s” and “'Truly’s”—his jeers at “ heavy
Bulstrode” and “peppery Scot”—his exhortations to “ my
brave one,” “my beautiful great soul,”—become at last tedious
and obtrusive.’ It is as if the showman should suddenly
bob his head up and personally assist Mr. Punch in his
warfare with the devil. A number of these interpolations
are explanations of Cromwell’s involved grammar, or com-
ments upon it. “Sentence catching fire explodes.” “Sen-
tence gone: meaning left clear enough.” “Sentence may be
said to burst asunder here for the present, but will gather
itself together again perhaps.”* “Sentence involving an
incurable Irish bull; the head of it eating the tail of it,
like a Serpent-of-Eternity; but the meaning shining very
clear through its contortions nevertheless.” _“ His Highness,
bursting with meaning, completes neither of these sentences ;

1 Letters and Speeches, i. 67.

2See Mrs. Lomas'’s notes to the Speeches, passim. See also ‘‘ Carlyle as Editor
of Cromwell's Speeches” by Sir Reginald Palgrave, National Review, January
1887,

8 Letters and Speeches, ii. 530, 551; iil. 70, 170, 173, 183.

4 Jbid., ili. 79, 80, 90, 95, 174.

INTRODUCTION XXxXIx

but pours himself, like an irregular torrent, through other
orifices and openings.” “Another little window into his
Highness: almost a half soliloquy: you see the speech getting
ready in the interior of his Highness.” !

In these comments Carlyle lets his imagination run riot.
He realizes the scene so vividly himself that he insists that his
readers shall see it as he does—they must see through his
eyes and hear through his ears. He knows the exact tone of
voice in which Cromwell spoke the words given on the printed
page. Now it is a “sonorous bass,” now “risen somewhat
into alt and rolling with a kind of rough music in the tones
of it,’—now “reverberating like thunder from the roof of
the Painted Chamber”—now the Protector’s voice has
“risen into a kind of recitative,” and once it “ends, I think,
in a kind of snort.” ?

He can tell you exactly how Cromwell looked when he
spoke the words. At one time his face wears “a pleasant
bantering look,” at another “ His Highness elevating his
brows; face assuming a look of irony, of rough banter.”
The subject changes from light to serious, and the speaker’s
expression changes with it. We see “a certain truculency on
his Highness’s visage,” or some nobler emotion than merely
truculency reflected there. When the Protector tells his
Parliament that rather than consent to the wilful throwing
away of this government “I can sooner be willing to be
rolled into my grave and buried with infamy,” Carlyle
pictures “the aspect of that face, with its lion-mouth and
mournful eyes, kindled now, and radiant all of it, with sor-
row, with rebuke, and wrathful defiance.” ?

Again, when the Protector denounces the men who seek to
stir up a new civil war in England, careless of the blood and
misery they may cause,—“ He that considereth not these,”
declares Cromwell, “must have the heart of a Cain. The
wrath and justice of God will prosecute such a man to his
grave, if not to Hell.” In comes Carlyle with his comment ;
—‘“ Where is Sam Cooper or some prince of limners to take
us that look of his Highness? I would give my ten best

1 Letters and Speeches, ii. 378, 379, 381 ; iii. 60. 2 /bid., ii, 381, 386, 550; iii. 80,
3 Jbzd., ii. 386, 528, 548; iii. 112,

xl INTRODUCTION

historical paintings for it, gilt frames and twaddle criticisms
into the bargain.”?

Sometimes Carlyle describes the effect of the speeches on
Cromwell’s audience. At one remark “Lenthall tries to
blush”; at another Lord Whitelocke’s “‘heavy face en-
deavours to smile in response”; now there are “suppressed
murmurs from Bradshaw and Company,” and we behold
“Haselrig and Scot looking very grim” as they listen.
Once, by a bold piece of personification, the “Old Parliament
dubiously rolls its eye.” At need he even invents imaginary
auditors ;—Cromwell’s first speech is interrupted by “stifled
cries from Dryasdust,” and its progress is suspended whilst
Carlyle has a couple of rounds with his old antagonist.
“Patience, my friend, my estimable timber-headed, leaden-
hearted friend.” More groans from Dryasdust; “ Hush, my
friend,” cries Carlyle, and calls him “a human owl.” ?

To some at least of Carlyle’s readers these editorial eccen-
tricities are distasteful. They find his comments, as Cromwell
himself said of Mr. Hitch’s choral services, “ unedifying and
offensive,” and murmur, under their breaths, something about
the dignity of history. But if we regard Carlyle’s work as a
* Cromwelliad,” or a kind of historical drama, we shall not
find them out of place. They fulfil an artistic purpose like
the comic scenes in a Shakespearian tragedy, and serve to
heighten by contrast the loftier passion and purer enthu-
siasm of Cromwell’s own utterances.

In dealing with the letters Carlyle was not tempted to
indulge this licence of interpolation. He modernized and
emended them much less than the speeches, though still a
little too much. Another defect is the method of arranging
the letters. The first edition contained 157 letters. The
interest which it aroused led people to send Carlyle copies
of letters of Cromwell’s in their possession, or to point out
to him the sources from which fresh letters might be obtained.
In this way he collected about ninety letters and documents,
of which he incorporated some fifty-three in his second edition,
inserting the rest in a vast appendix. After this revision he

1 Letters and Speeches, iii. 174. Misprinted high-art paintings in people's edition.
2 /bid., ii, 281, ag1, 368, 369, 408; iii. 55, 78.

INTRODUCTION xli

resolved to make no further changes, refusing, as he said, to
“unhoop his cask and insert new staves.” For the future,
“new letters, should such still turn up, I will not, except they
contradict some statement, or fibre of a statement, in the
text, undertake to introduce there; but deposit them with-
out ceremony in the loose lumber-room, in a more or less
swept condition.” ? New letters did continue to turn up, and
Carlyle, as he threatened, relegated them to the lumber room
of his appendix. The result is that several of the most
interesting of “the authentic utterances of the man, Oliver
Cromwell,” may easily be overlooked by the student. The
battle of Langport was one of the most important battles of
the war, and Cromwell played a considerable part in it, but
his letter about it, with its very characteristic reference to
the battle of Naseby, is hidden away out of sight. The same
fate befalls Cromwell’s long and very instructive letter to
John Sadler about the principles of Irish policy.2 Most
editors would have taken the small trouble necessary to in-
sert such valuable additions in their right place in the text.

Another defect of Carlyle as an editor is that he was
somewhat careless and uncritical in accepting letters pur-
porting to be written by Cromwell. Give him a memoir or
a book—anything with a man visible behind it—and he
judged its value with the greatest shrewdness, but when he
had to deal with a single letter or a collection of letters he
was less clear-sighted. In several cases he failed to distinguish
the true from the false.

There are two curious instances of this, Letter 200 in
Carlyle’s collection, a letter from Cromwell to Thurloe, is an
eighteenth century forgery.? ‘There was no external evidence
to support the statement that the letter was by Cromwell,
but Carlyle pronounced it “by internal evidence a genuine
note.” He saw, however, that there was something wrong
with the letter, and mended it by omitting the most suspicious
phrases, and otherwise improving the style. The strange
thing is that he did not think it necessary to point out to
his readers the nature of the alterations he had made; and

1 Preface to second edition, May, 1846, vol. i. p. vi. hs
2 Letters and Speeches, iii. 245, 266. 3 Jbid., li. 453.

xii INTRODUCTION

never saw that by admitting the necessity of such alterations
he was destroying all the claim of the letter to be held
authentic. For that claim rested entirely on the credibility
of its contents, and on nothing else.

A more famous instance of the same kind is the case of the
Squire Papers. These papers are a collection of letters
attributed to Cromwell, and usually printed in the appendix
to Carlyle’s Cromwell. By competent judges it is now
universally admitted that these letters are forgeries manu-
factured for the express purpose of deceiving Carlyle.’ Their
author, William Squire, was a resident at Yarmouth, who
combined an interest in local antiquities with a taste for
practical jokes. In January 1847, just after the publication
of the first edition of Cromwell, he wrote to Carlyle, saying
that the book had given him great pleasure, and concluding
with the statement that he had in his possession the journal
of one of Oliver’s troopers (one Sam Squire, an ancestor of
his own) and other papers relating to the period. Eventually
he sent Carlyle copies of some thirty-five letters purporting
to be written by Cromwell, which Carlyle printed in F’raser’s
Magazine for December 1847. In this article Carlyle de-
scribed the letters as “of indubitable authenticity,” and their
communicator as “a person of perfect veracity, and even of
scrupulous exactitude in details.” “Any remark or state-
ment of his concerning them is to be entirely relied on.”
Nevertheless there were details in the phraseology of these
letters which at once excited suspicion. Antiquaries began
to express doubts of their authenticity, and one joined in
after another, like ‘dogs answering each other’s howls in the
night,” said Carlyle. But all their critical howling did not
shake his faith. ‘You can say,” ran the message which he
sent to Squire, “I never for one moment doubted of his
letters, nor am likely, till the age of miracles come back.” ?

What right had Carlyle to be so certain that the things
were genuine? What tests had he applied to these
documents ? What precautions had he taken against
deception ?

1 For that reason “The Squire Papers” are omitted in this edition.
2 March 1848.

INTRODUCTION xliii

He had never seen the supposed originals of the letters,
nor a single scrap of any one of them. He had accepted
Squire’s statements about the letters without any hesitation,
though those statements were themselves contradictory.!. In
his first letter? Squire said that he thought of some day
publishing his ancestor’s papers. In his second letter* he
‘certo Carlyle copies of the documents, but insisted that

is own name and the name of his ancestor should remain a
secret. He was afraid, he said, of offending some of his
relatives and causing bad blood if he published them, and
he would rather “see every scrap of old paper in ashes first.”
Three months later he sent copies of some of the letters, and
added that he had just burnt the original letters and jour-
nals.“ When Carlyle heard this news he became nearly dis-
tracted, but he still remained believing.

He persuaded his friend Edward Fitzgerald, the poet, who
lived in those parts, to find out Squire, to see if any remains
could yet be saved, and to find out what manner of man
Squire was. Fitzgerald reported that Squire was “a straight-
forward, choleric, ingenuous fellow—a little mad,” but he liked
him, and thought Carlyle would like him. ‘“ He adraires you,”
added Fitzgerald, “beyond measure,” but on second thoughts
crossed out the “beyond measure.”

So far as internal evidence went the letters seemed to
Carlyle perfectly satisfactory. The nineteenth century phrases
they contained did not make him turn a hair. But the absence
of dates to some of the letters, and the unlikely dates assigned
to others, seemed to demand explanation. Squire answered
Carlyle’s enquiries by saying that the letters in question were
undated, or that he had supplied the dates conjecturally
from his ancestor’s journal, or that “damp and vermin” had
eaten away the dates. “As to the dates of letters, many I
guessed the year of, as they were so eaten away or red with

1For the history of the letters and Squire’s correspondence with Carlyle and
Fitzgerald, see the documents published by Mr. Aldis Wright in the English
Historical Review for April, 1886, p. 311.

2On 2oth January, 1847. 3On 11th February, 1847.

4 Later still; in January 1848, Squire wrote to Carlyle saying, ‘‘ When I sent you
copies I did not expect them ever getting printed, or I had burnt even them,” and
explaining that ‘‘the earnest request of my father, now no more,” was the source of
his objection to their publication,

xliv INTRODUCTION

damp nothing was legible.” But why the vermin dieted
themselves exclusively on the dates he did not explain.

So with perfect confidence Carlyle printed the letters, and
not till more than a year later, in January 1849, did he first
behold Squire in the flesh. Carlyle minutely describes their
interviews, and sketches Squire’s portrait. “A man of round
rosy face, large grey eyes, full of innocence yet of unquiet
vehemence. . . . Something radically honest, even brave and
benevolent, was in the man’s look, nay something blowsy
and almost jolly.” Squire’s manner was odd and flighty,
his utterances were often rather incoherent ; he was certainly
eccentric, and “of the kind called half mad.” This he ac-
counted for, to Carlyle’s perfect satisfaction, by explaining
that when he was a boy he had a fall whereby his skull was
broken “into 37 pieces.”

Carlyle questioned him further, and found his answers
rambling, incoherent, and even inclined to rave. In spite of
all he concludes “‘an impetuous truthfulness does shine thro’
all his crazy vehemences.”

But besides not being sane enough it was clear that Squire
was not clever enough to forge the letters.’ ‘* A most entirely
ignorant man,” says Carlyle. When he was taken to the
London Library he burst into “ignorant babble and wonder-
ment” over the books shown him, and had never heard of
Rushworth, Whitelocke, or any other authorities on the
period.

So that after that interview and a second one, Carlyle,
though heartily sick of the whole subject, still believed in the
authenticity of the letters. When he published the third
edition of his Cromwell, he sent a copy to Squire, who
answered that his heart had throbbed with feelings of delight
on beholding his treasured autograph, that he felt honoured
and proud that he had had the pleasure of seeing and hearing
Carlyle, and signed himself “ your delighted, faithful, and
admiring servant.”

So ended Carlyle’s connection with Squire. The comedy

'Mrs. Carlyle mentions a rumour that Landor wrote the letters “for a joke

against Carlyle.” She concludes that fool though he was, he would hardly indulge
in so bada jest. Mew Letters, i. 241.

INTRODUCTION xlv

was played out. Carlyle had been taken in by an imposture
which did not deceive the dull antiquaries on whom he had
poured such scorn. The hater of shams had seen the impostor ~
face to face and taken him for a true man. Squire’s ignor-
ance was merely assumed, Squire’s craziness only a device for
avoiding inconvenient questions. The 35 unpublished letters
of Cromwell were as fictitious as the 37 pieces of Squire’s skull.
And that eminent humorist, having avenged Dryasdust, emi-
grated to New Zealand, where, some twenty years later, he
closed in peace those “large grey eyes full of innocence.”

Carlyle’s unscientific treatment of documents does not neces-
sarily affect the correctness of his judgment on Cromwell. But
there was one fundamental defect in his equipment which
vitiated his views of Cromwell’s character and of Cromwell’s
relation to his age. Carlyle’s knowledge of previous English
history, and—at that time—of later English history, was
very slight. We have his own word for the fact. “I want,”
he wrote in 1839, “to get acquainted with England—a great
secret to me always hitherto—and I may as well begin here
as elsewhere.” ! Accordingly he read widely upon the period
covered by Cromwell’s life, but it is evident that he read little
upon the period which preceded it or that which followed it.
By this insufficient knowledge his conception of events was
distorted and his understanding of Cromwell’s time necessarily
limited. He pictured English history before Oliver as a long
tract of darkness—a dull and dismal labyrinth of which Dry-
asdust was king. Then comes the short reign of heroisms and
veracities, brief as the lightning in the night, and as swiftly
swallowed up again by the darkness. Oliver dies: England
goes back to shams and to sheltering fallacies in Church and
State, and the genius of England, instead of soaring sunwards
like the eagle, sticks its head in a bush like the ostrich,
“intent on gross terrene provender.”

One must not take Carlyle’s rhetorical figures too literally,
but it is clear from his whole treatment of the subject that he
regarded the Puritan Revolution as an isolated phenomenon,
and did not fully appreciate its connection with the rest of
English history. Puritanism was the product of the division

1Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i, 153.

xlvi INTRODUCTION

of opinion which began with the Reformation—a religious
movement which circumstances developed into a political
revolution. ‘True to his principles as to the place of great
men in history, Carlyle incarnates the whole movement in
one man, and makes it die with him. “Oliver is gone, and
with him English Puritanism,” says Carlyle, but as a matter of
fact the downfall of the Puritan government did not put an
end to the Puritan movement. It continued to exist and to
exert a profound influence on the political, social, and in-
tellectual growth of England: its results are with us still.
A great movement lives, not in any single life, but in the
ideas it brings into the world, and leaves growing in the
minds of men.

Carlyle’s prejudices as well as his theories warped his judg-
ment. He approached the complex problems of seventeenth
century politics as if they were a series of simple moral
questions, and as if the great struggle between Puritans and
Royalists had been a conflict in which God was on one side
and the Devil on the other. ‘To him the essential object for
which the Puritans contended was “to see God’s own law
made good in the world,” and he assumed that Vane’s and
Cromwell’s interpretation of that law was right, and that of
Laud and Falkland wrong. Though he saw the importance
of the religious factor in the Civil War more clearly than any
previous historian had done, his treatment of the issue was
narrow and one-sided. At bottom he was always too much
the Scotch Calvinist to be impartial.

Religion, however, was only one factor in the Great Re-
bellion. It was a struggle for self-government as well as
for religious freedom. Carlyle had little sympathy with the
demand for self-government, and hence he was unjust not
only to the Royalists but also to the Republicans. In his
account of the Protectorate the position and the ideals of the
parliamentary opposition are never fairly stated. He argues
that the Protector’s government was a good one, the Protector
a divinely inspired hero, and the refusal of the Republicans
to accept them mere pedantry and blindness to facts.

If we want a fair statement of the position of Cromwell’s
opponents we must go toa more sober and a more learned

INTRODUCTION xl vii

historian. “It was no merely theoretical constitutional
difference,” says Dr. Gardiner; “Oliver was good, and his
government was good, but he owed his position to military
force. If military force was to settle affairs of government
rightly to-day, it might settle them wrongly to-morrow.
England would for ever be at the mercy of those who: held the
sword. Happily there was present to Englishmen the instinct
or consciousness—call it what you will—that it was better
for a nation to blunder on, making mistakes as it goes, than
to have the most excellent arrangements forced upon it by
external violence.”

Carlyle shut his eyes to the principles which underlay the
conflict between Cromwell and his parliaments, and regarded
the whole struggle simply as a fight between a hero and a
talking apparatus. According to Mr. Froude the lesson
which Carlyle drew from his study of Cromwell’s times was
“a, general inference of the incapacity of a popular assembly
to guide successfully and permanently the destinies of this or
any other country.” It would be truer to say that he began
his Cromwellian researches with this belief in his mind, and
that it moulded all the conclusions he drew from the facts.
His eyes might be on the pages of Rushworth or Whitelocke,
but his heart was always in the nineteenth century, with “ my
own poor generation,” as he called it. He had no scientific
interest in the past, no interest in the seventeenth century
for its own sake. “Thus,” said he, “do the two centuries
_ stand related to me—the seventeenth worthless except pre-
cisely so far as it can be made the nineteenth.”! Therefore
he looked at the seventeenth century through the spectacles
of the nineteenth, and brought to his study of it preconcep-
tions which warped his view of men and things.

Read Chartism or Past and Present, and they will explain
Carlyle’s Cromwell. When their writer looked around him
at the England of 1843 he could see nothing but suffering
and wrong. Parliamentary Reform had brought no remedy
for the diseases of society, and party leaders seemed incapable
of devising any. The time was out of joint, and it appeared
to him that nothing but a hero could set it right. When

'Norton, Correspondence of Carlyle and Emerson, ii. 10.
VOL. 1.—d

xviii INTRODUCTION

Carlyle was making his hasty survey of the battle-field of
Worcester he met a labouring man, and talked to him about
the battle. The labourer said he “ had heard of such a thing,”
and that he wished to God “we had another Oliver, sir;
times is dreadful bad.” Carlyle put him down in his notes
as “a shrewd, well-conditioned fellow,” and gave him a
shilling.!_ The shilling was well deserved, for in a few words
the poor labourer had summed up the lesson which Carlyle’s
three volumes were meant to teach the world. Carlyle had
said in his haste that parliamentary institutions were a failure,
and he naturally discovered that the facts of Cromwell’s career
roved his conclusion. Like too many other historians he
boind in the past just what he went to the past to find.

To the end of his life Carlyle never ceased to reiterate the
same doctrine. Mr. Espinasse, who helped him to prepare
the second edition of the Letters and Speeches, describes what
he used to see and hear when he visited the little house in
Cheyne Row. “Carlyle,” he tells us, “ prized his success, no
doubt for its own sake, but also because he attached great
importance to his countrymen’s adoption of his estimate of
Cromwell. Once more his conversation, or rather his mono-
logues, turned much on Cromwell, who for a long time
coloured his thoughts and his waking dreams. I can see him
now in an old brown dressing-gown, seated on a footstool on
the hearth-rug close to the fire-place, in the little parlour,
sending most deftly up the chimney whiffs from a long clay
pipe. . . . I can hear him between the whiffs, which served as
commas and colons (there was never a full stop), pouring forth,
in the strongest possible of Scotch accents, an oral Latter- |
Day Pamphlet, contrasting Cromwell and the Puritans with
contemporary English politicians and the multitudes whom
they were leading by the nose to the abyss. I see Mrs.
Carlyle, with head bent and one hand covering her face,
listening in silence. She had heard it all so often before,
ete lady, and knew how little would come of it. I can hear »

er, when Carlyle’s denunciation became terribly fierce, make
the considerate appeal, ‘Don’t be angry with Mr. Espinasse,

1 Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, i. 314.

INTRODUCTION xlix
he is not to blame—’ or ‘ My dear, your tea is getting quite
cold, that is the way with reformers.’ ”

For one moment Carlyle thought he had found in Sir
Robert Peel the strong man whom the distracted times re-
quired. The Repeal of the Corn Laws seemed to prove it.
“* Whatever,” said he, “ were the spoken unveracities of Parlia-
ment—and they are many on all hands, lamentable to gods
and men—here has a great veracity been done in Parliament,
considerably our greatest for many years past; a strenuous,
courageous, and needful thing.” Accordingly when the
second edition of the Letters appeared a copy was sent to
Peel, with a letter saying this and much more. “The book,”
he told him, “should you ever find leisure to read and master
it, may perhaps have interest for you—may perhaps—who
knows?—have admonition, exhortation, in various ways
instruction and encouragement for yet other labours which
England, in a voiceless but most impressive manner, still
expects and demands of you. The authentic words and
actings of the noblest governor England ever had may well
have interest for all governors of England; may well be, as
all Scripture is, as all genuine words and actings are, ‘ profit-
able ’—profitable for reproof, for correction, and for edifying
and strengthening withal.”?

Whether English prime ministers accepted the practical
conclusions which Carlyle drew from Oliver’s career or not,
he was right in thinking that they might learn something
from a study of Oliver’s character. But Peel died out of
office, and too soon to realize the hopes which he had aroused ;
his successors showed no trace of any Cromwellian inspiration,
and Carlyle relapsed into complete pessimism.

Froude’s description of Carlyle in his later years forms a
companion picture to that drawn by Mr. Espinasse.

“ He spoke much on politics and the character of public
men. From the British Parliament he was firmly persuaded
that no good was to be looked for. A democratic Parlia-
ment, from the nature of it, would place persons at the head
of affairs increasingly unfit to deal with them. Bad would

1 Espinasse, Literary Recollections, p. 82.
2 Froude, Carlyle’s Life in London, i. 376.

] INTRODUCTION

be followed by worse, and worse by worst, till the very fools
would see that the system must end. Lord Wolseley, then
Sir Garnet, went with me once to call in Cheyne Row,
Carlyle having expressed a wish to see him. He was much
struck with Sir Garnet, and talked freely with him on many
subjects. He described the House of Commons as ‘six
hundred talking asses, set to make laws and to administer the
concerns of the greatest empire the world had ever seen,’
with other uncomplimentary phrases. When he rose to go,
he said, ‘ Well, sir, I am glad to have made your acquaint-
ance, and I wish you well. There is one duty which I hope
may be laid upon you before you leave this world—to lock the
door of yonder place, and turn them all about their business.’ ” 1

This fanatical hatred of parliamentary assemblies colours
and distorts all Carlyle’s account of the Protectorate. It led
him—as we have seen—to misrepresent the attitude of Crom-
well’s parliaments towards Cromwell, and it led him to mis-
represent Cromwell’s attitude towards his parliaments. It
made Carlyle—if one may use the phrase—more Cromwellian
than Cromwell himself. For the Protector did not share his
biographer’s contempt for representative government. But
for their general the army would have expelled the Long
Parliament at least a year or two before they did. It was
only after long reluctance, and only when all his efforts to
bring about a compromise had failed, that Cromwell forcibly
put astop to its sittings. He did not do the act with a light
heart, but looked upon it as a hard necessity.

And when Cromwell had put the key of the House in his
pocket, and had sent the members about their business, he did
not decree (as Carlyle would have done) that henceforth there
should be no more talking-shops in England. On the con-
trary, the first thing he did was to call another, in order “ to
divest the sword of all power in the civil administration,”
and when that failed he called a second and a third. For
Cromwell’s political ideal was not a government without |
parliaments, but a government which worked with and
through parliaments. Without the consent of the people of
England in Parliament assembled he knew that he could

1Froude, Carlyle's Life in London, ii. 446.

INTRODUCTION li

found nothing permanent, that he could not secure for
posterity the civil and religious liberties for which so man
men had died ; that he could not bridge over the gulf which
the revolution had made between the past and the present.
If Parliament would co-operate with him a lasting settlement
of the nation might be effected, and he could lay down his
dictatorship. “If,” said he, “the wisdom of this parliament
should have found a way to settle the interests of this nation,
upon the foundations of justice, and truth, and liberty to the
people of God and concernments of men as Englishmen—I
would have lain at their feet, or at anybody else’s feet, that
things might have run in such a current.” !

Cromwell knew more than his biographer about governing
men, and his own view of his position is a refutation of
Carlyle’s theory. The supremely able man is in power; he
has fifty thousand never-beaten swordsmen to keep him there ;
yet he is unconscious that he possesses any divine right to
rule, and eager to share his authority with those he governs ;
he knows that he can enforce their obedience, but wears him-
self out in the endeavour to obtain their co-operation ; and
because he cannot obtain that co-operation he feels that he
is a failure, and that his work is unfinished.

When Carlyle has once taught us that Cromwell was an
honest man, the historical value of the book lies not in
Carlyle’s representation of Cromwell, but in Cromwell’s revela-
tion of himself in its pages. There are some books which
show us Cromwell as he appeared to contemporary observers,
and many which show us Cromwell as he appears to posthu-
mous idolaters or iconoclasts, but this is the only one which
shows us Cromwell as he appeared to himself. By limiting
himself to the collection of Cromwell’s utterances Carlyle
produced a more valuable book than he would have done if
he had completed the history of Cromwell’s times which he
cast into the flames. We know what that history would have
been like from the fragment which has been published? It
would have been a series of portraits and incidents, vigor-
ously drawn, but loosely strung together, each individually
full of life and colour, and sometimes touched with poetic

1 Speech xii. 2 Historical Sketches,

hi INTRODUCTION

imagination or glowing with prophetic fervour, but a narrative
without order and without proportion. All Carlyle’s finest
qualities are in the book he did give us, and his history would
neither have told us how the things really happened, nor
taught us to understand the causes of the things. True
history should do both.

So also if Carlyle had given us a biography of Cromwell
on the same scale as his biography of Frederick, the world
might not have been the gainer by the exchange. We should
have had a full-length portrait of Cromwell instead of a half-
length, and the background and foreground would have been
more carefully finished, but it would not have been a better
likeness. It would have possessed the same merits and the
same defects as the portrait of Cromwell given in the Letters
and Speeches.

As it is Carlyle himself has provided the means for testing
and correcting his estimate of Cromwell. A collection of all
the recorded utterances of a great man has qualities which
the most skilful biography with its abstracts and extracts of
those utterances never can possess. Such a collection, if it is
carefully read, makes a sharper and a deeper impression on
the mind than any life written by a later hand. Nothing
intervenes between the reader and the records—as he reads,
by degrees the facts group themselves together, the breath of
life breathes upon the dry bones, and the figure of the man
takes shape and rises before him.

Tennyson has described the feeling which the reading of
the letters of his dead friend produced upon himself :—

So word by word, and line by line,
The dead man touched me from the past,
And all at once it seemed at last

The living soul was flashed on mine.

This is the process which takes place if we study the Letters

and Speeches closely enough, and the effect which that study .
produces. It was for this reason that Carlyle brought them

together, and in his eyes the text was of more value than his

own commentary upon it.

C. H. FIRTH.

EDITOR’S NOTE, 1904

L is perhaps necessary to give a short explanation of the
method pursued in the present edition of Carlyle’s
Cromwell. As regards the text of the letters, every effort
has been made to see the originals, when they exist, in order
to correct any errors, either of transcription or printing,
which have crept into the copies used by Carlyle. The
Duke of Portland very courteously sent up to the Public
Record Office, for this purpose, those volumes of his great
series of manuscripts which contain Cromwell documents ;
and Mrs. Alfred Morrison and Sir Richard Tangye kindly
allowed me access to their collections. Mrs. Morrison pos-
sesses (amongst others) the fine holograph letters which
Carlyle calls the “‘ Pusey seventeen,” and which he knew only
as they are printed in Harris’s Life of Cromwell.

The Cromwell letters printed in the Thurloe State Papers
are mostly taken from the original drafts (or copies made at
the time) in Thurloe’s hand; these drafts being preserved
amongst the Thurloe MSS. at the Bodleian Library, although,
curiously enough, Carlyle does not seem to have been aware
of the fact. “The originals are gone with Birch,” he wrote
of Letters CCIV.-CCVL., “ who has not even told us in whose
“handwriting they were ... the idle ineffectual Editor.”
The Thurloe letters have now been collated with these
originals and some few mistakes found and corrected, but as
a rule Birch’s transcripts are admirably correct. Not content
with using the immense amount of material in his hands, he,
or he and his publisher, Mr. Gyles, appealed to the owners
of manuscripts for any letters which would make the collec-
tion more complete. Some interesting points in relation to
the Cromwell letters are to be found in a volume of Birch’s
papers at the British Museum.

(liii)

liv EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904

In a letter written in 1740, one Mr. Theophilus Rowe, of
Hampstead, offered for Birch’s use the copy of a letter from
Oliver Cromwell to Mazarin (Letter CCXVI.), which copy
was endorsed by his grandfather, Mr. William Rowe, as “ his
Highness’ letter.” This William Rowe was the well-known
scout-master to the Parliament army, afterwards (conjointly
with Rushworth), registrar of the Court of Admiralty; a
man of considerable influence “ because of his near relation
to Thurloe” (Egmont MSS.). Amongst his papers were also
the reports of Cromwell’s speeches of May 8 [but dated 7] and
May 25, 1657, which are printed in Thurloe. These texts,
therefore, as well as the Mazarin letter, are contemporary
and above suspicion. In the same volume is a letter from
Rawlinson, the antiquary, stating that he had “a remark-
able canting letter of Oliver Cromwell’s to Lord Wharton”
(evidently Letter LX VIII.) which Birch might copy if he
thought it worth including—as he naturally did.

Another source of Cromwell documents is the collection
known as the Pell MSS. at the British Museum. All the
letters derived from this collection have also been collated
with the originals, but the text printed in Vaughan’s Pro-
tectorate (from which Carlyle copied them) has very few
errors.

There is no need to defend Birch from Carlyle’s charges of
idleness and inefficiency ; his colossal work speaks for itself.
But there is one patient and painstaking worker of a bygone
day on whose behalf fairness demands a word. Carlyle
spares no opportunity of showing his contempt for the work
of Mark Noble. He laughs at the ‘imbecility” of this
careful investigator of marriage-contracts, parish registers,
genealogies and pedigrees (see vol. 1., p. 13); but when we
examine the points which give rise to this scorn, we by no
means find it to be justified. For instance, in relation to
the birth of Richard Cromwell’s first child, Carlyle writes,
*“‘Richard’s first child, according to Noble’s registers, was
“not born till 3d Nov. 1652. . . . Noble’s registers, as we
“shall soon see, are very defective” (ii. 52 n). And again—
“ Dorothy Cromwell . . . has a ‘little brat’ ;—but the poor
“little thing must have died soon: in Noble’s inexact lists
“there is no trace of its ever having lived ” (ii. 69). Noble’s

EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904 lv

lists are not inexact. He gives the birth of Richard’s first
daughter as March 26, 1650, but, following a very usual plan,
he puts the sons first, and our “impatient historian” has not
troubled to turn the leaf. The “little brat” in question, so
far from dying young, lived to be over eighty. Carlyle makes
the same mistake a year later. In a letter written on June
28, 1651 (Letter CLXXVIII., put by Carlyle, in error, to
July) Cromwell refers to the expected birth of another child.
“Noble’s lists are very defective!” Carlyle repeats; “These
“Letters, too, were before the poor man’s eyes.” But again,
it is merely that Carlyle has failed to turn the leaf.

To take a third case: he speaks of the list of estates
which Cromwell died possessed of ;—‘ which Schedule poor
“Noble has found somewhere—not where he says he did, ‘in
“Commons Journals, 14 May, 1659’” (41. 495). But Noble
does not say so. He prints the schedule, dated as above, and
states, rightly, that it is given in the Journals. It was not,
however, read in the House until the 25th, and so appears
under this date. If Carlyle had looked in the index, or even
turned over a page or two, he would have found it. Now,
these points all give an impression of Noble’s “extreme im-
becility,” and yet in each case he is right, and Carlyle is
wrong. ‘There are inaccuracies in dates in Noble’s book, but
these, apparently, are mostly printers’-errors, such as abound in
many books of his day.

Taking Carlyle’s edition as a whole, the mistakes in the letters
are very numerous, but not, as a rule, important. Some-
times, however, they affect the sense, and in such cases
Carlyle unhesitatingly inserted words of his own, without
reflecting that, as Cromwell was a very accurate writer, he
would not be likely to send out letters which needed such
“embellishments” to explain them.

See, for instance, Letter XCIII., written to Mr. Mayor on
the subject of Richard Cromwell’s marriage, and entirely in
Cromwell’s own hand. Into this short letter Carlyle in-
serted nineteen words, most of which were quite unnecessary,
and one or two misleading. Moreover, where Cromwell
speaks of the contingency of Mayor himself having a son,
Carlyle (who imagined him to be speaking of Richard) added
a note, “Grandson, i.e. In the next sentence, die means

lvi EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904

“more properly dive.” It is hardly necessary to say that, in
an important business letter, Cromwell did not say “son”
when he meant “ grandson,” or “die” when he meant “live”.

To give another instance ;—in Letter XLIII., to Fairfax,
“head-quarters” was substituted for “new quarters” and
“ Adjutant Allen” for “Mr. Allen”. There are two or three
other small mistakes, and at the end of the letter, some
words having been torn away with the seal, Carlyle supplied
them conjecturally, but without any intimation of this fact.
Also, he was rather fond of doing what he himself, in speak-
ing of one of Cromwell’s reporters, calls “paring down the
warts”; improving the composition a little by avoiding rep-
etition of words, or the use of ambiguous pronouns. But
as students must prefer to have Cromwell’s letters as Crom-
well himself wrote them, they are now given verbatim,
Carlyle’s “improvements” being added in the footnotes.

In some few cases, the names of persons to whom the
letters were written—not known to, or else mistaken by,
Carlyle—have been found. Letter X., hitherto without ad-
dress, was written to Colonel Hobart; Letter XX XII. was
not to Fairfax but to Lenthall; Letter CCV. was certainly
to Luke Stokes, Governor of Nevis, not to Searle, Governor
of Barbados; Letter CLX XXVIII, which Carlyle addressed
to a hypothetical Mr. Parker, “ Agent for the Company of
Adventurers, etc.,” was evidently written to Major Packer;
and Appendix No. 28 (5) was to Sir John Walsh, not to Sir
John Wilde.

In the Supplement will be found 145 letters,! not con-
tained in Carlyle’s collection. Many of these are of slight
interest and no importance, and are only included on Carlyle’s
own principle that “all clearly authentic Letters of Cromwell
“. .. in this book, by the title of it, are naturally to be
“looked for.” These unimportant letters are merely calen-
dared, not printed in full, and in certain cases, such as letters
of recommendation to the Heads of the Universities or to
the Council in Ireland, specimens only are given. Of the ad-
ditional letters, 35 are from the MSS. at the Public Record
Office, London; 11 from the Public Record Office, Dublin;

1 Besides speeches and other documents.

; Letters on the same subject are some-
times grouped together,

EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904 lvii

16 from MSS. at the British Museum; 17 from MSS. at
Oxford (including those from the Clarke collection at
Worcester College); 5 from Corporation archives; 38 from
private collections (most of this last group having been
brought to the knowledge of students by the Reports of the
Hist. MSS. Commissioners) ; and 1 from the French archives.
All these are either the originals, or contemporary copies
(usually official entries); 8 are from the old newspapers of the
period and 14 from more modern printed sources.

Most of these letters have appeared in print in one or
another historical collection or magazine, but they are now
for the first time gathered together, and in nearly all cases
have been copied direct from the originals.

The most important of the additional letters are those to
Robert Hammond (Supplement, Nos. 26, 35, 65) which were
found by Dr. Gardiner amongst the Marquis of Lothian’s MSS.
at Newbattle, and have been printed by Mr. Firth in the
Clarke Papers. 'These Carlyle would have delighted in, with
their affectionate interest in the young officer, and their quaint
conceits of Brother Heron, Brother Fountain and Sir Roger.
He would have been pleased also with the letter in favour of
Dr. Welles (No. 9), hanging as a pendant to his own Letter I.
The first letter in the Supplement (printed by the kind per-
mission of Lady Newdigate-Newdegate) has a double interest,
first as being a very early one, the earliest we have except the
note to Downing (Appendix I.), and secondly, as shewing
that already Cromwell had that interest in sport which, as Mr.
Firth has shown, characterized him throughout his later life.
The letter concerning Richard’s marriage treaty (No. 43),
completes the series on that subject, and contains a touch-
ing reference to the illness of Cromwell’s aged mother. A
hitherto unpublished letter to Mazarin (No. 79 a), evidently
written in the summer of 1653, has been communicated by
M. Jean Lemoine, Bibliothécaire at the Paris Ministere de
la Guerre, who has also been extremely kind in giving
information concerning the other letters to Mazarin, obtained
from the French archives and printed by Carlyle.

There are several letters to Vice-Admiral or “ General”
Penn (Supplement, Nos. 58 (2), 76, 80, 94-97), partly in
relation to naval affairs, and partly on behalf of Cromwell’s

viii EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904

young kinsmen, Slingsby, Stewart and Whitstone. An im-
portant letter to the Commanders in the West Indies (No.
119), printed in Thurloe, was omitted by Carlyle. He pro-
bably had it copied with the rest, and mislaid it in some
“shuffling of his paper-masses.” Another long and inter-
esting letter is that to Major Wilkes (No. 98), which was
found by Mr. Firth amongst the Clarke Papers. ‘There
are three new letters from the Protector to his son Henry
(Nos. 124, 134, 145) gathered respectively from the Public
Record Office, the British Museum and the Irish Record
Office. No. 134, which has only lately been acquired by
the British Museum, is especially interesting, and is a fine
holograph.

Many of the additional letters throw fresh light on
points in Cromwell’s military movements in the Eastern
Association, Wales, Yorkshire (six letters to Col. Charles
Fairfax, from the originals in Sir Richard Tangye’s collec-
tion), Scotland and Ireland; and a very large number
show a kindly interest in the affairs of his fellow-men ; letters
on behalf of a former school-fellow, an old Ironside, poor
clerks, widows and orphans, royalists protected by Articles of
War, and residents in Ireland in danger of transplantation.
Of this last group there are so many amongst the State Papers
at Dublin, that Mr. Herbert Wood, of the Irish Public
Record Office, has been good enough to make a selection for
me, it being impossible and unnecessary to include them all.
The most interesting is one (No. 128) on behalf of the poet
Spenser’s grandson. See also those in relation to Lord
Claneboye, Lord Coursey and Sir John Temple (Nos. 83, 103,
105) and one concerning the Irish troops sent to Spain (No,
132).

It has been found rather difficult to draw the line between
letters of Cromwell and letters of his Council, submitted to
and signed by him, a class which Carlyle pretty rigorously
excluded (as he did also the State letters in Latin, written
by Milton, with one exception. See iii. 199). The tempta-
tion was great to include the letter to Fleetwood in relation
to the election of Parliament men in Ireland, printed by Mr.
Firth in his edition of Ludlow’s Memoirs (i. 387), and a
letter to Scotland concerning the dissensions amongst the —

EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904 lix

godly people there (S. P. Dom. I. 78, p. 557); but it was
thought better not to admit them. Certain letters purport-
ing to be written by Cromwell to his daughter, Mrs. Clayton,
which appeared in Notes and Queries (Feb. 20, 1869) and
were printed by Mr. Waylen in the first edition of his House
of Cromwell, are also excluded, the internal evidence being
strongly against their authenticity.

The treatment of the Letters has been easy; that of the
Speeches very difficult. For here we are upon different
ground: we have not what Cromwell said, but only what he
is reported to have said, sometimes taken down in shorthand
(a fruitful source of small errors) and often under disadvan-
tages of time and place. In all probability, therefore, the
text is at times corrupt, and, here and there, it is evidently
so. Carlyle studied the speeches with sympathetic care, and
reached very definite conclusions as to their meaning, and
these volumes being only a new edition of Carlyle’s Crom-
well, the speeches have been for the most part left as he
printed them. That is to say, where he has altered the
wording in order to give what he believed to be the true sense,
his version stands in the text; also all his ‘* embellishments ”
(as Dr. Gardiner called the interpolations), his ejaculations,
lines of pause, and italics of emphasis.

But a few small changes have been made. First, there
seemed nothing gained by retaining the multitude of capital
letters with which Carlyle bestrewed his pages, as they answer
no good end and are troublesome to the eye. Secondly, Car-
lyle of set purpose modernized the phraseology ; but (at the
present day, at any rate, when Seventeenth Century documents
have been so widely studied), the result of this is not greater
clearness, but a sense of unreality and anachronism. These
words have therefore been put back to their true form, and
when small, unimportant alterations have a consensus of old
authorities against them, they are omitted. Thirdly, Carlyle
professed to distinguish words added by himself by putting
them within single inverted commas, but the exceptions to
this rule are very much more numerous than the examples of
it. These insertions are now exactly indicated.

Finally, it must be remembered that in many cases
Carlyle contented himself with using one printed text, with-

ie EDITOR’S NOTE, 1904

out collating it. For instance, for the speeches contained in
the old MS. book at the British Museum (Add. MS. 6125),
he entirely trusted to Mr. Rutt’s version, printed with Burton’s
Diary. Thishas many mistakes, and, misled by them, Carlyle
has sometimes quite missed the point, and had to alter very
much in order to make sense. All the texts have now been
carefully collated, and when it is evident that Carlyle mis-
read or mistook the meaning, the old text is given, Carlyle’s
version being relegated to a footnote. But, as a rule it is
the old version or versions which are given in the footnotes—
given perhaps even to a tiresome extent; but it seemed
desirable that, without going beyond these volumes, students
should be able to see how the various texts render any given
passage.

This is, of course, a compromise, and no compromise can
be altogether satisfactory. On the whole, it appeared to be
the best plan, but no one can be more sensible than myself
that it is open to criticism.

To a certain extent, each one of the speeches has neces-
sarily been treated on its own merits, for of some we have
very good reports and of others very bad ones; in some cases
Carlyle used an excellent text, and in others a very poor one.
For instance, for certain of the speeches on kingship, he relies
on the reprint of Monarchy Asserted, given in Somers’ Tracts.
He sighs and groans over this; declares that the words of
Oliver, left in the pamphlet itself in “a very accidental con-
dition,” have been “growing ever more distracted, as each
“new Imaginary-Editor and unchecked Printer, in succession,
“did his part to them, till now, in Somers’ Tracts, which is
“our latest form of the business, they strike description silent.
“Chaos itself is cosmos in comparison with that pamphlet
“in Somers . . . those Stiett iki engl trampled down for
‘two centuries now by mere bison and hoofed cattle” (iii. 22).
But if Carlyle believed this to be the case, why did he not
work from the pamphlet itself? There are two copies of it
at the British Museum. Asa matter of fact, it is not the case
at all. Scott simply reprinted the old pamphlet, and the only
difference which the “two centuries” have produced is that
there are some careless misprints and that it is even more
badly punctuated than the original, But for two or three

EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904 Ixi

of these speeches, and especially for the important No. XIII.,
there is a better text in the book already referred to (Add.
MS. 6125) at the British Museum.

Although, as before said, errors have evidently crept in,
yet as regards most of the speeches, we may feel pretty con-
fident that we have a very fair report of what Cromwell said ;
for where two or more versions differ so much in detail as to
make it unlikely that they are copied from the same source,
or from each other, and yet agree not only in substance but
in words and phrasing, we may be sure that we are not far
from the true reading. A short footnote at the beginning
of each speech explains what the authorities are.

In one, and only in one speech, I have ventured to discard
most of the embellishments, and to give the speech almost as
it stands in the old pamphlet. This is No. IV., which is dis-
tinctly stated (in a notice in the Clarke Papers) to have
been revised by Oliver himself. Carlyle was, of course, not
aware of this, but he evidently realized the comparative
superiority of the text, for he altered it much less than any
of the others.

Of additional speeches, or abstracts of speeches, in the
Supplement, there are about twenty; far the most im-
portant being those delivered in the various army councils
in 1647. These were discovered by Mr. Firth amongst the
Clarke MSS., and printed by him in the first volume of the
Clarke Papers. It is greatly to be regretted that Carlyle
did not know of them; for they admirably fill up the hiatus
which he so much lamented in Cromwell’s authentic utter-
ances at this date. Six great meetings are fully reported
(Supplement, Nos. 21, 24, 25 (1, 2, 3, 4)) and at some of
these Cromwell spoke several times.

The speech upon his going for Ireland (No. 42, also taken .
from the Clarke Papers) is important and interesting, and
there are several short reports of speehes which are very
useful as being what Carlyle would call “little windows into
his Highness’s mind.”

The Supplement also contains a few other documents—
Declarations, Articles of Surrender, etc.—which are either im-
portant in themselves or helpful in throwing light on passages
in Cromwell’s history.

Ixil EDITOR'S NOTE, 1904

In these volumes the additional notes (which are placed
within square brackets) are confined, as much as possible, to
matters of fact. Any attempt to challenge Carlyle’s views
and opinions in relation to Church or Parliament would have
been foreign to the scope of the edition. Where, here and
there, some comment has seemed needful (as for instance, on
the result of Cromwell’s policy in Ireland), no apology will be
required for giving the words of those who have been the
foremost workers in the field rather than my own.

Some new facts in relation to the Cromwell family have
been gleaned from the Barrington MSS. at the British
Museum ; and, for the Protectorate, much use has been made
of the dispatches of Bordeaux, the French ambassador in
England, gathered from the admirable series of French
transcripts at the Public Record Office. These dispatches
are very valuable, for Bordeaux gained his information from
good sources, and we have the testimony of Lockhart (Crom-
well’s ambassador to France) that his accounts of English
affairs were accurate and fair.

In conclusion, I have to express my very sincere gratitude
to those who have kindly given me help and information.
My obligations to the Duke of Portland, Mrs. Alfred
Morrison, Sir Richard Tangye, Lady Newdigate-Newdegate,
M. Jean Lemoine and Mr. Herbert Wood have been already
mentioned. Thanks are also due to Dr. Stubbs, Dean of
Ely ; Capt. Charles Lindsay; Mr. Pelham R. Papillon; Rev.
C. T. Eland, vicar of Felstead; Rev. W. J. Henderson,
Principal of the Baptist College, Bristol; Mr. Richard Wel-
ford, of Newcastle-on-Tyne ; Dr. T. K. Abbott, librarian of
Trinity College, Dublin; and Mr. R. A. Roberts, of the Public
Record Office.

My indebtedness to Mr. Firth is beyond words.

And finally it is almost needless to say how great has been
the help which I have derived from the writings of Dr. S. R.
Gardiner, whose name must ever be associated with Cromwell
literature, and whose exhaustive researches have lightened
the labours of all students of the Cromwell period.

Ss. C. LOMAS,

OLIVER CROMWELL’S
LETTERS AND SPEECHES

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I

ANTI-DRYASDUST

Wuar and how great are the interests which connect themselves
with the hope that England may yet attain to some practical
belief and understanding of its History during the Seventeenth
Century, need not be insisted on at present; such hope being
still very distant, very uncertain. We have wandered far away
from the ideas which guided us in that Century, and indeed
which had guided us in all preceding Centuries, but of which
that Century was the ultimate manifestation: we have wandered
very far; and must endeavour to return, and connect ourselves
therewith again! It is with other feelings than those of poor
peddling Dilettantism, other aims than the writing of successful
or unsuccessful Publications, that an earnest man occupies himself
in those dreary provinces of the dead and buried. The last
glimpse of the Godlike vanishing from this England ; conviction
and veracity giving place to hollow cant and formulism,—antique
‘Reign of God,’ which all true men in their several dialects and
modes have always striven for, giving place to modern Reign of
the No-God, whom men name Devil : this, in its multitudinous
meanings and results, is a sight to create reflections in the earnest
man! One wishes there were a History of English Puritanism,
the last of all our Heroisms ; but sees small prospect of such a
thing at present.
VoL. 1.—1

2 INTRODUCTION

‘ Few nobler Heroisms,’ says a well-known Writer long occupied
on this subject, ‘at bottom perhaps no nobler Heroism ever
‘transacted itself on this Earth; and it lies as good as lost to
‘us; overwhelmed under such an avalanche of Human Stupidities
‘as no Heroism before ever did. Intrinsically and extrinsically
‘it may be considered inaccessible to these generations. Intrinsic-
‘ally, the spiritual purport of it has become inconceivable, incred-
‘ible to the modern mind. LExtrinsically, the documents and
‘records of it, scattered waste as a shoreless chaos, are not legible.
‘They lie there, printed, written, to the extent of tons and square
‘miles, as shot-rubbish ; unedited, unsorted, not so much as
‘indexed ; full of every conceivable confusion ;—yielding light to
‘very few; yielding darkness, in several sorts, to very many.
‘Dull Pedantry, conceited idle Dilettantism,—prurient Stupidity
‘in what shape soever,—is darkness and not light! There are
‘from Thirty to Fifty Thousand unread Pamphlets of the Civil
‘War in the British Museum alone: huge piles of mouldering
‘wreck, wherein, at the rate of perhaps one pennyweight per
‘ton, lie things memorable. They lie preserved there, waiting
‘happier days; under present conditions they cannot, except for
‘idle purposes, for dilettante excerpts and such like, be got
‘examined. The Rushworths, Whitlockes, Nalsons, Thurloes ;
‘enormous folios, these and many others have been printed, and
‘some of them again printed, but never yet edited,—edited as
‘you edit wagonloads of broken bricks and dry mortar, simply by
‘tumbling up the wagon! Not one of those monstrous old
‘volumes has so much as an available Index. It is the general

rule of editing on this matter. If your editor correct the press,
‘jt is an honourable distinction to him.

‘Those dreary old records, they were compiled at first by
‘Human Insight, in part ; and in great part, by Human Stupidity
‘withal ;—but then it was by Stupidity in a laudable diligent
‘state, and doing its best; which was something :—and, alas,
‘they have been successively elaborated by Human Stupidity in
‘the idle state, falling idler and idler, and only pretending to be
‘diligent ; whereby now, for us, in these late days, they have
‘grown very dim indeed! To Dryasdust Printing-Societies, and
‘such like, they afford a sorrowful kind of pabulum ; but for all
‘serious purposes, they are as if non-extant ; might as well, if
‘matters are to rest as they are, not have been written or printed
‘at all. The sound of them is not a voice, conveying knowledge
‘or memorial of any earthly or heavenly thing ; it is a wide-spread

ANTI-DRYASDUST 3

‘inarticulate slumberous mumblement, issuing as if from the lake
‘of Eternal Sleep. Craving for oblivion, for abolition and honest
‘silence, as a blessing in comparison !—

‘This then,’ continues our impatient friend, ‘is the Elysium
‘we English have provided for our Heroes! The Rushworthian
‘Elysium. Dreariest continent of shot-rubbish the eye ever saw.
‘Confusion piled on confusion to your utmost horizon’s edge:
‘obscure, in lurid twilight as of the shadow of Death; trackless,
‘without index, without finger-post, or mark of any human fore-
“goer ;—where your human footstep, if you are still human, echoes
‘bodeful through the gaunt solitude, peopled only by somnambu-
‘lant Pedants, Dilettants, and doleful creatures, by Phantasms,
‘errors, inconceivabilities, by Nightmares, pasteboard Norroys,
‘ griffins, wiverns, and chimeras dire! There, all vanquished, over-
‘whelmed under such waste lumber-mountains, the wreck and dead
‘ashes of some six unbelieving generations, does the Age of Crom-
‘well and his Puritans lie hidden from us. This is what we, for
‘our share, have been able to accomplish towards keeping our
‘ Heroic Ones in memory. By way of sacred poet they have found
‘voluminous Dryasdust, and his Collections and Philosophical
‘ Histories.

‘To Dryasdust, who wishes merely to compile torpedo Histo-
‘ries of the philosophical or other sorts, and gain immortal laurels
‘for himself by writing about it and about it, all this is sport ;
‘but to us who struggle piously, passionately, to behold, if but in
‘glimpses, the faces of our vanished Fathers, it is death !—O Dry-
‘asdust, my voluminous friend, had Human Stupidity continued
‘in the diligent state, think you it had ever come to this? Surely
‘at least you might have made an Index for these huge books!
‘Even your genius, had you been faithful, was adequate to that.
‘Those thirty thousand or fifty thousand old Newspapers and
‘ Pamphlets of the King’s Library, it is you, my voluminous friend,
‘that should have sifted them, many long years ago. Instead of
‘droning out these melancholy scepticisms, constitutional philo-
‘sophies, torpedo narratives, you should have sifted those old
‘stacks of pamphlet matter for us, and have had the metal grains
‘lying here accessible, and the dross-heaps lying there avoidable ;
‘you had done the human memory a service thereby; some human
‘remembrance of this matter had been more possible !’

Certainly this description does not want for emphasis: but all
ingenuous inquirers into the Past will say there is too much truth
in it. Nay, in addition to the sad state of our Historical Books,

4 INTRODUCTION

and what indeed is fundamentally the cause and origin of that,
our common spiritual notions, if any notion of ours may still de-
serve to be called spiritual, are fatal to a right understanding of
that Seventeenth Century. The Christian Doctrines, which then
dwelt alive in every heart, have now in a manner died out of all
hearts,—very mournful to behold; and are not the guidance of
this world any more. Nay, worse still, the Cant of them does yet
dwell alive with us, little doubting that it is Cant ;—in which fatal
intermediate state the Eternal Sacredness of this Universe itself,
of this Human Life itself, has fallen dark to the most of us, and
we think that too a Cant anda Creed. Thus the old names suggest
new things to us,—not august and divine, but hypocritical, piti-
able, detestable. The old names and similitudes of belief still
circulate from tongue to tongue, though now in such a ghastly
condition: not as commandments of the Living God, which we
must do, or perish eternally ; alas, no, as something very different
from that! Here properly lies the grand unintelligibility of the
Seventeenth Century for us. From this source has proceeded our
maltreatment of it, our miseditings, miswritings, and all the other
‘avalanche of Human Stupidity,’ wherewith, as our impatient
friend complains, we have allowed it to be overwhelmed. We
have allowed some other things to be overwhelmed! Would to
Heaven that were the worst fruit we had gathered from our
Unbelief and our Cant of Belief!—Our impatient friend con-
tinues :

‘I have known Nations altogether destitute of printers-types
‘and learned appliances, with nothing better than old songs, monu-
‘mental stoneheaps and Quipothrums to keep record by, who
‘had truer memory of their memorable things than this! Truer
‘memory, I say: for at least the voice of their Past Heroisms,
‘if indistinct, and all awry as to dates and statistics, was still
‘melodious to those Nations. The body of it might be dead
‘enough; but the soul of it, partly harmonised, put in real accord-
‘ance with the “ Eternal Melodies,” was alive to all hearts, and
‘could not die. The memory of their ancient Brave Ones did not
‘rise like a hideous huge leaden vapour, an amorphous emana-
‘tion of Chaos, like a petrifying Medusa Spectre, on those poor
‘Nations: no, but like a Heaven’s Apparition, which it was, it
‘still stood radiant beneficent before all hearts, calling all hearts
‘to emulate it, and the recognition of it was a Psalm and Song.
‘These things will require to be practically meditated by and
‘by. Is human Writing, then, the art of burying Heroisms, and

ANTLDRYASDUST 5

‘highest Facts, in Chaos; so that no man shall henceforth con-
‘template them without horror and aversion, and danger of
‘locked-jaw? What does Dryasdust consider that he was born
‘for ; that paper and ink were made for ?

‘It is very notable, and leads to endless reflections, how the
‘Greeks had their living Jad, where we have such a deadly inde-
‘scribable Crommelliad. The old Pantheon, home of all the gods,
‘has become a Peerage-Book,—with black and white surplice-con-
‘troversies superadded, not unsuitably. The Greeks had their
‘Homers, Hesiods, where we have our Rymers, Rushworths, our
‘Norroys, Garter-Kings, and Bishops Cobweb. Very notable, I
‘say. By the genius, wants and instincts and opportunities of the
‘one People, striving to keep themselves in mind of what was
‘memorable, there had fashioned itself, in the effort of successive
‘centuries, a Homer’s Iliad : by those of the other People, in suc-
‘cessive centuries, a Collins's Peerage improved by Sir Egerton
‘Brydges. By their Pantheons ye shall know them! Have not
‘we English a talent for silence? Our very Speech and Printed-
‘Speech, such a force of torpor dwelling in it, is properly a higher
‘power of Silence. There is no Silence like the Speech you
‘cannot listen to without danger of locked-jaw! Given a divine
‘ Heroism, to smother it well in human Dulness, to touch it with
‘the mace of Death, so that no human soul shall henceforth
‘recognise it for a Heroism, but all souls shall fly from it as
‘from a chaotic Torpor, an Insanity and Horror,—I will back
‘our English genius against the world in such a problem !

‘Truly we have done great things in that sort; down from
‘Norman William all the way, and earlier: and to the English
‘mind at this hour, the past History of England is little other
‘than a dull dismal labyrinth, in which the English mind, if
‘eandid, will confess that it has found of knowable (meaning
‘even conceivable), of loveable, or memorable,—next to nothing.
‘As if we had done no brave thing at all in this Earth ;—as if
‘not Men but Nightmares had written of our History! The
‘English, one can discern withal, have been perhaps as brave a
‘People as their neighbours ; perhaps, for Valour of Action and
‘true hard labour in this Earth, since brave Peoples were first
‘made in it, there has been none braver anywhere or anywhen:
‘—pbut, also, it must be owned, in Stupidity of Speech they have
‘no fellow! What can poor English Heroisms do in such case,
‘but fall torpid into the domain of the Nightmares? | For of a
‘truth, Stupidity is strong, most strong. As the Poet Schiller

6 INTRODUCTION

‘sings: “ Against Stupidity the very gods fight unvictorious.”
‘There is in zt an opulence of murky stagnancy, an inexhausti-
‘bility, a calm infinitude, which will baffle even the gods,—which
‘will say calmly, “ Yes, try all your lightnings here ; see whether
‘my dark belly cannot hold them!”

‘‘Mit der Dummheit kampfen Géotter selbst vergebens.”’

Has our impatient friend forgotten that it is Destiny withal
as well as ‘Stupidity ;’ that such is the case more or less with
Human History always! By very nature it is a labyrinth and
chaos, this that we call Human History; an abatis of trees and
brushwood, a world-wide jungle, at once growing and dying.
Under the green foliage and blossoming fruit-trees of Today,
there lie, rotting slower or faster, the forests of all other Years
and Days. Some have rotted fast, plafits of annual growth, and
are long since quite gone to inorganic mould; others are like
the aloe, growths that last a thousand or three thousand years.
You will find them in all stages of decay and preservation ; down
deep to the beginnings of the History of Man. Think where
our Alphabetic Letters came from, where our Speech itself came
from ; the Cookeries we live by, the Masonries we lodge under!
You will find fibrous roots of this day’s Occurrences among the
dust of Cadmus and Trismegistus, of Tubalcain and Triptolemus ;
the tap-roots of them are with Father Adam himself and the
cinders of Eve’s first fire! At bottom, there is no perfect History ;
there is none such conceivable.

All past Centuries have rotted down, and gone confusedly
dumb and quiet, even as that Seventeenth is now threatening
to do. Histories are as perfect as the Historian is wise, and is
gifted with an eye anda soul! For the leafy blossoming Present
Time springs from the whole Past, remembered and unremember-
able, so confusedly as we say :—and truly the Art of History,
the grand ditference between a Dryasdust and a sacred Poet, is
very much even this: To distinguish well what does still reach
to the surface, and is alive and frondent for us; and what reaches
no longer to the surface, but moulders safe underground, never
to send forth leaves or fruit for mankind any more: of the former
we shall rejoice to hear; to hear of the latter will be an affliction
to us; of the latter only Pedants and Dullards, and disastrous
malefactors to the world, will find good to speak. By wise
memory and by wise oblivion: it lies all there! Without
oblivion, there is no remembrance possible. When both oblivion

ANTI-DRYASDUST 7

and memory are wise, when the general soul of man is clear,
melodious, true, there may come a modern Iliad as memorial of
the Past: when both are foolish, and the general soul is over-
clouded with confusions, with unveracities and discords, there is
a ‘ Rushworthian chaos.’ Let Dryasdust be blamed, beaten with
stripes if you will; but let it be with pity, with blame to Fate
chiefly. Alas, when sacred Priests are arguing about ‘black and
white surplices ;’ and sacred Poets have long professedly deserted
Truth, and gone a woolgathering after ‘Ideals’ and such like,
what can you expect of poor secular Pedants? The labyrinth
of History must grow ever darker, more intricate and dismal ;
vacant cargoes of ‘Ideals’ will arrive yearly, to be cast into the
oven; and noble Heroisms of Fact, given up to Dryasdust, will
be buried in a very disastrous manner !—

But the thing we had to say and repeat was this, That
Puritanism is not of the Nineteenth Century, but of the Seven-
teenth ; that the grand unintelligibility for us lies here. The
Fast-day Sermons of St. Margaret’s Church Westminster, in
spite of printers, are all grown dumb! In long rows of little
dumpy quartos, gathered from the bookstalls, they indeed stand
here bodily before us: by human volition they can be read, but
not by any human memory remembered. We forget them as
soon as read ; they have become a weariness to the soul of man.
They are dead and gone, they and what they shadowed; the
human soul, got into other latitudes, cannot now give harbour to
them. Alas, and did not the honourable Houses of Parliament
listen to them with rapt earnestness, as to an indisputable
message from Heaven itself? Learned and painful Dr. Owen,
learned and painful Dr. Burgess; Stephen Marshall, Mr. Spur-
stow, Adoniram Byfield, Hugh Peters, Philip Nye: the Printer
has done for them what he could, and Mr. Speaker gave them
the thanks of the House:—and no most astonishing Review-
Article, or tenth-edition Pamphlet, of our day can have half
such ‘brilliancy,’ such ‘spirit,’ ‘eloquence, —such virtue to produce
belief, which is the highest and in reality the only literary success,
—as these poor little dumpy quartos once had. And behold,
they are become inarticulate quartos ; spectral; and instead of
speaking, do but screech and gibber! All Puritanism has grown
inarticulate; its fervent preachings, prayings, pamphleteerings
are sunk into one indiscriminate moaning hum, mournful as the
voice of subterranean winds. So much falls silent: human
Speech, unless by rare chance it touch on the ‘ Eternal Melodies,’

8 INTRODUCTION

and harmonise with them; human Action, Interest, if divorced
from the Eternal Melodies, sinks all silent. The fashion of this
world passeth away.

The Age of the Puritans is not extinct only and gone away
from us, but it is as if fallen beyond the capabilities of Memory
herself; it is grown unintelligible, what we may call incredible.
Its earnest Purport awakens now no resonance in our frivolous
hearts. We understand not even in imagination, one of a
thousand of us, what it ever could have meant. It seems
delirious, delusive ; the sound of it has become tedious as a tale
of past stupidities. Not the body of heroic Puritanism only,
which was bound to die, but the soul of it also, which was and
should have been, and yet shall be immortal, has for the present
passed away. As Harrison said of his Banner, and Lion of the
Tribe of Judah: “ Who shall rouse him up ?””—

‘For indisputably,’ exclaims the above-cited Author in his ve-
hement way, ‘this too was a Heroism ; and the soul of it remains
‘part of the eternal soul of things! Here, of our own land and
‘lineage, in practical English shape, were Heroes on the Earth
‘once more. Who knew in every fibre, and with heroic daring
‘laid to heart, That an Almighty Justice does verily rule this
‘world ; that it is good to fight on God’s side, and bad to fight on
‘the Devil’s side! The essence of all Heroisms and Veracities
‘that have been, or that will be.—Perhaps it was among the
‘nobler and noblest Human Heroisms, this Puritanism of ours:
‘but English Dryasdust could not discern it for a Heroism at all ;
‘—as the Heaven's lightning, born of its black tempest, and de-
‘structive to pestilential Mud-giants, is mere horror and terror to
‘the Pedant species everywhere; which, like the owl in any
‘sudden brightness, has to shut its eyes,—or hastily procure
‘smoked-spectacles on an improved principle. Heaven’s bright-
‘ness would be intolerable otherwise. Only your eagle dares
‘look direct into the fire-radiance; only your Schiller climbs
‘aloft “to discover whence the lightning is coming.” ‘ Godlike
‘men love lightning,” says one. Our old Norse fathers called it
‘a God; the sunny blue-eyed Thor, with his all-conquering
‘thunder-hammer,—who again, in calmer season, is beneficent
‘Summer-heat. Godless men love it not; shriek murder when
‘they see it; shutting their eyes, and hastily procuring smoked-
‘spectacles. O Dryasdust, thou art great and thrice great ! ’"— —

‘But alas,’ exclaims he elsewhere, getting his eye on the real
nodus of the matter, ‘ what is it, all this Rushworthian inarticulate

ANTI-DRYASDUST 9

‘rubbish-continent, in its ghastly dim twilight, with its haggard
‘wrecks and pale shadows ; what is it, but the common Kingdom
‘of Death? This zs what we call Death, this mouldering dumb
‘wilderness of things once alive. Behold here the final evanes-
‘cence of Formed human things; they had form, but they are
‘changing into sheer formlessness ;—ancient human speech itself
‘has sunk into unintelligible maundering. This is the collapse,
‘—the etiolation of human features into mouldy blank ; dissolu-
‘tion ; progress towards utter silence and disappearance ; disas-
‘trous ever-deepening Dusk of Gods and Men !— —Why has the
‘living ventured thither, down trom the cheerful light, across the
‘Lethe-swamps and Tartarean Phlegethons, onwards to these
‘baleful halls of Dis and the three-headed Dog? Some Destiny
‘drives him. It is his sins, I suppose :—perhaps it is his love,
‘strong as that of Orpheus for the lost Eurydice, and likely to
‘have no better issue !’—

Well, it would seem the resuscitation of a Heroism from the
Past Time is no easy enterprise. Our impatient friend seems
really getting sad! We can well believe him, there needs pious
love in any ‘Orpheus’ that will risk descending to the Gloomy
Halls ;—descending, it may be, and fronting Cerberus and Dis, to
no purpose! For it oftenest proves so; nay, as the Mythologists
would teach us, always. Here is another Mythus. Balder the
white Sungod, say our Norse Skalds, Balder, beautiful as the
summer-dawn, loved of Gods and men, was dead. His Brother
Hermoder, urged by his Mother’s tears and the tears of the
Universe, went forth to seek him. He rode through gloomy
winding valleys, of a dismal leaden colour, full of howling winds
and subterranean torrents ; nine days ; ever deeper, down towards
Hela’s Death-realm: at Lonesome Bridge, which, with its gold
gate, spans the River of Moaning, he found the Portress, an
ancient woman, called Modgudr, ‘the Vexer of Minds,’ keeping
watch as usual: Modgudr answered him, “Yes, Balder passed
this way; but he is not here; he is down yonder,—far, still far
to the North, within Hela’s Gates yonder.”” Hermoder rode on,
still dauntless, on his horse, named ‘Swiftness’ or ‘Mane of
Gold ;’ reached Hela’s Gates; leapt sheer over them, mounted
as he was; saw Balder, the very Balder, with his eyes :—but
could not bring him back! The Nornas were inexorable ; Balder
was never to come back. Balder beckoned him mournfully a
still adieu; Nanna, Balder’s Wife, sent ‘a thimble’ to her

-

10 INTRODUCTION

mother as a memorial: Balder never could return !— —Is not
this an emblem? Old Portress Modgudr, I take it, is Dryasdust
in Norse petticoat and hood; a most unlovely beldame, the
‘Vexer of Minds!’

We will here take final leave of our impatient friend, occupied
in this almost desperate enterprise of his; we will wish him,
which it is very easy to do, more patience, and better success than
he seems to hope. And now to our own small enterprise, and
solid despatch of business in plain prose!

CHAPTER II
OF THE BIOGRAPHIES OF OLIVER
Ye

Ours is a very small enterprise, but seemingly a useful one ;
preparatory perhaps to greater and more useful, on this same
matter: The collecting of the Letters and Speeches of Oliver
Crommvell, and presenting them in natural sequence, with the still
possible elucidation, to ingenuous readers. This is a thing that
can be done; and after some reflection, it has appeared worth
doing. No great thing: one other dull Book added to the
thousand, dull everyone of them, which have been issued on
this subject! But situated as we are, new Dulness is unhappily
inevitable ; readers do not reascend out of deep confusions with-
out some trouble as they climb.

These authentic utterances of the man Oliver himself—I
have gathered them from far and near; fished them up from
the foul Lethean quagmires where they lay buried; I have
washed, or endeavoured to wash them clean from foreign
stupidities (such a job of buckwashing as I do not long to
repeat); and the world shall now see them in their own shape.
Working for long years in those unspeakable Historie Provinces,
of which the reader has already had account, it becomes more
and more apparent to one, That this man Oliver Cromwell was,
as the popular fancy represents him, the soul of the Puritan
Revolt, without whom it had never been a revolt transcendently
memorable, and an Epoch in the World’s History ; that in fact
he, more than is common in such cases, does deserve to give his
name to the Period in question, and have the Puritan Revolt
considered as a Cromwelliad, which issue is already very visible

BIOGRAPHIES OF OLIVER i1

for it. And then farther, altogether contrary to the popular
fancy, it becomes apparent that this Oliver was not a man of
falsehoods, but a man of truths ; whose words do carry a meaning
with them, and above all others of that time are worth con-
sidering. His words,—and still more his szlences, and uncon-
scious instincts, when you have spelt and lovingly deciphered
these also out of his words,—will in several ways reward the
study of an earnest man. An earnest man, I apprehend, may
gather from these words of Oliver’s, were there even no other
evidence, that the character of Oliver, and of the Affairs he
worked in, is much the reverse of that mad jumble of ‘ hypo-
crisies, &c. &c., which at present passes current as such.

But certainly, on any hypothesis as to that, such a set of
Documents may hope to be elucidative in various respects.
Oliver’s Character, and that of Oliver's Performance in this
world: here best of all may we expect to read it, whatsoever it
was. Even if false, these words, authentically spoken and
written by the plies actor in the business, must be of prime
moment for understanding of it. .These are the words this man
found suitablest to represent the Things themselves, around him,
and in him, of which we seek a History. The newborn Things
and Events, as they bodied themselves forth to Oliver Cromwell
from the Whirlwind of the passing Time,—this is the name and
definition he saw good to give of them. To get at these direct
utterances of his, is to get at the very heart of the business ;
were there once light for us in these, the business had begun
again at the heart of it to be luminous !—On the whole, we will
start with this small service, the Letters and Speeches of Olwer
Cromwell washed into something of legibility again, as the pre-
liminary of all. May it prosper with a few serious readers. The
heart of that Grand Puritan Business once again becoming visible,
even in faint twilight, to mankind, what masses of brutish dark-
ness will gradually vanish from all fibres of it, from the whole
body and environment of it, and trouble no man any more!
Masses of foul darkness, sordid confusions not a few, as I
calculate, which now bury this matter very deep, may vanish :
the heart of this matter and the heart of serious men once again
brought into approximation, to write some ‘ History’ of it may
be a little easier,—for my impatient friend or another.

To dwell on or criticise the particular Brographies of Cromwell,
after what was so emphatically said above on the general subject,
would profit us ibut little. Criticism of these poor Books cannot

12 INTRODUCTION

express itself except in language that is painful. They far surpass
in ‘stupidity’ all the celebrations any Hero ever had in this
world before. They are in fact worthy of oblivion,—of charitable
Christian burzal.

Mark Noble reckons up some half dozen ‘ Original Biographies
of Cromwell ;’! all of which and some more I have examined ;
but cannot advise any other man to examine. There are several
laudatory, worth nothing ; which ceased to be read when Charles
II. came back, and the tables were turned. The vituperative are
many: but the origin of them all, the chief fountain indeed of
all the foolish lies that have circulated about Oliver since, is the
mournful brown little Book called Flagellum, or the Life and
Death of O. Cromwell, the late Usurper, by James Heath ; which
was got ready so soon as possible on the back of the Annus
Mirabilis or Glorious Restoration,? and is written in such spirit as
we may fancy. When restored potentates and high dignitaries
had dug up ‘above a hundred buried corpses, and flung them in
‘a heap in St. Margaret’s Churchyard,’ the corpse of Admiral
Blake among them, and Oliver’s old Mother’s corpse ; and were
hanging on Tyburn gallows, as some small satisfaction to them-
selves, the dead clay of Oliver, of Ireton, and Bradshaw ;—when
high dignitaries and potentates were in such a humour, what
could be expected of poor pamphleteers and garreteers? Heath’s
poor little brown lying Flagellum is described by one of the
moderns as a ‘ Flagitium ;' and Heath himself is called ‘ Carrion
Heath,—as being ‘an unfortunate blasphemous dullard, and
‘scandal to Humanity ;—blasphemous, I say; who when the
‘image of God is shining through a man, reckons it in his sordid
‘soul to be the image of the Devil, and acts accordingly ; who in
‘fact has no soul, except what saves him the expense of salt ; who
‘intrinsically is Carrion and not Humanity:’ which seems hard
measure to poor James Heath. ‘He was the son of the King’s
‘Cutler,’ says Wood, ‘and wrote pamphlets,’ the best he was able,
poor man. He has become a dreadfully dull individual, in
addition to all!—Another wretched old Book of his, called
Chronicle of the Civil Wars, bears a high price in the Dilettante
Sale-catalogues ; and has, as that Flagellum too has, here and
there a credible trait not met with elsewhere: but in fact, to the
ingenuous inquirer, this too is little other than a tenebrifie Book ;

1 Noble’s Cromwell, i, 294-300. His list is very inaccurate and incomplete, but
not worth completing or rectifying.
2The First Edition seems to be of 1663.

BIOGRAPHIES OF OLIVER 13

cannot be read except with sorrow, with torpor and disgust,—and
in fine, if you be of healthy memory, with oblivion. The latter
end of Heath has been worse than the beginning was! From
him, and his Flagellums and scandalous Human Platitudes, let no
rational soul seek knowledge.

Among modern Biographies, the great original is that of Mark
Noble above cited ;! such ‘original’ as there is: a Book, if we
must call it a Book, abounding in facts and pretended-facts more
than any other on this subject. Poor Noble has gone into much
research of old leases, marriage-contracts, deeds of sale and such
like: he is learned in parish-registers and genealogies, has con-
sulted pedigrees ‘measuring eight feet by two feet four ;’ goes
much upon heraldry ;—in fact, has amassed a large heap of evi-
dences and assertions, worthless and of worth, respecting Crom-
well and his Connexions; from which the reader, by his own
judgment, is to extract what he can. For Noble himself is a
man of extreme imbecility ; his judgment, for most part, seeming
to lie dead asleep; and indeed it is worth little when broadest
awake. He falls into manifold mistakes, commits and omits in
all ways; plods along contented, in an element of perennial
dimness, purblindness; has occasionally a helpless broad inno-
cence of platitude which is almost interesting. A man indeed
of extreme imbecility ; to whom nevertheless let due gratitude be
borne.

His book, in fact, is not properly a Book, but rather an
Aggregate of bewildered jottings ; a kind of Cromwellian Bio-
graphical Dictionary, wanting the alphabetical, or any other,
arrangement or index: which latter want, much more remediable
than the want of judgment, is itself a great sorrow to the reader.
Such as it is, this same Dictionary without judgment and without
arrangement, ‘bad Dictionary gone to pie,’ as we may call it, is
the storehouse from which subsequent Biographies have all
furnished themselves. The reader, with continual vigilance of
suspicion, once knowing what man he has to do with, digs
through it, and again through it; covers the margins of it with
notes and contradictions, with references, deductions, rectifica-
tions, execrations,—in a sorrowful, but not entirely unprofitable
manner. Another Book of Noble’s, called Lives of the Regicides,
written some years afterwards, during the French Jacobin time,

1 Memoirs of the Protectoral House of Cromwell, By the Rev. Mark Noble. 2 vols.
London, 1787.

14 INTRODUCTION

is of much more stupid character; nearly meaningless indeed ;
mere water bewitched; which no man need buy orread. And it
is said he has a third Book, on some other subject, stupider still :
which latter point, however, may be considered questionable.

For the rest, this poor Noble is of very impartial mind respect-
ing Cromwell ; open to receive good of him, and to receive evil,
even inconsistent evil: the helpless, incoherent, but placid and
favourable notion he has of Cromwell in 1787 contrasts notably
with that which Carrion Heath had gathered of him in 1663.
For, in spite of the stupor of Histories, it is beautiful, once more,
to see how the Memory of Cromwell, in its huge inarticulate
significance, not able to speak a wise word for itself to any one,
has nevertheless been steadily growing clearer and clearer in the
popular English mind; how from the day when high dignitaries
and pamphleteers of the Carrion species did their ever-memorable
feat at Tyburn, onwards to this day, the progress does not stop.

In 1698,! one of the earliest words expressly in favour of
Cromwell was written by a Critic of Ludlow’s Memoirs. The
anonymous Critic explains to solid Ludlow that he, in that solid
but somewhat wooden head of his, had not perhaps seen entirely
into the centre of the Universe, and workshop of the Destinies ;
that, in fact, Oliver was a questionable uncommon man, and he
Ludlow a common handfast, honest, dull and indeed partly
wooden man,—in whom it might be wise to form no theory at
all of Cromwell. By and by, a certain ‘Mr. Banks,’ a kind of
Lawyer and Playwright, if I mistake not, produced a still more
favourable view of Cromwell, but in a work otherwise of no
moment; the exact date, and indeed the whole substance of
which is hardly worth remembering.”

The Letter of ‘John Maidston to Governor Winthrop, —Win-
throp Governor of Connecticut, a Suffolk man, of much American
celebrity,—is dated 1659; but did not come into print till 1742,
along with Thurloe’s other Papers.* Maidston had been an
Officer in Oliver’s Household, a Member of his Parliaments, and
knew him well. An Essex man he ; probably an old acquaintance
of Winthrop’s; visibly a man of honest affections, of piety,

1So dated in Somers Tracts (London, 1811), vi. 416,—but liable to correction
if needful. Poor Noble (i. 297) gives the same date, and then placidly, in the next
line, subjoins a fact inconsistent with it. As his manner is !

2 Short Critical Review of the Life of Oliver Cromwell. By a Gentleman of the
Middle Temple. London, 1739.

3 Thurloe, i. 763-8 ;—and correct Noble, i. 94.

BIOGRAPHIES OF OLIVER 15

decorum, and good sense. Whose loyalty to Oliver is of a
genuine and altogether manful nature,—mostly silent, as we can
discern. His Letter gives some really lucid traits of those dark
things and times; especially a short portraiture of the Protector
himself, which, the more you know him, you ascertain the more
to be a likeness. Another Officer of Oliver’s Household, not to
be confounded with this Maidston, but a man of similar position
and similar moral character to Maidston’s ; a ‘Groom of the Bed-
chamber,’ whose name one at length dimly discovers to be
Harvey,! not quite unknown otherwise; it is also well worth
listening to on this matter. He, in 1659, a few months before
Maidston wrote, had published a credible and still interesting
little Pamphlet, Passages concerning his late Highness’ s last Sickness ;
to which, if space permit, we shall elsewhere refer. In these
two little off-hand bits of writing, by two persons qualified to
write and witness, there is a clear credibility for the reader; and
more insight obtainable as to Oliver and his ways than in any of
the express Biographies.

That anonymous Life of Crommell, which Noble very ignorantly
ascribes to Bishop Gibson, which is written in a neutral spirit, as
an impartial statement of facts, but not without a secret decided
leaning to Cromwell, came out in 1724, It is the Life of Crommell
found commonly in Libraries :? it went through several editions
in a pure state; and I have seen a ‘fifth edition’ with foreign
intermixtures, ‘ printed at Birmingham in 1778,’ on gray paper,
seemingly as a Book for Hawkers. The Author of it was by no
means ‘ Bishop Gibson,’ but one Kimber, a Dissenting Minister
of London, known otherwise as a compiler of books.2 He has
diligently gathered from old Newspapers and other such sources ;
narrates in a dull, steady, concise, but altogether unintelligent
manner ; can be read without offence, but hardly with any real
instruction. Image of Cromwell’s self there is none, express or
implied, in this Book; for the man himself had none, and did

1 The ‘ Cofferer,’ elsewhere called Steward of the Household, is ‘Mr. Maidston ;’
‘Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, Mr. Charles Harvey, Mr. Underwood.'—Prest-
wich’s funeral of the Protector (reprinted in Forster’s British Statesmen, v. 436, &c.)

2The Life of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth. \mparti-
ally collected, &c. London, 1724. Distinguished also by a not intolerable
Portrait.

3{It is, however, quite possible that the Gibson family may have assisted in com-
piling the book, for Bishop Gibson’s uncle and patron, Dr. Thomas Gibson (a
distinguished physician and a dissenter) married Richard Cromwell's daughter,
Anna. ]

16 INTRODUCTION

not feel the want of any: nay in regard to external facts also,
there are inaccuracies enough,—here too, what is the general
rule in these books, you can find as many inaccuracies as you
like: dig where you please, water will come! As a crown to all
the modern Biographies of Cromwell, let us note Mr. Forster's
late one :! full of interesting original excerpts, and indications of
what is notablest in the old Books; gathered and set forth with
real merit, with energy in abundance and superabundance ; amount-
ing in result, we may say, to a vigorous decisive tearing up of all
the old hypotheses on the subject, and an opening of the general
mind for new.

Of Cromwell’s actual biography, from these and from all Books
and sources, there is extremely little to be known. It is from his
own words, as I have ventured to believe, from his own Letters
and Speeches well read, that the world may first obtain some dim
glimpse of the actual Cromwell, and see him darkly face to face.
What little is otherwise ascertainable, cleared from the circum-
ambient inanity and insanity, may be stated in brief compass.
So much as precedes the earliest still extant Letters, I subjoin
here in the form most convenient.

CHAPTER III
OF THE CROMWELL KINDRED

O.iver CromMweELL, afterwards Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, was born at Huntingdon, in St. John’s Parish there,
on the 25th of April 1599. Christened on the 29th of the same
month; as the old Parish-registers of that Church still legibly
testify.”

His Father was Robert Cromwell, younger son of Sir Henry
Cromwell, and younger brother of Sir Oliver Cromwell, Knights
both ; who dwelt successively, in rather sumptuous fashion, at the
Mansion of Hinchinbrook hard by. His Mother was Elizabeth
Steward, daughter of William Steward, Esquire, in Ely; an opulent |
man, a kind of hereditary Farmer of the Cathedral Tithes and
Church lands round that city; in which capacity his son, Sir

1 Statesmen of the Commonwealth. By John Forster (London, 1840). Vols. iv.
and v.
2 Noble, i. 92.

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 17

Thomas Steward, Knight, in due time succeeded him, resident
also at Ely. Elizabeth wasa young widow when Robert Cromwell
married her: the first marriage, to one ‘ William Lynne, Esquire,
of Bassingbourne in Cambridgeshire,’ had lasted but a year: hus-
band and only child are buried in Ely Cathedral, where their
monument still stands ; the date of their deaths, which followed
near on one another, is 1589.1 The exact date of the young
widow’s marriage to Robert Cromwell is nowhere given; but
seems to have been in 1591.2 Our Oliver was their fifth child ;
their second boy ; but the first soon died. They had ten children
in all ; of whom seven came to maturity, and Oliver was their
only son. I may as well print the little Note, smelted long ago
out of huge dross-heaps in Noble’s Book, that the reader too
may have his small benefit of it.3

This Elizabeth Steward, who had now become Mrs. Robert
Cromwell, was, say the genealogists, ‘indubitably descended from
the Royal Stuart Family of Scotland ;’ and could still count
kindred with them. ‘From one Walter Steward, who had ac-
companied Prince James of Scotland, when our inhospitable
politic Henry IV. detained the poor Prince, driven in by stress
of weather to him here. Walter did not return with the Prince
to Scotland; having ‘fought tournaments, —having made an
advantageous marriage-settlement here. One of his descendants,
Robert Steward, happened to be Prior of Ely when Henry VIII.

1 Noble, ii. 198, and Ms, pemes me. 2 Jord., i. 88.

3 OLIVER CROMWELL’S BROTHERS AND SISTERS

Oliver's Mother had been a widow (Mrs. Lynne of Bassingbourne) before marry-
ing Robert Cromwell; neither her age nor his is discoverable here,

1. First child (seemingly), /oan, baptised 24th September 1592; she died in 1600
(Noble, i. 88).

2. Elizabeth, 14th October 1593; died unmarried, thinks Noble, in 1672, at
Ely. See Appendix, No. 20, a Letter in regard to her, which has turned up.
(Note of 1857),

3. Henry, 31st August 1595; died young, ‘ before 1617.’

4. Catherine, 7th February 1596-7; married to Whitstone, a Parliamentary
Officer ; then to Colonel [John] Jones.

5- OLIVER, born 25th April 1599.

6. Margaret, 22d February 1600-1; she became Mrs, Wauton, or Walton,
Huntingdonshire ; her son was killed at Marston Moor,—as we shall see.

7. Anna, 2d January 1602-3; Mrs. Sewster, Huntingdonshire; died rst Novem-
ber 1646 :—her Brother Oliver had just ended the ‘first Civil War’ then.

8. Jane, 19th January 1605-6 ; Mrs. Desborow, Cambridgeshire ; died, seemingly,
in 1656.

9. Robert, 18th January 1608-9 ; died same April.

10. Robina, so named for the above Robert: uncertain date: became Mrs.
Dr. French ; then wife of Bishop Wilkins : her daughter by French, her one child,
was married to Archbishop Tillotson.

VOtewl——o

18 INTRODUCTION

dissolved the Monasteries ; and proving pliant on that occasion,
Robert Steward, last Popish Prior, became the first Protestant
Dean of Ely, and—‘ was remarkably attentive to his family,’ says
Noble. The profitable Farming of the Tithes at Ely, above
mentioned ; this, and other settlements, and good dotations of
Church lands among his Nephews, were the fruits of Robert
Steward’s pliancy on that occasion. The genealogists say, there
is no doubt of this pedigree ;—and explain in intricate tables,
how Elizabeth Steward, Mother of Oliver Cromwell, was in-
dubitably either the ninth, or the tenth, or some other fractional
part of half a cousin to Charles Stuart King of England.!
Howsoever related to Charles Stuart or to other parties, Robert
Cromwell, younger son of the Knight of Hinchinbrook, brought
her home, we see, as his Wife, to Huntingdon, about 1591; and
settled with her there, on such portion, with such prospects as a
cadet of the House of Hinchinbrook might have. Portion con-
sisting of certain lands and messuages round and in that Town of
Huntingdon,—where, in the current name ‘Cromwell’s Acre,’ if
not in other names applied to lands and messuages there, some
feeble echo of him and his possessions still survives, or seems to
survive. These lands he himself farmed: the income in all is
guessed or computed to have been about 300/. a year; a tolerable
fortune in those times; perhaps somewhat like 1000/. now.
Robert Cromwell’s Father, as we said, and then his elder Brother,
dwelt successively in good style at Hinchinbrook near by. It
was the Father Sir Henry Cromwell, who from his sumptuosity
was called the “Golden Knight” that built, or that enlarged,
remodelled and as good as built, the Mansion of Hinchinbrook ;
which had been a Nunnery while Nunneries still were: it was
the son, Sir Oliver, likewise an expensive man, that sold it to the
Montagues, since Earls of Sandwich, whose seat it still is. A
stately pleasant House, among its shady lawns and expanses, on
the left bank of the Ouse river, a short half mile west of Hunt-
ingdon ;—still stands pretty much as Oliver Cromwell’s Grand-
father left it; rather kept good and defended from the inroads
of Time and Accident, than substantially altered. Several Por-
traits of the Cromwells, and other interesting portraits and —
memorials of the seventeenth and subsequent centuries, are still
there. The Cromwell blazonry ‘on the great bay window,’ which

1([This theory, however, has been entirely refuted by Mr. Walter Rye, who shows
that Mrs. Cromwell was descended from an old Norfolk family, originally named
Styward. See Zhe Genealogist, 1885, p. 34.]

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 19

Noble makes so much of, is now gone, destroyed by fire; has
given place to Montague blazonry ; and no dull man can bore us
with that any more.

Huntingdon itself lies pleasantly along the left bank of the
Ouse ; sloping pleasantly upwards from Ouse Bridge, which con-
nects it with the old village of Godmanchester ; the Town itself
consisting mainly of one fair street, which towards the north end
of it opens into a kind of irregular market-place, and then con-
tracting again soon terminates. The two churches of All-Saints
and St. John’s, as you walk up northward from the Bridge, appear
successively on your left; the churchyards flanked with shops or
other houses. The Ouse, which is of very circular course in this
quarter, ‘ winding as if reluctant to enter the Fen-country,’ says
one Topographer, has still a respectable drab-colour, gathered from
the clays of Bedfordshire ; has not yet the Stygian black which in
a few miles farther it assumes for good. Huntingdon, as it were,
looks over into the Fens; Godmanchester, just across the river,
already stands on black bog. The country to the East is all Fen
(mostly unreclaimed in Oliver’s time, and still of a very dropsical
character) ; to the West it is hard green ground, agreeably broken
into little heights, duly fringed with wood, and bearing marks of
comfortable long-continued cultivation. Here, on the edge of
the firm green land, and looking over into the black marshes with
their alder-trees and willow-trees, did Oliver Cromwell pass his
young years. Drunken Barnabee, who travelled, and drank, and
made Latin rhymes, in that country about 1635, through whose
glistening satyr-eyes one can still discern this and the other
feature of the Past, represents to us on the height behind
Godmanchester, as you approach the scene from Cambridge
and the south, a big Oak-tree,—which has now disappeared,
leaving no notable successor.

Vent Godmanchester, ubi

Ut Ixion captus nube,
Ste, ete.

And he adds in a Note,

Quercus anilis erat, tamen eminus oppida spectat ;
Stirpe viam monstrat, plumea fronde tegit ;—

Or in his own English version,

An aged Oak takes of this Town survey,
Finds birds their nests, tells passengers their way.1

1 Barnabe Itinerarium (London, 1818), p. 96.

20 INTRODUCTION

If Oliver Cromwell climbed that Oak-tree, in quest of bird-nests
or boy-adventures, the Tree, or this poor ghost of it, may still
have a kind of claim to memory.

The House where Robert Cromwell dwelt, where his son Oliver
and all his family were born, is still familiar to every inhabitant
of Huntingdon : but it has been twice rebuilt since that date, and
now bears no memorial whatever which even Tradition can con-
nect with him. It stands at the upper or northern extremity of
the Town,—beyond the Market-place we spoke of; on the left
or river-ward side of the street. It is at present a solid yellow
brick house, with a walled court-yard ; occupied by some towns-
man of the wealthier sort. The little Brook of Hinchin, making
its way to the Ouse which is not far off, still flows through the
court-yard of the place,—offering a convenience for malting or
brewing, among other things. Some vague but confident tradi-
tion as to Brewing attaches itself to this locality ; and traces of
evidence, I understand, exist that before Robert Cromwell’s time,
it had been employed asa Brewery: but of this or even of Robert
Cromwell’s own brewing, there is, at such a distance, in such an
element of distracted calumny, exaggeration and confusion, little
or no certainty to be had. Tradition, ‘the Rev. Dr. Lort’s Manu-
scripts,’ Carrion Heath, and such testimonies, are extremely in-
secure as guides! Thomas Harrison, for example, is always called
‘the son of a Butcher;’ which means only that his Father, as
farmer or owner, had grazing-lands, down in Staffordshire, where-
from naturally enough proceeded cattle, fat cattle as the case
might be,—well fatted, I hope. Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex
in Henry Eighth’s time, is in like manner called always ‘the son
of a Blacksmith at Putney ;’—and whoever figures to himself a
man in black apron with hammer in hand, and tries to rhyme
this with the rest of Thomas Cromwell’s history, will find that
here too he has got into an insolubility. ‘The splenetic credulity
‘and incredulity, the calumnious opacity, the exaggerative ill-
‘nature and general flunkeyism and stupidity of mankind,’ says
my Author, ‘are ever to be largely allowed for in such circum-
stances,’ We will leave Robert Cromwell’s brewing in a very
unilluminated state. Uncontradicted Tradition, and old printed
Royalist Lampoons, do call him a Brewer: the Brook of Hinchin, —
running through his premises, offered clear convenience for malt-
ing or brewing ;—in regard to which, and also to his Wife’s
assiduous management of the same, one is very willing to believe
Tradition. The essential trade of Robert Cromwell was that of

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 21

managing those lands of his in the vicinity of Huntingdon: the
grain of them would have to be duly harvested, thrashed, brought
to market ; whether it was as corn or as malt that it came to
market, can remain indifferent to us.

For the rest, as documents still testify, this Robert Cromwell
did Burgh and Quarter-Session duties ; was not slack but moder-
ately active as a country-gentleman ; sat once in Parliament in
his younger years ;! is found with his elder or other Brothers on
various Public Commissions for Draining the Fens of that region,
or more properly for inquiring into the possibility of such an
operation ; a thing much noised of then; which Robert Crom-
well, among others, reported to be very feasible, very promising,
but did not live to see accomplished, or even attempted. His
social rank is sufficiently indicated ;—and much flunkeyism,
falsity and other carrion ought to be buried! Better than all
social rank, he is understood to have been a wise, devout, sted-
fast and worthy man, and to have lived a modest and manful
life in his station there.

Besides the Knight of Hinchinbrook, he had other Brothers
settled prosperously in the Fen regions, where this Cromwell
Family had extensive possessions. One Brother Henry was
‘seated at Upwood,’ a fenny district near Ramsey Mere; one
of his daughters came to be the wife, second wife, of Oliver St.
John, the Shipmoney Lawyer, the political ‘dark-lantern,’ as
men used to name him; of whom we shall hear farther. Another
Brother ‘was seated’ at Biggin House between Ramsey and
Upwood; a moated mansion, with ditch and painted paling
round it. <A third Brother was seated at—my informant knows
not where! In fact I had better, as before, subjoin the little
smelted Note which has already done its duty, and let the reader
make of that what he can.? Of our Oliver’s Aunts one was

1‘ 35to Eliz. :’ Feb.—April 1593 (Noble, i. 83; from Willis),
2 OLIvER’s UNCLES.

1. Sir Oliver of Hinchinbrook: his eldest son John, born in 1589 (ten years
older than our Oliver), went into the army, ‘ Colonel of an English regiment in the
Dutch service :’ this is the Colonel Cromwell who is said, or fabled, to have sought
a midnight interview with Oliver, in the end of 1648, for the purpose of buying off
Charles I. ; to have ‘laid his hand on his sword,’ &c. &c. The story is in Noble,
i, 51; with no authority but that of Carrion Heath. Other sons of his were soldiers,
Royalists these: there are various Cousin Cromwells that confusedly turn up on
both sides of the quarrel. [Sir Oliver’s eldest daughter, Elizabeth, was the only one
of his children who contributed towards the group of cousins by whom Oliver was
surrounded, She married Sir Richard Ingoldsby, and their son was the Col.

22 INTRODUCTION

Mrs. Hampden of Great Hampden, Bucks: an opulent, zealous
person, not without ambitions ; already a widow and mother of
two Boys, one of whom proved very celebrated as Jonn HamppeEN ;
she was Robert Cromwell’s Sister. Another Cromwell Aunt of
Oliver's was married to ‘Whalley, heir of the Whalley family in

Ingoldsby—“ Dick Ingoldsby"—whom Richard Cromwell declared he would trust
before all the rest of his officers; although he could neither pray nor preach. |

Robert Cromwell, our Oliver's Father, was the next brother of the Hinchinbrook
Knight. The third Brother, second uncle, was : ee

2. Henry Cromwell, of Upwood near Ramsey Mere: adventurer in the Virginia
Company: sat in Parliament 1603-1611; one of his daughters Mrs. St. John.
Died 1630 (Noble, i. 28).

3. Richard: ‘buys in 1607’ a bit of ground in Huntingdon; died ‘at Ramsey,’
1628 ; was member for Huntingdon in Queen Elizabeth’s time :—-Lzved in Ramsey?
Is buried at Upwood.

4. Sir Philip: Biggin House; knighted at Whitehall, 1604 (Noble, i. 31). His
second son, Philip [Richard], was in Col. Ingoldsby’s regiment ; wounded at the storm
of Bristol, in 1645. Third son, Thomas, was in Ireland with Strafford (signs Mont-
norris’s death-warrant there, in 1630) ; lived afterwards in London ; became Major,
and then Colonel, in the Xzzg’s Army. Fourth son, Oliver, was in the Parliamen-
tary Army; had watched the King in the Isle of Wight,—went with his cousin, our
Oliver, to Ireland in 1649, and died or was killed there. [This Oliver—Major
Oliver, of Sir Thos. Morgan’s regiment of foot—is noteworthy from the fact that
his signature is so much like that of his renowned cousin that care has to be taken
to distinguish between them. Like many other officers, he was encouraged to make
“« discoveries’ of Papists’ and Delinquents’ estates, and allowed half the proceeds
towards his arrears. See his Petition and Information to the Committee for
Advance of Money, pp. 1028, 1030, in the Calendar of that Committee. He
died before Waterford, of a fever, in October 1649, and his death is referred to in
the Lord General's letter of t9th Dec. (No. cxvii.)] Fifth son, Robert, ‘ poisoned
his Master, an Attorney, and was hanged at London, —if there be truth in ‘ Heath's
Flagellum’ (Noble, i. 35) ‘and some Pedigrees ;’—year not given ; say about 1635,
when the lad, ‘born 1617,’ was in his 18th year? I have found no hint of this
affair in any other quarter, not in the wildest Royalist-Birkenhead or Walker’s-
Independency lampoon; and consider it very possible that @ Robert Cromwell
having suffered ‘ for poisoning an Attorney,’ he may have been ca//ed the cousin of
Cromwell by ‘ Heath and some Pedigrees.’ But of course anybody caz ‘ poison an
Attorney,’ and be hanged for it! [Robert Cromwell was certainly accused of
poisoning the Attorney. This is what his own relatives say about it. ‘My
cousin, Robert Cromwell, son to Sir Philip, bound with an Attorney, is (upon his
master’s death) imprisoned and questioned for poisoning of him, which we hope
he will be clear from in the close.” (Sir Thos. Barrington to his mother, April, 1632.
Barrington MSS, at the British Museum, Ayverton MS. 2646, f. 17). ‘‘ Yesterday
your cousin Cromwell's trial was heard. The probabilities are foul, but he is likely to
find great friends.” (Judith Barrington to the same, Tuesday, Whitsun Week, 1632.
Jbid., fol. 30). ‘‘ My cousin Cromwell, condemned, is reprieved, and generally
reputed a guiltless poor youth, and this evening my Lord of Holland endeavours
his farther reprieve and pardon.” (Sir Thomas to the same, May 25, 1632. Jdzd.,
fol. 35). From which it may be hoped that he did not poison the Attorney after all. ]

[Amongst the Barrington MSS. are also letters from Sir Oliver and Henry
Cromwell to their sister, Lady Barrington, in relation to the death of their brother
Philip, which took place on January 24, 1627-8. He was buried on the 28th, at
Ramsey. ‘‘ He led a religious life,” writes his brother Henry: ‘‘ He hath left behind
him many children with small means ; roo/. apiece will be the uttermost can be

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 23

Notts ;’ another to the ‘heir of the Dunches of Pusey, in Berk-
shire ;’ another to—In short the stories of Oliver’s ‘ poverty,’ if
they were otherwise of any amount, are all false ; and should be
mentioned here, if still here, for the /ast time. The family was
of the rank of substantial gentry, and duly connected with such
in the counties round, for three generations back. Of the
numerous and now mostly forgettable cousinry we specify farther
only the Mashams of Otes in Essex, as like to be of some cursory
interest to us by and by.

There is no doubt at all but Oliver the Protector’s family was
related to that of Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, the Putney
‘ Blacksmith’s’ or Iron-master’s son, transiently mentioned above ;
the Malleus Monachorum, or, as old Fuller renders it, ‘ Mauler of
Monasteries,’ in Henry Eighth’s time. The same old Fuller, a
perfectly veracious and most intelligent person, does indeed re-
port as of ‘his own knowledge, that Oliver Protector, once upon
a time when Bishop Goodman came dedicating to him some
unreadable semi-popish jargon about the ‘mystery of the Holy
Trinity, and some adulation about ‘his Lordship’s relationship
to the former great Purifier of the Church,’ and Mauler of
’ Monasteries,—answered impatiently, “ My family has no relation

wrought for them out of his estate” (Zgerton MS. 2645, fol. 138). In 1630 are
other letters from Sir Oliver and Henry, the former speaking of himself as grown
old and being a poor man without awife. His second wife, Anne, had died in 1626. ]

Oliver's Aunt Elizabeth was married to William Hampden of Great Hampden,
Bucks (year not given, Noble, i. 36, nor at p. 68 of vol. il. ; nor in Lord Nugent's
Memorials of Hampden) : he died in 1597 ; she survived him 67 years, continuing
a widow (Noble, ii. 69). Buried in Great Hampden Church, 1664, aged 90. She
had two sons, John and Richard: John, born 1594,—Richard, an Oliverian too,
died in 1659 (Noble, ii. 70).

Aunt Joan (elder than Elizabeth) was ‘ Lady Barrington ;’ [wife of Sir Francis
Barrington, of Barrington Hall, Essex. ‘‘ The Joan Barrington branch (of the
Cromwell family) including Barringtons, Gerrards, Mashams and Bourchier, could
muster, in about the fourth year of the Long Parliament, no less than seven mem-
bers, namely : Sir Thomas Barrington the Protector's first cousin ; Sir John Bar-
rington, young Gerrard and young Masham, his first cousins once removed ; Sir
Gilbert Gerrard and Sir William Masham, who had married his first cousins, and
lastly Sir John Bourchier.” See Mr. Stanley Weyman’s article on ‘‘ Oliver Cromwell's
Kinsfolk,” English Historical Review, January, 1891.] Aunt Frances (younger) was
Mrs. Whalley. Richard Whalley of Kerton, Notts; a man of mark ; sheriff, &c. ;
three wives, children only by his second, this ‘Aunt Fanny.’ Three children :—
Thomas Whalley (no years given, Noble, ii. 141) died in his father’s lifetime ; left a son
who wasa kind of Royalist, but yet had a certain acceptance with Olivertoo. Edward
Whalley, the famed ‘ Colonel,’ and Henry Whalley, ‘ the Judge-Advocate :’ wretched
biographies of these twoare in Noble, pp. 141, 143- 56. Colonel Whalley and Colonel
Goff, after the Restoration, fled to New England ; lived in ‘caves’ there, and had
a sore time of it: New England, in a vague manner, still remembers them.

Enough of the Cousinry !—

24 INTRODUCTION

to his!” This old Fuller reports, as of his own knowledge. I
have consulted the unreadable semi-popish jargon, for the sake
of that Dedication; I find that Oliver’s relationship to Thomas
Cromwell is in any case stated wrong there, not right: I reflect
farther that Bishop Goodman, oftener called ‘ Bishop Badman’ in
those times, went over to Popery; had become a miserable im-
poverished old piece of confusion, and at this time could appear
only in the character of begging bore,—when, at any rate, for it
was in the year 1653, Oliver himself, having just turned out the
Long Parliament,! was busy enough! I infer therefore that
Oliver said to him impatiently, without untruth, “You are quite
wrong as to all that: good morning !””—and that old Fuller, like-
wise without untruth, reports it as above.

But, at any rate, there is other very simple evidence entirely
conclusive. Richard or Sir Richard Cromwell, great-grandfather
of Oliver Protector, was a man well known in his day ; had been
very active in the work of suppressing monasteries ; a righthand
man to Thomas the Mauler: and indeed it was on Monastic Pro-
perty, chiefly or wholly, that he had made for himself a sumptuous
estate in those Fen regions. Now, of this Richard Cromwell
there are two Letters to Thomas Cromwell, ‘ Vicar-General,’ Earl
of Essex, which remain yet visible among the Manuscripts of the
British Museum ; in both of which he signs himself with his own
hand, ‘your most bounden Nephew, —an evidence sufficient to
set the point at rest. Copies of the Letters are in my possession ;
but I grudge to inflict them on the reader. One of them, the
longer of the two, stands printed, with all or more than all its
original misspelling and confused obscurity, in Noble :? it is
dated ‘Stamford,’ without day or year; but the context farther
dates it as contemporary with the Lincolnshire Rebellion, or

1The date of Goodman's Book is 25th June 1653; here is the correct title of
it (King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 73, § 1): ‘The two great Mysteries of Christian
Religion ; the Ineffable Trinity and Wonderful Incarnation: by G. G. G.’ (mean-
ing Godfrey Goodman, Glocestrensis). Unfortunate persons who have read Laud’s
writings are acquainted with this Bishop Goodman, or Badman; he died a declared
Papist. Poor man, his speculations, now become jargon to us, were once very
serious and eloquent to him! Such is the fate that soon overtakes all men who,
quitting the ‘Eternal Melodies,’ take up their abode in the outer Temporary
Discords, and seek their subsistence there! ‘This is the part of the Dedication that
concerns us:

‘To his Excellency my Lord Oliver Cromwell, Lord General. My Lord,—
‘Fifty years since, the name of Socinus,’ &c.—‘ Knowing that the Lord Cromwell
‘(your Lordship’s great uncle) was then in great favour,’ &.—‘ GODFREE Goop-
MAN,’

2i, 242,

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 25

Anti-Reformation riot, which was directly followed by the more
formidable ‘ Pilgrimage of Grace’ in Yorkshire to the like effect,
in the autumn of 1536.1 Richard, in company with other higher
official persons, represents himself as straining every nerve to
beat down and extinguish this traitorous fanatic flame, kindled
against the King’s Majesty and his Reform of the Church; has
an eye in particular to a certain Sir John Thymbleby in Lincoln-
shire, whom he would fain capture as a ringleader ; suggests that
the use of arms should be prohibited to these treasonous popula-
tions, except under conditions ;—and seems hastening on, with
almost furious speed ; towards Yorkshire and the Pilgrimage of
Grace, we may conjecture.2 The second Letter, also without
date except ‘Tuesday,’ 3 shadows to us an official man, again on
business of hot haste ; journeying from Monastery to Monastery ;
finding this Superior disposed to comply with the King’s Majesty,
and that other not disposed, but capable of being made so;
intimates farther that he will be at his own House ( presumably
Hinchinbrook), and then straightway ‘home,’ and will report
progress to my Lord in person. On the whole, as this is the
earliest articulate utterance of the Oliver Family; and casts a
faint glimmer of light, as from a single flint-spark, into the dead
darkness of the foregone century; and touches withal on an
acquaintance of ours, the ‘Prior of Ely, —Robert Steward, last
Popish Prior, first Protestant Dean of Ely, and brother of Mrs.
Robert Cromwell’s ancestor, which is curious to think of,—we
will give the Letter, more especially as it is very short :

“ To my Lord Crommell.

“I have me most humbly commended unto your Lordship. I
“rode on Sunday to Cambridge to my bed ;4 and the next morn-

1 Herbert (in Kennet, ii. 204-5).

2(This first letter is in the Harley MZSS. (vol. 283, f. 156). It is clearly written
in aclerk’s hand, and the only ‘‘ obscurity” about it is that a good many contractions
are employed, but they are used quite regularly. From its connexion with other
letters of the same period, it must have been written on October 14, 1536. Sir John
Thimbleby did not need capturing, as he had ‘‘ come in” a day or two before. ]

3(It is dated Tuesday, r5th October, which fixes it to 1538, and it is calendared
by Dr. Gairdner under this date. There are many letters from Richard Cromwell
to his uncle at the Public Record Office. In one, written in May of this same year,
he tells how the King went to Hunsdon to see his little son, ‘‘and there solaced all
this day with much mirth and joy, dallying with him in his arms a long space, and
so holding him in a window for the sight and great comfort of all the people”
(Letters and Papers of Henry VII, vol. xiii., pt. i., p. 372).]

4From London, we suppose.

26 INTRODUCTION

“ing was up betimes, supposing to have found at Ely Mr. Pollard
“and Mr. Williams. But they were departed before my coming :
“and so, ‘they’ being at dinner at Somersham with the Bishop
“of Ely, I overtook them ‘there.’! At which time, I opened
“your pleasure unto them in everything. Your Lordship, I think,
‘shall shortly apperceive the Prior of Ely to be of a froward sort,
“by evident tokens ;? as, at our coming home, shall be at large
“related unto you.

“At the making hereof we had done nothing at Ramsey
“saving that over night I communed with the Abbot; whom I
“found comformable to everything as shall be at this time put
“in ure.2 According as your Lordship’s will is, as soon as we
“have done at Ramsey, we go to Peterborough, and from thence
“to my house; and so home.* The which, I trust, shall be at
“the farthest on this day come seven days.

“Thus the Blessed Trinity preserve your Lordship’s health.

“ Your Lordship’s most bounden Nephew,
“ RicHaRD CRUMWELL.

“From Ramsey, on Tuesday in the morning; being the rsth of October.” 5

The other Letter is still more express as to the consanguinity ;
it says, among other things, ‘And longer than I may have heart
‘so, as my most bounden duty is, to serve the King’s Grace with
‘body, goods, and all that ever I am able to make; and your
‘Lordship, as Nature and also your manifold kindness bindeth,
‘I beseech God I no longer live.’® ‘As Nature bindeth.’
Richard Cromwell then thanks him, with a bow to the very
ground, for ‘my poore wyef, who has had some kind remem-
brance from his Lordship ; thinks all ‘his travail but a pastime ;’
and remains, ‘at Stamford this Saturday at eleven of the clock,

1The words within s¢mgle commas, ‘they’ and ‘there,’ are added for bringing
out the sense ; a plan we shall follow in all the Original Letters of this Collection.

2 He proved tameable, Sir Richard,—and made yous Great-grandson rich, for
one consequence of that !

3 (Carlyle printed ‘‘act” and explained it as meaning ‘‘ brought to legal black
and white,” but the original has ‘‘put in ure,” an old phrase meaning taken in
hand, or put in practice. There were other mistakes in his transcript of the letter,
which is here printed from the original. ]

4'To London,

5 MSS. Cotton. Cleopatra E. IV. f. 235. The envelope and address are not
here; but this docket of address, given in a sixteenth-century hand, and otherwise
indicated by the text, is not doubtful. The signature alone, is in Richard’s hand.
In the Letter printed by Noble the address vewzazzs in the hand of Richard’s clerk.

§ [This is not a verbatim quotation, Carlyle has improved Cromwell’s grammar
a little. }

THE CROMWELL KINDRED 27

‘your humble Nephew most bounden,’ as in the other case. A
vehement, swift-riding man! Nephew, it has been suggested,
did not mean in Henry the Eighth’s time so strictly as it now does
brother’s or sister’s son; it meant nepos rather, or kinsman of a
younger generation: but on all hypotheses of its meaning, the
consanguinity of Oliver Protector of England and Thomas Mauler
of Monasteries is not henceforth to be doubted.1

Another indubitable thing is, That this Richard, your Nephew
most bounden, has signed himself in various Lawdeeds and Notarial
papers stillfextant, ‘Richard Cromwell alias Williams ;’ also that
his sons and grandsons continued to sign Cromwell alias Williams ;
and even that our Oliver himself in his youth has been known to
sign so. And then a third indubitable thing on this matter is,
That Leland, an exact man, sent out by Authority in those
years to take cognisance, and make report, of certain points
connected with the Church Establishments in England, and whose
well-known Itenerary is the fruit of that survey, has written
in that Work these words; under the head, ‘Commotes? in
Glamorganshire :’

‘ Kibworth lieth,’ extendeth, ‘from the mouth of Remny up to
‘an Hill in the same Commote, called Kevenon, a six miles from
‘the mouth of Remny. This Hill goeth as a wall overthwart
‘betwixt the Rivers of Thave and Remny. A two miles from
‘this Hill by the south, and a two miles from Cardiff, be vestigia
‘of a Pile or Manor Place decayed, at Egglis Newith in the Parish
‘of Llandaff? On the south side of this Hill was born Richard
‘Williams alias Cromwell, in the Parish Llanilsen.’ 4

That Richard Cromwell, then, was of kindred to Thomas Crom-
well; that he, and his family after him, signed ‘alias Williams ;’

1[He was his nephew, son of his sister Katherine, who married Morgan
Williams, brewer, of Putney. This son, Richard, took his mother’s name, and
entered the service of Henry VIII. In 1538, the priory of Hinchinbrook was
bestowed on him, and in 1540 the site and part of the possessions of Ramsey
Abbey.

2 ate is the Welsh word Cwmwd, now obsolete as an official division,
equivalent to cantred, hundred. Kibworth Commote is now Kibbor Hundred.

3*Egglis Newith’ is Zg/wys Newydd, New Church, as the Welsh peasants still
name it, though officially it is now called White Church. River ‘Thave’ means
Taff. The description of the wall-like Hill between two streams, Taff and Remny,
is recognisably correct: Kevenon, spelt Cevm-on, ‘ Ash-tree ridge,’ is still the name
of the Hill.

4 Noble, i. 238, collated with Leland (Oxford, 1769), iv. fol. 56, pp. 37, 38. Le-
land gathered his records ‘in six years,’ between 1533 and 1540; he died, en-
deavouring to assort them, in 1552. They were long afterwards published by
Hearne.

28 3 INTRODUCTION

and that Leland, an accurate man, said and printed, in the official
scene where Richard himself was living and conspicuous, He
was born in Glamorganshire: these three facts are indubitable ;
—but to these three we must limit ourselves. For, as to the
origin of this same ‘alias Williams,’ whether it came from the
general ‘ Williamses of Berkshire,’ ! or from ‘Morgan Williams
a Glamorganshire gentleman married to the sister of Thomas
Cromwell,’ or from whom or what it came, we have to profess
ourselves little able, and indeed not much concerned to decide.
Williamses are many: there is Richard Cromwell, in that old
Letter, hoping to breakfast with a Williams at Ely,—but finds
both him and Pollard gone! Facts, even trifling facts, when
indisputable may have significance ; but Welsh Pedigrees, ‘ with
seventy shields of arms,’ ‘Glothian Lord of Powys’ (prior or
posterior to the Deluge), though ‘ written on a parchment eight
‘feet by two feet four, bearing date 1602, and belonging to the
‘Miss Cromwells of Hampstead,’? are highly unsatisfactory to
the ingenuous mind! We have to remark two things: First,
that the Welsh Pedigree, with its seventy shields and ample
extent of sheepskin, bears date London, 1602; was not put to-
gether, therefore, till about a hundred years after the birth of
Richard, and at a great distance from the scene of that event:
circumstances which affect the unheraldic mind with some mis-
givings. Secondly, that ‘learned Dugdale, upon whom mainly,
apart from these uncertain Welsh sheepskins, the story of this
Welsh descent of the Cromwells seems to rest, has unfortunately
stated the matter in two different ways,—as being, and then also
as not being,—in two places of his learned Lumber-Book.®
Which circumstance affects the unheraldic mind with still fataller
misgivings,—and in fact raises irrepressibly the question and
admonition, “ What boots it? Leave the vain region of blazonry,
“of rusty broken shields and genealogical marine-stores ; let it
“remain forever doubtful! The Fates themselves have appointed
“it even so. Let the uncertain Simulacrum of a Glothian, prior
“or posterior to Noah’s Deluge, hover between us and the utter
“Void ; basing himself on a dust-chaos of ruined heraldries, lying
“ genealogies, and saltires checky, the best he can!”

1 Biographia Britannica (London, 17869), iv. 474.

2 Noble, i. 1. [But the pedigree, attested by York Herald, is very valuable for
more historic times. ]

°>Dugdale’s Baronage, ii. 374, 393. [Carlyle has overlooked the fact that in the
second notice, Dugdale is speaking of another branch of the family. ]

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 29

The small Hamlet and Parish Church of Cromwell, or Crum-
well (the Well of Crum, whatever that may be), still stands on
the Eastern edge of Nottinghamshire, not far from the left bank
of the Trent ; simple worshippers still doing in it some kind of
divine service every Sunday. From this, without any ghost to
teach us, we can understand that the Cromwell kindred all got
their name,—in very old times indeed. From torpedo rubbish-
records we learn also, without great difficulty, that the Barons
Cromwell were summoned to Parliament from Edward Second’s
time and downward ; that they had their chief seat at Tattershall
in Lincolnshire ; that there were Cromwells of distinction, and of
no distinction, scattered in reasonable abundance over that Fen-
country,—Cromwells Sheriffs of their Counties there in Richard’s
own time.! The Putney Blacksmith, Father of the Malleus, or
Hammer that smote Monasteries on the head,—a Figure worthy
to take his place beside Hephaistos, or Smith Mimer, if we ever
get a Pantheon in this Nation,—was probably enough himself a
Fen-country man; one of the junior branches, who came to live
by metallurgy in London here. Richard, also sprung of the
Fens, might have been his kinsman in many ways, have got the
name of Williams in many ways, and even been born on the Hill
behind Cardiff, independently of Glothian. Enough: Richard
Cromwell, on a background of heraldic darkness, rises clearly
visible to us; a man vehemently galloping to and fro, in that
sixteenth century ; tourneying successfully before King Harry,?
who loved a man; quickening the death-agonies of Monasteries ;
growing great on their spoil ;—and fated, he also, to produce
another Malleus Cromwell that smote a thing or two. And so
we will leave this matter of the Birth and Genealogy.

CHAPTER IV
EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY

Tue few ascertained, or clearly imaginable, Events in Oliver’s
Biography may as well be arranged, for our present purpose, in
the form of annals.

1Fuller’s Worthies, § Cambridgeshire, &c.
2Stowe’s Chronicle (London, 1631), p. 580; Stowe’s Survey, Holinshed, &c.

30 INTRODUCTION

1603

Early in January of this year, the old Grandfather, Sir Henry,
‘the Golden Knight,’ at Hinchinbrook, died:1 our Oliver, not
quite four years old, saw funerealia and crapes, saw Father and
Uncles with grave faces, and understood not well what it meant,
—understood only, or tried to understand, that the good old
Grandfather was gone away, and would never pat his head any
more. The maternal Grandfather, at Ely, was yet, and for above
a dozen years more, living.

The same year, four months afterwards, King James, coming
from the North to take possession of the English crown, lodged
two nights at Hinchinbrook ; with royal retinue, with immense
sumptuosities, addressings, knight-makings, ceremonial exhibi-
tions; which must have been a grand treat for little Oliver.
His Majesty came from the Belvoir-Castle region, ‘hunting all
the way, on the afternoon of Wednesday 27th April 1603 ; and
set off, through Huntingdon and Godmanchester, towards Royston,
on Friday forenoon.2, The Cambridge Doctors brought him an
Address while here ; Uncle Oliver, besides the ruinously splendid
entertainments, gave him hounds, horses and astonishing gifts at
his departure. In return there were Knights created, Sir Oliver
first of the batch, we may suppose; King James had decided
that there should be no reflection for the want of Knights at
least. Among the large batches manufactured next year was
Thomas Steward of Ely, henceforth Sir Thomas, Mrs. Robert
Cromwell’s Brother, our Oliver’s Uncle. Hinchinbrook got
great honour by this and other royal visits ; but found it, by and
by, a dear-bought honour.—

Oliver's Biographers, or rather Carrion Heath his first Bio-
grapher whom the others have copied, introduced various tales
into these early years of Oliver: of his being run away with by
an ape along the leads of Hinchinbrook, and England being all
but delivered from him, had the Fates so ordered it; of his
seeing prophetic spectres ; of his robbing orchards, and fighting
tyrannously with boys ; of his acting in School Plays; of his &e.
&c.—The whole of which, grounded on ‘ Human Stupidity’ and

_ Poor Noble, unequal sometimes to the copying of a Parish-register, with his
judgment as/eep, dates this event 1603-4 (at p. 20, vol. i.), and then placidly (at p.
40) states a fact inconsistent therewith. [Noble's dates are as a rule very accurate,
but his book, like many of that day, has a good many misprints. Carlyle himself
has one here, for the reference should be p. 22.]

2Stowe’s Chronicle, 812, &e.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 31

Carrion Heath alone, begs us to give it Christian burial once for
all. Oliver attended the Public School of Huntingdon, which
was then conducted by a worthy Dr. Beard, of whose writing I
possess a Book,! of whom we shall hear again: he learned, to
appearance moderately well, what the sons of other gentlemen
were taught in such places ; went through the universal destinies
which conduct all men from childhood to youth, in a way not
particularised in any one point by an authentic record. Readers
of lively imagination can follow him on his bird-nesting expedi-
tions, to the top of ‘ Barnabee’s big Tree,’ and elsewhither, if
they choose; on his fen-fowling expeditions, social sports and
labours manifold ; vacation-visits to his Uncles, to Aunt Hampden
and Cousin John among others : all these things must have been ;
but how they specially were is forever hidden from all men. He
had kindred of the sort above specified ; parents of the sort above
specified, rigorous yet affectionate persons, and very religious, as
all rational persons then were. He had two sisters elder, and
gradually four younger; the only boy among seven. Readers
must fancy his growth there, in the North end of Huntingdon,
in the beginning of the Seventeenth Century, as they can.

In January 1603-4,2 was held at Hampton Court a kind of

1 The Theatre of God's Judgments: By Thomas Beard, Doctor of Divinity, and
Preacher of the Word of God in the Town of Huntingdon: Third Edition, increased
by many new Examples (‘Examples’ of God's Justice vindicating itself openly on
Violaters of God’s Law,—that is the purport of the Book): Lond. 1631.—A kindly
ingenious little Book; still partly readable, almost loveable; some thin but real
vein of perennial ingenuity and goodness recognisable in it. What one might call
a Set of ‘ Percy-Anecdotes ;’ but Anecdotes authentic, solemnly select, and with a
purpose: ‘ Percy-Anecdotes’ for a more earnest Century than ours! Dedicated to
the Mayor and Burgesses of Huntingdon,—for sundry good reasons ; among others,
‘Because, Mr. Mayor, you were my scholar, and brought up in my house.’

? Here, more fitly perhaps than afterwards, it may be brought to mind, that the
English year in those times did not begin till March; that New Year’s Day was
the 25th of March. Soin England, at that time, in all records, writings and books ;
as indeed in official records it continued so till 1752. In Scotland it was already
not so; the year began with January there ever since 1600;—as in all Catholic
countries it had done ever since the Papal alteration of the Sty/e in 1582; and as
in most Protestant countries, excepting England, it soon after that began to do.
Scotland in respect of the day of the month still followed the Old Style.

‘New Year's Day the 25th of March:’ this is the whole compass of the fact;
with which a reader in those old books has, not without more difficulty than he
expects, to familiarise himself. It has occasioned more misdatings and consequent
confusions to modern editorial persons than any other as simple circumstance. So
learned a man as Whitaker Historian of Whalley, editing Str George Radclifé's
Correspondence (London, 1810), with the lofty air which sits well on him on other
Occasions, has altogether forgotten the above small circumstance: in consequence
of which we have Oxford Carriers dying in January, or the first half of March, and
to our great amazement going on to forward butter-boxes in the May following ;—
and similar miracles not a few occurring: and in short the whole Correspondence

32 INTRODUCTION

Theological Convention, of intense interest all over England,
and doubtless at Huntingdon too; now very dimly known, if at
all known, as the ‘ Hampton-Court Conference.’ It was a meeting
for the settlement of some dissentient humours in religion. The
Millennary Petition,—what we should now call the ‘ Monster
Petition,’ for the like in number of signatures was never seen
before,—signed by near a thousand Clergymen, of pious straitened
consciences: this and various other Petitions to his Majesty, by
persons of pious straitened consciences, had been presented ;
craving relief in some ceremonial points, which, as they found
no warrant for them in the Bible, they suspected (with a very
natural shudder in that case) to savour of Idol-worship and
Mimetic Dramaturgy, instead of God-worship, and to be very
dangerous indeed for a man to have concern with! Hampton-
Court Conference was accordingly summoned. Four world-
famous Doctors, from Oxford and Cambridge, represented the
pious straitened class, now beginning to be generally conspicuous
under the nickname Puritans. The Archbishop, the Bishop of
London, also world-famous men, with a considerable reserve of
other bishops, deans and dignitaries, appeared for the Church by
itself Church. Lord Chancellor, the renowned Egerton, and the
highest official persons, many lords and courtiers with a tincture
of sacred science, in fact the flower of England, appeared as
witnesses ; with breathless interest. The King himself presided ;
having real gifts of speech, and being very learned in Theology,—
which it was not then ridiculous but glorious for him to be.
More glorious than the monarchy of what we now call Literature
would be; glorious as the faculty of a Goethe holding visibly of
Heaven: supreme skill in Theology then meant that. To know
God, eds, the Makrer,—to know the divine Laws and inner
Harmonies of this Universe, must always be the highest glory
fora man! And not to know them, always the highest disgrace
for a man, however common it be !—

is jumbled to pieces; a due bit of topsy-turvy being introduced into the Spring of
every year; and the learned Editor sits, with his lofty air, presiding over mere
Chaos come again !—— In the text here, we of course translate into the modern
year, but leaving the day of the month as we find it; and if for greater assurance
both forms be written down, as for instance 1603-4, the /as¢ figure is always the |
modern one; 1603-4 means 1604 for ourcalendar. [As regards social observances,
however, New Year’s Day was then as it isnow. A letter so dated would be
written on January 1, not March 25, and people wished each other a Happy
New Year on the Feast of the Circumcision, not of the Annunciation. Thus

Evelyn, on January 1, 1655, speaks of begging a blessing on the year which he
was now entering. }

EVENTS IN OLIVER’S BIOGRAPHY 33

Awful devout Puritanism, decent dignified Ceremonialism
(both always of high moment in this world, but not of equally
high) appeared here facing one another for the first time. The
demands of the Puritans seem to modern minds very limited
indeed: That there should be a new correct Translation of the
Bible (granted), and increased zeal in teaching (omitted) ; That
‘lay impropriations’ (tithes snatched from the old Church by
laymen) might be made to yield a ‘seventh part’ of their amount,
towards maintaining ministers in dark regions which had none
(refused) ; That the Clergy in districts might be allowed to meet
together, and strengthen one another’s hands as in old times
(refused with indignation) ;—on the whole (if such a thing durst be
hinted at, for the tone is almost inaudibly low and humble), That
pious straitened Preachers, in terror of offending God by Idolatry,
and useful to human souls, might not be cast out of their parishes
for genuflexions, white surplices and such like, but allowed some
Christian liberty in mere external things: these were the claims
_of the Puritans ;—but his Majesty eloquently scouted them to
the winds, applauded by all bishops, and dignitaries lay and
clerical ; said, If the Puritans would not conform, he would ‘ harry
them out of the country ;'—and so sent Puritanism and the Four
Doctors home again, cowed into silence, for the present. This
was in January 1604.!_ News of this, speech enough about it,
could not fail in Robert Cromwell’s house among others. Oliver
is in his fifth year,—always a year older than the Century.

In November 1605, there likewise came to Robert Cromwell’s
house, no question of it, news of the thrice unutterable Gun-
powder Plot. Whereby King, Parliament, and God’s Gospel in
England, were to have been, in one infernal moment, blown
aloft ; and the Devil’s Gospel, and accursed incredibilities, idol-
atries, and poisonous confusions of the Romish Babylon, substi-
tuted in their room! The eternal Truth of the Living God to be-
come an empty formula, a shamming grimace of the Three-hatted
Chimera! These things did fill Huntingdon and Robert Crom-
well’s house with talk enough, in the winter of Oliver's sixth
year. And again, in the summer of his eleventh year, in May
1610, there doubtless failed not news and talk, How the Great
Henry was stabbed in Paris streets ; assassinated by the Jesuits ;
—black sons of the scarlet woman, murderous to soul and to

body.

1 Neal's History of the Puritans (London, 1754), i. 4z1,
VOL. 1.—3

34 INTRODUCTION

Other things, in other years, the diligent Historical Student
will supply according to faculty. The History of Europe, at
that epoch, meant essentially the struggle of Protestantism
against Catholicism,—a broader form of that same struggle, of
devout Puritanism against dignified Ceremonialism, which forms
the History of England then. Henry the Fourth of France, so
long as he lived, was still to be regarded as the head of Protes-
tantism ; Spain, bound up with the Austrian Empire, as that of
Catholicism. Henry’s ‘Grand Scheme’ naturally strove to carry
Protestant England along with it; James, till Henry’s death,
held on, in a loose way, by Henry; and his Political History, so
far as he has any, may be considered to lie there. After Henry's
death, he fell off to ‘Spanish Infantas,’ to Spanish interests ; and,
as it were, ceased to have any History, nay began to have a
negative one.

Among the events which Historical Students will supply for
Robert Cromwell’s house, and the spiritual pabulum of young
Oliver, the Death of Prince Henry in 1612,! and the prospective
accession of Prince Charles, fitter for a ceremonial Archbishop
than a governing King, as some thought,—will not be forgotten.
Then how the Elector Palatine was married ; and troubles began
to brew in Germany ; and little Dr. Laud was made Archdeacon
of Huntingdon :—-such news the Historical Student can supply.
And on the whole, all students and persons can know always
that Oliver’s mind was kept full of news, and never wanted for
pabulum! But from the day of his Birth, which is jotted down,
as above, in the Parish-register of St. John’s Huntingdon, there
is no other authentic jotting or direct record concerning Oliver
himself to be met with anywhere, till in the Admission-Book of
Sidney-Sussex College, Cambridge, we come to this,”

1616

‘A Festo Annunciationis ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli,
1616;’ such (meaning merely, From Nen-year’s-day, or 25th
March, to 29th September) is the general Heading of the List of
Scholars, or Admissi, for that Term ;—and first in order there,
stands, ‘ Olivertus Cromwell Huntingdoniensis admissus ad com-
‘“meatum Sociorum, A prilis vicesimo tertio ; Tutore Magistro Ricardo

16th Nov. (Camden's Annals).

2 Noble, i. 254;—corrected by the College Book itself, [This must mean
‘collated with’ as Noble's entry is quite accurate. ]

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 35

‘ Honlet :’ Oliver Cromwell from Huntingdon admitted Fellow
Commoner, 23d April 1616 ; Tutor Mr. Richard Howlet.—
Between which and the next Entry some zealous individual of
later date has crowded-in these lines: ‘ Hic fut grandis ille
‘Impostor, Carnifex perditissimus, qui pientissimo Rege Carolo Primo
‘nefarid cede sublato, ipsum usurpavit Thronum, et Tria Regna per
‘quinque ferme annorum spatium, sub Protectoris. nomine, indomitd
‘tyrannide vexavit.. Had the zealous individual specifically dated
this entry, it had been a slight improvement,—on a thing not
much improvable. We can guess, After 1660, and not long
after.

Curious enough, of all days, on this same day Shakspeare, as
his stone monument still testifies, at Stratford-on-Avon, died:

Obitt Anno Domini 1616.
tatis 53. Die 23 Apr.3

While Oliver Cromwell was entering himself of Sidney-Sussex
College, William Shakspeare was taking his farewell of this world,
Oliver’s Father had, most likely, come with him ; it is but some
fifteen miles from Huntingdon; you can go and come in a day.
Oliver's Father saw Oliver write in the Album at Cambridge : at
Stratford, Shakspeare’s Ann Hathaway was weeping over his bed.
The first world-great thing that remains of English History, the
Literature of Shakspeare, was ending; the second world-great
thing that remains of English History, the armed Appeal of Puri-
tanism to the Invisible God of Heaven against many very visible
Devils, on Earth and Elsewhere, was, so to speak, beginning.
They have their exits and their entrances. And one People, in
its time, plays many parts.

Chevalier Florian, in his Life of Cervantes, has remarked that
_Shakspeare’s death-day, 23d April, 1616, was likewise that of
Cervantes at Madrid. ‘Twenty-third of April’ is, sure enough,
the authentic Spanish date: but Chevalier Florian has omitted
to notice that the English twenty-third is of Old Style. The
brave Miguel died ten days before Shakspeare ; and already lay
buried, smoothed right nobly into his long rest. The Historical
Student can meditate on these things.—

In the foregoing winter, here in England, there was much
trying of Ker Earl of Somerset and my Lady once of Essex, and
the poisoners of Overbury ; and before Christmas the inferior

1 Collier's Life of Shakspeare (London, 1845), p. 253.

\

36 INTRODUCTION

murderers and infamous persons were mostly got hanged ; and
in these very days, while Oliver began his studies, my Lord of
Somerset and my Lady were tried, and not hanged. And Chief
Justice Coke, Coke upon Lyttleton, had got into difficulties by
the business. And England generally was overspread with a
very fetid atmosphere of Court-news, murders, and divorce-cases,
in those months; which still a little affects even the History of
England. Poor Somerset Ker, King’s favourite, ‘son of the
Laird of Ferniehirst, he and his extremely unedifying affairs,—
except as they might transiently affect the nostrils of some
Cromwell of importance,—do not much belong to the History
of England! Carrion ought at length to be buried. Alas, if
‘wise memory’ is ever to prevail, there is need of much ‘ wise
oblivion’ first.—

Oliver's Tutor in Cambridge, of whom legible History and 1
know nothing, was ‘ Magister Richard Howlet :’! whom readers
must fancy a grave ancient Puritan and Scholar, in dark anti-
quarian clothes and dark antiquarian ideas, according to their
faculty.The indubitable fact is, that he Richard Howlet did,
in Sidney-Sussex College, with his best ability, endeavour to
infiltrate something that he called instruction into the soul of
Oliver Cromwell and of other youths submitted to him: but
how, of what quality, with what method, with what result, will
remain extremely obscure to every one. In spite of mountains
of books, so are books written, all grows very obscure. About
this same date, George Radcliffe, Wentworth Strafford’s George,
at Oxford, finds his green-baize table-cover, which his mother

1(Mr. Howlett appears, some twenty years afterwards, in Ireland. Archbishop
Usher, writing to Laud on July 9, 1638, in relation to the provostship of Trinity
College, Dublin, says: ‘‘ There is also here Mr. Howlett (who is to succeed the
other [the newly-appointed Bishop of Cork and Ross], as they say, in the Deanery
of Cashel), late fellow of Sidney College in Cambridge, an able man and very fit
for government.” Dr. Bramhall, Bishop of Derry, writes of him more at length.
‘There is now a treaty of marriage between Mr. Howlett, one who was ten years
president (szc.) of Sydney College and my tutor, so far as to bear my name on his
books for some small time before I took my degree, though very little elder, and
Mrs. Browne’s only daughter. My Lord [Archbishop ?] hath expressed his approba-
tion of it. He is his [pupil and evased] chaplain, and shall succeed the Provost in the
Deanery of Cashel, and the Bishop of Cork in the rectory of Cargelene, and hath
pretty land of his own in England, worth 60o0/. or a thousand marks. I never knew
him quarrel with any man in my time. A moderate man in his tenets, far from Dr.
Ward's rigidity and his way, and one to whom my Lord would desire sooner to
trust the government of the College here than any man in the kingdom, as himself
hath told me.” S. P. Dom. Ireland, Car. /., cclvi., 107, 108. Howlett was installed

as Dean of Cashel on March 9g, 1638-9 (Cotton's aséz), but did not obtain the
Provostship. }

EVENTS IN OLIVER’S BIOGRAPHY 37

had sent him, too small; has it cut into < stockings ’ and goes
about with the same.! So unfashionable were young Gentlemen
Commoners. Queen Elizabeth was the first person in this
country who ever wore knit stockings.

1617

In March of this year, 1617, there was another royal visit at
Hinchinbrook.” But this time, I conceive, the royal entertainment
would be much more moderate ; Sir Oliver’s purse growing lank.
Over in Huntingdon, Robert Cromwell was lying sick, somewhat
indifferent to royal progresses.

King James, this time, was returning northward to visit poor
old Scotland again, to get his Pretended-Bishops set into activity,
if he could. It is well known that he could not, to any satisfac-
tory extent, neither now nor afterwards : his Pretended-Bishops,
whom by cunning means he did get instituted, had the name of
Bishops, but next to none of the authority, of the respect, or alas,
even of the cash, suitable to the reality of that office. They were
by the Scotch People derisively called Tulchan Bishops.—Did the
reader ever see, or fancy in his mind, a Tulchan? A Tulchan is,
or rather was, for the thing is long since obsolete, a Calf-skin
stuffed into the rude similitude of a Calf,—similar enough to
deceive the imperfect perceptive organs of a Cow. At milking-
time the Tulchan, with head duly bent, was set as if to suck ;
the fond cow looking round fancied that her calf was busy, and
that all was right, and so gave her milk freely, which the cunning
maid was straining in white abundance into her pail all the while !
The Scotch milkmaids in those days cried, “ Where is the Tulchan ;

_is the Tulchan ready?’ So of the Bishops. Scotch Lairds were
eager enough to ‘milk’ the Church Lands and Tithes, to get the
rents out of them freely, which was not always easy. They were
glad to construct a Form of Bishops to please the King and
Church, and make the milk come without disturbance. The

1 ‘University College, Oxford, 4th Dec. 1610.
“Loving Mother,—* * Send also, I pray, you by Briggs ” (this is Briggs
the Carrier, who dies in January, and continues forwarding butter in May),
“‘a green table-cloth of a yard and half a quarter, and two linen table-cloths.
‘* * If the green table-cloth be too little, I will make a pair of warm stockings
“of it, * * —Thus remembering my humble duty, I take my leave.—Your
“loving son,
‘“GEORGE RADCLIFFE.”
Radcliffe’s Letters, by Whitaker (London, 1810), p, 64-5.
2Camden’s Annals, Nichols’s Progresses.

38 INTRODUCTION

reader now knows what a Tulchan Bishop was. A piece of
mechanism constructed not without difficulty, in Parliament and
King’s Council, among the Scots; and torn asunder afterwards
with dreadful clamour, and scattered to the four winds, so soon
as the Cow became awake to it !—

Villiers Buckingham, the new favourite, of whom we say little,
was of the royal party here. Dr. Laud, too, King’s Chaplain,
Archdeacon of Huntingdon, attended the King on this occasion ;
had once more the pleasure of seeing Huntingdon, the cradle of
his promotions, and the birth-place of Oliver. In Scotland, Dr.
Laud, much to his regret, found “ no religion at all,” no surplices,
no altars in the east or anywhere; no bowing, no responding ;
not the smallest regularity of fuglemanship or devotional drill-
exercise ; in short “no religion at all that I could see,’—which
grieved me much.!

What to us is greatly more momentous: while these royal
things went on in Scotland, in the end of this same June at
Huntingdon, Robert Cromwell died. His Will is dated 6th
June.? His burial-day is marked in the Church of All-Saints,
24th June 1617. For Oliver, the chief mourner, one of the
most pregnant epochs. The same year, died his old Grandfather
Steward, at Ely. Mrs. Robert Cromwell saw herself at once
fatherless and a second time widowed, in this year of bereave-
ment. Left with six daughters and an only son; of whom three
were come to years.

Oliver was now, therefore, a young heir; his age eighteen, last
April. How many of his Sisters, or whether any of them, were
yet settled, we do not learn from Noble’s confused searching of
records or otherwise. Of this Huntingdon household, and its
new head, we learn next to nothing by direct evidence ; but can
decisively enough, by inference, discern several things. ‘Oliver
returned no more to Cambridge.’ It was now fit that he should
take his Father’s place here at Huntingdon, that he should, by
the swiftest method, qualify himself in some degree for that.

The universal very credible tradition is, that he, ‘soon after,’
proceeded to London, to gain some knowledge of Law. ‘Soon
after’ will mean certain months, we know not how many, after

1 Wharton's Laud (London, 1695), pp. 97, 109, 138.

2 Noble, i. 84.

3 [His sister Margaret married Valentine Walton, June 20, 1617, on or about
the day of her father’s death (perhaps hurriedly, just before he died), as is shown
by the register of St. John’s, Huntingdon. }

— en

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 39

July 1617. Noble says, he was entered ‘of Lincoln’s Inn.’ The
Books of Lincoln’s Inn, of Gray’s Inn, of all the Inns of Court
have been searched ; and there is no Oliver Cromwell found in
them. The Books of Gray’s Inn contain these Cromwell Names,
which are perhaps worth transcribing :

Thomas Cromwell, 1524; Francis Cromwell, 1561 ;
Gilbert Cromwell, 1609; Henry Cromwell, 1620;
Henry Cromwell, 22d February, 1653.

The first of which seems to me probably or possibly to mean
Thomas Cromwell Malleus Monachorum, at that time returned
from his Italian adventures, and in the service of Cardinal Wolsey ;
—taking the opportunity of hearing the ‘readers, old Benchers ~
who then actually read, and of learning Law. The Henry Crom-
well of February 1653-4 is expressly entered as ‘Second sonne
to his Highness Oliver, Lord Protector :’ an interesting little
fact, since it is an indisputable one. For the rest, Henry Crom-
well was already a Colonel] in the Army in 1651 :1 in 1654, during
the spring months he was in Ireland ; in the month of June he
was at Chippenham in Cambridgeshire with his father-in-law,
being already married ;? and next year he went again on political
business to Ireland, where he before long became Lord Deputy :*
if for a while, in the end of 1654, he did attend in Gray’s Inn, it
can only have been, like his predecessor the Malleus, to gain
some inkling of Law for general purposes ; and not with any
view towards Advocateship, which did not lie in his course at all,
and was never very lovely either to his Father or himself. Oliver
Cromwell’s, as we said, is not a name found in any of the Books
in that period.

Whence is to be inferred that Oliver was never of any Inn;
that he never meant to be a professional Lawyer; that he had
entered himself merely in the chambers of some learned gentle-
man, with an eye to obtain some tincture of Law, for doing
~ County Magistracy, and the other duties of a gentleman citizen,
in a reputable manner. The stories of his wild living while in
Town, of his gambling and so forth, rest likewise exclusively on

1Qld Newspaper, in Cromwelliana, p. 91.

2*toth May 1653,—Mr. Henry Cromwell to Elizabeth Russel’ (Registers of
Kensington Church, in Faulkener’s Azstory of Kensington, p. 360).

3 Here are the successive dates ; 4th March 1653-4, he arrives at Dublin (Thurloe’s
State Papers, ii. 149); is at Chippenham, 18th June 1654 (2d. ii. 381); arrives at
Chester on his way to Ireland again, 22d June 1655 (2d. iii. 581) ;—produces his
commission as Lord Deputy, 24th or 25th November 1657 (Noble, i. 202),

40 INTRODUCTION

Carrion Heath ; and solicit oblivion and Christian burial from all
men. We cannot but believe he did go to Town to gain some
knowledge of Law. But when he went, how long he stayed,
cannot be known except approximately by years ; under whom he
studied, with what fruit, how he conducted himself as a young
man and law-student, cannot be known at all. Of evidence
that he ever lived a wild life about Town or elsewhere, there
exists no particle. To assert the affirmative was then a great
reproach to him; fit for Carrion Heath and others: it would be
now, in our present strange condition of the Moral Law, one
knows not what. With a Moral Law gone all to such a state of
moonshine ; with the hard Stone-tables, the god-given Precepts
and eternal Penalties, dissolved all in cant and mealy-mouthed
official flourishings,—it might perhaps, with certain parties, be a
credit! The admirers and the censurers of Cromwell have alike
no word to record on the subject.

1618

Thursday, 29th October 1618. This morning, if Oliver, as is
probable, were now in Town studying Law, he might be eye-wit-
ness of a great and very strange scene: the Last Scene in the
Life of Sir Walter Raleigh! Raleigh was beheaded in Old
Palaceyard ; he appeared on the scaffold there ‘about eight
o'clock’ that morning ; ‘an immense crowd,’ all London, and in
a sense all England, looking on. A cold hoarfrosty morning.
Earl of Arundel, now known to us by his Greek Marbles; Earl
of Doncaster (‘Sardanapalus’ Hay, ultimately Earl of Carlisle) :
these with other earls and dignitaries sat looking through win-
dows near by; to whom Raleigh in his last brief manful speech
appealed, with response from them. He had failed of finding
Eldorados in the Indies lately ; he had failed, and also succeeded,
in many things in his time: he returned home with his brain and
his heart ‘broken,’ as he said ;—and the Spaniards, who found
King James willing, now wished that he should die. A very
tragic scene. Such a man, with his head grown gray; with his
strong heart ‘breaking,—still strength enough in it to break
with dignity. Somewhat proudly he laid his old grey head on
the block ; as if saying, in better than words, “There then!”
The Sheriff offered to let him warm himself again, within doors

1Camden ; Biog. Britan.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 41

again at a fire. “Nay, let us be swift,” said Raleigh ; “in few
“minutes my ague will return upon me, and if I be not dead
“before that, they will say I tremble for fear.” —If Oliver, among
the ‘immense crowd,’ saw this scene, as is conceivable enough,
he would not want for reflections on it.

What is more apparent to us, Oliver in these days is a visitor
in Sir James Bourchier’s Town residence. Sir James Bourchier,
Knight, a civic gentleman; not connected at all with the old
Bourchiers Earls of Essex, says my heraldic friend ; but seem-
ingly come of City merchants rather, who by some of their
quarterings and cognizances appear to have been ‘ Furriers,’ says
he :—Like enough. Not less but more important, it appears
this Sir James Bourchier was a man of some opulence, and had
daughters ; had a daughter Elizabeth, not without charms for
the youthful heart. Moreover he had landed property near
Felsted in Essex, where his usual residence was. Felsted, where
there is still a kind of School or Free-School, which was of more
note in those days than now. That Oliver visited in Sir James’s
[house] in Town or elsewhere, we discover with great certainty
by the next written record of him.

1620

The Registers of St. Giles’s Church, Cripplegate, London, are
written by a third party as usual, and have no autograph signa-
tures; but in the List of Marriages for ‘August 1620, stand
these words, still to be read sic :

‘ Oliver Cromwell to Elizabeth Bourcher. 22.’

Milton’s burial-entry is in another Book of the same memorable
Church, ‘12 Nov. 1674;’ where Oliver on the 22d of August
1620 was married.

Oliver is twenty-one years and four months old on this his
wedding-day. He repaired, speedily or straightway we believe,
to Huntingdon, to his Mother’s house, which indeed was now
his. His Law-studies, such as they were, had already ended, we
infer: he had already set up house with his Mother; and was
now bringing a Wife home ; the due arrangements for that end
having been completed. Mother and Wife were to live together ;
the Sisters had got or were getting married,—Noble’s researches
and confused jottings do not say specially when: the Son, as new
head of the house, an inexperienced head, but a teachable, ever-

42 INTRODUCTION

learning one, was to take his Father’s place; and with a wise
Mother and a good Wife, harmonising tolerably well we shall
hope, was to manage as he best might. Here he continued,
unnoticeable but easily imaginable by History, for almost ten
years: farming lands; most probably attending quarter-sessions ;
doing the civic, industrial, and social duties, in the common
way ;—living as his Father before him had done. His first child
was born here, in October 1621; a son, Robert, baptised at Si
John’s Church on the 13th of the month, of whom nothing farther
is known.) A second child, also a son, Oliver, followed, whose
baptismal date is 6th February 1622-3, of whom also we have
almost no farther account,—except one that can be proved to be
erroneous.2. The List of his other children shall be given by
and by.

1623

In October 1623, there was an illumination of tallow lights, a
ringing of bells, and gratulation of human hearts in all Towns in
England, and doubtless in Huntingdon too: on the safe return

1 Date of his burial discovered lately, in the old Parish-Register of Felsted in
Essex ; recorded in peculiar terms, and specially in the then Vicar's hand : ‘ Rodertus
“Cromwell, Filius honorandi, viri Mtis’ (Militis) ‘ Olzveris Cromwell et Elizabethe
‘ Usxoris ejus, sepultus furt 31° die Mati 1639. Et Robertus fuit eximie pius juvents,
Deum timens supra multos.' (See Edinburgh Review, No. 209, January 1856, p.
54.) So that Oliver's first great loss in his Family was of this Eldest Son, then in
his 18th year ; not of a Younger one as was hitherto supposed. (/Vo/e of 1857.) [An
attempt was made by a writer in the Asser Review (volii., p. 124) to prove that
this Robert was the son of Sir Oliver, the Protector’s uncle. The argument was
originally founded upon a mistaken idea that the date of the entry was 1623; but
even after the writer discovered and acknowledged his mistake, he was apparently
still inclined to think that the Oliver might better be the Protector’s uncle than
himself, on account of the difficulty caused by the word JZ#s,__As the children of
Sir Oliver by his first wife Elizabeth, were, in 1639, middle-aged men, and as his
second wife was not Elizabeth, but’Anne, this theory, in addition to other objections,
would involve the necessity of giving Sir Oliver a third and quite unknown wife, as
a mother for the equally unknown boy. In yol. y. of the same Review (p. 225)
Mr. John French, in defending the Edinburgh Reviewer’s (z.e. Mr. John Forster's)
theory, gives an interesting description of the Registers of Felsted, and suggests that
the Vicar might easily make the mistake of supposing Oliver to be a knight. Asa
matter of fact, the whole difficulty has been caused by a misreading of the entry.
The Rev. C. T. Eland, Vicar of Felsted, has kindly allowed the present editor to
inspect the register, and the true reading is as follows: Podertus Cromwell, filius
honorandi viri mri (magistri) Oliveris Cromwell et Elizabethe uxoris ejus sepultus
fuit 3%mo die Mait: iste (?) Robertus fuit eximie spet juvenis deumgque timens
supra muitos.” The year date, 1639, appears only at the beginning of the entries

for that year; and not this entry ‘‘specially” but all of that period are in the then
Vicar’s hand. |

2 Noble, i. 132.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 43

of Prince Charles from Spain without the Infanta.! A matter of
endless joy to all true Englishmen of that day, though no English-
man of this day feels any interest in it one way or the other.
But Spain, even more than Rome, was the chosen throne of
Popery ; which in that time meant temporal and eternal Damna-
bility, Falsity to God’s Gospel, love of prosperous Darkness
rather than of suffering Light,—infinite baseness rushing short-
sighted upon infinite peril for this world and for all worlds. King
James, with his worldly-wise endeavourings to marry his son into
some first-rate family, never made a falser calculation than in
this grand business of the Spanish Match. The soul of England
abhorred to have any concern with Spain or things Spanish.
Spain was as a black Domdaniel, which, had the floors of it been
paved with diamonds, had the Infanta of it come riding in such
a Gig of Respectability as was never driven since Phaéton’s
Sun-chariot took the road, no honest English soul could wish to
have concern with. Hence England illuminated itself. The
articulate tendency of this Solomon King had unfortunately
parted company altogether with the inarticulate but ineradicable
tendency of the Country he presided over. The Solomon King
struggled one way; and the English Nation with its very life-
fibres was compelled to struggle another way. The rent by
degrees became wide enough!

For the present, England is all illuminated, a new Parliament
is summoned ; which welcomes the breaking of the Spanish
Match, as one might welcome the breaking of a Dr. Faustus’s
Bargain, and a deliverance from the power of sorcerers. Uncle
Oliver served in this Parliament, as was his wont, for Huntingdon-
shire. They and the Nation with one voice impelled the poor
old King to draw out his fighting tools at last, and beard this
Spanish Apollyon, instead of making marriages with it. No
Pitt’s crusade against French Sansculottism in the end of the
Eighteenth Century could be so welcomed by English Preservers
of the Game, as this defiance of the Spanish Apollyon was by
Englishmen in general in the beginning of the Seventeenth.
The Palatinate was to be recovered, after all; Protestantism,
the sacred cause of God’s Light and Truth against the Devil’s
Falsity and Darkness, was to be fought for and secured. Supplies
were voted ; ‘drums beat in the City’ and elsewhere, as they

1H. L. (Hamond L’Estrange) : Reign of King Charles (London, 1656), p. 3.
‘October sth,’ the Prince arrived,

44 INTRODUCTION

had done three years ago,! to the joy of all men, when the
Palatinate was first to be ‘defended:’ but now it was to be
‘recovered ;’ now a decisive effort was to be made. The issue,
as is well known, corresponded ill with these beginnings. Count
Mansfeldt mustered his levies here, and set sail; but neither
France nor any other power would so much as let him land.
Count Mansfeldt’s levies died of pestilence in their ships; ‘ their
bodies, thrown ashore on the Dutch coast, were eaten by hogs,’
till half the armament was dead on shipboard: nothing came of
it, nothing could come. Witha James Stuart for Generalissimo,
there is no good fighting possible. The poor King himself soon
after died ;? left the matter to develop itself in other still fataller
ways.

ia those years it must be that Dr. Simcott, Physician in Hun-
tingdon, had to do with Oliver's hypochondriac maladies. He
told Sir Philip Warwick, unluckily specifying no date, or none
that has survived, “he had often been sent for at midnight ;”
Mr. Cromwell for many years was very “splenetic” (spleen-
struck), often thought he was just about to die, and also “had
fancies about the Town Cross.”? Brief intimation; of which
the reflective reader may make a great deal. Samuel Johnson
too had hypochondrias; all great souls are apt to have,—and
to be in thick darkness generally, till the eternal ways and the
celestial guiding-stars disclose themselves, and the vague Abyss
of Life knit itself up into Firmaments for them. Temptations
in the wilderness, Choices of Hercules, and the like, in succinct
or loose form, are appointed for every man that will assert a soul
in himself and be a man. Let Oliver take comfort in his dark
sorrows and melancholies. The quantity of sorrow he has, does
it not mean withal the quantity of sympathy he has, the quantity
of faculty and victory he shall yet have? Our sorrow is the
inverted image of our nobleness. The depth of our despair
measures what capability, and height of claim we have to hope.
Black smoke as of Tophet filling all your universe, it can yet
by true heart-energy become flame, and brilliancy of Heaven.
Courage !

It is therefore in these years, undated by History, that we
must place Oliver’s clear recognition of Calvinistie Christianity ;
what he, with unspeakable joy, would name his Conversion ; his

1z1th June 1620 (Camden’s Aznals),
2 Sunday, 27th March 1625 (Wilson, in Kennet, ii., 790).
3Sir Philip Warwick’s J/emozs (London, 1701), p. 249.

“

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 45

deliverance from the jaws of Eternal Death. Certainly a grand
epoch for a man: properly the one epoch; the turning-point
which guides upwards, or guides downwards, him and his ac-
tivity forevermore. Wilt thou join with the dragons; wilt thou
join with the Gods? Of thee too the question is asked ;—
whether by a man in Geneva gown, by a man in ‘ Four surplices
at Allhallowtide,’ with words very imperfect ; or by no man and
no words, but only by the Silences, by the Eternities, by the
Life everlasting and the Death everlasting. That the ‘Sense
of difference between Right and Wrong’ had filled all Time and
all Space for man, and bodied itself forth into a Heaven and Hell
for him: this constitutes the grand feature of those Puritan, Old-
Christian Ages; this is the element which stamps them as Heroic,
and has rendered their works great, manlike, fruitful to all gener-
ations. Itis by far the memorablest achievement of our Species ;
without that element, in some form or other, nothing of Heroic
had ever been among us.

For many centuries, Catholic Christianity, a fit embodiment of
that divine Sense, had been current more or less, making the
generations noble: and here in England, in the Century called
the Seventeenth, we see the last aspect of it hitherto,—not the
last of all, it is to be hoped. Oliver was henceforth a Christian
man ; believed in God, not on Sundays only, but on all days, in
all places, and in all cases.

1624

The grievance of Lay Impropriations, complained of in the
Hampton-Court Conference twenty years ago, having never
been abated, and many parts of the country being still thought
insufficiently supplied with Preachers, a plan was this year fallen
upon to raise by subscription, among persons grieved at that state
of matters, a Fund for buying-in such Impropriations as might
offer themselves; for supporting good ministers therewith, in
destitute places; and for otherwise encouraging the ministerial
work, The originator of this scheme was ‘the famous Dr. Pres-
ton, 1a Puritan College Doctor of immense ‘fame’ in those and
in prior years; courted even by the Duke of Buckingham, and
tempted with the gleam of bishoprics; but mouldering now in
great oblivion, not famous to any man. His scheme, however,

1 Heylin’s Life of Laud. |

46 INTRODUCTION

was found good. The wealthy London Merchants, almost all
of them Puritans, took it up; and by degrees the wealthier
Puritans over England at large. Considerable ever-increasing
funds were subscribed for this pious object; were vested in
‘Feoffees,’—who afterwards made some noise in the world,
under that name. They gradually purchased some Advowsons
or Impropriations, such as came to market ; and hired, or assisted
in hiring, a great many ‘ Lecturers,’ persons not generally in full
‘ Priest’s-orders’ (having scruples about the ceremonies), but in
‘Deacon’s’ or some other orders, with permission to preach, to
‘lecture,’ as it was called: whom accordingly we find lecturing
in various places, under various conditions, in the subsequent
years ;—often in some market-town, ‘on market-day ;’ on
‘Sunday-afternoon,’ as supplemental to the regular Priest when
he might happen to be idle, or given to black and white sur-
plices; or as ‘running Lecturers, now here, now there, over
a certain district. They were greatly followed by the serious
part of the community ; and gave proportional offence in other
quarters. In some years hence, they had risen to such a height,
these Lecturers, that Dr. Laud, now come into authority, took
them seriously in hand, and with patient detail hunted them
mostly out; nay brought the Feoffees themselves and their
whole Enterprise into the Star-chamber, and there, with em-
phasis enough, and heavy damages, amid huge rumour from the
public, suppressed them. This was in 1633 ; a somewhat strong
measure. How would the Public take it now, if,—we say not
the gate of Heaven, but the gate of the Opposition Hustings
were suddenly shut against mankind,—if our Opposition News-
papers, and their morning Prophesyings, were suppressed !—
That Cromwell was a contributor to this Feoffee Fund, and
a zealous forwarder of it according to his opportunities, we
might already guess; and by and by there will occur some
vestige of direct evidence to that effect.

Oliver naturally consorted henceforth with the Puritan Clergy
in preference to the other kind ; zealously attended their ministry,
when possible ;—consorted with Puritans in general, many of
whom were Gentry of his own rank, some of them Nobility of
much higher rank. A modest devout man, solemnly intent ‘to
make his calling and his election sure, to whom, in credible
dialect, the Voice of the Highest had spoken. Whose earnest-
ness, sagacity and manful worth gradually made him conspicuous
in his circle among such.—The Puritans were already numerous.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 47

John Hampden, Oliver’s Cousin, was a devout Puritan, John Pym
the like ; Lord Brook, Lord Say, Lord Montague,—Puritans in the
better ranks, and in every rank, abounded. Already either in
conscious act, or in clear tendency, the far greater part of the
serious Thought and Manhood of England had declared itself
Puritan.

1625

Mark Noble, citing Willis’s Notctia, reports that Oliver appeared
this year as Member ‘for Huntingdon’ in: King Charles’s first
Parliament.1 It is a mistake ; grounded on mere blunders and
clerical errors. Browne Willis, in his Notetia Parlamentaria, does
indeed specify as Member for Huntingdonshire an ‘ Oliver Crom-
well, Esq., who might be our Oliver. But the usual member in
former Parliaments is Sir Oliver, our Oliver's Uncle. Browne
Willis must have made, or have copied, some slip of the pen.
Suppose him to have found in some of his multitudinous parch-
ments, an ‘ Oliver Cromwell, Knight of the Shire :’ and in place of
putting in the ‘Sir,’ to have put in ‘ Esq. ;’ it will solve the whole
difficulty.. Our Oliver, when he indisputably did afterwards
enter Parliament, came in for Huntingdon Town ; so that, on this
hypothesis, he must have first been Knight of the Shire, and
then have sunk (an immense fall in those days) to be a Burgh
Member ; which cannot without other ground be credited. What
the original Chancery Parchments say of the business, whether
the error is theirs or Browne Willis’s, I cannot decide ; on inquiry
at the Rolls’ Office, it turns out that the Records, for some fifty
years about this period, have vanished “a good while ago.” ?
Whose error it may be, we know not ; but an error we may safely
conclude it is. Sir Oliver was then still living at Hinchinbrook,
in the vigour of his years, no reason whatever why he should not
serve as formerly ; nay, if he had withdrawn, his young Nephew,
of no fortune for a Knight of the Shire, was not the man to
replace him. The Members for Huntingdon Town in this
Parliament, as in the preceding one, are a Mr. Mainwaring and
a Mr. St. John. The County Members in the preceding Parlia-
ment, and in this too with the correction of the concluding

1 Noble, i. 100.

2(This can only mean that the original returns from the county of Huntingdon in
this year (but by no means for fifty years) are wanting. The Crown Office list, how-
ever, supplies the deficiency, and, of course, gives Oliver Cromwell, Anzght, as the
county member. ]

48 INTRODUCTION

syllable in this are ‘Edward Montague, Esquire, and ‘Oliver
Cromwell, Knight.’

1626

In the Ashmole Museum at Oxford stands catalogued a ‘ Letter
‘from Oliver Cromwell to Mr. Henry Downhall, at St. John’s
‘College, Cambridge ; dated, Huntingdon, 14 October 1626 ;’ 1
which might perhaps, in some very faint way, have elucidated
Dr. Simcott and the hypochondrias for us. On applying to kind
friends at Oxford for a copy of this Letter, I learn that there is
now no Letter, only a mere selvage of paper, and a leaf wanting
between two leaves. It was stolen, none knows when; but stolen
it is ;—which forces me to continue my Introduction some nine
years farther, instead of ending it at this point. Did some zealous
Oxford Doctor cut the Letter out, as one weeds a hemlock from
a parsley-bed ; that so the Ashmole Museum might be cleansed,
and yield only pure nutriment to mankind? Or was it some
collector of autographs, eager beyond law?? Whoever the thief
may be, he is probably dead long since; and has answered for
this,—and also, we may fancy, for heavier thefts, which were
likely to be charged upon him. If any humane individual ever
henceforth get his eye upon the Letter, let him be so kind as
send a copy of it to the Publishers of this Book, and no questions
will be asked. ®

1627

A Deed of Sale, dated 20 June 1627, still testifies that Hin-
chinbrook this year passed out of the hands of the Cromwells
into those of the Montagues.t* The price was 3000/.; curiously
divided into two parcels, down to shillings and pence,—one of
the parcels being already a creditor's. The Purchaser is ‘Sir

1 Bodleian Library: Codices Mss. Ashmoleani, no. 8398.

2(Mr. Sanford says of this; ‘‘ I confess I strongly suspect Hearne to have been
guilty of this peculation. His character in that respect is not immaculate, and the
letter first appears in print in one of his miscellaneous antiquarian gatherings, the
Liber Niger Scaccariz, appendix” (Studies and Lllustrations of the Great Rebellion,
p. 227, note). It seems however very doubtful whether the ovigzza/ was ever in the
Ashmole Museum at all, for after giving the letter Hearne prints the following note,
‘‘T copied this (saith Mr. Ashmole) from the original, being then in the said Mr.
Downhall’s hands. The child above mentioned was named Richard, who came to
be Lord Protector, 1658.'"]

5 Letter found, worth nothing: Appendix, No. 1. (Note to Second Edition.)

4 Noble, i. 43.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 49

‘Sidney Montague, Knight, of Barnwell, one of His Majesty’s
‘Masters of the Requests. Sir Oliver Cromwell, son of the
Golden Knight, having now burnt out his splendour, disappeared
in this way from Hinchinbrook ; retired deeper into the Fens, to a
place of his near Ramsey Mere, where he continued still thirty
years longer to reside, in an eclipsed manner. It was to this
house at Ramsey that Oliver, our Oliver, then Captain Cromwell
in the Parliament’s service, paid the domiciliary visit much talked
of in the old Books. The reduced Knight, his Uncle, was a
Royalist or Malignant ; and his house had to be searched for
arms, for munitions, for furnishings of any sort, which he might
be minded to send off to the King, now at York, and evidently
intending war. Oliver's dragoons searched with due rigour for
the arms; while the Captain respectfully conversed with his
Uncle ; and even ‘insisted’ through the interview, say the old
Books, ‘on standing uncovered :’ which latter circumstance may
be taken as an astonishing hypocrisy in him, say the old block-
head Books. The arms, munitions, furnishings were with all
rigour of law, not with more rigour and not with less, carried
away; and Oliver parted with his Uncle, for that time, not
‘craving his blessing, I think, as the old blockhead Books say ;
but hoping he might, one day, either get it or a better than it,
for what he had now done. Oliver, while in military charge of
that country, had probably repeated visits to pay to his Uncle ;
and they know little of the man or of the circumstances, who
suppose there was any likelihood or need of either insolence or
hypocrisy in the course of these.

As for the old Knight, he seems to have been a man of easy
temper; given to sumptuosity of hospitality; and averse to
severer duties.: When his eldest son, who also showed a turn
for expense, presented him a schedule of debts, craving aid
towards the payment of them, Sir Oliver answered with a bland
sigh, “1 wish they were paid.” Various Cromwells, sons of his,
nephews of his, besides the great Oliver, took part in the Civil
War, some on this side, some on that, whose indistinct designa-
tions in the old Books are apt to occasion mistakes with modern
readers. Sir Oliver vanishes now from Hinchinbrook, and all
the public business records, into the darker places of the Fens.?

1Fuller’s Worthies, § Huntingdonshire.

2/'There is a certificate from him to the Privy Council in October 1637, at the
Public Record Office. See Calendar S. P. Dom. Chas. 1, Addenda, p.743. Dugdale,
in a letter written on Sept. 8, 1655, gives the following account of his death.

VOL. £L-—4

50 INTRODUCTION

His name disappears from Willis :—in the next Parliament, the
Knight of the Shire for Huntingdon becomes, instead of him,
‘Sir Capell Bedall, Baronet.’ The purchaser of Hinchinbrook,
Sir Sydney Montague, was brother of the first Earl of Man-
chester, brother of the third Lord Montague of Boughton,! and
father of ‘the valiant Colonel Montague,’ valiant General Mon-
tague, Admiral Montague, who, in an altered state of circumstances,
became first Earl of Sandwich, and perished, with a valour worthy
of a better generalissimo than poor James Duke of York, in the
Seafight of Solebay (Southwold Bay, on the coast of Suffolk) in
1672.?

In these same years, for the dates and all other circumstances
of the matter hang dubious in the vague, there is record given
by Dugdale, a man of very small authority on these Cromwell
matters, of a certain suit instituted, in the King’s Council, King’s
Court of Requests, or wherever it might be, by our Oliver and
other relations interested, concerning the lunacy of his Uncle,
Sir Thomas Steward of Ely. It seems they alleged, This Uncle
Steward was incapable of managing his affairs, and ought to be
restrained under guardians. Which allegation of theirs, and
petition grounded on it, the King’s Council saw good to deny:
whereupon—Sir Thomas Steward continued to manage his affairs,
in an incapable or semi-capable manner; and nothing followed
upon it whatever. Which proceeding of Oliver's, if there ever
was such a proceeding, we are, according to Dugdale, to consider
an act of villany,—if we incline to take that trouble. What we
know is, That poor Sir Thomas himself did not so consider it ;
for, by express testament some years afterwards, he declared
Oliver his heir in chief, and left him considerable property, as if
nothing had happened. So that there is this dilemma: If Sir
Thomas was imbecile, then Oliver was right; and unless Sir
Thomas was imbecile, Oliver was not wrong! Alas, all calumny
and carrion, does it not incessantly ery, “Earth, oh, for pity’s
sake, a little earth!”

‘‘ His [the Protector’s] uncle, Sir Oliver Cromwell, is lately dead by an unhappy
accident, for I hear that he was out in the rain, and after his return sitting by a
good fire without any company in the room, by some weakness or swoon fell into
the fire, and was so scorched that he died about two days after.” /7z/th Report of
the Hist. MSS. Commissioners, Appendix, p. 176.]

1[Third Sir Edward, but first Baron. }
2 Collins's Peerage (London, 1741), ii. 286-9.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 51

1628

Sir Oliver Cromwell has faded from the Parliamentary scene
into the deep Fen-country, but Oliver Cromwell, Esq. appears
there as Member for Huntingdon, at Westminster on ‘Monday
the 17th of March’ 1627-8. This was the Third Parliament
of Charles: by much the most notable of all Parliaments till
Charles’s Long Parliament met, which proved his last.

Having sharply, with swift impetuosity and indignation, dis-
missed two Parliaments, because they would not ‘supply’ him
without taking ‘grievances’ along with them; and, meanwhile
and afterwards, having failed in every operation foreign and
domestic, at Cadiz, at Rhé, at Rochelle ; and having failed, too,
in getting supplies by unparliamentary methods, Charles ‘con-
sulted with Sir Robert Cotton what was to be done;’ who
answered, Summon a Parliament again. So this celebrated
Parliament was summoned. It met, as we said, in March 1628,
and continued with one prorogation till March 1629. The two
former Parliaments had sat but a few weeks each, till they
were indignantly hurled asunder again; this one continued
nearly a year. Wentworth (Strafford) was of this Parliament ;
Hampden too, Selden, Pym, Holles, and others known to us:
all these had been of former Parliaments as well; Oliver
Cromwell, Member for Huntingdon, sat there for the first
time.

It is very evident, King Charles, baffled in all his enterprises,
and reduced really to a kind of crisis, wished much this Parlia-
ment should succeed ; and took what he must have thought
incredible pains for that end. The poor King strives visibly
throughout to control himself, to be soft and patient ; inwardly
‘writhing and rustling with royal rage. Unfortunate King, we
see him chafing, stamping,—a very fiery steed, but bridled, check-
bitted, by innumerable straps and considerations; struggling
much to be composed. Alas, it would not do. This Parliament
was more Puritanic, more intent on rigorous Law and divine
Gospel, than any other had ever been. As indeed all these
Parliaments grow strangely in Puritanism ; more and ever more
earnest rises from the hearts of them all, “O Sacred Majesty,
lead us not to Antichrist, to [llegality, to temporal and eternal
Perdition!” The Nobility and Gentry of England were then a
very strange body of men. The English Squire of the Seven-
teenth Century clearly appears to have believed in God, not as

52 INTRODUCTION

a figure of speech, but as a very fact, very awful to the heart of
the English Squire. ‘He wore his Bible-doctrine round him,’
says one, ‘as our Squire wears his shot-belt; went abroad with
‘it, nothing doubting.’ King Charles was going on his father’s
course, only with frightful acceleration: he and his respectable
Traditions and Notions, clothed in old sheepskin and respectable
Church-tippets, were all pulling one way; England and the
Eternal Laws pulling another ;—the rent fast widening till no
man could heal it.

This was the celebrated Parliament which framed the Petition
of Right, and set London all astir with ‘bells and bonfires’ at
the passing thereof; and did other feats not to be particularised
here. Across the murkiest element in which any great Entity
was ever shown to human creatures, it still rises, after much con-
sideration, to the modern man, in a dim but undeniable manner,
as a most brave and noble Parliament. The like of which were
worth its weight in diamonds even now ;—but has grown very
unattainable now, next door to incredible now. We have to say
that this Parliament chastised sycophant Priests, Mainwaring,
Sibthorp, and other Arminian sycophants, a disgrace to God’s
Church ; that it had an eye to other still more elevated Church-
Sycophants, as the mainspring of all; but was cautious to give
offence by naming them. That it carefully ‘abstained from
naming the Duke of Buckingham.’ That it decided on giving
ample subsidies, but not till there were reasonable discussion of
grievances. That in manner it was most gentle, soft-spoken,
cautious, reverential ; and in substance most resolute and valiant.
Truly with valiant patient energy, in a slow stedfast English
manner, it carried, across infinite confused opposition and dis-
couragement, its Petition of Right, and what else it had to carry.
Four hundred brave men,—brave men and true, after their sort !
One laments to find such a Parliament smothered under Dryas-
dust’s shot-rubbish. The memory of it, could any real memory of
it rise upon honourable gentlemen and us, might be admonitory,
—would be astonishing at least. We must clip one extract from
Rushworth’s huge Rag-fair of a Book ; and mournfullest torpedo
rubbish-heap, of jewels buried under sordid wreck and dust and
dead ashes, one jewel to the wagon-load ;—and let the reader
try to make a visual scene of it as he can. Here, we say, is an
old Letter, which ‘old Mr. Chamberlain of the Court of Wards,’
a gentleman entirely unknown to us, received fresh and new,
before breakfast, on a June morning of the year 1628 ; of which

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 53

old Letter, we, by a good chance,! have obtained a copy for the
reader. It is by Mr. Thomas Alured, a good Yorkshire friend,
Member for Malton in that county ;—written in a hand which,
if it were not naturally stout, would tremble with emotion.
Worthy Mr. Alured, called also ‘ Al’red’ or ‘ Aldred ;’ uncle or
father, we suppose, to a ‘Colonel Alured,’ well known after-
wards to Oliver and us: he writes; we abridge and present, as
follows :
“Friday, 6th June, 1628.

“ Sir,—Yesterday was a day of desolation among us in Parlia-
“ment; and this day, we fear, will be the day of our dissolution.

“Upon Tuesday Sir John Eliot moved that as we intended to
“furnish his Majesty with money, we should also supply him with
“counsel. Representing the doleful state of affairs, he desired
“there might be a Declaration made to the King, of the danger
“wherein the Kingdom stood by the decay and contempt of re-
“ligion, by the insufficiency of his Ministers, by the” &c. &ec.
“Sir Humphrey May, Chancellor of the Duchy, said, ‘it was a
“ strange language ;’ yet the House commanded Sir John Eliot
“to go on. Whereupon the Chancellor desired, ‘If he went on,
“ he the Chancellor might go out.’ They all bade him ‘begone :’
“yet he stayed, and heard Sir John out. The House generally
“inclined to such a Declaration ; which was accordingly resolved
“to be set about.

«But next day, Wednesday, we had a Message from his Ma-
« jesty by the Speaker,? That as the Session was positively to end
«in a week, we should husband the time, and despatch our old
“businesses without entertaining new !’— —Intending neverthe-
less “to pursue our Declaration, we had, yesterday, Thursday
“ morning, anew Message brought us, which I have here enclosed.
“ Which requiring us Not to cast or lay any aspersion upon any Min-
“ister of his Majesty, the House was much affected thereby.” Did
they not in former times proceed by fining and committing John
of Gaunt, the King’s own son; had they not, in very late times,
meddled with and sentenced the Lord Chancellor Bacon and
others? What are we arriving at !—

“Sir Robert Philips of Somersetshire spake, and mingled his

lRushworth’s Historical Collections (London, 1682), i. 609-10, (Note, vols.
ii. and iii. of this Copy are of 1680, a przor edition seemingly ; iv. and v. of 1692 ;
vi. and vii. of 1701; viii., Strafford’s Trial, of 1700.) [Carlyle is no doubt speaking
of the copy he himself used. Part x was first published in 1659, and Strafford’s
Trial in 1680. ] 2 Sir John Finch, J

54 INTRODUCTION

“words with weeping. Mr Pym did the like. Sir Edward
“Cook” (old Coke upon Lyttleton), “‘ overcome with passion, see-
“ing the desolation likely to ensue, was forced to sit down when
“he began to speak, by the abundance of tears.” O Mr. Cham-
berlain of the Court of Wards, was the like ever witnessed ?
“Yea, the Speaker in his speech could not refrain from weeping
“and shedding of tears. Besides a great many whose grief made
“themdumb. But others bore up in that storm, and encouraged
“the rest.” We resolved ourselves into a Committee, to have freer
scope for speech; and called Mr. Whitby to the chair.

The Speaker, always in close communication with his Majesty,
craves leave from us, with much humility, to withdraw “ for half
an hour;” which, though we knew well whither he was going,
was readily granted him. It is ordered, “No other man leave
the House upon pain of going to the Tower.” And now the
speaking commences, “freer and frequenter,” being in Com-
mittee, and old Sir Edward Coke tries it again.

“Sir Edward Cook told us, ‘He now saw God had not accepted
“of our humble and moderate carriages and fair proceedings ;
“and he feared the reason was, We had not dealt sincerely with
“the King and Country, and made a true representation of the
“causes of all those miseries. Which he, for his part, repented
“that he had not done sooner. And therefore, not knowing
“whether he should ever again speak in this House, he would
“now do it freely ; and so did here protest, That the author and
“cause of all those miseries was—Tue Duke or BuckInGHam.’
“Which was entertained and answered with a cheerful accla-
“mation of the House.” (Yea, yea! Well moved, well spoken!
Yea, yea!) “As, when one good hound recovers the scent,
“the rest come in with full cry ; so they (we) pursued it, and
“every one came home, and laid the blame where he thought
“the fault was,’—on the Duke of Buckingham, to wit. “And
“as we were putting it to the question, Whether he should be
“named in our intended Remonstrance as the chief cause of all
“our miseries at home and abroad,—the Speaker, having been,
“not half an hour, but three hours absent, and with the King,
“returned ; bringing this Message, That the House should
“then rise (being about eleven o'clock), adjourn till the morrow
“morning, and no Committees to sit, or other business to go on,
“in the interim.’

And so, ever since, King’s Majesty, Speaker, Duke and Coun-
cillors, they have been meditating it all night !

EVENTS IN OLIVERS BIOGRAPHY 55

“What we shall expect this morning, therefore, God of Heaven
“knows! We shall meet betimes this morning ; partly for the
“‘business’ sake ; and partly because, two days ago, we made an
“order, That whoever comes in after Prayers shall pay twelve
“pence to the poor.

“ Sir, excuse my haste :—and let us have your prayers ; where-
“of both you and we have need. I rest,—affectionately at your
“service,

“THomas ALURED.”

This scene Oliver saw, and formed part of; one of the me-
morablest he was ever in. Why did those old honourable
gentlemen ‘weep’? How came tough old Coke upon Lyttleton,
one of the toughest men ever made, to melt into tears like a girl,
and sit down unable to speak? The modern honourable gentle-
man cannot tell. Let him consider it, and try if he can tell!
And then, putting off his Shot-belt, and striving to put on some
Bible-doctrine, some earnest God’s Truth or other,—try if he
can discover why he cannot tell !—

The Remonstrance against Buckingham was perfected; the
hounds having got all upon the scent. Buckingham was ex-
pressly ‘named,’—a daring feat: and so loud were the hounds,
and such a tune in their baying, his Majesty saw good to con-
firm, and ratify beyond shadow of cavil, the invaluable Petition
of Right, and thereby produce ‘bonfires,’ and bob-majors upon
all bells. Old London was sonorous; in a blaze with joy-fires.
Soon after which, this Parliament, as London, and England,
and it, all still continued somewhat too sonorous, was hastily,
with visible royal anger, prorogued till October next,—till January
as it proved. Oliver, of course, went home to Huntingdon to
his harvest-work ; England continued simmering and sounding
as it might.

The day of prorogation was the 26th of June.! One day in
the latter end of August, John Felton, a short swart Suffolk
gentleman of military air, in fact a retired lieutenant of grim
serious disposition, went out to walk in the eastern parts of
London. Walking on Tower Hill, full of black reflections on
his own condition, and on the condition of England, and a Duke
of Buckingham holding all England down into the jaws of ruin
and disgrace,—John Felton saw, in evil hour, on some cutler’s
stall there, a broad sharp hunting-knife, price one shilling. John

1 Commons Journals, i. 920.

56 INTRODUCTION

Felton, with a wild flash in the dark heart of him, bought the
said knife; rode down to Portsmouth with it, where the great
Duke then was; struck the said knife, with one fell plunge, into
the great Duke’s heart. This was on Saturday the 23d of August
of this same year.!

Felton was tried; saw that his wild flashing inspiration had
been not of God, but of Satan. It is known he repented: when
the death-sentence was passed on him, he stretched out his right
hand ; craved that this too, as some small expiation, might first
be stricken off; which was denied him, as against law. He died
at Tyburn ; his body was swinging in chains at Portsmouth ;—
and much else had gone awry, when the Parliament reassembled,
in January following, and Oliver came up to Town again.

1629

The Parliament Session proved very brief; but very energetic,
very extraordinary. ‘Tonnage and Poundage,’ what we now call
Customhouse Duties, a constant subject of quarrel between Charles
and his Parliaments hitherto, had again been levied nithout Par-
liamentary consent ; in the teeth of old Tallagio non concedendo,
nay even of the late solemnly confirmed Petition of Right; and
naturally gave rise to Parliamentary consideration. Merchants
had been imprisoned for refusing to pay it; Members of Parliament
themselves had been ‘ supeena’d :’ there was a very ravelled coil to
deal with in regard to Tonnage and Poundage. Nay the Petition
of Right itself had been altered in the Printing; a very ugly
business too.

In regard to Religion also, matters looked equally ill. Syco-
phant Mainwaring, just censured in Parliament, had been pro-
moted to a fatter living. Sycophant Montague, in the like
circumstances, to a Bishopric: Laud was in the act of consecrating
him at Croydon, when the news of Buckingham’s death came
thither. There needed to be a Committee of Religion. The
House resolved itself into Grand Committee of Religion; and
did not want for matter. Bishop Neile of Winchester, Bishop
Laud now of London, were a frightfully ceremonial pair of
Bishops; the fountain they of innumerable tendencies to Papistry
and the old-clothes of Babylon! It was in this Committee of

1Clarendon (i. 68); Hamond L’Estrange (p. 90); D’Ewes (ms. Autobio-
graphy), &c.; all of whom report ‘the minute circumstances of the assassination,
not one of them agreeing completely with another.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 57

Religion, on the 11th day of February 1628-9, that Mr. Cromwell,
Member for Huntingdon, stood up and made his first Speech, a

fragment of which has found its way into History, and is now

known toall mankind. He said, “ He had heard by relation from
“one Dr. Beard” (his old Schoolmaster at Huntingdon), “that
“Dr. Alablaster had preached flat Popery at Paul’s Cross; and
“that the Bishop of Winchester” (Dr. Neile) “had commanded
“him as his Diocesan, He should preach nothing to the contrary.
“ Mainwaring, so justly censured in this House for his sermons,
“was by the same Bishop’s means preferred to a rich living. If
“these are the steps to Church-preferment, what are we to ex-
“peet 24

Dr. Beard, as the reader knows, is Oliver’s old Schoolmaster
at Huntingdon ; a grave, speculative, theological old gentleman,
seemingly,—and on a level with the latest news from Town.
Of poor Dr. Alablaster there may be found some indistinct, and
instantly forgettable particulars in Wood’s Athene. Paul’s Cross,
of which I have seen old Prints, was a kind of Stone Tent, ‘with
leaden roof,’ at the north-east corner of Paul’s Cathedral, where
Sermons were still, and had long been, preached in the open air ;
crowded devout congregations gathering there; with forms to
sit on, if you came early. Queen Elizabeth used to ‘tune her
pulpits,’ she said, when there was any great thing on hand; as
Governing Persons now strive to tune their Morning Newspapers.
Paul’s Cross, a kind of Times Newspaper, but edited partly by
Heaven itself, was then a most important entity! Alablaster,

1 Parliamentary History (London, 1763), viii. 289. [Of this speech, Dr. S. R.
Gardiner observes: ‘‘ Nicholas, who took down the speeches in shorthand, gives
the speech thus: ‘Mr. Cromwell saith that Dr. Beard told him that one Dr.
Alablaster did at the Spital preach in a sermon tenets of popery, and Beard being
to refute the same, the now Bishop of Winton, then Bishop of Lincoln, did send
for Dr. Beard, and charge him, as his Diocesan, not to preach any doctrine contrary
to that which Alablaster had delivered ; and when Dr. Beard did, by the advice of
Bishop Felton, preach against Dr. Alablaster’s sermon and person, Dr. Neile, now
Bishop of Winton, did reprehend him, the said Beard, for it.’ The remainder of
the speech as printed from the Parliamentary History by Carlyle, referring to Main-
waring and concluding: ‘if these are the steps to Church-preferment, what are we
to expect’ is taken from another speech by another speaker on a different occasion.”
History of England, vol. vii. p. 55, mote. Dr. Gardiner explains that it was the
custom, on the First Sunday after Easter, for a preacher to be selected to sum up the
main points of three other sermons preached before the Lord Mayor, &c., from a
pulpit in Spital Square. It became known that Beard (thus selected in some year
not later than 1617) intended to attack his predecessor Alablaster; hence Neile’s
veto, it being easy to understand, ‘‘that the sight of one preacher ascending the
pulpit to criticise the opinions of another which he was expected to condense, would
be regarded as unseemly by a Bishop like Neile.” /dzd, p. 56. ]

58 INTRODUCTION

to the horror of mankind, was heard preaching ‘flat Popery’
there,—‘ prostituting our columns’ in that scandalous manner !
And Niele had forbidden him to preach against it: ‘what are
we to expect ?’

The record of this world-famous utterance of Oliver still lies
in manuscript in the British Museum, in Mr. Crewe’s Notebook,
or another's: it was first printed in a wretched old Book called
Ephemeris Parliamentaria, professing to be compiled by Thomas
Fuller ; and actually containing a Preface recognisable as his, but
nothing else that we can so recognise : for ‘quaint old Fuller’ is
aman of talent; and this Book looks as if compiled by some
spiritual Nightmare, rather than a rational Man. Probably some
greedy Printer’s compilation ; to whom Thomas, in ill hour, had
sold his name. In the Commons Journals, of that same day, we
are farther to remark, there stands, in perennial preservation, this
notice : ‘Upon question, Ordered, That Dr. Beard ot Huntingdon
‘be written to by Mr. Speaker, to come up and testify against
‘the Bishop; the order for Dr. Beard to be delivered to Mr.
‘Cromwell.’ The first mention of Mr. Cromwell's name in the
Books of any Parliament.—

A new Remonstrance behoves to be resolved upon; Bishops
Neile and Laud are even to be named there. Whereupon, before
they could get well ‘named,’ perhaps before Dr. Beard had well
got up from Huntingdon to testify against them, the King hastily
interfered. This Parliament, in a fortnight more, was dissolved ;
and that under circumstances of the most unparalleled sort.
For Speaker Finch, as we have seen, was a Courtier, in constant
communication with the King: one day while these high matters
were astir, Speaker Finch refused to ‘put the question’ when
ordered by the House! He said he had orders to the contrary ;
persisted in that ;—and at last took to weeping. What was the
House to do? Adjourn} for two days, and consider what to do!
On the second day, which was Wednesday, Speaker Finch
signified that by his Majesty’s command they were again ad-
journed till Monday next. On Monday next, Speaker Finch,
still recusant, would not put the former nor indeed any question,
having the King’s order to adjourn again instantly. He refused ;
was reprimanded, menaced ; once more took to weeping; then
started up to go his ways. But young Mr. Holles, Denzil Holles,
the Earl of Clare’s second son, he and certain other honourable
members were prepared for that movement : they seized Speaker
Finch, set him down in his chair, and by main force held him

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 59

there! A scene of such agitation as was never seen in Parlia-
ment before. ‘The House was much troubled.’ “ Let him go,”
cried certain Privy Councillors, Majesty’s Ministers, as we should
now call them, who in those days sat in front of the Speaker,
“Let Mr, Speaker go!” cried they imploringly.— “No!”
answered Holles; “God’s wounds, he shall sit there, till it please
the House to rise!’” The House, in a decisive though almost
distracted manner, with their Speaker thus held down for them,
locked their doors ; redacted Three emphatic Resolutions, their »
Protest against Arminianism, against Papistry, against illegal
Tonnage and Poundage ;! and passed the same by acclamation;
letting no man out, refusing to let even the King’s Usher in;
then swiftly vanishing so soon as the resolutions were passed, for
they understood the Soldiery was-coming.? For which surprising
procedure, vindicated by Necessity the mother of Invention and
supreme of Lawgivers, certain honourable gentlemen, Denzil
Holles, Sir John Eliot, William Strode, John Selden, and others
less known to us, suffered fine, imprisonment, and much legal
tribulation: nay Sir John Eliot, refusing to submit, was kept in
the Tower till he died.

This scene fell out on Monday, 2d of March 1629. Directly
on the back of which, we conclude, Mr. Cromwell quitted 'Town
for Huntingdon again ;—told Dr. Beard also that he was not
wanted now; that he might at leisure go on with his Theatre
of God’s Judgments now.* His Majesty dissolved the Parliament
by Proclamation ; saying something about ‘vipers’ that had been
there.

It was the last Parliament in England for above eleven years.
The King had taken his course. The King went on raising sup-
plies without Parliamentary law, by all conceivable devices; of
which Shipmoney may be’ considered the most original, and sale
of Monopolies the most universal. The monopoly of ‘soap’ itself
was very grievous to men.* Your soap was dear, and it would
not wash, but only blister. The ceremonial Bishops, Bishop or
Archbishop Laud now chief of them,—they, on their side, went
on diligently hunting out ‘ Lecturers,’ erecting ‘altars in the east
end of churches ;’ charging all clergymen to have, in good repair

1[The three Resolutions were; 1. against Popery and Arminianism ; 2. against
illegal levying of Tonnage and Poundage; 3. against paying dues so levied.]

2 Rushworth, i. 667-9.

3 Third Edition, ‘increased with many new examples,’ in 1631.

4See many old Pamphlets.

60 INTRODUCTION

and order, ‘ Four surplices at Allhallowtide.’1 Vexations spiritual
and fiscal, beyond what we can well fancy now, afflicted the souls
of men. The English Nation was patient ; it endured in silence,
with prayer that God in justice and mercy would look upon it.
The King of England with his chief-priests was going one way ;
the Nation of England by eternal laws was going another: the
split became too wide for healing. Oliver and others seemed
now to have done with Parliaments ; a royal Proclamation forbade
them so much as to speak of such a thing.

1630

In the ‘new charter’ granted to the Corporation of Hunting-
don, and dated 8th July 1630, Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, Thomas
Beard, D.D. his old Schoolmaster, and Robert Barnard, Esquire,
of whom also we may hear again, are named Justices of the
Peace for that Borough.? I suppose there was nothing new in
this nomination; a mere confirming and continuing of what had
already been. But the smallest authentic fact, any undoubted
date or circumstance regarding Oliver and his affairs, is to be
eagerly laid hold of.*

1631

In or soon after 1631, as we laboriously infer from the imbro-
glio records of poor Noble, Oliver decided on an enlarged sphere
of action as a Farmer; sold his properties in Huntingdon, all
or some of them; rented certain grazing-lands at St. Ives, five
miles down the River, eastward of his native place, and removed
thither. The Deed of Sale is dated 7th May 1631;* the pro-
perties are specified as in the possession of himself or his Mother ;
the sum they yielded was 1800/. With this sum Oliver stocked
his Grazing-Farm at St. Ives. The Mother, we infer, continued

1aud's Diary, in Wharton's Laud. 2 Noble, i. ro2.

3[Cromwell objected to the terms of this new charter, and upon complaint of the
Corporation to the Privy Council that he had: made ‘“‘disgraceful and unseemly
speeches’’ to the Mayor and Mr. Barnard, was by the Council committed to
custody, 2nd November 1630. The case was submitted to Henry, Earl of Man-
chester, who blamed Cromwell’s conduct, but ordered the charter to be amended
to meet his objections. As for Cromwell’s language, he found it to be “spoken
in heat and passion and desired to be forgotten,’ and as Mr. Barnard was equally
willing to be friends all parties were left reconciled. See Mr. Firth’s Odver
Cromwell, pp, 31, 32. For a letter written in April, 1631, see Supplement No. r.]

4 Noble, 1. 103-4.

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 61

to reside at Huntingdon, but withdrawn now from active oc-
cupation, into the retirement befitting a widow up in years.
There is even some gleam of evidence to that effect: her
properties are sold; but Oliver’s children born to him at St.
Ives are still christened at Huntingdon, in the Church he was
used to; which may mean also that their good Grandmother was
still there.

Properly this was no change in Oliver’s old activities ; it was
an enlargement of the sphere of them. His Mother still at
Huntingdon, within few miles of him, he could still superintend
and protect her existence there, while managing his new opera-
tions at St. Ives. He continued here till the summer or spring
of 1636.1 A studious imagination may sufficiently construct the
figure of his equable life in those years. Diligent grass-farm-
ing; mowing, milking, cattle-marketing: add ‘hypochondria,’
fits of the blackness of darkness, with glances of the brightness
of very Heaven; prayer, religious reading and meditation;
household epochs, joys and cares :—we have a solid substantial
inoffensive Farmer of St. Ives, hoping to walk with integrity
and humble devout diligence through this world; and, by his
Maker's infinite mercy, to escape destruction, and find eternal
salvation, in wider Divine Worlds. This latter, this is the grand
clause in his Life, which dwarfs al] other clauses. Much wider
destinies than he anticipated were appointed him on Earth; but
that, in comparison to the alternative of Heaven or Hell to all
Eternity, was a mighty small matter.

The lands he rented are still there, recognisable to the Tourist ;
gross boggy lands, fringed with willow-trees, at the east end of
the small Town of St. Ives, which is still noted as a cattle-
market in those parts. The ‘Cromwell Barn,’ the pretended
‘ House of Cromwell,’ the &c. &c. are, as is usual in these cases,
when you come to try them by the documents, a mere jumble of
incredibilities, and oblivious human platitudes, distressing to the
mind.

But a Letter, one Letter signed Oliver Cromwell and dated
St. Ives, does remain, still legible and indubitable to us. What
more is to be said on St. Ives and the adjacent matters will
best arrange itself round that Document. One or two entries
here, and we arrive at that, and bring these imperfect Intro-
ductory Chronicles to a close.

1 Firth’s Oliver Cromwell, i. 106.

62 INTRODUCTION

1632

In January of this year Oliver’s seventh child was born to him ;
a boy, James; who died the day after baptism. There remained
six children, of whom one other died young; it is not known
at what date. Here subjoined is the list of them, and of those
subsequently born; in a Note, elaborated, as before, from the
imbroglios of Noble.

1 OLIVER CROMWELL’S CHILDREN.

(Married to Elizabeth Bourchier, 22d August 1620.)

1. Robert; baptised 13th October 1621. Named for his Grandfather. No farther
account of him; he died before ripe years. [Died in 1639 at Felsted. See note on
p. 42 above, It was to his death that the Protector referred on his own deathbed,
as he distinctly said ‘‘my eldest son.” Carlyle put ‘‘ Oliver” in, in brackets, in
his early editions, and M. Guizot and others followed him, omitting the brackets. ]

2. Oliver; baptised 6th February 1662-3 [szc. Of course 1622-3 is meant]; went to
Felsted School. ‘Captain in Harrison’s Regiment,’—no. At Peterborough in
1643 (Noble, i. 133-4). He died, or was killed during the War; date and place
not yet discoverable. Noble says it was at Appleby; referring to Whitlocke.
Whitlocke (p. 318 of 1st edition, 322 of 2d), on ransacking the old Pamphlets,
turns out to be indisputably in error. The Protector on his death-bed alludes to
this Oliver’s death [szc]: ‘‘ It went to my heart like a dagger, indeed it did.” [He
would appear to have been admitted as a pensioner at St. Catherine’s College,
Cambridge, in 1640, as amongst the entries in a book known as “‘ Daniel Mills’
register” is ‘‘ Oliver, second son of Oliver Cromwell, Huntingdon”. See Appendix
to 4th Report of the Wzst. MSS. Commissioners, p. 423. It is curious that Cromwell
should be described as ‘‘of Huntingdon” at this late date, when he was living at
Ely, but he perhaps still had some property there, and certainly kept up a
connexion with the place after he left it. (See p. 6x above). On the breaking out
of the Civil War, young Oliver became cornet in Lord St. John’s troop of horse,
and when the Ironsides were raised, was made captain of one of the troops. He
probably died of small-pox at Newport Pagnell in the spring of 1644. See note on
p. 176 below. ]

3. Bridget ; baptised 4th August 1624. Married to Jreton, 15th June 1646 (Noble,
i, 134, is twice in error); widow, 26th November 1651. Married to Fleetwood
(exact date, after long search, remains undiscovered ; Noble, ii. 355, says ‘ before’
June 1652,—at random seemingly). Died at Stoke Newington, near London,
September 1681. [Married to Fleetwood on June 8, 1652. See ii. 246.]

4. Richard; born 4th October 1626. At Felsted School. ‘In Lincoln’s Inn,
27th May 1647:’ an error? Married, in 1649, Richard Mayor’s daughter, of
Hursley, Hants, First in Parliament, 1654. Protector, 1658. Dies, poor idle
Triviality, at Cheshunt, r2th July 1712. [Was a captain in Fairfax’s life-guard. ]

5. Henry; baptised at All-Saints (the rest are at St. John’s), Huntingdon, 2oth
January 1627-8. Felsted School. In the army at sixteen. Captain, under Harrison
I think, in 1647. Colonel in 1649, and in Ireland with his Father. Lord Deputy
there in 1657. In 1660, retired to Spinney Abbey, ‘near Soham,’ nearer Wicken,
in Cambridgeshire. Foolish story of Charles II. and the ‘stable-fork’ there
(Noble, i. 212), Died 23d March 1673-4; buried in Wicken Church. A brave
man and true: had Ae been named Protector, there had, most likely, been quite
another History of England to write, at present !

6. Elizabeth; baptised 2d July 1629. Mrs. Claypole, 1645-6. Died at 3 in the
morning, Hampton-Court, 6th August 1658,—four weeks before her Father. A

EVENTS IN OLIVER'S BIOGRAPHY 63

This same year, William Prynne first began to make a noise in
England. A learned young gentleman ‘from Swainswick near
Bath,’ graduate of Oxford, now ‘an Outer Barrister of Lincoln’s
Inn ;’ well read in English Law, and full of zeal for Gospel
Doctrine and Morality. He, struck by certain flagrant scandals
of the time, especially by that of Play-acting and Masking, saw
good, this year, to set forth his Histriomastiz, or Player’s Scourge ;
a Book still extant, but never more to be read by mortal. For
which Mr. William Prynne himself, before long, paid rather dear.
The Book was licensed by old Archbishop Abbot, a man of
Puritan tendencies, but now verging towards his end. Peter
Heylin, ‘lying Peter’ as men sometimes call him, was already
with hawk’s eye and the intensest interest reading this now un-
readable Book, and, by Laud’s direction, taking excerpts from
the same.—

It carries our thought to extensive world-transactions over sea,
to reflect that in the end of this same year, ‘6th November 1632,’
the great Gustavus died on the Field of Liitzen ; fighting against
Wallenstein ; victorious for the last time. While Oliver Crom-
well walked peacefully intent on cattle-husbandry, that winter-

graceful, brave, and amiable woman. The lamentation about Dr. Hewit and
‘bloodshed’ (in Clarendon and others) is fudge. [This may be so; but there
appears to be no doubt that she often interested herself in favour of the oppressed

party. Thus Carrington writes: ‘‘ How many of the Royalist prisoners got she
not freed? How many did she not save from death whom the laws had con-
demned . . . she employed her prayers even with tears to spare such men

whose ill fortune had designed them to suffer.” Lz/e and Death of his most Serene
Highness, Oliver, late Lord Protector, p. 264.

At St. Ives and Ely :

7. James; baptised 8th January 1631-2; died next day.

8. Mary; baptised (at Huntingdon still) 9th February 1636-7. Lady Faucon-
berg, 18th November 1657. Dean Swift knew her: ‘ handsome and like her Father.’
(Journal to Stella, 13th November, 1710.) Died 14th March 1712 (1712-3? is not
decided in Noble). Richard died within a few months of her. [Died in March
1712-3, eight months after Richard, to whom she acted as executrix. ]

g. Frances; baptised (at Ely now) 6th December 1638, ‘Charles II. was for
marrying her;’ not improbable. Married Mr. Rich, Earl of Warwick's grandson,
r1th November 1657: he died in three months, 16th February 1657-8. No child
by Rich. Married Sir John Russel,—the Checquers Russels. Died 27th January
t71g-20. [Should be 1720-1. Married John, afterwards Sir John, Russell of
Chippenham on May 7, 1663. Chequers did not come to the Russells until
more than a century later. There are letters and many notices of her and her
sister Mary in the Azs¢. ASS. Commissioners Report on Mrs. Frankland Russell
Astley’s papers. |

In all, 5 sons and 4 daughters; of whom 3 sons and all the daughters came to
maturity. i

The Protector’s Widow died at Norborough, her son-in-law Claypole’s place
(now ruined, patched into a farmhouse; near Market Deeping; it is itself in
Northamptonshire), 8th October 1672. ;

64 INTRODUCTION

day, on the grassy banks of the Ouse at St. Ives, Gustavus
Adolphus, shot through the back, was sinking from his horse in
the battle-storm far off, with these words: “Ich habe genug,
Bruder ; rette Dich. Brother, I have got enough; save thyself.” 1

On the 19th of the same month, November 1632, died likewise
Frederick Elector Palatine, titular King of Bohemia, husband of
King Charles’s sister, and father of certain Princes, Rupert and
others, who came to be well known in our History. Elizabeth,
the Widow, was left with a large family of them in Holland, very
bare of money, of resource, or immediate hope; but conducted
herself, as she had all along done, in a way that gained much
respect. ‘Alles fiir Ruhm und Ihr, All for Glory and Her,’ were
the words Duke Bernhard of Weimar carried on his Flag, through
many battles in that Thirty-Years War. She was of Puritan
tendency ; understood to care little about the Four surplices at
Allhallowtide, and much for the root of the matter.

Attorney-General Noy, in these months, was busy tearing up
the unfortunate old manufacturers of soap ; tormenting mankind
very much about soap.” He tore them up irresistibly, reduced
them to total ruin; good soap became unattainable.

1633

In May 1633, the second year of Oliver’s residence in this new
Farm, the King’s Majesty, with train enough, passed through
Huntingdonshire, on his way to Scotland to be crowned. The
loud rustle of him disturbing, for a day, the summer husbandries
and operations of mankind. His ostensible business was to be
crowned ; but his intrinsic errand was, what his Father’s formerly
had been, to get his Pretended-Bishops set on foot there; his
Tulchans converted into real Calves ;—in which, as we shall see,
he succeeded still worse than his Father had done. Dr. Laud,
Bishop Laud, now near upon Archbishophood, attended his
Majesty thither as formerly ; still found ‘no religion’ there, but
trusted now to introduce one. The Chapel at Holyrood-house
was fitted up with every equipment textile and metallic; and
little Bishop Laud in person ‘performed the service,’ in a way to
illuminate the benighted natives, as,;was hoped,—show them how _
an Artist could do it. He had also some dreadful travelling
through certain of the savage districts of that country.

1Schiller : Geschichte des 30jahrigen Krieges.
2 Rushworth, ii. 135, 252, &c.

EVENTS IN OLIVER’S BIOGRAPHY 65

Crossing Huntingdonshire, on this occasion, in his way North-
ward, his Majesty had visited the Establishment of Nicholas
Ferrar at Little Gidding, on ‘the western border of that county.!
A surprising Establishment, now in full flower; wherein above
fourscore persons, including domestics, with Ferrar and his
Brother and aged Mother at the head of them, had devoted
themselves to a kind of Protestant Monachism, and were getting
much talked of in those times. They followed celibacy, and
merely religious duties; employed themselves in ‘binding of
Prayer-books,’ embroidering of hassocks, in almsgiving also, and
what charitable work was possible in that desert region; above
all, they kept up, night and day, a continual repetition of the
English Liturgy ; being divided into relays and watches, one
watch relieving another as on shipboard ; and never allowing at
any hour the sacred fire to go out. This also, as a feature of the
times, the modern reader is to meditate. In Isaac Walton’s Lives
there is some drowsy notice of these people, not unknown to the
modern reader. A far livelier notice ; record of an actual visit to
the place, by an Anonymous Person, seemingly a religious Lawyer,
perhaps returning from Circuit in that direction, at all events a
most sharp distinct man, through whose clear eyes we also can
still look ;—is preserved by Hearne in very unexpected neigh-
bourhood.*, The Anonymous Person, after some survey and
communing, suggested to Nicholas Ferrar, “ Perhaps he had but
“assumed all this ritual mummery, in order to get a devout life
“led peaceably in these bad times?’’ Nicholas, a dark man,
who had acquired something of the Jesuit in his Foreign travels,
looked at him ambiguously, and said, “I perceive you are a
person who know the world!’”’ They did not ask the Anony-
mous Person to stay dinner, which he considered would have
been agreeable.— —

Note these other things, with which we are more immediately
concerned. In this same year the Feoffees, with their Purchase
of Advowsons, with their Lecturers and Running Lecturers, were
fairly rooted out, and flung prostrate into total ruin ; Laud
having set Attorney-General Noy upon them, and brought them
into the Starchamber. ‘God forgive them, writes Bishop Laud,
‘and grant me patience !’—on hearing that they spake harshly

1 Rushworth, ii. 178.

2Thomee Caii Vindicie Antiquitatis Academie Oxoniensis (Oxf. 1730), ii. 702-
794. There are two Lives of Ferrar ; considerable writings about him; but, except
this, nothing that much deserves to be read,

VOL.) b.-—o

66 INTRODUCTION

of him; not gratefully, but ungratefully, for all this trouble
he took! In the same year, by procurement of the same
zealous Bishop hounding-on the same invincible Attorney-
General, William Prynne our unreadable friend, Peter Heylin
having read him, was brought to the Starchamber ; to the
Pillory, and had his ears cropt off, for the first time ;—who
also, strange as it may look, manifested no gratitude, but the
contrary, for all that trouble! }

1634

In the end of this the third year of Oliver's abode at St. Ives,
came out the celebrated Writ of Shipmoney. It was the last
feat of Attorney-General Noy: a morose, amorphous, cynical
Law-Pedant, and invincible living heap of learned rubbish ;
once a Patriot in Parliament, till they made him Attorney-
General, and enlightened his eyes : who had fished up from
the dust-abysses this and other old shadows of ‘ precedents,’
promising to be of great use in the present distressed state of
the Finance Department. Parliament being in abeyance, how to
raise money was now the grand problem. Noy himself was
dead before the Writ came out; a very mixed renown following
him. The Vintners, says Wood, illuminated at his death, made
bonfires, and ‘drank lusty carouses:’ to them, as to every man,
he had been a sore affliction. His heart, on dissection, adds old
Anthony, was found ‘all shrivelled up like a leather penny-
purse ;’ which gave rise to comments among the Puritans.?
His brain, said the pasquinades of the day, was found reduced to
a mass of dust, his heart was a bundle of old sheep-skin writs,
and his belly consisted of a barrel of soap.? Some indistinct
memory of him still survives, as of a grisly Law Pluto, and dark
Law Monster, kind of Infernal King, Chief Enchanter in the
Domdaniel of Attorneys ; one of those frightful men, who, as his
contemporaries passionately said and repeated, dare to ‘decree
injustice by a law.’

The Shipmoney Writ has come out, then ; and Cousin Hamp-
den has decided not to pay it !—As the date of Oliver’s St. Ives
Letter is 1635-6, and we are now come in sight of that, we will
here close our Chronology.

1 Rushworth ; Wharton’s Laud.
2 Wood’s Athene (Bliss’s edition, London, 1815), ii. 583.
® Rushworth,

OLIVER'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES 67

CHAPTER V
OF OLIVER’S LETTERS AND SPEECHES

Letters and authentic Utterances of Oliver lie scattered, in print
and manuscript, in a hundred repositories, in all varieties, of con-
dition and environment. Most of them, all the important of
them, have already long since been printed and again printed ;
but we cannot in general say, ever read: too often it is apparent
that the very editor of these poor utterances had, if reading
mean understanding, never read them. They stand in their
old spelling ; mispunctuated, misprinted, unelucidated, unin-
telligible,—defaced with the dark incrustations too well known
to students of that Period. The Speeches above all, as hitherto
set forth in The Somers Tracts, in The Milton State-Papers, in ae
Burton's Diary, and other such books, excel human belief :
certainly no such agglomerate of opaque confusions, printed and
reprinted ; of darkness on the back of darkness, thick and three-
fold ; is known to me elsewhere in the history of things spoken
or printed by human creatures.1 Of these Speeches, all except
one, which was published by authority at the time, I have to
believe myself, not very exultingly, to be the first actual reader
for nearly two Centuries past.

Nevertheless these Documents do exist, authentic though de-
faced ; and invite every one who would know that Period, to
study them till they become intelligible again. The words of
Oliver Cromwell,—the meaning they had, must be worth recover-
ing, in that point of view. To collect these Letters and authentic
Utterances, as one’s reading yielded them, was a comparatively
grateful labour ; to correct them, elucidate and make them legible
again, was a good historical study. Surely ‘a wise memory’
would wish to preserve among men the written and spoken
words of such a man;—and as for the ‘ wise oblivion,’ that is
already, by Time and Accident, done to our hand. Enough is
already lost and destroyed ; we need not, in this particular case,
omit farther.

Accordingly, whatever words authentically proceeding from
Oliver himself I could anywhere find yet surviving, I have here

1 [All this is much exaggerated. And why Cariyle thought that no students
had ever read the speeches in these collections is not very apparent.. Beyond these
reprints, Carlyle seldom troubled to go. ]

68 INTRODUCTION

gathered ; and will now, with such minimum of annotation as
may suit that object, offer them to the reader. That is the pur-
port of this Book. I have ventured to believe that, to certain
patient earnest readers, these old dim Letters of a noble English
Man might, as they had done to myself, become dimly legible
again ; might dimly present, better than all other evidence, the
noble figure of the Man himself again. Certainly there is His-
torical instruction in these Letters :—Historical, and perhaps
other and better, At least, it is with Heroes and god-inspired
men that I, for my part, would far rather converse, in what
dialect soever they speak! Great, ever fruitful; profitable for
reproof, for encouragement, for building up in manful purposes
and works, are the words of those that in their day were men.
I will advise serious persons, interested in England past or
present, to try if they can read a little in these Letters of Oliver
Cromwell, a man once deeply interested in the same object.
Heavy as it is, and dim and obsolete, there may be worse read-
ing, for such persons in our time.

For the rest, if each Letter look dim, and have little light,
after all study ;—yet let the Historical reader reflect, such light
as it has cannot be disputed at all. These words, expository of
that day and hour, Oliver Cromwell did see fittest to be written
down. The Letter hangs there in the dark abysses of the Past :
if like a star almost extinct, yet like a real star; fixed; about
which there is no cavilling possible. That autograph Letter, it
was once all luminous as a burning beacon, every word of it a
live coal, in its time ; it was once a piece of the general fire and
light of Human Life, that Letter! Neither is it yet entirely
extinct: well read, there is still in it light enough to exhibit its
own self; nay to diffuse a faint authentic twilight some distance
round it. Heaped embers which in the daylight looked black,
may still look redin the utter darkness. These Letters of Oliver
will convince any man that the Past did exist! By degrees the
combined small twilights may produce a kind of general feeble
twilight, rendering the Past credible, the Ghosts of the Past
in some glimpses of them visible! Such is the effect of con-
temporary letters always ; and I can very confidently recommend
Oliver’s as good of their kind. A man intent to force for him-
self some path through that gloomy chaos called History of the
Seventeenth Century, and to look face to face upon the same,
may perhaps try it by this method as hopefully as by another.
Here is an irregular row of beacon-fires, once all luminous as

OLIVER'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES 69

suns; and with a certain inextinguishable erubescence still, in
the abysses of the dead deep Night. Let us look here. In
shadowy outlines, in dimmer and dimmer crowding forms, the
very figure of the old dead Time itself may perhaps be faintly
discernible here !—

I called these Letters good,—but withal only good of their
kind. No eloquence, elegance, not always even clearness of ex-
pression, is to be looked for in them. They are written with far
other than literary aims; written, most of them, in the very
flame and conflagration of a revolutionary struggle, and with an
eye to the despatch of indispensable pressing business alone :
but it will be found, I conceive, that for such end they are well
written. Superfluity, as if by a natural law of the case, the
writer has had to discard; whatsoever quality can be dispensed
with is indifferent to him. With unwieldy movement, yet with a
great solid step he presses through, towards his object; has
marked out very decisively what the real steps towards it are ;
discriminating well the essential from the extraneous ;—forming
to himself, in short, a true, not an untrue picture of the business
that is to be done. There is in these Letters, as I have said
above, a silence still more significant of Oliver to us than any
speech they have. Dimly we discover features of an Intelligence,
and Soul of a Man, greater than any speech. The Intelligence
that can, with full satisfaction to itself, come out in eloquent
speaking, in musical singing, is, after all, a small Intelligence.
He that works and does some Poem, not he that merely says one,
is worthy of the name of Poet. Cromwell, emblem of the dumb
English, is interesting to me by the very inadequacy of his
speech. Heroic insight, valour and belief, without words,—
how noble is it in comparison to the adroitest flow of words
without heroic insight !—

I have corrected the spelling of these Letters ; I have punctu- ©
ated, and divided them into paragraphs, in the modern manner.
The Originals, so far as I have seen such, have in general no
paragraphs: if the Letter is short, it is usually found written on
the first leaf of the sheet; often with the conclusion, or some
postscript, subjoined crosswise on the margin,—indicating that
there was no blotting-paper in those days; that the hasty writer
was loath to turn the leaf. Oliver’s spelling and pointing are of
the sort common to educated persons in his time; and readers
that so wish, may have specimens of him in abundance, and of
all due dimness, in many printed Books: but to us, intent here

70 INTRODUCTION

to have the Letters read and understood, it seemed very proper
at once and altogether to get rid of that encumbrance. Would
the rest were all as easily got rid of! Here and there, to bring
out the struggling sense, I have added or rectified a word,—but
taken care to point out the same; what words in the Text of
the Letters are mine, the reader will find marked off by single
commas: it was of course my supreme duty to avoid altering, in
any respect, not only the sense, but the smallest feature in the
physiognomy, of the Original. And so, ‘a minimum of annota-
tion’ having been added, what minimum would serve the purpose,
—here are the Letters and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell ; of which
the reader, with my best wishes, but not with any very high
immediate hope of mine in that particular, is to make what he can.

Surely it is far enough from probable that these Letters of
Cromwell, written originally for quite other objects, and selected
not by the Genius of History, but by blind Accident which has
saved them hitherto and destroyed the rest,—can illuminate for
a modern man this Period of our Annals, which for all moderns,
we may say, has become a gulf of bottomless darkness! Not so
easily will the modern man domesticate himself in a scene of
things every way so foreign to him. Nor could any measurable
exposition of mine, on this present occasion, do much to illuminate
the dead dark world of the Seventeenth Century, into which the
reader is about to enter. He will gradually get to understand, as
I have said, that the Seventeenth Century did exist; that it was
not a waste rubbish-continent of Rushworth-Nalson State-papers,
of Philosophical Scepticisms, Dilettantisms, Dryasdust Torpedo-
isms ;—but an actual flesh-and-blood Fact; with colour in its
/ cheeks, with awful august heroic thoughts in its heart, and at
last with steel sword in its hand! Theoretically this is a most
small postulate, conceded at once by everybody ; but practically
it is a very large one, seldom or never conceded; the due
practical conceding of it amounts to much, indeed to the sure
promise of all.—I will venture to give the reader two little pieces
of advice, which, if his experience resemble mine, may prove
furthersome to him in this inquiry: they include the essence of
all that I have discovered respecting it.

The first is, By no means to credit the wide-spread report that
these Seventeenth-Century Puritans were superstitious crack-
brained persons ; given up to enthusiasm, the most part of them ;
the minor ruling part being cunning men, who knew how to
assume the dialect of the others, and thereby, as skilful Machia-

OLIVER'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES 71

vels, todupe them. This is a wide-spread report ; but an untrue
one. I advise my reader to try precisely the opposite hypothesis.
To consider that his Fathers, who had thought about this World
very seriously indeed, and with very considerable thinking faculty
indeed, were not quite so far behindhand in their conclusions
respecting it. That actually their ‘enthusiasms,’ if well seen
into, were not foolish but wise. That Machiavelism, Cant,
Official Jargon, whereby a man speaks openly what he does not
mean, were, surprising as it may seem, much rarer then than
they have ever since been. Really and truly it may in a manner
be said, Cant, Parliamentary and other Jargon, were still to
invent in this world. O Heavens, one could weep at the con-
trast! Cant was not fashionable at all ; that stupendous invention
of ‘Speech for the purpose of concealing Thought’ was not yet
made. A man wagging the tongue of him, as if it were the
clapper of a bell to be rung for economic purposes, and not so
much as attempting to convey any inner thought, if thought he
have, of the matter talked of,—would at that date have awakened
all the horror in men’s minds, which at all dates, and at this date
too, is due to him. The accursed thing! No man as yet dared
to do it; all men believing that God would judge them. In the
History of the Civil War far and wide, I have not fallen in with
one such phenomenon. Even Archbishop Laud and Peter Heylin
meant what they say; through their words you do look direct
into the scraggy conviction they have formed :—or if ‘lying
Peter’ do lie, he at least knows that he is lying! Lord Cla-
rendon, a man of sufficient unveracity of heart, to whom indeed
whatsoever has direct veracity of heart is more or less horrible,
speaks always in official language ; a clothed, nay sometimes even
quilted dialect, yet always with some considerable body in the
heart of it, never with none! The use of the human tongue
was then other than it now is. I counsel the reader to leave all
that of Cant, Dupery, Machiavelism, and so forth, decisively lying
at the threshold. He will be wise to believe that these Puritans
do mean what they say, and to try unimpeded if he can discover
what that is. Gradually a very stupendous phenomenon may
rise on his astonished eye. A practical world based on Belief in
God ;—such as many centuries had seen before, but as never any
century since has been privileged to see. It was the last glimpse
of it in our world, this of English Puritanism: very great, very
glorious ; tragical enough to all thinking hearts that look on it
- from these days of ours.

72 INTRODUCTION

S My second advice is, Not to imagine that it was Constitution,
‘Liberty of the people to tax themselves,’ Privilege of Parlia-
ment, Triennial or annual Parliaments, or any modification of
these sublime Privileges now waxing somewhat faint in our
admirations, that mainly animated our Cromwells, Pyms, and
Hampdens to the heroic efforts we still admire in retrospect.
Not these very measurable ‘ Privileges,’ but a far other and deeper,
which could not be measured; of which these, and all grand

\“ social improvements whatsoever, are the corollary. Our ancient
Puritan Reformers were, as all Reformers that will ever much
benefit this Earth are always, inspired by a Heavenly Purpose.
To see God’s own Law, then universally acknowledged for com-
plete as it stood in the holy Written Book, made good in this
world ; to see this, or the true unwearied aim and struggle to-
wards this: it was a thing worth living for and dying for!
Eternal Justice ; that God’s Will be done on Earth as it is in
Heaven: corollaries enough will flow from that, if that be there ;
if that be not there, no corollary good for much will flow. It
was the general spirit of England in the Seventeenth Century.
In other somewhat sadly disfigured form, we have seen the same
immortal hope take practical shape in the French Revolution,
and once more astonish the world. That England should all
become a Church, if you like to name it so: a Church presided
over not by sham-priests in ‘Four surplices at Allhallowtide,’
but by true god-consecrated ones, whose hearts the Most High
had touched and hallowed with his fire :—this was the prayer of
many, it was the godlike hope and effort of some.

Our modern methods of reform differ somewhat,—as indeed
the issue testifies. I will advise my reader to forget the modern
methods of Reform; not to remember that he has ever heard of
a modern individual called by the name of Reformer, if he would
understand what the old meaning of the word was. The Crom-
wells, Pyms, Hampdens, who were understood on the Royalist
side to be firebrands of the Devil, have had still worse measure
from the Dryasdust Philosophies, and sceptical Histories, of later
times. They really did resemble firebrands of the Devil, if you
looked at them through spectacles of a certain colour. For fire is

_) always fire. But by no spectacles, only by mere blinders and

5 mooden-eyed spectacles, can the flame-girt Heaven’s-messenger

© pass for a poor mouldy Pedant and Constitution-monger, such as

~ this would make him out to be!

On the whole, say not, good reader, as is often done, “It was

OLIVER’S LETTERS AND SPEECHES 73

then all one as now.’’ Good reader, it was considerably different
then from now. Men indolently say, “The Ages are all alike ;
“ever the same sorry elements over again, in new vesture ; the
“issue of it always a melancholy farce-tragedy, in one Age as in
“another!’’ Wherein lies very obviously a truth; but also in
secret a very sad error withal. Sure enough, the highest Life
touches always, by large sections of it, on the vulgar and uni-
versal: he that expects to see a Hero, or a Heroic Age, step
forth into practice in yellow Drury-lane stage-boots, and speak in
blank verse for itself, will look long in vain. Sure enough, in
the Heroic Century as in the Unheroic, knaves and cowards, and
cunning greedy persons were not wanting,—were, if you will,
extremely abundant. But the question always remains, Did they
lie chained, subordinate in this world’s business; coerced by
steel-whips, or in whatever other effectual way, and sent whim-
pering into their due subterranean abodes, to beat hemp and
repent ; a true never-ending attempt going on to handcuff, to
silence and suppress them? Or did they walk openly abroad,
the envy of a general valet-population, and bear sway ; profess-
ing, without universal anathema, almost with general assent, that
they were the Orthodox Party, that they, even they, were such
men as you had right to look for ?—

Reader, the Ages differ greatly, even infinitely, from one
another. Considerable tracts of Ages there have been, by far
the majority indeed, wherein the men, unfortunate mortals, were
aset of mimetic creatures rather than men; without heart-
insight as to this Universe, and its Heights and its Abysses ;
without conviction or belief of their own regarding it, at all ;—
who walked merely by hearsays, traditionary cants, black and
white surplices, and inane confusion ;—whose whole Existence
accordingly was a grimace ; nothing originai in it, nothing genuine
or sincere but this only, Their greediness of appetite and their
faculty of digestion. Such unhappy Ages, too numerous here
below, the Genius of Mankind indignantly seizes, as disgraceful
to the Family, and with Rhadamanthine ruthlessness—annihi-
lates ; tumbles large masses of them swiftly into Eternal Night.
These are the Unheroic Ages ; which cannot serve, on the general
field of Existence, except as dust, as inorganic manure. The
memory of such Ages fades away forever out of the minds of all
men. Why should any memory of them continue? The fashion
of them has passed away; and as for genuine substance, they
never had any. To no heart of a man any more can these Ages

74 INTRODUCTION

become lovely. What melodious loving heart will search into
their records, will sing of them, or celebrate them? Even torpid
Dryasdust is forced to give over at last, all creatures declining to
hear him on that subject; whereupon ensues composure and
silence, and Oblivion has her own.

Good reader, if you be wise, search not for the secret of Heroic
Ages, which have done great things in this Earth, among their
falsities, their greedy quackeries and unheroisms! It never lies
and never will lie there. Knaves and quacks,—alas, we know
they abounded: but the Age was Heroic even because it had
declared war to the death with these, and would have neither
truce nor treaty with these; and went forth, flame-crowned, as
with bared sword, and called the Most High to witness that it
would not endure these !——But now for the Letters of Crom-
well themselves.

PART I

TO THE BEGINNING OF THE CIVIL WAR

1636—1642

LETTER I

Sr. Ives, a small Town of perhaps fifteen hundred souls, stands
on the left or Northeastern bank of the River Ouse, in flat grassy
country, and is still noted as a Cattle-market in those parts. Its
chief historical fame is likely to rest on the following one remain-
ing Letter of Cromwell’s, written there on the 11th of January
1635-6.

The little Town, of somewhat dingy aspect, and very quiescent
except on market-days, runs from Northwest to Southeast,
parallel to the shore of the Ouse, a short furlong in length: it
probably, in Cromwell’s time, consisted mainly of a row of houses
fronting the River ; the now opposite row, which has its back to
the River, and still is shorter than the other, still defective at
the upper end, was probably built since. In that case, the
locality we hear of as the ‘Green’ of St. Ives would then be the
space which is now covered mainly with cattle-pens for market-
business, and forms the middle of the street. A narrow steep old
Bridge, probably the same which Cromwell travelled, leads you
over, westward, towards Godmanchester, where you again cross
the Ouse, and get into Huntingdon. Eastward out of St. Ives,
your route is towards Earith, Ely and the heart of the Fens.

At the upper or Northwestern extremity of the place stands
the Church ; Cromwell’s old fields being at the opposite extremity.
The Church from its Churchyard looks down into the very River,
which is fenced from it by a brick wall. The Ouse flows here,
you cannot without study tell in which direction, fringed with gross

(75)

76 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [11 Jan.

reedy herbage and bushes; and is of the blackness of Acheron,
streaked with foul metallic glitterings and plays of colour.
For a short space downwards here, the banks of it are fully
visible ; the western row of houses being somewhat the shorter, as
already hinted: instead of houses here, you have a rough wooden
balustrade, and the black Acheron of an Ouse River used as a
washing-place or watering-place for cattle. The old Church,
suitable for such a population, stands yet as it did in Cromwell’s
time, except perhaps the steeple and pews ; the flagstones in the
interior are worn deep with the pacing of many generations.
The steeple is visible from several miles distance ; a sharp high
spire, piercing far up from amid the willow-trees. The country
hereabouts has all a clammy look, clayey and boggy ; the produce
of it, whether bushes and trees, or grass and crops, gives you
the notion of something lazy, dropsical, gross.—This is St. Ives,
a most ancient Cattle-market by the shores of the sable Ouse,
on the edge of the Fen-country ; where, among other things
that happened, Oliver Cromwell passed five years of his existence
as a Farmer and Grazier. Who the primitive Jves himself was,
remains problematic; Camden says he was ‘Ivo a Persian ;’—
surely far out of his road here! From him however, Phantasm
as he is (being indeed Nothing,—except an ancient ‘ stone-coffin,’
with bones, and tatters of ‘bright cloth’ in it, accidentally
ploughed up in this spot, and acted on by opaque human
wonder, miraculous ‘dreams,’ and the ‘Abbot of Ramsey ’),!
Church and Village indisputably took rise and name ; about the
Year 1000 or later ;—and have stood ever since ; being founded
on Cattle-dealing and the firm Earth withal. Ives or Yves, the
worthy Frenchman, Bishop of Chartres in the time of our Henry
Beauclerk ; neither he nor the other French Yves, Patron Saint
of Attorneys, have anything to do with this locality ; but miracu-
lous ‘Ivo the Persian Bishop,’ and that anonymous stone-coffin
alone,—

Oliver, as we observed, has left hardly any memorial of him-
self at St. Ives. The ground he farmed is still partly capable of
being specified, certain records or leases being still in existence,
It lies at the lower or Southeast end of the Town; a stagnant |
flat tract of land, extending between the houses or rather kitchen-
gardens of St. Ives in that quarter, and the banks of the River,

1 His Legend (De Beato Yuone, Episcopo Persad), with due details, in Bollandus,
Acta Sanctorum, Junii, tom. ii. (Venetiis, 1742), pp. 288-92.

1636.] LETTER I, ST. IVES 77

which, very tortuous always, has made a new bend here. If
well drained, this land looks as if it would produce abundant
grass, but naturally it must be little other than a bog. Tall
bushy ranges of willow-trees and the like, at present, divide it
into fields; the River, not visible till you are close on it, bound-
ing them all to the South. At the top of the fields next to the
Town is an ancient massive Barn, still used as such; the people
call it ‘Cromwell’s Barn :’—and nobody can prove that it was
not his! It was evidently some ancient man’s or series of ancient
men’s.

Quitting St. Ives Fen-ward or Eastward, the last house of all,
which stands on your right hand among gardens, seemingly the
best house in the place, and called Slepe Hall, is confidently
pointed out as ‘Oliver’s House.’ It is indisputably Slepe-Hall
House, and Oliver’s Farm was rented from the estate of Slepe
Hall. It is at present used for a Boarding-school: the worthy
inhabitants believe it to be Oliver’s; and even point out his
‘Chapel’ or secret Puritan Sermon-room in the lower story of
the house: no Sermon-room, as you may well discern, but to
appearance some sort of scullery or wash-house or bake-house.
“It was here he used to preach,” say they. Courtesy forbids
you to answer, “Never!” But in fact there is no likelihood
that this was Oliver's House at all: in its present state it does
not seem to be a century old ;! and originally, asis like, it must
have served as residence to the Proprietors of Slepe-Hall estate,
not to the Farmer of a part thereof. Tradition makes a sad
blur of Oliver’s memory in his native country! We know, and
shall know, only this, for certain here, That Oliver farmed part
or whole of these Slepe-Hall Lands, over which the human feet
can still walk with assurance; past which the River Ouse still
slumberously rolls, towards Earith Bulwark and the Fen-country.
Here of a certainty Oliver did walk and look about him habitually,
during those five years from 1631 to 1636; a man studious of
many temporal and many eternal things. His cattle grazed
here, his ploughs tilled here, the heavenly skies and infernal
abysses overarched and underarched him here.

In fact there is, as it were, nothing whatever that still
decisively to every eye attests his existence at St. Ives, except
the following old Letter, accidentally preserved among the

1 Noble, i. 102, 106. [This reference means nothing, but on p. 261, Noble says
that Oliver’s house is not standing. ]

78 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [11 Jan.

Harley Manuscripts in the British Museum. Noble, writing in
1787, says the old branding-irons, ‘O. C.,’ for marking sheep,
were still used by some Farmer there; but these also, many
years ago, are gone. In the Parish-records of St. Ives, Oliver
appears twice among some other ten or twelve respectable
ratepayers; appointing, in 1633 and 1634, for ‘St. Ives cum
Slepa’ fit annual overseers for the ‘Highway and Green :’—one
of the Oliver Signatures is now cut out. Fifty years ago, a
vague old Parish-clerk had heard from very vague old persons,
that Mr. Cromwell had been seen attending divine service in
the Church with ‘a piece of red flannel round his neck, being
subject to inflammation.’! Certain letters ‘written in a very
kind style from Oliver Lord Protector to persons in St. Ives,’ do
not now exist; probably never did. Swords ‘ bearing the in-
itials of O. C.,’ swords sent down in the beginning of 1642, when
War was now imminent, and weapons were yet scarce,—do any
such still exist? Noble says they were numerous in 1787; but
nobody is bound to believe him. Walker? testifies that the
Vicar of St. Ives, Rev. Henry Downhall, was ejected with his
curate in 1642;°% an act which Cromwell could have hindered,
had he been willing to testify that they were fit clergymen.
Alas, had he been able! He attended them in red flannel, but
had not exceedingly rejoiced in them, it would seem.—There is,
in short, nothing that renders Cromwell’s existence completely
visible to us, even through the smallest chink, but this Letter
alone, which, copied from the Museum Manuscripts, worthy Mr.
Harris * has printed for all people. We slightly rectify the
spelling, and reprint.

1See Noble: his confused gleanings and speculations concerning St. Ives are to
be found, i. 105-6, and again, i. 258-61.

2 Sufferings of the Clergy. See also Appendix, No. 1.

8[Walker says ‘‘about 1642." He does not mention a curate, or speak of
Cromwell as having anything to do with the matter, but states that Downhall was
turned out for ‘“‘refusing to admit a factious lecturer.” Szuerings of the Clergy,
part ii. p. 230. ]

4 Life of Cromwell: a blind farrago, published in 1761, ‘after the manner of
Mr. Bayle,’—a very bad ‘manner,’ more especially when a Harris presides over
it! Yet poor Harris’s Book, his three Books (on Cromwell, Charles and James I.)
have worth: cartloads of Excerpts, carefully transcribed,—and edited, in the way
known to us, ‘by shoving up the shafts.’ The increasing interest of the subject —
brought even these to a second edition in 1814.

1636.] LETTER L., ST. IVES 79

To my very loving Friend Mr. Storie, at the Sign of the Dog in the
Royal Exchange, London : Deliver these.

St. Ives, r1th January 1635.

Mr. Srorie,

Among the catalogue of those good works
which your fellow-citizens and our countrymen have done, this
will not be reckoned for the least, that they have provided for
the feeding of souls. Building of hospitals provides for men’s
bodies ; to build material temples is judged a work of piety ;
but they that procure spiritual food, they that build up spiritual
temples, they are the men truly charitable, truly pious. Such a
work as this was your erecting the lecture in our country; in
the which you placed Dr. Welles, a man for goodness and
industry, and ability to do good every way, not short of any I
know in England : and I am persuaded that, sithence his
coming, the Lord hath by him wrought much good amongst
us.

It only remains now that He who first moved you to this, put
you forward to the continuance thereof: it was the Lord; and
therefore to Him lift we up our hearts that He would perfect
it. And surely, Mr. Storie, it were a piteous thing to see a
lecture fall, in the hands of so many able and godly men as I
am persuaded the founders of this are; in these times, wherein
we see they are suppressed, with too much haste and violence,
by the enemies of God his truth. Far be it that so much guilt
should stick to your hands, who live in a city so renowned for
the clear shining light of the gospel. You know, Mr. Storie, to
withdraw the pay is to let fall the lecture: for who goeth to
warfare at his own cost? I beseech you therefore in the bowels
of Christ Jesus put it forward, and let the good man have his
pay. The souls of God his children will bless you for it: and
so shall I; and ever rest,—

Your loving Friend in the Lord,

OLIveER CROMWELL,

80 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR 11 Jan.

Commend my hearty love to Mr. Busse, Mr. Bradly,! and my
other good friends. I would have written to Mr. Busse; but I
was loath to trouble him with a long letter, and I feared I should
not receive an answer from him: from you I expect one so soon
as conveniently you may. Vale.*

Such is Oliver’s first extant Letter. The Roya] Exchange has
been twice burned since this piece of writing was left at the Sign
of the Dog there. The Dog Tavern, Dog Landlord, frequenters
of the Dog, and all their business and concernment there, and
the hardest stone masonry they had, have vanished irrecoverable.
Like a dream of the Night; like that transient Sign or Effigies
of the Talbot Dog, plastered on wood with oil pigments, which
invited men to liquor and house-room in those days! The per-
sonages of Oliver’s Letter may well be unknown te us.

Of Mr. Story, strangely enough, we have found one other
notice: he is amongst the Trustees, pious and wealthy citizens
of London for most part, to whom the sale of Bishops’ Lands is,
by act of Parliament, committed, with many instructions and
conditions, on the 9th of October 1646.2 ‘James Story’ is one
of these; their chief is Alderman Fowke. From Oliver's ex-
pression, ‘our Country,’ it may be inferred or guessed that Story
was of Huntingdonshire: a man who had gone up to London,
and prospered in trade, and addicted himself to Puritanism ;—
much of him, it is like, will never be known! Of Busse and
Beadly (unless Busse be a misprint for Bunse, Alderman Bunce,
another of the above ‘ Trustees ’), there remains no vestige.

Concerning the ‘ Lecture,’ however, the reader will recal what
was said above of Lecturers, and of Laud’s enmity to them; of
the Feoffees who supported Lecturers, and of Laud’s final sup-
pression and ruin of those Feoffees in 1633. Mr. Story’s name is
not mentioned in the List of the specific Feoffees ; but it need
not be doubted he was a contributor to their fund, and probably

[Printed ‘‘ Beadly” by Carlyle. ]
2Scobell’s Acts and Ordinances (London, 1658), p. 99.

* Harris (London, 1814), p. 12. This Letter, for which Harris, in 1761, thanks,
the Trustees of the British Museum,’ is not now discoverable in that Establishment ;
‘a search of three hours through all the Catalogues, assisted by one of the Clerks,’
reports itself to me as fruitless. —Does exist safe, nevertheless (Sloane MSS. no.
2035b, fol. 3, a venerable brown Autograph); and, in the ‘new Catalogue,’ will be
better indicated. ‘Busse’ is by no means ‘ Buwse’ as some have conjectured, (Note
to Third Edition.)

1636.] LETTER I., ST. IVES 81

a leading man among the subscribers. By the light of this Letter
we may dimly gather that they still continued to subscribe, and
to forward Lectureships where possible, though now in a less
ostentatious manner.

It appears there was a Lecture at Huntingdon: but his Grace
of Lambeth, patiently assiduous in hunting down such objects,
had managed to get that suppressed in-1633,! or at least to get
the King’s consent for suppressing it. This in 1633. So that
‘Mr. Wells’ could not, in 1636, as my imbecile friend supposes,?
be ‘the Lecturer in Huntingdon,’ wherever else he might lecture.
Besides Mr. Wells is not in danger of suppression by Laud, but
by want of cash! Where Mr. Wells lectured, no mortal knows,
or will ever know. Why not at St. Ives on the market-days ?
Or he might be a ‘Running Lecturer,’ not tied to one locality :
that is as likely a guess as any.

Whether the call of this Wells Lectureship and Oliver’s Letter
got due return from Mr. Story we cannot now say; but judge
that the Lectureship,—as Laud’s star was rapidly on the ascend-
ant, and Mr. Story and the Feoffees had already lost 1800/. by
the work, and had a fine in the Starchamber still hanging over
their heads,—did in fact come to the ground, and trouble no
Archbishop or Market Cattle-dealer with God’s Gospel any more.
Mr. Wells, like the others, vanishes from History, or nearly so.3
In the chaos of the King’s Pamphlets one seems to discern dimly
that he sailed for New England, and that he returned in better
times. Dimly once, in 1641 or 1642, you catch a momentary
glimpse of a ‘Mr. Wells’ in such predicament, and hope it was
this Wells,—preaching for a friend, ‘in the afternoon,’ in a
Church in London.

Reverend Mark Noble says, the above Letter is very curious,

1 Wharton’s Laud (London, 169s), p. 527. 2 Noble, i. 259.

3[This is Dr. Samuel Welles, who upon the breaking out of the Civil War, became
chaplain to Lord Essex’s regiment of horse. There are many orders for payment
to him amongst Essex’s warrants. On July 20, 1644, the Earl writes to the
Treasurer at War that ‘‘ whereas Mr. Samuel Wells, chaplain to my own regiment
of horse, has served in my army a long time, and therein diligently discharged the
duty of his place and being in much want for supplying of necessaries to his wife and
family ” he desires that ten pounds be paid him on account ; and again in the following
January that 10/. be imprested to him, he having ‘‘a long time served in the army, and
duly and constantly attended the same, for which there is much pay due and arrears
unto him, and he being at present in much want and necessity.” Commonwealth
Exchequer Papers, Public Record Ofice. These warrants are receipted by ‘‘ Samuel
Welles.”” About the same time Cromwell wrote a short letter in his favour, which
will be found in the Supplement to these volumes ; No. 9.]

4Old Pamphlet: Title mislaid and forgotten.

VOL, .E-—O

82 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [11 Jan.

and a convincing proof how far gone Oliver was, at that time, in
religious enthusiasm. Yes, my reverend imbecile friend, he is
clearly one of those singular Christian enthusiasts, who believe
that they have a soul to be saved, even as you do, my reverend
imbecile friend, that you have a stomach to be satisfied,—and

ywho likewise, astonishing to say, actually take some trouble about

that. Far gone indeed, my reverend imbecile friend !

This then is what we know of Oliver at St. Ives. He wrote
the above Letter there. He had sold his Properties in Hunting-
don for 1800/.; with the whole or with part of which sum he
stocked certain Grazing-Lands on the Estate of Slepe Hall, and
farmed the same for a space of some five years. How he lived
at St. Ives: how he saluted men on the streets; read Bibles;
sold cattle ; and walked, with heavy footfall and many thoughts,
through the Market Green or old narrow lanes in St. Ives, by
the shore of the black Ouse River,—shall be left to the reader’s
imagination. There is in this man talent for farming ; there are
thoughts enough, thoughts bounded by the Ouse River, thoughts
that go beyond Eternity,—and a great black sea of things that
he has never yet been able to thank.

I count the children he had at this time ; and find them six : Four
boys and two girls; the eldest a boy of fourteen, the youngest
a girl of six ; Robert, Oliver, Bridget, Richard, Henry, Elizabeth.
Robert and Oliver, I take it, are gone to Felsted School, near
Bourchier their Grandfather’s in Essex. Sir Thomas Bourchier
the worshipful Knight, once of London, lives at Felsted; Sir
William Masham, another of the same, lives at Otes, hard by, as
we shall see.

Cromwell at the time of writing this Letter was, as he himself
might partly think probable, about to quit St. Ives. His mother’s
brother Sir Thomas Steward, Knight, lay sick at Ely in those
very days. Sir Thomas makes his will in this same month of
January, leaving Oliver his principal heir; and on the 30th it
was all over, and he lay in his last home: ‘ Buried in the Cathe-
dral of Ely, 30 January 1635-6.’

Worth noting, and curious to think of, since it is indisputable :
On the very day while Oliver Cromwell was writing this Letter
at St. Ives, two obscure individuals, ‘ Peter Aldridge and Thomas
Lane, Assessors of Shipmoney,’ over in Buckinghamshire, had
assembled a Parish Meeting in the Church of Great Kimble, to

1 Noble, i. 259.

1636.] LETTER II., ELY 83

assess and rate the Shipmoney of the said Parish: there, in the
cold weather, at the foot of the Chiltern Hills, ‘11 January 1635,’
the Parish did attend, ‘ John Hampden, Esquire,’ at the head of
them, and by a Return still extant,! refused to pay the same or
any portion thereof,—witness the above ‘ Assessors,’ witness also
two ‘ Parish Constables’ whom we remit from such unexpected
celebrity. John Hampden’s share for this Parish is thirty-one
shillings and sixpence ; for another Parish it is twenty shillings ;
on which latter sum, not on the former, John Hampden was
tried.

LETTER II.

Otiver removed to Ely very soon after writing the foregoing Letter.
There is a ‘receipt for 10/.’ signed by him, dated ‘Ely, 10 June
1636 ;’2 and other evidence that he was then resident there.
He succeeded to his Uncle’s Farming of the Tithes; the Leases
of these, and new Leases of some other small lands or fields
granted him, are still in existence. He continued here till the
time of the Long Parliament; and his Family* still after that,
till some unascertained date, seemingly about 1647,? when it
became apparent that the Long Parliament was not like to rise
for a great while yet, and it was judged expedient that the whole
household should remove to London. His mother appears to
have joined him in Ely; she quitted Huntingdon, returned to
her native place, an aged grandmother,—was not, however, to end
her days there.

As Sir Thomas Steward, Oliver's Uncle, farmed the Tithes of
Ely, it is reasonable to believe that he, and Oliver after him,
occupied the House set apart for the Tithe-Farmer there; as.
Mark Noble, out of dim Tradition, confidently testifies. This is
‘the house occupied by Mr. Page ;’4 under which name, much
better than under that of Cromwell, the inhabitants of Ely now
know it. The House, though somewhat in a frail state, is still
standing; close to St. Mary’s Churchyard; at the corner of the great

1 Facsimile Engraving of it, in Lord Nugent's Memorials of Hampden (London,
1832), i. 231. ;

2 Noble, i. 107.

3See Appendix, No. 7, last Letter there. (More to Third Edition.)

4 Noble, i. 106. :

84 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR 113 Oct.

Tithe-barn of Ely, or great Square of tithe-barns and offices,—
which ‘ is the biggest barn in England but one,’ say the Ely people.
Of this House, for Oliver’s sake, some Painter will yet perhaps
take a correct likeness :—it is needless to go to Stuntney, out on
the Soham road, as Oliver’s Painters usually do ; Oliver never lived
there, but only his Mother’s cousins! Two years ago this House
in Ely stood empty ; closed finally up, deserted by all the Pages,
as ‘the Commutation of Tithes’ had rendered it superfluous: this
year (1845), I find it is an Alehouse, with still some chance of
standing. It is by no means a sumptuous mansion; but may
have conveniently held a man of three or four hundred a year,
with his family, in those simple times. Some quaint air of gen-
tility still looks through its rugged dilapidation. It is of two
stories, more properly of one and a half; has many windows,
irregular chimneys and gables! Likely enough Oliver lived
here; likely his Grandfather may have lived here, his Mother
have been born here. She was now again resident here. The
tomb of her first husband and child, Johannes Lynne? and poor
little Catharina Lynne, is in the Cathedral hard by. ‘Such are
the changes which fleeting Time procureth.’—

The Second extant Letter of Cromwell’s is dated Ely, October
1638.° It will be good to introduce, as briefly as possible, a few
Historical Dates, to remind the reader what o'clock on the Great
Horologe it is, while this small letter is a-writing. Last year in
London there had been a very strange spectacle ; and in three
weeks after, another in Edinburgh, of still more significance in
English History.

On the 30th of June 1637, in Old Palaceyard, three men,
gentlemen of education, of good quality, a Barrister, a Physician
and a Parish Clergyman of London were set on three Pillories ;
stood openly, as the scum of malefactors, for certain hours there ;
and then had their ears cut off,—bare knives, hot branding-irons,
—and their cheeks stamped ‘S. L.,’ Seditious Libeller; in the
sight of a great crowd, ‘silent’ mainly, and looking ‘pale.’ The
men were our old friend William Prynne,—poor Prynne, who had
got into new trouble, and here lost his ears a second and final

1(The tithe barn was pulled down in 1842. Cromwell’s house is now again in ,

private hands and in good condition, but Carlyle’s description does not fit it (as
it now is, at any rate) for it has neither irregular chimneys nor gables. There is a
photograph of it in Mr. Firth’s Oliver Cromwedd, in Mr. Kingston’s Civil War in
East Anglia, and elsewhere.

2 He was William, son of John,

3In Appendix, No. 2, another note of his. (Third Edition.)

4 State Trials (Cobbett’s, London, 1809), iii. 746,

1638.] VY LETTER Ii: ELY 85

time, having had them ‘sewed on again’ before: William Prynne,
Barrister; Dr. John Bastwick; and the Rev. Henry Burton,
Minister of Friday-street Church. Their sin was against Laud
and his surplices at Allhallowtide, not against any other man or
thing. Prynne, speaking to the people, defied all Lambeth, with
Rome at the back of it, to argue with him, William Prynne alone,
that these practices were according to the Law of England ; “and
if I fail to prove it,’ said Prynne, “let them hang my body at
the door of that Prison there,’ the Gate-house Prison. ‘ Whereat
the people gave a great shout,—somewhat of an ominous one,
I think. Bastwick’s wife, on the scaffold, received his ears in
her lap, and kissed him.! Prynne’s ears the executioner ‘rather
sawed than cut.’ “Cut me, tear me,” cried Prynne; “I fear thee
not; I fear the fire of Hell, not thee!”” The June sun had shone
hot on their faces. Burton, who had discoursed eloquent religion
all the while, said, when they carried him, near fainting, into a
house in King-street, “It is too hot to last.”

Too hot indeed. For at Edinburgh, on Sunday the 23d of
July following, Archbishop Laud having now, with great effort
and much manipulation, got his Scotch Liturgy and Scotch
Pretended-Bishops ready,? brought them fairly out to action,—
and Jenny Geddes hurled her stool at their head. “ Let us read
the Collect of the Day,” said the Pretended-Bishop from amid
his tippets ;—“ De’il colic the wame of thee!” answered Jenny,
hurling her stool at his head. “Thou foul thief, wilt thou say
mass at my lug?” ? I thought we had got done with the mass

1Towers’s British Biography.

2 Rushworth, ii. 321, 343; iil. Appendix, 153-5; &c.

3. —‘No sooner was the Book opened by the Dean of Edinburgh, but a
‘number of the meaner sort, with clapping of their hands and outcries, made a
‘great uproar; and one of them, called Jane or /anot Gaddis (yet living at the
‘writing of this relation), flung a little folding-stool, whereon she sat, at the Dean’s
‘head, saying, ‘‘ Out thou false thief! dost thou say the mass at my lug?’’? Which
‘was followed with so great a noise,’ &c. These words are in the Continuation of
Baker's Chronicle, by Phillips (Milton’s Nephew) ; fifth edition of Baker (London,
1670), p. 478. They are ot in the fourth edition of Baker, 1665, which is the first
that contains the Continuation; they follow as here in all the others, Thought to
be the first grave mention of Jenny Geddes in Printed History; a heroine still
familiar to Tradition everywhere in Scotland.

In a foolish Pamphlet, printed in 1661, entitled Adindurgh’s Joy, &c.,—Joy for
the Blessed Restoration and Annus Mirabilis,—there is mention made of ‘the
immortal Janet Geddis,’ whom the writer represents as rejoicing exceedingly in that
miraculous event; she seems to be a well-known person, keeping ‘a cabbage-stall
at the Tron Kirk,’ at that date. Burns, in his Highland Tour, named his mare
Jenny Geddes. “Helen of Troy, for practical importance in Human History, is but
a small Heroine to Jenny :—but she has been luckier in the recording !—For these
bibliographical notices I am indebted to thé friendliness.of Mr. David Laing of the
Signet Library, Edinburgh.

86 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR 113 Oct.

some time ago ;—and here it is again! “A Pape, a Pape!” cried
others: “Stane him!” 1—In fact the service could not go on at
all. This passed in St. Giles’s Kirk, Edinburgh, on Sunday 23d
July 1637. Scotland had endured much in the bishop way for
above thirty years bygone, and endeavoured to say nothing,
bitterly feeling a great deal. But now, on small signal, the hour
was come. All Edinburgh, all Scotland, and behind that all
England and Ireland, rose into unappeasable commotion on the
flight of this stool of Jenny’s; and his Grace of Canterbury, and
King Charles himself, and many others had lost their heads before
there could be peace again. The Scotch People had sworn their
Covenant, not without ‘tears;’ and were in these very days of
October 1638, while Oliver is writing at Ely, busy with their
whole might electing their General Assembly, to meet at Glasgow
next month. I think the Twlchan Apparatus is likely to be some-
what sharply dealt with, the Cow having become awake to it!
Great events are in the wind; out of Scotland vague news, of
unappeasable commotion risen there.

In the end of that same year, too, there had risen all over
England huge rumour concerning the Shipmoney Trial at Lon-
don. On the 6th of November 1637, this important Process of
Mr. Hampden’s began. Learned Mr. St. John, a dark tough
man, of the toughness of leather, spake with irrefragable law-
eloquence, law-logic, for three days running, on Mr. Hampden’s
side ; and learned Mr. Holborn for three other days ;—preserved
yet by Rushworth in acres of typography, unreadable now to all
mortals. For other learned gentlemen, tough as leather, spoke
on the opposite side; and learned judges animadverted ;—at
endless length, amid the expectancy of men. With brief pauses,
the Trial lasted for three weeks and three days. Mr. Hampden
became the most famous man in England,?—by accident partly.
The sentence was not delivered till April 1638 ; and then it went
against Mr. Hampden: judgment in Exchequer ran to this effect,
‘ Consideratum est per eosdem Barones quod preedictus Johannes Hamp-
‘den de usdem vigints solidis oneretur, He must pay the Twenty
shillings, ‘et inde satisfaciat.’? No hope in Law-Courts, then ;
Petition of Right and Tallagio non concedendo have become an
old song. If there be not hope in Jenny Geddes’s stool and’
‘De’il colic the wame of thee,’ we are in a bad way !—

1 Rushworth, Kennet, Balfour. 2 Clarendon. '
* Rushworth, iii., Appendix, 159-216; ib. ii. 480.

1638. ] LETTER II, ELY 87

During which great public Transactions, there had been in
Cromwell’s own Fen-country a work of immense local celebrity
going on: the actual Drainage of the Fens, so long talked about ;
the construction, namely, of the great Bedford Level, to carry the
Ouse River direct into the sea ; holding it forcibly aloft in strong
embankments, for twenty straight miles or so; not leaving it to
meander and stagnate, and in the wet season drown the country,
as heretofore. This grand work began, Dryasdust in his be-
wildered manner knows not when ; but it ‘went on rapidly, and
had ended in 1637.1 Or rather had appeared, and strongly en-
deavoured, to end in 1637 ; but was not yet by any means settled
and ended; the whole Fen-region clamouring that it could not,
and should not, end so. In which wide clamour, against injustice
done in high places, Oliver Cromwell, as is well known, though
otherwise a most private quiet man, saw good to interfere ; to
give the universal inarticulate clamour a voice, and gain a remedy
for it. He approved himself, as Sir Philip Warwick will testify,?
a ‘man that would set well at the mark,’ that took sure aim, and
had a stroke of some weight in him. We cannot here afford
room to disentangle that affair from the dark rubbish-abysses, old
and new, in which it lies deep buried: suffice it to assure the
reader that Oliver did by no means ‘ oppose’ the Draining of the
Fens, but was and had been, as his Father before him, highly
favourable to it; that he opposed the King in Council wishing to
do a public injustice in regard to the Draining of the Fens ; and
by a ‘great meeting at Huntingdon,’ and other good measures,
contrived to put a stop to the same.’ At a time when, as Old

1 Dugdale’s Hist, of Embankments ; Cole's, Wells's, &c. &c. History of the Fens.

2 Warwick's Memoirs (London, 1701), p. 250.

3[* In 1638, the King intervened, declared the work of drainage incomplete, and
undertook to complete it himself, announcing that the inhabitants of the district
were to continue in possession of their lands and commons till the work was really
finished. Nothing else is known of Cromwell’s part in these disputes save a vague
story told in the Memoirs of Sir Philip Warwick that ‘the vulgar’ grew clamorous
against the scheme and that Mr. Cromwell appeared as the head of their faction.
Warwick, writing long after the events he referred to, assumed as a matter of
course that Cromwell opposed the King, and the mistake found easy credence...”
Some years later, Cromwell came forward to defend the Rights of the Commoners
of St. Ives, whose waste lands had been enclosed and sold to the Earl of Man-
chester. The commoners petitioned the Long Parliament ; but the House of Lords
intervened in favour of Manchester. ‘‘ Cromwell got the House of Commons to
appoint a committee to consider the rights of the case. Hyde, its chairman, was
greatly scandalised by the vehemence with which Cromwell advocated the rights of
the Commoners before it. [See p. rox below.] . . . This persistent championship
of the rights of peasants and small freeholders was the basis of Cromwell's influence
in the Eastern Counties. Common rights were something concrete and tangible,

88 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [13 Oct.

Palaceyard might testify, that operation of going in the teeth of
the royal will was somewhat more perilous than it would be now!
This was in 1638, according to the good testimony of Warwick.!
Cromwel) acquired by it a great popularity in the Fen-country,
acquired the name or nickname ‘ Lord of the Fens ;’ and what
was much more valuable, had done the duty of a good citizen,
whatever he might acquire by it. The disastrous public Events
which soon followed put a stop to all farther operations in the
Fens, for a good many years.

These clamours of local grievance near at hand, these rumours
of universal grievance from the distance,—they were part of the
Day’s noises, they were sounding in Cromwell’s mind, along with
many others now silent, while the following Letter went off to-
wards ‘Sir William Masham’s House called Otes in Essex,’ in
the year 1638.—Of Otes and the Mashams in Essex, there must
likewise, in spite of our strait limits, be a word said. The
Mashams were distant Cousins of Oliver;? this Sir William
Masham, or Massam as he is often written, proved a conspicuous
busy man in the Politics of his time ; on the Puritan side ;—rose
into Oliver’s Council of State at last. The Mashams became
Lords Masham in the next generation, and so continued for a
while ; one Lady Masham was a daughter of Philosopher Cud-
worth, and is still remembered as the friend of John Locke,
whom she tended in his old days ; who lies buried, as his monu-
ment still shows, at the Church of High Laver, in the neighbour-
hood of which Otes Mansion stood. High Laver, Essex, not far
from Harlow Station on the Northeastern Railway. The Mashams
are all extinct, and their Mansion is swept away as if it had not
been. ‘Some forty years ago,’ says my kind informant, ‘a
‘wealthy Maltster of Bishop’s Stortford became the proprietor
‘by purchase ; and pulled the Manorhouse down; leaving the
‘outhouses as cottages to some poor people.’ The name Otes,

which appealed to many who were not Puritans, and came home to men to whom
Parliamentary privileges were remote abstractions. Every village Hampden
looked to Cromwell as a leader, and was ready to follow him. In 1643, a
royalist newspaper nicknamed him ‘The Lord of the Fens,’ but his popularity with
the fenmen began long before the military exploits which gained him the title.”
Firth's Cromwedl, pp, 33, 34-]

1 Warwick's Memoirs, p. 250. Poor Noble blunders, as he is apt todo. [But
Noble says 1638; see p. 107.]

2(Sir William Masham's wife was Cromwell's own cousin, daughter of his Aunt
Joan (Lady Barrington), and therefore cousin also to Mrs. St. John. ]

1638. ] LETTER II, ELY 89

the tomb of Locke, and this undestroyed and now indestructible
fraction of Ragpaper alone preserve the memory of Mashamdom
in this world. We modernise the spelling; let the reader, for it
may be worth his while, endeavour to modernise the sentiment
and subject matter.

There is only this farther to be premised, That St. John, the
celebrated Shipmoney Barrister, has married for his second wife
a Cousin of Oliver Cromwell’s, a Daughter of Uncle Henry’s,
whom we knew at Upwood long ago ;! which Cousin, and perhaps
her learned husband reposing from his arduous law-duties along
with her, is now on a Summer or Autumn visit at Otes, and has
lately seen Oliver there.

To my beloved Cousin Mrs. St. Johns, at Sir Wilkam Masham his
House called Oates, in Essex: Present these.

Ely, 13th October 1638.

Dear Cousin,

I thankfully acknowledge your love in your
kind remembrance of me upon this opportunity. Alas, you do
too highly prize my lines, and my company. I may be ashamed
to own your expressions, considering how unprofitable I am, and
the mean improvement of my talent.

Yet to honour my God by declaring what He hath done for
my soul, in this I am confident, and I will be so. Truly, then,
this I find: That He giveth springs in a dry and barren wilder-
ness where no water is. I live (you know where) in Mesheck,
which they say signifies Prolonging ; in Kedar, which signifieth
Blackness: yet the Lord forsaketh me not. Though He do
prolong, yet He will (I trust) bring me to His tabernacle, to His
resting-place. My soul is with the congregation of the firstborn,
my body rests in hope, and if here I may honour my God either
by doing or by suffering, I shall be most glad.

Truly no poor creature hath more cause to put forth himself
in the cause of his God than I. I have had plentiful wages

1 Antea, p. 20. [St. John’s first wife was also a cousin of Cromwell's, a daughter
of Lady Masham by her first husband, ] :

90 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [13 Oct.

beforehand, and I am sure I shall never earn the least mite.
The Lord accept me in His Son, and give me to walk in the
light, and give us to walk in the light, as He is the light. He
it is that enlighteneth our blackness, our darkness. I dare not
say, He hideth His face from me. He giveth me to see light in
His light. One beam in a dark place hath exceeding much re-
freshment in it: blessed be His Name for shining upon so dark
a heart as mine! You know what my manner of life hath been.
Oh, I lived in and loved darkness, and hated the light ; I was a
chief, the chief of sinners. This is true: I hated godliness, yet
God had mercy on me. O the riches of Hismercy. Praise Him
for me, pray for me, that He who hath begun a good work would
perfect it to the day of Christ.

Salute all my good friends in that family whereof you are yet
a member. I am much bound unto them for their love. I bless
the Lord for them; and that my son, by their procurement, is so
well. Let him have your prayers, your counsel; let me have
them.

Salute your husband and sister from me :—He is not a man of
his word! He promised to write about Mr. Wrath of Epping ;
but as yet I received no letters :—put him in mind to do what
with conveniency may be done for the poor cousin I did solicit
him about.

Once more farewell. The Lord be with you so: prayeth

Your truly loving Cousin,
Ouiver CroMwELL.!

My wife’s service and love presented to all her friends.

There are two or perhaps three sons of Cromwell’s at Felsted
School by this time : a likely enough guess is, that he might have
been taking Dick over to Felsted on that occasion when he came
round by Otes, and gave such comfort by his speech to the pious |
Mashams, and to the young Cousin, now on a summer visit at

_ 1 Thurloe’s State Papers (London, 1742), i. 1. [A copy of this letter is calendared
in the appendix to the 2nd Report of the Historical Manuscripts Commissioners.
Noted by Mr. Horwood: ‘‘ Religious and wordy.’”]

1638. ] LETTER II., ELY 91

Otes. What glimpses of long-gone summers; of long-gone
human beings in fringed trouser-breeches, in starched ruff, in
hood and fardingale ;—alive, they, within their antiquarian cos-
tumes, living men and women; instructive, very interesting to
one another! Mrs. St. John came down to breakfast every
morning in that summer visit of the year 1638, and Sir William
said grave grace, and they spake polite devout things to one
another; and they are vanished, they and their things and
speeches,—all silent, like the echoes of the old nightingales that
sang that season, like the blossoms of the old roses. O Death,
O Time !—

For the soul’s furniture of these brave people is grown not less
unintelligible, antiquarian, than their spanish boots and lappet
caps. Reverend Mark Noble, my reverend imbecile friend, dis-
covers in this Letter evidence that Oliver was once a very dissolute
man; that Carrion Heath spake truth in that Flagellum Balder-
dash of his. O my reverend imbecile friend, hadst thou thyself
never any moral life, but only a sensitive and digestive? Thy
soul never longed towards the serene heights, all hidden from
thee ; and thirsted as the hart in dry places wherein no waters
be? It was never a sorrow for thee that the eternal pole-star had
gone out, veiled itself in dark clouds ;—a sorrow only that this
or the other noble Patron forgot thee when a living fell vacant ?
I have known Christians, Moslems, Methodists,—and, alas, also
reverend irreverent Apes by the Dead Sea!

O modern reader, dark as this Letter may seem, I wil] advise
thee to make an attempt towards understanding it. There is in
it a ‘tradition of humanity’ worth all the rest. Indisputable
certificate that man once had a soul; that man once walked
with God,—his little Life a sacred island girdled with Eternities
and Godhoods. Was it not a time for heroes? Heroes were
then possible. I say, thou shalt understand that Letter ; thou
also, looking out into a too brutish world, wilt then exclaim
with Oliver Cromwell,—with Hebrew David, as old Mr. Rouse
of Truro, and the Presbyterian populations, still sing him in the
Northern Kirks :—

Woe's me that I in Meshec am
A sojourner so long,

Or that I in the tents do dwell
To Kedar that belong !

Yes, there is a tone in the soul of this Oliver that holds of the
Perennial. With a noble sorrow, with a noble patience, he longs

92 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR _[1639.

towards the mark of the prize of the high calling. He, I think,
has chosen the better part. The world and its wild tumults,—if
they will but let him alone! Yet he too will venture, will do and
suffer for God’s cause, if the call come. What man with better
reason? He hath had plentiful wages beforehand; snatched
out of darkness into marvellous light: he will never earn the
least mite. Annihilation of self; Selbsttédtung, as Novalis calls
it; casting yourself at the footstool of God’s throne, “To live or
to die forever ; as Thou wilt, not as I will.” Brother, hadst thou
never, in any form, such moments in thy history? Thou knowest
them not, even by credible rumour? Well, thy earthly path was
peaceabler, I suppose. But the Highest was never in thee, the
Highest will never come out of thee. Thou shalt at best abide
by the stuff; as cherished housedog, guard the stuff,—perhaps
with enormous gold-collars and provender: but the battle, and
the hero death, and victory’s fire-chariot carrying men to the
Immortals, shall never be thine. I pity thee; brag not, or I
shall have to despise thee.

TWO YEARS

Sucu is Oliver's one Letter from Ely. To guide us a little
through the void gulf towards his next Letter, we will here in-
tercalate the following small fractions of Chronology.

1639

May—July. The Scots at their Glasgow Assembly! had rent
their Tulchan Apparatus in so rough a way, and otherwise so ill
comported themselves, his Majesty saw good, in the beginning
of this year, immense negotiation and messaging to and fro having
proved so futile, to chastise them with an Army. By unheard-of
exertions in the Extra-Parliamentary way, his Majesty got an
Army ready; marched with it to Berwick,—is at Newcastle, 8th
May 1639.2 But, alas, the Scots, with a much better Army,
already lay encamped on Dunse Law; every nobleman with his
tenants there, as a drilled regiment, round him ; old Fieldmarshal

l Nov, 1638; Baillie’s Letters (Edinburgh, 1841), i, 118-176.
2 Rushworth, iii. 930.

1640.] TWO YEARS 93

Lesley for their generalissimo; at every Colonel’s tent this pennon
flying,! For Christs Crown and Covenant; there was no fighting to
be thought of.? Neither could the Pacification there patched up
be of long continuance. The Scots disbanded their soldiers ; but
kept the officers, mostly Gustavus-Adolphus men, still within
sight.

1640

The Scotch Pacification, hastily patched up at Dunse Hill, did
not last; discrepancies arose as to the practical meaning of this
and the other clause in it. Discrepancies which the farther they
were handled, embroiled themselves the more. His Majesty
having burnt Scotch paper Declarations ‘by the hands of the
common hangman,’ and almost cut off the poor Scotch Chancellor
Loudon’s head, and being again resolute to chastise the rebel
Scots with an Army, decides on summoning a Parliament for that
end, there being no money attainable otherwise. To the great
and glad astonishment of England ; which, at one time, thought
never to have seen another Parliament! Oliver Cromwell sat in
this Parliament for Cambridge ;* recommended by Hampden, say
some ; not needing any recommendation in those Fen-countries,
think others. Oliver’s Colleague was a Thomas Meautys, Esquire.*
This Parliament met, 13th April 1640: it was by no means
prompt enough with supplies against the rebel Scots; the King
dismissed it in a huff, 5th May; after a Session of three weeks:
Historians call it the Short Parliament. His Majesty decides on
raising money and an Army ‘by other methods ;’ to which end,
Wentworth, now Earl Strafford and Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland,
who had advised that course in the Council, did himself subscribe
20,000/. Archbishop Laud had long ago seen a ‘cloud rising’
against the Four surplices at Allhallowtide ; and now it is cover-
ing the whole sky, in a most dismal and really thundery-looking
manner.

His Majesty by ‘ other methods,’ commission of array, benevo-

1[‘‘Everie companie had flying at the captaine’s tent-doore” is what Baillie
says.

% Lon iii. g26-49 ; Baillie, i. 184-221 ; King’s Army ‘ dismissed’ (a/¢er Pacification),
24th June (Rushworth, iii. 946).

3 Browne Willis, pp. 229, 30; Rushworth, ili. 1105.

4[Thomas Meautys was elected as member for Cambridge in King James's parlia-
ment of 1621, and sat for that borough in all the parliaments of King Charles's
reign up to the Long Parliament. He was Clerk of the Privy Council from 1623
until within a short time of his death in 1642. ]

94 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR [1640.

lence, forced-loan, or how he could, got a kind of Army on foot,!
and set it marching out of the several Counties of the South to-
wards the Scotch Border: but it was a most hopeless Army.
The soldiers called the affair a Bishops’ War; they mutinied
against their officers, shot some of their officers : in various Towns
on their march, if the Clerygyman were reputed Puritan, they
went and gave him three cheers ; if of Surplice tendency, they
sometimes threw his furniture out of window.? No fighting
against poor Scotch Gospellers was to be hoped for from these
men.—Meanwhile the Scots, not to be behindhand, had raised a
good Army of their own; and decided on going into England
with it, this time, ‘to present their grievances to the King’s
Majesty.’ On the 20th of August 1640, they cross the Tweed
at Coldstream ; Montrose wading in the van of them all. They
wore uniform of hodden gray, with blue caps; and each man
had a moderate haversack of oatmeal on his back.*

August 28th. The Scots force their way across the Tyne, at
Newburn, some miles above Newcastle ; the King’s Army making
small fight, most of them no fight; hurrying from Newcastle,
and all town and country quarters, towards York again, where
his Majesty and Strafford were. The Bishops’ War was at an
end. The Scots, striving to be gentle as doves in their behaviour,
and publishing boundless brotherly Declarations to all the
brethren that loved Christ’s Gospel and God’s Justice in England,
—took possession of Newcastle next day ; took possession gradu-
ally of all Northumberland and Durham,—and stayed there, in
various towns and villages, about a year. The whole body of
English Puritans looked upon them as their saviours: some
months afterwards, Robert Baillie heard the London ballad-singers,
on the streets, singing copiously with strong lungs, “ Gramercy,
good Master Scot,” by way of burden.°

His Majesty and Strafford, in a fine frenzy at this turn of
affairs, found no refuge, except to summon a ‘Council of Peers,’
to enter upon a ‘Treaty’ with the Scots; and alas, at last,
summon a New Parliament. Not to be helped in any way.
Twelve chief Peers of the summoned ‘Council’ petitioned for a
Parliament ; the City of London petitioned for a Parliament,
and would not lend money otherwise. A Parliament was
appointed for the 3d of November next ;—whereupon London

1 Rushworth, iii. 1241.
2 Vicars’ Parliamentary Chronicle (Lond. 1644), p. 20.
3 Old Pamphlets, 4 Rushworth, iii, 1236, &c. 5 Baillie’s Le¢éers.

1640.] TWO YEARS 95

cheerfully lent 200,000/.; and the treaty with the Scots at
Ripon, Ist October 1640,! by and by transferred to London, went
peaceably on at a very leisurely pace. The Scotch Army lay
quartered at Newcastle, and over Northumberland and Durham,
on an allowance of 850/. a-day ; an Army indispensable for Puri-
tan objects ; no haste in finishing its Treaty. The English Army
lay across in Yorkshire ; without allowance except from the
casualties of the King’s Exchequer ;' in a dissatisfied manner,
and occasionally getting into ‘ Army-Plots.’

This Parliament, which met on the 3rd of November 1640,
has become very celebrated in History by the name of the Long
Parliament.? It accomplished and suffered very singular destinies ;
suffered a Pride’s Purge, a Cromwell’s Ejectment ; suffered Re-
instatements, Re-ejectments ; and the Rump or Fag-end of it did
not finally vanish till 16th March 1659-60. Oliver Cromwell sat
again in this Parliament for Cambridge Town; Meautys, his old
Colleague, is now changed for ‘ John Lowry, Esquire,’ * probably
a more Puritanic man, The Members for Cambridge University
are the same in both Parliaments.+

1 Rushworth, iii. 1282.

2[Of the composition of the Long Parliament, Mr. Morley writes that the list
reads like a catalogue of the existing county families, and that ‘‘it is hardly an
exaggeration to say that the House of Lords now contains a smaller proportion of
ancient blood than the famous lineages that figure in the roll of the great revolu-
tionary House of Commons. It was essentially an aristocratic and not a popular
house, as became only too clear five or six years later, when Levellers and soldiers
came into the field of politics. The Long Parliament was made up of the very
flower of the English gentry and the educated laity.” Morley’s Oliver Cromwell,

Pp. 75-]
? Willis; Rushworth, iv. 3. See Cooper’s Annals of Cambridge (London, 1845),

iii, 303, 4.
4(Mr. Weyman thus sums up Cromwell's position at the beginning of the Long
Parliament. ‘‘ He had had already some experience of the House, he bore a well-

known name and had a fair estate, and the reputation in his own district of being a
strenuous, stirring, stiff-backed man, But in addition he had—or he and his cousin,
the already famous John Hampden had—the following kinsfolk among the members :
Oliver St. John, the Solicitor-General, a first cousin; Edmund Dunch, Sir Thomas
Barrington and Edmund Waller, also first cousins; Sir Richard Knightley, Sir
Robert Pye and Sir John Trevor, Hampden’s sons-in-law ; Valentine Walton, Crom-
well’s brother-in-law; and Sir Gilbert Gerrard and Sir William Masham, the
husbands of Cromwell's first cousins—ten votes; with Cromwell and Hampden,
twelve. Then, in addition to these he had in the House at its first sitting five distant
connexions, the sons or kinsmen of the fore-going; Francis Gerrard, Thomas
Trevor, Sir Oliver Luke, Sir Samuel Luke and Humphrey Salwey.... From
time to time, as vacancies occurred and royalists were disabled, this number was
increased very considerably, Sir John Barrington, William Masham, John Trevor,
John Jones, Thomas Waller, Richard Ingoldsby, Henry Ireton and Richard Salwey
coming up to recruit the clan which, notwithstanding death and defection, can
scarcely in 1647 have mustered less than twenty-three votes.” ‘‘ Oliver Cromwell's
Kinsfolk,” English Historical Review, January, 1891. }

96 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR (1640-1.

LETTER III

'o my lowing friend Mr. Willingham, at his House in Smnithin’s
Lane:

‘London, February 1640.’?
Sir,
I desire you to send me the reasons of the

Scots to enforce their desire of Uniformity in Religion, expressed
in their 8th Article; I mean that which I had before of you. I
would peruse it against we fall upon that debate, which will be
speedily. Yours,

O.tveR CROMWELL.*

THERE is a great quantity of intricate investigation requisite to
date this small undated Note, and make it entirely transparent !
The Scotch Treaty, begun at Ripon, is going on,—never ended :
the agitation about abolishing Bishops has just begun, in the
House and out of it.

On Friday, 11th December 1640, the Londoners present their
celebrated ‘ Petition,’ signed by 15,000 hands, craving to have
Bishops and their Ceremonies radically reformed. Then on
Saturday, 23d January 1640-1, comes the still more celebrated
‘Petition and Remonstrance from 700 Ministers of the Church of
England,’ to the like effect. Upon which Documents, especially
upon the latter, ensue strenuous debatings,® ensues a ‘Committee
of Twenty-four ;’ a Bill to abolish Superstition and Idolatry ; and,
in a week or two, a Bill to take away the Bishops’ Votes in
Parliament: Bills recommended by the said Committee. <A
diligent Committee ; which heard much evidence, and theo-
logical debating, from Dr. Burgess and others. Their Bishops
Bill, not without hot arguing, passed through the Commons;
was rejected by the Lords ;—took effect, however, in a much
heavier shape, within year and day. Young Sir Ralph Verney,
son of Edmund the Standard-bearer, has preserved very careful

1The words within single commas, here as always in the ‘Text of Cromwell’s
Letters, are mine, not his; the date in this instance is conjectural or inferential.

2 Commons Journals, ii. 72.

3 /bid. ii. 81; 8th and gth of February. See Baillie’s Le¢¢ers, i. 302; and Rush-
worth, iv. 93 and 174.

* Harris, p. 517; Sloane MSS. no, 2035), fol. 5.

1641.) LETTER III, ANTI-EPISCOPACY 97

Notes of the theological revelations and profound arguments,
heard in this Committee from Dr. Burgess and others ; intensely
interesting at that time to all ingenuous young gentlemen; a
mere torpor now to all persons.

In fact, the whole world, as we perceive, in this Spring of 1641,
is getting on fire with episcopal, anti-episcopal emotion ; and the ,
Scotch Commissioners, with their Desire of Uniformity, are natur- “
ally the centre of the latter. Bishop Hall, Smectymnuus, and
one Mr. Milton ‘near St. Bride’s Church,’ are getting all their
Pamphlets ready.—The assiduous contemporary individual who
collected the huge stock of loose Printing now know as King’s
Pamphlets in the British Museum, usually writes the date on the '
title-page of each; but has, with a curious infelicity, omitted it
in the case of Milton’s Pamphlets, which accordingly remain
undateable except approximately.

The exact copy of the Scotch Demands towards a Treaty I
have not yet met with, though doubtless it is in print amid the
unsorted Rubbish Mountains of the British Museum. Notices of
it are to be seen in Baillie, also in Rushworth. The first Seven
Articles relate to secularities ; payment of damages ; punishment
of incendiaries, and so forth: the Seventh is the ‘recalling’ of
the King’s Proclamations against the Scots. The Eighth, ‘anent
a solid peace betwixt the Nations,’ involves this matter of
Uniformity in Religion, and therefore is of weightier moment.
Baillie says: ‘For the Eighth great Demand some days were
spent in preparation.’ The Lords would have made no difficulty
about dismantling Berwick and Carlisle, or such like ; but finding
that the other points of this Eighth Article were to involve the
permanent relations of England, they delayed. ‘We expect it
this very day,’ says Baillie (28th February 1640-1). Oliver
Cromwell also expects it this very day, or ‘speedily, —and
therefore writes to Mr. Willingham for a sight of the Documents
again.

Whoever wishes to trace the emergence, re-emergence, slow
ambiguous progress, and dim issue of this ‘Highth Article, may
consult the opaque but authentic Commons Journals, and strive
to elucidate the same by poor old brown Pamphlets, in the places _,
cited below.? It was not finally voted in the affirmative till the

1 Baillie, i. 297, and aztea and postea ; Rushworth, iv. 166,

2 Commons Journals, ii. 84, 85; Diurnal Occurrences in Parliament (Printed for
William Cooke, London, 1641,—often erroneous as to the day), roth February, 7th
March, rsth May.

vol. f—7

98 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR (1641.

middle of May; and then still it was far from being ended. It
ended, properly, in the Summoning of a ‘Westminster Assembly
of Divines, To ascertain for us how ‘ the two Nations’ may best
attain to ‘ Uniformity of Religion.’

This ‘ Mr. Willingham my loving friend,’ of whom I have found
no other vestige anywhere in Nature, is presumably a London
Puritan concerned in the London Petition and other such matters,
to whom the Member for Cambridge, a man of known zeal, good
connexion, and growing weight, is worth convincing.!

Oliver St. John the Shipmoney Lawyer, now Member for
Totness, has lately been made Solicitor-General ; on the 2d of
February 1640-1, D’Ewes says of him, ‘newly created’; a date
worth attending to.?  Strafford’s Trial is coming on; to begin on
the 22d of March: Strafford and Laud are safe in the Tower long
since; Finch and Windebank, and other Delinquents in high
places, have fled rapidly beyond seas.

IN THE LONG PARLIAMENT

Tuart little Note, despatched by a servant to Swithin’s Lane in
the Spring of 1641, and still saved by capricious destiny while
so much else has been destroyed,—is all of Autographic that
Oliver Cromwell has left us concerning his proceedings in the
first three-and-twenty months of the Long Parliament.? Months

1[He was George Willingham, a prominent London merchant, a member of the
London Sequestration Committee. A series of letters addressed to him by
Nehemiah Wharton (preserved amongst the State Papers) will be found in Arche-
ologia, vol. XXXV, Pp. 310-334. There are other notices of, and letters from him
amongst the State Papers. See Calendars S.P. Dom.: Chas. /., for the years
1641-1643 ; 1645-1647; and Addenda 1625-1649. |

2 Sir Simond D’Ewes's Notes of the Long Parliament (Harleian Mss., nos. 162-6),
fol. 189 a; p. 156 of Transcript exes me. [The appointment was made 29th
January. ]

3 [All of ‘‘autographic,” perhaps, but there are several notices of Cromwell in the
early days of the Long Parliament, to be found in D'Ewes' Diary. He moved the
second reading of the Act for annual Parliaments in December, 1640, and he sup-
ported the Londoners’ petition for the abolition of episcopacy on oth February, 1641.
He so bluntly opposed the views of a member who urged its rejection that some )
were for having him called to the bar, but owing to the influence of Pym and Holles,
he was allowed to go on. D’Ewes shortly reports what he said. ‘‘ He did not
understand why that gentleman that last spake should make an inference of parity
from the church to the State, nor that there was any necessity of the great revenues
of bishops. He was more convinced touching the irregularity of bishops than even
before, because like the Roman hierarchy they would not endure to have their

1641] IN THE LONG PARLIAMENT 99

distinguished, beyond most others in History, by anxieties and
endeavours, by hope and fear and swift vicissitude, to all England
as well as him: distinguished on his part by much Parliamentary
activity withal ; of which, unknown hitherto in History, but still
capable of being known, let us wait some other opportunity of
speaking. Two vague appearances of his in that scene, which
are already known to most readers, we will set in their right date
and place, making them faintly visible at last ; and therewith
leave this part of the subject.

In D’Ewes’s Manuscript above cited! are these words, relating to
Monday, 9th November 1640, the sixth day of the Long Parliament :
‘Mr. Cromwell delivered the Petition of John Lilburn,’—young
Lilburn, who had once been Prynne’s amanuensis, among other
things, and whose ‘ whipping with 200 stripes from Westminster
to the Fleet Prison,’ had already rendered him conspicuous. This
is the record of D’Ewes. To which let us now annex the following
well-known passage of Sir Philip Warwick ; and if the reader fancy
the Speeches on the previous Saturday,? and how the ‘whole of
this Monday was spent in hearing grievances’ of the like sort,
some dim image of a strange old scene may perhaps rise upon
him.

‘The first time I ever took notice of Mr. Cromwell,’ says
Warwick, ‘was in the very beginning of the Parliament held in
‘November 1640; when I,’ Member for Radnor, ‘ vainly thought
‘myself a courtly young gentleman,—for we courtiers valued
‘ourselves much upon our good clothes! I came into the House
‘one morning,’ Monday morning, ‘well clad; and perceived a
‘gentleman speaking, whom I knew not,—very ordinarily ap-
‘parelled ; for it was a plain cloth suit, which seemed to have
‘been made by an ill country-tailor ; his linen was plain, and not

condition come to atrial.” In May, 1641, he joined with Sir Henry Vane in bringing
in the ‘‘ Root and Branch Bill ;” in September he supported the suggestion for altera-
tions in the Book of Common Prayer, declaring that there were passages in it to
which ‘‘ grave and learned divines” could not submit; in October he carried a
resolution to confer with the Lords concerning the King's appointment of bishops
to the vacant sees; and in November another that the Lords should be asked to
join in voting Essex as commander of the trained bands in the South of England.
This brings us to the Grand Remonstrance. Also, as Mr. Sanford has calculated,
during the first ten months of the Long Parliament, Cromwell was specially appointed
to sit on eighteen committees, exclusive of those of which the knights and burgesses
generally of the Eastern counties were members. (See Sanford’s Studies and [llus-
trations of the Great Rebellion, pp. 306, 670.). }

1 D’Ewes, fol. 4. :
2 Commons Journals, 7th Nov. 1640; Rushworth, iv. 24, &c.

100 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR (1641.

‘very clean; and I remember a speck or two of blood upon his
‘little band, which was not much larger than his collar. His
‘hat was without a hat-band. His stature was of a good size ;
‘his sword stuck close to his side: his countenance swoln and
‘reddish, his voice sharp and untuneable, and his eloquence full
‘of fervour. For the subject matter would not bear much of
‘reason ; it being on behalf of a servant of Mr. Prynne’s who had
‘dispersed Libels ;’—yes, Libels, and had come to Palaceyard for
it, as we saw: ‘I sincerely profess, it lessened much my reverence
‘unto that Great Council, for this gentleman was very much
‘hearkened unto;’! which was strange, seeing he had no gold
lace to his coat, nor frills to his band; and otherwise, to me in

\_my poor featherhead, seemed a somewhat unhandy gentleman !

The reader may take what of these Warwick traits he can
along with him, and also omit what he cannot take; for though
Warwick’s veracity is undoubted, his memory after many years,
in such an element as his had been, may be questioned. The
‘band, we may remind our readers, is a linen tippet, properly
the shirt-collar of those days, which, when the hair was worn
long, needed to fold itself with a good expanse of washable linen
over the upper-works of the coat, and defend these and their
velvets from harm. The ‘specks of blood, if not fabulous,
we, not without general sympathy, attribute to bad razors: as
for the ‘hatband, one remarks that men did not speak with
their hats on ; and therefore will, with Sir Philip’s leave, omit
that. The ‘untuneable voice,’ or what a poor young gentleman
in these circumstances would consider as such, is very significant
to us.

Here is the other vague appearance ; from Clarendon’s Life.?
‘He, Mr. Hyde, afterwards Lord Clarendon, ‘ was often heard to
‘mention one private Committee, in which he was put accidentally
‘into the chair; upon an Enclosure which had been made of
‘great wastes, belonging to the Queen’s Manors, without the
‘consent of the tenants, the benefit whereof had been given by
‘the Queen toa servant of near trust, who forthwith sold the
‘lands enclosed to the Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal;
‘who together with his Son Mandevil were now most concerned
‘to maintain the Enclosure; against which, as well the inhabitants _
‘of other manors, who claimed Common in those wastes, as the
‘Queen’s tenants of the same, made loud complaints, as a great

1 Warwick, p: 247. 2j. 78 (Oxford, 1761).

1641.) IN THE LONG PARLIAMENT - 101

‘oppression, carried upon them with a very high hand, and sup-
‘ported by power.

‘The Committee sat in the Queen’s Court ; and Oliver Crom-
‘well being one of them, appeared much concerned to counten-
‘ance the Petitioners, who were numerous together with their
‘ Witnesses ; the Lord Mandevil being likewise present as a party,
‘and by the direction of the Committee sitting covered. Crom-
‘well, who had never before been heard to speak in the House
‘of Commons, ’——at least not by me, though he had often spoken,
and was very well known there,—‘ ordered the Witnesses and
‘ Petitioners in the method of the proceeding ; and seconded, and
‘enlarged upon what they said, with great passion; and the
‘Witnesses and persons concerned, who were a very rude kind of
‘people, interrupted the Counsel and Witnesses on the other side,
‘with great clamour, when they said anything that did not please
‘them; so that Mr. Hyde (whose office it was to oblige men of
‘all sorts to keep order) was compelled to use some sharp re-
‘proofs, and some threats, to reduce them to such a temper that
‘the business might be quietly heard. | Cromwell, in great fury,
‘reproached the Chairman for being partial, and that he dis-
‘countenanced the Witnesses by threatening them: the other
‘appealed to the Committee ; which justified him, and declared
‘that he behaved himself as he ought to do; which more inflamed
‘him,’ Cromwell, ‘who was already too much angry. When
‘upon any mention of matter-of-fact, or of the proceeding before
‘and at the Enclosure, the Lord Mandevil desired to be heard,
‘and with great modesty related what had been done, or explained
‘what had been said, Mr. Cromwell did answer, and reply upon
‘him with so much indecency and rudeness, and in language so
‘contrary and offensive, that every man would have thought, that
‘as their natures and their manners were as opposite as it is
‘ possible, so their interest could never have been the same. In
‘the end, his whole carriage was so tempestuous, and his be-
‘haviour so insolent, that the Chairman found himself obliged to
‘reprehend him ; and to tell him, That if he’ Mr. Cromwell ‘ pro-
‘ceeded in the same manner, he’ Mr. Hyde ‘would presently
‘adjourn the Committee, and the next morning complain to the
‘House of him. Which he never forgave ; and took all occasions
‘afterwards to pursue him with the utmost malice and revenge,
‘to his death,—not Mr. Hyde’s, happily, but Mr. Cromwell’s,
who at length did cease to cherish ‘malice and revenge’ against

Mr. Hyde!

102 BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR (1641.

Tracking this matter, by faint indications, through various
obscure courses, I conclude that it related to ‘the Soke of
Somersham,’! near St. Ives; and that the scene in the Queen’s
Court probably occurred in the beginning of July 1641.2. Crom-
well knew this Soke of Somersham, near St. Ives, very well;
knew these poor rustics, and what treatment they had got; and
wished, not in the imperturbablest manner it would seem, to see
justice done them. Here too, subtracting the due subtrahend
from Mr. Hyde’s Narrative, we have a pleasant visuality of an
old summer afternoon ‘in the Queen’s Court’ two hundred years
ago.

Cromwell's next Letters present him to us, not debating, or
about to debate, concerning Parliamentary Propositions and
Scotch ‘Eighth Articles, but with his sword drawn to enforce
them ; the whole Kingdom divided now into two armed conflict-
ing masses, the argument to be by pike and bullet henceforth.

1 Commons Journals, li. 172.
2 bid, 87; 150; 172; 192; 215; 218; 219,—the dates extend from 17th Feb-
ruary to 21st July 1641.

PART II

YO THE END OF THE FIRST CIVIL WAR
1642-1646

PRELIMINARY

Tuere is therefore a great dark void, from February 1641 to
January 1643, through which the reader is to help himself from
Letter III. over to Letter IV., as he best may. How has pacific
England, the most solid pacific country in the world, got all into
this armed attitude; and decided itself to argue henceforth by
pike and bullet till it get some solution? Dryasdust, if there
remained any shame in him, ought to look at those wagonloads
of Printed Volumes, and blush! We, in great haste, offer the
necessitous reader the following hints and considerations.

It was mentioned above that Oliver St. John, the noted Puritan
Lawyer, was already, in the end of January 1641, made Solicitor-
General. The reader may mark that as a small fraction of an
event showing itself above ground, completed ; and indicating to
him a grand subterranean attempt on the part of King Charles
and the Puritan Leaders, which unfortunately never could become
a fact or event. Charles, in January last or earlier (for there are
no dates discoverable but this of St. John’s), perceiving how the
current of the Nation ran, and what a humour men were getting
into, had decided on trying to adopt the Puritan leaders, Pym,
Hampden, Holles and others, as what we should now call his
‘Ministers:’ these Puritan men, under the Earl of Bedford as
chief, might have hoped to become what we should now call a
‘Majesty’s Ministry, and to execute peaceably, with their King
presiding over them, what reforms had grown inevitable. A

(103)

104 FIRST CIVIL WAR (1641.

most desirable result, if a possible one; for of all men these had
the least notion of revolting, or rebelling against their King!

This negotiation had been entered into, and entertained as a
possibility by both parties : so much is indubitable ; so much and
nothing more, except that it ended without result.1_ It would in
our days be the easiest negotiation ; but it was then an impossible
one. For it meant that the King should content himself with
the Name of King, and see measures the reverse of what he
wished and willed, take effect by his sanction. Which, in sad
truth, had become a necessity for Charles I. in the England of
1641. His tendency and effort has long been the reverse of
England’s ; he cannot govern England, whatever he may govern !
And yet to have admitted this necessity,—alas, was it not to have
settled the whole Quarrel, without the eight-and-forty years of
fighting, and confused bickering and oscillation, which proved to
be needful first? The negotiation dropped ; leaving for visible
result only this appointment of St. John’s. His Majesty on that
side saw no course possible for him.

Accordingly he tried it in the opposite direction, which also,
on failure by this other, was very natural for him. He entered
into secret tamperings with the Officers of the English Army ;
which, lying now in Yorkshire, ill-paid, defeated, and in neigh-
bourhood of a Scotch Army victoriously furnished with 850.
a-day, was very apt for discontent. There arose a ‘first Army-
Plot’ for delivering Strafford from the Tower; then a second
Army-Plot for some equally wild achievement, tending to deliver
Majesty from thraldom, and send this factious Parliament about
its business. In which desperate schemes, though his Majesty
strove not to commit himself beyond what was necessary, it
became and still remains indubitable that he did participate ;—
as indeed, the former course of listening to his Parliament having
been abandoned, this other of coercing or awing it by armed force
was the only remaining one.

These Army- Plots, detected one after another, and investigated
and commented upon, with boundless interest, in Parliament and
out of it, kept the Summer and Autumn of 1641 in continual
alarm and agitation ; taught all Opposition persons, and a factious
Parliament in general, what ground they were standing on ;—
and in the factious Parliament, especially, could not but awaken
the liveliest desire of having the Military Force put in such hands

1 Whitlocke, Clarendon; see Forster’s Statesmen, ii, 150-7.

1641.] PRELIMINARY 105

as would be safe for them. ‘The Lord-Lieutenants of Counties,’
this factious Parliament conceived an unappeasable desire of
knowing who these were to be:—this is what they mean by
‘Power of the Militia;’ on which point, as his Majesty would
not yield a jot, his Parliament and he,—the point becoming daily
more important, new offences daily accumulating, and the split
ever widening,—ultimately rent themselves asunder, and drew
swords to decide it.

Such was the well-known consummation ; which in Cromwell’s
next Letter we find to have arrived. Here are a few Dates which
may assist the reader to grope his way thither. From ‘Mr Wil-
lingham in Swithin’s Lane’ in February 1641, to the Royal
Standard at Nottingham in August 1642, and ‘Mr, Barnard at
Huntingdon’ in January 1643, which is our next stage, there is
a long vague road; and the lights upon it are mostly a universal
dance of will-o’-wisps, and distracted fire-flies in a state of excite-
ment,—not good guidance for the traveller !

1641

Monday, 3d May. Strafford’s trial being ended, but no sentence
yet given, Mr. Robert Baillie, Minister of Kilwinning, who was
here among the Scotch Commissioners at present, saw in Palace-
yard, Westminster, ‘some thousands of Citizens and Apprentices’
(Miscellaneous Persons and City Shopmen, as we should now call
them), who rolled about there ‘all day,’ bellowing to every Lord
as he went in or came out, ‘with a loud and hideous voice :’
“ Justice on Strafford! Justice on Traitors!” 1—which seemed
ominous to the Reverend Mr. Baillie.

In which same hours, amid such echoes from without, the
honourable House of Commons within doors, all in great tremor
about Army-Plots, Treasons, Death-perils, was busy redacting a
‘ Protestation ;’ a kind of solemn Vow, or miniature Scotch Cove-
nant, the first of a good many such in those earnest agitated times,
—to the effect: “We take the Supreme to witness that we will
stand by one another to the death in prosecution of our just objects
here ; in defence of Law, Loyalty and Gospel here.” To this
effect ; but couched in very mild language, and with a ‘ Preamble,’
in which our Terror of Army-Plots, the moving principle of the
affair, is discreetly almost shaded out of sight ; it being our object

i Baillie, i, 351.

106 FIRST CIVIL WAR (1641,

that the House should be ‘ unanimous’ in this Protestation. As
accordingly the House was; the House, and to a great extent
the Nation. Hundreds of honourable Members, Mr. Cromwell
one of them, sign the Protestation this day ; the others on the
following days: their names all registered in due succession in
the Books.! Nay, it is ordered that the whole Nation be invited
to sign 1t; that each honourable Member send it down to his
constituents, and invite them to sign it. Which, as we say, the
constituents, all the reforming part of them, everywhere in
England, did; with a feeling of solemnity very strange to the
modern mind. Striking terror into all Traitors; quashing down
Army-Plots for the present, and the hopes of poor Strafford for-
ever. A Protestation held really sacred ; appealed to, henceforth,
as a thing from which there was no departing. Cavaleades of
Freeholders, coming up from the country to petition the Hon-
ourable House,—for instance, the Four-thousand Petitioners from
Buckinghamshire, about ten months hence,—rode with this
Protestation ‘stuck in their hats.’2 A very great and awe-inspir-
ing matter in those days; till it was displaced by greater of the
like kind,—Solemn League and Covenant, and others.®

Monday next, 10th May, his Majesty accordingly signed sen-
tence on Strafford ; who was executed on the Wednesday following.
No help for it. A terrible example; the one supremely able
man the King had.

On the same Monday, !0th May, his Majesty signed likewise
another Bill, That this Parliament should not be dissolved with-
out its own consent. A Bill signed in order that the City might
lend him money on good Security of Parliament ; money being
most pressingly wanted, for our couple of hungry Armies Scotch
and English, and other necessary occasions. <A Bill which seemed
of no great consequence except financial ; but which, to a People
reverent of Law, and never, in the wildest clash of battle-swords,
giving up its religious respect for the constable’s baton, proved
of infinite consequence. His Majesty’s hands are tied ; he cannot
dismiss this Parliament, as he has done the others ;—no, not with-
out its own consent.

August 10th, Aymy-Plotters having fled beyond seas; the
Bill for Triennial Parliaments being passed; the Episcopacy-
Bill being got to sleep; and by the use of royal varnish a kind of

1 Commons Journals, ii, 132, 3, &c. ; Rushworth, iv. 241, 4.

2z2th January 1641-2; Rushworth, iv. 486.
3 Copy of it, sent to Cambridge: Appendix, No. 3.

1641.] PRELIMINARY 107

composure, or hope of composure, being introduced ; above all
things, money being now borrowed to pay the Armies and dis-
band them,—his Majesty, on the 10th of the month,! set out
for Scotland. To hold a Parliament, and compose matters there,
as his Majesty gave out. To see what old or new elements of
malign Royalism could still be awakened to life there, as the
Parliament surmised, who greatly opposed his going.—Mr. Crom-
well got home to Ely again, for six weeks, this autumn ; there
being a recess from 9th September when the business was got
gathered up, till 20th October when his Majesty was expected
back. An Interim Committee, and Pym from his ‘lodging at
Chelsea,’ 2 managed what of indispensable might turn up.
November 1st. News came to London, to the reassembled
Parliament,? that an Irish Rebellion, already grown to be an
Irish Massacre, had broken out. An Irish Catholic imitation of
the late Scotch Presbyterian achievements in the way of ‘ religious
liberty ;’—one of the best models, and one of the worst imitations
ever seen in this world. Erasmus’s Ape, observing Erasmus
shave himself, never doubted but it too could shave. One knows
what a hand the creature made of itself, before the edgetool
could be wrenched from it again! As this poor Irish Rebellion
unfortunately began in lies and bluster, and proceeded in lies and
bluster, hoping to make itself good that way, the ringleaders
had started by pretending or even forging some warrant from
the King; which brought much undeserved suspicion on his
Majesty, and greatly complicated his affairs here for a long while.
November 22d. The Irish Rebellion blazing up more and
more into an Irish Massacre, to the terror and horror of all
Antipapist men; and in England, or even in Scotland, except
by the liberal use of varnish, nothing yet being satisfactorily
mended, nay all things hanging now, as it seemed, in double
and treble jeopardy,—the Commons had decided on a ‘Grand
Petition and Remonstrance,’ to set forth what their griefs and
necessities really were, and really would require to have done
for them. The Debate upon it, very celebrated in those times,
came on this day, Monday 22d November. The longest Debate
ever yet known in Parliament ; and the stormiest,—nay, had it
not been for Mr. Hampden’s soft management, ‘we had like to

1 Wharton's Laud, p. 62.

2 His Report, Commons Journals, ii. 289.

3 Laud, 62; Commons Journals, in die.

4 Commons Journals, in die; D’ Ewes Mss, f. 179 b.

108 FIRST CIVIL WAR (1641.

have sheathed our swords in each other’s bowels,’ says Warwick ;
which I find otherwise to be true. The Remonstrance passed
by a small majority. It can be read still in Rushworth,’ drawn
up in precise business order; the whole 206 Articles of it,—
every line of which once thrilled electrically into all men’s
hearts, as torpid as it has now grown. ‘ The chimes of
Margaret’s were striking two in the morning when we came
out.’—It was on this occasion that Oliver, ‘coming down stairs,’
is reported to have said, He would have sold all and gone to
New England, had the Remonstrance not passed ;* a vague
report, gathered over dining-tables long after, to which the
reader need not pay more heed than it merits. His Majesty
returned from Scotland on the Thursday following; and had
from the City a thrice-glorious Civic Entertainment.*
December 10th. The Episcopal business, attempted last Spring
in vain, has revived in December, kindled into life by the Remon-
strance ; and is raging more fiercely than ever; crowds of
Citizens petitioning, Corporation ‘going in sixty coaches’ to
petition ;° the Apprentices, or City Shopmen, and miscellaneous
persons, petitioning :—Bishops ‘ much insulted’ in Palaceyard,
as they go in or out. Whereupon hasty Welsh Williams,
Archbishop of York, once Bishop of Lincoln and Lord Keeper,
he with Eleven too hasty Bishops, Smectymnuus Hall being one
of them, give in a Protest on this 10th of December,® That they
cannot get to their place in Parliament; that all shall be null
and void till they do get there. A rash step; for which, on the
30th of the same month, they are, by the Commons, voted
guilty of Treason ; and ‘in a cold evening,’ with small ceremony,
are bundled, the whole dozen of them, into the Tower. For
there is again rioting, again are cries ‘loud and hideous ;’—
Colonel Lunsford, a truculent one-eyed man, having ‘ drawn
his sword’ upon the Apprentices in Westminster Hall, and
truculently slashed some of them; who of course responded in
a loud and hideous manner, by tongue, by fist, and single-stick :
nay, on the morrow, 28th December,’ they came marching
many thousands strong, with sword and pistol, out of the City,
“Slash us now! while we wait on the Honourable House for an

answer to our petition !””—and insulted his Majesty’s Guard at
1(A majority of eleven only. ] Ziv. 438-513; see also 436, 7.
5 Clarendon [iv. 52]. 4 Rushworth, iv. 429.
5 Vicars, p. 56. § Rushworth, iv. 467.

7 Tbid., 464.

1642.] PRELIMINARY 109

Whitehall.1 What a Christmas of that old London, of that old
Year! On the 6th of February following, Episcopacy will be
voted down, with blaze of ‘bonfires, and ‘ringing’ of all the

bells,—very audible to poor old Dr. Laud? over in the Tower
yonder.

1642

January 4th. His Majesty seeing these extremities arrive, and
such a conflagation begin to blaze, thought now the time had
come for snatching the main livecoals away, and so quenching
the same. Such coals of strife he counts to the number of Five
in the Commons House, and One in the Lords: Pym, Hampden,

4

Haselrig, with Holles and Strode (who held down the Speaker —

fourteen years ago), these are the Five Commons; Lord Kim-
bolton, better known to us as Mandevil, Oliver’s friend, of the
‘Soke of Somersham,’ and Queen’s-Court Committee, he is the
Lord. His Majesty flatters himself he has gathered evidence
concerning these individual firebrands, That they ‘invited the
Scots to invade us’ in 1640: he sends, on Monday 3d January,?
to demand that they be given up to him as Traitors. Deliberate,
slow and, as it were, evasive reply. Whereupon, on the morrow,
he rides down to St. Stephen’s himself, with an armed very mis-
cellaneous force, of Five-hundred or of Three-hundred truculent
braggadocio persons at his back ; enters the House of Commons,
the truculent persons looking in after him from the lobby,—with
intent to seize the said Five Members, five principal hot coals ;
and trample them out, for one thing. It was the fatallest step this
poor king ever took. The five members, timefully warned, were
gone into the City ; the whole Parliament removed itself into
the City, ‘to be safe from armed violence.’ From London City,
and from all England, rose one loud voice of lamentation,
condemnation: Clean against law! Paint an inch thick, there
is, was, or can be, no shadow of law in this. Will you grant us
the Militia now; we seem to need it now!—His Majesty’s
subsequent stages may be dated with more brevity.

January 10th. The King with his Court quits Whitehall ; the
Five Members and Parliament purposing to return tomorrow,

1/On this same day, December 28, Cromwell moved an address to the King,
praying him to remove the Earl of Bristol, who was believed to have advised the
bringing in of the Scots army. (D’Ewes Dzary.) ]

2Wharton’s Laud, p. 62; see also p. 65.

3 Commons Journals, ii, 367.

110 FIRST CIVIL WAR (1642.

with the whole City in arms round them.! He left Whitehall ;
never saw it again till he came to lay down his head there.

March 9th. The King has sent away his Queen from Dover,
‘to be in a place of safety, —and also to pawn the Crown Jewels
in Holland, and get him arms. He returns Northward again,
avoiding London. Many Messages between the Houses of
Parliament and him: “ Will your Majesty grant us Power of the
Militia ; accept this list of Lord-Lieutenants?” On the 9th of
March, still advancing Northward without affirmative response,
he has got to Newmarket; where another Message overtakes
him, earnestly urges itself upon him: Could not your Majesty
please to grant us Power of the Militia fora limited time? “No,
by God!” answers his Majesty, “not for an hour!” ?—On the
19th of March he is at York ; where his Hull Magazine, gathered
for service against the Scots, is lying near; where a great Earl
of Newcastle, and other Northern potentates, will help him;
where at least London and its Puritanism, now grown so fierce,
is far off.

There we will leave him ; attempting Hull Magazine, in vain ;
exchanging messages with his Parliament; messages, missives,
printed and written Papers without limit :—Law-pleadings of
both parties before the great tribunal of the English Nation,
each party striving to prove itself right, and within the verge of
Law: preserved still in acres of typography, once thrillingly
alive in every fibre of them ; now a mere torpor, readable by
few creatures, not rememberable by any. It is too clear his
Majesty will have to get himself an army, by Commission of
Array, by subscriptions of loyal plate, pawning of crown jewels,
or how he can. The Parliament by all methods is endeavouring
to do the like. London subscribed ‘Horses and Plate,’ every
kind of plate, even to women’s thimbles, to an unheard-of
amount ;® and when it came to actual enlisting, in London
alone there were ‘Four-thousand enlisted in a day.’4 Four-
thousand, some call it Five-thousand, in a day: the reader may
meditate that one fact. Royal messages, Parliamentary messages ;
acres of typography thrillingly alive in every fibre of them,—
these go on slowly abating, and military preparations go on
steadily increasing till the 23d of October next. The King’s
‘Commission of Array for Leicestershire’ came out on the 12th

1 Vicars, p. 64. 2 Rushworth, iv. 533.
* Vicars, pp. 93, 109; see Commons Journals, roth June 1642.
4 Wood's A¢hene, iii. 193.

1642.] PRELIMINARY 1

of June, commissions for other counties following as convenient ;
the Parliament’s ‘Ordinance for the Militia,’ rising cautiously
pulse after pulse towards clear emergence, had attained comple-
tion the week before.!_ The question puts itself to every English
soul, Which of these will you obey ?—and in all quarters of
English ground, with swords getting out of their scabbards, and
yet the constable’s baton still struggling to rule supreme, there
is a most confused solution of it going on. +

Of Oliver in these months we find the following things noted ;
which the imaginative reader is to spread out into significance
for himself the best he can.

February 7th. ‘Mr. Cromwell,’ among others, ‘offers to lend
Three-hundred Pounds for the service of the Commonwealth,’ ?—
towards reducing the Irish Rebellion, and relieving the afflicted .
Protestants there, or here. Rushworth, copying ia List of such —
subscribers, of date 9th April 1642, has Cromwell’s name written
down for ‘5001.’ 3—seemingly the same transaction ; Mr. Cromwell
having now mended his offer: or else Mr. Rushworth, who uses
the arithmetical cipher in this place, having misprinted. Hamp-
den’s subscription there is 1,000/. In Mr. Cromwell it is clear
there is no backwardness, far from that: his activity in these
months notably increases. In the D’ Ewes mss.4 he appears and
reappears ; suggesting this and the other. practical step, on be-
half of Ireland oftenest ; in all ways zealously urging the work.®

July 15th. ‘Mr. Cromwell moved that we might make an
‘order to allow the Townsmen of Cambridge to raise two Com-
‘panies of Volunteers, and to appoint Captains over them.’® On
which same day, 15th July, the Commons Clerk writes these
words: ‘Whereas Mr. Cromwell hath sent down arms into the
‘County of Cambridge, for the defence of that County, it is this
‘day ordered,’ 7—that he shall have the ‘ 100/.’ expended on that
service repaid him by and by.* Is Mr. Cromwell aware that

1 Husbands the Printer’s First Collection (Lond. 1643), pp. 346, 331-

2 Commons Journals, ii. 408.

3 Rushworth, iv. 564. 4February—July 1642.

5[Of Cromwell’s relatives, Sir Thomas Barrington gave 1,200/,; Sir Gilbert
Gerard 1,o00/. (according to the Commons Journals, Rushworth says 2,000/.) Sir
William Masham and Oliver St. John each 600/. ]

6 D’Ewes Mss. f. 658-66. 7 Commons Journals, ii. 674.

8[Cromwell’s receipt for the money, written upon the back of the order sent
down, and dated July rg, is amongst the State Papers at the Public Record Office,
S.P. Dom.: Chas. I., vol. 491, No. 71a. The arms were probably intended
for the two companies of volunteers, for which, according to D’Ewes, he had just
moved Parliament. ] ;

112 FIRST CIVIL WAR 1649.

there lies a colour of high treason in all this; risk not of one’s
purse only, but of one’s head? Mr. Cromwell is aware of it, and
pauses not. The next entry is still stranger.

August 15th. ‘Mr. Cromwell in Cambridgeshire has seized the
‘Magazine in the Castle at Cambridge ; and hath hindered the
‘carrying of the Plate from that University ; which, as some re-
‘port, was to the value of 20,000/. or thereabouts.’1 So does Sir
Philip Stapleton, member for Aldborough, member also of our
new ‘Committee for Defence of the Kingdom,’ report this day.
For which let Mr. Cromwell have indemnity.2—Mr. Cromwell
has gone down into Cambridgeshire in person, since they began
to train there, and assumed the chief management,—to some
effect, it would appear.®

The like was going on in all shires in England ; wherever the
Parliament had a zealous member, it sent him down to his shire
in these critical months, to take what management he could or
durst. The most confused months England ever saw. In every
shire, in every parish ; in courthouses, alehouses, churches, mar-
kets, wheresoever men were gathered together, England, with
sorrowful confusion in every fibre, is tearing itself into hostile
halves, to carry on the voting by pike and bullet henceforth.

Brevity is very urgent on us, nevertheless we must give this
other extract. Bramston the Shipmoney Judge, in trouble with
the Parliament and sequestered from his place, is now likely to
get into trouble with the King, who in the last days of July has
ordered him to come to York on business of importance. Judge
Bramston sends his two sons, John and Frank, fresh young men,
to negotiate some excuse. They ride to York in three days;
stay a day at York with his Majesty; then return, ‘on the same
horses,’ in three days,—to Skreens in Essex; which was good

1[There are some interesting depositions concerning this matter in the ‘‘ case” of
Capt. James Docwra, brought before the Committee for Compounding. See S.P.
Dom. interregnum, G. vol. 80, pp. 649 ef seg. See also Sir Richard Tangye’s 7wo
Protectors, p. 59.]

2Commons Journals, ii. 720, 6. See likewise Tanner MS, lxili. 116; Querela
Cantabrigtensis (and wipe away its blubberings and inexactitudes a little), Zzfe of
Dr. Barwick, &c., —Cambridge Portfolio (London, 1840), ii. 386-8.

3[Another glimpse of Cromwell at Cambridge is given in one of the news-letters
of the time. The heads of some of the Colleges, and the bishop of Ely, were
struggling to put in force the King’s Commission of Array, when down came Mr.
Cromwell ‘‘in a terrible manner, with what force he could draw together, and sur-
rounds divers colleges while we were at our devotions in our several chapels; taking
away several doctors of divinity, heads of colleges . . . and these he carries with
ie to eee in triumph,"" Avzg’s Pamphlets at the British Museum (EF. 115,

oO, 14.).

1642.] PRELIMINARY 113

riding. John, one of them, has left a most watery incoherent
Autobiography, now printed, but not edited,—nor worth editing,
except by /ire to ninety-nine hundredths of it; very distracting;
in which, however, there is this notable sentence; date about
the middle of August, not discoverable to a day. Having been
at York, and riding back on the same horses in three days:

‘In our return on Sunday, near Huntingdon, between that and
‘Cambridge, certain musketeers start out of the corn, and com-
- ‘mand us to stand ; telling us we must be ‘searched, and to that
‘end must go before Mr. Cromwell, and give account from
‘whence we came and whither we were going. I asked, where
‘Mr. Cromwell was? A soldier told us, He was four miles off.
‘I said, It was unreasonable to carry us out of our way ; if Mr.
‘ Cromwell had been there, I should have willingly given him all
‘the satisfaction he could desire ; and putting my hand into my
‘pocket, I gave one of them Twelvepence, who said, We might
‘pass. By this I saw plainly it would not be possible for my
‘Father to get to the King with his coach ;’1—neither did he
go at all, but stayed at home till he died.

September 14th. Here is a new phasis of the business. Ina
‘List of the Army under the command of the Earl of Essex,’? we
find that Robert Earl of Essex is ‘Lord General for King and
Parliament’ (to deliver the poor beloved King from traitors, who
have misled him, and clouded his fine understanding, and ren-
dered him as it were a beloved Parent fallen insane) ; that Robert
Earl of Essex, we say, is Lord General for King and Parliament ;
that William the new Earl of Bedford is General of the Horse,
and has, or is every hour getting to have, ‘seventy-five troops of
60 men each;’ in every troop a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Cornet
and Quartermaster, whose names are all given. In Troop Sixty-
seven, the Captain is ‘ Oliver Cromwell, —honourable member for
Cambridge ;* many honourable members having now taken arms;

1 Autobiography of Sir John Bramston, Knt. (Camden Society, 1845), p. 86.

2 King's Pamphlets, small gto, no. 73. [E., 117. No. 3.]

3[The first notice of Cromwell’s troop found in the army accounts is a payment
dated September 7, 1642, for a month’s pay due to Captain Oliver Cromwell’s
troop of sixty men, mustered on August 29, receipted by John Desborough, his
quarter-master. Commonwealth Exchequer Papers, Public Record Office. Amongst
the MSS. of John Webster Esq., reported on by the Hist. MSS. Commissioners,
(3rd Report, App., p. 420) is a warrant from Lord General Essex to Sir Gilbert
Gerrard, treasurer of the army, to pay qoqé. 13s. ‘‘ unto Captain Oliver Cromwell,
captain of a troop of eighty harquebusiers,” together with a holograph note from
Cromwell to Captain Vernon, desiring the money to be paid to George Barton,

VOL. I.—8

114 FIRST CIVIL WAR 1642.

Mr. Hampden, for example, having become Colonel Hampden,—
busy drilling his men in Chalgrove Field at this very time. But
moreover, in Troop Eight of Earl Bedford’s Horse, we find another
‘Oliver Cromwell, Cornet ;’—and with real thankfulness for
this poor flint-spark in the great darkness, recognise him for our
honourable member’s Son. His eldest Son Oliver,! now a stout
young man of twenty. “Thou too, Boy Oliver, thou art fit to
“ swing a sword. If there ever was a battle worth fighting, and
“to be called God’s battle, it is this; thou too wilt come!”’
How a staid, most pacific, solid Farmer of three-and-forty decides
on girding himself with warlike iron, and fighting, he and his,
against principalities and powers, let readers who have formed
any notion of this man conceive for themselves.

On Sunday, 23d October, was Edgehill Battle, called also
Keinton Fight, near Keinton on the south edge of Warwickshire.
In which battle Captain Cromwell was present, and did his duty,
let angry Denzil say what he will.2. The Fight was indecisive ;
victory claimed by both sides. Captain Cromwell told Cousin
Hampden, They would never get on with a set of poor tapsters
and town-apprentice people fighting against men of honour. To
cope with men of honour they must have men of religion. ‘Mr.
‘ Hampden answered me, It was a good notion, if it could be exe-
‘cuted.’ Oliver himself set about executing a bit of it, his share
of it, by and by.?
his servant. See Supplement, No. 2. Of this warrant, the editor of the Webster
MSS. remarks ‘‘It is believed that this is the only known evidence of Cromwell

having been a captain of foot.” He never was. Harquebusiers, at that time, were
light horse. ]

1 Antea, p. 62. [Should be ‘‘his second son.”’] ;

2Vicars, p. 198; Denzil Holles's AZemozrs (in Mazares's Tracts, vol.i.). [‘‘ In
later years, it pleased party pamphleteers to assert that he was not even present at
the battle, but a contemporary account specially mentions Captain Cromwell in a
list of officers who ‘ never stirred from their troops, but fought till the last minute.'”
Firth’s Cromwell, p. 84. Mr. Firth thinks, however, that he may not have been
present at the beginning of the battle. See ‘‘ The Raising of the Ironsides” in
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1899. |

3[Mr. Morley compares the Parliament Army before the New Model, to the
American Army at the beginning of the War of Independence. ‘‘In each case the
combatants expected the conflict to be short. In each case the battle of popular
liberty was first fought by weak bodies, ill-paid, ill-disposed to discipline, mounted
on cart-horses and armed with fowling-pieces, mainly anxious to get back to their
homes as soon as they could, and fluctuating from month to month with the humours,
the jealousies or the means of the separate counties in England, or the separate
states in America. ‘Short enlistments,’ said Washington, ‘and a mistaken depend-
ence on militia, have been the origin of all our misfortunes ; the evils of a standing
army are remote, but the consequence of wanting one is certain and inevitable ruin.
To carry on the war systematically, you must establish your army on a permanent
and national footing.’ What Washington said in 1776 was just what Cromwell
said in 1644.” Olever Cromwell, p. 175.

1643.) LETTER IV., HUNTINGDON 115

‘We all thought one battle would decide it,’ says Richard
Baxter ;1 and we were all much mistaken! This winter there
arise among certain Counties ‘ Associations’ for mutual defence,
against Royalism and plunderous Rupertism ; a measure cherished
by the Parliament, condemned as treasonable by the King. Of
which ‘ Associations,’ countable to the number of five or six, we
name only one, that of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge,
Herts; with Lord Grey of Wark for Commander; where, and
under whom, Oliver was now serving. This ‘Eastern Associa-
tion’ is alone worth naming. All the other Associations, no
man of emphasis being in the midst of them, fell in few months
to pieces ; only this of Cromwell’s subsisted, enlarged itself, grew
famous ;—and indeed kept its own borders clear of invasion during
the whole course of the War. Oliver, in the beginning of 1643,
is serving there, under the Lord Grey of Wark. Besides his
military duties, Oliver, as natural, was nominated of the Com-
mittee for Cambridgeshire in this Association ; he is also of the
Committee for Huntingdonshire, which as yet belongs to another
‘ Association.’ ° Member for the Committee of Huntingdonshire ;
to which also has been nominated a ‘ Robert Barnard, Esquire,?—
who, however, does not sit, as I have reason to surmise !

LETTER IV

Tue reader recollects Mr. Robert Barnard, how, in 1630, he got
a Commission of the Peace for Huntingdon, along with ‘ Dr.
Beard and Mr. Oliver Cromwell, to be fellow Justices there.
Probably they never sat much together, as Oliver went to St.
Ives soon after, and the two men were of opposite politics, which
in those times meant opposite religions, But here in twelve years
space is a change of many things!

To my assured friend Robert Barnard, Esquire: Present these.
‘Huntingdon,’ 23d January 1642.
Mr. Barnarp,
It’s most true, my Lieutenant with some
other soldiers of my troop were at your house. I dealt ‘so’
1 77fe (London, 1696), Part i. p. 43.

2Husbands, i. 892; see for the other particulars, ii. 183, 327, 804, 809;
Commons Journals, &c. :

116 FIRST CIVIL WAR (Jan.

freely ‘as’ to inquire after you; the reason was, I had heard
you reported active against the proceedings of Parliament, and for
those that disturb the peace of this country and the kingdom,—
with those of this country who have had meetings not a few, to
intents and purposes too-too full of suspect.1

It’s true, Sir, 1 know you have been wary in your carriages :
be not too confident thereof. Subtlety may deceive you ; inte-
grity never will. With my heart I shall desire that your judg-
ment may alter, and your practice. I come only to hinder men
from increasing the rent,—from doing hurt; but not to hurt any
man: nor shall I you; I hope you will give me no cause. If you
do, I must be pardoned what my relation to the public calls for,

If your good parts be disposed that way, know me for

Your servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.

Be assured fair words from me shall neither deceive you of
your houses? nor of your liberty.*

My Copy, two Copies, of this Letter I owe to kind’ friends,
who have carefully transcribed it from the Original at Lord
Gosford’s, The present Lady Gosford is ‘ granddaughter of Sir
Robert Barnard,’ to whose lineal ancestor the Letter is addressed.
The date of time is given; there never was any date or address of
place,—which probably means that it was written in Huntingdon
and addressed to Huntingdon, where Robert Barnard, who be-
came Recorder of the place, is known to have resided. Oliver,
in the month of January 1642-3, is present in the Fen-country,
and all over the Eastern Association, with his troop or troops ;
looking after disaffected persons; ready to disperse royalist
assemblages, to seize royalist plate, to keep down disturbance,
and care in every way that the Parliament Cause suffer no
damage. A Lieutenant and party have gone to take some
survey of Robert Barnard, Esquire ; Robert Barnard, standing on

* Original in the possession of Lord Gosford, at Warlingham in Suffolk.

1 Country is equivalent to county or region ,; too-too, in those days, means little
more than oo ; suspect is suspectadzlity, almost as proper as our modern szspicion.
2(This should perhaps be ‘‘ horses.'’] 5 Appendix, No. 4.

1643.] LETTER V., CAMBRIDGE 117

the right of injured innocence, innocent till he be proved guilty,
protests: Oliver responds as here, in a very characteristic way.

It was precisely in these weeks, that Oliver from Captain
became Colonel: Colonel of a regiment of horse, raised on his
own principles so far as might be, in that ‘Eastern Association ;’
and is henceforth known in the Newspapers as Colonel Cromwell.
Whether on this 23d of January, he was still Captain, or had
ceased to be so, no extant accessible record apprises us.1 On
the 2d March 1642-3, I have found him named as ‘Col. Crom-
well, 2 and hitherto not earlier. He is getting ‘men of religion’
to serve in this cause,—or at least would fain get such if he
might.

LETTER V
CAMBRIDGE

In the end of February 1642-3, ‘Colonel’ Cromwell is at Cam-
bridge ; ‘great forces from Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk’ having
joined him, and more still coming in. There has been much
alarm and running to and fro, over all those counties, Lord
Capel hanging over them with an evident intent to plunder
Cambridge, generally to plunder and ravage in this region ; as
Prince Rupert has cruelly done in Gloucestershire, and is now
cruelly doing in Wilts and Hants. Colonel Cromwell, the soul
of the whole business, must have had some bestirring of himself ;
some swift riding and resolving, now here, now there. Some
‘12,000 men,’ however, or say even ‘23,000 men’ (for rumour
runs very high!) from the Associated Counties, are now at last
got together about Cambridge, and Lord Capel has seen good to
vanish again. ‘He was the first man that rose to complain of
Grievances, in this Parliament ;’ he, while still plain Mr. Capel,
member for Herts: but they have made a Lord of him, and the
wind sits now in another quarter !|—

Lord Capel has vanished ; and the 12,000 zealous Volunteers

1[He is first mentioned as Colonel in the proceedings of the Norfolk Committee
on January 26. Tanner Ms. xiv. 125. Lord Grey calls him so in a letter of February
6. Lbid. 157.]

2 Cromwelliana, p. 2. 3 [éid, ; Vicars, p. 273.

4 Vicars; Newspapers, 6th-15th March (in Cromwedliana, p. 2).

118 FIRST CIVIL WAR [8 March.

of the Association are dismissed to their counties, with monition
to be ready when called for again. Moreover, to avoid like
perils in future, it is now resolved to make a Garrison of Cam-
bridge ; to add new works to the Castle, and fortify the Town
itself. This is now going on in the early spring days of 1643;
and Colonel Cromwell and all hands are busy !—Here is a small
Document, incidentally preserved to us, which becomes signifi-
cant if well read.

Fen Drayton is a smal] Village on the Eastern edge of Cam-
bridgeshire, between St. Ives and Cambridge,—well known to
Oliver. In the small Church of Fen Drayton, after divine service
on Sunday the 12th of March 1642-3, the following Warrant,
‘delivered to the Churchwardings’ (by one Mr. Norris, a Con-
stable, who spells very ill), and by them to the Curate, is read to
a rustic congregation,—who sit, somewhat agape, | apprehend,
and uncertain what to do about it.

COM. CANT. (‘Camsripeesuire To wit’)

To all and every the Inhabitants of Fen Drayton in the
Hundred of Papworth.

Wnuereas we have been enforced, by apparent grounds of ap-
proaching danger, to begin to fortify the town of Cambridge, for
preventing the enemy’s inroad, and the better to maintain the
peace of this county :

Having in part seen your good affections to the cause, and
now standing in need of your further assistance to the perfecting
of the said Fortifications, which will cost at the least two-thousand
pounds, We are encouraged as well as necessitated to desire a
freewill offering of a liberal contribution from you, for the better
enabling of us to attain our desired ends, viz. the preservation
of our county ; knowing that every honest and well-affected man,
considering the vast expenses we have already been at, and our
willingness to do according to our ability, will be ready and
willing to contribute his best assistance to a work of so high
concernment and so good an end.

We do therefore desire that what shall be by you freely given
and collected may with all convenient speed be sent to the Com-

1643.] LETTER V., CAMBRIDGE 119

missioners at Cambridge, to be employed to the use aforesaid.
And so you shall further engage us to be
Yours ready to serve,
O.iveR CROMWELL.
Tuomas Marryn.*
(‘and twenty-three others.’)
Cambridge, this 8th of March 1642.

What shall be by you gathered, deliver it to Thomas Noris
this bearer.

The Thomas Martyn, Sir Thomas, and the others whom we
suppress, are all of the Cambridge Committees of those times ;1
zealous Puritan men, not known to us otherwise. Norris did
not raise much at Fen Drayton; only 1/. 19s. 2d., ‘subscribed
by fifteen persons,’ according to his Endorsement ;—the general
public at Fen Drayton, and probably in other such places,
hesitates a little to draw its purse as yet! One way or other,
however, the work of fortifying Cambridge was got done.? A
regular Force lies henceforth in Cambridge : Captains Fleetwood,
Desborow, Whalley, new soldiers who will become veterans and
known to us, are on service here. Of course the Academic
stillness is much fluttered by the war-drum, and many a confused
brabble springs up between Gown and Garrison ; college tippets,
and on occasion still more venerable objects, getting torn by the
business! The truth is, though Cambridge is not so Malignant
as Oxford, the Surplices at Allhallowtide have still much sway
there ; and various Heads of Houses are by no means what one
could wish: of whom accordingly Oliver has had, and still oc-
casionally has, to send,—by instalments as the cases ripen,—a
select batch up to Parliament: Reverend Dr. This and then also
Reverend Dr. That ; who are lodged in the Tower, in Ely House,
in Lambeth or elsewhere, in a tragic manner, and pass very
troublous years.®

Cambridge continues henceforth the Bulwark and Metropolis

* Cooper’s Annals of Cambridge (Cambridge, 1845), ili. 340.

1Husbands’ Second Collection (London, 1646), p. 329; Commons Journals,
ills 1535) &c.

2 Reported complete, 15th July 1643 (Cooper's. dmmalJs, iil. 350).

3 Querela Cantabrigiensis, &c. &c. in Cooper, ubz supra.

120 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 March.

of the Association ; where the Committees sit,! where the centre
of all business is. ‘Colonel Cook,’ I think, is Captain of the
Garrison; but the soul of the Garrison, and of the Association
generally, is probably another Colonel. Now here, now swiftly
there, wherever danger is to be fronted, or prompt work is to
be done :—for example, off to Norwich just now, on important
businesses ; and, as is too usual, very ill supplied with money.

LETTER V

Or Captain Nelson I know nothing; seem to see an uncertain
shadow of him turn up again, after years of industrious fighting
under Irish Inchiquin and others, still a mere Captain, still ter-
ribly in arrear even as to pay.? ‘It’s pity a Gentleman of his
affections should be discouraged!’ ‘The Deputy Lieutenants,’
Suffolk Committee, could be named, if there were room.? The
‘business for Norfolk’ we guess to be, as usual, Delinquents,-—
symptoms of delinquent Royalists getting to a head.

To my honoured Friends the Deputy Lieutenants for the
County of Suffolk

_ Cambridge, roth March 1642.

GENTLEMEN,

I am sorry I should so often trouble you about

the business of money: it’s no pleasant subject to be too fre-
quent upon. But such is Captain Nelson’s occasion, for want
thereof, that he hath not wherewith to satisfy for the billet of
his soldiers ; and so this business for Norfolk, so hopeful to set
all right there, may fail. Truly he hath borrowed from me, else
he could not have paid to discharge this town at his departure.
It’s pity a gentleman of his affections should be discouraged !
1[The Grand Committee sat at the Beary, next Sidney Street, and the sub-com-
mittee in a room next the Grand Committee Chamber. See East Anglia and the
Great Civil War, p. 99. Some twenty years later, Pepys paid a visit to Cambridge
and ‘‘took up at the Bear.” ‘‘ Where,” he writes ‘‘I met Dr. Fairbrother. He told
me how the room we were in was the room where Cromwell and his associated officers
did begin to plot and act their mischiefs in these counties.” Pepys’ Diary, ed.

Wheatley, ii. 362. ]
2 Commons Journals, Vv. 524, 530+ ® Husbands, ii. 171, 193.

PO TFane ei

1643.] LOWESTOFT 121

Wherefore I earnestly beseech you to consider him and the
cause. It’s honourable that you do so. What you can help
him to, be pleased to send into Norfolk; he hath not wherewith
to pay a troop one day, as he tells me. Let your return be

speedy,—to Norwich.
Gentlemen, command
Your servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.

«P.S.’ I hope to serve you in my return: with your con-
junction, we shall quickly put an end to these businesses, the

Lord assisting.*

By certain official docketings on this same Letter, it appears
that Captain Nelson did receive his 100/.; touched it promptly
on the morrow, ‘11th March ;—I say received: JoHn NELSON.’
How the Norfolk businesses proceeded and what end they came
to in Suffolk itself, we shall now see.

LOWESTOFT

Ture Colonel has already had experience in such Delinquent
matters ; has, by vigilance, by gentle address, by swift audacity
if needful, extinguished more than one incipient conflagration.
Here is one such instance,—coming to its sad maturity, and
bearing fruit at Westminster, in these very hours.

On Monday, 13th March 1642-3, Thomas Conisby, Esquire,
High Sheriff of Herts, appears visibly before the House of
Commons, to give account of a certain ‘ Pretended Commission
of Array, which he had been attempting to execute one Market-
day, some time since, at St. Albans in that county." Such King’s
Writ, or Pretended Commission of Array, the said High Sheriff
had, with a great Posse Comitatus round him, been executing one
Market-day at St. Albans (date irrecoverably lost *),—when Crom-

* Autograph, in the possession of C. Meadows, Esq., Great Bealing, Wood-
bridge, Suffolk,

1 Commons Journals, ii, 1000, I.

2(About January 14. See Kingdom's Weekly Intelligencer, January 10-17.
King’s Pamphlets, C. 21, b. 10.]

122 FIRST CIVIL WAR [17 March.

well’s Dragoons dashed suddenly in upon him; laid him fast,—
not without difficulty : he was first seized by ‘six troopers,’ but
rescued by his royalist multitude ; then ‘twenty troopers’ again
seized him ; ‘barricadoed the inn-yard’;! conveyed him off to
London to give what account of the matter he could. There he
is giving account of it,—a very lame and withal an ‘insolent’ one,
as seems to the Honourable House ; which accordingly sends
him to the Tower, where he had to lie for several years. Com-
missions of Array are not handy to execute in the Eastern
Association at present! Here is another instance ; general
result of this ride into Norfolk,—‘ end of these businesses,’ in fact.

The ‘ Meeting at Laystoff, or Lowestoft in Suffolk, is mentioned
in all the old Books; but John Cory, Merchant Burgess of Nor-
wich, shall first bring us face to face with it. Assiduous Sir
Symond got ia copy of Mr. Cory’s Letter,? one of the thousand
Letters which Honourable Members listened to in those morn-
ings; and here now is a copy of it for the reader,—-news all fresh
and fresh, after waiting two hundred and two years. Colonel
Cromwell is in Norwich: old Norwich becomes visible and
audible, the vanished moments buzzing again with old life,—if
the reader will read well. Potts, we should premise, and Palgrave,
were lately appointed Deputy Lieutenants of Norwich City ; Cory
I reckon to be almost a kind of Quasi-Mayor, the real Mayor
having lately been seized for Royalism : Knyvett of Ashwellthorpe
we shall perhaps transiently meet again. The other royalist
gentlemen also are known to antiquaries of that region, and
what their ‘seats’ and connexions were: but our reader here
can without damage consider merely that they were Sons of
Adam, furnished in general with due seats and equipments ; and
read the best he can:

“To Sw John Potts, Knight Baronet, of Mannington, Norfolk :
“ These. Laus Deo

** Norwich, 17° Martii 1642.4

“Right honourable and worthy Sir,—I hope you came in due
“time to the end of your journey in health and safety ; which I

lVicars, p. 246; May's History of the Long Parliament (Guizot's French Trans-
lation), ii. 196.

2:D'Ewes Mss, f. 1139; Transcript, p. 378.
3 Commons Journals, roth December 1642.
+ Means 1643 of our Style. There are yet seven days of the Old Year to run.

1643.] LOWESTOFT - 123

«shall rejoice to hear. Sir, I might spare my labour in now
“writing; for I suppose you are better informed from other
“hands; only to testify my respects:

“Those sent out on Monday morning, the 13th, returned that
“night, with old Mr. Castle of Raveningham, and some arms of
«his, and of Mr. Loudon’s of Alby, and of Captain Hamond’s,
“with his leading staff-ensign and drum. Mr. Castle is secured
“at Sheriff Greenwood’s. That night letters from Yarmouth
«informed the Colonel,! That they had, that day, made stay of
«Sir John Wentworth, and of one Captain Allen from Lowestoff,
«who had come thither to change dollars; both of whom are
“yet secured ;—and further, That the Town of Lowestoff had
“received-in divers strangers, and was fortifying itself.

“The Colonel advised no man might enter in or out the gates
«¢ of Norwich, that night. And the next morning, between five
“and six, with his five troops, with Captain Fountain’s, Captain
“ Rich’s, and eighty of our Norwich Volunteers, he marched
«towards Lowestoff; where he was to meet with the Yarmouth
« Volunteers, who brought four or five pieces of ordnance. The
«Town ‘of Lowestoff’ had blocked themselves up ; all except
“ where they had placed their ordnance, which were three pieces ;
“before which a chain was drawn to keep off the horse.

“The Colonel summoned the Town, and demanded, If they
“ would deliver up their strangers, the Town and their army 2
“ promising them then favour, if so; if not,none. They yielded
“to deliver up their strangers, but not to the rest. Whereupon
“ our Norwich dragoons crept under the chain before mentioned ;
“and came within pistol-shot of their ordnance ; proffering to
“fire upon their cannoneer,—who fled: so they gained the two
“pieces of ordnance, and broke the chain; and they and the
“horse entered the Town without more resistance. Where
“ presently eighteen strangers yielded themselves ; among whom
«were, of Suffolk men: Sir T. Barker, Sir John Pettus ;—of
“Norfolk: Mr. Knyvett of Ashwellthorpe, ‘whom we are to
«meet again ;’ Mr. Richard Catelyn’s Son,—some say his Father
“too was there in the morning; Mr. F. Cory, my unfortunate
« eousin, who I wish would have been better persuaded,?

1‘ y7z, Cromwell,’ adds D’Ewes.

2(Their names and in some cases the amount of their fines will be found in a list
sent up to the Committee for Compounding in 1648, by Tobias Frere. F. Cory is a
mis-reading for T—Thomas—Cory of Norwich, See Cal. Committee for Compound-
ing, pp. 113-116 ; also letter xxxvi., below. Knyvett's estate was sequestered for this

124 FIRST CIVIL WAR [20 March.

“Mr, Brooke, the sometime minister of Yarmouth, and some
“others, escaped, over the river. There was good store of pistols,
“ and other arms: I hear, above fifty cases of pistols. The Colonel
“stayed there Tuesday and Wednesday night. I think Sir John
“Palgrave and Mr. Smith went yesterday to Berks. It is
“rumoured Sir Robert Kemp had yielded to Sir John Palgrave ;
“how true it is I know not, for I spoke not Sir John yesterday
“as he came through Town. I did your message to Captain
“Sherwood. Not to trouble you further, I crave leave; and am

ever
“ Your Worship’s at command, Joun Cory.

“ Postscriptum, 20th March 1642.—Right worthy Sir, The above-
“said, on Friday, was unhappily left behind; for which I am
“sorry; as also that I utterly forgot to send your plate. On
“Friday night the Colonel brought in hither with him the
“prisoners taken at Lowestoff, and Mr. Trott of Beccles. On
“ Saturday night, with one troop, they sent all the prisoners to
“Cambridge. Sir John Wentworth is come off with the payment
“of 1000/. On Saturday, Dr. Corbett of Norwich, and Mr.
“Henry Cooke! the Parliament-man, and our old ‘ Alderman’
“Daniell were taken in Suffolk. Last night, several troops
“went out; some to Lynn-ward, it’s thought ;? others to Thet-

business, but was discharged by the Sequestration Committee in September, 1644,
chiefly by Cromwell’s means, he having testified to the Earl of Manchester that
Knyvett surrendered voluntarily at Lowestoft, was unarmed, save for the sword
which he ordinarily wore, and knew nothing of the townsmen’s intentions, whereupon
the Earl wrote to the County Committee in his favour. In 1655, when the insurrec-
tion in the West had furnished a pretext for again harassing the royalists, the
Commissioners for the peace of the County called upon Knyvett to pay the deci-
mation tax. He petitioned the Protector, reminding him of his former action on his
behalf, but when Oliver referred the petition to the Commissioners they certified
that whereas the petitioner alleged that for more than eleven years he had lived
“‘unblameable as to the public,” he had to their knowledge given no testimony of
his good affection to the Parliament's interest, but rather the contrary. The Protector
next referred the matter to his Council, and on their report, an order was sent down
to the Major-General and Commissioners to discharge him or not as they saw cause ;
so that probably he did not escape after all. See Cal. S.P. Dom. : Commonwealth,
1655-1656, Pp. 344, 345, 347, 390. The certificate of the Peace Commissioners is
printed in Thurloe, iv. 705. ]

1 Corbett is or was ‘Chancellor of Norwich Diocese ;’ Henry Cooke is Son of
Coke upon Lyttleton,—has left his place in Parliament, and got into dangerous
courses,

2(Cromwell himself went to Lynn, entered it on Monday, 2oth March, secured
the town, seized upon a small barque laden with arms from Dunkirk, and on
Wednesday the 22nd was back at Cambridge again; having, as Mr. Kingston
points out, ‘‘ Since Sunday week ridden from Cambridge to Norwich, from Norwich

+

1643.] LETTER VI., CAMBRIDGE 125

“ ford-ward, it’s supposed,—because they had a prisoner with
“them. Sir, I am in great haste, and remember nothing else at
“present.

« Joun Cory.”

Cory still adds: “Sir Richard Berney sent to me, last night,
“and showed and gave me the Colonel’s Note to testify he had
“paid him the 50/.”—a forced contribution levied by the Associa-
tion Committee upon poor Berney, who had shown himself ‘ back-
ward :’ let him be quiet henceforth, and study to conform.!

This was the last attempt at Royalism in the Association where
Cromwell served. The other ‘ Associations,’ no man duly forward
to risk himself being present in them, had already fallen, or were
fast falling, to ruin; their Counties had to undergo the chance of
War as it came. Huntingdon County soon joined itself with this
Eastern Association.?, Cromwell’s next operations, as we shall
perceive, were to deliver Lincolnshire, and give it the power of
joining, which in September next took effect. Lincoln, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Herts, Hunts: these are thenceforth
the ‘Seven Associated Counties, called often the ‘ Association’
simply, which make a great figure in the old Books,—and kept
the War wholly out of their own borders, having had a man of
due forwardness among them.

LETTERS VI—VIII

Tue main brunt of the War, during this year 1643, is in the ex-
treme Southwest, between Sir Ralph Hopton and the Earl of
Stamford ; and in the North, chiefly in Yorkshire, between the
Earl of Newcastle and Lord Fairfax. The Southwest, Cornwall
or Devonshire transactions do not much concern us in this place ;

to Yarmouth and Lowestoft, from Lowestoft back to Norwich and thence to King’s
Lynn and back to Cambridge, besides crushing royalist risings, and brought in
royalist gentry prisoners from various parts of the two counties.” East Anglia and
the Great Civil War, p. 95.)

1[Qn this same 20th of March, Cromwell sent an order to the constables of Holt

concerning the county forces. See Supplement, No. 3.)
2 26th May,—Husbands, il. 183. 8 bid. p. 327.

126 FIRST CIVIL WAR [23 March.

but with the Yorkshire we shall by and by have some concern.
A considerable flame of War burns conspicuous in those two
regions: the rest of England, all in a hot but very dim state, may
be rather said to smoke, everywhere ready for burning, and inci-
dentally catch fire here and there.

Essex, the Lord General, lies at Windsor, all spring, with the
finest Parliamentary Army we have yet had; but unluckily can
undertake almost nothing, till he see. For his Majesty in Oxford
is also quiescent mostly; engaged in a negotiation with his
Parliament ; in a Treaty,—of which Colonel Hampden and other
knowing men, though my Lord of Essex cannot, already predict
the issue. And the Country is all writhing in dim conflict, suffer-
ing manifold distress. And from his Majesty's headquarters ever
and anon there darts out, now hither now thither, across the dim
smoke-element, a swift fierce Prince Rupert, plundering and
blazing ; and then suddenly darts in again ;—too like a streak
of sudden fire, for he plunders, and even burns, a good deal!
Which state of things Colonel Hampden and others witness with
much impatience ; but cannot get the Lord General to undertake
anything till he see.

An obscure entangled scene of things; all manner of War-
movements and swift-shooting electric influences crossing one
another, with complex action and reaction ;—as happens in a
scene of War; much more of Civil War, where a whole People
and its affairs have become electric.—Here are Three poor Letters,
reunited at last from their long exile, resuscitated after long
interment: not ina very luminous condition! Vestiges of Oliver
in the Eastern Association ; which, however faint, are welcome
to us.

LETTER VI

Tue Essex people, at least the Town of Colchester and Langley
their Captain have, in some measure, sent their contingent to
Cambridge ; but money is short. Cromwell, home rapidly again
from Norfolk, must take charge of it ; has an order from the Lord
General ;—nay it seems a Great Design is in view ; and Cromwell
too, like Richard Baxter and the rest of us, imagines one grand
effort might perhaps end these bleeding miseries.

1643.] LETTER VI, CAMBRIDGE 127

To the Mayor of Colchester and Captain John Langley

‘ Cambridge,’ 23d March 1642.
GENTLEMEN,
Upon the coming down of your townsmen to

Cambridge, Captain Langley not knowing how to dispose of them,
desired me to nominate a fit Captain, which I did, an honest,
religious, valiant Gentleman, Captain Dodsworth, the bearer
hereof.

He hath diligently attended the service, and much improved
his men in their exercise ; but hath been unhappy beyond others
in not receiving any pay for himself, and what he had for his
soldiers is out long ago. He hath, by his prudence, what with
fair and winning carriage, what with money borrowed, kept them
together. He is able to do so no longer: they will presently
disband if a course be not taken.

It’s pity it should be so. For I believe they are brought into
as good order as most companies in the Army. Besides, at this
instant, there is great need to use them, I having received a
special command from my Lord General, To advance with what
force we can, to put an end (if it may be) to this Work, God so
assisting, from whom all help cometh.

I beseech you, therefore, consider this Gentleman, and the
soldiers ; and if it be possible, make up his company a hundred-
and-twenty ; and send them away with what expedition is pos-
sible. It may (through God’s blessing) prove very happy. One
month’s pay may prove all your trouble. I speak to wise men:
God direct you. I rest,

Yours to serve you,
Ouitver CromMweELu.*

The present Great Design, though it came to nothing, is not
without interest for us. Some three days before the date of this
Letter, as certain Entries in the Commons Journals still testify,}

* Morant’s History of Colchester (London, 1748), book i. p. 55: ‘from the Origi-
nal,’ he says, but not where that was or is.

1 Commons Journals, iii. 10, 12.

128 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 April.

there had risen hot alarm in Parliament ; my Lord General writ-
ing from Windsor ‘at three in the morning:’ Prince Rupert out
in one of his forays; in terrible force before the Town of Ayles-
bury : ought not one to go and fight him ?—Without question !
eagerly answer Colonel Hampden and others: Fight him, beat
him; beat more than him! Why not rise heartily trom Windsor
with this fine Army; calling the Eastern Association and all
friends to aid us; and storm in upon Oxford itself? It may
perhaps quicken the negotiations there !—

This Design came to nothing, and soon sank into total obscur-
ity again. But it seems Colonel Hampden did entertain such a
Design, and even take some steps in it. And this letter of
Oliver’s, coupled with the Entries in the Commons Journals, is
perhaps the most authentic proof we yet have of that fact; an
interesting fact which has rested hitherto on the vague testimony
of Clarendon,! who seems to think the Design might have suc-
ceeded. But it came to nothing; Colonel Hampden could not
rouse the Lord General to do more than ‘write at three in the
morning,’ and send ‘special commands,’ for the present.

LETTER VII

Anp now here is a new horde of ‘ Plunderers’ threatening the
Association with new infall fromthe North. The old Newspapers
call them ‘Camdeners ;’ followers of a certain Noel, Viscount
Camden, from Rutlandshire ; who has seized Stamford, is driving
cattle at a great rate, and fast threatening to become important
in those quarters.—‘ Sir John Burgoyne’ is the Burgoyne of Potton
in Bedfordshire, chief Committee-man in that County: Bedford
is not in our Association ; but will perhaps lend us help in this
common peril.

‘To my honoured Friend Sir John Burgoyne, Baronet : These.’

‘Huntingdon,’ roth April 1643.
Sir,
These Plunderers draw near. I think it will
do well if you can afford us any assistance of Dragooners, to help
in this great exigence. We have here about six or seven troops

1 History of the Rebellion (Oxford, 1819), ii. 319 ; see also May's Long Parliament
(Maseres’s edition, London, 1812), p. 192.

Ee

1643.] LETTER VIII, HUNTINGDON 129

of horse; such, I hope, as will fight. It’s happy to resist such
beginnings betimes.

If you can contribute anything to our aid, let us speedily
participate thereof. In the mean time, and ever, command

Your humble servant,

O.iveR CRoMWELL.*

Concerning these Camdeners at Stamford and elsewhere, so
soon as Colonel Cromwell has got himself equipt, we shall hear
tidings again. Meanwhile, say the old Newspapers, ‘there is a
‘regiment of stout Northfolk blades gone to Wisbeach, Croyland,
‘and so into Holland’ of Lincolnshire, ‘to preserve those parts,’
—if they may. Colonel Cromwell will follow; and give good
account of that matter by and by.

Lincolnshire in fact ought to be all subdued to the Parliament ;
added to the Association. We could then cooperate with Fair-
fax across the Humber, and do good service! So reason the
old Committees, as one dimly ascertains.—The Parliament
appointed a Lieutenant of Lincolnshire, Lord Willoughby of Par-
ham, a year ago;? but he is much infested with Camdeners,
with enemies in all quarters, and has yet got no secure
footing there. Cromwell’s work, and that of the Association,
for the next twelvemonth, as we shall perceive, was that of
clearing Lincolnshire from enemies, and accomplishing this pro-
blem,

LETTER VIII

Meanwuite enter Robert Barnard, Esquire, again. Barnard,
getting ever deeper into trouble, has run up to Town ; has been
persuading my Lord of Manchester and others, That he is not a
disaffected man; that a contribution should not be inflicted on
him by the County Committee.

* Communicated (from an old Copy) by H. C. Cooper, Esq., Cambridge.

1In Cooper's Annals, ili. 343.
2 Commons Journals (ii. 497), 25th March 1642. New encouragement and
sanction given him (Rushworth, v. 108), of date 9th Jan, 1642-3.

VOL. 1.—9

130 FIRST CIVIL WAR [17 April.

To his very loving Friend Robert Barnard, Esquire : Present these

‘Huntingdon,’ 17th April 1643.
Sir,
I have received two Letters, the one from my

Lord of Manchester, the other from yourself, much to the same
effect : I hope therefore one answer will serve them both, which
is in short this: That we know you are dissaffected to the
Parliament ; and truly if the Lords, or any friends, may take
you off from a reasonable contribution, for my part I should be
glad to be commanded to any other employment. Sir, you may,
if you will, come freely into the country about your occasions.
For my part, I have protected you in your absence ; and shall
do so to you. ‘
This is all, but that I am ready to serve you, and rest,
Your loving friend,
OuiverR CRoMWELL.*

Let Barnard return, therefore ; take a lower level, where the
ways are more sheltered in stormy weather ;—and so save him-
self, and ‘become Recorder after the Restoration. Subtlety
may deceive him; integrity never will !—

LETTERS IX—XI

CroMWELL, we find, makes haste to deal with these ‘ Camdeners.’
His next achievement is the raising of their Siege of Croyland
(in the end of April, exact date not discoverable) ;1 concerning
which there are large details in loud-spoken Vicars.2, How the
reverend godly Mr. Ram and godly Sergeant Horne, both of
Spalding, were ‘set upon the walls to be shot at, when the

* Gentleman’ s Magazine (London, 1791), lxi. 44; no notice whence, no criticism
or commentary there; Letter undoubtedly genuine.

1(The town, then held for the King, was assaulted on three sides, by Hobart,
Irby and Cromwell, on Tuesday, April 25, and entered on the following Friday.
See Last Anglia and the Great Civil War, p. 107. |
2« Thou that with ale, or viler liquors,
‘Didst inspire Withers, Prynne and Vicars.’
Hudibras, canto i. 645.

1643.) LETTER IX., LINCOLNSHIRE 131

Spalding people rose to deliver Croyland; how ‘Colonel Sir
Miles Hobart’ and other Colonels rose also to deliver it,—and
at last how ‘the valiant active Colonel Cromwell’ rose, and did
actually deliver it.1

Cromwell has been at Lynn, he has been at Nottingham, at
Peterborough, where the Soldiers were not kind to the Cathedral
and its Surplice-furniture:? he has been here and then swiftly
there; encountering many things. For Lincolnshire is not easy
to deliver ; dangers, intricate difficulties abound in those quarters,
and are increasing. Lincolnshire, infested with infalls of Cam-
deners, has its: own Malignancies too; and, much more, is sadly
overrun with the Marquis of Newcastle’s Northern ‘ Popish Army’
at present. An Army ‘full of Papists,’ as is currently reported ;
officered by renegade Scots, ‘Sir John Henderson,’ and the like
unclean creatures. For the Marquis, in spite of the Fairfaxes,
has overflowed Yorkshire ; flowed across the Humber ; has fortified
himself in Newark-on-Trent, and is a sore affliction to the well-
affected thereabouts. By the Queen’s interest he is now, from
Earl, made Marquis, as we see. For indeed, what is worst of all,
the Queen in late months has landed in these Northern parts,
with Dutch ammunition purchased by English Crown Jewels ; is
stirring up all manner of ‘ Northern Papists’ to double animation ;
tempting Hothams and other waverers to meditate treachery,
for which they will pay dear. She is the centre of these new
perils. She marches Southward, much agitating the skirts of
the Eastern Association ; joins the King ‘on Keinton field’ or
Edgehill field, where he fought last autumn.—She was impeached
of treason by the Commons. She continued in England till the
following summer ;* then quitted it for long years.

Let the following Three Letters,—one of which is farther
distinguished as the first of Cromwell’s ever published in the
Newspapers,—testify what progress he is making in the difficult
problem of delivering Lincolnshire in this posture of affairs.

LETTER IX

THERE was in those weeks, as we learn from the old News-
papers, a combined plan, of which Cromwell was an element, for

1Vicars, p. 322-5; Newspapers (25th April—2d May), in Cromwelliana, p. 4.
2 Royalist Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 4); Querela Cantad. &c. &c.
3 From February 1642-3 till July 1644 (Clarendon, iii. 195; Rushworth, v. 684).

132 FIRST CIVIL WAR [3 May.

capturing Newark ; there were several such ; but this and all the
rest proved abortive, one element or another of the combination
always failing. That Cromwell was not the failing element we
could already guess, and may now definitely read.

‘Lord Grey,’ be it remembered, is Lord Grey of Groby, once
Military Chief of the Association,\—though now I think employed
mainly elsewhere, nearer home: a Leicestershire man; as are
‘Hastings’ and ‘Hartop:’ well-known all of them in the troubles
of that County. Hastings, strong for the King, holds ‘ Ashby-
de-la-Zouch, which is his Father’s House, well fortified ;’? and
shows and has shown himself a pushing man. ‘ His Excellency’
is my Lord General Essex. ‘Sir John Gell’ is Member and
Commander for Derbyshire, has Derby Town for Garrison. The
Derbyshire forces, the Nottinghamshire forces, the Association
forces: if all the ‘forces’ could but be united! But they never
rightly can,

To the Right Honourable the Lords and others the Committees at
Lincoln : These

‘Lincolnshire,’ 3d May 1643.

My Lorps anp GENTLEMEN,

I must needs be hardly thought
on because I am still the messenger of unhappy tidings and
delays concerning you, though I know my heart is to assist you
with all expedition.

My Lord Grey hath now again failed me of the rendezvous
at Stamford, notwithstanding that both he and I received letters
from his Excellency, commanding us both to meet, and, to-
gether with Sir John Gell and the Nottingham forces, to join
with you. My Lord Grey sent Sir Edward Hartop to me, to
let me know he could not meet me at Stamford according to our
agreement ; fearing the exposing of Leicester to the forces of
Mr. Hastings and some other troops drawing that way.

1[William, Lord Grey of Wark, was Major-General of the Eastern Association,
Thomas, Lord Grey of Groby, son of the Earl of Stamford, was made Major-General
of the Midland Counties Association in January, 1642-3, with especial charge of
Nottingham and Leicester.

Henry Hastings was the second son of the Earl of Huntingdon. |

2 Clarendon, ii, 202.

1643.} LETTER IX., LINCOLNSHIRE 133

Believe it, it were better, in my poor opinion, Leicester were
not, than that there should not be an immediate taking of the
field by your forces to accomplish the common end, wherein I
shall deal as freely with him when I meet him as you can
desire. I perceive Ashby-de-la-Zouch sticks much with him.
I have offered him now another place of meeting,! to come to
which I suppose he will not deny me; and that to be tomorrow.
If you shall therefore think fit to send one over unto us to be
with us at night, you do not know how far we may prevail
with him to draw speedily to a head, with Sir John Gell and
the other forces, where we may all meet at a general rendez-
vous, to the end you know of, and then you shall receive full
satisfaction concerning my integrity ;? and if no man shall help
you, yet will not I be wanting to do my duty, God assisting me.

If we could unite those forces and with them speedily make
Grantham the general rendezvous, both of yours and ours, I
think it would do well. I shall bend my endeavours that way.
Your concurrence by some able instrument to solicit this, might
probably exceedingly hasten it ; especially having so good a
foundation to work upon as my Lord General’s commands.
Our Norfolk forces, which will not prove as many as you may
imagine by six or seven hundred men, will lie conveniently at
Spalden ; and, I am confident, be ready to meet at Grantham at
the general rendezvous.

I have no more to trouble you; but begging of God to take
away the impediments that hinder our conjunction, and to pros-
per our designs, take leave.

Your faithful servant,
O.tveR CRoMWELL.*

1 Name, not so fit to be wr¢¢tem for fear of accidents, is very much unknown
now ! ;
2 Means, ‘that the blame was not in me.’

* Tanner mss. (Oxford), Ixii. g4 : the address lost, the date of place never
given ; the former clearly restorable from Commons Journals, ii. 75. [The address
is there, and below it is written ‘‘ from Mr. Cromwell.” The signature only is in
Cromwell’s own hand. This letter was sent up to the Speaker (enclosed in one of

134 FIRST CIVIL WAR [13 May.

‘Some rendezvous at Grantham does take place, some uniting
of forces, more or fewer; and strenuous endeavour thereupon.
As the next Letter will testify.

LETTER X

Tuis Letter is the first of Cromwell’s ever published in the
Newspapers. ‘That valiant soldier Colonel Cromwell’ has writ-
ten on this occasion to an official Person of name not now
discoverable :

To Str Miles Hobart : 3 These’ +

Thasten [Syston ?], ‘13th May 1643.’
NosLe Sir,

God hath given us, this evening, a glorious
victory over our enemies. They were, as we are informed,

one-and-twenty colours of horse-troops, and three or four of
dragoons.

their own), by three members of the Committee, Capt. John Hotham, Sir Edward
Ayscough and Sir Chris. Wray, who, having heard that they were accused of want
of diligence, wrote on May 5, defending themselves. ‘‘ There hath not at any time
this three weeks,” they declare, ‘‘ passed one day that we have not writ both to Col.
Cromwell, the Norfolk gentlemen and my Lord Grey to appoint a place of meeting
and we would march to them, wheresoever it were ; their answer always was they
would meet, but something of importance was first to be done in those countries
they were then in, which hitherto hath been the cause that little is done only the
particular countries where we quarter put to a very great charge without benefit to
the public. We have sent you here enclosed the last letter that came from Col.
Cromwell, that you may see we are in no fault.” Captain Hotham does not feel
it necessary to mention that hardly a day passed without his also writing to the
Earl of Newcastle! On April 14, he had told the Earl that he believed he had
persuaded Sir Chris. Wray and Sir Edward Ayscough to ‘‘ desist,” so that the
country might be entirely at the King’s devotion, and the very day before his
plausible assurances to Lenthall, he wrote to Newcastle ‘‘ I am as much your
servant as ever. . . but these tickle people put me to my wits’ end. . . . Our lying
still and not hasting Cromwell to join is, I am sure, some advantage; for he is still
kept to eat up the fat clergy at Peterborough, although my Lord of Essex hath writ
often tojthe contrary to him.” Aést, MSS, Commissioners’ Report on the Portland
MSS. vol. i. pp. 701-707. _ It is no wonder, if the Lincolnshire gentlemen were plan-
ning to ‘‘ desist,” that the Parliament army did not get much assistance from them. ]

1[The person to whom this letter was written is given in A Zywe Redation,
EK. 104 (12). As regards this contest, Dr. Gardiner says, ‘‘ the whole fortune of the
Civil War was in that nameless skirmish. A body of Puritan horsemen had driven
twice their number before them as chaff before the wind, and, as armies were then
SONS superiority in cavalry was superiority in war.” Great Civil War,
i, 143.

1643) LETTER X., GRANTHAM 135

It was late in the evening when we drew out; they came and
faced us within two miles of the town. So soon as we had the
alarm, we drew out our forces, consisting of about twelve troops,
whereof some of them so poor and broken, that you shall seldom
see worse: with this handful it pleased God to cast the scale.1
For after we had stood a little above musket-shot the one body
from the other and the dragooners had fired on both sides for
the space of half an hour or more, they not advancing towards
us, we agreed ” to charge them. And, advancing the body after
many shots on both sides, we came on with our troops a pretty
round trot, they standing firm to receive us: and our men charg-
ing fiercely upon them, by God’s providence they were imme-
diately routed, and ran all away, and we had the execution of
them two or three miles.

I believe some of our soldiers did kill two or three men apiece
in the pursuit; but what the number of dead is we are not
certain. We took forty-five prisoners, besides divers of their
horse and arms, and rescued many prisoners whom they had
lately taken of ours; and we took four or five of their colours.

‘I rest’
% * *

‘OxuiveR CROMWELL.’ *

On inquiry at Grantham, there is no vestige of tradition as to
the scene of this skirmish ; which must have been some two miles
out on the Newark road. Thomas May, a veracious intelligent
man, but vague as to dates, mentions two notable skirmishes of
Cromwell's ‘near to Grantham,’ in the course of this business ; one
especially in which ‘he defeated a strong party of the Newarkers,
‘where the odds of number on their side was so great that it
‘seemed almost a miraculous victory :’ that probably is the one
now in question. Colonel Cromwell, we farther find, was very
‘vigilant of all sallies that were made, and took many men and

1f ‘Of victory on our side.” Vicars]. 21 ‘* Advanced ” in Vicars. ]

* Perfect Diurnal of the Passages in Parliament, 22d-29th May 1643; com-
pleted from Vicars, p. 332, whose copy, however, is not, except as to sense and
facts, to be relied on. [Also E. 104, though here also the wording seems to have
been ‘‘ improved” a little. ]

136 FIRST CIVIL WAR [28 May.

‘colours at several times ;’! and did what was in Colonel Crom-
well ;—but could not take Newark at present. One element
or other of the combination always fails. Newark, again and
again besieged, did not surrender until the end of the War. At
present, it is terribly wet weather, for one thing ; ‘thirteen days
of continual rain.’

The King, as we observed, is in Oxford : Treaty, of very slow
gestation, came to birth in March 2 last, and was carried on there
by Whitlocke and others till the beginning of April; but ended
in absolute nothing. The King still continues in Oxford,—his
head-quarters for three years to come. The Lord General Essex
did at one time think of Oxford, but preferred to take Reading
first ; is lying now scattered about Thame, and Brickhill in Buck-
inghamshire, much drenched with the unseasonable rains, ina
very dormant, discontented condition. Colonel Hampden is
with him. There is talk of making Colonel Hampden Lord
General. The immediate hopes of the world, however, are turned
on ‘that valiant soldier and patriot of his country’ Sir William
Waller, who has marched to discomfit the Malignants of the
West.

On the 4th of this May, Cheapside Cross, Charing Cross, and
other Monuments of Papist Idolatry were torn down by authority,
‘troops of soldiers sounding their trumpets, and all the people
‘shouting ;’ the Book of Sports was also burnt upon the ruins of
the same.° In which days, too, all the people are working at
the Fortification of London.

LETTER XI

Tue ‘ great Service,’ spoken of in this Letter, we must still
understand to be the deliverance of Lincolnshire in general ; or
if it were another, it did not take effect. No possibility yet of
getting over into Yorkshire to cooperate with the Fairfaxes,—
though they much need help, and there have been speculations

1 History of Long Parliament, p. 208.

2[The propositions were presented to the King on February 1, but fresh
overtures were made on March 18. ]

8 Whitlocke, rst edition, pp. 63-5 ; Husbands, ii. 48-119.

4Rushworth, v. 290; May, p. 192.

® Lithgow (in Somers Tracts, iv. 536); Vicars (date incorrect), p. 327.

———-.

1643.) LETTER XI., LINCOLNSHIRE 137

of that and of other kinds.1_ For the War-tide breaks in very
irregular billows upon our shores; at one time we are pretty
clear of Newark and its Northern Papists ; and anon ‘the Queen
has got into Newark,’ and we are like to be submerged by them.
As a general rule, intricate perilous difficulties abound ; and cash
is scarce. The Fairfaxes, meanwhile, last week, have gained a
Victory at Wakefield ;? which is a merciful encouragement.

‘To the Mayor, &c. of Colchester : These’

‘Lincolnshire,’ 28th May 1643.
GENTLEMEN,
I thought it my duty once more to write unto

you for more strength to be speedily sent unto us, for this great
service.

I suppose you hear of the great defeat given by my Lord
Fairfax to the Newcastle forces at Wakefield. It was a great
mercy of God to us, and had it not been bestowed upon us at
this very present, my Lord Fairfax had not known how to have
subsisted. We assure you, should the force we have miscarry,
expect nothing but a speedy march of the enemy up unto you.

Why you should not strengthen us to make us subsist,—
judge you the danger of the neglect ; and how inconvenient this
improvidence, or unthrifty, may be to you! I shall never write
but according to my judgment : I tell you again, it concerns you
exceedingly to be persuaded by me. My Lord Newcastle is
near six-thousand foot, and about sixty troops of horse ; my Lord
Fairfax is about three-thousand foot, and nine troops of horse ;
and we have about twenty-four troops of horse and dragooners.
The enemy draws more to the Lord Fairfax: our motion and
yours must be exceedingly speedy, or else it will do you no good
at all.

If you send, let your men come to Boston. I beseech you

1Qld Newspapers (30th May, 12th June 1643), in Cromweddiana, p. 6.

2erst May 1643: Letter by Lord Fairfax (in Rushworth, v. 268); Short Me
morials, by the younger Fairfax (in Somers Tracts, v. 380).

3(Should be dated ‘‘ Nottingham.” See Life of Col. Hutchinson, ed, Firth, i, 218,
363; and Fairfax Correspondence, iii. 45, 46. |

138 FIRST CIVIL WAR [21 June.

hasten the supply to us: forget not money. I press not hard ;
though I do so need that, I assure you, the foot and dragooners
are ready to mutiny. Lay not too much upon the back of a poor
gentleman, who desires, without much noise, to lay down his life,
and bleed the last drop to serve the Cause and you. I ask not
your money for myself; if that were my end and hope (viz. the
pay of my place), I would not open my mouth at this time. I
desire to deny myself; but others will not be satisfied. I beseech
you hasten supplies. Forget not your prayers.
Gentlemen, I am
+ Yours,
O.tveR CROMWELL.*

‘Lay not too much upon a poor gentleman, —who is really
doing what he can; shooting swiftly, now hither, now thither,
wheresoever the tug of difficulty lies; struggling very sore, as
beseems the Son of Light and Son of Adam, not to be vanquished
by the mud-element !

Intricate struggles; sunk almost all in darkness now :—of
which take this other as a token, gathered still luminous from
the authentic but mostly inane opacities of the Commons Journals : 1
“21 June 1643, Mr. Pym reports from the Committee of the
‘Safety of the Kingdom,’ our chief authority at present, to this
effect, That Captain Hotham, son of the famed Hull Hotham,
had, as appeared by Letters from Lord Grey and Colonel Crom-
well, now at Nottingham, been behaving very il] ; had plundered
divers persons without regard to the side they were of; had, on
one occasion, ‘turned two pieces of ordnance against Colonel
Cromwell ;’ nay, once, when Lord Grey’s quartermaster was in
some huff with Lord Grey ‘ about oats,’ had privily offered to the

* Morant's A/zstory of Colchester, book i. p. 56. [On June1s the Committee of
the Association wrote to Sir Thomas Barrington and the other deputy lieutenants
of Essex that they had received a letter ‘‘to second former desires from Colonel
Cromwell for the speedy advance of Sir John Pagrove’s [Palgrave's] regiment out of
Wisbeach and of our three companies . . . for the increase of the Parliament
forces under Lord Grey of Groby, . . . and seeing the Queen is on her march with
1,200 horseand 3,000 foot, as credibly informed by Colonel Cromwell's letter, and that
their forces are beneath that number,” they urge the sending of further supplies both
of men and money to secure the town and prevent mutiny in the garrison of
Cambridge. Barrington MSS., Eg. MS. 2646, fol. 267. ]

lili, 138.

1643.) LETTER XII... HUNTINGDON 139

said quartermaster that they two should draw out their men, and
have a fight for it with Lord Grey ;—not to speak of frequent cor-
respondences with Newark, with Newcastle, and the Queen now
come back from Holland: wherefore he is arrested there in
Nottingham, and locked up for trial.

This was on the Wednesday, this report of Pym’s: and, alas,
while Pym reads it, John Hampden, mortally wounded four days
ago in a skirmish at Chalgrove Field, lies dying at Thame ;—
died on the Saturday following !

LETTERS XII—XV

‘On Thursday! July the 27th,’ on, or shortly before that day,
‘news reach London’ that Colonel Cromwell has taken Stamford,
—retaken it, I think ; at all events taken it. Whereupon the
Cavaliers from Newark and Belvoir Castle came hovering about
him: he drove them into Burleigh House, Burleigh on the Hill
in Rutlandshire, and laid siege to the same; ‘at three in the
morning, battered it with all his shot, and stormed it at last.?
Which is ‘a good help we have had this week.

On the other hand, at Gainsborough we are suffering siege ;
indisputably the Newarkers threaten to get the upper hand in
that quarter of the County. Here is Cromwell’s Letter,—happily
now the original itself ;—concerning Lord Willoughby of Parham,
and the relief of Gainsborough ‘ with powder and match.’

1/On July 23, the Committee sent to the deputy lieutenants of Essex the copy
of a letter received that morning from Colonel Cromwell, in order, as they write, to
show the danger they are inand how the enemy approaches. Lord Fairfax and Lord
Willoughby have taken Gainsborough, but hold it with much difficulty, which is the
cause of the requiring a speedy supply. They are sending the two troops required by
Colonel Cromwell, and are raising what other strength they can to send to him.
This leaves their garrison [Cambridge] very destitute, and they pray for more men
and money. Barrington MSS., Eg. MS., 2647, fol. 51. ]

2Vicars ; Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 6).

3[“In the North, God be thanked,” Pym wrote to Barrington on August 2,
“matters go reasonable prosperously. Col. Cromwell, in the taking of Burley
House, took five troops of horse, three of dragoons, three companies of foot. Since
that, they have beaten the King’s forces before Gainsborough, and if my Lord of
Newcastle's whole army had not come upon them in the very instant they had had
a more complete victory.” Zg. JZS., 2647, fol. 13b. J

140 FIRST CIVIL WAR [31 July.

LETTER XII

In Rushworth and the old Newspaper copies of this Letter,
along with certain insignificant, perhaps involuntary variations,
there are two noticeable omissions; the whole of the frst para-
graph, and nearly the whole of the /ast, omitted for cause by the
old official persons ; who furthermore have given only the virtual
address ‘ To the Committee for the Association sitting at Cambridge, +
not the specific one as here :

To my noble Friends, Sir Edmon Bacon, Knight and Baronet,
Sir William Springe, Knight and ‘Baronet, Sir Thomas Ber-
nardiston, Knight, Maurice Barrowe, Esquire: Present these

Huntingdon, 31st July 1643.
GENTLEMEN,

No man desires more to present you with
encouragements than myself, because of the forwardness I find
in you (to your honour be it spoken) to promote this great
cause, and truly God follows you with encouragements, who is
the God of blessings : and I beseech you let Him not lose His
blessings upon us. They come in season, and with all the ad-
vantages of heartening: as if God should say, Up and be
doing, and I will help you and stand by you. There is nothing
to be feared but our own sin and sloth.”

It hath pleased the Lord to give your servant and soldiers

a notable victory now at Gainsborough. I marched after the

taking of Burlye House upon Wednesday to Grantham, where

met me about 300 horse and dragoons of Nottingham. With
these, by agreement with the Lincolners we met at North Scarle,
which is about ten miles from Gainsbrowe, upon Thursday in
the evening, where we tarried until two of the clock in the

1 [The letter, as here printed, is not to the Committee of the Association at all,
but to the Deputy Lieutenants (also members of the County Committee) of Suffolk,
It is, however, quite possible that a similar letter was sent to Cambridge, (omitting
the passages specially meant for the Suffolk Committee), and that it was the
Cambridge letter which Rushworth copied. }

?'This paragraph is omitted in Rushworth and the Newspapers.

1643.. LETTER XII, HUNTINGDON 141

morning, and then with our whole body advanced towards
Gainsbrowe.

About a mile and a half from the town, we met a forlorn-
hope of the enemy of near 100 horse. Our dragoons laboured
to beat them back ; but not alighting off their horses, the enemy
charged them, and beat some four or five of them off their horses :
our horse charged them, and made them retire unto their main
body. We advanced, and came to the bottom of a steep hill,
upon which the enemy stood ; we could not well get up but by
some tracts, which our men assaying to do, a body of the enemy
endeavoured to hinder; wherein we prevailed, and got the top
of the hill. This was done by the Lincolners, who had the
vantguard.

When we all recovered the top of the hill, we saw a great
body of the enemy’s horse facing of us, at about musket-shot or
less distance ; and a good reserve of a full regiment of horse
behind it. We endeavoured to put our men into as good order
as we could, the enemy in the mean time advancing towards
us, to take us at disadvantage; but in such order as we were,
we charged their great body, I having the right wing ; we came
up horse to horse, where we disputed it with our swords and
pistols a pretty time; all keeping close order, so that one could
not break the other. At last, they a little shrinking, our men
perceiving it, pressed in upon them, and immediately routed this
whole body ; some flying on one side, others on the other of the
enemy’s reserve; and our men, pursuing them, had chase and
execution about five or six miles.

I, perceiving this body which was the reserve standing still
unbroken, kept back my Major, Whaley,! from the chase, and
with my own troop and one other of my regiment, in all being
three troops, we got into a body, In this reserve stood General

1[Major, afterwards Colonel Edward Whalley, whose life is in the Déctionary
of National Biography, was Cromwell's first cousin, son of his youngest aunt,
Frances. He was captain of the second troop of the Ironsides, served successively
as Major and Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment, and was a Colonel in the New
Model Army. ]

142 FIRST CIVIL WAR [31 July.

Cavendish ; who one while faced me, another while faced four of
the Lincoln troops, which were all of ours that stood upon the
place, the rest being engaged in the chase. At last the General
charged the Lincolners, and routed them. I immediately fell
on his rear with my three troops, which did so astonish him,
that he gave over the chase, and would fain have delivered
himself from me, but I pressing on forced them down a hill,
having good execution of them, and below the hill, drove the
General with some of his soldiers into a quagmire, where my
Captain-lieutenant! slew him with a thrust under his short ribs.
The rest of the body was wholly routed, not one man staying
upon the place.

We then, after this defeat which was so total, relieved the
town with such powder and provisions as we brought, which
done, we had notice that there were six troops of horse and 300
foot on the other side of the town, about a mile off us: we
desired some foot of my Lord Willoughby, about 400; and,
with our horse and these foot, marched towards them: when
we came towards the place where their horse stood, we beat
back with my troops about two or three troops of the enemy,
who retired into a small village at the bottom of the hill.
When we recovered the hill, we saw in the bottom, about a
quarter of a mile from us, a regiment of foot; after that
another; after that Newcastle’s own regiment, consisting in
all of about 50 foot colours, and a great body of horse; which
indeed was Newcastle’s Army, which, coming so unexpectedly,
put us to new consultations. My Lord Willoughby and I, being
in the town, agreed to call off our foot. I went to bring them
off: but before I returned, divers of the foot were engaged.
The enemy advancing with his whole body, our foot retreated
in some disorder, and with some loss got the town; where now
they are. Our horse also came off with some trouble, being
wearied with this long fight, and their horses tired; yet faced

1 James Berry,

1643.} LETTER XIL, HUNTINGDON 143

the enemy’s fresh horses, and by several removes got off with-
out the loss of one man; the enemy following in the rear with
a great body. The honour of this retreat is due to God, as also
all the rest: Major Whaley did in this carry himself with all
gallantry becoming a gentleman and a Christian.

Thus have you this true relation, as short as I could. What
you are to do upon it, is next to be considered! If I could
speak words to pierce your hearts with the sense of our and your
condition, I would. If you will raise 2,000 Foot at the present
to encounter this army of Newcastle’s, to raise the siege, and to
enable us to fight him, we doubt not, by the grace of God, but
that we shall be able to relieve the town, and beat the enemy
on? the other side Trent ;—whereas if somewhat be not done in
this, you will see Newcastle’s Army march up into your bowels ;
being now, as it is, on this side Trent. I know it will be difficult
to raise thus many in so short time: but let me assure you, it’s
necessary, and therefore to be done. At least do what you may,
with all possible expedition. I would I had the happiness to
speak with one of you: truly I cannot come over, but must
attend my charge ; our enemy is vigilant. The Lord direct you

what to do.
Gentlemen, I am
Your faithful servant,
Ourver CROMWELL.

P.S. Give this gentleman credence : he is worthy to be trusted,
he knows the urgency of our affairs better than myself. If he
give you intelligence, in point of time, of haste to be made,
believe him: he will advise for your good.*

1 The rest of this paragraph, all except the last sentence, is omitted : Postscript,
too, omitted. [See note on p. 140 above. |
2 Means ‘to.’

* Rushworth, v. 278;—given now (Zhird Edition) according to Autograph in
the possession of Dawson Turner, Esq., Great Yarmouth. (Pagers of Norfolk
Archeological Society, Jan. 1848; and Atheneum, London, 11th March 1848.)
[The original is now in the collection formed by the late Alfred Morrison Esq., and
from it, two or three mistakes which appeared in Carlyle’s transcript have been
corrected. ]

144 FIRST CIVIL WAR [31 July.

About two miles south of Gainsborough, on the North-Scarle
road, stands the Hamlet and Church of Lea; near which is a
‘Hill,’ or expanse of upland, of no great height, but sandy, covered
with furze, and full of rabbit-holes, the ascent of which would be
difficult for horsemen in the teeth of an enemy. This is under-
stood to be the ‘ Hill’ of the Fight referred to here. Good part
of it is enclosed, and the ground much altered, since that time ;
but one of the fields is still called ‘ Redcoats Field, and another
at some distance nearer Gainsborough ‘ Graves Field ;’ beyond
which latter, ‘on the other or western face of the Hill, a little
‘over the boundary of Lea Parish with Gainsborough Parish, on
‘the left hand (as you go North) between the Road and the River,’
is a morass or meadow still known by the name of Cavendish’s
Bog, which points out the locality.’

Of the ‘ Hills’ and ‘ Villages’ rather confusedly alluded to in
the second part of the Letter, which probably lay across Trent
Bridge on the Newark side of the river, I could obtain no elucida-
tion,—and must leave them to the guess of local antiquaries in-
terested in such things.”

‘General Cavendish, whom some confound with the Earl of
Newcastle’s brother, was his Cousin, ‘the Earl of Devonshire’s
second son ;’ an accomplished young man of three-and-twenty ;
for whom there was great lamenting ;—indeed a general emotion
about his death, of which we, in these radical times, very irreverent
of human quality itself, and much more justly of the dresses of
human quality, cannot even with effort form any adequate idea.
This was the first action that made Cromwell to be universally
talked of: He dared to kill this honourable person found in
arms against him! ‘Colonel Cromwell gave assistance to
‘the Lord Willoughby, and performed very gallant service
‘against the Earl of Newcastle’s forces. This was the beginning
‘of his great fortunes, and now he began to appear in the
‘world,’ 8 :

IMs. pees me.

2’Two other Letters on this Gainsborough Action, in Appendix, No. 5. [See
also three letters on the needs of the army, written to the Deputy Lieutenants of
Essex, August 1, 4 and 6; Supplement No. 4. Interesting letters relating to
Gainsborough, written by Sir John Meldrum and Lord Willoughby, will be found
printed (from the Zenner MSS.) in the Appendix to the Raising of the [ronsides, as
also one from the Speaker to Cromwell in answer toa letter in which Cromwell had
evidently complained of the unwillingness of the county forces to march out of their
own country. |

3 Whitlocke (rst edition, London, 1682,—as always, unless the contrary be
specified), p. 68.

ee

1643.) LETTER XIII, HUNTINGDON — 145

Waller has an Elegy, not his best, upon ‘Charles Ca’ndish.’ !
It must have been written some time afterwards: poor Waller,
in these weeks, very narrowly escapes death himself, on account
of the ‘ Waller Plot ;’—makes an abject submission ; pays 10,0001.
fine ; and goes upon his travels into foreign parts !—

LETTER XIII

Here meanwhile is a small noteworthy thing. Consider these
‘Young Men and Maids,’ and that little joint-stock company of
theirs! Amiable young persons, may it prosper with you.
Twelve-score pounds and so many stand of muskets,—well, this
little too, in the great Cause, will help. For a pure preached
Gospel, and the ancient liberties of England, who would not try
to help? Fine new cloaks and fardingales are good; but a
company of musketeers busy on the right side, how much better !
—Colonel Cromwell, now home again, has received a Deputation
on the matter; and suggests improvements. ‘Country’ which
will take your muskets, means County. Three pounds, we
perceive by calculation, will buy a war-saddle and pistols. Who
the ‘Sir’ is, guessable as some Chairman of this ‘Young Men
and Maids’ Society; and in what Town he sits, whether in
Huntingdon itself or in another,—must remain forever uncertain.”
His Address, by negligence, has vanished ; his affair wholly has
vanished ; the body of it gone all to air, and only the soul of it
now surviving, and like to survive !

To

‘Huntingdon,’ 2nd August 1634.
Sir, ,
I understand by these gentlemen the good

affections of your young men and maids, for which God is to be
praised.

1Fenton’s Waller, p. 209.

2(The town was Norwich. See Mercurius Aulicus, August 3, 1643, Mr.
Kingston infers that Cromwell alludes to another troop raised in this way (Zas¢
Anglia and the Great Civil War, p. 130), but that he is speaking of the Norwich
one is made evident by his promise to take it into his own regiment. The Norwich
‘“‘Maiden Troop,” was commanded by Captain Robert Swallow, and formed the
_ eleventh troop of the Ironsides ; the lieutenant being Joseph Sabberton. There was
a second ‘‘ Maiden Troop,” however, raised by the contributions of the maids of
London, and commanded by Captain Blackwell, serving in the Karl of Essex’s army.
See Raising of the [ronsides, p. 16.}

VOL.) 1—10

146 FIRST CIVIL WAR [5 Aug.

I approve of the business: only I desire to advise you that
your foot company may be turned into a troop of horse ; which
indeed will (by God’s blessing) far more advantage the cause
than two or three companies of foot; especially if your men be
honest godly men, which by all means I desire. I thank God
for stirring up the youth to cast in their mite, which I desire
may be employed to the best advantage ; therefore my advice is,
that you would employ your twelve-score pounds to buy pistols and
saddles, and I will provide four-score horses; for 400/. more
will not raise a troop of horse. As for the muskets that are
bought, I think the country will take them of you. Pray raise
honest godly men, and I will have them of my regiment. As
for your officers, I leave it as God shall or hath directed to choose,
and rest,

Your loving friend,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

LETTER XIV

GaINnsBoROUGH was directly taken, after this relief of it; Lord
Willoughby could not resist the Newarkers with Newcastle at
their head. Gainsborough is lost, Lincoln is lost; unless help
come speedily, all is like to be lost. The following letter, with
its enclosure from the Lord Lieutenant Willoughby of Parham,
speaks for itself. Read the Enclosure first.

“ To Colonel Cromwell ;
“Boston, 5th August 1643.

“‘ NosLe Sir,—Since the business at Gainsborough, the hearts
“of our men have been so deaded as we have lost most of them
“by running away, so as we were forced to leave Lincoln upon
“a sudden, and if I had not done it, then I should have been left
“alone init. So as now I am at Boston, where we are but very

* Fairfax Correspondence (London, 1849), ili. 56: the Original is Autograph ;
address quite gone; docketed ‘Colonel Cromwell's Letter to’ (in regard to) ‘the
Bachelors and Maids, 2d August 1643, from Huntingdon.’

1643.]} LETTER X1V., HUNTINGDON _— 147

“poor in strength; so as without some speedy supply, I fear
“we shall not hold this long neither.

“My Lord General I perceive hath writ to you, to draw all
“your forces together. I should be glad to see it ; for if that will
“not be, there can be no good expected. If you will endeavour
“to stop my Lord of Newcastle, you must presently draw them
“to him and fight him; for without we be master of the field,
“we shall all be pulled out by the ears, one after another.

“The Foot, if they will come up, may march very securely to
“ Boston ; which, to me, will be very considerable to your Asso-
“ciation ; for if they! get that Town, which is now very weak for
“defence for want of men, I believe they will not be long out of
“ Norfolk and Suffolk.

“I can say no more but desire you to hasten, and rest,

“Francis WIiLLowsy.’” 2

To my honoured Friends the Commissioners at Cambridge :
These present
Huntingdon, 6th August 1643.

GENTLEMEN,
You see by this enclosed how sadly your

affairs stand. It’s no longer disputing, but out instantly all you
can. Raise all your bands;* send them to Huntingdon; get
up what volunteers you can; hasten your Horses.

Send these letters to Suffolk, Norfolk and Essex, without
delay.* I beseech you spare not, but be expeditious and indus-
trious. Almost all our Foot have quitted Stamford: there is
nothing to interrupt an enemy, but our Horse, that is consider-
able. You must act lively ; do it without distraction. Neglect

no means. I am
Your faithful servant,

OLIvER CROMWELL.*

1[z.e., the enemy. ]

2 Baker MSS., Trinity College Library, Cambridge [This isa mistake. They
are in the University Library], xxxiv. 429; [another copy] is in Tanner MSS, too,
together with the following. [The original is amongst the Barrington MSS., Eg.
2647, fol. 120. ]

3 Trainbands.

4[For the Letters to the Essex Committee, see Supplement, No. 4.]

* Cooper's Annals of Cambridge, iii. 355; Tanner MSS, \xii. 229. [A copy.]

148 FIRST CIVIL WAR [8 Aug.

In the Commons Journals, August 4th,| are various Orders,
concerning Colonel Cromwell and his affairs, of a comfortable
nature: as, ‘That he shall have the Three-thousand Pounds, al-
ready levied in the Associated Counties, for payment of his men 2%
likewise privilege of ‘ Free Quarter on the march he is now upon;’
and lastly, ‘That the Six Associated Counties do forthwith raise
two-thousand men more’ for his behoof and that of the Cause.
On which occasion Speaker Lenthall, as we otherwise find, writes
to him on the part of the House, in these encouraging terms:
‘The House hath commanded me to send you these enclosed
‘Orders; and to let you know that nothing is more repugnant
‘to the sense of this House, and dangerous to this Kingdom,
‘than the unwillingness of their forces to march out of their
‘several Counties.’—‘ For yourself, they do exceedingly approve
‘of your faithful endeavours to God and the Kingdom.’ ?

LETTER XV

Tur Committee’s answer, ‘my return from you,’ will find
Cromwell at Stamford ; to which, as to the place of danger, he is
already speeding and spurring. Here is his next Letter to these
Honoured Friends :

To my honoured Friends the Commissioners at Cambridge :
These present

‘Peterborough,’ 8th August 1643.
GENTLEMEN,

Finding our foot much lessened at Stamford,
and having a great train and many carriages, I held it not safe
to continue there, but presently after my return from you, I
ordered the foot to quit that place and march into Holland, ‘to
Spalding ;’ which they did on Monday last.? I was the rather
induced so to do because of the letter I received from my Lord
Willowby, a copy whereof I sent you.

I am now at Peterborough, whither I came this afternoon,

1 Commons Journals, iii. 193.
2 Tanner MSS. \xii, (i.), 224. 3 Yesterday.

1648] LETTER XV., PETERBOROUGH 149

I was no sooner come but Lieutenant Colonel Wood sent me
word from Spalding, That the enemy was marching, with
twelve flying colours of horse and foot, within a mile of Swin-
stead: so that I hope it was a good providence of God that our
foot were at Spalding.

It much concerns your Association, and the Kingdom, that
so strong a place as Holland is be not possessed by them. If
you have any foot ready to march, send them away to us with
all speed. I fear lest the enemy should press in upon our foot ;
he being thus far advanced towards you, I hold it very fit that
you should hasten your horse at Huntingdon, and what you can
speedily raise at Cambridge, unto me. I dare not go into Hol-
land with my horse, lest the enemy should advance with his
whole body of horse, this way,into your Association ; but remain
ready here, endeavouring ! my Lord Grey’s and the Northampton-
shire horse to me, that so, if we be able, we may fight the
enemy, or retreat unto you, with our whole strength. I beseech
you hasten your levies, what you can ; especially those of foot.
Quicken all our friends with new letters upon this occasion ;
which I believe you will find to be a true alarm. The particulars
I hope to be able to inform you speedily of, more punctually ;
having sent, in all haste, to Colonel Wood for that purpose.

The money I brought with me is so poor a pittance when it
comes to be distributed amongst all my troops that, considering
their necessity, it will not half clothe them, they were so far
behind ; if we have not more money speedily, they will be ex-
ceedingly discouraged.? I am sorry you put me to it to write
thus often. It makes it seem a needless importunity in me ;
whereas, in truth, it is a constant neglect of those that should
provide for us. Gentlemen, make them able to live and subsist

1‘ but am ready endeavouring,’ 27 ov7g.

2/Compare the letter from Harlackenden (a prominent member of the Committee),
to Barrington, written a few weeks later. ‘‘ Colonel Cromwell tells me he wept when
he came to Boston and found no moneys for him from Essex and other counties. He
saith he regards moneys as little as any man, but for his troops, if they have not

moneys speedily, they are in an undone condition.” Barrington MSS., Eg. 2647,
fol, 296. ]

150 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 Aug.

that are willing to spend their blood for you. I say no more;
but rest

Your faithful servant,
Otrver CRoMWELL.*

Sir William Waller, whom some called William the Conqueror,
has been beaten all to pieces on Lansdown Heath, about three
weeks ago. The Fairfaxes too are beaten from the field; glad
to get into Hull,—which Hotham the Traitor was about deliver-
ing to her Majesty, when vigilant persons laid him fast.1_ And,
in the end of May, Earl Stamford was defeated in the Southwest ;
and now Bristol has been suddenly surrendered to Prince Rupert,
—for which let Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes (says Mr. Prynne, still
very zealous) be tried by Court-Martial, and if possible, shot.

LETTERS XVI—XVIII

In the very hours while Cromwell was storming the sand-hill
near Gainsborough ‘by some tracks,’ honourable gentlemen at
St. Stephen’s were voting him Governor of the Isle of Ely. Ely
in the heart of the Fens, a place of great military capabilities, is
much troubled with ‘corrupt ministers, with ‘corrupt train-
bands,’ and understood to be in a perilous state ; wherefore they
nominate Cromwell to take charge of it.2 We understand his
own Family to be still resident in Ely.

The Parliament affairs, this Summer, have taken a bad course ;
and except it be in the Eastern Association, look everywhere
declining. They have lost Bristol, their footing in the South-
west and in the North is mostly gone; Essex’s Army has melted

* Fairfax Correspondence, iii. 58.

10f Hotham: 2oth June 1643 (Rushworth, v. 275, 6) ;—of the Fairfaxes, at
Adderton Moor : 3oth June (2d. 279) ;-—of Waller : 13th July (2d. 285; Clarendon,
ii. 376-9). Stratton Fight in Cornwall, defeat of Stamford by Hopton, was 16th
May ; Bristol is 22d July (Rushworth, v. 271, 284). [Adderton Moor should be
Adwalton Moor. ‘The Battle of Lansdown Heath was on July 5; it was at Round-
way Down that Waller's army was annihilated on the 13th. Bristol did not surrender
until the 26th, ]

2 Commons Journals, iii. 186 (of 28th July 1643); 2d¢d. 153, 167, 180, &c. to 657
(gth October 1644).

1643. ] EASTERN ASSOCIATION 151

away, without any action of mark all Summer, except the /oss of
Hampden in a skirmish. In the beginning of August, the King
breaks out from Oxford, very clearly superior in force; goes to
settle Bristol ; and might thence, it was supposed, have marched
direct to London, if he had liked. He decides on taking Glou-
cester with him before he quit those parts. The Parliament, in
much extremity, calls upon the Scots for help; who under con-
ditions will consent.

In these circumstances, it was rather thought a piece of hero-
ism in our old friend Lord Kimbolton, or Mandevil, now become
Earl of Manchester, to accept the command of the Eastern Asso-
ciation: he is nominated ‘Sergeant-Major of the Associated
Counties, 10th August, 1643; is to raise new force, infantry
and cavalry; has four Colonels of Horse under him ; Colonel
Cromwell, whosoon became his second in command, is one of
them; Colonel Norton, whom we shall meet afterwards, is another.!
‘The Associated Counties are busy listing,’ intimates the old
Newspaper ; ‘and so soon as their harvest is once over, which
‘for present much retardeth their proceedings, the Earl of Man-
‘chester will doubtless have a very brave and considerable
‘ Army, to be a terror to the Northern Papists, Newarkers and
Neweastles, ‘if they advance Southward.’? When specially it
was that Cromwell listed his celebrated body of Jronsides is of
course not to be dated, though some do carelessly date it, as
from the very ‘beginning of the War;’ and in Bates? and
others are to be found various romantic details on the subject,
which deserve no credit. Doubtless Cromwell, all along, in the
many changes his body of men underwent, had his eye upon
this object of getting good soldiers and dismissing bad; and
managed the matter by common practical vigilance, not by
theatrical clap-traps as Dr. Bates represents. Some months
ago, it was said in the Newspapers, of Colonel Cromwell’s
soldiers, ‘no man swears but he pays his twelvepence;’ no
plundering, no drinking, disorder, or impiety allowed.4 We
may fancy, in this new levy, as Manchester's Lieutenant and
Governor of Ely, when the whole force was again winnowed
and sifted, he might complete the process, and see his Thousand
Troopers ranked before him, worthy at last of the name of Jron-

1 Commons Journals, iii. 199, 200; Husbands, ii. 286, 276-8.
2e9th August 1643, Cromwedliana, p. 7.
3 Hlenchus Motuum. 4May 1643, Cromwedliana, p. 5.

152 FIRST CIVIL WAR [at Aig:

sides. They were men that had the fear of God; and gradually
lost all other fear. “Truly they were never beaten at all,” says
he.— Meanwhile :

1643

August 21st.. The shops of London are all shut for certain
days:2 Gloucester is in hot siege; nothing but the obdurate
valour of a few men there prevents the King, with Prince Rupert,
called also Prince Robert and Prince Robber, from riding rough-
shod over us. The City, with much emotion, ranks its Trained
Bands under Essex; making up an Army for him, despatches
him to relieve Gloucester. He marches on the 26th; steadily
along, in spite of rainy weather and Prince Rupert ; westward,
westward: on the night of the tenth day, September 5th, the
Gloucester people see his signal-fire flame up, amid the dark
rain, ‘on the top of Presbury Hill ;’—and understand that they
shall live and not die. The King ‘fired his huts, and marched

1[In March, 1643, it would appear from Cory’s letter (see p. 123 above) that
Cromwell had five troops. In September, he had ten; before April, 1644, he had
fourteen. The strength of a troop in the Eastern Association seems originally to
have been eighty men, but a year later, in 1644, it often rose to a hundred.

The original captains of the Ironsides were as follows :—

x. Colonel Cromwell. Captain-Lieutenant, James Berry, and in 1644, John
Gladman.

2. Edward Whalley, Major and afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel. Cavalry regi-
ments had not usually a lieutenant-colonel, but the size of Cromwell’s made an
extra field officer necessary.

3. John Disbrowe or Desborough. Made Major on Whalley’s promotion.

4. Oliver Cromwell, junr. On his death, in the spring of 1644, Captain John
Browne.

5. Valentine Walton, junr. After his death at Marston Moor, Captain William
Packer.

6. Captain Ayres or Ayers. Left in June, 1644, when his troop was given to
Berry.

7. Captain Robert Patterson, and, in the spring of 1644, Captain Robert
Horsman.

8. Captain John Grove.

g. Captain Samuel Porter ‘‘ of Essex.”

to. Captain Adam Lawrence.
rr. Captain Robert Swallow (the Maiden troop).

tz. Captain Christopher Bethell.

13. Captain Ralph Margery.

14. Major Henry Ireton (formerly Major in Sir Francis Thornhaugh’s regiment
of horse). See Razsing.of the lronsides. |

2 Rushworth, v 201.

3See Webb's Bibliotheca Gloucestrensis, a Collection, &c. (Gloucester, 1825), or
Corbet's contemporary Szeve of Gloucester (Somers Tracts, v. 296), which forms the
main substance of Mr. Webb's Book,

1643.| LETTER XVI, CAMBRIDGE 153

off without delay. He never again had any real chance of pre-
vailing in this War. Essex, having relieved the West, returns
steadily home again, the King’s forces hanging angrily on his
rear; at Newbury in Berkshire, he had to turn round, and give
them battle,—First Newbury Battle, 20th September, 1643,—
wherein he came off rather superior.! Poor Lord Falkland, in
his ‘clean shirt,’ was killed here. This steady march to Glou-
cester and back again, by Essex, was the chief feat he did during
the War; a considerable feat, and very characteristic of him,
the slow-going, inarticulate, indignant, somewhat elephantine
man.

Here however, in the interim, are some glimpses of the
Associated Counties; of the ‘listing’ that now goes on there, a
thing attended with its own confused troubles.

LETTER XVI

Letter Sixteenth is not dated at all; but incidentally names
its place; and by the tenor of it sufficiently indicates these
autumn days, first days of September, as the approximate time.
‘Our handful,’ to be known by and by as Jronsides, they are
ready and steady ; but we see what an affair the listing of the
rest is; cash itself like to be dreadfully short; men difficult to
raise, worth little when raised ;—add seizure of Malignant neigh-
bours’ horses, proclamations, reclamations, and the Lawyer's
tongues, and all men’s, everywhere set wagging! Spring and
Barrow are leading Suffolk Committee-men, whom we shall see
again in that capacity.2, Of Captain Margery, elsewhere than in
that Suffolk Troop now mustering, I know nothing ; but Colonel
Cromwell knows him, can recommend him as a man worth some-
thing :* if Margery, to mount himself in this pressure, could
‘raise the horses from Malignants, in some measure,—were it
not well?

1 Clarendon, ii. 460; Whitlocke, p. 70. 2 See also p. 140 above.
3{Ralph Margery, captain in Cromwell's own regiment in 1644, and in that of
Sir Robert Pye in the New Model. |

154 FIRST CIVIL WAR [Sept.

To my noble Friends, Sir William Springe, Knight and Baronet, and
Maurice Barrowe, Esquire, etc., Present these

‘Cambridge, — September 1643.”
GENTLEMEN,

I have been now two days at Cambridge, in
expectation to hear the fruit of your endeavours in Suffolk
towards the public assistance. Believe it, you will hear of a
storm in few days. You have no Infantry at all considerable ;
hasten your Horses ;—a few hours may undo you, neglected.—I
beseech you be careful what captains of Horse you choose, what
men be mounted: a few honest men are better than numbers.
Some time they must have for exercise. If you choose godly
honest men to be captains of Horse, honest men will follow
them ; and they will be careful to mount such.

The King is exceeding strong in the West. If you be able
to foil a force at the first coming of it, you will have reputation ;
and that is of great advantage in our affairs. God hath given it
to our handful; let us endeavour to keep it. I had rather have
a plain russet-coated captain that knows what he fights for, and
loves what he knows, than that which you call a gentleman and
is nothing else. I honour a gentleman that is so indeed.

I understand Mr. Margery hath honest men will follow him:
if so, be pleased to make use of him; it much concerns your
good to have conscientious men. I understand that there is an
order for me to have 3,000/. out of the Association ; and Essex

1[Probably written on or about August 29. Harlackenden, in his letters to
Barrington, gives him various items of news about his cousin, Colonel Cromwell,
from which we can fairly well trace the latter’s movements. He was at Cambridge
on August 27, and on the 2gth signs a letter from the Committee of the Association
to the deputy lieutenants of Essex, complaining that their ‘‘ companies” have
arrived in a very destitute condition and must be supplied without delay. On
the 31st the Committee writes again and more strongly, concerning the Essex men.
They are ‘‘in so naked a posture that to employ them were to murder them”. If
needful arms, etc., are not sent them, ‘‘it will beget a mutiny or disbanding,” and
a work of great hope and consequence must die in the birth. Cromwell does not
sign this letter, from which it may be inferred that he had left Cambridge. On
September 4 he was at Ely, and on the sth, marched towards Lincoln. In his
warning to the Suffolk authorities to take care of the men’s march, etc., Cromwell
is still probably thinking of the Essex men, of whom Manchester writes a few days
later that as many, he believes ‘‘ are run away as are come”’ (£g., 2647, fol. 229.).]

1643.] LETTER XVIL, BOSTON 155

hath sent their part, or near it. I assure you we need exceed-
ingly. I hope to find your favour and respect. I protest, if it
were for myself, I would not move you. This is all, from
Your faithful servant,
OutveR CROMWELL.

P.S. If you send such men as Essex hath sent, it will be to
little purpose. Be pleased to take care of their march ; and that
such may come along with them as will be able to bring them to
the main body; and then I doubt not but we shall keep them,
and make good use of them. I beseech you, give countenance
to Mr. Margery. Help him in raising this troop; let him not
want your favour in whatsoever is needful for promoting this
work ; and command your servant. If he can raise the horses
from malignants, let him have your warrant : it will be of special
service. *

LETTER XVII

Listine still; and with more trouble than ever. Matters go
not well: ‘Nobody to pul-on,’ nobody to push ; cash too is and
remains defective ;—here, however, is another glimpse of the
Tronsides, first specific glimpse, which is something.

To my honoured Friend Oliver St. John, Esquire,' at Lincoln’s Inn :
These present.
‘Eastern Association,’ 11th Sept. ‘1643.’

Sir,
Of all men I should not trouble you with

money matters, did not the heavy necessities my Troops are in,
press me beyond measure. I am neglected exceedingly !
1 am now ready for? my march towards the enemy ; who hath
entrenched himself over against Hull, my Lord Newcastle having
* Original in the possession of Dawson Turner, Esq., Great Yarmouth ; printed
in Papers of Norfolk Archeological Society (Norwich, January 1848).

1[“ Solicitor,” evased. |
2°Upon' crossed out as ambiguous; ‘ready for’ written over it.

156 FIRST CIVIL WAR [11 Sept.

besieged the town. Many of my Lord of Manchester's troops
are come to me:! very bad and mutinous, not to be confided in ;
they paid to a week almost; mine no ways provided for to
support them, except by the poor Sequestrations of the County
of Huntingdon. My troops increase. I have a lovely company ;
you would respect them, did you know them. They are no Ana-
baptists, they are honest sober Christians: they expect to be
used as men!

If [1] took pleasure to write to the House in bitterness, I have
occasion. ‘Of’ the 3,000/. allotted me, I cannot get the part
of Norfolk nor Hertfordshire: it was gone before I had it. I
have minded your service to forgetfulness of my own and Soldiers’
necessities. I desire not to seek myself, ‘but’ I have little
money of my own to help my soldiers. My estate is little. I
tell you, the business of Ireland and England hath had of me,
in money, between eleven and twelve hundred pounds; there-
fore my private can do little to help the public. You have had
my money: I hope in God I desire to venture my skin. So do
mine. Lay weight upon their patience ; but break it not. Think
of that which may be a real help. I believe 5,000/.? is due.

If you lay aside the thought of me and my letter, I expect no
help. Pray for

Your true friend and servant,
OLtveR CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ There is no care taken how to maintain that force of
Horse and Foot raised and a-raising by my Lord of Manchester.
He hath not one able to put on ‘that business.’ The force will
fall if some help not. Weak counsels and weak actings undo

1[At Boston, most likely, as he is said to ‘‘return” there after his expedition,
On September 9, Manchester writes, ‘‘ My horse and dragoons are most of them
sent away to Col. Cromwell, for the stopping of the Earl of Newcastle's march this
way, and drawing the Yorkshire and Lincolnshire horse into a body with them.”
He ends his letter with another tirade against the unfortunate Essex men, who if
they cannot have arms and money, are, he says ‘‘ far more dreadful to me than any
enemy whatsoever.” 9, 2647, fol. 241. |

2 Erased, as not the correct sum.

1643. ] EASTERN ASSOCIATION 157

all !—[two words crossed out]: or all will be lost, if God help not !
Remember who tells you.*

In Lynn Regis there arose ‘ distractions,’ last Spring ; distrac-
tions ripening into open treason, and the seizure of Lynn by Ma-
lignant forces,— Roger L’ Estrange, known afterwards as Sir Roger
the busy Pamphleteer, being very active in it. Lynn lies strong
amid its marshes ; a gangrene in the heart of the Association itself.
My Lord of Manchester is now, with all the regular Foot, and
what utmost effort of volunteers the Country can make, besieging
Lynn, does get it, at last, in a week hence. Ten days hence the
Battle of Newbury is got ; and much joy for Gloucester and it.
But here in the Association, with such a weight of enemies upon
us, and such a stagnancy and staggering want of pith within us,
things still look extremely questionable !—

Monday, 25th September. The House of Commons and the
Assembly of Divines take the Covenant, the old Scotch Covenant,
slightly modified now into a ‘Solemn League and Covenant ;’ in
St. Margaret’s Church, Westminster.1_ They lifted up their hands
seriatim, and then ‘stept into the chancel to sign.’ The List yet
remains in Rushworth,— incorrect in some places. There sign in
all about 220 Honourable Members that day.2 The whole Par-
liamentary Party, down to the lowest constable or drummer in
their pay, gradually signed. It was the condition of assistance
from the Scotch; who are now calling out ‘all fencible men from
sixteen to sixty, for a third expedition into England. <A very
solemn Covenant, and Vow of all the People ; of the awfulness of
which, we, in these days of Customhouse oaths and loose regard-

* Additional Ayscough MSS, sors*, art. 25 [should be f. 6]: printed, with some
errors, in Annual Register, xxxv. 358. [This letter was presented by John
Wilmot, Esq., to the British Museum in 1793. ‘The same volume of Add, MSS.
also contains a facsimile of the letter, and it was to this, curiously enough, and not
to the original, that Carlyle gave his reference. There are no words crossed out,
but a portion of the margin, where Cromwell (as often) wrote the concluding part
of his letter, has been torn away in opening it. What is left appears to be
“ - once or come, or all will be lost, etc.” The facsimile has ‘‘ that is done”
inserted, but there is no warrant whatever for this and it does not even make sense, ]

1 Commons Journals, iii. 252, 4; Rushworth (incorrect in various particulars, —
unusual with Rushworth), v. 475, 480; the Covenant itself, 2. 478.

2[Yonge's Diary gives the number as 112, which, Mr, Gardiner says, ‘‘ disposes
of the longer list given by Rushworth as evidence of the presence of members who
figure in it on this particular occasion.” Hzstory of the Great Civil War, i. 235
note, Rushworth’s numbers apparently had not been reached even a week later,
for Anthony Nicoll, writing on Oct. 4, says: ‘‘ The Scotch Covenant taken by
above eight score of our house.” g. 2647, fol. 298. |

158 FIRST CIVIL WAR [28 Sept.

less talk, cannot form the smallest notion.—Duke Hamilton,
seeing his painful Scotch diplomacy end all in this way, flies to
the King at Oxford,—is there ‘put under arrest,’ sent to Pen-
dennis Castle near the Land’s End.

LETTER XVIII

In Rushworth’s List of Members convenanting in St. Margaret’s
Church on Monday September 25th, the name of Oliver Crom-
well stands visible: but it is an error; as this Letter and other
good evidences still remain to show. Indeed some singular
oscitancy must have overtaken the watchful Rushworth, on that
occasion of the Covenant ; or what is likelier, some inextricable
shuffle had got among his Paper-masses there, when he came to
redact them long after,—the indefatigable painful man! Thus
he says furthermore, and again says, the signing took place ‘on
September 22d,’ which was Friday ; whereas the Rhadamanthine
Commons Journals still testify that, on Friday September 22d,
there was merely order and appointment made to sign on the 25th ;
and that the signing itself took place, accordingly, on Monday
September 25th, as we have givenit. With other errors,— incident
to the exactest Rushworth, when his Paper-masses get shuffled !
—Here is another entry of his, confirmable beyond disputing ;
which is of itself fatal to that of ‘Oliver Cromwell’ among ‘those
who signed the Covenant that day.’ Oliver Cromwell had quite
other work to do than signing of Covenants, many miles
away from him just now; and indeed, I guess, did not sign this
one for many days and weeks to come; not till he got to his
place in Parliament again, with more leisure on his hands than
now.?

Tuesday, ‘26th September. The Lord Willoughby’ of Parham
‘and Colonel Cromwell came to Hull® to consult with the Lord
‘Fairfax ; but made no stay: and the same day, Sir Thomas Fair-
‘fax crossed Humber with twenty Troops of Horse, to join with
‘Cromwell’s forces in Lincolnshire.’* For the Marquis of New-
castle is begirdling, and ever more closely besieging, the Lord

1 Burnet: Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton,

2(He signed on February 5. See Commons Journals, iii. 389.]

8[Cromwell was in Hull on September 22; Lord Willoughby on September
23. Sir Thomas crossed the Humber on the 26th, and the three met at Boston. ]

4 Rushworth, v. 280,

1643.| LETTER XVIII, LINCOLNSHIRE 159

Fairfax in Hull; which has obliged him to ship his brave Son,
with all the horse, across the Humber, in this manner: horse are
useless here ; under the Earl of Manchester, on the other side,
they may be of use.

The landing took place at Saltfleet that same afternoon, say
the Newspapers: here now is what followed thereupon,—success-
ful though rather dangerous march into the safe parts of Lincoln-
shire, and continuance of the drillings, fightings, and enlistment
there. Committee-men ‘Spring and Barrow’ are known to us ;
of Margery and ‘the Malignants’ horses’ we have also had some
inkling once.

To his honoured Friends, Sir William Springe and Mr. Barrome ;
These present
‘Holland,! Lincolnshire,’ 28th Sept. 1643.

GENTLEMEN,
It hath pleased God to bring off Sir Thomas

Fairfax his Horse over the river from Hull, being about one-and-
twenty troops of Horse and Dragoons. The Lincolnshire Horse
laboured to hinder this work, being about thirty-four colours of
Horse and Dragoons: we marched up to their landing-place,
and the Lincolnshire Horse retreated.

After they were come over, we all marched towards Holland ;
and when we came to our last quarter upon the edge of Holland,
the enemy quartered within four miles of us, and kept the field
all night with his whole body: his intendment, as we conceive,
was to fight us, or hoping to interpose betwixt us and our retreat ;
having received, to his thirty-four colours of Horse, twenty fresh
troops, ten companies of ‘Dragoons ;’* and about a thousand
Foot, being General King’s own regiment. With these he at-
tempted our guards and our quarters ; and, if God had not been
merciful, had ruined us before we had known of it, the five troops
we set to keep the watch failing much of their duty.? But we

1[This should be ‘Boston.’] 2 Word torn,

3[Harlackenden gives some further details of this affair in a letter of September
30: ‘‘Colonel Cromwell writes to us that he is very safely returned to Boston, for
which he desireth us to give God the praise of such a mercy, for divers troops of my

Lord Willoughby of Parham had an alarum from the enemy, Newcastle his forces,
that were and now are returned into Lincolnshire, and all those troops did run

160 FIRST CIVIL WAR [28 Sept.

got to horse, and retreated in good order, with the safety of
all our Horse of the Association, not losing four of them that I
hear of, and we got five of theirs. And for this we are exceedingly
bound to the goodness of God, who brought our troops off with
so little loss.

I write unto you to acquaint you with this the rather that God
may be acknowledged, and that you may help forward, in sending
such force away unto us as lie unprofitably in your country, and
especially that troop of Captain Margery’s, which surely would?
not be wanting, now we so much need it. [The enemy may teach
us that wisdom who is not wanting to himself in making up
his best strength for the accomplishment of his designs. |?

I hear there hath been much exception taken to Captain Mar-
gery and his officers, for taking of horses. I am sorry you should
discountenance those who (not to make benefit to themselves,
but to serve their country) are willing to venture their lives, and
to purchase to themselves the displeasure of bad men, that they
may do a public benefit. I undertake not to justify all Captain
Margery’s actions, but his own conscience knows whether he
hath taken the horses of any but malignants, and it were some-
what too hard to put it upon the consciences of your fellow
Deputy Lieutenants, whether they have not freed the horses of
known malignants; a fault not less, considering the sad estate
of this Kingdom, than to take a horse from a known honest man ;
the offence being against the public, which is a considerable
aggravation. I know not the measure that every one takes of
malignants. I think it is not fit Captain Margery should be the

away and gave no alarum to any of the rest of Col. Cromwell his forces, and it
was God’s infinite mercy their throats were not cut in their beds.’” He adds that
a court martial was to be held upon the business as it was feared that there was
treachery amongst them, In the same letter he states that one of Col. Cromwell’s
captains had very lately been at Hull, where Lady Fairfax gave him this motto in
a favour, ‘‘ Wrather die than truth deny”. ‘The captain reported that ‘‘ they in
Hull that are honest fear the Earl of Newcastle his forces no more than a fly, but
many there are rotten at the heart.” (Ag. 2647, fol. 286.).]

1 should. 2[This passage was omitted by Carlyle. ]

1643.] LETTER XVIIL, LINCOLNSHIRE 161

judge: but if he, in this taking of horses, hath observed the
parliament! character of a malignant, and cannot be charged for
one horse otherwise taken, it had been better that some of the
bitterness wherewith he and his have been followed had been
spared. The horses that his Cornet? Boallry took, he will put
himself upon that issue for them all.

If these men be accounted troublesome to the country, I
shall be glad you would send them all to me. I'll bid them
welcome. And when they have fought for you, and endured
some other difficulties of war which your honester men will
hardly bear, I pray you then let them go for honest men.? I
profess unto you, many of those men which are of your country’s
choosing, under Captain Johnson, are so far from serving you,
that, were it not that I have honest troops to master them,
although they be well paid, yet they are so mutinous that I may
justly fear they would cut my throat. Gentlemen, it may be it
provokes some spirits to see such plain men made Captains of
Horse. It had been well that men of honour and birth had
entered into these employments, but why do they not appear?
Who would have hindered them? But seeing it was necessary
the work must go on, better plain men than none, but best to
have men patient of wants, faithful and conscientious in the
employment, and such, I hope, these will approve themselves to
be. Let them therefore, if I be thought worthy of any favour,
leave your country with your good wishes and a blessing. I am
confident they‘ will be well bestowed, and I believe before it
be long, you will be in their debt; and then it will not be hard
to quit scores.

What arms you can furnish them withal, I beseech you do it.
I have ever hitherto found your kindness great to me: I know
not what I have done to lose it; I love it so well, and price it

1(Carlyle printed this word as “‘plain.’’ The transcriber was probably puzzled
by the contraction mark. ]

2*Coronett' 27 orig.

3[Compare letter to Barrington, Supplement, No, 5. |

* your wishes.

Oty Selb &

162 FIRST CIVIL WAR [28 Sept.

so high, that I would do my best to gain more. You have the
assured affection of
Your most humble and faithful servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.

P.S.—I understand there were some exceptions taken at a
horse that was sent to me, which was seized out of the hands of
one Mr. Goldsmith of Wilby. If he be not by you judged a ma-
lignant, and that you do not approve of my having of the horse, I
shall as willingly return him again as you shall desire, and there-
fore, I pray you, signify your pleasure to me herein under your
hands. Not that I would, for ten thousand horses, have the
horse to my own private benefit, saving to make use of him for
the Public, for I will most gladly return the value of him to the
State. Ifthe gentleman stand clear in your judgments, I beg it
as a special favour that, if the gentleman be freely willing to let
me have him for my money, let him set his own price: I shall
very justly return him the money. Or if he be unwilling to part
with him, but keeps him for his pleasure, be pleased to send me
an answer thereof: I shall instantly return him his horse; and
do it with a great deal more satisfaction to myself than keep
him. Therefore I beg it of you to satisfy my desire in this last
request ; it shall exceedingly oblige me to you. If you do it not,
I shall rest very unsatisfied, and the horse will be a burden to me
so long as I shall keep him. *

The Earl of Manchester, recaptor of Lynn Regis lately, is still
besieging and retaking certain minor strengths and Fen garrisons,
—sweeping the intrusive Royalists out of those Southern Towns
of Lincolnshire. This once done, his Foot once joined to Crom-
well’s and Fairfax’s Horse, something may be expected in the
Midland parts too.

* Original in the possession of Dawson Turner, Esq., Great Yarmouth ; printed
in Papers of Norfolk Archeological Society (Norwich, January 1848). [The original,
signed, is now in the possession of Sir Richard Tangye. }

1643.] WINCEBY FIGHT 163

WINCEBY FIGHT

LincotnsHirE, which has now become one of the Associated
Seven,! and is still much overrun by Newarkers and Northern
Papists, shall at last be delivered.

Hull siege still continues, with obstinate sally and onslaught ;
on the other hand, Lynn siege, which the Earl of Manchester
was busy in, has prosperously ended ; and the Earl himself, with
his foot regiments, is now also here; united, in loose quarters,
with Cromwell and Fairfax, in the Boston region, and able prob-
ably to undertake somewhat.? Cromwell and Fairfax with the
horse, we perceive, have still the brunt of the work to do. _ Here,
after much marching and skirmishing, is an account of Winceby
Fight, their chief exploit in those parts, which cleared the country
of the Newarkers, General Kings, and renegade Sir John
Hendersons ;—as recorded by loud-spoken Vicars. In spite of
brevity we must copy the Narrative. Cromwell himself was
nearer death in this action than ever in any other; the victory
too made its due figure, and ‘appeared in the world.’

Winceby, a small upland Hamlet, in the Wolds, not among
the Fens, of Lincolnshire, is some five miles west of Horncastle.
The confused memory of this Fight is still fresh there ; the Lane
along which the chase went bears ever since the name of ‘Slash
Lane,’ and poor Tradition maunders about it as she can. Hear
Vicars, a poor human soul zealously prophesying as if through the
organs of an ass,-—in a not mendacious, yet loud-spoken, exagger-
ative, more or less asinine manner : +

* * * ©All that night,’ Tuesday, 10th October 1643, ‘we
‘were drawing our horse to the appointed rendezvous ; and the
‘next morning, being Wednesday, my Lord’ Manchester ‘gave
‘order that the whole force, both horse and foot, should be drawn
‘up to Bolingbroke Hill, where he would expect the enemy,

1 20th September 1643, Husbands ii. 327.

2[He joined them on October 9, at the siege of Bolingbroke Castle. ]

3{And Cromwell’s men, at any rate, were hardly in a condition to do it, being
still sorely in need of clothes and boots as well as money. See letter to Sir
Thomas Barrington, Supplement, No. 5.]

4Third form of Vicars; God’s Ark overtopping the World’s Waves, or the
Third Part of the Parliamentary Chronicle: by John Vicars (London, printed by
M. Simons and J. Meecock, 1646), p. 45. There are three editions or successive
forms of this Book of Vicars’s (see Bliss’s Wood, zz voce): it is always, unless the
contrary be expressed, the second (of 1644) that we refer to here.

164 FIRST CIVIL WAR [11 Oct.

‘being the only convenient ground to fight with him. But
‘Colonel Cromwell was no way satisfied that we should fight ; our
‘horse being extremely wearied with hard duty two or three
‘ days together. !

‘The enemy also drew, that’ Wednesday ‘ morning, their whole
‘body of horse and dragooners into the field, being 74 colours of
‘horse, and 21 colours of dragoons, in all 95 colours. We had not
‘many more than half so many colours of horse and dragooners;
‘but I believe we had as many men,?—besides our foot, which
‘indeed could not be drawn up until it was very late. The
‘enemy’s word was “Cavendish ; ’’ ’—he that was killed in the
‘Bog; ‘and ours was “Religion.” I believe that as we had no
‘notice of the enemy's coming towards us, so they had as little of
‘our preparation to fight with them. It was about twelve of the
‘clock ere our horse and dragooners were drawn up. After that
‘we marched about a mile nearer the enemy ; and then we began
‘to descry him, by little and little, coming towards us. Until
‘this time we did not know we should fight ; but so soon as our
‘men had knowledge of the enemy’s coming, they were very full
‘of joy and resolution, thinking it a great mercy that they should
‘now fight with him. Our men went on in several bodies, sing-
‘ing Psalms. Quarter-master-General Vermuyden with five
‘troops had the forlorn-hope, and Colonel Cromwell the van,
‘assisted with other of my Lord’s troops, and seconded by Sir T.
‘Fairfax. Both armies met about Ixbie, if I mistake not the
‘Town’s name,—you do mistake, Mr. Vicars; it is Winceby, a
mere hamlet and not a town.

‘Both they and we had drawn up our dragooners ; who gave
‘the first charge ; and then the horse fell in. Colonel Cromwell
‘fell with brave resolution upon the enemy, immediately after
‘their dragooners had given him the first volley ; yet they were
‘so nimble, as that, within half pistol-shot, they gave him another :
‘his horse was killed under him at the first charge, and fell down
‘upon him; and as he rose up, he was knocked down again by
‘the Gentleman who charged him, who ‘twas conceived was Sir

1[Mr. Firth instances this as an example of the solicitude for his horses which
probably conduced much to the efficiency of Cromwell's regiment. See ‘‘ Cromwell's
Views on Sport,” MWacmillan’s Magazine, October 1894. Another like incident
occurred after the second battle of Newbury. See p. 183 below. ]

2(Compare Rushworth part iii, vol. ii, 281, where he says that Manchester’s
‘‘troops were fuller”. Also a letter from Withrington (zézd, p. 282) ‘their (z.e.,
the Parliament) horse are very good and extraordinarily armed: and may be re-
ported to be between fifty and sixty troops, being very strong ’’. }

1643. ] WINCEBY FIGHT 165

‘Ingram Hopton: but afterwards he’ the Colonel ‘recovered a
‘poor horse in a soldier’s hands, and bravely mounted himself
‘again. Truly this first charge was so home-given, and performed
‘with so much admirable courage and resolution by our troops,
‘that the enemy stood not another; but were driven back upon
‘their own, body, which was to have seconded them ; and at last
‘put these into a plain disorder; and thus, in less than half an
‘hour’s fight, they were all quite routed, and’—driven along
Slash Lane at a terrible rate, unnecessary to specify. Sir
Ingram Hopton, who had been so near killing Cromwell, was
himself killed. ‘Above a hundred of their men were found
drowned in ditches, in quagmires that would not bear riding ;
the ‘dragooners now left on foot’ were taken prisoners; the
chase lasted to Horncastle or beyond it,—and Henderson the
renegade Scot was never heard of in those parts more. My Lord
of Manchester’s foot did not get up till the battle was over.

This very day of Winceby Fight, there has gone on at Hulla
universal sally, tough sullen wrestle in the trenches all day ; with
important loss to the Marquis of Newcastle ; loss of ground, loss
of lives, loss still more of invaluable guns, brass drakes, sackers,
what not :—and on the morrow morning the Townsfolk, looking
out, discern with emotion that there is now no Marquis, that the
Marquis has marched away under cloud of night, and given up
the siege. Which surely are good encouragements we have had ;
two in one day.

This will suffice for Winceby Fight, or Horncastle Fight, of
11th October 1643;} and leave the reader to imagine that
Lincolnshire too was now cleared of the ‘Papist Army,’ as we
violently nickname it,—all but a few Towns on the Western
border, which will be successfully besieged when the Spring
comes.

1Account of it from the other side, in Rushworth, v. 282; Hull Siege, &c. 2d.
280. [See also King’s Pamphlets, E. 71, Nos. 5, 18, 22, and Manchester's letter in
Lords Journals, vi. 255. ‘‘I must give the Horse under my command their due
praise,"’ he wrote, ‘‘ that they charged very gallantly. Col. Cromwell charged in
the yan with my regiment and his own, and behaved himself with resolution and
honour. Sir Thomas Fairfax (who is a person that exceeds any expressions as a
commendation of his resolution and valour) was to second the first body of horse
that charged, and he performed what he was commanded with readiness and
success, I may truly say that after the second charge, our men had little else to
do but to pursue a flying enemy, which they did for many miles.”]

166 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 Jan.

LETTERS XIX, XX

In the month of January 1643-4, Oliver, as Governor of Ely, is
present for some time in that City; lodges, we suppose, with his
own family there ; doing military and other work of government :
—makes a transient appearance in the Cathedral one day ; memor-
able to the Reverend Mr. Hitch and us.

The case was this. Parliament, which, ever since the first
meeting of it, had shown a marked disaffection to Surplices at
Allhallowtide and ‘monuments of Superstition and Idolatry,’ and
passed Order after Order to put them down,—has in August last
come to a decisive Act on the subject, and specifically explained
that go they must and shall. Act of Parliament which, like the
previous Orders of Parliament, could only have gradual partial
execution, according to the humour of the locality ; and gave rise
to scenes. By the Parliament’s directions, the Priest, Church-
wardens, and proper officers were to do it, with all decency:
failing the proper officers, zmproper officers, military men passing
through the place, these and such like, backed by a Puritan
populace, and a Puritan soldiery, had to do it ;—not always in
the softest manner. As many a Querela, Peter Heylin’s (lying
Peter’s) History, and Persecutzo Undecima, still testifies with angry
tears. You cannot pull the shirt off a man, the skin off a man,
in a way that will please him !—Our Assembly of Divines, sitting
earnestly deliberative ever since June last,? will direct us what
Form of Worship we are to adopt,—some form, it is to be hoped,
not grown dramaturgic to us, but still awfully symbolic for us.
Meanwhile let all Churches, especially all Cathedrals, be stript of
whatever the general soul so much as suspects to be stage-property
and prayer by machinery,—a thing we very justly hold in terror
and horror, and dare not live beside !—

Ely Cathedral, it appears, had still been overlooked,—Ely,
much troubled with scandalous ministers, as well as with dis-
affected trainbands,—and Mr. Hitch, under the very eyes of
Oliver, persists in his Choir-service there. Here accordingly is
an official Note, copies of which still sleep in some repositories.

128th August 1643 (Scobell, i. 53; Commons Journals, iii. 220): 2d November
1642 (Commons Journals, and Husbands, ii. 119): 31st August 1641; 23d January
1641 (Commons Journals, in diebus).

? Bill for convocation of them, read a third time, 6th January 1642-3 (Commons
Journals, ii. 916); Act itself with the Names, 13th June 1643 (Scobell, i. 42-4).

1644. ] LETTER XIX., ELY 167

LETTER XIX
‘To the Reverend Mr. Hitch, at Ely: These’

aie j Ely, roth January 1643.
r. Hitcu,

Lest the soldiers should in any tumultuary or
disorderly way attempt the reformation of your Cathedral Church,
I require you to forbear altogether your choir-service, so unedi-
fying and offensive : and this as you will answer it, if any disorder ?
should arise thereupon.

I advise you to catechise,’ and read and expound the Scriptures
to the people, not doubting but the Parliament, with the advice
of the Assembly of Divines,* will in due time direct you farther.
I desire the sermons may be where ® usually they have been,—but
more frequent.

Your loving friend,
O.tver CRoMWELL.*

Mr. Hitch paid no attention ; persisted in his Choir-service :—
whereupon enter the Governor of Ely with soldiers, ‘with a
rabble at his heels, say the old Querelas. With a rabble at his
heels, with his hat on, he walks up to the Choir; says audibly :
«J ama man under Authority; and am commanded to dismiss
this assembly,’—then draws back a little, that the Assembly
may dismiss with decency. Mr. Hitch has paused for a moment ;
but seeing Oliver draw back, he starts again: “ As it was in the
beginning ”—!—“ Leave off your fooling, and come down, Sir!’’®
said Oliver, in a voice still audible to this Editor ; which Mr.
Hitch did now instantaneously give ear to. And so, ‘with his

1 Spelt ‘‘Hich” by Cromwell. 2 Over ‘‘ contention” erased,
3 At first written as beginning with ch, but cancelled.
4 << Of Divines ”’ is interlined. 5 Over ‘‘as”’ erased.

6 Walker's Suferings of the Clergy (London, 1714), Part isis

* Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1788), lviii. 225 : copied ‘from an old Copy,
by a Country Rector,’ who has had some difficulty in reading the name of Hitch,
and knows nothing farther about him or it. | Now printed from the facsimile (of
the holograph original) in /sographie des hommes celebres. The letter is there
stated to be addressed ‘‘au Rey. Henry (szc) Hich,”’ and to be in the collection of
Mons. P. Congreve. A contemporaneous MS. copy of this letter, with slight
differences, is in possession of Miss Disbrowe, Walton Hall, Burton-on-Trent. ]

168 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 Jan.

whole congregation,’ files out, and vanishes from the field of
History.!

Friday, 19th January. The Scots enter England by Berwick,
21,000 strong: on Wednesday they left Dunbar ‘up to the knees
in snow :’ such a heart of forwardness was in them.* Old Lesley,
now Earl of Leven, was their General, as before ; a Committee of
Parliamenteers went with him. They soon drove-in Newcastle’s
‘Papist Army’ within narrower quarters; in May, got Manchester
with Cromwell and Fairfax brought across the Humber to join
them, and besieged Newcastle himself in York. Which, before
long, will bring us to Marston Moor, and Letter Twenty-first.

In this same month of January, 22d day of it, directly after
Hitch’s business, Colonel Cromwell, now more properly Lieu-
tenant-General Cromwell,? Lieutenant to the Earl of Manchester
in the Association, transiently appeared in his place in Parliament;
complaining much of my Lord Willoughby, as of a backward
General, with strangely dissolute people about him, a great sorrow
to Lincolnshire ;4—and craving that my Lord Manchester might
be appointed there instead: which, as we see, was done; with
good result.

1[We cannot but feel that if the man who bravely dared to ‘‘ pray and give thanks
before his God as he did aforetime” had been on the other side, Carlyle would have
looked upon him with very different eyes. Mr. Frederic Harrison says of this
incident ‘‘ The ring of the ‘ sharp, untuneable voice’ is not pleasant here; nor is
driving a priest from his pulpit an honourable mission.” Mr. Harrison’s excuse for
Cromwell is that ‘‘ he was a soldier in a civil war, executing peremptory orders.”
Oliver Cromwell, p. 71. Possibly the harshness was more in appearance than in
reality. The two men probably knew each other well, for Oliver, as farmer of the
capitular tithes and feoffee of Parson’s Charity (a somewhat close ecclesiastical
body of which the Bishop and Dean are ex-officio chairmen) must have been
brought into frequent association with the Cathedral authorities, and it is noticeable
that he signs himself ‘‘ Your loving friend.’? The name of Hitch does not occur
amongst the Predendaries at this time, but to the kindness of Dr. C. W. Stubbs,
Dean of Ely, the present editor is indebted for the following note. ‘The Rev.
William Hitch first appears in the Chapter books in r6rz, as vicar choral; in 1614
as epistolar ; in 1617 as headmaster of the school, and in 1621 as precentor. These
offices he held in 1642, at which date there is a break in the Chapter Account
books. When they begin again in 1660, ‘ Mr. Hitch’ is again found as holder of
the same offices, until 1685, without any intimation that it is not the same man.
It would have been a little surprising however to find that the Precentor did not
“cease his fooling’ for another quarter of a century, until, indeed, he was 97,
and from another MS. book amongst the Chapter archives it appears that
William Hitch died in October, 1658 (having held the post of schoolmaster up to
the time of his death) and that he was succeeded in this, and (at the Restoration)
in his other offices, by his son Thomas, born in 162r.""}

2 Rushworth, v. 603-6.

* (He must have received his commission o January 22, as his allowances as
Major-General ceased, and his pay as Lieutenant-General began on that date. See
Raising of the lronsides, p. 37.)

4 D'&wes MSS. vol. iv., f. 280 b. [Harley MSS, 165, f. 280, b.]

1644.] LETTER XX., CAMBRIDGE 169

LETTER XX

Azour the end of next month, February 1644, the Lieutenant-
General, we find, has been in Gloucester, successfully convoying
Ammunition thither,! and has taken various strong-houses by
the road,—among others, Hilsden-House in Buckinghamshire,”
with important gentlemen, and many prisoners ; which latter,
‘Walloons, French, and other outlandish men,’ appear in Cam-
bridge streets in a very thirsty condition ; and are, in spite of
danger, refreshed according to ability, by the loyal Scholars, and
especially by ‘Mrs. Cumber’s maid,’ with a temporary glass of
beer.2 In this expedition there had gone with Cromwell a
certain Major-General Crawford, whom he has left behind in the
Hilsden neighbourhood ; to whom there is a Letter, here first
producible to modern readers, and connected therewith a tale
otherwise known.

Letter Twentieth, which exists as a Copy, on old dim paper,
in the Kimbolton Archives, addressed on the back of the sheet,
with all reverence, T'o the Earl of Manchester, and forms a very
opaque puzzle in that condition,—turns out, after due study, to
have been a Copy by that Crawford, of a Letter addressed to
himself :* Copy hastily written off, along with other hasty con-
fused sheets still extant beside it, for the Earl of Manchester's
use, on a certain Parliamentary occasion, which will by and by
concern us too for a moment,

1[He did not go himself to Gloucester, but merely carried out the orders sent
him to see that the ammunition designed for that garrison arrived safely at Warwick.
See Great Civil War, i. 311. ]

2[For a detailed account of the taking of Hilsden House, see a letter from Sir
Samuel Luke to the Earl of Essex, printed in Sanford’s Studies and Lllustrations of
the Great Rebellion, Appendix B. Seealso Memoirs of the Verney Family, ii, 192. ]

3 Querela (in Cooper's Annals, iii. 370); Cromwelliana, p. 8 (5th Mar. 1643).
[The passage referred to is as follows ; ‘‘ When the King’s prisoners, taken at Hilsden
House, were brought famished and naked in triumph by Cambridge to London, some
of our scholars were knocked down in the streets only for offering them a cup of
small beer to sustain nature, and the drink thrown in the kennel, rather than the
famished and parched throats of the wicked, as they esteemed them, should usurp
one drop of the creature. And it is much to be feared that they would have starved
them in prison there, if a valiant chambermaid (Mistress Cumber’s maid) had not
relieved them by force, trampling under her feet in the kennel their great persecutor,
a lubberly Scotch Major [Homes].” Mistress Cumber, it may be surmised, was the
wife of Dr. Comber, Master of Trinity, who was ejected as a“ delinquent” not long
afterwards. ]

_ 4[It appears to be in a clerk’s hand ; almost certainly is a copy, but Cromwell's

signature has been imitated. }

170 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 March.

A ‘Lieutenant-Colonel,’ Packer I dimly apprehend is the
name of him,! has on this Hilsden-and-Gloucester expedition
given offence to Major-General Crawford ; who again, in a some-
what prompt way, has had Packer laid under arrest, under
suspension at Cambridge; in which state Packer still painfully
continues. And may, seemingly, continue: for here has my
Lord of Manchester just come down with a Parliamentary Com-
mission ‘to reform the University,’ a thing of immense noise and
moment, and ‘is employed in regard of many occasions ;’ is, in
fact, precisely in these hours,? issuing his Summonses to the
Heads of Houses ; and cannot spare an instant for Packer and
his pleadings. Crawford is still in Buckinghamshire; never-
theless the shortest way for Packer will be to go to Crawford,
and take this admonitory Letter from his superior in command :

‘To Major-General Crawford : These’

Cambridge, roth March ‘ 1643.’
Sir,

The complaints you preferred to my Lord
against your Lieutenant-Colonel, both by Mr. Lee and your own
letters, have occasioned his stay here: my Lord being ‘so’
employed, in regard of many occasions which are upon him, that
he hath not been at leisure to hear him make his defence : which,
in pure justice, ought to be granted him or any man before a
judgment be passed upon him.

During his abode here and absence from you, he hath acquainted
me what a grief it is to him to be absent from his charge, especially
now the regiment is called forth to action: and therefore, asking
of me my opinion, I advised him speedily to repair unto you,
and thought good by him thus to write unto you. Surely you
are not well advised thus to turn off one so faithful to the Cause,
and so able to serve you as this man is. Give me leave to tell

1[This letter quite clearly relates to Crawford's own lieutenant-colonel, whose
name was Henry Warner. Packer was not then—or ever—a lieutenant-colonel.
At this time he was a lieutenant in Cromwell's regiment of horse. But he also about
this time, had been arrested by Crawford, and Cromwell probably had him in
his mind as well as Warner, although the latter furnished the text for his discourse.
See Razsing of the [ronsides, p. 4%. Lee was a Presbyterian chaplain. See
Lilburne’s /nxocency and Truth Justified, 1645, p. 42.)

21th March (Cooper iii. 371; details in Neal, ii. 79-89).

3In Appendix, No, 6: Letter from Oliver, notably busy, and not yet got to
Cambridge.

1644.] LETTER XX., CAMBRIDGE 171

you, I cannot be of your judgment ; that if a man notorious for
wickedness, for oaths, for drinking, hath as great a share in your
affection as one that fears an oath, that fears to sin, that this
doth commend your election of men to serve as fit instruments
in this work.

Ay, but the man is an Anabaptist. Are you sure of that.
Admit he be, shall that render him incapable to serve the Public.
He is indiscreet. It may be so, in some things, we have all
human infirmities. I tell you, if you had none but such indiscreet
men about you, and would be pleased to use them kindly, you
would find as good a fence to you as any you have yet chosen.

Sir, the State, in choosing men to serve them, takes no notice
of their opinions, if they be willing faithfully to serve them, that
satisfies. I advised you formerly to bear with men of different
minds from yourself: if you had done it when I advised you to
it, I think you would not have had so many stumblingblocks in
your way. It may be you judge otherwise, but I tell you my
mind. I desire you would receive this man into your favour and
good opinion. I believe, if he follow my counsel, he will deserve
no other but respect from you. Take heed of being sharp, or
too easily sharpened by others, against those to whom you can
object little but that they square not with you in every opinion
concerning matters of religion. If there be any other offence to
be charged upon him, that must in a judicial ‘way’ receive a
determination ; I know you will not think it fit my Lord should
discharge an officer of the Field but in a regulate way. I question
whether either you or I have any precedent for that.

I have not further to trouble you, but rest,

Your humble servant,
Ouiver CroMWELL.*

Adjoined to this Letter, as it now lies,—in its old repository
at Kimbolton, copied and addressed in the enigmatic way above-
mentioned,—there is, written in a Clerk’s hand, but corrected in

* Communicated, with much politeness, by the Duke of Manchester, from Family
Papers at Kimbolton. [Now deposited at the Public Record Office. ]

172 FIRST CIVIL WAR [10 March.

the hand which copied the Letter,! a confused loud-spoken
recriminatory Narrative, of some length, about the Second Battle
of Newbury ; touching also, in a loud confused way, on the case
of Packer and others :—evidently the raw-material of the Earl’s
Speech in defence of himself,? in the time of the Self-denying
Ordinance ; of which the reader will hear by and by. Assiduous
Crawford had provided the Earl with these helps to prove
Cromwell an insubordinate person, and what was equally terrible
a favourer of Anabaptists. Ofthe Letter, Crawford, against whom
also there lay accusations, retains the Original ; but furnishes this
Copy ;—of which, unexpectedly, we too have now obtained a
reading.

This sharp Letter may be fancied to procure the Lieutenant-
Colonel’s reinstatement ; who, we have some intimation, does
march with his regiment again, in hopes to take the Western
Towns of Lincolnshire. Indeed Lieutenant-Colonel Packer, if
this were verily Packer as he seems to be, became a distinguished
Colonel afterwards, and gave Oliver himself some trouble with
his Anabaptistries.2 In the Letter itself, still more in the
confused Papers adjoined to it, of Major-General Crawford’s
writing,—there is evidence enough of smouldering fire-elements
in my Lord’s Eastern-Association Army ! The Lieutenant-General
Cromwell, one perceives, is justly suspected of a lenity for Sec-
taries, Independents, Anabaptists themselves, provided they be
‘men that fear God,’ as he phrases it. Lieutenant-Colonel
Lilburn (Freeborn John), Lieutenant-Colonel Fleetwood risen
from Captaincy now: these and others, in the Crawford Docu-
ments, come painfully to view in this Lincolnshire campaign
and afterwards; with discontents, with ‘Petitions, and one
knows not what ; all tending to Sectarian courses, all countenanced
by the Lieutenant-General.! Most distasteful to Scotch Crawford,
to my Lord of Manchester, not to say criminal and unforgiveable
to the respectable Presbyterian mind.

Reverend Mr. Baillie is now up in Town again with the Scotch
Commissioners,—for there is again a Scotch Commission here,

1([This is a mistake; they are not in the same hand. An additional interest has
been given to these papers by the fact that Carlyle’s autograph notes, sent to the late
Duke of Manchester, are now annexed to them, The ‘loud-spoken”’ narrative
has been printed under the title of 4 Narrative of the Baril of Manchesters
Campaign. See note, p. 184 below. ]

* Rushworth, v. 733-6.

3 Ludlow (London, 1721), ii. 599. [See his life in the Dictionary of National
Biography).

4MS. by Crawford [?] at Kimbolton,

1644.} LETTER XX., CAMBRIDGE 173

now that their Army has joined us: Reverend Mr. Baillie, taking
good note of things, has this pertinent passage some six months
hence : ‘The Earl of Manchester, a sweet meek man, did formerly
‘permit Lieutenant-General Cromwell to guide all the Army at
‘his pleasure: the man Cromwell is a very wise and active head’
—yes, Mr. Robert !—‘ universally well beloved as religious and
“stout; but a known Independent or favourer of Sects, —the
issues of which might have been frightful! ‘But now our
‘countryman Crawford has got a great hand with Manchester,
‘stands high with all that are against Sects ;’ which is a blessed
change indeed,!—and may partly explain this Letter and some
other things to us!

Of Major-General Crawford, who was once a loud-sounding
well-known man, but whose chance for being remembered much
longer will mainly ground itself on a Letter he copied with very
different views, let us say here what little needs to be said. He
is Scotch ; of the Crawfords of Jordan-Hill, in Renfrewshire ; has
geen service in the German Wars, and is deeply conscious of it ;
—paints himself to us as a headlong audacious fighter, of loose
loud tongue, much of a pedant and braggart, somewhat given to
sycophancy too. Whose history may sum itself up, practically,
in this one fact, That he helped Cromwell and the Earl of
Manchester to quarrel ; and his character in this other, That he
knew Lieutenant-General Cromwell to be a coward. This he,
Crawford knew ; had seen it; was wont to assert it, and could
prove it. Nay once, in subsequent angry months, talking to the
Honourable Denzil Holles in Westminster Hall, he asserted it
within earshot of Cromwell himself; ‘who was passing into the
House, and I am very sure did hear it, as intended ;’—who,
however, heard it as if it had been no affair of his at all; and
quietly walked on, as if /us affairs lay elsewhere than there !?
From which I too, the knowing Denzil, drew my inferences,—
ignominious to the buman character !—Poor Crawford, after
figuring much among the Scotch Committee-men and Presbyterian
Grandees for a time, joined or rejoined the Scotch Army under
Lesley ; and fell at the Siege of Hereford in 1645, fighting
gallantly I doubt not, and was quiet thenceforth.’

1 Baillie, ii. 229 (16th September 1644).

2 Holles's Memoirs: in Maseres’s Select Tracts (London, 1815), i. 199.

3 Wood's Athene (Life, p. 8) ; Baillie, ii. 235 and sepzus (correct 24, il, p. 218 x,
and Godwin, i. 380); Holles; Scotch Peerages, &c, &c, [See also. his life in the
Dictionary of National Biography. |

174 FIRST CIVIL WAR [2 July.

In these same weeks there is going on a very famous Treaty
once more, ‘Treaty of Uxbridge:’ with immense apparatus of
King’s Commissioners and Parliament and Scotch Commissioners ;1
of which however, as it came to nothing, there need nothing here
be said. Mr. Christopher Love, a young eloquent divine, of hot
Welsh blood, of Presbyterian tendency, preaching by appoint-
ment in the place, said, He saw no prospect of an agreement, he
for one; “ Heaven might as well think of agreeing with Hell ;” ”
words which were remembered against Mr. Christopher. The King
will have nothing to do with Presbyterianism, will not stir a step
without his Surplices at Allhallowtide ; there remains only War ;
a supreme managing ‘Committee of both Kingdoms ;’ combined
forces, and war. On the other hand, his Majesty, to counter-
balance the Scots, had agreed to a ‘Cessation in Ireland,’ sent
for his ‘Irish Army’ to assist him here,—and indeed already got
them as good as ruined, or reduced to a mere marauding appa-
ratus.2 A new ‘Papist’ or partly ‘Papist Army,’ which gave
great scandal in this country. By much the remarkablest man
in it was Colonel George Monk ; already captured at Nantwich,
and lodged in the Tower.

But now the Western Towns of Lincolnshire are all taken ;
Manchester with Cromwell and Fairfax are across the Humber,
joined with the Scots besieging York, where Major-General
Crawford again distinguishes himself;+—and we are now at
Marston Moor.

LETTER XXI
MARSTON MOOR

In the last days of June 1644, Prince Rupert, with an army of
some 20,000 fierce men,° came pouring over the hills from Lanca-

1 g9th Jan.—sth March, Rushworth, v. 844-946 ; Whitlocke, p. 122, 3. [Carlyle
was very careful as a rule to discriminate between old and new styles, but for once
he has failed to do so. The Treaty of Uxbridge was a year later than this, at the
beginning of 1644-5. ]

2 Wood, iii. 281 ; Commons Journals, &c.

3 Rushworth, v. 547 (Cessation, 15th September 1643); v. 299-303 (Siege of
Nantwich, and ruin of the Irish Army, 21st November).

4Fires a mine without orders ; storms in, hoping to take the city himself; and is
disastrously repulsed (Rushworth, v. 631 ; Baillie, ii, 200).

5|This is too high an estimate. He had 14,000, or possibly 15,000. At the
battle, after Newcastle's army had joined him, their combined forces were probably
about r1,000 foot and 6,500 or possibly 7,500 horse. See Mr. Firth’s ‘‘ Marston
Moor," in the Zvansactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1899, pp. 20, 23.]

1644.) LETTER XXI., MARSTON MOOR 175

shire, where he had left harsh traces of himself, to relieve the
Marquis of Newcastle, who was now with a force of 6,000 besieged
in York, by the united forces of the Scots under Leven, the
Yorkshiremen under Lord Fairfax, and the Associated Counties
under Manchester and Cromwell. On hearing of his approach,
the Parliament Generals raised the Siege; drew out on the
Moor of Long Marston, some four miles off, to oppose his coming.
He avoided them by crossing the River Ouse ; relieved York,
Monday, Ist July; and might have returned successful; but
insisted on Newcastle’s joining him, and going out to fight the
Roundheads. The battle of Marston Moor, fought on the morrow
evening, Tuesday, 2d July 1644, from 7 .to 10 o'clock, was the
result,—entirely disastrous for him.

Of this Battle, the bloodiest of the whole War, I must leave ~

the reader to gather details in the sources indicated below ;! or
to imagine it in general as the most enormous hurlyburly, of fire
and smoke, and steel-flashings and death-tumult, ever seen in
those regions: the end of which, about ten at night, was ‘ Four-
thousand one-hundred-and-fifty bodies’ to be buried, and total
ruin to the King’s affairs in those Northern parts.

The Armies were not completely drawn up till after five in the
evening; there was a ditch between them ; they stood facing
one another, motionless except the exchange of a few cannon-
shots, for an hour-and-half. Newcastle thought there would be
no fighting till the morrow, and had retired to his carriage for
the night.2. There is some shadow of surmise that the stray
cannon-shot which, as the following Letter indicates, proved
fatal to Oliver’s Nephew, did also, rousing Oliver’s humour to
the charging point, bring on the general Battle. ‘The Prince
of Plunderers,’ invincible hitherto, here first tasted the steel of
Oliver’s Ironsides, and did not in the least like it. ‘The Scots
‘ delivered their fire with such constancy and swiftness, it was as
‘if the whole air had become an element of fire, —in the ancient
summer gloaming there.

1 King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 164 (various accounts by eye-witnesses) ; no.
168, one by Simeon Ash, the Earl of Manchester’s Chaplain; no. 167, &c.: Rush-
worth, v. 632: Carte’s Ormond Papers (London, 1739), i. 56: Fairfax’s Memorials
(Somers Tracts, v. 389). Modern accounts are numerous, but of no value.

2[ Newcastle had strolled to his coach to take a pipe. Rupert was eating his
supper in the rear. Carlyle’s statement has been improved upon by other modern
writers, one of whom states that all the royalist generals ‘‘ were comfortably settled
for the night.” |

176 FIRST CIVIL WAR [5 July.

‘To my loving Brother, Colonel Valentine Walton: These’

‘ Leaguer before York,’ 5th July 1644.
Dear Sir,

It’s our duty to sympathise in all mercies ;
that we may praise the Lord together in chastisements or trials,
that so we may sorrow together. -

Truly England and the Church of God hath had a great
favour from the Lord, in this great victory given unto us, such
as the like never was since this war began. It had all the evi-
dences of an absolute victory obtained by the Lord’s blessing
upon the godly party principally. We never charged but we
routed the enemy. The left wing, which I commanded, being
our own horse, saving a few Scots in our rear,! beat all the
Prince’s horse. God made them as stubble to our swords, we
charged their regiments of foot with our horse, routed all we
charged. The particulars I cannot relate now, but I believe, of
twenty-thousand the Prince hath not four-thousand left. Give
glory, all the glory, to God.

Sir, God hath taken away your eldest son by a cannon-shot.

It brake his leg. We were necessitated to have it cut off,
whereof he died.

Sir, you know my trials this way :? but the Lord supported

1(Of this, Mr. Firth writes: ‘‘ Cromwell’s letter to Valentine Walton has been
censured by historians on the ground that it does justice neither to the services of the
Scots nor to those of David Leslie (Gardiner, Great Civil War, ii. x ; Markham,
Great Lord Fairfax, p. 168), . . . but critics seem to forget that the letter in question
is not a despatch but a letter of condolence, and the few lines it devotes to the battle
are merely an introduction to the story of Captain Walton’s death. . . , For the
rest, the facts stated in the letter are rigidly accurate. It is perfectly true that the
left wing, under Cromwell’s command, beat all the royalist horse, and that it con-
sisted of the cavalry of the Eastern Association, with a few Scots as its reserve.
And the fact that this victorious cavalry was raised, trained and inspired as well as
commanded by Cromwell, justifies the popular verdict which hailed him as the great
agent in this victory.” ‘‘ Marston Moor,” in Transactions of the Royal Historical
Society, 1899, p. 61. ]

2T conclude, the poor Boy Oliver has already fallen in these Wars,—none of xs
knows where, though his Father well knew !— —Woze to Third Edition - In the Squire
Papers (Iraser's Magazine, December 1847) is this passage ; ‘Meeting Cromwell
‘again after some absence, just on the edge of Marston Battle, Squire says, ‘‘I
‘thought he looked sad and wearied, for he had had a sad loss; young Oliver got
‘killed to death not long before, I heard: it was near Knaresborough, and 30 more
‘got killed.”’— -—Note of 1857: see antea, p. 62 n. [The Parliamentary Scout of
March 15-22, 1644 (E. 38, No. 18) states that young Oliver had just died of

1644.) LETTER XXI.,, MARSTON MOOR 177

me with this, That the Lord took him into the happiness we all
pant after and live for. There is your precious child full of
glory, to know sin nor sorrow any more. He was a gallant
young man, exceeding gracious. God give you His comfort.
Before his death he was so full of comfort that to Frank Russel
and myself he could not express it, it was so great above his
pain. This he said tous. Indeed it was admirable. A little
after, he said, one thing lay upon his spirit. I asked him, what
that was. He told me that it was, that God had not suffered
him to be no more the executioner of His enemies. At his fall,
his horse being killed with the bullet, and as I am informed
three horses more, I am told he bid them open to the right and
left, that he might see the rogues run. Truly he was exceed-
ingly belovediin the Army, of all that knew him. But few
knew him, for he was a precious young man, fit for God. You
have cause to bless the Lord. He is a glorious saint in Heaven,
wherein you ought exceedingly to rejoice. Let this drink up
your sorrow ; seeing these are not feigned words to comfort you,
but the thing is so real and undoubted a truth. You may do all
things by the strength of Christ. Seek that, and you shall easily
bear your trial. Let this public mercy to the Church of God
make you to forget your private sorrow. The Lord be your
strength: so prays
Your truly faithful and loving brother,
Ottver CROMWELL,

My love to your daughter, and to my Cousin Percevall, Sister
Desbrowe and all friends with you.*

small-pox at Newport Pagnell. Dr. Gardiner writes of this: ‘‘ The passage has a
genuine ring about it, and I am quite incredulous about the story told in the Sgucre
Papers.” Great Civil War, 1. 314. The statement in the Scout is supported by
one in the Memoir of Richard Cromwell (Lives and Characters of tllustrious persons
dying in 711) that Oliver ‘‘a very handsome young gentleman,” died of small-pox
soon after he had joined the army. Captain Walton commanded a troop in Crom-
well’s regiment. ]

*Seward’s Anecdotes (London, 1798), i. 362: reproduced in Ellis's Orzginal
Letters (First Series), iii, 299. _‘ Original once in the possession of Mr. Langton of
Welbeck Street,’ says Ellis ;—‘ in the Bodleian Library,’ says Seward.’ [Now printed
from the holograph original in the Morrison Collection].

VOL. t.——-12

178 FIRST CIVIL WAR [5 July.

Colonel Valentine Walton, already a conspicuous man, and
more so afterwards, is of Great-Staughton, Huntingdonshire, a
neighbour of the Earl of Manchester’s; Member for his County,
and a Colonel since the beginning of the War. There had long
been an intimacy between the Cromwell Family and his. His
Wife, the Mother of this slain youth, is Margaret Cromwell,
Oliver’s younger Sister, next to him in the family series. ‘Frank
Russel’ is of Chippenham, Cambridgeshire, eldest Son of the
Baronet there; already a Colonel; soon afterwards Governor
of Ely in Oliver’s stead.! It was the daughter of this Frank
that Henry Cromwell, some ten years hence, wedded.

Colonel Walton, if he have at present some military charge of
the Association, seems to attend mainly on Parliament ; and this
Letter, I think, finds him in Town. The poor wounded youth
would have to lie on the field at Marston while the Battle was
fought ; the whole Army had to bivouac there, next to no food,
hardly even water to be had. That of ‘Seeing the rogues run,’
occurs more than once at subsequent dates in these Wars:? who
first said it, or whether anybody ever said it, must remain un-
certain.

York was now captured in a few days: Prince Rupert had fled
across into Lancashire, and so ‘south to Shropshire, to recruit
again, > Marquis Newcastle with ‘about eighty gentlemen,’ dis-
gusted at the turn of affairs, had withdrawn beyond seas. The
Scots moved northward to attend the Siege of Newcastle,—
ended it by storm in October next. On the 24th of which
same month, 24th October 1644, the Parliament promulgated
its Rhadamanthine Ordinance, To ‘hang any Irish Papist taken
in arms in this country ;’* a very severe Ordinance, but not
uncalled for by the nature of the ‘marauding apparatus’ in
question there.

1See Noble, ii. 407, 8,—with vigilance against his blunders.

2 Ludlow.

3[ ‘* Rupert was made of sterner stuff. Collecting about 6,000 horse, who still
remained together, he rode out of the gates of York, not to fly, but to retrieve, if
it were yet possible, the great disaster.” Great Civil War, i. 382.]

4 Rushworth, v. 783.

1644. ] LETTER XXII, LINCOLN 179

LETTERS XXII, XXIII

Tue next Two Letters represent the Army and Lieutenant-
General got home to the Association again; and can be read
with little commentary. ‘The Committee for the Isle of Ely,’
we are to remark, consists of Honourable Members connected
with that region, and has its sittings in London.! Of ‘ Major
Ireton’ we shall hear farther. ‘Husband’ also is slightly met
with elsewhere; and ‘Captain Castle’ grew, I think, to be
Colonel Castle, and perished at the Storm of Tredah, some years
afterwards.

LETTER XXII
For my noble Friends the Committee for the Isle of Ely:

Present these

Lincoln, rst September 1644.
GENTLEMEN,
I understand that you have lately released

some persons committed by Major Ireton and Captain Husbands,
and one committed by Captain Castle, all ‘committed’ upon
clear and necessary grounds as they are represented unto me;
‘grounds’ rendering them as very enemies as any we have, and
as much requiring to have them continued secured.

I have given order to Captain Husbands to see them recom-
mitted to the hands of my Marshal, Richard White. And I
much desire you (for future) not to entrench upon me so much
as to release them, or any committed in the like case by myself,
or my Deputy and Commanders in the Garrison, until myself or
some superior authority? be satisfied in the cause, and do give
order in allowance for their enlargement, for I profess I will
be no Governor, nor engage any other under me to undertake
such a charge, upon such weak terms.

1/(The letter is to the local Committee at Ely. } 2 Not inferior !

180 FIRST CIVIL WAR _ [6or5 Sept.

I am 0 sensible of the need we have to improve the present
opportunity of our being master in the field and having no enemy
near the Isle, to spare what charge may be towards the making
of those fortifications which may make it more defensible here-
after if we shall have more need, as I shall desire you, for that
end, to ease the Isle and Treasury from the superfluous charge
of two several Committees for the several parts of the Isle;
and that one Committee, settled at March, may serve for the
whole Isle.

Wherefore I wish that one of your number may, in your
courses, intend! and appear at that Committee, to manage and
uphold it the better for all parts of the Isle.

Resting upon your care herein, I remain

Your friend to serve you,

O.iveR CROMWELL.*

LETTER XXIII

Stearorp is in Lincolnshire, a march farther South. Lieut.-
General Cromwell with the Eastern-Association Horse, if the
‘Foot’ were once settled,—might not he dash down to help the
Lieutenant-General [sic] Essex and his ‘ Army in the West?’ Of
whom, and of whose sad predicament amid the hills of Cornwall
there, we shall see the issue anon. Brother Walton, a Parliament
man, has written, we perceive, to Cromwell, suggesting such a
thing ; urging haste if possible. In Cromwell is no delay: but
the Eastern-Association Army, horse or foot, is heavy to move,—
beset, too, with the old internal discrepancies, Crawfordisms,
scandals at Sectaries, and what not.

1‘intend' means ‘take pains;’ March is a Zows in the Ely region.

* Old Copy, now (January 1846) on sale at Mr, Graves's, Pall-Mall; printed in
the Atheneum of 13th December 1845. Old copy, such as the Clerks of Honour-
able Members were wont to take of Letters read in the House, or officially else-
where ;—worth copying for certain parties, in a time without Newspapers like ours.
[Now printed from the copy in the possession of Sir Richard Tangye. The
Atheneum gave it correctly, but Carlyle altered it in several places. ]

1644.) LETTER XXIII, SLEAFORD 181

For Colonel ‘ Valentine’ Walton: These in London

Sleaford, 6th or 5th September ‘1644.’

Sir,

We do with grief of heart resent the sad
condition of our Army in the West, and of affairs there. That
business hath our hearts with it, and truly had we wings, we
would fly thither. So soon as ever my Lord and the Foot set me
loose, there shall be no want in me to hasten what I can to that
service, for indeed all other considerations are to be laid aside,
and to give place to it, as being of far more importance. I hope
the Kingdom shall see that, in the midst of our necessities, we
shall serve them without disputes. We hope to forget our wants,
which are exceeding great, and ill-cared for; and desire to refer
the many slanders heaped upon us by false tongues to God, who
will, in due time, make it appear to the world that we study the
glory of God, ‘and’ the honour and liberty of the Parliament, for
which we unanimously fight, without seeking our own interests.

Indeed we find our men never so cheerful as when there is
work to do. I trust you will always hear so of them. The Lord
is our strength, and in Him is all our hope. Pray for us. Pre-
sent my love to my friends: I beg their prayers. The Lord still
bless you.

We have some amongst us much! slow in action: if we could
all intend our own ends less, and our ease too, our business in
this Army would go on wheels for expedition. ‘But’ because
some of us are enemies to rapine, and other wickednesses, we are
said to be factious, to seek to maintain our opinions in religion
by force, which we detest and abhor. 1 profess I could never
satisfy myself of the justness of this War, but from the authority
of the Parliament to maintain itself in its rights; and in this
Cause I hope to approve myself an honest man and single-
hearted.

Pardon me that I am thus troublesome. I write but seldom ;

1‘ much’ is old for very.

182 FIRST CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

it gives me a little ease to pour my mind, in the midst of calum-
nies, into the bosom of a friend.
Sir, no man more truly loves you than
Your brother and servant,
O.tver CROMWELL.*

THREE FRAGMENTS OF SPEECHES
SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE

Tue following Three small Fragments of Speeches will have to
represent for us some six months of occasional loud debating, and
continual anxious gestation and manipulation, in the Two Houses,
in the Committee of Both Kingdoms, and in many other houses
and places ;—the ultimate outcome of which was the celebrated
‘Self-denying Ordinance,’ and ‘ New Model’ of the Parliament’s
Army ; which indeed brings on an entirely New Epoch in the
Parliament’s Affairs.

Essex and Waller had, for the third or even fourth time,
chiefly by the exertions of ever-zealous London, been fitted out
with Armies ; had marched forth together to subdue the West ;
—andiended in quite other results than that. The two Generals
differed in opinion; did not march long together: Essex, urged
by a subordinate, Lord Roberts, who had estates in Cornwall and
hoped to get some rents out of them,’ turned down thitherwards
to the left ; Waller bending up to the right ;—with small issue
either way. Waller's last action was an indecisive, rather un-
successful Fight, or day of skirmishing, with the King, at
Cropredy Bridge on the border of Oxford and Northampton
Shires,*? three days before Marston Moor. After which both
parties separated: the King to follow Essex, since there was now
no hope in the North; Waller to wander Londonwards, and
gradually ‘lose his Army by desertion,’ as the habit of him was.
As for the King, he followed Essex into Cornwall with effect ;

* Seward’s Anecdotes, ut supra, \, 362.

1{/Two notes to Cambridge, an order concerning sick soldiers, two letters to Sir
Samuel Luke, and one to the sequestrators of the Isle of Ely help to fill the gap.
See Supplement, Nos. 6-9. ]

2 Clarendon, 3 a9th June 1644, Clarendon, ii, 655,

1644.) SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE 183

hemmed him in among the hills there, about Bodmin, Lostwithiel,
Foy, with continual skirmishing, with ever-growing scarcity of
victual ; forced poor Essex to escape to Plymouth by the Fleet,
and leave his Army to shift for itself as best might be: the horse
under Balfour to cut their way through ; the foot under Skippon
to lay down their arms, cease to be soldiers, and march away
‘with staves in their hands’ into the wide world.? This sur-
render was effected Ist September 1644, two months after Mar-
ston Moor. The Parliament’s and Cromwell’s worst anticipation,
in that quarter, is fulfilled.

The Parliament made no complaint of Essex; with a kind of
Roman dignity, they rather thanked him. They proceeded to
recruit Waller and him, summoned Manchester with Cromwell
his Lieutenant-General to join them ; by which three bodies,
making again a considerable army, under the command of Man-
chester and Waller (for Essex lay ‘sick,’ or seeming to be sick),
the King, returning towards Oxford from his victory, was inter-
cepted at Newbury; and there, on Sunday, 27th October 1644,
fell out the Second Battle of Newbury. Wherein his Majesty,
after four hours confused fighting, rather had the worse ; yet
contrived to march off, unmolested, ‘by moonlight at 10 o'clock,’ +
towards Wallingford, and got safe home. Manchester refused
to pursue: though urged by Cromwell, and again urged. Nay
twelve days after, when the King came back, and openly
revictualled Dennington Castle, an important strongplace hard
by,—Manchester, in spite of Cromwell’s urgency, still refused to
interfere.®

They in fact came to a quarrel here, these two :—and much
else that was represented by them came to a quarrel; Pres-
bytery and Independency, to wit. Manchester was reported to

1 His own distinct, downright and somewhat sulky Narrative, in Rushworth, v.
ol.
2('This is not quite accurate. Being hard pressed, and in lack of forage, Essex
decided that his horse must, if possible, break through and escape. ‘This, under Sir
William Balfour, they successfully did, on the early morning of August 31. Essex,
with the foot, was forced back step by step, but it was not until next morning, when
Skippon announced that the men could not be trusted to stir from their halting
ground without taking to flight, that the Earl made up his mind to leave them. ]

3 Clarendon, li. 717.

4[ Or rather, as soon as the moon (then in its first quarter) had set at ten o’clock.
See Great Civil War ii, 51, note. ]

5[It was when the King came back to Donnington that Manchester dd wish
Cromwell to go against him, and Cromwell pleaded the spent and harassed state of
his horses as mentioned below. Another instance, as Mr. Firth remarks in his
article on ‘‘ Cromwell and Sport,’’ of Cromwell's consideration for his horses, See
note on p. 164 above].

184 FIRST CIVIL WAR ~— [25 Nov.

have said, If they lost this Army pursuing the King, they had
no other ; the King ‘might hang them all.’ To Cromwell
and the thoroughgoing party, it had become very clear that
high Essexes and Manchesters, of limited notions and large
estates and anxieties, who besides their fear of being themselves
beaten utterly, and forfeited and ‘ hanged, were afraid of
beating the King too well, would never end this Cause in a
good way. Whereupon ensue some six months of very complex
manipulation, and public and private consultation, which these
Three Fragments of Speeches, are here to represent for us.!

I. In the House of Commons, on Monday 25th November, 1644,
Lieutenant-General Cromivell did, as ordered on the Saturday be-
fore, exhibit a charge against the Earl.of Manchester, to this effect :

That the said Earl hath always been indisposed and backward
to engagements, and the ending of the War by the sword ; and

1[For this matter, see The Quarrel between the Earl of Manchester and Oliver
Cromwell, edited by Mr. Bruce and Prof. Masson for the Camden Society. This
volume contains zzter alia, the Narrative of the Earl of Manchester s Campaign
(mentioned on p. 172 above), the Statement by an Opponent of Oliver Cromwell,
and Notes of Evidence against the Earl of Manchester ,; all taken from the MSS.
of the Duke of Manchester, and also the so-called Varrative of Oliver Cromwell
to the House, preserved amongst the State Papers at the Public Record office.
Mr. Bruce thought this unlike Cromwell's style, and suggested that probably
Waller, Hesilrige and Vane had a hand in drawing it up. Prof. Masson, on the
other hand, believed it to be Cromwell's own, with perhaps suggestions from
Hesilrige and Waller. In the Camden Miscellany No. 8., Dr. Gardiner printed
a letter from Manchester to the House of Lords, found amongst the Zazner AZSS.
which, as he observed, had an important bearing on the matter. After speaking
of the discontents of his army; of his endeavours to quiet them and of the value
and esteem he has always had for many of those in his army who have differed
from him in judgment, Manchester proceeds ‘‘ Lieut.-General Cromwell shall be
my compurgator in this matter. He knows that I always placed him in chiefest
esteem and credit with me. But it is true that of late I have not given so free and
full a power unto him as formerly I did, because I heard that he used his power so
as in honour I could not avow him in it, and indeed I grew jealous that his
designs were not as he made his professions to me; for his expressions were
sometimes against the nobility; that he hoped to live to see never a nobleman in
England, and he loved such better than others because they did not love lords.
He hath further expressed himself with contempt of the Assembly of Divines, to
whom I pay a reverence as to the most learned and godly convention that hath
been this many ages, yet these he termed persecutors; and that they persecuted
honester men than themselves. His animosity against the Scotch nation...
was such as he told me that in the way they now carried themselves, pressing for
their discipline [z.e. urging the taking of the covenant], he could as soon draw his
sword against them as against any in the King's army; and he grew so pressing
for his designs as he told me that he would not deny but that he desired to have
none in my army but such as were of the Independent judgment, giving me this
reason :—That in case there should be propositions for peace or any conclusion of
a peace such as might not stand with those ends that honest men should aim at,
this army might prevent such a mischief.” ]

1644.) SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE 185

‘always’ for such a Peace to which a victory would be a dis-
advantage ;—and hath declared this by principles express to
that purpose, and ‘by’ a continued series of carriage and
actions answerable.

And since the taking of York,! as if the Parliament had now
advantage full enough, he hath declined whatsoever tended to
farther advantage upon the Enemy; ‘hath’ neglected and stu-
diously shifted-off opportunities to that purpose, as if he thought
the King too low, and the Parliament too high,—especially at
Dennington Castle.”

That he hath drawn the Army unto, and detained them in,
such a posture as to give the Enemy fresh advantages ; and
this, before his conjunction with the other Armies,’ by his own
absolute will, against or without his Council of War, against
many commands of the Committee of both Kingdoms, and with
contempt and vilifying ‘of’ those commands ;—and, since the
conjunction, sometimes against the Councils of War, and some-
times ‘by’ persuading and deluding the Council to neglect one
opportunity with pretence of another, and this again of a third, and
at last by persuading ‘them’ that it was not fit to fight at all.* 4

To these heavy charges, Manchester,—furnished with his con-
fused Crawford Documents, and not forgetting Letter Twentieth
which we lately read,—makes heavy answer, at great length,
about a week after: of which we shall remember only this piece
of counter-charge, How his Lordship had once, in those very
Newbury days, ordered Cromwell to proceed to some rendez-
vous with the horse, and Cromwell, very unsuitably for a
Lieutenant-General, had answered, The horses were already
worn off their feet ; “if your Lordship want to have the skzns of
the horses, this is the way to get them!”® Through which

1 Directly after Marston Moor.

2 [One of Cromwell's complaints was that Manchester was very backward and
could hardly be persuaded to march for Welbeck. Mr. Kingston suggests that his
hesitation here might be due toa chivalrous disinclination to disturb the family of
his old enemy the Marquis of Newcastle. After the surrender of Welbeck, the
Earl undertook the protection and maintenance of Newcastle’s children. See
East Anglia and the Great Civil War, p. 167.)

3 Waller’s and Essex’s at Newbury.

4 [It must be remembered, on Manchester's behalf, that his troops were weary,
unpaid and in want of necessaries, and also that there was a very strong feeling in
the Associated counties against their troops being sent away to the West. See
East Anglia and the Great Civil War, p. 170 et seq. |

5 [See note on p. 183 above. Carlyle does not quite accurately give what Man-
chester is reported to have said, viz.: that Cromwell came to him ‘‘and in a

* Rushworth, v. 732; Common Journals, iil. 703) 5-

186 FIRST CIVIL WAR [9 Dec.

small slit, one looks into large seas of general discrepancy in
those old months! Lieutenant-General Cromwell is also re-
ported to have said, in a moment of irritation surely, “There
would never be a good time in England till we had done with
Lords.” But the most appalling report that now circulates in
the world is this, of his saying once, “If he met the King in
battle, he would fire his pistol at the King as at another ;”—
pistol, at our poor semi-divine misguided Father fallen insane: a
thing hardly conceivable to the Presbyterian human mind! ?

II. In the House of Commons, on Wednesday 9th December, all
sitting in Grand Committee, ‘there was a general silence for a good
space of time, one looking upon the other to see who would break
the ice, in regard to this delicate point of getting our Essexes and
Manchesters softly ousted from the Army ; a very delicate point
indeed ;—when Lieutenant-General Cromwell stood up, and spake
shortly to this effect :

It is now a time to speak, or forever hold the tongue. The
important occasion now, is no less than To save a Nation, out of
a bleeding, nay almost dying condition: which the long continu-
ance of this War hath already brought it into; so that without a
more speedy, vigorous and effectual prosecution of the War,—
casting off all lingering proceedings like ‘those of’ soldiers-of-
fortune beyond sea, to spin out a war,—we shall make the king-
dom weary of us, and hate the name of a Parliament.

For what do the enemy say? Nay, what do many say that
were friends at the beginning of the Parliament? Even this,
That the Members of both Houses have got great places and
commands, and the sword into their hands ; and, what by interest
in the Parliament, what by power in the Army, will perpetually
continue themselves in grandeur, and not permit the War speedily
to end, lest their own power should determine with it, This
‘that’ I speak here to our own faces, is but what others do utter
discontented manner expressed himself, asking me whether I intended to flay my

horse, for if I called them to a rendezvous, I might have their skins but no service
from them". Rushworth, v. 734. ]

‘Rushworth, v. 734. [This is not in Rushworth. ]
? Old Pamphlets sepius, onwards to 1649.

1644.) SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE 187

abroad behind our backs. I am far from reflecting on any. I
know the worth of those Commanders, Members of both Houses,
who are yet in power: but if I may speak my conscience without
reflection upon any, I do conceive if the Army be not put into
another method, and the War more vigorously prosecuted, the
People can bear the War no longer, and will enforce you to a
dishonourable Peace.

But this 1 would recommend to your prudence, Not to insist
upon any complaint or oversight of any Commander-in-chief
upon any occasion whatsoever ; for as I must acknowledge my-
self guilty of oversights, so I know they can rarely be avoided
in military matters. Therefore waving a strict inquiry into the
cause of these things, let us apply ourselves to the remedy ;
which is most necessary. And I hope we have such true
English hearts, and zealous affections towards the general weal
of our Mother Country, as no Members of either House will
scruple to deny themselves, and their own private interests,
for the public good; nor account it to be a dishonour done to
them, whatever the Parliament shall resolve upon in this weighty
matter.*

Ill. On the same day, seemingly at a subsequent part of the debate,
Lieutenant-General Cromwell said likenise, as follows :

Mr. Speaker,—I am not of the mind that the calling of the
Members to sit in Parliament will break, or scatter our Armies.
I can speak this for my own soldiers, that they look not upon
me, but upon you; and for you they will fight, and live and die

* Rushworth, vi. 4. [‘‘Such was the first speech of Cromwell's which has come
down to us, where he appears as a statesman impressing his policy on Parliament
and the nation. Both in form and in substance it is in the highest sense character-
istic. ‘There is the strong personality, the rough mother-wit, the vivid and racy
phrase, as of a man in authority taking counsel with his familiars, not as of the
orator addressing a senate. There is the directness of purpose with laborious care
to avoid premature precision in detail, any needless opposition and all personal
offence. The form is conciliatory, guarded and qualified, almost allusive ; even the
specific measure recommended is left to be inferred or subsequently defined. Yet
the general purpose how clear ! the will behind the words how strenuous !" Harrison's
Oliver Cromwell, p. 83.)

188 FIRST CIVIL WAR [1644

in your Cause ;! and if others be of that mind that they are of,
you need not fear them. They do not idolize me, but look upon
the Cause they fight for. You may lay upon them what com-
mands you please, they will obey your commands in that Cause
they fight for.*

To be brief, Mr. Zouch Tate, Member for Northampton, moved
this day a Self-denying Ordinance ; which, in a few days more,
was passed in the Commons. It is not so easily got through
the Lords ; but there too it had ultimately to pass. One of the
most important clauses was this, introduced not without difficulty.
That religious men might now serve nithout taking the Covenant
as a first preliminary,—perhaps they might take it by and by.
This was a great ease to tender consciences: and indicates a
deep split, which will grow wider and wider, in our religious
affairs, The Scots Commissioners have sent for Whitlocke and
Maynard to the Lord General’s, to ask in judicious Scotch dialect,
Whether there be not ground to prosecute Cromwell as an ‘ in-
cendiary?’ “You ken varry weel !’’—the two learned gentlemen
shook their heads.?

This Self-denying Ordinance had to pass; it and the New
Model wholly; by the steps indicated below.2 Essex was
gratified by a splendid Pension,—very little of it ever actually
paid; for indeed he died some two years after: Manchester
was put on the Committee of Both Kingdoms: the Parliament
had its New-Model Army, and soon saw an entirely new epoch
in its affairs.

1[Cromwell was, however, engaging for his soldiers rather more than they were
disposed to perform. They loved their leader, and were in no mind to be parted
from him. On January 12, Sir Samuel Luke’s Deputy at Newport Pagnell wrote
to the Governor, then in London, ‘‘I heard that there was a great mutiny at Cam-
bridge by Colonel Cromwell's regiment, who was to be put under another Colonel,
which is a Scotchman; but they are resolved not to lay down their arms till, as
they say, they have vindicated Colonel Cromwell.” Luke's Letter Book, Stowe
MS., 190, f. t04b. ]

2 Whitlocke, iii. p. rx. (December 1644).

3 Rushworth, vi. 7, 8: Self-denying Ordinance passed in the Commons igth
December, and is sent to the Lords; Conference about it, 7th January ; rejected
by the Lords rsth January,—because ‘‘we do not know what shape the Army will
now suddenly take.” [The Lords rejected it on January 13. See Lords’ Journals
and ¢ext of Rushworth, though the margin gives it as the rsth.] Whereupon,
21st January, ‘Fairfax is nominated General;’ and on the roth February, the
New Model is completed and passed: ‘ 7/zs is the shape the Army is to take,”
A second Self-denying Ordinance, now introduced, got itself finally passed 3d
April 1645.

* Cromwelliana, p. 12,

.

1645.) LETTER XXIV., SALISBURY — 189

LETTER XXIV

Berore the old Officers laid down their commissions, Waller with
Cromwell and Massey were sent on an expedition into the West
against Goring and Company ;! concerning which there is some
echo in the old Books and Commons Journals, but no definite
vestige of it, except the following Letter, read in the House of
Commons, 9th [12th] April 1645; which D’Ewes happily had
given his Clerk to copy. The Expedition itself, which proved
successful, is now coming towards an end. Fairfax, the new
General, is at Windsor all April; full of business, regimenting,
discharging, enlisting, new-modelling.

LETTER XXIV

For the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the
Army: Haste, Haste: These: At Windsor

‘Salisbury,’ 9th April (ten o’clock at night) 1645.
Sir,

Upon Sunday last we marched towards Bruton
in Somersetshire, which was General Goring’s head-quarter : but
he would not stand us; but marched away, upon our approach,
to Wells and Glastonbury, whither we held it unsafe to follow
him, lest we should engage our body of Horse too far into that
enclosed country, not having foot enough to stand by them; and
partly because we doubted the advance of Prince Rupert with
his force to join with Goring ; having some notice from Colonel
Massey of the Prince his coming this way.’

General Goring hath ‘Sir Richard’ Greenvil in a near posture

ifWhen in February, the regiment was ordered to join Waller's army, ‘ it
murmured, grew mutinous and seemed about to refuse obedience, On March 3,
the House ordered Cromwell to go with it, its murmurs ceased, and obedience was
immediately restored.” Firth’s Oliver Cromwell, p. 119. A short letter to Luke
written just at the time of their starting for the West is in the Supplement, No, ro.
2 See letter to Whalley, of same day. Supplement, No. 11.

190 FIRST CIVIL WAR [9 April.

to join with them. He hath all their garrisons in Devon, Dorset
and Somersetshire, to make an addition to him. Whereupon,
Sir William Waller having a very poor Infantry of about 1,600
men, lest they, being so inconsiderable, should engage! our
Horse, we came from Shaftesbury to Salisbury to secure our
Foot ; to prevent the being necessitated to a too unequal engage-
ment, and to be nearer a communication with our friends.

Since our coming hither, we hear Prince Rupert is come to
Marshfield, a market-town not far from Trowbridge. If the
enemy advance altogether, how far we may be endangered,
that I humbly offer to you; entreating you to take care of us,
and to send us with all speed such an assistance, to Salisbury, as
may enable us to keep the field and to repel the enemy, if God
assist us: at least to secure and countenance us so as that we
be not put to the shame and hazard of a retreat ; which will lose
the Parliament many friends in these parts, who will think them-
selves abandoned upon our departure from them. Sir, I beseech
you send what Foot and Horse you can spare towards Salisbury,
by the way of Kingscleere, with what convenient expedition may
be. Truly we look to be attempted upon every day.

These things being humbly represented to your knowledge
and care, I subscribe myself,

Your most humble servant,
Outver CroMWELL.*

In Carte’s Ormond Papers? (i. 79) is a Letter of the same date
on the same subject, somewhat illustrative of this. See also
Commons Journals, in die.

lentangle or incumber. [Rather ‘‘ force our Horse to engage.’’]
2(The reference should be to Carte’s Original Letters and Papers. |

* D' Ewes MSS., vol. v. p. 189; [Harley MSS., vol. clxvi. p. 189] p. 445 of
‘Transcript.

1645.) LETTER XXV., BLETCHINGTON 191

LETTERS XXV—XXVII

Prince Rupert had withdrawn without fighting; was now at
Worcester with a considerable force, meditating new infall. For
which end, we hear, he has sent 2,000 men across the country
to his Majesty at Oxford, to convoy ‘his Majesty’s person and
the Artillery’ over to Worcester to him,—both of which objects
are like to be useful there. The Committee of Both Kingdoms
order the said Convoy to be attacked.

‘The charge of this service they recommended particularly to
‘Lieutenant-General Cromwell, who looking on himself now as
‘discharged of military employment by the New Ordinance, which
‘was to take effect within few days, and to have no longer op-
‘ portunity to serve his country in that way, was, the night before,
‘come to Windsor, from his service in the West, to kiss the
‘General’s hand and to take his leave of him: when, in the
‘morning ere he was come forth his chamber, those commands,
‘than which he thought of nothing less in all the world, came to
‘him from the Committee of Both Kingdoms.’!

‘The night before’ must mean, to all appearance, the 22d of
April. How Cromwell instantly took horse ; plunged into Oxford-
shire, and on the 24th, at Islip Bridge, attacked and routed this
said Convoy ; and the same day ,‘ merely by dragoons’? and fierce
countenance, took Bletchington House, for which poor Colonel
Windebank was shot, so angry were they: all this is known from
Clarendon, or more authentically from Rushworth ;? and here now
is Cromwell’s own account of it :

1Sprigge’s Anglia Rediviva (London, 1647), p. 10. Sprigge was one of Fair-
fax’s Chaplains; his Book, a rather ornate work, gives florid but authentic and
sufficient account of this New-Model Army in all its features and operations, by
which ‘England’ had ‘come alive again.’ A little sparing in dates; but correct
where they are given, None of the old Books is better worth reprinting. —For some
glimmer of notice concerning Joshua Sprigge himself, see Wood 7m voce,—and dis-
believe altogether that ‘Nat Fiennes’ had anything to do with this Book.

2(Cromwell does not say this: what he means is that besides his horse he had
only a few dragoons and no regular foot. ]

svi, 23, 4.

192 FIRST CIVIL WAR (25 April.

LETTER XXV

‘Commitrer of Both Kingdoms,’ first set up in February gone
a year, when the Scotch Army came to help, has been the Ex-
ecutive in the War-department ever since; a great but now a
rapidly declining authority. Sits at Derby House: Four Scotch ;
Twenty-one English, of whom Six a quorum. Johnston of War-
riston is the notablest Scotchman ; among the leading English
are Philip Lord Wharton and the Younger Vane.’

‘Watlington’ is in the Southeast nook of Oxfordshire ; a day’s
march from Windsor. ‘Major-General Browne’ commands at
Abingdon ; a City Wood-merchant once; a zealous soldier, of
Presbyterian principles at present. The rendezvous at Watlington
took place on Wednesday night ; the 25th of April is Friday.

‘To the Right Honourable the Committee of Both Kingdoms, at
Derby House: These’

Bletchington, 25th April 1645
My Lorps aNnp GENTLEMEN,

According to your Lordships’ appointment,
I have attended your service in these parts, and have not had
so fit an opportunity to give you an account as now.

So soon as I received your commands, I appointed a rendezvous
at Watlington. The body being come up, I marched to Wheatley
Bridge, having sent before to Major-General Browne for intel-
ligence, and it being market-day at Oxford, from whence I like-
wise hoped, by some of the market-people, to gain notice where
the enemy was. 2

1 List, and light as to its appointment, in Commons Journals (7th Feb. 1643-4),
iii, 391; Baillie, ii, rq e¢ sepzus. Its Papers and Correspondence, a curious set of
records, lie in very tolerable order in the State-Paper Office. [The records of this
great committee (known as S/ate Papers. Interregnum £.) form one of the most
valuable sources of our knowledge of the military operations of the Parliament dur-
ing the Civil War. For the year 1644, we have the daily proceedings of the com-
mittee, the letters sent out to the commanders, and most important of all, the letters
written to the Committee by the officers in the field. For the following years of the war
the series is not so complete, the entry-books of letters from the commanders failing
us after February 1645, and the day-books being many of them lacking. The
entry-books of letters sent out to the commanders are almost perfect up to the dis-
solution of the committee in December, 1648. These records are all included in
the Calendars of the State Papers. ]

1645.) LETTER XXV., BLETCHINGTON 193

Towards night I received certain notice by Major-General
Browne, that the carriages were not stirred, that Prince Maurice
was not here; and by some Oxford scholars, that there are four
carriages and wagons ready in one place, and in another five,
all, as I conceived, fit for a march.!

I received notice also that the Earl of Northampton’s Regiment
was quartered at Islip; wherefore in the evening I marched that
way, hoping to have surprised them, but, by the mistake and
failing of the forlorn-hope, they had an alarm there, and to all
their quarters, and so escaped me; by means whereof they had
time to draw all together.

I kept my body all night at Islip, and, in the morning, a party
of the Earl of Northampton’s regiment, the Lord Wilmot’s and
the Queen’s, came to make an infall upon me. Sir Thomas Fair-
fax’s regiment? was the first that took the field; the rest drew
out with all possible speed. That which is the General’s Troop
charged a whole squadron of the enemy, and presently broke it.
Our other troops coming seasonably on, the rest of the enemy
were presently put into confusion ; sothat we had the chase of them
three or four miles ; wherein we killed many, and took near two-
hundred prisoners, and about four-hundred horse.

Many of them escaped towards Oxford and Woodstock, divers
were drowned, and others got into a strong house in Bletching-
ton, belonging to Sir Thomas Cogan ; wherein Colonel Windebank
kept a garrison with near two-hundred men, whom I presently
summoned ; and after a long Treaty, he went out, about twelve
at night, with these terms here enclosed ; leaving us between
two and three-hundred muskets, besides horse arms, and other
ammunition, and about threescore-and-eleven horses more.

This was the mercy of God, and nothing is more due than a
real acknowledgment. And though I have had greater mercies,
yet none clearer: because, in the first ‘place,’ God brought them

1*march,’ out towards Worcester.
2‘ which was once mine,’ he might have added, but modestly does not; only
alluding to it from afar, in the next sentence,

VOU to

194 FIRST CIVIL WAR [29 April.

to our hands when we looked not for them ; and delivered them
out of our hands, when we laid a reasonable design to surprise
them, and which we carefully endeavoured. His mercy appears
in this also, that I did much doubt the storming of the house, it
being strong and well manned, and I having few dragoons, and
this being not my business ; and yet we got a

I hope you will pardon me if I say, God is not enough owned.
We look too much to men and visible helps: this hath much
hindered our success. But I hope God will direct all to acknow-

ledge Him alone in all ‘ things.’
Your most humble servant,
O.tver CRoMWELL.*

Poor Windebank was shot by sudden Court-martial, so enraged
were they at Oxford,—for Cromwell had not even foot-soldiers,
still less a battering gun. It was his poor young Wife, they said,
she and other ‘ladies on a visit there,’ that had confused poor
Windebank : he set his back to the wall of Merton College, and
received his death-volley with a soldier's stoicism.! The Son of
Secretary Windebank, who fled beyond seas long since.

LETTER XXVI

How Cromwell, sending off his new guns and stores to Abing-
don, now shot across westward to ‘ Radcot Bridge’ or ‘ Bampton-
in-the-Bush ;’ and on the 26th gained a new victory there; and
on the whole made a rather brilliant sally of it :—this too is known
from Clarendon, or more authentically from Rushworth ; but only
the concluding unsuccessful part of this, the fruitless Summons
to Farringdon, has left any trace in autograph.?

# Pamphlet in Parliamentary History, ili. 359 : read in the House, Monday 28th
ats reels Journals, iv. 124),—Letter to Fairfax on the same subject, Appendix,
Ornegill)s

1 Heath’s Chronicle, p. 122. [Francis, the Secretary's second son. ]

2[In 1868 there was found amongst the MSS. of the House of Lords, a letter
from Cromwell to the Committee of Both Kingdoms, which was printed by Carlyle
in the later editions of his work. See Appendix 7 (2). It is also printed at full
length in the Calendar of the MSS. of the House of Lords, sixth Report of the
Historical MSS, Commissioners, p. 56 b.]

1645.) LETTER XXVII., FARRINGDON 195

To the Governor of the Garrison in .F arringdon

29th April 1645.
Sir,
I summon you to deliver into my hands the

House wherein you are, and your ammunition, with all things
else there, together with your persons, to be disposed of as the
Parliament shall appoint, which if you refuse to do, you are to
expect the utmost extremity of war. I rest,
Your servant,
OLIverR CRoMWELL.*

Tuis Governor, ‘Roger Burgess, is not to be terrified with
fierce countenance and mere dragoons; he refuses. Cromwell
withdraws into Farringdon Town, and again summons:

LETTER XXVII

To the same ; same date
Sir,
I understand by forty or fifty poor men whom

you forced into your house, that you have many there whom you
cannot arm, and who are not serviceable to you.

If these men should perish by your means, it were great in-
humanity surely. Honour and honesty require this, that though
you be prodigal of your own lives, yet not to be so of theirs. If
God give you into my hands, I will not spare a man of you, if

you put me to a storm.
OLIvER CROMWELL.*

Roger Burgess, still unawed, refuses ; Cromwell waits for in-
fantry from Abingdon ‘till 3 next morning,’ then storms ; loses
fourteen men, with a captain taken prisoner ;!—and draws away,
leaving Burgess to crow over him. The Army, which rose from

* Rushworth, vi. 26.

1[A newspaper of the day (Mercurius Aulicus, E. 285, No. 14) states that Crom-
well lost two hundred killed, a captain, an ensign and eight men prisoners, and had
many wounded, It also gives another letter from Cromwell to Burgess, written on
April 30, after the attempt to storm. See Supplement, No, 12. ]

196 FIRST CIVIL WAR [4 June.

Windsor yesterday, gets to Reading this day, and he must hasten
thither.

Yesterday, Wednesday,! Monthly-fast day, all Preachers, by
Ordinance of Parliament, were praying for ‘God’s merciful assist-
‘ance to this New Army now on march, and His blessing upon
‘their endeavours.’? Consider it; actually ‘praying!’ It was
a capability old London and its Preachers and Populations had ;
to us the incrediblest.

LETTER XXVIII

By Letter Twenty-eighth it will be seen that Lieutenant-General
Cromwell has never yet resumed his Parliamentary duty. In
fact, he is in the Associated Counties, raising force ; ‘ for protec-
tion of the Isle of Ely, and other purposes. To Fairfax and his
Officers, to the Parliament, to the Committee of Both Kingdoms,
to all persons, it is clear that Cromwell cannot be dispensed with.
Fairfax and his Officers petition Parliament* that he may be
appointed their Lieutenant-General, Commander-in-Chief of the
Horse. There isaclear necessity init. Parliament, the Commons
somewhat more readily than the Lords, continue, by instalments
of ‘ forty days,’ of ‘three months,’ his services in the Army ; and
at length grow to regard him as a constant element there. A few
others got similar leave of absence, similar dispensation from the
Self-denying Ordinance. Sprigge’s words, cited above, are no

1[‘« Yesterday’ was Tuesday, April 29. Fairfax did not start until the 30th,
reaching Reading the same day. Cromwell joined him at Newbury on May 2.]

2 Rushworth, vi. 25.

3[{In a letter to Lenthall, of May 9 (See Supplement, No. 13) Cromwell declares
his intention of going after Charles, but an old pamphlet tells us that ‘‘ he soon left
following the King.” He was summoned back from the pursuit by Fairfax in the
middle of May, and on May 26 the House of Commons, “‘ having great testimonies
of the gallant, zealous and valiant services performed by Lieut.-General Cromwell”
ordered him to go down into the Isle of Ely. (Commons Journals, iv. 155. Per-
fect Diurnal, E. 261 (1)). He was, in fact, much needed in his own part of the
world. ‘It was no sooner noised that Lieutenant-Colonel (s¢¢) Cromwell was to be
sent into the Isle of Ely but the courage of the Association began to be high with hope
and the City to be full of joy” (see 4 Diary, E. 288 (5)). His stay, however, was
very short, for Fairfax needed him even more than the Association did, and on June
12, he had rejoined the General. ‘‘ To speak truth, at this instance, it were to be
wished he were in the army, for its conceived by some the King will fight, and
ceo might put much courage into his friends.” (Zoderate /ntelligencer, E.
288 (7).

4 Their Letter (Newspapers, gth-16th June), in Crvomwed/iana, p, 18.

1645.) LETTER XXVIIL, HUNTINGDON 197

doubt veracious ; yet there is trace of evidence! that Cromwell’s
continuance in the Army had, even by the framers of the Self-
denying Ordinance, been considered a thing possible, a thing
desirable. As it well might! To Cromwell himself there was
no overpowering felicity in getting out to be shot at, except where
wanted; he very probably, as Sprigge intimates, did let the
matter in silence take its own course.”

‘To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of
the Parliament's Army ; These’
Huntingdon, 4th June 1645.

Sir,

I most humbly beseech you to pardon my long
silence. I am conscious of the fault, considering the great obli-
gations lying upon me. But since my coming into these parts,
I have been busied to secure that part of the Isle of Ely where
I conceived most danger to be.

Truly I found it in a very ill posture, and it is yet but weak ;
without works, ammunition or men considerable, and of money
least : and then, I hope, you will easily conceive of the defence :
and God has preserved us all this while to a miracle. The party
under Vermuyden waits the King’s army, and is about Deeping ;
has a command to join with Sir John Gell, if he commands him.
So ‘too’ the Nottingham Horse. I shall be bold to present you
with intelligence as it comes tome. We heard you were march-
ing towards us, which was matter of rejoicing to us.’

I am bold to present this as my humble suit: That you would
be pleased to make Captain Rawlins, this bearer, a Captain of

1 Godwin's History of the Commonwealth (London, 1824), i. 405.

2[** No direct evidence has yet been produced as to how far Cromwell had arranged
his plans for being continued in command, or how far this purpose was generally
understood and accepted. It would have been contrary to his nature of restless
vigilance and of personal self-reliance either to commit to chance so momentous
an office or willingly to stand aside out of romantic delicacy. We may doubt the
discernment of the worthy Sprigge, when he tells us of the lieutenant-general ‘ that
he thought of nothing less in the world.’ Cromwell must have known the counsels
of the Committee. And doubtless he felt himself so necessary to the cause, and
his ascendancy to be so complete, that he might safely leave others to determine
_ the manner and season of his own personal exemption.” Harrison’s O/?ver Crom-

well, p. 88.)
3[This sentence was omitted by Carlyle. ]

198 FIRST CIVIL WAR [6 June.

Horse. He has been so before; was nominated to the Model;
is a most honest man. Colonel Sidney leaving his regiment, if
it please you to bestow his troop on him, I am confident he will
serve you faithfully. So, by God’s assistance, will
Your most humble servant,
Otiver CroMWELL.*

The ‘ Vermuyden’ mentioned here, who became Colonel Ver-
muyden, is supposed to be a son of the Dutch Engineer who
drained the Fens.! ‘Colonel Sidney’ is the celebrated Algernon ;
he was nominated in the ‘ Model,’ but is ‘ leaving his regiment ;’
having been appointed Governor of Chichester.? Captain Rawlins
does obtain a Company of Horse; under ‘Colonel Sir Robert
Pye.’ 3—Colonel Montague, afterwards Earl of Sandwich, has a
Foot-Regiment here. Hugh Peters is ‘Chaplain to the Train.’

BY EXPRESS

Farrrax, with his New-Model Army, has been beleaguering
Oxford, for some time past; but in a loose way, and making
small progress hitherto. The King, not much apprehensive
about Oxford, is in the Midland Counties; has just stormed
Leicester (‘last night of May,’ says Clarendon,‘ a terrible night,
and still more terrible ‘daybreak’ and day following it), which
perhaps may itself relieve Oxford. His Majesty is since at halt,
or in loose oscillating movement, ‘ hunting’ on the hills, ‘ driving
large herds of cattle before him,’—nobody, not even himself, yet
knows whitherward. Whitherward? This is naturally a very
agitating question for the neighbouring populations; but most
of all, intensely agitating for the Eastern Association,—though
Cromwell, in that Huntingdon Letter, occupied with Ely and
other Garrisons, seems to take it rather quietly. But two days
later, we have trace of him at Cambridge, and of huge alarm

*Rushworth, vi. (London, 17or), p. 37.

1{Colonel Vermuyden commanded a regiment of horse in the New Model Army,
but resigned for private reasons just before Naseby, and was succeeded in command
of the regiment by Cromwell. ]

2 Commons Journals, iv. 136 (gth May 1645).

3 Army-List, in Sprigge (p. 330). 411,857.

1645.] BY EXPRESS, CAMBRIDGE 199

round him there. Here is an old Piece of Paper still surviving ;
still emblematic of old dead days and their extinct agitations,
when once we get to decipher it! They are the Cambridge
Committee that write ; ‘the Army about Oxford,’ we have seen,
is Fairfax’s.

‘To the Deputy-Lieutenants of Suffolk : These’

Cambridge, 6th June 1645.
GENTLEMEN,
The cloud of the enemy’s army hanging still

upon the borders, and drawing towards Harborough, make some
supposals that they aim at the Association. In regard whereof,
we having information that the army about Oxford was not
yesterday advanced, albeit it was ordered so to do, we thought
meet to give you intelligence thereof ;—and therewith earnestly
to propound to your consideration, That you will have in readi-
ness what Horse and Foot may be had, that so a proportion may
be drawn forth for this service, such as may be expedient.

And because we conceive that the exigence may require Horse
and Dragoons, we desire that all your Horse and Dragoons may
hasten to Newmarket ; where they will receive orders for farther
advance, according as the motion of the enemy and of our army
shall require. And to allow both the several troops of Dragoons
and Horse one week’s pay, to be laid down by the owner ; which
shall be repaid out of the public money out of the county ; the
pay of each trooper being 14 shillings per week, and of a dragoon

10s. 6d. per week.
Your servants,

H. Mitpmay, W. SpRING,

W. HevenincuamM, Maurice Barrow,

Ti. Mitton (sic), Naruaniet Bacon,

‘PS.’ The Place of Rendezvous for the Francis RussE.t,

Horse and Dragoons is to be at Newmarket ; OLiverR CROMWELL,
and for the Foot Bury.—Since the writing Hum. Watcor,
hereof, we received certain mtelligence that Isaak Puuter,
the enemy’s body, with 60 carriages, was Ep - - - [illegible.]}

1[ Probably Edward Clench. |

200 FIRST CIVIL WAR (14 June.

upon his march towards the Association, 3 miles on this side
Harborough, last night at 4 of the clock.*

The Original, a hasty, blotted Paper, with the Signatures in
two unequal columns (as imitated here), and with the Postscript
crammed hurriedly into the corner, and written from another ink-
bottle as is still apparent,—represents to us an agitated scene in
the old Committee-rooms at Cambridge that Friday. In Rushworth
(see vi. 36-8), of the same date, and signed by the same parties,
with some absentees (Oliver among them, probably now gone on
other business) and more new arrivals,—is a Letter to Fairfax
himself, urging him to speed over, and help them in their peril.
They say, ‘We had formerly written to the Counties to raise
their Horse and Dragoons, and have now written’ as above for
one instance, ‘ to quicken them.’—The Suffolk and other Horse,
old Ironsides not hindmost, did muster; and in about a week
hence, there came other news from ‘this side Harborough last
night’ !

LETTER XXIX
NASEBY

Tue old Hamlet of Naseby stands yet, on its old hill-top, very
much as it did in Saxon days, on the Northwestern border of
Northamptonshire ; some seven or eight miles from Market-Har-
borough in Leicestershire ; nearly on a line, and nearly midway,
between that Town and Daventry. A peaceful old Hamlet, of
some eight-hundred souls ; clay cottages for labourers, but neatly
thatched and swept ; smith’s shop, saddler’s shop, beer-shop, all
in order; forming a kind of square, which leads off Southwards
into two long streets: the old Church, with its graves, stands in
the centre, the truncated spire finishing itself with a strange old
Ball, held up by rods ; a ‘hollow copper Ball, which came from
Boulogne in Henry the Kighth’s time, —which has, like Hudibras’s
breeches, ‘been at the Siege of Bullen. The ground is upland,
moorland, though now growing corn; was not enclosed till the
last generation, and is still somewhat bare of wood. It stands

* Original, long stationary at Ipswich, is now (Jan. 1849) the property of John
Wodderspoon, Esq., Mercury Office, Norwich. i

1645.] LETTER XXIX., NASEBY 201

nearly in the heart of England: gentle Dulness, taking a turn
at etymology, sometimes derives it from Navel ; ‘ Navelsby, quasi
Navelsby, from being, &c.: Avon Well, the distinct source of
Shakspeare’s Avon, is on the Western slope of the high grounds ;
Nen and Welland, streams leading towards Cromwell’s Fen-
country, begin to gather themselves from boggy places on the
Eastern side. The grounds, as we say, lie high; and are still,
in their new subdivisions, known by the name of‘ Hills,’ ‘ Rutput
Hill,’ ‘Mill Hill, ‘Dust Hill,’ and the like, precisely as in
Rushworth’s time: but they are not properly hills at all; they
are broad blunt clayey masses, swelling towards and from each
other, like indolent waves of a sea, sometimes of miles in extent.
It was on this high moor-ground, in the centre of England,
that King Charles, on the 14th of June 1645, fought his last
battle ; dashed fiercely against the New-Model Army, which he
had despised tili then ; and saw himself shivered utterly to ruin
thereby. ‘Prince Rupert, on the King’s right wing, charged up
the hill, and carried all before him;’ but Lieutenant-General
Cromwell charged downhill on the other wing, likewise carrying
all before him,—and did not gallop off the field to plunder, he.
Cromwell, ordered thither by the Parliament, had arrived from
the Association two days before, ‘amid shouts from the whole
Army :’ he had the ordering of the Horse this morning.’ Prince
Rupert, on returning from his plunder, finds the King’s infantry
a ruin; prepares to charge again with the rallied Cavalry ; but
the Cavalry too, when it came to the point, ‘broke all asunder, —
never to reassemble more. The chase went through Harborough ;
where the King had already been that morning, when in an evil
hour he turned back, to revenge some ‘surprise of an outpost at
Naseby the night before,’ and give the Roundheads battle.
Ample details of this Battle, and of the movements prior and
posterior to it, are to be found in Sprigge, or copied with some
abridgment into Rushworth; who has also copied a strange old
Plan of the Battle ; half plan, half picture, which the Sale-Cata-
logues are very chary of, in the case of Sprigge. By assiduous
attention, aided by this Plan, as the old names yet stick to the
localities, the Narrative can still be, and has lately been, pretty
accurately verified, and the Figure of the old Battle dimly brought

1[{Fairfax had been in some doubt whether he might not have to fight before
Cromwell could reach him, in which case he had meant ‘‘to decline the usual way
of a General, and to assume the command of the horse” himself. (AZoderate [n-
telligencer, E, 288 (7).)]

202 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 June.

back again.! The reader shall imagine it, for the present—On
the crown of Naseby Height stands a modern Battle-monument ;
but, by an unlucky oversight, it is above a mile to the east of
where the Battle really was. There are likewise two modern
Books about Naseby and its Battle; both of them without value.”

The Parliamentary Army stood ranged on the Height still
partly called ‘ Mill Hill,’ as in Rushworth’s time, a mile and half
from Naseby ; the King’s Army, on a parallel ‘ Hill,’ its back to
Harborough ;—with the wide table of upland now named Broad
Moor between them ; where indeed the main brunt of the action
still clearly enough shows itself to have been. There are hollow
spots, of a rank vegetation, scattered over that Broad Moor ;
which are understood to have once been burial mounds ;—some
of which, one to my knowledge, have been (with more or less of
sacrilege) verified as such. A friend of mine? has in his cabinet
two ancient grinder-teeth, dug lately from that ground,—and
waits for an opportunity to rebury them there. Sound effectual
grinders, one of them very large ; which ate their breakfast on
the fourteenth morning of June two hundred years ago, and,
except to be clenched once in grim battle, had never work to do
more in this world !—a stack of dead bodies, perhaps about 100,
‘had been buried in this Trench; piled as in a wall, a man’s
‘length thick: the skeletons lay in courses, the heads of one
‘course to the heels of the next; one figure, by the strange
‘position of the bones, gave us the hideous notion of its having
‘been thrown in before death! We did not proceed far :—perhaps

1 Appendix, No. 8.

2(For modern accounts of the battle w7¢h value, see Dr. Gardiner’s Great Civil
War, and Mr. Firth’s Oliver Cromwell. ]

*[The friend was Edward Fitzgerald. In 1842, Carlyle and Dr. Arnold made a
pilgrimage to the field of Naseby, but were misled by the position of the obelisk
erected by Fitzgerald's father (mentioned above) and which, Carlyle afterwards wrote
in disgust, ‘‘might as well stand at Charing Cross.” They saw nothing,” wrote
Fitzgerald, ‘‘and walked over what was not the field of battle,” However, at
Carlyle’s request, Fitzgerald—to whom the land belonged—undertook some investi-
gations, guided by Carlyle’s letters, which contained very clear descriptions of what
he ought to see, and also had the trench excavated as mentioned above, watched by
an old Scotch farmer who thought the soil would be very good as manure for turnips !
Of this, Carlyle wrote to Fitzgerald: ‘The Opening of that burial heap blazes
strangely in my thoughts; these are the very jawbones that were clenched together
in deadly rage, on this very ground, 197 years ago. It brings the matter home to
one with a strange veracity ; as if for the first time one saw it to be no fable and
theory, but a dire fact. I will beg for a tooth and a bullet ; authenticated by
your own eyes and word of honour. Our Scotch friend too, making turnip manure
of it, he is part of the picture. . . . Honour to thrift, If of 5000 wasted men, you
can make a few usable turnips, why, doit!” (Led¢ers of Edward Fitzgerald, ed. 1894,
vol. i. pp. 125-138. )]

1645.] LETTER XXIX., NASEBY 208

‘some half-dozen skeletons. The bones were treated with all
‘piety ; watched rigorously, over Sunday, till they could be covered
‘in again.’! Sweet friends, for Jesus’ sake forbear !—

At this Battle Mr. John Rushworth, our Historical Rushworth,
had, unexpectedly, for some instants, sight of a very famous per-
son. Mr. John is Secrétary to Fairfax; and they have placed
him today among the Baggage-wagons, near Naseby Hamlet,
above a mile from the fighting, where he waits in an anxious
manner. It is known how Prince Rupert broke our left wing,
while Cromwell was breaking their left. ‘A Gentleman of
Public Employment in the late Service near Naseby’ writes next
day, ‘ Harborough, 15th June, 2 in the morning,’ a rough graphic
Letter in the Newspapers,” wherein is this sentence :

* * «A party of theirs that broke through the left wing of
‘horse, came quite behind the rear to our Train; the Leader of
‘them, being a person somewhat in habit like the General, in a
‘red montero, as the General had. He came as a friend; our
‘commander of the guard of the Train went with his hat in his
‘hand, and asked him, How the day went? thinking it had been
‘the General: the Cavalier, who we since heard was Rupert,
‘asked him and the rest, If they would have quarter? They
‘cried No; gave fire, and instantly beat them off. It was a
‘happy deliverance,’—without doubt.

There were taken here a good few ‘ladies of quality in car-
riages ;’—and above a hundred Irish ladies not of quality, tattery
camp-followers ‘with long skean-knives about a foot in length,’
which they well knew how to use; upon whom I fear the Ordi-
nance against Papists pressed hard this day.? The King’s Car-
riage was also taken, with a Cabinet and many Royal Autographs
in it, which when printed made a sad impression against his
Majesty,—gave in fact a most melancholy view of the veracity
of his Majesty, “On the word of a King.” * All was lost !—®

IMS. penes me.

2 King's Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 212, § 26, p. 2: the contemporaneous Col-
lector has named him with his pen; ‘Mr. Rushworth’s Letter, being the Secretary
to his Excellency.’

3 Whitlocke.

4 The King's Cabinet opened; or Letters taken in the Cabinet at Naseby Field
(London, 1645) :—reprinted in Harlecan Miscellany (London, 1810), v. 514.

5[One of the old newspapers gives us a peep at the Ironsides after the battle.
‘We hear Cromwell’s sometime regiment are grown wiser, if it may be so called ;
for having helped to beat the enemy out of the field, they did not, as at Marston
Moor, leave them that fought least to get most, but fell upon the good booty as
well as others”. (Moderate Intelligencer, E. 289 (17).)]

204 FIRST CIVIL WAR (14 June.

Here is Cromwell’s Letter, written from Harborough, or
‘ Haverbrowe’ as he calls it, that same night; after the hot
Battle and hot chase were over. The original, printed long
since in Rushworth, still lies in the British Museum,—with ‘a
strong steady signature, which one could look at with interest.
‘The Letter consists of two leaves; nfuch worn, and now sup-
‘ported by pasting ; red seal much defaced ; is addressed on the
‘second leaf :’

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Speaker of the Commons
House of Parliament: These

Harborough, 14th June 1645.
Sir,

Being commanded by you to this service, I
think myself bound to acquaint you with the good hand of God
towards you and us.

We marched yesterday after the King, who went before us
from Daventry to Harborough; and quartered about six miles
from him. This day we marched towards him. He drew out
to meet us; both armies engaged. We, after three hours fight
very doubtful, at last routed his army; killed and took about
5,000, very many officers, but of what quality we yet know not.
We took also about 200 carriages, all he had; and all his guns,
being 12 in number, whereof two were demi-cannon, two demi-
culverins, and.(I think) the rest sackers. We pursued the enemy
from three miles short of Harborough to nine beyond, even to
the sight of Leicester, whither the King fled.

Sir, this is none other but the hand of God ; and to Him alone
belongs the glory, wherein none are to share with Him. The
General served you with all faithfulness and honour: and the
best commendations I can give him is, that I dare say he attri-
butes all to God, and would rather perish than assume to him-
self. Which is an honest and a thriving way, and yet as much
for bravery may be given to him, in this action, as to a man.

1[See Cromwell's remarks upon Naseby in his letter announcing the victory of
Langport, Appendix, No, 9.]

1645.] LETTER XXIX., NASEBY 205

Honest men served you faithfully in this action. Sir, they are
trusty; I beseech you in the name of God, not to discourage
them. I wish this action may beget thankfulness and humility
in all that are concerned in it. He that ventures his life for
the liberty of his country, I wish he trust God for the liberty of
his conscience, and you for the liberty he fights for.!_ In this he
rests, who is

Your most humble servant,
O.iverR CRoMWELL.*

John Bunyan, I believe, is this night in Leicester,’ not yet
writing his Pilgrim’s Progress on paper, but acting it on the face
of the Earth, with a brown matchlock on his shoulder. Or
rather, without the matchlock, just at present ; Leicester and he
having been taken the other day. ‘ Harborough Church ’ is get-
ting ‘filled with prisoners’ while Oliver writes,—and an immense
contemporaneous tumult everywhere going on! ®

The ‘honest men who served you faithfully’ on this occasion
are the considerable portion of the Army who have not yet suc-
ceeded in bringing themselves to take the Covenant. Whom
the Presbyterian Party, rigorous for their own formula, call
‘Schismatics,’ ‘Sectaries, ‘ Anabaptists,’ and other hard names;
whom Cromwell, here and elsewhere, earnestly pleads for. To
Cromwell, perhaps as much as to another, order was lovely, and
disorder hateful ; but he discerned better than some others what
order and disorder really were. The forest-trees are not in
‘order’ because they are all clipt into the same shape of
Dutch-dragons, and forced to die or grow in that way; but
because in each of them there is the same genuine unity of life,

1f*So little did the House of Commons share Cromwell's sentiments on this
matter,” writes Dr. Gardiner, ‘‘ that in sending his letter to the press, they omitted
this paragraph,” but ‘‘ the House of Lords, probably in mere thoughtlessness, simul-
taneously ordered a complete copy of the letter to be sent forth to the world.”
(Great Civil War, ii. 252). Both versions are amongst the Avng’s Pamphlets (E.
288, Nos. 26 and 27), and Thomason imagined the curtailed copy to be the true
one, writing upon it, ‘‘ This is Crumwell’s owne trew letter,” and upon the un-
mutilated copy, ‘‘a false letter in the conclusion”, |

2(Mr, E. G. Atkinson's discovery of the Muster-rolls of the Newport Pagnell
garrison at the Public Record Office, proves that it was there, and not at Leicester
that Bunyan served. |

3[See letter to Sir Samuel Luke, written next day. Supplement No. rq.]

* Harl, MSS., No. 7502, art. 5, p. 7; Rushworth, vi. 45.

206 FIRST CIVIL WAR [4 Aug.

from the inmost pith to the outmost leaf, and they do grow
according to that !—Cromwell naturally became the head of this
Schismatic Party, intent to grow not as Dutch-dragons, but as
real trees ; a Party which naturally increased with the increasing
earnestness of events and of men.—

The King stayed but a few hours in Liecester; he had taken
Leicester, as we saw, some days before, and now it was to be re-
taken from him some days after :—he stayed but a few hours
here ; rode on, that same night, to Ashby-de-la-Zouch, which he
reached ‘at daybreak, —poor wearied King !—then again swiftly
Westward, to Wales, to Ragland Castle, to this place and that ;
in the hope of raising some force, and coming to fight again;
which, however, he could never do.! Some ten months more of
roaming, and he, ‘disguised as a groom,’ will be riding with
Parson Hudson towards the Scots at Newark.

The New-Model Army marched into the Southwest; very
soon ‘relieved Colonel Robert Blake’ (Admiral Blake), and
many others ;—marched to ever new exploits and victories,
which excite the pious admiration of Joshua Sprigge; and very
soon swept all its enemies from the field, and brought this War
to a close.?

The following Letters exhibit part of Cromwell’s share in that
business, and may be read with little commentary.

LETTER XXX
THE CLUBMEN

Tue victorious Army, driving all before it in the Southwest, where
alone the King had still any considerable fighting force, found
itself opposed by a very unexpected enemy, famed in the old
Pamphlets by the name of Clubmen. The design was at bottom
Royalist; but the country-people in those regions had been

1 Iter Carolinum,; being a succinct Relation of the necessitated Marches, Retreats
and Sufferings of his Majesty Charles the First, from roth January 1641 till the time
of his Death, 1648: Collected by a daily Attendant upon his Sacred Majesty during
all the said time. London, 1660.—It is reprinted in Somers Tracts (v. 263), but,
as usual there, without any editing except a nominal one, though it somewhat
needed more.

2A Journal of every day's March of the Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax (in Sprigge, p. 331).

1645.) LETTER XXX., THE CLUBMEN- 207

worked upon by the Royalist Gentry and Clergy, on the some-
what plausible ground of taking up arms to defend themselves
against the plunder and harassment of both Armies.!_ The great
mass of them were Neutrals; there even appeared by and by
various transient bodies of ‘Clubmen’ on the Parliament side,
whom Fairfax entertained occasionally to assist him in pioneer-
ing and other such services. They were called Clubmen, not,
as M. Villemain supposes,? because they united in Clubs, but
because they were armed with rough country weapons, mere
bludgeons if no other could be had. Sufficient understanding
of them may be gained from the following Letter of Cromwell,
prefaced by some Excerpts.

From Rushworth: ‘Thursday, July 3d, Fairfax marched from
‘Blandford to Dorchester, 12 miles; a very hot day. Where
‘Colonel Sidenham, Governor of Weymouth, gave him infor-
‘mation of the condition of those parts; and of the great
‘danger from the Club-risers;’ a set of men ‘who would not
‘suffer either contribution or victuals to be carried to the
‘Parliament’s garrisons. And the same night Mr. Hollis of
‘Dorsetshire, the chief leader of the Clubmen, with some others
‘of their principal men, came to Fairfax: and Mr. Hollis owned
‘himself to be one of their leaders ; affirming that it was fit the
‘ people should show their grievances and their strength. Fairfax
‘treated them civilly, and promised they should have an answer
‘the next morning. For they were so strong at that time, that it
‘was held a point of prudence to be fair in demeanour towards
‘them for a while ; for if he should engage with General Goring
‘and be put to the worst, these Clubmen would knock them on
‘the head as they should fly for safety.2—That which they
‘desired from him was a safe-conduct for certain persons to go

1[They originated amongst the farmers in the West, for suppressing plundering
by the soldiers. See Zhe Desires and Resolutions of the Clubmen (E. 292,
No. 24). :

x oa dick friends ought to be informed that M. Villemain’s Book on
Cromwell is, unluckily, a rather ignorant and shallow one.—Of M. Guizot, on
the other hand, we are to say that his Iwo Volumes, so far as they go, are the
fruit of real ability and solid studies applied to those Transactions.

3[The General dzd engage with General Goring, but was not ‘‘ put to the worst”,
For Cromwell's account of the battle of Langport, fought July 10, see Appendix,
No. 9; on this same day he wrote a letter on behalf of Lieutenant-Colonel John
Lilburn, for which see Supplement, No. 15. On the following day, he had rather a
narrow escape, for, going with some of his officers to view Bridgwater, and ‘‘ making
some stay upon a discourse, the enemy shot a brace of musket bullets, which killed a
cornet of his regiment, but the Lieut.-General was preserved.” (Mercurius Civicus,

E, 293 (7).)]

208 FIRST CIVIL WAR [4 Aug.

‘to the King and Parliament with petitions :’1 which Fairfax in
a very mild but resolute manner refused.

From Sprigge,? copied also into Rushworth with some inaccu-
racies: ‘On Monday, August 4th, Lieutenant-General Cromwell,
‘having intelligence of some of their places of rendezvous for
‘their several divisions, went forth’ from Sherborne ‘ with a party
‘of Horse to meet these Clubmen; being well satisfied of the
‘danger of their design. As he was marching towards Shaftes-
‘bury with the party, they discovered some colours upon the top
‘ ofa high hill, full of wood and almost inaccessible. A Lieutenant
‘with a small party was sent to them to know their meaning,
‘and to acquaint them that the Lieutenant-General of the Army
‘was there; whereupon Mr. Newman, one of their leaders, thought
“fit to come down, and told us, The intent was to desire to know
‘why the gentlemen were taken at Shaftesbury on Saturday ?3
‘The Lieutenant-General returned him this answer: That he
‘held himself not bound to give him or them an account ; what
‘was done was by authority, and they that did it were not re-
‘sponsible to them that had none: but not to leave them wholly
‘unsatisfied, he told him that those persons so met had been the
‘occasions and stirrers of many tumultuous and unlawful meet-
‘ings; for which they were to be tried by law ; which trial ought
‘not by them to be questioned or interrupted. Mr. Newman
‘desired to go up to return the answer; the Lieutenant-General
‘with a small party went with him; and had some conference
‘with the people ; to this purpose: That whereas they pretended
‘to meet there to save their goods, they took a very ill course for
‘that: to leave their houses was the way to lose their goods ;
‘and it was offered them, that justice should be done upon any
‘who offered them violence; and as for the gentlemen taken
‘at Shaftesbury, it was only to answer some things they were
‘accused of, which they had done contrary to law and the peace
‘of the Kingdom.—Herewith they seeming to be well satisfied,
‘promised to return to their houses ; and accordingly did so.

‘These being thus quietly sent home, the Lieutenant-General
‘advanced further, to a meeting of a greater number, of about
‘4000, who betook themselves to Hambleton Hill, near Shrawton.
‘ At the bottom of the hill ours met a man with a musket, and

' Rushworth, vi. §2. 2pp. 78, 9.
* [Owing to the antagonistic attitude of the Dorset Club-men, Fairfax, then engaged

at the siege of Sherburne, had sent Fleetwood against them, and forty of the ring-
leaders were seized at Shaftesbury. |

1645.) LETTER XXX., THE CLUBMEN 209

‘asked, whither he was going? he said, To the Club Army ; ours
‘asked, what he meant to do. He asked, what they had to do
‘with that. Being required to lay down his arms, he said he
‘would first lose his life; but was not so good as his word, for
‘though he cocked and presented his musket, he was prevented,
‘disarmed, and wounded, but not ’—Here, however, is Cromwell’s
own Narrative :

To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Fairfaz, Commander-in-Chief
of the Parliament's Forces, ‘at Sherborne: These’

‘Shaftesbury,’ 4th August 1645.
Sir,

I marched this morning towards Shaftesbury.
In my way I found a party of clubmen gathered together, about
two miles of this side of the town, towards you; and one Mr.
Newman in the head of them, who was one of those who did
attend you at Dorchester, with Mr. Hollis. I sent to them to
know the cause of their meeting: Mr. Newman came to me and
told me, that the clubmen in Dorset and Wilts, to the number
of ten-thousand, were to meet about their men which were taken
away at Shaftesbury, and that their intendment was to secure:
themselves from plundering. To the first, I told them, that al-
though no account was due to them, yet I knew the men were
taken by your authority, to be tried judicially for raising a third
party in the Kingdom ; and if they should be found guilty, they
must suffer according to the nature of their offence ; if innocent,
I assured them you would acquit them. Upon this they said, if
they have deserved punishment, they would not have any thing
to do with them; and so were quieted as to that point. For
the other ‘point,’ I assured them, that it was your great care,
not to suffer them in the least to be plundered, and that they
should defend themselves from violence, and bring to your army
such as did them any wrong, where they should be punished
with all severity: upon this, very quietly and peaceably they
marched away to their houses, being very well satisfied and con-
tented.

VoL. 1.—14

210 FIRST CIVIL WAR [4 Aug.

We marched on to Shaftesbury, where we heard a great body
of them was drawn together about Hamilton [Hambledon] Hill ;
—where indeed near two-thousand were gathered. I sent a
forlorn of about fifty Horse; who coming very civilly to
them, they fired upon them; and they desiring some of them to
come to me, were refused with disdain. They were drawn into
one of the old camps,! upon a very high hill: I sent one Mr.
Lee? to them, To certify the peaceableness of my intentions, and
to desire them to peaceableness, and to submit to the Parliament.
They refused, and fired at us. I sent him a second time, to let
them know, that if they would lay down their arms, no wrong
should be done them. They still (through the animation of their
leaders, and especially two vile ministers) refused ; I commanded
your Captain-Lieutenant to draw up to them, to be in readiness
to charge ; and if upon his falling on, they would lay down arms,
to accept them and spare them. When he came near, they
refused his offer, and let fly at him; killed about two of his men,
and at least four horses, and passage not being for above three
a-breast, kept them out: whereupon Major Desburgh wheeled
about ; got in the rear of them, beat them from the work, and
did some small execution upon them; I believe killed not
twelve of them, but cut very many, and we have taken about
300; many of which are ® poor silly creatures, whom if you please
to let me send home, they promise to be very dutiful for time to
come, and will be hanged before they come out again.

The ringleaders which we have, I hope to bring to you. They
had taken divers of the Parliament soldiers prisoners, besides
Colonel Fienes his men; and used them most barbarously ;
bragging, they hoped to see my Lord Hopton, that he is to
command them; they expected from Wilts great store; and
gave out they meant to raise the siege at Sherborne + when they

Roman Camps (Gough's Camden, i. 52).
2*One Mr. Lee who, upon the approach of ours, came from them,’ (Sprigge, p.

-)
3[“ a” in orig. ] 4[“ Shaftesbury” evased. }

1645. ] LETTER XXXI, BRISTOL 211

were all met. We have gotten good store of their arms, and
they carried few or none home. We quarter about ten miles off,
and purpose to draw our quarters near to you to-morrow.
Your most humble servant,
OLiveR CromwELL.*

‘On Tuesday at night, August 5th, the Lieutenant-General’
Cromwell ‘with his party returned to Sherborne,’ where the
General and the rest were very busy besieging the inexpugnable
Sir Lewis Dives.

‘This work,’ which the Lieutenant-General had now been
upon, continues Sprigge, ‘though unhappy, was very necessary.’ !
No messenger could be sent out but he was picked up by these
Clubmen ; these once dispersed, ‘a man might ride very quietly
from Sherborne to Salisbury. The inexpugnable Sir Lewis
Dives (a thrasonical person known to the readers of Evelyn),
after due battering, was now soon stormed: whereupon, by
Letters found on him, it became apparent how deeply Royalist
this scheme of Clubmen had been; ‘Commissions for raising
Regiments of Clubmen ;’ the design to be extended over England
at large, ‘yea into the Associated Counties :’ however, it has now
come to nothing; and the Army turns Northward to the Siege
of Bristol, where Prince Rupert is doing all he can to entrench
himself.?

LETTER XXXI
STORM OF BRISTOL

‘On the Lord’s Day, September 21, according to Order of Par-
‘liament, Lieutenant-General Cromwell’s Letter on the taking
‘of Bristol was read in several Congregations about London, and

* Newspapers (Cromwelliana, p, 20). [Now printed from the holograph original
in Tanner MSS. 1x. 236. ]

1Sprigge, p. 81.

2(On arriving at Keynsham, a little to the south of Bristol, Cromwell seems to
have escaped a danger of another sort, for the AZoderate Intelligencer for the week
August 28-Sept. 4 states that the general officers had been called away from the
place, and that ‘‘it was since understood that the contagion was in the house where
Lieut.-Gen. Cromwell, Lieut.-Gen, Hammond and Col. Pickering lay; but the zeal
to the public makes those things looked over."’ (E. 299 (8).)]

212 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Sept.

‘thanks returned to Almighty God for the admirable and wonder-
‘ful reducing of that city. The Letter of that renowned Com-
‘mander is well worth observation.’! For the Siege itself and
what preceded and followed it, see, besides this Letter, Rupert’s
own account,? and the ample details of Sprigge copied with
abridgment by Rushworth: Sayer’s History of Bristol gives Plans,
and all manner of local details, though in a rather vague way.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Speaker of the Commons
House of Parliament ; These
Bristol, 14th September 1645.

Sir,

It hath pleased the General to give me in
charge to represent unto you a particular account of the taking
of Bristol ; the which I gladly undertake.

After the finishing of that service at Sherborne, it was disputed
at a council of war, Whether we should march into the West or
to Bristol. Amongst other arguments, the leaving so considerable
an enemy at our backs, to march into the heart of the Kingdom ;
the undoing of the country about Bristol, which was exceedingly
harassed by the Prince his being but a fortnight thereabouts ; the
correspondence he might hold in Wales ; the possibility of uniting
the enemy’s forces where they pleased, and especially the drawing
to an head the disaffected clubmen of Somerset, Wilts and
Dorset, when once our backs were towards them: these con-
siderations, together with the taking so important a place, so
advantageous for the opening of trade to London, did sway the
balance, and begat that conclusion.

When we came within four miles of the city, we had a new
debate, whether we should endeavour to block it up, or make a
regular siege. The latter being overruled, Colonel Welden with
his brigade marched to Pile Hill, on the south side of the city,
being within musket-shot thereof: where in a few days they
made a good quarter, overlooking the city. Upon our advance,
the enemy fired Bedminster, Clifton, and some other villages,

1 Newspapers, Cromwelliana, p. 24. 2 Rushworth, vii. 69, &c.

1645.] LETTER XXXII, BRISTOL 213

and would have fired the country thereabouts if our unexpected
coming had not hindered. The General caused some Horse and
Dragooners under Commissary-General Ireton to advance over
Avon, to keep-in the enemy on the north side of the town,
until the foot could come up: and after a day, the General,
with Colonel Montague’s and Colonel Rainsborowe’s brigades,
marched over at Keynsham to Stapleton, where he quartered
that night. The next day, Colonel Montague, having his post
assigned with his brigade, was to secure all between Froom and
Avon. He came up to Lawford’s Gate,! within musket-shot
thereof. Colonel Rainsborowe’s post was near to Durdham
Down, where the Dragooners and three regiments of Horse
made good a post upon the Down, between him and the River
Avon, on his right hand, and from Colonel Rainsborowe’s
quarters to Froom River, on his left. A part of Colonel Birch
and Major-General Skippon’s regiments were to maintain that
post.

These posts being thus settled, our Horse were forced to be
upon exceeding great duty, to stand by the Foot, lest the Foot,
being so weak in all their posts, might receive an affront ; and
truly herein we were very happy, that we should receive so little
loss by sallies, considering the paucity of our men to make good
their posts, and the strength of the enemy within. By sallies
(which were three or four) I know not that we lost thirty men,
in all the time of our siege. Of officers of quality, only Colonel
Okey was taken, by mistake going to the enemy, thinking them
to be friends, and Captain Guilliams slain in a charge. We took
Sir Bernard Asteley; and killed Sir Richard Crane, men very
considerable with the Prince.

We had a council of war concerning the storming of the
town, about eight days before we took it; and in that there
appeared great unwillingness to the work, through the unseason-
ableness of the weather, and other apparent difficulties. Some

1 One of the Bristol Gates.

214 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Sept.

inducement to bring us thither was the report of the good
affection of the townsmen to us; but that did not answer
expectation. Upona second consideration, it was overruled for a
storm, which no sooner concluded, but difficulties were removed,
and all things seemed to favour the design; and indeed there
hath been seldom the like cheerfulness in officers and soldiers
to any work like to this, after it was once resolved on. The day
and hour of our storm was appointed to be Wednesday morning,
the tenth, about one of the clock. We chose to act it so early
because we hoped thereby to surprise the enemy; with this
resolution also (to avoid confusion and falling foul one upon
another), that when we had recovered! the line, and forts
upon it, we would not to (sic) advance further until day. The
general signal unto the storm, was, the firing of straw, and
discharging four piece of cannon at Prior Hill Fort.

The signal was very well perceived by all, and truly the men
went on with great resolution, and very presently recovered the
line, making way for the Horse to enter. Colonel Montague
and Colonel Pickering, who stormed at Lawford’s Gate, where
was a double work, well filled with men and cannon, presently
entered, and with great resolution beat the enemy from their
works, and possessed their cannon. Their expedition was such
that they forced the enemy from their advantages, without any
considerable loss to themselves. ‘They laid down the bridges for
the Horse to enter; Major Desborowe commanding the Horse,
who very gallantly seconded the Foot. Then our Foot advanced
to the city walls, where they possessed the gate against the
Castle Street: whereinto were put an hundred men, who made
it good. Sir Hardresse Waller, with his and the General’s
regiment, with no less resolution, entered on the other side of
Lawford’s Gate, towards Avon River; and put themselves into
an immediate conjunction with the rest of the brigade.

During this, Colonel Rainborowe and Colonel Hammond at-

' yecovered means ‘taken,’ ‘ got possession of :' ¢he Line is a new earthen work
outside the walls ; very deficient in height, according to Rupert's account.

1645.] LETTER XXXI, BRISTOL 215

tempted Prior Hill Fort, and the line downwards towards Froome ;
Colonel Birch and the Major-General’s regiment being to storm
towards Froome River. Colonel Hammond possessed the line
immediately, and beating the enemy from it, made way for our
Horse to enter. Colonel Rainborowe, who had the hardest task
of all at Prior Hill Fort, attempted it; and fought near three
hours for it, and indeed there was great despair of carrying the
place ; it being exceeding high, a ladder of thirty rounds scarcely
reaching the top thereof; but his resolution was such that, not-
withstanding the inaccessibleness and difficulty, he would not
give it over. The enemy had four piece of cannon upon it ; which
they played with round and case shot upon our men: his Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Bowen and others were two hours at push of pike,
standing upon the palisadoes, but could not enter. Colonel
Hammond being entered the line, Captain Ireton,! with a forlorn
of Colonel Riche’s regiment (interposing with his Horse between
the enemy’s Horse and Colonel Hammond), received a shot with
two pistol-bullets, which broke hisarm. By means of hisentrance,
Colonel Hammond did storm the Fort on that part which was
inward; by which means, Colonel Rainborowe and Colonel
Hammond’s men entered the Fort, and immediately put to the
sword almost all in it, and as this was the place of most difficulty,
so ‘it was’ of most loss to us on that side, and of very great honour
to the undertakers. The Horse did second them with great
resolution :2 both those Colonels do acknowledge that their in-
terposition between the enemy’s Horse and their Foot was a
great means of obtaining this strong Fort, without which all the
rest of the line to Froome River would have done us little good :
and indeed neither Horse nor Foot would have stood in all that
way, in any manner of security, had not the Fort been taken.
Major Bethel’s were the first Horse entered the line; who did
behave himself very gallantly, and was shot in the thigh, had one
or two shot more, and his horse shot under him. Colonel Birch

1This is not the famous Ireton; this is his Brother. ‘ Commissary-General

Ireton,’ as we have seen (p. 213), is also here; he is not wedded yet.
2[«* And indeed” erased, apparently by Cromwell. ]

216 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Sept.

with his men, and the Major-General’s regiment, entered with
very great resolution where their post was; possessing the
enemy’s guns, and turning them upon them.

By this, all the line from Prior Hill Fort to Avon, which was
a full mile, with all the forts, ordnance and bulwarks, were
possessed by us but one, wherein there were about 120 men of the
Enemy ! which the General summoned, and all the men submitted.

The success on Colonel Welden’s side did not answer with
this; and although the Colonels, and other the officers and
soldiers both Horse and Foot, testified very much resolution, as
could be expected, Colonel Welden, Colonel Ingoldsby, Colonel
Herbert, and the rest of the Colonels and Officers, [both of Horse
and Foot],? doing what could be well looked for from men of
honour ; yet what by reason of the height of the works, which
proved higher than report made them, and the shortness of the
ladders, they were repulsed, with the loss of about 100 men.
Colonel Fortescue’s Lieutenant-Colonel was killed, Major Crom-
well? dangerously shot and two of Colonel Ingoldsby’s brothers
hurt ; with some officers.

Being possessed of thus much as hath been related, the town
was fired in three places by the enemy, which we could not put
out; and this begat a great trouble to the General and us all,
fearing to see so famous a city burnt to ashes before our faces.
Whiles we were viewing so sad a spectacle, and consulting which
way to make further advantage of our success, the Prince sent a
trumpet to the General to desire a treaty for the surrender of
the town, to which the General agreed; and deputed Colonel
Montague, Colonel Rainborowe, and Colonel Pickering for that
service ; authorising them with instructions to treat and conclude —
the Articles, which are these enclosed ; for performance whereof
hostages were mutually given.*

eemmengaie Says 220, but Sprigge gives the number correctly. ]

These words inserted in Cromwell's hand. ]
3A cousin. [Richard, second son of Sir Philip. ]
+(A letter written to the Speaker on the roth, by the commissioners with the

army, giving an account of the day’s work, is printed in the Azst. MSS. Com-
missioners Report on the Portland MSS. i, 268.)

1645.] LETTER XXXI, BRISTOL 217

On Thursday about two of the clock in the afternoon, the
Prince marched out ; having a convoy of two regiments of Horse
from us; and making election of Oxford for the place he would
go to, which he had liberty to do by his Articles.

The cannon which we have taken are about 140 mounted ;
about 100 barrels of powder already come to our hands, with a
good quantity of shot, ammunition, and arms. We have found
already between 2000 and 3000 muskets. The Royal Fort had
in it victuals for one-hundred-and-fifty men, for three-hundred-
and-twenty days; the Castle victualled for near half so long.
The Prince had Foot of the Garrison (as the Mayor of the City
informed me), two-thousand five-hundred, and about one thousand
Horse, besides the Trained Bands of the town, and Auxiliaries
1200, some say 1500. I hear but one man hath died of the
plague ! in all our army, although we have quartered amongst
and in the midst of infected persons and places. We had not
killed of ours in this storm, nor all this siege, 200 men.

Thus I have given you a true, but not a full account of this
great business ; wherein he that runs may read, That all this is
none other than the work of God. He must be a very Atheist
that doth not acknowledge it.

It may be thought that some praises are due to these gallant
men, of whose valour so much mention is made: their humble
suit to you and all that have an interest in this blessing, is, That
in the remembrance of God’s praises they may be forgotten. It’s
their joy that they are instruments to God’s glory, and their
country’s good ; it’s their honour that God vouchsafes to use them.
Sir, they that have been employed in this service know, that
faith and prayer obtained this city for you: I do not say ours
only, but of the people of God with you and all England over,
who have wrestled with God? for a blessing in this very thing.
Our desires are, that God may be glorified by the same spirit of

1[The scribe wrote ‘‘ black,” which is corrected to ‘‘ plague” by Cromwell. ]
2{*' waited on God” is corrected to ‘‘ wrestled with God” by Cromwell’s own
hand. |

213" FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Sept.

faith by which we asked all our sufficiency, and having received
it, it’s meet that He have all the praise. Presbyterians, Inde-
pendents, all had here the same spirit of faith and prayer; the
same pretence and answer; they agree here, know no names of
difference : pity it is it should be otherwise anywhere. All that
believe, have the real unity, which is most glorious, because in-
ward and spiritual, in the Body, and to the Head.!_ As for being
united in forms, commonly called Uniformity, every Christian will
for peace-sake study and do, as far as conscience will permit ;
and from brethren, in things of the mind we look for no compul-
sion, but that of light and reason. In other things, God hath
put the sword into the Parliament’s hands, for the terror of evil-
doers, and the praise of them that do well. If any plead
exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel : if any would wring
it out of your hands, or steal it from you under what pretence
soever, I hope they shall do it without effect. That God may
maintain it in your hands, and direct you in the use thereof, is
the prayer of
Your humble servant,
OuiverR CRoMWELL.*

These last paragraphs are, as the old Newspapers say, ‘very
remarkable.’ If modern readers suppose them to be ‘cant,’ it
will turn out an entire mistake. I advise all modern readers not
only to believe that Cromwell here means what he says ; but even
to try how they, each for himself in a new dialect, could mean the
like or something better !—

1« Head’ means Christ, ‘Body’ is True Church of Christ.

* Rushworth, vi. 85; Sprigge, pp. 112-118. [The original (from which it is now
printed) signed and here and there corrected by Cromwell, is at Welbeck. It
agrees with the version in Lords Jowrnads, which differs in many small points from
that given by Sprigge and Rushworth. But the Lords’ version is given as if sent by
Fairfax himself, and wherever the words ‘‘ the General” occur in Cromwell's letter,
they are omitted or altered. Also, the last part of the letter, from ‘‘two hundred
men,” is left out altogether. The official copies of Cromwell's despatches usually
left out his religious meditations and exhortations. Of this Dr. Gardiner writes:
‘Of Cromwell's warnings the Commons took little heed. They indeed ordered
that his despatch should be printed, but they took care to mutilate it, as they had
mutilated his despatch from Naseby. No word of his referring to the difference
between Presbyterians and Independents was, for the time, suffered to meet the

1645.) LETTER XXXII, WINCHESTER 219

Prince Rupert rode out of Bristol amid seas of angry human
faces, glooming unutterable things upon him ; growling audibly,
in spite of his escort, “ Why not hang him!” For indeed the
poor Prince had been necessitated to much plunder ; commanding
‘the elixir of the Blackguardism of the Three Kingdoms,’ with
very insufficient funds for most part !—He begged a thousand
muskets from Fairfax on this occasion, to assist his escort in pro-
tecting him across the country to Oxford; promising, on his
honour, to return them after that service. Fairfax lent the
muskets ; the Prince did honourably return them, what he had
of them,—honourably apologising that so many had ‘deserted ’
on the road, of whom neither man nor musket were recoverable
at present. !

LETTERS XXXII—XXXV

From Bristol the Army turned Southward again, to deal with
the yet remaining force of Royalism in that quarter. Sir Ralph
Hopton, with Goring and others under him, made stubborn
resistance ; but were constantly worsted, at Langport, at Torring-
ton, wheresoever they rallied and made a new attempt.2 The
Parliament Army went steadily and rapidly on; storming Bridge-
water, storming all manner of Towns and Castles; clearing the

public eye.” Great Civil War, ii. 320. The omitted paragraph was afterwards
printed in a pamphlet entitled Strong Motives (E. 304, No. 15). The action of Parlia-
ment may, however, conceivably have been due simply to a desire, not to suppress
but to compress Cromwell's account, publishing the news for the information of
the public, but omitting the reflections which, they perhaps thought, were intended
only for themselves. ]

1 (It will be remembered that as Rupert surrendered Bristol to Fairfax in 1645,
so Fiennes had surrendered it to Rupert in 1643. After its recovery, Fairfax wrote a
congratulatory letter to Fiennes’ father, Lord Say, telling him that his son’s ‘‘ honour
and innocency”’ were now fully vindicated, and stating that Lieut.-General Cromwell
intended to make a full relation, clearing the whole business. In the pamphlet in
which this letter is printed, is also a Declaration by Fairfax and his officers, in vin-
dication of Fiennes, which Mr, Firth thinks may be the ‘‘ Relation’”’ in question.
See Notes and Queries, 7th series, ix. p. 181. ]

2(This account is confused. The battle of Langport, as we have seen, was
fought on July 10, two months before Bristol was taken, and Bridgewater was
stormed on July 22. Torrington, on the other hand, was Hopton’s last stand
and was not stormed until February 16, 1645-6. ‘The chief places taken in the
interval between the surrender of Bristol and of Winchester were Devizes, Laycock
House, and Berkeley Castle. |

220 FIRST CIVIL WAR [6 Oct.

ground before them: till Sir Ralph was driven into Cornwall ;
and, without resource or escape, saw himself obliged next spring 4
to surrender, and go beyond seas. A brave and honourable man ;
respected on both sides ; and of all the King’s Generals the most
deserving respect. He lived in retirement abroad; taking no
part in Charles Second’s businesses; and died in honourable
poverty before the Restoration.

The following Three Letters? are what remain to us concern-
ing Cromwell’s share in that course of victories. _He was present
in various general or partial Fights from Langport to Bovey Tracey;
became especially renowned by his Sieges, and took many Strong
Places besides those mentioned here.

LETTER XXXII
For the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esq., Speaker of the

House of Commons : ®

Winton, 6th October 1645.
Sir,

I came to Winchester on the Lord’s day, being
the 28th of September, with Colonel Pickering, commanding his
own, Colonel Mountague’s, and Sir Hardress Waller's regiments,
After some dispute with the Governor, we entered the town. I
summoned the Castle; was denied ; whereupon we fell to prepare
our batteries, which we could not perfect (some of our guns
being out of order) until Friday following. Our battery was six
guns ; which being finished,—after one firing of them round, I
sent him a second summons for a treaty; which he refused;
whereupon we went on with our work, and made a breach in
the wall near the Black Tower; which, after about 200 shot, we
thought stormable ; and purposed on Monday morning to attempt

1 Truro, March 14, 1645-6 (Rushworth, vi. r10).

? Appendix, No. g, contains Two more: Battle of Langport, and Summons to |
Winchester (/Voze of 1857).

3['The original of this letter is at Welbeck. Carlyle, following Rushworth, sup-
posed it to be written to Fairfax. ]

4[See Appendix, No. 9 (2) for the summons, and o/e on the same for the
Governor's answer. |

1645.) LETTER XXXII, WINCHESTER 221

it. On Sunday night, about ten of the clock, the Governor beat
a parley, desiring to treat. I agreed unto it ; and sent Colonel
Hammond and Major Harrison in to him, who agreed upon these
enclosed Articles.

Sir, this is the addition of another mercy. You see God is
not weary in doing you good: I confess, Sir, His favour to you
is as visible, when He comes by His power upon the hearts of
your enemies, making them quit places of strength to you, as
when He gives courage to your soldiers to attempt hard things ;
His goodness in this is much to be acknowledged.

For the Castle was well manned with 680 foot and horse, there
being near 200 gentlemen, officers, and their servants; well
victualled, with very great store of wheat and beer,! 15,000 weight
of cheese, near 20 barrels of powder, 7 piece of cannon; the
works were exceeding good and strong. It’s very likely it would
have cost much blood to have gained it by storm. We have not
lost twelve men: this is repeated to you, that God may have all
the praise, for it’s all His due.

Sir, I rest,
Your most humble servant,
Ouiver CRoMWELL.*

P.S. I understand exceptions are taken at my giving a pass
to Mr. Chichley to come into Cambridgeshire to see his lady.
Truly, Sir, I did it upon the suggestion of his lady’s being very

1[Spelt ‘‘beare”’ in the original. The editor of the rst volume of the Report on
the Portland MSS. suggests that it may mean the corn of that name, but cheese,
wheat and beer are very commonly mentioned together, while the mention of
“‘beare’”’ is not very usual, except in Ireland. Moreover, the scribe originally
wrote ‘‘ great store of wheat, 15,000 weight of cheese and beare”’ afterwards erasing
the beer and entering it above instead ; and in the list given in Rushworth, we find
x12 hogsheads of beer, but no grain except wheat. ]

*Sprigge, p. 128; Newspapers (in Cvomwedl/iana, p, 25); Rushworth, iv. 91.
[Now printed from the original at Welbeck, with the addition of the postscript,
which is not in any of the printed texts. With the original is also the copy of
Articles stated by Cromwell to be enclosed. ‘This is printed by Rushworth (iv. 1.
gt), but with two mistakes. In the first Article, ‘‘ function” should be ‘‘ furniture,”
and in the fifth, ‘‘ be in their own time” should be “‘ live at their own homes.” Rush-
worth also prints a list of the provisions found in the castle. Hugh Peters was chaplain
to the train of artillery. It does not appear that he acted as Cromwell's secretary. ]

222 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Oct.

ill and much desiring to see him, she being (as I believe you
will hear) a virtuous woman and sister to a true servant of yours,
Colonel Russells. I thought it to be an act of humanity. I shall
not hereafter presume. I can say I have done you service by
some civilities, nor have I taken liberty this way, 1 hope I never
shall, but out of judgment to serve you. If it offend the House,
I ask their pardon, and had rather be chidden by you than
accused by them from whom I have not deserved any jealousy
of me, who truly bear an upright heart to the public, and am
sorry I need this apology.

Sir, Mr. Peeters is to wait upon you with some considerations
concerning the army which it may be are not so fit to be com-
mitted to writing, yet very fit you should seasonably be acquainted
with them, wherein I beseech you to hear him.

‘Lieutenant-General Cromwell’s Secretary,’ who brings this
Letter, gets 50/. for his good news.!_ By Sprigge’s account,” he
appears to have been ‘ Mr. Hugh Peters,’ this Secretary. Peters
there makes a verbal Narrative of the affair, to Mr. Speaker and
the Commons, which, were not room so scanty, we should be
glad to insert.

It was at this surrender of Winchester that certain of the cap-
tive enemies having complained of being plundered contrary to
Articles, Cromwell had the accused parties, six of his own sol-
diers, tried: being all found guilty, one of them by lot was
hanged, and the other five were marched off to Oxford, to be
there disposed of as the Governor saw fit. The Oxford
Governor politely returned the five prisoners, ‘with an acknow-
ledgment of the Lieutenant-General’s nobleness.’

LETTER XXXIII

Basinc House, Pawlet Marquis of Winchester’s Mansion,
stood, as the ruined heaps still testify, at a small distance from |
Basingstoke in Hampshire. It had long infested the Parlia-

1 Commons Journals, 7th October 1645.
2p. 129. 3 Sprigge, p. 133.

1645.) LETTER XXXII, BASINGSTOKE 223

ment in those quarters; and been especially a great eyesorrow
to the ‘Trade of London with the Western Parts.’ With
Dennington Castle at Newbury, and this Basing House at
Basingstoke, there was no travelling the western roads, except
with escort, or on sufferance. The two places had often been
attempted ; but always in vain. Basing House especially had
stood siege after siege, for four years ; ruining poor Colonel This
and then poor Colonel That; the jubilant Royalists had given
it the name of Basting House:! there was, on the Parliament
side a kind of passion to have Basing House taken. The
Lieutenant-General, gathering all the artillery he can lay hold
of; firing incessantly, 200 or 500 shot at some given point till
he see a hole made; and then storming like a fire-flood :—he
perhaps may manage it.

[To the Honourable William Lenthall, Speaker of the
Commons House of Parliament: These]
Basingstoke, 14th October 1645.

Sir,
I thank God, I can give you a good account

of Basing. After our batteries placed, we settled the several
posts for the storm: Colonel Dalbier was to be on the north
side of the House near the Grange; Colonel Pickering on his
left hand, and Sir Hardress Waller’s and Colonel Montague’s
regiments next him. We stormed, this morning, after six of
the clock: the signal for falling on was the firing four of our
cannon ; which being done, our men fell on with great resolu-
tion and cheerfulness. We took the two houses without any
considerable loss to ourselves. Colonel Pickering stormed the
New House, passed through, and got the gate of the Old
House; whereupon they summoned a parley, which our men
would not hear,

In the meantime Colonel Montague’s and Sir Hardress Wal-
ler’s regiments assaulted the strongest work, where the enemy
kept his court of guard ; which, with great resolution, they
recovered ; beating the enemy from a whole culverin, and from

1 (But Loyalty House was what its owner loved to call it. See p. 227 below.]

224 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Oct.

that work: which having done, they drew their ladders after
them, and got over another work, and the house-wall, before
they could enter. In this Sir Hardress Waller, performing his
duty with honour and diligence, was shot in the arm, but not
dangerous.

We have had little loss: many of the Enemy our men put to
the sword, and some officers of quality ; most of the rest we
have prisoners, amongst which the Marquis ‘ of Winchester him-
self, and Sir Robert Peake, with divers other officers, whom I
have ordered to be sent up to you. We have taken about ten
pieces of ordnance, with much ammunition, and our soldiers a
good encouragement.

I humbly offer to you, to have this place utterly slighted, for
these following reasons: It will ask about eight-hundred men to
manage it; it is no frontier; the country is poor about it; the
place exceedingly ruined by our batteries and mortar-pieces, and
by a fire which fell upon the place since our taking it. If you
please to take the Garrison at Farnham, some out of Chichester,
and a good part of the foot which were here under Dalbier, and
to make a strong quarter at Newbury with three or four troops
of horse, I dare be confident it would not only be a curb to
Dennington, but a security and a frontier to all these parts ;
inasmuch as Newbury lies upon the river, and will prevent any
incursion from Dennington, Wallingford or Farringdon into
these parts; and by lying there, will make the trade most
secure between Bristol and London for all carriages. And I
believe the gentlemen of Sussex and Hampshire will with more
cheerfulness contribute to maintain a garrison on a frontier than
in their bowels, which will have less safety in it.

Sir, I hope not to delay, but march towards the West tomorrow ;
and to be as diligent as [ may in my expedition thither. I must
speak my judgment to you, That if you intend to have your work
carried on, recruits of Foot must be had, and a course taken to
pay your army ; else, believe me, Sir, it may not be able to answer
the work you have for it to do.

1645.) LETTER XX XIII, BASING HOUSE 225

I entreated Colonel Hammond to wait upon you, who was
taken by a mistake whilst we lay before this Garrison, whom
God safely delivered to us, to our great joy ; but to his loss of
almost all he had, which the enemy took from him. The Lord
grant that these mercies may be acknowledged with all thank-
fulness: God exceedingly abounds in His goodness to us, and
will not be weary until righteousness and peace meet and that
He hath brought forth a glorious work for the happiness of this
poor Kingdom. Wherein desires to serve God and you, with a

faithful heart,
Your most humble servant,

Otiver CRoMWELL.*

Colonel Hammond, whom we shall by and by see again,
brought this good news to London, and had his reward, of 2001. ;?
Mr. Peters also, being requested ‘to make a relation to the
House of Commons, spake as follows.’ The reader will like to
hear Mr. Peters for once, a man concerning whom he has heard
so many falsehoods, and to see an old grim scene through his
eyes. Mr. Peters related :

“That he came into Basing House some time after the storm,”
on Tuesday 14th of October 1645 ;—“and took a view first of
“the works ; which were many, the circumvallation being above
“a mile compass. The Old House had stood (as it is reported)
“two or three hundred years, a nest of Idolatry ; the New House
“surpassing that, in beauty and stateliness; and either of them
“fit to make an emperor's court.

“The rooms before the storm (it seems), in both Houses, were
all completely furnished ; provisions for some years rather than
“months ; 400 quarters of wheat; bacon divers rooms-full, con-
“taining hundreds of flitches ; cheese proportionable ; with oat-
“meal, beef, pork ; beer divers cellars-full, and that very good,”
—Mr. Peters having taken a draught of the same.

“A bed in one room, furnished, which cost 1,300/. Popish
“books many, with copes, and such utensils. That in truth,
“the House stood in its full pride; and the Enemy was per-

* Sprigge, pp. 137-9; Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 27); and Hari. MSS.
787. [f 73. An old copy.]
1 Commons Journals (15th October 1645), iv. 309.
voL., 1.—15

226 FIRST CIVIL WAR [14 Oct.

“suaded that it would be the last piece of ground that would
“be taken by the Parliament, because they had so often foiled
“our forces which had formerly appeared before it. In the
‘several rooms and about the House, there were slain seventy-
“four, and only one woman, the daughter of Dr. Griffith, who
“by her railing,’ poor lady, “provoked our soldiers (then in
heat) into a further passion. There lay dead upon the ground,
“ Major Cuffle ;—a man of great account amongst them, and a
“notorious Papist; slain by the hands of Major Harrison (that
“godly and gallant gentleman)”’,—all men know him; “and
“Robinson the Player,! who, a little before the storm, was known
“to be mocking and scorning the Parliament and our Army.
“Eight or nine gentlewomen of rank, running forth together,
“were entertained by the common soldiers somewhat coarsely,
“yet not uncivilly, considering the action in hand.

“The plunder of the soldiers continued till Tuesday night:
“one soldier had an hundred-and-twenty Pieces in gold for his
“share ; others plate, others jewels ;—amongst the rest, one got
“three bags of silver, which (he being not able to keep his own
“ counsel) grew to be common pillage amongst the rest, and the
“fellow had but one half-crown left for himself at last —Also
“the soldiers sold the wheat to country-people ; which they held
“up at good rates awhile; but afterwards the market fell, and
“there were some abatements for haste. After that, they sold the
“household stuff, whereof there was good store, and the country
“loaded away many carts; and continued a great while, fetchin
“out all manner of household stuff, till they had fetched out all
“the stools, chairs, and other lumber, all which they sold to the
“country-people by piecemeal.

“Tn all these great houses, there was not one iron bar left in
“all the windows (save only what was in the fire), before night.
“And the last work of all was the lead; and by Thursday
“morning, they had hardly left one gutter about the House.
“And what the soldiers left, the fire took hold on, which made
“more than ordinary haste; leaving nothing but bare walls and
“chimneys in less than twenty hours ;—being occasioned by the
“neglect of the Enemy in quenching a fire-ball of ours at first.” —
What a scene!

“We know not how to give a just account of the number of
“persons that were within. For we have not three-hundred

'[‘* Robinson the player was taken there. He was in Drury Lane, a comedian,
but now he acted his own tragedy.” (Diary, or an Exact Journal, E. 305. 7.)]

1645.) LETTER XXXIII, BASING HOUSE 227

“prisoners ; and it may be, an hundred slain,—[of] whose bodies,
“some, being covered with rubbish, came not to our view,! only,
“riding to the House on Tuesday night, we heard divers crying
“in vaults for quarter ; but our men could neither come to them,
“nor they to us. But amongst those that we saw slain, one of
“ their officers lying on the ground, seeming so exceeding tall, was
“measured ; and from his great toe to his crown was 9 foot in
“length” (sic).

“The Marquis being pressed, by Mr. Peters arguing with him,”
which was not very chivalrous in Mr. Peters, “broke out and
“said, ‘That if the King had no more ground in England but
“Basing House, he would adventure as he did, and so maintain
“it to the uttermost ;’—meaning with these Papists ; comforting
“himself in this disaster, ‘That Basing House was called Loyalty.’
“‘ But he was soon silenced in the question concerning the King
‘and Parliament ; only hoping that the King might have a day
“‘again.—And thus the Lord was pleased in a few hours to show
“us what mortal seed all earthly glory grows upon; and how
“just and righteous the ways of God are, who takes sinners in
“their own snares, and lifteth up the heads of His despised
* people.

“This is now the twentieth garrison that hath been taken in
“this Summer, by this Army ;—and, I believe most of them the
“answers of the prayers, and trophies of the faith, of some of
“God’s servants, the Commander of this Brigade,” Lieutenant-
General Cromwell, “having spent much time with God in prayer
“the night before the storm ;—and seldom fighting without some
“Text of Scripture to support him. This time he rested upon
‘*that blessed word of God, written in the hundred-and-fifteenth
“ Psalm, eighth verse, They that make them are like unto them ; so
“ts every one that trusteth in them, which, with some verses going
“ before, was now accomplished.” ?

1[The number of the slain was never accurately known. Dr. Gardiner thinks this
estimate is probably about right (Great Civil War, ii. 364), but Vicars says near
three hundred (Burning Bush, p. 291%) and Mr. Firth believes this number to be
more likely (O/iver Cromwell, p. 133). Peters appears to have gone off to London
before there had been time to ascertain the exact details. The volume of the
King’s Pamphlets, E. 305, has various notices of the storm. |

2 Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory; for thy mercy
‘and for thy truth’s sake. Wherefore should the Heathen say, Where is now their
‘God? Our God is in the Heavens : he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased |—
‘ Their Idols are silver and gold ; the work of men’s hands, They have mouths, but
‘they speak not ; eyes have they, but they see not: they have ears, but they hear
‘not; noses have they, but they smell not ; they have hands, but they handle not ;

228 FIRST CIVIL WAR [16 Oct.

‘Mr. Peters presented the Marquis’s own Colours, which he
‘brought from Basing ; the Motto of which was, Donec pax redeat
‘terris: the very same King Charles gave upon his Coronation-
‘money, when he came to the Crown.’!1—So Mr. Peters; and
then withdrew,—getting by and by 200/. a-year settled on him.?

This Letter was read in all Pulpits next Sunday, with thanks
rendered to Heaven, by order of Parliament. Basing House is
to be carted away ; ‘whoever will come for brick or stone shall
freely have the same for his pains.’ #

Among the names of the Prisoners taken here one reads that
of Ingo Jones,—unfortunate old Inigo. Vertue, on what evidence
I know not, asserts farther that Wenceslaus Hollar, with his
graving tools, and unrivalled graving talent, was taken here.*
The Marquis of Winchester had been addicted to the Arts,—to
the Upholsteries perhaps still more. A magnificent kind of man:
whose ‘best bed,’ now laid bare to general inspection, excited the
wonder of the world.

LETTER XXXIV

Fairrax, with the Army, is in Devonshire; the following
Letter will find him at Tiverton ; Cromwell marching that way,
having now ended Basing. It is ordered in the Commons House
that Cromwell be thanked ; moreover that he now attack Den-
nington Castle, of which we heard already at Newbury. These
messages, as I gather, reached him at Basing, late ‘last night,’
—Wednesday 15th, the day they were written in London.5
Thursday morning early, he marched; has come (‘came,’ he
calls it) as far as Wallop; purposes still to make a forced march
‘to Langford House to-night’ * (probably with horse only, and

‘feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they through their throat! They
‘that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them.’—These
words, awful as the words of very God, were in Oliver Cromwell's heart that night.

'Sprigge, pp. 139-42. [But the Marquis’s own motto was 4 lymez loyaulté. |

2 Whitlocke. 5 Commons Journals, iv. 309.

4 Life of Hollar, > Commons Journals (iv. 309), r5th Oct. 1645.

8[There were several mis-readings in this letter as printed by Carlyle, one or two
of which altered the sense, Reading ‘‘in today’s march I came to Wallop,” and,
further on, ‘‘I shall be at Langford House to-night,” he supposed that Cromwell did
the whole in one day, whereas, no doubt, he started on Wednesday, the rsth (as in
his letter of the r4th he announced his intention of doing) and arrived at Langford
on the 17th, as he states in his next letter. ]

1645) LETTER XXXIV., WALLOP 229

leave the foot to follow) ;—answers meanwhile his messages here
(see next Letter), and furthermore writes this :

To the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the
Parliament's Army : 1 Haste: These

Wallop, 16th October 1645.
Sir,
In two days march I came to Wallop, twenty

miles from Basing, towards you. That night I received this
enclosed from the Speaker of the House of Commons, which I
thought fit to send you; and to which I returned an answer, a
copy whereof I have also sent enclosed to you.?

I perceive that it’s the desire to have the place? taken-in.
But truly I could not do other than let them know what the
condition of affairs in the West are, and submit the business to them
and you. I shall be at Langford tomorrow night, if God please.
I hope the work will not be long. If it should, I will rather
leave a small part of the foot (if Horse will not be sufficient to
take it in), than be detained from obeying such commands as I
shall receive. 1 humbly beseech you to be confident that no man
hath a more faithful heart to serve you than myself, nor shall be
more strict to observe your commands than

Your most humble servant,
OLiveR CrRoMWELL.

Sir, I beseech you to let me have your resolution in this busi-
ness with all the possible speed that may be ; because whatsoever _
I be designed to, I wish I may speedily endeavour it, time being
so precious for action in this season.*

Langford House, whither Oliver is now bound, hoping to arrive

1Marching from Collumpton to Tiverton, while Cromwell writes (Sprigge, p.

334). ‘
[This letter to Lenthall has not been discovered. }
5 Dennington Castle.

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 61 [127]—only the Signature is in Oliver’s hand.
{Sealed with the Cromwell arms. ] ;

230 FIRST CIVIL WAR [17 Oct.

tonight, is near Salisbury.!_ He did arrive accordingly ; drew out
part of his brigade, and summoned the place ;—here is his own
most brief account of the business.

LETTER XXXV

To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the
Honourable House of Commons: These

Salisbury, 17th October (12 at night) 1645.

Sir,

I gave you an account, the last night, of my
marching to Langford House, whither I came this day, and
immediately sent them ina summons. The Governor desired I
should send two Officers to treat with him, and I accordingly
appointed Lieutenant-Colonel Hewson and Major Kelsey there-
unto. The Treaty produced the Agreement, which I have here
enclosed to you.

The General, I hear, is advanced as far West as Collumpton,
and hath sent some Horse and Foot to Tiverton. It is earnestly
desired, that this force? might march up to him ;—it being con-
venient that we stay a day for our Foot that are behind and
coming up.

I wait your answer to my Letter ‘last night’ from Wallop: I
shall desire that your pleasure may be speeded to me ;—and rest,

Sir,
Your humble servant,
OLIVER CRoMWELL.*
1[Langford House belonged to Lord Coleraine. Lieut.-Gen. Sir Bartholomew
Pell was governor. It had been unsuccessfully besieged by Waller and Cromwell
in the previous April (See 4 Diary, E. 278 (29)). Early in October there was a
report in London that it had fallen on the grd inst. On October 7 the Moderate
Intelligencer wrote: ‘‘They say there will be wagers laid that Basing is taken
before Langford. When both are taken, then the way is open, and passage for
trade clear, which is worth a little more than thanks.” (E. 304 (r1).) Major
William Ludlow was appointed governor; Col. Hewson reported the surrender,

and got so/. to buy himself two good horses. ]
2[‘‘ those Foot” in pamphlet ; printed ‘‘ more foot” by Carlyle. |

*King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 229 [E. 305], art. 19 (no. 42 of The Weekly
Account). [Now printed from the original in the possession of Captain Lindsay.

1645.) LETTER XXXV., SALISBURY — 231

Basing is black ashes, then; and Langford is ours, the Garri-
son to march forth tomorrow at twelve of the clock, being the
18th instant.! And now the question is, Shall we attack Den-
nington or not ?—

Colonel Dalbier, a man of Dutch birth, well known to readers
of the old Books, is with Cromwell at present; his Second in
command. It was from Dalbier that Cromwell first of all learned
the mechanical part of soldiering ; he had Dalbier to help him
in drilling his Ironsides ; so says Heath, credible on such a point.?
Dennington Castle was not besieged at present ; it surrendered
next spring to Dalbier.? Cromwell returned to Fairfax ; served
through Winter with him in the West, till all ended there.

About a month before the date of this Letter, the King had
appeared again with some remnant of force, got together in Wales ;
with intent to relieve Chester, which was his key to Ireland: but
this force too he saw shattered to pieces on Rowton Heath, near
that City.4 He had also had an eye towards the great Montrose
in Scotland, who in these weeks was blazing at his highest there :
but him too David Lesley with dragoons, emerging from the mist
of the Autumn morning, on Philipshaugh near Selkirk, had, in one
fell hour, trampled utterly out. The King had to retire to Wales
again; to Oxford and obscurity again.

On the 14th of next March, as we said, Sir Ralph Hopton
surrendered himself in Cornwall. On the 22d of the same
month, Sir Jacob Astley, another distinguished Royalist General,
the last of them all,—coming towards Oxford with some small
force he had gathered,—was beaten and captured at Stow
among the Wolds of Gloucestershire :® surrendering himself,
the brave veteran said, or is reported to have said, “ You have
now done your work, and may go to play,—unless you will fall
out among yourselves.”

Signed. Seal of Arms. On outside, note in different hand ‘‘ on Tuesday night
last the forces of Abbington and Hame House went to Farrington, and took 200
horse and 60 foot, and were like to take the garrison.’’]

‘Sprigge, p. 145.

2[Mr. Firth thinks Heath’s story improbable ‘‘as Dalbier served under Essex,
and not in the army of the Eastern Association”. See life of Dalbier, Dict, Wat.
Biog. Supplement.)

3st April 1646 (Rushworth. vi. 252).

4 24th September 1645 (Rushworth, vi. 117; Lord Digby's account of it, Ormond
Papers, ii. 90).

5 Hopton’s own account of it, Ormond Papers, ii, 109-26,

6 Rushworth, vi, 139-41. :

232 FIRST CIVIL WAR [27 April

On Monday night, towards twelve of the clock, 27th April
1646, the King in disguise rode out of Oxford, somewhat un-
certain whitherward,—at length towards Newark and the Scots
Army.!. On the Wednesday before, Oliver Cromwell had
returned to his place in Parliament.2 Many detached Castles
and Towns still held out, Ragland Castle even till the next
August ; scattered fires of an expiring conflagration, that need
to be extinguished with effort and in detail. Of all which
victorious sieges, with their elaborate treaties and moving
accidents, the theme of every tongue during that old Summer,
let the following one brief glimpse, notable on private grounds,
suffice us at present.

Oxford, the Royalist metropolis, a place full of Royalist digni-
taries, and of almost inexpugnable strength, had it not been so
disheartened from without,—was besieged by Fairfax himself in
the first days of May. There was but little fighting, there was
much negotiating, tedious consulting of Parliament and King;
the treaty did not end in surrender till Saturday 20th June.
And now, dated on the Monday before, at Holton, a country
Parish in those parts, there is this still legible in the old Church
Register, — intimately interesting to some friends of ours!
‘Henry Ireton, Commissary-General to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
‘and Brincet, Daughter to Oliver Cromwell, Lieutenant-
‘General of the Horse to the said Sir Thomas Fairfax,—were
‘married, by Mr. Dell, in the Lady Whorwood her House in
‘Holton, 15th June 1646.—A.zBan Eatss, Rector.®

Ireton, we are to remark, was one of Fairfax’s Commissioners
on the Treaty for surrendering Oxford, and busy under the walls
there at present: Holton is some five miles east of the City;
Holton House we guess by various indications to have been
Fairfax’s own quarter. Dell, already and afterwards well
known, was the General’s Chaplain at this date. Of ‘the Lady
Whorwood’ I have traces, rather in the Royalist direction ; her

1 Rushworth, vi. 267; /ter Carolinum. [At three in the morning of the 27th,
Payne says. See Cary, Memorials of the Civil War, i. p. t2.]

2 Cromwelliana, p. 31. [ ‘‘ The ever-renowned and never to be forgotten Lieut. -
Gen, Cromwell came this day [23rd] into the House of Commons and sat there as
a member, the house much rejoicing at his presence and welfare” and desiring
Mr. Speaker to give him hearty thanks for his great services, ‘‘ which Mr,
Speaker did accordingly.” (Perfect Diurnal, E. 506. (35). ]

® Parish Register of Holton (copied, Oct. 1846). Poor Noble (i. 134) seems to
have copied this same Register, and to have misread his own Note: giving instead
of Holton, Va/ton, an imaginary place ; and instead of June, January, an .mpos-
sible date. See antea, p. 62; postea, Letter XLI. p, 245.

1646.) LETTER XXXV., NEW MEMBERS 233

strong moated House, very useful to Fairfax in those weeks,
still stands conspicuous in that region, though now under new
figure and ownership; drawbridge become fixed, deep ditch now
dry, moated island changed into a flower-garden ;—‘ rebuilt in
1807.’ Fairfax’s Lines, we observe, extended ‘from Heading-
ton Hill to Marston,’ several miles in advance of Holton House,
then ‘from Marston across the Cherwell, and over from that to
‘the Isis on the North side of the City ;’ southward and else-
where, the besieged, ‘by a dam at St. Clement’s Bridge, had
laid the country all under water:’1—in such scene, with the
treaty just ending and general Peace like to follow, did Ireton
welcome his Bride,—a brave young damsel of twenty-one ;
escorted, doubtless by her Father among others, to the Lord
General’s house; and there, by the Rev. Mr. Dell, solemnly
handed over to new destinies!

This wedding was on Monday 15th June ;? on Saturday came
the final signing of the treaty: and directly thereupon, on
Monday eat, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice took the road,
with their attendants, and their passes to the sea-coast ; a sight
for the curious. On Tuesday ‘there went about 300 persons,
mostly of quality ;’ and on Wednesday all the Royalist force,
‘ 3,000’ (or say 2,000) ‘to the Eastward, 500 to the North ;’ with
‘drums beating, colours flying,’ for the last time ; all with passes,
with agitated thoughts and outlooks: and in sacred Oxford, as
poor Wood intimates,’ the abomination of desolation supervened !
—Oxford surrendering with the King’s sanction quickened other
surrenders ; Ragland Castle itself, and the obstinate old Marquis,
gave in before the end of August: and the First Civil War, to
the last ember of it, was extinct.

The Parliament, in these circumstances, was now getting itself
‘recruited,’-—its vacancies filled up again. The Royalist Mem-
bers who had deserted three years ago, had been, without much
difficulty, successively ‘disabled,’ as their crime came to light:
but to issue new writs for new elections, while the quarrel with
the King still lasted, was a matter of more delicacy ; this too,
however, had at length been resolved upon, the Parliament
Cause now looking so decidedly prosperous, in the Autumn of
1645. Gradually, in the following months, the new Members

1 Rushworth, vi. 279-285.

2[In the Supplement (No, 16) will be found a letter to the Earl of Clare, written
the day after the wedding. }

3 Fastz, ii. 58, sec, edit.

234 FIRST CIVIL WAR (1646.

were elected, above Two-hundred-and-thirty of them in all.
These new Members, ‘ Recruiters,’ as Anthony Wood and the
Royalist world reproachfully call them, were by the very fact
of their standing candidates in such circumstances, decided
Puritans all,—Independents many of them. Colonel, afterwards
Admiral Blake (for Taunton), Ludlow, Ireton (for Appleby),
Algernon Sidney, Hutchinson, known by his Wife’s Memoirs,
were among these new members. Fairfax, on his Father's
death some two years hence, likewise came in.!

1 The Writ is issued 16th March 1647-8 (Commons Journals),

PART III
BETWEEN THE TWO CIVIL WARS

1646—1648

LETTERS XXXVI—XLII

Tue conquering of the King had been a difficult operation ; but
to make a Treaty with him now when he was conquered, proved
an impossible one. The Scots, to whom he had fled, entreated
him, at last, ‘with tears’ and ‘on their knees,’ to take the
Covenant, and sanction the Presbyterian worship, if he could not
adopt it: on that condition they would fight to the last man for
him ; on no other condition durst or would a man of them fight
for him. The English Presbyterians, as yet the dominant party,
earnestly entreated to the same effect. In vain, both of them.
The King had other schemes: the King, writing privately to
Digby before quitting Oxford, when he had some mind to venture
privately on London, as he ultimately did on the Scotch Camp,
to raise Treaties and Caballings there, had said, “endeavouring
“to get to London; being not without hope that I shall be able
‘so to draw either the Presbyterians or the Independents to
“side with me for extirpating one another, that I shall be really
“King again.” 1 Such a man is not easy to make a Treaty with,
—on the word of a King! In fact, his Majesty, though a belli-
gerent party who had not now one soldier on foot, considered
himself still a tower of strength; as indeed he was; all men
having a to us inconceivable reverence for him, till bitter Neces-
sity and he together drove them away from it. Equivocations,

1QOxford, 26th March 1646; Carte’s Life of Ormond, iii. (London, 1735), p. 452

35)

236 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS 27 July.

spasmodic obstinacies, and blindness to the real state of facts,
must have an end.—

The following Seven Letters, of little or no significance for
illustrating public affairs, are to carry us over a period of most
intricate negotiation ; negotiation with the Scots, managed man-
fully on both sides, otherwise it had ended in quarrel ; negotia-
tions with the King; infinite public and private negotiations ;—
which issue at last in the Scots marching home with 200,000/.
as ‘a fair instalment of their arrears,’ in their pocket; and the
King marching, under escort of Parliamentary Commissioners,
to Holmby House in Northamptonshire, to continue in strict
though very stately seclusion, ‘on 50/. a day, + and await the
destinies there.

LETTER XXXVI

Knyvett, of Ashwellthorpe in Norfolk, is one of the un-
fortunate Royalist Gentlemen whom Cromwell laid sudden hold
of at Lowestoff, some years ago, and lodged in the Castle of
Cambridge,—suddenly snuffing out their Royalist light in that
quarter. Knyvett, we conclude, paid his ‘contribution, or due
fine, for the business ;? got safe home again; and has lived
quieter ever since. Of whom we promised the reader some
transitory glimpse once more.’

Here accordingly is a remarkable Letter to him, now first ad-
justed to its right place in this Series. The Letter used to be
in the possession of the Lords Berners, whose ancestor this
Knyvett was, one of whose seats this Ashwellthorpe in Norfolk
still is. With them, however, there remains nothing but a Copy
now, and that without date, and otherwise not quite correct.
Happily it had already gone forth in print with date and address
in full;—has been found among the lumber and_ innocent
marine-stores of Sylvanus Urban, communicated, in an incidental
way, by ‘a Gentleman at Shrewsbury,’ who, in 17874 had got
possession of it,—honestly, we hope; and to the comfort of
readers here.

1 Whitlocke, p. 244.
2(This is just what apparently he had not done. See p. 124” above. |
5 Antea, p. 123. 4[This should be 1784. ]

1646.) LETTER XXXVI, LONDON 237

For my noble Friend Thomas Knyvett, Esquire, at his House at
Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk : These

London, 27th July 1646.

Sir,

I cannot pretend to any interest in you for
anything I have done, nor ask any favour for any service I may
do you. But because I am conscious to myself of a readiness to
serve any gentleman in all possible civilities, I am bold to be
beforehand with you to ask your favour on the behalf of your
honest poor neighbours of Hapton, who, as I am informed, are
in some trouble, and are likely to be put to more, by one Robert
Browne, your tenant, who, not well pleased with the way of
those men, seeks their disquiet all he may.

Truly nothing moves me to desire this, more than the pity I
bear them in respect of their honesties, and the trouble I hear
they are like to suffer for their consciences. And however the
world interprets it, I am not ashamed to solicit for such as are
anywhere under a pressure of this kind ; doing herein as I would
be done by. Sir, this is a quarrelsome age ; and the anger seems
to me to be the worse, where the ground is things of difference
in opinion ;! which to cure, to hurt men in their names, persons
or estates, will not be found an apt remedy. Sir, it will not
repent you to protect those poor men of Hapton from injury and
oppression: which that you would is the effect of this letter.
Sir, you will not want the grateful acknowledgment, nor ut-
most endeavours of requital from

Your most humble servant,
Oxiver CroMWELL.*

Hapton is a Parish and Hamlet some seven or eight miles
south of Norwich, in the Hundred of Depwade; it is within
a mile or two of this Ashwellthorpe; which was Knyvett’s

1[The words ‘difference in’ are crossed over with the pen. Note, in Gentle-
gan's Magazine. |

* Gentleman’ s Magazine, 1787, [1784] liv. 337.

238 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [31 July.

residence at that time. What ‘Robert Browne your Tenant’
had in hand or view against these poor Parishioners of Hapton,
must, as the adjoining circumstances are all obliterated, remain
somewhat indistinct to us. We gather in general that the
Parishioners of Hapton were a little given to Sectarian, In-
dependent notions; which Browne, a respectable Christian of
the Presbyterian strain could not away with. The oppressed
poor Tenants have contrived to make their case credible to
Lieutenant-General Cromwell, now in his place in Parliament
again ;—have written to him; perhaps clubbed some poor six-
pences, and sent up a rustic Deputation to him: and he,
‘however the respectable Presbyterian world may interpret it,
is not ashamed to solicit for them:’ with effect, either now or
soon.

LETTER XXXVII

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliament's
Forces ;1 These
‘London,’ 31st July 1646.
Sir,
I was desired to write a letter to you by

Adjutant Fleming. The end of it is, To desire your letter in
his recommendation. He will acquaint you with the sum there-
of, more particularly what the business is. I most humbly sub-
mit to your better judgment, when you hear it from him.

Craving pardon for my boldness in putting you to this trouble,

I rest,
Your most humble servant,
O.iver CRoMWELL.*

Adjutant Fleming is in Sprigge’s Army-list. I suppose him
to be the Fleming who, as Colonel Fleming, in Spring 1648,
had rough service in South Wales two years afterwards ; and

1At Ragland, or about leaving Bath for the purpose of concluding Ragland
Siege (Rushworth, vi. 290).

* Sloane MSS, 1519, fol. 70. [144. Signed only.]

1646] LETTER XXXVII, LONDON 239

was finally defeated,—attempting to ‘seize a Pass’ near Pem-
broke Castle, then in revolt under Poyer; was driven into a
Church, and there slain,—some say, slew himself.

Of Fleming’s present ‘business’ with Fairfax, whether it were
to solicit promotion here, or continued employment in Ireland,
nothing can be known. The War, which proved to be but the
‘ First War,’ is now, as we said, to all real intents, ended: Ragland
Castle, the last that held out for Charles, has been under siege for
some weeks; and Fairfax, who had been ‘at the Bath for his
health,’ was now come or coming into those parts for the per-
emptory reduction of it.2, There have begun now to be discussions
and speculations about sending men to Ireland ;3 about sending
Massey (famed Governor of Gloucester) to Ireland with men, and
then also about disbanding Massey’s men.

Exactly a week before, 24th July 1646, the united Scots and
Parliamentary Commissioners have presented their ‘ Propositions ’
to his Majesty at Newcastle:+ Yes or No, is all the answer they
can take. They are most zealous that he should say Yes.
Chancellor Loudon implores and prophesies in a very remark-
able manner: “all England will rise against you; they,” these
Sectarian Parties, “will process and depose you, and set up
another Government,” unless you close with the Propositions.°

1 Rushworth, vii. 1097, 38:—a little ‘before’ 27th March 1648, [Captain
Fleming was in Colonel Graves’s regiment, and was Adjutant-General of the horse in
the New Modelarmy. He wascaptain ofa troop of horse at Abingdon in 1645, under
Major-General Browne, which was sent in July to join Fairfax’s army (Ca/. S. P.
Dom. 1645-1647, p. 28). He is called captain as late as March 22, 1648, but spoken
of as Colonel on April 7. (Cal. S. P. Dom. 1648, 1649, pp. 34, 41.) ‘The news of
his death reached London on April 29 (Rushworth vii. 1174). ]

2 [bid, vi. 293;—Fairfax’s first Letter from Ragland is of 7th August; r4th
August he dates from Usk; and Ragland is surrendered on the 17th.

* Cromwelliana, April, 1646, p. 31.

4[The Commissioners did not reach Newcastle until July 30, but Charles had
received a copy of the Propositions at the end of June. ]

5(As the chief demands of the Propositions were that the King should accept the
‘Respectable Presbyterianism” of which Carlyle is so impatient, and should en-
force the taking of the Covenant throughout the kingdom, it is difficult to see how
closing with them would have put an end to the antagonism of the sectaries.
The following is Dr, Gardiner’s account of the ‘“‘haughty no.” ‘‘It can surprise
no one that Charles refused to give way ; but there can hardly be one, even amongst
his most devoted admirers, who can approve of the manner in which, after rejecting
the offer of the Scots, he replied to the English Commissioners. He did not flash
out into becoming indignation at the suggestion that he should—as he would him-
self have expressed it—abandon the Church, his crown and his friends, Neither did
he clearly say what he was himself ready to grant. He merely handed to the
Commissioners on August 1 a letter in which he complained of the difficulty of giving
a decided answer in the short time allowed to him, and pressed once more for leave
to come to London to discuss more thoroughly the points which had been raised,

240 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS (10 Aug.

His Majesty, on the Ist of August (writing at Newcastle, in the
same hours whilst Cromwell writes this in London), answers in
a haughty way, No.!

LETTER XXXVIII

August 10th. The Parliamentary Commissioners have returned,
and three of the leading Scots with them,—to see what is now
to be done. The ‘Chancellor’ who comes with Argyle is Loudon,
the Scotch Chancellor, a busy man in those years. Fairfax is at
Bath; and ‘the Solicitor, St. John, the Shipmoney Lawyer, is
there with him.

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, the General : These

London, roth August 1646.
SIR,

Hearing you were returned from Ragland to
the Bath, I take the boldness to make this address unto you.
Our Commissioners sent to the King came this night to Lon-
don.2 I have spoken with two of them, and can only learn these
generals, That there appears a good inclination in the Scots to
the rendition of our town,’ and to their march out of the King-
dom. When they bring in their papers, we shall know more.
Argile, the Chancellor, and Dunfarlin are come up. Duke of
Hamilton is gone from the King into Scotland. I hear that
Montrose his men are not disbanded. The King gave a very
general answer. Things are not well in Scotland; would they
were in England! We are full of faction and worse.
I hear for certain that Ormond hath concluded a Peace with
the Rebels. Sir, I beseech you command the Solicitor to come

He would never, he vaguely added, ‘consent to anything destructive to that just
power which by the laws of God and the land, he is born unto,’ but on the other
hand he was ready to pass all bills ‘really for the good and peace of his people.’
Great Civil War, vol. iii. p. 133.]

? Rushworth, vi. 319-21. * Commons Journals, 11th Aug, 1646.
8[z.e., Newcastle. ] 4[Proclaimed on July 30. }

1646.] LETTER XXXVIII., LONDON 241

away tous. His help would be welcome. Sir, I hope you have
not cast me off. Truly I may say, no [one] more affectionately
honours nor loves you. You and yours are in my daily prayers.
Yqu have done enough to command the uttermost of,
Your faithfullest and most obedient servant,
OLiveR CromweELt,*

‘P.S.” I beseech you, my humble service may be presented
to your Lady.

‘P.S, 2d’! The money for disbanding Massey’s men is got-
ten, and you will speedily have directions about them from the
Commons House.

‘Our Commissioners’ to Charles at Newcastle, who have re-
turned ‘this night,’ were: Earls Pembroke and Suffolk, from the
Peers; from the Commons, Sir Walter Earle (Weymouth), Sir
John Hippesley (Cockermouth), Robert Goodwin (East Grinstead,
Sussex), Luke Robinson (Scarborough).?

‘Duke of Hamilton :’ the Parliamentary Army found him in
Pendennis Castle,—no, in St. Michael’s Mount Castle,—when
they took these places in Cornwall lately. The Parliament has
let him loose again ;—he has begun a course of new diplomacies,
which will end still more tragically for him.

Ormond is, on application from the Parliament, ostensibly
ordered by his Majesty not to make peace with the outlaw Irish
rebels ; detestable to all men :—but he of course follows his own
judgment of the necessities of the case, being now nearly over
with it himself, and the King under restraint unable to give any
real ‘orders.’ The truth was, Ormond’s Peace, odious to all
English Protestants, had been signed and finished in March last ;
with this condition among others, That an Army of 10,000 Irish
were to come over and help his Majesty ; which truth is now
beginning to ooze out. A new Ormond Peace :—not materially
different I think from the late very sad Glamorgan one ; which
had been made in secret, through the Earl of Glamorgan, in
Autumn last ; and then, when by ill chance it came to light, had

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 63. [131. Holograph, sealed with the Cromwell arms. ]

1This second Postscript has been squeezed-in aéove the other, and is evidently
written a/ter it. ;
? Rushworth, vi. 309, where the proposals are also given.

VOL. 1.—I16

242 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 Aug.

needed to be solemnly denied in Winter following, and the Earl
of Glamorgan to be thrown into prison to save appearances! On
the word of an unfortunate King!!—It would be a comfort to
understand farther, what the fact soon proves, that this new
Peace also will not hold ; the Irish Priests and Pope’s Nuncios
disapproving of it. Even while Oliver writes, an Excommunica-
tion or some such Document is coming out, signed “ Frater
O’Farrel,” “ Abbas O’Teague,” and the like names : poor Ormond
going to Kilkenny, to join forces with the Irish rebels, is treacher-
ously set upon, and narrowly escapes death by them.?
Concerning ‘the business of Massey's men, there are some
notices in Ludlow.2 The Commons had ordered Fairfax to dis-
band them, and sent the money, as we see here ; whereupon the
Lords ordered him, Not. Fairfax obeyed the Commons; apolo-
gised to the Lords,—who had to submit, as their habit was.
Massey’s Brigade was of no particular religion ; Massey’s Miscel-
lany,—‘some of them will require passes to Aithiopia,’ says
ancient wit. But Massey himself was strong for Presbyterianism,
for strict Drill-sergeantey and Anti-heresy of every kind: the
Lords thought his Miscellany and he might have been useful.4

1 Rushworth, vi. 239-247; Birch’s Juguiry concerning Glamorgan, Carte’s
Ormond ; &c. Correct details in Godwin, li, 102-124.

2 Rushworth, vi. 416; Carte's Zzfe of Ormond. [From the reference it appears
that Carlyle means the Declaration of the ‘‘ Congregation of both clergies of
Ireland” on August 12, signed by the Nuncio, and many bishops and abbots.
Low down in the list come the two names which Carlyle has selected; O’Farrel,
Provincial Prior of the preaching Friars, and O’Teg or O’Teige, not an abbot, but
merely proctor for the Bishop of Armagh. Carlyle’s account of Ormond’s danger is
exaggerated. He was summoned by the Supreme Council in consequence of the
refusal of the Nuncio’s party to accept the peace, and reached Kilkenny in safety ;
but hearing that Owen O'Neil was on the march and that the tribes of Carlow and
Wexford were preparing to rise, he withdrew to Dublin, to save himself from the
tisk of being taken prisoner. According to the author of the Aphorismical Dis-
covery, the Nuncio and Congregation were so alarmed by Ormond’s advance to
Kilkenny, that they hastily retreated to Waterford, and summoned O'Neil to their
rescue, ‘‘as they were in mighty danger to be taken prisoners”. But on hearing of
O’Neil’s approach, Ormond in his turn took fright, and hurried back to Dublin,
‘breathless and fearful as to a sanctuary.” Gilbert’s Contemporary History of
Affairs in Ireland, i. 125, 126.]

3 Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow (London, 1722), ii. 181 fed. Firth i., 141, also
Appendix B., zd¢d. 48x. |

4[Massey afterwards went over tothe King. See his Life in the Dict. Nav.
Biography. |

1646.) LETTER XXXIX., LONDON 243

LETTER XXXIX

His Excellency, in the following Letter, is Fairfax; John
Rushworth, worthy John, we already know! Fairfax has returned
to the Bath, still for his health; Ragland being taken, and the
War ended.

For John Rushworth, Esquire, Secretary to his Excellency, at Bath :
These

The House ‘of Commons,’ 26th August ‘ 1646.’

Mr. RusHwortu,

I must needs entreat a favour on the behalf
of Major Lilburne, who has a long time wanted employment,
and by reason thereof! his necessities may grow upon him.

You should do very well to move the General to take him into
favourable thoughts. I know, a reasonable employment will
content him. As for his honesty and courage, I need not speak
much of ‘that,’ seeing he is so well known both to the Genera
and yourself.

I desire you answer my expectation herein so far as you may.
You shall very much oblige,

Sir,
Your real friend and servant,
Outver CRoMWELL.*

This is not ‘ Freeborn John,’ the Sectarian Lieutenant-Colonel
once in my Lord of Manchester's Army; the Lilburn whom
Cromwell spoke for, when Sir Philip Warwick took note of
him ; the John Lilburn ‘who could not live without a quarrel ;
‘who if he were left alone in the world would have to divide
‘himself in two, and set the John to fight with Lilburn, and the
‘Lilburn with John!’ Freeborn John is already a Lieutenant-
Colonel by title; was not in the New Model at all; is already
deep in quarrels,—lying in limbo since August last, for abuse of

1[Printed ‘‘reason good” by Carlyle.]
* Sloane MSS, 1519, fol. 7x [f. 146] ;—Signature alone is Oliver's.

244. BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS 66 Oct.

his old master Prynne.! He has quarrelled, or is quarrelling,
with Cromwell too; calls the Assembly of Divines an Assembly
of Dry-vines ;—will have little else but quarrelling henceforth.—
This is the Brother of Freeborn John; one of his two Brothers.
Not Robert, who already is or soon becomes a Colonel in the New
Model, and does not ‘want employment.’ This is Henry Lil-
burn: appointed, probably in consequence of this application,
Governor of Tynemouth Castle: revolting to the Royalists, his
own Soldiers slew him there, in 1648. These Lilburns were
from Durham County.

LETTER XL

‘ DELINQUENTs,’ conquered Royalists, are now getting them-
selves fined ? according to rigorous proportions, by a Parliament
Committee, which sits, and will sit long, at Goldsmiths’ Hall,
making that locality very memorable to Royalist gentlemen.*

The Staffordshire Committee have sent a Deputation up to
Town. They bring a Petition; very anxious to have 2,000/. out
of their Staffordshire Delinquents from Goldsmiths’ Hall, or
even 4,000/.,—to pay off their forces, and send them to Ireland ;
which lie heavy on the County at present.+

1 Wood, iii. 353.

2[The Lord Cromwell amongst the rest. See Oliver's letter on his behalf,
Supplement, No. 17.]

’'The proceedings of it, all now in very superior order, still lie in the State-Paper
Office. [Now at the Public Record Office. When Carlyle wrote this, the two
great series known as the Royalist Comfosition Papers were already admirably
arranged and had Manuscript indexes—had been partly arranged, indeed, by the
officers of the Committee itself. But the great collection of records of the Com-
mittee—order books, letter books, treasurers’ books, &c.—as well as a mass of
miscellaneous papers, were practically useless, in view of the immense labour of
searching for notices of any particular person or place, until the publication, in the
series of Calendars of State Papers, of the Calendar of Committee jor Com-
pounding, edited by Mrs. Everett Green, who brought together under one heading
all notices of each of the seven thousand ‘‘ cases” and upwards calendared in her
volumes. |

4[In the early days of the Parliament rule, the fines of delinquents were mostly
paid in to the County Committees, who, after satisfying the claims made upon them
by their county forces, their own expenses, &c., sent the balance (often a very small
one, and truly it is a wonder there was any at all) to the central Committee. But
after the royalists were allowed to compound directly at Goldsmiths’ Hall, the
County Committees were often hard put to it to get money enough to answer the
demands made upon them, ]

1646. LETTER XLI, LONDON 245

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, ‘General of the Parliament's
Army :’ These
London, 6th October 1646.

Sir,
I would be loath to trouble you with anything ;

but indeed the Staffordshire Gentlemen came to me this day, and
with more than ordinary importunity did press me to give their
desires furtherance to you. Their letter will show what they
entreat of you. Truly, Sir, it will not be amiss to give them
what ease may well be afforded, and the sooner the better,
especially at this time.!

I have no more at present, but to let you know the business
of your Army is like to come on tomorrow. You shall have
account of that business so soon as I am able to give it. I
humbly take leave, and rest,

Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
OLIVER CROMWELL.*

The Commons cannot grant the prayer of this Petition ;?
Staffordshire will have to rest as it is for some time. ‘The
business of your army’ did come on ‘ tomorrow ;’ and assessments
for a new six-months were duly voted for it, and other proper
arrangements made.®

LETTER XLI

Cotone IrETON, now Commissary-General Ireton, was wedded,
as we saw, to Bridget Cromwell on the 15th of June last. A
man ‘able with his pen and his sword ;’ a distinguished man.

1‘ and the sooner,’ &c. : these words are inserted above the line, by way of care¢
and afterthought.

27th December 1646, Commons Journals, V. 3.

3 7th October 1646, /d2d., iv. 687.

* Sloane MSS. 15109, fol. 72 [f. 148]—Oliver's own hand.—Note, his signature
seems generally to be Oiver Cromwell, not O. Cromwell; to which practice we
conform throughout, though there are exceptions toit. [The exceptions.are probably
quite as numerous—and if we include all his army warrants, very much more
numerous—than the rule, |

246 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS | [25 Oct.

Once B.A. of Trinity College, Oxford, and Student of the
Middle Temple; then a gentleman trooper in my Lord General
Essex’s Life-guard; now Colonel of Horse, soon Member of Parlia-
ment: rapidly rising. A Nottinghamshire man ; has known the
Lieutenant-General ever since the Eastern-Association times.
Cornbury House, not now conspicuous on the maps, is discoverable
in Oxfordshire, disguised as Blandford Lodge,—not too far from
the Devizes, at which latter Town Fairfax and Ireton have just
been, disbanding Massey’s Brigade. The following Letter will
require no commentary.

For my beloved Daughter Bridget Ireton, ai Cornbury, the General's
: Quarters : These

London, 25th October 1646,

Dear DauGHTer,

I write not to thy husband; partly to avoid
trouble, for one line of mine begets many of his, which I doubt
makes him sit up too late; partly because I am myself indisposed!
at this time, having some other considerations.

Your friends at Ely are well: your Sister Claypole is (I trust
in mercy) exercised with some perplexed thoughts. She sees
her own vanity and carnal mind, bewailing it: she seeks after
(as I hope also) that which will satisfy. And thus to be a seeker 2
is to be of the best sect next to a finder; and such an one shall
every faithful humble seeker be at the end. Happy seeker,
happy finder! Who ever tasted that the Lord is gracious, with-
out some sense of self, vanity, and badness? Who ever tasted
that graciousness of His, and could go less* in desire, and less
than pressing after full enjoyment? Dear Heart, press on; let
not husband, let not anything cool thy affections after Christ. I
hope he‘ will be an occasion to inflame them. That which is
best worthy of love in thy husband is that of the image of Christ
he bears. Look on that, and love it best, and all the rest for
that. I pray for thee and him; do so for me.

‘not in the mood at this time, having other matters in view.

2( Probably an allusion to the sect known as the Seekers. ]

3 /ess is an adjective ; to go, in such case, signifies to decome, as ‘go mad,’ &e.
4 thy husband,

1646] | LETTER XLII, LONDON 247

My service and dear affections to the General and Generales.
I hear she is very kind to thee; it adds to all other obligations.
My love to all.

Iam
Thy dear Father,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

Bridget Ireton is now Twenty-two. Her Sister Claypole
(Elizabeth Cromwell) is five years younger. They were both
wedded last Spring. ‘Your Friends at Ely’ will indicate that
the Cromwell Family was still resident in that city ;! though, I
think, they not long afterwards removed to London. Their
first residence here was King-Street, Westminster ;? Oliver for
the present lodges in Drury Lane: fashionable quarters both, in
those times.?

General Fairfax had been in Town only three days before, at-
tending poor Essex’s funeral: a mournful pageant, consisting of
‘both the Houses, Fairfax and all the Civil and Military Officers
‘then in Town, the forces of the City, a very great number
‘of coaches and multitudes of people ;’ with Mr. Vines to
preach ;—regardless of expense, 5,000/. being allowed for it.*

LETTER XLII

Tue intricate Scotch negotiations have at last ended. The
paying of the Scots their first instalment, and getting them to
march away in peace, and leave the King to our disposal, is the
great affair that has occupied Parliament ever since his Majesty
refused the Propositions. Not till Monday the 21st December

*« A Copy of Oliver Cromwell's Letter to his Daughter Ireton, exactly taken
from the Original.’ Harleian MSS, no. 6988, fol. 224 (not mentioned in Harleian
Catalogue).—In another Copy sent me, which exactly corresponds, is this Note:
‘Memo; The above Letter of Oliver Cromwell Jno Caswell Mercht of London had
‘from his Mother Linington, who had it from old Mrs. Warner, who liv'd with Oliver
«‘ Cromwell’s Daughter. — —And was Copied from the Original Letter, which is in the
‘hands of John Warner Esq” of Swanzey, by Cha* Norris, 25th Mar; 1749.’

1 See also Appendix, No. 8, last Letter there (Vote to Third Edition.)

2 Cromwelliana, p. 60.

3[They had come up in the summer, and their firs¢ residence was in Drury
Lane. They moved to King Street the following year. |

4 Rushworth, vi. 329; Whitlocke, p. 230.

248 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS 21 Dec.

could it be got ‘perfected’ or ‘almost perfected.’ After a busy
day spent in the Commons House on that affair,! Oliver writes the
following Letter to Fairfax. The ‘ Major-General’ is Skippon.
Fairfax, ‘since he left Town,’ is most likely about Nottingham,
the head-quarters of his Army, which had been drawing rather
northward, ever since the King appeared among the Scots.
Fairfax came to Town 12th November, with great splendour of
reception ; left it again ‘18th December.’

On the morrow after that, 19th December 1646, the Londoners
presented their Petition, not without tumult; complaining of
heavy expenses and other great grievances from the Army ;
and craving that the same might be, so soon as possible
disbanded, and a good Peace with his Majesty made.? The
first note of a very loud controversy which arose between the
City and the Army, between the Presbyterians and the Inde-
pendents, on that matter. Indeed the humour of the City
seems to be getting high ; impatient for ‘a just peace’ now
that the King is reduced. On Saturday 6th December, it was
ordered that the Lord Mayor be apprised of tumultuous as-
semblages which there are, ‘to the disturbance of the peace ;”
and be desired to quench them,—if he can.

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the
Parliament's Armies : These

London, 21st December 1646.

Sir,

Having this opportunity by the Major-General
to present a few lines unto you, I take the boldness to let you
know how our affairs go since you left the Town.

We have had a very long Petition from the City: how it
strikes at the Army, and what other aims it has, you will see by
the contents of it; as also what the prevailing temper is at this
present, and what is to be expected from men. But this is our
comfort, God is in heaven, and He doth what pleaseth Him;
His and only His counsel shall stand, whatever the designs ot
men, and the fury of the people be,

1 Commons Journals, Vv. 22, 23,
? King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no, 290 [E, 366, 14] (cited by Godwin, ii, 260),

1646.] LETTER XLII., LONDON 249

We have now, I think, almost! perfected all our business for
Scotland. I believe Commissioners will speedily be sent down
to see agreements performed ; it’s intended that Major-General
Skippon have authority and instructions from your Excellency
to command the Northern Forces, as occasion shall be, and that
he have a Commission of Martial Law. Truly I hope that the
having the Major-General to command? this Party will appear
to be a good thing, every day more and more.

Here has been a design to steal away the Duke of York from
my Lord of Northumberland: one of his own servants, whom he
preferred to wait on the Duke, is found guilty of it; the Duke
himself confessed so. I believe you will suddenly hear more of
it.

I have no more to trouble you ‘with ;’ but praying for you,
rest,

Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
Otiver CroMWELL.*

Skippon, as is well known, carried up the cash, 200,000/., to
Newcastle successfully, in a proper number of wagons ; got it all
counted there, ‘bags of 100/., chests of 1000/.,’ (5th-16th January
1646-7) ; after which the Scots marched peaceably away.

The little Duke of York, entertained in a pet-captive fashion
at St. James’s, did not get away at this time ; but managed it,
by and by, with help of a certain diligent intriguer and turncoat
called Colonel Bamfield ;? of whom we may hear farther.

On Thursday, 11th February 1646-7, on the road between
Mansfield and Nottingham,—road between Newcastle and Holm-
by House,—‘ Sir Thomas Fairfax went and met the King; who

1 ‘almost’ is inserted with a cared,

2 At this point, the bottom of the page being reached, Oliver takes to the broad
margin, and writes the remainder there lengthwise, continuing till there is barely
room for his signature, on the outmost verge of the sheet ; which, as we remarked
already, is a common practice with him in writing Letters :—-he is always loath to
turn the page ;—having zo dlotting-paper at that epoch ; having only sand to dry
his ink with, and a natural indisposition to pause till he finish !

3 Clarendon, iii. 188. f

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 78, p. 147. [f 150. Holograph. |

250 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS  [March.

‘stopped his horse ; Sir Thomas alighted, and kissed the King’s
‘hand; and afterwards mounted, and discoursed with the King
‘as they passed towards Nottingham.’! The King had left New-
castle on the 3d of the month; got to Holmby, or Holdenby, on
the 13th ;—and ‘there,’ says the poor Iter Carolinum, ‘ during
pleasure.’

LETTERS XLII, XLIV

Berore reading these two following Letters, read this Extract
from a work still in Manuscript, and not very sure of ever getting
printed :

‘The Presbyterian “Platform” of Church Government, as
‘recommended by the Assembly of Divines or “ Dry-Vines,” has
‘at length, after unspeakable debatings, passings and repassings
‘through both Houses, and soul’s-travail not a little, about
‘“ruling-elders,” “power of the keys,” and such like,—been
‘got finally passed, though not without some melancholy shades
‘of Erastianism, or “the Voluntary Principle,” as the new phrase
‘runs. The Presbyterian Platform is passed by Law; and Lon-
‘don and other places, busy “electing their ruling-elders,” are
‘just about ready to set it actually on foot. And now it is hoped
‘there will be some “ uniformity” as to that high matter.

‘Uniformity of free-growing healthy forest-trees is good ; uni-
‘formity of clipt Dutch-dragons is not so good! The question,
‘Which of the two? is by no means settled,—though the
‘ Assembly of Divines, and majorities of both Houses, would fain
‘think it so. The general English mind, which, loving good

1Whitlocke, p. 274; //er Carolinum (in Somers Tracts, vi. [v.] 274) : Whitlocke's
date, as usual, is inexact. [So is the /¢ey. Fairfax met the King on Friday, the
te2th. ‘‘ Yesterday,” says a news-letter, ‘‘his Majesty came from Mansfield, and
the General went out to meet him’’—met him two miles from the town, as
other letters say, and escorted him into Nottingham. ‘‘ Upon the 13th of February,
being Saturday, the King's Majesty at seven of the clock in the morning went out
of Nottingham attended by the General and officers” (E. 377, No. 12). He meant
to have reached Holmby on Monday night, the rsth, but did not arrive there until
the next day. ‘‘ There were great triumphs at Northampton on Tuesday last when
the tidings were brought that his Majesty was near Holmby. ‘The bells rang and
the great guns went off. . . . Multitudes of people resorted to welcome his Majesty,
the road from Harborow to Holmby being adorned with thousands and thousands
of spectators crying with a loud voice ‘God bless your Majesty’. The King smiling
upon them passed along cheerfully, saying he hoped this journey would prove a
prosperous voyage both to him and his posterity.” (did. No, 16.).]

1647.] LETTERS XLIII., XLIV. 251

‘order in all things, loves regularity even at a high price, could
‘be content with this Presbyterian scheme, which we call the
‘Dutch-dragon one; but a deeper portion of the English mind
‘inclines decisively to growing in the forest-tree way,—and indeed
‘will shoot out into very singular excrescences, Quakerisms and
‘what not, in the coming years. Nay already we have Ana-
‘baptists, Brownists, Sectaries and Schismatics springing up very
‘rife: already there is a Paul Best, brought before the House of
‘Commons for Socinianism ; nay we hear of another distracted
‘individual who seemed to maintain, in confidential argument,
‘that “‘God was mere Reason.” ! There is like to be need of
‘garden-shears, at this rate! The devout House of Commons,
‘viewing these things with a horror inconceivable in our loose
‘days, knows not well what to do. London City cries, “ Apply
‘the shears!”—the Army answers, “ Apply them gently ; cut off
‘nothing that is sound!” The question of garden-shears, and
‘how far you are to apply them, is really difficult ;—the settling
‘ of it will lead to very unexpected results. London City knows
‘with pain, that there are “many persons in the Army who have
‘never yet taken the Covenant ;” the Army begins to consider
‘it unlikely that certain of them will ever take it !’—

These things premised, we have only to remark farther, that
the House of Commons, meanwhile, struck with devout horror,
has, with the world generally, spent Wednesday the 10th of
March 1646-7, as a Day of Fasting and Humiliation for Blas-
phemies and Heresies.? Cromwell’s Letter, somewhat remark-
able for the grieved mind it indicates * was written next day.
Fairfax with the Army is at Saffron Walden in Essex; there is
an Order this day‘ that he is to quarter where he sees best.
There are many Officers about Town; soliciting payments,
attending private businesses: their tendency to Schism, to Ana-
baptistry and Heresy, or at least to undue tolerance for all that,
is well known. This Fast-day, it would seem, is regarded as a

1 Whitlocke. 2 Tbid., p. 243.

3[A manifest attack upon him had been made in the Resolutions of the House on
March 8, that except the Lord General, there should remain no officer in the new
army of horse and dragoons, of higher rank than a colonel. Dr. Gardiner suggests
that ‘‘it was probably on this occasion that the bitterness of his soul found expres-
sion in a conversation with Ludlow. ‘It is a miserable thing,’ he is reported to
have said, ‘to serve a Parliament, to which let a man be never so faithful, if one
pragmatical fellow amongst them rise and asperse him, he shall never wipe it off,
whereas, when one serves a general, he may do as much service and yet be free
from all blame and envy.’” Great Civil War, iii. 221. |

4 Commons Journals, v. 110,

252 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [11 March.

kind of covert rebuke to them. Fast-day was Wednesday ; this
is Thursday evening :

LETTER XLIII

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliament's
Army, ‘at Saffron Walden :’ These

‘London, 11th March 1646.’!
Sir,
Your letters about your new quarters,” directed

to the Houses,’ came seasonably, and were to very good purpose.
There want not, in all places, men who have so much malice
against the army as besots them: the late Petition, which sug-
gested a dangerous design upon the Parliament in ‘ your’ coming
to those quarters ¢ doth sufficient‘ly’ evidence the same: but they
got nothing by it, for the House did assoil the army from all
suspicion, and have left you to quarter where you please.®

Never were the spirits of men more embittered than now.
Surely the Devil hath but a short time. Sir, it’s good the heart
be fixed against all this. The naked simplicity of Christ, with
that wisdom He please to give, and patience, will overcome all
this. That God.would keep your heart as He has done hitherto,
is the prayer of

Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
OLIvER CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’° I desire my most humble service may be presented
to my Lady.—Mr. Allen? desires Colonel Baxter,’ sometime

1[Dr. Gardiner is inclined to put the date of this letter a few days later. ]

2{Carlyle printed ‘‘head” quarters and ‘‘adjutant” Allen, but the words are
quite plainly as given above. ] :

3 Commons Journals, vy. 110, 11th March 1646 (Letter is dated Saffron Walden,
gth March),

4Saffron Walden, in the Eastern Association : ‘ Vo¢ to quarter in the Eastern
Association,’ had the Lords, through Manchester their Speaker, lately written
(Commons Journals, infra); but without effect.

5 Commons Journals, vy. 110, 11th March 1646.

6 Written across on the margin, according to custom,

‘[z.e., Col, John Barkstead. |

1647.] LETTER XLIV., LONDON 253

Governor of Reading, may be remembered. I humbly desire
Colonel Overton may not be out of your remembrance. He is a
deserving man, and presents his humble service to you. Upon
the Fast-[day divers] soldiers were raised (as I hear), both horse
and foot, near 200 in Covent Garden, To prevent [us soldiers]
from cutting the Presbyterians’ throats! These are fine tricks
to mock God with.*

This flagrant insult to ‘us soldiers,’ in Covent Garden and
doubtless elsewhere, as if the zealous Presbyterian Preacher were
not safe from violence in bewailing Schism,—is very significant.
The Lieutenant-General himself might have seen as well as
‘heard’ it,—for he lived hard by, in Drury Lane I think ; but
was of course at his own Church, bewailing Schism too, though
not in so strait-laced a manner.—

Oliver’s Sister Anna, Mrs Sewster, of Wistow, Huntingdon-
shire, had died in these months, Ist November 1646.1 Among
her little girls is one, Robina, for whom there is a distinguished
Scotch Husband in store ; far off as yet, an ‘Ensign in the French
Army’ as yet, William Lockhart by name; of whom we may
hear more.

This Letter lies contiguous to Letter XXXIV. in the Sloane
Volume: Letter XXXIV. is sealed conspicuously with red wax ;
this Letter, as is fit, with black. The Cromwell crest, ‘lion with
ring on his fore-gamb, —the same big seal,—is on both.

LETTER XLIV

Commons JourNats, 17th March 1646: ‘Ordered, That the Com-
‘mittee of the Army do write unto the General, and acquaint
‘him that this House takes notice of his care in ordering that
‘none of the Forces under his Command should quarter nearer

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 62. [f. 129]. [The words now placed in square brackets
were supplied by Carlyle, though he did not indicate the fact. ‘The original is too
much damaged in these two places for us to know what the actual words were, but
in the second hiatus they cannot have been ‘‘us soldiers’, as the last three letters
are visible and are ies, oes or ces; also the army was not in London, Perhaps it
should be ‘‘ the sectaries,’”’]

1See antea, p. 17; and Noble, i. 89.

254 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS (19 March.

‘than Five-and-twenty Miles of this City: That notwithstanding
‘his care and directions therein, the House is informed that some
‘of his Forces are quartered much nearer than that; and To
‘desire him to take course that his former Orders, touching the
‘quartering of his Forces no nearer than Twenty-five Miles, may
‘be observed.’

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliament's
Army: These
London, tgth March 1646.

Sir,
This enclosed order I received ; but, I suppose,

letters from the Committee of the Army to the effect of this are
come to your hands before this time. I think it were very good
that the distance of twenty-five miles be very strictly observed ;
and they are to blame that have exceeded the distance, contrary
to your former appointment. This letter I received this evening
from Sir William Massam,! a member of the House of Commons ;
which I thought fit to send you; his house being much within
the distance of twenty-five miles of London. I have sent the
officers down, as many as I could well light of.
Not having more at present, I rest,
Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
OLIVER CRoMWELL.*

The troubles of the Parliament and Army are just beginning.
The order for quartering beyond twenty-five miles from London,
and many other ‘orders’ were sadly violated in the course of
this season. ‘Sir W. Massam’s House,’ ‘Otes in Essex,’ is a
place known to us since the beginning of these Letters.

The Officers ought really to go down to their quarters in the
Eastern Counties; Oliver has sent them off, as many of them
as he ‘could well light of’

The Presbyterian System is now fast getting into action: on
the 20th of May 1647, the Synod of London, with due Prolocutor

“Masham.

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 74. [f. 152. Holograph. ]

1647. ] ARMY MANIFESTO 255

or Moderator, met in St. Paul’s.1_ In Lancashire too the System
is fairly on foot; but I think in other English Counties it was
somewhat lazy to move, and never came rightly into action,
owing to impediments.—Poor old Laud is condemned of treason,
and beheaded, years ago; the Scots, after Marston Fight, press-
ing heavy on him; Prynne too being very ungrateful. That
‘performance’ of the Service to the Hyperborean populations
in so exquisite a way, has cost the Artist dear! He died very
gently; his last scene much the best, for himself and for us.
The two Hothams also, and other traitors, have died.

ARMY MANIFESTO

Our next entirely authentic Letter is at six months distance: a
hiatus not unfrequent in this Series; but here most especially to

be regretted ; such a crisis in the affairs of Oliver and of England ae

transacting itself in the interim. The Quarrel between City
and Army, which we here see begun ; the split of the Parliament
into two clearly hostile Parties of Presbyterians and Indepen-
dents, represented by City and Army; the deadly wrestle of
these two Parties, with victory to the latter, and the former
flung on its back, and its ‘Eleven Members’ sent beyond Seas :
all this transacts itself in the interim, without autograph note
or indisputably authentic utterance of Oliver's to elucidate it
for us.2. We part with him labouring to get the Officers sent
down to Saffron Walden; sorrowful on the Spring Fast-day in
Covent Garden: we find him again at-Putney in Autumn; the
insulted Party now dominant, and he the most important man
in it. One Paper which I find among the many published on
that occasion, and judge pretty confidently, by internal evidence,
to be of his writing, is here introduced ; and there is no other
that I know of.

How this Quarrel between City and Army, no agreement
with the King being for the present possible, went on waxing ;

1 Rushworth, vi. 489; Whitlocke (p. 249) dates wrong.

2(This hiatus is now very much filled up by the notes on the meetings of the
Council of the Army found by Mr. Firth amongst the Clarke MSS. (See Supple-
ment, Nos, 21-25, and for letters, Appendix 10 and Supplement, 18-20, 23.) For
a concise account of the position of the army at this time, in relation to its own
officers, the Parliament and the King, see Mr. Firth’s Preface to Clarke Papers
vol, i.

256 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

developing itself more and more visibly into a Quarrel between
Presbyterianism and Independency ; attracting to the respective
sides of it the two great Parties in Parliament and in England
generally: all this the reader must endeavour to imagine for
himself,—very dimly, as matters yet stand. In books, in Narra-
tives old or new, he will find little satisfaction in regard to it.
The old Narratives, written all by baffled enemies of Cromwell,!
are full of mere blind rage, distraction and darkness; the new
Narratives, believing only in ‘ Machiavelism,’ &c., disfigure the
matter still more. Common History, old and new, represents
Cromwell as having underhand,—in a most skilful and indeed
prophetic manner,—fomented or originated all this commotion
of the elements; steered his way through it by ‘hypocrisy, by
‘master-strokes of duplicity,’ and such like. As is the habit
hitherto of History.

‘The fact is,’ says a Manuscript already cited from, ‘poor
‘History, contemporaneous and subsequent, has treated this
‘matter in a very sad way. Mistakes, misdates ; exaggerations,
‘unveracities, distractions; all manner of misseeings and mis-
‘notings in regard to it, abound. How many grave historical
‘statements still circulate in the world, accredited by Bishop
‘Burnet and the like, which on examination you will find melt
‘away into after-dinner rumours,—gathered from ancient red-
‘nosed Presbyterian gentlemen, Harbottle Grimston and Com-
‘pany, sitting over claret under a Blessed Restoration, and
‘talking to the loosely recipient Bishop in a very loose way!
‘Statements generally with some grain of harmless truth, mis-
‘interpreted by those red-nosed honourable persons ; frothed up
‘into huge bulk by the loquacious Bishop above mentioned, and
‘so set floating on Time’s Stream. Not very lovely to us, they,
‘nor the red-noses they proceed from! I do not cite them here ;
‘I have examined most of them; found not one of them fairly
‘ believable ;—wondered to see how already in one generation,
‘earnest Puritanism being hung on the gallows or thrown out in
‘St. Margaret’s Churchyard, the whole History of it had grown
‘mythical, and men were ready to swallow all manner of nonsense
‘concerning it. Ask for dates, ask for proofs: Who saw it, heard
‘it; when was it, where? A misdate, of itself, will do much.
‘So accurate a man as Mr. Godwin, generally very accurate in

1 Holles's Memoirs; Waller's Vindication of his Character; Clement Walker's
History of Independency, &e. &e.

a

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 257

‘such matters, makes “a master-stroke of duplicity’ merely by
‘mistake of dating:1 the thing when Oliver did say it, was a
‘credible truth, and no master-stroke or stroke of any kind!

«« Master-strokes of duplicity ;” “false protestations ;”’ “ fo-
‘menting of the Army discontents:’’ alas, alas! It was not
‘Cromwell that raised these discontents; not he, but the ele-
‘mental Powers! Neither was it, I think, “by master-strokes of
‘duplicity’ that Cromwell steered himself victoriously across
‘such a devouring chaos ; no, but by continuances of noble manful
‘ simplicity, I rather think,—by meaning one thing before God,
‘and meaning the same before men, not as a weak but asa strong
‘man does. By conscientious resolution ; by sagacity, and silent
‘wariness and promptitude ; by religious valour and veracity,—
‘which, however it may fare with foxes, are really, after all, the
‘ grand source of clearness for a man in this world !’— —We here
close our Manuscript.?

Modern readers ought to believe that there was a real impulse
of heavenly Faith at work in this Controversy; that on both
sides, more especially on the Army’s side, here lay the central
element of al]; modifying all other elements and_ passions ;—
that this Controversy was, in several respects, very different from
the common wrestling of Greek with Greek for what are. called

1 Godwin, ii. 300,—citing Walker, p. 31 (should be p. 33).

2(Mr. Firth says, in the Preface to vol. i. of the Clarke Papers: ‘‘ The theory of
Cromwell’s opponents is that he first by his false protestations that the army should
disband whensoever they should be commanded, induced the Parliament to pass
the disbanding votes, and then, by means of the Agitators, induced the army to
refuse to disband. This is the theory set forth by Colonel Wogan. It is also the
theory of Clement Walker. . . . A similar theory is embodied in Butler's well-
known verses :—

‘*So Cromwell with deep oaths and vows,
Swore all the Commons out o’ th’ house,
Vowed that the red-coats should disband
Ay marry would they, at their command ;
And trolled them on, and swore and swore
Till th’ Army turned them out of door.”
—Hudibras, pt. 2, canto ii.

But Mr. Firth goes on to show that on the very day when the first disbanding
vote was passed, Cromwell was ‘‘ dangerously ill with an imposthume in his head” ;
that his dissatisfaction with the policy of the Presbyterians was notorious ; that he
stayed much away at this time both from the House and the Committee of both
kingdoms, and that he even thought of leaving England and taking service under
the Elector Palatine. The Clarke Papers show us what his attitude really was, and
that he did his utmost, with all sincerity, to mediate between the army and the
Parliament; for which he was much abused by the extreme men, such as John
Lilburn and Wildman. ]

VOL. t—1%

258 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

‘Political objects !’—Modern readers, mindful of the French
Revolution, will perhaps compare these Presbyterians and Inde-
pendents to the Gironde and the Mountain. And there is an
analogy; yet with differences. With a great difference in the
situations; with the difference, too, between Englishmen and
Frenchmen, which is always considerable; and then with the
difference between believers in Jesus Christ and believers in
Jean Jacques, which is still more considerable !*

A few dates, and chief summits of events, are all that can be
indicated here, to make our ‘ Manifesto’ legible.

From the beginnings of this year 1647 and earlier, there had
often been question as to what should be done with the Army.
The expense of such an Army, between twenty and thirty thou-
sand men, was great ; the need of it, Royalism being now subdued,
seemed small; besides it was known that there were many in it
who ‘had never taken the Covenant,’ and were never likely to
take it. This latter point, at a time when Heresy seemed rising
like a hydra,? and the Spiritualism of England was developing
itself in really strange ways, became very important too,—became
gradually most of all important, and the soul of the whole
Controversy.

Early in March, after much debating, it had been got settled
that there should be Twelve-thousand men employed in Ireland ®
which was now in sad need of soldiers. The rest were, in some
good way, to be disbanded. The ‘way,’ however, and whether
it might really be a good way, gave rise to considerations.—With-
out entering into a sea of troubles, we may state here in general
that the things this Army demanded were strictly their just
right: Arrears of pay, ‘three-and-forty weeks’ of hard-earned
pay; indemnity for acts done in War; and clear discharge ac-
cording to contract, not service in Ireland except under known
Commanders and conditions,—‘our old Commanders,’ for ex-
ample. It is also apparent that the Presbyterian party in Parlia-

1[Mr. Morley says of this: ‘‘ It would be nearer the mark to say that the sectaries
were beforehand with Jean Jacques, and that half the troubles that confronted
Cromwell and his men sprang from the fact that English sectaries were now saying
to one another something very like what Frenchmen said in Rousseau’s dialect a
hundred and forty years later.” But surely Carlyle’s meaning is more than this.
Our English sectaries, in their wildest moods, never ceased to look up to something
higher than mere earthly guidance, to some one above a mere human teacher. ‘The
goddess of reason was never enthroned in Westminster Abbey. |

2See Edwards’s Gangrena (London, 1646) for many furious details of it.

36th March, Commons Journals, v. 107.

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 259

ment, the leaders of whom were, several of them, Colonels of
the Old Model, did not love this victorious Army; that indeed
they disliked and grew to hate it, useful as it had been to them.
Denzil Holles, Sir William Waller, Harley, Stapleton, thése men,
all strong for Presbyterianism, were old unsuccessful Colonels or
Generals under Essex; and for very obvious reasons looked
askance on this Army, and wished to be, so soon as possible, rid
of it. The first rumour of a demur or desire on the part of the
Army, rumour of some Petition to Fairfax by his Officers as to the
‘way’ of their disbanding, was by these Old-Military Parliament
men very angrily repressed ; nay, in a moment of fervour, they
proceeded to decree that whoever had, or might have, a hand
in promoting such Petition in the Army was an ‘Enemy to the
State, and a Disturber of the Public Peace, —and sent forth the
same in a ‘ Declaration of the 30th of March,’ which became very
celebrated afterwards. This unlucky ‘ Declaration,’ Waller says,
was due to Holles, who smuggled it one evening through a thin
House. ‘“ Enemies to the State, Disturbers of the Peace:”’ it
was a severe and too proud rebuke ; felt to be unjust, and looked
upon as ‘a blot of ignominy ;’ not to be forgotten, nor easily for-
given, by the parties it was addressed to. So stood matters at
the end of March.

At the end of April they stand somewhat thus. Two Parlia-
ment Deputations, Sir William Waller at the head of them, have
been at Saffron Walden, producing no agreement :! five digni-
taries of the Army, ‘ Lieutenant-General Hammond, Colonel
Hammond, Lieutenant-Colonel Pride,’ and two others,? have been
summoned to the bar;* some subalterns given into custody ;
Treton himself ‘ordered to be examined ;’—and no ‘ satisfaction
to the just desires of the Army ;’ on the contrary, the ‘blot of
ignominy’ fixed deeper on it than before. We can conceive a
universal sorrow and anger, and all manner of dim schemes and
consultations going on at Saffron Walden and the other Army-
quarters, in those days. Here is a scene from Whitlocke, worth
looking at, which takes place in the Honourable House itself;
date 30th April 1647 :4

1 Waller, pp. 42-85. [March 21; April 14. ]

2(One of the ‘‘two others” was Lieut.-Col. Grimes; the other, Robert Lilburn.
Ireton was already in town. See Clarke Papers, i. xi.]

3 Commons Journals, v. t29 (29th March 1647).

4Whitlocke, p. 249; Commons Journals in die; and a fuller account in Rush-
worth, vi. 474. [See also Clarke Papers, i. Appendix B.] The ‘ Letter,’ immediately
referred to, is in Cary's Memorials (Selections from the Tanner MSS.,; London,
1842), i, 201.

260 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

‘Debate upon the Petition and Vindication of the Army.
‘Major-General Skippon, in the House, produced a Letter
‘presented to him the day before by some Troopers, in behalf of
‘Eights Regiments of the Army of Horse. Wherein they ex-
‘ pressed some reasons, Why they could not engage in the service
‘of Ireland under the present Conduct, under the proposed
Commandership, by Skippon and Massey; ‘and complained, Of
‘the many scandals and false suggestions which were of late
‘raised against the Army and their proceedings; That they were
‘taken as enemies; That they saw designs upon them, and upon
‘many of the Godly Party in the Kingdom; That they could
‘not engage for Ireland till they were satisfied in their expecta-
‘tions, and their just desires granted.—Three Troopers, Edward
‘Sexby, William Allen, Thomas Sheppard, who brought this
‘Letter, were examined in the House, touching the drawing and
‘subscribing of it; and, Whether their Officers were engaged in
‘it or not? They affirmed, That it was drawn up at a Rendez-
‘yous of several of those Eight Regiments; and afterwards at
‘several meetings by Agents or Agitators, for each Regiment ;
‘and that few of their Officers knew or took notice of it.

‘Those Troopers bemg demanded, Whether they had not been
‘Cavaliers ?—it was attested by Skippon, that they had con-
‘stantly served the Parliament, and some of them from the
‘beginning of the War. Being asked concerning the meaning
‘of some expressions in the Petition, especially concerning
‘certain men aiming at a Sovereignty,’—‘ they answered, That
‘the Letter being a joint act of those Regiments, they could
‘not give a punctual answer, being only Agents; but if they
‘might have the queries in writing, they would send or carry
‘them to those Regiments, and return their own and their
‘answers.—They were ordered to attend the House upon sum-
‘mons.’

Three sturdy fellows, fit for management of business ; let the
reader note them. They are ‘ Agents’ to the Army: a class of
functionaries called likewise ‘ Adjutators’ and misspelt ‘ Agita-
tors ;’1 elected by the common men of the Army, to keep the

1[Dr. Murray, in the Vew English Dictionary, writes: ‘‘ Careful investigation
satisfies me that 4ev%¢atoy was the actual title, and 4djuéazor only a bad spelling of
soldiers familiar with Adjutants and the Adjutors of 1642. Adjutator has naturally
seemed more plausible to recent writers unfamiliar with this old sense of ‘ to agitate,’”
this old sense being to do the actual work of (the affairs of) another, to manage, to
act as agent. See Great Civil War, vol. iii. p. 243, where Dr. Gardiner gives the
chronology of the word. ]

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 261

ranks in unison with the Officers in the present crisis of their
affairs. This is their first distinct appearance in the eye of
History ; in which, during these months, they play a great part.
Evidently the settlement with the Army will be a harder task
than was supposed.

During these same months some languid negotiation with the
King is going on ; Scots Commissioners come up to help in treat-
ing with him ; but as he will not hear of Covenant or Presbytery,
there can no result follow. It was an ugly aggravation of the
blot of ignominy which the Army smarts under,—the report raised
against it, That some of the Leaders had said, “if the King
would come to them, they would put the crown on his head
again,’— Cromwell, from his place in Parliament, earnestly
watches these occurrences ; waits what the great ‘birth of Pro-
vidence’ in them may be ;—‘ carries himself with much weari-
ness; is more and more looked up to by the Independent
Party, for his interest with the Soldiers. One day, noticing the
‘high carriages’ of Holles and Company, he whispers Edmund
Ludlow who sat by him, “These men will never leave till the
Army pull them out by the ears!”"}_ Holles and Company, who
at present rule in Parliament, pass a New Militia Ordinance for
London; put the Armed Force of London into hands more
strictly Presbyterian.? There have been two London Petitions
against the Army, and two London Petitions covertly in favour
of it; the Managers of the latter, we observe, have been put in
prison.

May 8th [7th]. Anew and more promising Deputation, Crom-
well at the head of it. ‘Cromwell, Ireton, Fleetwood, Skippon,’
proceed again to Saffron Walden; investigate the claims and
grievances of the Army ;* engage, as they had authority to do,
that real justice shall be done them; and in a fortnight return
with what seems an agreement and settlement; for which
Lieutenant-General Cromwell receives the thanks of the House.*

1 Ludlow, i. 189; see Whitlocke, p. 252. [Mr. Firth thinks that this speech was
made between August 6 and 20, as Major Huntington tells much the same
story, assigning it to that date (see Lud/ow's Memoirs, ed. Firth, i. 148), but as
Huntington says that Cromwell often said it, it seems quite conceivable that he
may have made the remark to Ludlow earlier in the year. At any rate he must
have been quite angry enough to think it, if he did not say it. ]

24th May 1647, Commons Journals, y. 160;—‘ Thirty-one Persons,’ their names

iven,
: 3 Letters from them, in Appendix, No. 10. [And Cromwell's speech to the officers
in Saffron Walden Church. Supplement, No. 2r. |

4May 21st, Commons Journals, v. 181. [Only two of their number, Cromwell
and Fleetwood, returned to London, See Supplement, No. 22,]

262 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

The House votes what if conceives to be justice, ‘ eight weeks of
pay’ in ready money, bonds for the rest,—and so forth. Con-
gratulations hereupon ; a Committee of Lords and Commons are
ordered to go down to Saffron Walden, to see the Army dis-
banded.

May 28th. On arriving at Saffron Walden, they find that their
notions of what is justice, and the Army’s notions, differ widely.1
“Eight weeks of pay,” say the Army; “we want nearer eight
times eight!” Disturbances in several of the quarters :—at
Oxford the men seize the disbanding-money as part of payment,
and will not disband till they get the whole. A meeting of Ad-
jutators, by authority of Fairfax, convenes at Bury St. Edmund’s,?
—a regular Parliament of soldiers, ‘each common man paying
fourpence to meet the expense ;’ it is agreed that the Army’s
quarters shall be ‘contracted,’ brought closer together; that on
Friday next, 4th of June, there shall be a Rendezvous, or General
Assembly of all the Soldiers, there to decide on what they will
do.?

June 4th and 5th. The Newmarket Rendezvous, ‘on Kentford
Heath,’ a little east of Newmarket, is held ; a kind of Covenant
is entered into, and other important things are done :—but
elsewhere in the interim a thing still more important had been
done. On Wednesday June 2d, Cornet Joyce,—once a London
tailor they say, evidently a very handy active man,—he, and
Five-hundred common troopers, a volunteer Party, not expressly
commanded by anybody * but doing what they know the whole

1[The eight weeks’ pay had been in the first instance agreed upon with the army
by the commissioners. What roused the anger of the soldiers was that although
upon the return of Cromwell and his fellows the House had resolved that ‘‘a real
and visible security’ should be given for the rest of the arrears—instead of passing an
ordinance which should give effect thereto, they determined to proceed at once to
the disbandment.

[It was not a meeting of the Agitators, but a Council of War called by Fairfax
which met at Bury on May 29. The petition from the Agitators (for a rendezvous)
was read at it, having been presented to the General that morning. ]

* Rushworth, vi. pp. 496-510.

4[It is of course quite unlikely that Joyce acted without orders. Major Hunt-
ington says that the cornet declared that Lieutenant-General Cromwell ‘‘ gave him
orders in London to do what he had done.” Another witness says that it was
resolved at a meeting at Cromwell's house that Joyce should be ordered ‘‘ either to
secure the person of the King from being removed by any other, or, if occasion were,
to remove him to some place of better security . . . which was accordingly done,
both with the knowledge and approbation of Lieutenant-General Cromwell, though
he afterwards, like a subtle fox, would not be pleased to take notice of it.” See Great
Cwil War, ili. 267, 272. The probability is that Cromwell gave orders for the
seizing but not for the removal of the King, unless a rescue was attempted. ]

1647.) ARMY MANIFESTO 263

Army wishes to be done, sally out of Oxford, where things are
still somewhat disturbed ; proceed to Holmby House ; and, after
two days of talking, bring ‘the King’s Person’ off with them.
To the horror and despair of the Parliament Commissioners in
attendance there ; but clearly to the satisfaction of his Majesty,
—who hopes, in this new shuffle-and-deal, some good card will
turn up for him; hopes, with some ground, ‘the Presbyterians
and Independents may now be got to extirpate one another.’
His Majesty rides willingly ; the Parliament Commissioners
accompany, wringing their hands ;—to Hinchinbrook, that same
Friday night ; where Colonel Montague receives them with all
hospitality, entertains them for two days. Colonel Whalley with
a strong party, deputed by Fairfax, had met his Majesty ; offered
to deliver him from Joyce, back to Holmby and the Parlia-
ment ; but his Majesty positively declined.1—Captain Titus, quase
Tighthose, very well known afterwards, arrives at St. Stephens’
with the news; has 50/. voted him ‘to buy a horse,’ for his great
service; and fills all men with terror and amazement. The
Honourable Houses agree to ‘sit on the Lord’s day;’ have
Stephen Marshal to pray for them; never were in such a plight
before. The Controversy, at this point, has risen from Eco-
nomical into Political : Army Parliament in the Eastern Counties,
against Civil Parliament in Westminster ; and, ‘ How the Nation
shall be settled’ between them; whether its growth shall be in
the forest-tree fashion, or in the clipt Dutch-dragon fashion ?—

Monday, June 7th. All Officers in the House are ordered
forthwith to go down to their regiments. Cromwell, without
order, not without danger of detention, say some,—has already
gone: this same day, ‘ General Fairfax, Lieutenant-General
Cromwell and the chief men of the Army,’ have an interview
with the King, ‘at Childerley House between Huntingdon and
Cambridge :’ his Majesty will not go back to Holmby ; much
prefers ‘the air ’ of these parts, the air of Newmarket for instance ;
and will continue with the Army.” Parliament Commissioners,
with new Votes of Parliament, are coming down; the Army
must have a new Rendezvous, to meet them. New Rendezvous

1[On Sunday, the 6th, Whalley wrote to Fairfax: ‘‘ His Majesty about five of
the clock this afternoon was pleased to be a little merry, and laughingly told me he
now perceived your Excellency would not force him back to Holdenby . . . he
desired to give order to his servants to prepare to go to Newmarket tomorrow. .. .
His Majesty longs to be there, and this night expects to hear from you, and to be
answered in his desires.” Clarke Papers, i, 22. |

2 Rushworth, vi. 549.

264 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

at Royston, more properly on Triploe Heath near Cambridge, is
appointed for Thursday ; and in the interim a ‘ Day of Fasting
and Humiliation’ is held by all the soldiers,—a real Day of
Prayer (very inconceivable in these days), For God’s enlighten-
ment as to what should now be done.

Here is Whitlocke’s account of the celebrated Rendezvous
itself—somewhat abridged from Rushworth, and dim enough ;
wherein, however, by good eyes a strange old Historical Scene
may be discerned. The new Votes of Parliament do not appear
still to meet ‘the just desires’ of the Army; meanwhile, let all
things be done decently and in order.

‘The General had ordered a Rendezvous at Royston ;” properly
on Triploe Heath, as we said; on Thursday 10th June 1647:
the Force assembled was about Twenty-one thousand men, the
remarkablest Army that ever wore steel in this world. ‘The
‘General and the Commissioners rode to each Regiment. They
‘first acquainted the General’s Regiment with the Votes of the
‘Parliament ; and Skippon,’ one of the Commissioners, ‘ spake to
‘them to persuade a compliance. An Officer of the Regiment
‘made answer, That the Regiment did desire that their answer
‘might be returned after perusal of the Votes by some select
‘Officers and Agitators, whom the Regiment had chosen; and
‘said, This was the motion of the Regiment.

‘He desired the General and Commissioners to give him leave
‘to ask the whole Regiment if this was their answer. Leave
‘being given, they cried, “ All.” Then he put the question, If
‘any man were of a contrary opinion he should say, No ;—and
‘not one man gave his “No.’—The Agitators in behalf of the
‘soldiers pressed to have the question put at once, Whether the
‘Regiment did acquiesce and were satisfied with the Votes?’
The Agitators knew well what the answer would have been !—
‘But in regard the other way was more orderly, and they might
' cate perusal proceed more deliberately, that question was laid
“aside.

‘The like was done in the other Regiments; and all were
‘very unanimous ; and always after the Commissioners had done
‘reading the Votes, and speaking to each Regiment, and had
‘received their answer, all of them cried out, “ Justice, Justice !’”’
—not a very musical sound to the Commissioners.

‘A Petition was delivered in the field to the General, in the
‘name of “many well-affected people in Essex ;” desiring, That
‘the Army might o/ be disbanded; in regard the Commonwealth

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 265

‘had many enemies, who watched for such an occasion to destroy
‘the good people.’ !

Such, and still dimmer, is the jotting of dull authentic Bul-
strode,—drowning in official oil, and somnolent natural pedantry
and fat, one of the remarkablest scenes our History ever had:
An Armed Parliament, extra-official, yet not without a kind of
sacredness, and an Oliver Cromwell at the head of it; demanding
with one voice, as deep as ever spake in England, “ Justice,
Justice!” under the vault of Heaven.

That same afternoon, the Army moved on to St. Albans,?
nearer to London; and from the Rendezvous itself, a joint Letter
was despatched to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, which the
reader is now at last to see. I judge it, pretty confidently, by
evidence of style alone, to be of Cromwell’s own writing.® It
differs totally in this respect from any other of those multitudin-
ous Army-Papers ; which were understood, says Whitlocke, to
be drawn up mostly by Ireton, ‘ who had a subtle working brain;’
or by Lambert, who also had got some tincture of Law and other
learning, and did not want for brain. They are very able Papers,
though now very dull ones. This is in a far different style; in
Oliver’s worst style; his style when he writes in haste,—and not
in haste of the pen merely, for that seems always to have been
a most rapid business with him; but in haste before the matter
had matured itself for him, and the real kernels of it got parted
from the husks. A style of composition like the structure of a
block of oak-root,—as tortuous, unwedgeable, and as strong !
Read attentively, this Letter can be understood, can be believed :
the tone of it, the ‘voice’ of it, reminds us of what Sir Philip
Warwick heard; the voice of a man risen justly into a kind of
chaunt,—very dangerous for the City of London at present.

1 Whitlocke, p. 255. [See also Perfect Diurnal, E. 515, 19.]

2(That day it only advanced as far as Royston, and there the letter was written. |

3{Dr. Gardiner says that ‘‘ Carlyle fixed on it as Cromwell's production from its
style. The evidence of its ideas is quite as striking. It is apparently in reference
to Cromwell's language in proposing this letter that we are told that ‘O. Crom-
well spake as gallantly and as heroic as if he had been charging his enemies in the
field.’ (Clarke Papers, i. 134.) . . . Not only is most of it written in his style but
it is redolent of his ideas. It displays Cromwell as concealing from himself that he
was really executing a change of front, and tenaciously holding to his old doctrine
that the intervention of an army in affairs of state is a grave evil, whilst in reality he
was furthering a course which he had long condemned. By a strange self-delusion,
he refused to admit that he was giving his approval to an enterprise in which soldiers
were attempting to bend the course of politics by the employment of their swords.
What they required to be done was required by them not as soldiers but as English--
men, and their being soldiers could not strip them of their interest in the welfare of
their country.” Great Civil War, iii. 287. |

266 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS 10 June.

To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council of the City of London : These

Royston, roth June 1647.

RicHt HonouraBLE AND WortTHY FRIENDs,

Having, by our letters and other addresses
presented by our General to the Honourable House of Commons,
endeavoured to give satisfaction of the clearness of our just
demands; and ‘having’ also, in papers published by us, remon-
strated the grounds of our proceedings in prosecution thereof;
—all which having been exposed to public view, we are confident
have come to your hands, and at least received a charitable con-
struction from you ;—the sum of all these our Desires as Soldiers
is no other than a desire of satisfaction to our demands as soldiers;
and reparation upon those who have, to the utmost, improved
all opportunities and advantages, by false suggestions, misre-
presentations and otherwise, for the destruction of this Army
with a perpetual blot of ignominy upon it. Which ‘injury’ we
should not value, if it singly concerned our own particulars, being
ready to deny ourselves in this, as we have done in other cases,
for the Kingdom’s good: but under this pretence, we find no less
involved than the overthrow of the privileges both of Parliament
and People; wherein rather than they! shall fail in their de-
signs, or we receive what in the eyes of all good men is just [it
is] endeavoured to engage the kingdom in a new war, and this
singly by those who, when the truth of these things shall be
made to appear, will be found the authors of these evils that are
feared ;—as having no other way to protect themselves from ques-
tion and punishment but by putting the Kingdom into blood,
under pretence of the honour of and their love to the Parliament,
as if that were dearer to them than us; or as if they had given
greater proof of their faithfulness to it than we.

But we perceive that, under these veils and pretences, they
seek to interest in their design the city of London :—as if that

1The Presbyterian leaders in Parliament, Holles, Stapleton, Harley, Waller, &c.

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 267

city ought to make good their miscarriages, and should prefer a
few self-seeking men before the welfare of the public. And in-
deed we have found these men so active to accomplish their
designs, and to have such apt instruments for their turn in that
city, that we have cause to suspect they may engage many
therein upon mistakes,—which are easily swallowed, in times of
such prejudice against them! that have given (we may speak it
without vanity) the most public testimony of their good affec-
tions to the public, and to that city in particular.

‘As’ for the thing we insist upon as Englishmen,—and surely
our being soldiers hath not stript us of that interest, although
our malicious enemies would have it so,—we desire a settlement
ot the peace of the Kingdom and of the liberties of the subject,
according to the votes and declarations of Parliament, which,
before we took up arms, were, by the Parliament, used as argu-
ments and inducements to invite us and divers of our dear friends
out; some of which have lost their lives in this war, which being,
by God’s blessing, finished, we think we have as much right to
demand, and desire to see, a happy settlement, as we have to our
money and the other common interest of soldiers which we have
insisted upon.? We find also the ingenious and honest people,
in almost all the parts of the Kingdom where we come, full of
the sense of ruin and misery if the Army should be disbanded
before the peace of the Kingdom, and those other things before
mentioned, have a full and perfect settlement.

We have said before, and profess it now, We desire no al-
teration of the Civil Government. We desire not to intermeddle
with, or in the least to interrupt, the settling of the Presbyterial
Government. Nor did we seek to open a way to licentious
liberty, under pretence of obtaining ease for tender consciences.

We profess, as ever in these things, when the State have once
made a settlement, we have nothing to say but to submit or

1 Oblique for ‘ us.’
2[Dr. Gardiner suggests that this passage was possibly not written by Cromwell.
Mr. Firth thinks it was. ]

268 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [10 June.

suffer. Only we could wish that every good citizen, and every
man that walks peaceably in a blameless conversation, and is
beneficial to the Commonwealth, may have liberty and encourage-
ment ; it being according to the just policy of all States, even
to justice itself.

These things are our desires, and the things for which we
stand; beyond which we shall not go. And for the obtaining of
these things, we are drawing near your city ;1—professing sin-
cerely from our hearts, ‘that’ we intend not evil towards you ;
declaring, with all confidence and assurance, that if you appear
not against us in these our just desires, to assist that wicked
Party that would embroil us and the Kingdom, nor we nor our
Soldiers shall give you the least offence. We come not to do
any act to prejudice the being of Parliaments, or to the hurt of
this ‘ Parliament’ in order to the present settlement of the King-
dom. We seek the good of all. And we shall here wait, or
remove to a farther distance there to abide, if once we be assured
that a speedy settlement of things be in hand,—until they be ac-
complished. Which done, we shall be most ready, either all of
us, or so many of the Army as the Parliament shall think fit, to
disband, or go for Ireland.

And although you may suppose that a rich city may seem an
enticing bait to poor hungry soldiers to venture far to gain the
wealth thereof,—yet, if not provoked by you, we do profess,
rather than any such evil should fall out, the soldiers shall make
their way through our blood to effect it. And we can say this
for most of them, for your better assurance, that they so little
value their pay, in comparison of higher concernments to a public
good, that rather than they will be unrighted in the matter of their
honesty and integrity (which hath suffered by the Men they aim
at and desire justice upon), or want the settlement of the King-
dom’s peace, and theirs with their fellow-subjects’ Liberties,
they will lose all. Which may be a strong assurance to you

1 That is the remarkable point !

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 269

that it’s not your wealth they seek, but the things tending in
common to your and their welfare. That they may attain ‘these,’
you shall do like fellow-subjects and brethren if you solicit the
Parliament for them, on their behalf.

If after all this, you, or a considerable number of you, be
seduced to take up arms in opposition to, or hindrance of,
these our just undertakings, we hope by this brotherly premoni-
tion, to the sincerity whereof we call God to witness, we have
freed ourselves from all that ruin which may befall that great
and populous City; having hereby washed our hands thereof.

We rest,

Your affectionate Friends to serve you,
Tuomas Farrrax. Henry JReETON.
OLIvER CROMWELL. Rosert Livpurn.
Rosert HamMonp. Joun Desporow.
Tuomas Hammonp. Tuomas RainsBorow.
Harpress WALLER. Joun LAMBERT.
NATHANIEL Ric. Tuomas Harrison.*

Tuomas Prine.

This Letter was read next day in the Commons House,‘—not
without emotion. Most respectful answer went from the Guild-
hall, ‘in three coaches with the due number of outriders.’

On June 16th, the Army, still [now] at St. Albans, accuses of
treason Eleven Members of the Commons House by name, as,
chief authors of all these troubles ; whom the Honourable House
is respectfully required to put upon their Trial, and prevent from
voting in the interim. These are the famed Eleven Members ;
Holles, Waller, Stapleton, Massey are known to us; the whole
List, for benefit of historical readers, we subjoin in a Note.” They

* Rushworth, vi. 554. [Carlyle made a good many alterations in the text, which
is now printed as given in Rushworth. Compare with this a letter from the officers
written on June 13—but probably not sent—‘“‘ to several Counties.” Clarke Papers,
i. 130. ]

1 Commons Journals, v. 208.

2 Denzil Holles (Member for Dorchester), Sir Philip Stapleton (Boroughbridge),
Sir William Waller (Andover), Sir William Lewis (Petersfield), Sir John Clotworthy
(Malden), Recorder Glynn (Westminster), Mr. Anthony Nichols (Bodmin) ; these
Seven are old Members, from the beginning of the Parliament ;—the other Four

270 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS (June.

demurred ; withdrew ; again returned ; in fine, had to ‘ ask leave
to retire for six months,’ on account of their health, we suppose.
They retired swiftly in the end; to France ; to deep concealment,
—to the Tower otherwise.

The history of these six weeks, till they did retire and the
Army had its way, we must request the reader to imagine for
himself! Long able Papers, drawn by men of subtle brain and
strong sincere heart: the Army retiring always to a safe distance
when their Demands are agreed to; straightway advancing if
otherwise,—which rapidly produces an agreement. A most re-
markable Negotiation ; conducted with a method, a gravity and
decorous regularity beyond example in such cases. The ‘shops’
of London were more than once ‘shut ;’ tremor occupying all
hearts :—but no harm was done.? The Parliament regularly paid
the Army; the Army lay coiled round London and the Parlia-
ment, now advancing, now receding ; saying in the most respectful
emblematic way, “Settlement with us and the Godly People,
or !”—The King, still with the Army,’ and treated like a

are ‘recruiters,’ elected since 1645: Major-General Massey (Wootton Basset),
Colonel Walter Long (Ludgershall), Colonel Edward Harley (Herefordshire), Sir
John Maynard (Lostwithiel).

1[For Cromwell's speeches at the Council of the Army on 16th July, see Supple-
ment, No. 24. |

2[In the collection of Captain Lindsay are three very interesting letters to
Colonel John Moore (then in Ireland) from his wife, describing the state of affairs
in London during this month of June. In the first, dated June 22, she wrote:
‘‘Things are in the most saddest condition that ever mortals beheld. Every day
we look for Sir Thomas Fairfax his army, whether in love or with force it is not
known, The army doth carry themselves so fair that they gain the hearts of all the
counties, and they petition to Sir Thomas Fairfax that he shall not lay down arms
till things be settled. The army doth accuse four of the Lords and eleven of the
House of Commons. . . I have much ado to keep my goods, for the Parliament,
to please the city, hath passed an order that no parliament man’s goods nor lands
shall be protected. . . . The plague is very hot here. It is the next door but two
to Sir Gregory Norton's, over against us. . . . The King is at Newmarket; the
army doth not much regard him, for he is very stubborn to them. The Lord
knows their intention. The Cavaliers are very merry to see us contend, but I hope
they will have no cause’. A week later she wrote again. ‘‘ We are here in less
safety than you, for there you know your enemies and here we do not. The Lord
in mercy look upon us, for the divisions of Reuben are great; the army is very high
and the King is stubborn. The Parliament stand upon their own guard; we look
every day for a siege but I hope God will protect his own. The army will never
rest till they have purged some of their gross injustice and bribery”, These letters
were formerly the property of Captain Stewart of Alltyrodyn, and are calendared
in the roth Report of the Hist. MSS. Commiéssioners, Appendix iv. p. 97.]

5[At the end of June, by order of Parliament, and with consent of the Lord
General, the King was removed to Richmond, under escort of Colonel Whalley.
See letter from Cromwell and Hewson to Whalley, Supplement, No. 23. There

1647.] ARMY MANIFESTO 271

King, endeavoured to play his game, ‘in meetings at Woburn’
and elsewhere; but the two Parties could not be brought to
extirpate one another for his benefit.

Towards the end of July, matters seem as good as settled: the
Holles ‘ Declaration,’ that ‘ blot of ignominy,’ being now expunged
from the Journals ;! the Eleven being out ; and now at last, the
New Militia Ordinance for London (Presbyterian Ordinance
brought in by Holles on the 4th of May) being revoked, and
matters in that quarter set on their old footing again. The two
Parties in Parliament seem pretty equal in numbers; the Pres-
byterian Party, shorn of its Eleven, is cowed down to the due
pitch ; and there is now prospect of fair treatment for all the
Godly Interest, and such a Settlement with his Majesty as may
be the best for that. Towards the end of July, however, London
City, torn by factions, but Presbyterian by the great majority,
rallies again in a very extraordinary way. Take these glimpses
from contemporaneous Whitlocke ; and rouse them from their
fat somnolency a little.

July 26th. Many young men and Apprentices of London came
to the House in a most rude and tumultuous manner; and pre-
sented some particular Desires.? Desires, That the Eleven may
come back; that the Presbyterian Militia Ordinance be not
revoked,—that the Revocation of it be revoked. Desire, in
short, That there be no peace made with Sectaries, but that the
London Militia may have a fair chance to fight them !—Drowsy
Whitlocke continues; almost as if he were in Paris in the
eighteenth century: ‘The Apprentices, and many other rude
‘boys and mean fellows among them, came into the House of
‘Commons; and kept the Door open and their hats on; and
‘ealled out as they stood, “ Vote, Vote!” and in this arrogant
‘posture, stood till the votes passed in that way, To repeal the
‘Ordinance for change of the Militia, to’ &c. ‘In the evening

can be no doubt that at this time Cromwell, supported by Ireton, was doing his
utmost to bring about an agreement with the King. See note on p, 282, below. A
letter preserved amongst the Duke of Sutherland’s MSS., written on Sept. 28,
states, ‘‘ The division in the Army increases between Cromwell's and the Agitators’
factions ; these suspect Cromwell and his faction, who, they conceive, labour to in-
sinuate too much into the King’s favour . . . I have been certainly informed that
Cromwell spoke much on the King’s behalf when his answers to the Propositions
were controverted in the House”. W. Langley to John Langley, A/zst. MSS.
Commissioners’ Report v., App., P. 179: ]

1 Asterisks still in the place of it, Commons Journals, 29th March 1647.
2/The petition was from the Common Council itself, but the mob of apprentices,
etc,, followed the deputation which came to present it. ]

272 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [July.

‘about seven o'clock, some of the Common Council came down
‘to the House :’ but finding the Parliament and Speaker already
had been forced, they, astute Common-Council men, ordered their
Apprentices to go home again, the work they had set them upon
being now finished.1_ This disastrous scene fell out on Monday
26th July 1647: the Houses, on the morrow morning, without
farther sitting, adjourned till Friday next.

On Friday next,——behold, the Two Speakers, ‘ with the
Mace,’ and many Members of both Houses, have withdrawn ;
and the Army, lately at Bedford, is on quick march towards
London! Alarming pause. ‘About noon,’ however, the Re-
mainders of the Two Houses, reinforeed by the Eleven who
reappear for the last time, proceed to elect new Speakers, ‘ get
the City Mace;’ order, above all, that there be a vigorous
enlistment of forces under General Massey, General Poyntz,
and others. ‘St. James’s Fields’ were most busy all Saturday,
all Monday; shops all shut; drums beating in all quarters ;
a most vigorous enlistment going on. Presbyterianism will die
with harness on its back. Alas, news come that the Army is
at Colnebrook, advancing towards Hounslow; news come that
they have rendezvoused at Hounslow, and received the Speakers
and fugitive Lords and Commons with shouts. Tuesday, 3d
August 1647, was such a day as London and the Guildhall
never saw before or since! Southwark declares that it will
not fight ; sends to Fairfax for Peace and a ‘sweet composure ;’
comes to the Guildhall in great crowds petitioning for Peace ;—
at which sight, General Poyntz, pressing through for orders about
his enlistments, loses his last drop of human patience ; ‘draws
his sword’ on the whining multitudes, ‘slashes several persons,
whereof some died.’2. The game is nearly up. Look into the
old Guildhall on that old Tuesday night : the palpitation,
tremulous expectation ; wooden Gog and Magog themselves
almost sweating cold with terror:

‘General Massey sent out scouts to Brentford: but Ten men
‘of the Army beat Thirty of his; and took a flag from a Party
‘of the City. The City Militia and Common Council sat late ;
‘and a great number of people attended at Guildhall. When a
‘scout came in and brought news, That the Army made a halt ;
‘or other good intelligence,—they cry, “One and all!” But if
‘the scouts reported that the Army was advancing nearer them,

1Whitlocke, p. 263. 2(These things happened on Monday, August 2. |

1647. ] LETTER XLV., PUTNEY 273

‘then they would cry as loud, “Treat, treat, treat!” So they
‘spent most part of the night. At last they resolved to send
‘the General an humble letter, beseeching him that there
‘might be a way of composure.’ !

On Friday morning, was ‘a meeting at the Earl of Holland’s
House in Kensington’ (the Holland House that yet stands), and
prostrate submission by the Civic Authorities and Parliamentary
Remainders ; after which the Army marched ‘three deep by
Hyde Park’ into the heart of the City, ‘with boughs of laurel in
their hats ;’—and it was all ended.? Fair treatment for all the
Honest Party: and the Spiritualism of England shall not be
forced to grow in the Presbyterian fashion, however it may
grow. Here is another entry from somnolent Bulstrode. The
Army soon changes its headquarters to Putney ;* one of its
outer posts is Hampton Court, where his Majesty, obstinate still,
but somewhat despondent now of getting the two Parties to
extirpate one another, is lodged.

Saturday, ‘September 18th. After a sermon in Putney Church,
‘the General, many great Officers, Field-Officers, inferior Officers
‘and Adjutators, met in the Church; debated the Proposals of
‘the Army’ towards a Settlement of this bleeding Nation ;
‘altered some things in them ;—and were very full of the
‘Sermon, which had been preached by Mr. Peters.’ 4

LETTERS XLV—LVIII

Turse Fourteen Letters, touching slightly on public affairs, with
one or two glimpses into private, must carry us, without com-

1 Whitlocke, p. 265. [The letter was sent on the morning of Tuesday, August

2[On Friday, the 6th, the General, with two regiments of horse and foot, ‘‘ came
to bring in the Lords and Members of the House of Commons that were enforced
away,” and having escorted them to the Parliament House, was himself received in
the House of Lords with much honour, Lieut.-Gen, Cromwell and his other chief
officers being in attendance on him. ‘The march into the city was on Saturday, the
7th. In the early days of September, Cromwell seems to have taken a short holiday.
‘* Cromwell is gone to the Isle of Wight,” wrote a Royalist newspaper ; ‘‘ Col. Ham-
mond is governor thereof . . . only Master Cromwell is Dominus fac totum” .]

% 28th August, Rushworth, vii. 792. [The 27th appears to have been the date.
Dr, Gardiner says the 26th, but Rushworth, writing on the 28th, distinctly says that
the General held a Council of War at Kingston ‘‘ yesterday” and removed to
Putney ‘‘last night.” ] :

4 Whitlocke, p. 272.

VOR, 1.18

oa

274 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [1 Sept.

mentary, in a very dim way, across to the next stage in Oliver's
History and England’s: the Flight of the King from Hampton
Court and the Army, soon followed by the actual breaking-out
of the Second Civil War.

LETTER XLV

Wiuams, Archbishop of York, ‘hasty hot Welsh Williams,’ —
whom we once saw, seven years ago, as Bishop of Lincoln, get-
ting jostled in Palaceyard, protesting thereupon, and straightway
getting lodged in the Tower,!—is to concern us again for one
moment. A man once very radiant to men, as obscure as he has
now grown: a most high-riding far-shining Solar Luminary in
that epoch; obscure to no man in England for thirty years
last past! A man of restless mercurial vivacity, of endless
superficial dexterity and ingenuity, of next to no real wisdom ;—
very fit to have swift promotions and sudden eclipses in a Stuart
Court ; not worthy of much memory otherwise. Of his rapid
rises, culminations, miraculous faculties and destinies, to us all
useless, indifferent and extinct, let there be silence here,—
reference to Bishop Hacket and the Futile Ingenuities.?

Archbishop Williams,—for he got delivered from the Tower
at that time, and recovered favour, and was ‘enthroned Arch-
bishop at York’ while his Majesty was raising his War-standard
there,—found, after a while, that there was little good to be got
of his Archbishophood ; that his best weapon would be, not the
crosier, but the linstock and cannon-rammer, at present: he
went to his Welsh estate of Aberconway, and ‘ procuring a Com-
mission from his Majesty,’ fortified Conway Castle ‘at his own
expense, and invited the neighbouring gentry to lodge their
plate and valuables there, as in a place of security. Good ;—for
the space of a year or two. But now, some time ago in the
death-throes of the late War, while North Wales was bestirring
itself as in last-agony for his Majesty's behoof,—there came a
certain Colonel Sir John Owen, of whom we shall hear again ;
he, this Owen, came before Castle Conway with large tumultuary
force ; demanded the same in his Majesty’s name, to be governed

1 Antea, p. 108.

2 Hacket's Life of Archbishop Williams (a considerable Folio, Lond. 1712) ;
Philip's Life of Wiliams (an Octavo Abridgment of that); &c.

1647.] LETTER XLV., PUTNEY 275

by him Sir John Owen, as essential for his Majesty’s occasions
at that time. High-sniffing, indignant refusal on the part of
Williams: impetuous capture and forcible possession, on the
part of Owen. Hot Williams, blown all to flame hereby, applied
to Col. Mitton, the Parliamentary Colonel of those parts; said
to him, “ Expel me this intolerable Owen; Owen out, I will
hold this Castle for the Parliament and you,—his Majesty seems
nearly done with fighting now.” A thing difficult to explain
completely to the Royalist mind: Bishop Hacket has his own
ados with it; and in stupid Saunderson! and others, it is one
loud howl, “Son of the morning, how art thou fallen!”

Explained or not, ‘my Lord of York’ does hold Conway Castle
on those terms, at this date ; is taking a certain charge of North
Wales in his busy way; and has even been corresponding with
Cromwell, on the subject. They had known one another in old
years: Buckden, the Bishop of Lincoln’s House, is in the neigh-
bourhood of Huntingdon; where Cromwell, it is understood,
used occasionally to wait upon him; pleading for oppressed
Lecturers and the like,—the Bishop having, from political or
other biases, a kind of lenity for Puritans.?

Cromwell is very brief with him here ; courteous as to an old
neighbour rather in eclipse ; but evidently wishing to have no
unnecessary business with the Governor of Conway. We see he
could on occasion jocosely claim ‘kindred’ with him, as himself
a ‘Williams :’ and that perhaps is the chief interest of this smal]
Document, which the reader will now abundantly understand.

For the Right Honourable my Lord of York; These

‘Putney,’ 1st September 1647.
My Lorp,
Your advices will be seriously considered by

us. We shal] endeavour our uttermost, so to settle the affairs of
North Wales as, to the best of our understandings, does most
conduce to the public good thereof and of the whole. And
that without private respect, or to the satisfaction of any
humour, which has been too much practised by the occasion
of our troubles.

1 History of Charles I,

2( Had, indeed, such strong Puritan leanings himself as had brought him, in past

years, into perpetual conflict with Laud; into Star Chamber processes and im-
prisonment.

276 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [14 Sept.

The drover you mention will be secured (as far as we are
able) in his affairs, if he come to ask it. Your kinsman shall be
very welcome to me: I shall study to serve him for kindred’s
sake ; among whom let not be forgotten,

My Lord,
Your cousin and servant,
Outver CROMWELL.

The Governor of Conway will not be forgotten, to prevent his
abuse.*

My Lord of York still lived some year or two in Conway Castle ;
saw his enemy Sir John Owen in trouble enough ; but died before
long,—chiefly of broken heart for the fate of his Majesty, thinks
Bishop Hacket. A long farewell to him.

LETTER XLVI

Tue Marquis of Ormond, a man of distinguished integrity,
patience, activity and talent, had done his utmost for the King
in Ireland, so long as there remained any shadow of hope there.
His last service, as we saw, was to venture secretly on a Peace
with the Irish Catholics,—Papists, men of the Massacre of 1641,
men of many other massacres, falsities, mad blusterings and
confusions,—whom all parties considered as sanguinary Rebels,
and regarded with abhorrence. Which Peace, we saw farther,
Abbas O’Teague and others threatening to produce excommuni-
cation on it, the ‘Council of Kilkenny’ broke away from,—not
in the handsomest manner. Ormond, in this Spring of 1647,
finding himself reduced to ‘seven barrels of gunpowder’ and
other extremities, without prospect of help or trustworthy bargain
on the Irish side,—agreed to surrender Dublin, and what else
he had left, rather to the Parliament than to the Rebels; his
Majesty, from England, secretly and publicly advising that
course. The Treaty was completed: ‘Colonel Michael Jones,’
lately Governor of Chester, arrived with some Parliamentary
Regiments, with certain Parliamentary Commissioners, on the

* Gentleman's Magazine (1789), lix. 877.

1647.] LETTER XLVI, PUTNEY 277

Tth of June:! the surrender was duly effected, and Ormond
withdrew to England.

A great English force had been anticipated; but the late
quarrel with the Army had rendered that impossible. Jones,
with such inadequate force as he had, made head against the
Rebels ; gained ‘a great victory’ over them on the 8th of August,
at a place called Dungan Hill, not far from Trim:? ‘the most
signal victory we had yet gained ;’ for which there was thank-
fulness enough. Four days before that Sermon by Hugh Peters,
followed by the military conclave in Putney Church, Cromwell
had addressed this small Letter of Congratulation to Jones,
whom, by the tone of it, he does not seem to have as yet person-
ally known :

For the Honourable Colonel Jones, Governor of Dublin, and
Commander-in-Chief of all the Forces in Leinster: These

‘ Putney,’ 14th September 1647.

Sir,
The mutual engagement * and agreement we

have in the same Cause‘* give me occasion, as to congratulate,
so abundantly to rejoice in God’s gracious Dispensation unto you
and by you. We have (both in England and Ireland), found the
immediate presence and assistance of God,° in guiding and suc-
ceeding our endeavours hitherto; and therefore ought (as I
doubt not both you and we desire), to ascribe the glory ° of all
to him, and to improve all we receive from him unto him
alone.

Though, it may be, for the present a cloud may lie over our
actions to them ® who are not acquainted with the grounds of
them ;7 yet we doubt not but God will clear our integrity and
innocency from any other ends we aim at but his® glory and the

1Carte’s Ormond, i. 603. 2 Rushworth, vii. 779 ; Carte, ii. 5.

3 [Carlyle printed ‘‘ interest.” |

4Word uncertain to the Copyist; sense not doubtful. [Word not doubtful
either.

oT God's ” in the original. The word has been followed by others subsequently
erased (might be ‘‘ gracious hand,” but this is very doubtful) and the s of God’s was
not erased. |

6[ Printed ‘‘ glories” and ‘‘ those” by Carlyle. ] ,

7 [Written over an erasure ‘‘ our T—”; might be “' transactions.” |

8[ Written over ‘‘God’s” erased. ],

278 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS _ [13 Oct.

public good. And as you are an instrument herein, so we shall?
(as becometh us), upon all occasions, give you your due honour.
For mine own particular, wherein I may have your commands
to serve you, you shall find none more ready than he that sincerely
desires to approve himself,
Your affectionate friend and humble servant,
Ouiver CROMWELL.*

Michael Jones is the name of this Colonel; there are several
Colonel Joneses ; difficult to distinguish. One of them, Colonel
John Jones, Member for Merionethshire, and known too in Ire-
land, became afterwards the Brother-in-law of Cromwell; and
ended tragically as a Regicide in 1661. Colonel Michael gained
other signal successes in Ireland; welcomed Oliver into it in
1649 ; and died there soon after of a fever.”

One of the remarkablest circumstances of this new Irish Cam-
paign is, that Colonel Monk, George Monk, is again in it. He
was taken prisoner, fresh from Ireland, at Nantwich, three years
ago. After lying three years in the Tower, seeing his Majesty's
affairs now desperate, he has consented to take the Covenant,
embark with the Parliament ; and is now doing good service in
Ulster.

LETTER XLVII

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax : These

Putney, 13th October 1647.
Sire,
The case concerning Captain Middleton?

hears‘ ill, inasmuch as it is delayed (upon pretences) from

1[** shall” inserted with caret ; the next word (apparently ‘‘ doe’’) erased. ]

2[See his Life in the Dict. Nat. Biography.)

’[Captain in Cromwell's own (formerly Vermuyden's) regiment. ]

4sounds. [The original has ‘“‘heeres”. Carlyle’s is probably, but not quite
certainly the true interpretation. In the last paragraph of the letter, Carlyle (or
his copyist) read ‘‘feared"’ instead of ‘‘scarce” and had to insert ‘‘to” in order
to make sense. ]

*MS. Volume of Letters in Trinity-College Library, Dublin (marked; F. 3
18), fol. 62 [now No. 1]. Holograph. Docketed by Jones himself, of whom the
Volume contains other memorials. [The exact reading kindly communicated by
the Rey. T. K. Abbott, librarian of Trinity College. |

1647.] LETTER XLVIL, PUTNEY 279

coming to a trial. It is not (I humbly conceive) fit that it
should stay any longer. The Soldiers complain thereof, and
their witnesses have been examined. Captain Middleton, and
some others for him, have made stay thereof hitherto.

I beseech your Excellency to give order it may be tried on
Friday, or Saturday at farthest, if you please ; and that so much
may be signified to the Advocate.

Sir, I pray excuse my not-attendance upon you. I scarce miss
the House a day, where it’s very necessary for me to be. I hope
your Excellency will be at the head-quarter tomorrow, where, if
God please, I shall wait upon you.

I rest,
Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
Ouiver CromwELL.*

Captain Middleton and his case have vanished completely out
of the records ; whether it was tried on Saturday, and how de-
cided, will never now be known. Doubtless Fairfax ‘signified ’
somewhat to the Advocate about it, but let us not ask what.
‘The Advocate’ is called ‘ John Mills, Esquire, Judge-Advocate ;’ !
whose military Law-labours have mostly become silent now.
The former Advocate was Dr Dorislaus ; of whom also a word.
Dr. Dorislaus, by birth Dutch ; appointed Judge-Advocate at the
beginning of Essex’s campaignings; known afterwards on the
King’s Trial ; and finally, for that latter service, assassinated at
the Hague, one evening, by certain highflying Royalist cut-
throats, Scotch several of them. The Portraits represent him as
a man of heavy, deep-wrinkled, elephantine countenance, pressed
down with the labours of life and law; the good ugly man here
found his quietus.

The business in the House, ‘ where it’s necessary for me to be’
without miss of a sitting, is really important, or at least critical,
in these October days: Settlement of Army arrears, duties and
arrangements ; Tonnage and Poundage ; business of the London
Violence upon the Parliament (pardoned for the most part) ;
business of Lieutenant-Colonel John Lilburn, now growing very

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 80 [f. 160. Holograph. ]
1Sprigge, p. 326.

230 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS _ [22 Oct.

noisy ;—above all things, final Settlement with the King, if that
by any method could be possible. The Army-Parliament too
still sits; ‘Council of War’! with its Adjutators meeting fre-
quently at Putney.? In the House, and out of the House,
Lieutenant-General Cromwell is busy enough.

This very day, ‘Wednesday 13th October 1647,’ we find him
deep in debate ‘On the farther establishment of the Presbyterial
Government’ (for the law is still loose, the Platform except in
London never fairly on foot) ; and Teller on no fewer than three
divisions. First, Shall the Presbyterian Government be limited
to three years? Cromwell answers Yea, in a House of 73; is
beaten by a majority of 3. Second, Shall there be a limit of time
to it? Cromwell again answers Yea; beats, this time by a
majority of 14, in a House now of 74 (some individual having
dropt in). Z'hird, Shall the limit be seven years? Cromwell
answers Yea ; and in a House still of 74 is beaten by 8. It is
finally got settled that the limit of time shall be ‘to the end of
‘the next Session of Parliament after the end of this Present
‘Session, —a very vague Period, this ‘present session’ having
itself already proved rather long! Note, too, this is not yet a
Law ; it is only a Proposal to be made to the King, if his Majesty
will concur, which seems doubtful. | Debating enough !—Satur-
day last there was a call of the House, and great quantities of
absent Members ; ‘ egrotantes,’ fallen ill, a good many of them,
—sickness being somewhat prevalent in those days of waiting
upon Providence.’

LETTER XLVIII
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax ; These

Putney, 22d October 1647.
Sir

Hearing the Garrison of Hull is much dis-

tracted in the present government, and that the most faithful
and honest Officers have no disposition to serve there any longer
under the present Governor ; and that it is their earnest desires,

l[z.e. Council of the Army; though often called Council of War. ]
2 Rushworth, vii. 849, &c, 3 Commons Journals, v. 329; 1b. 332.

1647.] LETTER XLVIIL, PUTNEY 281

with all the faithful and trusty inhabitants in the Town, to have
Colonel Overton sent to them to be your Excellency’s deputy
over them, I do humbly offer to your Excellency, whether it
might not be convenient that Colonel Overton be speedily sent
down ; that so that garrison may be settled in safe hands. And
that your Excellency would be pleased to send for Colonel Over-
ton, and confer with him about it, that either the regiment ‘ now’
in the town may be so regulated as your Excellency may be
confident that the garrison may be secured by them ; or otherwise
it may be drawn out, and his own regiment in the Army be sent
down thither with him. But I conceive, if the regiment in Hull
can be made serviceable to your Excellency, and included in the
Establishment, it will be better to continue it there, than to bury
a regiment of your Army in that garrison.

Sir, the expedition! will be very necessary, in regard of the
present distraction there. This I thought fit to offer to your
Excellency’s consideration. I shall humbly take leave, and
subscribe myself,

Your Excellency’s
Most Humble ‘and faithful servant,
OLIveR CroMWELL.’ *

After Hotham’s defection and execution, the Lord Ferdinando
Fairfax, who had valiantly defended the place, was appointed
Governor of Hull; which office had subsequently been conferred
on_the Generalissimo Sir Thomas, his Son; and was continued
to him, on the readjustment of all Garrisons in the Spring of this
same year.? Sir Thomas therefore was express Governor of Hull
at this time. Who the Substitute or Deputy under him was, I
do not know.? Some Presbyterian man; unfit for the stringent

1(Carlyle rendered this ‘‘ expedient,” which possibly is what Cromwell meant.
But it is more likely that he is emphasizing the need for Overton to be ‘‘ speedily
sent down.’’]

213th March 1646-7 (Commons Journals, v. 111).

3 (He appears to have been John Mauleverer. See Tanner MSS. lix, 661.]

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 82 [f. 164].—Signature, and all after ‘humble,’ is torn
off. The Letter is not an autograph; it has been dictated, apparently in great
haste,

282 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [11 Nov.

times that had arrived, when no algebraic formula, but only
direct vision of the relations of things would suffice a man.

Colonel Overton was actually appointed Governor of Hull:
there is a long Letter from the Hull people about Colonel
Overton’s laying free billet upon them, a Complaint to Fairfax
on the subject, next year! He continued long in that capacity ;
zealously loyal to Cromwell and his cause,? till the Protectorship
came on. His troubles afterwards, and confused destinies, may
again concern us a little.

This Letter is written only three weeks before the King took
his flight from Hampton Court. One spark illuminating (very
faintly) that huge dark world, big with such results, in the
Army’s quarters about Putney, and elsewhere !®

LETTER XLIX

Tue immeasurable Negotiations with the King, ‘ Proposals of
the Army, ‘Proposals of the Adjutators of the Army,’ still
occupying tons of printed paper, the subject of intense debatings
and considerations in Westminster, in Putney Church, and in
every house and hut of England, for many months past,—
suddenly contract themselves for us, like a universe of gaseous
vapour, into one small point: the issue of them all is failure.
The Army Council, the Army Adjutators, and serious England
at large, were in earnest about one thing; the King was not in
earnest, except about another thing: there could be no bargain
with the King.

Cromwell and the Chief Officers have for some time past
ceased frequenting his Majesty or Hampton Court; such visits
being looked upon askance by a party in the Army,‘ they have

lath March 1647-8 (Rushworth, vii. ro20).

?Sir James Turner's Memotrs, Milton State-Papers (London, 1743), pp. 10, 24,
161,—where the Editor calls him Colonel Richard Overton: his name was Robert :
‘Richard Overton’ is a ‘ Leveller,’ unconnected with him; ‘ Codozed Richard Over-
ton’ is a non-existence.

3[ For Cromwell's speeches in the General Council of Officers at Putney, October
28-November 1, see Supplement, No. 25.]

*['‘ Cromwell's negotiations with the King, his speeches in favour of monarchy,
his modification of the terms offered by the army to Charles, and his attempt to
moderate the terms offered by Parliament, all exposed him to suspicion. . . . The
pamphleteers of the Levellers, as the extreme Radicals were popularly termed,
_ published broadcast vague charges of treachery and double-dealing against the army

leaders. . . . In their appeals to Cromwell there was a touch of surprise and sorrow.

1647.) LETTER XLIX., HAMPTON COURT 283

left the matter to Parliament; only Colonel] Whalley, with due
guard, and Parliament Commissioners, keep watch ‘for the security
of his Majesty.’ In the Army, his Majesty’s real purpose be-
coming now apparent, there has arisen a very terrible ‘ Levelling
Party ;’ a class of men demanding punishment not only of
Delinquents, and Deceptive Persons who haye involved this
Nation in blood, but the ‘Chief Delinquent ;’ minor Delinquents
getting punished, how should the Chief Delinquent go free? A
class of men dreadfully in earnest ;—to whom a King’s Cloak is
no impenetrable screen; who within the King’s Cloak discern
that there is a Man, accountable to a God! The Chief Officers,
except when officially called, keep distant: hints have fallen
that his Majesty is not out of danger.—In the Commons Journals
this is what we read :

‘Friday 12th November 1647. A Letter from Lieutenant-
‘General Cromwell, of 11th November, twelve at night, was
‘read ; signifying the escape of the King ; who went away about
‘9 o'clock yesterday’ evening.

Cromwell, we suppose, lodging in head-quarters about Putney,
had been roused on Thursday night by express That the King
was gone; had hastened off to Hampton Court ; and there about
‘twelve at night’ despatched a Letter to Speaker Lenthall.
The Letter, which I have some confused recollection of having,
somewhere in the Pamphletary Chaos, seen in full, refuses to
disclose itself at present except as a Fragment :

‘For the Honourable Wiiliam Lenthall, Speaker of the House of
Commons : These’

‘Hampton Court, Twelve at night,
11th November 1647.’

‘Sir,’
A EEN Fe Mahesty re 4 withdrawn
himself * * atnine o'clock.
The manner is variously reported ; and we will say little of
it at present, but that his Majesty was expected at supper, when

‘Oh my once much honoured Cromwell,’ wrote Wildman, ‘can that breast of
yours—the quondam palace of freedom—harbour such a monster of wickedness as
this regal principle.’ While Wildman hoped ‘to waken Cromwell’s conscience
from the dead,’ Lilburn, confessing that his good thoughts of Cromwell were not
yet wholly gone, threatened to pull him down from his fancied greatness before he
was three months older.” Firth’s Oliver Cromwell, p. 175.]

1 Commons Journals, Vv. 356.

284 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [Nov.

the Commissioners and Colonel Whalley missed him ; upon which
they entered the room, and found his Majesty had left his cloak
behind him in the Gallery in the private way. He passed, by
the backstairs and vault, towards the water-side.

He left some letters upon the table in his withdrawing room,
of his own handwriting ; whereof one was to the Commissioners
of Parliament attending him, to be communicated to both Houses,

‘and is here enclosed.’
#* * *

‘Oxtver CRoMWELL.’ *

We do not give his Majesty’s Letter ‘here enclosed: it is
that well-known one where he speaks, in very royal style, still
every inch a King, Of the restraints and slights put upon him,
—men’s obedience to their King seeming much abated of late.
So soon as they return to a just temper, “I shall instantly break
through this cloud of retirement, and show myself ready! to be
Pater Patrie,’—as I have hitherto done.

LETTER L

Tue Ports are all ordered to be shut ; embargo laid on ships.
Read in the Commons Journals again: ‘Saturday 13th Nov.
‘Colonel Whalley was called in; and made a particular Relation
‘of all the circumstances concerning the King’s going away from
‘Hampton Court 11° Novembris last. He did likewise deliver-in
‘a Letter directed unto him from Lieutenant-General Crom-
‘well, concerning some rumours and reports of some design of
‘danger to the person and life of the King: The which was
‘read. Ordered, That Colonel Whalley do put in writing the said
‘Relation, and set his hand to it ; and That he do leave a true
‘Copy of the said Letter from Lieutenant-General Cromwell.’ 2

Colonel Whalley’s Relation exists ; and a much fuller Relation
and pair of Relations concerning this Flight and what preceded
and followed it, as viewed from the Royalist side, by two parties

* Rushworth, vii, 871.

1T“‘ really" in Lords Journals, ix. 519.) 2 Commons Journals, v. 358.

1647.] LETTER: LL.“ PUINEY 285

to the business, exist:! none of which shall concern us here.
Lieutenant-General Cromwell’s Letter to Whalley also exists ; a
short insignificant Note : here it is, fished from the Dust-Abysses,
which refuse to disclose the other. Whalley is ‘Cousin Whalley,’
as we may remember; Aunt Frances’s and the Squire of Kerton’s
Son,—a Nottinghamshire man.’

For my beloved Cousin, Colonel Whalley, at Hampton Court :
These’

‘Putney, November 1647.’
Dear Cos. WHALLEY,

There are rumours abroad of some intended
attempt on his Majesty’s person. Therefore I pray have a care
of your guards, for if any such thing should be done, it would
be accounted a most horrid act. * * *

Yours,
OLtveR CROMWELL.*

See, among the Old Pamphlets, Letters to the like effect
from Royalist Parties: also a Letter of thanks from the King to
Whalley ;—ending with a desire, ‘to send the black-gray bitch
to the Duke of Richmond,’ on the part of his Majesty: Letters
from &c., Letters to &c., in great quantities.’ For us here this
brief notice of one Letter shall suffice :

‘ Monday 15th November 1647. Letter from Colonel Robert
‘Hammond, Governor of the Isle of Wight, from Cowes, of 13°

1 Berkley's Memoirs (printed, London, 1699) ; Ashburnham’s Varrative (printed,
London, 1830) ;—which require to be sifted, and contrasted with each other and
with third parties, by whoever is still curious on this matter; each of these Narra-
tives being properly a Pleading, intended to clear the Writer of all blame, in the
first place.

2See antea, p. 23, note. 8 Parl, Hist. xvi. 324-30.

* King's Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 337, § 15, p. 7[E. 413]. [Probably written
on the morning of the 11th, after Fleetwood’s violent speech in the Commons, and
sent off by express, as Whalley states that it reached him on this date, (See his Wore
Full Relation 4, E. 416, 23.) _ Berkley says that a letter was received from Crom-
well that day containing great fears of the intentions of the Levelling party against
the King. (JZemoirs, 50.) He may be speaking of this letter to Whalley, as we have
only a fragment of it. The King also alludes in writing to Whalley to ‘‘ the letter
you showed me to-day.” But this allusion might be to the letter to himself signed
E. R., printed in the Old Parliamentary History, xvi. 328. Dr. Gardiner and Mr.
Firth have disposed of the theory that Cromwell frightened the King from Hampton
Court. See Great Civil War, iv. 17, and Firth’s Oliver Cromwedd, p. 185. |

286 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [23 Dec.

‘ Novembris, signifying that the King is come into the Isle ot
‘Wight.’1 The King, after a night and a day of riding, saw not
well whither else to go. He delivered himself to Robert
Hammond ;? came into the Isle of Wight. Robert Hammond
is ordered to keep him strictly within Carisbrook Castle and
the adjoining grounds, in a vigilant though altogether respectful
manner.

This same ‘ Monday’ when Hammond’s Letter arrives in Lon-
don is the day of the mutinous Rendezvous ‘in Corkbush Field,
between Hertford and Ware ;’3 where Cromwell and the General
Officers had to front the Levelling Principle, in a most dangerous
manner, and trample it out or be trampled out by it on the spot.
Eleven Mutineers are ordered from the ranks; tried by Court-
Martial on the Field; three of them condemned to be shot ;—
throw dice for their life, and one is shot, there and then. The
name of him is Arnald; long memorable among the Levellers.
A very dangerous Review service! Head-quarters now change
to Windsor.

LETTER LI

A sMALL charitable act, for one who proved not very worthy.
Friends of a young gentleman in trouble, Mr. Dudley Wyatt
by name, have drawn this word from the Lieutenant-General,
who on many grounds is powerful at Cambridge.

‘To Dr. Thomas Hill, Master of Trinity College, Cambridge’

Windsor, 23d December 1647.
Sir,
As I am informed, this Gentleman the Bearer

hereof, in the year 1641, had leave of his College to travel into
Ireland for seven years; and in his absence he (being then actu-
ally employed against the Rebels in that Kingdom) was ejected
out of his fellowship* by mistake, the College Registry being
not looked into, to inquire the cause of his non-residence.

1 Commons Journals, in die (v. 359).

is Berkley’s and Ashburnham's Varratives.
3 Rushworth, vii. 875. 4[Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ College.” ]

1647.] LETTER LII., LONDON 287

I cannot therefore but think it a just and reasonable request,
that he be readmitted to all the benefits, rights and privileges
which he enjoyed before that ejection ; and therefore desire you
would please to effect it accordingly. Wherein you shall doa
favour will be owned by

Your affectionate friend and servant,
OLivER CrRoMWELL.*

Dudley Wyatt, Scholar of Trinity College, 25th April 1628 ;
B.A., 1631; Fellow, 4th October 1633; vanishes from the Bursar’s
Books in 1645: no notice of him farther, or of any effect produced
by the Lieutenant-General’s Letter on his behalf, is found in the
College records. Indeed, directly after this Letter, the young
gentleman, of a roving turn at any rate, appears to have -dis-
covered that there was new war and mischief in the wind, and
better hope at Court than at College for a youth of spirit. He
went to France to the Queen (as we may gather); went and
came; developed himself into a busy spy and intriguer ;—attained
to Knighthood, to be the ‘Sir Dudley Wyatt’ of Clarendon’s
History ;! whom, and not us, he shall henceforth concern.

LETTER LII

Rosert Hammonp, Governor of the Isle of Wight, who has for
the present become so important to England, is a young man ‘ of
good parts and principles:’ a Colonel of Foot; served formerly
as Captain under Massey in Gloucester ;—where, in October 1644,
he had the misfortune to kill a brother Officer, one Major Gray,
in sudden duel, ‘for giving him the lie ;’ he was tried, but ac-
quitted, the provocation being great. He has since risen to be

**Muniment Room, Trinity College, Cambridge (Collection entitled Papers
‘yelating to Trin. Coll., vol. 3): a Transcript, Original not now forthcoming,—
‘docketed in the hand of one Porter, Clerk to Thomas Parne, about 1724, L. P.
‘ Cromwell's Letter concerning Sir Dudley Wyatt.’ (Communicated by the Rey. J.
Edleston, Fellow of Trinity, March 1849.)—Harl. WSS. no. 7053, f. 153 b.:
printed, from the latter, in Hartshorne’s Book Rarities in the University of Cam-
bridge (London, 1829), p. 277. The Harl. MSS. copy adds: ‘N.B. Upon this
Letter, Sir Dudley Wyatt was readmitted,’—but did not stay, as would appear.

1ii. 959, ili. 22, &e,

288 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS | [3 Jan.

Colonel, and become well known.! Originally of Chertsey,
Surrey ; his Grandfather, and perhaps his Father, a Physician
there. His Uncle, Thomas Hammond, is now Lieutenant-
General of the Ordinance; a man whom, with this Robert, we
saw busy in the Army Troubles last year. The Lieutenant-
General, Thomas Hammond, persists in his democratic course ;
patron at this time of the Adjutator speculations ; sits afterwards
as a King’s-Judge.

In strong contrast with whom is another Uncle, Dr. Henry
Hammond, a pattern-flower of loyalty, one of his Majesty's
favourite Chaplains. It was Uncle Thomas that first got this
young Robert a Commission in the Army: but Uncle Henry
had, in late months, introduced him to his Majesty at Hampton
Court, as an ingenuous youth, repentant, or at least sympathetic
and not without loyalty. Which circumstance, it is supposed,
had turned the King’s thoughts in that bewildered Flight of his,
towards Colonel Robert and the Isle of Wight.

Colonel Robert, it would seem, had rather disliked the high
course things were sometimes threatening to take, in the Putney
Council of War; and had been glad to get out of it for a quiet
Governorship at a distance. But it now turns out, he has got
into still deeper difficulties thereby. His ‘temptation’ when
the King announced himself as in the neighbourhood, had been
great: Shall he obey the King in this crisis; conduct the King
whitherward his Majesty wishes? Or be true to his trust and
the Parliament? He ‘grew suddenly pale ;’—he decided as we
saw.

The Isle of Wight, holding so important a deposit, is put
under the Derby-House Committee, old ‘Committee of Both
Kingdoms,’ some additions being made thereto, and some ex-
clusions. Oliver is of it, and Philip Lord Wharton, among
others. Lord Wharton, a conspicuous Puritan and intimate of
Oliver’s; of whom we shall afterwards have occasion to say
somewhat,

This Committee of Derby House was, of course, in continual
communication with Robert Hammond. Certain of their Letters
to him had, after various fortune, come into the hands of the
Honourable Mr. Yorke (Lord Hardwicke) ; and were lying in his

1[He is the Colonel Hammond mentioned as being at the siege of Bristol (p. 214
above) and was connected with Cromwell by his marriage to John Hampden’s
daughter. There are some important letters to him from Cromwell in the Supple-
ment, Nos. 26, 35, 65. ]

1648.] LETTER LIL, LONDON 289

house, when it and they were, in 1752, accidentally burnt. A
Dr. Joseph Litherland had, by good luck, taken copies ; Thomas
Birch, lest fire should again intervene, printed the Collection,—
a very thin Octavo, London, 1764. He has given some intro-
ductory account of Robert Hammond ; copying, as we do mainly
here, from Wood’s Athene ;1 and has committed—as who does
not >—several errors. His Annotations are sedulous but inef-
fectual, What of the Letters are from Oliver we extract with
thanks.

A former Letter, of which Oliver was ‘the penner,’ is now
lost. ‘Our brethren’ in the following letter are the Scots, now
all excluded from Derby-House Committee of Both Kingdoms.
The ‘ Recorder’ is Glyn, one of the vanished Eleven, Stapleton
being another; for both of whom it has been necessary to
appoint substitutes in the said Committee.

For Colonel Robert Hammond, Governor of the Isle of Wight:
These, for the Service of the Kingdom. Haste: Post Haste
‘London,’ 3d January 1647.

(My Lord Wharton’s, near ten at night.)
Dearest Rosin,

Now (blessed be God) I can write and thou
receive freely. I never in my life saw more deep sense, and less
will to show it unchristianly, than in that which thou didst write
to us when we were at Windsor, and thou in the midst of thy
temptation, which indeed, by what we understand of it, was a
great one, and occasioned ® the greater by the letter the General
sent thee; of which thou wast not mistaken when thou didst
challenge me to be the penner.

How good has God been to dispose all to mercy! And
although it was trouble for the present, yet glory has come out
of it; for which we praise the Lord with thee and for thee.
And truly thy carriage has been such as occasions much honour
to the name of God and to religion. Go on in the strength of
the Lord; and the Lord be still with thee.

lili. 500.

2[ Perhaps Fairfax’s letter of December 28. One from Cromwell himself, probably

written at the end of December, will be found in the Supplement, No. 26, ]
3 rendered.

VoL. 1—19

290 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS _ [3 Jan.

But, dear Robin, this business hath been (I trust) a mighty
providence to this poor Kingdom and to us all. The House of
Commons is very sensible of the King’s dealings, and of our
brethren’s, in this late transaction. You should do well, if you
have anything that may discover juggling, to search it out, and
let us know it. It may be of admirable use at this time ; because
we shall (I hope) instantly go upon business in relation to them,!
tending to prevent danger.

The House of Commons has this day voted as follows: Ist,
They will make no more Addresses to the King; 2nd, None
shall apply to him without leave of the two Houses, upon pain
of being guilty of high treason; 3rd, They will receive nothing
from the King, nor shall any other bring anything to them from
him, nor receive anything from the King ;? lastly, the Members
of both Houses who were of the Committee of Both Kingdoms
are established in all that power in themselves, for England and
Ireland, which they ‘formerly’ had to act with Both Kingdoms
‘England and Scotland’: and Sir John Evelyn of Wilts is added
in the room of Mr. Recorder and Nathaniel Fiennes in the room
of Sir Philip Stapleton, and my Lord of Kent in the room of the
Earl of Essex.? I think it good you take notice of this, the
sooner the better.

Let us know how it is with you in point of strength, and what

1the Scots.

2(The following is a Royalist account of Cromwell’s own part in the debate.
‘Of his (Lieut.-Gen. Cromwell’s) power and greatness we have a very pregnant
instance by his lordly carriage in the House, upon debate of that vote which
denies all addresses to or returns from his Majesty ; for when Mr. Maynard stood
up and gave reasons against the passing of such a vote . . . then Mr. Cromwell
(to show that this was no time to speak sense and reason) stood up, and the glow-
worm glistening in his beak, he began to spit fire; and as the devil quoted
scripture against our Saviour, so did he against his sovereign, and told the House:
It is written, Thou shalt not suffer an hypocrite to reign; and what then (I pray
you) will become of himself? But to show that it was so decreed, I am told he
laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword, as the only graceful conclusion of so
gallant a piece of oratory.” Mercurius Pragmaticus, Jan. 4-11. E. 422 (17).]

® Essex is dead; Stapleton, one of the Eleven who went to France, is dead;
Recorder Glyn, another of them, is in the Tower. For the ‘ Votes,’ see Commons
Journals, Vv. 415 (3d January 1647-8). [Recorder Glynne, however, emerged from
the Tower and grew into high favour with Oliver, who made him Lord Chief Justice
in 1655, and a member of his Upper House. ]

1648.] LETTER LIIL, LONDON 291

you need from us. Some of us think the King well with you, and
that it concerns us to keep that Island in great security, because
of the French, &c.: and if so,! where can the King be better ?
If you have more force ‘sent,’ you will be sure of full provision
for them.
The Lord bless thee. Pray for
Thy dear friend and servant,
OLIveR CRoMWELL.*

In these same days noisy Lilburn has accused Cromwell of
meaning or having meant to make his own bargain with the
King, and be Earl of Essex anda great man. Noisy John thinks
all great men, especially all Lords, ought to be brought low.
The Commons have him at their bar in this month.?

LETTER LIII

Here, by will of the Destinies preserving certain bits of
paper and destroying others, there introduces itself a little piece
of Domesticity; a small family-transaction, curiously enough
peering through by its own peculiar rent, amid these great
world-transactions: Marriage-treaty for Richard Cromwell, the
Lieutenant-General’s eldest Son.

What Richard has been doing hitherto no Biographer knows.
In spite of Noble, I incline to think he too had been in the
Army ; in October last there are two Sons mentioned expressly
as being officers there: ‘One of his Sons, Captain of the
General’s Lifeguard ; his other Son, Captain of a troop in Colonel
Harrison’s Regiment,’—so greedy is he of the Public Money to
his own family!* Richard is now heir-apparent ; our poor Boy
Oliver therefore, ‘Cornet Oliver, we know not in the least
where, must have died. “It went to my heart like a dagger;

lif we do secure and fortify it.

2 roth January, Commons Journals, v. 437.

3 sth October 1647 (Royalist Newspaper, citing a Pamphlet of Lilburn’s), Cvom-
welliana, p. 36.

* Birch’s Hammond Letters, p. 23. Given also in Harris, p. 497.

292 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [325 Feb.

indeed it did.” ! The phrase of the Pamphlet itself, we observe,
is ‘his other Son,’ not ‘ one of his other Sons,’ as if there were now
but two left. If Richard was ever in the Army, which these
probabilities may dimly intimate, the Lifeguard, a place for persons
of consequence, was the likeliest for him. The Captain in Harri-
son’s Regiment will in that case be Henry.—The Cromwell family,
as we laboriously guess and gather, has about this time removed
to London.2 Richard, if ever in the Lifeguard, has now quitted it :
an idle fellow, who could never relish soldiering in such an Army ;
he now wishes to retire to Arcadian felicity and wedded life in
the country.

The ‘Mr. M.’ of this Letter is Richard Mayor, Esquire, of
Hursley, Hants,’ the young lady’s father. Hursley, not far from
Winchester, is still a manorhouse, but no representative of Richard
Mayor’s has now place there or elsewhere. The treaty, after
difficulties, did take effect.4 Mayor, written also Major and
Maijor, a pious prudent man, becomes better known to Oliver,
to the world and to us in the sequel. Richard Norton, Member
for Hants since 1645, is his neighbour; an old fellow-soldier
under Manchester, fellow-colonel in the Eastern Association,
seemingly very familiar with Oliver, he is applied to on this
delicate occasion.

For my noble Friend Colonel Richard Norton : These

‘London,’ 25th February 1647.
Dear Norton,

I have sent my son over to thee, being willing
to answer Providence; and although I confess I have had an
offer of a very great proposition, from a father, of his daughter,
yet truly I rather incline to this in my thoughts ; because, though

1fRichard was certainly in Fairfax’s LifeGuard. For Oliver's death, see p. 176
above. Carlyle left this quotation even in his latest edition, but evidently by
inadvertence, as he had discovered that it referred to Robert, not Oliver. ]

2(They were in London before this. See note on p. 247 above. }

3 Noble, il. 436-42.

4[So little, says Mr. Firth, did Cromwell ‘‘ dream of ever becoming himself the
ruler of England, that at the very moment when fortune had opened the widest
field to ambition, he began negotiations for the marriage of his eldest son to the
daughter of a private gentleman of no great influence or position.” Oliver Cromwell,
p. 192. Perhaps, however, it was Richard who did not dream, or would not wait.
At that time, Cromwell had difficulty enough in giving even the modest settlements
which Mr. Mayor demanded. }

1648. ] LETTER LIIL, LONDON 293

the other be very far greater, yet I see difficulties, and not that
assurance of godliness; yet indeed fairness. I confess that
which is told me concerning [the] estate of Mr. M. is more than
I look for, as things now stand.

If God please to bring it about, the consideration of piety in
the parents, and such hopes of the gentlewoman in that respect,
make the business to me a great mercy; concerning which I
desire to wait upon God.

I am confident of thy love ; and desire things may be carried
with privacy. The Lord do His will: that’s best; to which
submitting, I rest,

Your humble servant,
O.iveR CroMWELL.*

What other Father it was that made ‘the offer of a very great
proposition ’ to Oliver, in the shape of his Daughter as Wife to
Oliver’s Son, must remain totally uncertain for the present ; per-
haps some glimpse of it may turn up by and by. There were
‘difficulties’ which Oliver did not entirely see through ; there
was not that assurance of ‘ godliness’ in the house, though there
was of ‘fairness’ and natural integrity ; in short, Oliver will pre-
fer Mayor, at least will try him,—and wishes it carried with
privacy.

The Commons, now dealing with Delinquents, do not forget to
reward good Servants, to ‘conciliate the Grandees,’ as splenetic
Walker calls it. For above two years past, ever since the War
ended, there has been talk and debate about settling 2,500/. a-
year on Lieutenant-General Cromwell; but difficulties have
arisen. First they tried Basing-House Lands, the Marquis of
Winchester’s, whom Cromwell had demolished ; but the Marquis’s
affairs were in disorder ; it was gradually found the Marquis had
for most part only a Life-rent there :—only ‘ Abbotston and
Itchin’ in that quarter could be realised. Order thereupon to
settle ‘ Lands of Papists and Delinquents’ to the requisite amount,
wheresoever convenient. To settle especially what Lands the
Marquis of Worcester had in that ‘County of Southampton ;’

* Harris, p. 501. Copy of this, and of the next Two Letters to Norton, by
Birch, in Ayscough MSS. 4162, f. 56, &c. [But now printed from the holograph
original in the Morrison Collection. ]

294 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [7 March.

which was done,—though still with insufficient result.’ Then
came the Army Quarrels, and an end of such business. But
now in the Commons Journals, 7th March, the very day of
Oliver’s next Letter, this is what we read:? ‘ An ordinance for
‘passing unto Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, Lieutenant-General,
‘certain Lands and Manors in the Counties of Gloucester, Mon-
‘mouth and Glamorgan, late the lands of the Earl of Worcester
«was this day read the third time and, upon the question, passed ;
‘and ordered to be sent unto the Lords for their concurrence.’
Oliver himself, as we shall find, has been dangerously sick. This
is what Clement Walker, the splenetic Presbyterian, ‘ an elderly
‘gentleman of low stature, in a gray suit, with a little stick in
‘his hand,’ reports upon the matter of the Grant :

‘The 7th of March, an Ordinance to settle 2,500/. a-year of
‘Land, out of the Marquis of Worcester’s Estate,—old Marquis
of Worcester at Ragland, father of my Lord Glamorgan, who in
his turn became Marquis of Worcester and wrote the Century of
Inventions,—2,500/. a-year out of this old Marquis’s Estate ‘ upon
‘ Lieutenant-General Cromwell! I have heard some gentlemen
‘that know the Manor of Chepstow and the other Lands affirm’
that in reality they are worth 5,000/. or even 6,000/. a-year ;—
which is far from the fact, my little elderly friend!* ‘You see,

1 Commons Journals (iv. 416), 23d January 1645-6; the Marquis of Worcester’s
Hampshire Lands, /0. 426, a week afterwards: ‘Abberston and Itche//," meaning
Abbotston and Itchin, Marquis of W2mchester’s there. See also Letter of Oliver
St. John to Cromwell, in Thurloe, i. 75.—Commons Journals (v. 44) about a year
afterwards, 7th January 1646-7: ‘remainder of the 2,500/.’ from Marquis of Win-
chester’s Lands in general; which in a fortnight more is found to be impossible :
whereupon ‘ Lands of Delinquents and Papists,’as in the Text. None of these
Hampshire Lands, except Abbotston and Itchin, are named. Noble says, ‘ Fawley
— in the same County; which is possible enough.

v. 482.

3 tprebeniy 2 did not recognise his title of Marquis, conferred in 1642. ]

4[Probably at first he only had the rents, not actual possession of the estates,
then all under sequestration. Cromwell’s expression ‘‘ bestowed 1680/. per annum
out of the Earl of Worcester's estate” (see p. 296 below) seems to mean this. Ap-
parently Chepstow was not settled until 1650 (see Ca/. of Com. for Compounding,
p. 603.) And it must be remembered that Cromwell by no means succeeded to an
unencumbered or uncontested estate. There are many indications in the Sfaze
Papers of the difficulty he had in substantiating his claim. In January, 1651, for
instance, Thurloe wrote that the Monmouth County Committee had been taking
the rents of the Manor of Crym, which should have been sent to the General. They
apologised, said they did not understand, but a year and a half afterwards had not
repaid them. In July, 1651, Thurloe complained again; this time against divers
persons in Gloucestershire, who still held possession of estates granted to the
General; to his great detriment. And when Chepstow and other lands were
settled in 1650, it was expressly with saving to all ‘‘ claims” (except those of the
Worcester family or other delinquents). What these ‘‘claims” meant, and how

LS

1648, ] LETTER LIV., LONDON 295

continues he, ‘though they have not made King Charles “a
‘Glorious King,” ’ as they sometimes undertook, ‘they have settled
‘a Crown-Revenue upon Oliver, and have made him as glorious
‘a King as ever John of Leyden was!’ !——A very splenetic old
gentleman in gray ;—verging towards Pride’s Purge, and lodg-
ment in the Tower, I think! He is from the West ; known long
since in Gloucester Siege ; Member now for Wells ; but terminates
in the Tower, with ink, and abundant gall in it, to write the
History of Independency there.

LETTER LIV

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliament's
Armies at Windsor: These
‘London,’ 7th March 1647.

Sir,
It hath pleased God to raise me out of a

dangerous sickness ; and I do most willingly acknowledge that
the Lord hath (in this visitation) exercised the bowels of a
Father towards me. I received in myself the sentence of
death, that I might learn to trust in him that raiseth from the
dead, and have no confidence in the flesh. It’s a blessed thing
to die daily, for what is there in this world to be accounted of.
The best men according to the flesh, and things, are lighter
than vanity. I find this only good, to love the Lord and his
poor despised people, to do for them, and to be ready to suffer
with them: and he that is found worthy of this hath obtained
great favour from the Lord; and he that is established in this
shall (being conformed to? Christ and the rest of the Body)? par-
ticipate in the glory of a+ Resurrection which will answer all.°

they interfered with the ‘‘enjoyment” of the confiscated estates, may be read

on almost every page of the Calendar of Committee for Compounding. For
abstracts of those made on Lord Worcester’s estates, see his case in the Calendar,
pp. 1705-1715-)]

1 History of Independency (London, 1648), Part i, 83 and 55.

2{ Written above ‘‘after conformity with” erased. |

3 Christ’s Body, his Church. 4[Written above ‘“‘the” erased. |

5 Turns now to the margin of the sheet, lengthwise.

296 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [21 March.

Sir, I must thankfully confess your favour in your last letter.
I see I am not forgotten; and truly, to be kept in your remem-
brance is very great satisfaction to me; for I can say in the sim-
plicity of my heart, I put a high and true value upon your love,
which when I forget, I shall cease to be a grateful and an honest
man.

I most humbly beg my service may be presented to your Lady,
to whom I wish all happiness, and establishment in the truth.
Sir, my prayers are for you, as becomes

Your Excellency’s
Most humble servant,
O.IveR CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ Sir, Mr. Rushworth will write to you about the Quar-
tering, and the letter lately sent you; and therefore I forbear.*

FREE OFFER

From the Committee of the Lords and Commons for the Affairs
of Ireland sitting at Derby House, Sir John Evelyn reports a
certain offer from Lieutenant-General Cromwell; which is read
in the words following :

‘To the Honourable the Committee of Lords and Commons for the
Affairs of Ireland, sitting at Derby House: The Offer of Lieu-
tenant-General Cromwell for the Service of Ireland’

21° Martii 1647.

Tue two Houses of Parliament having lately bestowed 1,680/.
per annum upon me and my heirs, out of the Earl of Worcester’s
Estate ; the necessity of affairs requiring assistance, I do hereby
offer one-thousand pounds annually to be paid out of the rents

* Sloane MSS. 1519, fol. 79 [f. 158. Holograph, Seal with the Cromwell arms}.

1648.] LETTER LV., FARNHAM 297

of the said land; that is to say, 500/. out of the next Michael-
mas rent, and so on, by the half years, for the space of five
years, if the war in Ireland shall so long continue, or that I live
so long: to be employed for the service of Ireland, as the Par-
liament shall please to appoint; provided the said yearly rent
of 1,680/. become not to be suspended by war or other accident.

And whereas there is an arrear of pay due unto me whilst I
was Lieutenant-General unto the Earl of Manchester, of about
1,500/., audited and stated ; as also a great arrear due for about
two years being Governor of the Isle of Ely: I do hereby
discharge the State from all or any claim to be made by me
thereunto.

OLIveR CROoMWELL.*

‘ Ordered, That this House doth accept of the Free Offer of
‘Lieutenant-General Cromwell, testifying his zeal and good
‘affections, to the service of Ireland.’ My splenetic little gentle-
man in gray, with the little stick in his hand, takes no notice
of this; which modifies materially what the Chepstow Connois-
seurs and their ‘five or six thousand a-year’ reported lately !!

LETTER LV

Here is Norton and the Marriage again. Here are news out
of Scotland that the Malignant Party, the Duke of Hamilton’s
Faction, are taking the lead there; and about getting up an
Army to attack us, and deliver the King from Sectaries :?
Reverend Stephen Marshall reports the news. Let us read :

* Commons Journals, Vv. 513.

1[Moreover Cromwell's pay had lately been reduced from 4/. to 3/. aday. Dr.
Gardiner calculates that for the next five years he would only have about 75/. per
annum left of the grants for his own use. And as the calculation does not take into
account the resignation of his arrears as Governor of Ely, the balance would be
even less. Great Civil War, iv. 79.]

2 Rushworth, vii. ogo, &c.

298 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [28 March.

For my noble Friend Col. Richard Norton: These

Farnham, 28th March 1648.
Dear Dick,
It had been a favour indeed to have met you

here at Farnham, but I hear you are a man of great business ;
therefore I say no more: if it be a favour to the House of Com-
mons to enjoy you, what is it tome. But, in good earnest, when
will you and your Brother Russell be a little honest, and attend
your charge. Surely some expect it, especially the good fellows
who chose you.

I have met with Mr. Mayor; we spent two or three hours
together last night. I perceive the gentleman is very wise and
honest, and indeed much to be valued. Some things of common
fame! did a little stick: I gladly heard his doubts, and gave
such answer as was next at hand, I believe, to some satisfaction.
Nevertheless I exceedingly liked the gentleman’s plainness and
free dealing with me. I know God has been above all ill reports,
and will in His own time vindicate me; I have no cause to com-
plain. I see nothing but that this particular business between
him and me may go on. The Lord’s will be done.

For news out of the North there is little, only the mal[ignant]
party is prevailing in the Parliament of S[cotland]. They are
earnest for a war; the ministers? oppose as yet. Mr. Marshall
is returned, who says so, and so do many of our letters. Their
great Committee of Dangers have two malignants for one right.
It’s said they have voted an army of 40,000 in Parliament ; so
‘say’ some of yesterday’s letters. But I account my news ill
bestowed, because upon an idle person.

1 shall take speedy course in the business concerning my
Tenants ; for which, thanks. My service to your Lady. I am
really,

Your affectionate servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

1 Against myself :—‘ favour for Sectaries,' and so forth. 2 Clergy.

* Harris, p. 502. [Printed now from the holograph original in the Morrison
Collection. xdorsed ‘No. 2.” See p. 4117 below. ]

1648.] LETTER LVI, LONDON 299

Had Cromwell come out to Farnham on military business?
Kent is ina ticklish state; it broke out some weeks hence in
open insurrection,1—as did many other places, when once the
‘Scotch Army of 40,000’ became a certainty.

‘The business concerning my Tenants’ will indicate that in
Hampshire, within ken of Norton, in Fawley Park, in Itchin,
Abbotston, or elsewhere, ‘my Tenants’ are felling wood, cutting
copses, or otherwise not behaving to perfection: but they shall
be looked to.

For the rest, Norton really ought to attend his duties in Par-
liament! In earnest ‘an idle fellow,’ as Oliver in sport calls
him. Given to Presbyterian notions ; was purged out by Pride ;
came back; dwindled ultimately into Royalism. ‘ Brother
Russel’ means only brother member. He is the Frank Russel
of the Letter on Marston Moor. Now Sir Francis; and sits for
Cambridgeshire. A comrade of Norton’s; seemingly now in
his neighbourhood, possibly on a visit to him.

The attendance on the House in these months is extremely
thin; the divisions range from 200 to as low as 70. Nothing
going on but Delinquents’ fines, and abstruse negotiations with
the Isle of Wight, languid Members prefer the country till some
result arrive.

LETTER LVI

Herz is a new phasis of the Wedding-treaty ; which, as seems,
‘doth now a little stick.’ Prudent Mr. Mayor insists on his
advantages ; nor is the Lieutenant-General behindhand. What
‘lands’ all these of Oliver’s are, in Cambridgeshire, Norfolk,
Hampshire, no Biographer now knows. Portions of the Par-
liamentary Grants above alluded to; perhaps ‘Purchases by
Debentures,’ some of them. Soldiers could seldom get their
Pay in money; with their ‘ Debentures’ they had to purchase
Forfeited Lands ;—a somewhat uncertain investment of an
uncertain currency.

The Mr. Robinson mentioned in this Letter is a pious
Preacher at Southampton.? ‘My two little Wenches’ are Mary
and Frances: Mary aged now near twelve; Frances ten.?

loath or 25th May 1648 (Rushworth, vii. 1128).
2 Harris, p. 504. 3 See antea, p. 63.

300 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS {3 April.

‘ For my noble Friend Colonel Richard Norton: These’

London, 3d April 1648.
Dear Norton,

I could not in my last give you a perfect
account of what passed between me and Mr. M[ayor], because
we were to have a conclusion of our speech! that morning after
I wrote my letter to you.2) Which we had; and having had
a full interview of one anothers minds, we parted with this:
That both would consider with our relations, and according to
satisfactions given there, acquaint each other with our minds.

I cannot tell how better to do it, to receive or give satis-
faction, than by you who (as I remember), in your last, said that,
if things did stick between us, you would use your endeavour
towards “a close.

The things insisted upon were these (as I take it). Mr. Mayor
desired 400/. per annum of Inheritance * lying in Cambridgeshire
and Norfolk, to be presently settled,* and to be for maintenance,
wherein I desired to be advised by my Wife. I offered the land
in Hampshire for present maintenance, which I dare say, with
copses and ordinary fells,® will be, communibus annis, 5001. per
annum; besides 500/. per annum in Tenants’ hands holding but
for one life, and about 300/. per annum, some for two lives, some
for three lives. But as to this, if the latter be not liked of, I
shall be willing a further conference be had in ‘regard to’ the
first.

In point of jointure I shall give satisfaction, and as to the
settlements of lands given me by the Parliament, satisfaction to
be given in like manner, according as we discoursed. In what
else was demanded of me, I am willing (so far as I remember
any demand was) to give satisfaction. Only, I having been
informed by Mr. Robinson that Mr. Mayor did, upon a former

‘(Harris, followed by Carlyle, misread this ‘‘speed"’.] 2 Letter LV.

8 [z.e., his own lands, not those granted by Parliament as were the Hampshire
lands. ‘Therefore considered as of safer tenure. ]

4On the Future Pair. 5 fellings,

1648. ] LETTER LVL, LONDON 301

match, offer to settle the Manor wherein he lived, and to give
2,000/. in money, I did insist upon that; and do desire it may
not be with difficulty. The money I shall need for my two
little wenches, and thereby I shall free my Son from being
charged with them. Mr. Mayor parts with nothing in present.
but that money, saving their board, which I should not be
unwilling to give them, to enjoy the comfort of their society ;
which it’s reason he smart for, if he will rob me altogether of
them.

Truly the land to be settled,—both what the Parliament
gives me, and my own,—is very little less than 3,000/. per
annum, all things considered, if I be rightly informed. And a
lawyer of Lincoln’s Inn, having searched all the Marquis of
Worcester’s writings, which were taken at Ragland and sent for
by the Parliament, and this gentleman appointed by the Com-
mittee to search the said writings, assures me there is no
scruple concerning the title. And it so fell out that this
gentleman who searched was my own lawyer, a very godly able
man, and my dear friend, which I reckon no small mercy. He
is also possessed of the writings for me.1

I thought fit to give you this account, desiring you to make
such use of it as God shall direct you, and I doubt not but you
will do the part of a friend between two friends. I account
myself one, and I have heard you say Mr. Mayor was entirely
so to you. What the good pleasure of God is, I shall wait;
there is only rest. Present my service to your Lady, to Mr.
Mayor, &c. I rest,

Your affectionate servant,
Ouiver CromMweELt,

‘P.S.’ I desire you to carry this business with all privacy. I
beseech you to do so, as you love me. Let me entreat you not
to Jose a day herein, that I may know Mr. Mayor's mind, for I
think I may be at leisure for a week to attend this business, to

holds these Ragland Documents on my behalf.

302 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS [6 April.

give and take satisfaction ; from which perhaps I may be shut
up afterwards by employment.’ I know thou art an idle fellow,
but prithee neglect me not now; delay may be very incon-
venient to me; I much rely upon you. Let me hear from you
in two or three days. I confess the principal consideration as
to me, is the absolute settlement ‘by Mr. Mayor’ of the Manor
wherein he lives; which he would do but conditionally, in case
he prove to have no son, and but 3,000/. in case he have a son.?
But as to this, I hope farther reason may work him to more.*

Of ‘my two little Wenches,’ Mary, we may repeat, became
Lady Fauconberg ; Frances was wedded to the Honourable Mr.
Rich; then to Sir John Russell. Elizabeth and Bridget are
already Mrs. Claypole and Mrs. Ireton. Elizabeth, the younger,
was first married. They were all married very young ; Elizabeth,
at her wedding, was little turned of sixteen.

LETTER LVII

For Colonel Robert Hammond

‘London,’ 6th April 1648.

Dear Rosin,
Your business is done in the House: your

10/. by the week is made 20/.; 1000/. given you; and Order to
Mr. Lisle to draw up an Ordinance for 500/. per annum to be
settled upon you and your heirs. This was done with smooth-
ness; your friends were not wanting to you. I know thy
burden; this is an addition to it: the Lord direct and sustain
thee.

1 Went to Wales in May.

2 [Carlyle altered this into ‘‘ which he would not do but conditionally, in case
they have a son, and but 3000/. in case they have no son,” supposing evidently
that in case ‘‘he prove, etc.,” related to Richard (and his wife), but Mayor is no

doubt providing for the contingency of himself having an heir male. Comp. pp.
425, 428, below. ]

* Harris, p. 502. [Now printed from the holograph original in the Morri
Collection, zdorsed ‘‘ No. 3."] - : ees

1648. ] LETTER LVII., LONDON 303

Intelligence came to the hands of a very considerable person,
that the King attempted to get out of his window; and that he
had a cord of silk with him whereby to slip down, but his breast
was so big the bar would not give him passage. This was done
in one of the dark nights about a fortnight ago. A gentleman
with you led him the way, and slipped down. The Guard, that
night, had some quantity of wine with them. The same party
assures that there is aquafortis gone down from London, to re-
move that obstacle which hindered ; and that the same design
is to be put in execution in the next dark nights. He saith that
Captain Titus and some others about the King are not to be
trusted. He is a very considerable person of the Parliament
who gave this intelligence, and desired it should be speeded to
you.

The gentleman that came out of the window was Master
Firebrace ; the gentlemen doubted are Cresset, Burrowes, and
Titus; the time when this attempt of escape was, the 20th of
March.

Your servant,
O.iver CroMWELL.*

Henry Firebrace is known to Birch, and his Narrative is known.
‘ He became Clerk of the Kitchen to Charles II.’—-The old Books
are full of King’s Plots for escape, by aquafortis and otherwise.!
His Majesty could make no agreement with the Parliament, and
began now to smell War in the wind. His presence in this or
the other locality might have been of clear advantage. But
Hammond was too watchful. Titus, with or without his new
horse, attends upon his Majesty ; James Harrington also (after-
wards author of Oceana) ; and ‘the Honourable Thomas Herbert,’
who has left a pleasing Narrative concerning that affair. These,
though appointed by the Parliament, are all somewhat in favour
with the King. Hammond’s Uncle the Chaplain, as too favour-
able, was ordered out of the Island about Christmas last,

* Birch, p. 40. The Original in cipher.
1 Lilly's Life; Wood, § Hammond; &c. &c,

304. BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS (18 April.

LETTER LVIII

‘Tur Gentleman I mentioned to you,’ who is now travelling
towards Dover with this hopeful Note in his pocket, must remain
forever anonymous. Of Kenrick I have incidentally heard, at
Worcester Fight or elsewhere ; but of ‘the Gentleman’ nowhere
ever. A Shadow, sunk deep, with all his business, in the Land
of Shadows; yet still indisputably visible there: that is the
miracle of him!

To Colonel Kenrick, Lieutenant of Dover Castle: These

‘London,’ 18th April 1648.
Sir,

This is the gentleman I mentioned to you.
I am persuaded you may be confident of his fidelity to you in
the things you will employ him in.

I conceive he is fit for any civil employment, as having been
bred towards the law, and having beside very good parts. He
hath been a captain-lieutenant : and therefore I hope you ‘ will’
put such value upon him, in ‘the’ civil way, as one that hath
borne such a place shall be thought by you worthy of. Whereby
you will much oblige,

Your affectionate servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ I expect to hear from you about your defects in the
Castle, that so you may be timely supplied.*

‘Defects in the Castle,’ and in all Castles, were good to be
amended speedily,—in such predicaments as we are now again
on the eve of.

Be Ss os Magazine (1791), \xi, 520; without comment or indication of any
ind,

1648. ] PRAYER-MEETING 305

PRAYER-MEETING

Tue Scotch Army of Forty-thousand, ‘to deliver the King from
Sectaries,’ is not a fable but a fact. Scotland is distracted by
dim disastrous factions, very uncertain what it will do with the
King when he zs delivered: but in the meanwhile Hamilton has
got a majority in the Scotch Parliament; and drums are beating
in that country : the ‘ Army of Forty-thousand, certainly coming,’
hangs over England like a flaming comet, England itself being
all very combustible too. In few weeks hence, discontented
Wales, the Presbyterian Colonels declaring now for Royalism, will
be in a blaze; large sections of England, all England very ready
to follow, will shortly after be in a blaze.

The small Governing Party in England, during those early
months of 1648, are in a position which might fill the bravest
mind with misgivings. Elements of destruction everywhere
under and around them; their lot either to conquer, or igno-
miniously to die. A King not to be bargained with; kept in
Carisbrook, the centre of all factious hopes, of world-wide in-
trigues: that is one element. A great Royalist Party, subdued
with difficulty, and ready at all moments to rise again: that is
another. A great Presbyterian Party, at the head of which is
London City, ‘ the Purse-bearer of the Cause,’ highly dissatisfied
at the course things had taken, and looking desperately round
for new combinations and a new struggle: reckon that for a third
element. Add lastly a headlong Mutineer, Republican, or Level-
ling Party: and consider that there is a working House of Commons
which counts about Seventy, divided in pretty equal halves too,—
the rest waiting what will come of it. Come of it, and of the
Scotch Army advancing towards it !—

Cromwell, it appears, deeply sensible of all this, does in these
weeks make strenuous repeated attempts towards at least a union
among the friends of the Cause themselves, whose aim is one,
whose peril is one. But to little effect. Ludlow, with visible
satisfaction, reports how ill the Lieutenant-General sped, when
he brought the Army Grandees and Parliament Grandees ‘to a
Dinner’ at his own house, ‘in King Street,’ and urged a cordial
agreement: they would not draw together at all.! Parliament

1 Ludlow, i. 238 [i. 184, ed. Firth, This is the meeting when, according to
Ludlow, he and Cromwell threw cushions at each other. |

VoL, 1.—20

306 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS _ [1648.

would not agree with Army ; hardly Parliament with itself: as
little, still less, would Parliament and City agree. Ata Common
Council in the City, prior or posterior to this Dinner, his success,
as angry little Walker intimates, was the same. ‘Saturday 8th
April 1648,’ having prepared the ground beforehand, Cromwell
with another leader or two, attended a Common Council; spake,
as we may fancy, of the common dangers, of the gulfs now
yawning on every side: ‘ but the City,’ chuckles my little gentle-
man in gray, with a very shrill kind of laughter in the throat of
him, ‘ were now wiser than our First Parents; and rejected the
‘ Serpent and his subtleties.’ In fact, the City wishes well to
Hamiltonand his Forty-thousand Scots ; the City has, forsome time,
needed regiments quartered in it, to keep down open Royalist-
Presbyterian insurrection. It was precisely on the morrow after
this visit of Cromwell’s that there rose, from small cause, huge
Apprentice-riot in the City: discomfiture of Trainbands, seizure
of arms, seizure of City Gates, Ludgate, Newgate, loud wide cry
of “God and King Charles!’—riot not to be appeased but by
‘desperate charge of cavalry, ? after it had lasted forty hours.’
Such are the aspects of affairs, near and far.

Before quitting Part Third, I will request the reader to under-
take a small piece of very dull reading ; in which however, if he
look till it become credible and intelligible to him, a strange
thing, much elucidative of the heart of this matter, will disclose
itself. At Windsor, one of these days, unknown now which,‘
there is a Meeting of Army Leaders. Adjutant-General Allen,
a most authentic earnest man, whom we shall know better after-
wards, reports what they did. Entirely amazing to us. These
are the longest heads and the strongest hearts in England ; and
this is the thing they are doing; this is the way they, for their
part, begin despatch of business. The reader, if he is an earnest
man, may look at it with very many thoughts, for which there
is no word at present,

1 History of Independency, part i. 85.

2 (‘The Lieutenant-General drew forth a party of horse, fell upon them, killed
him who carried the colours, and one or two more were slain, and divers of them
cut and hacked by the troopers, whereupon they soon fled and were dissipated.”
See News letter from London, Clarke Pagers, ii. 3. |

3 Rushworth, vii. rosr.

4[‘‘ The beginning of 1648” (see next page) means, of course after 25th March.
From passages in Mercurius Pragmaticus, Whitlocke’s Memoriais and the
Clarendon MSS., Dr. Gardiner concludes that the days of the conference were
April 29, 30, and May 1. Great Civil War, iv. p. 117.

1648. ] PRAYER-MEETING 307

‘In the year Forty-seven, you may remember,’ says Adjutant
Allen, ‘we in the Army were engaged in actions of a very high
‘nature ; leading us to very untrodden paths,—both in our Con-
‘tests with the then Parliament, as also Conferences with the
‘King. In which great works,—wanting a spirit of faith, and
‘also the fear of the Lord, and also being unduly surprised with
‘the fear of man, which always brings a snare, we, to make haste,
‘as we thought, out of such perplexities, measuring our way by
‘a wisdom of our own, fell into Treaties with the King and his
‘Party: which proved such a snare to us, and led into such laby-
‘rinths by the end of that year, that the very things we thought
‘to avoid, by the means we used of our own devising, were all,
‘with many more of a far worse and more perplexing nature,
‘brought back upon us. To the overwhelming of our spirits,
‘weakening of our hands and hearts; filling us with divisions,
‘confusions, tumults, and every evil work; and thereby en-
‘dangering the ruin of that blessed Cause we had, with such
‘success, been prospered in till that time.

‘For now the King and _ his Party, seeing us not answer their
‘ends, began to provide for themselves, by a Treaty with the
‘then Parliament, set on foot about the beginning of Forty-eight.
‘The Parliament also was, at the same time, highly displeased
‘with us for what we had done, both as to the King and them-
‘selves. The good people likewise, even our most cordial friends
‘in the Nation, beholding our turning aside from that path of
‘simplicity we had formerly walked in, and been blessed in, and
‘thereby much endeared to their hearts,—began now to fear,
‘and withdraw their affections from us, in this politic path which
‘we had stepped into, and walked in to our hurt, the year before.
‘And as a farther fruit of the wages of our backsliding hearts,
‘we were also filled with a spirit of great jealousy and divisions
‘amongst ourselves; having left that Wisdom of the Word,
‘which is first pure and then peaceable; so that we were now
‘fit for little but to tear and rend one another, and thereby pre-
‘pare ourselves, and the work in our hands, to be ruined by our
‘common enemies. Enemies that were ready to say, as many
‘others of like spirit in this day do,! of the like sad occasions
‘amongst us, “Lo this is the day we looked for.” The King
‘and his party prepare accordingly to ruin all; by sudden In-

11659; Allen's Pamphlet is written as a Monition and Example to Fleetwood
and the others, now in a similar peril, but with no Oliver now among them.

308 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS (1648.

‘surrections in most parts of the Nation: the Scot, concurring
‘with the same designs, comes in with a potent Army under
‘Duke Hamilton. We in the Army, in a low, weak, divided,
‘perplexed condition in all respects, as aforesaid :—some of us
‘judging it a duty to lay down our arms, to quit our stations,
‘and put ourselves into the capacities of private men,—since
‘what we had done, and what was yet in our hearts to do, tending
‘as we judged to the good of these poor Nations, was not accepted
‘by them.

‘Some also even encouraged themselves and us to such a thing,
‘by urging for such a practice the example of our Lord Jesus;
‘who, when he had borne an eminent testimony to the pleasure
‘of his Father in an active way, sealed it at last by his sufferings ;
‘which was presented to us as our pattern for imitation. Others
‘of us, however, were different-minded ; thinking something of
‘another nature might yet be farther our duty ;—and these there-
‘fore were, by joint advice, by a good hand of the Lord, led to
‘this result ; viz., To go solemnly to search out our own iniquities,
‘and humble our souls before the Lord in the sense of the same ;
‘which, we were persuaded, had provoked the Lord against us,
‘to bring such sad perplexities upon us at that day. Out of
‘which we saw no way else to extricate ourselves.

‘ Accordingly we did agree to meet at Windsor Castle about
‘the beginning of Forty-eight. And there we spent one day
‘together in prayer; inquiring into the causes of that sad dis-
‘ pensation, —let all men consider it ; ‘ coming to no farther result
‘that day; but that it was still our duty to seek. And on the
‘morrow we met again in the morning ; where many spake from
‘the Word, and prayed ; and the then Lieutenant-General.Crom-
‘well, —unintelligible to Posterity, but extremely intelligible to
‘himself, to these men, and to the Maker of him and of them,—
‘did press very earnestly on all there present, to a thorough con-
‘sideration of our actions as an Army, and of our ways particularly
‘as private Christians: to see if any iniquity.could be found in
‘them; and what it was, that if possible we might find it out,
‘and so remove the cause of such sad rebukes as were upon us
‘(by reason of our iniquities, as we judged) at that time. And
‘the way more particularly the Lord led us to herein was this:
‘To look back and consider what time it was when with joint
‘satisfaction we could last say to the best of our judgments, ©
‘The presence of the Lord was amongst us, and rebukes and
‘judgments were not as then upon us. Which time the Lord

1648.] PRAYER-MEETING 309

‘led us jointly to find out and agree in; and having done so,
‘to proceed, as we then judged it our duty, to search into all
‘our public actions as an Army afterwards. Duly weighing (as
‘the Lord helped us) each of them, with their grounds, rules,
‘and ends, as near as we could. And so we concluded this
‘second day, with agreeing to meet again on the morrow. Which
‘accordingly we did upon the same occasion, reassuming the
‘consideration of our debates the day before, and reviewing our
‘actions again.

‘By which means we were, by a gracious hand of the Lord,
‘led to find out the very steps (as we were all then jointly con-
‘vineed) by which we had departed from the Lord, and provoked
“Him to depart from us. Which we found to be those cursed
‘carnal Conferences our own conceited wisdom, our fears, and
‘want of faith had prompted us, the year before, to entertain
‘with the King and his Party. And at this time, and on this
‘occasion, did the then Major Goffe (as I remember was his title)
‘make use of that good Word, Proverbs First and Twenty-third,
‘Turn you at my reproof ; behold, I mill pour out my Spirit unto you,
‘I will make known my words unto you. Which, we having found
‘out our sin, he urged as our duty from those words. And the
‘Lord so accompanied by His Spirit, that it had a kindly effect,
‘like a word of His, upon most of our hearts that were then
‘present: which begot in us a great sense, a shame and loathing
‘of ourselves for our iniquities, and a justifying of the Lord as
‘righteous in His proceedings against us.

‘And in this path the Lord led us, not only to see our sin, but
‘also our duty; and this so unanimously set with weight upon
‘each heart that none was able hardly to speak a word to each
‘other for bitter weeping, —does the modern reader mark it;
this weeping, and who they are that weep! Weeping ‘partly
‘in the sense and shame of our iniquities ; of our unbelief, base
‘fear of men, and carnal consultations (as the fruit thereof) with
‘our own wisdoms, and not with the Word of the Lord,—which
‘only is a way of wisdom, strength and safety, and all besides it
‘are ways of snares. And yet we were also helped, with fear
‘and trembling, to rejoice in the Lord ; whose faithfulness and
‘loving-kindness, we were made to see, yet failed us not ;—who
‘remembered us still, even in our low estate, because His mercy
“endures for ever. Who no sooner brought us to His feet, ac-
‘knowledging Him in that way of His (viz. searching for, being
‘ashamed of, and willing to turn from, our iniquities), but He

310 BETWEEN THE CIVIL WARS _[1648.

‘did direct our steps; and presently we were led and helped to
‘a clear agreement amongst ourselves, not any dissenting, That
‘it was the duty of our day, with the forces we had, to go out
‘and fight against those potent enemies, which that year in all
‘places appeared against us.’ Courage! ‘With an humble con-
‘fidence, in the name of the Lord only, that we should destroy
‘them. And we were also enabled then, after serious seeking
‘His face, to come to a very clear and joint resolution, on many
‘grounds at large there debated amongst us, That it was our
‘duty, if ever the Lord brought us back again in peace, to call
‘Charles Stuart, that man of blood, to an account for that blood
‘he had shed, and mischief he had done to his utmost, against
‘the Lord’s Cause and People in these poor Nations.’ Mark
that also !

‘ And how the Lord led and prospered us in all our undertak-
‘ings that year, in this way ; cutting His work short, in righteous-
‘ness; making it a year of mercy, equal if not transcendent to
‘any since these Wars began; and making it worthy of remem-
‘brance by every gracious soul, who was wise to observe the
‘Lord, and the operations of His hands,—I wish may never be
‘forgotten.’ Let Fleetwood, if he have the same heart, go and
do likewise.

Abysses, black chaotic whirlwinds :—does the reader look upon
it all as Madness? Madness lies close by ; as Madness does to
the Highest Wisdom, in man’s life always: but this is not mad !
This dark element, it is the mother of the lightnings and the
splendours ; it is very sane this !—

1A faithful Memorial of that remarkable Meeting of many Officers of the Army
in yee at Windsor Castle, in the year 1648, &c. &c. (in Somers Tracts, vi.
499-501.

PART IV
SECOND CIVIL WAR

1648

LETTERS LIX—LXII

AsouT the beginning of May 1648, the general Presbyterian-
Royalist discontent announces itself by tumults in Kent, tumults
at Colchester, tumults and rumours of tumult far and near;
portending, on all sides, that a new Civil War is at hand. The
Seotch Army of Forty-thousand is certainly voted ; certainly
the King is still prisoner at Carisbrook ; factious men have yet
made no bargain with him: certainly there will and should
be a new War? So reasons Presbyterian Royalism every-
where. Headlong discontented Wales in this matter took the
lead.

Wales has been full of confused discontent all Spring ; this or
the other confused Colonel Poyer, full of brandy and Presbyterian
texts of Scripture, refusing to disband till his arrears be better
paid, or indeed till the King be better treated. To whom other
confused Welsh Colonels, as Colonel Powel, Major-General
Laughern, join themselves. There have been tumults at Cardiff,
tumults here and also there; open shooting and fighting.
Drunken Colonel Poyer, a good while ago, in March last, seized
Pembroke ; flatly refuses to obey the Parliament’s Order when
Colonel Fleming presents the same.—Poor Fleming, whom we
saw some time ago soliciting promotion ;* he here, attempting

1 Letter XX XVII.

(311)

312 SECOND CIVIL WAR [May.

to defeat some insurrectionary party of this Poyer’s ‘at a Pass’
(name of the Pass not given), is himself defeated, forced into a
Church, and killed.1. Drunken Poyer, in Pembroke strong Castle,
defies the Parliament and the world: new Colonels, Parliament-
ary and Presbyterian-Royalist, are hastening towards him, for
and against. Wales, smoking with confused discontent all Spring,
has now, by influence of the flaming Scotch comet or Army of
Forty-thousand, burst into a general blaze. ‘The gentry are
all for the King ; the common people understand nothing, and
follow the gentry.’ Chepstow Castle too has been taken ‘by a
stratagem.’ The country is all up or rising: ‘the smiths have
all fled, cutting their bellows before they went ;’ impossible to
get a horse shod,—never saw such a country!! On the whole,
Cromwell will have to go. Cromwell, leave being asked of Fair-
fax, is on the 1st of May ordered to go; marches on Wednesday
the 3d. Let him march swiftly !

Horton, one of the Parliamentary Colonels, has already, while
Cromwell is on march, somewhat tamed the Welsh humour, bya
good beating at St. Fagan’s : St. Fagan’s Fight, near Cardiff, on the
8th of May, where Laughern, hastening towards Poyer and Pem-
broke, is broken in pieces. Cromwell marches by Monmouth,?
by Chepstow (11th May); takes Chepstow Town; attacks the
Castle, Castle will not surrender,—he leaves Colonel Ewer to do
the Castle; who, after four weeks, does it. Cromwell, by
Swansea and Carmarthen, advances towards Pembroke ; quelling
disturbance, rallying force, as he goes; arrives at Pembroke in
some ten days more ; and, for want of artillery, is like to have a
tedious siege of it.

1 Rushworth, vii. 1097.

2[He was at Gloucester on May 8; and on May 9, either from that city or
from Monmouth, wrote to Fairfax, and also to Captain Roberts, a local officer.
See Supplement, Nos. 27, 28. On the 16th he was at Cardiff. See his letter to
Capt. Crowther, zdid. No. 29.]
_ 3 Abundant details lie scattered in Rushworth, vii. : Poyer and Pembroke Castle,
in March, p. 1033; Fleming killed (rst May), p. 1097. [On p. 2397 above Carlyle
says ‘‘before March 27". As the news was received in London on April 29
(Rushworth, vii. p. 1174) it was probably about the middle of April.] Chepstow
surprised (‘ beginning of May’), p. r109,—retaken (29th May), p. 1130; St, Fagan's
Fight (8th May), p. rrr0; Cromwell’s March, pp. Irai-g.

1648. ] LETTER LIX., PEMBROKE 313

LETTER LIX

Here is his first Letter from before the place: a rugged
rapid despatch, with some graphic touches in it, and rather more
of hope than the issue realised. Guns of due quality are not to
be had. In the beginning of June,! ‘Hugh Peters’ went across
to Milford Haven, and from the Lion, a Parliament Ship riding
there, got ‘two drakes, two demi-culverins, and two whole
culverins,’ and safely conveyed them to the Leaguer; with
which new implements an instantaneous essay was made, and a
‘storming’ thereupon followed, but without success.—Of ‘the
Prince,’ Prince Charles and his revolted ships, of the ‘victory in
Kent’ and what made it needful, we shall have to speak anon.

‘To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the House
of Commons ; These’

Leaguer before Pembroke, 16th June 1648.?
Sir,
All that you can expect from hence is a

relation of the state of this Garrison of Pembroke, which is
briefly thus:

They begin to be in extreme want of provision, so as in all
probability they cannot live a fortnight without being starved.
But we hear that they mutinied about three days since; cried
out, “Shall we be ruined for two or three men’s pleasure?
Better it were we should throw them over the walls.” It’s
certainly reported to us that within four or six days they'll cut
Poyer’s throat, and come all away to us. Poyer told them,
Saturday last, that if relief did not come by Monday night,
they should no more believe him, nay they should hang him.

We have not got our guns and ammunition from Wallingford
as yet, but, however, we have scraped up a few, which stand us
in very good stead. Last night, we got two little guns planted,
which in twenty-four hours will take away their Mills, and then,

1 Cromwelliana, p. 40.
2[Carlyle dated it June 14th, but probably only by inadvertence, ]

314 SECOND CIVIL WAR (16 June.

as Poyer himself confesses, they are all undone. We made an
attempt to storm it, about ten days since ; but our ladders were
too short, and the breach so as men could not get over. We
lost a few men, but I am confident the enemy lost more. Captain
Flower, of Colonel Dean’s regiment, was wounded; and Major
Grigg’s Lieutenant and Ensign slain; Captain Burges lies
wounded, and very sick. J question not, but within a fortnight
we shall have the town;/‘and’ Poyer hath engaged himself to
the officers of the town, not to keep the castle longer than the
town can hold out. Neither indeed can it [? he]; for we can take
away his water in two days, by beating down a staircase, which
goes into a cellar where he hath a well. They allow the men
half-a-pound of beef, and as much bread a-day, but it is almost
spent.

We must rejoice at what the Lord hath done for you in Kent.
Upon our thanksgiving! for that victory, which was both from
sea and leaguer, Poyer told his men, that it was the Prince,
‘Prince Charles and his revolted ships,’ was coming with relief.
The other night they mutinied in the town. Last night we
fired divers houses ; which ‘fire’ runs up the town still: it much
frights them. Confident I am, we shall have it in fourteen days
by starving. I am,

Sir,
Your servant,
Ouiver CroMWELL.*

Precisely in about ‘ Fourteen days’ a new attempt was made,?
not without some promising results, but again ineffectual. ‘The
Guns are not come from Bristol, for want of wind ;’ and against
hunger and short scaling-ladders Poyer is stubborn. Three days
after this Letter to Lenthall, some three weeks since the siege
began, here is another, to Major Saunders.

1 By Cannon-volleys. 2 Rushworth, vii. 1175,

eer vii, 1159: read in the House, 2oth June 1648 (Commons Journals,
Vv, .

1648,] LETTER LX., PEMBROKE 3165

LETTER LX

Or this Major, afterwards Colonel, Thomas Saunders, now lying
at Brecknock, there need little be said beyond what the Letter
itself says. He is ‘of Derbyshire,’ it seems; sat afterwards as
a King’s-Judge, or at least was nominated to sit; continued
true to the Cause, in a dim way, till the very Restoration ; and
withdrew then into total darkness.

This Letter is endorsed in Saunder’s own hand, ‘The Lord
‘ General’s order for taking Sir Trevor Williams, and Mr. Morgan,
‘Sheriff of Monmouthshire.’ Of which two Welsh individuals,
except that Williams had been appointed Commander-in-chief
of the Parliament’s forces in Monmouthshire some time ago, and
Morgan High Sheriff there,! both of whom had now revolted, we
know nothing, and need know nothing. The Letter has come
under cover enclosing another Letter, of an official sort, to one

‘Mr. Rumsay’ ? (a total stranger to me) ; and is superscribed, For
Yourself.

To Major Thomas Saunders, at Brecknock ; These’

‘Before Pembroke,’ 17th June 1648.
Sir,
I send you this enclosed by itself, because it’s

of greater moment. The other you may communicate to Mr.
Rumsey as far as you think fit and I have written. I would not
have him or other honest men be discouraged that I think it not
fit, at present, to enter into contests ; it will be good to yield a
little, for public advantage, and truly that is my end, wherein
I desire you to satisfy them.

I have sent, as my Letter mentions, to have you remove out
of Brecknockshire ; indeed, into that part of Glamorganshire
which lieth next Monmouthshire, for this end: We have plain
discoveries that Sir Trevor Williams, of Llangibby,* about two
miles from Usk in the county of Monmouth, was very deep in

1yzoth January 1645-6, Williams; 17th November, 1647, Morgan; Commons
Journals, in diebus.

2(Written, like the other, to Saunders, but which Mr. Rumsay may see—
No doubt Edward Rumsay is meant; one of the Commissioners for South Wales. }

3 He writes ‘ Langevie;’ ‘Munmouth’ too.

316 SECOND CIVIL WAR [17 June.

the plot of betraying Chepstow Castle; so that we are out of
doubt of his guiltiness thereof.!_ I do hereby authorise you to
seize him; as also the High Sheriff of Monmouth, Mr. Morgan,
who was in the same plot.

But, because Sir Trevor Williams is the more dangerous man
by far, I would have you seize him first, and the other will easily
be had. To the end you may not be frustrated and that you
be not deceived, I think fit to give you some characters of the
man, and some intimations how things stand. He is a man, as
I am informed, full of craft and subtlety, very bold and resolute ;
hath a house at Llangibby well stored with arms, and very
strong ; his neighbours about him very malignant, and much for
him ; who are apt to rescue him if apprehended, much more to
discover anything which may prevent it. He is full of jealousy,
partly out of guilt, but much more because he doubts some that
were in the business have discovered him, which indeed they
have, and also because he knows that his servant is brought
hither, and a minister to be examined here, who are able to
discover the whole plot.

If you should march directly into that county and near him
it’s odds he either fortifies his house, or gives you the slip: so
also, if you should go to his house, and not find him there, or if
you attempt to take him, and miss to effect it, or if you make
any known inquiry after him, it will be discovered.

Wherefore, ‘as’ to the first, you have a fair pretence of going
out of Brecknockshire to quarter about Newport and Caerleon,
which is not above four or five miles from his house. You may
send to Colonel Herbert, whose house lieth in Monmouthshire :
who will certainly acquaint you where he is. You are also to
send to Captain Nicholas, who is at Chepstow, to require him to
assist you, if he ‘Williams’ should get into his house and stand
upon his guard. Samuel Jones, who is Quartermaster to Colonel
Herbert's troop, will be very assisting to you, if you send to him

1 [See letter to Richard Herbert of St. Jillians, Appendix, No. rr (3). ]

1648. ] LETTER LXI., PEMBROKE 317

to meet you at your quarters, both by letting you know where
he is, and also in all matters of intelligence. If there shall be
need, Captain Burges his troop, now quartered in Glamorganshire,
shall be directed to receive orders from you.

You perceive by all this that we are (it may be) a little too
much solicitous in this business; it’s our fault, and indeed such
a temper causeth us often to overact business. Wherefore, with-
out more ado, we leave it to you, and you to the guidance of
God herein, and rest,

Yours,
Ouiver CROMWELL.

‘PS.’ If you seize him, bring, (and let him be brought with
a strong guard), to me. If Captain Nicholas should light on him
at Chepstow, do you strengthen him with a good guard to bring
him. If you seize his person, disarm his house ; but let not his
arms be embezzled. If you need Captain Burges his troop, it
quarters between Newport and Chepstow. *

Saunders, by his manner of endorsing this Letter, seems to
intimate that he took his two men; that he keeps the Letter by
way of voucher. Sir Trevor Williams by and by! compounds as
a Delinquent,—retires then into ‘Langevie House’ in a dimini-
shed state, and disappears from History.’ Of Sheriff Morgan,
except that a new Sheriff is soon appointed, we have no farther
notice whatever.?

*

LETTER LXI

Since Cromwell quitted London, there have arisen wide com-
motions in that central region too; the hope of the Scotch Army
and the certainty of this War in Wales excite all unruly things

* Harris, p. 549; and Forster, iv. 239.

1 Commons Journals,

2[ Williams was sequestered, but discharged on appeal by the Barons of the
Exchequer. (See his case in the Calendar of Committee for Compounding, p.
2947). The William Morgan there joined with him is the Sheriff. ]

3 Note to Colonel Hughes, 26th June 1648, in Appendix, No. rr (rt).

318 SECOND CIVIL WAR [28 June.

and persons. At Pembroke lately we heard the cannons fire,
both from Leaguer and Ships, for a ‘victory in Kent:’ con-
cerning which and its origins and issues, take the following
indications.

May 16th. Came a celebrated ‘Surrey Petition :’ highflying
armed cavalcade of Freeholders from Surrey, with a Petition
craving in very high language that Peace be made with his
Majesty: they quarrelled with the Parliament’s Guard in West-
minster Hall, drew swords, had swords drawn upon them ; ‘the
Miller of Wandsworth was run through with a halbert,’ he and
others; and the Petitioners went home in a slashed and highly
indignant condition. Thereupon, May 24th, armed meeting of
Kentish-men on Blackheath; armed meeting of Essex-men ;
several armed meetings, all in communication with the City
Presbyterians: Fairfax, ill of the gout, has to mount,—in ex-
tremity of haste, as a man that will quench fire among smoking
flax,

June Ist. Fairfax, at his utmost speed, smites fiercely against
the centre of this Insurrection; drives it from post to post:
drives it into Maidstone ‘about 7 in the evening,’ ‘ with as hard
fighting as I ever saw ;’ tramples it out there. The centre-flame
once trampled out, the other flames, or armed meetings, hover
hither and thither ; gather at length, in few days, all at Colchester
in Essex ; where Fairfax is now besieging them, with a very
obstinate and fierce resistance from them. This is the victory
in Kent, these are the ‘glorious successes God has vouchsafed
you, which Oliver alludes to in this Letter.

We are only to notice farther that Lambert is in the North ;
waiting, in very inadequate strength, to see the Scots arrive.
Oliver in this Letter signifies that he has reinforced him with
some ‘horse and dragoons,’ sent by ‘West Chester,’ which we
now call Chester, where ‘ Colonel Duckenfield’ is Governor. The
Scots are indubitably coming: Sir Marmaduke Langdale (whom
Oliver, we may remark, encountered in the King’s left wing at
Naseby Fight) has raised new Yorkshiremen, has seized Berwick,
seized Carlisle, and joined the Scots; it is becoming an openly
Royalist affair. In Lancashire a certain Sir Richard Tempest,
very forward in his Royalism, goes suddenly blazing abroad ‘ with
1,000 horse and many knights and gentlemen,’ threatening huge
peril; but is, in those very hours, courageously set upon by
Colonel Robert Lilburn with what little compact force there is,
and at once extinguished :—an acceptable service on the part of

1648] LETTER LXI, PEMBROKE 319

Colonel Robert ; for which let him have thanks from Parliament,
and reward of 1,000/.1

Very desirable, of course, that Oliver had done with Pembroke,
and were fairly joined with Lambert. But Pembroke is strong ;
Poyer is stubborn, hopes to surrender ‘on conditions ;’ Oliver,
equally stubborn, though sadly short of artillery and means, will
have him ‘at mercy of the Parliament,’ so signal a rebel as him.?
Fairfax’s Father, the Lord Ferdinando, died in March last ;? so
that the General’s title is now changed :

To his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliament's
Army : These

Before Pembroke, 28th June 1648.
My Lorp,

I have some few days since despatched horse
and dragoons for the north. I sent them by the way of West
Chester, thinking it fit so to do in regard of this enclosed letter
which I received from Colonel Duckenfield, requiring them to
give him assistance in the way. And if it should prove that a
present help would not serve the turn, then I ordered Captain
Pennyfeather's troop ‘ to remain with the Governor ‘ Duckenfield ;’
and the rest immediately to march towards Leeds, and to send
to the Committee of York, or to him that commands the forces in
chief there, for directions whither they should come, and how
they shall be disposed of.

The number I sent are six troops, four of horse, and two of

1 Whitlocke, pp. 312, 313; Commons Journals (5th July 1648), v. 624; &e. [The
first news of the victory came from Lancashire, but the fight was in N orthumber-
land, Tempest having been sent thither by Langdale, and lying about Whitting-
ham and Eslington and along Coquet Water. See Hesilrige’s letter, Rushworth,
Part iv., vol. ii., p. 1177.]

2(The Moderate for the week June 29-July 6 (E. 451, 18), mentions letters
from Cromwell to Fairfax and the Derby House Committee, of June 27, which
letters ‘‘ say that they within the town and castle cannot hold out above ten days
at farthest; that Poyer sent out a message to the Lieut.-Gen. admiring that a David
should be so persecuted by a Saul, having been always faithful to the Parliament
_ , . but the honour of Parliament and their general lying so deep at stake, the
Lieut.-Gen. would not admit of any response or capitulation, though the governor
inclined thereunto.’’]

313th March 1647-8 (Rushworth, vii. 1030).

4[Of Colonel Horton's regiment of horse. ]

320 SECOND CIVIL WAR [28 June.

dragoons; whereof three are Colonel Scrope’s, and Captain
Pennyfeather’s troop, and the other two dragoons. I could
not, by the judgement of the Colonels here, spare more, nor
send them sooner, without manifest hazard to these parts. Here
is (as I have formerly acquainted your Excellency) a very
desperate enemy, who, being put out of all hope of mercy, are
resolved to endure to the uttermost extremity ; being very many
‘of them’ gentlemen of quality, and men thoroughly resolved.
They have made some notable sallies upon Lieutenant-Colonel
Reade’s quarter,! to his loss. We are forced to keep divers
posts, or else they would have relief, or their horse break away.
Our foot are about three or four-and-twenty hundred, we being
necessitated to leave some in garrisons,

The Country, since we sat down before this place, have made
two or three insurrections, and are ready to do it every day; so
that, what with looking to them, and disposing our horse to that
end, and to get us in provisions, (without which we should starve)
this country being so miserably exhausted and so poor, and we
no money to buy victuals, that indeed, whatever may be thought,
it’s a mercy we have been able to keep our men together in the
midst of such necessities, the sustenance of the foot (for the most
part) being but bread and water.? Our guns, through the unhappy
accident at Berkley, not yet come to us; (and indeed it was a
very unhappy thing they were brought thither), the winds having
been also so cross, that since they were recovered from sinking,
they could not ‘come to us,’ and this place not being to be had

1 Reade had been entrusted with the Siege of Tenby: that had ended June 2d
(Commons Journals, v. 588); and Reade is now assisting at Pembroke. [He had
been a captain in Colonel Holborne’s regiment of foot in Essex's army; was now
in command of Colonel Overton's foot regiment. Colonel Richard Lehunt (see page
322) was a captain in Fleetwood’s regiment of horse in Manchester’sarmy. During
1644, his troop, with some others, was under the temporary command of Colonel
inne at Chesterfield. In 1651, he had command of a regiment of foot in

reland.

2(Some of the soldiers seized cattle belonging to Major-General Laugharne,
(then in Pembroke, “‘very sick of body and mind,”) but his wife appealed to
Cromwell, who not only ordered their restoration but gave her permission to go
into the castle to her husband and to take a doctor with her. Moderate Inteili-
gencer, June 1-8; Perf, Occurrences, June 9-16. (E. 446 (28) ; 522 (40)).]

1648. ] LETTER LXI., PEMBROKE 321

without fit instruments for battery, except by starving.! And
truly I believe the enemy’s straits does increase upon them very
fast, and that within a few days an end will be put to this
business; which surely might have been before, if we had
received things wherewith to have done it. But it will be done
in the best time.?

I rejoice much to hear of the blessing of God upon your
Excellency’s endeavours. I pray God teach® this nation, and
those that are over us, and your Excellency and all us that are
under you, what the mind of God may be in all this, and what
our duty is. Surely it is not that the poor godly people of this
Kingdom should still be made the object of wrath and anger,
nor that our God would have our necks under a yoke of
bondage ;‘ for these things that have lately come to pass have
been the wonderful works of God; breaking the rod of the
oppressor, as in the day of Midian, not with garments much
rolled in blood, but by the terror of the Lord ; who will yet save
His people and confound His enemies, as in that day. The Lord
multiply His spirit upon you, and bless you, and keep your heart
upright ; and then, though you be not conformable to the men of
this world, nor to their wisdom, yet you shall be precious in the
eyes of God, and He will be to you a sun and a shield.

My Lord, I do not know that I have had a letter from any of
your Army, of the glorious successes God has vouchsafed you. I

1‘ Without ez¢her fit instruments for battering [battery] excef¢ by starving.’ Great
haste, and considerable stumbling in the grammar of this last sentence! After
‘ starving,’ a mere comma; and so on,

2 God’s time is the best.

[Carlyle printed ‘‘that” instead of ‘‘ teach,” and so had to alter the sentence
into: “I pray God that this nation . . . and all we that are under you ‘ may dis-
cern’ what the mind of God may be,” in order to make sense. There were several
other mis-readings in his copy of the letter, the most curious being one near the end,
where he printed ‘‘a horn and a shield” instead of ‘‘a sun and a shield.”’]

4[ What a light is thrown upon Cromwell's thoughts by these words! No
Parliamentary supremacy or rule of the majority . . . was uppermost in_his mind,
Security for those he styled ‘the poor godly people’ was the main object of his
striving, though he was too large-minded not to assign a large, if but a secondary
place, to questions relating to the fall or preservation of Kings and Parliaments, as
the institutional framework of political order without which even ‘the poor godly
people’ could not enter the haven of safety.” Gardiner’s Cromwel/, p. 95]

VOL aie

322 SECOND CIVIL WAR (28 June.

pray pardon the complaint because I long to rejoice with you. I
take leave ; and rest,
My Lord,
Your most humble and faithful servant,
OuivER CROMWELL.

‘PS.’ Sir, I desire you that Colonel Lehunt may have a com-
mission to command a troop of Horse, the greatest part whereof
came from the enemy to us; and that you would be pleased to
send blank commissions for his inferior officers,—with what speed
may be.*

In Rushworth, under date March 24th, is announced that ‘Sir
‘W. Constable has taken care to send ordnance and ammunition
‘from Gloucester, for the service before Pembroke.’! ‘The
unhappy accident at Berkley,’ I believe, is the stranding of the
‘Frigate, or Shallop, that carried them. Guns are not to be had
of due quality for battering Pembroke. In the mean time,
several bodies of ‘horse’ are mentioned as deserting, or taking
quarter and service on the Parliament side.2_ It was over these
that Lehunt is to be appointed Colonel [szc] ; and to Fairfax as
General-in-chief ‘of all the Parliament’s Forces raised or to be
raised, it belongs to give him and his subordinates the due
commissions.

July 5th, Young Villiers Duke of Buckingham, son of the
assassinated Duke; he with his Brother Francis, with the Earl
of Holland, and others who will pay dear for it, started up about
Kingston on Thames with another open Insurrectionary Arma-
ment; guided chiefly by Dutch Dalbier, once Cromwell’s in-
structor, but now gone over to the other side. Fairfax and the
Army being all about Colchester in busy Siege, there seemed a
good opportunity here. They rode towards Reigate, these King-
ston Insurgents, several hundreds strong: but a Parliament Party
‘under Major Gibbons’ drives them back ; following close, comes
to action with them between ‘ Nonsuch Park and Kingston,’ where
the poor Lord Francis, Brother of the Duke, fell mortally wounded ;
—drives them across the river ‘into Hertfordshire ;’ into the

* Sloane MSS. 1519, f. 90 [f. 180}.

Lyi, 1036, ? Rushworth, Cromwedliana,

1648. ] LETTER LXIL, PEMBROKE 323

lion’s jaws. For Fairfax sent a Party out from Colchester ; over-
took them at St. Neot’s; and captured, killed, or entirely dis-
sipated them.' Dutch Dalbier was hacked in pieces, ‘so angry
were the soldiers at him.’? The Earl of Holland stood his trial
afterwards ; and lost his head. The Duke of Buckingham got
off ;—might almost as well have died with poor Brother Francis
here, for any good he afterwards did. Two pretty youths, as
their Vandyke Portraits in Hampton Court still testify ; one of
whom lived to become much uglier !

July 8th. Duke Hamilton, with the actual Scotch Army, is
‘at Annan’ on the Western Border, ready to step across to
England. Not quite Forty-thousand; yet really about half
that number, tolerably effective. Langdale, with a vanguard
of Three-thousand Yorkshiremen, is to be guide; Monro, with
a body of horse that had long served in Ulster, is to bring up
the rear. The great Duke dates from Annan, 8th July 1648.3
Poor old Annan ;—never saw such an Army gathered, since the
Scotch James went to wreck in Solway Moss, above a hundred
years ago!* Scotland is in a disastrous, distracted condition ;
overridden by a Hamilton majority in Parliament. Poor Scotland
will, with exertion, deliver its ‘ King from the power of Sectaries ;’
and is dreadfully uncertain what it will do with him when de-
livered! Perhaps Oliver will save it the trouble.

July 11th. Oliver at last is loose from Pembroke; as the
following brief Letter will witness.

1 Rushworth, vii. 1178, 82.

2(Sir Michel Livesey, Major Gibbons and Captain Pretty went with the troops
against them. The party from Colchester was commanded by Colonel Scrope. The
Dutchman, Dalbier, had served the late Duke of Buckingham before ever he served
Parliament. There are two letters on this affair amongst the papers of Lord Montagu
of Beaulieu. The first is from Cromwell’s old acquaintance, Robert Barnard of
Huntingdon, who says that on coming to St. Neot’s the insurgents ‘‘ took up Inns,
were very quiet and sleepy; like young soldiers, though chased from Kingston,
yet set no guards.’’ Dalbier, at any rate, was an old enough soldier to know better,
but perhaps they thought precaution useless. Holland, Barnard says, was taken in
his chamber. ‘The Duke, with a small party, charged twice, then rode away and
escaped. ‘The second letter is from the widow of Sir Ralph Winwood to her son-in-
law, Lord Montagu of Boughton. Hehad asked if she was not affrighted by the
near approach of the rebels to Ditton. Truly, she says, not much; for they ‘‘ heard
not of the dangers till it was past.” See Ast. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on
Lord Montagu's MSS., pp. 161, 162. ]

3 Rushworth, vii. 1184. 4 James V. A.D. 1542.

324 SECOND CIVIL WAR [il July.

LETTER LXII

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the House
of Commons : These
‘Pembroke,’ 11th July 1648.1

Sir,
The town and Castle of Pembroke were sur-

rendered to me this day, being the eleventh of July, upon the
propositions which I send you here enclosed.2 What arms,
ammunition, victual, ordnance and other necessaries of war are
in ‘the’ town, I have not to certify you, the Commissioners I
sent in to receive the same not being yet returned, nor like
suddenly to be; and J am unwilling to defer the giving you an
‘account of this mercy for a day.

The persons excepted are such as have formerly served you in
a very good cause, but, being now apostatised I did rather make
election of them than of those who had always been for the
King, judging their iniquity double, because they have sinned
against so much light, and against so many evidences of Divine
Presence going along with and prospering a righteous cause, in
the management of which they themselves had a share.

I rest,
Your most humble servant,
O.tver CRoMWELL.*

Drunken Colonel Poyer, Major-General Laughern and certain
o hers, ‘ persons excepted,’ have had to surrender at mercy ;° a

1[The year date is added in different ink. The letter is endorsed ‘‘ Lieutt.
enerall Cromwell's letter touching the surrender of Pomfrett (séc) Castle.""]
2 Given in Rushworth, vii. 1190.
3[Laugharne, Poyer and Powell were sent up from Nottingham to London ;
there told to draw lots which should be put to death. The lot fell upon Poyer,
who was accordingly shot in the Piazza of Covent Garden. ]

* Copy in Tanner MSS. \xii. 159: printed, correctly, in Grey on the Third
Volume of Neal's Puritans (Appendix, p. 129), from another source. |Now printed
from the original (signed and sealed by Cromwell) at Welbeck, where are also the
‘‘ propositions” or articles of surrender here mentioned as enclosed. These latter
are given by Rushworth in substance only. For Cromwell's last summons to Pem-
broke, see Supplement, No.30, Grey's text of this letter was quite correct, but Carlyle,
besides one or two small deviations, printed the last line but one, ‘‘ evidences of
Divine Providence going along with and prospering a just cause.’’]

1648] LETTER LXIIL, PRESTON BATTLE 325

great many more on terms: Pembroke happily is down ;—and
the Welsh War is ended.! Cromwell hurries northward: by
Gloucester, Warwick ; gets ‘3,000 pairs of shoes’ at Leicester ;
leaves his prisoners at Nottingham (with Mrs. Hutchinson and
her Colonel, in the Castle there) ; joins Lambert among the hills
of Yorkshire,” where his presence is much needed now.

July 27th. In these tumultuous months the Fleet too, as we
heard at Pembroke once,’ has partially revolted ; ‘set Colonel
Admiral Rainsborough ashore,’ in the end of May last. The
Earl of Warwick, hastily sent thither, has brought part of it to
order again ; other part of it has fled to Holland, to the Young
Prince of Wales. The Young Prince goes hopefully on board,
steers for the coast of England ; emits his summons and manifesto
from Yarmouth roads, on the 27th of this month. Getting
nothing at Yarmouth, he appears next week in the Downs;
orders London to join him, or at least to lend him 20,0001.°

It all depends on Hamilton and Cromwell now. His Majesty
from Carisbrook Castle, the revolted Mariners, the London Pres-
byterians, the Besieged in Colchester, and all men, are waiting
anxiously what they now will make of it when they meet.

LETTERS LXII—LXVI

PRESTON BATTLE

Tue Battle of Preston or Battle-and-Rout of Preston lasts three
days; and extends over many miles of wet Lancashire country,
—from ‘Langridge Chapel a little on the east of Preston,

1Order, ‘12th July 1648’ (the day after Pembroke), for demolishing the Castle
of Haverfordwest : in Appendix, No. 11 (4).

2 At Barnard Castle, on the 27th July, ‘ his horse’ joined (Rushworth, vii, r2rz) ;
he himself not till a fortnight after, at Wetherby farther south. [Lambert and he
met at Leeds according to the Moderate /ntelligencer. Before going west, Crom-
well marched against Pontefract, and seized the town, but there was no hope at
this time of gaining the Castle ‘‘ unless by famine; so hard is it to gain that which
so easily is lost’. E. 459 (19). }

3 Antea, p. 314.

4[The news was forwarded from Colchester on the 27th, but the Prince had
left Yarmouth on the 24th. Seea letter of that date printed in Lords Journals, x.

399. ‘‘ This day in the morning,” the bailiffs wrote, they had sent messengers
aboard the Prince’s ship to whom he had given his declaration, and ‘‘ This after-
noon the ships weighed anchor . . . and are gone for the Downs.’’]

5 Rushworth, vii. ; 9th May, p. 1131; 8th June, 11th June, pp. 1145, rrs1; 27th
July, pp. 1207, rars, &e,

326 SECOND CIVIL WAR [17 Aug.

southward to Warrington Bridge, and northward also as far as
you like to follow. A wide-spread, most confused transaction ;
the essence of which is, That Cromwell, descending the valley of
the Ribble, with a much smaller but prompt and compact force,
finds Hamilton flowing southward at Preston in very loose order ;
dashes in upon him, cuts him in two, drives him north and south,
into as miserable ruin as his worst enemy could wish.1

There are four accounts of this Affair by eye-witnesses, still
accessible: Cromwell’s account in these Two Letters; a Captain
Hodgson’s rough brief recollections written afterwards ; and on
the other side, Sir Marmaduke Langdale’s Letter in vindication
of his conduct there ; and lastly the deliberate Narrative of Sir
James Turner (‘alias Dugald Dalgetty,’ say some).? As the Affair
was so momentous, one of the most critical in all these Wars, and
as the details of it are still so accessible, we will illustrate Crom-
well’s own account by some excerpts from the others. Combin-
ing all which, and considering well, some image of this rude old
tragedy and triumph may rise upon the reader.

Captain Hodgson, an honest-hearted, pudding-headed York-
shire Puritan, now with Lambert in the Hill Country, hovering
on the left flank of Hamilton and his Scots, saw Cromwell’s face
at Ripon, much to the Captain’s satisfaction. ‘The Scots,’ says
he, ‘marched towards Kendal; we towards Ripon, where Oliver
‘met us with horse and foot. We were then betwixt Eight or
‘Nine thousand: a fine smart Army, and fit for action. We
‘marched up to Skipton; the Forlorn of the Enemy’s horse,’ Sir
Marmaduke’s, ‘ was come to Gargrave;... having made havoe
‘of the country, it seems, intending never to come there again.’
‘Stout Henry Cromwell,’ he gave them a check at Gargrave ;3—
and better still is comir g.

Here, however, let us introduce Sir James Turner, a stout

1[‘* This was the first time that Cromwell had actually been in supreme command
in a great victory, and too much praise cannot be accorded him for his hardihood,
energy and skill. The speed of his motions and his prompt decision had rendered
it possible for him to strike home at his adversary in the flank and to eat him up
piecemeal. During three days of incessant marching and fighting he halted only to
do battle or to take the rest absolutely needed, and at the end of that time the enemy’s
foot had been killed, captured or dispersed to the last man, and his horse wasa
beaten rabble, flying toward the border.” Roosevelt's C romwell, p. 129. ]

" 2[Also ; A Letter from Holland (E. 467, 21), a narrative by an English royalist with
the army.

5 Hodgson's Memoirs (with Slingsby's A/emoirs, Edinburgh, 1808; a dull auth-
entic Book, left full of blunders, of darkness natural and adscititious, by the Editor),
Pp: 114, 5.

1648.) LETTER LXIIL, PRESTON BATTLE 827

pedant and soldier-of-fortune, original Dugald Dalgetty of the
Novels, who is now marching with the Scots, and happily has a
turn for taking Notes. The reader will then have a certain
ubiquity, and approach Preston on both sides. Of the Scotch
Officers, we may remark, Middleton and the Earl of Calendar
have already fought in England for the Parliament: Baillie, once
beaten by Montrose, has been in many wars, foreign and domestic ;
he is lefthand cousin to the Reverend Mr. Robert, who heard the
Apprentices in Palace-yard bellowing “Justice on Strafford!” long
since, in a loud and hideous manner. Neither of the Lesleys is
here, on this occasion; they abide at home with the oppressed
minority. The Duke, it will be seen, marches in extremely loose
order ; vanguard and rearguard very far apart,—and a Cromwell
attending him on flank !

‘At Hornby,’ says the learned Sir James alias Dugald, ‘a day’s
‘march beyond Kendal, it was advised, Whether we should march
‘by Lancashire, Cheshire, and the Western Counties; or if we
‘should go into Yorkshire, and so put ourselves in the straight
‘road to London, with a resolution to fight all ‘who’ would oppose
‘us? Calendar was indifferent; Middleton was for Yorkshire ;
‘Baillie for Lancashire. When my opinion was asked, I was for
‘Yorkshire ; and for this reason only, That I understood Lan-
‘cashire was a close country, full of ditches and hedges; which
“was a great advantage the English would have over our raw and
‘undisciplined musketeers ; the Parliament’s army consisting of
‘experienced and well-trained soldiers, and excellent firemen ;
‘on the other hand, Yorkshire being a more open country
‘and full of heaths, where we both might make use of our horse,
‘and come sooner to push of pike’ with our foot. ‘My Lord
‘Duke was for Lancashire way ; and it seemed he had hopes that
‘some forces would join with him in his march that way. I have
‘indeed heard him say, that he thought Manchester his own if he
‘came near it. Whatever the matter was, I never saw him
‘tenacious in anything during the time of his command but in
‘that. We chose to go that way, which led us to our ruin.

‘Our march was much retarded by most rainy and tempestuous
‘weather, the elements fighting against us; and by staying for
‘country horses to carry our little ammunition. The vanguard
‘is constantly given to Sir Marmaduke, upon condition he
‘should constantly furnish guides; pioneers for clearing the
‘ways ; and, which was more than both these, to have good and
‘certain intelligence of all the Enemy’s motions. But whether

328 SECOND CIVIL WAR [17 Aug.

‘it was by our fault or his neglect, want of intelligence helped
‘to ruin us; for,—in fact we were marching in extremely loose
order ; left hand not aware what the right was doing ; van and
rear some twenty or thirty miles apart ;—far too loose for men
that had a Cromwell on their flank !

On the night of Wednesday 16th August 1648, my Lord Duke
has got to Preston with the main body of his foot; his horse
lying very wide,—ahead of him at Wigan, arear of him, one
knows not where, he himself hardly knows where. Sir Marma-
duke guards him on the left, ‘on Preston Moor, about Langridge
Chapel,’ some four miles up the Ribble,—and knows not, in the
least, what storm is coming. For Cromwell, this same night,
has got across the hills to Clitheroe and farther; this same
Wednesday night he lies ‘at Stonyhurst,’ where now the College
of Stonyhurst is,—‘a Papist’s house, one Sherburne’s ;’ and
tomorrow morning there will be news of Cromwell.

‘That night,’ says Hodgson, ‘ we pitched our camp at Stanyares
‘Hall, a Papist’s house, one Sherburne: and the next morning
‘a Forlorn was drawn out of horse and foot. And at Langridge
‘Chapel our horse’ came upon Sir Marmaduke ; ‘drawn up very
‘formidably. One Major Poundall’ (Pownel, you pudding-head !)
‘and myself commanded the Forlorn of foot. And here being
‘drawn up by the Moorside (a mere scantling of us, as yet,! not
‘half the number we should have been), the General’ Cromwell
‘comes to us, and commands to march.2 We not having half of
‘our men come up, desired a little patience; he gives out the
‘word “ March!” ’—not having any patience, he, at this moment!
And so the Battle of Preston, the first day of it,is begun. Here
is the General’s own Report of the business at night. Poor
Langdale did not know at first, and poor Hamilton did not know
all day, that it was Cromwell who was now upon them.’ Sir

1[**that scattering we had, being not half” is what Hodgson writes. ]

[This hardly gives a true idea of the relative Proportions of the forces engaged
at this point; where ‘“ Langdale’s 3,600 Englishmen, unsupported except by
Hamilton's small body of horse, were exposed to the attack of more than double
their number of the best soldiers in the world. . . . By the admission of friend and
foe, Langdale and his Englishmen fought like heroes, * Yet after four hours’ struggle,
they were at last compelled to give way and to fall back upon the town.” (Great Civil
War, iv. p. 187.) Later in the day most of his infantry surrendered, his horse and
Hamilton’s escaping northward to join Munro ; Baillie and the Scottish infantry were
driven across the Darwen, and the bridge over this stream, as well as that over the
Ribble, was occupied by Cromwell. Hamilton's army had lost 1,000 killed and 4,000
prisoners. This was the position at the end of the first day's battle. }

’ Sir Marmaduke’s Letter,

1648.] LETTER LXIII., PRESTON BATTLE 329

Marmaduke complains bitterly that he was not supported ; that
they did not even send him powder,—marched away the body
of their force as if this matter had been nothing ; ‘ merely some
flying party, Ashton and the Lancashire Presbyterians.’ Crom-
well writes in haste, late at night.

LETTER LXIilI

For the Honourable Committee of Lancashire sitting at Man-
chester.
(1 desire the Commander of the Forces there to open this Letter if it
come not to their hands)
Preston, 17th August, 1648.

GENTLEMEN,
It hath pleased God, this day, to show His

great power by making the Army successful against the common
Enemy.

We lay the last night at Mr. Sherburn’s of Stonihurst, nine
miles from Preston, which was within three miles of the Scots
quarters. We advanced betimes next morning towards Preston,
with a desire to engage the Enemy; and by that time our for-
lorn had engaged the Enemy, we were about four miles from
Preston, and thereupon we advanced with the whole Army: and
the enemy being drawn out upon a moor betwixt us and the
town, the Armies on both sides engaged ; and after a very sharp
dispute, continuing for three or four hours, it pleased God to
enable us to give them a defeat ; which I hope we shall improve,
by God’s assistance, to their utter ruin: and in this service your
countrymen have not the least! share.

We cannot be particular, having not time to take account of
the slain and prisoners; but we can assure you we have many
prisoners, and many of those of quality ; and many slain; and
the Army so dissipated ‘as I say.’ The principal part whereof,
with Duke Hambleton, is on south side Ribble and Darwain

1means ‘the not least.’

330 SECOND CIVIL WAR (17 Aug.

[Darwen] Bridge, and we lying with the greatest part of the
Army close to them ; nothing hindering the ruin of that part of
the enemy’s Army but the night. It shall be our care that they
shall not pass over any ford beneath the Bridge,! to go northward,
or to come betwixt us and Whalley.

We understand Colonel-Genera] Ashton’s are at Whalley ; we
have seven troops of horse and dragoons that we believe lie at or
near Clitheroe. This night I have sent order to them expressly
to march to Whalley, to join to those companies; that so we
may endeavour the ruin of this enemy. You perceive by this
letter how things stand. By this means the enemy is broken ;
and most of their Horse being gone northwards, and we having
sent a considerable party at the very heel of them, and the
enemy having lost almost all his ammunition, and near four-
thousand arms, so that the greatest part of the Foot are naked:
and therefore, in order to perfecting this work, we desire you to
raise your county; and to improve your forces to the total ruin
of that enemy, which way soever they go; and if? you shall
accordingly do your part, doubt not of their total ruin.

We thought fit to speed this to you; to the end you may not
be troubled if they shall march towards you, but improve your
interest as aforesaid, that you may give glory to God for this
unspeakable merey. This is all at present from,

Your very humble servant,
Ouiver CromweELt.*

Commons Journals, Monday 21° Augusti 1648: <The Copy of a
‘Letter from Lieutenant-General Cromwell, from Preston, of 17°
‘ Augusti 1648, to the Committee of Lancashire sitting at Man-
‘chester, enclosed in a Letter from a Member of this House from

1 There is such a ford, rideable if tide and rain permit.

‘that’ in the Original.—The punctuation and grammar of these sentences
might have been improved; but their breathless impetuosity, directness, sincere
singleness of purpose, intent on the despatch of business only, would haye been ob-
scured in the process,

* Lancashire during the Civil War (a Collection of Tracts republished by the
Chetham Society, Manchester, 1844), p. 256. The Letter is in many old Pamphlets
of the time. Langdale's Letter is also given in this Chetham Book, p. 267.

1648.) LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 331

‘Manchester, of 19° Augusti 1648, were this day read. Ordered,
‘That it be referred to the Committee at Derby House to send
‘away a' copy of Lieutenant-General Cromwell’s Letter to the
‘General’ Fairfax, ‘and to the Lord Admiral’ Warwick, to en-
courage them in their part of the work.—The enclosing ‘ Letter
from the Member of this House at Manchester,’ short and in-
significant, about ‘ dispensations,’ ‘ providences,’ &c. is also given
in the old Pamphlets, and in this Chetham Book now before us.
He signs himself ‘W. L.;’ probably William Langton, the new
Member for Preston.

LETTER LXIV

CroMWELL, on this Thursday Night, does not yet know all the
havoc he has made. Listen to stout Sir James from the other
side ; and pity poor men embarked in a hollow Cause, with a
Duke of Hamilton for General !

‘ Beside Preston in Lancashire,’ says the stout Knight, ‘ Crom-
‘well falls on Sir Marmaduke’s flank. The English’ of Sir
Marmaduke ‘imagine it was one Colonel Ashton, a powerful
‘ Presbyterian, who had got together about 3,000 men to oppose us,
‘ because we came out of Scotland without the General Assembly’s
‘permission. Mark the quarrel. While Sir Marmaduke disputes
‘the matter, Baillie, by the Duke’s order, marches to Ribble
‘ Bridge, and passeth it with all the foot except two brigades.’
Never dreaming that Cromwell is upon us! ‘This was two miles
‘from Preston. By my Lord Duke’s command, I had sent some
‘ammunition and commanded-men to Sir Marmaduke’s assist-
‘ance: but to no purpose ; for Cromwell prevailed ; so that our
‘English first retired, and then fled. It must be remembered
‘that, the night before this sad encounter, Earl Calendar and
‘Middleton were gone to Wigan, eight miles from thence, with
‘a considerable part of the cavalry. Calendar was comed back,
‘and was with the Duke,’ while the action took place; ‘and so
‘was I: but upon the rout of Sir Marmaduke’s people, Calendar
‘got away to Ribble, where he arrived safely by a miracle, as I
‘think ; for the Enemy was between the Bridge and us, and had
‘killed or taken the most part of our two brigades of foot,’ which
was all that Baillie had left here.

332 SECOND CIVIL WAR [17 Aug.

‘The Duke with his guard of horse, Sir Marmaduke with many
‘officers, among others myself, got into Preston Town, with in-
‘tention to pass a ford below it, though at that time not rideable.
‘At the entry of the Town, the enemy pursued us hard. The
‘Duke faced about, and put two troops of them to a retreat ;
‘but so soon as we turned from them, they ‘again’ turned upon us.
‘The Duke facing the second time, charged them, which suc-
‘ceeded well. Being pursued the third time, my Lord Duke
‘cried To charge once more for King Charles! One trooper
‘refusing, he beat him with his sword. At that charge we put
‘the enemy so far behind us, that he could not overtake us so
‘*soon again.’ Then Sir Marmaduke and I entreated the Duke to
‘haste him to his Army ; and truly he showed here as much per-
‘sonal valour as any man could be capable of. We swam the
‘River; and so got to the place where Lieutenant-General
‘ Baillie had advantageously lodged the foot, on the top of a Hill,
‘among very fencible enclosures.

‘After Calendar came to the infantry, he very unadvisedly
‘sent six hundred musketeers to defend Ribble Bridge ;_ for
‘the way Cromwell had to it was a descent from a hill that
‘commanded all the champaign ; which was about an English
‘quarter of a mile in length between the Bridge and that Hill
‘where our foot were lodged. So that our musketeers, having
‘no shelter, were forced to receive all the musket-shot of
‘Cromwell’s infantry, which was secure within thick hedges ;
‘and after the loss of many men, were forced to run back to our
‘foot. Here Claud Hamilton, the Duke’s Lieutenant-Colonel,
‘had his arm broke with a musket-bullet.

‘The Bridge ‘of Ribble’ being lost, the Duke called all the
‘Colonels together on horseback to advise what was next to be
‘done. We had no choice but one of two: Either stay, and
‘maintain our ground till Middleton (who was sent for) came
‘back with his cavalry ; Or else march away that night, and
‘find him out. Calendar would needs speak first; whereas
‘by the custom of war he should have told his opinion last,—
‘and it was, To march away that night so soon as it was dark.
‘This was seconded by all the rest, except by Lieut.-General
‘Baillie and myself. But all the arguments we used,—as the
‘impossibility of a safe retreat, from an enemy so powerful of
‘horse in so very foul weather, and extremely deep way; our
‘soldiers exceeding wet, weary and hungry ; the inevitable
‘loss of all our ammunition,—could not move my Lord Duke by

1648.] LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 333

‘his authority to contradict the shameful resolution taken by
‘the major part of his officers.

‘After that the drumless march is resolved on, and but few
‘horse appointed to stay in rear of the foot, I enquired, What
‘should become of our unfortunate Ammunition, since forward
‘with us we could not get it? It was not thought fit to blow it
‘up that night, lest thereby the Enemy should know of our
‘retreat, or rather flight. I was of that opinion too; but for
‘another reason : for we could not have blown it ‘up’ then,
‘without a visible mischief to ourselves, being so near it. It
‘was ordained it should be done three hours after our departure,
‘by a train: but that being neglected, Cromwell got it all.

‘Next morning we appeared at Wigan Moor; half our number
‘less than we were ;—most of the faint and weary soldiers having
‘lagged behind; whom we never saw again. Lieutenant-General
‘Middleton had missed us,’ such excellent order was in this
Army ; ‘for he came by another way to Ribble Bridge. It was
‘to be wished he had still stayed with us! He, not finding us
‘there, followed our track : but ‘ he was himself’ hotly pursued by
‘Cromwell’s horse; with whom he skirmished the whole way
‘till he came within a mile of us. He lost some men, and
‘several were hurt, among others Colonel Urrey! got a danger-
‘ous shot on the left side of his head; whereof, though he was
‘afterwards taken prisoner, he recovered. In this retreat of
‘Middleton’s, which he managed well, Cromwell lost one of the
‘gallantest officers he had, Major Thornhaugh; who was run
‘into the breast with a lance, whereof he died.

‘After Lieutenant-General Middleton’s coming, we began to
‘think of fighting in that Moor: but that was found impossible,
‘in regard it was nothing large, and ‘was’ environed with enclo-
‘sures which commanded it, and these we could not maintain
‘long, for want of that ammunition we had left behind us;
‘and therefore we marched forward with intention to gain
‘Warrington, ten miles from the Moor we were in; and
‘there we conceived we might face about, having the command
‘of a Town, a River, and a Bridge. Yet I conceive there was
‘but few of us thought we might be beaten, before we were
‘masters of any of them.

‘It was towards evening and in the latter end of August,’
Friday 18th of the month, ‘when our horse began to march.

1 Sir John Hurry, the famous Turncoat, of whom afterwards,

334 SECOND CIVIL WAR [18 Aug.

‘Some regiments of them were left with the rear of the foot:
‘Middleton stayed with them; my Lord Duke and Calendar
‘were before. As I marched with the last brigade of foot
‘through the Town of Wigan, I was alarmed, That our horse
‘behind me were beaten, and run several ways, and that the
‘enemy was in my rear. I faced about with that brigade ; and
‘in the Market-place, serried the pikes together, shoulder to
‘shoulder, to keep up any that should charge: and sent orders
‘to the rest of the brigades before, To continue their march, and
‘follow Lieutenant-General Baillie who was before them. It
‘was then night, but the moon shone bright. A regiment of
‘horse of our own appeared first, riding very disorderly. I got
‘them to stop, till I commanded my pikes to open, and give
‘way for them to ride or run away, since they would not stay.
‘ But ‘now’ my pikemen, being demented (as I think we were all),
‘would not hear me: and two of them ran full tilt at me,’-—
poor Dalgetty! ‘One of their pikes, which was intended for
‘my belly, I gripped with my left hand; the other ran me
‘near two inches in the inner side of my right thigh; all of
‘them crying, of me and those horse, ‘That all of us were Crom-
‘well’s men! This was an unseasonable wound ; for it made me,
‘after that night, unserviceable. This made me forget all rules
‘of modesty, prudence and discretion,—my choler being up,
and my blood flowing! ‘I rode to our horse, and desired them
‘to charge through these foot. They fearing the hazard of the
‘pikes, stood: I then made a cry come from behind them, That
‘the enemy was upon them. This encouraged them to charge
‘my foot so fiercely, that the pikemen threw down their pikes,
‘and got into houses. All the horse galloped away, and as I
‘was told afterwards, rode not through but over our whole foot,
‘treading them down; and in this confusion Colonel Lock-
‘hart, —let the reader note that Colonel,—‘ was trod down from
‘his horse, with great danger of his life.

‘Though the enemy was near, yet I beat drums to gather my
‘men together. Shortly after came Middleton with some horse.
“I told him what a disaster I had met with, and what a greater
‘I expected. He told me he would ride before, and make the
‘horse halt. I marched, however, all that night till it was fair
‘day ; and then Baillie, who had rested a little, entreated me to
‘go into some house and repose on a chair; for I had slept none
‘in two nights, and eaten as little. I alighted; but the constant
‘alarms of the Enemy’s approach made me resolve to ride for-

1648.) LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 335

‘ward to Warrington, which was but a mile; and indeed I may
‘say I slept all that way, notwithstanding my wound.’

While the wounded Dalgetty rides forward, let us borrow
another glimpse from a different source ;! of bitter struggle still
going on a little to the rear of him. ‘At a place called Red-
bank,’ near Winwick Church, two miles from Warrington, ‘the
‘Scots made a stand with a body of pikes, and lined the hedges
‘with muskets ; who so rudely entertained the pursuing Enemy,
‘that they were compelled to stop until the coming up of Colonel
‘Pride’s regiment of foot, who, after a sharp dispute, put those
‘same brave fellows to the run. They were commanded by a
‘little spark in a blue bonnet, who performed the part of an
‘excellent commander, and was killed on the spot.’ Does any
one know this little spark in the blue bonnet? Noone. His
very mother has long ceased to weep for him now. Let him
have burial, and a passing sigh from us!—Dugald Turner con-
tinues :

‘I thought to have found either the Duke or Calendar, or
‘both here,’ at Warrington : ‘but I did not; and indeed I was
‘often told that Calendar carried away the Duke with him,
‘much against his mind. Here did the Lieutenant-General of
‘the foot meet with an Order, whereby he is required “To
‘make as good conditions for himself and those under him as
‘he could; for the horse would not come back to him, being
‘resolved to preserve themselves for a better time.” Baillie
‘was surprised with this: and looking upon that action which
‘he was ordered to do, as full of dishonour, he lost much of that
‘patience of which naturally he was master ; and beseeched any
‘that would to shoot him through the head,’—poor Baillie!
‘At length having something composed himself, and being
‘much solicited by the officers who were by him, he wrote to
‘Cromwell. I then told him, That so long as there was a reso-
‘lution to fight, I would not go a foot from him; but now that
‘they were to deliver themselves prisoners, I would preserve my
‘liberty as long as I could: and so took my leave of him, carry-
‘ing my wounded thigh away with me. I met immediately
‘with Middleton ; who sadly condoled the irrecoverable losses
‘of the two last days. Within two hours after, Baillie and all
‘the officers and soldiers that were left of the foot were Crom-
‘well’s prisoners. I got my wound dressed that morning by my

1 Heath’s Chronicle, p. 323.

336 . SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Aug.

‘own surgeon ; and took from him those things I thought neces-
‘sary for me; not knowing when I might see him again; as
‘indeed I never saw him after.’ !

This was now the Saturday morning when Turner rode away,
‘carrying his wounded thigh with him ;’ and got up to Hamilton
and the vanguard of horse; who rode, aimless or as good as
aimless henceforth, till he and they were captured at Uttoxeter,
or in the neighbourhood. Monro with the rear-guard of horse,
‘always a day’s march behind,’ hearing now what had befallen,
instantly drew bridle; paused uncertain; then, in a marauding
manner, rode back towards their own country.

Of which disastrous doings let us now read Cromwell’s victori-
ous account, drawn up with more deliberation on the morrow
after. ‘This Gentleman,’ who brings up the Letter, is Major
Berry ; ‘once a Clerk in the Shropshire Iron-works ;’ now a very
rising man.” ‘He had lived with me,’ says Richard Baxter, ‘as
guest in my own house ;’ he has now high destinies before him,—
which at last sink lower than ever.®

To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the House
of Commons : These

‘ Warrington,’ 20th August 1648.
Sir, -
I have sent up this gentleman to give you an

account of the great and good hand of God towards you, in the
late victory obtained against the enemy in these parts.

After the conjunction of that party which I brought with
me out of Wales with the northern forces about Knaresborough
and Weatherby, hearing that the enemy was advanced with
their army into Lancashire, we marched the next day, being the
13th of this instant August, to Oatley (having cast off our train,
and sent it to Knaresborough, because of the difficulty of the

' Memoirs of his own Life and Times, by Sir James Turner (Edinburgh, 1829),

p. 63-7.

2[This is the James Berry who was Captain-Lieutenant of Cromwell's own troop
of the Ironsides in 1643, and who slew Charles Cavendish at Gainsborough (Letter
XI.). In August, 1644, he succeeded to the command of the 6th troop, formerly
Captain Ayres’. In 1647 he became Major of Colonel Twisleton’s regiment; in
1651 obtained a regiment of his own, and in 1655 was made one of Cromwell’s
Major-Generals. See his life in the Dictéonary of National Biography. |

* Baxter's Life, pp. 57, 97, 58, 72,

1648.] LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 337

marching therewith through Craven, and to th’ end we might
with more expedition attend the enemy’s motion): and on the
14th to Skipton, the 15th to Gisborn, the 16th to Hodder Bridge
over Ribble ;! where we held a council of war. At which we had
in consideration, Whether we should march to Whalley that
night, and so on, to interpose between the enemy and his
further progress into Lancashire and so southward, which we
had some advertisement the enemy intended, and ‘we are’
since confirmed that they intended for London itself: Or
whether to march immediately over the said Bridge, there
being no other betwixt that and Preston, and engage the
enemy there, who we did believe would stand _ his ground,
because we had information that the Irish forces under Monro
lately come out of Ireland, which consisted of twelve-hundred
horse and fifteen-hundred foot, were on their march towards
Lancashire to join with them.

It was thought that to engage the enemy to fight was our
business, and the reason aforesaid giving us hopes that our
marching on the north side of Ribble would effect it, it was
resolved we should march over the Bridge; which accordingly
we did; and that night quartered the whole Army in the field
by Stonihurst Hall, being Mr. Sherburn’s house, a place nine
miles distant from Preston. Very early the next morning we
marched towards Preston: having intelligence that the enemy
was drawing together thereabouts from all his out-quarters, we
drew out a forlorn of about two-hundred horse and four-hundred
foot, the horse commanded by Major Smithson, the foot by Major
Pounel. Our forlorn of horse marched within a mile ‘to’ where
the enemy was drawn up, in the enclosed grounds by Preston,
on that side next us, and there, upon a moor, about half a mile

1Over Hodder rather, which is the chief tributary of the Ribble in those upland
parts, and little inferior to the main stream in size, Ribble from the Northeast,
Hodder from the North, then a few miles farther, Calder from the South ; after which
Ribble pursues its old direction; draining an extensive hill-tract by means of
frequent inconsiderable brooks, and receiving no notable stream on either side till,

far down, the Darwen from the East and South falls in near Preston, and the
united waters, now a respectable River, rush swiftly into the Irish sea,

VOL. 1.—22

338 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Aug.

distant from the enemy’s Army, met with their scouts and out-
guard, and did behave themselves with that valour and courage
as made their guards (which consisted both of horse and foot)
to quit their ground, and took divers prisoners; holding this
dispute with them until our forlorn of foot came up for their
justification, and by those we had opportunity to bring up our
whole Army.

So soon as our foot and horse were come up, we resolved
that night to engage them if we could, and therefore, advancing
with our forlorn, and putting the rest of our Army into as good
a posture as the ground would bear (which was totally in-
convenient for our horse, being all enclosure and miry ground),
we pressed upon them. The regiments of foot were ordered as
followeth. There being a lane, very deep and ill, up to the
enemy's Army, and leading to the town, we commanded two
regiments of horse, the first whereof was Colonel Harrison’s and
next was my own, to charge up that lane; and on either side
of them advanced the ‘main’-battle,—which were Lieutenant-
Colonel Read’s, Colonel Dean’s and Colonel Pride’s on the
right, Colonel Bright’s and my Lord General’s on the left, and
Colonel Ashton with the Lancashire regiments in reserve. We
ordered Colonel Thornhaugh’s and Colonel Twisleton’s regi-
ments of horse on the right, and one regiment in reserve for
the lane; and the remaining horse on the left: so that, at
last, we came to a hedge-dispute, the greatest of the impression
from the enemy being upon our left wing, and upon the ‘main’-
battle on both sides the lane, and upon our horse in the lane:
in all which places the enemy were forced from their ground,
after four hours dispute, until we came to the town; into
which four troops of my regiment first entered, and, being
well seconded by Colonel Harrison’s regiment, charged the
enemy in the town and cleared the streets.

There came no bands! of your foot to fight that day but did

1[* hands” in the Chetham Book. }

1648.) LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 339

it with incredible valour and resolution; among which Colonel
Bright’s, my Lord General’s, Lieutenant-Colonel Read’s and
Colonel Ashton’s had the greatest work, they often coming to
push of pike and to close firing, and always making the enemy
to recoil. And indeed I must needs say, God was as much seen
in the valour of the officers and soldiers of these before-men-
tioned as in any action that hath been performed ; the Enemy
making, though he was still worsted, very stiff and sturdy re-
sistance. Colonel Dean’s and Colonel Pride's, outwinging the
enemy, could not come to so much share of the action; the
enemy shogging 1 down towards the Bridge, and keeping almost
all in reserve, that so he might bring fresh hands? often to fight,
which we not knowing, but lest we should be outwinged, ‘we’
placed those two regiments to enlarge our right wing, which was
the cause they had not at that time so great a share in that
action.

At the last the enemy was put into disorder, many men slain,
many prisoners taken; the Duke, with most of the Scots horse
and foot, retreated over the bridge, where, after a very hot
dispute betwixt the Lancashire regiments, part of my Lord
General’s, and them, being at push of pike, they were beaten
from the bridge, and our horse and foot, following them, killed
many and took divers prisoners, and we possessed the bridge
over Darwent ‘also, and a few houses there ; the enemy being
driven up within musket-shot of us where we lay that night,’ we
not being able to attempt farther upon the enemy, the night
preventing us. In this posture did the enemy and we lie the
most part of that night. Upon entering the town, many of the
enemy’s horse fled towards Lancaster, in the chase of whom went
divers of our horse, who pursued them near ten miles, and had

1 Shog is from the same root as shock; ‘shogging,’ a word of Oliver's in such
cases, signifies moving by pulses, intermittently. Ribble Bridge lay on the Scotch
right; Dean and Pride, therefore, who~fought on the English right, got gradually
less and less to do. [Cromwell uses the term ‘‘ shogging down” also in his account
of the battle of Dunbar. See ii., 105, below. The Chetham Book has ‘shaging,’]

2[ Perhaps this also should be ‘‘ bands.”
° The Darwen between us and them.

340 SECOND CIVIL WAR (20 Aug.

execution of them, and took about five-hundred horse and many
prisoners. We possessed in this fight very much of the enemy s
ammunition, I believe they lost four or five thousand arms. The
number of slain we judge to be about a thousand ; the prisoners
we took were about four-thousand.

In the night the Duke was drawing off his Army towards
Wiggon; we were so wearied with the dispute that we did not
so well attend the enemy’s going off as might have been, by means
whereof the enemy was gotten at least three miles with his rear,
before ours got to them. I ordered Colonel Thornhaugh to
command two or three regiments of horse to follow the enemy,
if it were possible to make him stand till we could bring up the
Army. The enemy marched away seven or eight thousand foot
and about four-thousand horse; we followed him with about
three-thousand foot and two-thousand five-hundred horse and
dragoons, and, in this prosecution, that worthy gentleman, Colonel
Thornhaugh, pressing too boldly, was slain, being run into the
body and thigh and head by the enemy’s lancers.1. And give me
leave to say, he was a man as faithful and gallant in your
service as any, and one who often heretofore lost blood in your
quarrel, and now his last. He hath left some behind him to
inherit a father’s honour, and a sad widow; both now the
interest of the Commonwealth.

Our horse still prosecuted the enemy, killing and taking
divers all the way. At last the enemy drew up within three
miles of Wiggon, and by that time our Army was come up, they
drew off again, and recovered Wiggon before we could attempt
any thing upon them. We lay that night in the field close by
the enemy, being very dirty and weary, and having marched
twelve miles of such ground as I never rode in all my life, the
day being very wet. We had some skirmishing, that night, with
the enemy, near the town, where we took General Van Druske

1*Run through with a lancier in Chorley, he wanting his arms,’ say Hodgson.
For ‘arms’ read ‘armour,’ corslet, &c. This is the Colonel Thornhaugh so often
mentioned, praised and mourned for, by Mrs. Hutchinson.

1648.) LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 341

and a Colonel, and killed some principal Officers, and took about
a hundred prisoners ; where I also received a Letter from Duke
Hamilton, for civil usage towards his kinsman Colonel Hamilton,!
whom he left wounded there. We took also Colonel Hurrey
and Lieutenant-Colonel Ennis [Innes], sometimes in your service.
The next morning the enemy marched towards Warrington, and
we at the heels of them. The town of Wiggon, a great and poor
town, and very malignant, were plundered almost to their skins
by them.

We could not engage the enemy until we came within three
miles of Warrington, and there the enemy made a stand, at a
pass near Winwicke. We held them in some dispute till our
Army came up, they maintaining the pass with great resolution
for many hours; ours and theirs coming to push of pike and
very close charges, and forced us to give ground; but our men,
by the blessing of God, quickly recovered it, and charging very
home upon them, beat them from their standing, where we killed
about a thousand of them, and took (as we believe) about two-
thousand prisoners, and prosecuted them home to Warrington
Town, where they possessed the bridge, which had a strong
barricado and a work upon it, formerly made very defensive.
As soon as we came thither, I received a message from Lieut.-
General Bailly, desiring some capitulation ; to which I yielded.
Considering the strength of the pass, and that I could not go
over the River ‘Mersey’ within ten miles of Warrington with
the Army, I gave him these terms: That he should surrender
himself and all his officers and soldiers prisoners of war, with all
his arms and ammunition and horses, to me, I giving quarter for
life, and promising civil usage. Which accordingly is done: and

1Claud Hamilton; see Turner supra. Who ‘Van Druske’ is, none knows.
“Colonel Hurry’ is the ever-changing Sir John Hurry, sometimes called Urry and
Hurrey, who whisks like a most rapid actor of all work, ever on a new side, ever
charging in the van, through this Civil-War Drama. The notablest feat he ever
did was leading Prince Rupert on that marauding party, from Oxford to High
Wycombe, on the return from which Hampden met his death (Clarendon, ii. 351).
Hurry had been on the Parliament-side before. He was taken, at last, when
Montrose was taken; and hanged out of the way. Of Innes (‘ Ennis’) I know
nothing at present.

342 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Aug.

the Commissioners deputed by me have received, and are receiv-
ing, all the arms and ammunition, which will be, as they tell
me, about four-thousand complete arms, and as many prisoners :
and thus you have their Infantry totally ruined. What colonels
and officers are with Lieut.-General Bailly, I have not yet
received the list.

The Duke is marching with his remaining Horse, which are
about three-thousand, towards Namptwich, where the gentlemen
of the county have taken about five-hundred of them, of which
they sent me word this day. The country will scarce suffer any
of my men to pass, except they have my hand~ writing ;’ telling
them, They are Scots. They bring in and kill divers of them,
as they light upon them. Most of the nobility of Scotland are
with the Duke. If I had a thousand horse that could but trot
thirty miles, I should not doubt but to give a very good account
of them, but truly we are so harassed and haggled out in this
business, that we are not able to do more than walk ‘at’ an easy
pace after them. I have sent post to my Lord Grey, to Sir Henry
Cholmely and Sir.Edward Roads [Rodes] to gather all together,
with speed, for their prosecution ; as likewise to acquaint the
Governor of Stafford therewith.

I hear Munroe is about Cumberland with the horse that ran
away,! and his ‘own’ Irish horse and foot, which are a considerable
body. I have left Colonel Ashton’s three regiments of foot, with
seven troops of horse (six of Lancashire and one of Cumberland),
at Preston ; and ordered Colonel Scroop with five troops of horse
and two troops of dragoons, ‘and’ with two regiments of foot
(Colonel Lassalls’ and Colonel Wastal’s), to embody with them,
by which I hope he will be able to make a resistance till we can
come up to them, and have ordered them to put their prisoners
to the sword if the Scots shall presume to advance upon them,
because they cannot bring them off with security.”

1 Northward from Preston on the evening of the 17th, the Battle-day.

2Tt is to be hoped the Scots under Monro will not presume to advance, for the

prisoners here in Preston are about four-thousand! These are not Baillie’s Warring-
ton men ‘who surrendered on quarter for life:’ these are ‘at discretion.’

1648.) LETTER LXIV., PRESTON BATTLE 348

Thus you have a narrative of the particulars of the success
which God hath given you: which I could hardly at this time
have done, considering the multiplicity of business, but truly,
when I was once engaged in it, I could hardly tell how to say
less, there being so much of God ‘in it’; and I am not willing
to say more, lest there should seem to be any of man. Only
give me leave to add one word, showing the disparity of forces
on both sides ; that so you may see, and all the world acknowledge,
the great hand of God in this business. The Scots Army could
not be less than twelve-thousand effective foot, well armed, and
five-thousand horse ; Langdale not less than two-thousand five
hundred foot, and fifteen-hundred horse: in all twenty-one-
thousand ; and truly very few of their foot but were as well
armed if not better than yours, and at divers disputes did fight
two or three hours before they would quit their ground. Yours
were about two-thousand five-hundred horse and dragoons of
your old Army; about four-thousand foot of your old Army ;
also about sixteen-hundred Lancashire foot, and about five-hundred
Lancashire horse : in all, about eight-thousand six-hundred. You
see by computation about two-thousand of the enemy slain; be-
twixt eight and nine thousand prisoners, besides what are lurking
in hedges and private places, which the country daily bring in or
destroy. Where Langdale and his broken forces are, I know not,
but they are exceedingly shattered.

Surely, Sir, this is nothing but the hand of God, and where-
ever anything in this world is exalted, or exalts itself, God will
pull it down, for this is the day wherein He alone will be
exalted. It is not fit for me to give advice, nor to say a word
what use should be made of this, more than to pray you, and
all that acknowledge God, that they would exalt Him, and not
hate His people, who are as the apple of His eye, and for whom
even Kings shall be reproved ; and that you would take courage
to do the work of the Lord, in fulfilling the end of your magis-
tracy, in seeking the peace and welfare of the people of this
Land, that all that will live quietly and peaceably may have

344 SECOND CIVIL WAR (20 Aug.

countenance from you, and they that are implacable and will not
leave troubling the Land may speedily be destroyed out of the
land. And if you take courage in this, God will bless you, and
good men will stand by you, and God will have glory, and the
Land will have happiness by you in despite of all your enemies.
Which shall be the prayer of,
Your most humble and faithful servant,
O.iver CRoMWELL.

Postscript. We have not, in all this, lost a considerable
officer but Colonel Thornhaugh, and not many soldiers, con.
sidering the service: but many are wounded, and our horse
much wearied. I humbly crave that some course may be taken
to dispose of the prisoners. The trouble, and extreme charge of
the country where they lie, is more than the danger of their
escape. I think they would not go home if they might, without
a convoy, they are so fearful of the country, from whom they
have deserved so ill. Ten men will keep a thousand from

' *
running away.

Commons Journals, Wednesday 23d August 1648: ‘ Ordered,
‘That the sum of Two-hundred Pounds be bestowed upon
‘Major Berry, and the sum of One-hundred Pounds upon Edward
‘Sexby, who brought the very good news of the very great
‘Success obtained, by the great mercy of God, against the whole
‘Scots Army in Lancashire, and That the said respective sums
‘shall be ’—in short, paid directly. Of Major Berry, Richard
Baxter’s friend, we have already heard. Captain Edward Sexby,
here known to us as Captain for the first time,—did we not once
see him in another character? One of Three Troopers with a
Letter, in the Honourable House, in the time of the Army
Troubles?! He will again turn up, little to his advantage, by
and by. A Day of universal Thanksgiving for this ‘wonderful
great Success’ is likewise ordered; and a printed schedule of
items to be thankful for, is despatched, ‘to the number of 10,000,’
into all places.?

* Chetham-Society Book, ut supra, PP. 259-267.

1 Antea, p. 260; and Ludlow i. 189. 2 Commons Journals, v. 685.

1648.) LETTER LXV., WARRINGTON = 345

LETTER LXV

Ler the following hasty Letter, of the same date with that
more deliberate one to Lenthall, followed by another as hasty,
terminate the Preston Business. Letters of hot Haste, of Hue-
and-Cry ; two remaining out of many such, written ‘to all the
Countries,’ in that posture of affairs ;—the fruit of which we
shall soon see. Colonels ‘Cholmely, White, Hatcher, Rhodes,’
Country Colonels of more or less celebrity, need not detain us at
present.

To the Honourable Sir Henry Cholmley and Sir Edward Rodes :
near Pontefract. Haste, haste.

Warrington, 20th August 1648.

‘ GENTLEMEN,
We have quite tired our horse in pursuit of

the enemy: we have killed, taken and dissipated all his foot,
and left him only some horse, with whom the Duke is fled into
Delamere Forest, having neither foot nor dragoons. They have
taken five-hundred of them there, I mean the country forces
‘have,’ as they send me word this day.

They? are so tired, and in such confusion, that if my Horse
could but trot after them, I could take them all, but we are so
weary, we shall scarce be able to do more than walk after
them. I beseech you therefore, let Sir Henry Cholmley, Sir
Edward Rodes, Colonel Hacker, and Colonel White, and all the
countries about you, be sent to, to rise with you and follow
them. For they are the miserablest party that ever was: I
durst engage myself with five-hundred fresh horse, and five-

1(Sir Henry Cholmely was in command of some of the Yorkshire militia forces,
Sir Edward Rodes was county commissioner and afterwards High Sheriff for York-
shire. Colonel White is the Colonel Charles White mentioned in Mrs. Hutchinson’s
life of her husband. He was in command of some horse from Nottinghamshire. In
1659 he headed the revolt in Derbyshire in connexion with Sir George Booth’s
insurrection. Colonel Hatcher was a misprint. It is Colonel Fras. Hacker, best
known to the world from having been on guard at the King’s execution, At this
time he commanded the Leicester, Notts and Derby horse. He had a regiment
under Cromwell in the Scotch war; see letter to him, No. clxii. and Carlyle’s note

thereon. His life is in the Dictionary of National Biography. |
2 The Scots,

346 SECOND CIVIL WAR (23 Aug.

hundred nimble foot, to destroy them all. My horse are miser-
ably beaten out, and I have ten-thousand of them prisoners.

We have killed we know not what, but a very great number,
having done execution upon them at the least thirty miles
together, besides what we killed in the two great fights, the one
at Preston and the other at Warrington ‘or Winwick Pass.’
The enemy was four and twenty thousand horse and foot in the
day of the fight, whereof eighteen-thousand foot and six-thousand
horse: and our number about six-thousand foot and three-
thousand horse at the utmost.

This is a glorious day: God help England to answer His
minds! I have no more, but beseéch you in all your parts to
gather into bodies, and pursue them. I rest,

Your most humble servant,
O.iveR CRoMWELL.

‘P.S.’ The greatest part, by far, of the Nobility of Scotland
are with Duke Hamilton.*

Undernritten. The address, as above, and order that it be shown
to the Committee of York, Col. Bethel and Capt. Crackinthorp,
again signed by Cromwell.

LETTER LXVI

‘For the Honourable the Committee at York: These’
Wigan, 23d August 1648.
GENTLEMEN,

I have intelligence even now |come] to my
hands, That Duke Hamilton with a wearied body of Horse is
drawing towards Pomfret; where probably he may lodge him-
self, and rest his horse, as not daring to continue in these
Countries where we have driven him, the Country-people rising
in such numbers, and stop[ping] his passage at every bridge.

Major-General Lambert, with a considerable force, pursues

* Copy in the possession of W. Beaumont, Esq., Warrington. [But now corrected
from the signed original, in the possession of Sir Richard Tangye. }

1648.] LETTER LXVI., WIGAN 347

him at the heels. I desire you that you would get together what
force you can, to put a stop to any further designs he may have,
and to be ready to join with Major-General Lambert, if there
shall be need. J am marching Northward with the greatest
part of the Army, where I shall be glad to hear from you.
I rest, gentlemen,
Your very affectionate friend and servant,
OLiver CRoMWELL.

I could wish you would draw out whatever force you have;
either to be in his rear or to impede his march. For I am per-
suaded if he, or the greatest part of those that be with him be
taken, it would make an end of the Business of Scotland.

O. CromMwELt *

This Letter, carelessly printed in the old Newspaper, is with-
out address ; but we learn that it ‘came to my hands this present
afternoon,’ ‘at York,’ 26th August 1648 ;—whither also truer
rumours, truer news, as to Hamilton and his affairs, are on the
road.

On Friday 25th, at Uttoxeter in Staffordshire, the poor Duke
of Hamilton, begirt with enemies, distracted with mutinies and
internal discords, surrenders and ceases ; ‘very ill, and unable to
march.” ‘My Lord Duke and Calendar,’ says Dalgetty, ‘fell out
and were at very high words at supper, where I was,’ the night
before ; ‘each blaming the other for the misfortune and mis-
carriage of our affairs:’ a sad employment! Dalgetty himself
went prisoner to Hull; lay long with Colonel Robert Overton,
an acquaintance of ours there. ‘As we rode from Uttoxeter, we
‘made a stand at the Duke’s window; and he looking out with
“some kind words, we took our eternal farewell of him,’—never
saw him more. He died on the scaffold for this business ;! being

*Newspaper, Packets of Letters from Scotland and the North, no. 24 (London,
printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 29th August 1648). (E. 461, No. 29.]
——See in Appendix, no. 12, Letter of same date to Derby-House Committee,
requesting supplies (/Voze of 1857), [The letter is now printed from a contemporary
MS. copy, in the possession of Sir Richard ‘Tangye. ]

1[At his trial he spoke gratefully of Cromwell's courtesy and civility, and of his
favour to the ‘‘ poor wounded gentlemen” who were left behind, saying that “truly
he performed more than he did capitulate for." (See Gardiner's Great Civil War,
vol. iv. p. 206.)]

348 SECOND CIVIL WAR [23 Aug.

Earl of Cambridge, and an English Peer as well as Scotch :—the
unhappiest of men; one of those ‘singularly able men’ who,
with all their ‘ability,’ have never succeeded in any enterprise

whatever !—

Colchester Siege, one of the most desperate defences, being
now plainly without object, terminates, on Monday next.!_ Sur-
render, ‘on quarter’ for the inferior parties, ‘at discretion’ for
the superior. Two of the latter, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir
George Lisle, gallant Officers both, are sentenced and shot on
the place. ‘By Ireton’s instigation,’ say some:? yes, or
without any special instigation; merely by the nature of the
case! They who, contrary to Law and Treaty, have again in-
volved this Nation in blood, do they deserve nothing >—Two more,
Goring ® and Lord Capel, stood trial at Westminster; of whom
Lord Capel lost his head. He was ‘the first man that rose to
complain of Grievances’ in November 1640; being then Mr.
Capel, and Member for Hertfordshire.

The Prince with his Fleet in the Downs, too, so soon as these
Lancashire tidings reached him, made off for Holland ; ‘ entered
the Hague in thirty coaches,’ and gave up his military pursuits.
The Second Civil War, its back once broken here at Preston,
rapidly dies everywhere ; is already as good as dead.

In Scotland itself there is no farther resistance. The oppressed
Kirk Party rise rather, and almost thank the conquerors. ‘Sir
George Monro,’ says Turner, ‘ following constantly a whole day’s
march to the rear of us,’ finding himself, by this unhappy Battle,
cut asunder from my Lord Duke, and brought into contact with
Cromwell instead,—‘marched straight back to Scotland and
joined with Earl Lanark’s forces,’ my Lord Duke’s brother.
‘ Straight back,’ as we shall find, is not the word for this march.

‘But so soon as the news of our Defeat came to Scotland,’
continues Turner, ‘ Argyle and the Kirk Party rose in arms ; every

1 28th August, Rushworth, vii. 1242.

2 (See the curious wrangle between Lucas and Ireton, given in the Clarke Papers,
vol. ii. pp. 31-39. To Sir Charles’ demand to know by whom he was condemned,
whether by Fairfax alone or by a Council of War, Ireton replied ‘‘ You were con-
demned by the Parliament, upon your own actions. [The War] wherein you have
so voluntarily a second time engaged, hath rendered you in their judgment in general
your whole party deserving death, and yourself in some particular exceptions.” He
goes on to argue that Parliament having declared all engaging in the second war to |
be traitors and rebels, the General and his Council have not to pass judgment, but
only to decide who come under the judgment already pronounced. ]

8[z.e, the Earl of Norwich. ] j

1648.] LETTERS LXVILI.-LXXIX. 349

229

mother’s son; and this was called the “ Whiggamore Raid:
1648,—first appearance of the Whig Party on the page of His-
tory, I think! ‘David Lesley was at their head, and old Leven,’
the Fieldmarshal of 1639, ‘in the Castle of Edinburgh; who
‘cannonaded the Royal’ Hamilton ‘troops whenever they came in
‘view of him!’!

Cromwell proceeds northward, goes at last to Edinburgh itself,
to compose this strange state of matters.

LETTERS LXVII—LXXIX

Monro with the rearward of Hamilton’s beaten Army did not
march ‘straight back’ to Scotland as Turner told us, but very
obliquely back ; lingering for several weeks on the South side of
the Border ; collecting remnants of English, Scotch, and even
Irish Malignants, not without hopes of raising a new Army from
them,—cruelly spoiling those Northern Counties in the interim.
Cromwell, waiting first till Lambert with the forces sent in pur-
suit of Hamilton can rejoin the main Army, moves Northward,
to deal with these broken parties, and with broken Scotland
generally. The following Thirteen Letters bring him as far as
Edinburgh: whither let us now attend him with such lights as
they yield.

LETTER LXVII.

Ouiver Sr. Joun, a private friend, and always officially an im-
portant man, always on the Committee of Both Kingdoms,
Derby-House Committee, or whatever the governing Authority
might be,—finds here a private Note for himself; one part of
which is very strange to us. Does the reader look with any
intelligence into that poor old prophetic, symbolic Deathbed-scene
at Preston? Any intelligence of Prophecy and Symbol, in
general; of the symbolic Man-child Mahershalal-hashbaz at
Jerusalem, or the handful of Cut Grass at Preston ;—of the
opening Portals of Eternity, and what last departing gleams there

1Turner, «i supra ; Guthry's Memoirs (Glasgow, 1748), p. 285.

350 SECOND CIVIL WAR [1 Sept.

are in the Soul of the pure and just >—Mahershalal-hashbaz
(‘ Hasten-to-the-spoil,’ so called), and the bundle of Cut Grass
are grown somewhat strange to us! Read; and having sneered
duly,— consider :

For my worthy Friend Oliver St. John, Esquire, Solicitor-General :
These, at Lincoln’s Inn

Knaresborough, rst Sept. ‘ 1648.’
Dear Sir,

I can say nothing but surely the Lord our God
is a great and glorious God. He only is worthy to be feared and
trusted, and His appearances patiently to be waited for. He will
not fail His people. Let every thing that hath breath praise
the Lord.

Remember my love to my dear brother H. V[ane] I pray he
make not too little, nor I too much, of outward dispensations : 1
God preserve us all, that we, in simplicity of our spirits, may
patiently attend upon them; let us all not be careful what use
men will make of these actings. They shall, will they, nill they,
fulfil the good pleasure of God, and so shall serve our gene-
rations. Our rest we expect elsewhere: that will be durable.
Care we not for tomorrow, nor for anything. This Scripture has

been of great stay to me: read it; Isaiah eighth, 10, 11, 14;—
read all the chapter.”

1{When, in 1656, the Protector proceeded against Sir Harry Vane for his
‘‘ Healing Question,” Vane wrote a letter in which he alludes to this. The message
which in former times you sent me is in my memory still. It was immediately after
the Lord had appeared with you against Duke Hamilton’s army, when you bida
friend of mine tell your brother Vane (for so you then thought fit to call me), that
you were as much unsatisfied with his passive and suffering principles as he was with
your active. And indeed I must crave leave to make you this reply at this time;
that I am as little satisfied with your active and self-establishing principles, in the
lively colours wherein daily they show themselves, as you are or can be with my
passive ones, and am willing in this to join issue with you and to beg of the Lord to
judge between us and to give the decision according to truth and righteousness.”
See letter printed at the end of Zhe Proceeds of the Protector .. . against Sir
Henry Vane in 1656. E. 889, 11. ]

? Yes, the indignant symbolic ‘Chapter,’ about Mahershalal-hashbaz, and the
vain desires of the wicked, is all worth reading ; here are the Three Verses referred
to, more especially: ‘Take council together,’ ye unjust, ‘and it shall come to .
‘naught ; speak the word, and it shall not stand. For God is with us. —Sanctify the
‘Lord of Hosts; and let Him be your fear, and let Him be your dread. And He
‘shall be for a sanctuary :—but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to

1648. ] LETTER LXVIIL. 351

I am informed from good hands, that a poor godly man died
in Preston, the day before the fight, and being sick, near the
hour of his death, he desired the woman that looked to him, To
fetch him a handful of grass. She did so, and when he received
it, he asked Whether it would wither or not, now it was cut?
The woman said, Yea. He replied, So should this Army of the
Scots do, and come to nothing, so soon as ours did but appear, or
words to this effect ; and so immediately died.

My service to Mr. W. P., Sir J. E., and the rest of our good
friends. I hope I do often remember you.

Yours,
OLiveR CROMWELL.

My service to Frank Russell and honest Pickering.*

‘Sir J. E.,’ when he received this salutation, was palpable
enough ; but has now melted away to the Outline of a Shadow!
I guess him to be Sir John Evelyn of Wilts; and, with greater
confidence, ‘Mr. W. P.’ to be William Pierpoint, Earl of King-
ston’s Son, a man of superior faculty, of various destiny and
business, ‘ called in the Family traditions, Wise William ;’ Ancestor
of the Dukes of Kingston (Great-grandfather of that Lady Mary,
whom as Wortley Montagu all readers still know); and much a
friend of Oliver, as we shall transiently see.

LETTER LXVIII

ANOTHER private Letter : to my Lord Wharton ; to congratulate
him on some ‘particular mercy, seemingly the birth of an heir,
and to pour out his sense of these great general mercies. This
Philip Lord Wharton is also of the Committee of Derby House,
the Executive in those months ; it is probable,! Cromwell had been
sending despatches to them, and had hastily enclosed these
private Letters in the Packet.

‘both the Houses of Israel; for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jeru-
‘salem! And many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be
‘snared, and be taken.’ This last verse, we find, is often in the thoughts of Oliver.

* Ayscough MSS. 4107, f. 94 [13]; a copy by Birch,
1 Commons Journals, vi. 6, 5th September.

352 SECOND CIVIL WAR [2 Sept.

Philip Lord Wharton seems to have been a zealous Puritan,
much concerned with Preachers, Chaplains &c. in his domestic
establishment ; and full of Parliamentary and Politico-religious
business in public. He had a regiment of his own raising at
Edgehill Fight ; but it was one of those that ran away; where-
upon the unhappy Colonel took refuge ‘in a sawpit,—says
Royalism confidently, crowing over it without end.1_ A quarrel
between him and Sir Henry Mildmay, Member for Malden, about
Sir Henry’s saying, “ He Wharton had made his peace at Oxford ”
in November 1643, is noted in the Commons Journals, iii. 300. It
was to him, about the time of this Cromwell Letter, that one
Osborne, a distracted King’s flunkey, had written, accusing Major
Rolf, a soldier under Hammond, of attempting to poison Charles
in the Isle of Wight.2—This Philip’s patrimonial estate, Wharton,
still a Manor-house of somebody, lies among the Hills on the
southwest side of Westmoreland ; near the sources of the Eden,
the Swale rising on the other watershed not far off. He seems,
however, to have dwelt at Upper Winchington, Bucks, ‘a seat
near Great Wycomb.’ He lived to be a Privy Councillor to
William of Orange. He died in 1696. Take this other anecdote,
once a very famous one:

‘James Stewart of Blantyre in Scotland, son of a Treasurer
‘Stewart, and himself a great favourite of King James, was a
‘gallant youth; came up to London with great hopes: but a
‘discord falling out between him and the young Lord Wharton,
‘they went out to single combat each against the other; and at
‘the first thrust each of them killed the other, and they fell dead
‘in one another's arms on the place.’* The ‘ place’ was Islington
fields ; the date 8th November 1609. The tragedy gave rise to
much balladsinging and other rumour. Our Philip is that slain
Wharton’s Nephew.

This Letter has been preserved by Thurloe ; four blank spaces
ornamented with due asterisks occur in it,—Editor Birch does
not inform us whether from tearing off the Seal, or why. In
these blank spaces the conjectural sense, which I distinguish here
as usual by commas, is occasionally somewhat questionable.

1 Wood's Azhene, iii. 177, and in all manner of Pamphlets elsewhere.
2. Wood, iii. sor; Pamphlets; Commons Journals, &c.

3 Wood, iv. 407, 542; Fasti, i. 325; Nicolas's Synopsis of the Peerage,
* Scotstarvet's Staggering State (Edinburgh, 1754, a very curious little Book), |

Pp. 32.
B Bivtiotheca Topographica, no. xlix.

1648.] LETTER LXVIILI. 353

For the Right Honourable the Lord Wharton: These

‘Knaresborough,’ 2d Sept. 1648.
My Lorp,

You know how untoward I am at this business
of writing, yet a word. I beseech the Lord make us sensible of
this great mercy here, which surely was much more than ‘the
sense of it’ the House expresseth.! I trust ‘to have, through’
the goodness of our God, time and opportunity to speak of it to
you face to face. When we think of our God, what are we. Oh,
His mercy to the whole society of saints, despised, jeered saints!
Let them mock on. Would we were all saints. The best of us
are (God knows) poor weak saints, yet saints; if not sheep, yet
lambs, and must be fed. We have daily bread,? and shall have
it, in despite of all enemies. There’s enough in our Father's
house, and He dispenseth it.3 I think, through these outward
mercies (as we call them), Faith, Patience, Love, Hope, all are
exercised and perfected, yea, Christ formed, and grows to a per-
fect man within us. I know not how well to distinguish, the
difference is only in the subject, ‘not in the object ;’ to a worldly
man they are outward, to a saint Christian, but I dispute not.

My Lord, I rejoice in your particular mercy. I hope that ‘it’ is
so to you. If so, it shall not hurt you; not make you plot or
shift for the young Baron to make him great. You will say, He
is God’s to dispose of, and guide for ; and there you will leave him.

My love to the dear little Lady,* better ‘to me ’ than the chila.
The Lord bless you both. My love and service to all friends

1 The House calls it ‘a wonderful great mercy and success,’ this Preston victory
(Commons Journals, v. 680) ;—and then passes on to other matters, not quite adequ-
ately conscious that its life had been saved hereby! What fire was blazing, and how
high, in Wales, and then in Lancashire, is known only in perfection to those that
trampled it out. ;

2 Spiritual food, encouragement of merciful Providence, from day to day.

3 There follows here in the Birch edition: ‘As our eyes’ [seven stars] ‘ behinde,
then wee can’ [seven stars| ‘we for him:’ words totally unintelligible ; and not
worth guessing at, the original not being here, but only Birch’s questionable reading
of it.

4[The “little lady” was Jane, daughter of Arthur Goodwyn of Upper Winchenden,
who sat for his county, together with John Hampden, at the beginning of the Long
Parliament. She was Lord Wharton's second wife.]

VOI O

354 SECOND CIVIL WAR [2 Sept.

high and low ; if you will, ‘to’ my Lord and Lady Mulgrave and

Will Hill. I am truly,
Your faithful friend and humblest servant,
Outver CRoMWELL.*

During these very days, perhaps it was exactly two days after,
‘on Monday last,’ if that mean 4th September,—Monro, lying
about Appleby, has a party of horse ‘sent into the Bishopric ;’
firing ‘divers houses’ thereabouts, and not forgetting to plunder
‘the Lord Wharton’s tenants’ by the road : Cromwell penetrating
towards Berwick, yet still at a good distance, scatters this and
other predatory parties rapidly enough to Appleby,—as it were
by the very wind of him ; like a coming mastiff smelt in the gale
by vermin. They are swifter than he, and get to Scotland, by
their dexterity and quick scent, unscathed. ‘Across to Kelso’
about September 8th.?

Mulgrave in those years is a young Edmund Sheffield, of whom,
except that he came afterwards to sit in the Council of State, and
died a few days before the Proctector, History knows not much.
—‘Will Hill’ is perhaps William Hill, a Puritan Merchant in
London,? ruined out of ‘a large estate’ by lending for the public
service; who, this Summer, and still in this very month, is
dunning the Lords and Commons, the Lords with rather
more effect, to try if they cannot give him some kind of payment,
or shadow of an attempt at payment,—he having long lain in
jail for want of his money. A zealous religious, and now destitute
and insolvent man; known to Oliver ;—and suggests himself
along with the Mulgraves by the contrast of ‘Friends high and
low.’ Poor Hill did, after infinite struggling, get some kind of
snack at the Bishops’ Lands by and by.‘

The ‘young Baron’ now born is father, I suppose,—he or his
brother is fathe,—of the far-famed high-gifted half-delirious
Duke of Wharton.

* Thurloe, i. go.

1 Cromwelliana, p. 45. 2 Rushworth, vii. 1250, 3. 9, 60.

3 (There was, however, a William Hill, a Justice of the Peace for Buckingham-
shire (see Calendar of Committee for Compounding, p. 631) whom it is more
likely that Cromwell means. ]

4 Commons Journals, vi. 29, 243.

° He, Thomas, the one now born ; subsequently Marquis, and a man otherwise of
distinction; who ‘died, rath April 1715, in the 67th year of his age: Boyer'’s
Political State of Great Britain (April 1715, London), p. 305. (Note to Third
Edition : communicated by Mr. T. Watts of the British Museum.)

1648. ] DECLARATION 355

On the 8th of September, Cromwell is at Durham! scaring the
Monro fraternity before him; and publishes the following

DECLARATION

Wuereas the Scottish Army, under the command of James
Duke of Hamilton, which lately invaded this nation of England,
is, by the blessing of God upon the Parliament forces, defeated
and overthrown, and some thousands of their soldiers and officers
are now prisoners in our hands, so that, by reason of their great
number, and want of sufficient guards and watches to keep them
so carefully as need requires (the Army being employed upon
_ other duty and service of the Kingdom), divers may escape away,
and many, both since and upon the pursuit, ‘do’ lie in private
places in the country:

I thought it very just and necessary to give notice to all, and
accordingly do declare, That if any Scottishmen (officers or
soldiers) lately members of the said Scottish Army, and taken or
escaped in or since the late fight and pursuit, shall be found
straggling in the countries, or running away from the places
assigned them to remain in till the pleasure of the Parliament,
or ‘of’ his Excellency the Lord General be known,—It will be ac-
counted a very good and acceptable service to the country and
Kingdom of England, for any person or persons to take and
apprehend all such Scottishmen, and to carry them to any officer
having the charge of such prisoners ; or, for want of such officer,
to the Committee or Governor of the next Garrison for the
Parliament within the county where they shall be so taken; to
be secured and kept in prison, as they shall find most convenient.

And the said Committee, Officer, or Governor respectively, are
desired to secure such of the said prisoners as shall be so appre-
hended and brought unto them, accordingly. And if any of the
said Scottish officers or soldiers shall make any resistance, and

1 Commons Journals, vii. 1260. [He reached it on or before the 7th. See
Supplement No. 32.]

356 SECOND CIVIL WAR [11 Sept.

refuse to be taken or render themselves, all such persons well-
affected to the service of the Parliament and Kingdom of England,
may and are desired to fall upon, fight with, and slay such refusers :
but if the said prisoners shall continue and remain within the
places and guards assigned for the keeping of them, that then
no violence, wrong, nor injury be offered to them by any means.
Provided also, and special care is to be taken, That no Scottish-
man residing within this kingdom, and not having been a member
of the said Army, or such of the said Scottish prisoners as shall
have liberty given them, and sufficient passes to go to any place
appointed, may not be interrupted or troubled hereby.

Ottver CroMWELL.*
‘Durham,’ 8th September 1648.

LETTER LXIX

FairFax is still at Colchester, arranging the ‘ransoms,’ and
confused wrecks of the Siege there ; Cromwell has now reached
Berwick, at least his outposts have,—all the Monroes now fairly
across the Tweed. ‘ Lieutenant-Colonel Cowell,’ I conclude, was
mortally wounded at Preston Battle; and here has the poor
Widow been, soliciting and lamenting.?

For his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, General of all the
Parliament's Armies: These

‘ Alnwick,’ 11th September 1648.
My Lorp,
Since we lost Lieutenant-Colonel Cowell, his
Wife came to me near Northallerton, much lamenting her loss,
and the sad condition she and her children were left in.
He was an honest worthy man. He spent himself in your and
the kingdom’s service. He being a great trader in London,

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 46).

1 Rushworth, vii. 125.

2[Lieut.-Colonel William Cowell, of Fairfax's regiment of foot, previously Major
of the regiment. He probably was wounded at Preston, as we know from Letter |
LXIV. that Fairfax’s foot regiment was engaged there, No record of any payment to
his widow is to be found amongst the papers of the Committee for Advance of
Money, or of the Committee for Compounding. Perhaps Cromwell’s letter of the
7th (Supplement No, 32) had relation to this same matter. ]

1648.] LETTER LXX., ALNWICK 357

deserted it to serve the kingdom. He lent! much moneys to
the State ; and I believe few outdid him. He hatha great arrear
due tohim. Heleft a wife and three small children but meanly
provided for. Upon his deathbed, he commended this desire to
me, That I should befriend his to the Parliament or to your
Excellency. His wife will attend you for letters to the Parlia-
ment, which I beseech you to take into a tender consideration.
I beseech you to pardon this boldness to,
Your Excellency’s most humble servant,
OLIvER CROMWELL.*

On the 19th June 1649, ‘Widow Cowell’ is ordered to be paid
her Husband’s Arrears by the Committee at Haberdashers’ Hall.?
One hopes she received payment, poor woman! ‘ Upon his death-
bed her Husband commended this desire to me.’

In the very hours while this Letter is a-writing, ‘Monday 11th
September 1648,’ Monro, now joined with the Earl of Lanark,
presents himself at Edinburgh: but the Whiggamore Raid, all
the force of the West Country, 6,000 strong, is already there ;
‘draws out on the crags be-east the Town,’ old Leven in the Castle
ready to fire withal; and will not let him enter. Lanark and
Monro, after sad survey of the inaccessible armed crags, bend
westward, keeping well out of the range of Leven’s guns,—to
Stirling ; meet Argyle and the Whiggamores, make some Treaty
or Armistice, and admit them to be the real ‘ Committee of Estates,’
the Hamilton Faction having ended.? Here are Three Letters,
Two of one date, directly on the back of these occurrences.

LETTER LXX

For the Governor of Bernick: These

Alnwick, 15th September 1648.
Sir,
Being come thus near, I thought fit to demand

the town of Berwick to be delivered into my hands, to the use

1[Carlyle printed ‘‘lost”’.] 2 Commons Journals, vi. 237.
3 Guthry, pp. 288-97.

* Lansdowne MSS. 1236, fol. 89.

358 SECOND CIVIL WAR [16 Sept.

of the Parliament and kingdom of England, to whom of right
it belongeth.

I need not use any arguments to convince you of the justice
hereof. The witness that God hath borne against your Army,
in their Invasion of those who desired to sit in peace by you, doth
at once manifest His dislike of the injury done to a Nation that
meant you no harm, but hath been all along desirous to keep
amity and brotherly affection and agreement with you.

If you deny me in this, we must make a second appeal to God,
putting ourselves upon Him, in endeavouring to obtain our rights,
and let Him be judge between us. And if our aim be anything
beyond what we profess, He will requite it. If further trouble
ensue upon your denial, we trust He will make our innocency
to appear.

I expect your answer to this summons, this day, and rest,

Your servant,
O.iveR CRoMWELL.*

Ludovic Lesley, the Scotch Governor of Berwick, returns ‘a
dilatory answer,’ not necessary for us to read. Here is a more
important message :

LETTER LXXI

For the Right Honourable the Lord Marquis of Argyle, and the
rest of the well-affected Lords, Gentlemen, Ministers, and People
now in arms in the Kingdom of Scotland : Present

‘Near Berwick,’ 16th September 1648.
My Lorps anp GENTLEMEN,

Being (in prosecution of the common enemy)
advanced, with the Army under my command, to the borders of
Scotland, I thought fit, to prevent any misapprehension or pre-
judice that might be raised thereupon, to send your Lordships

* Lords Journals (in Parliamentary History, xvii. 485).

1648.] LETTER LXXI, NEAR BERWICK 359

these Gentlemen, Colonel Bright, Scoutmaster-General Rowe,
and Mr Stapylton, to acquaint you with the reasons thereof:
concerning which I desire your Lordships to give them credence.
I remain,
My Lords,
Your very humble servant,
Outver CROMWELL.*

Colonel Bright and Scoutmaster Rowe are persons that often
occur, though somewhat undistinguishably, in the Old Pamphlets.!
Bright in the end of this month, was sent over, ‘from Berwick’
apparently, to take possession of Carlisle, now ready to surrender
to us.2- ‘Scoutmaster’ is the Chief of the Corps of ‘Guides,’ as
soldiers now call them. As to Stapylton or Stapleton, we have
to remark that, besides Sir Philip Stapleton, the noted Member
for Boroughbridge, and one of the Eleven, who is now banished
and dead, there is a Bryan Stapleton now Member for Aldborough ;
he in January last? was Commissioner to Scotland: but this
present Stapylton is still another. Apparently, one Robert
Stapylton ; a favourite Chaplain of Cromwell’s ; an Army-Preacher,
aman of weight and eminence in that character. From his
following in the rear of Colonel and Scoutmaster, instead of taking
precedence in the Lieutenant-General’s Letter, as an M.P. would
have done, we may infer that this Reverend Robert Stapylton is
the Cromwell Messenger,—sent to speak a word to the Clergy
in particular.

Scoutmaster Rowe, William Rowe, appears with an enlarged
sphere of influence, presiding over the Cromwell spy-world in a
very diligent, expert and almost respectable manner, some years
afterwards, in the Milton State-Papers. His counsel might be
useful with Argyle ; his experienced eye, at any rate, might take
a glance of the Scottish Country, with advantage to an invading
General.

* Thurloe, i. 100.

1[Col. John Bright commanded a regiment in Lord Fairfax’s Army. When these
northern regiments passed under Sir Thomas Fairfax’s command in the summer of
1647, his regiment was added to the New Model Army, of which he remained a
member until1650. (See his life in the Dictionary of National Biography.) William
Rowe succeeded Leonard Watson as Scout-Master General. Many of his letters are
printed in Nickoll’s Letters and Papers of State, 7.e., the Milton State-Papers. |

2 Cromwelliana, p. 48.

Commons Journals, v. 442; Whitlocke, p. 290.

360 SECOND CIVIL WAR (16 Sept.

Of the Reverend Mr. Stapylton’s proceedings on this occasion
we have no notice: but he will occur afterwards in these Letters ;
and two years hence, on Cromwell's second visit to those Northern
parts, we find this recorded : ‘ Last Lord’s Day,’ 29th September
1650, ‘ Mr. Stapylton preached in the High Church,’ of Edinburgh,
while we were mining the Castle !—‘forenoon and afternoon,
‘before his Excellency with his Officers; where was a great
‘concourse of people ; many Scots expressing much affection at
‘the doctrine, in their usual way of groans.’! In their usual way
of groans, while Mr. Stapylton held forth: consider that !—Mr.
Robert, ‘at 10 o'clock at night on the 3d September’ next year,
writes, ‘from the other side of Severn,’ a copious despatch con-
cerning the Battle of Worcester,? and then disappears from
History.

The following Letter, of the same date, was brought by the
same Messengers for the Committee of Estates.

LETTER LXXII

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Estates for the Kingdom
of Scotland : These

‘ Near Berwick,’ 16th September 1648.
Ricut Honouraste,

Being upon my approach to the borders of the
kingdom of Scotland, I thought fit to acquaint you of the reason
thereof.

It is well known how injuriously the kingdom of England was
lately invaded by the Army under Duke Hamilton, contrary to
the Covenant and ‘to’ our leagues of amity, and against all the
engagements of love and brotherhood between the two nations.
And notwithstanding the pretence of your late Declaration,?
published to take with the people of this kingdom, the Commons
of England in Parliament assembled declared the said Army so
entering as enemies to the kingdom; and those of England who

1 Cromwelliana, p. 92. [This is not an exact quotation. ]
2 /bid., pp. 112, 113, 3 To be found in Rushworth; read it not !

1648,] LETTER LXXII., NEAR BERWICK 361

should adhere to them, as traitors. And having! received com-
mand to march with a considerable part of their Army, to oppose
so great a violation of faith and justice; what a witness God,
being appealed to,? hath borne, upon the engagement of the two
Armies, against the unrighteousness of man, not only yourselves,
but this kingdom, yea and a great part of the known world will,
1 trust, acknowledge. How dangerous a thing is it to wage an
unjust war; much more, to appeal to God the Righteous Judge
therein. We trust He will persuade you better by this manifest
token of His displeasure, lest His hand be stretched out yet
more against you, and your poor people also, if they will be
deceived.

That which I am to demand of you is, The restitution of the
garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle into my hands, for the use of
the Parliament and kingdom of England. If you deny me herein,
I must make our appeal to God, and call upon Him for assistance,
in what way He shall direct us; wherein we are, and shall be, so
far from seeking the harm of the well-affected people of the
kingdom of Scotland, that we profess as before the Lord, that
(what difference an Army, necessitated in a hostile way to recover
the ancient rights and inheritance of the kingdom under which
they serve, can make?) we shall use our endeavours to the utmost
that the trouble may fall upon the contrivers and authors of this
breach, and not upon the poor innocent people, who have been
led and compelled into this action, as many poor souls now
prisoners to us confess.

We thought ourselves bound in duty thus to expostulate with
you, and thus to profess, to the end we may bear our integrity

1 The grammar requires ‘I having,’ but the physiognomy of the sentence requires
nothing.

2 on Preston Moor.

3 Means: ‘so far as an army, necessitated to vindicate its country by War, can
make a discrimination.’ The ‘ancient rights and inheritance’ are the right to choose
our own King or No-King, and so forth. [Cromwell was simply demanding the
restitution of Berwick and Carlisle, ‘‘the ancient rights and inheritance of the
Kingdom of England.” Dr. Gardiner says ‘‘ Carlyle is certainly wrong in inter-
preting these words to imply ‘the right to choose our own King or No-King, and
so forth.'" Great Civil War, iv. 229.)

362 SECOND CIVIL WAR [18 Sept.

out before the world, and may have comfort in God, whatever
the event be. Desiring your answer, I rest,
Your Lordships’ humble servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

The troubles of Scotland are coming thick. The ‘ Engagers,’
those that ‘engaged’ with Hamilton, are to be condemned ; then,
before long, come ‘ Resolutioners’ and ‘ Protesters ;’ and in the
wreck of the Hamilton-Argyle discussions, and general cuncta-
tions,—all men desiring to say; Yes and No instead of Yes or No,
—Royalism and Presbyterianism alike are disastrously sinking.

The Lordships here addressed as ‘Committee of Estates’ can
make no answer, for they do not now exist as Committee of Estates ;
—Argyle and Company are now assuming that character: the
shifting of the dresses, which occasions some complexity in those
old Letters, is just going on. From Argyle and Company, how-
ever, who see in Cromwell their one sure stay, there are already
on the road conciliatory congratulatory messages, by Lairds and
Majors, ‘from Falkirk,’ where the Whiggamore Raid and Lanark
are making their Armistice or Treaty. Whereupon follows, with
suitably vague Superscription, for Argyle and Company :

LETTER LXXIII

To the Right Honourable the Earl of Loudon, Chancellor of the
Kingdom of Scotland ;

To be communicated to the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Burgesses now

wn arms,' who dissented in Parliament from the late Engagement
against the Kingdom of England.

Cheswick,? 18th Sept. 1648.
RigHtT HonouraBte,

We received yours from Falkirk of the 15th
September instant. We have had also a sight of your Instructions

* Thurloe, i. 100,

1« The Whiggamore Raid,’ as Turner calls it, now making a Treaty with Lanark,
Monro, and the other Assignees of the bankrupt Hamilton concern, Expressly ad-
dressed, in the next Letter, as ‘Committee of Estates,’ ‘hey now.

_* Cheswick, stilla Manorhouse ‘ of the Family of Strangeways,’ lies three or four
miles south of Berwick, on the great road to Newcastle and London.

1648.) LETTER LXXIIL, CHESWICK 363

given to the Laird of Greenhead and Major Strahan, as also other
two papers concerning the treaty between your Lordships and the
enemy, wherein your care of the interest of the kingdom of
England, for the delivery of their towns! unjustly taken from
them, and ‘your’ desire to preserve the unity of both nations,
appears. By which also we understand the posture you are in
to oppose the enemies of the welfare and the peace of both the
kingdoms, for which we bless God for His goodness to you, and
rejoice to see the power of the kingdom of Scotland in a hopeful
way to be invested in the hands of those who, we trust, are taught
of God to seek His honour, and the comfort of His people.

And give us leave to say, as before the Lord, who knows the
secrets of all hearts, that, as we think one especial end of Pro-
vidence in permitting the enemies of God and goodness in both
kingdoms to rise to that height, and exercise such tyranny over
His people, was to show the necessity of unity amongst those
of both nations, so we hope and pray that the late glorious
dispensation, in giving so happy success against your and our
enemies in our victories, may be the foundation of union of the
people of God in love and amity. Unto that end we shall, God
assisting, to the utmost of our power endeavour to perform what
may be behind on our part, and when we shall, through any
wilfulness, fail therein, let this profession rise up in judgment
against us, as having been made in hypocrisy, a severe avenger
of which God hath lately appeared, in His most righteous wit-
nessing against the Army under Duke Hamilton, invading us
under specious pretences of piety and justice. We may humbly
say, we rejoice with more trembling”? than to dare to do so
wicked a thing.

Upon our advance to Alnwick, we thought fit to send a good
body of our horse to the borders of Scotland, and thereby a
summons to the Garrison of Berwick ;* to which having received

1 Berwick and Carlisle, which by agreement in 1646-7 were not to be garrisoned
except by consent of do¢h Kingdoms.

2‘ Join trembling with your mirth’ (Second Psalm). [‘' Rejoice with trembling,”
Authorised Version. | 3 Letter LXX.

364 SECOND CIVIL WAR [18 Sept.

a dilatory answer, I desired a safe-convoy for Colonel Bright and
the Scoutmaster!-General of this Army to go to the Committee
of Estates in Scotland, who, I hope, will have the opportunity to
be with your Lordships before this come to your hands, and,
according as they are instructed, will let your Lordships in some
measure (as well as we could in so much ignorance of your
condition) know our affections to you. And understanding
things more fully by yours, we now thought fit to make you this
‘present’ return.

The command we received, upon the defeat of Duke Hamilton,
was, to prosecute this business until the enemy were put out of
a condition or hope of growing into a new Army, and the garrisons
of Berwick and Carlisle were reduced. Four regiments of our
horse and some dragoons, who had followed the enemy into the
south parts,” being now come up; and this country not able to
bear us, the cattle and old corn thereof having been wasted by
Monro and the forces with him; the Governor of Berwick also
victualling his garrison from Scotland side ; and the enemy yet
in so considerable a posture as by these gentlemen and your
papers we understand, still prosecuting their former design, having
gotten the advantage of Stirling Bridge, and so much of Scotland
at their backs to enable them thereunto, and your Lordships’
condition not being such, at present, as may compel them to
submit to the honest and necessary things you have proposed to
them for the good of both the kingdoms: we have thought fit,
out of the sense of our duty to the commands laid upon us by
those who have sent us, and to the end we might be in a posture
more ready to give you assistance (and not be wanting to what
we have made so large professions of), to advance into Scotland
with the Army.’ And we trust, by the blessing of God, the
common enemy will thereby the sooner be brought to a submission

1[Thurloe has ‘‘ Lieutenant-General,” probably a mistake of the transcriber. ]
2 Uttoxeter and thereabouts.

3 Neither does the sentence end even here! It is dreadfully bad composition
yet contains a vigorous clear sense in it,

1648.) LETTER LXXIIL, CHESWICK 365

to you: and we thereby shall do what becomes us in order to the
obtaining of our garrisons, engaging ourselves that, so soon as we
shall know from you that the enemy shall yield to the things you
have proposed to them, and we have our garrisons delivered to
us, we shall forthwith depart out of your kingdom, and in the
meantime be ‘even’ more tender towards the Kingdom of
Scotland, in the point of charge, than if we were in our own
native kingdom.

If we shall receive from you any desire of a more speedy
advance, we shall readily yield compliance therewith, desiring
also to hear from you how affairs stand. -This being the result
of a Council of War, I present it to you as the expression of their
affections and of my own, who am,

My Lords,
Your most humble servant,
O.tver CRoMWELL.*

Cheswick, where Oliver now has his head-quarter, lies, as we
said, some three or four miles south of Berwick, on the English
side of Tweed. Part of his forces crossed the River, I find, next
day ; a stray regiment had without order gone across, the day
before.—The ‘Laird of Greenhead,’ Sir Andrew Ker, is known
in the old Scotch Books; still better, Major Strahan, who makes
a figure on his own footing by and by. The Anti-Hamilton or
Whiggamore Party are all inclined to Cromwell ; inclined, and yet
averse : wishing to say “ Yes and No:” if that were possible !—

The answer to this Letter immediately follows in T'hurloe ;
but it is not worth giving. The intricate longwindedness of mere
Loudons, Argyles and the like, on such subjects at this time of
day, is not tolerable to either gods or men. “We, Loudon,
Argyle, and Company, are very sensible how righteously God who
judgeth the Earth’ has dealt with Hamilton and his followers ;
an intolerable, unconscionable race of men, tending towards mere
ruin of religion, and ‘ grievously oppressive ’ to us. We hope all
things from you, respectable Lieutenant-General. We have sent
influential persons to order the giving up of Berwick and Carlisle
instantly ; and hope these Garrisons will obey them. We rest,
—Humbly devoted,—Argyle, Loudon, and Company.”

* Thurloe, i. ror,

366 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Sept.

Influential Persons: ‘Friday last, the 22d September, the
‘Marquis of Argyle, the Lord Elcho, Sir John Scot and others
‘came as Commissioners from the Honest Party in Scotland to
‘the Laird of Mordington’s House at Mordington, to the Lieu-
‘tenant-General’s quarters, two miles within Scotland. That night
‘the Marquis of Argyle sent a trumpet to Berwick,’ !—Berwick
made delays, needed to send to the Ear] of Lanark first. Lanark,
it is to be hoped, will consent. Meanwhile the Lieutenant-
General opens his parallels, diligently prepares to besiege, if
necessary. Among these influential Persons, a quick reader
notices ‘Sir John Scot,’—and rejoices to recognise him, in that
dim transient way, for the ‘ Director of the Chancery,’ and Laird
of Scotstarvet in Fife, himself in rather a staggering state? at present,
worthy old gentleman !

PROCLAMATION

WuereEas we are marching with the Parliament’s Army into
the kingdom of Scotland, in pursuance of the remaining part of
the enemy who lately invaded the kingdom of England, and for
the recovery of the garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle :

These are to declare, that if any officer or soldier under my
command shall take or demand any money, or shall violently
take any horses, goods or victual, without order, or shall abuse
the people in any sort, he shall be tried by a Council of War:
and the said person so offending shall be punished, according to
the Articles of War made for the government of the Army in the
kingdom of England, which ‘ punishment’ is death.

Each colonel, or other chief officer in every regiment, is to
transcribe a copy of this, and to cause the same to be delivered
to each captain of his regiment: and every said captain of each
respective troop and company is to publish the same to his troop

1 Rushworth, vii. 1282.

2 Scott of Scotstarvet's Staggering State of Scots Statesmen is the Strange Title of
his strange little Book: not a Satire at all, but a Homily on Life’s Nothingness
enforced by examples; gives in this brief compass, not without a rude Laconic
geniality, the cream of Scotch Biographic History in that age, and unconsciously a
curious self-portrait of the Writer withal.

1648.) LETTER LXXIV., NORHAM 367

or company, and to take a strict course that nothing be done
contrary hereunto,
Given under my hand, this 20th September 1648.
Ottver CromwELL,*

LETTER LXXIV

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Estates of the Kingdom
of Scotland, at Edinburgh; These
Norham, 21st Sept. 1648.

Ricut Honouras te,

We perceive that there was, upon our advance
to the Borders, the last Lord’s Day,! a very disorderly carriage
by some horse, who, without order, did steal over the Tweed, and
plundered some places in the kingdom of Scotland, and since
that, some stragglers have been alike faulty, to the wrong of the
inhabitants, and to our very great grief of heart.

I have been as diligent as I can to find out the men that have
done the wrong, and I am still in the discovery thereof, and I trust
it shall appear to you that there shall be nothing wanting on my
part that may testify how much we abhor such things, and to the
best of my information I cannot find the least guilt of the fact ?
to lie upon the regiments of this Army, but upon some of the
Northern horse, who have not been under our discipline and
government, until just that we came into these parts.

I have commanded those forces away back again into England,
and I hope the exemplarity of justice will testify for us our great
detestation of the fact.2 For the remaining forces, which are of
our old regiments, we may engage for them their officers will
keep them from doing any such things, and we are confident that,
saving victual, they shall not take anything from the inhabitants,
and in that also they shall be so far from being their own carvers,

* Newspapers in Cromwelliana, p. 46.
latst Sept. 1648 is Thursday; last Sunday is 17th. 2° fait.”

368 SECOND CIVIL WAR [21 Sept.

as that they shall submit to have provisions ordered and propor-
tioned by the consent, and with the direction, of the committees
and gentlemen of the country, and not otherwise, if they} please
to be assisting to us therein.
1 thought fit, for the preventing of misunderstanding, to give
your Lordships this account ; and rest,
My Lords,
Your most humble servant,
Outver CRoMWELL.*

‘ Upon our entrance into Scotland, a regiment lately raised in the
* Bishopric of Durham, under Colonel Wren, behaved themselves
‘rudely ;? which as soon as the Lieutenant-General of this Army ”
Cromwell ‘had notice of, he caused it to rendezvous upon Tweed
‘banks ; and the Scottish people having challenged several horses
‘taken from them by that Regiment, the Lieutenant-General
‘caused the said horses to be restored back, and the plunderers
‘to be cashiered. A Lieutenant that countenanced such deeds
‘was delivered into the Marshal’s hands ; and the Colonel himself,
‘conniving at them, and not doing justice upon the offenders
‘when complaints were brought in to him, was taken from the
‘head of his Regiment, and suspended from executing his place,
‘until he had answered at a Council of War for his negligence in
‘the performance of his duty. This notable and impartial piece

1 These Committees.

2 (Col. Francis Wren, afterwards Commissioner and Treasurer for the county of
Durham. His men do not seem to have confined their ill-conduct to the Scottish
side of the Tweed, for an unfortunate dweller in Northumberland, near the border,
lamented that his estate had been wasted by the Cavaliers, the Scottish Army,
General Cromwell’s Army coming and going, and especially by Col. Wren’s
regiment, which last plundered him of all he had. See Calendar of Committee for
Compounding, p. 1048. These northern troops, who had never been under his
‘discipline and government,” must have been a sore trial to Cromwell. Perhaps it
is of the same regiment that a Lancashire letter complains so bitterly. ‘Within
three days after that General Cromwell had left Preston to pursue the Duke, there
came up to Preston to follow him a regiment of Northern men out of the Bishopric
of Durham, carrying all black ‘Curllers’. . . . These were the most thievish
companies that ever the Country was pestered with during the war. Notwithstanding
they had extraordinary allowances out of the parish [of Kirkham] so that at the least
they had roo/, for three days’ quarter, yet they went most of the parish over,
plundering and stealing whatever they could conveniently carry away.” 4
Discourse of the War in Lancashire, p. 67.]

* Thurloe, i. 103 (From the Public Records of Scotland, in the Laigh Parliament-
House at Edinburgh). ‘:

1648.] LETTER LXXV., BERWICK 369

‘ of justice did very much take with the people ; and the Regiment
‘is ordered back into Northumberland, !—as we see.

The answer of ‘Loudon Cancellarius’ to this Letter from Nor-
ham is given in the old Newspapers.2 The date is Edinburgh,
28th September 1648. Loudon of course is very thankful for
such tenderness and kind civilities ; thankful especially that the
Honourable Lieutenant-General has come so near, and by the
dread of him forced the Malignants at Stirling Bridge to come to
terms, and leave the Well-affected at peace. A very great
blessing to us ‘the near distance of your forces at this time,’ —
though once (you ken varry weel, and Whitlocke kens,) we con-
sidered you an incendiary, and I, O honourable Lieutenant-
General, would so fain have had you extinguished,—not knowing
what I did!

Norham lies on the South shore of the Tweed, some seven miles
above Berwick :

‘Day set on Norham’s castled steep.’ 3

Cromwell went across to Mordington, and met the ‘ Influential
Persons,’ on the morrow. As the following Letter, taking a
comprehensive survey of the matter, will abundantly manifest.

LETTER LXXV

‘To the Honourable William Lenthall, Speaker of the
House of Commons ; These’

Berwick, 2d October 1648.
Sir,
I have formerly represented to the Committee

at Derby House,‘ how far I have prosecuted your business in
relation to the commands I did receive from them, to wit : that
I having sent a party of horse with a summons to Berwick, and
a letter to the Committee of Estates, which I supposed did
consist of the Earl of Lanerick and his participates, and a letter

1 Perfect Diurnal, October 2d to gth (in Cromwelliana, p. 47):

2 Joid., p. 47. 4 3 Scott’s Marmion.

4 Long Letter, dated 2oth September, recapitulating what is already known to
us here. Appendix, No. 13.

VOU eto

370 SECOND CIVIL WAR [2 Oct.

of kindness and affection to the Marquis of Argyle and the well-
affected party in arms at ‘or about’ Edinburgh, with credence to
Colonel Bright and Mr. William Rowe, Scoutmaster of the Army,
To let them know upon what grounds and with what intentions
we came into their kingdom, and how that, in the mean time,
the Marquis of Argyle and the rest at Edinburgh had sent Sir
Andrew Carr, Laird of Greenhead, and Major Straughan to me,
with a letter, and papers of instructions, expressing their good
affection to the kingdom of England, and disclaiming the late
Engagement ; together with my answer to the said letters and
papers, duplicates of all which I sent to the Committee at Derby
House, and therefore forebear to trouble you with the things
themselves. I think now fit to give you an account, what further
progress has been made in your business.

The two ‘Scotch’ Armies being drawn up, the one under
Lanerick and Munro at Stirling, and the other under the Ear] of
Leven and Lieutenant-General Lesley betwixt that and Edin-
burgh ; the heads of the two Armies being upon treaties concerning
their own affairs, and I having given (as I hoped) sufficient satis-
faction concerning the justice of your cause, and the clearness of
my intentions in entering that kingdom,—‘I’ did (upon Thursday
being the one and twentieth of September, and two days before
the Tweed being fordable), march over Tweed at Norham into
Scotland, with four regiments of horse, and some dragoons, and
six regiments of foot, and there quartered; my head-quarters
being at the Lord Mordington’s House.

Where hearing of the Marquis of Argyle, the Lord Elcho, and
some others, were coming to me from the Committee of Estates
assembled at Edinburgh,—I went, on Friday the two and
twentieth of September, some part of the way to wait upon his
Lordship. Who, when he was come to his quarters, delivered
me a letter, of which this enclosed is a copy,! signed by the Lord
Chancellor, by warrant of the Committee of Estates. And after

1 Conceivable by us here.

1648. ] LETTER LXXV., BERWICK 371

some time spent in giving and receiving mutual satisfaction
concerning each other’s integrity and clearness (wherein I must
be bold to testify for that noble Lord the Marquis, the Lord
Elcho, and the other gentlemen with him, that I have found
nothing in them but what becomes Christians and men of honour),
the next day it was resolved, that the command of the Committee
of Estates to the Governor of Berwick, for rendering the town,
should be sent to him, by the Lord Elcho and Colonel Scott,
which accordingly was done. But he, pretending that he had
not received the command of that place from those that now
demanded it of him, desired liberty to send to the Earl of
Lanerick, engaging himself then to give his positive answer, and
intimating it should be satisfactory.

Whilst these things were in transacting, I ordered Major-
General Lambert to march towards Edinburgh, with six regiments
of horse and a regiment of dragoons, who accordingly did so, and
quartered in East Louthian, within six miles of Edinburgh; the
foot lying in his rear at Coperspeth and thereabout.!

Upon Friday, the 29th of September, came an order from the
Earl of Lanerick, and divers other Lords of his party, requiring
the Governor of Berwick to march out of the town; which ac-
cordingly he did, on Saturday the last of September, at which
time I entered; having placed a garrison there for your use.
The Governor would fain have capitulated for the English ‘who
were with him,’ but we, having this advantage upon him, would
not hear of it : so that they are submitted to your mercy, and are
under the consideration of Sir Arthur Heselrige, who (I believe)
will give you a good account of them; and who has already
turned out the malignant Mayor, and put an honest man in his
room.

I have also received an order for Carlisle, and have sent Colonel
Bright, with horse and foot to receive it, Sir Andrew Carr and
Colonel Scott being gone with him to require an observance of

1 What follows now, is published as a fragment in the Newspapers.

372 SECOND CIVIL WAR [2 Oct.

the order ; there having been a treaty and an agreement betwixt
the two parties in arms in Scotland, to disband all forces, except
fifteen-hundred horse and foot under the Earl of Leven, which
are to be kept up to see all remaining forces disbanded.

And having some other things to desire from the Committee
of Estates at Edinburgh for your service, I am myself going
thitherward this day ; and so soon as I shall be able to give you
a further account thereof, I shall doit. In the mean time, I make
it my desire that the garrison of Berwick (into which I have
placed a regiment of foot, and ‘which’ shall be attended also by
a regiment of horse) may be provided for, and that Sir Arthur
Heselrige may receive commands to supply it with guns and am-
munition from Newcastle, and be otherwise enabled by you to
furnish this garrison with all other necessaries, according as a
place of that importance will require. Desiring that these mercies
may beget trust and thankfulness to God the only author of them,
and an improvement of them to His glory and the good of this
poor kingdom, I rest,

Your most humble servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

LETTER LXXVI

Fottows here a small Note, enclosing a duplicate of the above
Letter, for Fairfax; written chiefly to enforce the request as to
Haselrig and Berwick,—‘ Hasleridge’ and ‘ Barwick,’ as Oliver
here spells. Haselrig is Governor of Newcastle, a man of chief
authority in those Northern regions.—Fairfax, who has been
surveying, regulating, and extensively dining in Townhalls,
through the Eastern Counties, is now at St. Albans,\—the Army’s
head-quarters for some time to come.

* Tanner MS. [lvii, 330, Signed.] (in Cary's Memorials ii. 18); Newspapers
(Cromwelliana, p. 48).

1Since 16th September, Rushworth, vii. 1271.

1648.) LETTER LXXVI, BERWICK 373

For his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, at St. Albans ;
These
Berwick, 2d October 1648.

May IT PLEASE YouR EXCELLENCY,

I received your late directions with your Com-
missions, how they shall be disposed, which I hope I shall pursue
to your satisfaction.

I having sent an account to the House of Commons, concerning
affairs here, am bold (being straitened in time) to present you
with a duplicate thereof, which I trust will give you satisfaction.
I hope there is a very good understanding between the honest
party of Scotland and us here, and better than some would have.
Sir, I beg of your Excellency to write to Sir A. Haselrige to
take care of Berwick; he having all things necessary for the
Garrison ‘here,’ at Newcastle ; which is left destitute of all, and
may be lost if this be not ‘done.’ I beg of your Lordship a
commission to be speeded to him. I have no more at present ;
but rest,

My Lord,
Your most humble servant,
Outver CRoMWwELL.*

In these weeks, once more, there is an intensely interesting
Treaty going on in the Isle of Wight ; Treaty of Forty days with
the King; solemn Parliamentary Commissioners on one hand,
Majesty with due Assistants on the other, very solemnly debating
and negotiating day after day, for forty days and longer, in the
Town of Newport there.!_ The last hope of Presbyterian Royalism
in this world. Not yet the last hope of his Majesty ; who still,
after all the sanguinary ruin of this year, feels himself a tower of
strength ; inexpugnable in his divine right, which no sane man
can question ; settlement of the Nation impossible without him.
Happily, at any rate, it is the last of the Treaties with Charles
Stuart,—for History begins to be weary of them. Treaty which

* Sloane MSS. 1519, p. 92. [f. 183. | Holograph.]

1 Warwick, pp. 321-9; Rushworth, vii. &c. &c. Began 18th September; was
lengthened out by successive permissions to the 18th, 25th, and even 27th of
November,

374 SECOND CIVIL WAR [2 Oct.

came to nothing, as all the others had done. Which indeed could
come only to nothing ; his Majesty not having the smallest design
to abide by it; his Majesty eagerly consulting about ‘escape’ all
the while,—escape to Ormond who is now in Ireland again,
escape somewhither, anywhither ;—and considering the Treaty
mainly as a piece of Dramaturgy, which must be handsomely done
in the interim, and leave a good impression on the Public.1. Such
is the Treaty of Forty Days; a mere torpor on the page of His-
tory; which the reader shall conceive for himself ad libitum.
The Army, from head-quarters at St. Albans, regards him and it
with a sternly watchful eye; not participating in the hopes of
Presbyterian Royalism at all ;—and there begin to be Army Coun-
cils held again.

As for Cromwell, he is gone forward to Edinburgh ; reaches
Seaton, the Earl of Winton’s House, which is the head-quarters
of the horse, a few miles east of Edinburgh, on Tuesday evening.
Next day, Wednesday 4th October 1648, come certain Dignitaries
of the Argyle or Whiggamore Party, and escort him honourably
into Edinburgh ; ‘to the Earl of Murrie’s House in the Cannigate’
(so, in good Edinburgh Scotch, do the old Pamphlets spell it) ;
‘where a strong guard,’ an English Guard, ‘ is appointed to keep
constant watch at the Gate ;’ and all manner of Earls and persons
of Whiggamore quality come to visit the Lieutenant-General ;
and even certain Clergy come, who have a leaning that way.2—
The Earl of Moray’s House, Moray House, still stands in the
Canongate of Edinburgh, well known to the inhabitants there.
A solid spacious mansion, which, when all bright and new two-
hundred years ago, must have been a very adequate lodging.
There are remains of noble gardens ; one of the noble state-rooms,
when I last saw it, was an extensive Paper Warehouse. There is
no doubt but the Lieutenant-General did lodge here ; Guthry
seeming to contradict this old Pamphlet, turns out to confirm it.3

The Lieutenant-General has received certain Votes of Parlia-
ment,* sanctioning what he has done in reference to these Scotch

1 His own Letters (in Wagstaff’s Vindication of the Royal Martyr, in Carte’s
Ormond, &c.); see Godwin, ii. 608-23.

2 True Account of the great Expressions of Love from the Noblemen &c. of
Scotland unto Lieutenant-General Cromwell and his Officers; In a Letter to a
Friend (London, 1648; King's Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 392, § 26 [E. 468], dated,
with the pen 23d October) ; Abridged in Rushworth, vii. 1295.

’Guthry’s AZemoirs, p. 297. For a description of the place, see Chaméers’s
Edinburgh Journal, 21st January 1837.

4 Commons Journals, 28th September 1648,

1648.) LETTER LXXVIIL, EDINBURGH 375

Parties, and encouraging and authorising him to do more. Of
which circumstance, in the following official Document, he fails
not to avail himself, on the morrow after his arrival.

LETTER LXXVII

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Estates for the
Kingdom of Scotland ; These
Edinburgh, 5th October 1648.

Richt HonouraB.e,

I shall ever be ready to bear witness of your
Lordships’ forwardness to do right to the kingdom of England,
in restoring the garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle ; and having
received so good a pledge of your resolutions to maintain amity
and a good understanding between the Kingdoms of England
and Scotland, it makes me not to doubt but that your Lord-
ships will further grant what in justice and reason may be
demanded.

I can assure your Lordships, that the kingdom of England did
foresee that wicked design of the malignants in Scotland to break
all engagements of faith and honesty between the nations, and
to take from the kingdom of England the towns of Berwick and
Carlisle. And although they could have prevented the loss of
those considerable towns, without breach of the treaty, by laying
forces near unto them, yet such was the tenderness of the Parlia-
ment of England not to give the least suspicion of a breach with
the kingdom of Scotland, that they did forbear to do anything
therein, And it is not unknown to your Lordships, when the
malignants had gotten the power of your kingdom, how they
protected and employed our English malignants, though de-
manded by our Parliament, and possessed themselves of those
towns, and with what violence and unheard-of cruelties they
raised an Army, and began a war, and invaded the kingdom of
England, and endeavoured, to the uttermost of their power, to

376 SECOND CIVIL WAR [5 Oct.

engage both kingdoms in a perpetual quarrel, and what blood
they have spilt in our kingdom, and what great loss and prejudice
was brought upon our nation, even to the endangering the total
ruin thereof.

And although God did, by a most mighty and strong hand, and
that in a wonderful manner, destroy their designs, yet it is appa-
rent that the same ill-affected spirit still remains ; and that divers
Persons of great quality and power, who were either the contrivers,
actors, or abettors of the late unjust war made upon the kingdom
of England, are now in Scotland, who undoubtedly do watch for
all advantages and opportunities to raise dissensions and divisions
between the Nations.

Now forasmuch as I am commanded to prosecute the remain-
ing part of the Army that invaded the kingdom of England,
wheresoever it should go, to prevent the like miseries: And
considering that divers of that Army are retired into Scotland,
and that some of the heads of those malignants were raising new
forces in Scotland to carry on the same design, and that they will
certainly be ready to do the like upon all occasions of advantage :
And forasmuch as the kingdom of England hath lately received
so great damage by the failing of the kingdom of Scotland in not
suppressing malignants and incendiaries as they ought to have
done, and by suffering such persons to be put in places of great
trust in the kingdom, who by their interest in the Parliament and
the countries, brought the kingdom of Scotland so far as they
could, by unjust Engagement, to invade and make war upon their
brethren of England :

‘Therefore,’ my Lords, I hold myself obliged, in prosecution of
my duty and instructions, to demand, that your Lordships will
give assurance in the name of the kingdom of Scotland, that you
will not admit or suffer any that have been active in, or consenting
to, the said Engagement against England, or have lately been in
Arms at Stirling or elsewhere in the maintenance of that Engage- |
ment, to be employed in any public place or trust whatsoever.
And this is the least security I can demand, I have received an

1648.) LETTER LXXVIIL, EDINBURGH 377

order from both Houses of the Parliament of England,! which I
hold fit to communicate to your Lordships, whereby you will
understand the readiness of the kingdom of England to assist you
who were dissenters from the Invasion, and I doubt not but your
Lordships will be as ready to give such further satisfaction as they
in their wisdoms shall find cause to desire.
Your Lordships’ most humble servant,
OLIVER CROMWELL.*

This was presented on Thursday to the Dignitaries sitting in
the Laigh Parliament-House in the City of Edinburgh. During
which same day came ‘the Lord Provost to pay his respects’ at
Moray House; came ‘old Sir William Dick,’ an old Provost
nearly ruined by his well-affected Loans of Money in these Wars,
‘and made an oration in name of the rest ;’—came many
persons, and quality carriages, making Moray House a busy place
that day ; ‘of which I hope a good fruit will appear.’

Loudon Cancellarius and Company, from the Laigh Parliament-
House, respond with the amplest assent next day:? and on the
morrow, Saturday, all business being adjusted, and Lambert left
with two horse-regiments to protect the Laigh Parliament-House
from Lanarks and Malignants,—‘ when we were about to come
‘away, several coaches were sent to bring up the Lieutenant-
‘General, the Earl of Leven’ Governor of the Castle and Scotch
Commander-in-Chief, ‘with Sir Arthur Haselrig and the rest of
‘the Officers, to Edinburgh Castle ; where was provided a very
‘sumptuous Banquet,’ old Leven doing the honours, ‘my Lord
‘Marquis of Argyle and divers other Lords being present to grace
‘the entertainment. At our departure, many pieces of ordnance
‘and a volley of small shot was given us from the Castle ; and
‘some Lords convoying us out of the City, we there parted.’ The
Lord Provost had defrayed us, all the while, in the handsomest
manner. We proceeded to Dalhousie, the Seat of the Ramsays,
near Dalkeith: on the road towards Carlisle and home,—by
Selkirk and Hawick, I conclude. Here we stay till Monday
morning, and leave orders, and write Letters.

1 Votes of September 28th; Commons Journals, vi. 37: ‘received the day we
entered Edinburgh’ (Rushworth, «dz supra).

2 [bed.

* King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 392, § 19 [E. 468, 19]. Printed by Order of
Parliament,

378 SECOND CIVIL WAR [8 Oct.

LETTER LXXVIII

A privaTE Note in behalf of ‘this Bearer, Colonel Robert Mont-
gomery,’ now hastening up to Town; with whom we shall make
some farther acquaintance, in another quarter, by and by. Doubt-
less the request was complied with.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Honourable House of Commons ; These

Dalhousie, near Edinburgh, 8th October, 1648.
Sir,

Upon the desire of divers noblemen and others
of the kingdom of Scotland, I am bold to become a suitor to you
on the behalf of this gentleman, the bearer, Colonel Robert
Montgomery, son! of the Earl of Eglinton, whose faithfulness to
you in the late troubles may render him worthy of a far greater
favour than I shall, at this time, desire for him: for I can assure
you, that there is not a gentleman of that kingdom that appeared
more active against the late invaders of England than himself.

Sir, it’s desired that you would please to grant him an order
for two-thousand of the common prisoners that were of Duke
Hamilton’s Army.’ You will have very good security that they
shall not for the future trouble you : he will ease you of the charge
of keeping them, as speedily as any other way you can dispose of
them ; besides their being in a friend’s hands, so as there need
be no fear of their being ever employed against you.

Sir, what favour you shall please to afford the gentleman will
very much oblige many of your friends of the Scottish nation ;
and particularly

Your most humble servant,
Outver CromweELL.*
* (Carlyle, following Cary, printed ‘son in law,” adding the note, “Mistake

of the Lieutenant-General’s for ‘son ;’—‘ youngest son,’ say the Peerage Books.”
But Cromwell simply wrote ‘‘son.’"}

2| Montgomery's intention was to sell them to the King of Spain for service in
the Low Countries. He had difficulty in getting his number, and more difficulty
with the Spanish government, which delayed so long that he ultimately transferred

his offer to France. The negotiations were still proceeding when the King’s death |

was followed by the recall of the French ambassador from St. James's. (See Great
Ciwil War, iv. 231.)]

“ Tanner MSS, [lvii. 346, Signed.] (in Cary, ii. 32),

1648.]} LETTER LXXIX., DALHOUSIE = 379

LETTER LXXIX

Tue next, of Monday, is on public business ; deliberately look-
ing before and after.

To the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Honourable House of Commons: These
Dalhousie, 9th October 1648.
Sir,

In my last, wherein I gave you an account of
my despatch of Colonel Bright to Carlisle, after the rendition of
Berwick, I acquainted you with my intentions to go to the head-
quarters of my horse at the Earl of Wynton’s, within six miles of
Edinburgh ; that from thence I might represent to the Com-
mittee of Estates what I had further to desire in your behalf.

The next day after I came thither, I received an invitation
from the Committee of Estates to come to Edinburgh, they
sending to me the Lord Kirkcudbright and Major-General Hol-
born! for that purpose ; with whom I went the same day, being
Wednesday 4th of this instant October. We fell into considera-
tion, what was fit further to insist upon. And being sensible
that the late agreement between the Committee of Estates and
the Earls of Crawford, Glencarn, and Lanerick, did not suffi-
ciently answer my instructions, which was, to disenable them
from being in power to raise new troubles to England : therefore
I held it my duty, not to be satisfied only with the disbanding of
them, but considering their power and interest, I thought it
necessary to demand concerning them and all their abettors,
according to the contents of the paper” here enclosed.

Wherein (having received that very day your votes for giving
them further assistance) I did in the close thereof acquaint them
there with it ; reserving such further satisfaction to be given by
the kingdom of Scotland, as the Parliament of England should

1fJames Holborne. He had had command of a regiment of foot in Essex’s

army. |
Letter LXXVII,

380 SECOND CIVIL WAR [9 Oct.

in their wisdom see cause to desire. The Committee of Estates
sent the Earl of Cassilis, Lord Warriston, and two gentlemen
more to me, to receive what I had to offer unto them, which
upon Thursday I delivered. Upon Friday I received by the
said persons this enclosed answer,! which is the original itself.

Having proceeded thus far as a soldier, and I trust, by the
blessing of God, not to your disservice; and having laid the
business before you, I pray God direct you to do further as may
be for His glory, the good of the nation wherewith you are
intrusted, and the comfort and encouragement of the saints of
God in both kingdoms and all the world over. I do think the
affairs of Scotland are in a thriving posture, as to the interest of
honest men: and ‘Scotland is’ like to be a better neighbour to
you now than when the great pretenders to Covenant, religion
and treaties (I mean Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Lauderdale,
Traquair, Carnegy, and their confederates), had the power in
their hands. I dare say? that that party, with their pretences,
had not only, through the treachery of some in England (who
have cause to blush), endangered the whole State and kingdom
of England ; but also ‘had’ brought Scotland into such a con-
dition, as that no honest man who had the fear of God, or a
conscience of religion, the just ends of the covenant and treaties,
could have a being in that kingdom. But God, who is not to
be mocked or deceived, and is very jealous when His Name and
religion are made use of to carry on impious designs, hath taken
vengeance of such profanity, even to astonishment and admira-
tion. And I wish from the bottom of my heart, it may cause all
to tremble and repent, who have practised the like, to the blas-
pheming of His Name, and the destruction of His people ; so as
they may never presume to do the like again! And I think it
is not unseasonable for me to take the humble boldness to say
thus much at this time.

1 Already referred to; antea, p. 377.
2[Carlyle printed ‘‘ I dare be bold to say”; but ‘‘I dare say” in the 17th century
had only its true meaning of ‘‘I venture to say”. ]

1648.) LETTER LXXIX., DALHOUSIE — 381

All the enemy’s forces in Scotland are now disbanded. The
Committee of Estates have declared against all of that party’s
sitting in Parliament.! Good elections are ‘already’ made in
divers places, of such as dissented from and opposed the late
wicked Engagement: and they are now raising a force of about
4,000 Horse and Foot, which until they can complete, they have
desired me to leave them two regiments of Horse, and two troops
of Dragoons. Which accordingly I have resolved, conceiving I
had warrant by your late votes so to do, and have left Major-
General Lambert to command them.

I have received, and so have the officers with me, many honours
and civilities from the Committee of Estates, the City of Edinburgh,
and ministers ; with a noble entertainment, which we may not own
as done to us, but as your servants. I am now marching towards
Carlisle, and I shall give you such further accounts of your affairs
as there shall be occasion,

I am, Sir,
Your humble servant,
Otiver CroMWELL.*

Cromwell, at Carlisle on the 14th, has received delivery of the
Castle there, for which good news let the Messenger have 100/.?
Leaving all in tolerable order in those regions, the Lieutenant-
General hastens into Yorkshire to Pontefract or Pomfret Castle ;?
a strong place which had been surprised in the beginning of the
year, and is stubbornly defended ;—surrender being a very serious
matter now ; the War itself being contrary to Law and Treaty, and
as good as treason, think some.

1The Scotch Parliament, which is now getting itself elected.

2 Commons Journals, 20th October 1648. [On Oct. 25, he was at Barnard
Castle, arranging for the service of Carlisle garrison; and on Nov. 2, at Byron.
See Supplement, Nos. 33, 34.]

5 Appendix, No. 14.

*King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 392, § 19 [E. 468]; see Commons Journals, Vi.
54. [Printed by order of the House by Edward Husbands, printer to the House of
Commons. ]

382 SECOND CIVIL WAR [9 Nov.

LETTERS LXXX—LXXXVI

Tue Governor of Pontefract Castle is one Morris, once the Earl
of Strafford’s servant; a desperate man: this is the Lieutenant-
General’s summons to him.

LETTER LXXX

For the Governor of Pontefract Castle

‘Pontefract,’? 9th November, 1648.
Sir,

Being come hither for the reduction of this
place, I thought fit to summon you to deliver your garrison to
me, for the use of the Parliament. Those gentlemen and soldiers
with you may have better terms than if you should hold it to
extremity. I expect your answer this day, and rest,

Your servant,
OuivErR CRoMWELL.*

Governor Morris stiffly refuses ;? holds out yet a good while,—
and at last loses his head at York assizes by the business.?
Royalism is getting desperate; has taken to highway robbery ;
is assassinating, and extensively attempting to assassinate. Two
weeks ago, Sunday 29th October, a Party sallied from this very
Castle of Pontefract ; rode into Doncaster in disguise, and there,
about five in the afternoon, getting into Colonel Rainsborough’s
lodging, stabbed him dead :—murder, or a very questionable kind
of homicide !

‘(This letter would probably be dated from Knottingley, as were others at this
time, See a long letter to Hammond written on Nov. 6, and other letters dated
Novy, 6-11; Supplement, Nos. 35, 36 (1-5).]

2[Governor Morris's reply was as follows; ‘‘I am confident you do not expect
that I should pass my answer before I be satisfied that the summoner has power to
perform my conditions, which must be confirmed by Parliament, beside, the dispute
betwixt yourself and Sir Henry Cholmley, commander-in-chief by commission of the
militia of Yorkshire [see note on p. 385 below], which, as I am informed, denies all
subordination to your authority. When my understanding is cleared in this con-
cerning [z.e. important] scruple, I shall endeavour to be as modest in my reply as I
have read you in your summons.” Moderate Intelligencer, Nov. 9-16, E. 472, ii.]

*State Trials. * Rushworth, vii. 1279 &c., 1315.

* Newspapers (Cromwedliana, p. 48); [Moderate Intelligencer, Nov. 9-16]
Rushworth, vii. 1325.

1648.) LETTER LXXXI., KNOTTINGLEY 383

LETTER LXXxI

As to Pontefract and Governor Morris, here are some pertinent
suggestions, ‘ propositions,’ the old Pamphlet calls them, sent ‘in
a Letter from Lieutenant-General Cromwell and his Officers ;’
which are ‘read in the House,’ and straightway acted upon, to a
certain extent :—had they been acted upon in full, that business
might have ended sooner.

For the Right Honourable the Committee of Lords and Commons
sitting at Derby House : These present
Knottingley, near Pontefract,

15th November 1648.
My Lorps anp GENTLEMEN,

So soon as I came into these parts, I met with
an earnest desire from the Committee of this county to take upon
me the charge here, for the reducing of the garrison of Pomfret.
I received also commands from my Lord General to the same
effect. I have had the sight of a letter to the House of Commons,
wherein things are so represented, as if this siege were at such a
pass that the prize were already gained. In consideration where-
of, I thought fit to let you know what the true state of this
garrison is, as also the condition of the country, that so you may
not think my desire! for such things as would be necessary to
carry on this work unreasonable.

My Lords, the Castle hath been victualled with two-hundred
and twenty or forty fat cattle, within these three weeks, and
they have also gotten in (as I am credibly informed) salt enough
for them and more, so that I apprehend they are victualled for a
twelvemonth. The men within are resolved to endure to the
utmost extremity, expecting no mercy, as indeed they deserve
none. The place is very well known to be one of the strongest
inland garrisons in the kingdom, well watered, situated upon a
rock in every part of it, and therefore difficult to mine. The
walls very thick and high, with strong towers, and if battered,
very difficult of access, by reason of the depth and steepness

1[Carlyle printed ‘‘ demands,” and omitted ‘‘ to carry on this work.”’]

384 SECOND CIVIL WAR [15 Nov.

of the graft. The country is exceedingly impoverished, not
able to bear free-quarter, nor well able to furnish provisions,
if we had moneys. The work is like to be long, if materials be
not furnished answerable. I therefore think it my duty to re-
present unto you as followeth: viz.—

1. That moneys be provided for three complete regiments of
Foot, and two of Horse ; 2, That money be provided for all con-
tingencies which are in view, too many to enumerate. 3. That
five-hundred barrels of powder, ‘and’ six good battering-guns,
with three-hundred shot to each gun, be speedily sent down to
Hull: 4, We desire none may be sent less than demi-cannon.
5. We desire also some match and bullet. And if it may be, we
should be glad that two or three of the biggest mortar-pieces
with shells may likewise be sent.

And although the desires of such proportions may seem costly,
yet I hope you will judge it good thrift; especially if you con-
sider that this place hath cost the kingdom some hundred-thousands
of pounds already. And for aught I know, it may cost you one
more, if it be trifled withal, besides the dishonour of it, and what
other danger may be emergent, by its being in such hands. It’s
true, here are some two or three great guns in Hull, and here-
abouts, but they are unserviceable, and your garrisons in Yorkshire
are very much unsupplied at this time.

I have not as yet drawn any of our Foot to this place! only I
make use of Colonel Fairfax’s and Colonel Maleverie’s Foot
regiments and keep the rest of the guards with the Horse,
purposing to bring-on some of our Foot to-morrow, the rest
being a little dispersed in Lincoln and Nottingham Shires (these
parts being not well able to bear them) for some refreshment ;
which after so much duty they need, and a little expect.

And indeed I would not satisfy myself nor my duty to you and
them, to put the poor men, at this season of the year, to lie in
the field, before we be furnished with shoes, stockings and

1[Z.e., not any of the regular foot of the army; Fairfax’s and Mauleverer’s being
Yorkshire militia regiments. |

1648.) LETTER LXXXI., KNOTTINGLEY 385

clothes, for them to cover their nakedness (which we hear are in
preparation, and would! be speeded) and until we have deal-

boards to make them courts-of-guard, and tools to cast up works
to secure them.?

These things I have humbly represented to you; and waiting
for your resolution and command, I rest,

Your most humble servant,

Otrver CRoMWELL.*

Due Orders of the House in consequence, dated Saturday 18th
November, can be read in the same old Pamphlet ;* most prompt
Orders, giving if not ‘ Five-hundred Barrels of powder,’ yet ‘Two-
bundred-and-fifty ;’ a middle term, or compliance halfway, which
perhaps is as much as one could expect! Pontefract did not
surrender till the end of March next.‘

Meanwhile, the Royal Treaty in Newport comes to no good
issue, and the Forty Days are now done ; the Parliament by small
and smaller instalments prolongs it, still hoping beyond hope for
a good issue. The Army, sternly watchful of it from St. Albans,
is presenting a Remonstrance, That a good issue lies not in it;
that a good issue must be sought elsewhere than in it. By bring-
ing Delinquents to justice; and the Carer Detrnquent, who has
again involved this Nation in blood! To which doctrine, various
petitioning Counties and Parties, and a definite minority in Parlia-
ment and England generally, testify their stern adherence, at all
risks and hazards whatsoever.

1 Qld for ‘should.’

2(Concerning the want of necessaries, compare the letter from Col. Rainborowe
to Fairfax, written on October 15, preserved amongst the Clarke MSS, at Littlecote.
Also, a letter from Robert Spavin, Cromwell's secretary, dated November 2. Both
speak of the cordiality of the Yorkshire colonels, Charles Fairfax and Maul-
everer, and both complain of Sir Henry Cholmley’s animosity. ‘‘ Cholmley,” writes
Spavin, ‘‘a very knave, hates us to the death ; leapt at the news of Col. Rainborowe
being killed.” (See Azs¢. AZSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr, Leyborne-Popham's
MSS., pp. 7, 8.). Cromwell’s men seem to have thought that three weeks would
end the siege. Their chief apparently knew better. |

3See also Commons Journals, vi. 81.

450d March’ (Commons Journals, vi. 174).

* King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 397, § x2. {Packets of letters, etc. E. 473).

VOL. 1.—25

386 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Nov.

LETTER LXXXIlI

JenNeER Member for Cricklade, and Ashe Member for Westbury ;
these two, sitting I think in the Delinquents’ Committee at Gold-
smiths’ Hall,!—seem inclined for a milder course. Wherein the
Lieutenant-General does by no means agree with the said Jenner
and Ashe; having had a somewhat closer experience of the
matter than they!

‘Colonel Owen’ is a Welsh Delinquent ; | find he is a Sir John
Owen,?—the same Sir John who seized my Lord Archbishop’s
Castle of Conway, in that violent manner long since. A violent
man, now got into trouble enough ; of whom there arises life-and-
death question by and by. ‘The Governor of Nottingham’ is
Colonel Hutchinson, whom we know.* Sir Marmaduke Langdale
we also know,—and ‘presume you have heard what is become of
him?’ Sir Marmaduke, it was rigorously voted on the 6th of this
month, is one of the ‘Seven that shall be excepted from pardon ;’
whom the King himself, if he bargain with us, shall never forgive.®
He escaped afterwards from Nottingham Castle, by industry of
his own.

For my honoured Friends Robert Jenner and John Ashe, Esquires,
‘at London :’ These

Knottingley, near Pontefract,
20th November 1648.

-

GENTLEMEN,
I received an order from the Governor of Not-

tingham, directed to him from you, To bring up Colonel Owen,

1[John Ashe was chairman of the Committee of Compounding until its recon-
struction in the spring of 1650, and Jenner was one of its most active members.
These two were usually deputed by the Committee to report matters to the House
of Commons. }

2(It is not Sir John Owen who is here referred to, but another (uéde Mrs. Hutchin-
son's Life of her Husband, ed. Firth, ii. 385-7). Sir John was taken on June 5, and
imprisoned in Denbigh Castle (véde J. R. Phillips’ Cz? War in Wales, i. 410, and
Rushworth, vii. 1146, 1204). Sir John moreover had compounded in May, 1647,
and so could not now be petitioning to doso. This is Col. William Owen, of
Shropshire, whose case will be found in the Calendar of Committee for Com-
pounding, p. 1861. If the Committee had received Cromwell's letter on the 23rd,
as is possible, they took no notice of it, for on that day they issued a fresh order to
the Governor to ‘‘ yield conformity” and send up Owen ‘in pursuance of an Act
of Parliament of November 9."]

3 Antea, p. 274.

4(The Governor of Nottingham here alluded to was more probably Thomas.
Ae deputy for Col. Huichinson. See Calendar of Committee for Compounding,
p. 1856].

5 Commons Journals, vi. 70,

1648.) LETTER LX XXII., KNOTTINGLEY 387

or take bail for his coming up to make his composition, he having
made an humble petition to you! for the same. I must profess
to you, I was not a little astonished at the thing.

If I be not mistaken, the House of Commons did vote all those
traitors that did adhere to, or bring in, the Scots in their late
invading of this kingdom under Duke Hamilton, and not without
very clear justice, this being a more prodigious Treason than any
that had been perpetrated before ; because the former quarrel
on their part was that Englishmen might rule over one another ;
this to vassalise us toa foreign nation.2 And their fault who
have appeared in this summer’s business is certainly double to
theirs who were in the first, because it is the repetition of the
same offence against all the witnesses that God has borne,? by
making and abetting to a second war.

And if this was their justice,* and upon so good grounds, I
wonder how it comes to pass that so eminent actors should so
easily be received to compound. You will pardon me if I tell you
that, if it were contrary to some of your judgments that at the
rendition of Oxford, though we had the town in consideration,®
and blood saved to boot, yet two years purchase was thought too
little to expiate their offence ;® but now, when you have such men

1(Carlyle altered this to ‘‘ petition to the Parliament” but Cromwell was right.
The petitions to compound were usually addressed to the Committee. }

2(**Here was the sting, for we have never to forget that Oliver, like Milton,
was ever English of the English.” Morley’s Cromwedl, p. 266.]

3 From Naseby downwards, God, in the battle-whirlwind, seemed to speak and
witness very audibly.

4 House of Commons. 5 Town as some recompense.

®Oxford was surrendered 2oth-24th June 1646 (axéea, p. 199); the Malignants
found there were to have acomposition, not exceeding Two Years revenue for estates
of inheritance (Rushworth, vi. 280, 5),—which the victorious Presbyterian Party,
belike Jenner and Ashe amongst the rest, had exclaimed against as too lenient a
procedure. Very different now when the new Malignants, though a doud/y criminal
set, are bone of their own bone! [Carlyle—saying that this sentence is ‘‘ unin-
telligible to the careless reader, so hasty is it and overcrowded with meaning in the
original’’—altered it to ‘‘ you will pardon me if I tell you how contrary this is to
some of your judgments at the rendition of Oxford, though we had the town in
consideration and ‘our’ blood saved to boot; yet two years perhaps was thought
too little to expiate their offence ;” but as we have the original of the letter we know
that the text as printed above is what Cromwell really wrote, and although the
sentence will not construe, the meaning is quite clear. There were several other
alterations (or mistakes) in Carlyle’s version of this letter. Besides some unim-

portant errors, and printing ‘‘ petition to the Parliament” in line 4, instead of
** petition to you,” he left out the next phrase altogether, He had ‘‘ perfected’ instead

388 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Nov.

in your hands, and it will cost you nothing to do justice; now
after all this trouble and the hazard of a second war, for a little
more money ! all offences shall be pardoned !

This gentleman was taken with Sir Marmaduke Langdale,
in their flight together: I presume you have heard what is
become of him. Let me remember you that out of this garrison
was fetched not long since (I believe whilst we were in heat of
action) Colonel Humphrey Mathews, than whom this cause we
have fought for has not had a more dangerous enemy ; and he
not guilty only of being an enemy, but he apostatised from your
cause and quarrel; having been a colonel, if not more, under
you, and ‘then’ the desperatest promoter of the Welsh rebellion
amongst them all. And how near you were brought to ruin
thereby, all men that know anything can tell ;? and this man was
taken away to composition, by what order I know not.3

Gentlemen, though my sense does appear more severe than
perhaps you would have it, yet give me leave to tell you I find
a sense amongst the officers concerning such things as these,
even to amazement; which truly is not so much to see their
blood made so cheap, as to see such manifest witnessings of God
(so terrible and so just) no more reverenced.

I have directed the Governor to acquaint the Lord-General
herewith, and rest,

Gentlemen,
Your most obedient servant,
OLIVER CRoMWELL.*

Endorsed, “ Lieutenant-General Cromwell about prisoners.”

of ‘‘ perpetrated ” in line 10 ; ‘‘ perhaps” instead of “ purchase ’ in line 22, and ‘‘ those
men"’ instead of ‘these, even” in line 41, which last misreading involved the
insertion of “‘ the treatment of” before the word ‘‘ those” in order to make sense. ]

1 Goldsmiths’ Hall has a true feeling for Money ; a dimmer one for Justice, it seems !

* Witness Chepstow, St. Fagan’s, Pembroke :—‘ this man' is Mathews.

3[The order was made by the Committee for Compounding itself (as Cromwell
probably knew very well) on September 26, that he might prosecute his come
position, bail being taken of two sureties in 2,500/. apiece. Hi- fine, fixed at a
third, was 1,397/. 6s. 8d. and was paid the following spring. An interesting point’
about his case is that 500/. of his fine was to be paid ‘to Mr, Thomason, for the
library 4 MSS. bought from him.” See Calendar of Committee for Compounding,
Pp. 1855. |

“Sloane MS. 1519, fol. 94 [f. 186. Signed only],

i648,] LETTER LXXXII., KNOTTINGLEY 389

Here is a sour morsel for Jenner and Ashe; different from
what they were expecting! It is to be hoped they will digest
this piece of admonition, and come forth on the morrow two
sadder and two wiser men. For Colonel Owen, at all events,
there is clearly no outlook, at present, but sitting reflective in
the strong-room of Nottingham Castle, whither his bad Genius
had led him. May escape beheading on this occasion ; but very
narrowly. He ‘was taken with Sir Marmaduke in their flight
together:’ one of the confused Welshmen discomfited in June
and July last, who had fled to join Hamilton, and be worse dis-
comfited a second time. The House some days ago had voted
that ‘Sir John Owen,’ } our ‘Colonel Owen,’ should get off with
‘banishment ;’ likewise that Lord Capel, the Earl of Holland,
and other capital Delinquents should be ‘banished ;* and even
that James Earl of Cambridge (James Duke of Hamilton) should
be ‘fined 100,000.’ Such votes are not unlikely to produce ‘a
sense amongst the Officers,’ who had to grapple with these men,
as with devouring dragons lately, life to life. Such votes—will
need to be rescinded.?. Such, and some others! For indeed the
Presbyterian Party has rallied in the House during the late high
blaze of Royalism ; and got a Treaty set on foot as we saw, and
even got the Eleven brought back again.—

Jenner and Ashe are old stagers, having entered Parliament
at the beginning. They are frequently seen in public business ;
assiduous subalterns. Ashe sat afterwards in Oliver's Parlia-
ments.2 Of this Ashe I will remember another thing: once,
some years ago, when the House was about thanking some
Monthly-fast Preacher, Ashe said pertinently, “ What is the use
of thanking a Preacher who spoke so low that nobody could
hear him?” 4

Colonel Humphrey Mathews, we are glad to discover,® was one
ofthe persons taken in Pembroke Castle by Oliver himself in
July last: brought along with him, on the march towards Preston,
and left, as the other Welsh Prisoners were, at Nottingham ;—
out of which most just durance some pragmatical official, Ashe,
Jenner, or another, ‘by what order I know not,’ has seen good
to deliver him; him, ‘the desperatest promoter of the Welsh
Rebellion amongst them all.’ Such is red-tape even in a Heroic

1[This zs Sir John Owen; not ‘‘ our Colonel Owen” of Nottingham Castle. ]
Passed, roth November 1648 (Commons Journads, vi. 3); repealed, 13th De-
cember (with a Declaration ; Somers Tracts, v. 167).
3 Parliamentary History, xxi. 3.
4 D' Ewes MSS, p. 414. 5 Cromwelliana, pp. 41, 42.

390 SECOND CIVIL WAR [20 Nov.

Puritanic Age! No wonder ‘the Officers have a sense of it,’
amounting even ‘to amazement.’ Our blood that we have shed
in the Quarrel, this you shall account as nothing, since you so
please ; but these ‘manifest witnessings of God, so terrible and
so just,'—are they not witnessings of God; are they mere sports
of chance? Ye wretched infidel red-tape mortals, what will or
can become of you? By and by, if this course hold, it will
appear that ‘you are no Parliament ;’ that you are a nameless
unbelieving rabble, with the mere title of Parliament, who must
go about your business elsewhither, with soldiers’ pikes in your
rearward !—

This Lieutenant-General is not without temper, says Mr. Maid-
ston: ‘temper exceeding fiery, as I have known; yet the flame
‘of it kept down for most part, or soon allayed ;—and naturally
‘compassionate towards objects in distress, even to an effeminate
‘measure. Though God had made him a heart wherein was left
‘little room for any fear but what was due to God Himself, yet
‘did he exceed in tenderness towards sufferers,’ 1—yes, and in
rigour against infidel quacks and godless detestable persons,
which is the opposite phasis of that, he was by no means wanting !

LETTER LXXXIII

“Aut the Regiments here have petitioned my Lord General
‘against the Treaty’ at Newport, ‘and for Justice and a Settle-
‘ment of the Kingdom. They desired the Lieutenant-General
‘to recommend their Petition; which he hath done in the Letter
‘following ; ’"—which is of the same date, and goes in the same
bag with that to Jenner and Ashe, just given.?

For his Excellency the Lord General F. airfax, ‘at St Albans : These’

Knottingley, 2oth November 1648.
My Lorp,

I find a very great sense in the officers of the
regiments of the sufferings and the ruin of this poor kingdom, and

1 Maidston’s Letter to Winthrop (Thurloe, i. 766).

*( The petition from Cromwell's own regiment to himself, sent to him along with
that for presentation to the Lord General, is amongst the Clarke papers at Little- |
cote, It is signed by seventeen of his officers (See A/zst. MZSS. Commissioners’
Report on Mr. Leyborne-Popham's MSS., p. 9). The troops in Yorkshire were
following the lead of Ireton's regiment, whose petition was published on October 19.]

1648.) LETTER LX XXIV., KNOTTINGLEY 391

in them all a very great zeal to have impartial justice done upon
Offenders ; and I must confess, I do in all, from my heart, concur
with them ; and I verily think and am persuaded they are things
which God puts into our hearts.

I shall not need to offer anything to your Excellency: I know
God teaches you, and that He hath manifested His presence so
to you as that you will give glory to Him in the eyes of all the
world. I held it my duty, having received these petitions and
letters, and being ‘so’ desired by the framers thereof, to present
them to you. The good Lord work His will upon your heart,
enabling you to it; and the presence of Almighty God go along
with you. Thus prays,

My Lord,
Your most humble and faithful servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

This same day, Monday 20th November 1648, the Army from
St. Albans, by Colonel Ewer and a Deputation, presents its
humble unanimous ‘ Remonstrance’ to the House; craving that
the same be taken ‘into speedy and serious consideration’! It is
indeed a most serious Document ; tending to the dread Unknown!
Whereupon ensue ‘high debates,’ Whether we shall take it into
consideration? Debates to be resumed this day week. The
Army, before this day week, moves up to Windsor ; will see a
little what consideration there is. Newport Treaty is just expir-
ing ; Presbyterian Royalism, on the brink of desperate crisis, adds
still two days of life to it.

LETTER LXXXIV

Tue Army came to Windsor on Saturday the 25th; on which
same day Oliver, from Knottingley, is writing a remarkable
Letter, the last of the series, to Hammond in the Isle of Wight,

* Rushworth, vii. 1339.

1 Commons Journals, vi. 81; Remonstrance itself in Rushworth, vii. 1330.
{Rushworth gives only an abstract, but there is a copy amongst the King’s
Pamphlets, E. 473 (11). ]

392 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

who seems to be in much strait about ‘that Person’ and futile
Treaty now under his keeping there.!

First, however, read this Note, of like date, on a local matter:
one of many Notes which a vigilant Lieutenant-General, be where
he may, has to importune the Governing Powers with. Hull
Garrison and Governor Overton, like most garrisons and persons,
are short of pay. Grocers’ Hall, Haberdashers’ Hall, or some
section of the Finance Department, ought absolutely to take
thought of it.

For my noble Friend Thomas St. Nicholas, Esquire: ‘ These, at
London’ ?
Knottingley, 25th November 1648.

Sir,
I suppose it’s not unknown to you how much

the country is in arrear to the garrison of Hull; as likewise how
probable it is that the garrison will break, unless some speedy
course be taken to get them money; the soldiers at the present
being ready to mutiny, as not having money to buy them bread,
and without money the stubborn townspeople will not trust them
for the worth of a penny.

Sir, I must beg of you that, as you tender the good of the
country, so far as the security of that garrison is motioned, you
would give your assistance to the helping of them to their money
which the country owes them. The Governor ? will apply himself
to you, either in person or by letter. I pray you do for him
herein as in a business of very high consequence. I am the more
earnest with you, as having a very deep sense how dangerous the
event may be, of their being neglected in the matter of their pay.
I rest upon your favour herein, and subscribe myself,

Sir,
Your very humble servant,
Ottver Cromwett.*

1[And, two or three days later, a letter to Fairfax concerning the ‘‘ Remon-
strance.” See Supplement, No. 37.]

2{Certainly not London. Probably York ; possibly Wakefield. ]

3[Col. Robert Overton. ]

* Kimber's (anonymous) Life of Cromwell (4th edition, London, 1741), p. 92;
Not given in the rst edition; no notice whence.

oe

1648,) LETTER LXXXV., KNOTTINGLEY 393

Hull Garrison does not ‘break :’ doubtless St. Nicholas, a chief
Clerk, of weight in his department, did what he could. A Kentish
man this St. Nicholas,! if any one could be supposed to care what
he was; came to be Recorder of Canterbury, and even refractory
Member for Canterbury ;? has his seat, for the present, in the
Grocers’-Hall region, among the budgets or ‘bottomless bags,’ as
Independency Walker calls them. And now for the remarkable
Letter contemporaneous with this :

LETTER LXXXV
To Colonel Robert Hammond : These

‘Knottingley, near Pontefract,’
25th November 1648.
Dear Rosin,

No man rejoiceth more to see a line from
thee than myself. I know thou hast long been under trial. Thou
shalt be no loser by it. All ‘ things’ must work for the best.

Thou desirest to hear of my experiences. I can tell thee: I
am such a one as thou didst formerly know, having a body of sin
and death, but I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord there
is no condemnation, though much infirmity, and I wait for the
redemption. And in this poor condition I obtain mercy, and
sweet consolation through the Spirit, and find abundant cause
every day to exalt the Lord, and abase flesh, and herein? I have
some exercise.

As to outward dispensations, if we may so call them, we

have not been without our share of beholding some remarkable

1[Of Yorkshire, in the first instance, At this time he was Treasurer or Receiver
of the County Committee of the West Riding. Hence Cromwell's application to
him. He removed into Kent in 1649 or 1650. See Calendar of Commitiee for Com-
pounding, pp. 379, 380. After his removal to Kent, he was made one of the counsel
to the Committee for Compounding, Clerk of the Parliament and, in 1659, Recorder
of Canterbury. It is unlikely that he ever had anything to do with Grocers’ Hall,
but Carlyle more than once speaks of that committee as if it were connected with
the Committee for Compounding. } 4

* Whitlocke, September 1656 (2d edition, p. 642) ; Old Parliamentary History,

xxi. 8; and Commons Journals, vii. 650, 730.

%‘and in the latter respect at least.’

394 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

providences, and appearances of the Lord. His presence hath
been amongst us, and by the light of His countenance we have
prevailed! We are sure, the good-will of Him who dwelt in the
bush has shined upon us, and we can humbly say, We know
in whom we have believed, who is able and will perfect what
remaineth, and us also in doing what is well-pleasing in His
eyesight.

I find some trouble in your spirit ; occasioned first, not only by
the continuance of your sad and heavy burden, as you call it, upon
you, but ‘also’ by the dissatisfaction you take at the ways of
some good men whom you love with your heart, who through
this principle, That it is lawful for a lesser part, if in the right,
to force ‘a numerical majority’ &c.

To the first: call not your burden sad or heavy. If your
Father laid it upon you, He intended neither. He is the Father
of lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, who of
His own will begot us, and bade us count it all joy when such
things befall us ; they being for the exercise of faith and patience,
whereby in the end we shall be made perfect (James i.).

Dear Robin, our fleshly reasonings ensnare us. These make
us say, heavy, sad, pleasant, easy. Was there not a little of this
when Robert Hammond, through dissatisfaction too, desired re-
tirement from the Army, and thought of quiet in the Isle of
Wight?? Did not God find him out there? I believe he will
never forget this. And now I perceive he is to seek again ; partly
through his sad and heavy burden, and partly through his dis-
satisfaction with friends’ actings.

Dear Robin, thou and I were never worthy to be door-keepers
in this service. If thou wilt seek, seek to know the mind of
God in all that chain of Providence, whereby God brought thee
thither, and that person to thee ; how, before and since, God has
ordered him, and affairs concerning him: and then tell me,
whether there be not some glorious and high meaning in all this,

1At Preston, &c. ? 6th September of the foregoing Year.

1648.) LETTER LXXXV., KNOTTINGLEY 395

above what thou hast yet attained? And, laying aside thy
fleshly reason, seek of the Lord to teach thee what that is; and
He will do it. I dare be positive to say, it is not that the wicked
should be exalted, that God should so appear as indeed He hath
done.! For there is no peace to them. No, it is set upon the
hearts of such as fear the Lord, and we have witness upon wit-
ness, That it shall go ill with them and their partakers. I say
again, seek that spirit to teach thee ; which is the spirit of know-
ledge and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, of
wisdom and of the fear of the Lord. That spirit will close thine
eyes and stop thine ears, so that thou shalt not judge by them,
but thou shalt judge for the meek of the earth, and thou shalt
be made able to do accordingly. The Lord direct thee to that
which is well-pleasing in His eyesight.

As to thy dissatisfaction with friends’ actings upon that
supposed principle, I wonder not at that. If a man take not
his own burden well, he shall hardly others’, especially if involved
by so near a relation of love and Christian brotherhood as thou
art. I shall not take upon me to satisfy, but I hold myself bound
to lay my thoughts before so dear a friend. The Lord do His
own will.

You say: “God hath appointed authorities among the nations,
“to which active or passive obedience is to be yielded. This
“resides in England in the Parliament. Therefore active or
“passive” &c.?

Authorities and powers are the ordinance of God. This or
that species is of human institution, and limited, some with
larger, others with stricter bands, each one according to its con-
stitution. ‘But’ I do not therefore think the authorities may do
anything,’ and yet such obedience ‘be’ due, but all agree there
are cases in which it is lawful to resist. If so, your ground fails,

1¥For other purposes that God has so manifested Himself as, in these transactions
of ours, He has done.

2{Carlyle added the word ‘'resistance,” but the syllogism would rather require
“‘ obedience. ’’]

3 Whatsoever they like.

396 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

and so likewise the inference. Indeed, dear Robin, not to
multiply words, the query is, Whether ours be such a case?
This ingenuously is the true question.

To this I shall say nothing, though I could say very much;
but only desire thee to see what thou findest in thy own heart
as to two or three plain considerations. First, whether Salus
Populi be a sound position?! Secondly, whether in the way in
hand,’ really and before the Lord, before whom conscience must
stand, this be provided for, or the whole fruit of the war like to
be frustrated, and all most like to turn to what it was, and worse ?
And this, contrary to engagements, declarations, implicit covenants
with those ° who ventured their lives upon those covenants and
engagements, without whom perhaps, in equity, relaxation ought
not to be? Thirdly, Whether this Army be not a lawful power,
called by God to oppose and fight against the King upon some
stated grounds ; and being in power to such ends, may not oppose
one name of authority, for those ends, as well as another, the out-
ward authority that called them, not by their power making the
quarrel lawful, but it being so in itself?4 If so it may be acting
will be justified in foro humano.—But truly these kinds of reason-
ings may be but fleshly, either with or against: only it is good to
try what truth may be in them. And the Lord teach us,

My dear friend, let us look into providences ; surely they
mean somewhat. They hang so together; have been so constant,
so clear and unclouded. Malice, swoln malice against God’s
people, now called Saints, to root out their name; and yet they,
‘these poor Saints,’ by providence, having arms, and therein
blessed with defence and more, I desire, he that is for a
principle of suffering > would not too much slight this. I slight
not him who is so minded: but let us beware lest fleshly reason-

a The safety of the people the supreme law :’ is that a true doctrine or a false
one

? By this Parliamentary Treaty with the King. 3 Us soldiers.

‘(Carlyle altered this to: ‘‘ for those ends, as well as another N ame,—since it was
not the outward Authority summoning them that by z¢s power made the quarrel law-
ful, but the quarrel was lawful in itself? ay

5 Passive obedience.

1648.) LETTER LXXXV., KNOTTINGLEY 397

ing see more safety in making use of this principle than in acting.
Who acts, and resolves not through God to be willing to part

with all? Our hearts are very deceitful, on the right and on the
left.

What think you of Providence disposing the hearts of so many
of God’s people this way, especially in this poor Army, wherein
the great God has vouchsafed to appear. I know not one officer
among us but is on the increasing hand.!_ And let me say it is
here in the North, after much patience, we trust the same Lord
who hath framed our minds in our actings, is with us in this also.
And this contrary to a natural tendency, and to those comforts
our hearts could wish to enjoy with others. And the difficulties
probably to be encountered with, and the enemies, not few, even
all that is glorious in this world, with appearance of united names,
titles and authorities, and yet not terrified,” only desiring to fear

our great God, that we do nothing against His will. Truly this
is our condition.®

And to conclude. We in this Northern Army were in a waiting
posture, desiring to see what the Lord would lead us to. Anda
Declaration‘ is put out, at which many are shaken: although we

1 Come or coming over to this opinion.

2(Carlyle altered this paragraph, but gave the original in a footnote, with the
observation ‘‘ The incorrect original, rushing on in an eager, ungrammatical manner,
were it not that common readers might miss the meaning of it, would please me
better; at any rate, I subjoin it here as somewhat characteristic.” As it does not
seem to need a very uncommon reader to grasp Cromwell's meaning, what he did
say has now been given in the text. This is what Carlyle thinks he ought to
have said, ‘‘And let me say, it is after much patience—here in the North. We
trust, the same Lord who hath framed our minds in our actings is with us in this
also. And all contrary to a natural tendency, and to those comforts our hearts
could wish to enjoy as well as others. And the difficulties probably to be-en-
countered with, and the enemies :—not few; even all that is glorious in this world.
Appearance of united names, titles and authorities ‘all against us ;\—and yet not
terrified, ‘we;’.]

3[** Briefly stated, Cromwell's argument was that the victories of the army, and
the convictions of the godly, were external and internal evidence of God’s will, to be
obeyed asa duty. It was dangerous reasoning, and not less dangerous that secular
and political motives coincided with the dictates of religious enthusiasm. Similar
arguments might be held to justify not merely the temporary intervention of the
army, but its permanent assumption of the government of England. Practical good
sense and conservative instincts prevented Cromwell from adopting the extreme
consequences of his theory; with most of his comrades the logic of fanaticism was
qualified by no such considerations.” Firth’s Cromwedd, p. 213.]

4 Remonstrance of the Army, presented by Ewer on Monday last.

398 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

could perhaps have wished the stay of it till after the treaty, yet
seeing it is come out, we trust to rejoice in the will of the Lord,
waiting His further pleasure. Dear Robin, beware of men, look
up to the Lord. Let Him be free to speak and command in thy
heart. Take heed of the things I fear thou hast reasoned thyself
into, and thou shalt be able through Him, without consulting
flesh and blood, to do valiantly for Him and for His people.

Thou mentionest somewhat as if, by acting against such op-
position as is like to be, there will be a tempting of God. Dear
Robin, tempting of God ordinarily is either by acting presumptu-
ously in carnal confidence, or in unbelief through diffidence : both
these ways Israel tempted God in the wilderness, and He was
grieved by them. The encountering ‘of’ difficulties, therefore,
makes us not to tempt God ; but acting before and without faith.!
If the Lord have in any measure persuaded His people, as gener-
ally He hath, of the lawfulness, nay of the duty, this persuasion
prevailing upon the heart is faith, and acting thereupon is acting
in faith, and the more the difficulties are, the more faith. And
it is most sweet that he that is not persuaded have patience to-
wards them that are, and judge not: and this will free thee from
the trouble of others’ actings, which, thou sayest, adds to thy grief.
Only let me offer two or three things, and I have done.

Dost thou not think this fear of the Levellers (of whom there
is no fear) that they would destroy nobility, had caused some to
rake up corruption ; to find it lawful to make this ruining hypo-
critical agreement, on one part ?? Hath not this biased even some
good men? I will not say, their fear will come upon them ; but
if it do, they will themselves bring it upon themselves. Have not
some of our friends, by their passive principle (which I judge not,
only I think it liable to temptation as well as the active, and
neither good but as we are led into them by God,—neither to be
reasoned into, because the heart is deceitful), been occasioned to
overlook what is just and honest, and ‘to’ think the people of

‘Very true, my Lord General,—then, now, and always !
* Hollow Treaty at Newport,

1648.) LETTER LXXXV., KNOTTINGLEY 399

God may have as much or more good the one way than the other ?
Good by this Man, against whom the Lord hath witnessed ; and
whom thou knowest. Is this so in their hearts ; or is it reasoned,
forced in?!

Robin, I have done. Ask we our hearts, whether we think
that, after all, these dispensations, the like to which many gene-
rations cannot afford, should end in so corrupt reasonings of good
men, and should so hit the designings of bad? Thinkest thou,
in thy heart, that the glorious dispensations of God point out to
this? Or to teach His people to trust in Him, and to wait for
better things, when, it may be, better are sealed to many of their
spirits?2 And as a poor looker-on, I had rather live in the hope
of that spirit ‘which believes that God doth so teach us,’ and
take my share with them, expecting a good issue, than be led
away with the other.®

1] think it is ‘reasoned’ in, and by bad arguments too, my Lord General!
The inner heart of the men, in real contact with the inner heart of the matter, had
little to do with all that :—alas, was there ever any such ‘contact’ with the real truth
of any matter, on the part of such men, your Excellency! [‘‘Surely we have here
laid bare before us Cromwellian opinion in the making. As in other men, the wish
was father to the thought. The desire, whether for private or for public ends, shapes
the thoughts, and, in Cromwell’s case, as the desires swept a wider compass than
with most men, the thoughts took a larger scope, and, to some extent, jostled with
one another. The cloudy mixture would clear itself soon enough.” Gardiner’s
Cromwell, p. 10%. |

2 Already indubitably sure to many of them.

3[Mr. Morley says that Cromwell in this—‘‘ one of the most remarkable letters
he ever wrote’’—produces three arguments. ‘‘ First, is it sound to stand on safety
of the people as the supreme law? Second, will the treaty between King and Parlia-
ment secure the safety of the people, or will it not frustrate the whole fruit of the war
and bring back all to what it was and worse? Third, is it not possible that the army
too may be a lawful power, ordained by God to fight the King on stated grounds,
and that the army may resist on the same grounds one name of authority, the
Parliament, as well as the other authority, the King. Then he suddenly is dissatisfied
with his three arguments. . . . Cromwell’s understanding was far too powerful not
to perceive that sa/us populi and the rest of it would serve just as well for Strafford
or for Charles as it served for Ireton and the army, and that usurpation by troopers
must be neither more nor less hard to justify in principle than usurpation by a
King. So he falls back on the simpler ground of ‘providences,’ always his
favourite stronghold. . . . From the point of a modern’s carnal reasoning all this
has a thoroughly sophistic flavour, and it leaves a doubt of its actual weight in Oliver's
own mind. . . . In concluding the letter he denounces the Treaty of Newport as
a ‘ruining hypocritical agreement’ and remonstrates with those of their friends who
expect good from Charles. . . . A writer of a hostile school has remarked. in this
memorable letter ‘its cautious obscurity, shadowy significance ; its suavity, tender-
ness, subtlety ; the way in which he alludes to more than he mentions, suggests more
than pronounces his own argumentative intention, and opens an indefinite view, all

400 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Nov.

This trouble I have been at, because my soul loves thee, and
I would not have thee swerve, nor lose any glorious opportunity
the Lord puts into thy hand. The Lord be thy counsellor.
Dear Robin, I rest thine,

O.tverR CRoMWELL,*

Colonel Hammond, the ingenuous young man whom Oliver
much loves, did not receive this Letter at the Isle of Wight
whither it was directed ; young Colonel Hammond is no longer

there. On Monday the 27th, there came to him Colonel Ewer, |

he of the Remonstrance ; Colonel Ewer with new force, with an
Order from the Lord General and Army-Council that Colonel
Hammond do straightway repair to Windsor, being wanted at
head-quarters there. A young Colonel, with dubitations such as
those of Hammond’s, will not suit in that Isle at present.1 Ewer,
on the Tuesday night, a night of storm and pouring rain, besets
his Majesty’s lodgings in the Town of Newport (for his Majesty
is still on parole there), with strange soldiers, in a strange state
of readiness, the smoke of their gun-matches poisoning the air of
his Majesty’s apartment itself;—and on the morrow morning at
eight of the clock, calls out his Majesty’s coach; moves off with
his Majesty in grim reticence and rigorous military order, to
Hurst Castle, a small solitary stronghold on the opposite beach
yonder.?

For, at London, matters are coming rapidly to a crisis. The
resumed Debate, “Shall the Army Remonstrance be taken into

the hard features of which he softly puts aside.’ [J. B. Mozley]. Quite true; but
what if this be the real Cromwell, and represents the literal working of his own
habit and temper.” Morley's Cromwe//, p. 268. ]

* Birch, p. ror; ends the Volume.

1{Hammond evidently wrote to the army authorities what he had said to Crom-
well; that his obedience was due to Parliament. He refused to imprison the King,
and renewed this refusal when Ewer arrived with orders to that effect on November
27. But Ewer did not himself removethe King. He left the island with Hammond,
next day ; Lieutenant-Colonel Cobbet and Captain Merriman were sent over by
Fairfax and the Council of Officers, took the King out of the hands of Hammond's
deputies on the morning of Friday, December 1, and conveyed him to Hurst Castle.

The warrant to Cobbett and Merriman is printed in the Clarke Pagers, ii. 63.
The Governor of Hurst Castle was Captain Thomas Eyre, and to this similarity of
name is due the confusion in the contemporaneous accounts which led Carlyle to
believe that Ewer had carried Charles to the mainland. }

? Colonel Cooke's Narrative, in Rushworth, vii. 1344

*{See Cromwell's letter to Fairfax, Supplement 37. |

Lusi ia

ths

——

(

1648.) LETTER LXXXV., KNOTTINGLEY 401

consideration?” does not come out affirmative ; on the contrary,
on Thursday the 30th, it comes out negative by a Majority of
Ninety: “No, we will not take it into consideration.” —*« No?”
The Army at Windsor, thereupon, spends again ‘a day in Prayer.’
The Army at Windsor has decided on the morrow that it will
march to London :—marches, arrives accordingly, on Saturday
December 2d ; quarters itself in Whitehall, in St. James’s ; ‘and
‘other great vacant Houses in the skirts of the City and Villages
‘about, no offence being given anywhere.’! In the drama of
Modern History one knows not any graver, more noteworthy
scene ;—earnest as very Death and Judgment. They have
decided to have Justice, these men; to see God’s Justice done,
and His judgments executed on this Earth. The abysses where
the thunders and the splendours are bred,—the reader sees them
again laid bare ; and black Madness lying close to the Wisdom
which is brightest and highest :—and owls and godless men who
hate the lightning and the light, and love the mephitic dusk and
darkness, are no judges of the actions of heroes! ‘Shedders of |
blood?’ Yes, blood is occasionally shed. The healing Surgeon,
the sacrificial Priest, the august Judge pronouncer of God’s oracles
to men, these and the atrocious Murderer, are alike shedders of
blood ; and it is an owl’s eye that, except for the dresses they
wear, discerns no difference in these !—Let us leave the owl to
his hootings ; let us get on with our Chronology and swift course
of events,

On Monday 4th December, the House, for the last time, takes
‘into farther debate’ the desperate question, Whether his Ma-
jesty’s concessions in that Treaty of Newport are a ground of
settlement ?—debates it all Monday; has debated it all Friday
and Saturday before. Debates it all Monday, ‘till five o’clock
next morning ;’ at five o’clock next morning, decides it, Yea.
By a Majority of Forty-six. One-hundred-and-twenty-nine to
Eighty-three, it is at five o’clock on Tuesday morning decided,
Yea, they are a ground of settlement. The Army Chiefs and
the Minority consult together, in deep and deepest deliberation,
through that day and night ; not, I suppose, without Prayer; and
on the morrow morning this is what we see:

Wednesday 6th December 1648, ‘Colonel Rich’s regiment of
‘horse and Colonel Pride’s regiment of foot were a guard to the
‘Parliament ; and the City Trainbands were discharged’ from

1 Rushworth, vii. 1350.
VOL. 1.—26

402 SECOND CIVIL WAR [25 Noy.

that employment.! Yes, they were! Colonel Rich’s horse stand
ranked in Palaceyard, Colonel Pride’s foot in Westminster Hall
and at all entrances to the Commons House, this day: and in
Colonel Pride’s hand is a written list of names, names of the
chief among the Hundred-and-twenty-nine ; and at his side is
my Lord Grey of Groby, who, as this Member after that comes
up, whispers or beckons, “ He is one of them: he cannot enter!”
And Pride gives the word, “To the Queen’s Court ;”’ and Mem-
ber after Member is marched thither, Forty-one of them this
day : and kept there in a state bordering on rabidity, asking, By
what Law? and ever again, By what Law? Is there a colour or
faintest shadow of Law, to be found in any of the Books, Year-
books, Rolls of Parliament, Bractons, Fletas, Cokes upon Lyttleton,
for this? Hugh Peters visits them; has little comfort, no light
as to the Law; confesses, “It is by the Law of Necessity ; truly,
by the Power of the Sword.”

It must be owned the Constable’s baton is fairly down, this
day ; overborne by the Power of the Sword, and a Law not to be
found in any of the Books. At evening the distracted Forty-one
are marched to Mr. Duke’s Tavern hard-by, a ‘Tavern called
Hell;’ and very imperfectly accommodated for the night. Sir
Symonds D’Ewes, who has ceased taking notes long since ; Mr.
William Prynne, louder than any in the question of Law; Waller,
Massey, Harley, and other remnants of the old Eleven, are of this
unlucky Forty-one; among whom too we count little Clement
Walker ‘in his gray suit with his little stick,’ *__asking in the voice
of the indomitablest terrier or Blenheim cocker, “ By what Law ?
I ask again, By what Law?’’ Whom no mortal will ever be able
to answer, Such is the far-famed Purging of the House by Colonel
Pride.

This evening, while the Forty-one are getting lodged in Mr.
Duke’s, Lieutenant-General Cromwell came to Town.? Pontefract
Castle is not taken; he has left Lambert looking after that, and
come up hither to look after more important things.

The .Commons on Wednesday did send out to demand ‘the

Rushworth, vii. 1353 :—see Whitlocke (2d edition, p. 360), Walker's Zndepen-
dency, &c.

2 List in Rushworth, p. 1355.

5[‘ Lieutenant-General Cromwell, the night after the interruption of the House,
arrived from Scotland and lay at Whitehall, where, and at other places, he declared
that he had not been acquainted with this design; yet since it was done, he was
glad of it, and would endeavour to maintain it.” Ludlow’s Jemoirs, vol. i. p. 211,
ed, Firth, ]

1648.) LETTER LXXXVI, LONDON 403

Members of this House’ from Colonel Pride; but Pride made
respectful evasive answer ;—could not, for the moment, comply
with the desires of the Honourable House. On the Thursday
Lieutenant-General Cromwell is thanked; and Pride’s Purge
continues: new men of the Majority are seized; others scared
away need no seizing ;—above a Hundred in all;! who are sent
into their countries, sent into the Tower ; sent out of our way, and
trouble us no farther. The Minority has now become Majority ;
there is now clear course for it, clear resolution there has for some
time back been in it. What its resolution was, and its action that
it did in pursuance thereof, ‘an action not done in a corner, but
in sight of all the Nations,’ and of God who made the Nations,
we know, and the whole world knows !—

LETTER LXXXVI

Dutcu Doristaus, the learned Doctor, late Judge-Advocate,
employed in many weighty things, and soon to be employed in
the weightiest, wants now a very small accommodation which is in
the gift of certain Cambridge people. A busy Lieutenant-General,
while the world-whirlwind is piping loud, has to write for him this
small Note withal :

To the Right Worshipful the Master and Fellows of Trinity
Hall in Cambridge : These

‘London,’ 18th December 1648.
GENTLEMEN,
I am given to understand that by the late

decease of Dr. Duck, his chamber is become vacant in the
Doctors Commons, to which Dr. Dorislaus now desireth to be
your tenant: who hath done service unto the Parliament from
the beginning of these wars, and hath been constantly employed
by the Parliament in many weighty affairs, and especially of
late, beyond the seas, with the States General of the United
Provinces.

If you please to prefer him before any other, paying rent and

List in Somers Tracts, vi. 37; very incorrect, as all the Lists are.

404 SECOND CIVIL WAR (29 Jan.

fine to your College, I shall take it as a courtesy at your hands
whereby you will oblige,
Your assured friend and servant,
O.tveR CRoMWELL.*

Whether Dorislaus got Duck’s Chamber, we shall not ask;
being, some three weeks hence, employed as Advocate in the
King’s Trial, and shortly after assassinated at the Hague for that
work,! it proved to be of no importance to Dorislaus. The loud
world-whirlwind pipes as before.?

DEATH-WARRANT

Tue Trial of Charles Stuart falls not to be described in this
place ; the deep meanings that lie in it cannot be so much as
glanced at here. Oliver Cromwell attends in the High Court of
Justice at every session except one ; Fairfax sits only in the first.
Ludlow, Whalley, Walton, names known to us, are also constant
attendants in that High Court, during that long-memorable
Month of January 1649. The King is thrice brought to the
Bar; refuses to plead, comports himself with royal dignity, with
royal haughtiness, strong in his divine right ; ‘smiles’ con-
temptuously, ‘looks with an austere countenance ;’—does not
seem, till the very last, to have fairly believed that they would
dare to sentence him. But they were men sufficiently provided
with daring; men, we are bound to see, who sat there as in the
Presence of the Maker of all men, as executing the judgments of
Heaven above, and had not the fear of any man or thing on the
Earth below. Bradshaw said to the King, “Sir, you are not
“permitted to issue out in these discoursings. This Court is
“satisfied of its authority. No Court will bear to hear its
“authority questioned in that manner,”—‘“,Clerk, read the
“sentence !”” 3—

* Trinity-Hall MSS. ,; in Cambridge Portfolio (London, 1840), ii. 390.

1 Antea, p. 279; Wood, iii. 666-8.
2[ Under date Dec, 22, are two letters from Cromwell to the Governor of Windsor
Castle and to Col. Harrison concerning the safe guarding of the King. See Supple-

ment, Nos. 38, 39.] '
3(‘' By what authority. . . . This was indeed the question that the King put and
would never let drop. . . . The authority of the tribunal was founded on nothing

more valid than a mere resolution, called an ordinance, of some fifty members—what

—

1649.] DEATH-WARRANT 405

And so, under date, Monday 29th January 1648-9, there is this
stern Document to be introduced; not specifically of Oliver's
composition ; but expressing in every letter of it the conviction
of Oliver’s heart, in this, one of his most important appearances
on the stage of earthly life.!

To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Phayr, and to every of them

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying
and Judging of Charles Stuart, King of
England, 29th January 1648.

Wuereas Charles Stuart, King of England, is and standeth
convicted, attainted and condemned of High Treason and other
high Crimes; and Sentence upon Saturday last was pronounced
against him by this Court, To be put to death by the severing of
his head from his body; of which Sentence execution yet re-
maineth to be done :

These are therefore to will and require you to see the said
Sentence executed, in the open Street before Whitehall, upon the
morrow, being the Thirtieth day of this instant month of January,
between the hours of Ten in the morning and Five in the after-

was in truth little more than a bare quorum of a single branch of parliament, origin-
ally composed of nearly ten times as many, and deliberately reduced for the express
purpose of such a resolution by the violent exclusion of one hundred and forty three
of its members. If the legal authority was null, the moral authority for the act
creating the high court was no stronger. It might be well enough to say that the
people are the origin of power, but as a matter of fact, the handful who erected
the high court of justice notoriously did not represent the people in any sense of that
conjurer’s word, ‘They were never chosen by the people to make laws apart from
king and lords, and they were now picked out by the soldiers to do the behest of
soldiers.” Morley’s Cromwell, p. 280.]

[But the conviction was arrived at very slowly. ‘‘ Ireton,” says Bishop Burnet,
‘‘ was the person that drove it on; for Cromwell was all the while in some suspense
about it.” Cromwell ‘‘ approved of the seizure of Charles, and had no doubt of
the justice of bringing him to trial, but he doubted the policy of the King’s trial and
condemnation if any other satisfactory expedient could be devised. . . . We get
glimpses of Cromwell negotiating with lawyers and judges about the settlement of
the nation, inspiring a final attempt to come to terms with Charles, and arguing
that it would be safe to spare the King’s life if he would accept the conditions now
offered him. All these attempted compromises failed. The King preferred to part
with his life rather than with his regal power. . . . So the military revolution, for a
moment arrested in its progress, moved inevitably forward, and Cromwell went with
it.” Firth’s Cromwe//, p. 215, See also Dr. Gardiner, Great Civil War, iv. pp,
281-286, ]

406 SECOND CIVIL WAR (29 Jan.

noon of the same day, with full effect. And for so doing, this
shall be your sufficient warrant.

And these are to require all Officers, Soldiers, and others the
good People of this Nation of England, to be assisting unto you
in this service.

Given under our hands and seals,
Joun BrapsHaw.
Tuomas Grey, ‘Lorp Grey or Grosy.
Ouiver CRoMWELL.
(‘and Fifty-six others.’) *

“Tetre belluew, ac molossis suis ferociores, Hideous monsters,
more ferocious than their own mastiffs!” shrieks Saumaise ;!
shrieks all the world, in unmelodious soul-confusing diapason of
distraction,—happily at length grown very faint in our day. The
truth is, no modern reader can conceive the then atrocity, ferocity,
unspeakability of this fact. First, after long reading in the old
dead Pamphlets does one see the magnitude of it. To be
equalled, nay to be preferred think some, in point of horror, to
‘The Crucifixion of Christ.’ Alas, in these irreverent times of
ours, if all the Kings of Europe were cut in pieces at one swoop,
and flung in heaps in St. Margaret’s Churchyard on the same
day, the emotion would, in strict arithmetical truth, be small in
comparison! We know it not, this atrocity of the English
Regicides ; shall never know it. I reckon it perhaps the most
daring action any Body of Men to be met with in History ever,
with clear consciousness, deliberately set themselves to do.
Dread Phantoms, glaring supernal on you,—when once they are
quelled and their light snuffed out, none knows the terror of the
Phantom! The Phantom is a poor paper-lantern with a candle-
end in it, which any whipster dare now beard.

A certain Queen in some South-Sea Island, I have read in
Missionary Books, had been converted to Christianity ; did not
any longer believe in the old gods. She assembled her people ;
said to them, “ My faithful People, the gods do not dwell in that
burning-mountain in the centre of our Isle. That is not God;

*Rushworth, vii. 1426; Nalson’s Trial of King Charles (London, 1684);
Phelpes's Trial of &e. &e.

1Salmasii Defensio Regia (Sumptibus regiis, 1650), p, 6,

1649.] DEATH-WARRANT 407

no, that is a common burning-mountain,—mere culinary fire
burning under peculiar circumstances. See, I will walk before
you to that burning-mountain ; will empty my wash-bowl into it,
cast my slipper over it, defy it to the uttermost, and stand the
consequences ! ’—She walked accordingly, this South-Sea Heroine,
nerved to the sticking-place ; her people following in pale horror
and expectancy: she did her experiment ;—and, I am told, they
have truer notions of the gods in that Island ever since! Ex-
periment which it is now very easy to repeat, and very needless.
Honour to the Brave who deliver us from Phantom-dynasties, in
South-Sea Islands and in North!

This action of the English Regicides did in effect strike a damp
like death through the heart of Flunkeyism universally in this
world. Whereof Flunkeyism, Cant, Cloth-worship, or whatever
ugly name it have, has gone about incurably sick ever since ; and
is now at length, in these generations, very rapidly dying.1 The
like of which action will not be needed for a thousand years again.
Needed, alas—not till a new genuine Hero-worship has arisen,
has perfected itself; and had time to degenerate into a Flunkey-
ism and Cloth-worship again! Which I take to be a very long
date indeed.

Thus ends the Second Civil War. In Regicide, in a Common-
wealth and Keepers of the Liberties of England. In punishment
of Delinquents, in abolition of Cobwebs ;—if it be possible, in a
Government of Heroism and Veracity ; at lowest, of Anti-Flunkey-
ism, Anti-Cant, and the endeavour after Heroism and Veracity.

1(««This is not the tone in which the terrible but high-souled fanatics who did it
would have spoken of their own deed. . ... Nothing, unhappily, can be less true
than that the act of the regicides struck a damp through the heart of flunkeyism, or
that flunkeyism has gone about incurably sick of it ever since. It is liberty, if any-
thing, that has gone about sick of it." Goldwin Smith’s Three English Statesmen,
PP. 79, 73- : :

“Cant, alas, is not slain on any such easy terms by a single stroke of the re-
publican headsman’s axe. As if, for that matter, force, violence, sword and axe,
never conceal a cant and an unveracity of their own, viler and crueller than any
other.” Morley'’s Cromwell, p. 285.]

PART V

CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND
1649

LETTERS LXXXVII—XCVI

On Tuesday 30th January 1648-9, it is ordered in the Commons
House, ‘That the Post be stayed until tomorrow morning, ten of
the clock ;’ and the same afternoon, the King’s Execution having
now taken place, Edward Dendy, Sergeant-at-Arms, with due
trumpeters, pursuivants, and horse-troops, notifies, loud as he can
blow, at Cheapside and elsewhere, openly to all men, That who-
soever shall proclaim a new King, Charles Second or another,
without authority of Parliament, in this Nation of England, shall
be a Traitor and suffer death. For which service, on the morrow,
each trumpeter receives ‘ten shillings’ of the public money, and
Sergeant Dendy himself—shall see what he will receive! And
all Sheriffs, Mayors of Towns and such like are to do the same in
their respective localities, that the fact be known to every one.

After which follow, in Parliament and out of it, such debatings,
committee-ings, consultings towards a Settlement of this Nation,
as the reader can in a dim way sufficiently fancy for himself on
considering the two following facts.

First, That on February 13th, Major Thomas Scott, an honour-
able Member whom we shall afterwards know better, brings in his
Report or Ordinance for a Councit oF State, to be henceforth the
Executive among us; which Council, to the number of Forty-one
Persons, is thereupon nominated by Parliament; and begins its

1 Commons Journals, vi. 1a6; Scobell’s Acts and Ordinances (London, 1658,

657), ii 3.
1657), ii. 3 (409)

410 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [1 Feb.

Sessions at Derby House on the 17th. Bradshaw, Fairfax,
Cromwell, Whitlocke, Harry Marten, Ludlow, Vane the Younger,
and others whom we know, are of this Council.

Second, That, after much adjustment and new-modelling, new
Great Seals, new Judges, Sergeants-maces, there comes out, on
May 19th, an emphatic Act, brief as Sparta, in these words: ‘Be
‘it declared and enacted by this present Parliament, and by the
‘authority of the same: That the People of England, and of all
‘the dominions and territories thereunto belonging, are and shall
‘be, and are hereby constituted, made, established and confirmed
‘to be, a CoMMONWEALTH OR Free-Srate; and shall from hence-
‘forth be governed as a Commonwealth and Free-State,—by the
‘Supreme Authority of this Nation the Representatives of the
‘People in Parliament,! and by such as they shall appoint and
‘constitute officers and ministers under them for the good of the
‘People ; and that without any King or House of Lords.’ 2—What
modelling and consulting has been needed in the interim, the
reader shall conceive.

Strangely enough, among which great national transactions
the following small family-matters again turn up; asserting
that they too had right to happen in this world, and keep
memory of themselves,—and show how a Lieutenant-General’s
mind, busy pulling down Idolatrous Kingships, and setting up
Religious Commonwealths, has withal an idle eldest Son to
marry |—

There occurred ‘a stick,’ as we saw some time ago,’ in this
Marriage-treaty: but now it gathers life again ;—and, not to
agitate the reader’s sympathies overmuch, we will say at once
that it took effect this time ; that Richard Cromwell was actually
wedded to Dorothy Mayor, at Hursley, on May day 1649 ;4 and,
one point fairly settled at last!—But now mark farther how

1[Yet never was the Parliament less representative of the people than now.
y the expulsion of royalist members during the war, and of Presbyterians in
1648, it had been, as Cromwell said, ‘ winnowed and sifted and brought to a hand-
ful.’ When the Long Parliament met in November 1640, it consisted of about 490
members. In January 1649, those sitting or at liberty to sit in the House were not
more than ninety. Whole districts were unrepresented. In the list of sitting
members given in a contemporary pamphlet, there are none from the counties of
Herefordshire, Hertfordshire, Cumberland and Lancashire, or from any borough
within their limits. Wales was represented by three persons, and London by but a
single citizen.” Firth's Cromwell, p. 235.
? Scobell, ii. 30; Commons Journals, roth May.
3 Letter LVI. 4 Noble ii. 188,

ce

1649.) LETTER LXXXVII, LONDON 411

Anne, second daughter of the House of Hursley, came to be
married not long after to ‘John Dunch of Pusey in Berkshire ;’?
which Dunch of Pusey had a turn for collecting Letters. How
Dunch, groping about Hursley in subsequent years, found
‘Seventeen Letters of Cromwell,’ and collected them, and laid
them up at Pusey ; how, after a century or so, Horace Walpole,
likewise a collector of Letters, got his eye upon them; trans-
scribed them, imparted them to dull Harris.?2 From whom,
accordingly, here they still are and continue. This present
fascicle of Ten is drawn principally from the Pusey stock; the
remainder will introduce themselves in due course.?

LETTER LXXXVII

Coronet Norton, ‘dear Dick,’ was purged out by Pride; lazy
Dick and lazy Frank Russel were both purged out, or scared away,
and are in the lists of the Excluded. Dick, we infer, is now
somewhat estranged from Cromwell; probably both Dick and
Frank: Frank returned; Dick too, though in a fitful manner.
And so, there being now no ‘dear Norton’ on the spot, the
Lieutenant-General applies to Mr. Robinson, the pious Preacher
at Southampton, of whom we transiently heard already ;—a priest
and counsellor, and acting as such, to all parties.

For my very loving Friend Mr. Robinson, Preacher at Southampton :
These

‘London,’ 1st February 1648.
Sir,
I thank you for your kind letter. As to the

business you mention, I desire to use this plainness with you.

1[Dunch himself was related to Cromwell, whose youngest aunt, Mary, had
married Sir William Dunch, of Little Wittenham, Berkshire. John Dunch was
their grandson, and therefore Oliver's first cousin once: removed. }

2 Harris, p. 504.

3[At some time, the letter to Barrington, Supplement, No. 5, and the two letters
to Norton (of March 28, and April 3, 1648) stated by Harris to be ‘‘ in the posses-
sion of Robert Symmer Esq., of Mount St. Grosvenor Square,” must have been with
these Pusey letters, as they are numbered, 1-3, and the Pusey letters 4-21, in the
same hand. Number 9 is missing, but the rest are now all in the Morrison Collection,
a fine series of holographs, mostly in excellent condition. As they are numbered
chronologically, the missing one should be dated between March 14 and 25, 1648-9.
Those to Mr. Mayor are endorsed by himself, and have shorthand notes jotted on
the back, apparently of his replies. ]

412 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (1 Feb.

When the last overture was, between me and Mr. Mayor, by
the mediation of Colonel Norton, after the meeting | had with
Mr. Mayor at Farnham, I desired the Colonel (finding, as I
thought, some scruples and hesitation in Mr. Mayor), to know of
him whether his mind was free to the thing or not. Colonel
Norton gave me this account, that Mr. Mayor, by reason of some
matters as they then stood, was not very free thereunto, where-
upon I did acquiesce, submitting to the providence of God.

Upon your reviving of the business to me, and your letter,
I think fit to return you this answer, and to say in plainness of
spirit to you: that, upon your testimony of the gentlewoman’s
worth, and the common report of the piety of the family, I shall
be willing to entertain the renewing of the motion, upon such
considerations as may be to mutual satisfaction; only I think
that a speedy resolution will be very convenient to both parties.
The Lord direct all to His glory.

I desire your prayers therein ; and rest,
Your very affectionate friend,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

‘February Ist,’—it is Thursday; the King was executed on
Tuesday: Robinson at Southampton, I think, must have been
writing at the very time.

On Tuesday night last, a few hours after the King’s Execution,
Marquis Hamilton had escaped from Windsor, and been retaken
in Southwark next morning, Wednesday morning. ‘Knocking at
a door,’ he was noticed by three troopers ; who questioned him,
detected him ;! and bringing him to the Parliament Authorities,
made 40/. apiece by him. He will be tried speedily, by a new
High Court of Justice ; he and others.

* Harris, p. 504; one of the seventeen Letters found at Pusey. [Now printed
from the holograph original in the Morrison Collection, Endorsed No. 4.]

1 Cromwelliana, p. 51,

Si ASE

1649. | PASS 413

PASS

To all Officers and Soldiers, and all Persons whom these may concern

Wuereas John Stanley of Dalegarth, in the county of Cum-
berland, Esquire, hath subscribed to his composition, and paid
and secured his fine, according to the direction of Parliament :

These are to require you to permit and suffer him and his
servants quietly to pass into Dalegarth above-said, with their
horses and swords, and to forbear to molest or trouble him or any
of his family there; without seizing or taking away any of his
horses, or other goods or estate whatsoever ; and to permit and
suffer him or any of his family, at any time, to pass to any place,
about his or their occasions ; without offering any injury to him
or any of his family, either at Dalegarth, or in his or their travels :
As you will answer your contempt at your utmost perils.

Given under my hand and seal this 2d of February 1648.

OLIveR CROMWELL. *

Oliver's seal of ‘six quarterings’ is at the top. Of course only
the seal and signature are specially his: but this one Pass may
stand here as the sample of many that were then circulating,—!
emblem of a time of war, distress, uncertainty and danger, which
then was.

The 2d of February is Friday. Yesterday, Thursday, there was
question in the House of ‘many Gentlemen from the Northern
Counties, who do attend about Town to make their compositions,’
and of what is to be done with them.? The late business that
ended in Preston Fight had made many new delinquents in those

* Jefferson's History and Antiquities of Allerdale Ward, Cumberland (Carlisle,
1842), p. 284.

1[Some were circulating which had not been issued by Cromwell at all. One
Capt. Mitchell, a Leveller, but also a solicitor for Delinquents’ Causes at Gold-
smiths’ Hall, had been accustomed to procure such passes from Robert Spavin,
Cromwell’s secretary, and had also received from that treacherous person a large
number, either blanks, with Cromwell’s genuine signature, or forgeries of Spavin’s,
by means of which the confederates had made considerable sums, Spavin was
found out and dismissed, but they had a counterfeit seal made, and continued their
operations some time longer. }

2 Commons Journals, in die.

414 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [12 Feb.

parts ; whom now we see painfully with pale faces dancing attend-
ance in Goldsmiths’ Hall,—not to say knocking importunately at
doors in the gray of the morning, in danger of their life! Stanley
of Dalegarth has happily got his composition finished, his Pass
signed by the Lieutenant-General ; and may go home, with sub-
dued thankfulness, in a whole skin.1 Dalegarth Hall is still an
estate or farm, in the southern extremity of Cumberland ; on the
Esk river, in the Ravenglass district: not far from that small
Lake which Tourists go to see under the name of Devock Water.
Quiet life to Stanley there !

LETTER LXXXVIII

For my very worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire: These

‘ London,’ 12th February 1648.
Sir,
I received some intimations formerly, and by

the last return from Southampton a letter from Mr. Robinson,
concerning the reviving the last year’s motion touching my son
and your daughter. Mr. Robinson was also pleased to send me

1(There are, however, very few traces of the Preston campaign amongst the
papers of the Committee for Compounding. In the first place, excepting Lang-

dale’s troops and Sir Philip Musgrave’s men at Carlisle, there were next to no ~

Englishmen engaged in the business. Secondly, most of the North Country gentle-
men who were allowed to compound, had already done so. Thirdly, those taken
actually in arms and not protected by articles, would only under special circum-
stances be admitted to composition at all. Fourthly, the march of the Scottish
army was too ‘‘ outside” a thing to rouse the enthusiasm of the border English,
always jealous of their Scotch neighbours, and in this case irritated by the plunder-
ing of Hamilton’s men. It is not at all likely that Stanley had been concerned in
the Preston business at all, as he compounded in April 1647, and his fine, set on
January 27, 1649, was only a tenth, far too low for any one who had been lately
actively engaged against Parliament. Cromwell speaks of his having ‘paid and
secured his fine." Probably he paid part, and asked permission to go home and
find the rest, as the payment and discharge of the estate are not entered until the
following June. Even then he was not left to a quiet life, further demands being
made upon him the next year, after his father’s death. See Calendar of Committee
for Compounding, p. 1719. In the Supplement (No. 41) will be found a kind letter
written a few days later in favour of another compounder who had ‘‘come in
more than four years before this, but whose business was not yet settled. The
special activity at this time was due to the fact that the Committee for
Compounding had just been re-modelled, and that Parliament had issued strict
orders for giving in of accounts, and for sequestration of those delinquents who
were in arrears. |

1649.) LETTER LXXXVIIL, LONDON = 415

enclosed in his a letter from you to him, bearing date the 5th of
this instant February, wherein I find your willingness to entertain
any good means for the completing of that business.

From whence I take encouragement to send my son to wait
upon you, and by him to let you know, that my desires are (if
Providence so dispose), very full and free to the thing, if, upon
an interview, there prove also a freedom in the young persons
thereunto. What liberty you will give herein, I wholly submit
to you.

I thought fit, in my letter to Mr. Robinson, to mention some-
what of expedition, because indeed I know not how soon I may
be called into the field, or other occasions may remove me from
hence; having for the present some liberty of stay in London.
The Lord direct all to His glory. I rest,

Sir,
Your very humble servant,
O.iverR CrRoMWELL.*

Thomas Scott is big with the Council of State at present, he
produces it in the House tomorrow morning, 13th February ;
and the List of actual Councillors, as we say, is voted the next
day.

There is also frequent debate about Ireland! in these days, and
what is to be done for relief of it ; the Marquis of Ormond, fur-
nished with a commission from the Prince, who now calls himself
Charles IJ., reappeared there last year ; has, with endless patience
and difficulty, patched up some kind of alliance with the Papists,
Nuncio Papists and Papists of the Pale ; and so far as numbers go,
looks very formidable.? One does not know how soon one ‘ may
be called into the field.” However, there will several things
turn up to be settled first.

* Harris, p. 505; one of the Pusey seventeen. [No. 5. Holograph. In the
Morrison Collection.]

1 Cromwelliana, 14th February, &c. : P
2(Tt is hardly necessary to say that Ormond’s alliance was not with the party of
he Nuncio. }

416 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [22 Feb.

{ORDER

On the Saturday 17th February 1648-9, more properly on
Monday 19th, the Council of State first met, to constitute itself
and begin despatch of business.!_ Cromwell seems to have been

‘their first President. At first it had been decided that they
should have no constant President ; but after a time, the incon-
veniences of such a method were seen into, and Bradshaw was
appointed to the office.

The Minute-book of this Council of State, written in the clear
old hand of Walter Frost, still lies complete in the State-Paper
Office ; as do the whole Records of the Committee of Both King-
doms, of the Committee of Sequestrations in Goldsmiths’ Hall,
and many other Committees and officialities of the Period. By
the long labour of Mr. Lemon, these waste Documents, now
gathered into volumes, classed, indexed, methodised, have become
singularly accessible. Well read, the thousandth or perhaps ten-
thousandth part of them well excerpted, and the nine-hundred-
and-ninety-nine parts well forgotten, much light for what is really
English History might still be gathered there. Alas, if the Half
million of money, or but the twentieth part of it, wasted in mere
stupidities upon the old-parchment Record Commission, had been
expended upon wise labours here ! 2—But to our ‘ Order.’

Sir Oliver Fleming, a most gaseous but indisputable historical
Figure, of uncertain genesis, uncertain habitat, glides through
the old Books as ‘Master of the Ceremonies, —master of one
knows not well what. In the end of 1643 he clearly is nominated

1 Commons Journals, vi. 146.

2(The records and papers of the Council of State, known as Interregnum L.,
are now calendared amongst the general State Papers of their period. So are those
of the Committee of Both Kingdoms (Interregnum E.). ~The Goldsmiths’ Hall
Committee is always known as the Committee for Compounding, although in later
years its official title was Committee for Sequestrations, this later name being
already appropriated by the original Sequestration Committee, one of the earliest of
all, sitting at Armourers’ Hall.

‘The Committee for Compounding Calendar, already often quoted, was compiled
by Mrs. Everett Green, and she also arranged the Sequestration Committee's papers,
which, however, have not been calendared.

Mr. Lemon's labours—most helpful to his successors—did not extend quite so
far as Carlyle’s words would lead us to suppose. Even yet, these Committee papers
are only partially ‘‘ gathered into volumes,” and until they were calendared, it was
impossible to index them at all adequately.

Our oe would hardly endorse Carlyle's views on the Record Com-
mission !

1649.] ORDER 417

‘Master of the Ceremonies’ by Parliament itself ;1 and glides out
and in ever after, presiding over ‘Dutch Ambassadors,’ ‘ Swedish
Ambassadors’ and such like, to the very end of the Protectorate.”
A Blessed Restoration, of course, relieved him from his labours.
He, for the present, wants to see some Books in the late Royal

Library of St. James’s. This scrap of paper still lies in the British
Museum.

To the Keeper of the Library of St. James's

Tuese are to will and require you, upon sight hereof, to deliver
unto Sir Oliver Fleming, or to whom he shall appoint, two or
three such books as he shall choose, of which there is a double
copy in the Library : to be by him disposed ‘of’ as there shall be
direction given him by the Council. Of which you are not to fail,
and for which this shall be your warrant.

Given at the Council of State, this 22d day of February 1648.
Signed in the name, and by order of, the Council
of State appointed by authority of Parliament,
OLIVER CROMWELL,
(Preeses pro tempore).*

There is already question of selling the late King’s goods,
crown-jewels, plate, and ‘hangings, ? under which latter title, we
suppose, are included his Pictures,+ much regretted by the British

* Additional Ayscough MSS. 12,008 [f. 1).

12d November 1643, Commons Journals, iii. 299.

2[See his Humble Narrative, Somers Tracts vii., 499, ed. Scott. Amongst
the State Papers is a long letter from Sir Oliver to the Council of State,
written in April, 1649, in relation to the titles to be given to the Common-
wealth and the Council of State when conversing with foreign ministers, &c., it being
to be expected ‘‘that we must wrestle with many difficulties incidental to a new
government.’ Also offering suggestions as to the reception of foreign ministers,
one of which is that ‘‘ before the wardrobe stuff (of the King) be put up for sale, a
sufficient proportion of hangings and other furniture be kept" for the use of am-
bassadors extraordinary. See Calendar S. P. Dom.,; Commonwealth, 1649, 1650,
p. 113. ]

[They might have reserved the hangings for themselves,” a Royalist newspaper
observed, |

4[It is not at all likely that the ‘‘ hangings” (always a very important item in the
inventories of those days) included the pictures. Indeed these last, with the statues
and books, were not handed over to the Trustees for the sale of the King’s goods, but
were reserved to be disposed of by the Council of State. On July 20, Somerset
House was assigned to the Trustees, in order ‘‘to sell the goods to most advan-

VOL, 127

418 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [26 Feb.

connoisseur at present. They did not come actually to market
till July next.?

LETTER LXXXIX

Reverenp Mr. Stapylton, of whom we heard once before in
Edinburgh, has been down at Hursley with Mr. Richard ; Miss
Dorothy received them with her blushes, with her smiles ; the
elder Mayors with ‘many civilities:’ and the Marriage-treaty, as
Mr. Stapylton reports, promises well.

For my very worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire : These

‘London,’ 26th February 1648.
Sir,
I received yours by Mr. Stapleton, together

with an account of the kind reception and the many civilities
afforded especially to my Son, in the liberty given him to wait
upon your worthy Daughter, the report of whose virtue and godli-
ness has so great a place in my heart, that I think fit not to neglect
anything, on my part, which may conduce to consummate a close
of the business, if God please to dispose the young ones’ hearts
thereunto, and other suitable ordering ‘of’ affairs towards mutual
satisfaction appear in the dispensation of Providence.

For which purpose, and to the end matters may be brought to
as near an issue as they are capable of (not being at liberty, by
reason of public occasions, to wait upon you, nor, as I understand,
your health permitting), I thought fit to send this Gentleman,
Mr. Stapleton, instructed with my mind, to see how near we may
come to an understanding one of another therein. And although
I could have wished the consideration of things had been between

tage,” and on August 31, the Lord General and his officers could not yet be accom-
modated there, there being need to use the rooms to show the said goods. The
actual sale does not seem to have begun before October 2. See Calendar of State
Papers, 1649, 1650, under the above dates. The pictures were not sold and dispersed
until 1651. ]

1Scobell, Part ii, 46, the immense Act of Parliament for sale of them,

1649.] LETTER XC., LONDON 419

us two, it being of so near concernment, yet Providence for
the present not allowing, I desire you to give him credence on
my behalf.

Sir, all things which yourself and I had in conference at Farn-
ham do not occur to my memory, through multiplicity of business
intervening. I hope I shall with a very free heart testify my
readiness to that which may be expected from me.

I have no more at present, but desiring the Lord to order this
affair to His glory and the comfort of His servants, I rest,

Sir,
Your humble servant,
Ouiver CRoMWELL.*

LETTER XC

Tuis Thursday 8th March 1648-9, they are voting and debating
in a thin House, hardly above 60 there, Whether Duke Hamilton,
Earl Holland, Lords Capel, Goring, and Sir John Owen,—our old
friend ‘Colonel Owen’ of Nottingham Castle, Jenner and Ashe’s
old friend,!—are to die or to live ??

They have been tried in a new High Court of Justice, and all
found guilty of treason, of levying war against the Supreme
Authority of this Nation. Shall they be executed ; shall they be
respited? The House by small Majorities decides against the
first three ; decides in favour of the last; and as to Goring, the
votes are equal,—the balance-tongue trembles, “ Life or Death!”
Speaker Lenthall says, Life.’

Meanwhile, small private matters also must be attended to.

* Harris, p. 505; one of the Pusey seventeen. Signature only is in Cromwell's
hand. [No. 6. Holograph, Seal of Arms, In the Morrison Collection. Carlyle
puts here Harris's statement about the signature, which belongs to the next
letter. }

1Letter LXXXII.

2{ Hamilton was, throughout these proceedings, spoken of by his English title, Earl
of Cambridge. Lord Goring was the Earl of Norwich; his higher title, like all the
others granted by the King after the breaking out of the war, not being recognised
by Parliament. Sir John Owen, formerly Governor of Conway for the King, who
was tried with them, was not ‘‘ Colonel Owen of Nottingham Castle,” as is shown
on page 386 above. |

3 Commons Journals, vi. 159.

420 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [8 March.

For my very worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire: These?

‘London,’ 8th March 1648.
Sir,

Yours I have received ; and have given further
instructions to this bearer, Mr. Stapylton, to treat with you about
the business in agitation between your daughter and my son.

I am engaged? to you for all your civilities and respects
already manifested. I trust there will be a right understanding
between us, and a good conclusion: and though I cannot parti-
cularly remember the things spoken of at Farnham, to which
your letter seems to refer me, yet I doubt not but I have sent
the offer of such things now which give mutual satisfaction to us
both. My attendance upon public affairs will not give me leave
to come down unto you myself; I have sent unto you this gen-
tleman with my mind.

I salute Mrs. Mayor, though unknown, with the rest of your
family. I commit you, with the progress of the business, to the
Lord ; and rest,

Sir,
Your assured friend to serve you,
O.iverR CRoMWELL.*

On the morrow morning, poor versatile Hamilton, poor ver-
satile Holland, with the Lord Capel who the first of all in this
Parliament rose to complain of Grievances, meet their death in
Palaceyard. The High Court was still sitting in Westminster
Hall as they passed through ‘from Sir Robert Cotton’s house.’
Hamilton lingered a little, or seemed to linger, in the Hall;
still hopeful of reprieve and fine of 100,000/.: but the Earl of
Denbigh, his brother-in-law, a Member of the Council of State,
stept up to him; whispered in his ear ;—the poor Duke walked
on. That is the end of all his diplomacies ; his Scotch Army of

1[Headed by Harris, ‘‘ No direction. In another hand, but signed by himself.”
Harris was mistaken, however. It is in Cromwell’s hand throughout. ]
2 obliged.

* Harris, p. 506; one of the seventeen. [No. 7. Holograph. In the Morrison
Collection. ]

1649.] LETTER XC., LONDON 421

Forty-thousand, his painful ridings to Uttoxeter, and to many
other places, have all issued here. The Earl of Lanark will
now be Duke of Hamilton in Scotland: may a better fate await
him !

The once gay Earl of Holland has been ‘converted’ some days
ago, as it were for the nonce,—poor Earl! With regard to my
Lord Capel again, who followed last in order, he behaved, says
Bulstrode, ‘much after the manner of a stout Roman. He had no
‘Minister with him, nor showed any sense of death approaching ;
‘but carried himself all the time he was upon the scaffold with
‘that boldness and resolution as was to be admired. He wore a
‘sad-coloured suit, his hat cocked up, and his cloak thrown under
‘one arm; he looked towards the people at his first coming up,
‘and put off his hat in manner of a salute; he had a little dis-
‘course with some gentlemen, and passed up and down in a care-
‘Jess posture.’ Thus died Lord Capel, the first who complained
of Grievances: in seven years time there are such changes for a
man; and the first acts of his Drama little know what the last
will be !—

This new High Court of Justice is one of some Seven or Eight
that sat in those years, and were greatly complained of by Con-
stitutional persons. Nobody ever said that they decided contrary
to evidence ; but they were not the regular Judges. They took
the Parliament’s law as good, without consulting Fleta and
Bracton about it. They consisted of learned Sergeants and other
weighty persons nominated by the Parliament, usually in good
numbers, for the occasion.

Some weeks hence, drunken Poyer of Pembroke and the con-
fused Welsh Colonels are tried by Court Martial; Poyer, Powel,
Laughern are found to merit death. Death however shall be
executed only upon one of them ; let the other two be pardoned :
let them draw lots which two. ‘In two of the lots was written,
‘Life given by God ; the third lot was a blank. The Prisoners

1 Whitlocke, p. 380 (the fivs¢ of the ¢wo pages 380 which there are).

2{Capel’s ‘‘ frank and open nature, which had kept him unstained by the mire of
political intrigue, had to the last attracted the admiration even of his enemies,
Rejecting the services of a minister of a creed he detested, he stepped jauntily on
to the scaffold with his hat cocked and his cloak under his arm. His religion, he
said, was that of the Thirty-nine Articles, ‘the best he knew of.’ He was to die
for his fidelity to the King and his obedience to the fifth commandment. His late
master was ‘the most religious of all princes of the world,’ and his son was now
the lawful King, Capel died nobly defiant, and in him English royalism could
count one martyr more.” Gardiner’s History of the Commonwealth and Protect-
orate, i. 12.]

422 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 March.

‘were not willing to draw their own destiny; but a child drew
‘the lots, and gave them: and the lot fell to Colonel Poyer to
‘die.’!1 He was shot in Covent Garden ; died like a soldier, poor
confused Welshman ; and so ended.?

And with these executions, the chief Delinquents are now got
punished. The Parliament lays up its axe again ; willing to par-
don the smaller multitude, if they will keep quiet henceforth.

LETTER XCI

For my worthy Friend Dr. Love, Master of Bennett College, « Cam-
bridge :’ These

5 ‘London,’ 14th March 1648.
Sir,

I understand one Mrs. Nutting is a suitor

unto you, on the right of her Son, about the renewing of a
lease which holds of your College. The old interest I have
had makes me presume upon your favour. I desire nothing but
what is just ; leaving that to your judgment; and beyond which
I neither now nor at any time shall move. If I do, denial shall
be most welcome and accepted by,

Sir,

Your affectionate servant,
O.tveR CroMWELL.*

This is not the Christopher Love who preached at Uxbridge,
during the Treaty there in 1644; who is nowa minister in
London, and may again come before us; this is a Cambridge
‘Dr. Love,’ of whom I know nothing. Oliver, as we may gather,
had befriended him in the old Cambridge days; nothing hard

1 Whitlocke, 21st April, 1649.

2(This was on April 25, 1649. ‘‘It is observable,” writes William Clarke, ‘‘ that
the lot should fall upon him, who was the first beginner of the second war.” (See
Hist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr, Leyborne-Popham's MSS. p. 15.)]

* Lansdown MSS., 1236, fol. 87. [Holograph. Sealed. ‘‘My Lord Pagett”
written outside, in pencil, }

——

1649. ] LETTER XCI, LONDON 423

had befallen him during the reform of that University in 1644.
Probably in Baker’s Manuscripts it might be ascertained in what
year he graduated, where he was born, where buried ; but nothing
substantial is ever likely to be known of him,—or is indeed neces-
sary to be known.! ‘Mrs, Nutting’ and he were evidently
children of Adam, breathing the vital air along with Oliver
Cromwell; and Oliver, on occasion, endeavoured to promote
justice and kindness between them; and they remain two
‘shadows of small Names.’ ?

Yesterday, Tuesday 13th March, there was question in the
Council of State about ‘modelling of the forces that are to go to
Ireland ;’ and a suggestion was made, by Fairfax probably, who
had the modelling to do, that they would model much better if
they knew first under what Commander they were to go.?_ It is
thought Lieutenant-General Cromwell will be the man.

On which same evening, furthermore, one discerns in a faint
but an authentic manner, certain dim gentlemen of the highest
authority, young Sir Harry Vane to appearance one of them,
repairing to the lodging of one Mr. Milton, ‘a small house in
Holborn which opens backwards into Lincoln’s Inn Fields ;’ to
put an official question to him there! Not a doubt of it they
saw Mr. John this evening. In the official Book this yet stands
legible :

‘ Die Martis, 13° Martii 1648.’ ‘That it is referred to the same
‘Committee,’ Whitlocke, Vane, Lord Lisle, Earl of Denbigh, Harry
Marten, Mr. Lisle, ‘or any two of them, to speak with Mr. Milton,
‘to know, Whether he will be employed as Secretary for the
‘Foreign Languages? and to report to the Council.’* I have
authority to say that Mr. Milton, thus unexpectedly applied to,
consents; is formally appointed on Thursday next; makes his

1[This much may perhaps be said: that he, Dr. Richard Love, had at one time
been chaplain to the Earl of Newport; that he kept his mastership of ‘‘ Bennett a
College through all these troublous times and that he was made Dean of Ely in
1660, but apparently died only a few months after his appointment. ]

2 Cooper's Annals, iii. 491; Master's History of Corpus-Christe College (Cam-
bridge, 1753), pp. 143-54.—Mrs. Nutting, it appears, succeeded (Cambridge MS.,
penes me.)

3 Order-Book of the Council of State (in the State-Paper Office), i. 86. [Present
reference, S. P. Interregnum, I. 62, pp. 82-87, at the Public Record Office. Calendared
in the volume far 1649, 1650, p. 37. ‘There had been reports flying about that, in
consequence of the proclamation of the young King in Scotland, Cromwell meant
to march thither, and that he had said that if he had 10,000 men, he could “ crush
them in the shell.” The rumour probably arose from the preparations for Ireland ;
10,000 men being the number voted for that service. ]

4 /bid, ; Todd's Life of Milton (London, 1826), p. 96, 108-123.

424 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 March.

proof-shot, ‘to the Senate of Hamburgh,’ ! about a week hence ;—
and gives, and continues to give, great satisfaction to that Council,
to me, and to the whole Nation now, and to all Nations! Such
romance lies in the State-Paper Office.

Here, however, is another Letter on the Hursley Business, of
the same date as Letter XCI.; which must also be read. I do
not expect many readers to take the trouble of representing
before their minds the clear condition of ‘Mr. Ludlow’s lease,’
of ‘the 2501,’ ‘the 150/., &c., in this abstruse affair: but such
as please to do so, will find it all very straight at last. We
observe, Mr. Mayor has a decided preference for ‘my ould land ;’
land that I inherited, or bought by common contract, instead of
getting it from Parliament for Public Services! In fact, Mr.
Mayor seems somewhat of a sharp man: but neither has he a
dull man to deal with,—though a much bigger one.

LETTER XCII

‘For my worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley :
These’?

‘London,’ 14th March 1648.
Sir,
I received your paper by the hands of Mr.
Stapilton. I desire your leave to return my dissatisfaction
therewith. I shall not need to premise how much I have desired
(I hope upon the best grounds) to match with you. The same
desire still continues in me, if Providence see it fit. But I may
not be so much wanting to myself nor family as not to have some
equality of consideration towards it.?
I have two young daughters to bestow, if God give them life

1 Senatus Populusgue Anglicanus Amplissimo Civitatis Hamburgensis Senatui,
Salutem, (In Milton’s Litere Senatus Anglicani, this first Letter to the Ham-
burgers is not given.) ;

*[Headed by Harris, ‘‘ No direction, but wrote on the back, ‘ L. G. Cromwell's
letter of exceptions.’ ’]

5‘ it’ is not the family, but the match,

—s

1649.] LETTER XCII., LONDON 425

and opportunity. According to your offer, I have nothing for
them ; nothing at all in hand. If my son die, what consideration
is there to me, and yet a jointure parted with. If she die, there
is little ; if you have an heir male, then but 3,000/., without time
ascertained.!

But for these things, I doubt not but, by one interview between
you and myself, they might be accommodated to mutual satisfac-
tion ; and in relation to these, I think we should hardly part, or
have many words, so much do I desire a closure with you. But
to deal freely with you: the settling of the Manor of Hursley, as
you propose it, sticks so much with me, that either I understand
you not, or else it much fails my expectation. As you offer it,
there is 400/. per annum charged upon it. For the 150/. to your
Lady, for her life, as a jointure, I stick not at that: but the 2501.
per annum until Mr. Ludlow’s lease expire, the term whereof I
know not, and so much of the 2501. per annum as exceeds that
lease in annual value for some time also after the expiration of
the said lease,? gives such a maim to the Manor of Hursley as in-
deed renders the rest of the Manor very inconsiderable.

Sir, if I concur to deny myself in point of present moneys, as
also in the other things mentioned, as aforesaid, I may and I do
expect the Manor of Hursley to be settled without any charge
upon it, after your decease, saving your Lady’s jointure of 1501.
per annum, which if you should think it fit to increase, I should
not stand upon it. Your own estate is best known to you: but
surely your personal estate, being free for you to dispose, will,
with some small matter of addition, beget a nearness of equality,

1See Letter LVI. [Carlyle added many words here, printing: ‘And yet a
jointure parted with ‘on my side.’ If she die there is ‘on your side’ little ‘ money
parted with, even’ if you have an heir male, ‘ there is’ but 3,o00/., ‘and’ without time
ascertained.” ]

2*Ludlow’s Lease,’ &c, is not very plain. The ‘tenor of Ludlow’'s Lease’ is still
less known to us than it was to the Lieutenant-General! [Harris read ‘‘ tenor” in-
stead of term.] This much is clear: 250 + 150 = 400 pounds are to be paid oft
Hursley Manor by Richard and his Wife, which gives a sad ‘maim’ to it. When
Ludlow’s Lease falls in, there will be some increment of benefit to the Manor; but
we are to derive no advantage from that, we are still to pay the surplus ‘for some
time after.’

426 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 March.

if I hear well from others ; and if the difference in that were not
very considerable, I should not insist upon it.

What you demand of me is very high in all points. I am
willing to settle as you desire in everything, saving for present
maintenance 400/. per annum, 3001. per annum! I would have
somewhat free, to be thanked by them for. The 300/. per annum
of my old land? for a jointure, after my wife’s decease, I shall
settle ; and in the mean time out of other lands at your election ;
and truly, Sir, if that be not good, nor will any lands, I doubt.
I do not much distrust your principles in other things have acted?
you towards confidence. You demand in case my son have none
issue male but only daughters, then the‘ lands in Hantshire,
Monmouth and Gloucestershire to descend to the daughters, or
3,000/. apiece. The first would ‘be’ most unequal ; the latter
is too high. They will be well provided for by being inheritrixes
of their mother ; and I am willing to [for ?] 2,000/. apiece to be
charged upon those lands ‘for them.’

Sir, I cannot but with very many thanks acknowledge your
good opinion of me and of my son; as also your great civilities
towards him, and your daughter’s good respects, whose goodness
(though known to me only at such a distance by the report of
others) I much value. And indeed that causeth me so cheerfully
to deny myself as I do in the point of moneys, and so willingly
to comply in other things. But if I should not insist as before,
I should in a greater measure deny both my own reason and the
advice of my friends than were meet; which I may not do.
Indeed, Sir, I have not closed with a far greater offer of estate,
but rather chose to fix here: I hope I have not been wanting to
Providence in this.

1 Means, in its desperate haste; ‘except that instead of 400/7. per annum for
maintenance, we must say 300/.’

? Better than Parliament-land, thinks Mayor! liver too prefers it for his Wife ;
but thinks all land will have a chance to go, if that go.

Sactuated or impelled.

4[Carlyle inserted ‘‘ Cromwell” here, but the lands in the counties of Hants,
Monmouth and Gloucester were just what were of his own but those of the
Marquis of Winchester and of Worcester, ]

———

1649.] LETTER XCUI, LONDON 497

I have made myself plain to you, desiring you will make my
son the messenger of your pleasure and resolution herein as
speedily as with conveniency you may. I take leave,

And rest,
Your affectionate servant,
OLIVER CROMWELL.

I desire my service may be presented to your Lady and
daughters.*

On the morrow, which is Thursday the 15th, day also of John
Milton’s nomination to be Secretary, Lieutenant-General Crom-
well was nominated Commander for Ireland;1 satisfactory
appointments both.

LETTER XCIII

Tue Lieutenant-General is in hot haste to-day; sends a brief
Letter ‘by your Kinsman,’ consenting to almost everything.—
Mayor, as we saw before, decidedly prefers ‘my ould land’ to un-
certain Parliamentary land. Oliver (see last Letter) offered to
settle the 300/. of jointure upon his old land, after his Wife’s
decease ; he now agrees that half of it, 150/., shall be settled
directly out of the old land, and the other half out of what Par-
liamentary land Mayor may like best.—The Letter breathes
haste in every line; but hits, with a firm knock, in Cromwell’s
way, the essential nails on their head, as it hurries on.

‘Your Kinsman,’ who carries this Letter, turns out by and by
to be a Mr. Barton; a man somewhat particular in his ways of
viewing matters; unknown otherwise to all men. The Lieu-
tenant-General getting his Irish Appointment confirmed in Par-
liament, and the conditions of it settled,” is naturally very busy.

* Harris, p. 507; Dunch’s Pusey seventeen. [No. 8. Holograph. In the
Morrison Collection. ]

1(For his speech on the subject of taking the command in Ireland, see Supple-
ment, No. 42.]
2 Cromwelliana, p. 54; Commons Journals, &c.

428 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [25 March.

For my worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley : These

‘London,’ 25th March 1649.
Sir,

You will pardon the brevity of these lines ;
the haste I am in, by reason of business, occasions it. To testify
the earnest desire I have to see a happy period to this treaty
between us, I give you to understand, that I agree to 1501. per
annum out of the 300/. per annum of my old land for your
Daughter's jointure, over the 150, where you please; 400/. for
present maintenance where you shall choose ; either in Hantshire,
Gloucester- or Monmouthshire ; those lands ‘to be’ settled upon
my son and his heirs male by your daughter; and in case of
daughters only, 2,000/. apiece charged upon those lands. 4001. per
annum free,! to raise portions for my two daughters. I expect the
Manor of Hursley to be settled upon your eldest daughter and
her heirs.?,. Your Lady a jointure of 150/. per annum out of it.
For compensation to your younger daughter, I agree to leave it
in your power, after your decease, to charge it with as much as
will buy in the lease of the term of Allington? by a just com-
putation. I expect, so long as they live with you, their diet, as
you expressed ; or in case of voluntary parting 150/. per annum ;
3,000/. in case you have a son,‘ to be paid in two years next

1 Means, ‘shall be settled on Richard and his Wife, that I may be left free.’
[This meaning is at anyrate doubtful. ]

2“ The heirs of her body” added in another hand. ]

°* Ludlow’s Lease,’ I fancy. [Harris printed this, ‘‘lease of the farm at Alling-
ton,” but it is difficult to accept the word as ‘‘ ferme,” the first letter seeming to be
clearly a ¢, also the following word is certainly not ‘‘at,” but “of.” If we read
“term” the allusion must be to one of the leases for terms of lives of which Crom-
well has spoken before, perhaps to Ludlow’s, as Carlyle suggests.] Anne Mayor,
“your younger Daughter,’ married Dunch of Pusey; John Dunch, to whom we
owe these seventeen Letters. See also Letter, 27th August 1657.

4Grandson, 7.e. ; in the next sentence ‘ die’ means more properly Zzve. [Crom-
well does not mean grandson; see letters LVI., XCII, Nor does die mean live.
The point is that if Mayor has no son of his own, the manor house is to go to his
eldest daughter and her heirs, but if he should have a son, he is to pay her 3,000/.

within two years after the boy's birth. The time is now fixed for the first time; in,

letter XCII., Cromwell complained that it was left uncertain. And if his daughter
die without issue, Richard is to have 1,000/. within six months of her death. Carlyle
printed ‘‘ within six months ‘of the marriage,’ and inserted several other words,
needlessly. |

~~.

1649.] LETTER XCIIL, LONDON 429

following ; in case your daughter die without issue, 1,000/. within
six months.

Sir, if this satisfy, I desire a speedy resolution. I should the
rather desire so because of what your kinsman can satisfy you in.
The Lord bless you and your family, to whom I desire my affec-
tions and service may be presented. I rest,

Your humble servant,
O. CRoMWELL.*

Your Kinsman can in part satisfy you what a multiplicity of
business we are in: modelling the Army for Ireland ;—which in-
deed is a most delicate dangerous operation, full of difficulties
perhaps but partly known to your Kinsman !

For, in these days, John Lilburn is again growing very noisy ;
bringing out Pamphlets, England’s New Chains Discovered, in
several Parts. As likewise, T’he Hunting of the Foxes from Triploe
Heath to Whitehall by Five Small Beagles,\—the tracking out of
Oliver Cromwell and his Grandees, onward from their rendezvous
at Royston or Triploe,all the way to their present lodgment in
Whitehall and the seat of authority. ‘Five small Beagles,’ Five
vociferous petitionary Troopers, of the Levelling species, who for
their high carriage and mutinous ways have been set to ‘ride the
wooden horse’ lately. Do military men of these times understand
the wooden horse? He is a mere triangular ridge or roof of wood,
set on four sticks, with absurd head and tail superadded ; and
you ride him bare-backed, in face of the world, frequently with
muskets tied to your feet,—in a very uneasy manner! To
Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburn and these small Beagles it is manifest
we are getting into New Chams, not a jot better than the old;
and certainly Foxes ought to be hunted and tracked. Three of
the Beagles, the best-nosed and loudest-toned, by names Richard
Overton, William Walwyn, Thomas Prince,—these, with Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Lilburn, huntsman of the pack, are shortly after
this lodged in the Tower ;? ‘committed to the Lieutenant,’ to be
in mild but safe keeping with that officer.* There is, in fact, a

* Harris, p. 508; one of the seventeen. [No. 10. Holograph. Seal of arms,
black. In the Morrison Collection. ]

1Given in Somers Tracts, vi. 44-60.

2Q7th March, 11th April 1649 (Commons Journals, in diebus).

3[Eight troopers were originally associated with Lilburne in drawing up vg-
land's New Chains, and all eight names are appended to the petition to the General

430 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [30 March.

very dangerous leaven in the Army, and in the Levelling Public
at present, which thinks with itself: God’s enemies having been
fought down, chief Delinquents all punished, and the Godly Party
made triumphant, why does not some Millennium arrive ?

LETTER XCIV

‘Compensation, here touched upon, is the ‘compensation to
your younger Daughter’ mentioned in last Letter ; burden settled
on Hursley Manor, ‘after your decease,’ ‘to buy-in the Lease of
Allington Farm.’ Mayor wants it another way ; which ‘seems
very inconvenient,’ and in brief cannot be.

For my esteemed good Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire, These : at
Hursley

‘London,’ 30th March 1649.
Sir,

I received yours of the 28th instant. I desire
the matter of compensation may be as in my last to you. You
propose another way ; which truly seems to me very inconvenient,

I have agreed to all other things, as you take me (and that
rightly), repeating particulars in your paper. The Lord dispose
this great business (great between you and me) for good.

You mention to send by the post on Tuesday.! I shall speed
things here as I may. I am designed for Ireland, which will be

and Council of officers (demanding the re-establishment of the court of agitators)
in the copy amongst the Clarke Papers; uéz. - Robert Ward, Thomas Watson,
William Sawyer, Simon Graunt, George Jellis, Richard Rumball, John Benger and
Thomas Harbye. The first five names only are printed in the Hunting of the Foxes,
and they are probably the ‘five small beagles.” This pamphlet was published
about a fortnight after they were cashiered. Dr. Gardiner seems to intimate that
they were set on their own horses, but the expression in the Dixrnal sentenced to
ride the horse, with their faces to the tail,” would appear rather to mean what
Carlyle supposes. Overton, Prince and Walwyn were not, properly speaking,
“beagles” at all, but were imprisoned with Liiburne as having been associated
with him in the composition of the Second Part of England's New Chains.]

' The 30th of March is Friday ; Tuesday is the 3d of April.

a

1649.] LETTER XCV., LONDON 431

speedy. I should be very glad to see things settled before I go,
if the Lord will. My service to all your family. I rest,
Sir,
Your affectionate servant,
‘OuiveR CROMWELL. *

LETTER XCV

Wuo the Lawyer, or what the “arrest” of him is, which oc-
casions new expense of time, I do not know. On the whole, one
begins to wish Richard well wedded ; but the settlements do still
a little stick, and we must have patience.

For my worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley: These

‘London,’ 6th April 1649.

Sir,

I have received your papers enclosed in your
Letter ; although I know not how to make so good use of them
as otherwise might have been, to have saved expense of time, if
the arrest of your lawyer had not fallen out at this time.

I conceive a draught, to your satisfaction, by your own lawyer,
would have saved much time; which to me is precious. I hope
you will send some ‘one’ up, perfectly instructed. I shall en-
deavour to speed what is to be done on my part; not knowing
how soon I may be sent down towards my charge for Ireland.
And I hope to perform punctually with you.

Sir, my son had a great desire to come down and wait upon
your daughter. I perceive he minds that more than to attend
business here.! I should be glad to see him settled, and all things

* Harris, p. 508. [‘‘ Name torn off” as Harris says. No. 1x. Holograph. In
the Morrison Collection. ]

1The dog !

432 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 15 April.

a lilt tat Sail ellie by

finished before I go. I trust not to be wanting therein. The
Lord direct all our hearts into His good pleasure. I rest,
Sir, ;
Your affectionate servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.

My service to your Lady and family.*

There is much to be settled before I can ‘be sent down to my
charge for Ireland.’ The money is not yet got ;—and the Army
has ingredients difficult to model. Next week, a Parliamentary
Committee, one of whom is the Lieutenant-General, and another
is Sir Harry Vane, have to go to the City, and try if they will
lend us 120,000/. for this business. Much speaking in the Guild-
hall there, in part by Cromwell.! The City will lend; and now
if the Army were once modelled, and ready to march P—

LETTER XCVI

Herz, at any rate, is the end of the Marriage-treaty,—not even
Mr. Barton, with his peculiar ways of viewing matters, shall now
delay it long.

For my worthy Friend Richard Mayor, Esquire: These
‘London,’ r5th April 1649.
Sir,

Your kinsman Mr. Barton and myself, repair-
ing to our counsel for the perfecting this business so much con-
cerning us, did, upon Saturday this 15th of April, draw our
counsel to a meeting: where, upon consideration had of my letter
to yourself expressing my consent to particulars, which ‘letter,’
Mr. Barton brought to your counsel Mr. Hales of Lincoln’s Inn ;2
—upon the reading that which expresseth the way of your
settling Hursley, your kinsman expressed a sense of yours

* Harris, p. 509. [No. 12. Holograph. In the Morrison Collection. ]

1 yeth April 1649, Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 55).
2‘ Hales’ is the future Judge Hale.

1649.] LETTER XCVI, LONDON 433

contrary to the paper under my hand, as also to that under your
hand of the 28th of March, which was the same with mine as to
that particular.!

And indeed I know nothing of doubt, in that which I am to
do, but do agree it all to your kinsman, his satisfaction. Nor is
there much material difference save in this, wherein both my
paper sent by you to your counsel, and yours of the 28th, do in
literal and all equitable construction agree, viz.: To settle an
estate in fee-simple upon your daughter, after your decease;
which Mr. Barton affirms not to be your meaning, although he
has not (as to me) formerly made this any objection ; nor can the
words bear it; nor have I anything more considerable in lieu of
what I part with than this. And I dare appeal? to yours or any
counsel in England, whether it be not just and equal that I insist
thereupon.

And this misunderstanding (if it be yours, as it is your kins-
man’s), put a stop to the business ; so that our counsel could not
_ proceed, until your pleasure herein were known. Wherefore it
was thought fit to desire Mr. Barton to have recourse to you to
know your mind, he alleging he had no authority to understand
that expression so, but the contrary, which was thought not a
little strange, even by your own counsel.

I confess I did apprehend we should be incident to mistakes,
treating at such a distance, although I may take the boldness to
say, there is nothing expected from me but I agree ‘ to’ it to your
kinsman’s sense to a tittle.

Sir, I desired to know what commission your kinsman had to
help this doubt by an expedient, who denied to have any; but
did think it were better for you to part with some money, and
keep the power in your own hands as to the land, to dispose
thereof as you should see cause. Whereupon an overture was

1A mere comma here, instead of new paragraph; greatly obscuring the sense :—
‘as to that particular, and I know nothing of doubt in that which I am to doe, but
doe agree itt all,’ &c.

2(Harris mis-read this ‘‘ have appealed.’’]

VOL. I1.—28

434 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [15 April.

made, and himself and your counsel desired to draw it up; the
effect whereof this enclosed paper contains. And although I
should not like change of agreements, yet to show how much I
desire the perfecting of this business, if you like thereof (though
this be far the worse bargain), I shall submit thereunto; your
counsel also thinking that things may be settled this way with
more clearness and less intricacy. There is mention made of
900/. per annum to be reserved: but it comes to but about
800/.; my lands in Glamorganshire being but little above 4001.
per annum; and the 400/. per annum out of my manors in
Gloucester- and Monmouth-shire. I wish a clear understanding
may be between us; truly I would not willingly mistake,
desiring to wait upon Providence in this business. I rest,
Sir,
Your affectionate friend and servant,
O.tver CRoMWELL.

I desire my service may be presented to your Lady and
daughters. *

This is the last of the Marriage-treaty.! Mr. Barton, whom
‘no Counsel in England’ could back, was of course disowned in
his over-zeal; the match was concluded ; solemnised, Ist May
1649.2

Richard died 12th July 1712, at Cheshunt, age 86;° his Wife
died 5th January 1675-6, at Hursley, and is buried there,—where,
ever after Richard’s Deposition, and while he travelled on the
Continent, she had continued to reside. In pulling down the
old Hursley House, above a century since, when the Estate had
passed into other hands, there was found in some crevice of the
old walls a rusty lump of metal, evidently an antiquity ; which
was carried to the new Proprietor at Winchester ; who sold it as
‘a Roman weight,’ for what it would bring. When scoured, it
turned out,—or is said by vague Noble, quoting vague ‘ Vertue,’

* Harris, p. 509. [No. 13. Holograph—Seal of arms, In the Morrison
Collection. ]

1['There is one letter more, written on April 28. See Supplement, No. 43. ]
2 Noble, i. 188. 3 7btd., i. 176, 188. :

1649, ] THE LEVELLERS 435

‘Hughes’s Letters,’ and ‘ Ant. Soc.’ (Antiquarian Society), to have
turned out,—to be the Great Seal of the Commonwealth.) If
the Antiquaries still have it, let them be chary of it.

THE LEVELLERS

Wuite Miss Dorothy Mayor is choosing her wedding-dresses,
and Richard Cromwell is looking forward to a life of Arcadian
felicity now near at hand, there has turned up for Richard’s
Father and other parties interested, on the public side of things,
a matter of very different complexion, requiring to be instantly
dealt with in the interim. The matter of the class called
Levellers ; concerning which we must now say a few words.

In 1647, as we saw, there were Army Adjutators; and among
some of them wild notions afloat, as to the swift attainability of
Perfect Freedom civil and religious, and a practical Millennium
on this Earth; notions which required, in the Rendezvous at
Corkbushfield, ‘Rendezvous of Ware’ as they oftenest call it, to
be very resolutely trodden out. Eleven chief mutineers were
ordered from the ranks in that Rendezvous ; were condemned by
swift Court-Martial to die; and Trooper Arnald, one of them, was
accordingly shot there and then; which extinguished the mutiny
for that time. War since, and Justice on Delinquents, England
made a Free Commonwealth, and such like, have kept the Army
busy: but a deep republican leaven, working all along among
these men, breaks now again into very formidable development.?
As the following brief glimpses and excerpts may satisfy an
attentive reader who will spread them out, to the due expansion,
in his mind. Take first this glimpse into the civil province ; and
discern, with amazement, a whole submarine world of Calvinistic
Sansculottism, Five-point Charter and the Rights of Man, threat-
ening to emerge almost two centuries before its time !

‘The Council of State,’ says Whitlocke,’ just while Mr. Barton

1Noble, i. 195. Bewildered Biography of the Mayors, ‘Majors or Maijors,’
tbid., il. 436-40. f

2[There is a curious account in a Royalist newspaper of a quarrel in the House
between Cromwell and H. Marten, in February, 1649, when Cromwell is said to
have drawn his dagger, and ‘‘ clapping it on the seat by him, expressed great anger
against Harry and his levelling crew.’’ A@erc. Prag., Feb, 27-Mar. 5. |

® 17th April 1649, p. 384.

436 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [20 April.

is boggling about the Hursley Marriage-settlements, ‘has intelli-
‘gence of certain Levellers appearing at St. Margaret’s Hill, near
‘Cobham in Surrey, and at St. George’s Hill,’ in the same quarter :
‘that they were digging the ground, and sowing it with roots and
‘beans. One Everard, once of the Army, who terms himself a
‘Prophet, is the chief of them:’ one Winstanley is another chief.
‘They were Thirty men, and said that they should be shortly
‘Four-thousand. They invited all to come in and help them ; and
‘promised them meat, drink, and clothes. They threaten to pull
‘down Park-pales, and to lay all open; and threaten the neigh-
‘bours that they will shortly make them all come up to the hills
‘and work.’ These infatuated persons, beginning a new era in
this headlong manner on the chalk hills of Surrey, are laid hold
of by certain Justices, ‘by the country-people,’ and also by ‘two
troops of horse ;’ and complain loudly of such treatment ; appeal-
ing to all men whether it be fair.1 This is the account they give
of themselves when brought before the General some days after-
wards :

‘April 20th, 1649. Everard and Winstanley, the chief of those
‘that digged at St. George’s Hill in Surrey, came to the General
‘and made a large declaration, to justify their proceedings. Eve-
‘rard said, He was of the race of the Jews,’ as most men, called
Saxon and other, properly are; ‘That all the Liberties of the
‘People were lost by the coming in of William the Conqueror ;
‘and that, ever since, the People of God had lived under tyranny
‘and oppression worse than that of our Forefathers under the
‘Egyptians. But now the time of deliverance was at hand ; and
‘God would bring His People out of this slavery, and restore
‘them to their freedom in enjoying the fruits and benefits of the
‘Earth. And that there had lately appeared to him, Everard, a
‘vision ; which bade him, Arise and dig and plough the Earth,
‘and receive the fruits thereof. That their intent is to restore
‘the Creation to its former condition. That as God had promised
‘to make the barren land fruitful, so now what they did, was to
‘restore the ancient Community of enjoying the Fruits of the
‘Earth, and to distribute the benefit thereof to the poor and
‘needy, and to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. That

1 King's Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 427, § 6 (Declaration of the bloody and un-
christian Acting of William Star, &c, in opposition to those that dig‘upon George-
Hill in Surrey); 2. no. 418, § 5, &c. [A great deal of information about the
Diggers, a the very curious Diggers’ song, will be found in the Clarke Pagers, ii.
210, et seg.

1649. ] | THE LEVELLERS 437

‘they intend not to meddle with any man’s property, nor to break
‘down any pales or enclosures,’ in spite of reports to the con-
trary ; ‘but only to meddle with what is common and untilled,
‘and to make it fruitful for the use of man. That the time will
‘suddenly be, when all men shall willingly come in and give up
‘their lands and estates, and submit to this Community of
‘Goods.’

These are the principles of Everard, Winstanley, and the poor
Brotherhood,seemingly Saxon, but properly of the race of the
Jews, who were found dibbling beans on St. George’s Hill, under
the clear April skies in 1649, and hastily bringing in a new era
in that manner. ‘And for all such as will come in and work
‘with them, they shall have meat, drink, and clothes, which is
‘all that is necessary to the life of man: and as for money, there
‘is not any need of it; nor of clothes more than to cover naked-
‘ness.’ For the rest, ‘That they will not defend themselves by
‘arms, but will submit unto authority, and wait till the promised
‘opportunity be offered, which they conceive to be at hand. And
‘that as their forefathers lived in tents, so it would be suitable
‘to their condition, now to live in the same.

‘While they were before the General, they stood with their
‘hats on; and being demanded the reason thereof, they said,
‘Because he was but their fellow-creature. Being asked the
‘meaning of that phrase, Give honour to whom honour is due,—
‘they said, Your mouths shall be stopped that ask such a ques-
‘tion.

Dull Bulstrode hath ‘set down this the more largely because
it was the beginning of the appearance’ of an extensive levelling
doctrine, much to be ‘avoided’ by judicious persons, seeing it is
“a weak persuasion.” The germ of Quakerism and much else is
curiously visible here. But let us look now at the military phasis
of the matter; where ‘a weak persuasion’ mounted on cavalry
horses, with sabres and fire-arms in its hand, may become a very
perilous one.

Friday, 20th April 1649. The Lieutenant-General has con-
sented to go to Ireland ; the City also will lend money ; and now
this Friday the Council of the Army meets at Whitehall to decide
what regiments shall go on that service. ‘After a solemn seek-
ing of God by prayer,’ they agree that it shall be by lot: tickets
are put into a hat, a child draws them: the regiments, fourteen

1 Whitlocke, p. 384.

438 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [26 April.

of foot and fourteen of horse, are decided on in this manner.
‘The officers on whom the lot fell, in all the twenty-eight regi-
‘ments, expressed much cheerfulness at the decision.’ The
officers did :—but the common men are by no means all of that
humour. The common men, blown upon by Lilburn and his five
small Beagles, have notions about England’s new Chains, about the
Hunting of Foxes from Triploe Heath, and in fact ideas concern-
ing the capability that lies in man and in a free Commonwealth,
which are of the most alarming description.

Thursday 26th April. This night at the Bull in Bishopgate
there has an alarming mutiny broken out in a troop of Whalley’s
regiment there. Whalley’s men are not allotted for Ireland:
but they refuse to quit London, as they are ordered ; they want
this and that first : they seize their colours from the Cornet, who
is lodged at the Bull there:—the General and the Lieutenant-
General have to hasten thither ; quell them, pack them forth on
their march ; seizing fifteen of them first, to be tried by Court-
Martial. Tried by instant Court-Martial, five of them were found
guilty, doomed to die, but pardoned ; and one of them, Trooper
Lockyer, is doomed and not pardoned. Trooper Lockyer is shot,
in Paul’s Churchyard, on the morrow. A very brave young man,
they say; though but three-and-twenty, ‘he has served seven
years in these Wars,’ ever since the Wars began. ‘ Religious’
too, ‘of excellent parts and much beloved ;’—but with hot notions
as to human Freedom, and the rate at which the millenniums
are attainable, poor Lockyer! He falls shot in Paul’s Churchyard
on Friday, amid the tears of men and women. Paul’s Cathedral,
we remark, is now a Horseguard ; horses stamp in the Canon’s
stalls there: and Paul’s Cross itself, as smacking of Popery, where
in fact Alablaster once preached flat Popery, is swept altogether
away, and its leaden roof melted into bullets, or mixed with tin
for culinary pewter. Lockyer’s corpse is watched and wept over,
not without prayer, in the eastern regions of the City, till a new
week come ; and on Monday, this is what we see advancing west-
ward by way of funeral to him.

‘About one hundred went before the Corpse, five or six in a
‘file; the Corpse was then brought, with six trumpets sounding
‘a soldier’s knell; then the Trooper’s Horse came, clothed all
‘over in mourning, and led by a footman. The Corpse was
‘adorned with bundles of Rosemary, one half stained in blood ;
‘and the Sword of the deceased along with them. Some thou-
‘sands followed in rank and file: all had seagreen-and-black

a te dl

1649.] THE LEVELLERS 439

‘Ribbon tied on their hats,! and to their breasts : and the women
‘brought up the rear. At the new Churchyard in Westminster,
‘some thousands more of the better sort met them, who thought
‘not fit to march through the City. Many looked upon this
‘funeral as an affront to the Parliament and Army ; others called
‘these people “Levellers ;” but they took no notice of any one’s
‘sayings.’ 2

That was the end of Trooper Lockyer : six trumpets wailing
stern music through London streets; Rosemaries and Sword
half-dipt in blood ; funeral of many thousands in seagreen Ribbons
and black :—testimony of a weak persuasion now looking some-
what perilous. Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburn and his five small
Beagles, now in a kind of loose arrest under the Lieutenant of the
Tower, make haste to profit by the general emotion ; publish on
the Ist of May ° their ‘ Agreement of the People, —their Bentham-
Sieyes Constitution ; Annual very exquisite Parliament, and other
Lilburn apparatus; whereby the Perfection of Human Nature
will with a maximum of rapidity be secured, and a millennium
straightway arrive, sings the Lilburn Oracle.4

May 9th. Richard Cromwell is safe wedded ; Richard’s Father
is reviewing troops in Hyde Park, ‘seagreen colours in some of
their hats.’ The Lieutenant-General speaks earnestly to them.
Has not the Parliament been diligent, doing its best? It has
punished Delinquents ; it has voted, in these very days, resolu-
tions for dissolving itself and assembling future Parliaments. It
has protected trade ; got a good Navy afloat. You soldiers, there
is exact payment provided for you. Martial Law? Death, or
other punishment, of Mutineers? Well! Whoever cannot stand
Martial Law is not fit to be a soldier: his best plan will be to lay
down his arms; he shall have his ticket, and get his arrears as
we others do,—we that still mean to fight against the enemies
of England and this Cause.’—One trooper showed signs of inso-
lence ; the Lieutenant-General suppressed him by rigour and by
clemency ; the seagreen ribbons were torn from such hats as had
them. The humour of the men is not the most perfect. This
Review was on Wednesday: Lilburn and his five small Beagles

[The sea-green ribbons first appeared at Rainborowe’s funeral, perhaps, as Dr.
Gardiner suggests, as being considered appropriate to a sea-man., |

2 Whitlocke, p. 385. ® Whitlocke’s date, p. 385.

4[Under date April 28, is a short letter from Cromwell concerning the troops in
Hampshire. See Supplement, No. 44.]

> 15th April 1649, Commons Journals.

8 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 56).

440 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 May.

are, on Saturday, committed close Prisoners to the Tower, each
rigorously to a cell of his own.

It is high time. For now the flame has caught the ranks of
the Army itself, in Oxfordshire, in Gloucestershire, at Salisbury
where head-quarters are; and rapidly there is, on all hands, a
dangerous conflagration blazing out. In Oxfordshire, one Captain
Thompson, not known to us before, has burst from his quarters
at Banbury, with a Party of Two-hundred, in these same days;
has sent forth his Engiand’s Standard Advanced ;} insisting
passionately on the New Chains we are fettered with; indig-
nantly demanding swift perfection of Human Freedom, justice
on the murderers of Lockyer and Arnald ;—threatening that if
a hair of Lilburn and the five small Beagles be hurt, he will
avenge it ‘seventy-and-seven fold.’ This Thompson’s Party,
swiftly attacked by his Colonel, is broken within the week ; he
himself escapes with a few, and still roves up and down. To join
whom, or to communicate with Gloucestershire where help lies,
there has, in the interim, open mutiny, ‘above a Thousand
strong, with subalterns, with a Cornet Thompson brother of the
Captain, but without any leader of mark, broken out at Salisbury :
the General and Lieutenant-General, with what force can be
raised, are hastening thitherward in all speed. Now were the
time for Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburn; now or never might noisy
John do some considerable injury to the Cause he has at heart :
but he sits, in these critical hours, fast within stone walls!

Monday 14th May. All Sunday the General and Lieutenant-
General marched in full speed, by Alton, by Andover, towards
Salisbury ; the mutineers, hearing of them, start northward for
Buckinghamshire, then for Berkshire ; the General and Lieuten-
ant-General turning also northward after them in hot chase. The
mutineers arrive at Wantage; make for Oxfordshire by New-
bridge ; find the Bridge already seized ; cross higher up by swim-
ming ; get to Burford, very weary, and ‘turn out their horses to
grass ;’—Fairfax and Cromwell still following in hot speed, ‘a
march of near fifty miles’ that Monday. What boots it; there is
no leader, noisy John is sitting fast within stone walls! The
mutineers lie asleep in Burford, their horses out at grass ; the
Lieutenant-General, having rested at a safe distance since dark,

bursts into Burford as the clocks are striking midnight. He has

beset some hundreds of the mutineers, ‘who could only fire some

'Given in Walker's History of Independency, part il, 168; dated 6th May.

ue ee mer

1649.] THE LEVELLERS 441

shots out of windows ;’—has dissipated the mutiny, trodden down
the Levelling Principle out of English affairs once more. Here
is the last scene of the business ; the rigorous Court-Martial hav-
ing now sat; the decimated doomed Mutineers being placed on
the leads of the Church to see:

Thursday, 17th May. ‘This day in Burford Churchyard, Cornet
‘Thompson, brother to Thompson the chief leader, was brought
‘to the place of execution ; and expressed himself to this purpose,
‘ That it was just what did befall him ; that God did not own the
‘ways he went; that he had offended the General: he desired
‘the prayers of the people; and told the soldiers who were ap-
‘pointed to shoot him, that-when he held out his hands, they
‘should do their duty. And accordingly he was immediately,
‘after the sign given, shot to death. Next after him was a
‘Corporal, brought to the same place of execution; where, look-
‘ing upon his fellow-mutineers, he set his back against the wall ;
‘and bade them who were appointed to shoot, “Shoot!” and
‘died desperately. The third, being also a Corporal, was brought
‘to the same place; and without the least acknowledgment of
‘error, or show of fear, he pulled off his doublet, standing a pretty
‘distance from the wall; and bade the soldiers do their duty ;
‘looking them in the face till they gave fire, not showing the
‘least kind of terror or fearfulness of spirit. —So die the Leveller
Corporals ; strong they, after their sort, for the Liberties of Eng-
land ; resolute to the very death. Misguided Corporals! But
History, which has wept for a misguided Charles Stuart, and
blubbered, in the most copious helpless manner, near two centuries
now, whole floods of brine, enough to salt the Herringfishery,—
will not refuse these poor Corporals also her tributary sigh.
With Arnald of the Rendezvous at Ware, with Lockyer of the
Bull in Bishopsgate, and other misguided martyrs to the Liberties
of England then and since, may they sleep well !

Cornet Dean! who now came forward, as the next to be shot,
‘expressed penitence ;’ got pardon from the General: and there
was no more shooting. Lieutenant-General Cromwell went into
the Church, called down the Decimated of the Mutineers; re-
buked, admonished ; said, The General in his mercy had forgiven
them. Misguided men, would you ruin this Cause, which mar-
vellous Providences have so confirmed to us to be the Cause of

1(Cornet Henry Denne, author of a pamphlet on the rising in question, called
The Levellers Designe Discovered. |

442 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 May.

God? Go, repent ; and rebel no more, lest a worst thing befall
you! ‘They wept,’ says the old Newspaper ; they retired to the
Devizes for a time; were then restored to their regiments, and
marched cheerfully for Ireland.—Captain Thompson, the Cornet’s
brother, the first of all the Mutineers, he too, a few days after-
wards, was fallen-in with in Northamptonshire, stil] mutinous :
his men took quarter; he himself ‘fled to a wood;’ fired and
fenced there, and again desperately fired, declaring he would
never yield alive ;—whereupon ‘a Corporal with seven bullets in
his carbine’ ended Captain Thompson too; and this formidable
conflagration, to the last glimmer of it, was extinct.

Sansculottism, as we said above, has to lie submerged for al-
most two centuries yet. Levelling, in the practical civil or
military provinces of English things, is forbidden to be. In the
spiritual provinces it cannot be forbidden ; for there it everywhere
already is. It ceases dibbling beans on St. George’s Hill near
Cobham ; ceases galloping in mutiny across the Isis to Burford ;
—takes into Quakerisms, and kingdoms which are not of this
world. My poor friend Dryasdust lamentably tears his hair over
the ‘intolerance’ of that old Time to Quakerism and such like:
if Dryasdust had seen the dibbling on St. George’s Hill, the
threatened fall of ‘Park-pales, and the gallop to Burford, he
would reflect that Conviction in an earnest age means, not
lengthy Spouting in Exeter-Hall, but rapid silent Practice on the
face of the Earth ; and would perhaps leave his poor hair alone.

On Thursday night, 17th of the month, the General, Lieu-
tenant-General, and chief Officers arrive at Oxford; lodge in
All-Souls College ; head-quarters are to be there for some days.
Solemnly welcomed by the reformed University; bedinnered,
bespeeched ; made Doctors, Masters, Bachelors, or what was
suitable to their ranks, and to the faculties of this reformed
University. Of which high doings, degrees and convocation-
dinners, and eloquence by Proctor Zanchy, we say nothing,—
being in haste for Ireland. This small benefit we have from the
business: Anthony Wood, in his crabbed but authentic way, has
given us biographical sketches of all these Graduates ; biographies,
very lean, very perverse, but better than are commonly going then,
and in the fatal scarcity not quite without value.

1Wood's Athena, iv, (Fasti, ii, 127-155): the Graduates of Saturday, 19th
May 1649, are, Fairfax, p. 148; Cromwell, p. 152; Colonels Scrope, Grosvenor,
Stir Hardress Waller, I: ngoldsby, Harrison, Goff, Okey ; Adjutant-General Sedascue,
Scoutmaster Rowe: and of Monday, arst, Lieutenant-Colonel Cobbet, p. 140; John

1649.] LETTERS XCVII—CII 443

Neither do we speak of the thanking in the House of Com-
mons ;! or of the general Day of Thanksgiving for London,
which is Thursday the 7th June (the day for England at large
being Thursday 2ist),2—and of the illustrious Dinner which the
City gave the Parliament and Officers, and all the Dignitaries of
England, when Sermon was done. It was at Grocers’ Hall, this
City dinner; really illustrious. Dull Bulstrode, Keeper, or one
of the Keepers, of the Commonwealth Great Seal, was there,—
Keeper of that lump of dignified metal, found since all rusty in
the wall at Hursley: and my Lord of Pembroke, an Earl and
Member of the Council of State, ‘speaking very loud’ as his
manner was, insisted that illustrious Bulstrode should take place
above him. I have given place to Bishop Williams when he was
Keeper; and the Commonwealth Great Seal is as good as any
King’s ever was ;—illustrious Bulstrode, take place above me:
so!? ‘On almost every dish was enamelled a bandrol with the
‘word Welcome. No music but that of drum and trumpet ;’ no
balderdash, or almost none, of speech without meaning ; ‘no drink-
ing of healths or other incivility ;’—drinking of healths ;;a kind of
invocation or prayer, addressed surely not to God, in that humour ;
probably therefore to the Devil, or to the Heathen gods ; which
is offensive to the well-constituted mind. Four-hundred pounds
were given to the Poor of London, that they also might dine.+—

And now for Bristol and the Campaign in Ireland.

LETTERS XCVII—CII

Tuesday, 10th July 1649. ‘This evening about five of the clock,
‘the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland began his journey ; by the way
‘of Windsor, and so to Bristol. He went forth in that state and
‘equipage as the like hath hardly been seen; himself in a coach
‘with six gallant Flanders mares, whitish gray; divers coaches
‘accompanying him ; and very many great Officers of the Army ;
‘his Lifeguard consisting of eighty gallant men, the meanest

Rushworth, Cornet /oyce, p. 138:—of whom those marked here in /¢alics have
biographies worth looking at for an instant.

1[This was on May 26, by which time Cromwell was back in London. On the
gist he wrote a letter about the disposition of the troops. See Supplement, No. 4s. |

2 Commons Journals, 26th May 1649. * Whitlocke, p. 391.

4 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp. 59, 60).

444 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (9 July.

‘whereof a Commander or Esquire, in stately habit ;—with
‘trumpets sounding, almost to the shaking of Charing Cross, had
‘it been now standing. Of his Lifeguard many are Colonels ;
‘and believe me, it’s such a guard as is hardly to be paralleled
‘in the world. And now have at you, my Lord of Ormond!
‘You will have men of gallantry to encounter; whom to over-
‘come will be honour sufficient, and to be beaten by them will be
‘no great blemish to your reputation. If you say, Cesar or
‘Nothing: they say, A Republic or Nothing. The Lord Lieu-
‘tenant’s colours are white.’ !

Thus has Lord-Lieutenant Cromwell gone to the Wars in Ire-
land. But before going, and while just on the eve of going, he
has had the following, among a multiplicity of other businesses,
to attend to.

LETTER XCVII

Barnasas O’Bryen, Sixth Earl of Thomond, Twentieth-and-odd
King of Thomond, a very ancient Irish dignitary of the Limerick
regions, whom it were still worth while to conciliate, has fallen
into ‘straits, distresses ; applies to the Lord Lieutenant to help
him a little. The Lord Lieutenant thinks his case good ; for-
wards it with recommendation to Harrington, of the Council of
State, the proper official person in such matters. Note, this is
by no means Harrington of the Oceana, this ‘Sir James ;’ this
is Member (‘recruiter’) for Rutlandshire, and only a distant
cousin of the Oceana’s.

What the Earl of Thomond’s case was, as we have not seen
the ‘enclosed’ statement of it, shall remain somewhat vague to
us. Thomond had not joined the Irish Massacre, in 1641: but
neither would he join against it; he apologised to the King’s
Lieutenant on that occasion, said he had no money, no force ;
retired with many apologetic bows into England to the King
himself; leaving his unmonied Castle of Bunratty to the King’s
Lieutenant,—who straightway found some 2,000/. of good money
lying hidden in it, and cheerfully appropriated the same. I
incline to think, it may be for this Two-thousand-and-odd pounds,
to have it acknowledged as a debt and allowed on the Earl of
Peterborough’s estate, that the poor Earl, ‘in the modesty of his

1 Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 62).

1649] LETTER XCVIL, LONDON 445

desires, is now pleading. For he has been in active Royalist
services since that passive one; in Ormond Wars, cessations,
sequestrations, is a much-mulcted, impoverished man. And as
for the Earl of Peterborough his son-in-law, he was one of poor
Earl Holland’s people in that fatal futile rising of St. Neot’s last
year ; and is now wandering in foreign parts, in a totally ruined
condition. Readers who are curious may follow the indications
in the note.!_ Earl Thomond’s modest desire was allowed. Bun-
ratty Castle, where that 2,000/. was found ‘buried in the walls,’
is now quite deserted by the Thomonds; is now ‘the largest
Police-Barrack’ in those Limerick regions.

To my worthy friend Sir James Harrington, ‘ Knight, of the Council
of State: These’

‘London,’ gth July 1649.
Sir,
You see by this enclosed, how great damage

the Earl of Thomond hath sustained by these troubles, and what
straits he and his family are reduced unto by reason thereof.
You see the modesty of his desires to be such as may well merit
consideration. I am confident, that which he seeks is not so
much for advantage of himself, as out of a desire to preserve
his son-in-law the Earl of Peterburgh’s fortune and family from
ruin.?

If the result of the favour of the House fall upon him, although
but in this way, it is very probable it will oblige his Lordship to
endeavour the peace and quiet of this Commonwealth, which
will be no disservice to the State; perhaps of more advantage

1 Ludlow, i. 21; Whitlocke (2d edit.), p. 420, see also p. 201 ; Commons Journals,
vi. 279, 445 (15th August 1649, and 23d July 1650); Collins's Peerage, ii. 216;
&e. &e.

2[The Parliament order of July 23, given probably in consequence of Cromwell's
application, speaks of the money—2812/.—as ‘‘lent for the service of the State.”
Lord Peterborough, petitioning the Committee for Compounding in the previous
March, states that his father-in-law’s real estate is in the hands of the Irish rebels,
and his personal estate ‘‘ disposed for service of Parliament,” for which they are
debtors to him for 16,0o00/.; that the Committee to which this matter has been
referred have resolved that the fine set on petitioner may be allowed to Lord
Thomond in part to satisfy his debt and he is willing to accept it, but by reason of
public business, the report cannot be made to Parliament. See Calendar of Commiittee
Sor Compounding, p. 1208, Thomond yielded Bunratty to Parliament in 1646. ]

446 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [10 July.

than the extremity of his fine. Besides, you showing your readi-
ness to do a good office herein will very much oblige,
Sir,
Your affectionate servant,
Ouiver CROMWELL. *

LETTER XCVIII -

Here likewise is a Letter which the Lord Lieutenant, in still
greater haste, now in the very act of departing, has had to write,!
—on behalf of his ‘Partner’ or fellow Member for Cambridge ;
which likewise the reader is to glance at, before going :

For the Honourable Wilkam Lenthall, Esquire

‘London,’ toth July 1649.
Sir,

I beseech you, upon that score of favour (if
I be not too bold to call it friendship) which I have ever had
from you, let me desire you to promote my partner’s humble suit
to the house ; and obtain (as far as possible you may) some just
satisfaction for him. I know his sufferings for the public have
been great, besides the loss of his calling by his attendance here.
His affections have been true and constant ; and, I believe, his
decay great in his estate. It will be justice and charity to him ;
and I shall acknowledge it as a favour to,

Your most humble servant,
O.iver CRoMWELL. {

John Lowry, Esquire, is Oliver’s fellow Member for Cambridge.
What Lowry’s ‘losses,’ ‘estate,’ ‘calling,’ or history in general
were, remains undiscoverable. One might guess that he had

* Tanner MSS. (in Cary, ii. 150). [Vol. lvi. f. 69 in Tanner ; a copy evidently
made for use in the House, as it is endorsed, ‘‘ When the Lord Tumend or the
Lord Peterburroughs business comes in, give this to Mr. Speaker.”’]

+ Harris, p. 516; Hardeian MSS. no. 6988—collated, and exact,

1[The letter in favour of Captain Richard Price (Supplement, No. 46), was prob-
ably also written during these last days in town. ]

1649.] LETTER XCVIII., LONDON 447

been perhaps a lawyer, some call him a ‘chandler’ or trader,! of
Puritan principles, and fortune already easy. He did not sit in
the short Parliament of 1640, as Oliver had done ; Oliver’s former
‘Partner,’ one Meautys as we mentioned already, gave place to
Lowry when the new Election happened.

Lowry in 1645 was Mayor of Cambridge. Some controversy
as to the Privileges of the University there, which was now re-
formed according to the Puritan scheme, had arisen with the
Town of Cambridge : a deputation of Cambridge University men,
with ‘Mr. Vines’ at their head, comes up with a Petition to the
House of Commons, on the 4th of August 1645 ; reporting that
they are like to be aggrieved, that the ‘new Mayor of Cambridge
will not take the customary oaths,’ in respect to certain privileges
of the University ; and praying the House, in a bland and flatter-
ing way, to protect them. The House answers: “Yours is the
University which is under the protection of this House;” Ox-
ford, still in the King’s hands, being in a very unreformed state :
“this House can see no learning now in the Kingdom but by
your eyes ;”’—certainly you shall be protected !—Counter-Petitions
come from Lowry and the Corporation; but we doubt not the
University was protected in this controversy, and Gown made
good against Town.? What the controversy specially was, or
what became of it, let no living man inquire. Lowry here
vanishes into thick night again; nowhere reappears till in this
Letter of Cromwell’s.?

Letter written, as its date bears, on the very day when he set
out towards Bristol, to take the command in Ireland, ‘10th J uly
1649, about five in the afternoon.’ In some Committee-room, or
other such locality, in the thick press of business, Lowry had
contrived to make his way to the Lord Lieutenant, and to get
this Letter out of him. Which indeed proved very helpful. For
on that day week, the 17th of July 1649, we find as follows:
‘The humble Petition of John Lowry, Esquire, was this day read.
‘Ordered, That the sum of Three-hundred pounds be allowed
‘unto the said Mr. John Lowry, for his losses in the said Petition
‘mentioned: and that the same be charged upon the revenue:

1Cooper’s Annals of Cambridge.

2See Commons Journals, vi. 229, 24%.

3/There is a letter of Lowry’s amongst the papers of the Committee for Com-
pounding, written in the May of the following year; praying that John Jenkinson,
his son-in-law, an honest and able man, a good lawyer and late under-sheriff, may
be appointed steward to the Cambridge Commissioners. (See Calendar of Com-
mittee for Compounding, pp. 189, 233.)]

448 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 July.

‘and the Committee of Revenue are authorised and appointed
‘to pay the same: and the same is specially recommended to Sir
‘Henry Vane, Senior, to take care the same be paid accordingly, ?
—which we can only hope it was, to the solace of poor Mr.
Lowry, and the ending of these discussions.

Ten years later, in Protector Richard’s time, on Friday 22d
July 1659, ai\John Lowry, Esquire, now quite removed from Cam-
bridge, turns up again; claiming to be continued ‘Cheque in
Ward in the Port of London, —which dignity is according assured
him till ‘the first day of October next.” But whether this is
our old friend the Mayor of Cambridge, and what kind of pro-
vision for his old age this same Chequeship in Ward might be, is
unknown to the present Editor. Not the faintest echo or vistage
henceforth of a John Lowry either real or even possible. The
rest—gloomy Night compresses it, and we have no more to say.

LETTER XCIX

Mayor of Hursley, with whom are the young Couple, is con-
nected now with an important man: he has written in behalf of
‘Major Long ;’ for promotion as is likely. The important man
does not promote on the score of connexion ; and mildly signifies
so much.

For my very loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley :
These
Bristol, rgth July 1649.

Lovine Brotuer,

I received your letter by Major Longe, and
do in answer thereunto according to my best understanding, with
a due consideration to those gentlemen who have abid the brunt
of the service.

I am very glad to hear of your welfare, and that our children
have so good leisure to make a journey to eat cherries :—it’s
very excusable in my daughter, I hope she may have a very
good pretence for it! I assure you, Sir, I wish her very well,

1 Commons Journals, vi. 263. 2 Tbid. vii. 727.

1649. ] LETTER XCIX., BRISTOL 449

and I believe she knows it. I pray you tell her from me, I
expect she writes often to me; by which I shall understand how
all your family doth, and she will be kept in some exercise. I
have delivered my son up to you, and I hope you will counsel
him: he will need it, and indeed I believe he likes well what
you say, and will be advised by you. I wish he may be serious,
the times require it.

I hope my sister! is in health, to whom I desire my very
hearty affections and service may be presented, as also to my
Cousin Ann,? to whom I wish a good husband. I desire my
affections may be presented to all your family, to which I wish
a blessing from the Lord. I hope I shall have your prayers in
the business to which I am called. My wife, I trust, will be
with you before it be long, in her way towards Bristol.—Sir,
discompose not your thoughts nor estate for what you are to pay
me. Let me know wherein I may comply with your occasions
and mind, and be confident you will find me to you as your own
heart.

Wishing your prosperity and contentment very sincerely, with
the remembrance of my love, I rest,

Your affectionate brother and servant,
O. CromweELL.*

Mayor has endorsed this Letter: ‘Received 27th July 1649,
per Messenger express from Newbury.’ He has likewise, says
Harris, jotted on it ‘some shorthand, and ‘an account of his
cattle and sheep.’—Who the ‘ Major Long’ was, we know not:
Cromwell undertakes to ‘do’ for him what may be right and
reasonable, and nothing more.

Cromwell, leaving London as we saw on Tuesday evening
July 10th, had arrived at Bristol on Saturday evening, which was
the 14th. He had to continue here, making his preparations,
gathering his forces, for several weeks.2 Mrs. Cromwell means

1 Mrs. Mayor. 2 Miss Mayor, afterwards Mrs. Dunch of Pusey.
3[There is a short note from him to the Justices of Peace in those parts, dated
July 21, in the Supplement, No. 47.]
* Harris, p. 510: No. 8 of the Pusey seventeen. [It is No. 14, which would be
No 10 of the Pusey seventeen, Holograph. Sealed. In the Morrison Collection. ]
VoL. 1.—29

450 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [13 Aug.

seemingly to pass a little more time with him before he go. In
the end of July, he quits Bristol; moving westward by Tenby!
and Pembroke, where certain forces were to be taken up,—
towards Milford Haven; where he dates his next Letters, just
in the act of sailing.

LETTER C

Tue new Lord Lieutenant had at first designed for Munster,
where it seemed his best chance lay. Already he has sent some
regiments over, to reinforce our old acquaintance Colonel, now
Lieutenant-General Michael Jones, at present besieged in Dublin,
and enable him to resist the Ormond Army there. But on the
2d of August an important Victory has turned up for Jones ; sur-
prisal, and striking into panic and total rout, of the said Ormond
Army ;2 which fortunate event, warmly recognised in the follow-
ing Letter, clears Dublin of siege, and opens new outlooks for
the Lord Lieutenant there. He sails thitherward ; from Milford
Haven, Monday, August 13th. Ireton, who is Major-General,
or third in command, Jones being second, follows with another
division of the force, on Wednesday. Hugh Peters also went;
and ‘Mr. Owens’ also, for another chaplain.

The good ship John is still lying in Milford waters, we suppose,
waiting for a wind, for a turn of the tide. ‘My Son’ Richard
Cromwell, and perhaps Richard’s Mother, we may dimly surmise,
had attended the Lord Lieutenant thus far, to wish him speed on
his perilous enterprise ?

‘For my loving Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley :
These’

‘Milford Haven,’ from Aboard the John,
13th August 1649.
Lovine BroTHER,
I could not satisfy myself to omit this oppor-
tunity by my son of writing to you; especially there being so
1At Tenby, 2d August, Commons Journals, vi. 277.
*Rout at Rathmines or Bagatrath: Ormond’'s own Account of it, in Carte’s

Ormond Papers, ii. 403, 407-11: Jones's Account, in Cary's Memorials, ii. 159-62.
Commons Journals, vi. 278 (14th August 1649).

1649.) LETTER C., MILFORD HAVEN 451

late and great an occasion of acquainting you with the happy
news I received from Lieutenant-General Jones yesterday.

The Marquis of Ormond besieged Dublin with nineteen-
thousand men or thereabouts ; seven-thousand Scots and three-
thousand more were coming to that work. Jones issued out of
Dublin with four-thousand foot and twelve-hundred horse ; hath
routed his whole Army; killed about four-thousand upon the
place, and taken 2,517 prisoners, above three-hundred ‘of them’
officers, some of great quality.!

This is an astonishing mercy; so great and seasonable as
indeed we are like them that dreamed. What can we say! The
Lord fill our souls with thankfulness, that our mouths may be
full of His praise,—and our lives too; and grant we never forget
His goodness to us. These things seem to strengthen our faith
and love, against more difficult times. Sir, pray for me, That I
may walk worthy of the Lord in all that He hath called me unto.

I have committed my son to you; pray give him advice. I
envy him not his contents; but I fear he should be swallowed
up of them. I would have him mind and understand business,
read a little history, study the mathematics and cosmography :
—these are good, with subordination to the things of God.
Better than idleness, or mere ? outward worldly contents. These
fit for public services,? for which a man is born.

Pardon this trouble. I am thus bold because I know you love
me ; as indeed I do you, and yours. My love to my dear sister,
. and my Cousin Ann your daughter, and all friends. I rest,

Sir,
Your loving brother,
OLiver CromMweELL.

‘P.S.’ Sir, I desire you not to discommodate yourself because
of the money due to me. Your welfare is as mine: and therefore

1The round numbers of this account have, as is usual, come over greatly exag-
gerated (Carte, 22 supra).

2[‘*more” in Forster, but Carlyle’s emendation is probably correct. ]

3 Services useful to all men,

452 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [13 Aug.

let me know, from time to time, what will convenience you in
any forbearance ; I shall answer you in it, and be ready to accom-
modate you. And therefore do your other business, let not this
hinder.*

Of Jones and his Victory, and services in Ireland, there was on
the morrow much congratulating in Parliament: revival of an
old Vote, which had rather fallen asleep, For settling Lands of a
Thousand Pounds a-year on him; and straightway, more special
speedy Vote of ‘Lands to the value of Five-hundred Pounds
a-year for this last service ;’—which latter Vote, we hope, will
not fall asleep as the former had done.t

LETTER CI

Same date, same conveyance.

To my beloved Daughter Dorothy Cromwell, at Hursley ; These

From Aboard the John, 13th August 1649.

My pear DavuGHTER,

Your letter was very welcome to me. I like
to see anything from your hand, because indeed I stick not to say
I do entirely love you. And therefore I hope a word of advice
will not be unwelcome nor unacceptable to thee.

I desire you both to make it above all things your business to
seek the Lord: to be frequently calling upon Him, that He
would manifest Himself to you in His Son, and be listening what
returns He makes to you, for He will be speaking in your ear
and in your heart, if you attend thereunto, I desire you to pro-
voke your husband likewise thereunto. As for the pleasures of
this life, and outward business, let that be upon the bye. Be
above all these things, by faith in Christ, and then you shall have

* Forster's Statesmen of the Commonwealth, iv. 267 : From certain MSS. of Lord’
Nugent’s.

1 Commons Journals, Vi, 278, 8x (14th, 18th August 1649).

1649.]} LETTER CI., ABOARD THE JOHN 453

the true use and comfort of them, and not otherwise! I have
much satisfaction in hope your spirit is this way set, and I desire
you may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, and that I may hear thereof. The Lord is
very near, which we see by His wonderful works, and therefore
He looks that we of this generation draw near Him. This late
great mercy of Ireland is a great manifestation thereof. Your
husband will acquaint you with it. We should be much stirred
up in our spirits to thankfulness. We much need the spirit of
Christ, to enable us to praise God for so admirable a mercy.
The Lord bless thee, my dear daughter.
I rest,
Thy loving Father,
Ouiver CROMWELL.

‘P.S.’ I hear thou didst lately miscarry. Prithee take heed
of a coach by all means; borrow thy father’s nag when thou
intendest to go abroad.*

Is the last phrase ironical ; or had the ‘coach,’ in those ancient
roads, overset, and produced the disaster? Perhaps ‘thy Father’s
nag’ is really safer? Oliver is not given to irony; nor in a tone
for it at this moment. These gentle domesticities and pieties
are strangely contrasted with the fiery savagery and iron grimness,
stern as Doom, which meets us in the next set of Letters we have
from him !

On the second day following, on the 15th of August,? Crom-
well with a prosperous wind arrived in Dublin ; ‘where,’ say the
old Newspapers,’ ‘he was received with all possible demonstrations
‘of joy; the great guns echoing forth their welcome, and the
‘acclamations of the people resounding in every street. The
‘Lord Lieutenant being come into the City,—where the con-

1 How true is this; equal, in its obsolete dialect, to the highest that man has yet
attained to, in any dialect old or new!

2 Carte, ii. 83.

3In Kimber: Life of Cromwell (London, 1724), p. 126. [From the Perfect
Politician, 1660. |

* Forster, iv. 268: From certain MSS, of Lord Nugent's.

454 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND _ [22 Aug.

‘course of the people was very great, they all flocking to see him
‘of whom before they had heard so much,—at a convenient place
‘he made a stand,’ rising in his carriage we suppose, ‘and with
‘his hat in his hand made a speech to them.’ Speech unfortun-
ately lost: it is to this effect; “That as God had brought him
“thither in safety, so he doubted not but by Divine Providence
“to restore them all to their just liberties and properties,’ much
trodden down by those unblessed Papist-Royalist combinations,
and the injuries of war: “and that all those whose hearts’ affec-
“tions were real for the carrying on of the great work against
“the barbarous and bloodthirsty Irish and their adherents and
“confederates for propagating the Gospel of Christ, of the
“establishing of Truth and Peace, and restoring that bleeding
“Nation ‘of Ireland’ to its former happiness and tranquillity,—
“should find favour and protection from the Parliament of
“England and himself, and withal should receive such endow-
“ments and gratuities as should be answerable to their merits.”
‘This Speech,’ say the old Newspapers, ‘was entertained with
‘great applause by the people ; who all cried out, “We will live
‘and die with you!” ’

LETTER CII

Sir Grorce Ayscoucu, now vigilantly cruising on those coasts,
‘Vice-Admiral of the Irish Seas,’ who has done good service more
than once,—he ought not to suffer in his private economics by
absence on the Public Service.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament : These
Dublin, 22d August 1649.
Sir,

Before my coming for Ireland, I was bold to
move the House on the behalf of Sir George Ayscough, who
then I thought had merited the favour of the Parliament, but
since, much more, by his very faithful and industrious carriage in.
this place.

It seems, whilst he is attending your service, a lease he holds

1649.] DECLARATION 455

of the Deanery of Windsor had like to be purchased over his
head, he not coming to buy it himself by the time limited. He
holds a very considerable part of his estate in church-leases ; one
or more being in impropriate tithes, which he and his ancestors
have held for a good time: all which is like to determine, and
go from him and his, by your orders.

I found the Parliament well to resent the motion I made on
his behalf at that time. I desire you please to revive the busi-
ness ; and to obtain the House’s favour for him, which they in-
tended and expressed. He will, I presume, herewith send his
humble desires: for which I beg your furtherance ; and rest,

Sir,
Your most humble servant.
O.iveR CRoMWELL.*

Ayscough is a Lincolnshire man. Last year, in the time of the
Revolted Ships, he stood true to the Parliament ; and brought
his own ship off to them, in spite of perils. Serves now under
Blake: is fast rising as a Sea-officer. The Lord Lieutenant’s
request in behalf of him has already been complied with.!

A DECLARATION BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT
OF IRELAND

Micuaei Jones's Dublin Army, like all Armies hitherto in Ire-
land, is of a quite unsatisfactory structure, of habits and practices
quite unsatisfactory. The Lord Lieutenant is busy modelling it ;
rearranging it under new and more capable Officers ; above all,
clearing it of bad men: an Irish friend informs us, ‘There hath
‘been an huge purge of the Army which we found here: it was
‘an Army made up of dissolute and debauched men.’? ‘The

* Tanner MSS. (in Cary, ii. 163). [Tanner lvi. 93, Holograph, Sealed. ]

1 Commons Journals, 8th August 1649 (vi. 276) ;—see zd. gth July 1649 (on which
day most probably, the day of Thomond’s Letter too, Cromwell had been ‘ moving
the House’ for him). Whitlocke (2d edition), p. 317.

2 Newspaper Letter in King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 439, § 7 [E. 573]; an-
other, 24. § 22.

456 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [24 Aug.

‘Officers reduced are not a little discontented, writes another
friend: but the public service so requires it. Officers and men,
and all Ireland are to know that henceforth it is ona new footing
we proceed. Here is a Declaration, legible on such market-
crosses, church-doors, and the like, as we have access to; well
worth attending to in a distracted seat of war.!

This DecLaraTIon is appointed to be printed, and published through-
out all Ireland ; By special direction from—O.iveR CROMWELL.

Wuereas I am informed that, upon the marching out of the
Armies heretofore, or of parties from Garrisons, a liberty hath
been taken by the Soldiery to abuse, rob and pillage, and too
often to execute cruelties upon the Country People: Being re-
solved, by the grace of God, diligently and strictly to restrain
such wickedness for the future,

I do hereby warn and require all Officers, Soldiers, and others
under my command, henceforth To forbear all such evil practices
as aforesaid; and Not to do any wrong or violence toward
Country People, or persons whatsoever, unless they be actually
in arms or office with the Enemy ; and Not to meddle with the
goods of such, without special order.

And I further declare, That it shall be free and lawful to and
for all manner of persons dwelling in the country, as well gentle-
men and soldiers, as farmers and other people (such as are in
arms or office with or for the Enemy only excepted), to make
their repair, and bring any provisions unto the Army (while in
march or camp), or unto any Garrison under my command :
Hereby assuring all such, That they shall not be troubled or
molested in their persons or goods ; but shall have the benefit of
a free market, and receive ready money for goods or commodities
they shall so bring and sell: And that they, behaving themselves
peaceably and quietly ; and paying such Contributions, propor-
tionably with their neighbours, as have been, are, or shall be

1(This was preceded by one to the citizens of Dublin, issued on August 23. See
Supplement, No, 48.]

1649.] IRISH WAR 457

duly and orderly imposed upon them, for maintenance of the
Parliament's forces and other public uses,—shall have free leave
and liberty to live at home with their families and goods; and
shall be protected in their persons and estates by virtue thereof,
until the 1st day of January next: By or before which time, all
such of them as are minded to reside, and plough and sow, in the
quarters,—are to make their addresses, for now and further pro-
tections, to the Attorney-General, residing at Dublin, and to such
other persons as shall be authorised for that purpose.

And hereof I require all Soldiers, and others under my com-
mand, diligently to take notice and observe the same: as they
shall answer to the contrary at their utmost perils. Strictly
charging and commanding all Officers and others, in their several
places, carefully to see to it That no wrong or violence be done
to any such person as aforesaid, contrary to the effect of the pre-
mises. Being resolved, through the grace of God, to punish all
that shall offend contrary hereunto, very severely, according to
Law or Articles of War; to displace, and otherwise punish, all
such Officers as shall be found negligent in their places, and not
‘to’ see ‘to’ the due observance hereof, or not to punish the
offenders under their respective commands.

Given at Dublin, the 24th of August 1649.
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

IRISH WAR

Tue history of the Irish War is, and for the present must con-
tinue, very dark and indecipherable to us. Ireland, ever since
the Irish Rebellion broke out and changed itself into an Irish
Massacre, in the end of 1641, has been a scene of distracted
controversies, plunderings, excommunications, treacheries, con-
flagrations, of universal misery and blood and bluster, such as

* King's Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 439, § 25. [E. 573.]

458 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND 1649.

the world before or since has never seen. The History of it
does not form itself into a picture; but remains only as a huge
blot, an indiscriminate blackness; which the human memory
cannot willingly charge itself with! There are Parties on the
back of Parties; at war with the world and with each other.
There are Catholics of the Pale, demanding freedom of religion ;
under my Lord This and my Lord That. There are Old-Irish
Catholics, under Pope’s Nuncios, under Abbas O’Teague of the
excommunications, and Owen Roe O’Neil;—demanding not
religious freedom only, but what we now call ‘Repeal of the
Union ;’ and unable to agree with the Catholics of the English
Pale. Then there are Ormond Royalists, of the Episcopalian
and mixed creeds, strong for King without Covenant: Ulster
and other Presbyterians, strong for King and Covenant: lastly,
Michael Jones and the Commonwealth of England, who want
neither King nor Covenant. All these plunging and tumbling,
in huge discord, for the last eight years, have made of Ireland
and its affairs the black unutterable blot we speak of.

At the date of Oliver’s arrival, all Irish Parties are united in a
combination very unusual with them; very dangerous for the
incipient Commonwealth. Ormond, who had returned thither
with new Commission, in hopes to co-operate with Scotch
Hamilton during the Second Civil War, arrived too late for
that object; but has succeeded in rallying Ireland into one
mass of declared opposition to the Powers that now rule.
Catholics of the Pale, and Old-Irish Catholics of the Massacre,
will at length act together: Protestant English Royalism, which
has fled hither for shelter; nay, now at last Royalist Presby-
terianism, and the very Scots in Ulster,—have all joined with
Ormond ‘against the Regicides.’ They are eagerly inviting the
young Charles Second to come thither, and be crowned and made
victorious. He as yet. hesitates between that and Scotland ;—
may probably give Scotland the preference. But in all Ireland,
when Cromwell sets foot on it, there remain only two Towns,
Dublin and Derry, that hold for the Commonwealth; Dublin
lately besieged, Derry still besieged. A very formidable com-
bination. All Ireland kneaded together, by favourable accident
and the incredible patience of Ormond, stands up in one great
combination, resolute to resist the Commonwealth. Combination
great in bulk; but made of iron and clay ;—in meaning not so
great. Oliver has taken survey and measure of it; Oliver
descends on it like the hammer of Thor; smites it, as at one

1649.] IRISH WAR 459

fell stroke, into dust and ruin, never to reunite against him
more,!

One could pity this poor Irish people ; their case is pitiable
enough! The claim they started with, in 1641, was for religious
freedom. Their claim, we can now see, was just : essentially just,
though full of intricacy ; difficult to render clear and concessible ;
—nay, at that date of the World’s History, it was hardly re-
cognisable to any Protestant man for just; and these frightful
massacrings and sanguinary blusterings have rendered it, for the
present, entirely unrecognisable. A just, though very intricate
claim: but entered upon, and prosecuted, by such methods as
were never yet available for asserting any claim in this world!

Treachery and massacre: what could come of it? Eight years |

of cruel fighting, of desperate violence and misery, have left

matters worse a thousand-fold than they were at first. No want |

of daring, or of patriotism so-called; but a great want of other

things! Numerous large masses of armed men have been on |
foot ; full of fiery vehemence and audacity, but without worth as |

Armies: savage hordes rather ; full of hatred and mutual hatred,
of disobedience, falsity and noise. Undrilled, unpaid,—driving
herds of plundered cattle before them for subsistence ; rushing
down from hillsides, from ambuscadoes, passes in the mountains ;
* taking shelter always ‘in bogs whither the cavalry cannot follow
them.’ Unveracious, violent, disobedient men. False in speech ;
—alas, false in thought, first of all; who have never let the Fact
tell its own harsh story to them; who have said always to the
harsh Fact, “Thou art not that way, thou art this way!” The
Fact, of course, asserts that it is that way: the Irish Projects
end in perpetual discomfiture; have to take shelter in bogs
whither cavalry cannot follow! There has been no scene seen
under the sun like Ireland for these eight years. Murder,
pillage, conflagration, excommunication; wide-flowing blood,
and bluster high as Heaven and St. Peter ;—as if wolves or
rabid dogs were in fight here; as if demons from the Pit had
mounted up, to deface this fair green piece of God’s Creation
with ther talkings and workings! It is, and shall remain, very
dark to us. Conceive Ireland wasted, torn in pieces ; black Con-
troversy as of demons and rabid wolves rushing over the face of
it so long ; incurable, and very dim to us: till here at last, as in

1[For Cromwell's Irish Campaign, see Murphy’s Cromwell in /reland, Also
Gilbert’s Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland, vol. ii. passim. Many of the
following letters are printed there. ]

460 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND _[1649.

the torrent of Heaven's lightning descending liquid on it, we
have clear and terrible view of its affairs for a time !—

~  Oliver’s proceedings here have been the theme of much loud
\criticism and sibylline execration ; into which it is not our plan
to enter at present. We shall give these Irish Letters of his in
their own natural figure, and without any commentary whatever.
To those who think that a land overrun with Sanguinary Quacks
can be healed by sprinkling it with rose-water, these Letters must
be very horrible. Terrible Surgery this: but is it Surgery and
\. Judgment, or atrocious Murder merely? That is a question which
should be asked ; and answered. Oliver Cromwell did believe in
God’s Judgments ; and did not believe in the rose-water plan of
Surgery ;—which, in fact, is this Editor’s case too! Every idle lie
and piece of empty bluster this Editor hears, he too, like Oliver,
has to shudder at it; has to think : “Thou, idle bluster, not true,
thou also art shutting men’s minds against the God’s Fact ; thou
wilt issue as a cleft crown to some poor man some day ; thou also
wilt have to take shelter in bogs whither cavalry cannot follow!”
—But in Oliver’s time, as I say, there was still belief in the Judg-
ments of God ; in Oliver’s time, there was yet no distracted jargon
of ‘abolishing Capital Punishment,’ of Jean-Jacques Philanthropy,
and universal rose-water in this world still so full of sin. Men’s
notion was, not for abolishing punishments, but for making laws
just: God the Maker’s Laws, they considered, had not yet got
the Punishment abolished from them! Men had a notion, that
the difference between Good and Evil was still considerable —
equal to the difference between Heaven and Hell. It was a true
notion. Which all men yet saw, and felt in all fibres of their
existence, to be true. Only in late decadent generations, fast
hastening towards radical change or final perdition, can such
indiscriminate mashing-up of Good and Evil into one universal
patent-treacle, and most unmedical electuary, of Rousseau Senti-
mentalism, universal Pardon and Benevolence, with dinner and
drink and one cheer more, take effect in our earth. Electuary
very poisonous, as sweet as it is, and very nauseous; of which
Oliver, happier than we, had not yet heard the slightest intima-
tion even in dreams.

The reader of these Letters, who has swept all that very
ominous twaddle out of his head and heart, and still looks with
a recognising eye on the ways of the Supreme Powers with this
world, will find here, in the rude practical state, a Phenomenon
which he will account noteworthy. An armed Soldier, solemnly

1649.] IRISH WAR 461

conscious to himself that he is the Soldier of God the Just, —a
consciousness which it well beseems all soldiers and all men to
have always ;—armed Soldier, terrible as Death, relentless as
Doom ; doing God’s Judgments on the Enemies of God! It is
a Phenomenon not of joyful nature; no, but of awful, to be
looked at with pious terror and awe. Not a Phenomenon which
you are called to recognise with bright smiles, and fall in love
with at sight :—thou, art thou worthy to love such a thing ;
worthy to do other than hate it, and shriek over it? Darest
thou wed the Heaven’s lightning, then; and say to it, Godlike
One? Is thy own life beautiful and terrible to thee ; steeped
in the eternal depths, in the eternal splendours? Thou also,
art thou in thy sphere the minister of God’s Justice; feeling
that thou art here to do it, and to see it done, at thy soul’s peril ?
Thou wilt then judge Oliver with increasing clearness; other-
wise with increasing darkness, misjudge him.

In fact, Oliver’s dialect is rude and obsolete ; the phrases of
Oliver, to him solemn on the perilous battlefield as voices of God,
have become to us most mournful when spouted as frothy cant
from Exeter Hall. The reader has, all along, to make steady
allowance for that. And on the whole, clear recognition will be
difficult for him. To a poor slumberous Canting Age, mumbling
to itself everywhere, Peace, Peace, where there is no peace,—
such a Phenomenon as Oliver, in Ireland or elsewhere, is not the
most recognisable in all its meanings. But it waits there for
recognition; and can wait an Age or two. The Memory of
Oliver Cromwell, as I count, has a good many centuries in it
yet; and Ages of very varied complexion to apply to, before all
end. My reader, in this passage and others, shall make of it
what he can.

But certainly, at lowest, here is a set of Military Despatches
of the most unexampled nature! Most rough, unkempt ; shaggy
as the Numidian lion. A style rugged as crags ; coarse, drossy :
yet with a meaning in it, an energy, a depth; pouring on like a
fire-torrent ; perennial fire of it visible athwart all drosses and
defacements: not uninteresting to see! This man has come
into distracted Ireland with a God’s Truth in the heart of him,
though an unexpected one; the first such man they have seen
for a great while indeed. He carries Acts of Parliament, Laws
of Earth and Heaven, in one hand ; drawn sword in the other.
He addresses the bewildered Irish populations, the black raven-
ing coil of sanguinary blustering individuals at Tredah and else-

462 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (1649.

where: “Sanguinary blustering individuals, whose sword is grown
worthless as the barking of dogs; whose very thought is false,
representing not fact, but the contrary of fact,—behold, I am
come to speak and to do the truth among you. Here are Acts
of Parliament, methods of regulation and veracity, emblems the
nearest we poor Puritans could make them of God’s Law-Book,
to which it is and shall be our perpetual effort to make them
correspond nearer and nearer. Obey them, help us to perfect
them, be peaceable and true under them, it shall be well with
you. Refuse to obey them, I will not let you continue living!
As articulate-speaking veracious orderly men, not as a blustering
murderous kennel of dogs run rabid, shall you continue in this
Earth. Choose !”—They chose to disbelieve him; could not
understand that he, more than the others, meant any truth or
justice to them. They rejected his summons and terms at
Tredah: he stormed the place; and according to his promise,
put every man of the Garrison to death. His own soldiers are
forbidden to plunder, by paper Proclamation; and in ropes of
authentic hemp they are hanged when they do it.1_ To Wexford
Garrison the like terms as at Tredah ; and, failing these, the like
storm. Here is a man whose word represents a thing! Not
bluster this, and false jargon scattering itself to the winds: what
this man speaks out of him comes to pass as a fact ; speech with
this man is accurately prophetic of deed. This is the first King’s
face poor Ireland ever saw; the first Friend’s face, little as it
recognises him,—poor Ireland !

But let us take the Letters themselves; and read them with
various emotions, in which wonder will not fail. What a rage,
wide-sweeping, inexorable as Death, dwells in that heart ;—close
neighbour to pity, to trembling affection, and soft tears! Some
readers know that softness without rigour, rigour as of adamant to
rest upon, is but sloth and cowardly baseness; that without
justice first, real pity is not possible, and only false pity and
maudlin weakness is possible. Others, again, are not aware of
that fact.—To our Irish friends we ought to say likewise that this
Garrison of Tredah consisted, in good part, of Englishmen.2
Perfectly certain this :*—and therefore let “the bloody hoof of

1 Two instances : King’s Pamphlets, large gto, no. 42, § 19, 6th-rs5th Sept. 1649.
[E. 533. Should be 5-12 Oct.]

2 Ludlow, i. 3or.

3[Modern research has modified this opinion. Ormond’s own regiment had
probably very few English or Protestants in it; Col. Byrne's regiment was English,

but Wall’s and Warren's were mostly, if not altogether, Irish Catholics, as were also

the Hones of horse. See Commonwealth and Protectorate, i. 124. Also Murphy,
p. 86, 2.

1649.) LETTER CII, STORM OF TREDAH 463

the Saxon,” &c. forbear to continue itself on that matter. At its
peril! Idle blustering, and untruth of every kind lead to the
like terrible results in these days as they did in those.

LETTERS CIII—CVI
STORM OF TREDAH

Tue first of this set, a Summons to Dundalk, will be fully under-
stood so soon as the Two following it are read. The Two follow-
ing it, on Tredah, or Drogheda as we now name it, contain in
themselves, especially the Second and more deliberate of the two
contains, materials for a pretty complete account of the Transac-
tion there.! It requires only to be added, what Cromwell himself
has forborne to do, that on the repulse of the first attack, it was
he, in person, who, ‘witnessing it from the batteries,’ hastened
forward and led on the new attack: My pretty men, we must
positively not be repulsed ; we must enter here, we cannot do at
all without entering !—The rest of these Irish Letters may, I
hope, tell their own tale.

LETTER CIII

For the Chief Officer commanding in Dundalk : These

‘ Tredah,’ 12th September 1649.
Sir,
I offered mercy to the garrison of Tredah,? in

sending the Governor a summons before I attempted the taking
of it ;* which being refused brought their evil upon them.

1[See also the accounts of the siege, in The Kingdom's Faithful and Impartial
Scout (E. 533, 16) and Col. Hewson’s letter (/ézd. 15).]

2° Treedagh,’ he writes.

3[The summons to Drogheda ran as follows :—

Sir,—Having brought the Army belonging to the Parliament of England before
this place, to reduce it to obedience, to the end effusion of blood may be prevented, I
thought fit to summon you to deliver the same into my hands to their use. If this
be refused you will have no cause to blame me. I expect your answer and rest,

Your servant,
(Signed) O. CROMWELL.

September roth 1649.

Printed in Gilbert's Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland, ii, 260. Also
in Sketches from the Carte Papers, p. 17.]

464 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [16 Sept.

If you, being warned thereby, shall surrender your garrison to
the use of the Parliament of England, which by this I summon
you to do, you may thereby prevent effusion of blood. If, upon
refusing this offer, that which you like not befalls you, you will
know whom to blame. I rest,

: Your servant,
O.tver CroMWELL.*

The Chief Officer commanding in Dundalk never received this
Letter, I believe! What, in the interim, had become of Dundalk
and its Chief and other Officers, will shortly appear.

LETTER CIV

‘To the Honourable John Bradshaw, Esquire, President of the
Council of State: These’
‘Dublin,’ 16th September 1649.

Sir,

It hath pleased God to bless our endeavours
at Tredah.1 After battery, we stormed it. The enemy were
about 3,000 strong in the town. They made a stout resistance,
and near 1,000 of our men being entered, the enemy forced them
out again. But God giving a new courage to our men, they
attempted again, and entered, beating the enemy from their
defences.

The enemy had made three entrenchments, both to the right
and left ‘of’ where we entered; all which they were forced to
quit. Being thus entered, we refused them quarter; having, the
day before, summoned the town. I believe we put to the sword
the whole number of the defendants. I do not think thirty of
the whole number escaped with their lives. Those that did, are

* Autograph, in the possession of the Earl of Shannon, at Castle-Martyr, in the
County of Cork,

1[In this and other letters, Carlyle has altered the Drogheda of his printed |

source into Tredah; but Cromwell spelt it Tredagh or Treedagh, as stated in the
note on the previous page. ]

1649.] LETTER CIV., STORM OF TREDAH 465

in safe custody for Barbadoes. Since that time, the enemy
quitted tous Trim and Dundalk. In Trim they were in such
haste that they left their guns behind them.

This hath been a marvellous great mercy. The enemy, being
not willing to put an issue upon a field-battle, had put into this
garrison almost all their prime soldiers, being about 3,000 horse
and foot, under the command of their best officers; Sir Arthur
Ashton! being made governor. There were some seven or eight
regiments, Ormond’s being one, under the command of Sir
Edmund Verney. I do not believe, neither do I hear, that any
officer escaped with his life, save only one lieutenant, who, I hear,
going to the enemy said, that he was the only man that escaped
of all the garrison. The enemy were filled upon this with much
terror. And truly I believe this bitterness will save much effusion
of blood, through the goodness of God.

I wish that all honest hearts may give the glory of this to
God alone, to whom indeed the praise of this mercy belongs.
‘As’ for instruments, they were very inconsiderable the work
throughout.

[We are marching the army to Dublin, which we hope will
be here to-morrow night, where we desire to recruit with victual,
and shall then, God willing, advance towards the southern
design—you know what—only we think Wexford will be our
first undertaking in order to the other. |?

Captain Brandly did with forty or fifty of his men very gallantly
storm the tenalia ; for which he deserves the thanks of the State.
I rest, r

Your most humble servant,’
O.ivER CroMwELL.*
1(Aston is the true form, but the two were, at that date, written interchangeably,
as Ashley and Astley were. As regards Sir Edmund Verney, see Memoirs of the
Verney Family, ii. 344. |

[In Whitlocke, whose version was printed by Carlyle (and by Gilbert) the

passage in brackets is omitted and there is simply a note; ‘‘ Then he gives an account

of his purpose for Wexford, and concludes,” The missing passage is supplied by
The Kingdom's Weekly Intelligencer (E. 575, 5).]

* Whitlocke, p. 412.
vot. 1.—30

466 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 Sept.

‘ Tenalia, I believe, is now called Tenaille by engineers ; a kind
of advanced defensive-work, which takes its name from resem-
blance, real or imaginary, to the lip of a pair of pincers.

The ‘Sir Edmund Verney’ who perished here was the son of
the Standard-bearer at Edgehill. For Sir Arthur Ashton see
Clarendon. Poor Sir Arthur had a wooden leg which the soldiers
were very eager for, understanding it to be full of gold coin; but
it proved to be mere timber: all his gold, 200 broad pieces, was
sewed into his belt, and scrambled for when that came to light.!
There is in Wood’s Life? an old-soldier’s account of the Storm of
Tredah, sufficiently emphatic, by Tom Wood, Anthony’s brother,
who had been there.?

LETTER CV

For the Honourable; William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These
Dublin, 17th September 1649.

Sir,
Your Army being safely arrived at Dublin ;

and the enemy endeavouring to draw all his forces together about
Trim and Tecroghan (as my intelligence gave me) ; from whence
endeavours were used by the Marquis of Ormond to draw Owen
Roe O'Neal with his forces to his assistance, but with what
success I cannot yet learn, I resolved, after some refreshment
taken for our weather-beaten men and horses, and accommoda-
tions for a march, to take the field. And accordingly, upon
Friday the 30th of August‘ last, rendezvoused with eight regi-
ments of foot and six of horse and some troops of dragoons, three
miles on the north side of Dublin. The design was, to endeavour
the regaining of Tredah ; or tempting the enemy, upon his hazard
of the loss of that place, to fight.

1 Whitlocke, p. are. 2 Prefixed to the Athene Oxonienses.
*[Ludlow's, Dr. Bates’ and Wood's accounts are all printed by Gilbert (Contemp.
History, ii. 272-275). On Tom Wood's story, see Dr. Gardiner's comments.

Commonwealth and Protectorate, i. 135.
4 Friday is 31st ; this error as to the day of the month continues through the Letter.

1649.] LETTER CV., STORM OF TREDAH 467

Your Army came before the town upon Monday following,!
where having pitched, as speedy course was taken as could be
to frame our batteries, which took up the more time because
divers of the battering guns were on shipboard. Upon Monday
the 9th * of this instant, the batteries began to play. Whereupon
I sent Sir Arthur Ashton, the then Governor, a summons, To
deliver the town to the use of the Parliament of England. To
the which I received no satisfactory answer, but proceeded that
day to beat down the steeple of the church on the south side
of the town, and to beat down a tower not far from the same
place, which you will discern by the chart enclosed.

Our guns not being able to do much that day, it was resolved
to endeavour to do our utmost the next day to make breaches
assaultable, and by the help of God to storm them. The places
pitched upon were that part of the town-wall next a church
called St. Mary’s, which was the rather chosen because we did
hope that if we did enter and possess that church, we should be
the better able to keep it against their horse and foot until we
could make way for the entrance of our horse, which we did not
conceive that any part of the town would afford the like advan-
tage for that purpose with this. The batteries planted were
two: one was for that part of the wall against the east end of
the said church, the other against the wall on the south side.
Being somewhat long in battering, the enemy made six retrench-
ments: three of them from the said church to Duleek Gate, and
three from the east end of the church to the town-wall and so
backward. The guns, after some two or three hundred shot,
beat down the corner tower, and opened two reasonable good
breaches in the east and south wall.

Upon Tuesday the 10th of this instant, about five o’clock in
the evening, we began the storm, and after some hot dispute we
entered about seven or eight hundred men, the enemy disputing
it very stiffly with us. And indeed, through the advantages of

1 3d September, 2 roth,

468 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 Sept.

the place, and the courage God was pleased to give the defenders,
our men were forced to retreat quite out of the breach, not with-
out some considerable loss ; Colonel Cassell! being there shot in
the head, whereof he presently died, and divers officers and
soldiers, doing their duty, killed and wounded. There was a
tenalia to flanker the south wall of the town, between Duleek
Gate and the corner tower before mentioned, which our men
entered, wherein they found some forty or fifty of the enemy,
which they put to the sword. And this ‘tenalia’ they held, but
it being without the wall, and the sally-port through the wall
into that tenalia being choked up with some of the enemy
which were killed in it, it proved of no use for our entrance
into the town that way.

Although our men that stormed the breaches were forced to
recoil, as before is expressed, yet, being encouraged to recover
their loss, they made a second attempt, wherein God was pleased
‘so’ to animate them that they got ground of the enemy, and by
the goodness of God, forced him to quit his entrenchments. And
after a very hot dispute, the enemy having both horse and foot,
and we only foot, within the wall, they gave ground, and our men
became masters both? of their retrenchments and the church ;
which indeed, although they made our entrance the more difficult,
yet they proved of excellent use to us, so that the enemy could
not ‘now’ annoy us with their horse, but thereby we had advan-
tage to make good the ground, that so we might let in our own
horse, which accordingly was done, though with much difficulty.

The enemy retreated, divers of them, into the Mill-Mount: a
place very strong and of difficult access, being exceedingly high,
having a good graft, and strongly palisadoed. The Governor,
Sir Arthur Ashton, and divers considerable Officers being there,
our men getting up to them, were ordered by me to put them
all to the sword. And indeed, being in the heat of action, I

(Col. James Castle. ]

*(The printed tract has ‘‘ but of their retrenchments, etc.” Carlyle's emendation |

is evidently correct. ]

1649.)} LETTER CV., STORM OF TREDAH 469

forbade them to spare any that were in arms in the town, and, I
think, that night they put to the sword about 2,000 men, divers
of the officers and soldiers being fled over the Bridge into the
other part of the Town, where about one hundred of them
possessed St. Peter’s church-steeple, some the west gate, and
others a strong round tower next the gate called St. Sunday’s.
These being summoned to yield to mercy, refused, whereupon I
ordered the steeple of St. Peter’s Church to be fired, where one
of them was heard to say in the midst of the flames: “God damn
me, God confound me; I burn, I burn.”

The next day, the other two towers were summoned, in one of
which was about six or seven score; but they refused to yield
themselves, and we knowing that hunger must compel them, set
only good guards to secure them from running away until their
stomachs were come down. From one of the said towers, not-
withstanding their condition, they killed and wounded some of
our men. When they submitted, their officers were knocked on
the head, and every tenth man of the soldiers killed, and the
rest shipped for the Barbadoes. The soldiers in the other tower
were all spared, as to their lives only, and shipped likewise for
the Barbadoes.

I am persuaded that this is a righteous judgment of God upon
these barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands in so
much innocent blood;! and that it will tend to prevent the
effusion of blood for the future, which are the satisfactory grounds
to such actions, which otherwise cannot but work remorse and
regret. The officers and soldiers of this garrison were the flower
of all their army, and their great expectation was, that our at-
tempting this place would put fair to ruin us, they being confident

1[/Cromwell seems to have held all Ireland responsible for the massacres of eight
years before. There can have been few—if any—at Drogheda who had taken part
in them ; certainly not the officers, certainly not the English soldiers, and almost
certainly not Ormond’s own regiment, raised in his ancestral domains, round Kil-
kenny. ‘‘ But to Cromwell, as to the majority of Englishmen of his time, every
Irishman, and still more every English defender of the Irish cause, had made him-
self an accomplice in the misdeeds of certain Irishmen.” Commonwealth and
Protectorate, i. 139.]

470 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 Sept. |

of the resolution of their men, and the advantage of the place.
If we had divided our force into two quarters to have besieged
the north town and the south town, we could not have had such
a correspondency between the two parts of our army, but that
they might have chosen to have brought their army, and have
fought with which part ‘of ours’ they pleased, and at the same
time have made a sally with 2,000 men upon us, and have left
their walls manned ; they having in the town the number speci-
fied in this enclosed, but some say near four thousand.

Since this great mercy vouchsafed to us, I sent a party of
horse and dragoons to Dundalk,! which the enemy quitted, and
we are possessed of, as also ‘of’ another castle they deserted,
between Trim and Tredah, upon the Boyne. I sent a party of
horse and dragoons to a house within five miles of Trim, there
being then in Trim some Scots companies, which the Lord of
Ardes brought to assist the Lord of Ormond. But upon the
news of Tredah, they ran away, leaving their great guns behind
them, which we also have possessed.

And now give me leave to say how it comes to pass that this
work is wrought. It was set upon some of our hearts, That a
great thing should be done, not by power or might, but by the
Spirit of God. And is it not so clear? That which caused your
men to storm so courageously, it was the Spirit of God, who gave
your men courage, and took it away again; and gave the enemy
courage, and took it away again; and gave your men courage
again, and therewith this happy success.2 And therefore it is
good that God alone have all the glory.

It is remarkable that these people, at the first, set up the mass
in some places of the town that had been monasteries ; but after-
wards grew so insolent that, the last Lord’s day before the storm,
the Protestants were thrust out of the great Church called St.

1 Antea, Letter CIII.
2[Mr. Morley calls this paragraph ‘‘a theory of the Divine tactics in these

operations which must be counted one of the most wonderful of all the recorded |

utterances of Puritan theology.” (Odver Cromwell, p. 301.)]

1649.)] LETTER CV., STORM OF TREDAH 471

Peter’s, and they had public mass there: and in this very place
near one thousand of them were put to the sword, fleeing thither
for safety. I believe all their friars were knocked on the head
promiscuously but two; the one of which was Father Peter Taaff,
(brother to the Lord Taaff), whom the soldiers took, the next
day, and made an end of; the other was taken in the round
tower, under the repute of lieutenant, and when he understood
that the officers in that tower had no quarter, he confessed he
was a friar ; but that did not save him.

A great deal of loss in this business fell upon Colonel Hewson,
Colonel Cassell, and Colonel Ewers’ regiments ; Colonel Ewers
having two field-officers in his regiment shot ; Colonel Cassell
and a captain of his regiment slain ; Colonel Hewson’s captain-
lieutenant slain. I do not think we lost one hundred men upon
the place, though many be wounded.

I most humbly pray the Parliament will be pleased ‘that ’
this army may be maintained; and that a consideration may be
had of them, and of the carrying on the affairs here, ‘such’ as
may give a speedy issue to this work, to which there seems to
be a marvellous fair opportunity offered by God. And although
it may seem very chargeable to the State of England to main-
tain so great a force, yet surely to stretch a little for the
present, in following God’s providence, in hope the charge will
not be long, I trust it will not be thought by any (that have not
irreconcilable or malicious principles) unfit for me to move for
a constant supply, which, in human probability as to outward
means, is most likely to hasten and perfect this work. And in-
deed if God please to finish it here as He hath done in England,
the war is like to pay itself.

We keep the field much, our tents sheltering us from the
wet and cold, but yet the country-sickness overtakes many, and
therefore we desire recruits, and some fresh regiments of foot,
may be sent us. For it’s easily conceived by what the garrisons
already drink up, what our field-army will come to, if God shall

=

472 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 Sept.

give more garrisons into our hands. Craving pardon for this

great trouble, I rest,
Your most humble servant,
O.rver CROMWELL.

P.S. Since the writing of my letter, a major who brought off
forty-three horse from the enemy told me that it’s reported in
their camp that Owen Roe and they are agreed.

A list of the defendants in Tredah: The Lord of Ormond’s
regiment (Sir Edmund Verney Lieutenant-Colonel), 400 ; Colonel
Byrn, Colonel Warren, and Colonel Wall, 2,100; the Lord of
Westmeath, 200; Sir James Dillon, 200; and 200 horse.*

The report as to Owen Roe O’Neil is correct. Monk, who had
lately in Ulster entered upon some negotiation with O'Neil and
his Old-Irish Party, who, as often happened, were in quarrel with
the others, found himself deserted by his very soldiers, and
obliged to go to England ; where this policy of his, very useful
as Monk had thought, is indignantly disavowed by the Authorities,
who will not hear of such a connexion.! Owen Roe O'Neil
appears to have been a man of real ability: surely no able man,
or son of Order, ever sank in a more dismal welter of confusions
unconquerable by him! He did no more service or disservice
henceforth ; he died in some two months, of a disease in the
foot,—poisoned, say some, by the gift of a ‘ pair of russet-leather
boots’ which some traitor had bestowed on him.?

Such was the Storm of Tredah. A thing which, if one wanted
good assurance as to the essential meaning of it, might well ‘ work
remorse and regret:’ for indisputably the outer body of it is
emphatic enough! Cromwell, not in a light or loose manner,
but in a very solemn and deep one, takes charge for himself, at
his own peril, That it zs a Judgment of God: and that it did

“, ‘save much effusion of blood,’ we and all spectators can very
' readily testifiy. ‘The execrable policy of that Regicide,’ says

Jacobite Carte on the occasion, ‘had the effect he proposed. It

* Newspapers; in Parliamentary History (London, 1763), xix. 201.

lyoth August 1649 (Commons Journals, vi. 277). 2 Carte, ii. 83.

1649.) LETTER CV., STORM OF TREDAH 473

‘spread abroad the terror of his name; it cut’—In fact, it cut
through the heart of the Irish War. Wexford Storm followed
(not by forethought, it would seem, but by chance of war) in the
same stern fashion ; and there was no other storm or slaughter
needed in that Country. Rose-water Surgeons might have tried
it otherwise ; but that was not Oliver’s execrable policy, not the
Rose-water one. And so we leave it, standing on such basis as
it has.1

Ormond had sent orders to ‘burn’ Dundalk and Trim before
quitting them; but the Garrisons, looking at Tredah, were in
too much haste to apply the coal. They marched away at
double-quick time ; the Lord Lieutenant got possession of both
Towns unburnt. He has put Garrisons there, we see, which
‘drink up’ some of his forces. He has also despatched Colonel
Venables, of whom we shall hear again, with a regiment or two,
to reduce Carlingford, Newry,—to raise what Siege there may
be at Derry, and assist in settling distracted Ulster: of whose
progress here are news.

1[Ormond, writing to the King after the storming of Drogheda, says the successes
and power of the ‘‘rebels”’ (z.e., the Parliament forces) have so struck terror into the
people, that although they ‘‘ have yet numbers enough, and other competent means
to oppose,” they are yet so stupefied that it is with great difficulty that he can ‘“‘ per-
suade them to act anything like men towards their own preservation.” (Carte
Papers, ii. 396.) As for Cromwell's conduct at Drogheda, he declares, in a letter to
Byron of September 29 (also among the Car¢e Pagers and printed in Gilbert, ii.
271) that all his officers and soldiers promised quarter to such as would lay down
their arms, and performed it, as long as any place held out, which encouraged others
to yield. But when they had once all in their power, ‘‘then the word no quarter
went round, and the soldiers were many of them forced against their wills to kill
their prisoners, ‘The cruelty exercised there for five days after the town was taken,
would,” he declared, ‘‘make as many several pictures of inhumanity, as are to be
found in the book of martyrs or in the relation of Amboyna.” Dr. Gardiner points
out that ‘‘so far from sparing effusion of blood, [Cromwell’s] cruelty at Drogheda
and Wexford, successful at Ross and at a few lesser strongholds, only served to
exasperate the garrisons of Duncannon, of Kilkenny and of Clonmel; and in his
later movements, Cromwell, always prepared to accept the teaching of events, dis-
covered that the way of clemency was the shortest road to conquest.” (Common-
wealth and Protectorate, i. 175.) Perhaps the best defence of Cromwell's action
from a military point of view is that pointed out by Mr. Firth, vzz.- a letter from
Wellington to Canning in 1820, in which he writes, ‘‘I believe it has always been
understood that the defenders of a fortress stormed have no claim to quarter.”
The consequence of the new regulations and the humanity of modern warfare, he
continues, ‘‘ was to me the loss of the flower of the army in the assaults of Ciudad
Rodrigo and of Badajoz. I certainly should have thought myself justified in putting
both garrisons to the sword; and if I had done so to the first, it is probable I should
have saved 5,000 men in the assault of the second. I mention this in order to show
you that the practice of refusing quarter to a garrison which stands an assault is not
a useless effusion of blood.”—Despatches, Correspondence and Memoranda of
Arthur, Duke of Wellington, i. 93. See Commonwealth and Protectorate, i, 132,
note.]

474 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND _ [27 Sept.

LETTER CVI

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These
Dublin, 27th September 1649.

Mr. SPEAKER,
I had not received any account from Colonel

Venables (whom I sent from Tredah to endeavour the reducing
of Carlingford, and so to march northward towards a conjunc-
tion with Sir Charles Coote) until the last night.?

After he came to Carlingford, having summoned the place,
both the three castles and the fort commanding the harbour
were rendered to him; wherein were about forty barrels of
powder, seven pieces of cannon, about one thousand muskets,
and five-hundred pikes wanting twenty. In the entrance into
the harbour, Captain Fern, aboard your man-of-war, had some
danger, being much shot at from the sea fort, a bullet shooting
through his main-mast. The Captain’s entrance into that har-
bour was a considerable adventure, and a good service ; as also
was Captain Brandley’s,? who, with forty seamen, stormed a very
strong tenalia at Tredah, and helped to take it; for which he
deserves an owning by you.

Venables marched from Carlingford, with a party of Horse
and Dragoons, to the Newry; leaving the Foot to come
up after him. He summoned the place, and it was yielded before
his Foot came up to him. Some other informations I have re-
ceived from him, which promise well towards your northern
interest, which, if well prosecuted, will, I trust God, render you
a good account of those parts.

I have sent those things to be presented to the Council of
State for their consideration. I pray God, as these mercies flow
in upon you, He will give you an heart to improve them to His

1[Venables’ letter, dated September 22, is in Letters from Ireland (E. 575, 7)

and is reprinted in Gilbert’s Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland, ii. 267.)
2 Antea, p. 465.

1649.] LETTER CVI, DUBLIN 475

glory alone ; because He alone is the author of them, and of all
the goodness, patience and long-suffering extended towards you.

Your army has marched; and I believe, this night lieth at
Arcklow in the County of Wicklow, by the sea-side, between
thirty and forty miles from this place. I am this day, by God’s
blessing, going towards it.

I crave your pardon for this trouble ; and rest,

Your most humble servant,
OLiveR CROMWELL.

P.S. I desire the supplies moved for may be hastened. I am
verily persuaded, though the burden be great, yet it is for your
service. If the garrisons we take swallow up your men, how
shall we be able to keep the field? Who knows but the Lord
may pity England’s sufferings, and make a short work of this.
It is in His hand to do it, and therein only your servants rejoice.

I humbly present the condition of Captain George Jenkins
his Widow. He died presently after Tredah Storm. His Widow
is in great want.

A list of the Officers and Soldiers slain at the storming of
Tredah :—Sir Arthur Ashton, Governor; Sir Edmund Verney,
Lieutenant-Colonel to Ormond’s Regiment; Colonel Fleming,
Lieutenant-Colonel Finglass, Major Fitzgerald, with eight
Captains, eight Lieutenants, and eight Cornets, all of Horse;
Colonel Warren, Wall and Byrn, of Foot, with their Lieutenants,
Majors, &c. ; the Lord Taaff’s Brother, an Augustine Friar ; forty-
four Captains, and all their Lieutenants, Ensigns, &c.; 220 Re-
formadoes and Troopers ; 2,500 Foot-soldiers, besides Staff- Officers,
Surgeons, &c., and many inhabitants. *

* King’s Pamphlets, small 4to, no. 441, art 7, Letters from Treland, printed by
Authority (p. 13) [E. 575]. Parliamentary History (xix. 207-9) has copied
this Letter from the old Pamphlet (as usual, giving no reference) ; and after the
concluding ‘Surgeons, &c.,’ has taken the liberty of adding these words, ‘and
many inhabitants,’ of which there is no whisper in the old Pamphlets ;—a very
considerable liberty indeed! [The words ave in the very pamphlet here quoted.
Moreover the Parliamentary History does give the reference: ‘‘ The Lord Lieu-
tenant’s letters, from the original edition printed by John Field for Edward Husband,
printer to the Parliament of England, and published by their order.” As regards

476 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

Venables went on, rapidly accomplishing his service in the
North ; without much hurt ; though not without imminent peril
once,—by a camisado, or surprisal in the night-time, which is
afterwards alluded to in these Letters. The Lord Lieutenant,
we observe, still dates from Dublin, but is to quit it ‘this day ;’
his ‘Army has already marched:’ Southward now, on a new
series of operations.

LETTER CVII
STORM OF WEXFORD

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These

Wexford, 14th October 1649.
Sir,
The army marched from Dublin, about the

23d of September, into the county of Wicklow, where the enemy
had a garrison about fourteen miles from Dublin, called Killing-
kerick ; which they quitting, a company of the army was put
therein. From thence the army marched through almost a
desolated country, until it came to a passage over the river
Doro,! about a mile above the castle of Arcklow, which was the
first seat and honour of the Marquis of Ormond’s family ; which
he had strongly fortified, but ‘it’ was, upon the approach of the
army, quitted ; wherein we left another company of Foot.

From thence the army marched towards Wexford; where in
the way was a strong and large castle, at a town called Limerick,
the ancient seat of the Esmonds ; where the enemy had a strong
garrison, which they burnt and quitted, the day before our
coming thither. From thence we marched towards Ferns, an
the whole list, however, Mr. Firth suggests what probably is the true explanation ;
vez.: that it was not part of Cromwell's letter at all, but linked on to it by the

printer, perhaps by Parliament's orders. Yet he sent the list at the end of the
previous letter. See p. 470.]

' River Darragh ;—a branch of what is now called the Avoca; well known to
musical persons. '

1649.] LETTER CVI, WEXFORD 477

episcopal seat, where was a castle; to which I sent Colonel
Reynolds with a party to summon it ; which accordingly he did,
and it was surrendered to him ; where we having put a company,
advanced the army to a passage over the River Slane, which
runs down to Wexford; and that night ‘we’ marched into the
fields of a village called Eniscorfy, belonging to Mr. Robert
Wallop ;! where was a strong castle very well manned and pro-
vided for by the enemy ; and, close under it, in a very fair house
belonging to the same worthy person, a monastery of Franciscan
friars, the considerablest in all Ireland: they ran away the night
before we came. We summoned the castle, and they refused to
yield at the first, but upon better consideration, they were willing
to deliver the place to us, which accordingly they did ; leaving
their great guns, arms, ammunition and provisions behind them.

Upon Monday the first of October, we came before Wexford,
into which the enemy had put a garrison, consisting of ‘ part of’
their army ; this town having, until then, been so confident of
their own strength as that they would not, at any time, suffer a
garrison to be imposed upon them. The commander that brought
in those forces was Colonel David Synnott, who took upon him
the command of the place, to whom I sent a summons, a copy
whereof is this enclosed ; between whom and me there passed
answers and replies, copies whereof these also are :

1. “ For the Commander-in-Chief within the town of Wexford : These

‘Before Wexford, 3d October 1649.
‘STR;

“ Having brought the army belonging to the
“Parliament of England before this place, to reduce it to its
“due obedience : to the end effusion of blood may be prevented,

1 Wallop is Member (‘recruiter’) for Andover; a King’s-Judge; Member of
the Council of State; now and afterwards a conspicuous rigorous republican man.
He has advanced money, long since, we suppose, for the Public Service in Ireland ;
and obtained in payment this ‘fair House,’ and Superiority of Enniscorthy: pro-
perties the value or no-value of which will much depend on the Lord-Lieutenant’s
success at present.—Wallop’s representative, a Peer of the Realm, is still owner
here, as it has proved,

478 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

“and the town and country about it preserved from ruin, I
“thought fit to summon you to deliver the same to me, to the
“use of the State of England.

“By this offer, I hope it will clearly appear where the guilt
“will lie, if innocent persons should come to suffer with the
“nocent. I expect your speedy answer; and rest,

Sires
“ Your servant,
“ OtiveR CRoMWELL.” }

“For the Lord General Cromwell : These
“ Wexford, 3d October 1649.

“Sir,—I have received your letter of summons for the delivery
“up of this town into your hands, which standeth not with my
“honour to do of myself; neither will I take it upon me, without
“the advice of the rest of the officers and Mayor of this Corpora-
“tion ; this town being of so great consequence to all Ireland.
“Whom I will call together, and confer with; and return my
“resolution unto you, tomorrow by twelve of the clock.

“In the mean time, if you be so pleased, I am content to for-
“bear all acts of hostility, so you permit no approach to be made.
“ Expecting your answer in that particular, I remain,—my Lord,—
“your Lordship’s servant,

“¢Da. SINNOTT.”

2. “ For the Commander-in-Chief in Wexford : These
‘“ Before Wexford, 3d October, 1649.
Sir,
“T am contented to expect your resolution by
“twelve of the clock tomorrow morning. Because our tents are
“not so good a covering as your houses, and for other reasons, I
“cannot agree to a cessation. I rest, your servant,

“Oxiver CRomMWELL.”’ 2

1 (This copy is in Cromwell's own hand, ]

2(Gilbert gives the following and somewhat different version. ‘Sir, I have
received your resolutions to return your answer by 12 of the clock tomorrow
morning, which I agree unto; but for your other part of your letter, to forbear all
acts of hostility, I consider that your houses are better than our tents, and so shall
not consent unto that.” (Contemp. History, ii. 284.) But the copies in the
Tanner MSS, are those actually sent by Cromwell. ]

1649.] LETTER CVIL, WEXFORD 479

“ For the Lord General Cromwell : These
“* Wexford, 4th October 1649.

«Sir,—I have advised with the Mayor and Officers, as I
“ promised, and thereupon am content that four, whom I shall
“employ, may have a conference and treaty with four of yours,
“to see if any agreement and understanding may be begot be-
“tween us. To this purpose I desire you to send mine a safe-
“conduct, as I do hereby promise to send unto yours when you
“send me their names. And I pray that the meeting may be
“had tomorrow at eight of the clock in the forenoon, that they
“may have sufficient time to confer and debate together, and
“ determine and compose the matter; and that the meeting and
“place may be agreed upon, and the safe-conducts mutually sent
“for the said meeting this afternoon. Expecting your answer
“hereto, I rest, my Lord, your servant,

“Da, SINNOTT.

“Send me the names of your Agents, their qualities and
“degrees. Those I fix upon are: Major James Byrne, Major
“Theobald Dillon, Alderman Nicholas Cheevers, Mr. William
“ Stafford.”

3. “To the Commander-in-Chief in Wexford : These
‘“‘« Before Wexford,’ 4th October 1649.”’

‘Sin,

“ Having summoned you to deliver the town
“of Wexford into my hands, I might well expect the delivery
“thereof, and not a formal treaty; which is seldom granted but
“where the things stand upon a more equal foot.

“Tf therefore yourself or the town have any desires to offer,
“upon which you will surrender the place to me, I shall be able
“to judge of the reasonableness of them when they are made
“known to me. To which end, if you shall think fit to send the
“persons named in your last, entrusted by yourself and the town,
“by whom I may understand your desires, I shall give you a
“speedy and fitting answer. And I do hereby engage myself,
“ that they shall return in safety to you.

“] expect your answer hereunto within an hour ; and rest,

“ Your servant,
“ OLiveR CROMWELL.”

480 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

For the Lord General Cromwell : These
“ Wexford, 4th October 1649.

“ Sir,—I have returned you a civil answer, to the best of my
“judgment ; and thereby, I find, you undervalue me and this
“place so much, as you think to have it surrendered without
“capitulation or honourable terms, appears by your hour’s limita-
“tion in your last.

« Sir, had I never a man in this town but the townsmen, and
“the artillery here planted, I should conceive myself in a very
“befitting condition to make honourable conditions. And having
“a considerable party, with them, in the place, I am resolved to
“die honourably, or make such conditions as may secure my
“honour and life in the eyes of my own Party.

“To which reasonable terms if you hearken not, or give me
“‘not’ time to send my agents till eight of the clock in the
“forenoon tomorrow, with my propositions, with a further safe-
“conduct, I leave you to your better judgment, and myself
“to the assistance of the Almighty; and so conclude.—Your
“ servant,

“Da. SInNoTT.”

“ For the Lord General Cromnell
“ Wexford, 5th October 1649.

“‘Sir,—My propositions being now prepared, I -am ready to
“send my agents with them unto you. And for their safe re-
“turn, I pray you to send a safe-conduct by this bearer unto
“me, in hope an honourable agreement may thereupon arise
“between your Lordship and, my Lord, your Lordship’s servant,

“Da. SINNOTT.”

Whilst these papers were passing between us, I sent the Lieu-
tenant-General! with a party of dragoons, horse and foot, to
endeavour to reduce their fort, which lay at the mouth of their
harbour, about ten miles distant from us, to which he sent a troop
of dragoons, but the enemy quitted their fort, leaving behind
them about seven? great guns; betook themselves, by the help

1 Michael Jones. [He appears to have received the appointment in July, as the
Council of State calls him ‘‘ Major-General” on the 24th and “‘ Lieutenant-General ”

on the 26th. ]
2 [Number inserted by Cromwell in blank space. ]

1649.] LETTER CVIL, WEXFORD 481

of their boat, to a frigate of twelve guns lying in the harbour,
within cannon-shot of the fort. The dragoons possessed the fort,
and some seamen belonging to your fleet coming happily in at
the same time, they bent their guns at the frigate, and she
immediately yielded to mercy both herself, the soldiers that
had been in the fort, and the seamen that manned her. And
whilst our men were in her, the town, not knowing what had
happened, sent another small vessel to her, which our men also
took.

The Governor of the town having obtained from me a safe-
conduct for the four persons mentioned in one of the papers, to
come and treat with me about the surrender of the town, I
expected they should have done so, but instead thereof, the Earl
of Castlehaven brought to their relief, on the north side of the
river,! about five-hundred foot, which occasioned their refusal to
send out any to treat, and caused me to revoke my safe-conduct,
not thinking it fit to leave it for them to make use of it when
they pleased :

“ For the Lord General Crommell : These
“ Wexford, 5th October 1649.

“My Lorp,—Even as I was ready to send out my agents unto
“you, the Lord General of the horse came hither with a relief.
“Unto whom I communicated the proceedings between your
“ Lordship and me, and delivered him the propositions I intended
“to despatch unto your Lordship ; who hath desired a small time
“to consider of them, and to speed them unto me. Which, my
“Lord, I could not deny, he having a commanding power over
me.

“ Pray, my Lord, believe that I do not do this to trifle out time ;
“but for his present content ;—and if I find any long delay in his
“ Lordship’s returning them back unto me, I will proceed of my-
“self, according ‘to’ my first intention. To which I beseech
“your Lordship give credit; at the request, my Lord, of your
“ Lordship’s ready servant,

“Da, Sinnott.”

1 Carte, il. 92.
VOL. L—31

482 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

4. « For the Commander-in-Chief in Wexford : These

‘“¢« Wexford,’ 6th October 1649.

Th
“You might have spared your trouble in the

“account you give me of your transaction with the Lord General
“ of your horse, and of your resolution in case he answer not your

“expectations in point of time. These are your own concern-—

“ments, and it behoves you to improve [them] and the relief you
“mention to your best advantage.

“ A}l that I have to say is, to desire you to take notice, that I
«do hereby revoke my safe-conduct from the persons mentioned
“therein. When ye shall see cause to treat, you may send for
“another. I rest,

<eSIF,
«Your servant,
“ OxiveR CROMWELL.»

Our cannon being landed,! and we having removed all our
quarters to the south-east end of the town, next the castle,
‘which stands without the walls,’ it was generally agreed that
we should bend the whole strength of our artillery upon the
castle, being persuaded that if we got the castle, the town
would easily follow.

Upon Thursday the 11th instant (our batteries being finished
the night before), we began to play betimes in the morning ; and
having spent near a hundred shot, the governor's stomach came
down, and he sent to me to give leave for four persons intrusted
by him, to come unto me, and offer terms of surrender :

“ For the Lord General Cromwell ; These present
“Wexford, 11th October 1649.
“ Srr,—In performance of my last, I desire your Lordship to
“send me a safe-conduct for Major Theobald Dillon, Major

16th October (7d.). [Having been brought to the bar on September 29, but
prevented from landing because ‘‘ it blew so hard." See letter from Colonel Deane

to Colonel Popham, Hist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr. Leyborne-Popham's

MSS., p. 47.]

>

1649.] LETTER CVIL, WEXFORD 483

“James Birne, Alderman Nicholas Chevers, and Captain James
“ Stafford,! whom I will send to your Lordship instructed with
“my desires. And so I rest, my Lord, your servant,

“Da. SINNOTT.”

Which I condescending to, two field-officers with an Alderman
of the town, and the captain of the castle, brought out the pro-
positions enclosed,—which for their abominableness, manifesting
also the impudency of the men, I thought fit to present to your
view ;—together with my answer :

“The Propositions of Colonel David Sinnott, Governor of the Tonn
“and Castle of Wexford, for and on the behalf of the Officers
“and Soldiers and Inhabitants in the said Town and Castle, unto
“ General Crommvell.

“1. In primis, That all and every the Inhabitants of the said
“Town, from time to time and at all times hereafter, shall have
“free and uninterrupted liberty publicly to use, exercise and
“profess the Roman Catholic Religion, without restriction, mulct
“or penalty, any law or statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

“2. That the Regular and Secular Roman Catholic Clergy
“now possessed of the Churches, Church-livings, Monasteries,
“ Religious-houses and Chapels in the said Town, and in the
“suburbs and franchises thereof, and their successors, shall have,
“hold and enjoy, to them and their successors forever, the said
“churches, church-livings, monasteries, religious-houses and
“chapels, and shall teach and preach in them publicly, with-
“out any molestation, any law or statute to the contrary not-
“ withstanding.

“3. That Nicholas,? now Lord Bishop of Ferns, and his suc-
“cessors, shall use and exercise such jurisdiction over the Catho-
“lies of his Diocese as since his consecration hitherto he used.

“4, That all the Officers and Soldiers, of what quality or degree
“ soever, in the said Town and Castle, and such of the Inhabitants
“fas are so pleased, shall march with flying colours, and be con-
“veyed safe, with their lives, artillery, ordnance, ammunition,
“arms, goods of all sorts, horses, moneys and what else belongs
“to them, to the Town of Ross, and there to be left safe with

1[His previous letter had ‘‘ Mr. William Stafford.’’]
2{ Nicholas French. }

484 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

“their own party; allowing each musketeer, towards their
“march, a pound of powder, four yards of match, and twelve
“brace of bullets; and a strong Convoy to be sent with the said
“soldiers, within four-and-twenty hours after the yielding up of
“the said Town.

“5, That such of the Inhabitants of the said Town as will
“ desire to leave the same at any time hereafter, shall have free
“liberty to carry away out of the said Town all their frigates,
“artillery, arms, powder, bullets, match, corn, malt, and other
“provision which they have for their defence and sustenance,
“and all their goods and chattels, of what quality or condition
“soever, without any manner of disturbance whatsoever, and
“have passes and safe-conducts and convoys for their lives and
“said goods to Ross, or where else they shall think fit.

“6, That the Mayor, Bailiffs, Free Burgesses and Commons of
“the said Town may have, hold and enjoy the said Town and
“Suburbs, their commons, their franchises, and their liberties
“and immunities, which hitherto they enjoyed; and that the
“ Mayor, Bailiffs and Free Burgesses may have the government
“of the said Town, as hitherto they enjoyed the same from the
“Realm of England, and that they may have no other govern-
“ment, they adhering to the State of England, and observing
“their orders, and the orders of their Governors in this Realm for
“the time being.

“7, That all and every the Burgesses and Inhabitants, either
“native or strangers, of the said Town, who shall continue their
“abode therein, or come to live there within three months, and
“their heirs, shall have, hold and enjoy all and singular their
“several castles, messuages, houses, lands, tenements and _here-
“ditaments within the land of Ireland, and all their goods and
“chattels, of what nature, quality or condition soever, to them
“and their heirs, to their own several uses forever, without
“ molestation.

“8. That such Burgess or Burgesses, or other Inhabitant of
“the said Town, as shall at any time hereafter be desirous to
“leave the said Town, shall have free leave to dispose of their
“real and personal estates respectively to their best advantage ; |
“and further have full liberty and a safe-conduct respectively
“to go into England or elsewhere, according to their several
“pleasures who shall desire to depart the same.

“9, That all and singular the Inhabitants of the said Town,
“either native or stranger, from time to time and at all times

1649.] LETTER CVII., WEXFORD 485

“hereafter, shall have, reap-and enjoy the full liberty of free-
“born English subjects, without the least incapacity or restriction
“therein ; and that all the Freemen of the said Town, from time
“to time, shall be as free in all the seaports, cities and towns in
“England, as the Freemen of all and every the said cities and
“towns ; and all and every the Freemen of the said cities and
“towns to be as free in the said town of Wexford as the Freemen
“thereof, for their greater encouragement to trade and commerce
“together of all hands.

“10. That no memory remain of any hostility or distance
“which was hitherto between the said Town and Castle on the
“one part, and the Parliament or State of England on the other
“part ; but that all act and acts, transgressions, offences, depreda-
“tions and other crimes, of what nature or quality soever, be they
“ever so transcendent, attempted or done, or supposed to be
“attempted or done, by the Inhabitants of the said Town or
“any other, heretofore or at present adhering to the said Town,
“either native or stranger, and every of them,—shall pass in
“ oblivion ; without chastisement, challenge, recompense, demand
“or questioning for them, or any of them, now or at any time
“ hereafter.

“D. Sinnott.”

“ For the Commander-in-Chief in the Town of Weaford

“«¢ Before Wexford,’ r1th October 1649.
« Sir,
“JT have had the patience to peruse your

propositions ; to which I might have returned an answer with
“some disdain. But (to be short) I shall give the soldiers and
“noncommissioned officers quarter for life, and leave to go to
“their several habitations, with their wearing-clothes; they
“engaging themselves to live quietly there, and to take up
“arms no more against the Parliament of England. And the
“commissioned officers quarter for their lives, but to render
“themselves prisoners. And as for the inhabitants, I shall en-
“gage myself that no violence shall be offered to their goods,
“and that I shall protect the town from plunder.

“T expect your positive answer instantly; and if you will
“upon these terms surrender and quit, ‘and’ shall, in one hour,

486 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

“send forth to me four officers of the quality of field-officers,
“and two Aldermen, for the performance thereof,—I shall
“thereupon forbear all acts of hostility.
“ Your servant,
“ Oriver CROMWELL.’ *

Which ‘answer’ indeed had no effect. For whilst I was
preparing of it, studying to preserve the town from plunder,
that it might be of the more use to you and your army, the
captain, who was one of the commissioners, being fairly treated,
yielded up the castle to us, upon the top of which our men no
sooner appeared, but the enemy quitted the walls of the town,
which our men perceiving, ran violently upon the town with
their ladders, and stormed it. And when they were come into
the market-place, the enemy making a stiff resistance, our forces
brake them, and then put all to the sword that came in their
way. Two boatfuls of the enemy attempting to escape, being
overprest with numbers, sank, whereby were drowned near three-
hundred of them. I believe, in all, there was lost of the enemy
not many less than two-thousand ; and I believe not twenty of
yours killed from first to last of the siege. And indeed it hath
not without cause been deeply set upon our hearts, that, we
intending better to this place than so great a ruin, hoping the
town might be of more use to you and your army, yet God would
not have it so; but, by an unexpected providence, in His righte-
ous justice, brought a just judgment upon them; causing them
to become a prey to the soldier, who in their piracies had made
preys of so many families, and made with their bloods to answer

*The rest of the Wexford Correspondence is in Zazer and elsewhere; this
which completes it, being considered hopelessly lost, must be taken as a very
interesting little Document, now that it has turned up. Autograph (or Facsimile
Copy? much interlined and very hastily written), now (March 1846) in the
possession of Edward Crawford, Esq., Solicitor, Wellington Quay, Dublin. [The
original of this letter, signed by Cromwell, is stated to be in the library of the Royal
Irish Academy, Dublin. There is a facsimile of it in Gilbert's Condemporary
History, ii, facing p. 288; and a contemporary copy in the Bodleian, Carte Pagers,
xxv. 446. The rest of the correspondence is now printed from the copies in \
Tanner MS, Wi., 115-130. }

1649.] LETTER CVII., WEXFORD 487

the cruelties which they had exercised upon the lives of divers
poor Protestants ; two ‘instances’ of which I have been lately
acquainted with. About seven or eight score poor Protestants were
put by them into an old vessel, which being, as some say, bulged
by them, the vessel sank, and they were all presently drowned
in the harbour. The other ‘instance’ was thus: they put divers
Protestants into a chapel (which, since, they have used for a
mass-house, and in which one or more of their priests were now
killed), where they were famished to death.

The soldiers got a very good booty in this place, and had
they not! had opportunity to carry their goods over the river,
whilst we besieged it, it would have been much more. I could
have wished for their own good, and the good of the garrison,
they had been more moderate.? Some things which were not
easily portable, we hope we shall make use of to your behoof.
There are great quantities of iron, hides, tallow, salt, pipe-
and barrel-staves, which are under commissioners’ hands, to be
secured, We believe there are near a hundred cannon in the
fort, and elsewhere in and about the town. Here is likewise
some very good shipping: here are three vessels, one of them
of thirty-four guns, which a week’s time would fit to sea; there
is another of about twenty guns, very near ready likewise, and one
other frigate of twenty guns, upon the stocks, made for sailing,
which is built up to the uppermost deck: for her handsomeness’
sake, I have appointed the workmen to finish her, here being
materials to do it, if you or the Council of State shall approve
thereof. The frigate, also, taken by the fort, is a most excellent
vessel for sailing. Besides divers other ships and vessels in the
harbour.

This town is now so in your power, that ‘of’ the former
inhabitants, I believe scarce one in twenty can challenge any
property in their houses. Most of them are run away, and
many of them killed in this service. And it were to be wished,

! The Townsfolk. 2 Not forced us to storm them.

488 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Oct.

that an honest people would come and plant here; where are
very good houses, and other accommodations fitted to their
hands, and ‘which’ may by your favour be made of encourage-
ment to them, as also a seat of good trade, both inward and
outward, and of marvellous great advantage in the point of the
herring and other fishing. The town is pleasantly seated and
strong, having a rampart of earth within the wall, near fifteen
foot thick.

Thus it hath pleased God to give into your hands this other
mercy, for which, as for all, we pray God may have all the
glory. Indeed your instruments are poor and weak, and can do
nothing but through believing, and that is the gift of God also.

I humbly take leave, and rest,

Your most humble servant,
O.tveR CROMWELL.

*P.S.’ A day or two before our battery was planted, Ormond,
the Earl of Castlehaven, the Lord of Ardes and Clanneboyes
were on the other side of the water, with about 1,800 horse
‘and’ 1,500 foot; and offered to put in four or five hundred
foot more into the town; which the town refusing, he marched
away in all haste. I sent the Lieutenant-General after him,
with about 1,400 horse ; but the enemy made haste from him.*

Young Charles II., who has got to the Isle of Jersey, decidedly
inclining towards Ireland as yet, will probably be staggered by
these occurrences, when the news of them reaches him. Not good
quarters Ireland at present! The Scots have proclaimed him
King ; but clogged it with such conditions about the Covenant,
about Malignants, and what not, as nothing but the throat of an
ostrich could swallow. The poor young King is much at a loss ;!

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp. 65-7); completed by Tanner MSS. (in Cary,
ii. 168-185), and the Dublin Autograph given above at p. 68. [The letter, now
printed from the original, is in Tanner MS. lvi. 132. It is only signed by Crom-
well. The correspondence with the Governor was, of course, not inserted into the
letter, as is here done by Carlyle, but sent up with it. The following day, October
15, Cromwell wrote a letter to Fairfax, sending it no doubt along with the official
despatch, See Supplement, No. 49.]

1Carte’s Ormond Papers, i. 316, &e,

1649.) LETTER CVIII., ROSS 489

—must go somewhither, and if possible take some Mrs. Barlow
with him! Laird Winram,! Senator of the College of Justice, is
off to deal with him ;? to see if he cannot help him down with
the Covenant: the Laird’s best ally, I think, will be Oliver in
Ireland. At Edinburgh these are the news from that quarter :

‘In October and November this year there ran and were spread
‘frequent rumours that Lieutenant-General Oliver Cromwell was
‘routed in Ireland, yea killed; and again that he bore all down
‘before him like ane impetuous torrent : how that he had taken
‘Tradaffe and Washeford,’ Tredah and Wexford; ‘and there,
‘neither sparing sex nor age, had exercised all the cruelties of a
‘merciless inhuman and bloody butcher, even brutishly against
‘Nature. On these rumours Will Douglas,’ no great shakes at
metre, ‘did write these lines :—

‘*Cromwell is dead, and risen; and dead again,
And risen the third time after he was slain:
No wonder! For he’s messenger of Hell ;—
And now he buffets us, now posts to tell
What's past; and for more game new counsel takes
Of his good friend the Devil, who keeps the stakes.”' 8

LETTERS CVII—CXII
ROSS.

Unper date 5th November 1649, we read in the old Newspapers :
‘Our affairs here have made this progress: Wexford being
‘settled under the command of Colonel Cooke, our Army stayed
‘not long there; but hasted further unto Ross. Which is a
‘walled Town, situated upon the river Barrow, a very pleasant
‘and commodious river, bearing vessels of a very considerable
‘burden. Upon Wednesday the 17th of this instant October,
‘we sat down before Ross; and my Lord Lieutenant, the same
‘day, sent in this following Summons :’

1[George Windram, Laird of Liberton. ]
211th October 1649, Balfour’s Historical Works (Edinb, 182s), iii, 432,
8 [bid, p. 433.

490 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [17 Oct.

LETTER CVIII
For the Commander-in-Chief in Rosse ; These

‘Before Ross,’ 17th October 1649.

Sir,

Since my coming into Ireland, 1 have this
witness for myself, that I have endeavoured to avoid effusion of
blood ; having been before no place, to which such terms have
not been first sent as might have turned to the good and pre-
servation of those to whom they were offered; this being my
principle, that the people and places where I come may not
suffer, except through their own wilfulness.

To the end I may observe the like course with this place and
people therein, I do hereby summon you to deliver the town of
Ross into my hands, to the use of the Parliament of England.
Expecting your speedy answer, I rest,

Your servant,
OLIveR CROMWELL.*

‘The trumpeter that carried this summons was denied entrance
‘into the Town. They received his paper at the gates; and
‘told him that an answer should be returned thereunto by a
‘drummer of their own. Hereupon we prepared our batteries,
‘and made ready for a storm. Ormond himself, Ardes, and
‘Castlehaven were on the other side of the River; and sent in
‘supplies of 1,500 foot, the day before it was surrendered to us ;
‘1,000 foot being in it before we came unto it. Castlehaven
‘was in it that morning they delivered it, and Inchiquin too had
‘been there not above two or three days before our advance
‘thither. They boated over their men into the Town in our
‘sight ; and yet that did not discourage us in making ready all
‘provisions fitting for a storm. On Friday the 19th of this |
‘instant, our great pieces began to play, and early in the morn-
‘ing the Governor sent out his Answer to my Lord Lieutenant’s
‘Summons :

* Newspapers (in Cyomwelliana, p. 67).

1649.] LETTER CIX., ROSS 491

“‘ For General Cromwell, or, in his absence, For the Commander-in-
“ Chief of the Army now encamped before Rosse

“ Rosse, rgth October 1649.

“‘Str,—I received a summons from you, the first day you ap-
“peared before this place; which should have been answered
“ere now, had not other occasions interrupted me. And al-
“though I am now in far better condition to defend this place
“than I was at that time, yet am I, upon the considerations
“offered in your summons, content to entertain a treaty; and to
“receive from you those conditions that may be safe and honour-
“able for me to accept of. Which if you listen to, I desire that
“pledges on both sides may be sent, for performance of such
“articles as shall be agreed upon; and that all acts of hostility
“may cease on both sides, and each party keep within their
“distance. To this your immediate resolution is expected by,
“Sir, your servant,

“Lucas Taarr.”

‘Hereunto my Lord immediately returned this Answer, —
which counts here as our Hundred-and-ninth Letter :

LETTER CIX

For the Governor in Rosse: These

‘Before Ross,’ roth October 1649.
Sir,

If you like to march away with those under
your command, with their arms, bag and baggage, and with
drums and colours, and shall deliver up the town to me, I shall
give caution to perform these conditions; expecting the like
from you. As to the inhabitants, they shall be permitted to
live peaceably, free from the injury and violence of the soldiers.

If you like hereof, you can tell how to let me know your mind,
notwithstanding my refusal of a cessation, By these you will

492 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 Oct.

see the reality of my intentions to save blood, and to preserve
the place from ruin. I rest,
Your servant,
Ouiver CRromMwELL.*

‘Our batteries still continued, and made a great breach in the
‘Wall. Our men were drawn out in a readiness to storm.
‘Lieutenant-Colonel Ingoldsby being by lot chosen to lead
‘them ; but the Governor being willing to embrace conditions,
‘sent out this his Reply :

“ For General Cromwell : These
‘Ross, Igth October 1649.

“«Srr,—There wants but little of what I would propose ; which
“is, that such townsmen as have a desire to part, may have
“liberty within’ a convenient time to carry away themselves
“and goods; and liberty of conscience to such as shall stay ;
“and that I may carry away such artillery and ammunition as I
“have in my command. If you be inclined to this, I will send,
“upon your honour or safe-conduct, an officer to conclude with
“you. To which your immediate answer is expected by, Sir,
“your servant,

“ Lucas Taarr.”

‘Hereunto my Lord gave this return, —our Hundred-and-
tenth Letter.

LETTER CX

For the Governor in Rosse : These

‘Before Ross,’ rgth October 1649.
Sir,

What I formerly offered, I shall make good.
As for your carrying away any artillery or ammunition, that you

* Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 68).

‘[{‘ Liberty whitin them a convenient time” in the old pamphlet. ]

1649.] LETTER CX., ROSS 493

brought not in with you, or ‘that’ hath not come to you since
you had the command of that place, I must deny you that; ex-
pecting you ‘to’ leave it as you found it.

‘As’ for that which you mention concerning liberty of con-
science, I meddle not with any man’s conscience. But if by
liberty of conscience, you mean a liberty to exercise the mass, I
judge it best to use plain dealing, and to let you know, where
the Parliament of England have power, that will not be allowed
of. As for such of the townsmen who desire to depart, and
carry away themselves and goods (as you express), I engage my-
self they shall have three months time so to do; and in the
mean time shall be protected from violence in their persons and
goods, as others under the obedience of the Parliament.

If you accept of this offer, I engage my honour for a punctual
performance hereof. I rest,

Your servant,
O.tveR CroMWELL.*

‘The Governor returned this Answer :’

“ For General Cromwell: These
‘Rosse, 19th October 1649.

“«Sir,—I am content to yield up this place upon the conditions
“in your last and first letter. And if you please to send your
“‘safe-conduct to such as I shall employ to perfect these con-
“ditions, I shall on receipt thereof send them to you.! In the
“interval, to cease all acts of hostility, and that all parties keep
“their own ground, until matters receive a full end. And so
“remains, Sir, your servant,

“Lucas Taarr.”

‘Hereunto my Lord replied thus :’

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 68).

1[An old MS. copy has: ‘‘And if you please to send your commissioners to
join such as I shall employ to perfect these conditions, I shall send them to you,
(Add. MS., B. 4769.)}

494 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 Oct.

LETTER CXI

For the Governor of Rosse: These

tgth October 1649.
Sir,
You have my hand and honour engaged to
perform what I offered in my first and last Letters; which I
shall inviolably observe. I expect you send me immediately
four persons of such quality as may be hostages for your per-
formance ; for whom you have this safe-conduct enclosed, into
which you may insert their names, without which I shall not
cease acts of hostility. If any thing happen by your delay, to
your prejudice, it will not be my fault. Those you send may
see the conditions perfected. Whilst I forbear acts of hostility,
I expect you forbear all actings within. I rest,
Your servant,
O.iveR CROMWELL.*

‘This,’ says the old Newspaper, ‘ was the last message between
‘them: and hereupon the Governor sending out his four hostages
‘to compose and perfect the Agreement, our batteries ceased ;
‘our intentions to storm the Town were disappointed. . . . Thus
‘within the space of three days it hath pleased the Lord to give
‘us the possession of this town, a place of good strength, without
‘ effusion of blood, and a very good quarter to refresh our soldiers.
‘The Enemy marched over the River to the other side, and did
‘not come out of that side of the Town where we had encamped,’
—which I think was a judicious movement of theirs. What
English were in the Garrison, some Five or Six hundred here,
do, as their common custom is, ‘join us.’ Munster Royalist
Forces, poor Ormond men, they had rather live, than be slain in
such a Cause as this has grown,

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 69). [The old MS. copy amongst the 4dd.
MSS. here differs somewhat from that given in Cromwedliana from the old tract (Ad |
Brief Relation of State Affairs, E. 581, 4). It runs as follows: ‘‘ Sir, you having my
hand and honour engaged to perform what I offered you in my first and last letters,
which I shall inviolably observe, I expect you will send immediately four persons
of such quality as may be hostages sufficient for your performance, for whom you
have this safe-conduct, into which you may mention their names. Without this I
shall not cease," etc. The-rest is the same as the tract. It is impossible to say
which is the true version. ]

1649.] LETTER CXII., ROSS 495

- LETTER CXII

Here is Cromwell’s official account of the same business, in a
Letter to Lenthall.

‘ For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of
the Parliament of England: These

Ross, 25th October 1649.
Sir,

Since my last from Wexford, we marched to
Ross, a walled town, situated upon the Barrow ; a port-town, up
to which a ship of seven or eight hundred tons may come.

We came before it upon Wednesday the 17th instant, with
three pieces of cannon. That evening I sent asummons; Major-
General Taaff, being Governor, refused to admit my trumpet into
the town, but took the summons in, returning me no answer.
I did hear that near 1,000 foot had been put into this place
some few days before my coming to it. The next day was spent
in making preparations for our battery, and in our view there
were boated over from the other side of the river, of English,
Scots, and Irish, 1,500 more, Ormond, Castlehaven, and the Lord
of Ardes, being on the other side of the water to cause it to be
done.

That night we planted our battery, which began to play very
early the next morning. The Governor immediately sent forth
an answer to my summons, copies of all which I make bold
herewith to trouble you ‘with;’! the rather because you may
see how God pulls down proud stomachs. He desired com-
missioners might treat,jand that in the mean time there might
be a ceasing of acts of hostility on both sides, which I refused ;
sending in word, that if he would march away with arms, bag
and baggage, and give me hostages for performance, he should.
Indeed he might have done it without my leave, by the advan-

' We have just read them.

496 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [25 Oot.

tage of the river. He insisted upon having the cannon with
him, which I would not yield unto, but required the leaving the
artillery and the ammunition, which he was content to do, and
marched away, leaving the great artillery and the ammunition
in the stores to me. When they marched away, at least 500
English, many of them of the Munster forces, came to us.

Ormond is at Kilkenny, Inchiquin in Munster, Henry O’Neal,
Owen Roe’s son, is come up to Kilkenny, with near 2,000 horse
and foot, with whom and Ormond there is now a perfect con-
junction. So that now, I trust, some angry friends will think it
high time to take off their jealousy! from those to whom they
ought to exercise more charity.

The rendition of this garrison was a seasonable mercy, as
giving us an opportunity towards Munster, and is for the present
a very good refreshment for our men. We are able to say
nothing as to all this, but that the Lord is still pleased to own a
company of poor worthless creatures, for which we desire His
name to be magnified, and ‘that’ the hearts of all concerned
may be provoked to walk worthy of such continued favours.
This is the earnest desire of

Your most humble servant,
OLIvER CROMWELL.

P.S. Colonel Horton is lately dead of the country-disease,
leaving a son behind him. He was a person of great integrity
and courage. His former services, especially that of the last
summer, I hope will be had in remembrance.*

Poor Horton ; he beat the Welsh at St. Fagan’s, and did good
service ‘last summer ;’ and now he is dead of the ‘ Country-dis-
ease, —a pestilence, raging in the rear of Famine and the Spoil
of War,’ Famine has long reigned. When the War ended, |
Ludlow tells us, it was found necessary to issue a Proclamation

_ Jealousy of the Parliament's having countenanced Monk in his negotiations
with Owen Roe and the Old-Irish of the massacre.
[The ‘‘ country disease” is dysentery. ]

* Newspapers (in Parl. History, xix. 224-6).

1649.] LETTER CXIII., ROSS 497

that ‘no lambs or calves should be killed for one year, the
stock of cattle being exhausted, Such waste had there been,
continues he, in burning the possessions of the English, many
of the Natives themselves were driven to starvation; ‘and I
‘have been informed by persons deserving credit, that the same
‘calamity fell upon them even in the first year of the Rebellion,
‘through the depredations of the Irish; and that they roasted
‘men, and ate them, to supply their necessities.’! Such a War
is worth ending at some cost !—In the Lord Lieutenant’s Army,
we learn elsewhere, there was an abundant supply, the country
crowding in as to a good market, where sure prices were given,
and fair dealing enforced; all manner of depredators being,
according to the paper Proclamation, hanged in very authentic
hemp. ‘Much better supplied than any of the Irish Armies had
ever been.’ ?

LETTERS CXII—CXVIII

Tue stroke that fell on Tredah, repeated at Wexford, at Ross
not needing to be repeated, has, as we say, broken the brain of
the Irish War; the body of which, over Ireland generally, here
over the Southwest more especially, everywhere staggers falling,
or already lies fallen, writhing in paralytic convulsions, making
haste to die.? Of its final spasms, wide-spread confused death-
agonies, and general swift death, over this Munster region,
through the winter months, and of the Lord Lieutenant’s
demeanour therein, these Six Letters give us indication such as
may suffice.

LETTER CXIII

Herz is a small glimpse of domesticity again, due to the Pusey
Seventeen; very welcome to us in these wild scenes. Mayor
has endorsed it at Hursley, ‘Received 12th December 1649,’
‘Cousin Barton,’ I suppose, is the Barton who boggled at some

1 Ludlow, i. 338, 9. Carte, ii. 90. ‘ a

%[‘'The Roman Catholics, that stood so rigidly with the King upon religion
. .. are with much ado withheld from sending commissioners to Cromwell to
make stables of their Churches. An army we have, superior to the enemy, but no
industry of mine is able to provide so for it as to keep it one week at once together.”
Ormond to Jermyn, 30th November, Carte’s Original Letters, ii. 415. ]

VOL: ——O2

498 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [13 Nov.

things in the Marriage-Contracts ; a respectable man, though he
has his crotchets now and then.

For my beloved Brother Richard Mayor, Esquire, at Hursley in the
County Hampton ; These
Ross, 13th November 1649.

Dear BrotuHeER,
I am not often at leisure, nor now, to salute

my friends ; yet unwilling to lose this opportunity. I -take at;
only to let you know that you and your family are often in my
prayers. I wish the young ones well, though they vouchsafe
not to write to me.! As for Dick, I do not much expect it from
him, knowing his idleness, but I am angry with my daughter as
a promise-breaker. Pray tell her so; but I hope she will redeem
herself.

It has pleased the Lord to give us (since the taking of Wex-
ford and Ross) a good interest in Munster, by the access of Cork
and Youghal, which are both submitted ; their Commissioners *
are now with me. Divers other lesser garrisons are come in
also. The Lord is wonderful in these things; it’s His hand alone
does them: oh, that all the praise might be ascribed to Him!

I have been crazy in my health, but the Lord is pleased to
sustain me. I beg your prayers. I desire you to call upon my
son to mind the things of God more and more: alas, what profit
is there in the things of this world; except they be enjoyed in
Christ, they are snares. I wish he may enjoy his wife so, and
she him; I wish I may enjoy them both so.

My service to my dear sister ‘and’ Cousin Ann; my blessing
to my children, and love to my Cousin Barton and the rest.

Sir, I am,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
OLIvER CROMWELL.*
1[This last sentence is omitted by Harris, but given by Forster. }
2{Mis-read ‘‘ Commanders” by Harris. ]

* Harris, p. 511; one of the Pusey set, preserved by Dunch, as intimated above,
(No. 15. Holograph. In the Morrison Collection. ]

1649.] LETTER CXIV., ROSS 499

LETTER CXIV

Tur opportune Victory at Rathmines produced the revival of
an old Vote, produced also a new special Vote, in favour of Lieu-
tenant-General Jones ;! which new Vote ought not to fall asleep
again, as the old had done. Thomas Scott, of the Council of
State, whom we have already seen ; ‘ peppery Thomas,’ is not yet
to vanish from this History. Of Broghil, ‘Munster Business,’
and the rest, there will be farther notice in next Letter, which
is of the same date with this.

For the Hon. Thomas Scott, Esq. a member of the Council of State :
These

Ross, 14th November 1649.
Sir,

I hope you will excuse this trouble. I un-
derstand the House did vote Lieutenant-General Jones five-
hundred pounds per annum of lands of inheritance of Irish lands,
upon the news of the defeat given to the enemy before Dublin,
immediately before my coming over. I think it will be a very
acceptable work, and very well taken at your hands, to move the
House for an immediate settlement thereof: it will be very con-
venient at this time.

Another thing is this. The Lord Broghil is now in Munster ;
where he, I hope, will do very good offices: all his suit is for
two-hundred pounds to bring his wife over: such a sum would
not be cast away. He hath a great interest in the men that
come from Inchiquin.? I have made him and Sir William Fen-
ton, Colonel Blake and Colonel Deane (who I believe, ‘at least’
one of them, will be frequently in Cork Harbour, making that
a victualling place for the Irish fleet, instead of Milford Haven),
‘I have made them’ and Colonel Phaire, Commissioners for a
temporary management of affairs there.

1 Antea, p. 452.
? That desert to us from Lord Inchiquin, the Ormond Chief in Munster.

500 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Nov.

This business of Munster will empty your Treasury: there-
fore you have need to hasten our money allotted us; lest you
put us to stand with our fingers in our mouths.—I rest,

Sir,
Your servant,
OuiveR CROMWELL.*

LETTER CXV

Tur ‘General Blake’ of this Letter, ‘Colonel Blake’ of the
last, is Admiral Blake ; he, with Ayscough, Deane and vigilant
Sea-officers, cooperating with Oliver on land, now dominates
these waters. Prince Rupert, with the residue of the Revolted
Ships, is lying close, for shelter from him, under the guns of
Kinsale ;—verging, poor Prince, to a fugitive roaming sea-life,
very like Piracy in some of its features. He abandoned it as
desperate, before long. Poor Prince Maurice, sea-roving in like
fashion, went to the bottom; sank, in the West Indies, mouse
and man; and ended, none knows exactly where, when, or how.
Rupert invented, or helped to invent, * pinchbeck ’ in subsequent
years, and did no other service to the public that I know oft

The defection of Cork and Youghal, full of English influences
and complex distractions, followed naturally on Cromwell's suc-

* Tanner MSS. (in Cary, ii. 188). [The original is signed only by Cromwell. ]

1[Colonels Popham, Blake and Deane were the three ‘‘Generals at Sea” for
the Commonwealth. Col. Blake at this time hoisted his flag on the Lion. Deane
was on board the Phenix. Sir George Ayscue, ‘‘ Admiral of the Irish seas,” had
now left Ireland (in the S¢. Azdrew) and was about the Downs and off the coast
of Flanders.

Prince Rupert had got away before this. On Nov. 8, Deane wrote to Popham
from Milford Haven : ‘‘I received intelligence yesterday that Cork and Youghall are
declared for the Parliament of England, and upon that, Rupert sailed in haste from
Kinsale with seven ships.” ist. MSS. Commissioners’ Report on Mr. Leyborne-
Pophan’s MSS., p. 5°.

From a series of depositions amongst the Fanshaw papers, it would appear that
Prince Maurice was shipwrecked off the little island of St. Germans in the West
Indies, imprisoned in the great Castle (‘‘the Castle called the More"’) at St. Iago:
upon Porto Rico, and there either died or was put to death. (See Hist. MSS. Com-
missioners Report on the Fanshaw MSS. pp. 117, 134-139.) Rupert's action
at the battle of Sole Bay; his rescue of Monck’s fleet in 1666; his foundation of
the Hudson Bay Company ; his diligence at the Admiralty and upon the Committee
of Tangier, and his really remarkable scientific work in regard to the manufacture
of guns, powder and shot, deserve a fairer word of recognition than this contemptuous
allusion to ‘‘ pinchbeck.’’]

1649] LETTER CXV., ROSS 501

cesses. In Lady Fanshawe's Memoirs 1s a vivid account of the
universal hurlyburly that took place at Cork, on the verge of
this occurrence there: tremulous instant decision what you will
do, which side you will join; swift packing in the dead of night ;
swift riding off, in any carriage, cart, or ass-cart you can bargain
with for love or money! Poor Lady Fanshawe got to Galway,
there to try it yet a little longer.!

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England ; These

Ross, 14th November 1649.
Sir,
About a fortnight since, 1 had some good

assurance that Cork was returned to its obedience, and had
refused Inchiquin, who did strongly endeavour to redintegrate
himself there, but without success.? I did hear also that Colonel
Townsend was coming to me with their submission and desires,
but was interrupted by a fort at the mouth of Cork Harbour.
But having sufficient grounds upon the former information, and
other confirmations (out of the enemy’s camp) that it was true,
I desired General Blake (who was here with me), that he would
repair thither in Captain Mildmay’s Frigate, called the Nonsuch.
Who, when they came thither, received such entertainment as
these enclosed will let you see.

In the mean time the Garland, one of your third-rate ships,
coming happily into Waterford Bay, I ordered her, and a great
prize lately taken in that bay, to transport Colonel Phayr?® to
Cork ; whitherward he went, having along with him near five-
hundred foot, which I spared him out of this poor army, and
fifteen hundred pounds in money, giving him such instructions
as were proper for the promoting of your interest there. As
they went with an intention for Cork, it pleased God the wind

1{Lady Fanshaw, never very accurate in her dates, has about this time got a
year wrong, and puts this event into November 1650. }

2 See Carte, ii. gt.

3 He of the King’s Death-Warrant. [Cromwell writes ‘‘ Faire.’"]

502 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Nov.

coming cross, they were forced to ride off from Dungarvan,
where they met Captain Mildmay returning with the Nonsuch
Frigate, with Colonel Townsend aboard, coming to me, who
advertised them that Youghall had also declared for the Parlia-
ment of England. Whereupon they steered their course thither,
and sent for Colonel Gifford, Colonel Warden, Major Purden (who
with Colonel Townsend hath been very active instruments for
the return both of Cork and Youghal to their obedience, having
some of them ventured their lives twice or thrice to effect it),
and the Mayor of Youghall aboard them; who, accordingly,
immediately came and made tender of some propositions to be
offered to me.! But my Lord Broghil being on board the ship,
assuring them it would be more for their honour and advantage
to desire no conditions, they said they would submit. Whereupon
my Lord Broghil, Sir William Fenton, and Colonel Phayr, went
to the Town, and were received (I shall give you my Lord
Broghil’s own words) “mth all the real demonstrations of gladness
an overjoyed people were capable of.”

Not long after, Colonel Phayr landed his foot. And by the
endeavours of the noble person? afore mentioned, and the rest
of the gentlemen, the garrison is put in good order, and the
Munster officers and soldiers in that garrison in a way of settle-
ment. Colonel Phayr, as I hear, intends to leave two-hundred
men there, and to march with the rest overland to Cork. I hear
by Colonel Townsend, and the rest of the gentlemen that were
employed to me, that Baltimore, Castlehaven, Caperquin, and
some other places of hard names, are come in (I wish Foot come
over seasonably to man them); as also that there are hopes of
other places.

From Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of Connought, I had

1(For the letters and propositions from Youghal and Cork, and Cromwell’s
answers to them, etc., see Supplement, Nos. 50, 5r. }

2Lord Broghil. The somewhat romantic story of Cromwell’s first visit to him,
and chivalrous conquest of him, at his lodgings in London, ‘in the dusk of the
evening,’ is in Collins's Peerage (London 1741), iv. 253; and in many other Books ;
—copied from Morrice's Life of Orrery.

1649. ] LETTER CXV., ROSS 503

a letter, about three or four days since, that he is come over the
Bann, and hath taken Coleraine by storm, and that he being in
conjunction with Colonel Venables,—who I hear hath besieged
Carrickfergus ; which if through the mercy of God it be taken,
I know nothing considerable in the North of Ireland, but Charle-
mount, which is not in your hands.

We lie with the army at Ross; where we have been making
the bridge over the Barrow, and ‘have’ hardly yet accomplished
‘it’ as we could wish. The enemy lies upon the Nue [Nore],
on the land between the Barrow and it; having gathered to-
gether all the force they can get. Owen Roe’s men, as they
report them, are 6000 foot, and about 4001 horse, beside their
own army ‘in this quarter ;’
day for it: which we hope the Lord of His mercy will enable
us to give them, in His own good time. In whom we desire our
only trust and confidence may be.

Whilst we have lain here, we have not been without some
sweet taste of the goodness of God. Your ships have taken
some good prizes. The last was thus: there came-in a Dunkirk
man-of-war with 32 guns, who brought-in a Turkish man-of-war
whom she had taken, and another ship of 10 guns laden with
poor-john and oil. These two your ships took. But the man-
of-war whose prizes these two were, put herself under the Fort
of Duncannon, so that your ships could not come near her. It
pleased God we had two demi-cannon with the foot, on the shore,
which being planted, raked her through, killing and wounding
her men, so that after ten shot she weighed anchor, and ran into
your fleet, with a flag of submission, surrendering herself. She
was well manned, the prisoners taken being two-hundred-and-
thirty. I doubt the taking prisoners of this sort will cause the
wicked trade of piracy to be endless. They were landed here
before I was aware: and a hundred of them, as I hear, are

and they give out they will have a

1[The old newspaper has ‘' 4000.”’]

504 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Nov.

gotten into Duncannon, and have taken up arms there; and I
doubt the rest, that are gone to Waterford, will do us no good.
[The seamen, being so full of prizes and unprovided of victual,
knew not how otherway to dispose of them.] !

Another ‘mercy’ was this. We, having left divers sick men,
both horse and foot, at Dublin,—hearing many of them were
recovered, sent them orders to march up to us, which accordingly
they did. Coming to Arcklo, on Monday the first of this instant,
being about 350 horse and about 800 foot,—the enemy, hearing
of them (through the great advantage they have in point of in-
telligence), drew together a body of horse and foot near 3,000,
which Inchiquin commanded. There went also, with this party,
Sir Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Treavor, and most of their great
rantors.2. We sent fifteen or sixteen troops to their rescue, near
eight hours too late. It pleased God we sent them word by a
nearer way, to march close, and be circumspect, and to make what
haste they could to Wexfrod, by the sea-side. They had marched
near eighteen miles [and were come within seven miles of Wexford]
(the foot being miserably wearied), when the enemy gave the
scouts of the rearguard an alarm. Whereupon they immediately
drew up in the best order they could upon the sands, the sea
on the one hand, and the rocks on the other; where the enemy
made a very furious charge, ‘and’ overbearing our horse with
their numbers, which, as some of their prisoners confess, was
fifteen-hundred of their best horse, forced them in some disorder
back to the foot. Our foot stood, forbearing their firing till the
enemy was come almost within pistol-shot, and then let fly very
full in the faces of them: whereby some of them began to

[The words in square brackets are inserted in Cromwell's own hand. ]

2Braggarts, great guns. Trevor had given Venables, as above hinted, a
dangerous camisado in the North lately ; and was not far from ruining him, had |
the end corresponded with the beginning (see Carte, ii. 89). To which Cromwell
alludes, by and by, in this Letter. Lord Inchiquin, a man of Royalist-Presby-
terian tendencies, has fought long, on various sides. The name Armstrong is not
yet much of a ‘ranter;’ but a new Sir Thomas will become famous under Titus
Oates. [The Sir Thomas mentioned by Cromwell died about 1663. See Carte,
Life of Ormond, iv. 148, ed. 1851.] Ludlow gives a curious account of this same
running-fight on the sea-beach of Arklow (i. 309).

1649.] LETTER CXV., ROSS 505

tumble, the rest running off in.a very great disorder ;—and ‘they’
faced not about until they got ‘above’ musket-shot off. Upon
this our horse took encouragement, drawing up again ; bringing
up some foot to flank them. And a gentleman of ours, that had
charged through before, being amongst them undiscerned, hav-
ing put his signal into his hat as they did, took his opportunity
and came off; letting our men know, that the Enemy was in
great confusion and disorder, and that if they could attempt
another charge, he was confident good might be done on them.
It pleased God to give our men courage: they advanced ; and,
falling upon the enemy, totally routed them ; took two colours
[and divers prisoners],! and killed divers upon the place and
in the pursuit. I do not hear that we have [two]? men
killed ; and but one mortally wounded, and not five that are
prisoners.

The quick march of our party made Inchiquin ‘that’ he could
reach them with nothing but his horse, hoping to put them to
a stand until his foot came up; which if he had done, there had
probably been no saving of a man of this party. Without doubt
Inchiquin, Trevor, and the rest of those people, who are very
good at this work, had swallowed up this party, and indeed it
was, in human probability, lost ; but God, that defeated Trevor
in his attempt upon Venables (who? as I hear this night from
the enemy’s camp, was shot through the belly in this service,
and is carried to Kilkenny), [Sir Thomas Armstrong is also
wounded],* hath disappointed them, and poured shame upon
them in this defeat ; giving us the lives of a company of our dear
friends, which I hope will be improved to His glory and [their] ®
country’s good.

Sir, having given you this account, I shall not trouble you
much with particular desires. Those I shall humbly present to

1[These words inserted by Cromwell, over ‘‘some say near forty prisoners”

erased. |
2[Inserted by Cromwell over ‘‘ ten” erased. ]
3[z.e. Trevor. ] 4[Inserted in the margin, by Cromwell. }

5[Inserted by Cromwell over ‘‘ the” erased. ]

506 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [14 Nov.

the Council of State. Only, in the general, give me leave
humbly to offer what ever in my judgment I conceive to be for
your service, with a full submission to you. We desire recruits
may be speeded to us.! It is not fit to tell you how your garri-
sons will be unsupplied, or no field marching army considerable,
if ‘but’ three garrisons more were in our hands.’ It is not well
not to follow providences.? Your recruits, and the forces de-
sired will not raise your charge. If your assignments already
for the forces here did come to our hands in time, I should not
doubt ‘but’ by the addition of assessments here, to have your
charge in some reasonable measure borne and the soldier upheld,
without too much neglect or discouragement, which sickness, in
this country so ill agreeing with their bodies, puts upon them,
and ‘which’ this winter’s-action, I believe not heretofore known
by English in this country, subjects them to. To the praise of
God I speak it, I scarce know an officer of forty amongst us that
hath not been sick, and how many considerable ones we have
lost, is no little thought of heart to us.}

Wherefore I humbly beg that the moneys desired may be
seasonably sent over, and those other necessaries, clothes, shoes
and stockings, formerly desired, that so poor creatures may be
encouraged: and, through the same blessed Presence that hath
gone along with us, I hope, before it be long, to see Ireland no
burden to England, but a profitable part of its Commonwealth.
And certainly the extending your help in this way, at this time,
is the most profitable means speedily to effect it, and if I did
not think it your best thrift, I would not trouble you at all
with it.

I have sent Sir Arthur Loftus with these letters. He hath
gone along with us, testifying a great deal of love to your ser-
vice. I know his sufferings are very great, for he hath lost near
all: his regiment was reduced to save you charge, not out of

1Sentence omitted in the Newspaper.

2 Beckonings of Providence.

1649.) LETTER CXV1, WATERFORD 507

any exceptions to his person. I humbly therefore present him
to your consideration.

Craving pardon for this trouble, I rest,
Your most humble and faithful servant,
OLiveR CroMwELL.*

LETTER CXVI?

Commons Journals, 12° Decembris 1649: ‘A Letter from the
‘Lord Lieutenant of Ireland was this day read. Ordered, that
‘the said Letter be forthwith printed and published ;’—Lord
Mayor to be sure and send it to all the Ministers next Lord’s
Day, who are to be, as they best may, the voice of our devout
thankfulness for ‘these great mercies.’ Here is the Letter still
extant for posterity,—with or without thankfulness.

We cannot give the exact day of date. The Letter exists,
separate, or combined with other matter, in various old Pam-
phlets ; but is nowhere dated; and in fact, as the Entry in the
Commons Journals may indicate, was never dated either as to
place or time. The place we learn by the context: the time
was after Saturday November 24th,? and before December had
yet begun ;—probably enough, Sunday, November 25th.

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of
the Parliament of England : These

‘Before Waterford,—Nov. [25] 1649.’
Mr. SPEAKER,

The enemy being quartered between the two
rivers of Nore and the Barrow, and masters of all the passages
thereupon ; and giving out their resolution to fight us, thereby,
as we conceived, labouring to get reputation in the countries,

1 Paragraph omitted.
2[Before this letter comes one in the Supplement, No. 52. ]
3See, posted, p. 510; and Whitlocke, 2d edition, p. 433.

* Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, pp. 69-71); Tanner MSS. (in Cary, ii. 189-97).
{in Tanner, lvi. 142. Signed and corrected by Cromwell. Signed by him on the
outside also. |

508 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [Nov.

and accession of! more strength, it was thought fit our Army
should march towards them. Which accordingly upon Thursday
the 15th instant was done. The Major-General and Lieutenant-
General? (leaving me very sick at Ross behind them), with two
battering guns, advanced towards Inistioge ; a little walled town
about five miles from Ross, upon the Nore, on the south side
thereof, which was possessed by the enemy. But a party of our
men under the command of Colonel Abbott, the night before,
approaching the gates, and attempting to fire the same, the
enemy ran away through the river, leaving good store [of pro-
visions]* behind them.

Our commanders hoped by gaining of this town to have gained
a pass,t but indeed there fell so much sudden wet as made the
river unpassable, by that time the army was come up. Where-
upon, hearing that the enemy lay about two miles off ‘upon the
river, near Thomastown, a pretty large walled town upon the
Nore, on the north side thereof, having a bridge over the river,
our army marched thither. But the enemy had broke the bridge,
and garrisoned the town ; and in the view of our army, marched
away to Kilkenny, seeming to decline an engagement, although
I believe they were double our numbers, which they had power
to have necessitated us unto; but was noways in our power (if
they would stand upon the advantage of the passes) to engage
them unto; nor indeed to continue out two days longer, having
almost spent all the bread they ° carried with them.

Whereupon, seeking God for direction, they resolved to send
a good party of horse and dragoons under Colonel Reynolds to
Carrick ; and to march the residue of their army back towards
Ross, to gain more bread for the prosecution of that design, if by
the blessing of God it should take. Colonel Reynolds, marching —

1[Mis-printed ‘‘ occasion more strength" in the pamphlet. }

2Treton and Jones.

3[‘The words in square brackets are inserted in Cromwell's hand. ]

4A ford over the River.

5 ‘they’ and ‘them’ mean we and ws; the swift-rushing sentence here alters its
personality from first person to third, and so goes on.

1649.) LETTER CXVI., WATERFORD = 509

with twelve troops of horse, and three troops of dragoons, came
betimes in the morning to Carrick, where, dividing himself into
two parties, whilst they were amused! with the one, he entered
one of the gates with the other. Which the soldiers perceiving,
divers of them and their officers escaped over the river in boats :
about a hundred officers and soldiers taken prisoners, without the
loss of one man of our part. In this place is a very good castle,
and one of the ancientest seats belonging to the Lord of Ormond,
in Ireland: the same was rendered without any loss also, where
was good store of provisions for the refreshing of our men.

The Colonel giving us speedy intelligence of God’s mercy in
this, we agreed to march, with all convenient speed, the residue
of the army up thither, which accordingly was done, upon
Wednesday and Thursday the 21st and 22d of this instant ; and,
through God’s mercy, I was enabled to bear them company.’
Being come hither, we did look at it as an especial good hand of
Providence to give us this place ; inasmuch as it gives us a pass-
age over the river Sewer [Suir] to the city of Waterford, and
indeed into Munster to our shipping and provisions, which before
were beaten from us out of our Waterford Bay by the enemy's
guns. It hath given us also opportunity to besiege or block up
Waterford ; and we hope our gracious God will therein direct us
also. It hath given us also the opportunity of our guns, ammu-
nition, and victual; and indeed quarter for our horse, which
could not have subsisted much longer: so sweet a mercy was
the giving of this little place unto us.

Having rested there a night, and by noon the next day gotten
our army over the river, leaving Colonel Reynolds with about
one-hundred-and-fifty foot, his own six troops of horse, and one
troop of dragoons, with a very little ammunition according to
the smallness of our marching store, we marched away towards

1[Carlyle printed ‘‘amazed” in his early editions, but later corrected it to
‘‘ amused’? a word ordinarily used in describing sham attacks. ] j

2(From Carrick, Cromwell wrote to the Commander at Dungatvan, See Supple-
ment, No. 52.]

510 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [Nov.

Waterford, upon Friday the 23d; and on Saturday about noon
came before the city. The enemy, being not a little troubled
at this unsuspected business (which indeed was the mere guid-
ance of God), marches down with great fury towards Carrick,
with their whole army, resolving to swallow it up; and upon
Saturday the 24th, assaults the place round, thinking to take it
by storm. But God had otherwise determined, for the troopers
and the rest of the soldiers, with stones! did so pelt them, they ?
continuing very near four hours under the walls ; having burnt
the Gates, which our men barricadoed up with stones; and
likewise digged under the walls, and sprung a small mine, which
flew in their own faces, but they left about forty or fifty men
dead under the walls; and have drawn off, as some say, near
four-hundred more, which they buried up and down the fields ;
besides what are wounded. And, as Inchiquin himself confessed
in the hearing of some of their soldiers lately come to us, ‘this’
hath lost him above a thousand men. The enemy was drawing
off his dead a good part of the night. They were in such haste
upon the assault, that they killed their own trumpet as he was
returning with an answer to a summons sent by them. Both
in the taking and defending of this place Colonel Reynolds his
carriage was such as deserves much honour.®

Upon our coming before Waterford, I sent the Lieutenant-
General with a regiment of horse, and three troops of dragoons,
to endeavour the reducing of Passage Fort, a very large fort
with a castle in the midst of it, having five guns planted in it,
and commanding the river better than Duncannon, it not being
much above musket-shot over, where this fort stands; and we
can bring up hither ships of three-hundred tons, without any
danger from Duncannon. Upon the attempt, though our

1 Having only ‘a very little ammunition’ and small use of guns (see Whitlocke,
p. 418; Ludlow, &c.).
*[Carlyle here inserted ‘‘ were forced to draw off after,” but now that the letter
is printed from the original, this and some other insertions have been omitted. ]
3We shall hear of Reynolds again.
Ms 4Letters to and from the Mayor of Waterford on this occasion : Appendix,
0. 15.

1649.) LETTER CXVI, WATERFORD 511

materials were not very apt for the business, yet the enemy
called for quarter, and had it, and we the place. We also _pos-
sessed the guns which the enemy had planted to beat our ships
out of the bay, two miles below. By the taking of this fort, we
shall much straiten Duncannon from provisions by water, as we
hope they are not in a condition to get much by land; besides
the advantage it is of to us to have provisions to come up the
river.!

It hath pleased the Lord, whilst these things have been thus
transacting here, to add to your interest in Munster, Bandon
Bridge ; the town [as we hear]* upon the matter, thrusting out
young Jepson,®? who was their governor, or else he deserting it
upon that jealousy; as also Kinsale, and the fort there, out of
which fort four-hundred men marched upon articles, when it
was surrendered. So that now, by the good hand of the Lord,
your interest in Munster is near as good already as ever it was
since this war began. I sent a party about two days ago to my
Lord of Broghil ; from whom I expect to have an account of all.

Sir, what can be said to these things? Is it an arm of flesh
that doth these things? Is it the wisdom, and counsel, or strength
of men? It is the Lord only. God will curse that man and
his house that dares to think otherwise. Sir, you see the work
is done by divine leading. God gets into the hearts of men,
and persuades them to come under you. I tell you, a consider-
able part of your army is fitter for an hospital than the field:
if the enemy did not know it, I should have held it impolitic
to have writ it. They know it, yet they know not what to do.

I humbly beg leave to offer a word or two. I beg of those
that are faithful, that they give glory to God. I wish it may

1[Cromwell did not gain Waterford. Lack of provisions, disease and the terrible

weather, obliged him to raise the siege, and he marched away on December 2, as
related in the next letter. }

2[The words in square brackets inserted by Cromwell. ]

3 Young Jephson,’ I suppose, is the son of Jephson, Member for Stockbridge,
Hants; one of those whom Pride purged away ;—not without reason, as is here
seen. [Certainly not his son ; perhaps one of his brothers. But if a Jephson had
been there, he must have left when Col. Courtenay arrived. See Murphy, p. 208.}

512 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND (Nov.

have influence upon |the hearts and spirits of all those that are
now in place of government, in the greatest trust, that they may
all in heart draw near to God; giving Him glory by holiness of
life and conversation ; ‘and’ that these unspeakable mercies
may teach dissenting brethren on all sides to agree, at least, in
praising God. And if the Father of the family be so kind, why
should there be such jarrings and heart-burnings amongst the
children? And if it will not yet be received that these are seals
of God’s approbation of your great change of Government,—
which indeed was no more yours than these victories and suc-
cesses are ours,—yet let them with us say, even the most un-
satisfied heart amongst them, that both are the righteous judgments
and mighty works of God ; that He hath pulled down the mighty
from his seat, that calls to an account innocent blood ;! that He
thus breaks the enemies of His Church in pieces. And let them
not be sullen, but praise the Lord, and think of us as they please ;
and we shall be satisfied, and pray for them, and wait upon our
God. And we hope we shall seek the welfare and peace of our
native country, and the Lord give them hearts to do so too.
Indeed, Sir, I was constrained in my bowels to write thus much,
I ask your pardon ; and rest,
Your most humble servant,
Ouiver CROMWELL.*

An able Editor in the old Newspapers has been inexpressibly
favoured with the sight of a Letter to ‘an Honourable Member
of the Council of State ;’ Letter dated ‘Cork, 18th December
1649 ;’ wherein this is what we still read : ‘ Yesterday my Lord
‘Lieutenant came, from Youghal the head-quarter, unto Cork ;
‘my Lord Broghil, Sir William Fenton, and divers other Gentle-
‘men and Commanders attending his Excellency. Who hath

'[Carlyle altered to ‘‘ and calls to an account for innocent blood” which is pro-
bably, but not certainly, what Cromwell meant. ]

* Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, pp. 71-73). [‘‘ A letter from the right Honour-
able the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,” &c. E. 584,16. But now printed from the
original, Zanner MS. lvi., 150. The letter is signed, and in one or two places
corrected by Cromwell. It is endorsed ‘' Dec, ra2th.’’] ;

1649.] LETTER CXVIL, CORK 513

‘received here very hearty and noble entertainment. Tomorrow
‘tthe Major-General’ Ireton ‘is expected here :—both in good
‘health, God be praised. This week, I believe, they will visit
‘Kinsale, Bandon Bridge, and other places in this Province that
‘have lately declared for us, and that expect a return of his affec-
‘tion and presence, which joys many. Some report here that
‘the Enemy burns towns and provisions near our quarters: but
‘the example may at length turn to their own greatest prejudice.
‘Colonel Deane and Colonel Blake, our Sea-Generals, are both
‘riding in Cork Harbour.’ !
Dated on the morrow is this letter.

LETTER CXVII

For the Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of England : These?

Cork, 19th December 1649.
Mr. SPEAKER,

Not long after my last to you from before
Waterford [finding the indisposition in point of health increasing,
and our foot falling sick near ten of a company every night they
were upon duty, and our numbers not above three thousand
healthful foot in the field, being necessitated to put so many -
into garrisons as I have given you an account all along, the
enemy mustering about ten or twelve thousand horse and foot,
having well near as many in the town as we without, our bread
and other necessaries not coming to us] by reason of the tem-
pestuousness of the weather, we thought fit and it was agreed
to march away to winter quarters to refresh our men until God
shall please to give further opportunity for action.

1 Newspapers (in Cromwelliana, p. 73).

2[As this letter was printed in the old newspapers (and copied by Carlyle) it
was very incomplete, many passages being suppressed, no doubt by the authorities,
who feared to let the real condition of the army in Ireland become known. The
portions omitted are here given in square brackets, the letter being printed from
an old copy amongst the House of Lords MSS, (See Seventh Report of the Hist.
MSS. Commissioners, Appendix, p. 73.)]

VoL. 1.—33

514 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 Dec.

We marched off the second of this instant, it being as terrible
a day as ever I marched in, in all my life. Just as we marched
off in the morning, unexpected to us the enemy had brought an
addition of near two thousand horse and foot to the increase of
their garrison, which we plainly saw on the other side of the
water.

We marched that night some ten or twelve miles through a
craggy country to Kilmac-Thomas, a castle some eight miles
from Dungarvan [where we had to many scarce straw, food or
firing, being deceived in reports of the place].

As we were marching off in the morning from thence, the
Lord Broghil (I having sent before to him to march up to me)
sent a party of horse to let me know he was with about twelve
or! thirteen hundred of the Munster horse and foot about ten
miles off, near Dungarvan, which was: newly rendered to him.
[And indeed, upon this occasion I must needs say that in the
bringing in of this garrison, Kingsale, the fort of Bandonbridge,
Mallow and divers other garrisons, his Lordship hath been most
eminently serviceable unto you, and I do earnestly and humbly
desire he may be taken into consideration, his Lordship never
having shrunk from your interest, though under as great trials
and necessities as any man, he having his whole fortune under
the power of the enemy, which was in Ireland, and that little
in England so engaged that I dare say his wants were scarce to
be paralleled ; and as yet his estate lies in those countries which
are under the enemy’s power. Sir, I take no pleasure to mention
these things of charge, but where eminent services are done, and
those enabling the State to give marks of their favour and
good acceptance, I trust it will be accounted no fault in me to
represent the merits of men to you.] In the midst of those
good successes, wherein the kindness and mercy of God hath
appeared, the Lord in wisdom and for gracious ends best known
to Himself, hath interlaced some things which may give us cause

1[‘* of" in the MS.]

1649.] LETTER CXVII., CORK 515

of serious consideration what His mind therein may be; and we
hope we wait upon Him, desiring to know and to submit to his
good pleasure. The noble Lieutenant-General + (whose finger to
our knowledge never ached in all these expeditions) fell sick
(we doubt upon a cold taken upon our late wet march and ill
accommodation) and went to Dungarvan, where (struggling some
four or five days with a [pestilent and contagious spotted] fever)
he died, having run his course with so much honour, courage and
fidelity, as his actions better speak than my pen, What England
hath lost thereby is above me to speak. I am sure I have lost a
noble friend and companion in labours. [Before that, my poor
kinsman, Major Cromwell (if I may name him) died before
Waterford of a fever ; since that, two persons, eminently faithful,
godly and true to you, Lieut.-Colonel Wolfe and Scout-Master-
General Rowe, are dead at Youghall. Thus] you see how God
mingles out the cup unto us; indeed we are at. this time a crazy
company, yet we live in His sight, and shall work the time that
is appointed us, and shall rest after that in peace.”

But yet there hath been some sweet at the bottom of the
cup, of which I shall now give you an account. Being informed
that the enemy intended to take-in the Fort of Passage, and
that Lieutenant-General Farrell with his Ulsters* was to march
out of Waterford, with a considerable party of horse and foot,
for that service, I ordered Colonel Zanchy (who lay on the
north side of the Blackwater) to march with his regiment of
horse, and two pieces of two troops of dragoons to the relief of
our friends, which he accordingly did, his party consisting in all
of about three-hundred-and-twenty. When he came some few
miles from the place, he took some of the enemy’s stragglers
in the villages as they went, all which he put to the sword:
seven troopers of his killed thirty of them inone house. When
he came near the place, he found the enemy had close begirt it,

1 Michael Jones : Ludlow (i. 304) is a little misinformed.
2Yes, my brave one; even so! 3 Ulster-men.

516 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 Dec.

with about five-hundred Ulster foot under Major O’ Neale ; Colonel
Wogan also, the governor of Duncannon, with a party of his,
with two great battering guns and a mortar-piece, and Captain
Browne, the governor of Ballehack, was there also. Our men
furiously charged them and beat them from the place. The
enemy got into a place where they might draw up, and the
Ulsters, who bragged much of their pikes, made indeed for the
time a good resistance, but the horse, pressing sorely upon them,
broke them, killed near a hundred upon the place ; took three-
hundred-and-fifty prisoners, amongst which, Major O’Neale, and
the officers of five-hundred Ulster foot, all but those which were
killed; the renegado Wogan, with twenty-four of Ormond’s
kurisees,! and the governor of Ballehack. As?” concerning some
of these, I hope I shall not trouble your justice.

This mercy was obtained without the loss of one on our part,
only one shot in the shoulder. Lieutenant-General Farrell was
come up very near, with a very great party to their relief, but
our handful of men marching towards him, he shamefully hasted
away, and recovered Waterford. It is not unworthy taking
notice, That having appointed a public day of thanksgiving
throughout your territories in Ireland (as well as a week’s warn-
ing would permit) for the recovery of Munster, which proves a
sweet refreshment to us, even prepared by God for us, after our
weary and hard labour, That that very day, and that very time
that men were praising God, was this deliverance wrought.

[Sir, in all my addresses to you, I have much declined to make
discourses either of the enemy’s numbers or other advantages,
or of what remains to be recovered to you, or of the ways and
means best to break or hinder the enemy’s design or interests or
what might best promote your own, or indeed to trouble you
with many discourses of this kind, desiring chiefly to present you
with narratives of fact. But forasmuch as there is an aptness
from a current of successes to apprehend a work to be done

1[“Fusees” in the House of Lords MS. ] 2 Are” in MS.]

1649,] LETTER CXVIL, CORK 517

when indeed the greater part rest behind, and thereby that
which should enable to finish and perfect may be withdrawn or
slackened to the prejudice of public interest, I thought fit to
take the boldness to present you with a true view of the state of
affairs here, so far as occurs to me. At the present, O’Neale’s
party are in full conjunction with the Earl of Ormond, by which
they contribute the assistance of near seven thousand effective
horse and foot, these being the eldest sons of the Church of Rome,
most cried up and confided in by the clergy.

The rest of the army consists of the old English-Irish, some
protestants, some papists, and other popish Irish, who are carried
by the interest of Ormond, Clanrickarde, Castlehaven, Muskery,
Taaff and other old English and Irish, both lords and gentlemen,
who are able to bring, and have already in the field, very con-
siderable numbers of bodies of men not to be neglected upon
any human confidence, or under-valued. They have so much
of Ireland still in contribution as ministers to them a liveli-
hood for the war ; all the natives, almost to twenty, being friends
to them, but enemies to you. And although God hath blessed
you with a great tract of land in longitude alongst the shore, yet
it hath but a little depth into the country; and the people that
are under your contribution, being so daily robbed by their
neighbours, are disabled from following their tillage, whereby
to pay the same ; and we cannot be in all places to protect them,
unless we should resolve to keep no body of an army in any one
place. I mention this, not to increase your charge, but to pre-
vent mistakes concerning an over-value of your Irish contributions
as yet. And therefore, if the money out of England allotted to
this army be not continued to us, the army will no ways be able
to subsist, nor to prosecute your business. In the next place, of
[if] this interest grow purely popish, which the Roman clergy
are highly labouring, and are in a probable way to accomplish,
then it cannot but be expected that supplies will come to them
from foreign parts, which do too fast already. And therefore it
is humbly presented that such shipping as will be necessary for

518 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND [19 Dee.

this coast may be continued to us. The ports by which the
enemy expects their supplies of powder and all other ammunition
(which indeed, being kept from them, will disable them to their
defence, they having no manufacture within themselves) are
Waterford, which we have not as yet been able closely to shut
up, and where less than two ships cannot be applied for the ends
aforesaid, as also for the straightening of it, and the fort of Dun-
cannon, where now no ships are, partly because those determined
for the winter fleet are not yet come, which we desire may be
speeded.

Next, the bay of Dingle, in the river of Shannon, whither (as
we are informed) divers ships with ammunition are coming,
Gallway, in which two places less than three or four ships
(whereof one or two of countenance) cannot be, and Sligo ; as
also two ships to lie between Scotland and the North, and some
to follow the motions of the army, for their assistance with
necessaries.

This is the sum of what I thought fit to present unto you at
this time, and if we may be allotted any share of judgment (being
upon the place) we hope we have represented nothing unworthy
of due consideration. ]

And although this bespeaks! a continuance of charge, yet the
same good hand of Providence, which hath blessed your affairs
hitherto, is worthy to be followed to the uttermost. And who
knows, or rather who hath not cause to hope, that He may, in
His goodness, put a short period to your whole charge. Than
which no worldly thing is more desired and endeavoured by

Your most humble servant,
OLIVER CROMWELL.*

Ormond witnessed this defeat at Passage, from some steeple,
or ‘place of prospect’ in Waterford; and found the ‘ Mayor,’
whom he sent for, a most unreasonable man.”

1[This was printed ‘‘ Though the present state of affairs bespeaks,” in order to
make sense with what had gone before ; i.e., the ‘‘ deliverance’ in Munster. See
p. 516 above. } 2Carte, ii. 103; whose account is otherwise very deficient.

* Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, pp. 73, 74).

1649] LETTER CXVIL, CORK 519

‘The renegado Wogan :’ Captain Wogan, once in the Parlia-
ment service, joined himself to Hamilton and the Scots in 1648 ;
‘bringing a gallant troop along with him. His maraudings,
pickeerings, onslaughts, and daring chivalries became very cele-
brated after that. He was not slain or hanged here at Passage ;!
there remained for him yet, some four years hence, his grand feat
which has rendered all the rest memorable: ‘that of riding right
through England, having rendezvoused at Barnet, with a Party of
Two-hundred horse,’ to join Middleton’s new Scotch Insurrection
in the Highland Hills ; where he, soon after, died of consumption
and some slight hurt.2— What ‘ewrisees” are, I do not know;
may be curassiers, in popular locution:* some nickname for
Ormond’s men,—whom few loved ; whom the Mayor of Water-
ford, this very day, would not adtnit into his Town even for the
saving of Passage Fort. With certain of these ‘your justice’
need not be troubled.

This Letter, with two others, one from Ireton and one from
Broghil, all dated Cork, 19th December, were not received in
the Commons House till Tuesday 8th January ; such were then
the delays of the winter post. On which same day it is resolved,
That the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland be desired to come over,
and give his attendance here in Parliament.® Speaker is ordered
to write him a letter to that effect.

‘The ground of this resolution,’ says Whitlocke, ‘was That the
‘news of the King’s coming to Scotland became more probable
‘than formerly.’ Laird Winram’s dealings with him, and Crom-
well’s successes, and the call of Necessity are proving effectual !
‘And, continues Whitlocke, ‘the proceedings of the Scots in
‘raising of new forces gave an alarm to the Parliament : and some
‘of their Members who had discoursed with the Lord General
‘Fairfax upon those matters, and argued how necessary it would
‘be to send an Army into Scotland to divert the war from
‘England,—had found the General wholly averse to any such
‘thing ; and, by means of his lady, who was a strict Presbyterian,

1 Appendix, No. 16. [And Supplement, No. 54.]

2Clarendon, iii. 679; Whitlocke, Heath’s Chronicle, &c. [On Wogan, see
Clarke Papers, vol. 1. Appendix A, where Mr. Firth gives the continuation of
Wogan’s own narrative, the earlier part of which was printed by Carte, from the
Clarendon MSS.)

3[There is no doubt that the word means cuirassiers. They were Ormond’s own
life-guard, and the life-guards were usually cuirassiers. ]

4Carte, ii, 103. 5 Commons Journals, Vi. 343, 4

520 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND {1 Jan.

‘to be more a friend to the Scots than they, those Members,
‘wished. Therefore they thought this a fit time to send for the
‘Lieutenant of Ireland, the rather as his Army was now drawn
‘into winter-quarters.’

The Lord Lieutenant thought, or was supposed to think, of
complying straightway, as the old Newspapers instruct us; but
on better counsel, the Scotch peril not being very imminent as
yet, decided ‘to settle Ireland in a safe posture’ first. Indeed
the Letter itself is long in reaching him ; and the rumour of it,
which arrives much sooner, has already set the Enemy on false
schemes, whereof advantage might be taken.?

Meanwhile, in Munster, in Ireland generally, there is much to
be done, on the great scale and on the small. Some days before
the last Letter gets into the Speaker’s hands, here is another, a
private one, travelling towards Philip Lord Wharton, whom we
transiently saluted last year at Knaresborough.®

LETTER CXVIII

Lorp WuarrTon, when we last saw him, was of the Derby-
House Committee, a busy man and manager ; but he is not now
of the Council of State; having withdrawn from all management,
into a painful inquiring condition. One of our zealous Puritans
and Patriots, but much troubled with cautious dubitations ;
involved in ‘reasonings,’ in painful labyrinths of constitutional
and other logic, for the present. Of which sort there are now
many. Who indignantly drew the sword, and long zealously
fought and smote with it, nothing doubting ; and are now some-
what astonished at the issue that has come of it! Somewhat
uncertain whether these late high actings, executing judgment
on your King, abolition of your Honse of Lords, and so forth, are
owned by the Eternal Powers or not owned. Of Temporal
Powers there is clearly none that will own them ; and unless the
other do—? The Lord Lieutenant intimates, in his friendliest
way, that surely it is indispensable to have ‘satisfaction’ on that
score ; also that it is perilous not to get it; and furthermore that
labyrinths of constitutional and other logics are by no means the
course towards that.

} Whitlocke, p. 422. 2 Newspapers (in Cromwedliana, p. 77).
5 Appendix, No. 17; Letter, of 3rst December, recommending a Chief-Justice
for Munster.

1650.] LETTER CXVIIL, CORK 521

For the Right Honourable the Lord Wharton: These

Cork, 1st Jan. 1649.

My pear Frienp, my Lorp,

If I know my heart, I love you in truth: and
therefore if, from the jealousy of unfeigned love, I play the fool
a little, and say a word or two at guess, I know you will pardon it.

It were a vain thing, by letter, to dispute over your doubts,
or to undertake answer your objections. I have heard them
all; and | have rest from the trouble of them, and ‘of’ what
has risen in my own heart; for which I desire to be humbly
thankful. I do not condemn your reasonings; I doubt them.
It’s easy to object to the glorious actings of God, if we look
too much upon instruments. I have heard computations made
of the members in Parliament: ‘The’ good kept out, the worst
left in;! it has been so this nine years, yet what has God
wrought. The greatest works last; and still is at work.
Therefore take heed of this scandal.

Be not offended at the manner ‘of God’s working ;’ perhaps
no other way was left. What if God accepted the zeal, as He
did that of Phineas,? whose reason might have called for a jury ! 3
What if the Lord have witnessed his approbation and acceptance
to this also, not only by signal outward acts, but to the heart also ?
What if I fear my friend should withdraw his shoulder from
the Lord’s work (Oh, it’s grievous to do so) through scandals,
through false * mistaken reasonings.

1 Original has, ‘most bad remaining ;’ ‘these nine years’ means, ever since the
Parliament first met.

2* And behold, one of the Children of Israel came,and brought unto his brethren
‘a Midianitish woman ; in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the Congregation
“of the Children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the Tabernacle of
‘the Congregation,’—by reason of those very sins. ‘And when Phinehas the son
‘of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, saw it, he rose up from among the Con-
‘gregation, and took a javelin in his hand; and he went after the man of Israel
‘into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel and the woman,
‘through the belly. So the plague was stayed from the Children of Israel.’
(Numbers, xxv. 6-8.)

5[Carlyle altered to ‘‘whom reason might have called before a jury,” but
Cromwell wrote as above, and his meaning evidently is that Phineas inflicted

summary justice, instead of waiting for the culprits to be punished by ordinary
forms of law.] 4|This word erased. ]

VOL. 1.—33*

522 CAMPAIGN IN IRELAND {1 Jan.

There’s difficulty, there’s trouble ; in the other way, there’s
safety, ease, wisdom: in the one no clearness (this is an object-
tion indeed), in the other satisfaction. It’s well if we thought
of that first, and severed from the other considerations,! which do
often bias, if not bribe the mind, whereby mists are often raised
in the way we should walk in, and we call it darkness or dis-
satisfaction : Oh, our deceitful hearts! Oh, this pleasing world !
How great is it to be the Lord’s servant in any drudgery * (I
thought not to have written near the other side: love will not
let me alone; I have been often provoked ‘to it by you’) in
all hazards His worst is far above the world’s best! He makes
us able, in truth, to say so; we cannot of ourselves. How hard
a thing is it to reason ourselves up to the Lord’s service, though
it be so honourable ; how easy to put ourselves out of it, where
the flesh has so many advantages!

You was desired to go along with us: I wish it still? Yet we
are not triumphing; we may (for aught flesh knows) suffer
after all this: the Lord prepare us for His good pleasure! You
were with us in the Form of things: why not in the Power?*
I am persuaded your heart hankers after the hearts of your poor
friends ; and will, until you can find others to close with: which,
I trust (though we in ourselves be contemptible), God will not
let you do!

My service to the dear little Lady: I wish you make her
not a greater temptation than she is. Take heed of all relations.
Mercies should not be temptations: yet we too oft make them
so. The Lord direct your thoughts into the obedience of His
will, and give you rest and peace in the truth. Pray for

Your most true and affectionate
Servant in the Lord,
OutveR CROMWELL.

lof ‘safety,’ profit, &c. — 2 Turns the leaf, we perceive.

3 Shadow of condescension, implied in this, strikes his Excellency; which he
hastens to retract. '

4[Carlyle printed ‘ You were with us in the Power: why not in the Form?’’]

1650.) LETTER CXVIITI, CORK 523

‘P.S.’ I received a Letter from Robert Hammond, whom
truly I love in the Lord with most entire affection: it much
grieved me, not because I judge, but feared the whole spirit
of it was from temptation; indeed I thought I perceived a
proceeding in that which the Lord will (I trust) cause him to
unlearn. 1 would fain have written to him, but am straitened
in time. Would he would be with us a little! Perhaps it
would be no hurt to him.*

Of Wharton and his dubitations, which many share in, we
shall again hear. Of Wharton, young Colonel Hammond, young
Colonel Montague, Tom Westrow, Henry Lawrence, idle Dick,
men known to us, and men unknown ;—of them and their
abstruse ‘reasonings,’ and communings with the Lord Lieutenant
in St. James’s Park, we shall have a hint by and by. Some of
whom received full ‘satisfaction,’ and others never could.

* Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1814), Ixxxiv. p. 418. Given there without
editing ; no notice whence ; clearly genuine.——JVode to Third Edition. Original,
in autograph, endorsed by Wharton, ‘rec; 30th January 1649, from my Lord
Leefetennant of Ireland, from Ireland,’ is now (1848) in the Fitzwilliam Museum,
Cambridge ; Postscript here is added from the Original. [But the postscript is
given in the Gentleman's Magazine, where the letter is printed very correctly. The
alterations in it were made by Carlyle.] This Letter, and two others to be given by
and by (CXLVI. and CLXXXI.), cameto the Fitzwilliam Museum, some thirty
years ago; discovered ‘among the Court-rolls of the Manor of Wymondham Crom-
well, Norfolk.’

Enp or Vot. I.

THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED

ie tte squrto} cditeriin
doust a xantie

Se rs | si = » See mt eave pete

= 3 = ae I
ow il ere YIast Digew WET Peli x isi fy “aad San ioste
sEnoy piawmtistl jomelo piey oat i i) taal ¥

Wsitt “SI soit yc! PUB rote W mor ‘\trgetaot
+ bed sist to-*<.wreaday ert bees Rot
eadshl had sti ate aie » bon eptutaiest® 5 a)

¥ ; yee a ae.
carte 2, fren veh dent 2 oved. diate ae trot 2 enna

re 43 * : ' 9 - b fi Af =
(GUCsT BE” 1b Daves
? 2. = s

e = =) a =
ye & vty uc ter .qotaod) Stengnhy ee
GS) palin siti thesis 5 vobede 9908 Deh;
inet dio cto” worl ed benobew sigs m
x lop eode et eit aor bare toa
Isnig 4 0 besides, 2a crest Jelenpeey
; citi. 2 Fae Surat Leone
phi Joted Ait (| ae (uhh 97H,
= ' = ti ri. tsillives:s PhS) Gd ane A AAKZID baw « B :
ars ND wrirl bene wr to sl + ated) cll gaowts* hens roe 5

aT

a
‘
~

De

ve -_
:

‘ ‘

F

.

= '
\

;

“20

at ar) i
