The French Revolution, Vol. 1: The Bastille (Thomas Carlyle, 1837)
==========================================================
The most influential English history of the Revolution; history as epic prose-poetry. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (frenchrevolution0001thom_g6i6).

Pi a eee 


DC161.C3 1892 
The French revolution 


3 3eceb 00058 


a 
wa oad 
z 
le 
ec ee: 

: ¥ 4% 7 

oe é ee 
al + : be 


he 


3751 


ST. BONAVENTURE U LIBRARY & RESOURCE CTR 


Reet 
s 
set 
Da 
ates 
FA 
ae 
; 
a 


F 
* 
ee 
: 
aa 
A 
a 
Le 


4" 


TILE 


FRENCH REVOLUTION: 


A HIstTory, 


BY | 
THOMAS CARLYLE. 


Méya 6 ayov éort, Aeiov yap épyov' vrép Baotielac, imép éAevflepiac, 


urép eivpotac, inép atapasiac, ARRIANUS. 
Adypa yap aivTov Tic wera BaArer; yopic dé Gopigro wy meTaBodne, 7h 


aAdo doviAcia oTevovTav” Kab -elbeoOat Ripoomovousevan; ANTONINUS. 


JIN We IRI SS WTO EO) AN) sites 
VOL. I. 


THE BASTILLE. 


PHILADELPHIA : 
PORLER & COATES, 


ST. BONAVENTURE LERARY 
J. BORAVENTUR E, N.Y, 


ai. 


ae ee 
’ 


& 
p 


Und dem Volfe das Blech, das tn dev Mitte fic Eritmint. 
Wehe dem armen Blech, wenn nur twillfiirliche Schlage ? 
Ungewif treffen, und nie fertig der Keffel evfcheint! 
Goethe. 


135 583)/) =F, 


as 


BOOK I. 
DEATH OF LOUIS XY. 

CHAP. PAGE 
i bOUIS THE WEEL-BELOVED:.. = «5 <.. 5°72 + < co 13 
DMN ATIZEDULIEAT Stas Sigiss ana! op ells ne co Sheen awe 19 
PERK TOU os ate toe Sx ok ee 34 
INE OUISR THE: UNHORGODTEN ii i « «fe ele ly Smee 39 

BOOK II. 

THE PAPER AGE. 
LAAN UN GLRGDOD Ss c3 3 Adlea Gg eile ili Rime acuerns 53 
LeeLee RTION: IN HIPEROGEMPMS) @ soe = aus «s+ 622 

EFION Pas @) eS TEL OINDACEDT igs Mion ier ce) spas! eos: “or Ys) ois 66 
TW MO ae eaNE le ogi Be oc eee Ce en rae G2 
VY. AstRmA Repux wirHour CASH ......... 78 
AVATREVVSINGI) EA CSREES onl sc les py) he. Sle: Oo “ah a> wate 84 
WilCONTRAD \SOCTATs< fy So sl a & me a eee mo eee 91 
Ni ISR RINT DIAPER © oer ae a ots cde % 8 6%) o & 95 


CONTEN ES. 


THE BASTILLE. 


4 CONTENTS. - 
BOOK III. 
THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS: 

CHAP. PAGE 
I. DIsSHONORED: BILIS! 3.2 24-25 ce 2) eee Oe 
TI, ‘CONTROLLER, CAMONN (ce cried actuate came LED 

TECHS “NotTABLES@A. thc veal cake eat Suton LE 
IV LoMENIN’s Eiprers? Reco). sealant eee et 
V. Lom&nire’s THUNDERBOLTS .. . Shien Se peo: 

VI. Komennws: Proms 2)... © ol Ane ois aCe eRe ol ee 

WIT sIN@tERNECINER ahs cantata ieee ms me ae ee ot ere Hays 

VILK Lomente’s) DEATH-THROES. 9: 4) 2 = eeu 
IX. BurgIAL witH BonFIRE .... . Mere en ey LI 

BOOK IV. 
STATES-GENERAL. 

I) Treo NoraBpurs AGADN: coc) -cucmcl beeen ee 185 
Th. Tee EVeGrione S440: \0 wah es ob ee ee ee 194 
Lill Grown ELECTRIC. << = oa ees AY 
IV. Tae PROGESSION® << 9s se et i 210 

BOOK YV. 
THE THIRD ESTATE. 

Te INERTIA) «3. 3. ee ee eee o) ae OS 
i MrErcury DECBREZE! @ 2 eae eee eee mt ee 
Tile BRoGLIE: THE WAR-GOD 2 ac) =) eee 263 
RVs To, ARMS Nes Ani? ieee, Aaa eee oh recount ou 
VeeGIvE -USMARMS: = 45:2) Sie etek . 280 
VIASTORM AND VICTORY. « « o-cueCneeee ues) 
VIET. Not A SREVORT son aoe ce neat 6 oie 

VAITL. CongurERING *oUuR [KING <) ce oie eee 311 


LHE ULANDTERNE Ged eee 


pee 26 ns wales <4 OlT 


ania 


“ois 
is 


a CONTENTS. 
. BOOK VI. 
CONSOLIDATION. © 
CHAP. 
I. MAKE THE CONSTITUTION... . 
II. Tor ConsTiItTUENT ASSEMBLY . . 
I. Dam GENERAL OVERTURN. 2... ..-47 ... 
TV INS OURUM aM mec lester fe cos Senn ts cee Ba 
Weal BOURTa SN St Amn rc eiaic sae wee as 
BOOK VII. 
THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. 
IAT ROE MOTISMOs GaN to siecle. Ga Asta tek 
II. O RicHarp, O my Kine 
tiie Bisex) COGKADES!: sos sa. 
IV; Tree MENADS. . .By . . 
VE"UsuHar MAImnARD 2 2-2. 
Wise low ERSATEIGES . oto < os es 
VELIAPACD VA RGAGT EES (0 Grn. gical secu woes Go ae 
Wei Rei QUA IIH sel ee 
XQM IGANGA YEP EA tp ce wes Jd cee oe tc 
EX eclsEbE GRAND ON DR TMS is oe. ose isos me, Sees 
XI. From VERSAILLES . . my tae 
THE CONSTITUTION. 
BOOK I. 
THE FEAST OF PIKES. 
CHAP, 


I. In tHe TuILeries 


IJ. In tHe Sarie DE MANEGE 
Ill. Tot Muster 


5 (Cy cee fa ie ts 


semen rtinet ames) egre’ esl eels Gl eid, ey Me ss 


PAGE 
329 
338 
347 
360 
365 


ines re) a 


is 
- 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. . 


PAGE 
UHOMASICAREYEE 5. sy = 6 2 aye rontisptece: 


IMPASSE) Weim uscen IAs nc ME Uae mec aren, Uy A Gite ca 


MEAT) ANTEND Umi AUR Maen GP ie lar. ueeteuh ias pani huceieon aid 


PIFOUIS OX Visti sl a Pheer ee ee Ee AO) 

“Gop Gurpe AND Prorncr Us, we ARE Too YouNnG TO 
REIGN Gigen cas ee ee Oa ae Gees 5 NE ea pach 48 

ININCIKE Ren yeracl eiatl a wogber. cs) de es BAe ee a ee 


OUSS ENUM aa er Ee ets eae ogre ee eee ey eg (OO, 


LREO NM eee ee Fa re ee ly re TTD 


HWOREEN TES DRTEN NE DAM cs a gee alse elke bene ce Ghee QD 
DU VACerED SESE RGM MIRININE, Gh sys 9) sn ky kk, ate os oe A 


AYO MENTAL oye tte in ckectrectaten™, gos ae ee 140) 


BOusreminrPee. DUKE OF ORLBANG. 9. 5... «*. 3 + 1505, 


IDRC LUGE OTEN. (Mis ce oS) alee ee to we “Gey oe te a BOG 


THe Tennis-CourT OATH ..... . Bite oe ets oS) oo ay! 


VITA AtEANDE DE BREZEO nc a 6 ales sa a elk ae 258 


CAMILLE DESMOULINS AT THE CAFE DE Foy ..... 274 


PNB EDL AU GH EDs hale taut Seer so sa eeacs Qe OOO 


Nim HRROIGNENGMCH @. cos fle eric ts ws Got ew fw, oe 896 
MOPS EO ACY ADT PEM Meat oe oe reas, ee dhe or a= ao es eed 


ANACHARSIS @LOUOLZ . ¢ 296 < 2 ee eee Ge soe: 


% 


ROOK T 
a Samet on 
foe DEATHS OF LOUIS xve— 


tae - 


ata 


‘ 
4 

= a. ’ 

mati 
ge mr 
; ’ 

“ 
a - 
i 


THE 


FRENCH REVOLUTION. 


CHAPTER I. 
LOUIS THE WELL-BELOVED. 


Presipent Hénavuut, remarking on royal Sur- 
names of Honor how difficult it often is to ascertain 


not only why, but even when, they were conferred, 


takes occasion, in his sleek official way, to make a 
philosophical reflection. ‘The Surname of Bien-aimé 
‘(Well-beloved),’ says he, ‘ which Louis XV. bears, 
‘will not leave posterity in the same doubt. This 
‘Prince, in the year 1744, while hastening from one 


‘end of his kingdom to the other, and suspending his _ 
‘conquests in Flanders that he might fly to the assist- - 


‘ance of Alsace, was arrested at Metz by a malady 
‘which threatened to cut short his days. At the news 
‘of this, Paris, all in terror, seemed a city taken by 
‘storm: the churches resounded with supplications and 
‘groans; the prayers of priests and people were every 
‘moment interrupted by their sobs: and it was from 
‘an interest so dear and tender that this Surname of 
‘ Bien-aimé fashioned itself,—a title higher still than 
‘all the rest which this great Prince has earned.’ ? 


1Abrégé Chronologique de V Histoire de France (Paris, 1775), p. 701. 
13 


: Book I. 
14 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. ie 


So stands it written ; in lasting memorial of that year 
1744. Thirty other years have come and gone; and 
‘this great Prince’ again lies sick ; but in how altered 
circumstances now! Churches resound not with exces- 
sive groanings; Paris is stoically calm: sobs inter- 
rupt no prayers, for indeed none are offered; except 
Priests’ Litanies, read or chanted at fixed money-rate 
per hour, which are not liable to interruption. The 
shepherd of the people has been carried home from 
Little Trianon, heavy of heart, and been put to bed 
in his own Chateau of Versailles: the flock knows it, 
and heeds it not. At most, in the immeasurable tide 
of French Speech (which ceases not day after day, and 
only ebbs towards the short hours of night), may this 
of the royal sickness emerge from time to time as an 
article of news. Bets are doubtless depending: nay, 
some people ‘express themselves loudly in the streets. ’? 
But for the rest, on green field and steepled city, the 
May sun shines out, the May evening fades; and men 
ply their useful or useless business as if no Louis lay 
in danger. 

Dame Dubarry, indeed, might pray, if she had a 
_ talent for it; Duke D’Aiguillon too, Maupeou and the 
Parlement Maupeou: these, as they sit in their high | 
places, with France harnessed under their feet, know 
well on what basis they continue there. Look to it, 
D’Aiguillon ; sharply as thou didst, from the Mill of 
St. Cast, on Quiberon and the invading English ; thou, 


2 Mémoires de M. le Baron Besenval (Paris, 1805), ii. 59-90. 


¢ 
’ 
‘ 
Pr, 
ay | 
Pe 
= 
* 
t 
2 
f ‘ 
Z 
ue . 
Bs 
‘ 
bs i 
- ., 
ari - 
oA 
7 s% 
‘ 
‘ 
os La 


oren LOUIS THE WELL-BELOVED. 15 
d 


“covered if not with glory yet with meal!’ Fortune 
was ever accounted inconstant : and each dog has but 
his day. 

Forlorn enough languished Duke d’Aiguillon, some 
years ago; covered, as we said, with meal; nay with 
worse. For La Chalotais, the Breton Parlementeer, 
accused him not only of poltroonery and tyranny, but 
even of concussion (official plunder of money); which 
accusations it was easier to get ‘quashed’ by back- 
stairs Influences than to get answered: neither could. 
the thoughts, or even the tongues, of men be tied. 
Thus, under disastrous eclipse, had this grand-nephew 
of the great Richelieu to glide about ; unworshipped by 
the world; resolute Choiseul, the abrupt proud man, 
disdaining him, or even forgetting him. Little pros- 
pect but to glide into Gascony, to rebuild Chateaus 
there,*? and die inglorious killing game ! However,-in 
the year 1770, a certain young soldier, Dumouriez by 
name, returning from Corsica, could see ‘with sorrow, 
‘at Compiégne, the old King of France, on foot, with 
‘doffed hat, in sight of his army, at the side of a Aye 

‘nificent phaeton, doing homage to the—Dubarry.’ 4 

Much lay therein! Thereby, for one thing, Sala 
D’Aiguillon postpone the rebuilding of his Chateau, 
and rebuild his fortunes first. For stout Choiseul 
would discern in the Dubarry nothing but a wonder- 


’ Arthur Young: Travels during the years 1787-88-89 (Bury St. 
Edmunds, 1792), i. 44. ; 
* La Vie et les Mémoires du Général Dumouriez (Paris, 1822), i. 141. 


16 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
1744-74. 


fully dizened Scarlet-woman; and go on his way as if 
she were not. Intolerable: the source of sighs, tears, 
of pettings and poutings; which would not end till 
‘France’ (La France, as she named her royal valet) 
finally mustered heart to see Choiseul; and with that 
‘ quivering in the chin (tremblement du menton)’ natural 
in such case,° faltered out a dismissal: dismissal of his 
last substantial man, but pacification: of his scarlet- 
woman. Thus D’Aiguillon rose again, and culminated. 
And with him there rose Maupeou, the banisher of Par- 
lements; who plants you a refractory President ‘ at Croe 
‘in Combrailles on the top of steep rocks, inaccessible 
‘except by litters,’ there to consider himself. Like- 
wise there rose Abbé Terray, dissolute Financier, pay- 
ing eightpence in the shilling,—so that wits exclaim in 
some press at the playhouse, ‘‘ Where is Abbé Terray, 
that he might reduce us to two-thirds!”” And so have 
these individuals (verily by black-art) built them a 
Domdaniel, or enchanted Dubarrydom; call it an Ar- 
mida-Palace, where they dwell pleasantly ; Chancellor 
Maupeou ‘playing blind-man’s-buff’ with the scarlet 
Enchantress; or gallantly presenting her with dwarf 
Negroes ;—and a Most Christian King has unspeak- 
able peace within doors, whatever he may have with- 
out. ‘My Chancellor is a scoundrel; but I cannot 
do without him.’ ® 


Beautiful Armida-Palace, where the inmates live 


5 Besenval: Mémoires, ii. 21. 
6 Dulaure: Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1824), vii. 328, 


i 
a 


wt ee 
al 


. 


Ny kee. Y 


LN iat emetia Ga 


Chap. I. LOUIS THE WELL-BELOVED. 17 
1744-74. 


enchanted lives; lapped in soft music of adulation; 
waited on by the splendors of the world ;—which 
nevertheless hangs wondrously as by a single hair. 
Should the Most Christian King die; or even get 
seriously afraid of dying! For, alas, had not the fair 
haughty Chateauroux to fly, with wet cheeks and flam- 
ing heart, from that Fever-scene at Metz, long since ; 
driven forth by sour shavelings ? She hardly returned, 
when fever and shavelings were both swept into the 
background. Pompadour too, when Damiens wounded 
Royalty ‘slightly, under the fifth rib,’ and our drive 
to Trianon went off futile, in shrieks and madly shaken 
torches,—had to pack, and be in readiness: yet did 
not go, the wound not proving poisoned. For his 
Majesty has religious faith; believes, at least in a 
Devil. And now a third peril; and who knows what 
may bein it! For the Doctors look grave; ask priv- 
ily, If his Majesty had not the small-pox long ago ?— 
and doubt it may have been a false kind. Yes, Mau- 

peou, pucker those sinister brows of thine, and peer 
out on it with thy malign rat-eyes ; it is a questionable 
case. Sure only that man is mortal; that with the 
life of one mortal snaps irrevocably the wonderfulest-tal- 
isman, and all Dubarrydom rushes off, with tumult, 
into infinite Space; and ye, as subterranean Appari- 
tions are wont,-vanish utterly,—leaving only a smell 


of sulphur ! 


These, and what holds of these may pray,—to Beel- 
Vou. I.—2 


. Book I. 
18 DEATH OF LOUIS XY. Be 


zebub, or whoever will hear them. But from the rest 
of France there comes, as was said, no prayer; or one 
of an opposite character, ‘expressed openly in the 
streets.’ Chateau or Hdétel, where an enlightened 
Philosophism scrutinizes many things, is not given 
to prayer: neither are Rossbach victories, Terray 
Finances, nor, say only ‘sixty thousand Lettres de 
Cachet’ (which is Maupeou’s share), persuasives to- 
wards that. O Hénault! Prayers? From a France 
smitten (by black-art) with plague after plague, and 
lying now, in shame and pain, with a Harlot’s foot 
on its neck, what prayer can come? ‘Those lank 
scarecrows, that prowl hunger-stricken through all 
highways and byways of French Existence, will they 
pray? The dull millions that, in the workshop or 
furrowfield, grind foredone at the wheel of Labor, 
like haltered gin-horses, if blind, so much the quieter ? 
Or they that in the Bicétre Hospital, ‘ eight to a bed,’ 
he waiting their manumission? Dim are those heads 
of theirs, dull stagnant those hearts: to them the 
great Sovereign is known mainly as the great Re- 
grater of Bread. If they hear of his sickness, they 
will answer with a dull Zant pis pour lui; or with 
the question, Will he die? - 

Yes, will he die? that is now, for all France, the 
grand question, and hope; whereby alone the King’s 
sickness has still some interest. 


CHAPTER II. 


REALIZED IDEALS. 


S SucH a changed France have we; and a changed 
¥ Louis. Changed, truly; and further than thou yet 
- seest !—To the eye of History many things, in that 
i sick-room of Louis, are now visible, which to the 


it is well said, ‘in every object there is inexhaustible 
‘meaning; the eye sees in it what the eye brings 
‘means of seeing.’ To Newton and to Newton’s Dog 
Diamond, what a different pair of Universes; while 
the painting on the optical retina of both was, most 


room of Louis, endeavor to look with the mind too. 
Time was when men could (so to speak) of a given 
man, by nourishing and decorating him with fit appli- 
ances, to the due pitch, make themselves a King, 
almost as the Bees do; and what was still more to 
the purpose, loyally obey him when made. The man 
so nourished and decorated, thenceforth named royal, 
does verily bear rule; and is said, and even thought, 
_ to be, for example, ‘ prosecuting conquests in Flanders,’ 
when he lets himself like luggage be carried thither: 


and no light luggage; covering miles of road. For 
eid 


likely, the same! Let the Reader here, in this sick- 


Courtiers there present were invisible. For indeed 


20 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
1744-74. 


he has his unblushing Chateauroux, with her band- 
boxes and rouge-pots, at his side; so that, at every 
new station, a wooden gallery must be run up between 
their lodgings. He has not only his Mazson-Bouche, 
and Valetaille without end, but his very Troop of 
Players, with their pasteboard coulisses, thunder- 
barrels, their kettles, fiddles, stage-wardrobes, port- 
able larders (and chaffering and quarrelling enough) ; 
all mounted in wagons, tumbrils, second-hand chaises, 
—sufficient not to conquer Flanders, but the patience 
of the world. With such a flood of loud jingling 
appurtenances does he lumber along, prosecuting his 
conquests in Flanders: wonderful to behold. So 
nevertheless it was and had been: to some solitary 
thinker. it might seem strange; but even to him iney- 
itable, not unnatural. 

For ours is a most fictile world; and man is the 
most fingent plastic of creatures. A world not fix- 
able; not fathomable! An unfathomable Somewhat, 
which is Mot we; which we can work with, and live 
amidst,—and model, miraculously in our miraculous 
Being, and name World.—But if the very Rocks 
and Rivers (as Metaphysic teaches) are, in _ strict 
language, made by those outward Senses of ours, 
how much more, by the Inward Sense, are all Phe- 
nomena of the spiritual kind: Dignities, Authorities, 
Holies, Unholies! Which inward sense, moreover, 
is not permanent like the outward ones, but forever 
growing and changing. Does not the black African 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 91 
1744-74, 


take of Sticks and Old Clothes (say, exported Mon- 
mouth-Street cast-clothes) what will suffice, and of 
these, cunningly combining them, fabricate for himself 
an Hidolon (Idol, or Thing Seen), and name it Mumbo- 
Jumbo ; which he can thenceforth pray to, with up- 
turned awestruck eye, not without hope? The white 
European mocks; but ought rather to consider; and 
see whether he, at home, could not do the like a little 
more wisely. © 

So it was, we say, in those conquests of Flanders, 
thirty years ago: but so it no longer is. Alas, much 
more lies sick than poor Louis: not the French King 
only, but the French Kingship; this too, after long 
rough tear and wear, is breaking down. The world 


is all so changed; so much that seemed vigorous has 


sunk decrepit, so. much that was not is beginning to 
be!—Borne over the Atlantic, to the closing ear of 
Louis, King by the Grace of God, what sounds 
are these; muffled ominous, new in our centuries ? 
Boston Harbor is black with unexpected Tea: be- 
hold a Pennsylvanian Congress gather; and ere long, 
on Bunker Hill, Democracy announcing, in rifle-_ 
volleys death-winged, under her Star Banner, to the 


tune of Yankee-doodle-doo, that she is born, and, 


whirlwind-like, will envelop the whole world! 


Sovereigns die and sovereignties: how all dies, 
and is for a Time only; is a ‘Time-phantasm, yet 
reckons itself real!’ The Merovingian Kings, slowly 


22 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book 1. 

1744-74. 
wending on their bullock-carts through the streets of 
Paris, with their long hair flowing, have -all wended 
slowly on,—into Eternity. Charlemagne sleeps at 
Salzburg, with truncheon grounded; only Fable 
expecting that he will awaken. Charles the Hammer, 
Pepin Bow-legged, where now is their eye of menace, 
their voice of command? Rollo and his shaggy 
Northmen. cover not the Seine with ships; but have 
sailed off on a longer voyage. The hair of Towhead 
(Téte d’étoupes) now needs no combing ; Iron-cutter 
(Taillefer) cannot cut a cobweb; shrill Fredegonda, 
shrill Brunhilda have had out their hot life-scold, 
and lie silent, their hot life-frenzy cooled. Neither 
from that black Tower de Nesle descends now dark- 
ling the doomed gallant, in his sack, to the Seine 
waters; plunging into Night: for Dame de Nesle now 
cares not for this world’s gallantry, heeds not this 
world’s scandal; Dame de Nesle is herself gone into 
Night. They are all gone; sunk,—down, down, 
with the tumult they made; and the rolling and the 
trampling of ever new generations passes over them; 
and they hear it not any more forever. 

And yet withal has there not been realized some- 
what? Consider (to go no further) these strong Stone- 
edifices, and what they hold! Mud-Town of the Bor- 
derers (Lutetia Parisiorum or Baristorum) has paved 
itself, has spread over all the Seine Islands, and far 
and wide on each bank, and become City of Paris, 
sometimes boasting to be ‘Athens of Europe,’ and 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 23 
1744-74, 


even ‘ Capital of the Universe.’ Stone towers frown 
aloft; long-lasting, grim with a thousand years. Ca- 
thedrals are there, and a Creed (or memory of a Creed) 
in them; Palaces, and a State and Law. ‘Thou seest 
the Smoke-vapor; wnextinguished Breath as of a 
thing living. Labor’s thousand hammers ring on her 
anvils: also a more miraculous Labor works noise- 
lessly, not with the Hand but with the Thought. How 
have cunning workmen in all crafts, with their cunning 
head and right-hand, tamed’ the Four Elements to be 
their ministers ; yoking the Winds to their Sea-chariot, 
making the very Stars their Nautical Timepiece ;—and 
written and collected a Bibliotheque du Roi; among 
whose Books is the Hebrew Boox !~ A wondrous race 
of creatures: these have been realized, and what of 
Skill is in these: call not the Past Time, with all its 
confused wretchednesses, a lost one. 

Observe, however, that of man’s whole terrestrial 
possessions and attainments, unspeakably the noblest 
are his Symbols, divine or divine-seeming; under 
which he marches and fights, with victorious assurance, 
in this life-battle : what we can call his Realized Ideals. 
Of which realized ideals, omitting the rest, consider 
only these two: his Church, or spiritual Guidance ; his. 
Kingship, or temporal one. The Church: what a word 
was there; richer than Golconda and the treasures of 
the world! In the heart of the remotest mountains 
rises the little Kirk ; the Dead all slumbering round it, 
under their white memorial-stones, ‘in hope of a happy 


24 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
1744-74, 


resurrection :'—dull wert thou, O Reader, if never in 
any hour (say of moaning midnight, when such Kirk 
hung spectral in the sky, and Being was as if swal- 
lowed up of Darkness) it spoke to thee—things un- 
speakable, that went into thy soul’s soul. Strong was 
he that had a Church, what we can call a Church: he 
stood thereby, though ‘in the centre of Immensities, 
in the conflux of Eternities,’ yet manlike towards God 
and man; the vague shoreless Universe had become 
for him a firm city, and dwelling which he knew. Such 
virtue was in Belief; in these words, well spoken: J 
believe. Well might men prize their Credo, and raise 
stateliest Temples for it, and reverend Hierarchies, and 
give it the tithe of their substance ; it was worth living 
for and dying for. 

Neither was that an inconsiderable moment when 
wild armed men first raised their Strongest aloft on the 
buckler-throne, and, with clanging armor and hearts, 
said solemnly : Be thou our Acknowledged Strongest ! 
In such Acknowledged Strongest (well named King, 
Kén-ning, Can-ning, or Man that was Able) what a 
Symbol shown now for them,—significant with the des- 
tinies of the world! A Symbol of true Guidance in 
return for loving Obedience; properly, if he knew it, 
the prime want of man. A Symbol which might be 
called sacred; for is there not, in reverence for what is 
better than we, an indestructible sacredness? On 
which ground, too, it was well said there lay in the 
Acknowledged Strongest a divine right; as surely 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 95 
1744-74. 


there might in the Strongest, whether Acknowledged 
or not,—considering who it was that made him strong. 
And so, in the midst of confusions and unutterable 
incongruities (as all growth is confused), did this of 
Royalty, with Loyalty environing it, spring up; and 
grow mysteriously, subduing and assimilating (for a 
principle of Life was in it); till it also had grown 
world-great, and was among the main Facts of our 
modern existence. Such a Fact, that Louis XIV., for 
example, could answer the expostulatory Magistrate 
with his ‘“ L’ Htat c'est moi (The State? I am the 
State);’’ and be replied to by silence and abashed 
looks. So far had accident and forethought ; had your 
Louis Elevenths, with the leaden Virgin in their hat- 


‘band, and torture-wheels and conical owbliettes (man- 


eating!) under their feet; your Henri Fourths, with 
their prophesied social millennium, ‘when every peas- 
ant should have his fowl in the pot; ’ and on the whole, 
the fertility of this most fertile Existence (named of 
Good and Evyil),—brought it, in the matter of the 
Kingship. Wondrous! Concerning which may we not 
again say, that in the huge mass of Evil, as it rolls 
and swells, there is ever some Good working impris- 
oned; working towards deliverance and triumph 2 
How such Ideals do realize themselves; and grow, 
wondrously, from amid the incongruous ever-fluctuating 
chaos of the Actual: this is what World-History, if it 
teach any thing, has to teach us. . How they grow; 
and, after long stormy growth, bloom out mature, su- 


ST, BONAVENTURE LIBRARY 
C7 BONAVENTURE, N.Y 


_ 


H Book I. 
26 DEATH OF LOUIS XV pee 


preme; then quickly (for the blossom is brief) fall into 
decay ; sorrowfully dwindle; and crumbte. down, or 
rush down, noisily or noiselessly disappearing. The 
blossom is so brief; as of some centennial Cactus- 
flower, which after a century of waiting shines out for 
hours! Thus from the day when rough Clovis, in the 
Champ de Mars, in sight of his whole army, had to 
cleave retributively the head of that rough Frank, with 
sudden battle-axe, and the fierce words, “‘ It was thus 
thou clavest the vase” (St. Remi’s and mine) “at 
Soissons,”’ forward to Louis the Grand and his L’ Htat 
c'est mot, we count some twelve hundred years: and 
now this the very next Louis is dying, and so much 
dying with him !—Nay, thus too, if Catholicism, with 
and against Feudalism (but not against Nature and her 
bounty), gave us English a Shakspeare and Era of 
Shakspeare, and so produced a blossom of Catholicism 
—it was not till Catholicism itself, so far as Law could 
abolish it, had been abolished here. 

But of those decadent ages in which no Ideal either 
grows or blossoms? When Belief and Loyalty have 
passed away, and only the cant and false echo of them 
remains; and all Solemnity has become Pageantry ; 
and the Creed of persons in authority has become one 
of two things: an Imbecility or a Macchiavelism ? 
Alas, of these ages World-History can take no notice; 
they have to become compressed more and more, and 
finally suppressed in the Annals of Mankind; blotted 
out as spurious,—which indeed they are. Hapless 


aoe REALIZED IDEALS. 27 


ages: wherein, if ever in any, it is an unhappiness to 
be born. ''o be born, and to learn only, by every tra- 
dition and example, that God’s Universe is Belial’s 
and a Lie; and ‘the Supreme Quack’ the hierarch of 
men! In which mournfulest faith, nevertheless, do we 
not see whole generations (two, and sometimes even 
three successively) live, what they call living; and 
vanish,—without chance of reappearance ? 

In such a decadent age, or one fast verging that 
way, had our poor Louis been born. Grant also that 
if the French Kingship had not, by course of Nature, 
long to live, he of all men was the man to accelerate 
Nature. The Blossom of French Royalty, cactus-like, 
has accordingly made an astonishing progress. In 
those Metz days, it was still standing with all its 
petals, though bedimmed by Orleans Regents and 
Roué Ministers and Cardinals; but now, in 1774, we 
behold it bald, and the virtue nigh gone out of it. 


Disastrous indeed does it look with those same ‘ real- 


ized -ideals,’ one and all! The Church, which in its 
palmy season, seven hundred years ago, could make an 
Emperor wait barefoot, in penance-shirt, three days, in 
the snow, has for centuries seen itself decaying; re- 


duced even to forget old purposes and enmities, and~ 


join interest with the Kingship: on this younger 
strength it would fain stay its decrepitude; and these 
two will henceforth stand and fall together. Alas, the 
Sorbonne still sits there, in its old mansion ; but mum- 
bles only jargon of dotage, and no longer leads the 


\ ett 
—— 


28 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book 1. 
consciences of men: not the Sorbonne; it is Hneyclo- 
pédies, Philosophie, and who knows what. nameless 
innumerable multitude of ready Writers, profane Sing- 
ers, Romancers, Players, Disputators, and Pamphlet- 
eers, that now form the Spiritual Guidance of the 
world. The world’s Practical Guidance too is lost, or 
has glided into the same miscellaneous hands. Who is 
it that the King (Adle-man, named also Rot, Rex, or 
Director) now guides? His own huntsmen and prick- 
ers: when there is to be no hunt, it is well said, ‘ Le 
Roi ne fera rien (Today his Majesty will do nothing).’* 
He lives and lingers there, because he is living there, 
and none has yet laid hands on him. 

The nobles, in like manner, have nearly ceased 
either to guide or misguide; and are now, as their 
master is, little more than ornamental figures. It is 
long since they have done with butchering one another 
or their king: the Workers, protected, encouraged by 
Majesty, have ages ago built walled towns, and there 
ply their craft; will permit no Robber Baron to ‘live 
by the saddle,’ but maintain a gallows to prevent it. 
Ever since that period of the Fronde, the Noble has 
changed his fighting sword into a court rapier; and 
now loyally attends his king as ministering satellite ; 
divides the spoil, not now by violence and murder, but 
by soliciting and finesse. These men call themselves 
supports of the throne: singular gilt-pasteboard cary- 


1 Mémoires sur la Vie privée de Marie Antoinette, par Madame Cam- 
pan (Paris, 1826), i. 12. 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 29 
1744-74, 


atides in that singular edifice! For the rest, their 
privileges every way are now much curtailed. That 
Law authorizing a Seigneur, as he returned from| 
hunting, to kill not more than two Serfs, and refresh \ 
his feet in their warm blood and bowels, has fallen \ 
into perfect desuetude,—and even into incredibility ; 
for if Deputy Lapoule can believe in it, and call for 
the abrogation of it, so cannot we. No Charolois, 
for these last fifty years, though never so fond of 
shooting, has been in use to bring down slaters and 
plumbers, and see them roll from their roofs ;? but 
contents himself with partridges and grouse. Close- 
viewed, their industry and function is that of dressing 
gracefully and eating sumptuously. As for their 
debauchery and depravity, it is perhaps unexampled 
since the era of Tiberius and Commodus. Neverthe- 
less, one has still partly a feeling with the lady Maré- 
chale: ‘‘ Depend upon it, Sir, God thinks twice before 
damning aman of that quality.’’* These people, of~ 
old, surely had virtues, uses; or they could not have 
been there. Nay, one virtue they are still required 
to have (for mortal man cannot live without a con- 
science): the virtue of perfect readiness to fight duels. 

Such are the shepherds of the people: and now~ ~ 
how fares it with the flock? With the flock, as is 

2 Histoire de la Révolution Frangaise, par Deux Amis de la Liberté 
(Paris, 1792), ii. 212. 

3 Lacretelle: Histoire de France pendant le 18”° Siécle (Paris, 1819), 
neal, , 
£ Dulaure, vii. 261. 


Book 1. 
30 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. oe 


inevitable, it fares ill, and ever worse. They are not 
tended, they are only regularly shorn. They are sent 
for, to do statute-labor, to pay statute-taxes; to 
fatten battle-fields (named ‘bed of honor’) with their 
bodies, in quarrels which are not theirs; their hand 
and toil is in every possession of man; but for them- 
selves they have little or no possession. Untaught, 
uncomforted, unfed; to pine stagnantly in thick ob- 
scuration, in squalid destitution and obstruction: this 
is the lot of the millions; peuple taillable et corvéable 
a@ merci et miséricorde. In Brittany they once rose 
in revolt at the first introduction of Pendulum Clocks; 
thinking it had something to do with the Gabelle. 
Paris requires to be cleared out periodically by the 
Police; and the horde of hunger-stricken vagabonds 
to be sent wandering again over space—for a time. 
‘During one such periodical clearance,’ says Lacretelle, 
‘in May 1750, the Police had presumed withal to 
‘carry off some reputable people’s children, in the 
‘hope of extorting ransoms for them. The mothers 
‘fill the public places with cries of despair; crowds 
‘gather, get excited; so many women in distraction 
‘run about exaggerating the alarm: an absurd and 
‘horrid fable rises among the people; it is said that 
‘the doctors have ordered a Great Person to take 
‘baths of young human blood for the restoration of 
‘his own, all spoiled by debaucheries. Some of the 
‘rioters,’ adds Lacretelle, quite coolly, ‘were hanged 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 31 


‘on the following days:’ the Police went on.° O ye 
poor naked wretches! and this, then, is your inartic- 
ulate cry to Heaven, as of a dumb tortured animal, 
crying from uttermost depths of pain and debasement ? 
Do these azure skies, like a dead crystalline vault, 
only reverberate the echo of it on you? Respond to 
it only by ‘hanging on the following days’ ?—Not so: 
not forever! Ye are heard in Heaven. And the 
answer too will come,—in a horror of great darkness, 
and shakings of the world, and a cup of trembling 
which all the nations shall drink. 

Remark, meanwhile, how from amid the wrecks 
and dust of this universal Decay new Powers are 
fashioning themselves, adapted to the new time and 
its destinies. Besides the old Noblesse, originally of 
Fighters, there is.a- new recognized Noblesse of Law- 
yers; whose gala-day and proud battle-day even now 
is. An unrecognized Noblesse of Commerce; power- 
ful enough, with money in its pocket. Lastly, power- 
fulest of all, least recognized of all, a Noblesse of 
Literature; without steel on their thigh, without gold 
in their purse, but with the ‘grand _thaumaturgic 
faculty of Thought’ in their head. [Brench Philos- 
ophism has arisen; in which little word how much do 
we include! Here, indeed, lies properly the cardinal 
symptom of the whole wide-spread malady. Faith is 
gone out; Scepticism is come in. Evil abounds and 
accumulates; no man has Faith to withstand it, to 


5 Lacretelle, iii. 175. 


32 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 


1744-74. ~ 


amend it, to begin by amending himself; it must 
even go on accumulating. ] While hollow languor 
and vacuity is the lot of the Upper, and want and. 
stagnation of the Lower, and universal misery is very 
certain, what other thing is certain? That a Lie 
cannot be believed! / Philosophism knows only this: 
her other belief is mainly, that in spiritual supersen- 
sual matters no Belief is possible. Unhappy! Nay, 
as yet the Contradiction of a Lie is some kind 
of Belief; but the Lie with its Contradiction once 
swept away, what will remain? The five unsatiated 
Senses will remain, the sixth insatiable Sense (of 
vanity); the whole demonic nature of man will remain, 
—hurled forth to rage blindly without rule or rein; 
savage itself, yet with all the tools and weapons of 
civilization: a spectacle new in History. 

In such a France, as in a Powder-tower, where fire 
unquenched and now unquenchable is smoking and 
smouldering all round, has Louis XV. lain down to 
die. With Pompadourism and Dubarryism, his Fleur- 
de-lis has been shamefully struck down in all lands 
and on all seas; Poverty invades even the Royal 
Exchequer, and Tax-farming can squeeze out no 
more; there is a quarrel of twenty-five years’ stand- 
ing with the Parliament; everywhere Want, Dishon- 
esty, Unbelief, and hotbrained Sciolists for state-phy- 
sicians : it is a portentous hour. 

Such things can the eye of History see in this sick- 
room of King Louis, which were invisible to the 


Chap. II. REALIZED IDEALS. 33 
1744-74. 


Courtiers there. It is twenty years, gone Christmas- 
day, since Lord Chesterfield, summing up what he 
had noted of this same France, wrote, and sent off 
by post, the following words, that have become memor- 
able: ‘In short, all the symptoms which I have ever 
‘met with in History, previous to great Changes and 
‘Revolutions in government, now exist and daily 
‘increase in France.” 


6 Chesterfield’s Letters: December 25th, 1753. 
Vou. I.—3 - : 


CHAPTER III. 
VIATICUM. 


For the present, however, the grand question with 
the Governors of France is: Shall extreme unction, 
or other ghostly viaticum (to Louis, not to France), 
be administered ? 

It is a deep question. For, if administered, if so 
much as spoken of, must not, on the very threshold 
of the business, Witch Dubarry vanish; hardly to 
return ‘should Louis even recover? With her van- 
ishes Duke d’Aiguillon and Company, and all their 
Armida-Palace, as was said; Chaos swallows the 
whole again, and there is left nothing but a smell 
of brimstone. But then, on the other hand, what 
will the Dauphinists and Choiseulists say? Nay 
what may the royal martyr himself say, should he 
happen to get deadly worse, without getting delirious ? 
For the present, he still kisses the Dubarry hand; so 
we, from the anteroom, can note: but afterwards? 
Doctors’ bulletins may run as they are ordered, but 
it is ‘confluent small-pox,’—of which, as is whispered 
too, the Gatekeeper’s once so buxom Daughter lies 
ill: and Louis XV.-is not a man to be trifled with 
in his viaticum. Was he not wont to catechize his 

34 


Chap. eae VIATICUM. 35 


very girls in the Parc-aua-cerfs, and pray with and 
for them, that they might preserve their—orthodoxy ?} 
A strange fact, not an unexampled one; for there is 
no animal so strange as man. 

For the moment, indeed, it were all well, could 
Archbishop Beaumont but be prevailed upon—to wink 
with one eye! Alas, Beaumont would himself so fain 
do it: for, singular to tell, the Church too, and whole 
posthumous hope of Jesuitism, now hangs by the 
apron of this same unmentiénable woman. But then 
‘the force of public opinion’? Rigorous Christophe 
de Beaumont, who has spent his life in persecuting 
hysterical Jansenists and incredulous Non-confessors ; 
or even their dead bodies, if no better might be,— 
how shall he now open Heaven’s gate, and give Abso- 
lution with the corpus delicti still under his nose? 
Our Grand-Almoner Roche-Aymon, for his part, will 
not higgle with a royal sinner about turning of the 
key: but there are other Churchmen; there is a 
King’s Confessor, foolish Abbé Moudon; and Fanat- 
icism and Decency are not yet extinct. On the whole, 
what is to be done? The doors can be well watched ; 
the Medical Bulletin adjusted; and much, as usual, 
be hoped for from time and chance. 

The doors are well watched, no improper figure can 
enter. Indeed, few wish to enter; for the putrid 
infection reaches even to the Gil-de-Beuf; so that 
‘more than fifty fall sick, and ten die.’ Mesdames 


1 Dulaure (viii. 217); Besenval, &c. 


36 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Bo 


the Princesses alone wait at the loathsome sick-bed ; 
impelled by filial piety. The three Princesses, Grrazlle, 
Chiffe, Coche (Rag, Snip, Pig, as he was wont to name 
them), are assiduous there; when all have fled. The 
fourth Princess, Loque (Dud), as we guess, is already 
in the Nunnery, and can only give her orisons. Poor 
Graille and Sisterhood, they have never known a 
Father; such is the hard bargain Grandeur must 
make. Scarcely at the Débotter (when Royalty took 
off its boots) could they snatch up their ‘ enormous 
‘hoops, gird the long train round their waists, huddle 
‘on their black cloaks of taffeta up to the very chin;’ 
and so, in fit appearance of full dress, ‘every evening 
at six,’ walk majestically in; receive their royal kiss 
on the brow; and then walk majestically out again, to 
embroidery, small-scandal, prayers, and vacancy. If 
Majesty came some morning, with coffee of its own 
making, and swallowed it with them hastily while the 
dogs were uncoupling for the hunt, it was received as 
a grace of Heaven.” Poor withered ancient women ! 
in the wild tossings that yet await your fragile exist- 
ence, before it be crushed and broken; as ye fly 
through hostile countries, over tempestuous seas, are 
almost taken by the Turks; and wholly, in the Sans- 
culottic Earthquake, know not your right hand from 
your left, be this always an assured place in your 
remembrance: for the act was good and loving! To 


2 Campan, i. 11-36. 


Chap. III. VIATICUM. ; oe 
4/4, 


us also it is a little sunny spot, in that dismal howling 
waste, where we hardly find another. 

Meanwhile, what shall an impartial prudent Courtier 
do? In these delicate circumstances, while not only 
death or life, but even sacrament or no sacrament, is a 
question, the skilfulest may falter. Few are so happy as 
the Duke d’Orléans and the Prince de Condé; who can 
themselves, with volatile salts, attend the King’s ante- 
chamber; and, at the same time, send their brave 
sons (Duke de Chartres, Hyalité that is to be; Duke 
de Bourbon, one day Condé too, and famous among 
Dotards) to wait upon the Dauphin. With another 
few, it is a resolution taken; jacta est alea. Old 
Richelieu,—when Archbishop Beaumont, driven by 
public opinion, is at last for entering the sick-room,— 
will twitch him~by the rochet, into a recess; and 
there, with his old dissipated mastiff-face, and the 
oiliest vehemence, be seen pleading (and even, as we 
judge by Beaumont’s change of color, prevailing) 
‘that the King be not killed by a proposition in Divin- 
ity. 
his father: when the Curé of Versailles whimpers 


? 


Duke de Fronsac, son of Richelieu, can follow 


something about sacraments, he will threaten to ‘ throw 
him out of the window if he mention such a thing.’ 
Happy these, we may say; but to the rest that 
hover between two opinions, is it not trying? He who 
would understand to what a pass Catholicism, and much 
else, had now got ; and how the symbols of the Holiest 
have become gambling-dice of the Basest,—must read 


38 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
rah 2 


the narrative of those things by Besenval, and Soula- 
vie, and the other Court Newsmen of the time. He 
will see the Versailles Galaxy all scattered asunder, 
grouped into new ever-shifting Constellations. There 
are nods and sagacious glances ; go-betweens, silk dow- 
agers mysteriously gliding, with smiles for this constel- 
lation, sighs for that: there is tremor, of hope or des- 
peration, in several hearts. There is the pale grinning 
Shadow of Death, ceremoniously ushered along by 
another grinning Shadow, of Etiquette: at intervals 
the growl of Chapel Ogans, like prayer by machinery ; 
proclaiming, as in a kind of horrid diabolic horse- 
laughter, Vanity of vanities, all is Vanity! 


CHAPTER IV. | 


LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. 


Poor Louis! With these it is a hollow phantasma- 
gory, where like mimes they mope and mowl, and utter 
false sounds for hire; but’ with thee it is frightful 


earnest. 

Frightful to all men is Death; from of old named 
King of Terrors. Our little compact home of an Ex- 
istence, where we dwelt complaining, yet as in a home, 
is passing, in dark agonies, into an Unknown of Sep- 
aration, Foreignness, unconditioned Possibility. The 


. 
} 
\ 
} 
{ 
. 


| 


Heathen Emperor asks of his soul: Into what places | 


art thou now departing? The Catholic King must an- | 


swer: To the Judgment-bar of the Most High God!” 


Yes, it is a summing-up of Life; a final settling, and 
giving-in the ‘ account of the deeds done in the body: ’ 
they are done now; and lie there unalterable, and do 
bear their fruits, long as Eternity shall last. 


Louis XV. had always the kingliest abhorrence of. - 


Death. Unlike that praying Duke of Orleans, Ega- 
lités grandfather,—for indeed several of them had a 
touch of madness,—who honestly believed that there 
was no Death! He, if the Court Newsmen can be 


believed, started up once on a time, glowing with sul- 
39 


| 
H 


Be 


40 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
(is, 


phurous contempt and indignation on his poor Secre- 
tary, who had stumbled on the words, feu rot d’ Hspagne 
(the late King of Spain): ‘“ Pew rot, Monsieur ? ’— 
“« Monseigneur,”’ hastily answered the trembling but 
adroit man of business, ‘‘c’est une titre qwils prennent 
(‘tis a title they take).’’* Louis, we say, was not so 
happy; but he did what he could. He would not suf- 
fer Death to be spoken of; avoided the sight of church- 
yards, funereal monuments, and whatsoever could bring 
it to mind. It is the resource of the Ostrich; who, 
hard hunted, sticks his foolish head in the ground, and 
would fain forget that his foolish unseeing body is not 
unseen too. Or sometimes, with a spasmodic antag- 
onism, significant of the same thing, and of more, he 
would go; or stopping his court carriages, would send 
into churchyards, and ask ‘ how many new graves there 
were today,’ though it gave his poor Pompadour the 
disagreeablest qualms. We can figure the thought of 
Louis that day, when, all royally caparisoned for hunt- 
ing, he met, at some sudden turning in the Wood of 
Senart, a ragged Peasant with a coffin: ‘‘ For whom ?”’ 
—It was for a poor brother slave, whom Majesty had 
sometimes noticed slaving in those quarters. ‘‘ What 
did he die of ?’’—“ Of hunger: ’—the King gave his 
steed the spur.” 

But figure his thought, when Death is now clutching 
at his own heart-strings; unlooked for, inexorable! 
Yes, poor Louis, Death has found thee. No palace 


1 Besenval, i. 199. 2 Campan, iii. 39. 


ie el YT 
ere Cony ri 


er 


= *y 
om 

™ 

om” a 
ve 


a IV. LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. 41 


walls or life-guards, gorgeous tapestries or gilt buck- 
ram of stiffest ceremonial could keep him out; but he 
is here, here at thy very life-breath, and will extinguish 
it. Thou, whose whole existence hitherto was a chimera 
and scenic show, at length becomest a reality : sump- 
tuous Versailles bursts asunder, like a dream, into void 
Immensity ; Time is done, and all the scaffolding of 
Time falls wrecked with hideous clangor round thy 
soul: the pale Kingdoms yawn open; there must thou 
enter, naked, all unking’d, and await what is appointed 
thee! Unhappy man, there as thou turnest, in dull 
agony, on thy bed of weariness, what a thought is 
thine! Purgatory and Hell-fire, now all-too possible, 
in the prospect: in the retrospect,—alas, what thing 
didst thou do that were not better undone; what 
mortal didst thou generously help; what sorrow hadst 
thou mercy on? Do the ‘five hundred thousand’ 
ghosts, who sank shamefully on so many battle-fields 
from Rossbach to Quebec, that thy Harlot might take 
revenge for an epigram,—crowd round thee in this 
hour? Thy foul Harem; the curses of mothers, the 
tears and infamy of daughters? Miserable man! thou 
‘hast done evil as thou couldst:’ thy whole existence 
seems one hideous abortion and mistake of Nature; 
the use and meaning of thee not yet known. Wert thou 
a fabulous Griffin, devowring the works of men; daily 
dragging virgins to thy cave ;—clad also in scales that 
no spear would pierce: no spear but Death’s? A Grif- 
fin not fabulous but real! Frightful, O Louis, seem 


42 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 


these moments for thee.—We will pry no further into 
the horrors of a sinner’s deathbed. 


And yet let no meanest man lay flattering unction 
to his soul. Louis was a Ruler; but art not thou also 
one? His wide France, look at it from the Fixed 
Stars (themselves not yet Infinitude), is no wider than 
thy narrow brickfield, where thou too didst faithfully, 
or didst unfaithfully. Man, ‘Symbol of Eternity im- 
prisoned into Time!’ it is not thy works, which are 
all mortal, infinitely little, and the greatest no greater 
than the least, but only the Spirit thou workest in, that 
can have worth or continuance. 

But reflect, in any case, what a life-problem this of 
poor Louis, when he rose as Bien-Aimé from that Metz 
sick-bed, really was! What son of Adam could have 
swayed such incoherences into coherence? Could he? 
Blindest Fortune alone has cast him on the top of it: 
he swims there; can as little sway it as the drift-log 
sways the wind-tossed moon-stirred Atlantic. ‘“ What 
have I done to be so loved?” he said then. He may 
say now: What have I done to be so hated? Thou 
hast done nothing, poor Louis! Thy fault is properly 
even this, that thou didst nothing. What could poor 
Louis do? Abdicate, and wash his hands of it,—in 
favor of the first that would accept! Other clear 
wisdom there was none for him. As it was, he stood 
gazing dubiously, the absurdest mortal extant, a very 
Solecism Incarnate, into the absurdest confused world ; 


Chap. IV. LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. 43 


1774. 
—wherein at last nothing seemed so certain as this, 
That he, the incarnate Solecism, had five senses ; that 
there were Flying Tables (Tables Volantes, which van- 
ish through the floor, to come back reloaded), and a 
Pare-auz-cerfs. 

Whereby at least we have again this historical 
curiosity: a human being in an original position; 
swimming passively, as on some boundless ‘ Mother 
of Dead Dogs,\ towards issues which he partly saw. 
For Louis had withal a kind of insight in him. So, 
when a new Minister of Marine, or what else it might 
be, came announcing his new era, the Scarlet-woman 
would hear from the lips of Majesty at supper: ‘“ Yes, 
he spread out his ware like another; promised the 
beautifulest things in the world; not a thing of which 
will come: he does not know this region ; he will see.”’ 
Or again: “’Tis the twentieth time I have heard all 
that; France will never get a navy, I believe.” 
How touching also was this: “If J were Lieuten- 
ant of Police, I would prohibit those Paris cabri- 
olets.”’ 

Doomed mortal ;—for is it not a doom to be Sole- 
cism incarnate! A new Roi Fainéant, King Do- 
nothing; but with the strangest new Mayor of the 
Palace: no bow-legged Pepin now for Mayor, but 
that same cloud-capt, fire-breathing Spectre of DzE- 
MocRAcy; incalculable, which is enveloping the 
world !——Was Louis, then, no wickeder than this 


3 Journal de Madame de Hausset, p. 293, &e. 


44 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Bs 


or the other private Donothing and Eatall; such 
as we often enough see, under the name of Man 
of Pleasure, cumbering God’s diligent Creation, for 
a time? Say, wretcheder! His Life-solecism was 
seen and felt of a whole scandalized world; him end- 
less Oblivion cannot engulf, and swallow to endless 
depths,—not yet for a generation or two. 


However, be this as it will, we remark, not without 
interest, that ‘on the evening of the 4th,’ Dame 
Dubarry issues from the sick-room, with perceptible 
‘trouble in her visage.’ It is the fourth evening of 
May, year of Grace 1774. Such a whispering in the 
-GHil-de-Boeuf! Is he dying, then? What canbe 
said is, that Dubarry seems making up her packages ; 
she sails weeping through her gilt boudoirs, as if tak- 
ing leave. D’Aiguillon and Company are near their 
last card; nevertheless they will not yet throw up the 
game. But as for the sacramental controversy, it is 
as good as settled without being mentioned; Louis 
sends for his Abbé Moudon in the course of next 
night; is confessed by him, some say for the space 
of ‘seventeen minutes,’ and demands the sacraments 
of his own accord. 

Nay already, in the afternoon, behold is not this 
your Sorceress Dubarry with the handkerchief at her 
eyes, mounting D’Aiguillon’s chariot; rolling off in 
his Duchess’s consolatory arms? She is gone: and 
her place knows her no more. Vanish, false Sor- 


Chap. IV. LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. 45 


1774. 

ceress; into Space! Needless to hover at neighbor- 
ing Ruel; for thy day is done. Shut are the royal 
palace-gates for evermore; hardly in coming years 
shalt thou, under cloud of night, descend once, in 
black domino, like a black night-bird, and disturb 
the fair Antoinette’s music-party in the Park; all 
Birds of Paradise flying from thee, and musical 
windpipes growing mute. Thou unclean, yet un- 
malignant, not unpitiable thing! What a course 
was thine: from that first trucklebed (in Joan of 
Arc’s country) where thy mother bore thee, with 
tears to an unnamed father: forward, through lowest 
subterranean depths, and over highest sunlit heights, 
of Harlotdom and Rascaldom—to the guillotine-axe, 
which shears away thy vainly whimpering head! 
Rest there uncursed; only buried and abolished: 
what else befitted thee? 

Louis, meanwhile, is in considerable impatience for 
his sacraments; sends more than once to the window, 
to see whether they are not coming. Be of comfort, 
Louis, what comfort thou canst: they are under way, 
those sacraments. Towards six in the morning, they 
arrive. - Cardinal Grand-Almoner Roche-Aymon is 
here in pontificals, with his pyxes and his tools: he 
approaches the royal pillow; elevates his wafer ; 
mutters or seems to mutter somewhat ;—and so (as 
the Abbé Georgel, in words that stick to one, ex- 
presses it) has Louis ‘made the amende honorable to 


4 Campan, i. 197. 


46 DEATH OF LOUIS XY. Bowel: 
God:’ so does your Jesuit construe it.—‘* Wa, Wa,” 
as the wild Clotaire groaned out, when life was de- 
parting, ‘‘what great God is this that pulls down the 
strength of the strongest kings+’’® 

The amende honorable, what ‘legal apology’ you 
will, to God:—but not, if D’Aiguillon can help it, 
to man. Dubarry still hovers in his mansion at 
Ruel; and while there is life, there is hope. Grand- 
Almoner Roche-Aymon, accordingly (for he seems to 
be in the secret), has no sooner seen his pyxes and 
gear repacked, than he is stepping majestically forth 
again, as if the work were done! But King’s Con- 
fessor Abbé Moudon starts forward; with anxious 
acidulent face, twitches him by the sleeve; whispers 
in his ear. Whereupon the poor Cardinal has. to turn 
round; and declare audibly, “that his Majesty re- 
pents of any subjects of scandal he may have given 
(a pu donner); and purposes, by the strength of 
Heaven assisting him, to avoid the like—for the 
future !’’ Words listened to by Richelieu with mas- 
tiff-face, growing blacker; and answered to, aloud, 
‘with an epithet,’—which Besenval will not repeat. 
Old Richelieu, conqueror of Minorca, companion of 
Flying-Table orgies, perforator of bed-room walls,® 
is thy day also done? 

Alas, the Chapel organs may keep going; the 
Shrine of Sainte Geneviéve be let down, and pulled 


> Gregorius Turonensis: Histor. lib. iv. cap. 21. 
6 Besenval, i. 159-172. Genlis; Duc de Leyis, &e. 


Chap. IV. q) i v 
scat ha aa LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. AT 


up again,—without effect. In the evening the whole 
Court, with Dauphin and Dauphiness, assist at the 
Chapel: priests are hoarse with chanting their 
‘Prayers of Forty Hours;’ and the heaving bellows 
blow. Almost frightful! For the “very heaven 
blackens; battering rain-torrents dash, with thunder ; 
almost drowning the organ’s voice: and electric fire- 
flashes make the very flambeaux on the altar pale. 
So that the most, as we are told, retired, when it was, 
over, with hurried steps, ‘in ‘a state of meditation 
(recueillement),’ and said little or nothing.’ 

So it has lasted for the better half of a fortnight; 
the Dubarry gone almost a week. Besenval says, all 
the world was getting impatient que cela finit; that 
poor Louis would have done with it. Itis now the 
10th of May 1774: He will soon have done now. 

This tenth May day falls into the loathsome sick- 
bed; but dull, unnoticed there: for they that look 
out of the windows are quite darkened; the cistern- 
wheel moves discordant on its axis; Life, like a spent 
steed, is panting towards the goal. In their remote 
apartments, Dauphin and Dauphiness stand road- 
ready ; all grooms and equerries booted and spurred : 
waiting for some signal to escape the house of pesti- 
lence. And, hark! across the (Miil-de-Boeuf, what 


™ Weber: Mémoires concernant Marie Antoinette (London 1809), i. 22. 
8 One grudges to interfere with the beautiful theatrical ‘candle,’ 
which Madame Campan (i. 79) has lit on this occasion, and blown 
out, at the moment of death. What candles might be lit or blown 
out, in so large an Establishment as that of Versailles, no man at 


48 DEATH OF LOUIS XV. Book I. 
10th May 1774. 


sound is that; sound ‘terrible and absolutely like 
thunder’? It is the rush of the whole Court, rush- 
ing as in wager, to salute the new Sovereigns: Hail 
to your Majesties! The Dauphin and Dauphiness 
are King and Queen! Overpowered with many 
emotions, they two fall on their knees together, and, 
with streaming tears, exclaim, “*O God, guide us, 
protect us; we are too young to reign!’’—Too young 
indeed. 

But thus, in any case, ‘ with a sound absolutely like 
thunder,’ has the Horologe of Time struck, and an 
old Era passed away. The Louis that was, lies for- 
saken, a mass of abhorred clay; abandoned ‘to some 
poor persons, and priests of the Chapelle Ardente,’— 
who make haste to put him ‘in two lead coffins, pour- 
ing in abundant spirits of wine. The new Louis 
with his Court is rolling towards Choisy, through the 
summer afternoon: the royal tears still flow; but 
a word mispronounced by Monseigneur d’ Artois sets 
them all laughing, and they weep no more. Light 
mortals, how ye walk your light life-minuet, over 
bottomless abysses, divided from you by a film! 


For the rest, the proper authorities felt that no 


such distance would like to affirm: at the same time, as it was two 
o’clock in a May Afternoon, and these royal Stables must have been 
some five or six hundred yards from the royal sick-room, the ‘can- 
dle’ does threaten to go out in spite of us. It remains burning in- 


deed—in her fantasy ; throwing light on much in those Mémoires 
of hers. 


Chap. IV. i 
Aes an LOUIS THE UNFORGOTTEN. 49 


Funeral could be too unceremonious. Besenval him- 
self thinks it was unceremonious enough. ‘Two car- 
riages containing two noblemen of the usher species, 
and a Versailles clerical person; some score of 
mounted pages, some fifty palfreniers: these, with 
torches, but not so much as in black, start from Ver- 
sailles on the second evening, with their leaden bier. 
At a high trot they start; and keep up that pace. 
For the jibes (brocards) of those Parisians, who stand 
planted in two rows, all the way to St. Denis, and 
‘give vent to their pleasantry, the characteristic of 
the nation,’ do not tempt one to slacken. Towards 
midnight the vaults of St. Denis receive their own: 
unwept by any eye of all these; if not by poor 
Loque his neglected daughter’s, whose Nunnery is 
hard by. ny 

Him they crush down, and huddle under-ground, 
in this impatient way; him and his era of sin and 
tyranny and shame: for behold a New Era is come; 


the future all the brighter that the past was base. 
Vou. I.—4 


* 
2 


Z 


BOOK IL. 2 
THE PAPER AGH. a a 


pr 


gee 
¥ i et 7 
Fee’ 


CHAPTER I: 
ASTREA REDUX. 


A PARADOXICAL philosopher, carrying to the utter- 
most length that aphorism of Montesquieu’s, ‘ Happy 
the people whose annals are tiresome,’ has said, “Happy 
the people whose annals are vacant.’ | In which say- 
ing, mad as it looks, may there not still be found some 
grain of reason? For truly, as it has been written, 
‘ Silence 1 is divine,’ and of f Heav en; so in all earthly 
things | too there is a lence which is better than any 
speech. Consider it well, the Event, the thing which 
can be spoken of and recorded, is it not, in all cases, 
some disruption, some solution of continuity? Were 
it even a glad Event, it involves change, involves loss 
(of active Force); and so far, either in the past, or 
in the present, is an irregularity, a disease. Stillest 
perseverance were our blessedness; not dislocation 
and alteration,—could they be avoided. 

The oak grows silently, in the forest, a thousand 
years; only in the thousandth year, when the wood- 
man arrives with his axe, is there heard an echoing 
through the solitudes; and the oak announces itself, 
when, with far-sounding crash, it falls. How silent 


too was the planting of the acorn; scattered from the 
53 


54 THE PAPER AGE. Book II. 
1774-84. 


lap of some wandering wind! Nay, when our oak 
flowered, or put on its leaves (its glad Events), what 
shout of proclamation could there be? Hardly from 
the most observant a word of recognition. These 
things befell not, they were slowly done ; not in an 
hour, but through the flight of days: what was to be 
said of it? This hour seemed Seer as the last 
was, as the next would be. 

It is thus everywhere that foolish Rumor babbles 
not of what was done, but of what was misdone or 
undone; and foolish History (ever, more or less, the 
written epitomized synopsis of Rumor) knows so 
little that were not as well unknown. Attila Inva- 
sions, Walter-the-Penniless Crusades, Sicilian Vespers, 
Thirty-Years Wars: mere sin and misery; not work, 
but hindrance of work! For the Earth, all this while, 
was yearly green and yellow with her kind harvests ; 
the hand of the craftsman, the mind of the thinker 
rested not: and so, after all, and in spite of all, we 
have this so glorious high-domed blossoming World; 
concerning which, poor History may well ask, with 
wonder, Whence 7t came? She knows so little 6f it, 
knows so much of what obstructed it, what would have 
rendered it impossible. Such, nevertheless, by neces- 
sity or foolish choice, is her rule and practice; whereby 
that paradox, ‘Happy the people whose annals are 
vacant,’ is not without its true side. 


And yet, what seems more pertinent to note here, 


Chap. I. eee 
Chap. 1 ASTR/A REDUX. 55 


there is a stillness, not of unobstructed growth, but 
of passive inertness, the symptom of imminent down- 
fall. As victory is silent, so is defeat. Of the oppos- 
ing forces the weaker has resigned itself; the stronger 
marches on, noiseless now, but rapid, inevitable: the 
fall and overturn will not be noiseless. How all grows, 
and has its period, even as the herbs of the fields, be 
it annual, centennial, millennial! All grows and dies, 
each by its own wondrous laws, in wondrous fashion 
of its own; spiritual things most wondrously of all. 
Inscrutable, to the wisest, are these latter; not to be 
prophesied of, or understood. If when the oak stands 
proudliest flourishing to the eye, you know that its 
heart is sound, it is not so with the man; how much 
less with the Society, with the Nation of men! Of 
such it may be affirmed even that the superficial aspect, 
that the inward feeling of full health, is generally 
ominous. For indeed it is of apoplexy, so to speak, 
and a plethoric lazy habit of body, that Churches, 
Kingships, Social Institutions, oftenest die. Sad, 
when such Institution plethorically says to itself, Take 
thy ease, thou hast goods laid up;—like the fool of 
the Gospel, to whom it was answered, Fool, this night 
thy life shall be required of thee! om 
Is it the healthy peace, or the ominous unhealthy, 
that rests on France, for these next Ten Years? Over 
which the Historian can pass lightly, without call to 
linger: for as yet events are not, much less perform- 
ances. ‘Time of sunniest stillness ;—shall we call it, 


9 Book II. 
56 THE PAPER AGE 3ook IT. 


what all men thought it, the new Age of Gold? Call 
it at least, of Paper; which in many ways is the suc- 
cedaneum of Gold. Bank-paper, wherewith you can 
still buy when there is no gold left ; Book-paper, splen- 
dent with Theories, Philosophies, Sensibilities,—beau- 
tiful art, not only of revealing thought, but also of so 
beautifully hiding from us the want of Thought!. 
Paper is made from the rags of things that did once 
exist ; there are endless excellences in Paper.—What 
wisest Philosophe, in this haleyon uneventful period, 
could prophesy that there was approaching, big with 
darkness and confusion, the event of events? Hope 


ushers in a Revolution,—as earthquakes are preceded 
by bright weather. On the Fifth of May, fifteen 
years hence, old Louis will not be sending for the Sac- 
raments; but a new Louis, his grandson, with the 
whole pomp of astonished intoxicated France, will be 
opening the States-General. 


Dubarrydom and its D’Aiguillons are gone forever. 
There is a young, still docile, well-intentioned King ; 
a young, beautiful and bountiful, well-intentioned 
Queen ; and with them all France, as it were, become 
young. Maupeou and his Parlement have to vanish 
into thick night; respectable Magistrates, not indif- 
ferent to the Nation, were it only for having been op- 
ponents of the Court, descend now unchained from 
their ‘steep rocks at Croe in Combrailles’ and else- 
where, and return singing praises: the old Parlement 


are 


Chap. I. ASTRA REDUX. 57 
1774-84. 


of Paris resumes its functions. Instead of a profligate 
bankrupt Abbé Terray, we have now, for Controller- 
General, a virtuous philosophic Turgot, with a whole 
Reformed France in his head. By whom whatsoever 
is wrong, in Finance or otherwise, will be righted,—as 
far as possible. Is it not as if Wisdom herself were 
henceforth to have seat and voice in the Council of 
Kings? Turgot has taken office with the noblest plain- 
ness of speech to that effect; been listened to with the 
noblest royal trustfulness.! It is true, as King Louis 
objects, “ They say he never goes to mass ;”’ but lib- 
eral France likes him little worse for that; liberal 
France answers, “The Abbé Terray always went.” 
Philosophism sees, for the first time, a Philosophe (or 
even a Philosopher) in office: she in all things will 


-applausively second-him ; neither will light old Mau- 


repas obstruct, if he can easily help it. 

Then how ‘sweet’ are the manners; vice ‘losing all 
its deformity ;’ becoming decent (as established things, 
making regulations - for themselves, do); becoming 
almost a kind of ‘sweet’ virtue! Intelligence so 
abounds; irradiated by wit and the art of conversa- 
tion. Philosophism sits joyful in her glittering saloons, 
the dinner-guest of Opulence grown ingenuous, the 
very nobles proud to sit by her; and preaches, lifted 
up over all Bastilles, a coming millennium. From far 
Ferney, Patriarch Voltaire gives sign: veterans Di- 


1 Turgot’s Letter: Condorcet, Vie de Turgot (Gwvres de Condorcet, 
t, v.), p. 67. The date is 24th August 1774. 


58 THE PAPER AGE. Book II. 
1774-84. 


derot, D’Alembert have lived to see this day ; these with 
their younger Marmontels, Morellets, Chamforts, Ray- 
nals, make glad the spicy board of rich ministering 
Dowager, of philosophic Farmer-General. O nights 
and suppers of the gods! Of a truth, the long-dem- 
onstrated will now be done: ‘the Age of Revolutions 
approaches ’ (as Jean Jacques wrote), but then of happy 
blessed ones. Man awakens from his long somnambu- 
lism ; chases the Phantasms that beleaguered and be- 
witched him. Behold the new morning glittering 
down the eastern steeps; fly, false Phantasms, from 
its shafts of light; let the Absurd fly utterly, forsak- 
ing this lower Earth forever. It is Truth and Astrea 
Redux that (in the shape of Philosophism) henceforth 
reign. For what imaginable purpose was man made, 
if not to be ‘happy’! By victorious Analysis, and 
Progress of the Species, happiness enough now awaits 
him. Kings can become philosophers; or else phil- 
osophers Kings. Let but Society be once rightly con- 
stituted,—by victorious Analysis. The stomach that 
is empty shall be filled; the throat that is dry shall be 
wetted with wine. Labor itself shall be all one as 
rest; not grievous, but joyous. Wheat-fields, one 
would think, cannot come to grow untilled; no man 
made clayey, or made weary thereby ;—unless indeed 
machinery will do it? Gratuitous Tailors and Restau- 
rateurs may start up, at fit intervals, one as yet sees 
not how. But if each will, according to rule of Be- 
nevolence, have a care for all, then surely—no one will 


Chap. I. ASTRAA REDUX. 59 
1774-04, 


be uncared for. Nay, who knows but, by sufficiently 
victorious Analysis, ‘human life may be indefinitely 
— lengthened,’ and men get rid of Death, as they have 
already done of the Devil? We shall then be happy 
in spite of Death and the Devil.—So preaches magnil- 
oquent Philosophism her Redewnt Saturnia regna. 

The prophetic song of Paris and its Philosophes is 
audible enough in the Versailles Cil-de-Boeuf; and 
the Ciil-de-Boeuf, intent chiefly on nearer blessedness, 
can answer, at worst, with a polite, “Why not?” 
Good old cheery Maurepas is too joyful a Prime Min- 
ister to dash the world’s joy. Sufficient for the day be 
its own evil. Cheery old man, he cuts his jokes, and 
hovers careless along; his cloak well adjusted to the 
wind, if so be he may please all persons. “The simple 
young King, whom-a Maurepas cannot think of troub- 
ling with business, has retired into the interior apart- 
ments, taciturn, irresolute; though with a sharpness 
of temper at times: he, at length, determines on a 
little smith-work ; and so, in apprenticeship with a 
Sieur Gamain (whom one day he shall have little cause 
to bless), is learning to make locks.’ It appears fur- 
ther, he understood Geography ; and could read Eng- 
lish. Unhappy young King, his childlike trust in 
that foolish old Maurepas deserved another return. 
But friend and foe, destiny and himself have combined 
to do him hurt. 

Meanwhile the fair young Queen, in her halls of 


2 Campan, i. 125. 


60 THE PAPER AGE. Book IT. 
1774-84. 


state, walks like a goddess of Beauty, the cynosure of 
all eyes; as yet mingles not with affairs ;heeds not the 
future; least of all, dreads it. Weber and Campan* 
have pictured her, there within the royal tapestries, in 
bright boudoirs, baths, peignoirs, and the Grand and 
Little Toilette; with a whole brilliant world waiting 
obsequious on her glance: fair young daughter of 
Time, what things has Time in store for thee! Like 
Earth’s brightest Appearance, she moves gracefully, 
environed with the grandeur of Earth: a reality, and 
yet a magic vision; for, behold, shall not utter Dark- 
ness swallow it! The soft young heart adopts orphans, 
portions meritorious maids, delights to succor the poor, 
—such poor as come picturesquely in her way; and 
sets the fashion of doing it; for, as was said, Benev- 
olence has now begun reigning. In her Duchess de 
Polignac, in her Princess de Lamballe, she enjoys 
something almost like friendship: now too, after seven 
long years, she has a child, and soon even a Dauphin, 
of her own; can reckon herself, as Queens go, happy 
in a husband. 

Events? The grand events are but charitable 
Feasts of Morals (Fétes des meeurs), with their Prizes 
and Speeches; Poissarde Processions to the Dauphin’s 
cradle; above all, Flirtations, their rise, progress, de- 
cline and fall. There are snow-statues raised by the 
poor in hard winter, to a Queen who has given them 
fuel. There are masquerades, theatricals; beautify- 


3 Tb. i. 100-151. Weber, i. 11-50. 


Chap. I. ASTRAA REDUX. 61 
1774-84, 


ings of little Trianon, purchase and repair of St. 
Cloud; journeyings from the summer Court-Elysium 
to the winter one. There are poutings and grudgings 
from the Sardinian Sisters-in-law (for the Princes too 
are wedded); little jealousies, which Court-Etiquette 
can moderate. Wholly the lightest-hearted frivolous 
foam of Existence; yet an artfully refined foam; 
pleasant were it not so costly, like that which mantles 
on the wine of Champagne! 

Monsieur, the King’s elder Brother, has set up 
for a kind of wit; and leans towards the Philosophe 
side. Monseigneur d’Artois pulls the mask from 
a fair impertinent; fights a duel in consequence,— 
almost drawing blood.* He has breeches of a kind 
new in this world;—a fabulous kind; ‘four tall 
‘lackeys,’ says Mercier, as if he had seen it, ‘hold 
‘him up in the air, that he may fall into the garment 
‘without vestige of wrinkle; from which rigorous en- 
‘casement the same four, in the same way, and with 
‘more effort, have to deliver him at night.’® This 
last is he who now, as a gray timeworn man, sits des- 
olate at Gratz;® having winded up his destiny with 
the Three Days. In such sort are poor mortals swept 
and shovelled to and fro. 


4 Besenval, ii. 282-330. 
5 Mercier: Nouveau Paris, iii. 147. 
6 4. D. 1834, 


CHAPTER II. 
PETITION IN HIEROGLYPHS. 


Wirtu the working people, again, it is not so well. 
Unlucky! For there are from twenty to twenty-five 
millions of them. Whom, however, we lump together 
into a kind of dim compendious unity, monstrous but 
dim, far off, as the canaille; or, more humanely, as 
‘the masses.’ Masses indeed: and yet, singular to 
say, if, with an effort of imagination, thou follow 
them, over broad France, into their clay hovels, into 
their garrets and hutches, the masses consist all of 
units. Every unit of whom has his own heart and 
sorrows; stands covered there with his own skin, 
and if you prick him he will bleed. O purple Sover- 
eignty, Holiness, Reverence; thou, for example, Car- 
dinal Grand-Almoner, with thy plush covering of 
honor, who hast thy hands strengthened with digni-— 
ties and moneys, and art set on thy world watch- 
tower solemnly, in sight of God, for such ends,— 
what a thought: that every unit of these masses is 
a miraculous Man, even as thou thyself art; strug- 
gling, with vision or with blindness, for Ais infinite 
Kingdom (this life which he has got, once only, in 
the Middle of Eternities); with a spark of the Divin- 


ity, what thou callest an immortal soul, in him! 
62 


at 


fue PETITION IN HIEROGLYPHS. 63 


Dreary, languid do these struggle in their obscure 
remoteness; their hearth cheerless, their diet thin. 


For them, in this world, rises no Era of Hope; hardly 


now in the other,—if it be not hope in the gloomy 
rest of Death, for their faith too is failing. Untaught, 
uncomforted, unfed! A dumb generation; their voice 
only an inarticulate cry: spokesman, in the King’s 
Council, in the world’s forum, they have none that 
finds credence. At rare intervals (as now, in 1775), 
they will fling down their hoes and hammers; and, to 
the astonishment of thinking mankind,’ flock hither 
and thither, dangerous, aimless; get the length even 


-of Versailles. Turgot is altering the Corn-trade, 


abrogating the absurdest Corn-laws; there is dearth, 


real, or were it even ‘ factitious ;’ an indubitable scar- 


city of bread. And so, on the second day of May 
1775, these waste multitudes do here, at Versailles 
Chateau, in wide-spread wretchedness, in sallow faces, 
squalor, winged raggedness, present, as in legible 
hieroglyphic writing, their Petition of Grievances. , 
The Chateau gates have to be shut; but the King 
will appear on the balcony, and speak to them. They 
have seen the King’s face; their Petition of Griev- 
ances has been, if not read, looked at. For answer, 
two of them are hanged, on a ‘new gallows forty feet 
high;’ and the rest driven back to their dens,—for 
a time. 


1 Qacretelle: France pendant le 18”° Siccle, ii. 455. Biographie 
Universelle, 7 Turgot (by Durozoir). 


64 THE PAPER AGE. Book IT. 
1774-84. 


Clearly a difficult ‘point’ for Government, that of 
dealing with these masses ;—if indeed rt be not rather 
the sole point and problem of Government, and all 
other points mere accidental crotchets, superficialities, 
and beatings of the wind! For let Charter-Chests, 
Use and Wont, Law common and special say what 
they will, the masses count to so many millions of 
units; made, to all appearance, by God,—whose 
Earth this is declared to be. Besides, these people 
are not without ferocity ; they have sinews and indig- 
nation. Do but look what holiday old Marquis 
Mirabeau, the crabbed. old Friend of Men, looked 
on, in these same years, from his lodging, at the. 
Baths of Mont d’Or: ‘The savages descending in 
‘torrents from the mountains; our people ordered not 
‘to go out. The Curate in surplice and stole; Justice 
‘in its peruke; Marechausée sabre in hand, guarding 
‘the place, till the bagpipes can begin. The dance 
‘interrupted, in a quarter of an hour, by battle; the 
‘cries, the squealings of children, of infirm persons, 
‘and other assistants, tarring them on, as the rabble 
‘does when dogs fight: frightful men, or rather fright- 
‘ful wild-animals, clad in jupes of coarse woollen, with 
‘large girdles of leather studded -with copper nails; 
‘of gigantic stature, heightened by high wooden-clogs 
‘(sabots); rising on tiptoe to see the fight; tramp- 
‘ing time to it: rubbing their sides with their 
‘elbows: their faces haggard (figures hdves), and 
‘covered with their long greasy hair; the upper part 


coepeas. PETITION IN HIEROGLYPHS. 65 
(14-04. 


‘of the visage waxing pale, the lower distorting itself 
‘into the attempt at a cruel laugh and a sort of 
‘ferocious impatience. And these people pay the 
‘taille! And you want further to take their salt 
‘from them! And you know not what it is you are 
‘stripping barer, or as you call it, governing; what, 
‘by the spurt of your pen, in its cold dastard indiffer- 
‘ence, you will fancy you can starve always with 
‘impunity; always till the catastrophe come !—Ah 
‘Madame, such Government by Blindman’s-buff, stum- 
‘bling along too far, will end in the General Overturn 
‘(culbute générale).’ * 
Undoubtedly a dark feature this in an Age of 
Gold,—Age, at least, of Paper and Hope! Mean- 
while, trouble us not with thy prophecies, O croaking 
Friend of Men: ’tis long that we have heard such; 
and still the old world keeps wagging, in its old 
way. 

2 Mémoires de Mirabeau, écrits par Lui-méme, par son Pére, son 


Oncle et son Fils Adoptif- (Paris, 1834-5), ii. 186. 
Vox. I.—5 


CHAPTER III. 
QUESTIONABLE. 


Or is this same Age of Hope itself but a simula- 
crum; as Hope too often is? Cloud-vapor with 
rainbows painted on it, beautiful to see, to sail to- 
wards,—which hovers over Niagara Falls? In that 
case, victorious Analysis will have enough to do. 
(Alas, yes! a whole world to remake, if she could 
see it: work for another than she! For all is wrong, 
and gone out of joint; the inward spiritual, and the 
outward economical; head or heart, there is no sound- 
ness in it. As indeed, evils of all sorts are more or 
less of kin, and do usually go together: especially it 
is an old truth, that wherever huge physical evil is, 
there, as the parent and origin of it, has moral evil 
to a proportionate extent been. Before those five- 
and-twenty laboring Millions, for instance, could get 
that haggardness of face, which old Mirabeau now 
looks on, in a Nation calling itself Christian, and 
calling man the brother of man,—what unspeakable, 
nigh infinite Dishonesty (of seeming and not being) in 
all manner of Rulers, and appointed Watchers, spirit- 
ual and temporal, must there not, through long ages, 


have gone on accumulating! It will accumulate: 
66 


Chap. III. QUESTIONABLE. 67 
1774-84. 


moreover, it will reach a head; for the first of all 
Gospels is this, that a Lie cannot endure forever. 

-In fact, if we pierce through that rosepink vapor 
of Sentimentalism, Philanthropy, and Feasts of 
Morals, there lies behind it one of the sorriest spec- 
tacles. You might ask, What bonds that ever held a 
human society happily together, or held it together at 
all, are in force here? It is an unbelieving people; 
which has suppositions, hypotheses, and froth-systems 
of victorious Analysis ; and for belief this mainly, that 
Pleasure is pleasant. Hunger they have for all sweet 
things; and the law of Hunger: but what other law? 
Within them, or over them, properly none! 

Their King has become a King Popinjay: with his;~ 
Maurepas Government, gyrating as the weather-cock 
does, blown about by every wind. Above them they 
see no God; or they even do not look above, except 
with astronomical glasses. The Church indeed still _ 
is; but in the most submissive state; quite tamed by - 
Philosophism ; in a singularly short time; for the hour 
was come. Some twenty years ago, your Archbishop 
Beaumont would not even let the poor Jansenists get 
buried: your Loménie Brienne (a rising man, whom 
we shall meet with yet) could, in the name of the 
Clergy, insist on having the Antiprotestant Laws, 
which condemn to death for preaching, ‘put in exe- 
cution.”! And alas, now not so much as Baron Hol- 
bach’s Atheism can be burnt,—except as pipe-matches 


1 Boissy d’Anglas: Vie de Malesherbes, 1. 15-22. 


; Book II. 
68 THE PAPER AGE ooret 


by the private speculative individual. Our Church 
stands haltered, dumb, like a dumb ox ;~lowing only 
for provender (of tithes); content if it can have that ; 
or, with dumb stupor, expecting its further doom. 
And the Twenty Millions of ‘haggard faces;’ and, 
as finger-post and guidance to them in their dark 
struggle, ‘a gallows forty feet high’! Certainly a 
singular. Golden Age; with its Feasts of Morals, its 
‘sweet manners,’ its sweet institutions (instituteons 
douces); betokening nothing but peace among men! 
—Peace? O Philosophe-Sentimentalism, what hast 
thou to do with peace, when thy mother’s name is 
Jezebel? Foul Product of still fouler Corruption, 
thou with the corruption art doomed ! 


Meanwhile it is singular how long the rotten will 
hold together, provided you do not handle it roughly. 
For whole generations it continues standing, ‘with a 
ghastly affectation of life,’ after all life and truth has 
fled out of it: so loth are men to quit their old ways; 
and, conquering indolence and inertia, venture on new. 
Great truly is the Actual; is the Thing that has res- 
cued itself from bottomless deeps of theory and pos- 
sibility, and stands there as a definite indisputable 
Fact, whereby men do work and live, or once did so. 
Wisely shall men cleave to that, while it will endure ; 
and quit it with regret, when it gives way under them. 
Rash enthusiast of Change, beware! Hast thou well 


Chap. IIT. QUESTIONABLE. 69 
1774-84, 


considered all that Habit does in this life of ours; 
how all Knowledge and all Practice hang wondrous 
over infinite abysses of the Unknown, Impracticable; 
and our whole being is an infinite abyss, overarched 
by Habit, as by a thin Karth-rind, laboriously built 
together ? 

But if ‘every man,’ as it has been written, holds 
confined within him a mad-man,’ what must every 
Society do;—Society, which in its commonest state 
is called ‘the ‘standing miracle of this world’! 
‘Without such Earth-rind of Habit,’ continues our 
author, ‘call it System of Habits, in a word, fixed 
‘ways of acting and of believing,—Society would not 
‘exist at all. With such it exists, better or worse. 
‘Herein too, in this its System of Habits, acquired, 
‘retained how you will, lies the true Law-Code and 
‘Constitution of a Society; the only Code, though 
‘an unwritten one, which it can in no wise disobey. 
‘The thing we call written Code, Constitution, Form 
‘of Government, and the like, what is it but some 
‘miniature image, and solemnly expressed summary 
‘of this unwritten Code? Js,—or rather, alas, is 
‘not ; but only should be, and always tends to be! 
‘In which latter discrepancy lies struggle without 
‘end.’ And now, we add in the same dialect, let 
but, by ill chance, in such ever-enduring struggle, 
—your ‘thin Earth-rind’ be once broken! The 
fountains of the great deep boil forth; fire-fountains, 
enveloping, engulfing. Your ‘Earth-rind’” is  shat- 


fod +. Book II. 
70 THE PAPER AGE porn 


tered, swallowed up; instead of a green flowery 
world, there is a waste wild-weltering chaos; which 
has again, with tumult and struggle, to make itself 
into a world. 

On the other hand, be this conceded: Where thou 
findest a Lie that is oppressing thee, extinguish it. 
Lies exist there only to be extinguished; they wait 
and cry earnestly for extinction. Think well, mean- 
while, in what spirit thou wilt do it: not with hatred, 
with headlong selfish violence; but in clearness of 
heart, with holy zeal, gently, almost with pity. Thou 
wouldst not replace such extinct Lie by a new Lie, 
which a new Injustice of thy own were; the parent 
of still other Lies? Whereby the latter end of that 
business were worse than the beginning. 

So, however, in this world of ours, which has both 
an indestructible hope in the Future, and an indestruct- 
ible tendency to persevere .as in the Past, must Inno- 
vation and Conservation wage their perpetual conflict, 
as they may and can. Wherein the ‘ demonic element,’ 
that lurks in all human things, may doubtless, some 
once in the thousand years,—get vent! But indeed 
may we not regret that such conflict,—which, after all, 
is but like that classical one of ‘hate-filled Ama- 
zons with heroic Youths,’ and will end in embraces,— 
should usually be so spasmodic? For Conservation, 
strengthened by that mightiest quality in us, our in- 
dolence, sits for long ages, not victorious only, which 
she should be; but tyrannical, incommunicative. She 


Chap. It. QUESTIONABLE. CE. 
1774-84. 


holds her adversary as if annihilated; such adversary 
lying, all the while, like some buried Enceladus ; who, 
to gain the smallest freedom, has to stir a whole Trin- 
acria with its Aitnas. 

Wherefore, on the whole, we will honor a Paper 
Age too; an Era of hope! For in this same frightful 
process of Enceladus Revolt ; when the task, on which 
no mortal would willingly enter, has become imperative, 
inevitable,—is it not even a kindness of Nature that 
she lures us forward by cheerful promises, fallacious or 
not; and a whole generation plunges into the Erebus 
Blackness, lighted on by an Era of Hope? It has_ 
been well said: ‘Man is based on Hope; he has 
‘ properly no other possession but Hope; this habitation 
‘of his is named the Place of Hope.’ 


CHAPTER IV. 
MAUREPAS. 


But now, among French hopes, is not that of old 
M. de Maurepas one of the best-grounded; who hopes 
that he, by dexterity, shall contrive to continue Minis- 
ter? Nimble old man, who for all emergencies has his 
light jest; and ever in the worst confusion will emerge, 
cork-like, unsunk! Small care to him is Perfectibility, 
Progress of the Species, and Astrea Redux: good 
only, that a man of light wit, verging towards four- 
score, can in the seat of authority feel himself import- 
ant among men. ‘Shall we call him, as haughty 
Chateauroux was wont of old, ‘ M. Faquinet (Diminu- 
tive of Scoundrel)’? In courtier dialect, he is now 
named ‘the Nestor of France ;’ such governing Nestor 
as France has. 

At bottom, nevertheless, it might puzzle one to say 
where the Government of France, in these days, special- 
ly is. In that Chateau of Versailles, we have Nestor, 
King, Queen, ministers and clerks, with paper-bundles 
tied in tape: but the Government? For Government 
is a thing that governs, that guides; and if need be, 
compels. Visible in France there is not such a thing. 


Invisible, inorganic, on the other hand, there is: in 
72 


Chap. IV. MAUREPAS. 73 
1774-81. 


Philosophe saloons, in (Hil-de-Boeuf galleries; in the 
tongue of the babbler, in the pen of the pamphleteer. 
Her Majesty appearing at the Opera is applauded; she 
returns all radiant with joy. Anon the applauses wax 
fainter, or threaten to cease; she is heavy of heart, the 
light of her face has fled. Is Sovereignty some poor 
Montgolfier ; which, blown into by the popular wind, 
grows great and mounts; or sinks flaccid, if the wind 
be withdrawn? “France was long a ‘Despotism tem- 
pered by Epigrams ;’ and now, it would seem, the Epi- 
grams have got the upper hand. 

Happy were a young ‘Louis the Desired’ to make 
France happy; if it did not prove too troublesome, and 
he only knew the way. But there is endless discrep- 
ancy round him; so many claims and clamors; a mere 
confusion of tongues. Not reconcilable by man; not 
manageable, suppressible, save by some strongest and 
wisest man;—which only a lightly-jesting lightly- 
gyrating M. de Maurepas can so much as subsist amidst. 
Philosophism claims her new Era, meaning thereby 
innumerable things. And claims it in no faint voice; 
for France at large, hitherto mute, is now beginning to 
speak also; and speaks in that same sense. A huge, 
many-toned sound; distant, yet not unimpressive. On 
the other hand, the Mil-de-Boeuf, which, as nearest, one 
can hear best, claims with shrill vehemence that the 
Monarchy be as heretofore a Horn of Plenty; where- 
from loyal courtiers may draw,—to the just support of 
the throne. Let Liberalism and a New Era, if such is 


74 THE PAPER AGE. Book It. 
1774-81. 


the wish, be introduced; only no curtailment of the 
royal moneys! Which latter condition;-alas, is pre- 
cisely the impossible one. 

Philosophism, as we saw, has got her Turgot made 
Controller-General; and there shall be endless refor- 
mation. Unhappily this Turgot could continue only 
twenty months. With a miraculous Fortunatus’ Purse 
in his Treasury, it might have lasted longer ; with such 
Purse indeed, every French Controller-General, that 
would prosper in these days, ought first to provide him- 
self. But here again may we not remark the bounty 
of Nature in regard to Hope? Man after man advances 
confident to the Augean Stable, as if he could clean it; 
expends his little fraction of an ability on it, with such 
cheerfulness ; does, in so far as he was honest, accom- 
plish something. Turgot has faculties; honesty, insight, 
heroic volition; but the Fortunatus’ Purse he has not. 
Sanguine Controller-General! a whole pacific French 
Revolution may stand schemed in the head of the 
thinker; but who shall pay the unspeakable ‘ indemni- 
ties’ that will be needed? Alas, far from that: on 
the very threshold of the business, he proposes that the 
Clergy, the Noblesse, the very Parlements be subjected 
to taxes like the People! One shriek of indignation 
and astonishment reverberates through all the Chateau 
galleries ; M. de Maurepas has to gyrate: the poor King, 
who had written few weeks ago, ‘I/ n'y a que vous et 
‘mot qui aimions le peuple (There is none but you and 
‘TI that has the people’s interest at heart),’ must write 


Chap. IV." MAUREPAS, 75 
1774-81. 


now a dismissal ;' and let the French Revolution accom- 


plish itself, pacifically or not, as it can. 


Hope, then, is deferred? Deferred; not destroyed, 
or abated. Is not this, for example, our Patriarch 
Voltaire, after long years of absence, revisiting Paris ? 
With face shrivelled to nothing; with ‘huge peruke @ 
‘la Louis Quatorze, which leaves. only two eyes visible, 
‘ olittering like carbuncles,’ the old man is here.2?- What 
an outburst! Sneering Paris has suddenly grown rev- 
erent; devotional with Hero-worship. Nobles have 
disguised themselves as tavern-waiters to obtain sight 
of him; the loveliest of France would lay their hair 
beneath his feet. ‘His chariot is the nucleus of a 
they crown 


> 


Comet; whose train fills whole streets: 
him in the theatre, with immortal vivats; finally 
‘stifle him under roses,’—for old Richelieu recommend- 
ed opium in such state of the nerves, and the exces- 
sive Patriarch took too much. Her Majesty herself 
had some thought of sending for him; but was dis-_ 
suaded. Let Majesty consider it, nevertheless. The 
purport of this man’s existence has been to wither-up 
and annihilate all whereon Majesty and Worship for 
the present rests: and is it so that the world recognizes 
him? With Apotheosis; as its Prophet and Speaker, 
who has spoken wisely the thing it longed to say? 
Add only that the body of this same rose-stifled, beati- 
fied Patriarch cannot get buried except by stealth. 
It is wholly a notable business; and France, without 


1In May 1776. 2 February 1778. 


4 x H. Book II. 
76 THE PAPER AGE }ook U. 


doubt, is big (what the Germans call ‘ Of good Hope’): 
we shall wish her a happy birth-hour, and- blessed fruit. 


Beaumarchais too has now winded-up his Law-Plead- 
ings (Mémoires) ;* not without result, to himself and to 
the world. Caron Beaumarchais (or de Beaumarchais, 
for he got ennobled) had been born poor, but aspiring, 
esurient; with talents, audacity, adroitness ; above all, 
with the talent for intrigue: a lean, but also a tough 
indomitable man. Fortune and dexterity brought him 
to the harpsichord of Mesdames, our good Princesses 
Loque, Graille and Sisterhood. Still better, Paris Du- 
vernier, the Court-Banker, honored him with some 
confidence ; to the length even of transactions in cash. 
Which confidence, however, Duvernier’s Heir, a per- 
son of quality, would not continue. Quite otherwise ; 
there springs a Lawsuit from it: wherein tough Beau- 
marchais, losing both money and repute, is in the 
opinion of Judge-Reporter Goezman, of the Parle- 
ment Maupeou, and of a whole indifferent acquiescing 
world, miserably beaten. In all men’s opinion, only 
not in his own! Inspired by the indignation, which 
makes, if not verses, satirical law-papers, the withered 
Music-master, with a desperate heroism, takes up his 
lost cause in spite of the world; fights for it, against 
Reporters, Parlements and Principalities, with light 
banter, with clear logic; adroitly, with an inexhaust- 


* 1773-6. See Guvres de Beawmarchais ; where they, and the his- 
tory of them, are given. 


vos 


Chap. IV. MAUREPAS. 77 
1774-81. 


ible toughness and resource, like the skilfulest fencer ; 
on whom, so skilful is he, the whole world now looks. 


- Three long years it lasts; with wavering fortune. In 


fine, after labors comparable to the Twelve of Her- 
cules, our unconquerable Caron triumphs; regains his 
Lawsuit and Lawsuits; strips Reporter Goezman of 
the judicial ermine; covering him with a perpetual 
garment of obloquy instead :—and in regard to the 
Parlement Maupeou (which he has helped to extin- 
guish), to Parlements of all kinds, and to French Jus- 
tice generally, gives rise to endless reflections in the 
minds of men. Thus has Beaumarchais, like a lean 
French Hercules, ventured down, driven by destiny, 
into the Nether Kingdoms; and victoriously tamed 
hell-dogs there. He also is henceforth among the no- 


‘tabilities of his generation. 


CHAPTER VY. 
ASTRAA REDUX WITHOUT CASH. 


OBSERVE, however, beyond the Atlantic, has not the 
new day verily dawned! Democracy, as we said, is 
born; storm-girt, is struggling for life and victory. A 
sympathetic France rejoices over the Rights of Man; 
in all saloons, it is said, What a spectacle! Now too 
behold our Deane, our Franklin, American Plenipo- 
tentiaries, here in person soliciting: + the sons of the 
Saxon Puritans, with their Old-Saxon temper, Old- 
Hebrew culture, sleek Silas, sleek Benjamin, here on 
such errand, among the light children of Heathenism, 
Monarchy, Sentimentalism, and the Scarlet-woman. A 
spectacle indeed ; over which saloons may cackle joy- 
ous; though Kaiser Joseph, questioned on it, gave this 
answer, most unexpected from a Philosophe: “ Ma- 
dame, the trade I live by is that of royalist (Mon 
métier & mot c’est d’étre royaliste).” 

So thinks light Maurepas too; but the wind of 
Philosophism and force of public opinion will blow him 
round. Best wishes, meanwhile, are sent; clandestine 
privateers armed. Paul Jones shall equip his Bon 
Homme Richard: weapons, military stores can be 
smuggled over (if the English do not seize them); 


11777; Deanesomewhat earlier: Franklin remained till 1785. 
78 


ene ASTRAA REDUX WITHOUT CASH. 19 
440-0, 


wherein, once more Beaumarchais, dimly as the Giant 
Smuggler, becomes visible,—filling his own lank 
pocket withal. But surely, in any case, France should 
have a Navy. For which great object were not now 
the time; now when that proud Termagant of the 
Seas has her hands full? It is true, an impoverished 
Treasury cannot build ships; but the hint once given 
(which Beaumarchais says he gave), this and the other 
loyal Seaport, Chamber of Commerce, will build and 
offer them. Goodly vessels bound into the waters; a 
Ville de Paris, Leviathan of ships. 

And now when gratuitous three-deckers dance there 
at anchor, with streamers flying; and eleutheromaniac 
Philosophedom grows ever more clamorous, what can 
a Maurepas do—but gyrate? Squadrons cross the 
ocean: Gateses, Lees, rough Yankee Generals, ‘ with 
woollen night-caps under their hats,’ present arms to 
the far-glancing Chivalry of France; and new-born 
Democracy sees, not without amazement, ‘ Despotism 
tempered by Epigrams’ fight at her side. So, how- 
ever, it is. King’s forces and heroic volunteers ; 
Rochambeaus, Bouillés, Lameths, Lafayettes, have 
drawn their swords in this sacred quarrel of man- 
kind ;—shall draw them again elsewhere, in the 


strangest way. 


Off Ushant some naval thunder is heard. In the 
course of which did our young Prince, Duke de 
Chartres, ‘hide in the hold;’ or did he materially, by 


80 THE PAPER AGE. Book IL. 
1776-85. 


active heroism, contribute to the victory? Alas, by 
a second edition, we learn that there was no victory ; 
or that English Keppel had it.” Our poor young 
Prince gets his Opera plaudits changed into mocking 
tehees; and cannot become Grand-Admiral,—the 
source to him of woes which one may call endless. 
Wo also for Ville de Paris, the Leviathan of ships! 
English Rodney has clutched it, and led it home, with 
the rest; so successful was his ‘new manoeuvre of 
breaking the enemy’s line.’* It seems as if, accord- 
ing to Louis XV., ‘ France were never to have a navy.’ 
Brave Suffren must return from Hyder Ally and the 
Indian Waters; with small result; yet with great 
glory for ‘six’ non-defeats ;—which indeed, with such 
seconding as he had, one may reckon heroic. Let 
the old sea-hero rest now, honored of France, in his 
native Cevennes mountains; send smoke, not of gun- 
powder, but mere culinary smoke, through the old 
chimneys of the Castle of Jalés,—which one day, in 
other hands, shall have other fame. Brave Lapérouse 
shall by and by lift anchor, on philanthropic Voyage 
of Discovery ; for the King knows Geography. But, 
alas, this also will not prosper: the brave Navigator 
goes, and returns not; the Seekers search far seas for 
him in vain. He has vanished trackless into blue 
Immensity; and only some mournful mysterious 
shadow of him hovers long in all heads and hearts. 


297th July 1778. 3 9th and 12th April 1782. 
* August Ist 1785. 


Chap.V. ASTRA REDUX WITHOUT CASH. 81 
é 5 


Neither, while the War yet lasts, will Gibraltar 
surrender. Not though Crillon, Nassau-Siegen, 
with the ablest projectors extant, are there; and 
Prince Condé and Prince d’Artois have hastened to 
help. Wondrous leather-roofed Floating-Batteries, 
set afloat by French-Spanish Pacte de Famille, give 
gallant summons: to which, nevertheless, Gibraltar 
answers Plutonically, with mere torrents of redhot 
iron,—as if stone Calpe had become a throat of the 
Pit; and utters’ such a Doom’s-blast of a Vo, as 
all men must credit.® 

And so, with this loud explosion, the noise of War 
has ceased; an Age of Benevolence may hope, for- 
ever. Our noble volunteers of Freedom have re- 
turned, to be her missionaries. Lafayette, as the 
matchless of his time, glitters in the Versailles Miil- 
de-Boeuf; has his Bust set up in the Paris Hétel-de- 
Ville. Democracy stands inexpugnable, immeas- 
urable, in her New World; has even a foot lifted 
towards the Old;—and our French Finances, little 
strengthened by such work, are in no healthy way. 

What to do with the Finances? This indeed is 
the great question: a small but most black weather- 
symptom, which no radiance of universal hope can 
cover. We saw Turgot cast forth from the Controller- 
ship, with shrieks,—for want of a Fortunatus’ Purse. 
As little could M. de Clugny manage the duty; or 

5 Annual Register (Dodsley’s), xxv. 258-267. September, October, 


1782. 
Vor. I.—6 


82 THE PAPER AGE. Book IT. 
1776-81. 


indeed do anything, but consume his wages; attain 
‘a place in History,’ where as an ineffectual shadow 
thou beholdest him still lingering ;—and let the duty 
manage itself. Did Genevese Necker possess such 
a Purse, then? He possessed banker’s skill, banker's 
honesty; eredit of all kinds, for he had written 
Academic Prize Essays, struggled for India Com- 
panies, given dinners to Philosophes, and ‘realized 
a fortune in twenty years.’ He possessed, further, 
a taciturnity and solemnity; of depth, or else of dul- 
ness. How singular for Celadon Gibbon, false swain 
as he had proved ; whose father, keeping most probably 
his own gig, ‘would not hear of such a union,’—to 
find now his forsaken Demoiselle Curchod sitting in 
the high places of the world, as Minister’s Madame, 
and ‘Necker not jealous!’ ® 

A new young Demoiselle, one day to be famed as 
a Madame and De Staél, was romping about the 
knees of the Decline and Fall: the lady Necker 
founds Hospitals; gives solemn Philosophe dinner- 
parties, to cheer her exhausted Controller-General. 
Strange things have happened: by clamor of Phil- 
osophism, management of Marquis de Pezay, and 
Poverty constraining even Kings. And so Necker, 
Atlas-like, sustains the burden of the Finances, for 
five years long.’ Without wages, for he refused such ; 
cheered only by Public Opinion, and the ministering 
of his noble Wife. With many thoughts in him, it is 

6 Gibbon’s Letters: date, 16th June 1777, &e. 7 Till May 1781. 


Ny x) 


iy 


a 
a HKG rT (| 


env ASTRZA REDUX WITHOUT CASH. 83 
hoped ;—which, however, he is shy of uttering. His 
Comte Rendu, published by the royal permission, fresh 
sign of a New Era, shows wonders ;—which what but the 
genius of some Atlas-Necker can prevent from becom- 
ing portents? In Necker’s head too there is a whole 
pacific French Revolution, of its kind; and in that 
taciturn dull depth, or deep dulness, ambition enough. 

Meanwhile, alas, his Fortunatus’ Purse turns out 
to be little other than the old,‘ vectigal of Parsimony.’ 
Nay, he too has to produce his scheme of taxing: 
Clergy, Noblesse to be taxed; Provincial Assemblies, 
and the rest,—like a mere Turgot! The expiring 
M. de Maurepas must gyrate one other time. Let 
Necker also depart; not unlamented. 

Great in a private station, Necker looks on from the 
distance ; abiding his time. ‘Kighty thousand copies’ 
of his new Book, which he calls Administration ‘des 
Finances, will be sold in few days. He is gone; but 
shall return, and that more than once, borne by a 
whole shouting Nation. Singular Controller-General 
of the Finances; once Clerk in Thelusson’s Bank ! 


CHAPTER VI. 
WINDBAGS. 


So marches the world, in this its Paper Age, or Era 
of Hope. Not without obstructions, war-explosions ; 
which, however, heard from such distance, are little 
other than a cheerful marching-music. Tf indeed that 
dark living chaos of Ignorance and Hunger, five-and- 
twenty million strong, under your feet, were to begin 
playing ! 

For the present, however, consider Longchamp ; now 
when Lent is ending, and the glory of Paris and France 
has gone forth, as in annual wont. Not to assist at 
Tenebris Masses, but to sun itself and show itself, and 
salute the young Spring.’ Manifold, bright-tinted, 
glittering with gold; all through the Bois de Boulogne, 
in longdrawn variegated rows ;—like longdrawn living 
flower-borders, tulips, dahlias, lilies of the valley; all 
in their moving flower-pots (of new gilt carriages) : 
pleasure of the eye, and pride of life! So rolls and 
dances the Procession ; steady, of firm assurance, as if 
it rolled on adamant and the foundations of the world ; 
not on mere heraldic parchment,—under which smoul- 
ders a lake of fire. Dance on, ye foolish ones; ye sought 
not wisdom, neither have ye found it. Ye and your 


1 Mercier: Tableau de Paris, ii. 51. Louvet: Roman de Faublas, &e. 
$4 


Chap. VI. 7 N AGS. 
See WINDBAGS 85 


fathers have sown the wind, ye shall reap the whirl- 
wind. Was it not, from of old, written: The wages 
of sin ts death ? 


But at Longchamp, as elsewhere, we remark for one 
thing, that dame and cavalier are waited on each by a 
’ kind of human familiar, named jokez. Little elf, or 
imp; though young, already withered; with its with- 
ered air of premature vice, of knowingness, of com- 
pleted elf-hood; useful in various emergencies. The 
name jokei (jockey) comes from the English; as the 
thing also fancies that it does. Our Anglomania, in 
fact, is grown considerable; prophetie of much. If 
France is to be free, why shall she not, now when mad 
war is hushed, love neighboring Freedom? Cultivated 
men, your Dukes de Liancourt, de la Rochefoucault 
admire the English Constitution, the English National 
Character ; would import what of it they can. 


Of what is lighter, especially if it be light as wind, 


how much easier the freightage! Non-Admiral Duke 
de Chartres (not yet d’Orléans or Egalité) flies to and 
fro across the Strait; importing English Fashions: 
this he, as hand-and-glove with an English Prince of 


Wales, is surely qualified to do. Carriages and sad- = 


dles; top-boots and védingotes, as we call riding-coats. 
Nay the very mode of riding: for now no man on a 
level with his age but will trot @ / Anglaise, rising in 
the stirrups; scornful of the old sitfast method, in which, 
according to Shakspeare, ‘butter and eggs’ go to 


86 THE PAPER AGE. Book Il. 
((0-04,. 


market. Also, he can urge the fervid wheels, this 
brave Chartres of ours; no whip in Paris is rasher 
and surer than the unprofessional one of Monseigneur. 

Elf jokeis, we have seen; but see now real York- 
shire jockeys, and what they ride on, and train: Eng- 
lish racers for French Races. These likewise we owe 
first (under the Providence of the Devil) to Monsei- * 
gneur. Prince d’Artois also has his stud of racers. 
Prince d’Artois has withal the strangest horseleech : 
a moonstruck, much-enduring individual, of Neuchatel 
in Switzerland,—named Jean Paul Marat. A prob- 
lematic Chevalier d’Eon, now in petticoats, now in 
breeches, is no less problematic in London than in 
Paris; and causes bets and lawsuits. Beautiful days 
of international communion! Swindlery and Black- 
guardism have stretched hands across the Channel, 
and saluted mutually: on the race-course of Vincennes 
or Sablons, behold, in English curricle-and-four, wafted 
glorious among the principalities and rascalities, an 
English Dr. Dodd,?—for whom also the too early gal- 
lows gapes. 

Duke de Chartres was a young Prince of great 
promise, as young princes often are; which promise 
unfortunately has belied itself. With the huge Orléans 
Property, with Duke de Penthiévre for Father-in-law 
(and now the young Brother-in-law Lamballe killed 
by excesses),—he will one day be the richest man in 
France. Meanwhile, ‘his hair is all falling out, his 


2 Adelung: Geschichte der menschlichen Narrheit, 2 Doda. 


Chap. VI. VIN] iS. 
Tiss. WINDBAG 87 


blood is quite spoiled,’—by early transcendentalism 
of debauchery. Carbuncles stud his face; dark studs 
on a ground of burnished copper. A most signal fuil- 
ure, this young Prince! The stuff prematurely burnt 
out of him: little left but foul smoke and ashes of 
expiring sensualities ; what might have been Thought, 
Insight, and even Conduct, gone now, or fast going,— 
to confused darkness, broken by bewildering dazzle- 
ments; to obstreperous crotchets; to activities which 
you may call semi-delirious, or even semi-galvanic! 
Paris affects to laugh at his charioteering; but he 
heeds not such laughter. 

On the other hand, what a day, not of laughter, was 
that, when he threatened, for lucre’s sake, to lay sacri- 
legious hand on the Palais-Royal Garden!* The 
flower-parterres shall be riven up; the Chestnut Ave- 
nues shall fall: time-honored boscages, under which 
the Opera Hamadryads were wont to wander, not in- 
exorable to men. Paris moans aloud. Philidor, from 
his Café de la Régence, shall no longer look on green- 
ness; the loungers and losels of the world, where now 
shall they haunt? In vain is moaning. The axe 
glitters; the sacred groves fall crashing,—for indeed 
Monsigneur was short of money: the Opera Hama~ 
dryads fly with shrieks. Shriek not, ye Opera Hama- 
dryads ; or not as those that have no comfort. He will 
surround your Garden with new edifices and piazzas: 
though narrowed, it shall be replanted; dizened with 

3 1781-82. (Dulaure, viii. 423.) 


rE. Book. II. 
88 THE PAPER AGE eT 


hydraulic jets, cannon which the sun fires at noon ; 
things bodily, things spiritual, such as man has not 
imagined ;—and in the Palais-Royal shall again, and 
more than ever, be the Sorcerer's Sabbath and Satan- 
at-Home of our Planet. 


What will not mortals attempt? From remote An- 
nonay in the Vivarais, the Brothers Montgolfier send 
up their paper-dome, filled with the smoke of burnt 
wool.t The Vivarais Provincial Assembly is to be 
prorogued this same day: Vivarais Assembly-members 
applaud, and the shouts of congregated men. Will 
victorious Analysis scale the very Heavens, then? 

Paris hears with eager wonder; Paris shall ere long 
see. From Réveillon’s Paper-warehouse there, in the 
Rue St. Antoine (a noted Warehouse),—the new Mont- 
golfier air-ship launches itself. Ducks and_ poultry 
have been borne skyward: but now shall men be 
borne. Nay, Chemist Charles thinks of hydrogen 
and glazed silk. Chemist Charles will himself as- 
cend, from the Tuileries Garden ; Montgolfier solemnly 
cutting the cord. By Heaven, this Charles does also 
mount, he and another! Ten times ten thousand 
hearts go palpitating; all tongues are mute with 
wonder and fear ;—till a shout, like the voice of seas, 
rolls after him, on his wild way. He soars, he dwindles 
upwards; has become a mere gleaming circlet,—like 
some Turgotine snuffbox, what we call ‘ Turgotine- 


45th June 1783. > October and November 1783, 


Chap. VI. 1 
pew WINDBAGS. 89 


Platitude ;’ like some new daylight Moon! Finally 
he descends; welcomed by the universe. Duchess 
Polignac, with a party, is in the Bois de Boulogne, 
waiting ; though it is drizzly winter, the Ist of Decem- 
ber 1783. The whole chivalry of France, Duke de 
Chartres foremost, gallops to receive him.® 

Beautiful invention ; mounting heavenward, so beau- 
tifully,—so unguidably ! Emblem of much, and of our 
Age of Hope itself; which shall mount, specifically- 
light, majestically in this same manner; and hover,— 
tumbling whither Fate will. Well if it do not, PilAtre- 
like, explode: and demount all the more tragically !— 
So, riding on windbags, will men scale the Empyrean. 


Or observe Herr Doctor Mesmer, in his spacious 
Magnetic Halls. Long-stoled he walks; reverend, 
glancing upwards, as in rapt commerce; an Antique 
Egyptian Hierophant in this new age. Soft music 
flits; breaking fitfully the sacred stillness. Round 
their Magnetic Mystery, which to the eye is mere tubs 
with water,—sit breathless, rod in hand, the circles of 
Beauty and Fashion, each circle a living circular Pas- 
sion-Flower: expecting the magnetic afflatus, and 
new-manufactured Heaven-on-Earth. O women, O men, 
great is your infidel-faith! A Parlementary Duport, a 
Bergasse, D’Espréménil we notice there; Chemist 
Berthollet too,—on the part of Monseigneur de Char- 
tres. 

6 Lacretelle: 18¢ Siécle, iii. 258. 


90 THE PAPER AGE. Book II. 
1781-84. 


Had not the Academy of Sciences, with its Baillys, 
Franklins, Lavoisiers, interfered! But it did interfere.’ 
Mesmer may pocket his hard money, and withdraw. 
Let him walk silent by the shore of the Bodensee, by 
the ancient town of Constance; meditating on much. 
For so, under the strangest new vesture, the old great 
truth (since no vesture can hide it) begins again to be 
revealed: That man is what we call a miraculous crea- 
ture, with miraculous power over men; and, on the 
whole, with such a Life in him, and such a World 
round him, as victorious Analysis, with her Physiol- 
ogies, Nervous-systems, Physic and Metaphysic, will 
never completely name, to say nothing of explaining. 
Wherein also the Quack shall, in all ages, come in for 
his share. 


7 August 1784, 


CHAPTER VII. 
CONTRAT SOCIAL. 


In such suceession of singular prismatic tints, flush 
after flush suffusing our horizon, does the Era of Hope 
dawn on towards fulfilment. Questionable! As in- 
deed, with an Era of Hope that rests on mere univer- 
sal Benevolence, victorious Analysis, Vice cured of its 
deformity ; and, in the long run, on Twenty-five dark 
savage Millions, looking up, in hunger and weariness, 
to that Hece-signum of theirs ‘forty feet high,’ —how 
could it be but questionable ? 

Through all time, if we read aright, sin was, is, will 

‘be, the parent of misery.) This land calls itself most 
Christian, and has crosses and cathedrals; but its 
High-priest is some Roche-Aymon, some Necklace- 
Cardinal Louis de Rohan. The voice of the poor, 
through long years, ascends inarticulate, in Jacquerves, 
meal-mobs ; low-whimpering of infinite moan : unheeded 
of the Earth ; not unheeded of Heaven. Always more- 
over where the Millions are wretched, there are the 
Thousands straitened, unhappy; only the Units can 
flourish ; or say rather be ruined at last. Industry, all 
noosed and haltered, as if it too were some beast of 
chase for the mighty hunters of this world to bait, and 


cut slices from,—cries passionately to these its well- 
91 


92 THE PAPER AGE. Book II. 
1781-88. 


paid guides and watchers, not, Guide me; but, Laissez 
faire, Leaye me alone of your guidance! What mar- 
ket has Industry in this France? For two things there 
may be market and demand: for the coarser kind of 
field-fruits, since the Millions will live: for the finer 
kinds of luxury and spicery,—of multiform taste, from 
opera-melodies down to racers and courtesans ; since 
the Units will be amused. It is at bottom but a mad 
state of things. 

To mend and remake all which we have, indeed, vic- 
torious Analysis. Honor to victorious Analysis; nev- 
ertheless, out of the Workshop and Laboratory, what 
thing was victorious Analysis yet known to make? 
Detection of incoherences, mainly ; destruction of the 
incoherent. From of old, Doubt was but half a ma- 
gician ; she evokes the spectres which she cannot quell. 
We shall have ‘ endless vortices of froth-logic ;’ where- 
on first words, and then things, are whirled and swal- 
lowed. Remark, accordingly, as acknowledged grounds 
of Hope, at bottom mere precursors of Despair, this 
perpetual theorizing about Man, the Mind of Man, 
Philosophy of Government, Progress of the Species 
and such-like; the main thinking furniture of every 
head. Time, and so many Montesquieus, Mablys, 
spokesmen of Time, have discovered innumerable 
things: and now has not Jean Jacques promulgated 
his new Evangel of a Contrat Social ; explaining the 
whole mystery of Government, and how it is contracted 
and bargained for,—to universal satisfaction ? Theories 


Ad 


Chap. VII. CONTRAT SOCIAL. 93 
1781-88, 


of Government! Such have been, and will be; in ages 
of decadence. Acknowledge them in their degree; as 
processes of Nature, who does nothing in vain; as steps 
in her great process. Meanwhile, what theory is so 
certain as this, That all theories, were they never so 
earnest, painfully elaborated, are, and, by the very 
conditions of them, must be incomplete, questionable, 
and even false? Thou shalt know that this Universe 
is, what it professes to be, an infinite one. Attempt 
not to swallow 7t, for thy logical digestion; be thank- 
ful, if skilfully planting down this and the other fixed 
pillar in the chaos, thou prevent its swallowing thee. 
That a new young generation has exchanged the Scep- 
tic Creed, What shall I believe ? for passionate Faith 
in this Gospel according to Jean Jacques is a further 
step in the business; and betokens much. 

Blessed also is Hope; and always from the begin- 
ning there was some Millennium prophesied; Millen- 
nium of Holiness; but (what is notable) never till 
this new Era, any Millennium of mere Ease and 
plentiful Supply. In such prophesied Lubberland, 
of Happiness, Benevolence, and Vice cured of its 
deformity, trust not, my friends! Man is not what 
one calls a happy animal; his appetite for sweet — 
victual is so enormous. How, in this wild Universe, 
which storms in on him, infinite, vague-menacing, 
shall poor man find, say not happiness, but existence, 
and footing to stand on, if it be not by girding him- 
self together for continual endeavor and endurance? 


. : Book II. 
94 THE PAPER AGE ook 1 


Wo, if in his heart there dwelt no devout Faith ; if 
the word Duty had lost its meaning for him ! For as 
to this of Sentimentalism, so useful for weeping with 
over romances and on pathetic occasions, it otherwise 
verily will avail nothing; nay less. The healthy 
heart that said to itself, “‘ How healthy am I!” was 
already fallen into the fatalest sort of disease. Is not 
Sentimentalism twin-sister to Cant, if not one and the 
same with it? Is not Cant the materia prima of the 
Devil; from which all falsehoods, imbecilities, abomi- 
nations body themselves; from which no true thing 
‘can come? For Cant is itself properly a double- 
distilled Lie; the second-power of a Lie. 

And now if a whole Nation fall into that? In such 
case, I answer, infallibly they will return out of it! 
For life is no cunningly-devised deception or self-de- 
ception: it is a great truth that thou art alive, that 
thou hast desires, necessities; neither can these sub- 
sist and satisfy themselves on delusions, but on fact. 
To fact, depend on it, we shall come back: to such 
fact, blessed or cursed, as we have wisdom for. 
The lowest, least blessed fact one knows of, on 
which necessitous mortals have ever based them- 
selves, seems to be the primitive one of Cannibalism : 
That J can devour Thee. What if such’ Primitive 
Fact were precisely the one we had (with our improved 
methods) to revert to, and begin anew from ! 


~ ." 


eee 


CHAPTER VIIL 
PRINTED PAPER. 


In such a practical France, let the theory of Per- 
fectibility say what it will, discontents cannot be 
wanting: your promised Reformation is so indispen- 
sable; yet it comes not; who will begin it—with him- 
self? Discontent with what is around us, still more 
with what is above us, goes on increasing ; seeking 


ever new vents. 


Of Street Ballads, of Epigrams that from of old 
tempered Despotism, we need not speak. Nor of 
Manuscript Newspapers (Nouvelles @ la main) do we 
speak. Bachaumont and his jourmeymen and _fol- 
lowers may close those ‘thirty volumes of scurri- 
lous eaves-dropping, and quit that trade; for at 
length if not liberty of the Press, there is license. 
Pamphlets can be surreptitiously vended and read in 
Paris, did they even bear to be ‘ Printed at Pekin.’ 


' We have a Courrier de l Europe in those years, regu- 


larly published at London; by a De Morande, whom 
the guillotine has not yet devoured. There too an 
unruly Linguet, still unguillotined, when his own 
country has become too hot for him, and his brother 


Advocates have cast him out, can emit his hoarse wail- 
95 


96 THE PAPER AGE. Book it. 
1781-83. 


ings, and Bastille Dévoilée (Bastille Unveiled). Lo- 
quacious Abbé Raynal, at length, has his wish; sees 
the Histoire Philosophique, with its ‘lubricity,’ un- 
veracity, loose loud eleutheromaniac rant (contributed, 
they say, by Philosophedom at large, though in the 
Abbé’s name, and to his glory), burnt by the common 
hangman ;—and sets out on his travels as a martyr. 
It was the Edition of 1781; perhaps the last notable 
Book that had such fire-beatitude,—the hangman dis- 
covering now that it did not serve. 

Again, in Courts of Law, with their nfoney-quar- 
rels, divorce-cases, wheresoever a glimpse into the 
household existence can be had, what indications ! 
The Parlements of Besancon and Aix ring, audible 
to all France, with the amours and destinies of a 
young Mirabeau. He, under the nurture of a ‘ Friend 
of Men,’ has, in State Prisons, in marching Regiments, 
Dutch Authors’-garrets, and quite other scenes, ‘ been 
for twenty years learning to resist despotism ;’ despot- 
ism of men, and alas also of gods.” How, beneath 
this rose-colored veil of Universal Benevolence and 
Astrea Redux, is the sanctuary of Home so often a 
dreary void, or a dark contentious Hell-on-Earth ! 
The old Friend of Men has his own divorce-case too ; 
and at times, ‘his whole family but one’ under lock 
and key: he writes much about reforming and en- 
franchising the world; and for his own private be- 
hoof he has needed sixty Lettres-de-Cachet. A man 
of insight too; with resolution, even with manful 


Chap. VIII. PRINTED PAPER. oF 
1781-83. 


principle: but in such an element, inward and out- 
ward; which he could not rule, but only madden. 
Edacity, rapacity ;—quite contrary to the finer sen- 
sibilities of the heart! Fools, that expect your ver- 
dant Millennium, and nothing but Love and Abun- 
dance, brooks running wine, winds whispering music, 
—with the whole ground and basis of your existence 
champed into a mud of Sensuality; which, daily 
growing deeper, will soon have no bottom but the 
Abyss ! 

Or consider that unutterable business of the Dia- 
mond Necklace. Red-hatted Cardinal Louis —de 
Rohan; Sicilian jail-bird Balsamo Cagliostro; mil- 
liner Dame de Lamotte, ‘with a face of some piq- 
uancy:’ the ‘highest Church Dignitaries waltzing, in 
Walpurgis Dance, with quack-prophets, pickpurses 
and public women ;—a whole Satan’s Invisible World 
displayed; working there continually under the day- 
light visible one; the smoke of its torment going up 
forever! (The Throne has been brought into scandal- 
ous collision with the Treadmill. Astonished Europe 
rings with the mystery for nine months; sees only lie 
unfold itself from lie; corruption among the lofty and 
the low, gulosity, credulity, imbecility, strength no<~ 
where but in the hunger. Weep, fair Queen, thy 
first tears of unmixed wretchedness! Thy fair name 
has been tarnished by foul breath; irremediably while 
life lasts. No more shalt thou be loved and pitied by 
living hearts, till a new generation has been born, and 

Vou. I.—7 


Book IT. 
98 THE PAPER AGE. }ook TI. 


thy own heart lies cold, cured of all its sorrows.—The 
Epigrams henceforth become, not sharp and bitter ; 
but cruel, atrocious, unmentionable. On that 31st 
of May 1786, a miserable Cardinal Grand-Almoner 
Rohan, on issuing from his Bastille, is escorted by 
hurrahing crowds: unloved he, and worthy of no 
love; but important since the Court and Queen are 
his enemies.' 


How is our bright Era of Hope dimmed; and the 
whole sky growing bleak with signs of hurricane and 
earthquake! It is a doomed world: gone all ‘ obedience 
that made men free ;’ fast going the obedience that made 
men slaves,—at least to one another. Slaves only of 
their own lusts they now are, and will be. Slaves of 
sin; inevitably also of sorrow. Behold the mouldering 
mass of Sensuality and Falsehood; round which plays 
foolishly, itself a corrupt phosphoresence, some glimmer 
of Sentimentalism; and over all, rising, as Ark of 
their Covenant, the grim Patibulary Fork ‘forty feet 
high ;’ which also is now nigh rotted. Add only that 
the French Nation distinguishes itself among Nations 
by the characteristic of Excitability ; with the good, 
but also with the perilous evil, which belongs to that. 
Rebellion, explosion, of unknown extent is to be cal- 
culated on. There are, as Chesterfield wrote, ‘all the 
symptoms I have ever met with in History !’ 


1 Fils Adoptif: Mémoires de Mirabeau, iv. 325—See Carlyle’s Bio- 
graphical Essays, 7 Diamond Necklace, ? Count Cagliostro. 


Chap. VIII. PRINTED PAPER. 99 
1784-86.— 


Shall we say, then: Wo to Philosophism, that it de- 
stroyed Religion, what it called ‘extinguishing the 
abomination (écraser Pinfdme) ? Wo rather to those 
that made the Holy an abomination, and extinguish- 
able; wo to all men that live in such a time of world- 
abomination and world-destruction if Nay, answer the 
Courtiers, it was Turgot, it was Necker, with their mad 
innovating ; it was the Queen’s want of etiquette; it 
was he, it was she, it was that. Friends! it was every 
scoundrel that had lived, and quack-like pretended to 
be doing, and been only eating and misdoing, in all 
provinces of life, as Shoeblack or as Sovereign Lord, 
each in his degree, from the time of Charlemagne and 
earlier. All this ( for be sure no falsehood perishes, 
but is as seed sown out to grow) has been storing itself 
for thousands of years; and now the account-day has 
come. And rude will the settlement be; of wrath laid 
up against the day of wrath. O my Brother, be not 
thou a Quack! Die rather, if thou wilt take counsel ; 
tis but dying once, and thou art quit of it forever. 
Cursed is that trade; and bears curses, thou knowest 
not how, long ages after thou art departed, and the 
wages thou hadst are all consumed; nay, as the 
ancient wise have written,—through Eternity itself, 
and is verily marked in the Doom-Book of a God! 

Hope deferred maketh the heart sick. And yet, as 
we said, Hope is but deferred; not abolished, not abol- 
ishable. It is very notable, and touching, how this 
same Hope does still light onwards the French Nation 


+E. Book IT. 
100 THE PAPER AGE fart sete 


through all its wild destinies. For we shall still find 
Hope shining, be it for fond invitation, be it for anger 
and menace; as a mild heavenly light it shone; as a 
red conflagration it shines: burning sulphurous- blue, 
through darkest regions of Terror, it still shines; and 
goes not out at all, since Desperation itself is a kind 
of Hope. Thus is our Era still to be named of Hope, 
though in the saddest sense,—when there is nothing left 
but Hope. 


But if any one would know summarily what a Pan- 
dora’s Box lies there for the opening, he may see it in 
what by its nature is the symptom of all symptoms, the 
surviving Literature of the Period. Abbé Raynal, 
with his lubricity and loud loose rant, has spoken his 
word; and already the fast-hastening generation re- 
sponds to another. Glance at Beaumarchais’ Mariage 
de Figaro; which now (in 1784), after difficulty 
enough, has issued on the stage; and ‘runs its hun- 
dred nights,’ to the admiration of all men. By what 
virtue or internal vigor it so ran, the reader of our 
day will rather wonder: and indeed will know so much 
the better that it flattered some pruriency of the time ; 
that it spoke what all were feeling, and longing to 
speak. Small substance in that Figaro: thin wire- 
drawn intrigues, thin wiredrawn sentiments and sar- 
casms; a thing lean, barren; yet which winds and 
whisks itself, as through a wholly mad _ universe, 
adroitly, with a high-sniffing air: wherein each, as 


Chap. VIII. PRINTED PAPER. 101 
1784-88. 


was hinted, which is the grand secret, may see some 
image of himself, and of his own state and ways. So 
it runs its hundred nights, and all France runs with it; 
laughing applause. If the soliloquizing Barber ask : 
“What has your Lordship done to earn all this?” and 
can only answer: ‘“‘ You took the trouble to be born 
(Vous vous étes donné la peine de nattre),” all men 
must laugh: and a gay horse-racing Anglomaniac 
Noblesse loudest of all. For how can small books 
have a great danger in them? asks the Sieur Caron; 
and fancies his thin epigram may be a kind of reason. 
Conqueror of a golden fleece, by giant smuggling ; 
tamer of hell-dogs, in the Parlement Maupeou; and 


finally crowned Orpheus in the Thédtre Francais, 


Beaumarchais has now culminated, and unites the at- 
tributes of several demigods. We shall meet him once 
again, in the course of his decline. 

Still more significant are two Books produced on the 
eve of the ever-memorable Explosion itself, and read 
eagerly by all the world: Saint-Pierre’s Paul et Vir- 
ginie, and Louvet’s Chevalier de Faublas. Noteworthy 
Books; which may be considered as the last-speech of 
old Feudal France. In the first there rises melodiously, 
as it were, the wail of a moribund world: everywhere 
wholesome Nature in unequal conflict with diseased 
perfidious Art; cannot escape from it in the lowest hut, 
in the remotest island of the sea. Ruin and death 
must strike down the loved one; and, what is most sig- 
nificant of all, death even here not by necessity but by 


102 THE PAPER AGE. Book IT. 
1784-88. 


etiquette. What a world of prurient corruption lies 
visible in that super-sublime of modesty! Yet, on the 
whole, our good Saint-Pierre is musical, poetical though 
most morbid: we will call his Book the swan-song of old 
dying France. 

Louvet’s, again, let no man account musical. Truly, 
if this wretched Faublas is a death-speech, it is one 
under the gallows, and by a felon that does not repent. 
Wretched cloaca of a Book ; without depth even as a 
cloaca! What ‘picture of French society’ is here? 
Picture properly of nothing, if not of the mind that 
gave it out as some sort of picture. Yet symptom of 
much; above all, of the world that could nourish itself 
thereon. 


BOOK LL 


THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. 


2 
9 ~ 
~ 
~~... 
‘ 
. 
~ 
the » 
~ 
. 
. 


: 


~ 


- 


« ono eee 


Sa ee 


CHAPTER I. 


DISHONORED BILLS. 


WHILE the unspeakable confusion is everywhere 
weltering within, and through so many cracks in the 
surface sulphur-smoke is issuing, the question arises : 
Through what crevice will the main Explosion carry 
itself? Through which of the old craters or chim- 
neys; or must it, at once, form a new crater for itself? 
In every Society are such chimneys, are Institutions 
serving as such: even Constantinople is not without 
its safety-valves; there too Discontent can vent itself, 
—in material fire; by the number of nocturnal con- 
flagrations, or of hanged bakers, the Reigning Power 
can read the signs of the times, and change course ac- 
cording to these. 

We may say that this French Explosion will doubt- 
less first try all the old Institutions of escape; for by 
each of these there is, or at least there used to be, 
some communication with the interior deep; they are 
national Institutions in virtue of that. Had they even 
become personal Institutions, and what we can call 
choked up from their original uses, there nevertheless 
must the impediment be weaker than _ elsewhere. 


Through which of them, then? An observer might 
105 


106 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS.. Hoos 


have guessed: Through the Law Parlements ; above 
all, through the Parlement of Paris. 

Men, though never so thickly clad in dignities, sit 
not inaccessible to the influences of their time; es- 
pecially men whose life is business; who at all turns, 
were it even from behind judgment-seats, have come 
in contact with the actual workings of the world. 
The Counsellor of Parlement, the President himself, 
who has bought his place with hard money that he 
might be looked up to by his fellow-creatures, how 
shall he, in all Philosophe-soirées, and saloons of ele- 
gant culture, become notable as a Friend of Darkness ? 
Among the Paris Long-robes there may be more than 
one patriotic Malesherbes, whose rule is conscience and 
the public good; there are clearly more than one hot- 
headed D’Espréménil, to whose confused thought any 
loud reputation of the Brutus sort may seem glorious. 
The Lepelletiers, Lamoignons have titles and wealth ; 
yet, at Court, are only styled ‘Noblesse of the Robe.’ 
There are Duports of deep scheme; Fréteaus, Saba- 
tiers, of incontinent tongue: all nursed more or less 
on the milk of the Contrat Social. Nay, for the whole 
Body, is not this patriotic opposition also a fighting for 
oneself? Awake, Parlement of Paris, renew thy long 
warfare! Was not the Parlement Maupeou abolished 
with ignominy ? Not now hast thou to dread a Louis 
XIV., with the crack of his whip, and his Olympian 
looks; not now a Richelieu and Bastilles: no, the 
whole Nation is behind thee. Thou too (O heavens !) 


-s 


> 


Chap. I. DISHONORED BILLS. 107 
1781-83. 

mayest become a Political Power; and with the shak- 
ings of thy horse-hair wig shake principalities and dy- 
nasties, like a very Jove with his ambrosial curls! 


Light old M. de Maurepas, since the end of 1781, 
has been fixed in the frost of death: ‘‘ Never more,”’ 
said the good Louis, ‘shall I hear his step in the room 
there overhead; ’’ -his light jestings and gyratings are 
at an end. No more can the importunate reality be 
hidden by pleasant wit, and today’s evil be deftly 
rolled over upon tomorrow. The morrow itself has ar- 
rived; and now nothing but a solid phlegmatic M. de 
Vergennes sits there, in dull matter of fact, like some 


dull punctual Clerk (which he originally was); admits 


what cannot be denied, let the remedy come whence it 
will. In him is “no remedy; only clerklike ‘ despatch 
of business’ according to routine. The poor King, 
grown older yet hardly more experienced, must him- 
self, with such no-faculty as he has, begin governing ; 
wherein also his Queen will give help. Bright Queen, 
with her quick clear glances and impulses; clear, and 
even noble, but all too superficial, vehement-shallow, 
for that work! To govern France were such a problem ; 
and now it has grown well-nigh too hard to govern even” 
the Cil-de-Boeuf. For ifa distressed People has its cry, 
so likewise, and more audibly, has a bereaved Court. 
To the (Hil-de-Boeuf it remains inconceivable how, in a 
France of such resources, the Horn of Plenty should run 
dry : did it not use to flow? Nevertheless Necker, with 


108 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Boot 


his revenue of parsimony, has ‘ suppressed above six hun- 
dred places,’ before the Courtiers could oust him ; par- 
simonious finance-pedant as he was. Again, a military 
pedant, Saint-Germain, with his Prussian manoeuvres ; 
with his Prussian notions, as if merit and not coat-of- 
arms should be the rule of promotion, has disaffected mil- 
itary men; the Mousquetaires, with much else are sup- 
pressed ; for he too was one of your suppressors; and 
unsettling and oversetting, did mere mischief—to the 
CHil-de-Boeuf. Complaints abound; scarcity, anxiety : 
it is a changed (il-de-Boeuf. Besenval says, already 
in these years (1781) there was such a melancholy 
(such a tristesse) about Court, compared with former 
days, as made it quite dispiriting to look upon. 

No wonder that the (il-de-Boeuf feels melancholy, 
when you are suppressing its places! Not a place can 
be suppressed, but some purse is the lighter for it; and 
more than one heart the heayier; for did it not employ 
the working-classes too,—manufacturers, male and fe- 
male, of laces, essences ; of Pleasure generally, whoso- 
ever could manufacture Pleasure? Miserable econ- 
omies ; never felt over Twenty-five Millions! So, how- 
ever, it goes on: and is not yet ended. Few years more 
and the Wolf-hounds shall fall suppressed, the Bear- 
hounds, the Falconry; places shall fall, thick as autum- 
nal leaves. Duke de Polignac demonstrates, to the com- 
plete silencing of ministerial logic, that his place can- 
not be abolished ; then gallantly, turning to the Queen, 
surrenders it, since her Majesty so wishes. Less chiy- 


sli 


Che: Ti DISHONORED BILLS. 109 
450. 


alrous was Duke de Coigny, and yet not luckier: “‘ We 
got into a real quarrel, Coigny and I,” said King Louis; 
“but if he had even struck me, I could not have blamed 
him.”’? In regard to such matters there can be but one 
opinion. Baron Besenval, with that frankness of speech 
which stamps the independent man, plainly assures her 
Majesty that it is frightful (affreux) ; ‘you go to bed, 
and are not sure but you shall rise impoverished on the 
morrow: one might as well be in Turkey.” It is in- 
deed a dog’s life. 

How singular this perpetual distress of the royal 
treasury! And yet it is a thing not more incredible 
than undeniable. A thing mournfully true: the stum- 
bling-block on which all Ministers successively stum- 
ble and fall. Be it ‘want of fiscal genius,’ or some 
far other want, there is the palpablest discrepancy be- 
tween Revenue and Expenditure; a Deficet of the 
Revenue: you must ‘choke (combler) the Deficit,’ or 
else it will swallow you! This is the stern problem; 
hopeless seemingly as squaring of the circle. Con- 
troller Joly de Fleury, who succeeded Necker, could 
do nothing with it; nothing but propose loans, which 
were tardily filled up; impose new taxes, unproductive 
of money, productive of clamor and discontent. As~ 
little could Controller d’Ormesson do, or even less; for 
if Joly maintained himself beyond year and day, 
D’Ormesson reckons only by months: till ‘the King 
purchased Rambouillet without consulting him,’ which 


1 Besenval, iii. 255-58. 


110 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book TE) 


he took asa hint to withdraw. And so, towards the 
end of 1783, matters threatened to come to a still- 
stand. Vain seems human ingenuity. In vain has 
our newly-devised ‘ Council of Finances’ struggled, our 
Intendants of Finance, Controller-General of Finances : 
there are unhappily no Finances to control. Fatal paral- 
ysis invades the social movement ; clouds, of blindness or 
of blackness, envelop us: are we breaking down, then, 
into the black horrors of NATIONAL BANKRUPTCY ? 

Great is Bankruptcy: the great bottomless gulf 
into which all Falsehoods, public and private, do sink, 
disappearing ; whither, from the first origin of them, 
they were all doomed. For Nature is true and not 
alie. No lie you can speak or act but it will come, 
after longer or shorter circulation, like a Bill drawn 
on Nature’s Reality, and be presented there for pay- 
ment,—with the answer, Wo effects. Pity only that 
it often had so long a circulation: that the original 
forger were so seldom he who bore the final smart of 
it! Lies, and the burden of evil they bring, are 
passed on; shifted from back to back, and from rank 
to rank; and so land ultimately on the dumb lowest 
rank, who with spade and mattock, with sore heart 
and empty wallet, daily come in contact with reality, 
and can pass the cheat no further. 

Observe nevertheless how, by a just compensating 
law, if the lie with its burden (in this confused whirl- 
pool of Society) sinks and is shifted ever downwards, 
then in return the distress of it rises ever upwards 


Chap. I. DISHONORED BILLS. 111 


783. 
and upwards. Whereby, after the long pining and 
demi-starvation of those Twenty Millions, a Duke de 
Coigny and his Majesty come also to have their ‘real 
quarrel.’ Such is the law of just Nature; bringing, 
though at long intervals, and were it only by Bank- 
ruptcy, matters round again to the mark. 

But with a Fortunatus’ Purse in his pocket, through 
what length of time might not almost any Falsehood 
last! Your Society, your Household, practical or spir- 
itual Arrangement, is untrue, unjust, offensive to the eye 
of God and man. Nevertheless its hearth is warm, 
its larder well replenished: the innumerable Swiss of 
Heaven, with a kind of natural loyalty, gather round 
it; will prove, by pamphleteering, musketeering, that 
it is a truth; or if not an unmixed (unearthly, impos- 
sible) Truth, then better, a wholsomely attempered 
one (as wind is to the shorn lamb), and works well. 
Changed outlook, however, when purse and larder 
grow empty! Was your Arrangement so true, so 
accordant to Nature’s ways, then how, in the name 
of wonder, has Nature, with her infinite bounty, come 
to leave it famishing there? To all men, to all women 
and all children, it is now indubitable that your 
Arrangement was false. Honor to Bankruptcy ;~ 
ever righteous on the great scale, though in detail it 
is so cruel! Under all Falsehoods it works, un- 
weariedly mining. No Falsehood, did it rise heaven- 
high and cover the world, but Bankruptcy, one day, 
will sweep it down, and make us free of it. 


CHAPTER II. 
CONTROLLER CALONNE. 


Unper such circumstances of tristesse, obstruction 
and sick languor, when to an exasperated Court it 
seems as if fiscal genius had departed from among 
men, what apparition could be welcomer than that of 
M. de Calonne? Calonne, a man of indisputable 
genius; even fiscal genius, more or less; of experi- 
ence both in managing Finance and Parlements, for 
he has been Intendant at Metz, at Lille; King’s 
Procureur at Douai. A man of weight, connected 
with the moneyed classes: of unstained name,—if it 
were not some peccadillo (of showing a Client’s Letter) 
in that old D’Aiguillon-Lachalotais business, as good 
as forgotten now. He has kinsmen of heavy purse, 
felt on the Stock Exchange. Our Foulons, Berthiers 
intrigue for him:—old Foulon, who has now nothing 
to do but intrigue; who is known and even seen to 
be what they call a scoundrel; but of unmeasured 
wealth ; who, from Commissariat-clerk, which he once 
was, may hope, some think, if the game go right, to 
be Minister himself one day. 

Such propping and backing has M. de Calonne; 


and then intrinsically such qualities! Hope radiates 
112 


ee 


Chap. Il. CONTROLLER .CALONNE. 113 
100. 


from his face; persuasion hangs on his tongue. For 
all straits he has present remedy, and will make the 
world roll on wheels before him. On the 3d of 
November 1783, the Mlil-de-Boeuf rejoices in its 
new Controller-General. Calonne also shall have 
trial; Calonne also, in his way, as Turgot and Necker 
had done in theirs, shall forward the consummation ; 
suffuse, with one other flush of brilliancy, our now 
too leaden-colored Era of Hope, and wind it up— 
into fulfilment. 


Great, in any case, is the felicity of the Mil-de- 
Beeuf. Stinginess has fled from these royal abodes: 
suppression ceases; your Besenval may go peaceably 
to sleep, sure that he shall awake unplundered. Smil- 
ing Plenty, as if conjured by some enchanter, has 
returned ; scatters contentment from her new-flowing 
horn. And mark what suavity of manners! <A 
bland smile distinguishes our Controller: to all men 
he listens with an air of interest, nay of anticipation ; 
makes their own wish clear to themselves, and grants 
it; or at least, grants conditional promise of it. 
“T fear this is a matter of difficulty,” said her 
Majesty.—‘‘ Madame,” answered the Controller, cif 
it is but difficult, it is done; if it is impossible, it 
shall be done (se fera).” A man of such ‘facility ’ 
withal. To observe him in the pleasure-vortex of 
society, which none partakes of with more gusto, you 
might ask, When does he work? And yet his work, 

Vox. I.—8 


114 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. oe 
(50-00. 


as we see, is never behindhand; above all, the fruit 
of his work: ready-money. ‘Truly a man. of incred- 
ible facility; facile action, facile elocution, facile 
thought: how, in mild suasion, philosophic depth 
sparkles up from him, as mere wit and lambent spright- 
liness; and in her Majesty’s Soirées, with the weight 
of a world lying on him, he is the delight of men and 
women! By what magic does he accomplish miracles ? 
By the only true magic, that of genius. Men name 
him ‘the Minister ;’ as indeed, when was there another 
such? Crooked things are become straight by him, 
rough places plain; and over the Mil-de-Boeuf there 
rests an unspeakable sunshine. 

Nay, in seriousness, let no man say that Calonne 
had not genius: genius for Persuading; before all 
things, for Borrowing. With the skilfulest judicious 
appliances of underhand money, he keeps the Stock- 
Exchanges flourishing; so that Loan after Loan is 
filled up as soon as opened. ‘Calculators likely to 
know’? have calculated that he spent, in extraor- 
dinaries, ‘at the rate of one million daily ;’ which 
indeed is some fifty thousand pounds sterling: but did 
he not procure something with it; namely peace and 
prosperity, for the time being? Philosophedom grum- 
bles and croaks; buys, as we said, 80,000 copies of. 
Necker’s new Book: but Nonpareil Calonne, in her 
Majesty’s Apartment, with the glittering retinue of 


1 Besenval, iii. 216. 


oie) bi 


Chap. IT. CONTROLLER CALONNE. 115 
1783-86, 


Dukes, Duchesses, and mere happy admiring faces, 
can let Necker and Philosophedom croak. 


The misery is, such a time cannot last! Squander- | 
ing, and Payment by Loan is no way to choke a Deficit. | 
Neither is oil the substance for quenching conflagra- 
tions ;—alas no, only for assuaging them, not perma- | 
nently! To the Nonpareil himself, who wanted not 
insight, it is clear at intervals, and dimly certain at all 
times, that his trade is by nature temporary, growing 
daily more difficult ; that changes incalculable lie at no 
great distance. Apart from financial Deficit, the 
world is wholly in such a newfangled humor; all 
things working loose from their old fastenings, towards 
new issues and combinations. There is not a dwarf 
jokei, a cropt Brutus’-head, or Anglomaniac horse- 
man rising on his stirrups, that does not betoken 
change. But what then? The day, in any case, 
passes pleasantly ; for the morrow, if the morrow come, 
there shall be counsel too. Once mounted (by munif- 
icence, suasion, magic of genius) high enough in favor 


with the (iil-de-Boouf, with the King, Queen, Stock- 


Exchange, and so far as possible with all men, a Non- ‘Ze 


pareil Controller may hope to go careering through | 
the Inevitable, in some unimagined way, as hand- 
somely as another. 

At all events, for these three miraculous years, it 
has been expedient heaped on expedient: till now, 
with such cumulation and height, the pile topples peril- 


{ IN ee den. 5. Book III. 
116 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS cont 


ous. And here has this world’s-wonder of a Diamond 
Necklace brought it at last to the clear verge of tum- 
bling. Genius in that direction can no more: mounted 
high enough, or not mounted, we must fare forth. 
Hardly is poor Rohan, the Necklace-Cardinal, safely 
bestowed in the Auvergne Mountains, Dame de la 
Motte (unsafely) in the Salpétriére, and that mournful 
business hushed up, when our sanguine Controller once 
more astonishes the world. An expedient, unheard of 
for these hundred and sixty years, has been propounded ; 
and, by dint of suasion (for his light audacity, his hope 
and eloquence are matchless) has been got adopted— 
Convocation of the Notables. 

Let notable persons, the actual or virtual rulers of 
their districts, be summoned from all sides of France: 
let a true tale, of his Majesty's patriotic purposes and 
wretched pecuniary impossibilities, be suasively told 
them ; and then the question put: What are we to do? 
Surely to adopt healing measures ; such as the magic 
of genius will unfold; such as, once sanctioned by 
Notables, all eplacen and all men must, with more 
or less reluctance, submit to. 


CHAPTER III. 
THE NOTABLES. 


Herz, then, is verily a sign and wonder; visible to 
the whole world; bodeful of much. The Gil-de-Boeuf 
dolorously grumbles ; were we not well as we stood,— 
quenching conflagrations by oil? Constitutional Phil- 
osophedom starts with joyful surprise; stares eagerly 
what the result will be. The public creditor, the pub- 


. lic debtor, the whole thinking and thoughtless public 


have their several surprises, joyful or sorrowful. Count 
Mirabeau, who-has got. his matrimonial and other Law- 
suits huddled up, better or worse; and works now in 
the dimmest element at Berlin; compiling Prussian 
Monarchies, Pamphlets On Cagliostro ; writing, with 
pay, but not with honorable recognition, innumerable 
Despatches for his Government,—scents or descries 
richer quarry from afar. He, like an eagle or vulture, 
or mixture of both, preens his wings for flight home- 
wards. — 

M. de Calonne has stretched out an Aaron’s Rod 
over France; miraculous; and is summoning quite un- 
expected things. Audacity and hope alternate in him 
with misgivings; though the sanguine-valiant side 


1 Fils Adoptif: Mémoires de Mirabeau, t. iv. livv. 4 et 5, 
117 


HES: ©. THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Le 


carries it. Anon he writes to an intimate friend, ‘Je 
me fais pitié &@ mot-méme (I am an object of pity to 
myself) ;”” anon, invites some dedicating Poet or Poet- 
aster to sing ‘this Assembly of the Notables, and the 


Revolution that is preparing.’ ? 


Preparing indeed ; 
and a matter to be sung,—only not till we have seen 
it, and what the issue of it is. In deep obscure unrest, 
all things have so long gone rocking and swaying: 
will M. de Calonne, with this his alchemy of the 
Notables, fasten all together again, and get new rev- 
enues? Or wrench all asunder; so that it go no longer 
rocking and swaying, but clashing and colliding ? 

Be this as it may, in the bleak short days, we be- 
hold men of weight and influence threading the great 
vortex of French Locomotion, each on his several line, 
from all sides of France, towards the Chateau of Ver- 
sailles: summoned thither de par le roi. There, on 
the 22d day of February 1787, they have met, and 
got installed: Notables to the number of a Hundred 
and Thirty-seven, as we count them name by name: 
add seven Princes of the Blood, it makes the round 
Gross of Notables. Men of the sword, men of the 
robe; Peers, dignified Clergy, Parlementary Pres- 
idents: divided into Seven Boards (Bureaux) ; under 
our Seven Princes of the Blood, Monsieur, d’ Artois, 
Penthiévre, and the rest; among whom let not our 
new Duke d'Orléans (for, since 1785, he is Chartres 


? Biographie Universelle, 7 Calonne (by Guizot). 
3 Lacretelle, iii, 286. Montgaillard, i. 347, 


oe 


Chap. iit. THE NOTABLES. 119 


no longer) be forgotten. Never yet made Admiral, 
and now turning the corner of his fortieth year, with 
spoiled blood and prospects; half-weary of a world 
which is more than half-weary of him, Monseigneur’s 
future is most questionable. Not in illumination and 
insight, not even in conflagration; but, as was said, 
‘in dull smoke and ashes of outburnt sensualities,’ does 
he live and digest. Sumptuosity and sordidness; re- 
venge, life-weariness, ambition, darkness, putrescence ; 
and, say, in sterling money, three hundred thousand a 
year,—were this poor Prince once to burst loose from 
his Court-moorings, to what regions, with what phe- 
nomena, might he not sail and drift! Happily as yet 
he ‘affects to hunt daily ;’ sits there, since he must sit, 
presiding that Bureau of his, with dull moon-visage, 
dull glassy eyes, as if it were a mere tedium to him. 

We observe finally, that Count Mirabeau has actu- 
ally arrived. He descends from Berlin, on the scene 
of action; glares into it with flashing sun-glance ; 
discerns that it will do nothing for him. He had 
hoped these Notables might need a Secretary. They 
do need one; but have fixed on Dupont de Nemours, 
a man of smaller fame, but then of better ;—who in- 
deed, as his friends often hear, labors under this com- 
plaint, surely not a universal one, of having ‘five 
kings to correspond with.’* The pen of a Mirabeau 
cannot become an official one; nevertheless it remains 
a pen. In defect of Secretaryship, he sets to denoun- 


4 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau (Paris, 1832), p. 20. 


120 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Sok 
104, 


cing Stock-brokerage (Dénonciation de U Agiotage) ; tes- 
tifying, as his wont is, by loud bruit, that he is pres- 
ent and busy ;—till, warned by friend Talleyrand, and 
even by Calonne himself underhand, that ‘a seven- 
teenth Lettre-de-Cachet may be launched against him,’ | 
he timefully flits over the marches. 

And now, in stately royal apartments, as Pictures 
of that time still represent them, our hundred and 
forty-four Notables sit organized; ready to hear and 
consider. Controller Calonne is dreadfully behind- 
hand with his speeches, his preparatives; however, 
the man’s ‘facility of work’ is known to us. For 
freshness of style, lucidity, ingenuity, largeness of 
view, that opening Harangue of his was unsurpass- 
able: 
A Deficit, concerning which accounts vary, and the 


had not the subject-matter been so appalling. 


Controller's own account is not unquestioned; but 
which all accounts agree in representing as ‘ enor- 
mous.’ This is the epitome of our Controller’s diffi- 
culties: and then his means? Mere Turgotism; for 
thither, it seems, we must come at last: Provincial 
Assemblies; new Taxation; nay, strangest of all, 
new Land-tax, what he calls Subvention Territoriale, 
from which neither Privileged nor Unprivileged, No- 
blemen, Clergy, nor Parlementeers, shall be exempt ! 

Foolish enough! These Privileged Classes have 
been used to tax; levying toll, tribute and custom, 
at all hands, while a penny was left: but to be them- 
selves taxed? Of such Privileged persons, meanwhile, 


Chap. III. 
Sat THE NOTABLES. 121 


do these Notables, all but the merest fraction, consist. 
Headlong Calonne had given no heed to the ‘ composi- 
tion,’ or judicious packing of them; but chosen such 
Notables as were really notable; trusting for the issue 
to off-hand ingenuity, good fortune, and eloquence 
that never yet failed. Headlong Controller-General ! 
Eloquence can do much, but not all. Orpheus, with 
eloquence grown rhythmic, musical (what we call Poet- - 
ry), drew iron tears from the cheek of Pluto: but by 
what witchery of rhyme or prose wilt thou from the ~ 
pocket of Plutus draw gold? 

Accordingly, the storm that now rose and began to 
whistle round Calonne, first in these Seven Bureaus, 
and then on the outside of them, awakened by them, 
spreading wider and wider over all France, threatens 
to become unappeasable. A Deficit so enormous! 
- Mismanagement, profusion is too clear. Peculation 
itself is hinted at; nay, Lafayette and others go so 
far as to speak it out, with attempts at proof. The 
blame of his Deficit our brave Calonne, as was natu- 
ral, had endeavored to shift from himself on his 
predecessors; not excepting even Necker. But now 
Necker vehemently denies; whereupon an ‘angry 


- Correspondence,’ which also finds its way into print. _ 


In the Ciil-de-Boeuf, and her Majesty’s private 
Apartments, an eloquent Controller, with his ‘ Ma- 
dame, if it is but difficult,” had been persuasive: 
but, alas, the cause is now carried elsewhither. Be- 
hold him, one of these sad days, in Monsieur’s 


122 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book ILI. 


787. 
Bureau; to which all the other Bureaus have sent 
deputies. He is standing at bay: alone; exposed to 
an incessant fire of questions, interpellations, objurga- 
tions, from those ‘hundred and thirty-seven’ pieces 
of logic-ordnance,—what we may well call douches @ 
feu, fire-mouths literally! Never, according to Be- 
senval, or hardly ever, had such display of intellect, 
dexterity, coolness, suasive eloquence, been made by 
man. ‘To the raging play of so many fire-mouths he 
opposes nothing angrier than light-beams, self-posses- 
sion and fatherly smiles. With the imperturbablest 
bland clearness, he, for five hours long, keeps answer- 
ing the incessant volley of fiery captious questions, re- 
proachful interpellations ; in words prompt as lightning, 
quiet as light. Nay, the cross-fire too: such side-ques- 
tions and incidental interpellations as, in the heat of 
the main-battle, he (having only one tongue) could not 
get answered ; these also he takes up, at the first slake ; 
answers even these.? Could blandest suasive eloquence 
have saved France, she were saved. 

Heavy-laden Controller!~ In the Seven Bureaus 
seems nothing but hindrance: in Monsieur’s Bureau, 
a Loménie de Brienne, Archbishop of Toulouse, with 
an eye himself to the Controllership, stirs up the 
Clergy; there are meetings, underground intrigues. 
Neither from without anywhere comes sign of help 
or hope. For the Nation (where Mirabeau is now, 
with stentor-lungs, ‘denouncing Agio’) the Control- 


5 Besenval, iii. 196. 


# 
4 


SAR: 
Saas 
SeAs 


Chap, III. THE NOTABLES. 123 
March-April. 


ler has hitherto done nothing, or less. For Philo- 
sophedom he has done as good as nothing,—sent out 
some scientific Lapérouse, or the like: and is he not 
in ‘angry correspondence’ with its Necker? The 
very (Hil-de-Boeuf looks questionable ; a falling Con- 
troller has no friends. Solid M. de Vergennes, who 
with his phlegmatic judicious punctuality might have 
kept down many things, died the very week before 
these sorrowful Notables met. And now a Seal- -keep- 
er, Garde-des-Sceaux Miroménil, is thought to be play- 
ing the traitor: spinning plots for Loménie-Brienne ! 
Queen’ s-Reader Abbé de Vermond, unloved indiyid- 
ual, was Brienne’s creature, the work of his hands 
from the first: it may be feared the backstairs pas- 
Sage is open, the ground getting mined under our 
feet. Treacherous Garde-des-Sceaux Miroménil, at 
least, should be dismissed : Lamoignon, the eloquent 
Notable, a stanch man, with connections, and even 
ideas, Parlement-President yet intent on reforming 
Parlements, were not he the right Keeper? So, for 
one, thinks busy Besenval; and, at dinner-table, 
rounds the same into the Controller’s ear,—who al- 


ways, in the intervals of landlord-duties, listens to ot 


him as with charmed look, but answers nothing posi- 
tive.® 

Alas, what to answer? The force of private in- 
trigue, and then also the force of public opinion, 
grows so dangerous, confused! Philosophedom sneers 


§ Besenyal, iii. 203. 


124 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. po 
. 10d. 


aloud, as if its Necker already triumphed. The gap- 
ing populace gapes over Wood-cuts or Copper-cuts ; 
where, for example, a Rustic is represented convok- 
ing the Poultry of his barnyard, with this opening 
address: ‘‘Dear animals, I have assembled you to 
advise me what sauce -I shall dress you with;’’ to 
which a Cock responding, ‘‘We don’t want to be 
eaten,’ is checked by ‘‘ You wander from the point 
(Vous vous écartez de la question).”" Laughter and 
logic; ballad-singer, pamphleteer; epigram and cari- 
cature: what wind of public opinion is this,—as if 
the Cave of the Winds were bursting loose! At 
nightfall, President Lamoignon steals over to the 
Controller’s; finds him ‘ walking with large strides 
in his chamber, like one out of himself.’ With 
rapid confused speech the Controller begs M. de 
Lamoignon to give him ‘an advice.’ Lamoignon 
candidly answers that, except in regard to his own 
anticipated Keepership, unless that- would prove 
remedial, he really cannot take upon him to advise. 

‘On the Monday after Easter,’ the 9th of April 
1787, a date one rejoices to verify, for nothing can 
excel the indolent falsehood of these Histovres and 
Mémoires,—‘ On the Monday after Easter, as I, Be- 
‘senval, was riding towards Romainville to the Ma- 
- ‘réchal de Ségur’s, I met a friend on the Bouvelards, 
‘who told me that M. de Calonne was out. A little 


7 Republished in the Musée de la Caricature (Paris, 1834). 
8 Besenval iii. 209, 


ered 


Chap. TI. THE NOTABLES. 125 
April-May. 


‘further on came M. the Duke d'Orléans, dashing 
‘towards me, head to the wind’ (trotting @ 1 Anglaise), 
‘and confirmed the news.’® It is true news. Treach- 
erous Garde-des-Sceaux Miroménil is gone, and Lamoi- 
gnon is appointed in his room: but appointed for his 
own profit only, not for the Controller's: ‘next day’ 
the Controller also has had to move. A little longer 
he may linger near ; be seen among the money-changers, 
and even ‘working in the Controller’s office,’ where 
much lies unfinished: but neither will that hold. Too 
strong blows and beats this tempest of public opinion, 
of private intrigue, as from the Cave of all the Winds; 
and blows him (higher Authority giving sign) out of 
Paris and France,—over the horizon, into o asat balay 
or outer Darkness. 

Such destiny the magic of genius could not forever 
avert. Ungrateful (il-de-Boeuf! did he not mirac- 
ulously rain gold manna on you; so that, as a Courtier 
said, ‘‘ All the world held out its hand, and I held out 
my hat,’’—for a time? Himself is poor; penniless, 
had not a ‘ Financier’s widow in Lorraine’ offered him, 
though he was turned of fifty, her hand and the rich 
purse it held. Dim henceforth shall be his activity, 
though unwearied: Letters to the King, Appeals,~ 
Prognostications; Pamphlets (from London), written 
with the old suasive facility; which however do not 
persuade. Luckily his widow’s purse fails not. Once, 
in a year or two, some shadow of him shall be seen 


9 Besenyal, iii. 211. 


126 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. hoo 
104, 


hovering on the Northern Border, seeking election as 
National Deputy; but be sternly beckoned away. Dim- 
mer then, far-borne over utmost European lands, in 
uncertain twilight of diplomacy, he shall hover, intrig- 
uing for ‘Exiled Princes,’ and have adventures; be 
overset into the Rhine-stream and half-drowned, never- 
theless save his papers dry. Unwearied, but in vain! 
In France he works miracles no more; shall hardly re- 
turn thither to find a grave. Farewell, thou facile 
sanguine Controller-General, with thy light rash hand, 
thy suasive mouth of gold: worse men there have been, 
and better; but to thee also was allotted a task,— 
of raising the wind, and the winds; and thou hast 
done it. 


But now, while Ex-Controller Calonne flies storm- 
driven over the horizon, in this singular way, what 
has become of the Controllership? It hangs vacant, 
one may say; extinct, like the Moon in her vacant 
interlunar cave. Two preliminary shadows, poor M. 
Fourqueux, poor M. Villedeuil, do hold, in quick, sue- 
cession, some simulacrum of it,!’—as the new Moon 
will sometimes shine out with a dim preliminary old 
one in herarms. Be patient, ye Notables! An actual 
new Controller is certain, and even ready; were the 
indispensable manceuvres but gone through. Long- 
headed Lamoignon, with Home-Secretary Breteuil, 
and Foreign Secretary Montmorin have exchanged 


10 Besenval, iii. 225. 


Chap. III. THE NOTABLES. 127 
April-May. 


looks; let these three once meet and speak. Who is 
it that is strong in the Queen’s favor, and the Abbé 
de Vermond’s? That is a man of great capacity? Or 
at least that has struggled, these fifty years, to have it 
thought great; now, in the Clergy’s name, demanding 
to have Protestant death-penalties ‘put in execution ;’ 
now flaunting it in the Miil-de-Boeuf, as the gayest 
man-pleaser and woman-pleaser; gleaning even a good 
word from Philosophedom and your Voltaires and 
D’Alemberts? That has a party ready-made for him 
in the Notables ?—Loménie de Brienne, Archbishop 
of Toulouse! answer all the three, with the clearest 


“Instantaneous concord ; and rush off to propose -him to 


the King ; ‘in such haste,’ says Besenval, ‘that M. de 
Lamoignon had to borrow a szmarre,’ seemingly some 
kind of cloth apparatus necessary for that." 


Loménie-Brienne, who had all his life ‘ felt a kind 
of predestination for the highest offices,’ has now there- 
fore obtained them. He presides over the Finances ; 
he shall have the title of Prime Minister itself, and the 
effort of his long life be realized. Unhappy only that 
it took such talent and industry to gain the place; that 
to qualify for it hardly any talent or industry was left 
disposable! Looking now into his inner man, what 
qualification he may have, Loménie beholds, not with- 
out astonishment, next to nothing but vacuity and pos- 
sibility. Principles or methods, acquirement outward 


11 Besenval, ili. 224. 


128 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. et 
104, 


or inward (for his very body is wasted, by hard tear 
and wear) he finds none; not so much asa plan, even 
an unwise one. Lucky, in these circumstances, that 
Calonne has hada plan! Calonne’s plan was gathered 
from Turgot’s and Necker’s by compilation ; shall be- 
come Loménie’s by adoption. Not in vain has Lomé- 
nie studied the working of the British Constitution : 
for he professes to have some Anglomania, of a sort. 
Why, in that free country, does one Minster, driven 
out by Parliament, vanish from his King’s presence, 
and another enter, borne in by Parliament?” Surely 
not for mere change (which is ever wasteful); but that 
all men may have share of what is going ; and so the 
strife of Freedom indefinitely prolong itself, and no 
harm be done. 

The Notables, mollified by Easter festivities, by the 
sacrifice of Calonne, are not in the worst humor. 
Already his Majesty, while the ‘interlunar shadows’ 
were in office, had held session of Notables; and from 
his throne delivered promissory conciliatory eloquence ; 
‘the Queen stood waiting at a window, till his carriage 
‘came back; and Monsieur from afar clapped hands 
‘to her,’ in sign that all was well.’ It has had the 
best effect; if such do but last. Leading Notables 
meanwhile can be ‘caressed;’ Brienne’s new gloss, 
Lamoignon’s long head will profit somewhat; concili- 
atory eloquence shall not be wanting. On the whole, 


1 Montgaillard: Histoire de France, i. 410-17. 
13: Besenval, iii. 220. 


Chap. III. THE NOTABLES. 129 
April-May. 


however, is it not undeniable that this of ousting Ca- 
lonne and adopting the plans of Calonne, is a measure 
which, to produce its best effect, should be looked at 
from a certain distance, cursorily ; not dwelt on with 
minute near scrutiny? In a word, that no service the 
Notables could now do were so obliging as, in some 
handsome manner, to—take themselves away? Their 
‘Six Propositions’ about Provisional Assemblies, sup- 
pression of Corvées and suchlike, can be accepted with- 
out criticism. . The Subvention or Land-tax, and much 
else, one must glide hastily over; safe nowhere but in 
flourishes of conciliatory eloquence. Till at length, 
on this 25th of May, year 1787, in solemn final session, 
there burst forth what we can call an explosion of elo- 
quence; King, Loménie, Lamoignon and retinue tak- 
ing up the successive strain; in harangues to the num- 
ber of ten, besides his Majesty’s, which last the live- 
long day ;—whereby, as in a kind of choral anthem, 
or bravura peal, of thanks, praises, promises, the Not- 
ables are, so to speak, organed out, and dismissed to 
their respective places of abode. They had sat, and 
talked, some nine weeks; they were the first Notables 
since Richelieu’s, in the year 1626. 


By some Historians, sitting much at their ease, in the 
safe distance, Loménie has been blamed for this dis- 
missal of his Notables: nevertheless it was clearly time. 
There are things, as we said, which should not be dwelt 
on with minute close scrutiny: over hot coals you can- 

Vou. I.—9 


130 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. oe 


not glide too fast. In these Seven Bureaus, where no 
work could be done, unless talk were work, the ques- 
tionablest matters were coming up. Lafayette, for 
example, in Monseigneur d’Artois’ Bureau, took upon 
him to set forth more than one deprecatory oration 
about Lettres-de-Cachet, Liberty of the Subject, Agzo, 
and suchlike; which Monseigneur endeavoring to re- 
press, was answered that a Notable being summoned to 
speak his opinion must speak it." 

Thus too his Grace the Archbishop of Aix perorating 
once, with a plaintive pulpit-tone, in these words: 
“Tithe, that free-will offering of the piety of Christians” 
—‘ Tithe,” interrupted Duke la Rochefoucault, with 
the cold business-manner he has learned from the 
English, ‘that free-will offering of the piety of Chris- 
tians ; on which there are now forty thousand lawsuits 
"18 Nay, Lafayette, bound to speak his 
opinion, went the length, one day, of proposing to con- 
voke a ‘ National Assembly.’ ‘‘ You demand States- 
General ?” asked Monseigneur with an air of minatory 


in this realm. 


surprise.—‘‘ Yes, Monseigneur; and even better than 
that.’”’—“‘ Write it,”’ said Monseigneur to the Clerks. 
—Written accordingly it is; and what is more, will be 
acted by and by. 


14 Montgaillard, i. 360. 
15 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 20. 


'6 Toulongeon: Histoire de France depuis la Révolution de 1789 (Paris, 
1803), i. app. 4. 


CHAPTER IV. 
LOMENIFE’S EDICTS. 


Tuus, then, have the Notables returned home; 
carrying, to all quarters of France, such notions of 
deficit, decrepitude, distraction; and that States-Gen- 
eral will cure it, or will not cure it but kill it. Each 
Notable, we may fancy, is as a funereal torch; dis- 
closing hideous abysses, better left hid! The unquiet- 
est humor possesses all men; ferments, seeks issue, in 
_pamphleteering, .caricaturing, projecting, declaiming ; 
vain jangling of thought, word and deed. 

It is Spiritual Bankruptcy, long tolerated; verging 
now towards Economical Bankruptcy, and become in- 
tolerable. For from.the lowest dumb rank, the inevi- 
table misery, as was predicted, has spread upwards. In 
every man is some obscure feeling that his position, 
oppressive or else oppressed, is a false one: all men, in 
one or the other acrid dialect, as assaulters or as defend-~ 
ers, must give vent to the unrest that is in them. Of 
such stuff national well-being, and the glory of rulers, 
is not made. O Loménie, what a wild-heaving, waste- 
looking, hungry and angry world hast thou, after life- 


long effort, got promoted to take charge of! 
131 


= 


132 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. oat 


787. 


Loménie’s first Edicts are mere soothing ones: cre- 
ation of Provincial Assemblies, ‘for apportioning the 
imposts,’ when we get any; suppression of Corvées or 
statute-labor; alleviation of Gabdelle. Soothing meas- 
ures, recommended by the Notables; long clamored 
for by all liberal men. Oil cast on the waters has been 
known to produce a good effect. Before venturing with 
great essential measures, Loménie will see this singular 
‘swell of the public mind’ abate somewhat. 

Most proper, surely. But what if it were not a 
swell of the abating kind? There are swells that come 
of upper tempest and wind-gust. But again there are 
swells that come of subterranean pent wind, some say: 
and even of inward decomposition, of decay that has 
become self-combustion :—as when, according to Nep- 
tuno-Plutonic Geology, the World is all decayed down 
into due attritus of this sort; and shall now be exploded, 
and new-made! These latter abate not by oil.—The 
fool says in his heart, How shall not tomorrow be as 
yesterday ; as all days,—which were once tomorrows? 
The wise man, looking on this France, moral, intellect- 
ual, economical, sees, ‘in short, all the symptoms he 
has ever met with in history,’—wnabatable by soothing 
Edicts. 


Meanwhile, abate or not, cash must be had; and for 
that, quite another sort of Edicts, namely ‘bursal’ or 
fiscal ones. How easy were fiscal Edicts, did you know 
for certain that the Parlement of Paris would what they 


o~ ersten 


Chap. IV. LOMENIF’S EDICTS. 133 


May-June, 


call ‘register’ them! Such right of registering, proper- 
ly of mere writing down, the Parlement has got by old 
wont ; and, though but a Law-Court, can remonstrate, 
and higgle considerably about the same. Hence many 
quarrels ; desperate Maupeou devices, and victory and 
defeat ;—a quarrel now near forty years long. Hence 
fiscal Edicts, which otherwise were easy enough, become 
such problems. For example, is there not Calonne’s 
Subvention Territoriale, universal, unexempting Land- 
tax; the sheet-anchor of Finance? Or, to show, so 
far as possible, that one is not without original finance 


talent, Loménie himself can devise an Hdit du Timbre _, 


or Stamp-tax,—borrowed also, it is true; but then 
from America: may it prove luckier in France than 
there ! 

France has her resources: nevertheless, it cannot 
be denied, the aspect of that Parlement is question- 
able. Already among the Notables, in that final 
symphony of dismissal, the Paris President had an 
ominous tone. Adrien Duport, quitting magnetic 
sleep, in this agitation of the world, threatens to 
rouse himself into preternatural wakefulness. Shal- 
lower but also louder, there is magnetic D’Espréménil, 
with his tropical heat (he was born at Madras) ; with 
his dusky confused violence; holding of Illumination, 
Animal Magnetism, Public Opinion, Adam Weisshaup, 
Harmodius and Aristogiton, and all manner of con- 
fused violent things: of whom can come no good. 
The very Peerage is infected with the leaven. Our 


134 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Hooke 


Peers have, in too many cases, laid aside their frogs, 
laces, bagwigs; and go about in English costume, or 
ride rising in their stirrups,—in the most headlong 
manner; nothing but insubordination, eleutheromania, 
confused unlimited opposition in their heads. Ques- 
tionable: not to be ventured upon, if we had a For- 
tunatus’ Purse! But Loménie has waited all June, 
casting on the waters what oil he had; and now, 
betide as it may, the two Finance Edicts must out. 
On the 6th of July, he forwards his proposed Stamp- 
tax and Land-tax to the Parlement of Paris; and, ‘as 
if putting his own leg foremost, not his borrowed 
Calonne’s-leg, places the Stamp-tax first in order. 

Alas, the Parlement will not register: the Parle- 
ment demands instead a ‘state of the expenditure,’ 
a ‘state of the contemplated reductions ;’ ‘states’ 
enough; which his Majesty must decline to furnish! 
Discussions arise; patriotic eloquence: the Peers are 
summoned. Does the Nemean Lion begin to bristle ? 
Here surely is a duel, which France and the Universe 
may look upon: with prayers ; at lowest, with curiosity 
and bets. Paris stirs with new animation. The outer 
courts of the Palais de Justice roll with unusual crowds, 
coming and going; their huge outer hum mingles with 
the clang of patriotic eloquence within, and gives 
vigor to it. Poor Loménie gazes from the distance, 
little comforted; has his invisible emissaries flying 
to and fro, assiduous, without result. 


So pass the sultry dog-days, in the most electric 


ae 


chap. IV. LOMENIF’S EDICTS. 135 


manner; and the whole month of July. And still, 
in the Sanctuary of Justice, sounds nothing but Har- 
modius-Aristogiton eloquence, environed with the hum 
of crowding Paris; and no registering accomplished, 
and no ‘states’ furnished. ‘‘Statés?’’ said a lively 
Parlementeer: ‘‘ Messieurs, the states that should be 
furnished us, in my opinion are the STaTES-GENERAL.”’ 
On which timely joke there follow cachinnatory buzzes 
of approval. What a word to be spoken in the Palais 
de Justice! Old D’Ormesson (the Ex-Controller’s 
uncle) shakes his judicious head; far enough from 
laughing. But the outer courts, and Paris and France, 
catch the glad sound, and repeat it; shall repeat it, 
and reécho and reverberate it, till it grow a deafening 
peal. Clearly enough here is no registering to be 
thought of. 


The pious Proverb says, ‘There are remedies for 
all things but death.’ When a Parlement refuses 
registering, the remedy, by long practice, has become 
familiar to the simplest: a Bed of Justice. One 
complete month this Parlement has spent in mere idle 
jargoning, and sound and fury; the Timbre Edict 
not registered, or like to be; the Subvention not yet 
so much as spoken of. On the 6th of August let the 
whole refractory Body roll out, in wheeled vehicles, 
as far as the King’s Chateau of Versailles; there 
shall the King, holding his Bed of Justice, order 
them, by his own royal lips, to register. They may 


136 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. BOSAaT 


remonstrate, in an under tone; but they must obey, 
lest a worse unknown thing befall them. 

It is done: the Parlement has rolled out, on royal 
summons; has heard the express royal order to 
register. Whereupon it has rolled back again, amid 
the hushed expectancy of men. And now, behold, 
on the morrow, this Parlement, seated once more in 
its own Palais, with ‘crowds inundating the outer 
courts,’ not only does not register, but (O portent !) 
declares all that was done on the prior day to be null, 
and the Bed of Justice as good as a futility! In the 
history of France here verily is a new feature. Nay 
better still, our heroic Parlement, getting suddenly 
enlightened on several things, declares that, for its 
part, it is incompetent to register 'Tax-edicts at all,— 
having done it by mistake, during these late centuries; 
that for such act.one authority only is competent: 
the assembled Three Estates of the Realm! 

To such length can the universal spirit of a Nation 
penetrate the most isolated Body-corporate: say rather, 
with such weapons, homicidal and suicidal, in exasper- 
ated political duel, will Bodies-corporate fight! But, 
in any case, is not this the real death-grapple of war 
and internecine duel, Greek meeting Greek ; whereon 
men, had they even no interest in it, might look with 
interest unspeakable? Crowds, as was said, inundate 
the outer courts: inundation of young eleutheromaniac 
Noblemen in English costume, uttering audacious 
speeches; of Procureurs, Basoche-Clerks, who are 


Chap. 1Y, LOMENIE'S EDICTS. 137 
uly. 


idle in these days; of Loungers, Newsmongers and 
other nondescript classes,—rolls tumultuous there. 
‘From three to four thousand persons,’ waiting eagerly 
to hear the Arrétés (Resolutions) you arrive at within; 
applauding with bravos, with the clapping of from six 
to eight thousand hands! Sweet also is the meed of 
patriotic eloquence, when -your D’Espréménil, your 
Fréteau, or Sabatier, issuing from his Demosthenic 
Olympus, the thunder being hushed for the day, is 
welcomed, in the outer courts, with a shout from four 
thousand throats; is borne home shoulder-high ‘ with 


benedictions,’ and strikes the stars with his sublime 
head. 


CHAPTER YV: 
LOMENIE’S THUNDERBOLTS. 


Artsk, Loménie-Brienne; here is no case for ‘ Let- 
ters of Jussion;’ for faltermg or compromise. Thou 
seest the whole loose fluent population of Paris (what- 
soever is not solid, and fixed to work) inundating 
these outer courts, like a loud destructive deluge; the 
very Basoche of Lawyers’ Clerks talks sedition. The 
lower classes, in this duel of Authority with Authority, 
Greek throttling Greek, have ceased to respect the 
City-Watch: Police-satellites are marked on the back 
with chalk (the M signifies mouchard, spy); they are 
hustled, hunted like ferw nature. Subordinate rural 
Tribunals send messengers of congratulation, of ad- 
herence. Their Fountain of Justice is becoming a 
Fountain of Revolt. The Provincial Parlements look 
on, with intent eye, with breathless wishes, while their 
elder sister of Paris does battle: the whole Twelve are 
of one blood and temper; the victory of one is that 
of all. 

Ever worse it grows: on the 10th of August, there 
is ‘ Plainte’ emitted touching the ‘ prodigalities of 
Calonne,’ and permission to ‘proceed’ against him. 


No registering, but instead of it, denouncing: of 
138 


Chap. V. LOMENIE’S THUNDERBOLTS. 139 


August. 


dilapidation, peculation; and ever the burden of the 
song, States-General! Have the royal armories no 
thunderbolt, that thou couldst, O Loménie, with red 
right-hand, launch it among these Demosthenic theat- 
rical thunder-barrels, mere resin and noise for most 
part ;—and shatter, and smite them silent? On the 
night of the 14th of August, Loménie launches his. 
thunderbolt, or handful of them. Letters named of 
the Seal (de Cachet), as many as needful, some six- 
score and odd, are delivered over-night. And so, next 
day betimes, the whole Parlement, once more set on - 
wheels, is rolling incessantly towards Troyes in Cham- 
pagne; ‘escorted,’ says History, ‘with the blessings 
of all people;’ the very innkeepers and _postillions 
looking gratuitously reverent.'. This is the 15th of 


August 1787. 


What will not people bless; in their extreme need! 
Seldom had the Parlement of Paris deserved much 
blessing, or received much. ~An isolated Body-cor- 
porate, which, out of old confusions (while the Sceptre 
of the Sword was confusedly struggling to become a 
Sceptre of the Pen), had got itself together, better and_ 
worse, as Bodies-corporate do, to satisfy some dim de- 
sire of the world, and many clear desires of individ- 
uals ; and so had grown, in the course of centuries, on 
concession, on acquirement and usurpation, to be what 
we see it: a prosperous Social Anomaly, deciding 


+A. Lameth: Histoire de l Assemblée Constituante (Int. 73). 


140 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS es 
(ic 


Lawsuits, sanctioning or rejecting Laws; and withal 
disposing of its places and offices by sale -for ready- 
money,—which method sleek President Hénault, after 
meditation, will demonstrate to be the indifferent-best.’ 

In such a Body, existing by purchase for ready- 
money, there could not be excess of public spirit ; there 
might well be excess of eagerness to divide the public 
spoil. Men in helmets have divided that, with swords ; 
men in wigs, with quill and inkhorn, do divide it: and 
even more hatefully these latter, if more peaceably ; 
for the wig-method is at once irresistibler and baser. 
By long experience, says Besenval, it has been found 
useless to sue a Parlementeer at law; no Officer of 
Justice will serve a writ on one: his wig and gown are 
his Vulean’s-panoply, his enchanted cloak-of-darkness. 

The Parlement of Paris may count itself an unloved 
body ; mean, not magnanimous, on the political side. 
Were the King weak, always (as now) has his Parle- 
ment barked, cur-like, at his heels; with what popular 
cry there might be. Were he strong, it barked before 
his face; hunting for him as his alert beagle. An 
unjust Body; where foul influences have more than 
once worked shameful perversion of judgment. Does 
not, in these very days, the blood of murdered Lally 
cry aloud for vengeance? Baited, circumvented, 
driven mad like the snared lion, Valor had to sink 
extinguished under vindictive Chicane. Behold him, 
that hapless Lally, his wild dark soul looking. through 

* Abrégé Chronologique, p. 975. 


i, 


“/ 


Chap. V. LOMENIE’S THUNDERBOLTS. 141 
August. 


his wild dark face; trailed on the ignominious death- 
hurdle; the voice of his despair choked by a wooden 


gag! The wild fire-soul that has known only peril 


and toil ; and, for threescore years, has buffeted against 
Fate’s obstruction and men’s perfidy, like genius and 
courage amid poltroonery, dishonesty and common- 
place; faithfully enduring and endeavoring,—O Par- 
lement of Paris, dost thou reward it with a gibbet and 
a gag?* The dying Lally bequeathed his memory to ' 
his boy; a young Lally has arisen, demanding redress 
in the name of God and man. The Parlement of 
Paris does its utmost to defend the indefensible, abom- 
inable; nay, what is singular, dusky-glowing Aristo- 
giton d’Espréménil is the man chosen to be its spokes- 
man in that. 

Such Social Anomaly is it that France now blesses. 
An unclean Social Anomaly; but in duel against 
another worse! The exiled Parlement is felt to have 
‘covered itself with glory.’ There are quarrels in 
which even Satan, bringing help, were not unwelcome ; 
even Satan, fighting stiffly, might cover himself with 
glory,—of a temporary sort. 


But what a stir in the outer courts of the Palais, 
when Paris finds its Parlement trundled off to 
Troyes in Champagne; and nothing left but a few 
mute Keepers of Records; the Demosthenic thunder 
become extinct, the martyrs of liberty clean gone! 


3 9th May 1766: Biographie Universelle, 2 Lally, 


142 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. ee 


Confused wail and menace rises from the four thousand 
throats of Procureurs, Basoche-Clerks, Nondescripts, 
and Anglomaniac Noblesse; ever new idlers crowd to 
see and hear; Rascality, with increasing numbers and 
vigor, hunts mouchards. Loud whirlpool rolls through 
these spaces; the rest of the City, fixed to its work, 
cannot yet go rolling. Audacious placards are legible ; 
in anid about the Palais, the speeches are as good as 
seditious. Surely the temper of Paris is much changed. 
On the third day of this business (18th of August), 
Monsieur and Monseigneur d’Artois, coming in state- 
carriages, according to use and wont, to have these late 
obnoxious Arrétés and Protests ‘expunged’ from the 
Records, are received in the most marked manner. 
Monsieur, who is thought to be in opposition, is met 
with vivats and strewed flowers: Monseigneur, on the 
other hand, with silence; with murmurs, which rise to 
hisses and groans; nay an irreverent Rascality presses 
towards him in floods, with such hissing vehemence, 
that the Captain of the Guards has to give order, 
“* Haut les armes (Handle arms) ! ’—at which thunder- 
word, indeed, and the flash of the clear iron, the Ras- 
cal-flood recoils, through all avenues, fast enough.‘ 
New features these. Indeed, as good M. de Males- 
herbes pertinently remarks, “‘ it is a quite new kind of 
contest this with the Parlement: no transitory sput- 
ter, as from collision of hard bodies; but more like 


* Montgaillard, i. 369. Besenval, &c. 


Chap. V. LOMENIE’S THUN DERBOLTS. 143 
Aug.—Sept. 


“the first sparks of what, if not quenched, may be- 
come a great conflagration.” * 

This good Malesherbes sees himself now again in 
the King’s Council, after an absence of ten years; 
Loménie would profit if not by the faculties of the 
man, yet by the name he has. As for the man’s opin- 
ion, it is not listened to ;—-wherefore he will soon with- 
draw a second time; back to his books and his trees. 
In such King’s Council what can a good man profit ? 
Turgot tries it not a second time; Turgot has quitted 
France and this Earth, some years ago; and now cares 
for none of these things. Singular enough: Turgot, 
this same Loménie, and the Abbé Morellet were once 
a trio of young friends; fellow-scholars in the Sor- 
bonne. Forty new years have carried them severally 
thus far. 

Meanwhile the Parlement sits daily at Troyes, call- 
ing cases; and daily adjourns, no Procureur making 
his appearance to plead. Troyes is as hospitable as 
could be looked for: nevertheless one has compar- 
atively a dull life. No crowds now to carry you, 
shoulder-high, to the immortal gods; scarcely a Pa- 
triot or two will drive out so far, and bid you be of firm 
courage. You are in furnished lodgings, far from home 
and domestic comfort: little to do, but wander over 
the unlovely Champagne fields; seeing the grapes 
ripen; taking counsel about the thousand-times con- 
sulted: a prey to tedium; in danger even that Paris 

5 Montgaillard, i. 373. 


144 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. poy 


may forget you. Messengers come and go: pacific 
Loménie is not slack in negotiating, promising ; D’Or- 
messon and the prudent elder Members see no good in 
strife. : 

After a dull month, the Parlement, yielding and re- 
taining, makes truce, as all Parlements must. The 
Stamp-tax is withdrawn: the Subvention Land-tax is 
also withdrawn; but, in its stead, there is granted, 
what they call a ‘ Prorogation of the Second Twenti- 
eth,’—itself a kind of Land-tax, but not so oppressive 
to the Influential classes; which lies mainly on the 
Dumb class. Moreover, secret promises exist (on the 
part of the Elders), that finances may be raised by 
Loan. Of the ugly word States-General there shall 
be no mention. 

And so, on the 20th of September, our exiled Par- 
lement returns: D’Espréménil said, ‘it went out cov- 
ered with glory, but had come back covered with mud 
(de boue).’ Not so, Aristogiton; or if so, thou surely 
art the man to clean it. 


CHAPTER VI. 
LOMENIE’S PLOTS. 


Was ever unfortunate Chief Minister so bested as 
Loménie-Brienne? The reins of the State fairly in 
his hand these six months : and not the smallest mo- 
tive-power (of Finance) to stir from the spot with, this 
way or that! He flourishes his whip, but advances 
not. Instead of ready-money, there is nothing but 
rebellious debating and recalcitrating. 

Far is the public mind from having calmed ; it goes 
chafing and fuming ever worse: and in the royal cof- 
fers, with such yearly Deficit running on, there is 
hardly the color of coin. Ominous prognostics! Ma- 
lesherbes, seeing an exhausted, exasperated France 
grow hotter and hotter, talks of ‘ conflagration ;’ Mira- 
beau, without talk, has, as we perceive, descended on 
Paris again, close on the rear of the Parlement,’— 
not to quit his native soil any more. 

Over the Frontiers, behold Holland invaded by 
Prussia ;? the French party oppressed, England and 
the Stadtholder triumphing: to the sorrow of War- 
secretary Montmorin and all men. But without 

1 Fils Adoptif: Mirabeau, iv. 1. 5. 


2 October 1787. Montgaillard, i. 374. Besenvyal, iii, 283. 
Vou. I.—10 145 


146 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Boe 
(1O/, 


money, sinews of war, as of work, and of existence 
itself, what can a Chief Minister do? Taxes profit 
little; this of the Second Twentieth falls not due till 
next year; and will then, with its ‘strict valuation,’ 
produce more controversy than cash. Taxes on the 
Privileged Classes cannot be got registered ; are intol- 
erable to our supporters themselves: taxes on the Un- 
privileged yield nothing,—as from a thing drained dry 
more cannot be drawn. Hope is nowhere, if not in the 
old refuge of Loans. 

To Loménie, aided by the long head of Lamoignon, 
deeply pondering this sea of troubles, the thought sug- 
gested itself: Why not have a Successive’ Loan (4im- 
prunt Successif), or Loan that went on lending, year 
after year, as much as needful; say, till 1792? The 
trouble of registering such Loan were the same: we 
had then breathing time; money to work with, at least 
to subsist on. Edict of a Successive Loan. must be 
proposed. ‘T'o conciliate the Philosophes, let a liberal 
Edict walk in front of it, for emancipation of Protest- 
ants; let a liberal Promise guard the rear of it, that 
when our Loan ends, in that final 1792, the States- 
General shall be convoked. 

Such liberal Edict of Protestant Emancipation, the 
time having come for it, shall cost a Loménie as little 
as the ‘Death-penalties to be put in execution’ did. 
As for the liberal Promise, of States-General, it can 
be fulfilled or not: the fulfilment is five good years off; 
in five years much intervenes. But the registering ? 


ea Ya 


Chap. VI. LOMENIP’S. PLOTS. 147 
Oct.-Nov. 


Ah, truly, there is the difficulty !—However, we have 
that Promise of the Elders, given secretly at Troyes. 
Judicious gratuities, cajoleries, underground intrigues, 
with old Foulon, named ‘Ame dammnée, Familiar-demon, 
of the Parlement,’ may perhaps do the rest. At worst 
and lowest, the Royal Authority has resources,—which 
ought it not to put forth? If it cannot realize money, 
the Royal Authority is as good as dead; dead of that 
surest and miserablest death, inanition. Risk and 
win; without risk all is already lost! For the rest, 
as in enterprises of pith, a touch of stratagem often 
proves furthersome, his Majesty announces a Royal 
Hunt, for the 19th of November next; and all whom 
it concerns are joyfully getting their gear ready. 
Royal Hunt indeed; but of two-legged unfeathered 
game! At eleven in the morning of that Royal-Hunt 
day, 19th of November 1787, unexpected blare of 
trumpeting, tumult of charioteering and cavalcading 
disturbs the Seat of Justice: his Majesty is come, 
with (Garde-des-Sceaux Lamoignon, and Peers and 
retinue, to hold Royal Session and have Edicts reg- 
istered. What a change, since Louis XIV. entered 
here, in boots ; and, whip in hand, ordered his regis- 
tering to be done,—with an Olympian look, which 
none durst gainsay; and did, without stratagem, in 
such unceremonious fashion, hunt as well as register ! # 
For Louis XVI., on this day, the Registering will be 
enough ; if indeed he and the day. suffice for it. 


3 Dulaure, vi. 306. 


148 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. pe 
(ol, 


Meanwhile, with fit ceremonial words, the purpose 
of the royal breast is signified :—Two.Kdicts, for 
Protestant Emancipation, for Successive Loan: of 
both which Edicts our trusty Garde-des-Sceaux La- 
moignon will explain the purport; on both which a 
trusty Parlement is requested to deliver its opinion, 
each member having free privilege of speech. And 
so, Lamoignon too having perorated not amiss, and 
wound up with that Promise of States-General,—the 
Sphere-music of Parlementary eloquence begins. Ex- 
plosive, responsive, sphere answering sphere, it waxes 
louder and louder. The Peers sit attentive; of diverse 
sentiment: unfriendly to States-General; unfriendly 
to Despotism, which cannot reward merit, and is sup- 
pressing places. But what agitates his Highness 
d@’Orléans? The rubicund moon-head goes wagging ; 
darker beams the copper visage, like unscoured cop- 
per; in the glazed eye is disquietude; he rolls uneasy 
in his seat, as if he meant something. Amid unut- 
terable satiety, has sudden new appetite, for new for- 
bidden fruit, been vouchsafed him’ Disgust and 
edacity ; laziness that cannot rest; futile ambition, 
revenge, non-admiralship:—O, within that carbun- 
cled skin what a confusion of confusions sits bottled! 

‘Eight Couriers,’ in the course of the day, gallop 
from Versailles, where Loménie waits palpitating ; 
and gallop back again, not with the best news. In 
the outer Courts of the Palais, huge buzz. of expec- 
tation reigns; it is whispered the Chief Minister has 


Chap. VI. LOMENIF’S PLOTS. 149 


November. 


lost six votes overnight. And from within, resounds 
nothing but forensic eloquence, pathetic and even in- 
dignant ; heart-rending appeals to the royal clemency, 
that his Majesty would please to summon States-Gen- 
eral forthwith, and be the Savior of France :—where- 
in dusky-glowing D’Espréménil, but still more Saba- 
tier de Cabre, and Fréteau, since named Commére 
Fréteau (Goody Fréteau), are among the loudest. 
For six mortal hours it lasts, in this manner; the 
infinite hubbub unslackened. 

And so now, when brown dusk is falling through 
the windows, and no end visible, His Majesty, on hint 
of Garde-des-Sceaux Lamoignon, opens his royal lips 
once more to say, in brief, That he must have his 
Loan-Edict registered—Momentary deep pause !— 
See! Monseigneur d’Orléans rises; with moon-vis- 
age turned towards the royal platform, he asks, with 
a delicate graciosity of manner covering unutterable 
things: ‘‘ Whether it is a Bed of Justice, then, or a 
Royal Session?” Fire flashes on him from the throne 
and neighborhood: surly answer that “it is a Ses- 
sion.” In that case, Monseigneur will crave leave to 
remark that Edicts cannot be registered by order in a 
Session; and indeed to enter, against such registry, 
his individual humble Protest. ‘‘ Vous étes bien le 
maitre (You will do your pleasure),’’ answers the 
King; and thereupon, in high state, marches out, 
escorted by his Court-retinue; D’Orléans himself, as 
in duty bound, escorting him, but only to the gate. 


150 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book UL, 
787. 


Which duty done, D’Orléans returns in from the gate ; 
redacts his Protest, in the face of an applauding Par- 
lement, an applauding France; and so—has cut his 
Court-moorings, shall we say ? And will now sail 
and drift, fast enough, towards Chaos ? 


Thou foolish D’Orléans; Equality that art to be! 
Is Royalty grown a mere wooden Scarecrow; where- 
on thou, pert scaldheaded crow, mayest alight at pleas- 
ure, and peck? Not yet wholly. 

Next day, a Lettre-de-Cachet sends D’Orléans to 
bethink himself in his Chateau of Villers-Cotterets, 
where, alas, is no Paris with its Joyous necessaries of 
life; no fascinating indispensable Madame de Buffon, 
—light wife of a great Naturalist much too old for her. 
Monseigneur, it is said, does nothing but walk dis- 
tractedly, at Villers-Cotterets; cursing his stars. 
Versailles itself shall hear penitent wail from him, 
so hard is his doom. By a second, simultaneous 
Lettre-de-Cachet, Goody Fréteau is hurled into the 
Stronghold of Ham, amid the Norman marshes; by a 
third, Sabatier de Cabre into Mont St. Michel, amid 
the Norman quicksands. As for the Parlement, it 
must, on summons, travel out to Versailles, with its 
Register-Book under its arm, to have the Protest biffé 
(expunged) ; not without admonition, and even rebuke. 
A stroke of authority, which, one might have hoped, 
would quiet matters. 

Unhappily, no: it is a mere taste of the whip to 


Chap. VI. LOMENIE’S PLOTS. 151 


November, 


rearing coursers, which makes them rear worse! 
When a team of Twenty-five Millions begins rear- 
ing, what is Loménie’s whip? The Parlement. will 
nowise acquiesce meekly; and set to register the 
Protestant Edict, and do its other work, in salutary 
fear of these three Lettres-de-Cachet. Far from that, 
it begins questioning Lettres-de-Cachet generally, their 
legality, endurability ; emits dolorous objurgation, pe- 
tition on petition to have its three Martyrs delivered ; 
cannot, till that be complied with, so much as think of 
examining the Protestant Edict, but puts it off always 
‘till this day week.’ # 

In which objurgatory strain Paris and France joins - 
it, or rather has preceded it; making fearful chorus. 
And now also the other Parlements, at length opening 
their mouths, begin to join; some of them, as at 
“Grenoble and at Rennes, with portentous emphasis, 
—threatening, by way of reprisal, to interdict the 
very Tax-gatherer.° ‘In all former contests,” as 
_Malesherbes remarks, “it was the Parlement that 
excited the Public; but here it is the Public that ex- 
cites the Parlement.” 

£ Besenval, iii. 309. 5 Weber, i. 266. 


CHAPTER VII. 
INTERNECINE. 


Wuat a France, through these winter months of the 
year 1787! The very Giil-de-Boeuf is doleful, uncer- 
tain; with a general feeling, among the suppressed, 
that it were better to be in Turkey. The Wolf- 
hounds are suppressed, the Bear-hounds; Duke de 
Coigny, Duke de Polignac: in the Trianon little- 
heaven, her Majesty, one evening, takes Besenyal’s 
arm; asks his candid opinion. ‘The intrepid Besen- 
val, 


having, as he hopes, nothing of the sycophant 
in him,—plainly signifies that, with a Parlement in re- 
bellion, and an Mil-de-Boeuf in suppression, the King’s 
Crown is in danger ;—whereupon, singular to say, her 
Majesty, as if hurt, changed the subject, et ne me parla 
plus de rien!* 

To whom, indeed, can this poor Queen speak? In 
need of wise counsel, if ever mortal was; yet beset 
here only by the hubbub of chaos! . Her dwelling- 
place is so bright to the eye, and confusion and black 
care darkens it all. Sorrows of the Sovereign, sor- 
rows of the woman, thick-coming sorrows environ her 
more and more. Lamotte, the Necklace-Countess, has 


' Besenval, iii, 264. 
152 ee 


Chap. VII. INTERNECINE. HSS 
1787-88. a 


in these late months escaped, perhaps been suffered to 
escape, from the Salpétriére. Vain was the hope that 
Paris might thereby forget her; and this ever-widen- 
ing lie, and heap of lies, subside. The Lamotte, with 
a V (for Voleuse, Thief) branded on both shoulders, 
has got to England ; and will therefrom emit lie on 
lie; defiling the highest queenly name: mere dis- 
tracted lies;? which, in its present humor, France 
will greedily believe. 


For the rest, it is too clear our Successive Loan is 
not filling. As indeed, in such circumstances, a Loan 
registered by expunging of Protests was not the like- 
liest to fill. Denunciation of Lettres-de-Cachet, of 
Despotism generally, abates not: the Twelve Parle- 
ments are busy; the Twelve hundred Placarders, Bal- 
ladsingers, Pamphleteers. Paris is what, in figurative 
speech, they call ‘ flooded with pamphlets (regorge de 
brochures) ;’ flooded and eddying again. Hot deluge, 
—from so many Patriot ready-writers, all at the fervid 
or boiling point ; each ready-writer, now in the hour of 
eruption, going like an Iceland Geyser ! Against which 
what can a judicious Friend Morellet do; a Rivarol, 

-an unruly Linguet (well paid for it),—spouting cold ! 
Now also, at length, does come discussion, of the 
Protestant Edict: but only for new embroilment ; 


® Mémoires justificatifs de la Comtesse de Lamotte (London, 1788). 
Vie de Jeanne de St. Remi, Comtesse de Lamotte, &e. &e. See Diamond 


Necklace (ut supra). 


ee — —_— 


154 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. book Te : 


in pamphlet and counter-pamphlet, increasing the 
madness of men. Not even Orthodoxy, bedrid as she 
seemed, but will have a hand in this confusion. She 
once again in the shape of Abbé Lenfant, ‘whom Pre- 
lates drive to visit and congratulate,’ —raises audible 
sound from her pulpit-drum.? Or mark how D’Espré- 
ménil, who has his own confused way in all things, 
produces at the right moment in Parlementary ha- 
rangue, a pocket Crucifix, with the apostrophe : “ Will 
ye crucify him afresh?” Him, O D’Espréménil, 
without scruple ;—considering what poor stuff, of ivory 
and filigree, he is made of ! 

To all which add only, that poor Brienne has fallen 
sick; so hard was the tear and wear of his sinful 
youth, so violent, incessant is this agitation of his fool- 
ish old age. Baited, bayed at through so many throats, 
his Grace, growing consumptive, inflammatory (with 
humeur de dartre), lies reduced to milk diet; in exas- 
peration, almost in desperation; with ‘repose,’ pre- 
cisely the impossible recipe, prescribed as the indis- 
pensable.* 

On the whole, what can a poor Government do, but 
once more recoil ineffectual? The King’s Treasury is 
running towards the lees ; and Paris ‘eddies with a flood | 
of pamphlets.’ At all rates, let the latter subside a lit- 
tle! D’Orléans gets back to Raincy, which is nearer 
Paris and the fair. frail Buffon; finally to Paris itself : 


3 Lacretelle, iii. 343. Montgaillard, &c. 
4 Besenval, iii. 317. 


‘ 


Chap. VII. INT VE. 5 
oe NTERNECINE 155 


neither are Fréteau and Sabatier banished forever. 
‘The Protestant Edict is registered ; to the joy of Boissy 


_ protests expunged or else withdrawn, remains open,— 
_ the rather as few or none come to fill it. States-Gen- 
eral, for which the Parlement has clamored, and now 
| the whole Nation clamors, will follow ‘in five years,’ 


“Ha clamor was that! <‘ Messieurs,”’ said old D’Ormes- 
son, “you will get States-General, and you will repent 
j it.” Like the Horse in the Fable, who, to be avenged 
of his enemy, applied to the Man. The Man mounted ; 
4 did swift execution on the enemy; but, unhappily, 
would not dismount! Instead of five years, let three 
¥ years pass, and this clamorous Parlement shall have 
; both seen its enemy hurled prostrate, and been itself 
ridden to foundering (say rather, jugulated for hide 
and shoes), and lie dead in the ditch. 
pies such omens, however, we have reached the 


_ ment find passage for itself, but is everywhere shame- 
fully flung back. Beleaguered by Twelve rebellious 
-Parlements, which are grown to be the organs of an 
“amgry Nation, it can advance nowhither; can accom- 


_ 
Pes 


aten up of Deficit. 
_ The measure of the Iniquity, then, of the Falsehood 


d’Anglas and good Malesherbes: Successive Loan, all 


if indeed not sooner. O Parlement of Paris, what 


"spring of 1788. By no path can the King’s Govern- oS 


r 


156 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Ses 
108. 


nearly full? At least, that of the Misery is! From 
the hovels of the Twenty-five Millions, the misery, 
permeating upwards and forwards, as its law is, has 
got so far,—to the very (Hil-de-Beeuf of Versailles. 
Man’s hand, in this blind pain, is set against man: not 
only the low against the higher, but the higher against 
each other; Provincial Noblesse is bitter against Court 
Noblesse; Robe against Sword; Rochet against Pen. 
But against the King’s Government who is not bitter ? 
Not even Besenval, in these days. ‘To it all men and 
bodies of men are become as enemies ; it is the centre 
whereon infinite contentions unite and clash. What 
new universal vertiginous movement is this; of Insti- 
tutions, social Arrangements, individual Minds, which 
once worked codperative ; now rolling and grinding in 
distracted collision? Inevitable: it is the breaking- 
up of a World-Solecism, worn out at last, down even 
to bankruptcy of money! And so this poor Versailles 
Court, as the chief or central Solecism, finds all the 
other Solecisms arrayed against it. Most natural! 
For your human Solecism, be it Person or Combina- 
tion of Persons, is ever, by law of Nature, uneasy ; if 
verging towards bankruptcy, it is even miserable :— 
and when would the meanest Solecism consent to 
blame or amend ‘?tse/f, while there remained another 
to amend ? 

These threatening signs do not terrify Loménie, 
much less teach him. Loménie, though of light na- 
ture, is not without courage, of a sort. Nay, have we 


Neen 
one 


Chap. VII. INTERNECINE. 157 
April. 


not read of lightest creatures, trained Canary-birds, 
that could fly cheerfully with lighted matches, and fire 
cannon; fire whole powder-magazines? To sit and 
die of Deficit is no part of Loménie’s plan. The evil 
is considerable; but can he not remove it, can he not 
attack it? At lowest, he can attack the symptom of 
it: these rebellious Parlements he can attack, and per- 
haps remove. Much is dim to Loménie, but two things 
are clear: that such Parlementary duel with Royalty 
is growing perilous, nay internecine; above all, that 
money must be-had. Take thought, brave Loménie; 
thou Garde-des-Sceaux Lamoignon, who hast ideas! 
So often defeated, balked cruelly when the golden fruit 
seemed within clutch, rally for one other struggle. To 
tame the Parlement, to fill the King’s coffers: these 
are now life-and-death questions. 

-Parlements haye-been tamed, more than once. Set 
to perch ‘on the peaks of rocks inaccessible except by 
litters,’ a Parlement grows reasonable. O Maupeou, 
thou bold bad man, had we left thy work where it — 
was !—But apart from exile, or other violent methods, 
is there not one method, whereby all things are tamed, 
even lions? The method of hunger! What if the 
Parlement’s supplies were cut off; namely its Law- 
suits ! 

Minor Courts, for the trying of innumerable minor 
causes, might be instituted: these we could call Grand 
Bailliages. Whereon the Parlement, shortened of its. 
prey, would look with yellow despair; but the Public, 


158 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book 11 
108, 


fond of cheap justice, with favor and hope. Then 
for Finance, for registering of Edicts, why not, from 
our own iil-de-Boeuf Dignitaries, our Princes, Dukes, 
Marshals, make a thing we could call Plenary Court ; 
and there, so to speak, do our registering ourselves ? 
Saint Louis had his Plenary Court, of Great Barons ;° 
most useful to him: our Great Barons are still here (at 
least the Name of them is still here); our necessity is 
greater than his. 

Such is the Loménie-Lamoignon device; welcome 
to the King’s Council, as a light-beam in great dark- 
ness. The device seems feasible, it is eminently need- 
ful: be it once well executed, great deliverance is 
wrought. Silent, then, and steady; now or never! 
—the World shall see one other Historical Scene; and 
so singular a man as Loménie de Brienne still the 
Stage-manager there. 

Behold, accordingly, a Home-Secretary Bréteuil 
‘beautifying Paris,’ in the peaceablest manner, in 
this hopeful spring weather of 1788; the old hovels 
and hutches disappearing from our Bridges: as if for 
the State too there were halcyon weather, and nothing 
to do but beautify. Parlement seems to sit acknow- 
ledged victor. Brienne says nothing of Finance; or 
even says, and prints, that it is all well. How is 
this; such haleyon quiet ; though the Successive Loan 
did not fill? In a victorious Parlement, Counsellor 
Goeslard de Monsabert even denounces that ‘levying 


5 Montgaillard, i. 405. 


Chap. VII. INTERNECINE. 159 
April, 


of the Second Twentieth on strict valuation ;’ and gets 
decree that the valuation shall not be strict,—not on 
the Privileged classes. Nevertheless. Brienne endures 
it, launches no Lettre-de-Cachet against it. How is 
this ? 

Smiling is such vernal weather; but treacherous, 
sudden! For one thing, we hear it whispered, ‘the 
‘Intendants of Provinces have all got order to be at 
‘their posts on a certain day.’ Still more singular, 
what incessant Printing is this that goes on at the 
King’s Chateau, under lock and key?  Sentries 
occupy all gates and windows; the Printers come 
not out; they sleep in their workrooms; their very 
food is handed in to them!® A victorious Parlement 
smells new danger. D’Espréménil has ordered horses 
to Versailles; prowls round that guarded Printing- 
Office; prying, snuffing, if so be the sagacity and 
ingenuity of man may penetrate it. 

To a shower of gold most things are penetrable. 
D’Espréménil descends on the lap of a Printer’s 
Danaé, in the shape of ‘five hundred louis d’or;’ the 
Danaé’s Husband smuggles a ball of clay to her; 
which she delivers to the golden Counsellor of Parle- 
ment. Kneaded within it, there stick printed proof- 
sheets:—by Heaven! the royal Edict of that same 
self-registering Plenary Court; of those Grand Bail- 
liages that shall cut short our Lawsuits! It is to be 

6 Weber, i. 276. 


160 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book aL. 
d ie 


promulgated over all France-on one and the same 
day. 

This, then, is what the Intendants were bid wait 
for at their posts: this is what the Court sat hatching, 
as its accursed cockatrice-egg; and would not stir, 
though provoked, till the brood were out! Hie with 
it, D’Espréménil, home to Paris; convoke instantane- 
ous Sessions; let the Parlement, and the Earth, and 
the Heavens know it. 


sy 


CHAPTER VIII. 
LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. 


On the morrow, which is the 3d of May 1788, an 
astonished Parlement sits convoked ; listens speechless 
to the speech of D’Espréménil, unfolding the infinite 
misdeed. Deed of treachery; of unhallowed dark- 
ness, such as Despotism loves! Denounce it, O 
Parlement of Paris; awaken France and the Uni- 
verse; roll what thunder-barrels of forensic eloquence 
thou hast: with thee too it is verily Now or never ! 

The Parlement is not wanting, at such. juncture. 
In the hour of_his extreme jeopardy, the lion first 
incites himself by roaring, by lashing his sides. So 
here the Parlement of Paris. On the motion of 
D’Espréménil, a most patriotic Oath, of the One- 
and-all sort, is sworn, with united throat ;—an excel- 
lent new-idea, which, in these coming years, shall not 
remain unimitated. Next comes indomitable Decla- 
ration, almost of the rights of man, at least of the 
rights of Parlement; Invocation to the friends of 
French Freedom, in this and in subsequent time. 
All which, or the essence of all which, is brought to 
paper; in a tone wherein something of plaintiveness 
blends with, and tempers, heroic valor. And thus, 

Vor. I.—11 161 


162 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book 
155, 


having sounded the storm-bell,—which Paris hears, 
which all France will hear; and hurled such defiance 
in the teeth of Loménie and Despotism, the Parlement 
retires as from a tolerable first day’s work. 

But how Loménie felt to see his cockatrice-egg (so 
essential to the salvation of France) broken in this 
premature manner, let readers fancy! Indignant he 
clutches at his thunderbolts (de Cachet, of the Seal) ; 
and launches two of them: a bolt for D’Espréménil ; 
a bolt for that busy Goeslard, whose service in the 
Second Twentieth and ‘strict valuation’ is not for- 
gotten. Such bolts clutched promptly overnight, and 
launched with the early new morning, shall strike 
agitated Paris if not into requiescence, yet into whole- 
some astonishment. 

Ministerial thunderbolts may be launched; but if 
they do not hit? D’Espréménil and Goeslard, warned, 
both of them, as is thought, by the singing of some 
friendly bird, elude the Loménie Tipstaves; escape 
disguised through skywindows, over roofs, to their own 
Palais de Justice: the thunderbolts have missed. Paris 
(for the buzz flies abroad) is struck into astonishment 
not wholesome. The two Martyrs of Liberty doff their 
disguises ; don their long gowns: behold, in the space 
of an hour, by aid of ushers and swift runners, the 
Parlement, with its Counsellors, Presidents, even Peers, 
sits anew assembled. The assembled Parlement de- 
clares that these its two Martyrs cannot be given up, 
to any sublunary authority; moreover that the ‘ses- 


Chap. vit. LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. 163 


sion is permanent,’ admitting of no adjournment, till 
pursuit of them has been relinquished. 

And so, with forensic eloquence, denunciation and 
protest, with couriers going and returning, the Parle- 
ment, in this state of continual explosion that shall 
cease neither night nor day, waits the issue. Awak- 
ened Paris once more inundates those outer courts; 
boils, in floods wilder than ever, through all avenues. 
Dissonant hubbub there is; jargon as of Babel, in the 
hour when they were first smitten (as here) with 
mutual unintelligibility, and the people had not yet 
dispersed ! 

Paris City goes through its diurnal epochs, of work- 
ing and slumbering; and now, for the second time, 
most European and African mortals are asleep. But 
here, in this Whirlpool of Words, sleep falls not; the 
Night spreads her coverlid of Darkness over it in vain. 
Within is the sound of mere martyr invincibility ; tem- 
pered with the due tone of plaintiveness. Without is 
the infinite expectant hum,—growing drowsier a little. 
So has it lasted for six-and-thirty hours. 

But hark, through the dead of midnight, what tramp 
is this? Tramp as of armed men, foot and horse; 
Gardes Francaises, Gardes Suisses: marching hither ; 


in silent regularity ; in the flare of torchlight! There 


are Sappers too, with axes and crowbars: apparently, 
if the doors open not, they will be forced !—It is Cap- 
tain D’Agoust, missioned from Versailles. D’Agoust, 
a man of known firmness; who once forced Prince 


pat: 


164 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Booey 


Condé himself, by mere incessant looking at him, to 
give satisfaction and fight:' he now, with axes and 
torches, is advancing on the very sanctuary of Justice. 
Sacrilegious; yet what help? The man is a soldier; 
looks merely at his orders; impassive, moves forward 
like an inanimate engine. 

The doors open on summons, there need no axes; 
door after door. And now the innermost door opens ; 
discloses the long-gowned Senators of France; a hun- 
dred and sixty-seven by tale, seventeen of them Peers; 
sitting there, majestic, ‘in permanent session.’ Were 
not the man military, and of cast-iron, this sight, this 
silence reéchoing the clank of his own boots, might 
stagger him! For the hundred and sixty-seven receive 
him in perfect silence; which some liken to that of the 
Roman Senate overfallen by Brennus; some to that of 
a nest of coiners surprised by officers of the Police.? 
Messieurs, said D’Agoust, De par le Roi! Express 
order has charged D’Agoust with the sad duty of arrest- 
ing two individuals: M. Duval d’Espréménil and M. 
Goeslard de Monsabert. Which respectable individuals, 
as he has not the honor of knowing them, are hereby 
invited, in the King’s name, to surrender themselves.— 
Profound silence! Buzz, which grows a murmur: 
“We are all D’Espréménils!’’ ventures a voice; which 
other voices repeat. The President inquires, Whether 
he will employ violence? Captain D’Agoust, honored 
with his Majesty’s commission, has to execute his 


* Weber, i. 283. ® Besenval, iii. 355. 


ee VIII. LOMENIE’'S DEATH-THROES. 165 


Majesty's order ; would so gladly do it without violence, 
will in any case do it; grants an august Senate space 
to deliberate which method they prefer. And thereupon 
D’ Agoust, with grave military courtesy, has withdrawn 
for the moment. 

What boots it, august Senators? All avenues are 
closed with fixed bayonets. Your Courier gallops to 
Versailles, through the dewy Night; but also gallops 
back again, with tidings that the order is authentic, 
that it is irrevocable. The outer courts simmer with 
idle population ; but D’Agoust’s grenadier-ranks stand 
there as immovable floodgates: there will be no revolt- 
ing to deliver you. ‘ Messieurs!’’ thus spoke D’Ks- 
préménil, “when the victorious Gauls entered Rome, 
which they had carried by assault, the Roman Sena- 
tors, clothed in their purple, sat there, in their curule 
chairs, with a proud and tranquil countenance, await- 
ing slavery or death. Such too is the lofty spectacle, 
which you, in this hour, offer to the universe (@ /’univers), 
after having generously ’’—with much more of the like, 
as can still be read.* 

In vain, O D’Espréménil! Here is this cast-iron 
Captain D’Agoust, with his cast-iron military air, come 
back. Despotism, constraint, destruction sit waving in ~ 
his plumes. D’Espréménil must fall silent ; heroically 
give himself up, lest worse befall. Him Goeslard 
heroically imitates. With spoken and speechless emo- 
tion, they fling themselves into the arms of their Par- 


3 Toulongeon, i. App. 20. 


166 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. —— 


lementary brethren, for a last embrace: and so amid 
plaudits and plaints, from a hundred and sixty-five 
throats ; amid wavings, sobbings, a whole forest-sigh 
of Parlementary pathos,—they are led through wind- 
ing passages, to the rear-gate; where, in the gray of 
the morning, two Coaches with Hzrempts stand wait- 
ing. There must the victims mount; bayonets mena- 
cing behind. D’Espréménil’s stern question to the 
populace, ‘ Whether they have courage?’ is answered 
by silence. They mount, and roll; and neither the 
rising of the May sun (it is the 6th morning), nor its 
setting shall lighten their heart: but they fare forward 
continually ; D’Espréménil towards the utmost Isles 
of Sainte Marguerite, or Hiéres (supposed by some, if 
that is any comfort, to be Calypso’s Island); Goeslard 
towards the land-fortress of Pierre-en-Cize, extant then, 
near the City of Lyons. 

Captain D’Agoust may now therefore look forward 
to Majorship, to Commandantship of the Tuileries ;t— 
and withal vanish from History; where nevertheless 
he has been fated to do a notable thing. For not only 
are D’Espréménil and Goeslard safe whirling southward, 
but the Parlement itself has straightway to march out: 
to that also his inexorable order reaches. Gathering 
up their long skirts, they file out, the whole Hundred 
and Sixty-five of them, through two rows of unsym- 
pathetic grenadiers: a spectacle to gods and men. The 
people revolt not ; they only wonder and grumble: also, 

* Montgaillard, i. 404, 


Chap. vill. LOMENIE’'S DEATH-THROES. 167 
May-July. 


we remark, these unsympathetic grenadiers are Gardes 
Frangaises,—who, one day, will sympathize! In a 
word, the Palais de Justice is swept clear, the doors of 
it are locked; and D’Agoust returns to Versailles with 
the key in his pocket,—having, as was said, merited 
preferment. 

As for this Parlement of Paris, now turned out to 
the street, we will without reluctance leave it there. 
The Beds of Justice it had to undergo, in the coming 
fortnight, at Versailles, in’ registering, or rather re- 
fusing to register, those new-hatched Edicts; and how 
it assembled in taverns and tap-rooms there, for the 
purpose of Protesting ;° or hovered disconsolate, with 


_outspread skirts, not knowing where to assemble; and 


was reduced to lodge Protest ‘with a Notary ;’ and in 
the end, to sit still (in a state of forced ‘ vacation ’), 
and do nothing: all this, natural now, as the burying 
of the dead after battle, shall not concern us. The 
Parlement of Paris has as good as performed its part; 
doing and misdoing, so far, but hardly further, could 
it stir the world. 


Loménie has removed the evil, then? Not at all: 
not so much as the symptom of the evil; scarcely the 
twelfth part of the symptom, and exasperated the 
other eleven! The Intendants of Provinces, the 
military Commandants are at their posts on the ap- 
pointed 8th of May: but in no Parlement, if not in 

5 Weber, i. 299-303. 


168 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book M1, 
(folon 


the single one of Douai, can these new Edicts 
get registered. Not peaceable signing with ink ; 
but browbeating, bloodshedding, appeal to primary 
club-law! Against these Bailliages, against this 
Plenary Court, exasperated Themis everywhere shows 
face of battle; the Provincial Noblesse are of her 
party, and whoever hates Loménie and the evil time; 
with her Attorneys and Tipstaves, she enlists and 
operates down even to the populace. At Rennes in 
Brittany, where the historical Bertrand de Moleville 
is Intendant, it has passed from fatal continual duel- 
ling, between the military aud gentry, to street-fight- 
ing; to stone-volleys and musket-shot: and still the 
Edicts remain unregistered. The afflicted Bretons 
send remonstrance to Loménie, by a Deputation of 
Twelve ; whom, however, Loménie, having heard them, 
shuts up in the Bastille. A second larger Deputation 
he meets, by his scouts, on the road, and persuades or 
frightens back. But now a third largest Deputation 
is indignantly sent by many roads: refused audience 
on arriving, it meets to take counsel; invites Lafay- 
ette and all Patriot Bretons in Paris to assist; agitates 
itself; becomes the Breton Club, first germ of—the 
Jacobins’ Society.® 

So many as eight Parlements get exiled:’ others 
might need that remedy, but it is one not always easy 


6 A. F. de Bertrand-Moleville: Mémoires Particuliers (Paris, 1816), 
i.ch.i. Marmontel: Mémoires, iv. 27. 
7 Montgaillard, i. 308. 


Chap. VIII. LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. 169 
May-July. 


of appliance. At Grenoble, for instance, where a 
Mounier, a Barnave have not been idle, the Parle- 
ment had due order (by Lettres-de-Cachet) to depart, 
and exile itself: but on the morrow, instead of coaches 
getting yoked, the alarm-bell bursts forth, ominous; 
and peals and booms all day: crowds of mountaineers 
rush down, with axes, even with firelocks,—whom 
(most ominous of all!) the soldiery shows no eagerness 
to deal with. ‘Axe over head,’ the poor General has 
to sign capitulation; to engage that the Lettres-de- 
Cachet shall remain unexecuted, and a beloved Par- 
lement stay where it is. Besangon, Dijon, Rouen, 
Bourdeaux, are not what they should be! At Pau 
in Bearn, where the old Commandant had failed, the 
new one (a Grammont, native to them) is met by 
a Procession of townsmen with the Cradle of Henri 
Quatre, the Palladium of their town; is conjured as 
he venerates this old Tortoise-shell, in which the great 
Henri was rocked, not to trample on Bearnese liberty ; 
is informed, withal, that his Majesty’s cannon are all 
safe—in the keeping of his Majesty’s faithful Burghers 
of Pau, and do now lie pointed on the walls there ; 
ready for action !§ 

At this rate, your Grand Bailliages are like to have~ 
a stormy infancy. As for the Plenary Court, it has 
literally expired in the birth. The very Courtiers 
looked shy at it; old Marshal Broglie declined the 
honor of sitting therein. Assaulted by a universal 


8 Besenval, iii. 348. 


170 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book III. 


storm of mingled ridicule and execration,® this poor 
Plenary Court met once, and never any second time. 
Distracted country! Contention hisses up, with forked 
hydra-tongues, wheresoever poor Loménie sets his foot. 
‘Let a Commandant, a Commissioner of the King,’ 
says Weber, ‘enter one of these Parlements to have 
‘an Edict registered, the whole Tribunal will disap- 
‘pear, and leave the Commandant alone with the 
‘Clerk and First President. The Edict registered 
‘and the Commandant gone, the whole Tribunal 
‘hastens back, to declare such registration null. ‘The 
‘highways are covered with Grand Deputations of 
‘Parlements, proceeding to Versailles, to have their 
‘registers expunged by the King’s hand; or return- 
‘ing home, to cover a new page with a new resolution 
‘still more audacious.’ 

Such is the France of this year 1788. Not now 
a Golden or Paper Age .of Hope; with its horse- 
racings, balloon-flyings, and finer sensibilities of the 
heart: ah, gone is that; its golden effulgence paled, 
bedarkened in this singular manner,—brewing towards 
preternatural weather! For, as in that wreck-storm 


° La Cour Pléniére, héroi-tragi-comédie en trois actes et en prose; 
jouée le 14 Juillet 1788, par une société d’amateurs dans un Chateau 
aux environs de Versailles; par M. l’Abbé de Vermond, Lecteur de 
la Reine: A Baville (Lamoignon’s Country-house), etse trouve & Paris, 
chez la Veuve Liberté, 4 l’enseigne de la Révolution, 1788.—La Pas- 
sion, la Mort et la Résurrection dw Peuple: Imprimé A Jerusalem, &e. 
&e.—See Montgaillard. i. 407. 

10 Weber, i. 275: 


Se 


Chap. VIII. LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. Ve 
May-July. 


of Paul et Virginie and Saint-Pierre,—‘ One huge 


‘motionless cloud’ (say, of Sorrow and Indignation) 
‘girdles our whole horizon; streams up, hairy, copper- 
“edged, over a sky of the color of lead.’ Motionless 
itself; but ‘small clouds’ (as exiled Parlements and 
suchlike), ‘parting from it, fly over the zenith, with 
the velocity of birds:’—till at last, with one loud 
howl, the whole Four Winds be dashed together, and 
all the world exclaim, There is the tornado! Tout 
le-monde s’écria, Voilé UVouragan! 


For the rest, in such circumstances, the Successive 
Loan, very naturally, remains unfilled; neither, in- 
deed, can that impost of the Second Twentieth, at 
least not on ‘strict valuation,’ be levied to good pur- 
pose: ‘Lenders,’ says Weber, in his hysterical vehe- 
ment manner, ‘are afraid of ruin; tax-gatherers of 
hanging.’ The very Clergy turn away their face: 
convoked in Extraordinary Assembly, they afford 
no gratuitous gift (don gratuit),—if it be not that 
of advice; here too instead of cash is clamor for 
States-General.” 

O Loménie-Brienne, with thy poor flimsy mind all 
bewildered, and now ‘three actual cauteries’ on thy 
worn-out body; who art like to die of inflammation, 
provocation, milk-diet, dartres vives and maladie— 
(best untranslated) ;’? and presidest over a France 


11 Lameth: Assemb. Const. (Introd.) p. 87. 
12 Montgaillard, i. 424. 


172 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. noo 


with innumerable actual cauteries, which also is dying 
of inflammation and the rest! Was it wise to quit 
the bosky verdures of Brienne, and thy new ashlar 
ChAteau there, and what it held, for this? Soft were 
those shades and lawns; sweet the hymns of Poetasters, 
the blandishments of high-rouged Graces: and always 
this and the other Philosophe Morellet (nothing deem- 
ing himself or thee a questionable Sham-Priest) could 
be so happy in making happy :—and also (hadst thou 
known it), in the Military School hard by, there sat, 
studying mathematics, a dusky-complexioned taciturn 
Boy, under the name of: NAPpoLEoN BoNAPARTE!— 
With fifty years of effort, and one final dead-lift strug- 
gle, thou hast made an exchange! Thou hast got thy 
robe of office,—as Hereules had his Nessus’-shirt. 

On the 13th of July of this 1788, there fell, on the 
very edge of harvest, the most frightful hailstorm ; 
scattering into wild waste the Fruits of the Year; 
which had otherwise suffered grievously by drought. 
For sixty leagues round Paris especially, the ruin was 
almost total.“ To so many other evils, then, there is 
to be added, that of dearth, perhaps of famine. 

Some days before this hailstorm, on the 5th of July ; 
and still more decisively some days after it, on the 8th 
of August,—Loménie announces that the States-Gen- 
eral are actually to meet in the following month of 
May. Till after which period, this of the Plenary 
Court, and the rest, shall remaih postponed. Fur- 


13 See Mémoires de Morellet. 14 Marmontel, iv. 30. 


Chap. VIN. LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. 1738 
July-August. 


ther, as in Loménie there is no plan of forming or 
holding these most desirable States-General, ‘ thinkers 
are invited’ to furnish him with one,—through the 
medium of discussion by the public press! 

What could a poor Minister do?» There are still 
ten months of respite reserved: a sinking pilot will 
fling out all things, his very biscuit-bags, lead, log, 
compass and quadrant, before flinging out Admself. 
It is on this principle, of sinking, and the incipient 
delirium of despair, that we explain likewise the al- 
most miraculous ‘invitation to thinkers.’ Invitation 
to Chaos to be so kind as build, out of its tumultuous 
drift-wood, an Ark of Escape for him! In these 
cases, not invitation but command has usually proved 
serviceable.—The Queen stood, that evening, pensive, 
in a window, with her face turned towards the Garden. 
The Chef de Gobelet had followed her with an obse- 
quious cup of coffee; and then retired till it were 
sipped. Her Majesty beckoned Dame Campan to 
approach: “ Grand Diew!”’ murmured she, with the 
cup in her hand, “what a piece of news will be made 
public to-day! The King grants States-General.”’ 
Then raising her eyes to Heaven (if Campan were 
not mistaken), she added: ‘“’Tis a first beat of the: 


drum, of ill-omen for France. ‘This Noblesse will 


ruin us.’ 


During all that hatching of the Plenary Court, 
while Lamoignon looked so mysterious, Besenval had 


15 Campan, iii. 104, 111. 


174 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book II. 
108. 


kept asking him one question: Whether they had 
cash? To which as Lamoignon always answered 
(on the faith of Loménie) that the cash was safe, 
judicious Besenval rejoined that then all was safe. 
Nevertheless, the melancholy fact is, that the royal 
coffers are almost getting literally void of coin. In- 
deed, apart from all other things, this ‘invitation to 
thinkers,’ and the great change now at hand are 
enough to ‘arrest the circulation of capital,’ and for- 
ward only that of pamphlets. A few thousand gold 
louis are now all of money or money’s worth that re- 
mains in the King’s Treasury. With another move- 
ment as of desperation, Loménie invites Necker to 
come and be Controller of Finances! Necker has 
other work in view than controlling Finances for 
Loménie; with a dry refusal he stands taciturn ; 
awaiting his time. 

What shall a desperate Prime Minister do? He 
has grasped at the strongbox of the King’s Theatre: 
some Lottery had been set on foot for those sufferers 
by the hailstorm; in his extreme necessity, Loménie 
lays hands even on this.’* To make provision for the 
passing day, on any terms, will soon be impossible.— 
On the 16th of August, poor Weber heard, at Paris 
and Versailles, hawkers, ‘with a hoarse stifled tone 
of voice (voix étouffée, sourde),’ drawling and snuf- 
fling, through the streets, an KHdict concerning Pay- 
ments (such was the soft title Rivarol had contrived 


16 Besenval, iii. 360, 


Chap. VIII. LOMENIE’S DEATH-THROES. NW es, 
August, 


for it): all Payments at the Royal Treasury shall be 
made henceforth, three-fifths in Cash, and the remain~ 
ing two-fifths—in Paper bearing interest! Poor ~ 
Weber almost swooned at the sound of these cracked 
voices, with their bodeful raven-note; and will never 
. forget the effect it had on him.” 

But the effect on Paris, on the world generally ? 
From the dens of Stock-brokerage, from the heights 
of Political Economy, of Neckerism and Philosophism ; 
from all articulate and inarticulate throats, rise hoot- 
ings and howlings, such as ear had not yet heard. 
Sedition itself may be imminent! Monseigneur 
d’Artois, moved by Duchess Polignac, feels called 
to wait upon her Majesty; and explain frankly what 
crisis matters stand in. ‘The Queen wept;’ Brienne 
himself wept ;—for it is now visible and palpable that 
he must go. . 

Remains only that the Court, to whom his manners 
and garrulities were always agreeable, shall make his 
fall soft. The grasping old man has already got his 
Archbishopship of Toulouse exchanged for the richer 
one of Sens: and now, in this hour of pity, he shall 
have the Coadjutorship for his nephew (hardly yet of 
due age); a Dameship of the Palace for his niece; a 
Regiment for her husband; for himself a red Cardi- 
nal’s-hat, a Oowpe de Bois (cutting from the royal 
forests), and on the whole ‘from five to six hundred 
thousand livres of revenue:’' finally, his Brother, 


17 Weber, i. 339. 18 Thid. i, 341. 


176 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. oe 
= (00, 


the Comte de Brienne, shall still continue War-minis- 
ter. Buckled-round with such bolsters and huge feath- 
erbeds of Promotion, let him now fall as soft as he 
can ! 

And so Loménie departs: rich if Court-titles and 
Money-bonds can enrich him; but if these cannot, 
perhaps the poorest of all extant men. ‘ Hissed at 
by the people of Versailles,’ he drives forth to Jardi; 
southward to Brienne,—for recovery of health. Then 
to Nice, to Italy; but shall return; shall glide to and 
fro, tremulous, faint-twinkling, fallen on awful times: 
till the Guillotine—snuff out his weak existence? 
Alas, worse: for it is blown out, or choked out, 
foully, pitiably, on the way to the Guillotine! In his 
Palace of Sens, rude Jacobin Bailiffs made him drink 
with them from his own wine-cellars, feast with them 
from his own larder; and on the morrow morning, the 
miserable old man lies dead. This is the end of Prime 
Minister, Cardinal Archbishop Loménie de Brienne. 
Flimsier mortal was seldom fated to do as weighty a 
mischief; to have a life as despicable-envied, an exit 
as frightful. Fired, as the phrase is, with ambition: 
blown, like a kindled rag, the sport of winds, not this 
way, not that way, but of all ways, straight towards 
such a powder-mine,—which he kindled! Let us 
pity the hapless Loménie; and forgive him; and, as 
soon as possible, forget him. 


SOT h ee 


CHAPTER IX. 
BURIAL WITH BONFIRE. 


BEsENVAL, during these extraordinary operations, 
of Payment two-fifths in Paper, and change of Prime 
Minister, had been out on a tour through his District 
of Command; and indeed, for the last months, peace- 
fully drinking the waters of Contrexéville. Returning 
now, in the end of August, towards Moulins, and 
‘knowing nothing,’ he arrives one evening at Langres; 
finds the whole town in a state of uproar (grande ru- 
meur). Doubtless some sedition ; a thing too common 
in these days! He alights nevertheless; inquires of a 
‘man tolerably dressed,’ what the matter is '—‘‘ How?” 
answers the man, “ you have not heard the news? The 
Archbishop is thrown out, and M. Necker is recalled ; 
and all is going to go well!’’? 


Such rumeur and vociferous acclaim has risen round 
M. Necker, ever from ‘that day when he issued from - 


the Queen’s Apartments,’ a nominated Minister. It 


was on the 24th of August: ‘the galleries of the Cha- 
‘teau, the courts, the streets of Versailles; in few 
‘hours, the Capital; and, as the news flew, all France, 


1 Besenval, iii. 366. 
Vou. I.—12 177 


178 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book TIL 
150. 


‘resounded with the cry of Vive le Roi! Vive M. 
‘ Necker !’? In Paris indeed it unfortunately got the 
length of ‘turbulence.’ Petards, rockets go off, in the 
Place Dauphine, more than enough. A ‘wicker Figure 
(Mannequin d’osier),’ in Archbishop’s stole, made em- 
blematically, three-fifths of it satin, two-fifths of it 
paper, is promenaded, not in silence, to the popular 
judgment-bar; is doomed; shriven by a mock Abbé 
de Vermond; then solemnly consumed by fire, at the 
foot of Henri’s Statue on the Pont Neuf;—with such 
petarding and huzzaing that Chevalier Dubois and his 
City-watch see good finally to make a charge (more or 
less ineffectual) ; and there wanted not burning of sen- 
try-boxes, forcing of guard-houses, and also ‘dead 
bodies thrown into the Seine over-night,’ to avoid new 
effervescence.* 

Parlements therefore shall return from exile: Plen- 
ary Court, Payment two-fifths in Paper have vanished ; 
gone off in smoke, at the foot of Henri’s Statue. 
States-General (with a Political Millennium) are now 
certain; nay, it shall be announced, in our fond haste, 
for January next: and all, as the Langres man said, 
is ‘ going to go.’ 

To the prophetic glance of Besenval, one other thing 
is too apparent: that Friend Lamoignon cannot keep 


2 Weber, i. 342. 

3 Histovre Parlementaire dela Révolution Francaise; ou Journal des 
Assemblées Nationales depuis 1789 (Paris, 1833 et seqq.), i. 253. La- 
meth: Assemblée Constituante, i. (Introd.) p. 89. 


. - 


Chap. IX. BURIAL WITH BONFIRE. 179 
Sept. 14th-16th. 


his Keepership. Neither he nor War-minister Comte de 
Brienne! Already old Foulon, with an eye to be war- 
minister himself, is making underground movements. 
This is that same Foulon named dme damnée du Par- 
lement ; aman grown gray in treachery, in griping, 
projecting, intriguing and iniquity ; who once when it 
was objected, to some finance-scheme of his, “‘ What 
will the people do ?’’—made answer, in the fire of dis- 
cussion, “‘ The people may eat grass:’’ hasty words, 
which fly abroad irrevocable,—and will send back 
tidings ! 

Foulon, to the relief of the world, fails on this occa- 
sion; and will always fail. Nevertheless it steads not 
M. de Lamoignon. It steads not the doomed man that 
he have interviews with the King ; and be ‘seen to re- 
turn radieux,’ emitting rays. Lamoignon is the hated 
of Parlements: Comte de Brienne is Brother to the 
Cardinal Archbishop. The 24th of August has been ; 
and the 14th September is not yet, when they two, 
as their great Principal had done, descend,—made to 
fall soft, like him. 


And now, as if the last burden had been rolled from 
its heart, and assurance were at length perfect, Paris — 
bursts forth anew into extreme jubilee. The Basoche 
rejoices aloud, that the foe of Parlements is fallen ; No- 
bility, Gentry, Commonalty have rejoiced ; and rejoice. 
Nay now, with new emphasis, Rascality itself, starting 
suddenly from its dim depths, will arise and do it,—for 


180 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Eek 


down even thither the new Political Evangel, in some 
rude version or other, has penetrated. It is Monday, 
the 14th of September 1788: Rascality assembles 
anew, in great force, in the Place Dauphine; lets off 
petards, fires blunderbusses, to an incredible extent, 
without interval, for eighteen hours. There is again a 
* the centre of 
endless howlings. Also Necker’s Portrait snatched, 


or purchased, from some Printshop, is borne proces- 


wicker Figure, ‘ Mannequin of osier: 


sionally, aloft on a perch, with huzzas:—an example 
to be remembered. 

But chiefly on the Pont Neuf, where the Great 
Henri, in bronze, rides sublime; there do the crowds 
gather. All passengers must stop, till they have bowed 
to the People’s King, and said audibly: Vive Henri 
Quatre ; au diable Lamoignon! No carriage but must 
stop; not even that of his Highness d’Orléans. Your 
coach-doors are opened: Monsieur will please to put 
forth his head and bow; or even, if refractory, to 
alight altogether, and kneel: from Madame a wave of 
her plumes, a smile of her fair face, there where she 
sits, shall suffice:—and surely a coin or two (to buy 
fusées) were not unreasonable, from the Upper Classes, 
friends of Liberty? In this manner it proceeds for 
days; in such rude horse-play,—not without kicks. 
The City-watch can do nothing; hardly save its own 
skin: for the last twelvemonth, as we have sometimes 
seen, it has been a kind of pastime to hunt the Watch. 
Besenval indeed is at hand with soldiers; but they 


VAT VS 


Chap. IX. 
Sept. l4th-16th, 


BURIAL WITH BONFIRE. 181 
have orders to avoid firmg, and are not prompt to 
stir. 

On Monday morning the explosion of petards began : 
and now it is near midnight of Wednesday ; and the 
‘wicker Mannequin’ is to be buried,—apparently in 
the Antique fashion. Long rows of torches, following 
it, move towards the Hotel Lamoignon; but ‘a servant 
of mine’ (Besenval’s) has run to give warning, and 
there are soldiers come. Gloomy Lamoignon is not to 
die by conflagration, or this night ;—not yet fora year, 
and then by gunshot (suicidal or accidental is un- 
known).* Foiled Rascality burns its ‘Mannikin of © 
osier,’ under his windows; ‘tears up the sentry-box,’ 
and rolls off: to try Brienne; to try Dubois Captain 
of the Watch. Now, however, all is bestirring itself; 
Gardes Frangaises, Invalides, Horse-patrol: the Torch 
Procession is met with sharp shot, with the thrusting 
of bayonets, the slashing of sabres. Even Dubois 
makes a charge, with that Cavalry of his, and the cru- 
elest charge of all: ‘there are a great many killed and 
wounded.’ Not without clangor, complaint; subse- 
quent criminal trials, and official persons dying of 
heartbreak !° So, however, with steel-besom, Rascal- 
ity is brushed back into its dim depths, and the streets 
are swept clear. 

Not for a century and half had Rascality ventured 
to step forth in this fashion; not for so long, showed 


4 Histoire de la Révolution, par Deux Amis de la Liberté, i. 50. 
5 Ibid. p. 58. 


182 THE PARLEMENT OF PARIS. Book IIL 
106. 


its huge rude lineaments in the light of day. A Won- 
der and new Thing: as yet gambolling merely, in awk- 
ward Brobdignag sport, not without quaintness ; hardly 
in anger: yet in its huge half-vacant laugh lurks a 
shade of grimness,—which could unfold itself! 

However, the thinkers invited by Loménie are now 
far on with their pamphlets: States-General, on one 
plan or another, will infallibly meet; if not in Janu- 
ary, as was once hoped, yet at latest in May. Old 
Duke de Richelieu, moribund in these autumn days, 
opens his eyes once more, murmuring, “‘ What would 
Louis Fourteenth’ (whom he remembers) ‘“ have said !”’ 
—then closes them again, forever, before the evil 
time. 


BOOK IV. 


STATES-GENERAL. 


ary 


Ope a ee 
4 ss he xn 
Sees . ie 
<8 : 
= = 
“* 
7 = 
~~ 
i Le 
4 ‘ : 
P = ee as wus 
a a) i 
a J tO aia 
mm, ; ; A 
ty 
UA 
Ny . 
Ve 
A 2m i 
aay 
» + 


~ 
a 
alr 


CHAPTER I. 
THE NOTABLES AGAIN. 


THE universal prayer, therefore, is to be fulfilled ! 
Always in days of national perplexity, when wrong 
abounded and help was not, this remedy of States-Gen- 
eral was called for; by a Malesherbes, nay by a Féne- 
lon ;' even Parlements calling for it were ‘ escorted with 
blessings.’ And now behold it is vouchsafed us; States- 
General shall verily be! 


To say, let States-General be, was easy; to say in 
what manner they shall be, is not so easy. Since the 
year 1614, there have no States-General met in France, 
all trace of them has vanished from the living habits 
of men. Their structure, powers, methods of procedure, 
which were never in any measure fixed, have now be- 
come wholly a vague possibility. Clay which the pot- 
ter may shape, this way or that:—say rather, the 
twenty-five millions of potters; for so many have now, 
more or less, a vote in it! How to shape the States- 
General? There is a problem. Each Body-corporate, 
each privileged, each organized Class has secret hopes 


* Montgaillard, i. 461. 
185 


186 STATES-GENERAL. Book, IV. 
(00. 


of its own in that matter; and also secret misgivings 
of its own,—for, behold, this monstrous twenty-million 
Class, hitherto the dumb sheep which these others had 
to agree about the manner of shearing, is now also 
arising with hopes! It has ceased or is ceasing to be 
dumb ; it speaks through Pamphlets, or at least brays 
and growls behind them, in unison, —increasing won- 
derfully their volume of sound. 

As for the Parlement of Paris, it has at once declared 
for the ‘old form of 1614.’ Which form had this ad- 
vantage, that the Zvers Etat, Third Estate, or Com- 
mons, figured there as a show mainly: whereby the 
Noblesse and Clergy had but to avoid quarrel between 
themselves, and decide unobstructed what they thought 
best. Such was the clearly declared opinion of the 
Paris Parlement. But, being met by a storm of mere 
hooting and howling from all men, such opinion was 
blown straightway to the winds; and the popularity 
of the Parlement along with it,—never to return. The 
Parlement’s part, we said above, was as good as played. 
Concerning which, however, there is this further to be 
noted: the proximity of dates. It was on the 22d of 
September that the Parlement returned from ‘ vacation’ 
or ‘exile in its estates ;’ to be reinstalled amid bound- 
less jubilee from all Paris. Precisely next day it was, 
that this same Parlement came to its ‘clearly declared 
opinion :’ and then on the morrow after that, you be- 
hold it ‘covered with outrages;’ its outer court, one 
vast sibilation, and the giory departed from it for ever- 


isthe bk 


> 


Chap. I. THE NOTABLES AGAIN. 187 
Sept.-Oct. 


more.” A popularity of twenty-four hours was, in those 
times, no uncommon allowance. | ; 
On the other hand, how superfluous was that invita- 
tion of Loménie’s: the invitation to thinkers? Think- 
ers and unthinkers, by the million, are spontaneously 
at their post, doing what is in them. Clubs labor: 
Société Publicole ; Breton Club; Enraged Club, Clud 
des Enragés. Likewise Dinner-parties in the Palais 
Royal; your Mirabeaus, Talleyrands dining there, in 
company with Chamforts, Morellets, with Duponts and 
hot Parlementeers, not without object! For a certain 
Neckerean Lion’s-provider, whom one could name, 
assembles them there;*—or even their own private 
determination to have dinner does it. And then as 
to Pamphlets—in figurative language, ‘it is a sheer 
snowing of: pamphlets; like to snow-up the Govern- 
ment thoroughfares!’ Now is the time for Friends 


of Freedom; sane, and even insane. 


Count, or self-styled Count, d’Aintrigues, ‘the 
young Languedocian gentleman,’-with perhaps Cham- 
fort the Cynic to help him, rises into furor almost 
Pythic; highest, where many are high.* Foolish 
young Languedocian gentleman; who himself so 
soon, ‘emigrating among the foremost,’ has to fly 
indignant over the marches, with the Contrat Social 
in his pocket,—towards outer darkness, thankless 
intriguings, ignis-fatuus hoverings, and death by the 


* Weber, i. 347. 3 Thid., i. 360. 
4 Mémoire sus les Etats-Généraux, See Montgaillard, i. 457-9. 


188 STATES-GENERAL. Book LV. 


stiletto! Abbé Sieyes has left Chartres Cathedral, 
and canonry and book-shelves there ; has let his 
tonsure grow, and come to Paris with a secular head, 
of the most irrefragable sort, to ask three questions, 
and answer them: What is the Third Estate? All. 
— What has it hitherto been in our form of govern- 
ment? Nothing.— What does it want? . To become 
Something. 

D’Orléans,—for be sure he, on his way to Chaos, 
is in the thick of this,—promulgates his Deliberations ;° 
fathered by him, written by Laclos of the Lzazsons 
Dangereuses. The result of which comes out simply : 
‘The Third Estate is the Nation.’ On the other hand, 
Monseigneur d’ Artois, with other Princes of the Blood, 
publishes, in solemn Memorial to the King, that if 
such things be listened to, Privilege, Nobility, Mon- 
archy, Church, State and Strongbox are in danger.® 
In danger truly: and yet if you do not listen, are 
they out of danger? It is the voice of all France, 
this sound that rises. Immeasurable, manifold; as 
the sound of outbreaking waters: wise were he who 
knew what to do in it,—if not to fly to the mountains, 
and hide himself? 


How an ideal, all-seeing Versailles Government, 


> Délubérations a prendre pour les Assemblées des Bailliages. 

® Mémoire présenté au Roi, par Monseigneur Comte d’ Artois, M. le 
Prince de Condé, M. le Due de Bourbon, M. le Due d’Enghien, et 
M. le Prince de Conti. (Given in Hist. Parl. i. 256.) 


et ls kd 
a ia, be 


Chap. I. THE NOTABLES AGAIN. 189 
Sept.—Oct. 


sitting there on such principles, in such an environ- 
ment, would have determined to demean itself at this 
new juncture, may even yet be a question. Such a 
Government would have felt too well that its long task 
was now drawing to a close; that, under the guise 
of these States-General, at length inevitable, a new 
omnipotent Unknown of Democracy was coming into 
being; in presence of which no Versailles Govern- 
ment either could or should, except in a provisory 
character, continue extant.’ To enact which provisory 
character, so unspeakably important, might its whole 
faculties but have sufficed ; and so a peaceable, gradual, 
well-conducted Abdication and Domine-dimittas have 
been the issue! 

This for our ideal, all-seeing Versailles Government. 
But for the actual irrational Versailles Government ? 
Alas, that is a Government existing there only for its 
own behoof: without right, except possession; and 
now also without might. It foresees nothing, sees 
nothing ; has not so much as a purpose, but has only 
purposes,—and the instinct whereby all that exists 
will struggle to keep existing. Wholly a vortex; in 
which vain counsels, hallucinations, falsehoods, in- 
trigues, and imbecilities whirl; like withered rubbish-~ 
in the meeting of winds! The Mil-de-Boeuf has its 
irrational hopes, if also its fears. Since hitherto all 
States-General have done as good as nothing, why 
should these do more? The Commons, indeed, look 
dangerous; but on the whole is not revolt, unknown 


190 STATES-GENERAL. Book LV. 


now for five generations, an impossibility? The Three 
Estates can, by management, be set against each other ; 
the Third will, as heretofore, join with the King; will, 
out of mere spite and self-interest, be eager to tax and 
vex the other two. The other two are thus delivered 
bound into our hands, that we may fleece them like- 
wise. Whereupon, money being got, and the Three 
Estates all in quarrel, dismiss them, and let the future 
go as it can! As good Archbishop Loménie was wont 
to say: “‘There are so many accidents; and it needs 
but one to save us.” —Yes; and how many to destroy 
us ? 

Poor Necker in the midst of such an anarchy does 
what is possible for him. He looks into it with obsti- 
nately hopeful face; lauds the known rectitude of the 
kingly mind; listens indulgent-like to the known per- 
verseness of the queenly and courtly ;—emits if any 
proclamation or regulation, one favoring the Ters 
Etat ; but settling nothing; hovering afar off rather, 
and advising all things to settle themselves. The 
grand questions, for the present, have got reduced to 
two: the Double Representation, and the Vote by 
Head. Shall the Commons have a ‘double represen- 
tation, that is to say, have as many members as the 
Noblesse and Clergy united? Shall the States-Gen- 
eral, when once assembled, vote and deliberate, in one 
body, or in three separate bodies; ‘vote by head, or 
vote by class,’—ordre as they call it? These are the 
moot-points now filling all France with jargon, logic 


Chap. I. THE NOTABLES AGAIN. 191 


Noy. 


and eleutheromania. To. terminate which, Necker 
bethinks him, Might not a second Convocation of the 
Notables be fittest? Such second Convocation is 
resolved on. 

On the 6th of November of this year 1788, these 
Notables accordingly have reassembled; after an in- 
terval of some eighteen months. They are Calonne’s 
old Notables, the same Hundred and F orty-four,—to 
show one’s impartiality ; likewise to save time. They 
sit there once again, in their Seven Bureaus, in the 
hard winter weather : it is the hardest winter seen since 
1709; thermometer below zero of Fahrenheit, Seine 
River frozen over.” Cold, scarcity and eleuthero- 
maniac clamor: a changed world since these Notables 
were ‘organed out,’ in May gone a year! They shall 
see now whether, under their Seven Princes of the 
Blood, in their Seven Bureaus, they can settle the 
moot-points. 

To the surprise of Patriotism, these Notables, once 
so patriotic, seem to incline the wrong way; towards 
the anti-patriotic side. They stagger at the Double 
Representation, at the Vote by Head: there is not 
affirmative decision; there is mere debating, and that 
not with the best aspects. For, indeed, were not these 
Notables themselves mostly of the Privileged Classes ? 
They clamored once; now they have their misgivings ; 
make their dolorous representations. Let them vanish, 
ineffectual; and return no more! They vanish, after 


7 Marmontel: Mémoires (London, 1805), iv. 33. Hist. Parl. &c. 


192 STATES-GENERAL. Book Iv. 


a month’s session, on this 12th of December, year 
1788: the last terrestrial Notables; not _to reappear 
any other time, in the History of the World. 

And go, the clamor still continuing, and the Pam- 
phlets; and nothing but patriotic Addresses, louder 
and louder, pouring in on us from all corners of France, 
—Necker himself some fortnight after, before the year 
is yet done, has to present his Report ;° recommending 
at his own risk that same Double Representation ; nay 
almost enjoining it, so loud is the jargon and eleuthe- 
romania. What dubitating, what circumambulating! 
These whole six noisy months (for it began with 
Brienne in July), has not Report followed Report, 
and one Proclamation flown in the teeth of the 
other ?° 

However, that first moot-point, as we see, is now 
settled. As for the second, that of voting by Head 
or by Order, it unfortunately is still left hanging. It 
hangs there, we may say, between the Privileged 
Orders and the Unprivileged; as a ready-made battle- 
prize, and necessity of war, from the very first: 
which battle-prize whosoever seizes it—may thence- 
forth bear as battle-flag, with the best omens! 

But so, at least, by Royal Edict of the 24th of Jan- 
ruary,”” does it finally, to impatient expectant France, 


8 Rapport fait aw Roi dans son Conseil, le 27 Décembre 1788, 

*5th July; 8th August; 23d September, &c. &c. 

10 Réglement du Roi pour la Convocation des Ltats-Généraux a Ver- 
sailles. (Reprinted, wrong dated, in Histoire Parlementaire, i. 262.) 


me not only indubitable that National Deputies 
to meet, but possible (so far and hardly farther 
s the royal Regulation gone) to begin electing 


Vou. IL—13 = 


CHAPTER II. 
THE ELECTION. 


Up, then, and be doing! The royal signal-word 
flies through France, as through vast forests the rush- 
ing of a mighty wind. At Parish Churches, in Town- 
halls, and every House of Convocation ; by Bailliages, 
by Seneschalsies, in whatsoever form men convene; 
there, with confusion enough, are Primary Assemblies 
forming. To elect your Electors; such is the form 
prescribed: then to draw up your ‘ Writ of Plaints 
and Grievances (Cahier de plaintes et doléances),’ of 
which jatter there is no lack. 

With such virtue works this Royal January Edict ; 
as it rolls rapidly, in its leathern mails, along these 
frostbound highways, towards all the four winds. Like 
some fiat, or magic spell-word ;—which such things do 
resemble! For always, as it sounds out ‘at the mar- 
ket-cross,’ accompanied with trumpet-blast; presided 
by Bailli, Seneschal, or other minor Functionary, with 
beef-eaters ; or, in country churches, is droned forth 
after sermon, ‘au prdne des messes paroissales ;’ and 
is registered, posted and let fly over all the world,— 


you behold how this multitudinous French People, so 
194 


Chap. Il. THE ELECTION. 195 


long simmering and buzzing in eager expectancy, be- 
gins heaping and shaping itself into organic groups. 
Which organic groups, again, hold smaller organic 
grouplets: the inarticulate buzzing becomes articulate 
speaking and acting. By Primary Assembly, and then 
by Secondary; by ‘successive elections,’ and infinite 
elaboration and scrutiny, according to prescribed pro- 
cess,—shall the genuine ‘ Plaints and Grievances” be 
at length got to paper: shall the fit National Repre- 
sentative be at length laid hold of. 

How the whole People shakes itself, as if it had one 
life; and, in thousand-voiced rumor, announces that it 
is awake, suddenly out of long death-sleep, and will 
thenceforth sleep no more! The long looked-for has 
come at last; wondrous news, of Victory, Deliverance, 
Enfranchisement, sounds magical through every heart. 
To the proud strong man it has come; whose strong 
hands shall no more be gyved; to whom boundless un- 
conquered continents lie disclosed. The weary day- 
drudge has heard of it; the beggar with his crust 
moistened in tears. What! To us also has hope 
reached ; down even to us? Hunger and hardship are 
not to be eternal! The bread we extorted from the 
rugged glebe, and, with the toil of our sinews, reaped 
and ground, and kneaded into loaves, was not wholly 
for another, then; but we also shall eat of it, and he 


filled? Glorious news (answer the prudent elders), 


but all-too unlikely !—Thus, at any rate, may the 
lower people, who pay no money-taxes and have no 


196 STATES-GENERAL. a 


right to vote,' assiduously crowd round those that do; 
and most Halls of Assembly, within doors and with- 
out, seem animated enough. 

Paris, alone of Towns, is to have Representatives ; 
the number of them twenty. Paris is divided into 
Sixty Districts; each of which (assembled in some 
church, or the like) is choosing two Electors. Official 
deputations pass from District to District, for all is in- 
experience as yet, and there is endless consulting. 
The streets swarm strangely with busy crowds, pacific 
yet restless and loquacious; at intervals, is seen the 
gleam of military muskets ; especially about the Palais, 
where the Parlement, once more on duty, sits querulous, 
almost tremulous. 

Busy is the French world! In those great days, 
what poorest speculative craftsman but will leave his 
workshop ; if not to vote, yet to assist in voting? On 
all highways is a rustling and bustling. Over the wide 
surface of France, ever and anon, through the spring | 
months, as the Sower casts his corn abroad upon the 
furrows, sounds of congregating and dispersing; of 
crowds in deliberation, acclamation, voting by ballot 
and by voice,—rise discrepant towards the ear of 
Heaven. To which political phenomena add_ this 
economical one, that Trade is stagnant, and also Bread 
getting dear ; for before the rigorous winter there was, 
as we said, a rigorous summer, with drouth, and on the 
13th of July with destructive hail. What a fearful 


1 Réglement du Roi (in Histoire Parlementaire, as above, i. 267-307). 


Chap. II. } t 
ee oe THE ELECTION. 197 


day! all cried while that tempest fell. Alas, the next 
anniversary of it will be a worse.” Under such aspects 
is France electing National Representatives. 


The incidents and specialties of these Elections be- 
long not to Universal, but to Local or Parish History : 
for which reason let not the new troubles of Grenoble 
or Besancon ; the bloodshed on the streets of Rennes, 
and consequent march thither of the Breton ‘ Young 
Men’ with Manifesto by their ‘Mothers, Sisters and 
Sweethearts ;* nor suchlike detain us here. It is the 


same sad history everywhere; with superficial vari- 


ations. A reinstated Parlement (as at Besancon), 
which stands astonished at this Behemoth of a States- 
General it had itself evoked, starts forward, with more 
or less audacity, to fix a thorn in its nose, and, alas, is 
instantaneously struck down, and hurled quite out,— 
for the new popular force can use not only arguments 
but brickbats! Or else, and perhaps combined with 
this, it is an order of Noblesse (as in Brittany), which 
will beforehand tie up the Third Estate, that it harm 
not the old privileges. In which act of tying up, never 
so skilfully set about, there is likewise no possibility of 
prospering; but the Behemoth-Briareus snaps your 

2 Bailly: Mémoires, i. 336. 

3 Protestation et Arrété des Jeunes Gens de la Ville de Nantes, du 28 
Janvier 1789, avant leur départ pour Rennes. Arrété des Jeunes Gens 
de la Ville d@ Angers, du 4 Février 1789. Arrété des Meéres, Seurs, 


Epouses et Amantes des Jeunes Citoyens d’ Angers, dw 6 Février 1789, 
(Reprinted in Histoire Parlementaire, i. 290-3.) 


198 STATES-GENERAL. Book IV. 
(09, 


cords like green rushes. Tie up? Alas, Messieurs ! 
And then, as for your chivalry rapiers, valor_and wager- 
of-battle, think one moment, how can that answer ? 
The plebeian heart too has red life in it, which changes 
not to paleness at glance even of you; and ‘the six 
‘hundred Breton gentlemen assembled in arms, for 
‘seventy-two hours, in the Cordeliers’ Cloister, at 
‘Rennes, —have to come out again, wiser than they 
entered. For the Nantes Youth, the Angers Youth, 
all Brittany was astir; ‘mothers, sisters and sweet- 
hearts’ shrieking after them, March! The Breton 
Noblesse must even let the mad world have its 
way.‘ 

In other Provinces, the Noblesse, with equal good- 
will, finds it better to stick to Protests, to well-redacted 
‘Cahiers of grievances, and satirical writings and 
speeches. Such is partially their course in Provence ; 
whither indeed Gabriel Honoré Riquetti Comte de 
Mirabeau has rushed down from Paris, to speak a word 
in season. In Provence, the Privileged, backed by 
their Aix Parlement, discover that such novelties, en- 
joined though they be by Royal Edict, tend to National 
detriment; and what is still more indisputable, ‘to im- 
pair the dignity of the Noblesse.’ Whereupon Mira- 
beau protesting aloud, this same Noblesse, amid huge 
tumult within doors and without, flatly determines to 
expel him from their Assembly. No other method, not 
even that of successive duels, would answer with him. 


4 Hist. Parl. i. 287. Deux Amis dela Liberté, i. 105-128. 


7 ee 


Chap. II. 
Chap, oe THE ELECTION. 199 


the obstreperous fierce-glaring man. Expelled he 
accordingly is. 

‘Tn all countries, in all times,’ exclaims he departing, 
‘the Aristocrats have implacably pursued every friend 
‘of the People; and with tenfold implacability, if such 
‘a one were himself born of the Aristocracy. It was 
‘thus that the last of the Gracchi perished, by the 
‘hands of the Patricians. But he, being struck with 
‘the mortal stab, flung dust towards heaven, and called 
‘on the Avenging Deities; and from this dust there 
‘was born Marius,—Marius not so illustrious for exter- 
‘minating the Cimbri, as for overturning in Rome the 
; tyranny of the Nobles.’* Casting up which new curious 
handful of dust (through the Printing-press), to breed 
what it can and may, Mirabeau stalks forth into the 
Third Estate. 

That he now, to ingratiate himself with this Third 
Estate, ‘opened a cloth-shop in Marseilles,’ and for 
moments became a furnishing tailor, or even the fable 
that he did so, -is to us always among the pleasant 
memorabilities of this era. Stranger Clothier never 
wielded the ell-wand, and rent webs for men, or frac- 
tional parts of men. The Fils Adoptif is indignant at 
such disparaging fable,°“—which nevertheless was widely 
believed in those days.’ But indeed, if Achilles, in 


5 Fils Adoptif, v. 256. 

6 Mémoires de Mirabeau, v. 307. 

7 Marat: Ami-du-Peuple Newspaper (in Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 
103), &e. 


200 STATES-GENERAL. neon ; 


the heroic ages, killed mutton, why should not Mirabeau, 
in the unheroic ones, measure broadcloth ?~ 

More authentic are his triumph-progresses through 
that disturbed district, with mob jubilee, flaming 
torches, ‘windows hired for two louis,’ and voluntary 
guard of a hundred men. He is Deputy Elect, both 
of Aix and of Marseilles; but will prefer Aix. He 
has opened his far-sounding voice, the depths of his 
far-sounding soul; he can quell (such virtue is in a 
spoken word) the pride-tumults of the rich, the hunger- 
tumults of the poor; and wild multitudes move under 
him, as under the moon do billows of the sea: he has 
become a world-compeller, and ruler over men. 

One other incident and specialty we note; with how 
different an interest! It is of the Parlement of Paris ; 
which starts forward, like the others (only with less 
audacity, seeing better how it lay), to nose-ring that 
Behemoth of a States-General. Worthy Doctor Guil- 
lotin, respectable practitioner in Paris, has drawn up 
his little ‘Plan of a Cahier of doléances ;—as had he 
not, having the wish and gift, the clearest liberty to do? 
He is getting the people to sign it; whereupon the 
surly Parlement summons him to give account of him- 
self. He goes; but with all Paris at his heels; which 
floods the outer courts, and copiously signs the Cahier 
even there, while the Doctor is giving account of him- 
self within! The Parlement cannot too soon dismiss 
Guillotin, with compliments ; to be borne home shoulder- 


Chap. II. 
ee Ohl THE ELECTION. 201 


high.* This respectable Guillotin we hope to behold 
once more, and perhaps only once; the Parlement 


"not even once, but let it be engulfed unseen by 


us. 


Meanwhile such things, cheering as they are, tend 
little to cheer the national creditor, or indeed the credit- 
or of any kind. In the midst of universal portentous 
doubt, what certainty can seem so certain as money in 
the purse, and the wisdom of keeping it there? Trad- 
ing Speculation, Commerce of all kinds, has as far as 
possible come to a dead pause; and the hand of the 
industrious lies idle in his bosom. Frightful enough, 
when now the rigor of seasons has also done its part, 
and to scarcity of work is added scarcity of food! In 
the opening spring, there come rumors of forestallment, 
there come King’s Edicts, Petitions of bakers against 
millers; and at length, in the month of April,—troops. 
of ragged Lackalls, and fierce cries of starvation! 
These are the thrice-famed Brigands: an actual exist- 
ing quotity of persons; who, long reflected and rever- 
berated through so many millions of heads, as in con- 
cave multiplying mirrors, become a whole Brigand 
World; and, like a kind of Supernatural Machinery, . 
wondrously move the Epos of the Revolution. The 
Brigands are here; the Brigands are there; the Bri- 
gands are coming! Not otherwise sounded the clang 
of Phoebus Apollo’s silver bow, scattering pestilence 


8 Deux Amis de la Liberté, i. 141. 


202 STATES-GENERAL. Book Iv. 


and pale terror: for this clang too was of the imagi- 
nation; preternatural; and it too walked. in formless 
immeasurability, having made itself like to the Night 
(vuxte goexas) | 

But remark at least, for the first time, the singular 
empire of Suspicion, in those lands, in those days. If 
poor famishing men shall, prior to death, gather in 
groups and crowds, as the poor fieldfares and plovers 
do in bitter weather, were it but that they may chirp 
mournfully together, and misery look in the eyes of 
misery; if famishing men (what famishing fieldfares 
cannot do) should discover, once congregated, that they 
need not die while food is in the land, since they are 
many, and with empty wallets have right hands: in all 
this, what need were there of Preternatural Machinery ? 
To most people none; but not to French people, in a 
time of Revolution. These Brigands (as Turgot’s also 
were, fourteen years ago) have all been set on; enlisted, 
though without tap of drum,—by Aristocrats, by Demo- 
crats, by D’Orléans, D’ Artois, and enemies of the pub- 
lic weal. Nay Historians, to this day, will prove it by 
one argument: these Brigands, pretending to have no 
victual, nevertheless contrive to drink, nay have been 
seen drunk.’ An unexampled fact! But on the whole, 
may we not predict that a people, with such a width 
of Credulity and of Incredulity (the proper union of 
which makes Suspicion, and indeed unreason gener- 
ally), will see Shapes enough of Immortals fighting 


® Lacretelle: 18™¢ Sidcle, ii, 155. 


a oe 


ot) dell ee 


Chap.II,_ THE ELECTION. 203 
Feb.—April. 


in its battle-ranks, and never want for Epical Ma- 
chinery ? 

Be this as it may, the Brigands are clearly got to 
Paris, in considerable multitudes :!° with sallow faces, 
lank hair (the true enthusiast complexion), with sooty 
rags; and also with large clubs, which they smite 
angrily against the pavement! These mingle in the 
Election tumult; would fain sign Guillotin’s Cahier, 
or any Cahier or Petition whatsoever, could they but 
write. Their enthusiast complexion, the smiting of 
their sticks bodes little good to any one; least of all 
to rich master-manufacturers of the Suburb Saint- 
Antoine, with whose workmen they consort. 


10 Besenvyal, iii. 385, &e. 


CHAPTER. IIT 
GROWN ELECTRIC. 


But now also National Deputies from all ends of 
France are in Paris, with their commissions, what they 
call pouvoirs, or powers, in their pockets; inquiring, 
consulting; looking out for lodgings at Versailles. 
The States-General shall open there, if not on the 
First, then surely on the Fourth of May; in grand 
procession and gala. The Salle des Menus is all new- 
carpentered, bedizened for them; their very costume 
has been fixed: a grand controversy which there was, 
as to ‘slouch-hats or slouched-hats,’ for the Commons 
Deputies, has got as good as adjusted. Ever new 
strangers arrive: loungers, miscellaneous persons, of- 
ficers on furlough,—as the worthy Captain Dampmar- 
tin, whom we hope to be acquainted with: these also, 
from all regions, have repaired hither, to see what is 
toward. Our Paris Committees, of the Sixty Districts, 
are busier than ever; it is now too clear, the Paris 
Elections will be late. 


On Monday, the 27th day of April, Astronomer 


Bailly notices that the Sieur Réveillon is not at his 
204 


Chap. III. 
asi 27th-28th. GROWN ELECTRIC. 205 


post. The Sieur Réveillon, ‘extensive Paper Man- 
ufacturer of the Rue Saint-Antoine:’ he, commonly 
so punctual, is absent from Electoral Committee ;— 
and even will never reappear there. In those ‘im- 
mense Magazines of velvet paper’ has aught befallen? 
Alas, yes! Alas, it is no Montgolfier rising there to- 
day ; but Drudgery, Rascality and the Suburb that is 
rising! Was the Sieur Réveillon, himself once a 
journeyman, heard to say that ‘a journeyman might 
live handsomely on fifteen sous a day’? Some seven- 
pence halfpenny: ’tis a slender sum! Or was he only 
thought, and believed, to be heard saying it? By this 
long chafing and friction, it would appear, the National 
temper has got electric. 

Down in those dark dens, in those dark heads and 
hungry hearts, who knows in what strange figure the 
new Political Evangel may have shaped itself; what 
miraculous ‘Communion of Drudges’ may be getting~ 
formed! Enough: grim individuals, soon waxing to 
grim multitudes, and other multitudes crowding to see, 
beset that Paper-Warehouse ; demonstrate, in loud un- 
grammatical language (addressed to the passions too), 
the insufficiency of sevenpence halfpenny a-day. The. 
City-watch cannot dissipate them; broils arise and 
bellowings: Réveillon, at his wits’ end, entreats the 
Populace, entreats the Authorities. Besenval, now in 
active command, Commandant of Paris, does, towards 


evening, to Réveillon’s earnest prayer, send some 


thirty Gardes Frangaises. These clear the street, 


206 STATES-GENERAL. Book TV. 
789. 


happily without firing; and take post there for the 
night, in hope that it may be all over. 

Not so: on the morrow it is far worse. Saint-An- 
toine has arisen anew, grimmer than ever ;—reinforced 
by the unknown Tatterdemalion Figures, with their 
enthusiast complexion and large sticks. The City, 
through all streets, is flowing thitherward to see: ‘ two 
cartloads of paving-stones, that happened to pass that 
way,’ have been seized as a visible godsend. Another 
detachment of Gardes Francaises must be sent, Be- 
senval and the Colonel taking earnest counsel. Then 
still another ; they hardly, with bayonets and menace 
of bullets, penetrate to the spot. Whata sight! <A 
street choked up, with lumber, tumult and the endless 
press of men. A Paper-Warehouse eviscerated by axe 
and fire: mad din of Revolt; musket-volleys re- 
sponded to by yells, by miscellaneous missiles, by tiles 
raining from roof and window,—tiles, execrations and 
slain men! 

The Gardes Frangaises like it not, but have to per- 
severe. All day it continues, slackening and rallying ; 
the sun is sinking, and Saint-Antoine has not yielded. 
The City flies hither and thither: alas, the sound of 
that musket-volleying booms into the far dining-rooms 
of the Chaussée d’Antin; alters the tone of the din- 
ner-gossip there. Captain Dampmartin leaves his 
wine; goes out with a friend or two, to see the fight- 
ing. Unwashed men growl on him, with murmurs of 


1 Besenval, iii. 385-8, 


Chap. II. GROWN ELECTRIC. 207 


April 28th. 


» “CA bas les Aristocrates (Down with the Aristocrats) ;”’ 


and insult the cross of St. Louis! They elbow him, 
and hustle him; but do not pick his pocket ;—as in- 
deed at Réveillon’s too there was not the slightest 
stealing.” 

At fall of night, as the thing will not end, Besen- 
val takes his resolution : orders out the Gardes Suisses 
with two pieces of artillery. The Swiss Guards shall 
proceed thither; summon that rabble to depart, in the 
King’s name. If disobeyed, they shall load. their ar- 
tillery with grape-shot, visibly to the general eye; shall 
again summon; if again disobeyed, fire,—and keep 
firing ‘till the last man’ be in this manner blasted off, 
and the street clear. With which spirited resolution, 
as might have been hoped, the business is got ended. 
At sight of the lit matches, of the foreign red-coated 
Switzers, Saint-Antoine dissipates ; hastily, in the shades 
of dusk. There is an encumbered street ; there are ‘ from 
four to five hundred’ dead men. Unfortunate Réveil- 
lon has found shelter in the Bastille ; does therefrom, 
safe behind stone bulwarks, issue plaint, protestation, 
explanation, for the next month. Bold Besenval has 
thanks from all the respectable Parisian classes; but 
finds no special notice taken of him at Versailles,—a 
thing the man of true worth is used to.’ 


2 Bvénemens qui se sont passés sous mes yeux pendant la Révolution 
Francaise, par A. H. Dampmartin (Berlin, 1799), i. 25-27. 
5 Besenval, iii. 389. 


208 STATES-GENERAL. Ses 
109. 


But how it originated, this fierce electric sputter and 
explosion? From D’Orléans! cries the Court-party : 
he, with his gold, enlisted these Brigands,—surely in 
some surprising manner, without sound of drum: he 
raked them in hither, from all corners; to ferment 
and take fire; evil is his good. From the Court! 
cries enlightened Patriotism: it is the cursed gold 
and wiles of Aristocrats that enlisted them; set them 
upon ruining an innocent Sieur Réveillon ; to frighten 
the faint, and disgust men with the career of Free- 
dom. 

Besenval, with reluctance, concludes that it came 
from ‘the English, our natural enemies.’ Or, alas, 
might not one rather attribute it to Diana in the shape 
of Hunger? To some twin Droscurt, OPPRESSION 
and REVENGE; so often seen in the battles of men? 
Poor Lackalls, all betoiled, besoiled, encrusted into 
dim defacement ;—into whom nevertheless the breath 
of the Almighty has breathed a living soul! To 
them it is clear only that eleutheromaniac Philos- 
ophism has yet baked no bread; that Patriot Com- 
mittee-men will level down to their own level, and 
no lower. Brigands or whatever they might be, it 
was bitter earnest with them. They bury their dead 
with the title of Défensewrs de la Patrice, Martyrs 
of the good Cause. 

Or shall we say: Insurrection has now served its 
apprenticeship ; and this was its proof-stroke, and no 
inconclusive one? Its next will be a master-stroke ; 


Chap. IIT. GROWN ELECTRIC. 209 
April 28th. 


announcing indisputable Mastership to a whole aston- 
ished world. Let that rock-fortress, Tyrrany’s strong- 
hold, which they name Bastille, or Building, as if 
there were no other building,—look to its guns! 


But, in such wise, with primary and secondary 
Assemblies, and Cahiers of Grievances; with motions, 
congregations of all kinds; with much thunder of 
froth-eloquence, and at last with thunder of platoon- 
musketry,—does agitated France accomplish its Elec- 
tions. With confused winnowing and sifting, in this 
rather tumultuous manner, it has now (all except some 
remnants of Paris) sifted out the true wheat-grains of 
National Deputies, Twelve Hundred and Fourteen in 


number; and will forthwith open its States-General. 
Vou. I.—14 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE PROCESSION, 


On the first Saturday of May, it is gala at Ver- 
sailles; and Monday, fourth of the month, is to be 
a still greater day. The Deputies have mostly got 
thither, and sought out lodgings; and are now suc- 
cessively, in long well-ushered files, kissing the hand 
of Majesty in the Chateau. Supreme Usher de Brézé 
does not give the highest satisfaction: we cannot but 
observe that in ushering Noblesse or Clergy into the 
anointed Presence, he liberally opens both his folding- 
doors; and on the other hand, for members of the 
Third Estate opens only one! However, there is 
room to enter; Majesty has smiles for all. 

The good Louis welcomes his Honorable Members, 
with smiles of hope. He has prepared for them the 
Hall of Menus, the largest near him; and often sur- 
veyed the workmen as they went on. A spacious 
Hall: with raised platform for Throne, Court and 
Blood-royal; space for six hundred Commons Dep- 
uties in front; for half as many Clergy on this hand, 
and half as many Noblesse on that. It has lofty 
galleries; wherefrom dames of honor, splendent in 


gaze Wor ; foreign Diplomacies, and other gilt-edged 
210 


Chap. IV. ,ESS F 
Uae oak , THE PROCESSION mit 


white-frilled individuals, to the number of two thou- 
sand,—may sit and look. Broad passages flow through 
it; and, outside the inner wall, all round it. There 
are committee-rooms, guard-rooms, rohing-rooms: really 
a noble Hall; where upholstery, aided by the subject 
fine-arts, has done its best; and crimson tasselled 
cloths, and emblematic flewr's-de-lys are not wanting. 
The Hall is ready: the very costume, as we said, 
has been settled; and the Commons are not to wear 
that hated slouch-hat (chapeau clabaud), but one not 
quite so slouched (chapeau rabattu). As for their 
manner of working, when all dressed ; for their ‘ voting 
by head or by order’ and the rest,—this, which it 
were perhaps still time to settle, and in few hours 
will be no longer time, remains unsettled; hangs 
dubious ‘in the breast of Twelve Hundred Men. 


But now finally the Sun, on Monday the 4th of 
May, has risen ;—unconcerned, as if it were no special 
day. And yet, as his first rays could strike music 
from the Memnon’s Statue on the Nile, what tones 
were these, so thrilling, tremulous, of preparation 
and foreboding, which he awoke in every bosom at 
Versailles! Huge Paris, in all conceivable and in- 
conceivable vehicles, is pouring itself forth; from 
each Town and village come subsidiary rills: Ver- 
sailles is a very sea of men. But above all, from the 
Church of St. Louis to the Church of Notre-Dame: 
one vast suspended-billow of Life,—with spray scat- 


212 STATES-GENERAL. Book TV. 
109, 


tered even to the chimney-tops! For on chimney- 
tops too, as over the roofs, and up thitherwards on 
every lamp-iron, signpost, breakneck coign of vantage, 
sits patriotic Courage; and every window bursts with 
patriotic Beauty: for the Deputies are gathering at 
St. Louis Church; to march in procession to Notre- 
Dame, and hear sermon. 

Yes, friends, ye may sit and look: bodily or in 
thought, all France, and all Europe, may sit and 
look ; for it is a day like few others. Oh, one might 
weep like Xerxes:—So many serried rows sit perched 
there; like winged creatures, alighted out of Heaven: 
all these, and so many more that follow them, shall 
have wholly fled aloft again, vanishing into the blue 
Deep; and the memory of this day still be fresh. It 
is the baptism-day of Democracy; sick Time has 
given it birth, the numbered months being run. The 
extreme-unction day of Feudalism! A superannuated 
System of Society, decrepit with toils (for has it not 
done much; produced you, and what ye have and 
know !)—and with thefts and brawls, named glorious- 
victories; and with profligacies, sensualities, and on 
the whole with dotage and senility,—is now to die: 
and so, with death-throes and birth-throes, a new one 
is to be born. What a work, O Earth and Heavens, 
what a work! Battles and bloodshed, September 
Massacres, Bridges of Lodi, retreats of Moscow, 
Waterloos, Peterloos, Tenpound Franchises, Tarbar- 
rels and Guillotines, 


and from this present date, 


i 


Chap. IV. h 5 ‘ 
ae THE PROCESSION 213 


if one might prophesy, some two centuries of it still 
to fight! Two centuries; hardly less; before Dem- 
ocracy go through its due, most baleful, stages of 
Quackocracy ; and a pestilential World be burnt up, 
and have begun to grow green and young again. 
Rejoice nevertheless, ye Versailles multitudes; to 
you, from whom all this is hid, the glorious end of it 
is visible. This day, sentence of death is pronounced 
on Shams; judgment of resuscitation, were it but afar 
off, is pronounced on Realities. This day it is declared 
aloud, as with a Doom-trumpet, that a Lie is unbeliev- 
able. Believe that, stand by that, if more there be 
not; and let what thing or things soever will follow it 


follow. ‘Ye can no other; God be your help!’ So 


spake a greater than any of you; opening his Chapter 
of World-History. 


Behold, however! The doors of St. Louis Church 
flung wide; and the Procession of Processions ad- 
vancing towards Notre-Dame! Shouts rend the air ; 
one shout, at which Grecian birds might drop dead. 
It is indeed a stately, solemn sight. The Elected of 
France, and then the Court of France; they are mar- 
shalled and march there, all in prescribed place and 
costume. Our Commons ‘in plain black mantle and 
white cravat;’ Noblesse, in gold-worked, bright-dyed 
cloaks of velvet, resplendent, rustling with laces, wav- 
mg with plumes; the Clergy in rochet, alb, or other 
best pontificalibus : lastly comes the King himself, and 


214 STATES-GENERAL. Book IV. 
109, 


King’s Household, also in their brightest blaze of 
pomp,—their brightest and final one. Some Fourteen 
Hundred Men blown together from all winds, on the 
deepest errand. 

Yes, in that silent marching mass there lies Futurity 
enough. No symbolic Ark, like the old Hebrews, do 
these men bear : yet with them too is a Covenant ; they 
too preside at a new Era in the History of Men. The 
whole Future is there, and Destiny dim-brooding over 
it; in the hearts and unshaped thoughts of these men, 
it lies illegible, inevitable. Singular to think : . they 
have it in them; yet not they, not mortal, only the 
Eye above can read it,—as it shall unfold itself, in fire 
and thunder, of siege, and field-artillery ; in the rust- 
ling of battle-banners, the tramp of hosts, in the glow 
of burning cities, the shriek of strangled nations! 
Such things lie hidden, safe-wrapt in this Fourth day 
of May ;—say rather, had lain in some other unknown 
day, of which this latter is the public fruit and out- 
come. \As indeed what wonders lie in every Day,— 
had we the sight, as happily we have not, to decipher 
it; for is not every meanest Day ‘the conflux of two 
Eternities !’ 


Meanwhile, suppose we too, good Reader, should, as 
now without miracle Muse Clio enables us,—take our 
station also on some coign of vantage; and glance mo- 
mentarily over this Procession, and this Life-sea; with 
far other eyes than the rest do, 


namely with pro- 


Chap. IV. ; 
2 THE PROCESSION. 215 


phetic? We can mount, and stand there, without 
fear of falling. 

As for the Life-sea, or onlooking unnumbered Mul- 
titude, it is unfortunately all-too dim. Yet as we gaze 
fixedly, do not nameless Figures not a few, which shall 
not always be nameless, disclose themselves; visible or 
presumable there! Young Baroness de Staél—she evi- 
dently looks from a window ; among older honorable - 
women.’ Her father is Minister, and one of the gala 
personages ; to his own eyes the chief one. Young 
spiritual Amazon, thy rest is not there; nor thy loved 
Father's: ‘as Malebranche saw all things in God, so 
M. Necker sees all things in Necker, —a theorem that 
will not hold. 


/- But where is the brown-locked, light-behaved, 


fire-hearted Demoiselle Théroigne? Brown eloquent 
Beauty ; who, with thy winged words and glances, 


. shalt thrill rough bosoms, whole steel battalions, and 


persuade an Austrian Kaiser,—pike and helm lie pro- 
vided for thee in due season; and, alas, also strait- 
waistcoat and long lodging in the Salpétriére! Better 
hadst thou stayed in native Luxemburg, and been the 
mother of some brave man’s children: but it was not 
thy task, it was not thy lot. 

Of the rougher sex how, without tongue, or hundred 
tongues, of iron, enumerate the notabilities! Has not 
Marquis Valadi hastily quitted his Quaker broad- 


1 Madame de Staél: Considérations sur la Révolution Frangaise 
(London, 1818), i. 114-191. 


216 STATES-GENERAL. Hook 


brim; his Pythagorean Greek in Wapping, and the 
city of Glasgow?” De Morande from his Courrier de 
! Europe; Linguet from his Annales, they looked 
eager through the London fog, and became Ex-Ed- 
itors,—that they might feed the guillotine, and have 
their due. Does Louvet (of Faublas) stand a-tip-toe ? 
And Brissot, hight De Warville, friend of the Blacks? 
He, with Marquis Condorcet, and Claviére the Gen- 
evese ‘have created the Moniteur Newspaper,’ or are 
about creating it. Able Editors must give account of 
such a day. 

Or seest thou with any distinctness, low down prob- 
ably, not in places of honor, a Stanislas Maillard, rid- 
ing-tipstaff (huissier @ cheval) of the Chatelet ; one of 
the shiftiest of men? A Captain Hulin of Geneva, 
Captain Elie of the Queen’s Regiment; both with an 
air of half-pay? Jourdan, with tile-colored whiskers, 
not yet with tile-beard; an unjust dealer in mules? 
He shall be, in few months, Jourdan the Headsman, 
and have other work. 

Surely also, in some place not of honor, stands or 
sprawls up querulous, that he too, though short, may 
see,—one squalidest bleared mortal, redolent of soot 
and horse-drugs: Jean Paul Marat of Neuchatel ! 

LO Marat, Renovator of Human Science, Lecturer on 
Optics; O thou remarkablest Horseleech, once in 
D’Artois’ Stables,—as thy bleared soul looks forth, 
through thy bleared, dull-acrid, wo-stricken face, what 

Founders of the French Republic (London, 1798), 3 Valadi. 


ihe ee ee 


Z 


Chap. IV. 
ee THE PROCESSION. 217 


sees it in all this? Any faintest light of hope; like 
dayspring after Nova-Zembla night? Or is it but blue 
sulphur-light, and spectres; wo, suspicion, revenge 
without end? 

Of Draper Lecointre, how he shut his cloth-shop 
hard by, and stepped forth, one need hardly speak. 
Nor of Santerre, the sonorous Brewer from the Fau- 
bourg St. Antoine. T'wo other Figures, and only two, 
we signalize there. The huge, brawny Figure; through 
whose black brows, and rude flattened face (figure 
écrasée), there looks a waste energy as of Hercules not 
yet furibund,—he is an esurient, unprovided Advocate; 
Danton by name: him mark. Then that other, his 
slight-built comrade and craft-brother; he with the 
long curling locks; with the face of dingy black- 
guardism, wondrously irradiated with genius, as if a 
naphtha-lamp burnt within it: that Figure is Camille 
Desmoulins. A fellow of infinite shrewdness, wit, nay 
humor ; one of the sprightliest clearest souls in all these 
milions. Thou poor Camille, say of thee what they 
may, it were but falsehood to pretend one did not 
almost love thee, thou headlong lightly-sparkling man ! 
But the brawny, not yet furibund Figure, we say, is 
Jacques Danton; a name that shall be ‘tolerably 
known in the Revolution.’ He is President of the 
electoral Cordeliers District at Paris, or about to be it; 
and shall open his lungs of brass. 

We dwell no longer on the mixed shouting Multitude : 
for now, behold, the Commons Deputies are at hand! 


218 STATES-GENERAL. Book Eve 


1789. 


Which of these Six Hundred individuals, in plain 
white cravat, that have come up to regenerate France, 
might one guess would become their king? For a 
king or leader they, as all bodies of men, must have: 
be their work what it may, there is one man there 
who, by character, faculty, position, is fittest of all 
to do it; that man, as future not yet elected king, 
walks there among the rest. He with the thick black 
locks, will it be? With the dure, as himself calls it, 
or black boar’ s-head, fit to be ‘shaken’ as a senatorial 
portent? Through whose shaggy beetle-brows, and 
rough-hewn, seamed, carbuncled face, there look nat- 
ural ugliness, small-pox, incontinence, bankruptey,— 
and burning fire of genius; like comet-fire glaring 
fuliginous through murkiest confusions? It is Gabriel 
Honoré Riquetti de Mirabeau, the world-compeller ; 
man-ruling Deputy of Aix! According to the Bar- 
oness de Staél, he steps proudly along, though looked 
at askance here; and shakes his black chevelure, or 
lion’s-mane; as if prophetic of great deeds. 

Yes, Reader, that is the. Type-Frenchman of this 
epoch; as Voltaire was of the last. He is French 
in his aspirations, acquisitions, in his virtues, in his 
vices; perhaps more French than any other man ;— 
and intrinsically such a mass of manhood too. Mark 
him well. The National Assembly were all different 
without that” one; nay, he might say with the old 
Despot: ‘The National Assembly? I am that.” 

Of a southern climate, of wild southern blood: for 


Chap. IV. 
Se THE PROCESSION. 219 


the Riquettis, or Arrighettis, had to fly from Florence 
and the Guelfs, long centuries ago, and settled in 
Provence; where from generation to generation they 
have ever approved themselves a peculiar kindred: 
irascible, indomitable, sharp-cutting, true, like the 
steel they wore; of an intensity and. activity that 
sometimes verged towards madness, yet did not reach 
it. One ancient Riquetti, in mad fulfilment of a mad 
vow, chains two Mountains together; and the chain, 
with its ‘iron star of five rays,’ is still to be seen. 
May not a modern Riquetti wnchain so much, and 
set it drifting,—which also shall be seen? 

Destiny has work for that swart burly-headed Mira- 
beau; Destiny has watched over him, prepared him 
from afar. Did not his Grandfather, stout (Col- 
d’ Argent (Silver-Stock, so they named him), shat- 
tered and slashed by seven-and-twenty wounds in 
one fell day, lie sunk together on the Bridge at 
Casano; while Prince Eugene’s cavalry galloped and~ 
re-galloped over him,—only the flying sergeant had 
thrown a camp-kettle over that loved head; and 
Venddéme, dropping his spyglass, moaned out, ‘ Mira- 
beau is dead, then!’ Nevertheless he was not dead: 
he awoke to breath, and miraculous surgery ;—for 
Gabriel was yet to be. With his silver stock he 
kept his scarred head erect, through long years; and 
wedded; and produced tough Marquis Victor, the 
Friend of Men. Whereby at last in the appointed 
year 1749, this long-expected rough-hewn Gabriel 


220 STATES-GENERAL. Book Tv. 


Honoré did likewise see the light: roughest lion’s- 
whelp ever littered of that rough breed. How the 
old lion (for our old Marquis too was lion-like, most 
unconquerable, kingly-genial, most perverse) gazed 
wondering on his offspring; and determined to train 
him as no lion had yet been! It is in vain, O 
Marquis! This cub, though thou slay him and flay 
him, will not learn to draw in dogcart of Political 
Economy, and be a Friend of Men; he will not be 
Thou, but must and will be Himself, another than 
Thou. Divorce lawsuits, ‘whole family save one in 
prison, and three-score Lettres-de-Cachet’ for thy 
own sole use, do but astonish the world. 

Our luckless Gabriel, sinned against and sinning, 
has been in the Isle of Rhé, and heard the Atlantic 
from his tower; in the Castle of If, and heard the 
Mediterranean at Marseilles. He has been in the 
Fortress of Joux; and forty-two months, with hardly 
clothing to his back, in the Dungeon of Vincennes ;— 
all by Lettre-de-Cachet, from his lion father. He has 
been in Pontarlier Jails (self-constituted prisoner) ; was 
noticed fording estuaries of the sea (at low water), in 
flight from the face of men. He has pleaded before 
Aix Parlements (to get back his wife); the public 
gathering on roofs, to see since they could not hear: 
“the clatter-teeth (claque-dents) !” snarls singular old 
Mirabeau; discerning in such admired forensic elo- 
quence nothing but two clattering jaw-bones, and 
ahead vacant, sonorous, of the drum species. 


Chap. IV. ‘ESSION. 9 
se THE PROCESSION 221 


But as for Gabriel Honoré, in these strange way- 
farings, what has he not seen and tried! From drill- 
sergeants, to prime-ministers, to foreign and domestic 
booksellers, all manner of men he has seen. All 
manner of men he has gained; for at bottom it 
is a social, loving heart, that wild unconquerable 
one:—more especially all manner of women. From 
the Archer’s Daughter at Saintes to that fair young 
Sophie Madame Monnier, whom he could not but 
‘steal,’ and be beheaded for—in effigy! For in- 
deed hardly since the Arabian Prophet lay dead to 
Ali’s admiration, was there seen such a Love-hero, 
with the strength of thirty men. In War, again, he 
has helped to conquer Corsica; fought duels, irregular 
brawls; horsewhipped calumnious barons. In Liter- 
ature, he has written on Despotism, on Lettres-de- 
Cachet ; Erotics Sapphic-Werterean, Obscenities, Pro- 
fanities; Books on the Prussian Monarchy, on Caglh- 
ostro, on Calonne, on the Water-Companies of Paris: 
—each Book comparable, we will say, to a bituminous 
alarum-fire; huge, smoky, sudden! The firepan, the 
kindling, the bitumen were his own; but the lumber, 
of rags, old wood and nameless combustible rubbish _ 
(for all is fuel to him), was gathered from hucksters, 
and ass-panniers, of every description under heaven. 
Whereby, indeed, hucksters enough have been heard 
to exclaim: Out upon it, the fire is mine! 

Nay, consider it more generally, seldom had man 
such a talent for borrowing. The idea, the faculty of 


222 STATES-GENERAL. oo 
(00. 


another man he can make his; the man himself he 
can make his. ‘All reflex and echo (tout de reflet et 
de réverbére)!” snarls old Mirabeau, who can see, but 
- will not. Crabbed old Friend of Men! it is his social- 
ity, his aggregative nature; and will now be the qual- 
ity of qualities for him. In that forty-years ‘ struggle 
against despotism,’ he has gained the glorious faculty 
of self-help, and yet not lost the glorious natural gift 
of fellowship, of being helped. Rare union: this man 
can live self-sufficing—yet lives also in the life of 
other men; can make men love him, work with 
him; a born king of men! 

But consider further how, as the old Marquis still 
snarls, he has “‘made away with (humé, swallowed, 
snuffed-up) all Formulas ;’—a fact which, if we med- 
itate it, will in these days mean much. This is no 
man of system, then; he is only a man of instincts 
and insights. A man nevertheless who will glare 
fiercely on any object; and see through it, and con- 
quer it: for he has intellect, he has will, force beyond 
other men. A man not with logic-spectacles; but 
with an eye! Unhappily without Decalogue, moral 
Code or Theorem of any fixed sort; yet not without 
a strong living Soul in him, and Sincerity there: 
a Reality, not an Artificiality, not a Sham! And so 
he, having struggled ‘forty years against despotism,’ 
and ‘made away with all formulas,’ shall now become 
the spokesman of a Nation bent to do the same. For 
is it not precisely the struggle of France also to cast 


balla 
. i 


rst. SY 


Chap. IV. THE PROCESSION. 223 
May 4th. 


off despotism ; to make away with her old formulas,— 
having found them naught, worn out, far from the re- 
ality? She will make away with swch formulas ;—and 
even go bare, if need be, till she have found new ones. 

Towards such work, in such manner, marches he, 
this singular Riquetti Mirabeau. In fiery rough 
figure, with black Samson-locks under the slouch-hat, 
he steps along there. A fiery fuliginous mass, which 
could not be choked and smothered, but would fill all 
France with smoke. And now it has got air; it will 
burn its whole substance, its whole smoke-atmosphere 
too, and fill all France with flame. Strange lot! 
Forty years of that smouldering, with foul fire-damp 
and vapor enough; then victory over that ;—and like 
a burning mountain he blazes heaven-high; and, for 
twenty-three resplendent months, pours out, in flame 
and molten fire-torrents, all that is in him, the Pharos 


Y 


and Wonder-sign of an amazed Europe ;—and then lies” 


hollow, cold forever! Pass on, thou questionable Ga- 
briel Honoré, the greatest of them all: in the whole 
National Deputies, in the whole Nation, there is none 
like and none second to thee. 


But now if Mirabeau is the greatest, who of these 


Six Hundred may be the meanest? Shall we say, 
that anxious, slight, ineffectual-looking man, under 
thirty, in spectacles; his eyes (were the glasses off) 
troubled, careful; with upturned face, snuffing dimly 
the uncertain future time; complexion of a multiplex 
atrabiliar color, the final shade of which may be the 


224 STATES-GENERAL. Boe 


pale sea-green.? That greenish-colored (verddtre) in- 
dividual is an Advocate of Arras; his name is Mag- 
imilien Robespierre. The son of an Advocate; his 
father founded mason-lodges under Charles Edward, 
the English Prince or Pretender. Maximilien the 
first-born was thriftily educated ; he had brisk Camille 
Desmoulins for schoolmate in the College of Louis le 
Grand, at Paris. But he begged our famed Necklace- 
Cardinal, Rohan, the patron, to let him depart thence, 
and resign in favor of a younger brother. The strict- 
minded Max departed; home to paternal Arras; and 
even had a Law-case there and pleaded, not unsuccess- 
fully, ‘in favor of the first Franklin thunder-rod.’ 
With a strict painful mind, an understanding small 
but clear and ready, he grew in favor with official per- 
‘sons, who could foresee in him an excellent man of 
business, happily quite free from genius. The Bishop, 
therefore, taking counsel, appoints him Judge of his 
diocese ; and he faithfully does justice to the people: 
till behold, one day, a culprit comes whose crime mer- 
its hanging ; and the strict-minded Max must abdicate, 
for his conscience will not permit the dooming of any 
son of Adam to die. A _ strict-minded, strait-laced 
man! A man unfit for Revolutions? Whose small 
soul, transparent wholesome-looking as small-ale, could 
by no chance ferment into virulent alegar,—the mother 
of ever new alegar; till all France were grown acetous 
virulent? We shall see. 


* See De Staél, Considérations (ii. 142); Barbaroux, Mémoires, &e. 


Chap. IV. THE PROCESSION. 225 
May 4th. 


Between which two extremes of grandest and mean- 
est, so many grand and mean roll on, towards their 
several destinies, in that Procession! There is Ca- 
zalés, the learned young soldier ; who shall become the 
eloquent orator of Royalism, and earn the shadow of a 
name. Experienced Mounier, experienced Malouet ; 
whose Presidential Parlementary experience the stream 
of things shall soon leave stranded. A Pétion has left 
his gown and briefs at Chartres for a stormier sort of 
pleading ; has’ not forgotten his violin, being fond of 
music. His hair is grizzled, though he is still young: 
convictions, beliefs placid-unalterable are in that man ; 
not hindmost of them, belief in himself. A Protestant- 


clerical Rabaut-St.-Htienne, a slender young eloquent 


and vehement Barnave, will help to regenerate France. 
There are so many of them young. ‘Till thirty the 
Spartans did not suffer a man to marry: but how many 
men here under thirty ; coming to produce not one suf- 
ficient citizen, but a nation and a world of such! The 
old to heal up rents; the young to remove rubbish,— 
which latter, is it not, indeed, the task here ? 

Din, formless from this distance, yet authentically 
there, thou noticest the Deputies from Nantes? To us 
mere clothes-screens, with slouch-hat and cloak, but’ — 
bearing in their pocket a Cahzer of doléances with 
this singular clause, and more such, in it: ‘That the 
‘master wigmakers of Nantes be not troubled with 
‘new guild-brethren, the actually existing number of 

Vou. I.—15 ; 


226 STATES-GENERAL. Bee 
109. 


‘ninety-two being more than sufficient !’* The Rennes 
people have elected Farmer Gérard, ‘a man of natural 
sense and rectitude, without any learning.’ He walks 
there, with solid step; unique, ‘in his rustic farmer- 
clothes; which he will wear always; careless of short- 
cloaks and costumes. he name Gérard, or ‘ Pére 
Gérard, Father Gérard,’ as they please to call him, 
will fly far; borne about in endless banter ; in Royal- 
ist satires, in Republican didactic Almanacs.’ As for 
the man Gérard, being asked once, what he did, after 
trial of it, candidly think of this Parlementary work, 
—<‘T think,’ answered he, “‘that there are a good 
many scoundrels among us.’’ So walks Father Gérard ; 
solid in his thick shoes, whithersoever bound. 

And worthy Doctor Guillotin, whom we hoped to 
behold one other time? If not here, the Doctor should 
be here, and we see him with the eye of prophecy: for 
indeed the Parisian Deputies are all a little late. 
Singular Guillotin, respectable practitioner: doomed 
by a satiric destiny to the strangest immortal glory 
that ever kept obscure mortal from his resting-place, 
the bosom of oblivion! Guillotin can improve the 
ventilation of the. Hall; in all cases of medical 
police and hygiéne be a present aid: but, greater far, 
he can produce his ‘ Report on the Penal Code;’ and 
reveal therein a cunningly devised Beheading Ma- 


* Histoire Parlementaire, i. 335. ‘ 
5 Actes des Apétres (by Peltier and others); Almanach du Pere 
Gérard (by Collot d’Herbois), &c. &c. 


Chap. IV. 5 ; 
Gen THE PROCESSION. Od 


chine, which shall become famous and world-famous. 
This is the product of Guillotin’s endeavors, gained 
not without meditation and reading; which product 
popular gratitude or levity christens by a feminine 
derivative name, as if it were his daughter: La Gudl- 
lotine! ‘* With my machine, Messieurs, I whisk off 
“your head (vous fais sauter la téte) in a twinkling, 
‘“‘and you have no pain; ’’—whereat they all laugh.® 
Unfortunate Doctor! For two-and-twenty years he, 
unguillotined, shall hear nothing but guillotine, see 
nothing but guillotine; then dying, shall through long 
centuries wander, as it were, a disconsolate ghost, on 
the wrong side of Styx and Lethe; his name like to 
outlive Czesar’s. 

See Bailly, likewise of Paris, time-honored Historian 
of Astronomy Ancient and Modern. Poor Bailly, 
how thy serenely beautiful Philosophizing, with its soft 
moonshiny clearness and thinness, ends in foul thick 
confusion—of Presidency, Mayorship, diplomatic Off- 
ciality, rabid Triviality, and the throat of everlasting 
Darkness! Far was it to descend from the heavenly 
Galaxy to the Drapeau Rouge : beside that fatal dung- 
heap, on that last hell-day, thou must ‘ tremble,’ though 
only with cold, ‘de froid.’ Speculation is not practice : 
to be weak is not so miserable; but to be weaker than 
our task. Wo the day when they mounted thee, a 
peaceable pedestrian, on that wild Hippogriff of a 


6 Moniteur Newspaper, of December Ist, 1789 (in Histoire Parle- 


mentaire). 


228 STATES-GENERAL. Book a 
10d, 


Democracy ; which, spurning the firm earth, nay lashing 
at the very stars, no yet known Astolpho could have 
ridden ! 

In the Commons Deputies there are Merchants, 
Artists, Men of Letters; three hundred and seventy- 
four Lawyers ;7 and at least one Clergyman: the Abdé 
Steyes. Him also Paris sends, among its twenty. Be- 
hold him, the light thin man; cold, but elastic, wiry; 
instinct with the pride of Logic; passionless, or with 
but one passion, that of self-conceit. If indeed that can 
be called a passion, which, in its independent concen- 
trated greatness, seems to have soared into transcend- 
entalism ; and to sit there with a kind of godlike indif- 
ference, and look down on passion! He is the man, 
and wisdom shall die with him. This is the Sieyes who 
shall be System-builder, Constitution-builder General ; 
and build Constitutions (as many as wanted) skyhigh, 
—which shall all unfortunately fall before he get the 
scaffolding away. ‘‘ La Politique,” said he to Dumont, 
“‘ Polity is a science I think I have completed (achevée).’’® 
What things, O Sieyes, with thy clear assiduous eyes, 
art thou to see! But were it not curious to know how 
Sieyes, now in these days (for he is said to be still alive)? 
looks out on all that Constitution masonry, through the 
rheumy soberness of extreme age? Might we hope, 
still with the old irrefragable transcendentalism? The 


* Bouillé: Mémoires sur la Révolution Frangaise (London, L797) 53. 
68. 


8 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 64. 9a. D. 1834, 


Chap. IV. ‘ESS v 
a THE PROCESSION. 229 


victorious cause pleased the gods, the vanquished one 
pleased Sieyes (victa Caton?). 

Thus, however, amid skyrending vivats, and blessings 
from every heart, has the Procession of the Commons 
Deputies rolled by. 


Next follow the Noblesse, and next the Clergy ; con- 
cerning both of whom it might be asked, What they 
specially have come for? . Specially, little as they 
dream of it, to answer this question, put in a voice of 
thunder: What are you doing in God’s fair Earth and 
Task-garden ; where whosoever is not working is beg- 
ging or stealing ? Wo, wo to themselves and to all, if 
they can only answer: Collecting tithes, Preserving 
game !—Remark, meanwhile, how D’ Orléans affects to 
step before his own Order, and mingle with the Com- 
mons. For him are vivats: few for the rest, though 
all wave in plumed ‘hats of a feudal cut,’ and have 
sword on thigh; though among them is D’ Antraigues, 
the young Languedocian gentleman,—and indeed many 
a Peer more or less noteworthy. 

There are Liancourt, and La Rochefoucault ; the 
liberal Anglomaniac Dukes. There is a filially pious _- 
Lally; a couple of liberal Lameths. Above all, there 
is a Lafayette ; whose name shall be Cromwell-Grandi- 
son, and fill the world. Many a ‘formula’ has this 
Lafayette too made away with; yet not all formulas. 
He sticks by the Washington formula ; and by that he 
will stick ;—and hang by it, as by sure bower-anchor 


230 STATES-GENERAL. Soe 


hangs and swings the tight war-ship, which, after all 
changes of wildest weather and water, >is found still 
hanging. Happy for him; be it glorious or not! Alone 
of all Frenchmen he has a theory of the world, and 
right mind to conform thereto; he can become a hero 
and perfect character, were it but the hero of one idea. 
Note further our old Parlementary friend, Crispin-Cat¢- 
line d' Espréménil. He is returned from the Mediter- 
ranean Islands, a redhot royalist, repentant to the fin- 
ger-ends ;—unsettled-looking ; whose light, dusky-glow- 
ing at best, now flickers foul in the socket; whom the 
National Assembly will by and by, to save time, ‘re- 
gard as in a state of distraction.’ Note lastly that 
globular Younger Mirabeau; indignant that his elder 
Brother is among the Commons: it is Viscomte Mira- 
beau; named oftener Mirabeau Tonneau (Barrel Mira- 
beau), on account of his rotundity, and the quantities 
of strong liquor he contains. 

There then walks our French Noblesse. All in the 
old pomp of chivalry: and yet, alas, how changed from 
the old position; drifted far down from their native 
latitude, like Arctic icebergs got into the Equatorial 
sea, and fast thawing there! Once these Chivalry 
Duces (Dukes, as they are still named) did actually 
lead the world,—were it only towards battle-spoil, where 
lay the world’s best wages then: moreover, being the 
ablest Leaders going, they had their lion’s share, those 
Duces; which none could grudge them.: But now, 
when so many Looms, improved Ploughshares, Steam- 


Chap; IV. THE PROCESSION. 231 
Engines and Bills of Exchange have been invented; 
and, for battle-brawling itself, men hire Drill-Sergeants 
at eighteenpence a-day,—what mean these goldmantled 
Chivalry Figures, walking there ‘in black-velvet cloaks,’ 
in high-plumed ‘hats of a feudal cut’? Reeds shaken in 
the wind! 


The Clergy have got up; with Cahiers for abolishing 
pluralities, enforcing residence of bishops, better pay- 
ment of tithes." The Dignitaries, we can observe, 
walk stately, apart from the numerous Undignified,— 
who indeed are properly little other than Commons 
disguised in Curate-frocks. Here, however, though 
by strange ways, shall the Precept be fulfilled, and they 
that are greatest (much to their astonishment) become 
least. For one example, out of many, mark that plaus- 
ible Grégoire: one day Curé Grégoire shall be a 
Bishop, when the now stately are wandering distracted, 
as Bishops in partibus. With other thought, mark also 
the Abbé Maury: his broad bold face; mouth accu- 
rately primmed; full eyes, that ray out intelligence, 
falsehood,—the sort of sophistry which is astonished 
you should find it sophistical. Skilfulest vamper-up 
of old rotten leather, to make it look like new ; always 
a rising man; he used to tell Mercier, ‘“‘ You will see; 
I shall be in the Academy before you.” Likely in- 
deed, thou skilfulest Maury; nay thou shalt have a 
Cardinal’s Hat, and plush and glory; but alas, also, in 


10 Hist. Parl. i. 322-27. 11 Mercier: Nouveau Paris. 


232 STATES-GENERAL. BOON. 


the long ran—mere oblivion, like the rest of us; and 
six feet of earth! What boots it, vamping rotten 
leather on these terms? Glorious in comparison is the 
livelihood thy good old Father earns, by making shoes, 
—one may hope, in a sufficient manner. Maury does 
not want for audacity. He shall wear pistols, by and 
by; and, at death-cries of “ Za Lanterne, The Lamp- 
iron !”’—answer coolly, ‘‘ Friends, will you see better 
there ?”’ 

But yonder, halting lamely along, thou noticest next 
Bishop Talleyrand-Perigord, his Reverence of Autun. 
A sardonic grimness lies in that irreverend Reverence 
of Autun. He will do and suffer strange things; and 
will become surely one of the strangest things ever seen, 
or like to be seen. A man living in falsehood, and on 
falsehood; yet not what you can call a false man: there 
is the specialty! It will be an enigma for future ages, 
one may hope: hitherto such a product of Nature 
and Art was possible only for this age of ours,—Age 
of Paper, and of the Burning of Paper. Consider 
Bishop Talleyrand and Marquis Lafayette as the top- 
most of their two kinds; and say once more, looking at 
what they did and what they were, O Tempus ferax 
rerum ! 

On the whole, however, has not this unfortunate 
Clergy also drifted in the Time-stream, far from its 
native latitude? An anomalous mass of men; of 
whom the whole world has already a dim understand- 
ing that it can understand nothing. They were once 


Chap. IV. THE PROCESSION. 233 
May 4th. 


a Priesthood, interpreters of Wisdom, revealers of the 
Holy that is in Man; a true Clerus (or Inheritance 
of God on Earth): but now?—They pass silently, 
with such Oahiers as they have been able to redact ; 
and none cries, God bless them. 


King Louis with his Court: brings up the rear: he 
cheerful, in this day of hope, is saluted with plaudits; 
still more Necker his Minister. Not so the Queen; 
on whom hope shines not steadily any more. IIl- 
fated Queen! Her hair is already gray with many 
cares and crosses; her firstborn son is dying in these 
weeks: black falsehood has ineffaceably soiled her 
name; ineffaceably while this generation lasts. In- 
stead of Vive la Reine, voices insult her with Vive 
d’ Orléans.- Of her queenly beauty little remains 
except its stateliness ; not now gracious, but haughty, 
' rigid, silently enduring. With a most mixed feeling, 
wherein joy has no part, she resigns herself to a day 
she hoped never to have seen. Poor Marie Antoi- 
nette ; with thy quick noble instincts; vehement glan- 
cings, vision all-too fitful narrow for the work thou 
hast to do! O there are tears in store for thee; bit- 
terest wailings, soft womanly meltings, though thou 
hast the heart of an imperial Theresa’s Daughter. 
Thou doomed one, shut thy eyes on the future !— 


And so, in stately Procession, have passed the 
Elected of France. Some towards honor and quick 


234 STATES-GENERAL. Bookkys 


fire-consummation; most towards dishonor; not a 
few towards massacre, confusion, emigration, despera- 
tion: all towards Eternity !—So many heterogeneities 
cast together into the fermenting-vat; there, with in- 
calculable action, counteraction, elective affinities, ex- 
plosive developments, to work out healing for a sick 
moribund System of Society! Probably the strangest 
Body. of Men, if we consider well, that ever met 
together on our Planet on such an errand. So thou- 
sandfold complex a Society, ready to burst-up from 
its infinite depths; and these men, its rulers and 
healers, without life-rule for themselves,—other life- 
rule than a Gospel according to Jean Jacques! To 
the wisest of them, what we must call the wisest, man 
is properly an Accident under the sky. Man is with- 
out Duty round him; except it be ‘to make the Con- 
stitution.’ He is without Heaven above him, or Hell 
beneath him; he has no God in the world. 

What further or better belief can be said to exist 
in these Twelve Hundred? Belief in high-plumed 
hats of a feudal cut; in heraldic scutcheons; in the 
divine right of Kings, in the divine right of Game- 
destroyers. Belief, or what is still worse, canting 
half-belief; or worst of all, mere Macchiavellic pre- 
tence-of-belief,—in consecrated dough-wafers, and the 
godhood of a poor old Italian Man! Nevertheless in 
that immeasurable Confusion and Corruption, which 
struggles there so blindly to become less confused and 
corrupt, there is, as we said, this one salient point 


esters THE PROCESSION. 235 
of a New Life discernible: the deep fixed Determi- 
nation to have done with Shams. A determination, 
which, consciously or unconsciously, is fixed; which 
waxes ever more fixed, into very madness and fixed- 
idea; which in such embodiment as lies provided 
there, shall now unfold itself rapidly: monstrous, 
stupendous, unspeakable ; new for long thousands of 
years '—How has the Heaven’s light, oftentimes in 
this Earth, to clothe itself in thunder and electric 
murkiness; and descend as molten lightning, blast- 
ing, if purifying! Nay is it not rather the very 
murkiness, and atmospheric suffocation, that brings 
the lightning and the light? The new Evangel, as 
the old had been, was it to be born in the Destruction 
of a World? 

But how the Deputies assisted at High Mass, and 
heard sermon, and applauded the preacher, church as 
it was, when he preached politics; how, next day, 
with sustained pomp, they are, for the first time, 
installed in their Salle des Menus (Hall no longer 
of Amusements), and become a States-General,— 
readers can fancy for themselves. The King from 
his estrade, gorgeous as Solomon in all his glory, 
runs his eye over that majestic Hall; many-plumed, 
many-glancing ; bright-tinted as rainbow, in the gal- 
leries and near side-spaces, where Beauty sits raining 
bright influence. Satisfaction, as of one that after long 
voyaging had got to port, plays over his broad simple 
face: the innocent King! He rises and speaks with 


236 ' STATES-GENERAL. ao 
109. 


sonorous tone, a conceivable speech. With which, 
still more with the succeeding one-hourand two-hours 
speeches of Garde-des-Sceaux and M. Necker, full 
of nothing but patriotism, hope, faith, and deficiency 
of the revenue,—no reader of these pages shall be 
tried. 

We remark only that, as his Majesty, on finishing 
the speech, put on his plumed hat, and the Noblesse 
according to custom imitated him, our Tiers-Etat Dep- 
uties did mostly, not without a shade of fierceness, in 
like manner clap-on, and even crush-on their slouched 
hats; and stand there awaiting the issue.” Thick 
buzz among them, between majority and minority of 
Couvrez-vous, Décowvrez-vous (Hats off, Hats on)! 
To which his Majesty puts end, by taking off his 
own royal hat again. 

The session terminates without further accident or 
omen than this; with which, significantly enough, 
France has opened her States-General. 


2 Histoire Parlementaire (i. 356). Mercier: Nouveau Paris, &c. 


eno Ks Va i 
‘THE THIRD ESTATE. a 
a. = a ; ’ mot 

= ——— : “fia < 


~~ 
— 


"a “ cig. 


ast Sor 


rtey SS ae 
5 : i pis - eee 
iin. Oye cd 2 a 

eee ——. 
ge i Pes B iat 
‘ a..s ot 


CHAPTER I. 
INERTIA. 


THAT exasperated France, in this same National 
Assembly of hers, has got something, nay something 
great, momentous, indispensable, cannot be doubted ; 
yet still the question were: Specially what? A 
question hard to solve, even for calm onlookers at 
this distance ; wholly insoluble to actors in the middle 
of it. The States-General, created and conflated by 
the passionate effort of the whole Nation, is there as 
a thing high and lifted up. Hope, jubilating, cries 
aloud that it will prove a miraculous Brazen Serpent 
in the Wilderness; whereon whosoever looks, with 
faith and obedience, shall be healed of all woes and 
serpent-bites. 

We may answer, it will at least prove a symbolic 
Banner; round which the exasperated complaining 
Twenty-five Millions, otherwise isolated and without 
power, may rally, and work—what it is in them to 
work. If battle must be the work, as one cannot 
help expecting, then shall it be a battle-banner (say, 
an Italian Gonfalon, in its old Republican Carroceto) ; 
and shall tower up, car-borne, shining in the wind: 


and with iron tongue peal forth many a signal. A 
239 


240 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book y. 
109. 


thing of prime necessity ; which whether in the van 
or in the centre, whether leading or led and driven, 
must do the fighting multitude incalculable services. 
For a season, while it floats in the very front, nay 
as it were stands solitary there, waiting whether force 
will gather round it, this same National Carroceio, and 
the signal-peals it rings, are a main object with us. 


The omen of the ‘slouch-hats clapt on’ shows the 
Commons Deputies to have made up their minds on 
. one thing: that neither Noblesse nor Clergy shall 
have precedence of them; hardly even Majesty itself. 
To such length has the Contrat Social, and force of 
public opinion, carried us. For what is Majesty but 
the Delegate of the Nation; delegated, and bargained 
with (even rather tightly),—in some very singular 
posture of affairs, which Jean Jacques has not fixed 
the date of? 

Coming therefore into their Hall, on the morrow, 
an inorganic mass of Six Hundred individuals, these 
Commons Deputies perceive, without terror, that they 
have it all to themselves. Their Hall is also the 
Grand or general Hall for all the Three Orders. But 
the Noblesse and Clergy, it would seem, have retired 
to their two separate Apartments, or Halls; and are 
there ‘ verifying their powers,’ not in a conjoint but 
in a separate capacity. They are to constitute two 
separate, perhaps separately-voting Orders, then? It 
is as if both Noblesse and Clergy had silently taken 


Re ae INERTIA. 241 
for granted that they already were such! Two Orders 
against one; and so the Third Order to be left in a 
perpetual minority? 

Much may remain unfixed; but the negative of 
that is a thing fixed: in the Slouch-hatted heads, in 
the French Nation’s head. Double representation, 
and all else hitherto gained, were otherwise futile, 
null. Doubtless, the ‘powers must be verified ;’— 
doubtless, the Commission, the electoral Documents 
of your Deputy must be inspected by his brother 
Deputies, and found valid: it is the preliminary of 
all. Neither is this question, of doing it separately 
or doing it conjointly, a vital one: but if it lead to 
such? It must be resisted; wise was that maxim, 
Resist the beginnings! Nay were resistance unadvi- 
sable, even dangerous, yet surely pause is very nat- 
ural: pause, with Twenty-five Millions behind you, 
may become resistance enough.—The inorganic mass 
of Commons Deputies will restrict itself to a ‘system 
of inertia,’ and for the present remain inorganic. 


Such method, recommendable alike to sagacity and 
to timidity, do the Commons Deputies adopt; and, 
not without adroitness, and with ever more tenacity, . 
they persist in it, day after day, week after week. 
For six weeks their history is of the kind named 
barren; which indeed, as Philosophy knows, is often 
the fruitfulest of all. These were their still creation- 


days; wherein they sat incubating! In fact, what 
Vou. I.—16 


242 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book Ne 


they did was to do nothing, in a judicious manner. 
Daily the inorganic body reassembles; regrets that 
they cannot get organization, ‘ verification of powers 
in common,’ and begin regenerating France. Head- 
long motions may be made, but let such be repressed ; 
inertia alone is at once unpunishable and unconquer- 
able. 

Cunning must be met by cunning; proud preten- 
sion by inertia, by a low tone of patriotic sorrow ; 
low, but incurable, unalterable. Wise as serpents; 
harmless as doves: what a spectacle for France! 
Six Hundred inorganic individuals, essential for its 
regeneration and salvation, sit there, on their elliptic 
benches, longing passionately towards life; in painful 
durance ; like souls waiting to be born. Speeches are 
spoken; eloquent; audible within doors and without. 
Mind agitates itself against mind; the Nation looks 
on with ever deeper interest. Thus do the Commons 
Deputies sit incubating. 

There are private conclaves, supper-parties, consul- 
tations; Breton Club, Club of Viroflay; germs of 
many Clubs. Wholly an element of confused noise, 
dimness, angry heat;—wherein, however, the Eros- 
egg, kept at the fit temperature, may hover safe, 
unbroken till it be hatched. In your Mouniers, 
Malouets, Lechapeliers is science sufficient for that; 
fervor in your Barnaves, Rabauts. At times shall 
come an inspiration from royal Mirabeau: he is 
nowise yet recognized as royal; nay he was ‘ groaned 


ee INERTIA. 243 
at,’ when his name was first mentioned: but he is 
struggling towards recognition. 

In the course of the week, the Commons having 
called their Eldest to the chair, and furnished him 
with young stronger-lunged assistants,—can speak 
articulately ; and, in audible lamentable words, de- 
clare, as we said, that they are an inorganic body, 
longing to become organic. Letters arrive; but an 
inorganic body cannot open letters; they lie on the 
table unopened. The Eldest may at most procure 
for himself some kind of List or Muster-roll, to take 
the votes by; and wait what will betide. Noblesse 
and Clergy are all elsewhere: however, an eager pub- 
lic crowds all galleries and vacancies; which is some 
comfort. With effort, it is determined, not that a Dep- 
utation shall be sent,—for how can an inorganic body 
send deputations ’—but that certain individual Com- 
mons Members shall, in an accidental way, stroll into 
the Clergy Chamber, and then into the Noblesse one ; 
and mention there, as a thing they have happened 
to observe, that the Commons seem to be sitting 
waiting for them, in order to verify their powers. 
That is the wiser method! 

The Clergy, among whom are such a multitude of 
Undignified, of mere Commons in Curates’ frocks, 
depute instant respectful answer that they are, and 
will now more than ever be, in deepest study as to 
that very matter. Contrariwise the Noblesse, in 
cavalier attitude, reply, after four days, that they, 


244 THE THIRD ESTATE. Boe 


for their part, are all verified and constituted ; which, 
they had trusted, the Commons also were; such sep- 
arate verification being clearly the proper constitu- 
tional wisdom-of-ancestors method;——as they the 
Noblesse will have much pleasure in demonstrating 
by a Commission of their number, if the Commons 
will meet them, Commission against Commission ! 
Directly in the rear of which comes a deputation 
of Clergy, reiterating, in their insidious conciliatory 
way, the same proposal. Here, then, is a complexity: 
what will wise Commons say to this? 

Warily, inertly, the wise Commons, considering that 
they are, if not a French Third Estate, at least an 
Aggregate of individuals pretending to some title of 
that kind, determine, after talking on it five days, to 
name such a Commission,—though, as it were, with 
proviso not to be convinced: a sixth day is taken up 
in naming it; a seventh and an eighth day in getting 
the forms of meeting, place, hour and the like, settled: 
so that it is not till the evening of the 23d of May 
that Noblesse Commission first meets Commons Com- 
mission, Clergy acting as Conciliators ; and begins the 
impossible task of convincing it. One other meeting, 
on the 25th, will suffice: the Commons are incon- 
vincible, the Noblesse and Clergy irrefragably con- 
vincing ; the Commissions retire; each Order persist- 
ing in its first pretensions." 


1 Reported Debates, 6th May to 1st June 1789 (in Histoire Parle- 
mentaire, i. 379-422), 


May othi-15th. el a 

Thus have three weeks passed. For three weeks, 
the Third-Estate Carroccio, with far-seen Gonfalon, 
has stood stockstill, flouting the wind; waiting what 
foree would gather round it. 

Fancy can conceive the feeling of the Court; and 
how counsel met counsel, and loud-sounding inanity 
whirled in that distracted vortex, where wisdom could 
not dwell. Your cunningly devised Taxing-Machine 
has been got together; set up with incredible labor; 
and stands there, its three pieces in contact; its two 
fly-wheels of Noblesse and Clergy, its huge working- 
wheel of Tiers-Ktat. The two fly-wheels whirl in the 
softest manner; but, prodigious to look upon, the huge 
working-wheel hangs motionless, refuses to stir! The 
cunningest engineers are at fault. How will it work, 
when it does begin? Fearfully, my Friends; and to 
many purposes; but to gather taxes, or grind court- 
meal, one may apprehend never. Could we but have 
continued gathering taxes by hand! Messeigneurs 
d’Artois, Conti, Condé (named Court Triumvirate), 
they of the anti-democratic Mémoire au Roi, has not 
their foreboding proved true? They may wave re- 
proachfully their high heads; they may beat their 
poor brains; but the cunningest engineers can do 
nothing. Necker himself, were he even listened to, 
begins to look blue. The only thing one sees ad- 
visable is to bring up soldiers. New regiments, two, 
and a battalion of a third, have already reached Paris ; 
others shall get in march. Good were it, in all cir- 


246 THE THIRD ESTATE. eee 
109, 


cumstances, to have troops within reach; good that 
the command were in sure hands. Let Broglie be ap- 
pointed; old Marshal Duke de Broglie; veteran dis- 
ciplinarian, of a firm drill-sergeant morality, such as 
may be depended on. 

For, alas, neither are the Clergy, or the very No- 
blesse what they should be; and might be, when so 
menaced from without: entire, undivided within. The 
Noblesse, indeed, have their Catiline or Crispin D’Es- 
préménil, dusky-glowing, all in renegade heat; their 
boisterous Barrel-Mirabeau; but also they have their 
Lafayettes, Liancourts, Lameths; above all, their 
D’Orléans, now cut forever from his Court-moorings, 
and musing drowsily of high and highest sea-prizes 
(for is not he too a son of Henri Quatre, and partial 
potential Heir-Apparent ?)—on his voyage towards 
Chaos. From the Clergy again, so numerous are the 
Curés, actual deserters have run over: two small 
parties; in the second party Curé Grégoire. Nay 
there is talk of a whole Hundred and Forty-nine of 
them about to desert in mass, and only restrained by 
an Archbishop of Paris. It seems a losing game. 

But judge if France, if Paris sat idle, all this while ! 
Addresses from far and near flow in: for our Commons 
have now grown organic enough to open letters. Or 
indeed to cavil at them! Thus poor Marquis de Brézé, 
Supreme Usher, Master of Ceremonies, or whatever 
his title was, writing about this time on some ceremo- 
nial matter, sees no harm in winding up with a ‘ Mon- 


Seas ene INERTIA. 247 
Sieur, yours with sincere attachment.’—“ To whom 
does it address itself, this sincere attachment?’’ in- 
quires Mirabeau. ‘To the Dean of the Tiers-Etat.” 
—‘ There is no man in France entitled to write that,” 
rejoins he; whereat the Galleries and the World will 
not be kept from applauding.” Poor De Brézé! 
These Commons have a still older grudge at him; nor 
has he yet done with them. . 

In another way, Mirabeau has had to protest against 
the quick suppression of his Newspaper, Journal of the 
States-General ;—and to continue it under a new 
name. In which act of valor, the Paris Electors, still 
busy redacting their Cahier, could not but support 
him, by Address to his Majesty: they claim utmost 
‘provisory freedom of the press;’ they have spoken 
even about demolishing the Bastille, and erecting a 
Bronze Patriot King on the site !—These are the rich 
Burghers: but now consider how it went, for example, 
with such loose miscellany, now all grown eleuthero- 
maniac, of Loungers, Prowlers, social Nondescripts 
(and the distilled Rascality of our Planet), as whirls 
forever in the Palais Royal ;—or what low infinite 
groan, fast changing into a growl, comes from Saint- 
Antoine, and the Twenty-five Millions in base of 
starvation ! 

There is the indisputablest scarcity of corn ;—be it 
Aristocrat-plot, D’ Orléans-plot, of this year ; or drought 
and hail of last year: in city and province, the poor 


2 Moniteur (in Histoire Parlementaire, i. 405). 


248 THE THIRD ESTATE. Pes 


man looks desolately towards a nameless lot. And this 
States-General, that could make us an age of gold, is 
forced to stand motionless; cannot get its powers ver- 
ified! All industry necessarily languishes, if it be 
not that of making motions. 

In the Palais Royal there has been erected, appar- 
ently by subscription, a kind of Wooden Tent (en 
planches de bois) ;*—most convenient; where select 
Patriotism can now redact resolutions, deliver ha- 
rangues, with comfort, let the weather be as it will. 
Lively is that Satan-at-Home! On his table, on his 
chair, in every café, stands a patriotic orator ; a crowd 
round him within; a crowd listening from without, 
open-mouthed, through open door and window; with 
‘thunders of applause for every sentiment of more than 
common hardiness.’ In Monsieur Dessein’s Pamphlet- 
shop, close by, you cannot without strong elbowing get 
to the counter: every hour produces its pamphlet, or 
litter of pamphlets; ‘there were thirteen today, six- 
teen yesterday, ninety-two last week.’* Think of 
Tyranny and Scarcity; Fervid-eloquence, Rumor, 
Pamphleteering ; Société Publicole, Breton Club, En- 
raged Club;—and whether every tap-room, coffee- 
room, social reunion, accidental street-group, over wide 
France, was not an Enraged Club ! 

To all which the Commons Deputies can only listen 
with a sublime inertia of sorrow; reduced to busy 


3 Histoire Parlementaire, i. 429. 
* Arthur Young: Travels, i. 104. 


Chap. I. : 
May 27th-June 17th. ee Te 249 


themselves ‘with their internal police.’ Surer position 
no Deputies ever occupied; if they keep it with skill. 
Let not the temperature rise too high; break not the 
Eros-egg till it be hatched, till it break itself! An 
eager public crowds all Galleries and vacancies; ‘can- 
not be restrained from applauding.’ The two Priv- 
ileged Orders, the Noblesse all verified and constituted, 
may look on with what face they will: not without a 
secret tremor of heart. The Clergy, always acting the 
part of conciliators, make a clutch at the Galleries, 
and the popularity there; and miss it. Deputation of 
them arrives, with dolorous message about the ‘ dearth 
of grains,’ and the necessity there is of casting aside 
vain formalities, and deliberating on this. An insidi- 
ous proposal; which, however, the Commons (moved 
thereto by- sea-green Robespierre) dexterously accept 
as a sort of hint, or even pledge, that the Clergy will 
forthwith come over to them, constitute the States- 
General, and so cheapen grains!°’—Finally, on the 
27th day of May, Mirabeau, judging the time now 
nearly come, proposes that ‘the inertia cease;’ that, 
leaving the Noblesse to their own stiff ways, the Clergy 
be summoned, ‘in the name of the God of Peace,’ to 
join the Commons, and begin.® To which summons 
if they turn a deaf ear,—we shall see! Are not one 
Hundred and Forty-nine of them ready to desert? 
O Triumvirate of Princes, new Garde-des-Sceaux 
Barentin, thou Home-Secretary Breteuil, Duchess Po- 


5 Bailly: Mémoires, i. 114. § Histoire Parlementaire, i. 413. 


250 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V, 
é “ 


lignac, and Queen eager to listen,—what is now to be 
done? This Third Estate will get in motion, with the 
force of all France in it; Clergy-machinery with No- 
blesse-machinery, which were to serve as beautiful 
counterbalances and drags, will be shamefully dragged 
after it,—and take fire along with it. What is to be 
done? The Mil-de-Boeuf waxes more confused than 
ever. Whisper and counter-whisper; a very tempest 
of whispers! Leading men from all the Three Orders 
are nightly spirited thither; conjurors many of them; 
but can they conjure this? Necker himself were now 
welcome, could he interfere to purpose. 

Let Necker interfere, then ; and in the King’s name! 
Happily that incendiary ‘ God-of-Peace’ message is not 
yet answered. The Three Orders shall again have 
conferences; under this Patriot Minister of theirs, 
somewhat may be healed, clouted up ;—we meanwhile 
getting forward Swiss Regiments, and a ‘hundred 
pieces of field artillery.’ This is what the Mil-de- 
Beeuf, for its part, resolves on. 

But as for Necker—Alas, poor Necker, thy obstinate 
Third Estate has one first-last word, verdfication in com- 
mon, as the pledge of voting and deliberating in com- 
mon! Half-way proposals, from such a tried friend, 
they answer with a stare. The tardy conferences 
speedily break up: the Third Estate, now ready and 
resolute, the whole world backing it, returns to its 
Hall of the Three Orders; and Necker to the Wil-de- 


<3 


Chap. INERTIA. 251 


in i 
May 27th-June 17th. 


Beeuf, with the character of a disconjured conjuror 
there,—fit only for dismissal.” 

And so the Commons Deputies are at last on their 
own strength getting under way? Instead of Chair- 
man, or Dean, they have now got a President: Astron- 
omer Bailly. Under way, with a vengeance! With 
endless vociferous and temperate eloquence, borne on 
Newspaper wings to all lands, they have now, on this 
17th day of June, determined that their name is not 
Third Estate, but—National Assembly! They, then, 
are the Nation? Triumvirate of Princes, Queen, re- 
fractory Noblesse and Clergy, what, then, are you? A 
most deep question ;—scarcely answerable in living po- 
litical dialects, 

All regardless of which, our new National Assembly 
proceeds to appoint a ‘ committee of subsistences;’ dear 
to France, though it can find little or no grain. N ext, 
as if our National Assembly stood quite firm on its 
legs,—to appoint ‘four other standing committees ;’ 
then to settle the security of the National Debt; then 
that of the Annual Taxation: all within eight-and- 
forty hours. At such rate of velocity it is going: the 
conjurors of the MHil-de-Boeuf may well ask themselves, 
Whither ? 


T Debates, Ist to 17th June 1789 (in Histoire Parlementaire, i, 422- 
478). 


CHAPTER II. 
MERCURY DE BREZE. 


Now surely were the time for a ‘god from the ma- 
chine;’ there is a nodus worthy of one. The only 
question is, Which god? Shall it be Mars de Broglie, 
with his hundred pieces of cannon ?—Not yet, answers 
prudence ; so soft, irresolute is King Louis. Let it be 
Messenger Mercury, our Supreme Usher de Brézé ! 

On the morrow, which is the 20th of June, these Hun- 
dred and Forty-nine false Curates, no longer restrain- 
able by his Grace of Paris, will desert in a body: let 
De Brézé intervene, and produce—closed doors! Not 
only shall there be Royal Session, in that Salle des 
Menus; but no meeting, nor working (except by car- 
penters), till then. Your Third Estate, self-styled 
‘National Assembly,’ shall suddenly see itself extruded 
from its Hall, by carpenters, in this dexterous way, and 
reduced to do nothing, not even to meet, or articulate- 
ly lament,—till Majesty, with Séance Royale and new 
miracles, be ready! In this manner shall De Brézé, 
as Mercury ex machind, intervene ; and, if the Mil-de- 
Boeuf mistake not, work deliverance from the nodus. 

Of poor De Brézé we can remark that he has yet 


prospered in none of his dealings with these Commons. 
252 


Chap. I. MERCURY DE BREZE. 2538 
June 20th. 


Five weeks ago, when they kissed the hand of Maj- 
esty, the mode he took got nothing but censure; and 
then his ‘sincere attachment,’ how was it scornfully 
whiffed aside! Before supper, this night, he writes to 
President Bailly, a new Letter, to be delivered shortly 
after dawn tomorrow, in the King’s name. Which 
Letter, however, Bailly, in the pride of office, will 
merely crush together into his pocket, like a bill he 
does not mean to pay. 

Accordingly on Saturday morning the 20th of June, 
shrill-sounding heralds proclaim, through the streets of 
Versailles, that there is to be Séance Royale next Mon- 
day; and no meeting of the States-General till then. 
And yet, we observe, President Bailly, in sound of this, 
and with De Brézé’s Letter in his pocket, is proceeding, 
with National Assembly at his heels, to the accustomed 
Salle des. Menus; as if De Brézé and heralds were mere 
wind. It is shut, this Salle; occupied by Gardes Fran- 
gaises. “ Where is your Captain?” The Captain shows 
his royal order: workmen, he is grieved to say, are all 
busy setting up the platform for his Majesty's Séance ; 
most unfortunately, no admission ; admission, at fur- 
thest, for President and Secretaries to bring away papers, 
which the joiners might destroy !—President Bailly 
enters with Secretaries; and returns bearing papers a 
alas, within doors, instead of patriotic eloquence, there 
is now no noise but hammering, sawing, and operative 
screeching and rumbling! A profanation without 


parallel. 


254 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book y. 
10d, 


The Deputies stand grouped on the Paris Road, on 
this umbrageous Avenue de Versailles ; complaining 
aloud of the indignity done them. Courtiers, it is sup- 
posed, look from their windows, and giggle. The morn- 
ing is none of the comfortablest : raw; it is even driz- 
zling a little.’ But all travellers pause; patriot gallery- 
men, miscellaneous. spectators increase the groups. 
Wild counsels alternate. Some desperate Deputies 
propose to go and hold session on the great outer Stair- 
case at Marly, under the King’s windows; for his 
Majesty, it seems, has driven over thither. Others: 
talk of making the Chateau Forecourt, what they call 
Place d Armes, a Runnymede and new Champ de Mai 
of free Frenchmen: nay of awakening, to sounds of 
indignant Patriotism, the echoes of the M#il-de-Boeuf 
itself.—Notice is given that President Bailly, aided by 
judicious Guillotin and others, has found place in the 
Tennis-Court of the Rue St. Frangois. Thither, in long- 
drawn files, hoarse-jingling, like cranes on wing, the 
Commons Deputies angrily wend. 

Strange sight was this inthe Rue St. Francois, Vieux 
Versailles! A naked Tennis-Court, as the Pictures of 
that time still give it: four walls; naked, except aloft, 
some poor wooden penthouse, or roofed spectators’-gal- 
lery, hanging round them:—on the floor not now an 
idle teeheeing, a snapping of balls and rackets; but the 
bellowing din of an indignant National Representation, 
scandalously exiled hither! However, a cloud of wit- 


1 Bailly: Mémoires, i. 185-206. 


’ 


Ch e Lee 4 y J} { ay { e 
Chap. TT. MERCURY DE BREZE. 255 


nesses looks down on them, from wooden penthouse, 
from wall-top, from adjoining roof and chimney; rolls 
towards them from all quarters, with passionate spoken 
blessings. Some table can be procured to write on; 
some chair, if not to sit on, then to stand on. The 
Secretaries undo their tapes; Bailly has constituted the 
Assembly. 

Experienced Mounier, not wholly new to such things, 
in Parlementary revolts, which he has seen or heard of, 
thinks that it were well, in these lamentable threaten- 
ing circumstances, to unite themselves by an Oath.— 
Universal acclamation, as from smouldering bosoms 
getting vent! The Oath is redacted; pronounced 
aloud by President Bailly,—and indeed in such a sonor- 
ous tone, that the cloud of witnesses, even outdoors, 
hear it, and bellow response to it. Six hundred right- 
hands rise with President Bailly’s, to take God above 
to witness that they will not separate for man below, 
but will meet in all places, under all circumstances, 
wheresoever two or three can get together, till they have 
made the Constitution. Made the Constitution, Friends! 
That is a long task. Six hundred hands, meanwhile, 
will sign as they have sworn: six hundred save one ; 
one Loyalist Abdiel, still visible by this sole light= 
point, and namable, poor ‘M. Martin d’Auch, from 
Castelnaudary, in Languedoc.’ Him they permit to 
sign or signify refusal; they even save him from the 
cloud of witnesses, by declaring ‘his head deranged.’ 
At four o'clock, the signatures are all appended; new 


256 THE THIRD ESTATE. Roa 
10d. 


meeting is fixed for Monday morning, earlier than the 
hour of the Royal Session; that our Hundred and 
Forty-nine Clerical deserters be not balked: ‘we will 
meet at the Recollets Church or elsewhere,’ in hope that 
our Hundred and Forty-nine will join us ;—and now it 
is time to go to dinner. 

This, then, is the Session of the Tennis-Court, famed 
Séance du Jeu de Paume; the fame of which has gone 
forth to all lands. This is Mercurius de Brézé’s appear- 
ance as Deus ex machind ; this is the fruit it brings! 
The giggle of Courtiers in the Versailles Avenue has 
already died into gaunt silence. Did the distracted 
Court, with Garde-des-Sceaux Barentin, Triumvirate 
and Company, imagine that they could scatter six hun- 
dred National Deputies, big with a National Constitu- 
tion, like as much Barndoor poultry, big with next to 
nothing,—by the white or black rod of a Supreme 
Usher? Barndoor poultry fly cackling; but National 
Deputies turn round, lion-faced; and, with uplifted 
right-hand, swear an Oath that makes the four corners 
of France tremble. 

President Bailly has covered himself with honor ; 
which shall become rewards. The National Assembly 
is now doubly and trebly the Nation’s Assembly ; not 
militant, martyred only, but triumphant; insulted, and 
which could not be insulted. Paris disembogues itself 
once more, to witness, ‘with grim looks,’ the Séance 
Royale :? which, by a new felicity, is postponed till 

“See Arthur Young (Travels, i. 115-118); A. lancet &e. 


Chap. II. MERCURY DE BREEZE. Qb7 
June 22d-23d. 


Tuesday. The Hundred and Forty-nine, and even with 
Bishops among them, all in processional mass, have had 
free leisure to march off, and solemnly join the Com- 
mons sitting waiting in their Church. The Com- 
mons welcomed them with shouts, with embracings, 
nay with tears ;? for it is growing a life-and-death matter 
now. 

As for the Séance itself, the Carpenters seem to have 
accomplished their platform; but all else remains un- 
accomplished. Futile, we may say fatal, was the whole 
matter. King Louis enters, through seas of people, 
all grim-silent, angry with many things,—for it is a 
bitter rain too. Enters, to a Third Estate, likewise 
grim-silent; which has been wetted waiting under mean 
porches, at back-doors, while Court and Privileged 
were entering. by the front. King and Garde-des- 
Sceaux (there is no Necker visible) make known, not 
without longwindedness, the determinations of the royal 
breast. The Three Orders shall vote separately. On 
the other hand, France may look for considerable con- 
stitutional blessings; as specified in these Five-and- 
thirty Articles,* which Garde-des-Sceaux is waxing 
hoarse with reading. Which Five-and-thirty Articles, 
adds his Majesty again rising, if the Three Orders 
most unfortunately cannot agree together to effect them, 
I myself will effect: “seul je feraz le bien de mes peu- 
ples,” —which being interpreted may signify, You, con- 

3 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, c. 4. 


4 Mistoire Parlementaire, i. 13. 
Vout. I.—17 


258 THE THIRD ESTATE. Boo 
(00, 


tentious Deputies of the States-General, have probably 
not long to be here! But, in fine, all shall now with- 
draw for this day; and meet again, each Order in its 
separate place, tomorrow morning, for despatch of busi- 
ness. This is the determination of the royal breast: 
pithy and clear. And herewith King, retinue, Noblesse, 
majority of Clergy file out, as if the whole matter were 
satisfactorily completed. 

These file out; through grim-silent seas of people. 
Only the Commons Deputies file not out; but stand 
there in gloomy silence, uncertain what they shall 
do. One man of them is certain; one man of them 
discerns and dares! It is now that King Mirabeau 
starts to the Tribune, and lifts up his lion-voice. 
Verily a word in season; for, in such scenes, the 
moment is the mother of ages! Had not Gabriel 
Honoré been there,—one can well fancy, how the 
Commons Deputies, affrighted at the perils which 
now yawned dim all round them, and waxing ever 
paler in each other’s paleness, might very naturally, 
one after one, have glided off; and the whole course 
of European History have been different ! 

But he is there. List to the brool of that royal 
forest-voice ; sorrowful, low; fast swelling to a roar! 
Eyes kindle at the glance of his eye:—National 
Deputies were missioned by a Nation; they have 
swornan Oath; they— But lo! while the lion’s voice 
roars loudest, what Apparition is this? Apparition 
of Mercurius de Brézé, muttering somewhat !— 


Singh | 
eh 
4. 


om 


Chap. II. MERCURY DE BREZE. 259 


June 22d-28d. 


““Speak out,’’ cry several. Messieurs,” shrills De 
Brézé, repeating himself, “You have heard the 
King’s orders !’—Mirabeau glares on him with fire- 
flashing face; shakes the black lion’s mane: ‘“ Yes, 
Monsieur, we have heard what the King was advised 
to say: and you, who cannot be the interpreter of his 
orders to the States-General; you, who have neither 
place nor right of speech here ; you are not the man 
to remind us of it. (Go, Monsieur, tell those who 
sent you that we are here by the will of the People, 
and that nothing but the force of bayonets shall 
send us hence!*® And poor De Brézé shivers forth 
from the National Assembly ;—and also (if it be 
not in one faintest glimmer, months later) finally 
from the page of History !— 

Hapless De Brézé; doomed to survive long ages, 
in men’s memory, in this faint way, with tremulent 
white rod! He was true to Ktiquette, which was 
his Faith here below; a martyr to respect of per- 
sons. Short woollen cloaks could not kiss Majesty’s 
hand as long velvet ones did. Nay lately, when the 
poor little Dauphin lay dead, and some ceremonial 
Visitation came, was he not punctual to announce 
it even to the Dauphin’s dead body: ‘‘ Monseigneur, ~ 
a Deputation of the States-General!”® Sunt lachry- 
moe rerum. 

But what does the (Hil-de-Boeuf, now when De 
Brézé shivers back thither? Despatch that same 

5 Moniteur (Hist. Parl. ii. 22). 6 Montgaillard, ii. 38. 


260 THE THIRD ESTATE. Hoon 


force of bayonets? Not so: the seas of people still 
hang multitudinous, intent on what is passing; nay 
rush and roll, loud-billowing, into the Courts of the 
Chateau itself; for a report has risen that Necker 
is to be dismissed. Worst of all, the Gardes Fran- 
gaises seem indisposed to act: ‘two Companies of 
them do not fire when ordered!’ Necker, for not 
being at the Séance, shall be shouted for, carried 
home in triumph; and must not be dismissed. His 
Grace of Paris, on the other hand, has to fly with 
broken coach-panels, and owe his life to furious 
driving. The Gardes-du-Corps (Body-Guards), which 
you were drawing out, had better be drawn in again.® 
There is no sending of bayonets to be thought of. 
Instead of soldiers, the CHil-de-Boeuf sends—car- 
penters, to take down the platform. Ineffectual shift ! 
In few instants, the very carpenters cease wrenching 
and knocking at their platform; standing on it, 
hammer in hand, and listen open-mouthed.® The 
Third Estate is decreeing that it is, was, and will be, 
nothing but a National Assembly: and now, more- 
over, an inviolable one, all members of it inviolable: 
‘infamous, traitorous, towards the Nation, and guilty 
‘of capital crime, is any person, body-corporate, tri- 
‘bunal, court or commission that now or henceforth, 
‘during the present session or after it, shall dare to 
‘ pursue, interrogate, arrest, or cause to be arrested, - 


1 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 26. 8 Bailly, i. 217. 
9 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 23. 


Chap. I. MERCURY DE BREZE. 261 
June 23d-30th. 


‘detain, or cause to be detained, any’ &e. &e. ‘on 
‘whose part soever the same be commanded.’ ”. Which 
done, one can wind up with this comfortable reflection 
from Abbé Sieyes: ‘Messieurs, you are today what 
you were yesterday.”’ 

Courtiers may shriek; but it is, and remains, 
even so. Their well-charged explosion has exploded 
through the touch-hole; covering themselves with 
scorches, confusion, and unseemly soot! Poor Trium- 
virate, poor Queen; and above all, poor Queen’s Hus- 
band, who means well, had he any fixed meaning ! 
Folly is that wisdom which is wise only behindhand. 
Few months ago these Thirty-five Concessions had 
filled France with a rejoicing, which might have 
lasted for several years. Now it is unavailing, the 
very mention of it slighted; Majesty’s express orders 
set at naught. 

All France is in a roar; a sea of persons, estimated 
at ‘ten thousand,’ whirls ‘all this day in the Palais 
Royal.’ The remaining Clergy, and likewise some 
Forty-eight Noblesse, D’Orléans among them, have 
now forthwith gone over to the victorious Commons ; 
—by whom, as is natural, they are received ‘with 
acclamation.’ 

The Third Estate triumphs; Versailles Town shout- 
ing round it; ten thousand whirling all day in the 
Palais Royal; and all France standing a-tiptoe, not 
unlike whirling! Let the CMil-de-Boeuf look to it. 

10 Montgaillard, ii. 47. 1 Arthur Young, i. 119. 


262 THE THIRD ESTATE. oe 


As for King Louis, he will swallow his injuries; will 
temporize, keep silence; will at all costs have present 
peace. It was Tuesday the 28d of June, when he 
spoke that peremptory royal mandate; and the week 
is not done till he has written to the remaining obsti- 
nate Noblesse, that they also must oblige him, and 
give in. D’Espréménil rages his last; Barrel Mira- 
beau ‘breaks his sword,’ making a vow,—which he 
might as well have kept. The ‘Triple Family’ is 
now therefore complete; the third erring brother, the 
Noblesse, having joined it;—erring but pardonable; 
soothed, so far as possible, by sweet eloquence from 
President Bailly. 

So triumphs the Third Estate; and States-General 
are become National Assembly; and all France may 
sing Te Deum. By wise inertia, and wise cessation 
of inertia, great victory has been gained. It is the 
last night of June: all night you meet nothing on 
the streets of Versailles but ‘men running with 
torches,’ with shouts and jubilation. From the 2d 
of May, when they kissed the hand of Majesty, to 
this 50th of June when men run with torches, we 
count eight weeks and three days. For eight weeks 
the National Carroccio has stood far-seen, ringing 
many a signal; and, so much having now gathered 
round it, may hope to stand. 


CHAPTER If. 
BROGLIE THE WAR-GOD. 


THE Court feels indignant that it is conquered; but 
what then? Another time it will do better. Mercury 
descended in vain; now has the time come for Mars.— 
The gods of the Ciil-de-Boeuf have withdrawn into 
the darkness of their cloudy Ida; and sit there, shap- 
ing and forging what may be needful, be it ‘billets of 
a new National Bank,’ munitions of war, or things for- 
ever inscrutable to men. 

Accordingly, what means this ‘apparatus of troops’? 
The National Assembly can get no furtherance for its 
Committee of Subsistences; can hear only that, at 
Paris, the Bakers’ shops are besieged; that, in the 
Provinces, people are ‘living on meal-husks and boiled 
grass.’ But on all highways there hover dust-clouds, 
with the march of regiments, with the trailing of can- 
non: foreign Pandours, of fierce aspect ; Salis-Samade, 
Esterhazy, Royal-Allemand ; so many of them foreign ; 
to the number of thirty thousand,—which fear can 
magnify to fifty: all wending towards Paris and Ver- 
sailles! Already, on the heights of Montmartre, is a 
digging and delving; too like a scarping and trench- 


ing. The effluence of Paris is arrested Versailles-ward 
263 


264 THE THIRD ESTATE. sory 


by a barrier of cannon at Sévres Bridge. From the 
Queen’s Mews, cannon stand pointed on the National- 
Assembly Hall itself. The National Assembly has its 
very slumbers broken by the tramp of soldiery, swarm- 
ing and defiling, endless, or seemingly endless, all 
round those spaces, at dead of night, ‘without drum- 
music, without audible word of command.’* What 
means it? 

Shall eight, or even shall twelve Deputies, our 
Mirabeaus, Barnaves at the head of them, be whirled 
suddenly to the Castle of Ham; the rest ignominiously 
dispersed to the winds? No National Assembly can 
make the Constitution with cannon levelled on it from 
the Queen’s Mews! What means this reticence of the 
(Hil-de-Beeuf, broken only by nods and shrugs? In 
the mystery of that cloudy Ida, what is it that they 
forge and shape ?—Such questions must distracted Pa- 
triotism keep asking, and receive no answer but an 
echo. 

Questions and echo bad enough in themselves :—and 
now, above all, while the hungry food-year, which runs 
from August to August, is getting older; becoming 
more and more a famine-year! With ‘ meal-husks and 
boiled grass,’ Brigands may actually collect; and, in 
crowds, at farm and mansion, howl angrily, Food! 
Food! It is in vain to send soldiers against them: at 
sight of soldiers they disperse, they vanish as under 
ground; then directly reassemble elsewhere for new 


1A. Lameth: Assemblée Constituante, i. 41. 


Chap. III. i 2 2 
en: BROGLIE THE WAR-GOD. 65 


tumult and plunder. F rightful enough to look upon; 
but what to hear of, reverberated through Twenty-five 
Millions of suspicious minds! Brigands and Broglie, 
open Conflagration, preternatural Rumor are driving 
mad most hearts in France. What will the issue of 
these things be? 

At Marseilles, many weeks ago, the Townsmen have 
taken arms; for ‘suppressing of Brigands,’ and other 
purposes: the military Commandant may make of it 
what he will. Elsewhere, everywhere, could not the 
like be done? Dubious, on the distracted Patriot Im- 
agination, wavers, as a last deliverance, some fore- 
shadow of a National Guard. But conceive, above 
all, the Wooden Tent in the Palais Royal! <A univer- 
sal hubbub there, as of dissolving worlds: there loud- 
est bellows the mad, mad-making voice of Rumor; 
there sharpest gazes Suspicion into the pale dim 
World-Whirlpool ; discerning shapes and phantasms: 
imminent bloodthirsty Regiments camped on the 
Champ-de-Mars; dispersed National Assembly; red- 
hot cannon-balls (to burn Paris):—the mad War-god 
and Bellona’s sounding thongs. To the calmest man 
it is becoming too plain that battle is inevitable. 

Inevitable, silently nod Messeigneurs and Broglie: 
Inevitable and brief! Your National Assembly, 
stopped short in its Constitutional labors, may fatigue 
the royal ear with addresses and remonstrances: those 
cannon of ours stand duly levelled; those troops are 
here. The King’s Declaration, with its Thirty-five too 


266 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book y. 
4 6 


generous Articles, was spoken, was not listened to; 
but remains yet unrevoked: he himself shall effect it, 
seul il fera! 

As for Broglie, he has his headquarters at Versailles, 
all as in a seat of war: clerks writing ; significant staff- 
officers, inclined to taciturnity; plumed aides-de-camp, 
scouts, orderlies flying or hovering. He himself looks 
forth, important, impenetrable; listens to Besenval 
Commandant of Paris, and his warning and earnest 
counsels (for he has come out repeatedly on purpose), 
with a silent smile.2 The Parisians resist ? scornfully 
cry Messeigneurs. Asa meal-mob may! They have 
sat quiet, these five generations, submitting to all. 
Their Mercier declared, in these very years, that a 
Parisian revolt was henceforth ‘impossible.’* Stand 
by the royal Declaration, of the Twenty-third of June. 
The Nobles of France, valorous, chivalrous as of old, 
will rally round us with one heart ;—and as for this 
which you call Third Estate, and which we call canaille 


of unwashed Sansculottes, of Patelins, Scribblers, fac- 


tious Spouters,—brave Broglie, ‘ with a whiff of grape- 
shot (salve de canons),’ if need be, will give quick ac- 
count of it.. Thus reason they: on their cloudy Ida ; 
hidden from men,—men also hidden from them. 

Good is grapeshot, Messeigneurs, on one condition: 
that the shooter also were made of metal! But unfor- 
tunately he is made of flesh; under his buffs and ban- 
doleers, your hired shooter has instincts, feelings, even 


2 Besenvyal, iii. 398, 3 Mercier: Tableau de Paris, vi. 22. 


ee 


Chap. III. BROGLIE THE WAR-GOD. 267 
July 1st-lith. 


a kind of thought. It is his kindred, bone of his bone, 
this same canaille that shall be whiffed ; he has brothers 
in it, a father and mother,—living on meal-husks and 
boiled grass. His very doxy, not yet ‘dead i’ the 
spital,’ drives him into military heterodoxy ; declares 
that if he shed Patriot blood, he shall be accursed 
among men. ‘The soldier, who has seen his pay stolen 
by rapacious Foulons, his blood wasted by Soubises, 
Pompadours, and the gates of promotion shut inex- 
orably on him if he were not born noble,—is himself 
not without griefs against you. Your cause is not the 
soldier’s cause; but, as would seem, your own only, 
and no other god’s nor man’s. 

For example, the world may have heard how, at 
Béthune lately, when there rose some ‘riot about 
grains,’ of which sort there are so many, and the sol- 
diers stood drawn out, and the word ‘ Fire!’ was given, 
—not a trigger stirred; only the butts of all muskets 
rattled angrily against the ground; and the soldiers 
stood glooming, with a mixed expression of coun- 
tenance ;—till clutched ‘each under the arm of a pa- 
triot householder,’ they were all hurried off, in this 


manner, to be treated and caressed, and have their pay 


increased by subscription ! + 

Neither have the Gardes Frangaises, the best regi- 
ment of the line, shown any promptitude for street- 
firing lately. They returned grumbling from Réveil- 
lon’s; and have not burnt a single cartridge since; 


4 Histoire Parlementuire. 


268 THE THIRD ESTATE. soa x 
109. 


nay, as we saw, not even when bid. A dangerous 
humor dwells in these Gardes. Notable men too, in 
their way! Valadi the Pythagorean was, at one time, 
an officer of theirs. Nay, in the ranks, under the 
three-cornered felt and cockade, what hard heads may 
there not be, and reflections going on,—unknown to 
the public! One head of the hardest we do now dis- 
cern there: on the shoulders of a certain Sergeant 
Hoche. Lazare Hoche, that is the name of him; he 
used to be about the Versailles Royal Stables, nephew 
of a poor herbwoman; a handy lad; exceedingly 
addicted to reading. He is now Sergeant Hoche, and 
can rise no farther: he lays out his pay in rushlights, 
and cheap editions of books.° 

On the whole, the best seems to be: Consign these 
Gardes Francaises to their Barracks. So Besenval 
thinks, and orders. Consigned to their barracks, the 
Gardes Frangaises do but form a ‘ Secret Association,’ 
an Engagement not to act against the National As- 
sembly. Debauched by Valadi the Pythagorean; de- 
bauched by money and women! cry Besenval and 
innumerable others. Debauched by what you will, or 
in need of no debauching, behold them, long files of 
them, their consignment broken, arrive, headed by 
their Sergeants, on the 26th day of June, at the Palais 
Royal. Welcomed with vivats, with presents, and a 
pledge of patriot liquor; embracing and embraced ; 
declaring in words that the cause of France is their 


® Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, Londres (Paris), 1800, ii. 198. 


Chap. III. B I “G 
ES oe ROGLIE THE WAR-GOD. 269 


cause! Next day and the following days the like. 
What is singular too, except this patriot humor, and 
breaking of their consignment, they behave otherwise 
with ‘ the most rigorous accuracy.’ ® 

They are growing questionable, these Gardes! 
Eleven ringleaders of them are put in the Abbaye 
Prison. It boots not in the least. The imprisoned 
Eleven have only, ‘by the hand of an individual,’ to 
drop, towards nightfall, a line in the Café de Foy; 
where Patriotism harangues loudest on its table. ‘Two 
hundred young persons, soon waxing to four thousand,’ 
with fit crowbars, roll towards the Abbaye; smite 
asunder the needful doors ; and bear out their Eleven, 
with other military victims :—to supper in the Palais 
Royal Garden ; to board, and lodging ‘in camp-beds, 
in the Thédtre des Variétés ;’ other national Pryta- 
neum as yet not being in readiness. Most deliberate ! 
Nay so punctual were these young persons, that finding 
one military victim to have been imprisoned for real 
civil crime, they returned him to his cell, with pro- 
test. 

Why new military force was not called out? New 
military force was called out. New military force did 
arrive, full gallop, with drawn sabre: but the people” 
gently ‘laid hold of their bridles;’ the dragoons 
sheathed their swords ; lifted their caps by way of sa- 
lute, and sat like mere statues of dragoons,—except 
indeed that a drop of liquor being brought them, they 


6 Besenval, iii. 394-6. 


270 THE THIRD ESTATE. oe of 
109. 


‘drank to the King and Nation with the greatest cor- 
diality.’” Ye 

And now, ask in return, why Messeigneurs and 
Broglie the great god of war, on seeing these things, 
did not pause, and take some other course, any other 
course? Unhappily, as we said, they could see noth- 
ing. Pride, which goes before a fall; wrath, if not 
reasonable, yet pardonable, most natural, had hard- 
ened their hearts and heated their heads; so, with im- 
becility and violence (ill-matched pair), they rush to 
seek their hour. All Regiments are not Gardes Fran- 
gaises, or debauched by Valadi the Pythagorean: let 
fresh undebauched Regiments come up; let Royal- 
Allemand, Salis-Samade, Swiss Chateau-Vieux come 
up,—which can fight, but can hardly speak except in 
German gutturals; let soldiers march, and highways 
thunder with artillery-wagons: Majesty has a new 
Royal Session to hold,—and miracles to work there ! 
The whiff of grapeshot can, if needful, become a blast 
and tempest. 

In which circumstances, before the redhot balls 
begin raining, may not the Hundred-and-twenty Paris 
Electors, though their Cahier is long since finished, see 
good to meet again daily, as an ‘Electoral Club’? 
They meet first ‘in a Tavern ; ’—where ‘a large wed- 
ding-party’ cheerfully gives place to them.* But lat- 

7 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 32. 


® Dusaulx: Prise de la Bastille (Collection des Mémoires, par Berville 
et Barriére, Paris, 1821), p. 269. 


Chap. III. BROGLIE THE WAR-GOD. Zul 
July ist-11th. 


terly they meet in the Hétel-de- Ville, in the Townhall 
itself. Flesselles, Provost of Merchants, with his Four 
Kehevins (Scabins, Assessors), could not prevent it ; 
such was the force of public opinion. He, with his 
Echevins, and the Six-and-Twenty Town-Councillors, 
all appointed from Above, may well sit silent there, in 
their long gowns; and consider, with awed eye, what 
prelude this is of convulsion coming from Below, and 
how they themselves shall fare in that! 


CHAPTER IV. 
TO ARMS! 


So hangs it, dubious, fateful, in the sultry days of 
July. It is the passionate printed advice of M. Marat, 
to abstain, of all things, from violence.' Nevertheless 
the hungry poor are already burning Town Barriers, 
where Tribute on eatables is levied; getting clamorous 
for food. 


The twelfth July morning is Sunday ; the streets are 
all placarded with an enormous-sized De par le Roz, 
‘inviting peaceable citizens to remain within doors,’ to 
feel no alarm, to gather in no crowd. Why so? What 
mean these ‘ placards of enormous size’? Above all, 
what means this clatter of military ; dragoons, hussars, 
rattling in from all points of the compass towards the 
Place Louis Quinze; with a staid gravity of face, 
though saluted with mere nicknames, hootings and 
even missiles?? Besenval is with them. Swiss Guards 
of his are already in the Champs Elysées, with four 
pieces of artillery. 


1 Avis aw Peuple, ou les Ministres dévoilés, 1st July 1789 (in Histoire 
Purlementaire, ii. 37). 
2 Besenval, iii, 411. 
272 


ey 


Chap. IV. S! 
Foie io. TO ARMS 973 


Have the destroyers descended on us, then? From 
the Bridge of Sévres to utmost Vincennes, from Saint- 
Denis to the Champ-de-Mars, we are begirt! Alarm, 
of the vague unknown, is in every heart. The Palais 
Royal has become a place of awestruck interjections, 
silent shakings of the head: one can fancy with what 
dolorous stound the noontide cannon (which the Sun 
fires at crossing of his meridian) went off there; bode- 
ful, like an inarticulate voice of doom. Are these 
troops verily come out ‘against Brigands’? Where 
are the Brigands? What mystery is in the wind ?— 
Hark! a human voice reporting articulately the Job’s- 
news: Necker, People’s Minister, Savior of France, 
as dismissed. Impossible; incredible! 'Treasonous to 
the public peace! Such a voice ought to be choked 
in the’ water-works;*—had not the news-bringer 
quickly fled. Nevertheless, friends, make of it what 
you will, the news is true. Necker is gone. Necker 
hies northward incessantly, in obedient secrecy, since 
yesternight. We have a new Ministry: Broglie the 
War-god ; Aristocrat Breteuil ; Foulon who said the 
people might eat grass! 

Rumor, therefore, shall arise; in the Palais Royal, 
and in broad France. Paleness sits on every face; 
confused tremor and fremescence ; waxing into thun- 
der-peals, of Fury stirred on by Fear. 


But see Camille Desmoulins, from the Café de Foy, 
3 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 81. 4 Ibid. 


Vou. I.—18 


274 THE THIRD ESTATE. on 
(09. 


rushing out, sibylline in face; his hair streaming, in 
each hand a pistol! He springs to a- table: the 
Police satellites are eyeing him; alive they shall 
not take him, not they alive him alive. This time 
he speaks without stammering:—Friends! shall we 
die like hunted hares? Like sheep hounded into 
their pinfold; bleating for mercy, where is no mercy, 
but only a whetted knife? The hour is come; the 
supreme hour of Frenchman and Man; when Op- 
pressors are to try conclusions with Oppressed; and 
the word is, swift Death, or Deliverance forever. 
Let such hour be wedl-come! Us, meseems, one cry 
only befits: To Arms! Let universal Paris, univer- 
sal France, as with the throat of the whirlwind, sound 
only: To arms!—‘‘To arms!” yell responsive the 
innumerable voices; like one great voice, as of 
a Demon yelling from the air: for all faces wax 
fire-eyed, all hearts burn up into madness. Im such, 
or fitter words,® does Camille evoke the Elemental 
Powers, in this great moment.—Friends, continues 
Camille, some rallying-sign! Cockades; green ones; 
—the color of Hope!—As with the flight of locusts, 
these green tree-leaves; green ribbons from the neigh- 
boring shops; all green things are snatched, and made 
cockades of. Camille descends from his table, ‘stifled 
with embraces, wetted with tears ;’ has a bit of green 
ribbon handed him; sticks it in his hat. And now 


5 Vieux Cordelier, par Camille Desmoulins, No. 5 (reprinted in Col- 
lection des Mémoires, par Baudouin Freres, Paris, 1825’, p: 81, 


Chap. IV. TC 8! 
agen TO ARMS 275 


to Curtius’ Image-shop there; to the Boulevards ; 
to the four winds; and rest not till France be on 
fire ! 

France, so long shaken and wind-parched, is prob- 
ably at the right inflammable point. 
Curtius, who, one grieves to think, might be but 


As for poor 


imperfectly paid,—he cannot make two words about 
his Images. The Wax-bust of Necker, the Wax- 
bust of D’Orléans, helpers of France: these, covered 
with crape, as in funeral procession, or after the 
manner of suppliants appealing to Heaven, to Earth, 
and Tartarus itself, a mixed multitude bears off. — For 
asign! As indeed man, with his Singular imagina- 
tive faculties, can do little or nothing without signs: 
thus Turks look to their Prophet's Banner; also 
Osier Mannikins have been burnt, and Necker’s 
Portrait has erewhile figured, aloft on its perch. 

In this manner march they, a mixed, continually 
increasing multitude; armed with axes, staves and 
miscellanea ; grim, many-sounding, through the streets. 
Be all Theatres shut; let all dancing, on planked 
floor, or on the natural greensward, cease! Instead 
of a Christian Sabbath, and feast of guinguette taber- 
nacles, it shall be a Sorcerer’s Sabbath; and Paris, 
gone rabid, dance,—with the Fiend for piper! 

However, Besenval, with horse and foot, is in the 
Place Louis Quinze. Mortals promenading home- 
wards, in the fall of the day, saunter by, from 
Chaillot or Passy, from flirtation and a little thin 


276 THE THIRD ESTATE. a 


wine; with sadder step than usual. Will the Bust- 
Procession pass that way? Behold it; behold also 
Prince Lambese dash forth on it, with his Royal- 
Allemands! Shots fall, and sabre-strokes; Busts 
are hewed asunder; and, alas, also heads of men. 
A sabred Procession has nothing for it but to explode, 
along what streets, alleys, Tuileries Avenues it finds ; 
and disappear. One unarmed man lies hewed down; 
a Garde Francaise by his uniform: bear him (or bear 
even the report of him) dead and gory to his Barracks ; 
—where he has comrades still alive! 

But why not now, victorious Lambesc, charge 
through that Tuileries Garden itself, where the fugi- 
tives are vanishing? Not show the Sunday prome- 
naders too, how steel glitters, besprent with blood ; that 
it be told of, and men’s ears tingle ?—Tingle, alas, 
they did; but the wrong way. Victorious Lambesc, 
in this his second or Tuileries charge, succeeds but 
in overturning (call it not slashing, for he struck 
with the flat of his sword) one man, a poor old 
schoolmaster, most pacifically tottering there; and 
is driven out, by barricade of chairs, by flights of 
‘bottles and glasses,’ by execrations in bass voice 
and treble. Most delicate is the mob-queller’s voca- 
tion; wherein Too-much may be as bad as Not- 
enough. For each of these bass voices, and more 
each treble voice, borne to all parts of the City, 
rings now nothing but distracted indignation; will 
ring all night. The cry, Zo arms! roars tenfold; 


Wo 


er 4 eee 


Chap. IV. BA ! 
SES TO ARMS Dag 


steeples with their metal storm-voice boom out, as 
the sun sinks; armorers’ shops are broken open, 
plundered; the streets are a living foam-sea, chafed 
by all the winds. 

Such issue came of Lambese’s charge on the Tuil- 
eries Garden: no striking of salutary terror into 
Chaillot promenaders; a striking into broad wakeful- 
ness of Frenzy and the three Furies,—which otherwise 
were not asleep ! For they lie always, those subter- 
ranean Eumenides (fabulous and yet so true), in the 
dullest existence of man;—and can dance, brandish- 
ing their dusky torches, shaking their serpent-hair. 
Lambese with Royal-Allemand may ride to his bar- 
racks, with curses for his marching-music; then ride 
back again, like one troubled in mind: vengeful 
Gardes -Frangaises, sacreing, with knit brows, start 
out on him, from their barracks in the Chaussé 
d’Antin; pour a volley into him (killing and wound- 
ing); which he must not answer, but ride on.® 

Counsel dwells not under the plumed hat. If the 
Kumenides awaken, and Broglie has given no orders, 
what can a Besenval do? When the Gardes Fran- 
gaises, with Palais-Royal volunteers, roll down, greedy 
of more vengeance, to the Place Louis Quinze itself, 
they find neither Besenval, Lambesc, Royal-Allemand, 
nor any soldier now there. Gone is military order. 
On the far Eastern Boulevard, of Saint-Antoine, the 
Chasseurs Normandie arrive, dusty, thirsty, after 

6 Weber, ii. 75-91. 


278 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 


a hard day’s ride; but can find no billet-master, see 
no course in this City of confusions; cannot get to 
Besenval, cannot so much as discover where he is: 
Normandie must even bivouac there, in its dust and 
thirst,—unless some patriot will treat it to a cup of 
liquor, with advices. 

Raging multitudes surround the Hotel-de-Ville, 
crying: Arms! Orders! The Six-and-twenty 
Town-Councillors, with their long gowns,’ have 
ducked under (into the raging chaos) ;—shall never 
emerge more. Besenval is painfully wriggling him- 
self out, to the Champ-de-Mars; he must sit there 
‘in the cruelest uncertainty:’ courier after courier 
may dash off for Versailles; but will bring back no 
answer, can hardly bring himself back. For thé 
roads are all blocked with batteries and pickets, with 
floods of carriages arrested for examination: such was 
Broglie’s one sole order; the Mil-de-Beeuf, hearing 
in the distance such mad din, which sounded almost 
like invasion, will before all things keep its own head 
whole. A new Ministry, with, as it were, but one 
foot in the stirrup, cannot take leaps. Mad Paris is 
abandoned altogether to itself. 


What a Paris, when the darkness fell! A European 
metropolitan City hurled suddenly forth from its old 
combinations and arrangements ; to crash tumultuously 
together, seeking new. Use and wont will now no 
longer direct any man; each man, with what of origi- 


NY Ore ee 


Chap. IV. T RM ) 
Chap, IV. TO ARMS! : 279 


nality he has, must begin thinking ; or following those 
that think. Seven hundred thousand individuals, on 
the sudden, find all their old paths, old ways of acting 
and deciding, vanish from under their feet. And so 
there go they, with clangor and terror, they know not 
as yet whether running, swimming or flying,—headlong 
into the New Era. With clangor and terror: from 


above, Broglie the war-god impends, preternatural, with 


his redhot cannon-balls ; and from below, a preternatural 


Brigand-world menaces with dirk and firebrand ; mad- 
ness rules the hour. 

Happily, in place of the submerged Twenty-six, the 
Electoral Club is gathering ; has declared itself a ‘ Pro- 
visional Municipality.’ On the morrow, it will get 
Provost Flesselles, with an Echevin or two, to give help 
in many things. For the present it decrees one most 
essential thing: that forthwith a ‘Parisian Militia’ 
shall be enrolled. Depart, ye heads of Districts, to 
labor in this great work ; while we here, in Permanent 
Committee, sit alert. Let fencible men, each party in 
its own range of streets, keep watch and ward, all night. 
Let Paris court a little fever-sleep; confused by such 
fever-dreams, of ‘ violent motions at the Palais Royal ;’ 
—or from time to time start awake, and look out, pal- 
pitating, in its nightcap, at the clash of discordant 
mutually-unintelligible Patrols; on the gleam of distant 
Barriers, going up all-too ruddy towards the vault of 
Night." 
; T Deux Amis, i. 267-306. 


CHAPTER V. 
GIVE US ARMS. 


On Monday the huge City has awoke, not to its 
week-day industry: to what a different one! The 
working man has become a fighting.-man; has one want 
only: that of arms. The industry of all crafts has 
paused ;—except it be the smith’s, fiercely hammering 
pikes; and, in a faint degree, the kitchener’s, cooking 
offhand victuals; for bowche va toujours. Women too 
are sewing cockades ;—not now of green, which being 
D Artois color, the Hétel-de-Ville has had to interfere 
in it; but of red and blue, our old Paris colors: these, 
once based on a ground of constitutional white, are the 
famed Tr1coLor,—which (if prophecy err not) ‘ will go 
round the world.’ 

All shops, unless it be the Bakers’ and Vintners’, 
are shut: Paris is in the streets;—rushing, foaming 
like some Venice wine-glass into which you had dropped 
poison. The tocsin, by order, is pealing madly from 
all steeples. Arms, ye Elector Municipals; thou Fles- 
selles with thy Echevins, give us Arms!  Flesselles 
gives what he can: fallacious, perhaps insidious prom- 
ises of arms from Charleville; order to seek arms here, 


‘ order to seek them there. ‘The new Municipals give 
280 


QQ re ee 


Chap. V. 
rine GIVE US ARMS. 281 


what they can; some three hundred and sixty indif- 
ferent firelocks, the equipment of the City-Watch: 
‘a man in wooden shoes, and without coat, directly 
clutches one of them, and mounts guard.’ Also as 
hinted, an order to all Smiths to make pikes with their 
whole soul. 

Heads of Districts are in fervent consultation ; sub- 
ordinate Patriotism roams distracted, ravenous for arms. 
Hitherto at the Hétel-de-Ville was only such modicum 
of indifferent firelocks as we have seen. At the so- 
called Arsenal, there lies nothing but rust, rubbish and 
saltpetre,—overlooked too by the guns of the Bastille. 
His Majesty’s Repository, what they call Garde-Meu- 
ble, is forced and ransacked: tapestries enough, and 
gauderies ; but of serviceable fighting-gear small stock ! 
Two silver-mounted cannons there are; an ancient gift 
from his Majesty of Siam to Louis Fourteenth: gilt 
sword of the Good Henri; antique Chivalry arms and 
armor. These, and such as these, a necessitous Patriot- 
ism snatches greedily, for want of better. The Siamese 
cannons go trundling, on an errand they were not meant 
for. Among the indifferent firelocks are seen tourney- 
lances; the princely helm and hauberk glittering amid 
ill-hatted heads,—as in a time when all times and their 
possessions are suddenly sent jumbling ! 

At the Maison de Saint-Lazare, Lazar-House once, 
now a Correction-House with Priests, there was no trace 
of arms; but, on the other hand, corn, plainly to a 
culpable extent. Out with it, to market; in this 


282 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 
scarcity of grains |—Heavens, will ‘fifty-two carts,’ in 
long row, hardly carry it to the Halle aux Bleds ? 
Well, truly, ye reverend Fathers, was your pantry filled ; 
fat are your larders; over-generous your winebins, ye 
plotting exasperators of the Poor; traitorous forestallers 
of bread! 

Vain is protesting, entreaty on bare knees: the House 
of Saint-Lazarus has that in it which comes not out by 
protesting. Behold, how, from every window, it vomits: 
mere torrents of furniture, of bellowing and hurlyburly ; 
—the cellars also leaking wine. ‘Till, as was natural, 
smoke rose,—kindled, some say, by the desperate Saint- 
Lazaristes themselves, desperate of other riddance ; 
and the Establishment vanished from this world in 
flame. Remark nevertheless that ‘a thief’ (set on or 
not by Aristocrats), being detected there, is ‘ instantly 
hanged.’ 

Look also at the Chatelet Prison. The Debtors’ 
Prison of La Force is broken from without; and they 
that sat in bondage to Aristocrats go free: hearing of 
which the Felons at the Chatelet do likewise ‘dig up 
their pavements,’ and stand on the offensive; with the 
best prospects,—had not Patriotism, passing that way, 
‘fired a volley’ into the Felon world ; and crushed it 
down again under hatches. Patriotism consorts not 
with thieving and felony: surely also Punishment, this 
day, hitches (if she still hitch) after Crime, with fright- 
ful shoes-of-swiftness! ‘Some score or two” of wretched 
persons, found prostrate with drink in the cellars of 


aii Sis) 


me 


Chap. V. GIVE US ARMS. 283 
July 13th. 


that Saint-Lazare, are indignantly haled to prison; 
the Jailor has no room; whereupon, other place of se- 
curity not suggesting itself, it is written, ‘on les pendit, 
they hanged them.’' Brief is the word; not without 
significance, be it true or untrue! 


In such circumstances, the Aristocrat, the unpatri- 
otic rich man is packing-up for departure. But he 
shall not get departed. A wooden-shod force has seized 
all Barriers, burnt or not: all that enters, all that 
seeks to issue, is stopped there, and dragged to the 
H6tel-de-Ville: coaches, tumbrils, plate, furniture, 
‘many meal-sacks,’ in time even ‘flocks and herds’ 
encumber the Place de Gréve.? 

And so it roars, and rages, and brays; drums beat- 
ing, steeples pealing; criers rushing with hand-bells : 
“‘Oyez, oyez, All men to their Districts to be en- 
rolled!’’ The Districts have met in gardens, open 
squares; are getting marshalled into volunteer troops. 
No redhot ball has yet fallen from Besenval’s Camp ; on 
the contrary, Deserters with their arms are continually 
dropping in: nay now, joy of joys, at two in the after- 
noon, the Gardes Francaises, being ordered to Saint- 
Denis, and flatly declining, have come over in a body! 
It is a fact worth many. Three thousand six hundred 
of the best fighting men, with complete accoutrement ; 
with cannoneers even, and cannon! Their officers are 


1 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 96. — 
2 Dusaulx: Prise de la Bastille, p. 290. 


284 THE THIRD ESTATE. wee | 
109. 


left standing alone; could not so much as succeed in 
‘spiking the guns.’ The very Swiss, it-may now be 
hoped, Chateau-Vieux and the others, will have doubts 
about fighting. 

Our Parisian Militia,—which some think it were 
better to name National Guard,—is prospering as 
heart could wish. It promised to be forty-eight thou- 
sand; but will in few hours double and quadruple that 
number: invincible, if we had only arms! 

But see, the promised Charleville Boxes, marked 
Artillerie! Tere, then, are arms enough ?7—Conceive 
the blank face of Patriotism, when it found them filled 
with rags, foul linen, candle-ends, and bits of wood! 
Provost of the Merchants, how is this? Neither at 
the Chartreux Convent, whither we were sent with 
signed order, is there or ever was there any weapon of 
war. Nay here, in the Seine Boat, safe under tarpau- 
lings (had not the nose of Patriotism been of the finest), 
are ‘ five thousand-weight of gunpowder ;’ not coming 
in, but surreptitiously going out! What meanest 
thou, Flesselles? “Tis a ticklish game, that of 
‘amusing’ us. Cat plays with captive mouse: but 
mouse with enraged cat, with enraged National Tiger ? 

Meanwhile, the faster, O ye black-aproned Smiths, 
smite; with strong arm and willing heart. This man 
and that, all stroke from head to heel, shall thunder 
alternating, and ply the great forge-hammer, till stithy 
reel and ring again; while ever and anon, overhead, 
booms the alarm-cannon,—for the City has now got 


Chap. V GIVE US ARMS. 285 


July 13th. 


gunpowder. Pikes are fabricated; fifty thousand of 
them, in six-and-thirty hours: judge whether the 
Black-aproned have been idle. Dig trenches, unpave 
the streets, ye others, assiduous, man and maid; cram 
the earth in barrel-barricades, at each of them a yol- 
unteer sentry ; pile the whinstones in window-sills and 
upper rooms. Have scalding pitch, at least boiling 
water ready, ye weak old women, to pour it and dash 
it on Royal-Allemand, with your old skinny arms: 
your shrill curses along with it will not be wanting !— 
Patrols of the newborn National Guard, bearing 
torches, scour the streets, all that night; which other- 
wise are vacant, yet illuminated in every window by 
order. Strange-looking; like some naphtha-lighted 
City of the Dead, with here and there a flight of per- 
turbed Ghosts. 

O poor mortals, how ye make this Earth bitter for 
each other; this fearful and wonderful Life fearful and 
horrible; and Satan has his place in all hearts! Such 
agonies and ragings and wailings ye have, and have 
had, in all times :—to be buried all, in so deep silence ; 
and the salt sea is not swoln with your tears. 

Great meanwhile is the moment, when tidings of 
Freedom reach us ; when the long-enthralled soul, from 
amid its chains and squalid stagnancy, arises, were it 
still only in blindness and bewilderment, and swears 
by Him that made it, that it will be free’ Free? 
Understand that well, it is the deep commandment, 
dimmer or clearer, of our whole being, to be free. 


286 THE THIRD ESTATE. Boole 


Freedom is the one purport, wisely aimed at, or un- 
wisely, of all man’s struggles, toilings and sufferings, 
in this Earth. Yes, supreme is such a moment (if 
thou have known it): first vision as of a flame-girt 
Sinai, in this our waste Pilgrimage,—which thence- 
forth wants not its pillar of cloud by day, and pillar 
of fire by night! Something it is even,—nay, some- 
thing considerable, when the chains have grown cor- 
rosive, poisonous,—to be free ‘from oppression by our 
fellow-man.’ Forward, ye maddened sons of France ; 
be it towards this destiny or towards that! Around 
you is but starvation, falsehood, corruption and the 
clam of death. Where ye are is no abiding. 


Imagination may, imperfectly, figure how Com- 
mandant Besenval, in the Champ-de-Mars, has worn 
out these sorrowful hours. Insurrection raging all 
round; his men melting away! From Versailles, to 
the most pressing messages, comes no answer; or once 
only some vague word of answer which is worse than 
none. A Council of Officers can decide merely that 
there is no decision; Colonels inform him, ‘ weeping,’ 
that they do not think their men will fight. Cruel 
uncertainty is here: war-god Broglie sits yonder, inac- 
cessible in his Olympus ; does not descend terror-clad, 
does not produce his whiff of grapeshot; sends no 
orders. 

Truly in the Chateau of Versailles all seems mystery : 
in the Town of Versailles, were we there, all is rumor, 


a. 
“- * 
\ 


pal SY ba Sime 


ea GIVE US ARMS. 287 
alarm and indignation. An august National Assembly 
sits, to appearance, menaced with death ; endeavoring 
to defy death. It has resolved ‘that Necker carries 
with him the regrets of the Nation.’ It has sent 
solemn Deputation over to the Chateau, with entreaty 
to have these troops withdrawn. In vain: his Majesty, 


- with a singular composure, invites us to be busy rather 


with our own duty, making the Constitution! Foreign 
Pandours, and suchlike, go pricking and prancing, 
with a swashbuckler air; with an eye too probably to 
the Salle des Menus,—were it not for the ‘ grim-look- 
ing countenances’ that crowd all avenues there.* Be 
firm, ye National Senators; the cynosure of a firm, 
grim-looking people ! 

The august National Senators determine that there 
shall, at least, be Permanent Session till this thing end. 
Wherein however, consider that worthy Lafranc de 
Pompignan, our new President, whom we have named 
Bailly’s successor, is an old man, wearied with many 
things. He is the Brother of that Pompignan who 
meditated lamentably on the Book of Lamentations: 

Savez-vous pourquoi Jérémie 
Se lamentait toute sa vie? 


C'est qu'il prévoyait 
Que Pompignan le traduirait ! 


Poor Bishop Pompignan withdraws; having got Lafay- 
ette for helper or substitute: this latter, as nocturnal 
Vice-President, with a thin house in disconsolate hu- 


3 See Lameth; Ferrieres, &c, 


288 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 
109, 


mor, sits sleepless, with lights unsnuffed ;—waiting what 
the hours will bring. . 

So at Versailles. But at Paris, agitated Besenval, 
before retiring for the night, has stept over to old M. 
de Sombreuil, of the Hétel des Invalides hard by. M. 
de Sombreuil has, what is a great secret, some eight- 
and-twenty thousand stand of muskets deposited in his - 
cellars there; but no trust in the temper of his Inva- 
lides. This day, for example, he sent twenty of the 
fellows down to unscrew those muskets; lest Sedition 
might snatch at them: but scarcely, in six hours, had 
the twenty unscrewed twenty gun-locks, or dogsheads 
(chiens) of locks,—each Invalide his dogshead! If 
ordered to fire, they would, he imagines, turn their can- 
non against himself. 

Unfortunate old military gentlemen, it is your hour, 
not of glory! Old Marquis de Launay too, of the 
Bastille, has pulled up his drawbridges long since, ‘and 
retired into his interior ;’ with sentries walking on his 
battlements, under the midnight sky, aloft over the 
glare of illuminated Paris ;—whom a National Patrol, 
passing that way, takes the liberty of firing at: ‘seven 
shots towards twelve at night,’ which do not take effect.‘ 
This was the 13th day of July 1789; a worse day, many 
said, than the last 13th was, when only hail fell out of 


Heaven, not madness rose out of Tophet, ruining worse 
than crops! 
* Deux Amis de la Liberté, i, 312. 


eee 


Chap. V. : 7 ; S. 
ee GIVE US ARMS 289 


In these same days, as Chronology will teach us, hot 
old Marquis Mirabeau lies stricken down, at Argenteuil, 
—not within sound of these alarm-guns; for he proper- 
ly is not there, and only the body of him now lies, 
deaf and cold forever. It was on Saturday night that 
he, drawing his last life-breaths, gave up the ghost 
there ;—leaving a world, which would never go to his 
mind, now broken out, seemingly, into deliration and 
the culbute générale. What is it to him, departing 
elsewhither, on his long journey? The old Chateau 
Mirabeau stands silent, far off, on its scarped rock, in 
that ‘gorge of two windy valleys;’ the pale-fading 
spectre now of a Chateau: this huge World-riot, and 
France, and the World itself, fades also, like a shadow 
on the great still mirror-sea; and all shall be as God 
wills. m. 

Young Mirabeau, sad of heart, for he loved this 
crabbed brave old Father; sad of heart, and occu- 
pied with sad cares,—is withdrawn from Public His- 
tory. The great crisis transacts itself without him.’ 

5 Fils Adoptif: Mirabeau, vi. 1. 1. 
Vou. I.—19 


CHAPTER VI. 
STORM AND VICTORY. 


But, to the living and the struggling, a new, Four- 
teenth morning dawns. Under all roofs of this dis- 
tracted City is the nodus of a drama, not untragical, 
crowding towards solution. The bustlings and prepar- 
ings, the tremors and menaces; the tears that fell from 
old eyes! This day, my sons, ye shall quit you like 
men. By the memory of your fathers’ wrongs, by 
the hope of your children’s rights! Tyranny impends 
in red wrath : help for you is none, if not in your own 
right hands. This day ye must do or die. 

From earliest light, a sleepless Permanent Committee 
has heard the old cry, now waxing almost frantic, mu- 
tinous: Arms! Arms! Provost Flesselles, or what 
traitors there are among you, may think of those Charle- 
ville Boxes. A hundred-and-fifty-thousand of us; and 
but the third man furnished with so much as a pike! 
Arms are the one thing needful: with arms we are 
an unconquerable man-defying National Guard; with- 
out arms, a rabble to be whiffed with grapeshot. 

Happily the word has arisen, for no secret can be 
kept,—that there lie muskets at the Hétel des Invalides. 


Thither will we: King’s Procureur M. Ethys de Corny, 
290 


Pad) 


Chap, VI. hs) AN 
fone STORM AND VICTORY. 291 


and whatsoever of authority a Permanent Committee 
can lend, shall go with us. Besenval’s Camp is there ; 
perhaps he will not fire on us; if he kill us, we shall 
but die. 

Alas, poor Besenval, with his troops melting away in 
that manner, has not the smallest humor to fire! At 
five o'clock this morning, as he lay dreaming, oblivious 
in the Eeole Militaire, a ‘figure’ stood suddenly at his 
bedside; ‘with face rather handsome; eyes inflamed, 
speech rapid’ and curt, air audacious:’ such a figure 
drew Priam’s curtains! The message and monition of 
the figure was, that resistance would be hopeless ; that 
if blood flowed, wo to him who shed it. Thus spoke 
the figure: and vanished. ‘Withal there was a kind 
of eloquence that struck one.’ Besenval admits that 
he should have arrested him, but did not.!. Who this 
figure with inflamed eyes, with speech rapid and curt, 
might be? Besenval knows, but mentions not. Ca- 
mille Desmoulins ? Pythagorean Marquis Valadi, in- 
flamed with ‘violent motions all night at the Palais 
Royal’? Fame names him ‘ Young M. Meillar;? then 
shuts her lips about him forever. 

In any case, behold, about nine in the morning, our 
National Volunteers rolling in long wide flood south- 
westward to the Hétel des Invalides ; in search of the 


1 Besenval, iii. 414. 

2 Tableaux de ia Révolution, Prise de la Bastille (a folio Collection 
of Pictures and Portraits, with letter-press, not always uninstruc- 
tive,—part of it said to be by Chamfort). 


292 THE THIRD ESTATE. Boot. 


one thing needful. King’s Procureur M. Ethys de Corny 
and officials are there; the Curé of Saint-Etienne du 
Mont marches unpacific at the head of his militant 
Parish ; the Clerks of the Basoche in red coats we see 
marching, now Volunteers of the Basoche; the Volun- 
teers of the Palais Royal :—National Volunteers, nu- 
merable by tens of thousands; of one heart and mind. 
The King’s muskets are the Nation’s; think, old M. 
de Sombreuil, how, in this extremity, thou wilt refuse 
them! Old M. de Sombreuil would fain hold parley, 
send couriers; but it skills not: the walls are scaled, 
no Invalide firing a shot; the gates must be flung open. 
Patriotism rushes in, tumultuous, from grunsel up to 
ridge-tile, through all rooms and passages; rammaging 
distractedly for arms. What cellar, or what cranny 
can escape it? ‘The arms are found; all safe there; 
lying packed in straw,—apparently with a view to be- 
ing burnt! More ravenous than famishing lions over 
dead prey, the multitude, with clangor and vociferation, 
pounces on them; struggling, dashing, clutching :—to 
the jamming-up, to the pressure, fracture and probable 
extinction of the weaker Patriot.2 And so, with such 
protracted crash of deafening, most discordant Orches- 
tra-music, the Scene is changed; and eight-and-twenty 
thousand sufficient firelocks are on the shoulders of as 
many National Guards, lifted thereby out of darkness 
into fiery light. 


® Deux Amis, i. 302. 


Chap. VI. } v 
ane STORM AND VICTORY. 293 


Let Besenval look at the glitter of these muskets, as 
they flash by! Gardes Frangaises, it is said, have can- 
non levelled on him; ready to open, if need were, from 
the other side of the River.‘ Motionless sits he; ‘as- 
tonished,’ one may flatter one’s self, ‘at the proud bear- 
ing (fiére contenance) of the Parisians.—And now, to 
the Bastille, ye intrepid Parisians! -There grapeshot 
still threatens: thither all men’s thoughts and steps are 
now tending. os, 

Old De Launay, as we hinted, withdrew ‘into his 
interior’ soon after midnight of Sunday. He remains 
there ever since, hampered, as all military gentlemen 
now are, in the saddest conflict of uncertainties. The 
Hotel-de-Ville ‘ invites’ him to admit National Soldiers, 
which is a soft name for surrendering. On the other 
hand, his Majesty’s orders were precise. His garrison 
is but eighty-two old Invalides, reinforced by thirty- 
two young Swiss; his walls indeed are nine feet thick, 
he has cannon and powder; but, alas, only one day’s 
provision of victuals. The-city too is French, the 
poor garrison mostly French. Rigorous old De 
Launay, think what thou wilt do! 

All morning, since nine, there has been a cry 
everywhere: To the Bastille! Repeated ‘ deputa- 
tions of citizens’ have been here, passionate. for arms ; 
whom De Launay has got dismissed by soft speeches 
through portholes. Towards noon, Elector Thuriot 
de la Rosiére gains admittance; finds De Launay 


4 Besenval, iii. 416. 


294 THE THIRD ESTATE. Boo 


indisposed for surrender; nay disposed for blowing 
up the place rather. Thuriot mounts with him to the 
battlements: heaps of paving-stones, old iron and 
missiles lie piled; cannon all duly levelled; in every 
embrasure a cannon,—only drawn back a little! But 
outwards, behold, O Thuriot, how the multitude flows 
on, welling through every street: tocsin furiously 
pealing, all drums beating the générale: the Suburb 
Saint-Antoine rolling hitherward wholly, as one man! 
Such vision (spectral yet real) thou, O Thuriot, as 
from thy Mount of Vision, beholdest in this moment: 
prophetic of what other Phantasmagories, and loud- 
gibbering Spectral Realities, which thou yet beholdest 
not, but shalt! ‘* Que voulez-vous ?”’ said De Launay, 
turning pale at the sight, with an air of reproach, 
almost of menace. ‘‘ Monsieur,” said Thuriot, rising 
into the moral-sublime, “‘ what mean you ? Consider 
if I could not precipitate both of us from this height,” 
—say only a hundred feet, exclusive of the walled 
ditch! Whereupon De Launay fell silent. Thuriot 
shows himself from some pinnacle, to comfort the 
multitude becoming suspicious, fremescent: then de- 
scends ; departs with protest; with warning addressed 
also to the Invalides,—on whom, however, it produces 
but a mixed indistinct impression. The old heads are 
none of the clearest; besides, it is said, De Launay 
has been profuse of beverages (prodigua des buissons). 
They think, they will not fire,—if not fired on, if 


wer 


Chap. VI. STORM AND VICTORY. ~ 995 
July 14th. 


they can help it; but must, on the whole, be ruled 
considerably by circumstances. . 

Wo to thee, De Launay, in such an hour, if thou 
canst not, taking some one firm decision, rule circum- 
stances! Soft speeches will not serve; hard grape- 
shot is questionable; but hovering between the two 
is unquestionable. Ever wilder swells. the tide of 
men; their infinite hum waxing ever louder, into 
imprecations, perhaps into crackle of stray musketry, 
—which latter, on walls nine feet thick, cannot do 
execution. The Outer Drawbridge has been lowered 
for Thuriot; new deputation of citizens (it is the 
third, and noisiest of all) penetrates that way into 
the Outer Court: soft speeches producing no clear- 
ance of these, De Launay gives fire; pulls up his 
Drawbridge. A slight sputter ;—which has kindled 
the too combustible chaos; made it a roaring fire- 
chaos! Bursts forth Insurrection, at sight of its own 
blood (for there were deaths by that sputter of fire), 
into endless rolling explosion of musketry, distraction, 
execration ;—and overhead, from the Fortress, let one 
great gun, with its grapeshot, go booming, to show 
what we could do. The Bastille is besieged! 

On, then, all Frenchmen, that have hearts in your 
bodies! Roar with all your throats, of cartilage and 
metal, ye Sons of Liberty; stir spasmodically what- 
soever of utmost faculty is in you, soul, body, or 
spirit; for it is the hour! Smite, thou Louis Tour- 
nay, cartwright of the Marais, old-soldier of the 


296 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 


Regiment Dauphiné; smite at that Outer Drawbridge 
chain, though the fiery hail whistles round thee! 
Never, over nave or felloe, did thy axe strike such 
a stroke. Down with it, man; down with it to Orcus: 
let the whole accursed KEdifice sink thither, and 
Tyranny be. swallowed up forever! Mounted, some 
say, on the roof of the guard-room, some ‘on bayonets 
stuck into joints of the wall,’ Louis Tournay smites, 
brave Aubin Bonnemére (also an old soldier) second- 
ing him: the chain yields, breaks; the huge Draw- 
bridge slams down, thundering (avec fracas). Glori- 
ous: and yet, alas, it is still but the outworks. The 
Eight grim Towers, with their Invalide musketry, 
their paving-stones and cannon-mouths, still soar 
aloft intact ;—Ditch yawning impassable, stone-faced ; 
the inner Drawbridge with its back towards us: the 
Bastille is still to take! 


To describe this Siege of the Bastille (thought to 
be one of the most important in History) perhaps 
transcends the talent of mortals. Could one but, 
after infinite reading, get to understand so much as 
the plan of the building! But there is open Esplan- 
ade, at the end of the Rue Saint-Antoine; there are 
such Forecourts, Cour Avancé, Cour de T Orme, 
arched Gateway (where Louis Tournay now fights) ; 
then new drawbridges, dormant-bridges, rampart- 
bastions, and the grim Eight Towers: a labyrinthic 
Mass, high-frowning there, of all ages from twenty 


-* 


Se 


Chap. VI. ae ) 
ee STORM AND VICTORY. 297 


years to four hundred and twenty ;—beleaguered, in 
this its last hour, as we said, by mere Chaos come 
again! Ordnance of all calibres; throats of all 
capacities; men of all plans, every man his own 
engineer: seldom since the war of Pygmies and 
Cranes was there seen so anomalous a thing. Half- 
pay Elie is home for a suit of regimentals; no one 
would heed him in colored clothes: half- pay Hulin is 
haranguing Gardes Frangajses in the Place de Grave. 
Frantic Patriots pick up the grapeshots; bear them, 
still hot (or seemingly so), to the Hétel-de-Ville :— 
Paris, you perceive, is to be burnt! Flesselles. is 
‘pale to the very lips;’ for the roar of the multitude 


grows deep. Paris wholly has got to the acme of 


its frenzy; whirled, all ways, by panic madness. At 
every street-barricade, there whirls simmering a minor 
whirlpool,—strengthening the barricade, since God 
knows what is coming; and all minor whirlpools play 
distractedly into that grand Fire-Mahlstrom which 
is lashing round the Bastille. - 

And so it lashes and it roars. Cholat the wine- 
merchant has become an impromptu cannoneer. See 
Georget, of the Marine Service, fresh frem Brest, ply 
the King of Siam’s cannon. Singular (if we were 
not used to the like): Georget lay, last night, taking 
his ease at his inn; the King of Siam’s cannon also 
lay, knowing nothing of fim, for a hundred years. 
Yet now, at the right instant, they have got together, 
and discourse eloquent music. For, hearing what was 


298 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 


toward, Georget sprang from the Brest Diligence, and 
ran. Gardes Frangaises also will be here, with real 
artillery : were not the walls so thick !—Upwards from 
the Esplanade, horizontally from all neighboring roofs 
and windows, flashes one irregular deluge of musketry, 
without effect. The Invalides lie flat, firing compar- 
atively at their ease from behind stone ; hardly through 
portholes show the tip of a nose. We fall, shot; and 
make no impression ! 

Let conflagration rage; of whatsoever is combust- 
ible! Guard-rooms are burnt, Invalides mess-rooms. 
A distracted ‘ Peruke-maker with two fiery torches’ is 
for burning ‘the saltpetres of the Arsenal ;’—had not 
a woman run screaming; had not a Patriot, with some 
tincture of Natural Philosophy, instantly struck the 
wind out of him (butt of musket on pit of stomach), 
overturned barrels, and stayed the devouring element. 
A young beautiful lady, seized escaping in these Outer 
Courts, and thought falsely to be De Launay’s daugh- 
ter, shall be burnt in De Launay’s sight; she lies 
swooned ona paillasse: but again a Patriot, it is brave 
Aubin Bonnemére the old soldier, dashes in, and res- 
cues her. Straw is burnt; three cartloads of it, hauled 
thither, go up in white smoke; almost to the choking 
of Patriotism itself; so that Elie had, with singed 
brows, to drag back one cart; and Réole the ‘ gigantic 
haberdasher’ another. Smoke as of Tophet; confu- 
sion as of Babel; noise as of the Crack of Doom! 

Blood flows; the aliment of new madness. The 


Ch 4 VI, r N "4 
Ghap NE STORM AND VICTORY. 299 


wounded are carried into houses of the Rue Cerisaie ; 
the dying leave their last mandate not to yield till the 
accursed Stronghold fall. And yet, alas, how fall? 
The walls are so thick! Deputations, three in number, 
arrive from the Hétel-de-Ville; Abbé Fauchet (who 
was of one) can say, with what almost superhuman 
courage of benevolence.® These wave their Town-flag 
in the arched Gateway ; and stand, rolling their drum ; 
but to no purpose. In such Crack of Doom, De Lau- 
nay cannot hear them, dare not believe them; they 
return, with justified rage, the whew of lead still sing- 
ing in their ears. What to do? The Firemen are 
here, squirting with their fire-pumps-on the Invalides 


cannon, to wet the touchholes; they unfortunately can- 


not squirt so high; but produce only clouds of spray. 
Individuals of classical knowledge propose catapults. 
Santerre, the sonorous Brewer of the Suburb Saint- 
Antoine, advises rather that the place be fired, by a 
‘mixture of phosphorus and oil-of-turpentine spouted 
up through forcing-pumps :’ O- Spinola-Santerre, hast 
thou the mixture ready? Every man his own en- 
gineer! And still the fire-deluge abates not: even 
women are firing, and Turks; at least one woman 
(with her sweetheart), and one Turk. Gardes Fran- 
gaises have come: real cannon, real cannoneers. Usher 
Maillard is busy; half-pay Elie, half-pay Hulin rage 
in the midst of thousands. 


5 Fauchet’s Narrative (Deux Amis, i. 324). 
6 Deux Amis, i. 319; Dusaulx, &e. 


300 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book,_V. 
10d. 


How the great Bastille Clock ticks (inaudible) in its 
Inner Court there, at its ease, hour after hour; as if 
nothing special, for it or the world, were passing! It 
tolled One when the firing began; and is now pointing 
towards Five, and still the firing slakes not.—Far down, 
in their vaults, the seven Prisoners hear muffled din as 
of earthquakes; their Turnkeys answer vaguely. 

Wo to thee, De Launay, with thy poor hundred In- 
valides! Broglie is distant, and his ears heavy: Be- 
senval hears, but can send no help. One poor troop 
of Hussars has crept, reconnoitring, cautiously along 
the Quais, as far as the Pont Neuf. ‘We are come 
to join you,’’ said the Captain; for the crowd seems 
shoreless. A large-headed dwarfish individual, of 
smoke-bleared aspect, shambles forward, opening his 
blue lips, for there is sense in him; and croaks: 
“ Alight then, and give up your arms!”’ The Hus- 
sar-Captain is too happy to be escorted to the Barriers, 
and dismissed on parole. Who the squat individual 
was? Men answer, it is M. Marat, author of the ex- 
cellent pacific Avis au Peuple! Great truly, O thou 
remarkable Dogleech, is this thy day of emergence and 
new-birth: and yet this same day come four years—! 
—But let the curtains of the Future hang. 

What shall De Launay do? One thing only De 
Launay could have done: what he said he would do. 
Fancy him sitting, from the first, with lighted taper, 
within arm’s-length of the Powder Magazine; mo- 
tionless, like old Roman Senator, or Bronze Lamp- 


Chap. VI. 5 
aang STORM AND VICTORY. 301 


holder; coldly apprising Thuriot, and all men, by a 
slight motion of his eye, what his resolution was :— 
Harmless he sat there, while unharmed; but the 
King’s Fortress, meanwhile, could, might, would, or 
should in nowise be surrendered, save to the King’s 
Messenger: one old man’s life is worthless, so it be 
lost with honor ; but think, ye brawling canaille, how 
will it be when a whole Bastille springs skyward !—In 
such statuesque, taper-holding attitude, one fancies De 
Launay might have left Thuriot, the red Clerks of the 
Basoche, Curé of Saint-Stephen and all the tagrag-and- 


_ bobtail of the world, to work their will. 


And yet, withal, he could not do it. Hast thou con- 
sidered how each man’s heart is so tremulously respon- 
sive to the hearts of all men; hast thou noted how 
omnipotent is the very sound of many men? How 
their shriek of indignation palsies the strong soul; 
their howl of contumely withers with unfelt pangs? 
The Ritter Gluck confessed that the ground-tone of 
the noblest passage, in one of his noblest Operas, was 
the voice of the Populace he had heard at Vienna, 


‘erying to their Kaiser: Bread! Bread! Great is the 


combined voice of men; the utterance of their instincts, 
which are truer than their thoughts: it is the greatest 
a man encounters, among the sounds and shadows 
which make up this World of Time. He who can re- 
sist that, has his footing somewhere beyond Time. De 
Launay could not doit. Distracted, he hovers between 
two; hopes in the middle of despair ; surrenders not 


302 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book. V. 


his Fortress ; declares that he will blow it up, seizes 
torches to blow it up, and does not blowit. Unhappy 
old De Launay, it is the death-agony of thy Bastille 
and thee! Jail, Jailoring and Jailor, all three, such 
as they may have been, must finish. 

For four hours now has the World-Bedlam roared : 
call it the World-Chimera, blowing fire! The poor 
Invalides have sunk under their battlements, or rise 
only with reversed muskets: thay have made a white 
flag of napkins; go beating the chamade, or seeming 
to beat, for one can hear nothing. The very Swiss at 
the Portcullis look weary of firing; disheartened in 
the fire-deluge : a porthole at the drawbridge is opened, 
as by one that would speak. See Huissier Maillard, 
the shifty man! On his plank, swinging over the 
abyss of that stone Ditch; plank resting on parapet, 
balanced by weight of Patriots,—he hovers perilous: 
such a Dove towards such an Ark! Deftly, thou 
shifty Usher: one man already fell ; and lies smashed, 
far down there, against the masonry! Usher Maillard 
falls not: deftly, unerring he walks, with outspread 
palm. The Swiss holds a paper through his porthole ; 
the shifty Usher snatches it, and returns. Terms of 
surrender: Pardon, immunity to all! Are they ac- 
cepted ?—“ Foi dofficter, On the word of an officer,” 
answers half-pay Hulin,—or half-pay Elie, for men do 
not agree on it,—‘‘they are!” Sinks the drawbridge, 
—Usher Maillard bolting it when down; rushes-in the 


> -_* "<u 
voy Byielhe oie amnaenane So, 
STORM AND VICTORY. 303. 
pi 
“living deluge : the Bastille is fallen ! Victoire! La pe 


a 1 Histoire dela REihition, par Deux Tae de la Liberté, i. 267-306. 
~ Besenval, iii. 410-434. Dusaulx: Prise de la Bastille, 291-301. Bailly; 
Mémoires (Collection de Berville et Burriére), i. 322 et seqq. 


- aw 
a 
- - 
a 
ee 
se 
Al 
4 
i 
s 
“* 
a 4 
s ‘ 


CHAPTER VII. 
NOT A REVOLT. 


Wuy dwell on what follows? Hulin’s fod dofficeer 
should have been kept, but could not. The Swiss 
stand drawn up, disguised in white canvas smocks ; 
the Invalides without disguise; their arms all piled 
against the wall. The first rush of victors, in ecstasy 
that the death-peril is passed, ‘leaps joyfully on their 
necks ;’ but new victors rush, and ever new, also in 
ecstasy not wholly of joy. As we said, it was a living 
deluge, plunging headlong: had not the Gardes Fran- 
caises, in their cool military way, ‘ wheeled round with 
arms levelled,’ it would have plunged suicidally, by 
the hundred or the thousand, into the Bastille-ditch. 

And so it goes plunging through court and corridor ; 
billowing uncontrollable, firing from windows—on it- 
self; in hot frenzy of triumph, of grief and vengeance 
for its slain. The poor Invalides will fare ill; one 
Swiss, running off in his white smock, is driven back, 
with a death-thrust. Let all Prisoners be marched to 
the Townhall, to be judged !—Alas, already one poor 
Invalide has his right hand slashed off. him; his 


maimed body dragged to the Place de Gréve, and 
304 


Chap. VII. NOT A REVOLT. 305 


July 14th. 


hanged there. This same right hand, it is said, 
turned back De Launay from the Powder-Magazine, 
and saved Paris. 

De Launay, ‘discovered in gray frock with poppy- 
colored ribbon,’ is for killing himself with the sword 
of his cane. He shall to the Hétel-de-Ville; Hulin, 
Maillard and others escorting him; Elie marching fore- 
most ‘ with the capitulation-paper on his sword’s point.’ 
Through roarings and cursings; through hustlings, 
clutchings, and at last through strokes! Your escort 
is hustled aside, felled down; Hulin sinks exhausted 
on a heap of stones. Miserable De Launay! He 
shall never enter the Hétel-de-Ville: only his ‘ bloody 
hair-queue, held up in a bloody hand;’ that shall 
enter, for a sign. The bleeding trunk lies on the 
steps there; the head is off through the streets; 
ghastly, aloft on a pike. 

Rigorous De Launay has died; crying out, “O 
friends, kill me fast!’ Merciful De Losme must die; 
though Gratitude embraces him, in this fearful hour, 
and will die for him; it avails not. Brothers, your 
wrath is cruel! Your Place de Gréve is become a 
Throat of the Tiger; full of mere fierce bellowings, 
and thirst of blood. One other officer is massacred ; 
one other Invyalide is hanged on the Lamp-iron; with 
difficulty, with generous perseverance, the Gardes 
Frangaises will save the rest. Provost Flesselles, 
stricken long since with the paleness of death, must 
descend from his seat, ‘to be judged at the Palais 

Vor. I.—20 


306 THE THIRD ESTATE. coy, 


Royal :’—alas, to be shot dead, by an unknown hand, 
at the turning of the first street !— 

O evening sun of July, how, at this hone thy beams 
fall slant on reapers amid peaceful woody fields; on 
old women spinning in cottages; on ships far out in 
the silent main; on Balls at the Orangerie of Ver- 
sailles, where high-rouged Dames of the Palace are 
even now dancing with double-jacketed Hussar-Offcers ; 
—and also on this roaring Hell-porch of a Hotel-de- 
Ville! Babel Tower, with the confusion of tongues, 
were not Bedlam added with the conflagration of 
thoughts, was no type of it. One forest of distracted 
steel bristles, endless, in front of an Electoral Com- 
mittee ; points itself, in horrid radii, against this and 
the other accused breast. It was the Titans warring 
with Olympus; and they, scarcely crediting it, have 
conquered: prodigy of prodigies; delirious,—as it 
could not but be. Denunciation, vengeance; blaze 
of triumph on a dark ground of terror; all outward, 
all inward things fallen into one general wreck of 
madness ! 

Electoral Committee? Had it a thousand throats 
of brass, it would not suffice. Abbé Lefevre, in the 
Vaults down below, is black as Vulcan, distributing 
that ‘five thousand-weight of Powder; with what 
perils, these eight-and-forty hours! Last night, a 
Patriot, in liquor, insisted on sitting to smoke on the 
edge of one of the Powder-barrels: there smoked he, 


ov 
ee 


ans 
- 
“\ 


WL 


Chap.-VII. v aes 
aly 24th, NOT A REVOLT 307 


independent of the world,—till the Abbé ‘purchased 
his pipe for three francs,’ and pitched it far. 

Elie, in the grand Hall, Electoral Committee look- 
ing on, sits ‘with drawn sword bent in three places ;’ 
with battered helm, for he was of the Queen’s Regi- 
ment, Cavalry ; with torn regimentals, face singed and 
soiled; comparable, some think, to ‘an antique war- 
rior ;’—judging the people; forming a list of Bastille 
Heroes. O Friends, stain not with blood the greenest 
laurels ever gained in this world: such is the burden 
of Elie’s song: could it but be listened to. Courage, 
Elie! Courage, ye Municipal Electors! A declining 
sun; the need of victuals, and of telling news, will 
bring assuagement, dispersion: all earthly things 
must end. 


Along the streets of Paris circulate Seven Bastille 
Prisoners, borne shoulder-high ; seven Heads on pikes ; 
the Keys of the Bastile; and much else. See also the 
Gardes Frangaises, in their steadfast military way, 
marching home to their barracks, with the Invalides 
and Swiss kindly enclosed in hollow square. It is one 
year and two months since these same men stood un- 
participating, with Brennus d’Agoust at the Palais de 
Justice, when Fate overtook D’Espréménil; and now 
they have participated; and will participate. Not 
Gardes Frangaises henceforth, but Centre Grenadiers 
of the National Guard: men of iron discipline and 
humor,—not without a kind of thought in them! 


308 THE THIRD ESTATE. poe 
1009. 


Likewise ashlar stones of the Bastille continue 
thundering through the dusk; its paper archives 
shall fly white. Old secrets come to view; and long- 
buried Despair finds voice. Read this portion of an 
old Letter:' ‘If for my consclation Monseigneur 
‘would grant me, for the sake of God and the Most 
‘ Blessed Trinity, that I could have news of my dear 
‘wife; were it only her name on a card, to show that 
‘she is alive! It were the greatest consolation I could 
‘receive, and I should forever bless the greatness of 
‘Monseigneur.’ Poor Prisoner, who namest thyself 
Quéret-Démery, and hast no other history,—she is 
dead, that dear wife of thine, and thou art dead! 
"Tis fifty years since thy breaking heart put this 
question; to be heard now first, and long heard, in 
the hearts of men. 

But so does the July twilight thicken; so must 
Paris, as sick children, and all distracted creatures 
do, brawl itself finally into a kind of sleep. Mu- 
nicipal Electors, astonished to find their heads still 
uppermost, are home: only Moreau de Saint-Méry, 
of tropical birth and heart, of coolest judgment; he, 
with two others, shall sit permanent at the Town- 
hall. Paris sleeps; gleams upward the illuminated 
City: patrols go clashing, without common watch- 
word; there go rumors; alarms of war, to the extent 


1 Dated a la Bastille, 7 Octobre 1752; signed Quéret-Démery. Bas- 
tulle Dévoilée; in Linguet, Mémoires sur la Bastille (Paris, 1821), 
p- 199. 


Chap. VII. NOT A REVOLT. 309 


_ July 14th. 


of ‘ fifteen thousand men marching through the Suburb 
Saint-Antoine, —who never got it marched through. 
Of the day’s distraction judge by this of the night: 
Moreau de Saint-Méry, ‘ before rising from his seat, 
gave upwards of three thousand orders.’2 What 
a head; comparable to Friar Bacon’s Brass Head! 
Within it lies all Paris. Prompt must the answer 
be, right or wrong; in Paris is no other Authority 
extant. Seriously, a most cool clear head; for which 
also thou, O brave Saint-Méry, in many capacities, 
from august Senator to Merchant’s-Clerk, Book- 
dealer, Vice-King; in many places, from Virginia 
to Sardinia, shalt, ever as a brave man, find employ- 
ment.® 


Besenval has decamped, under cloud of dusk, ‘amid 
a great affluence of people,’ who did not harm him; 
he marches, with faint-growing tread, down the left 
bank of the Seine, all night,—towards infinite space. 
Re-summoned shall Besenval himself be; for trial, 
for difficult acquittal. His King’s-troops, his Royal- 
Allemand, are gone hence forever. 

The Versailles Ball and lemonade is done; the 
Orangerie is silent except for nightbirds. Over in 
the Salle des Menus Vice-President Lafayette, with 
unsnuffed lights, ‘with some Hundred or so of Mem- 


2 Dusaulx. 
3 Biographie Universelle, 2 Moreau Saint-Méry (by Fournier- 


Pescay). 


310 THE THIRD ESTATE. soe 


bers, stretched on tables round him,’ sits erect; out- 
watching the Bear. This day, a second solemn Dep- 
utation went to his Majesty; a second, and then 
a third: with ne effect. What will the end of these 
things be ? 

In the Court, all is mystery, not without whisper- 
ings of terror; though ye dream of lemonade and 
epaulettes, ye foolish women! His Majesty, kept in 
happy ignorance, perhaps dreams of double-barrels 
and the Woods of Meudon. Late at night, the Duke 
de Liancourt, having official right of entrance, gains 
access to the Royal Apartments; unfolds, with earnest 
clearness, in his constitutional way, the Job’s-news. 
“« Mais,”’ said poor Louis, ‘“c’est une révolte, Why, 
that is a revolt !’’—“‘ Sire,” answered Liancourt, ‘ it 
is not a revolt,—it is a revolution.” 


a 


CHAPTER VIII. 
CONQUERING YOUR KING. 


On the morrow a fourth Deputation to the Chateau 
is on foot: of a more solemn, not to say awful cha- 
racter ; for, besides ‘orgies in the Orangery,’ it seems 
‘the grain-convoys are all stopped;’ nor has Mir- 
abeau’s thunder been silent. Such Deputation is 
on the point of setting out,—when lo, his Majesty 
himself, attended only by his two Brothers, steps in; 
quite in the paternal manner; announces that the 
troops, and all causes of offence, are gone, and hence- 
forth there shall be nothing but trust, reconcilement, 
goodwill; whereof he ‘permits, and even requests,’ 
a National Assembly to assure Paris in his name! 
Acclamation, as of men suddenly delivered from death, 
gives answer. ‘The whole Assembly spontaneously 
rises to escort his Majesty back; ‘interlacing their 
arms to keep off the excessive pressure from him ;’ for 
all Versailles is crowding and shouting. The Chateau 
Musicians, with a felicitous promptitude, strike up the 
Sein de sa Famille (Bosom of one’s Family): the 
Queen appears at the Balcony with her little boy 


and girl, ‘kissing them several times ;’ infinite Vivats 
311 


312 THE THIRD ESTATE. Bes 
(5d. 


spread far and wide ;—and suddenly there has come, 
as it were, a new Ileaven-on-EKarth. 

Eighty-eight august Senators, Bailly, Lafayette and 
our repentant Archbishop among them, take coach for 
Paris, with the great intelligence; benedictions with- 
out end on their heads. From the Place Louis Quinze, 
where they alight, all the way to the Hotel-de-Ville, 
it is one sea of Tricolor cockades, of clear Na- 
tional muskets; one tempest of huzzaings, hand-clap- 
pings, aided by ‘occasional rollings’ of drum-music. 
Harangues of due fervor are delivered ; especially 
by Lally Tollendal, pious son of the ill-fated mur- 
dered Lally; on whose head, in consequence, a civic 
crown (of oak or parsley) is forced,—which he forcibly 
transfers to Bailly’s. 

But surely, for one thing, the National Guard should 
have a General! Moreau de Saint-Méry, he of the 
‘three thousand orders,’ casts one of his significant 
glances on the Bust of Lafayette, which has stood there 
ever since the American War of Liberty. Whereupon, 
by acclamation, Lafayette is nominated. Again, in 
room of the slain traitor or quasi-traitor Flesselles, 
President Bailly shall be—Provost of the Merchants? 
No: Mayor of Paris! So be it. Maire de Paris! 
Mayor Bailly, General Lafayette ; vive Bailly, vive La- 
fayette! the universal out-of-doors multitude rends 
the welkin in confirmation.—And now, finally, let us 
to Notre-Dame for a Te Deum. 

Towards Notre-Dame Cathedral, in glad procession, 


Chap. VIII. CONQUERING YOUR KING. 313 
July 15th. ; 


these Regenerators of ‘the Country walk, through a 
jubilant people ; in fraternal manner; Abbé Lefevre, 
still black with his gunpowder services, walking arm 
in arm with the white-stoled Archbishop. Poor Bailly 
comes upon the Foundling Children, sent to kneel to 
him; and ‘weeps.’ Ze Dewm, our Archbishop of- 
ficiating, is not only sung, but shot—with blank car- 
tridges. Our joy is boundless, as our wo threatened 
to be. Paris, by her own pike and musket, and the 
valor of her own heart, has conquered the very war- 
gods,—to the satisfaction now of Majesty itself. A 
courier is, this night, getting under way for Necker: 
the People’s Minister, invited back by sing, by 
National Assembly, and Nation, shall traverse France 
amid shoutings, and the sound of trumpet and timbrel. 

Seeing which course of things, Messeigneurs of the 
Court Triumvirate, Messieurs of the dead-born Broglie 
Ministry, and others such, consider that their part also 
is clear: to mount and ride. Off, ye too-royal Bro- 
glies, Polignacs and Princes of the Blood; off while it 
is yet time! Did not the Palais Royal, in its late noc- 
turnal ‘violent motions,’ set a specific price (place of 
payment not mentioned) on each of your heads ?— 
With precautions, with the aid of pieces of cannon 
and regiments that can be depended on, Messeigneurs, 
between the 16th night and 17th morning, get to their 
several roads. Not without risk! Prince Condé has 
(or seems to have) ‘men galloping at full speed :’ 
with a view, it is thought, to fling him into the river 


314 THE THIRD ESTATE. Book V. 


Oise, at Pont-Sainte-Mayence.' The Polignacs travel 
disguised; friends, not servants, on their coach-box. 
Broglie has his own difficulties at Versailles, runs his 
own risks at Metz and Verdun; does nevertheless get 
safe to Luxemburg, and there rests. 

This is what they call the First Emigration ; deter- 
mined on, as appears, in full Court-conclave; his 
Majesty assisting; prompt he, for his share of it, to 
follow any counsel whatsoever. ‘Three Sons of France, 
and four Princes of the blood of Saint Louis,’ says 
Weber, ‘could not more effectually humble the Burgh- 
‘ers of Paris than by appearing to withdraw in fear 
‘of their life.” Alas, the Burghers of Paris bear it 
with unexpected stoicism! The Man D’Artois indeed 
is gone; but has he carried, for example, the Land 
D’ Artois with him? Not even Bagatelle the Country- 
house (which shall be useful as a Tavern); hardly the 
four-valet Breeches, leaving the Breeches-maker !— 
As for old Foulon, one learns that he is dead ; at least 
‘a sumptuous funeral’ is going on; the undertakers 
honoring him, if no other will. Intendant Berthier, 
his son-in-law, is still living ; lurking: he joined Besen- 
val, on that Eumenides Sunday; appearing to treat it 
with levity ; and is now fled no man knows whither. 


The Emigration is not gone many miles, Prince 
Condé hardly across the Oise, when his Majesty, ac- 
cording to arrangement, for the Emigration also 


1 Weber, ii. 126. 


Chap. VIII. CONQUERING YOUR KING. 45) 
July 17th. 


thought it might do good,—undertakes a rather dar- 
ing enterprise: that of visiting Paris in person. With 


.a Hundred Members of Assembly; with small or no 


military escort, which indeed he dismissed at the 
Bridge of Sévres, poor Louis sets out; leaving a des- 
olate Palace; a Queen weeping, the Present, the Past 
and the Future all so unfriendly for her. 

At the Barrier of Passy, Mayor Bailly, in grand 


~ gala, presents him with the keys; harangues him, in 


Academic style; mentions that it isa great day; that 
in Henri Quatre’s case. the King had to make conquest 
of his People; but in this happier case, the People 
makes conquest of its King (a conquis son Roi). The 
King, so happily conquered, drives forward, slowly, 
through a steel people, all silent, or shouting only Jive 
la Nation ; is harangued at the Townhall, by Moreau 
of the three thousand orders, by King’s Procureur M. 
Ethys de Corny, by Lally Tollendal, and others; 
knows not what to think of it or say of it; learns that 
he is ‘Restorer of French Liberty, —as a Statue of 
him, to be raised on the site of the Bastille, shall tes- 
tify to all men. Finally, he is shown at the Balcony, 
with a Tricolor cockade in his hat; is greeted now, 
with vehement acclamation, from Square and Street, 
from all windows and roofs :—and so drives home again 
amid glad mingled and, as it were, intermarried shouts, 
of Vive le Rot and Vive la Nation ; wearied but safe. 


It was Sunday when the red-hot balls hung over us, 


316 THE THIRD ESTATE. BES A 
(59. 


in mid air: it is now but Friday, and ‘the Revolution 
is sanctioned.’ An august National Assembly shall 
make the Constitution; and neither foreign Pandour, 
domestic Triumvirate, with levelled Cannon, Guy-Faux 
powder-plots (for that too was spoken of); nor any 
tyrannic Power on the Earth or under the Earth, shall 
say to it, What dost thou ?—So jubilates the People; 
sure now of a Constitution. Cracked Marquis Saint- 
Huruge is heard under the windows of the Chateau ; 
murmuring sheer speculative-treason.? 


2 Campan, ii. 46-64. 


CHAPTER IX. 
THE LANTERNE. 


Tie Fall of the Bastille may be said to have shaken 
all France to the deepest foundations of its existence. 
The rumor of these wonders flies everywhere: with 
the natural speed of Rumor; with an effect thought 
to be preternatural, produced by plots. Did D’Orléans 
or Laclos, nay did Mirabeau (not overburdened with 
money at this time) send riding Couriers out from 
Paris ; to gallop ‘on all radii,’ or highways, towards all 
points of France? It is a miracle, which no penetrat- 
ing man will call in question.’ 

Already in most Towns, Electoral Committees were 
met; to regret Necker, in harangue and resolution. 
In many a Town, as Rennes, Caen, Lyons, an ebullient 
people was already regretting him in brickbats and 
musketry. But now, at every Town’s-end in France, 
there do arrive, in these days of terrror,—‘ men,’ as 
men will arrive; nay ‘men on_ horseback,’ since 
Rumor oftenest travels riding. ‘These men declare, 
with alarmed countenance, Te BRIGANDs to be coming, 
to be just at hand; and do then—ride on, about their 


1 Toulongeon, i. 95; Weber, &c. Ke. 
317 


318 THE THIRD ESTATE. a 
109. 


further business, be what it might! Whereupon the 
whole population of such Town defensively flies to 
arms. Petition is soon thereafter forwarded to National 
Assembly; in such peril and terror of peril, leave to 
organize yourself cannot be withheld: the armed pop- 
ulation becomes everywhere an enrolled National 
Guard. Thus rides Rumor, careering along all radii, 
from Paris outwards, to such purpose: in few days, 
some say in not many hours, all France to the utmost 
borders bristles with bayonets. Singular, but un- 
deniable,—miraculous or not!—But thus may any 
chemical liquid, though cooled to the freezing-point, 
or far lower, still continue liquid; and then, on the 
slightest stroke or shake, it at once rushes wholly into 
ice. Thus has France, for long months and even years, 
been chemically dealt with; brought below zero; and 
now, shaken by the Fall of a Bastille, it instantaneously 
congeals: into one crystallized mass, of sharp-cutting 
steel! Guaz a chi la tocea, ’Ware who touches it! 


In Paris, an Electoral Committee, with a new Mayor 
and General, is urgent with belligerent workmen to 
resume their handicrafts. Strong dames of the Mar- 
ket (Dames de la Halle) deliver congratulatory ha- 
rangues; present ‘bouquets to the Shrine of Sainte 
Geneviéve.’ Unenrolled men deposit their arms,— 
not so readily as could be wished: and receive ‘nine 
frances.” With Ze Deums, Royal Visits, and sanctioned 
Reyolution, there is haleyon weather; weather even 


— 


oA ve a 
SO 


Chap. IX. 
vot THE LANTERNE. 319 


of preternatural brightness; the hurricane being over- 
blown. 

Nevertheless, as is natural, the waves still run high, | 
hollow rocks retaining their murmur. We are but at 
the 22d of the month, hardly above a week since the 
Bastille fell, when it suddenly appears that old Foulon 
is alive; nay, that he is here, in early morning, in the 
streets of Paris: the extortioner, the plotter, who 
would make the people eat grass, and was a liar 
from the beginning !—It is even so. The deceptive 
‘sumptuous funeral’ (of some domestic that died); the 
hiding-place at Vitry towards Fontainebleau, have not 
availed that wretched old man. Some living domestic 
or dependant, for none loves Foulon, has betrayed him 
to the Village. Merciless boors of Vitry unearth him; 
pounce on him, like hell-hounds: Westward, old In- 
famy; to Paris, to be judged at the Hotel-de-Ville! 
His old head, which seventy-four years have bleached, 
is bare; they have tied an emblematic bundle of grass 
on his back; a garland of nettles and thistles is round 
his neck: in this manner; led with ropes; goaded on 
with curses and menaces, must he, with his old limbs, 
sprawl forward ; the pitiablest, most unpitied of all 
old men. 

Sooty Saint-Antoine, and every street, musters its 
crowds as he passes ;—the Hall of the Hétel-de-Ville, 
the Place de Gréve itself, will scarcely hold his escort 
and him. Foulon must not only be judged righteously, 
but judged there where he stands, without any delay. 


320 THE THIRD ESTATE. Loe on 
(09, 


Appoint seven judges, ye Municipals, or seventy-and- 
seven; name them yourselves, or we will name them: 
but judge him!” Electoral rhetoric, eloquence of 
Mayor Bailly, is wasted, for hours, explaining the 
beauty of the Law’s delay. Delay, and still delay! 
Behold, O Mayor of the People, the morning has worn 
itself into noon: and he is still unjudged !—Lafayette, 
pressingly sent for, arrives; gives voice: This Foulon, 
a known man, is guilty almost beyond doubt; but may 
he not have accomplices? Ought not the truth to be 
cunningly pumped out of him,—in the Abbaye Prison? 
It is a new light! Sansculottism claps hands ;—at 
which handclapping, Foulon (in his fainness, as his 
Destiny would have it) also claps. ‘See! they un- 
_ derstand one another !”’ cries dark Sansculottism, blaz- 
ing into fury of suspicion.—“ Friends,” said ‘a person 
in good clothes,’ stepping forward, ‘what is the use 
‘“‘of judging this man? Has not he been judged 
‘these thirty years?’ With wild yells, Sansculottism 
clutches him, in its hundred hands: he is whirled 
across the Place de Gréve, to the ‘Lanterne,’ Lamp- 
iron which there is at the corner of the Rue de la 
Vannerie ; pleading bitterly for life,—to the deaf 
winds. Only with the third rope—for two ropes 
broke, and the quavering voice still pleaded—can he 
be so much as got hanged! His Body is dragged 
through the streets; his Head goes aloft on a pike, 


2 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 146-9. 


Chap. : y 
Ves THE LANTERNE. | Balt 


the mouth filled with grass: amid sounds as of Tophet, 
from a grass-eating people.* 

Surely if Revenge is a ‘kind of Justice,’ it is a 
‘wild’ kind! O mad Sansculottism, hast thou risen, 
in thy mad darkness, in thy soot and rags; unex- 
pectedly, like an Enceladus, living-buried, from under 
his Trinacria? They that would make grass be eaten 
do now eat grass, in thts manner? After long dumb- * 
groaning generations, has the turn suddenly become 
thine ?—To such abysmal overturns, and frightful 
instantaneous inversions of the centre-of-gravity, are 
human Solecisms all liable, if they but knew it; the 
more liable, the falser (and topheavier) they are !— 


To add to the horror of Mayor Bailly and_ his 
Municipals, word comes that Berthier has also been. 
arrested ; that he is on his way hither from Compiégne. 
Berthier, Intendant (say Tax-levier) of Paris; syco- 
phant and tyrant;- forestaller of corn; contriver of 
Camps against the people ;—accused of many things: 
is he not Foulon’s son-in-law ; and, in that one point, 
guilty of all? In these hours, too, when Sansculottism 
has its blood up! The shuddering Municipals send 
one of their number to escort him, with mounted: 
National Guards. 

At the fall of day, the wretched Berthier, still wear- 
ing a face of courage, arrives at the Barrier; in an 
open carriage; with the Municipal beside him; five 


3 Deux Amis de la Liberté, ii. 60-6. 
Von. I.—21 


322 THE THIRD ESTATE. oes h 
3 7 (Ou. 


hundred horsemen with drawn sabres; unarmed foot- 
men enough: not without noise! Placards go bran- 
dished round him; bearing legibly his indictment, as 
Sansculottism, with unlegal brevity, ‘in huge letters,’ 
draws it up. Paris is come forth to meet him: with 
hand-clappings, with windows flung up; with dances, 
triumph-songs, as of the Furies. Lastly, the Head of 
Foulon; this also meets him on a pike. Well might 
his ‘look become glazed,’ and sense fail him, at such 
sight !—Nevertheless, be the man’s conscience what 
it may, his nerves are of iron. At the Héotel-de-Ville 
he will answer nothing. He says he obeyed superior 
orders ; they have his papers; they may judge and 
determine: as for himself, not having closed an eye 
these two nights, he demands, before all things, to have 
sleep. Leaden sleep, thou miserable Berthier! Guards 
rise with him, in motion towards the Abbaye. At the 
very door of the Hétel-de-Ville, they are clutched ; 
flung asunder, as by a vortex of mad arms; Berthier 
whirls towards the Lanterne. He snatches a musket: 
fells and strikes, defending himself like a mad lion: 
he is borne down, trampled, hanged, mangled: his 
Head too, and even his Heart, flies over the City 
on a pike. 

Horrible, in Lands that had known equal justice ! 


* ‘Tl a volé le Roi et la France (He robbed the King and France).’ 
“He devoured the substance of the People.’ ‘He was the slave of 
‘the rich, and the tyrant of the poor.’ ‘He drank the blood of the 
‘widow and orphan.’ ‘He betrayed his country.’ See Deux Amis, 
ii. 67-73. 


oa 


Chap sANTERNE. oat 
Chap, 1X. THE LANTERNE 323 


Not so unnatural in Lands that had never known it. 
“Le sang qui coule, est-il done si pur 2” asks 
Barnave; intimating that the Gallows, though by 
irregular methods, has its own.—Thou thyself, O 
Reader, when thou turnest that corner of the Rue 
de la Vannerie, and discernest still that same grim 
Bracket of old Iron, wilt: not want for reflections. 
‘Over a grocer’s shop,’ or otherwise; with ‘a bust 
of Louis XIV. in the niche under it, now no longer 
in the niche,—it still sticks there; still holding out 
an ineffectual light, of fish-oil; and has séen worlds 
wrecked, and says nothing. 

But to the eye of enlightened - Patriotism, what 
a thunder-cloud was this; suddenly shaping itself in 
the radiance of the halcyon weather! Cloud of 
Erebus -blackness ; betokening latent electricity with- 
out limit. Mayor Bailly, General Lafayette throw 
up their commissions, in an indignant manner ;—need 
to be flattered back again. The cloud disappears, as 
thunder-clouds do. The halcyon weather returns, 
though of a grayer complexion; of a character more 
and more evidently not supernatural. 

Thus, in any case, with what rubs soever, shall the 
Bastille be abolished from our Earth; and with it, 
Feudalism, Despotism; and, one hopes, Scoundrelism 
generally, and all hard usage of man by his brother 
man. Alas, the Scoundrelism and hard usage are not 
so easy of abolition! But as for the Bastille, it sinks 
day after day, and month after month; its ashlars 


324 THE THIRD ESTATE. es 


and boulders tumbling down continually, by express 
order of our Municipals. Crowds ofthe curious 
roam through its caverns; gaze on the skeletons 
found walled-up, on the ouwbliettes, iron cages, mon- 
strous stone-blocks with padlock chains. One day 
we discern Mirabeau there, along with the Genevese 
Dumont.2 Workers and onlookers make reverent 
way for him; fling verses, flowers on his path, Bas- 
tille-papers and curiosities into his carriage, with 
vivats. 

Able Editors compile Books from the Bastzlle 
Archives ; from what of them remain unburnt. The 
Key of that Robber-Den shall cross the Atlantic; 
shall lie on Washington’s hall-table. The great 
Clock ticks now in a private patriotic Clockmaker’s 
apartment; no longer measuring hours of mere 
heaviness. Vanished is the Bastille, what we call 
vanished: the body, or sandstones, of it hanging, 
in benign metamorphosis, for centuries to come, over 
the Seine waters, as Pont Lows Seize ;° the soul of 
it living, perhaps still longer, in the memories of 
men. 


So far, ye august Senators, with your Tennis-Court 
Oaths, your inertia and impetus, your sagacity and 
pertinacity, have ye brought us. ‘And yet think, 
Messieurs,’’ as the Petitioners justly urged, “you 


5 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 305. 
§ Dulaure: Histoire de Paris, viii. 434. 


Chap. IX. THE LANTERNE. 325 
July 22d. 


who were our saviors did yourselves need saviors,” 
—the brave Bastillers, namely; workmen of Paris; 
many of them in straitened pecuniary circumstances !7 
Subscriptions are opened; Lists are formed, more 
accurate than Elie’s; harangues are delivered. A 
Body of Bastille Heroes, tolerably complete, did get 
together ;—comparable to the Argonauts; hoping to 
endure like them. But in little more than a year 
the whirlpool of things threw them asunder again, 
and they sank. So many highest superlatives 
achieved by man are followed by new higher; and 
dwindle into comparatives and positives! The Siege 
of the Bastille, weighed with which, in the Historical 
balance, most other sieges, including that of Troy 
Town, are gossamer, cost, as we find, in killed and 
mortally vounded, on the part of the Besiegers, some 
Highty-three persons: on the part of the Besieged, 
after all that straw-burning, fire-pumping, and deluge 
of musketry, One poor solitary Invalid, shot stone- 
dead (rotde-mort) on the battlements!* The Bastille 
Fortress, like the City of Jericho, was overturned by 
miraculous sound. . 


7 Moniteur: Séance du Samedi 18 Juillet 1789 (in Histoire Parle- 


mentaire, ii. 137). 
8 Dusaulx: Prise de la Bastille, p. 447, &e. 


~*~ 


I 


1) OK, 


LEE 
a 
a 


>? 


NSOLIDATION. 


co 


CHAPTER I. 
MAKE THE CONSTITUTION. 


Here perhaps is the place to fix, a little more pre- 
cisely, what these two words, French Revolution, shall 
mean ; for, strictly considered, they may have as many 
meanings as there are speakers of them. All things 
are in revolution ; in change from moment to moment, 
which becomes sensible from epoch to epoch: in this 
Time-World of ours there is properly nothing else but 
revolution and mutation, and even nothing else conceiv- 
able. Revolution, you answer, means speedier change. 
Whereupon one has still to ask: How speedy? At what 
degree of speed; in what particular points of this vari- 
able course, which varies in velocity, but can never stop 
till Time itself stops, does revolution begin and end; 
cease to be ordinary mutation, and again become such ? 
It is a thing that'will depend on definition more or less 
arbitrary. 

For ourselves, we answer that French Revolution 
means here the open violent Rebellion, and Victory, 
of disimprisoned Anarchy against corrupt worn-out 
Authority: how Anarchy breaks prison; bursts-up 


from the infinite Deep, and rages uncontrollable, im- 
“829 


330 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 


1789. 


measurable, enveloping a world; in phasis after phasis 
of fever-frenzy ;—till the frenzy burning itself out, and 
what elements of new Order it held (since all Force 
holds such) developing themselves, the Uncontrollable 
be got, if not reimprisoned, yet harnessed, and its mad 
forces made to work towards their object as sane regu- 
lated ones. For as Hierarchies and Dynasties of all 
kinds, Theocracies, Aristocracies, Autocracies, Strum- 
petocracies, have ruled over the world; so it was ap- 
pointed, in the decrees of Providence, that this same 
Victorious Anarchy, Jacobinism, Sansculottism, French 
Revolution, Horrors of French Revolution, or what else 
mortals name it, should have its turn. The ‘ destructive 
wrath’ of Sansculottism: this is what we speak, having 
unhappily no voice for singing. 

Surely a great Phenomenon: nay it is a transcend- 
ental one, overstepping all rules and experience: the 
crowning Phenomenon of our Modern Time. For here 
again, most unexpectedly, comes antique Fanaticism in 
new and newest vesture; miraculous, as all Fanaticism 
is. Call it the Fanaticism of ‘making away with for- 
mulas, de humer les formules.’ The world of formulas, 
the formed regulated world, which all habitable world 
is,—must needs hate such Fanaticism like death; and 
be at deadly variance with it. The world of formulas 
must conquer it; or failing that, must die execrating it, 
anathematizing it ;—can nevertheless in nowise prevent 
its being and its having been. The anathemas are there, 
and the miraculous Thing is there. 


. ey 1a | 


Chap. I. MAKE THE CONSTITUTION. 331 
July-August. 


Whence it cometh? Whither it goeth? These are 
questions! When the age of Miracles lay faded into 
the distance as an incredible tradition, and even the age 


of Conventionalities was now old; and Man’s Existence 


had for long generations rested on mere formulas which 
were grown hollow by course of time; and it seemed 
as if no Reality any longer existed, but only Phan. 
tasms of realities, and God’s Universe were the work 
of the Tailor and Upholsterer mainly, and men were 
buckram masks that went about becking and grim- 
acing there,—on a sudden, the Earth yawns asunder, 
and amid Tartarean smoke, and glare of fierce bright- 
ness, rises SANSCULOTTISM, many-headed, fire-breath- 
ing, and asks: What think ye of me? Well may the 
buckram masks start together, terror-struck ; ‘into ex- 
pressive well-concerted groups!’ It is indeed, Friends, 
a most singular, most fatal thing. Let whosoever is 
but buckram and a phantasm look to it: ill verily may 
it fare with him; here methinks he cannot much longer 
be. Wo also to many a one who is not wholly buck- 
ram, but partly real and human! The age of Miracles 
has come back! ‘Behold the World-Phoenix, in fire- 
‘consummation and fire-creation: wide are her fanning 
‘wings; loud is her death-melody, of battle-thunders 
‘and falling-towns; skyward lashes the funeral flame, 
‘enveloping all things: it is the Death-Birth of a 


‘World!’ 


Whereby, however, as we often say, shall one un- 


332 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 
109, 


speakable blessing seem attainable. This, namely: 
that Man and his Life rest no more on hollowness and 
a Lie, but on solidity and some kind of Truth. Wel- 
come the beggarliest truth, so it be one, in exchange 
for the royalest sham! Truth of any kind breeds ever 
new and better truth; thus hard granite rock will 
crumble down into soil, under the blessed skyey in- 
fluences; and cover itself with verdure, with fruitage 
and umbrage. But as for Falsehood, which, in like 
contrary manner, grows ever falser,—what can it, or 
what should it do but decease, being ripe; decompose 
itself, gently or even violently, and return to the 
Father of it,-—too probably in flames of fire? 
Sansculottism will burn much; but what is incom- 
bustible it will not burn. Fear not Sansculottism ; 
recognize it for what it is, the portentous inevitable 
end of much, the miraculous beginning of much. One 
other thing thou mayest understand of it: that it too 
came from God; for has it not been? From of old, as 
it is written, are His goings forth; in the great Deep 
of things; fearful and wonderful now as in the begin- 
ning: in the whirlwind also he speaks; and the wrath 
of men is made to praise Him.—But to gauge and 
measure this immeasurable Thing, and what is called 
account for it, and reduce it toa dead logic formula, 
attempt not! Much less shalt thou shriek thyself 
hoarse, cursing it; for that, to all needful lengths, has 
been already done. As an actually existing Son of 
Time, look, with unspeakable manifold interest, of- 


Chap. I MAKE THE CONSTITUTION. 300 


J uly-August. 


tenest in silence, at what the Time did bring: there- 
with edify, instruct, nourish thyself, or were it but 
amuse and gratify thyself, as it is given thee. 


Another question which at every new turn will rise 
on us, requiring ever new reply, is this: Where the 
French Revolution specially 7s? In the King’s Palace, 
in his Majesty’s or her Majesty’s managements, and 
maltreatments, cabals, imbecilities and woes, answer 
some few :—whom we do not answer. In the National 
Assembly, answer a large mixed multitude: who ac- 
cordingly seat themselves in the Reporter’s Chair; and 
therefrom noting what Proclamations, Acts, Reports, 
passages of logic-fence, bursts of parliamentary elo- 
quence seem notable within doors, and what tumults 
and rumors of tumult become audible from without, 
produce volume on yolume; and, naming it History 
of the French Revolution, contentedly publish the 
same. To do the like, to almost any extent, with 30 
many Filed Newspapers, Choix des Rapports, His- 
totres Parlementaires as there are, amounting to many 
horseloads, were easy for us. Easy but unprofitable. 
The National Assembly, named now Constituent As- 
sembly, goes its course ; making the Constitution ; but™ 
the French Revolution also goes its course. 

In general, may we not say that the French Rev- 
olution lies in the heart and head of every violent- 
speaking, of every violent-thinking French Man? 
How the Twenty-five Millions of such, in their per- 


334 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 


plexed combination, acting and counter-acting, may 
give birth to events; which event successively is the 
cardinal one; and from what point of vision it may 
best be surveyed: this isa problem. Which problem 
the best insight, seeking light from all possible sources, 
shifting its point of vision whithersoever vision or 
glimpse of vision can be had, may employ itself in 
solving; and be well content to solve in some tolera- 
bly approximate way. 

As to the National Assembly, in so far as it still 
towers eminent over France, after the manner of a 
car-borne Carroccio, though now no longer in the van; 
and rings signals for retreat or for advance,—it is and 
continues a reality among other realities. But in so 
far as it sits making the Constitution, on the other 
hand, it is a fatuity and chimera mainly. Alas, in the 
never so heroic building of Montesquieu-Mably card- 
castles, though shouted over by the world, what interest 
is there? Occupied in that way, an august National 
Assembly becomes for us little other than a Sanhe- 
drim of Pedants, not of the gerund-grinding, yet of no 
fruitfuller sort; and its loud debatings and recrimina- 
tions about Rights of Man, Right of Peace and War, 
Veto suspensif, Veto absolu, what are they but so 
many Pedant’s-curses, ‘May God confound you for 
your Theory of Irregular Verbs!” 


A Constitution can be built, Constitutions enough @ 
la Steyes: but the frightful difficulty is, that of get- 


Ce es MAKE THE CONSTITUTION. 335 
ting men to come and live in them! Could Sieyes 
have drawn thunder and lightning out of Heaven to 
sanction his Constitution, it had been well: but with- 
out any thunder? Nay, strictly considered, is it not 
still true that without some such celestial sanction, 
given visibly in thunder or invisibly otherwise, no 
Constitution can in the long run be worth much more 
than the waste-paper it is written on? The Constitu- 
tion, the set of Laws, or prescribed Habits of Acting, 
that men will live under, is the one which images their 
Convictions,—their Faith as to this wondrous Uni- 
verse, and what rights, duties, capabilities they have 
there: which stands sanctioned, therefore, by Neces- 
sity itself; if not by a seen Deity, then by an unseen 
one. Other Laws, whereof there are always enough 
ready-made, are usurpations ; which men do not obey, 
but rebel against, and abolish at their earliest conve- 
nience. 

The question of questions accordingly were, Who is 
it that, especially for rebellers and abolishers, can 
make a Constitution? He that can image-forth the 
general Belief when there is one; that can impart one 
when, as here, there is none. A most rare man; ever, 
as of old, a god-missioned man! Here, however, in 
defect of such transcendent supreme man, Time with 
its infinite succession of merely superior men, each 
yielding his little contribution, does much. Force 
likewise (for, as Antiquarian Philosophers teach, the 
royal Sceptre was from the first something of a Ham- 


336 CONSOLIDATION. oy 
mer, to crack such heads as could not be convinced) 
will all along find somewhat to do. And thus in per- 
petual abolition and reparation, rending and mending, 
with struggle and strife, with present evil, and the 
hope and effort towards future good, must the Consti- 
tution, as all human things do, build itself forward ; 
or unbuild itself, and sink, as it can and may. O 
Sieyes, and ye other Committee-men, and Twelve 
Hundred miscellaneous individuals from all parts of 
France! what is the Belief of France, and yours, if 
ye knew it! Properly that there shall be no Belief; 
that all formulas be swallowed. The Constitution 
which will suit that? Alas, too clearly, a No-Consti- 
tution, an Anarchy ;—which also, in due season, shall 
be vouchsafed you. 

But, after all, what can an unfortunate National 
Assembly do? Consider only this, that there are 
Twelve Hundred miscellaneous individuals; not a 
unit of whom but has his own thinking-apparatus, 
his own speaking-apparatus! In every unit of them 
is some belief and wish, different for each, both that 
France should be regenerated, and also that he in- 
dividually should do it. Twelve Hundred separate 
Forces, yoked miscellaneously to any object, miscel- 
laneously to all sides of it; and bidden pull for 
life ! 

Or is it the nature of National Assemblies gener- 
ally to do, with endless labor and clangor, Nothing ? 
Are Representative Governments mostly at bottom 


Chap. I. MAKE THE CONSTITUTION. 337 
July-August. 


Tyrannies too’ Shall we say, the Tyrants, the am- 
bitious contentious Persons from all corners of the 
country do, in this manner, get gathered into one 
place; and there, with motion and counter-motion, 
with jargon and hubbub, cancel one another, like 
the fabulous Kilkenny Cats; and produce, for net- 
result, zero ;—the country meanwhile governing or 
guiding ¢tself, by such wisdom, recognized, or for 
most part unrecognized, as may exist in individual 
heads here and there ?—Nay, even that were a great 
improvement: for of oid, with their Guelf Factions 
and Ghibelline Factions, with their Red Roses and 
White Roses, they were wont to cancel the whole 
country as well. Besides they do it now ina much 
narrower cockpit; within the four walls of their 
Assembly House, and here and there an outpost of 
Hustings and Barrel-heads; do it with tongues too, 
not with swords :—all which improvements, in the art 
of producing zero, are they not great? Nay, best of 
all, some happy Continents (as the Western one, with 
its Savannahs, where whosoever has four willing limbs 
finds food under his feet, and an infinite sky over his 


head) can do without governing.—What Sphinx-ques-— 


tions; which the distracted world, in these very gen- 


erations, must answer or die! 
Vou. I.—22 


CHAPTER II. 
THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY. 


ONE thing an elected Assembly of Twelve Hundred 
is fit for: Destroying. Which indeed is but a more 
decided exercise of its natural talent for Doing Nothing. 
Do nothing, only keep agitating, debating ; and things 
will destroy themselves. 

So and not otherwise proved it with an august 
National Assembly. It took the name Constituent, 
as if its mission and function had been to construct or 
build; which also, with its whole soul, it endeavored 


to do: yet, in the fates, in the nature of things, there © 


lay for it precisely of all functions the most opposite 
to that. Singular, what Gospels men will believe ; 
even Gospels according to Jean Jacques! It was the 
fixed Faith of these National Deputies, as of all think- 
ing Frenchmen, that the Constitution could be made ; 
that they, there and then, were called to make it. 
How, with the toughness of old Hebrews or Ishmael- 
ite Moslem, did the otherwise light unbelieving People 
persist in this their Credo quia impossibile ; and front 
the armed world with it, and grow fanatic and even 
heroic, and do exploits by it! The Constituent 


Assembly’s Constitution, and several others, will, 
338 


eChapatt. THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY. 339 
July-Aug. 4th. 


being printed and not manuscript, survive to future 
generations, as an instructive well-nigh incredible 
document of the Time: the most significant Picture 
of the then existing France; or at lowest, Picture of 
these men’s Picture of it. 

But in truth and seriousness, what could the Nation- 
al Assembly have done? The thing to be done was, 
actually as they said, to regenerate France; to abol- 
ish the old France, and make a new one, quietly or 
forcibly, by concession or by violence: this by the 
Law of Nature has become inevitable. With what 
degree of violence, depends on the wisdom of those 
that preside over it. With perfect wisdom on the part 
of the National Assembly, it had all been otherwise ; 
but whether, in any wise, it could have been pacific, 
nay other than bloody and convulsive, may still be a 


question. 


Grant, meanwhile, that this Constituent Assembly 
does to the last continue to be something. With a 
sigh, it sees itself incessantly forced away from its 
infinite divine task of perfecting ‘the Theory of 
Irregular Verbs,’—to finite terrestrial tasks, which 
latter have still a significance for us. It is the cyno- 
sure of revolutionary France, this National Assembly. 
All work of Government has fallen into its hands, or 
under its control; all men look to it for guidance. In 
the middle of that huge Revolt of Twenty-five mil- 
lions, it hovers always aloft as Carroccio or Battle- 


340 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI j 
789, 


Standard, impelling and impelled, in the most confused 
way: if it cannot give much guidance, it will still seem 
to give some. It emits pacificatory Proclamations not a 
few; with more or with less result. It authorizes the 
enrolment of National Guards,—lest Brigands come 
to devour us, and reap the unripe crops. It sends 
missions to quell ‘effervescences;’ to deliver men 
from the Lanterne. It can listen to congratulatory 
Addresses, which arrive daily by the sackful; mostly 
in King Cambyses’ vein: also to Petitions and .com- 
plaints from all mortals; so that every mortal’s com- 
plaint, if it cannot get redressed, may at least hear 
itself complain. or the rest, an august National 
Assembly can produce Parliamentary Eloquence; and 
appoint Committees. Committees of the Constitution, 
of Reports, of Researches; and of much else: which 
again yield mountains of Printed Paper; the theme 
of new Parliamentary Eloquence, in bursts or in plen- 
teous smooth-flowing floods. And so, from the waste 
vortex whereon all things go whirling and grinding, 
Organic Laws, or the similitude of such, slowly emerge. . 

With endless debating, we get the Rights of Man 
written down and promulgated: true paper basis of 
all paper Constitutions. Neglecting, cry the oppo- 
nents, to declare the Duties of Man! Forgetting, 
answer we, to ascertain the Mights of Man ;—one of 
the fatalest omissions!—Nay sometimes, as on the 
Fourth of August, our National Assembly, fired sud- 
denly by an almost preternatural enthusiasm, will 


Chap. If. THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY. 341 
July-Aug. 4th, 


get through whole masses of work in one night. A 
memorable night, this Fourth of August: Dignitaries 
temporal and spiritual; Peers, Archbishops, Parle- 
ment-Presidents, each outdoing the other in patriotic 
devotedness, come successively to throw their now 
untenable possessions on the ‘altar of the father- 
land.’ ‘With louder and louder vivats,—for indeed 
it is ‘after dinner’ too,—they abolish Tithes, Sei- 
gnorial Dues, Gabelle, excessive Preservation of Game; 
nay Privilege, Immunity, Feudalism root and branch ; 
then appoint a Ze Deum for it; and so, finally, dis- 
perse about three in the morning, striking the stars 
with their sublime heads. Such night, unforeseen but 
forever memorable, was this of the Fourth of August 
1789. Miraculous, or semi-miraculous, some seem to 
think it. A new Night of Pentecost, shall we say, 
shaped according to the new Time, and new Church 
of Jean Jacques Rousseau? It had its causes; also 


its effects. 


In such manner labor the National Deputies; per- 
fecting their Theory of Irregular Verbs; governing 
France, and being governed by it; with toil and 
noise ;—cutting asunder ancient intolerable bonds ; 
and, for new ones, assiduously spinning ropes of 


sand. Were their labors a nothing or a something, 


yet the eyes of all France being reverently fixed on 
them, History can never very long leave them alto- 


gether out of sight. 


342 CONSOLIDATION. Hook a 


For the present, if we glance into that Assembly- 
Hall of theirs, it will be found, as is natural, ‘most 
irregular.’ As many as ‘a hundred members are on 
their feet at once;’ no rule in making motions, or 
only commencements of a rule; Spectators’ Gallery 
allowed to applaud, and even to hiss;' President, 
appointed once a fortnight, raising many times no 
serene head above the waves. Nevertheless, as in 
all human Assemblages, like does begin arranging 
itself to like; the perennial rule, Ubi homines sunt 
modi sunt, proves valid. Rudiments of methods 
disclose themselves; rudiments of parties. There 
is a Right Side (Cété Droit), a Left Side (Cété 
Gauche); sitting on M. le President’s right hand, 
or on his left: the Cédté Droit conservative; the 
Coté Gauche destructive. Intermediate is Anglo- 
maniac Constitutionalism, or Two-Chamber Royalism ; 
with its Mouniers, its Lallys,—fast verging towards 
nonentity. Preéminent, on the Right Side, pleads 
and perorates Cazalés the Dragoon-captain, eloquent, 
mildly fervent; earning for himself the shadow of 
a name. There also blusters Barrel-Mirabeau, the 
Younger Mirabeau, not without wit: dusky D’Espré- 
ménil does nothing but sniff and ejaculate; might, 
it is fondly thought, lay prostrate the Elder Mirabeau 
himself, would he but try,2—which he does not. Last 


1 Arthur Young, i. 111. 
? Biographie Universelle, 7 D’Espréménil (by Beaulieu). 


7 J 
Za 


Chap. II, THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY. 343 
July-August, 


and greatest, see, for one moment, the Abbé Maury ; 
with his jesuitic eyes, his impassive brass face, ‘ image 
of all the cardinal sins.’ Indomitable, unquenchable, 
he fights jesuitico-rhetorically ; with toughest lungs 
and heart; for Throne, especially for Altar and 
Tithes. So that a shrill voice exclaims once, from 
the Gallery: ‘Messieurs of the Clergy, you have 
to be shaved; if you wriggle too much, you will get 


Gut.” 3 


The Left side is also called the D’Orléans side; 
and sometimes, derisively, the Palais Royal. And 
yet, so confused, real-imaginary seems everything, 
‘it is doubtful,’ as Mirabeau said, ‘whether D’Orléans 
himself belonged to that same D’Orléans party.’ 
What can be known and seen is, that his moon-visage 
does beam forth from that point of space. There like- 
wise sits seagreen Robespierre; throwing in his light 
weight, with decision, not yet with effect. A thin 
lean Puritan and Precisian, he would make away 
with formulas; yet lives, moves and has his being 
wholly in formulas, of another sort. ‘ Peuple,’ such, 
according to Robespierre, ought to be the Royal 
method of promulgating Laws, ‘Peuple, this is the 
Law I have framed for thee; dost thou accept it ?’— 
answered, from Right side, from Centre and Left, 
by inextinguishable laughter.* Yet men of insight 
discern that the Seagreen may by chance go far: 


3 Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, ii. 519. 
4 Moniteur, No. 67 (in Hist. Pari.). 


344 CONSOLIDATION. —- Book VI. 
i ie 


“This man,” observes Mirabeau, “will do some- 
what; he believes every word he says.” 

Abbé Sieyes is busy with mere Constitutional work ; 
wherein, unluckily, fellow-workmen are less pliable 
than, with one who has completed the Science of 
Polity, they ought to be. Courage, Sieyes, never- 
theless! Some twenty months of heroic travail, of 
contradiction from the stupid, and the Constitution 
shall be built; the top-stone of it brought out with 
shouting,—say rather, the top-paper, for it is all 
Paper; and thow hast done in it what the Earth or 
the Heaven could require, thy utmost. Note like- 
wise this Trio; memorable for several things; mem- 
orable were it only that their history is written in an 
epigram: ‘Whatsoever these Three have in hand,’ it 
is said, ‘ Duport thinks it, Barnave speaks it, Lameth 
does it.’° 

But royal Mirabeau? Conspicuous among all 
parties, raised above and beyond them all, this man 
rises more and more. As we often say, he has an 
eye, he is a reality; while others are formulas and 
eye-glasses. In the Transient he will detect the 
Perennial; find some firm footing even among Paper- 
vortexes. His fame is gone forth-to all lands; it 
gladdened the heart of the crabbed old Friend of 
Men himself before he died. The very Postillions 
of inns have heard of Mirabeau: when an impatient 
Traveller complains that the team is insufficient, his 


5 See Toulongeon, i. ¢. 3. 


SYS SO 
. i i "7 4 


Chap. IT. . THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY. 345 
July-August. 


Postillion answers, ‘‘ Yes, Monsieur, the wheelers are 
weak; but my mirabeau (main horse), you see, is 
a right one, mais mon mirabeau est excellent.’ ® 


And now, Reader, thou shalt quit this noisy Dis- 
crepancy of a National Assembly; not (if thou be 
of humane mind) without. pity. Twelve hundred 
brother men are there, in the centre of ‘Twenty-five 
Millions; fighting so fiercely with Fate and with 
one another ; struggling their lives out, as most sons 
of Adam do, for that which profiteth not. Nay, on 
the whole, it is admitted further to be very dull. 
“Dull as this day’s Assembly,” said some one. 
““Why date, Pourquoi dater ?” answered Mirabeau. 

Consider that they are Twelve Hundred; that 
they not only speak, but read their speeches; and 
even borrow and steal speeches to read! With 
Twelve Hundred fluent speakers, and their Noah’s 
Deluge of vociferous commonplace, silence unattain- 
able may well seem the one blessing of Life. But 
figure Twelve Hundred pamphleteers; droning forth 
perpetual pamphlets: and no man to gag them! 
Neither, as in American Congress, do the arrange- 
ments seem perfect. A Senator has not his own 
Desk and Newspaper here; of Tobacco (much less 
of Pipes) there is not the slightest provision. Con- 
versation itself has to be transacted in a low tone, 
with continual interruption: only ‘ Pencil-notes’ cir- 


6 Dumont: Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 255, 


346 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI 


culate freely, ‘in incredible numbers, to the foot of 
the very tribune.’’ Such work is it, regenerating 
a Nation; perfecting one’s Theory of Irregular 
Verbs! 


7 See Dumont (pp. 159-67); Arthur Young, &c. 


ils, 


CHAPTER III. 
THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 


Or the King’s Court, for the present, there is almost 
nothing whatever to be said. Silent, deserted are these 
halls; Royalty languishes forsaken of its war-god and 
all its hopes, till once the (Mil-de-Boeuf rally again. 
The sceptre is departed from King Louis; is gone over 
to the Salle des Menus, to the Paris Townhall, or one 
knows not whither. In the July days, while all ears 
were yet deafened by the crash of the Bastille, and 
Ministers and Princes were scattered to the four winds, 
it seemed as if the very Valets had grown heavy of 
hearing. Besenval, also in flight towards Infinite 
Space, but hovering a little at Versailles, was address- 
ing his Majesty personally for an Order about post- 
horses; when, lo, ‘the Valet-in-waiting places himself 
familiarly between his Majesty and me,’ stretching out 
his rascal neck to learn what it was! His Majesty, in 
sudden choler, whirled round; made a clutch at the 
tongs: ‘I-gently prevented him; he grasped my hand 
in thankfulness,’ and I noticed tears in his eyes.’! 

Poor King; for French Kings also are men! Louis 
Fourteenth himself once clutched the tongs, and even 


1 Besenval, iii. 419, 
3AT7 


348 CONSOLIDATION. Dok 
(59, 


smote with them; but then it was at Louvois, and 
‘Dame Maintenon ran up.—The Queen sits weeping 
in her inner apartments, surrounded by weak women: 
she is ‘at the height of unpopularity ;’ universally re- 
garded as the evil genius of France. Her friends and 
familiar counsellors have all fled; and fled, surely, on 
the foolishest errand. The Chateau Polignac still 
frowns aloft, on its ‘bold and enormous cubical rock,’ 
amid the blooming champaigns, amid the blue girdling 
mountains of Auvergne:? but no Duke and Duchess 
Polignac look forth from it; they have fled, they have 
‘met Necker at Bale;’ they shall not return. That 
France should see her Nobles resist the Irresistible, 
Inevitable, with the face of angry men, was unhappy, 
not unexpected; but with the face and sense of pettish 
children? This was her peculiarity. They understood 
nothing ; would understand nothing. Does not, at this 
hour, a new Polignac, first-born of these Two, sit re- 
flective in the Castle of Ham ;° in an astonishment he 
will never recover from; the most confused of existing 
mortals ? 

King Louis has his new Ministry: mere Popularities; 
Old-President Pompignan; Necker, coming back in 
triumph; and other such.* But what will it avail him? 
As was said, the sceptre, all but the wooden gilt sceptre, 
has departed elsewhither. Volition, determination is 
not in this man: only innocence, indolence ; depend- 


2 Arthur Young, i. 165. 3 A.D, 1835. 
4 Montgaillard, ii. 108. 


x ? FA “a 
, “i 
. © 


Chap. III. ' THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 349 
July-August. 


ence on all persons but himself, on all circumstances 
but the circumstances he were lord of. So troublous 
internally is our Versailles and its work. Beautiful, if 
seen from afar, resplendent like a Sun; seen near at 
hand, a mere Sun’s-Atmosphere, hiding darkness, con- 


fused ferment of ruin! 


But over France, there goes on the indisputablest 
‘destruction of formulas:’ transaction of realities that 
follow therefrom. So many millions of persons, all 
gyved, and nigh strangled, with formulas ; whose Life 
nevertheless, at least the digestion and hunger of it, was 
real enough! Heaven has at length sent an abundant 
harvest: but what profits it the poor man, when Earth 
with her formulas interposes? Industry, in these times 
of insurrection, must needs lie dormant; capital, as 
usual, not circulating, but stagnating timorously in 
nooks. The poor man is short of work, is therefore 
short of money ; nay even had he money, bread is not 
to be bought for it.. Were it plotting of Aristocrats, 
plotting of D’Orléans; were it Brigands, preternatural 
terror, and the clang of Phoebus Apollo’s silver bow,— 
enough, the markets are scarce of grain, plentiful only - 
in tumult. Farmers seem lazy to thresh ;—being 
either ‘bribed ;’ or needing no bribe, with prices ever 
rising, with perhaps rent itself no longer so pressing. 
Neither, what is singular, do municipal enactments, 
‘That along with so many measures of wheat you shall 
sell so many of rye,’ and other the like, much mend the 


350 CONSOLIDATION. poe 


matter. Dragoons with drawn swords stand ranked 
among the corn-sacks, often more dragoons than sacks.” 
Meal-mobs abound; growing into mobs of a still darker 
quality. ) 

Starvation has been known among the French Com- 
monalty before this; known and familiar. Did not we 
see them, in the year 1775, presenting, in sallow faces, 
in wretchedness and raggedness, their Petition of 
Grievances; and, for answer, getting a brand-new 
Gallows forty feet high? Hunger and Darkness, 
through long years! For look back on that earlier 
Paris Riot, when a Great Personage, worn out by de- 
bauchery, was believed to be in want of Blood-baths ; 
and Mothers, in worn raiment, yet with living hearts 
under it, ‘filled the public places’ with their wild 
Rachel-cries,—stilled also by the Gallows. Twenty 
years ago, the Friend of Men (preaching to the deaf) 
described the Limousin Peasants as wearing a ‘ pain- 
stricken (souffre-douleur) look,’ a look past complaint ; 
‘as if the oppression of the great were like the hail and 
‘the thunder, a thing irremediable, the ordinance: of 
‘Nature.’® And now if, in some great hour, the shock 
of a falling Bastille should awaken you; and it were 
found to be the ordinance of Art merely; and remedi- 
able, reversible ! 

Or has the Reader forgotten that ‘ flood of savages,’ 
which, in sight of the same Friend of Men, descended 


5 Arthur Young, i. 129, &e. 
§ Fils Adoptif: Mémoires de Mirabeau, i. 364-394. 


Chap. III. THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 301 


July-August, 


from the mountains at Mont d’Or?  Lank-haired 
haggard faces; shapes rawboned, in high sabots, in 
woollen jupes, with leather girdles studded with copper 
nails! They rocked from foot to foot, and beat time 
with their elbows too, as the quarrel and battle, which 
was not long in beginning, went on; shouting fiercely ; 
the lank faces distorted into the similitude of a cruel 
laugh. For they were darkened and hardened: long 
had they been the prey of excise-men and tax-men; 
of ‘clerks with the cold spurt of their pen.’ It was 
the fixed prophecy of our old Marquis, which no man 
would listen to, that ‘such Government by Blind- 
‘man’s-buff, stumbling along too far, would end by 
the General Overturn, the Culbute Générale!’ 

No man would listen ; each went his thoughtless way ; 
—and Time and Destiny also travelled on. The Govy- 
ernment by Blind-man’s-buff, stumbling along, has 
reached the precipice inevitable for it. Dull Drudgery, 
driven on, by clerks with the cold dastard spurt of their 
pen, has been driven—into a Communion of Drudges! 
For now, moreover, there have come the strangest con- 
fused. tidings; by Paris Journals with their paper 
wings; or still more portentous, where no Journals 
are,’ by rumor and. conjecture: Oppression not in- 
evitable; a Bastille prostrate, and the Constitution 
fast getting ready! Which Constitution, if it be 
something and not nothing, what can it be but bread 
to eat ? 

7 See Arthur Young, i. 137, 150, &e. 


352 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 
109. 


The Traveller, ‘ walking uphill, bridle in hand,’ over- 
takes ‘a poor woman ;’ the image, as such commonly 
are, of drudgery and scarcity ; ‘ looking sixty years of 
age, though she is not yet twenty-eight.’ They have 
seven children, her poor drudge and she: a farm, with 
one cow, which helps to make the children soup; also 
one little horse, or garron. They have rents and quit- 
rents, Hens to pay to this Seigneur, Oat-sacks to that ; 
King’s taxes, Statute-labor, Church-taxes, taxes 
enough ;—and think the times inexpressible. She 
has heard that somewhere, in some manner, something 
is to be done for the poor: ‘‘ God send it soon; for the 
dues and taxes crush us down (nous écrasent) |’ § 

Fair prophecies are spoken, but they are not ful- 
filled. There have been Notables, Assemblages, turn- 
ings-out and comings-in. Intriguing and manceuver- 
ing; Parlementary eloquence and arguing, Greek 
meeting Greek in high places, has long gone on; yet 
still bread comes not. The harvest is reaped and 
garnered; yet still we have no bread. Urged by de- 
spair and by hope, what can Drudgery do, but rise, as 
predicted, and produce the General Overturn ? 

Fancy, then, some Five full-grown Millions of such 
gaunt figures, with their haggard faces (figures hdves) ; 
in woollen jupes, with copper-studded leather girths, 
and high sabots, starting up to ask, as in forest-roar- 
ings, their washed Upper-Classes, after long unre- 
viewed centuries, virtually this question: How have 


8 See Arthur Young, i. 134. 


{ 


Chap. III. THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 353 
July-August 


ye treated us; how have ye taught us, fed us and led 
us, while we toiled for you? The answer can be read 
in flames, over the nightly summer-sky. This is the 
feeding and leading we have had of you: Emptiness, 
—of pocket, of stomach, of head and of heart. Behold 
there is nothing in us ; nothing but what Nature gives 
her wild children of the desert: Ferocity and Appe- 
tite; Strength grounded on Hunger. Did ye mark 
among your Rights of Man, that man was not to die 
of starvation, while there was bread reaped by him? 
It is among the Mights of Man. 

Seventy-two Ch&ateaus have flamed aloft in the MAcon- 
nais and Beaujolais alone: this seems the centre of the 
conflagration; but it has spread over Dauphiné, Al- 
sace, the Lyonnais; the whole South-East is in a blaze. 
All over the North, from Rouen to Metz, disorder is 
abroad: smugglers of salt go openly in armed bands: 
the barriers of towns are burnt; toll-gatherers, tax- 
gatherers, official persons put to flight. ‘It was 
thought’ says Young, ‘the people, from hunger, would 
revolt ;’ and we see they have done it. Desperate 
Lackalls, long prowling aimless, now finding hope in 
desperation itself, everywhere form a nucleus. They 
ring the Church-bell by way of tocsin: and the Parish 
turns out to the work.’ Ferocity, atrocity; hunger 
and revenge: such work as we can imagine! 

Ill stands it now with the Seigneur, who, for ex- 
ample, ‘has walled-up the only Fountain of the Town- 


9 See Hist. Parl. ii. 243-6. 
Vou. I.—23 


354 CONSOLIDATION. nook : 


ship;’ who has ridden high on his charteer and parch- 
ments; who has preserved Game not wisely but too 
well. Churches also, and Canonries, are sacked, with- 
out mercy; which have shorn the flock too close, for- 
getting to feed it. Wo to the land over which Sans- 
culottism, in its day of vengeance, tramps roughshod, 
—shod in sabots! Highbred Seigneurs, with their 
delicate women and little ones, had to ‘ fly half-naked,’ 
under cloud of night: glad to escape the flames, and 
even worse. You meet them at the tables-d’héte of 
inns; making wise reflections or foolish, that ‘rank is 
destroyed ;’ uncertain whither they shall now wend.” 
The métayer will find it convenient to be slack in 
paying rent. As for the Tax-gatherer, he, long hunt- 
ing as a biped of prey, may now find himself hunted 
as one; his Majesty’s Exchequer will not ‘fill up the 
Deficit’ this season: it is the notion of many, that a 
Patriot Majesty, being the Restorer of French Liberty, 
has abolished most taxes, though, for their private 
ends, some men make a secret of it. 

Where this will end? In the Abyss, one may 
prophesy ; whither all Delusions are, at all moments, 
travelling ; where this Delusion has now arrived. For 
if there be a Faith, from of old, it is this, as we often 
repeat, that no Lie can live forever. The very Truth 
has to change its vesture, from time to time; and be 
born again. But all Lies have sentence of death writ- 
ten down against them, in Heaven’s Chancery itself; 


10 See Young, i. 149, &c. 


Chap. ILI. THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 355 
July-August. 


and, slowly or fast, advance incessantly towards their 
hour. ‘The sign of a Grand Seigneur being landlord,’ 
says the vehement plain-spoken Arthur Young, ‘ are 
‘wastes, landes, deserts, ling: go to his residence, you 
‘will find it in the middle of a forest, peopled with 
‘deer, wild boars and wolves. The fields are scenes of 
‘pitiable management, as the houses are of misery. 
‘To see so many millions of hands, that would be: in- 
‘dustrious, all idle and starving: O, if I were legis- 
‘lator of France for one day, I would make these great 
‘lords skip again!’" O Arthur, thou now actually 
beholdest them skip ;—wilt thou grow to grumble at 
that too? 

For long years and generations it lasted; but the 
time came. Featherbrain, whom no reasoning and no 
pleading could touch, the glare of the firebrand had to 
illuminate: there remained but that method. Consider 
it, look at it! The widow is gathering nettles for her 
children’s dinner; a perfumed Seigneur, delicately 
lounging in the Mil-de-Beeuf, has an alchemy whereby 
he will extract from her the third nettle, and name it 
Rent and Law: such an arrangement must end. 
Ought it not? But, O most fearful is such an end- 
ing! Let those, to whom God, in his great mercy, has 
granted time and space, prepare another and milder 
one. 


To some it is a matter of wonder that the Siegneurs 


11 See Young, i. 12, 48, 84, &c. 


356 CONSOLIDATION. coe 


did not do something to help themselves ; say, combine 
and arm: for there were a ‘hundred and fifty thousand 
of them,’ all valiant enough. Unhappily, a hundred 
and fifty thousand, scattered over wide Provinces, di- 
vided by mutual ill-will, cannot combine. The high- 
est Seigneurs, as we have seen, had already emigrated, 
—with a view of putting France to the blush. Neither 
are arms now the peculiar property of Seigneurs; but 
of every mortal who has ten shillings wherewith to buy 
a secondhand firelock. 

Besides, those starving Peasants, after all, have not 
four feet and claws, that you could keep them down 
permanently in that manner. They are not even of 
black color: they are mere Unwashed Seigneurs; and 
a Seigneur too has human bowels !—The Seigneurs 
did what they could; enrolled in National Guards ; 
fled, with shrieks, complaining to Heaven and Earth. 
One Seigneur, famed Memmay of Quincey, near Ve- 
soul, invited all the rustics of his neighborhood to a 
banquet; blew-up his Chateau and them with gun- 
powder; and instantaneously vanished, no man yet 
knows whither.W—Some half-dozen years after, he 
came back ; and demonstrated that it was by accident. 

Nor are the Authorities idle; though unluckily, all 
Authorities, Municipalities and suchlike, are in the 
uncertain transitionary state; getting regenerated from 
old Monarchic to new Democratic; no Official yet 
knows clearly what he is. Nevertheless, Mayors old 

; 12 Hist, Parl. ii. 161. 


Chap. IIT. THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 357 


July-August. 


or new do gather Marechaussées, National Guards, 
Troops of the line; justice, of the most summary sort, 
is not wanting. ‘The Electoral Committee of M&con, 
though but a Committee, goes the length of hanging, 
for its own behoof, as many as twenty. The Préydt 
of Dauphiné traverses the country ‘with a movable 
column,’ with tipstaves, gallows-ropes ; for gallows any 
tree will serve, and suspend its culprit, or ‘ thirteen’ 
culprits. é 

Unhappy country! How is the fair gold-and-green 
of the ripe bright Year defaced with horrid blackness ; 
black ashes of Chateaus, black bodies of gibbeted 
Men! Industry has ceased in it; not sounds of the 
hammer and saw, but of the tocsin and alarm-drum. 
The sceptre has departed, whither one knows not; 
—breaking itself in pieces: here impotent, there 
tyrannous. National Guards are unskilful and of 
doubtful purpose; Soldiers are inclined to mutiny: 
there is danger that they two may quarrel, danger 
that they may agree. Strasburg has seen riots: a 
Townhall torn to shreds, its archives scattered white 
on the winds; drunk soldiers embracing drunk citi- 
zens for three days, and Mayor Dietrich and Marshal 
Rochambeau reduced nigh to desperation.” 

Through the middle of all which phenomena is seen, 
on his triumphant transit, ‘escorted,’ through Béfort 
for instance, ‘by fifty National Horsemen and all the 


13 Arthur Young, i. 141. Dampmartin: Evénemens qui se sont passés 


sous mes yeux, i. 105-127. 


358 CONSOLIDATION. Book 
100. 


military music of the place,—M. Necker, returning 
from Bale! Glorious as the meridian; though poor 
Necker himself partly guesses whither it is leading.” 
One highest culminating day, at the Paris Townhall; 
with immortal vivats, with wife and daughter kneeling 
publicly to kiss his hand; with Besenval’s pardon 
granted,—but indeed revoked before sunset: one 
highest day, but then lower days, and ever lower, 
down even to lowest! Such magic is in-a name; and 
in the want of aname. Like some enchanted Mam- 
brino’s Helmet, essential to victory, comes this “Sa- 
vior of France; beshouted, becymballed by the 
world: alas, so soon to be disenchanted, to be pitched 
shamefully over the lists asa Barber’s Basin! Gibbon 
‘could wish to show him’ (in this ejected, Barber’s- 
Basin state) to any man of solidity, who were minded 
to have the soul burnt out of him, and become a caput 
mortuum, by Ambition, unsuccessful or successful.” 
Another small phasis we add, and no more: how, in 
the Autumn months, our sharp-tempered Arthur has 
been ‘ pestered for some days past,’ by shot, lead-drops 
and slugs, ‘rattling five or six times into my chaise 
and about my ears;’ all the mob of the country gone 
out to kill Game!’® It is even so. On the Cliffs of 
Dover, over all the Marches of France, there appear, 
this autumn, two signs on the Earth: emigrant flights 
of French Seigneurs; emigrant winged flights of 


™ Biographie Universelle, 7 Necker (by Lally-Tollendal), 
19 Gibbon’s Letters. 16 Young, i. 176. 


a Re oi): 
~ 


Cher: fie THE GENERAL OVERTURN. 359 
French Game! Finished, one may say, or as good as 
finished, is the Preservation of Game on this Earth; 
completed for endless Time. What part 7 had to 
play in the History of Civilization is played: plau- 
dite ; exeat! 


In this manner does Sansculottism blaze up, illus- 
trating many things ;—producing, among the rest, as 
we saw, on the Fourth of August, that semi-miraculous 
Night of Pentecost in the National Assembly ; semi- 
miraculous, which had its causes, and its effects. Feud- 
alism is struck dead; not on parchment only, and by 
ink ; but in very fact, by fire; say, by self-combustion. 
This conflagration of the South-East will abate; will 
be got scattered, to the West, or elsewhither: extin- 
guish it will not, till the fuel be all done. 


CHAPTER. EV. 
IN QUEUE. 


Ir we look now at Paris, one thing is too evident: 
that the Bakers’ shops have got their Queues, or Tails ; 
their long strings of purchasers, arranged zm tail, so 
that the first come be the first served,—were the shop 
once open! This waiting in tail, not seen since the 
early days of July, again makes its appearance in 
August. In time, we shall see it perfected by practice 
to the rank almost of an art; and the art, or quasi- 
art, of standing in tail become one of the character- 
istics of the Parisian People, distinguishing them from 
all other Peoples whatsoever. 

But consider, while work itself is so scarce, how a 
man must not only realize money, but stand waiting 
(if his wife is too weak to wait and struggle) for half- 
days in the Tail, till he get it changed for dear bad 
bread! Controversies, to the length sometimes of 
blood and battery, must arise in these exasperated 
Queues. Or if no controversy, then it is but one 
accordant Pange Lingua of complaint against the 
Powers that be. France has begun her long Curric- 
ulum of Hungering, instructive and productive beyond 


Academic Curriculums ; which extends over some seven 
360 


Chap. IV. IN QUEUE. 361 
August. 


most strenuous years. As Jean Paul says of his own 
Life, ‘to a great height shall the business of Hunger- 
ing go.’ 

Or consider, in strange contrast, the jubilee Cere- 
monies; for, in general, the aspect of Paris presents 
these two features: jubilee ceremonials and scarcity of 
victual. Processions enough walk in jubilee; of 
Young Women, decked and dizened, their ribbons all 
tricolor; moving with song and tabor, to the Shrine 
of Sainte Geneviéve, to thank her that the Bastille 
is down. The Strong Men of the Market, and the 
Strong Women, fail not with their bouquets and 
speeches. Abbé Fauchet, famed in such work (for 
Abbé Lefévre could only distribute powder) blesses 
tricolor cloth for the National Guard; and makes 
it a National Tricolor Flag; . victorious, or to be 
victorious, in the cause of civil and religious liberty 
all over the world. Fauchet, we say, is the man 
for Te-Deums, and public Consecrations ;—to which, 
as in this instance of the Flag, our National Guard 
will ‘reply with volleys of musketry,’ Church and 
Cathedral though it be;’ filling Notre Dame with 
such noisiest fuliginous Amen, significant of several 
things. 

On the whole, we will say our new Mayor Bailly, 
our new Commander Lafayette named also ‘ Scipio- 
Americanus,) have bought their preferment dear. 
Bailly rides in gilt state-coach, with beef-eaters and 


1See Hist. Parl. iii. 20; Mercier, Nouveau Puris, &c. 


362 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 


sumptuosity ; Camille Desmoulins, and others, sniffing 
at him for it: Scipio bestrides the “white charger,’ 
and waves with civic plumes in sight of all France. 
Neither of them, however, does it for nothing; but, 
in truth, at an exorbitant rate. At this rate, namely: 
of feeding Paris, and keeping it from fighting. Out 
of the City-funds, some seventeen thousand of the 
utterly destitute are employed digging on Montmartre, 
at tenpence a day, which buys them, at market price, 
almost two pounds of bad bread :—they look very 
yellow, when Lafayette goes to harangue them. The 
Townhall is in travail, night and day; it must bring 
forth Bread, a Municipal Constitution, regulations of 
all kinds, curbs on the Sanscullotic Press; above all, 
Bread, Bread. 

Purveyors prowl the country far and wide, with the 
appetite of lions; detect hidden grain, purchase open 
grain; by gentle means or forcible, must and will 
find grain. A most thankless task; and so difficult, 
so dangerous,—even if a man did gain some trifle by 
it! On the 19th of August, there is food for one 
day.” Complaints there are that the food is spoiled, 
and produces an effect on the intestines: not corn 
but plaster-of-paris! Which effect on the intestines, 
as well as that ‘smarting in the throat and palate,’ 
a Townhall Proclamation warns you to disregard, or 
even to consider as drastic-beneficial. The Mayor 
of Saint-Denis, so black was his bread, has, by 

2 See Bailly, Mémoires, ii. 137-409. 


aa A 


ie 


Chap. IV. IN QUEUE. 363 


August. 


a dyspeptic populace, been hanged on the Lanterne 
there. National Guards protect the Paris Corn- 
Market: first ten suffice; then six hundred.’ Busy 
are ye, Bailly, Brissot de Warville, Condorcet, and 
ye others ! 

For, as just hinted, there is a Municipal Constitu- 
tion to be made too. The old Bastille Electors, after 
some ten days of psalmodying over their glorious 
victory, began to hear it asked, in a splenetic tone, 
Who put you there? They accordingly had to give 
place, not without moanings and audible growlings 
on both sides, to a new larger Body, specially elected 
for that post. Which new Body, augmented, altered, 
then fixed finally at the number of Three Hundred, 
with the title of Town Representatives (Représentans 
de la Commune) now sits there; rightly portioned 
into Committees; assiduous making a Constitution ; 
at all moments when not seeking flour. 

And such a Constitution; little short of mirac- 
ulous: one that shall ‘consolidate the Revolution’! 
The Revolution is finished, then? Mayor Bailly and 
all respectable friends of Freedom would fain think 
so. Your Revolution, like jelly sufficiently bored, 
needs only to be poured into shapes, of Constitution, 
and ‘consolidated’ therein? Could it, indeed, con- 
trive to cool: which last, however, is precisely the 
doubtful thing, or even the not doubtful ! 

Unhappy Friends of Freedom; consolidating a 

3 Mast. Parl, ii. 421, 


364 CONSOLIDATION. Book VI. 


1789. 


Revolution! They must sit at work there, their 
pavilion spread on very Chaos; between two hostile 
worlds, the Upper Court-world. the nether Sansculottic 
one; and, beaten on by both, toil painfully, perilously, 
—doing, in sad literal earnest, ‘ the impossible.’ 


CHAPTER V- 
THE FOURTH ESTATE. 


PAMPHLETEERING opens its abysmal throat wider 
and wider; never to close more. Our Philosophes, 
indeed, rather withdraw; after the manner of Mar- 
montel, ‘retiring in disgust the first day.’ Abbé 
Raynal, grown gray and quiet in his Marseilles dom- 
icile, is little content with this work: the last literary 
act of the man will again be an act of rebellion ; an 
indignant: Letter to the Constituent Assembly ; an- 
swered by ‘the order of the day.’ Thus also Philo- 
sophe Morellet puckers discontented brows ; being 
indeed threatened in his benefices by that Fourth of 
August: it is clearly going too far. How astonishing 
that those ‘haggard figures in woollen jupes’ would 
not rest as satisfied with Speculation, and victorious 
Analysis, as we! 

Alas, yes: Speculation, Philosophism, once the 
ornament and wealth of the saloon, will now coin 
itself into mere Practical Propositions, and circulate 
on street and highway, universally; with results! 
A Fourth Estate, of Able Editors, springs up; in- 


creases and multiplies; irrepressible, incalculable. 
365 


366 CONSOLIDATION. Book. VI. 


New Printers, new Journals, and ever new (so pru- 
rient is the world), let our Three Hundred curb and 
consolidate as they can! Loustalot, under the wing 
of Prudhomme dull-blustering Printer, edits weekly 
his Révolutions de Paris; in an acrid, emphatic 
manner. Acrid, corrosive, as the spirit of sloes and 
copperas, is Marat, Friend of the People; struck 
already with the fact that the National Assembly, so 
full of Aristocrats, ‘can do nothing,’ except dissolve 
itself and make way for a better; that the Townhall 
Representatives are little other than babblers and 
imbeciles, if not even knaves. Poor is this man; 
squalid, and dwells in garrets; a man unlovely to 
the sense, outward and inward; a man forbid ;—and 
is becoming fanatical, posessed with fixed-idea. Cruel 
lusus of Nature! Did Nature, O poor Marat, as in 
cruel sport, knead thee out of her leavings and miscel- 
laneous waste clay; and fling thee forth, stepdame- 
like, a Distraction into this distracted Eighteenth 
Century? Work is appointed thee there; which 
thou shalt do. The Three Hundred have summoned 
and will again summon Marat: but always he croaks- 
forth answer sufficient; always he will defy them, or 
elude them; and endure no gag. 

Carra, ‘Ex-secretary of a decapitated Hospodar,’ 
and then of a Necklace-Cardinal; likewise Pam- 
phleteer, Adventurer in many scenes and lands,— 
draws nigh to Mercier, of the Tableau de Paris: 
and, with foam on his lips, proposes an Annales Patri- 


Chap. V. THE FOURTH ESTATE. 367 
Aug.-Sept. 


ottques. The Moniteur goes its prosperous way ; 
Barrére ‘weeps,’ on Paper as yet loyal ; Rivarol, 
Royou are not idle. Deep calls to deep: your Domine 
Saluum Fae Regem shall awaken Pange Lingua ; 
with an Ami-du-Peuple there is a  King’s-Friend 
Newspaper, Am/-du-Roi. Camille Desmoulins has 
appointed himself Procureur-Général de la Lanterne, 
Attorney-General of the Lamp-iron; and pleads, not 
with atrocity, under an atrocious title; editing weekly 
his brilliant Revolutions of Paris and Brabant. 
Brilliant, we say; for if, in that thick murk of Jour- 
nalism, with its dull blustering, with its fixed or loose 
fury, any ray of genius greet thee, be sure it is 
Camille's. The thing that Camille touches, he with 
his light finger adorns: brightness plays, gentle, un- 
expected, amid horrible confusions ; often is the word 
of Camille worth reading, when no other’s is. Ques- 
tionable Camille, how thou glitterest with a fallen, 
rebellious, yet still semi-celestial light ; as is the star- 
light on the brow of Lucifer! Son of the Morning, 
into what times and what lands art thou fallen! 
But in all things there is good ;—though it be not 
good for ‘consolidating Revolutions.’ Thousand wagon- 
loads of this Pamphleteering and Newspaper matter lie 
rotting slowly in the Public Libraries of our Europe. 
Snatched from the great gulf, like oysters by bibli- 
omaniac pearl-divers, there must they first rot, then 
what was pearl, in Camille or others, may be seen as 


such, and continue as such. 


368 CONSOLIDATION. Book, VI. 


Nor has public speaking declined, though Lafayette 
and his Patrols look sour on it. Loud always is the 
Palais Royal, loudest the Café de Foy ; such a miscel- 
lany of Citizens and Citizenesses circulating there. 
‘Now and then,’ according to Camille, ‘some Citizens 
‘employ the liberty of the press for a private purpose ; 
‘so that this or the other Patriot finds himself short of 
‘his watch or pocket-handkerchief!’ But for the rest, 
in Camille’s opinion, nothing can be a livelier image 
of the Roman Forum. ‘A Patriot proposes his mo- 
‘tion ; if it finds any supporters, they make him mount 
‘on a chair, and speak. If he is applauded, he pros- 
‘pers and redacts; if he is hissed, he goes his ways.’ 
Thus they, circulating and perorating. Tall shaggy 
Marquis Saint-Huruge, a man that has had losses, and 
has deserved them, is seen eminent, and also heard. 
‘ Bellowing’ is the character of his voice, like that of 
a Bull of Bashan; voice which drowns all voices, 
which causes frequently the hearts of men to leap. 
Cracked or half-cracked is this tall Marquis’s head ; 
uncracked are his lungs; the cracked and the un- 
cracked shall alike avail him. 

Consider farther that each of the Forty-eight Dis- 
tricts has its own Committee; speaking and motioning 
continually ; aiding in the search for grain, in the 
search for a Constitution ; checking and spurring the 
poor Three Hundred of the Townhall. That Danton, 
with a ‘voice reverberating from the domes,’ is Pres- 
ident of the Cordeliers District; which has already 


Chap. V. THE FOURTH ESTATE. 369 


Aug.—Sept. 


become a Goshen of Patriotism. That apart from the 
‘seventeen thousand utterly necessitous, digging on 
Montmartre,’ most of whom, indeed, have got passes, 
and been dismissed into Space ‘ with four shillings,’ — 
there is a strike, or union, of Domestics out of place; 
who assemble for public speaking: next, a strike of 
Tailors, for even they will strike and speak ; farther, a 
strike of Journeymen Cordwainers; a strike of Apoth- 
ecaries: so dear is bread. All these, having struck, 
must speak ; generally under the open canopy; and 
pass resolutions ;—Lafayette and his Patrols watching 
them suspiciously from the distance. 

Unhappy mortals: such tugging and lugging, and 
throttling of one another, to divide, in some not intol- 
erable way, the joint Felicity of man in this Earth; 
when the-whole lot to be divided is such a ‘ feast of 
shells !’—Diligent are the Three Hundred; none 
equals Scipio-Americanus in dealing with mobs. But 
surely all these things bode ill for the consolidating of 
a Revolution. 

1 Histoire Parlementaire, ii, 359, 417, 423. 
Vou. I.—24 


BOOK VIL 


THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. 


CHAPTER I. 
PATROLLOTISM. 


No, Friends, this Revolution is not of the consol- 
idating kind. Do not fires, fevers, sown seeds, chem- 
ical mixtures, men, events,—all embodiments of Force 
that work in this miraculous Complex of Forces named 
Universe,—go on growing, through their natural 
phases and developments, each according to its kind; 
reach their height, reach their visible decline; finally 
sink under, vanishing, and what we call die? They 
all grow; there is nothing but what grows, and shoots 
forth into its special expansion,—once give it leave to 
spring. Observe too that each grows with a rapidity 
proportioned, in general, to the madness and unhealth- 
iness there is in it: slow regular growth, though this 
also ends in death, is what we name health and sanity. 

A Sansculottism, which has prostrated Bastilles, 
which has got pike and musket, and now goes burning 
Chateaus, passing resolutions and haranguing under 
roof and sky, may be said to have sprung; and, by 
law of Nature, must grow. ‘To judge by the madness 
and diseasedness both of itself, and of the soil and ele- 
ment it is in, one might expect the rapidity and mon- 


strosity would be extreme. 
373 


Bye! THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book Nit. 


Many things, too, especially all diseased things, 
grow by shoots and fits. The first grand fit and shoot- 
ing-forth of Sansculottism was that of Paris conquer- 
ing its King; for Bailly’s figure of rhetoric was all- 
too sad a reality. The King is conquered; going at 
large on his parole; on condition, say, of absolutely 
good behavior,—which, in these circumstances, will 
unhappily mean no behavior whatever. A quite un- 
tenable position, that of Majesty put on its good be- 
havior! Alas, is it not natural that whatever lives 
try to keep itself living? Whereupon his Majesty’s 
behavior will soon become exceptionable; and so the 
Second grand Fit of Sansculottism, that of putting 
him in durance, cannot be distant. 


Necker, in the National Assembly, is making moan, 
as usual, about his Deficit: Barriers and Customhouses 
burnt; the Tax-gatherer hunted, not hunting; his 
Majesty’s Exchequer all but empty. The remedy is 
a Loan of thirty millions; then, on still more enticing 
terms, a Loan of eighty millions: neither of which 
Loans, unhappily, will the Stockjobbers venture to 
lend. The Stockjobber has no country, except his 
own black pool of Agio. 

And yet, in those days, for men that have a country, 
what a glow of patriotism burns in many a heart; 
penetrating inwards to the very purse! So early as 
the 7th of August, a Don Patriotique, ‘ Patriotic Gift 


ys 


A eee 


Chap. I. PATROLLOTISM. 375 
Aug.—Sept. 


of jewels to a considerable extent,’ has been solemnly 
made by certain Parisian women; and solemnly ac- 
cepted with honorable mention. Whom forthwith all 
the world takes to imitating and emulating. Patriotic 
Gifts, always with some heroic eloquence, which the 
President must answer and the Assembly listen to, 
flow in from far and near: in such number that the 
honorable mention can only be performed in ‘lists 
published at stated epochs.’ ’ Kach gives what he can: 
the very cordwainers have behaved munificently ; one 
landed proprietor gives a forest; fashionable society 
gives its shoebuckles, takes cheerfully to shoeties. 
Unfortunate-females give what they ‘have amassed in 
loving.’ The smell of all cash, as Vespasian thought, } 
Ie pood." 

Beautiful, and yet inadequate! The Clergy must 
be ‘invited’ to melt their superfluous Church-plate,— 
in the Royal Mint. Nay finally, a Patriotic Contri- 
bution, of the forcible sort, has to be determined on, 
though unwillingly; let the fourth part of your 
declared yearly revenue, for this once only, be paid 
down; so shall a National Assembly make the Consti- 
tution, undistracted at least by insolvency. Their own ~ 
wages, as settled on the 17th of August, are but 
Eighteen Francs a day, each man; but the Public 
Service must have sinews, must have money. To 
appease the Deficit; not to ‘combler, or choke, the 
Deficit,’ if you or mortal could! For withal, as 


1 Histoire Parlementaire, ii. 427. 


376 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book VIT. 


Mirabeau was heard saying, “it is the Deficit that 
Saves us.” 


Towards the end of August, our National Assembly 
in its constitutional labors has got so far as the question 
of Veto: shall Majesty have a Veto on the National 
Enactments; or not have a Veto? What speeches 
were spoken, within doors and without; clear, and also 
passionate logic; imprecations, comminations; gone 
happily, for most part, to Limbo! Through the 
cracked brain and uncracked lungs of Saint-Huruge, 
the Palais Royal rebellows with Veto. Journalism is 
busy, France rings with Veto. ‘I never shall forget,’ 
says Dumont, ‘my going to Paris, one of those days, 
‘with Mirabeau; and the crowd of people we found 
‘waiting for his carriage about Le Jay the Bookseller's 
‘shop. ‘They flung themselves before him; conjuring 
‘him, with tears in their eyes, not to suffer the Veto 
‘Absolu. They were in a frenzy: ‘Monsieur le 
‘Comte, you are the People’s Father, you must save 
‘us; you must defend us against those villains who 
‘are bringing back Despotism. If the King get this 
‘Veto, what is the use of National Assembly? We 
‘are slaves; all is done.’’’? Friends, ¢f the sky fall, 
there will be catching of larks! Mirabeau, adds 
Dumont, was eminent on such occasions: he answered 
vaguely, with a Patrician imperturbability, and bound 
himself to nothing. 


2 Sowvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 156. 


2 
4 


Chap. I. PATROLLOTISM. oui 
Aug.-Sept. 


Deputations go to the Hétel-de-Ville; anonymous 
Letters to Aristocrats in the National Assembly, threat- 
ening that fifteen thousand, or sometimes that sixty 
thousand, ‘will march to illuminate you.’ The Paris 
Districts are astir; Petitions signing: Saint-Huruge 
sets forth from the Palais Royal with an escort of 
fifteen hundred individuals, to petition in person. 
Resolute, or seemingly so, is the tall shaggy Marquis, 
is the Café de Foy: but.resolute also is Commandant- 
General Lafayette. The streets are all beset by 
Patrols: Saint-Huruge is stopped at the Barriére des 
Bons Hommes; he may bellow like the bulls of 
Bashan, but absolutely must return. The brethren 
of the Palais Royal ‘circulate all night,’ and make 
motions, under the open canopy; all Coffeehouses 
being shut. Nevertheless Lafayette and the Town- 
hall do prevail; Saint-Huruge is thrown into prison ; 
Veto Absolu adjusts itself into Suspensive Veto, pro- 
hibition not forever, but for a term of time; and this 
doom’s-clamor will grow silent, as the others have 
done. 

So far has Consolidation prospered, though with 
difficulty ; repressing the Nether Sansculottic world ;. 
and the Constitution shall be made. With difficulty : 
amid jubilee and scarcity; Patriotic Gifts, Bakers’- 
queues; Abbé-Fauchet Harangues, with their Amen 
of platoon-musketry ! Scipio-Americanus has deserved 
thanks from the National Assembly and France. They 
offer him stipends and emoluments to a handsome ex- 


378 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book NIL. 


tent; all which stipends and emoluments he, covetous 
of far other blessedness than mere money, does, in 
his chivalrous way, without scruple, refuse. 


To the Parisian common man, meanwhile, one thing 
remains inconceivable: that now when the Bastille is 
down, and French Liberty restored, grain should con- 
tinue so dear. Our Rights of Man are voted, Feudal- 
ism and all Tyranny abolished; yet behold we stand 
in queue! Is it Aristocrat forestallers; a Court still 
bent on intrigues? Something is rotten somewhere. 

And yet, alas, what to do? Lafayette, with his 
Patrols, prohibits everything, even complaint. Saint- 
Huruge and other heroes of the Veto lie in durance. 
People’s-Friend Marat was seized; Printers of Pa- 
triotic Journals are fettered and forbidden; the very 
Hawkers cannot cry, till they get license and leaden 
badges. Blue National Guards ruthlessly dissipate 
all groups; scour, with levelled bayonets, the Palais 
Royal itself. Pass, on your affairs, along the Rue 
Taranne, the Patrol, presenting his bayonet, cries, Z'o 
the left! Turn into the Rue Saint-Bénoit, he cries, 
To the right! A judicious Patriot (like Camille Des- 
moulins, in this instance) is driven, for quietness’ sake, 
to take the gutter. 

O much-suffering People, our glorious Revolution is 
evaporating in tricolor ceremonies and complimentary 
harangues! Of which latter, as Loustalot acridly 
calculates, ‘upwards of two thousand have been 


Chap. I. PATROLLOTISM.,  °879 
Aug.-Sept. 


‘delivered within the last month at the Townhall 
‘alone.’* And our mouths, unfilled with bread, are 
to be shut, under penalties? The caricaturist pro- 
mulgates his emblematic Tablature: Le Patrouillotisme 
chassant le Patriotisme, Patriotism driven out by Pa- 
trollotism. Ruthless Patrols ; long superfine harangues ; 
and scanty ill-baked loaves, more like baked Bath 
bricks,—which produce an effect on the intestines! 
Where will this end? In consolidation ? 


8 Révolutions de Paris Newspaper (cited in Histoire Purlementaire, ii. 
397.) 


CHAPTER II. 
O RICHARD, O MY KING. 


For, alas, neither is the Townhall itself without 
misgivings. The Nether Sansculottic world has been 
suppressed hitherto: but then the Upper Court- 
world! Symptoms there are that the il-de-Boeuf is 
rallying. 

More than once in the Townhall Sanhedrim, often 
enough from those outspoken Bakers’-queues, has the 
wish uttered itself: O that our Restorer of French 
Liberty were here ; that he could see with his own eyes, 
not with the false eyes of Queens and Cabals, and his 
really good heart be enlightened! For falsehood still 
environs him; intriguing Dukes de Guiche, with Body- 
guards; scouts of Bouillé; a new flight of intriguers, 
now that the old is flown. What else means this ad- 
vent of the Regiment de Flandre ; entering Versailles, 
as we hear, on the 23d of September, with two pieces 
of cannon? Did not the Versailles National Guard do 
duty at the Chateau’ Had they not Swiss; Hundred 
Swiss; Gardes-du-Corps, Bodyguards so called? Nay, 
it would seem, the number of Bodyguards on duty has, 


by a manceuvre, been doubled: the new relieving Bat- 
380 


Chap. II. O RICHARD, O MY KING. 381 
October Ist. 


talion of them arrived at its ae ; but the old relieved 
one does not depart ! 

Actually, there runs a whisper through the best- 
informed Upper-Circles, or a nod still more portentous 
than whispering, of his Majesty’s flying to Metz; of a 
Bond (to stand by him therein), which has been signed 
by Noblesse and Clergy, to the incredible amount of 
thirty, or even of sixty thousand. Lafayette coldly 
whispers it, and coldly asseverates it, to Count d’Es- 
taing at the Dinner-table; and D’Estaing, one of the 
bravest men, quakes to the core lest some lackey over- 
hear it; and tumbles thoughtful, without sleep, all 
night. Regiment de Flandre, as we said, is clearly 
arrived. His Majesty, they say, hesitates about sanc- 
tioning the Fourth of August; makes observations, of 
chilling tenor, on the very Rights of Man! Likewise, 
may not all persons, the Bakers’-queues themselves, 
discern, on the streets of Paris, the most astonishing 
number of Officers on furlough, Crosses of St. Louis, ° 
and suchlike? Some reckon ‘from a thousand to 
twelve hundred.’ Officers of all uniforms; nay one 
uniform never before seen by eye: green faced with red ! 
The tricolor cockade is not always visible: but what, in 
the name of Heaven, may these black cockades, which 
some wear, foreshadow? __ 

Hunger whets everything, especially Suspicion and 
Indignation. Realities themselves, in this Paris, have 


1 Brouillon de Lettre de M. d’ Estaing dla Reine (in Histoire Parle- 
mentaire, iii. 24), 


382 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book th 
109. 


grown unreal, preternatural. Phantasms once more 
stalk through the brain of hungry France. 0 ye lag- 
gards and dastards, ery shrill voices from the Queues, 
if ye had the hearts of men, ye would take your pikes 
and secondhand firelocks, and look into it; not leave 
your wives and daughters to be starved, murdered and 
worse !—Peace, women! The heart of man is bitter 
and heavy; Patriotism, driven out by Patrollotism, 
knows not what to resolve on. 


The truth is, the (iil-de-Boeuf has rallied; to a 
certain unknown extent. A changed (il-de-Beeuf; 
with Versailles National Guards, in their tricolor cock- 
ades, doing duty there; a Court all flaring with tri- 
color! Yet even toa tricolor Court men will rally. 
Ye loyal hearts, burnt-out Seigneurs, rally round your 
Queen! With wishes; which will produce hopes ; which 
will produce attempts ! 

For indeed self-preservation being such a law of 
Nature, what can a rallied Court do, but attempt and 
endeavor, or call it plot,—with such wisdom and un- 
wisdom as it has? . They will fly, escorted, to Metz, 
where brave Bouillé commands; they will raise the 
Royal Standard: the Bond-signatures shall become 
armed men. Were not the King so languid! Their 
Bond, if at all signed, must he signed without his 
privity.—Unhappy King, he has but one resolution: 
not to have a civil war. For the rest, he still hunts, 
having ceased lockmaking ; he still dozes, and digests ; 


Chap. II. O RICHARD, O MY KING. 383 
October Ist. 


is clay in the hands of the potter. Ill will it fare with 
him, in a world where all is helping itself; where, as 
has been written, ‘ whosoever is not hammer must be 
stithy ;’ and ‘the very hyssop on the wall grows there, 
‘in that chink, because the whole Universe could not 
‘prevent its growing !’ 

But as for the coming-up of this Regiment de Flan- 
dre, may it not be urged that there were Saint-Huruge 
Petitions, and continual meal-mobs? Undebauched 
Soldiers, be there plot, or only dim elements of a plot, 
are always good. Did not the Versailles Municipality 
(an old Monarchie one, not yet refounded into a Demo- 
cratic) instantly second the proposal? Nay the very 
Versailles National Guard, wearied with continual duty 
at the Chateau, did not object; only Draper Lecointre, 
who is now Major Lecointre, shook his head.—Yes, 
Friends, surely it was natural this Regiment de Flandre 
should be sent for, since it could be got. It was natural 
that, at sight of military bandoleers, the heart of the 
rallied (éil-de-Boeuf should. revive; and Maids of 
Honor, and gentlemen of honor, speak comfortable 
words to epauletted defenders and to one another. 
Natural also, and mere common civility, that the Body- 
guards, a Regiment of Gentlemen, should invite their 
Flandre brethren to a Dinner of welcome !—Such invi- 
tation, in the last days of September, is given and 
accepted. 

Dinners are defined as ‘the ultimate act of com- 
munion ;’ men that can have communion in nothing 


384 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book Vee 
100, 


else, can sympathetically eat together, can still rise into 
some glow of brotherhood over food and wine. The 
- Dinner is fixed on, for Thursday the First of October ; 
and ought to have a fine effect. Further, as such Din- 
ner may be rather extensive, and even the Noncom- 
missioned and the Common man be introduced, to see 
and to hear, could not his Majesty’s Opera Apartment, 
which has lain quite silent ever since Kaiser Joseph 
was here, be obtained for the purpose ?—The Hall of 
the Opera is granted; the Salon d’Hercule shall 
be drawing-room. Not only the Officers of Flandre, 
but of the Swiss, of the Hundred Swiss; nay of 
the Versailles National Guard, such of them as have 
any loyalty, shall feast: it will be a Repast like 
few. 
And now suppose this Repast, the solid: part of it, 
transacted; and the first bottle over. Suppose the 
customary loyal toasts drunk; the King’s health, the 
Queen’s with deafening vivats ;—that of the Nation 
‘omitted,’ or even ‘rejected.’ Suppose champagne 
flowing ; with pot-yalorous speech, with instrumental 
music; empty featherheads growing ever the noisier, 
in their own emptiness, in each others’ noise. Her 
Majesty, who looks unusually sad tonight (his Majesty 
sitting dulled with the day’s hunting), is told that the 
sight of it would cheer her. Behold! She enters there, 
)issuing from her State-rooms, like the Moon from clouds, 
this fairest unhappy Queen of Hearts; royal Husband 
/ by her side, young Dauphin in her arms! She descends 


Chap. IT. O RICHARD, O MY KING. 385 
October Ist. 


from the Boxes, amid splendor and acclaim; walks 
queenlike round the Tables ; gracefully escorted, 
gracefully nodding; her looks full of sorrow, yet of 
gratitude and daring, with the hope of France on her 


mother-bosom! And now, the band striking up, O° 


Richard, O mon Roi, V univers t’ abandonne (O Richard, 
O my King, the world is all forsaking thee), could man 
do other than rise to height of pity, of loyal yalor ? 
Could featherheaded young ensigns do other than, by 
white Bourbon Cockades, handed them from fair fingers ; 
by waving of swords, drawn to pledge the Queen’s 
health; by trampling of National Cockades ; by- seal- 
ing the Boxes, whence intrusive murmurs may come ; 
by vociferation, tripudiation, sound, fury and distrac- 
tion, within doors and without,—testify what tempest- 
tost state of vacuity they are in? © Till champagne 
and tripudiation do their work ; and all lie silent, 
horizontal ;_ passively slumbering with meed-of-battle 
dreams !— 

A natural Repast; in ordinary times, a harmless 
one: now fatal, as that of Thyestes; as that of Job’s 
Sons, when a strong wind smote the four corners of 


their banquet-house! Poor ill-advised Marie-Antoi-_ 


nette; with a woman’s vehemence, not with a. sover- 
eign’s foresight! It was so natural, yet so unwise. 
Next day, in public speech of ceremony, her Majesty 
declares herself ‘delighted with the Thursday.’ 
The heart of the (Hil-de-Boeuf glows into hope ; 
into daring, which is premature. Rallied Maids of 
Vou. I.—25 


* 


| 


386 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. _ Book fee 
100, 


Honor, waited on by Abbés, sew ‘white cockades; ’ 
distribute them, with words, with glances, to epauletted 
youths; who, in return, may kiss, not without fervor, 
the fair sewing fingers. Captains of horse and foot go 
swashing with ‘enormous white cockades;’ nay one 
Versailles National Captain has mounted the like, so 
witching were the words and glances, and laid aside his 
tricolor! Well may Major Lecointre shake his head 
with a look of severity; and speak audible resentful 
words. But now a swashbuckler, with enormous white 
cockade, overhearing the Major, invites him insolently, 
once and then again elsewhere, to recant; and failing 
that, to duel. Which latter feat Major Lecointre de- 
clares that he will not perform, not at least by any 
known laws of fence; that he nevertheless will, ac- 
cording to mere law of Nature, by dirk and blade, 
‘exterminate’ any ‘vile gladiator’ who may insult 
him or the Nation;—whereupon (for the Major is 
actually drawing his implement) ‘they ‘are parted,’ 
and no weasands slit.” 


2 Moniteur (in Histoire Parlementaire, iii. 59); Deux Amis, iii. 128- 
141; Campan, ii. 70-85; &ce. &e. 


CHAPTER III. 
BLACK COCKADES. 


But fancy what effect this Thyestes Repast, and 
trampling on the National Cockade, must have had in 
the Salle des Menus ; in the famishing Bakers’-queues 
at Paris! Nay such Thyestes Repasts, it would seem, 
continue. Flandre has given its Counter-Dinner to 
the Swiss and Hundred Swiss; then on Saturday there 
has been another. 

Yes, here with us is famine; but yonder at Ver- 
sailles is food, enough and to spare! Patriotism stands 
in queue, shivering hunger-struck, insulted by Patrol- 
lotism ; while bloodyminded Aristocrats, heated with 
excess of high living, trample on the National Cock- 
ade. Can the atrocity be ‘true? Nay look: green 
uniforms faced with red; black cockades,—the color 
of Night! Are we to have military onfall; and death 
also by starvation? For, behold, the Corbeil Corn- 
boat, which used to come twice a-day, with its plaster- 
of-paris meal, now comes only once. And the Town- 
hall is deaf; and the men are laggard and dastard !— 
At the Café de Foy, this Saturday evening, a new thing 
is seen, not the last of its kind: a woman engaged in 


public speaking. Her poor man, she says, was put to 
387 


388 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. BE 
(0d. 


silence by his District; their Presidents and Officials 
would not let him speak. Wherefore she here, with 
her shrill tongue, will speak ; denouncing, while her 
breath endures, the Corbeil Boat, the plaster-of-paris 
bread, sacrilegious Opera-dinners, green uniforms, 
Pirate Aristocrats, and those black cockades of 
theirs !— 

Truly, it is time for the black cockades at least to 
vanish. Them Patrollotism itself will not protect. 
Nay sharp-tempered ‘M. Tassin,’ at the Tuileries 
parade on Sunday morning, forgets all National mil- 
itary rule; starts from the ranks, wrenches down one 
black cockade which is swashing ominous there, and 
tramples it fiercely into the soil of France. Patrollot- 
ism itself is not without suppressed fury. Also the 
Districts begin to stir; the voice of President Danton 
reverberates in the Cordeliers: People’s-Friend Marat 
has flown to Versailles and back again ;—swart bird, 
not of the halcyon kind." 

And so Patriot meets Promenading Patriot, this 
Sunday ; and sees his own grim care reflected on the 
face of another. Groups, in spite of Patrollotism, 
which is not so alert as usual, fluctuate deliberative ; 
groups on the Bridges, on the Quais, at the patriotic 
Cafés. And ever as any black cockade May emerge, 
rises the many-voiced growl and bark: A bas, Down! 
All black cockades are ruthlessly plucked off: one in- 


1 Camille’s Newspaper, Révolutions de Paris et de Brabant (in His- 
toire Parlementaire, iii. 108). 


Chap. III. BLACK COCKADES. 389 
October 4th, 


dividual picks his up again; kisses it, attempts to 
refix it; but a ‘hundred canes start into the air,’ and 
he desists. Still worse went it with another individual ; 
doomed, by extempore Plebiscitum, to the Lanterne ; 
saved, with difficulty, by some active Corps-de-Garde. 
—Lafayette sees signs of an effervescence; which he 
doubles his Patrols, doubles his diligence, to prevent. 
So passes Sunday the 4th of October 1789. 

Sullen is the male heart, repressed by Patrollotism ; 
vehement is the female, irrepressible. The public- 
speaking woman at the Palais Royal was not the only 
speaking one:—Men know not what the pantry is, 
when it grows empty; only house-mothers know. O 
women, wives of men that will only calculate and not 
act! Patrollotism is strong; but Death, by starvation 
and.military onfall, is stronger. Patrollotism represses 
male Patriotism: but female Patriotism? Will Guards 
named National thrust their bayonets into the bosoms 
of women? Such thought, or rather such dim un- 
shaped raw material of a thought, ferments universally 
under the female nightcap; and, by earliest daybreak, 
on slight hint, will explode. 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE MENADS. 


Ir Voltaire once, in splenetic humor, asked his 
countrymen: ‘“‘ But you, Gualches, what have you in- 
vented?” they can now answer: The Art of Insurrec- 
tion. It was an art needed in these last singular times: 
an art for which the French nature, so full of vehe- 
mence, so free from depth, was perhaps of all others 
the fittest. 

Accordingly, to what a height, one may well say of 
perfection, has this branch of human industry been 
carried by France, within the last half-century! In- 
surrection, which Lafayette thought might be ‘the 
most sacred of duties,’ ranks now, for the French 
people, among the duties which they can perform. 
Other mobs are dull masses; which roll onwards with 
a dull fierce tenacity, a dull fierce heat, but emit no 
light-flashes of genius as they go. The French mob, 
again, is among the liveliest phenomena of our world. 
So rapid, audacious; so clear-sighted, inventive, 
prompt to seize the moment; instinct with life to its 
finger-ends! That talent, were there no .other, of 


spontaneously standing in queue, distinguishes, as we 
390 


ee a 


Chap. IV. v ». 
eaooer 5th. EB SESS 8 391 


said, the French People from all Peoples, ancient and 
modern. 

Let the reader confess too that, taking one thing 
with another, perhaps few terrestrial Appearances are 
better worth considering than mobs. Your mob isa 
genuine outburst of Nature; issuing from, or commu- 
nicating with, the deepest deep of Nature. When so 
much goes grinning and grimacing as a lifeless For- 
mality, and under the stiff buckram no heart can be felt 
beating, here once more, if nowhere else, is a Sincerity 
and Reality. Shudder at it; or even shriek over it, 
if thou must; nevertheless consider it. Such a Com- 
plex of human Forces and Individualities hurled forth, 
in their transcendental mood, to act and react, on circum- 
stances and on one another; to work out what it is in 
them to work. The thing they will do is known to no 
man; least of all to themselves. It is the inflamma- 
blest immeasurable Firework, generating, consuming 
itself. With what phases, to what extent, with what 
results it will burn off, Philosophy and Perspicacity 
conjecture in yain. 

‘Man,’ as has been written, ‘is forever interesting 
‘to man; nay properly there is nothing else interest- 


Sing), In which light also may we not discern» why 


most Battles have become so wearisome? Battles, in 
these ages, are transacted by mechanism ; with the 
slightest possible development of human individuality 
or spontaneity: men now even die, and kill one 
another, in an artificial manner. Battles ever since 


392 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book peu 
( 


~Homer’s time, when they were Fighting Mobs, have 
mostly ceased to be worth looking at, worth reading 
of or remembering. How many wearisome bloody 
Battles does History strive to represent ; or even, in a 
husky way, to sing :—and she would omit or carelessly 
slur-over this one Insurrection of Women ? 


A thought, or dim raw-material of a thought, was 
fermenting all night, universally in the female head, 
and might explode. In squalid garret, on Monday 
morning Maternity awakes, to hear children weeping 
for bread. Maternity must forth to the streets, to the 
herb-markets and Bakers’-queues; meets there with 
hunger-stricken Maternity, sympathetic, exasperative. 
O we unhappy women! But, instead of Bakers’- 
queues, why not to Aristocrats’ palaces, the root of 
the matter? Allons! Let us assemble. To the 
Hotel-de-Ville; to Versailles; to the Lanterne! 

In one of the Guardhouses of the Quartier Saint- 
Eustache, ‘a young woman’ seizes a drum,—for how 
shall National Guards give fire on women, on a young 
woman? The young woman seizes the drum; sets 
forth, beating it, ‘uttering cries relative to the dearth 
of grains.’ Descend, O mothers; descend, ye Judiths, 
to food and revenge !—Al]l women gather and go; 
crowds storm all stairs, force out all women: the 
female Insurrectionary Force, according to Camille, 
resembles the English Nayal one; there is a universal 
‘Press of women.’ Robust Dames of the Halle, slim 


Chap. IV. Ss. e 
erred THE MENADS 393 


Mantua-makers, assiduous, risen with the dawn 3 ancient 
Virginity tripping to matins; the Housemaid, with 
early broom ; all must go. Rouse ye, O women ; the 
laggard men will not act; they Say, we ourselves | 
may act! 

And so, like snowbreak from the mountains, for 
every staircase is a melted brook, it storms, tumultu- 
ous, wild-shrilling, towards the Hétel-de-Ville. Tu- 
multuous; with or without drum-music: for the Fau- 
bourg Saint-Antoine also has tucked-up its gown; and 
with besom-staves, fire-irons, and even rusty pistols 
(void of ammunition), is flowing on. Sound of it 
flies, with a velocity of sound, to the utmost Barriers. 
By seven o'clock, on this raw October morning, fifth 
of the month, the Townhall will see wonders. Nay, 
as chance would have it, a male party are already 
there: clustering tumultuously round some National 
Patrol, and a Baker who has been seized with short 
weights. They are there; and have even lowered the 
rope of the Lanterne. So that the official persons 
have to smuggle forth the short-weighing Baker by 
back-doors, and even send ‘to all the Districts’ for 
more force. 

Grand it was, says Camille, to see so many Judiths, 
from eight to ten thousand of them in all, rushing 
out to search into the root of the matter! Not un- 
frightful it must have been; ludicro-terrific, and most 
unmanageable. At such hour the overwatched Three 
Hundred are not yet stirring: none but some Clerks, 


394 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book oe 


a company of National Guards; and M. de Gouvion, 
the Major-general. Gouvion has fought in America 
for the cause of civil Liberty; a man of no incon- 
siderable heart, but deficient in head. He is, for the 
moment, in his back apartment; assuaging Usher 
Maillard, the Bastille sergeant, who has come, as 
too many do, with ‘representations.’ The assuage- 
ment is still incomplete when our Judiths arrive. 

The National Guards form on the outer stairs, with 
levelled bayonets; the ten thousand Judiths press 
up, resistless ; with obtestations, with outspread hands, 
—merely to speak to the Mayor. ‘The rear forces 
them; nay from male hands in the rear, stones 
already fly: the National Guard must do one of two 
things; sweep the Place de Gréve with cannon, or 
else open to right and left. They open; the living 
deluge rushes in. Through all rooms and cabinets, 
upwards to the topmost belfry: ravenous; seeking 
arms, seeking Mayors, seeking justice ;—while, again, 
the better-dressed speak kindly to the Clerks; point 
out the misery of these poor women; also their ail- 
ments, some even of an interesting sort." 

Poor M. de Gouvion is shiftless in this extremity ; 
—a man shiftless, perturbed: who will one day com- 
mit suicide. How happy for him that Usher Maillard 
the shifty was there, at the moment, though making 
representations! Fly back, thou shifty Maillard: 
seek the Bastille Company; and O return fast with 

1 Deux Amis, iii. 141-166. 


—_—=<*° #- = 


Chap. IV. THE MENADS. 895 
October 5th. 


it; above all, with thy own shifty head! For, be- 
hold, the Judiths can find no Mayor or Municipal ; 
scarcely, in the topmost belfry, can they find poor 
Abbé Lefévre the Powder-distributor. Him, for want 
of a better, they suspend there: mn the pale morning 
light; over the top of all Paris, which swims in one’s 
failing eyes:—a horrible end? Nay the rope broke, 
as French ropes often did; or else an Amazon cut 
it. Abbé Lefévre falls, some twenty feet, rattling 
among the leads; and lives long years after, though 
always with ‘a tremblement in the limbs.’? 

And now doors fly under hatchets; the Judiths 
have broken the Armory; haye seized guns and 
cannons, three money-bags, paper-heaps ; torches flare: 
in few minutes, our brave Hétel-de-Ville, which dates 
from the Fourth Henry, will, with all that it holds, 
be in flames! 

* Dusaulx: Prise de la Bastille, note, p. 281. 


CHAPTER V. 
USHER MAILLARD. 


In flames, truly,—were it not that Usher Maillard, 
swift of foot, shifty of head, has returned ! 

Maillard, of his own motion,—for Gouvion or the 
rest would not even sanction him,—snatches a drum ; 
descends the Porch-stairs, ran-tan, beating sharp, with 
loud rolls, his Rogues’-march: To Versailles! Adlons ; 
a@ Versailles! As men beat on kettle or warming- 
pan, when angry she-bees, or say, flying desperate 
wasps, are to be hived; and the desperate insects 
hear it, and cluster round it,—simply as round a 
guidance, where there was none: so now these Menads 
round shifty Maillard, Riding-Usher of the Chatelet. 
The axe pauses uplifted; Abbé Lefévre is left half- 
hanged: from the belfry downwards all vomits itself. 
What rub-a-dub is that? Stanislas Maillard, Bastille 
hero, will lead us to Versailles? Joy to thee, Maillard ; 
blessed art thou above Riding-Ushers! Away, then, 
away ! 

The seized cannon are yoked with seized cart- 
horses: brown-locked Demoiselle Théroigne, with pike 
and helmet, sits there as gunneress, ‘with haughty 


eye and serene fair countenance ;’ comparable, some 
396 


Chap. V. 
oe i USHER MAILLARD. 397 


think, to the Mad of Orléans, or even recalling ‘the 
idea of Pallas Athene.’' Maillard (for his drum still 
rolls) is, by heaven-rending acclamation, admitted 
General. Maillard hastens the languid march. 
Maillard, beating rhythmic, with sharp ran-tan, all 
along the Quais, leads forward, with difficulty, his 
Menadic host. Such a host—marched not in silence ! 
The bargeman pauses on the River; all wagoners and 
coach-drivers fly ; men peer from windows,—not women, 
lest they be pressed. Sight of sights: Bacchantes, 
in these ultimate Formalized’ Ages! Bronze Henri 
looks on, from his Pont-Neuf; the Monarchic Louvre, 
Medicean Tuileries see a day like none heretofore 
seen. 

And now Maillard has his Menads in the Champs 
Elysées (Fields Tartarean rather): and the Hétel-de- 
Ville has suffered comparatively nothing. Broken 
doors; an Abbé Lefévre, who shall never more dis- 
tribute powder; three sacks of money, most part of 
which (for Sansculottism, though famishing, is not 
without honor) shall be returned:? this is all the 
damage. (Great Maillard! A small nucleus of Order 
is round his drum ; but his outskirts fluctuate like the 
mad Ocean: for Rascality male and female is flowing” 
in on him, from the four winds: guidance there is 
none but in his single head and two drumsticks. 

O Maillard, when, since War first was, had General 
of Force such a task before him as thou this day? 

1 Deux Amis, iii. 157. 2 Hist. Parl. iii. 310. 


398 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Boonen 
(Od. 


Walter the Penniless still touches the feeling heart: 
but then Walter had sanction; had space to turn in; 
and also his Crusaders were of the male sex. Thou, 
this day, disowned of Heaven and Earth, art General 
of Menads. Their inarticulate frenzy thou must, on 
the spur of the instant, render into articulate words, 
into actions that are not frantic. Fail in it, this way 
or that! Pragmatical Officiality, with its penalties 
and law-books, waits before thee; Menads storm 
behind. If such hewed off the melodious head of 
Orpheus, and hurled it into the Peneus waters, what 
may they not make of thee,—thee rhythmic merely, 
with no music but a sheepskin drum !—Maillard did 
not fail. Remarkable Maillard, if fame were not an 
accident, and History a distillation of Rumor, how 
remarkable wert thou! 

On the Elysian Fields there is pause and fluctuation ; 
but, for Maillard, no return. He persuades his Menads, 
clamorous for arms and the Arsenal, that no arms are 
in the Arsenal; that an unarmed attitude, and petition 
toa National Assembly, will be the best: he hastily 
nominates or sanctions generalesses, captains of tens 
and fifties ;—and so, in loosest-flowing order, to the 
rhythm of some ‘eight drums’ (having laid aside his 
own), with the Bastille Volunteers baaeine up his 
rear, once more takes the road. 

Chaillot, which will promptly yield baked loaves, is 
not plundered; nor are the Sévres Potteries broken. 
The old arches of Sévres Bridge echo under Menadic 


ene yee 


a 


ah 


e) 


Chap. V. USHER MAILLARD. 399 
October 5th. 


feet; Seine River gushes on with his perpetual mur- 
mur; and Paris flings after us the boom of tocsin and 
alarm-drum,—inaudible, for the present, amid shrill- 
sounding hosts, and the splash of rainy weather. To 
Meudon, to Saint-Cloud, on both hands, the report of 
them is gone abroad; and hearths, this evening, will 
have a topic. The press of women still continues, for 
it is the cause of all Eve’s Daughters, mothers that are, 
or that ought to be. No carriage-lady, were it with 
never such hysterics, but ‘must dismount, in the mud 
roads, in her silk shoes, and walk. In this manner, 
amid wild October weather, they, a wild unwinged 
stork-flight, through the astonished country wend their 
way. ‘Travellers of all sorts they stop; especially 
travellers or couriers from Paris. Deputy Lechapelier, 
in his elegant vesture, from his elegant vehicle, looks 
forth amazed through his spectacles ; apprehensive for 
life ;—states eagerly that he is Patriot-Deputy Lecha- 
pelier, and even Old-President Lechapelier, who pre- 
sided on the Night of Pentecost, and is original mem- 
ber of the Breton Club. Thereupon ‘rises huge shout 
‘of Vive Lechapelier, and several armed persons spring 
‘up behind and before to escort him.’ 4 


Nevertheless, news, despatches from Lafayette, or 
vague noise of rumor, have pierced through by side 
roads. In the National Assembly, while all is busy 


3 Deux Amis, iii. 159. 
4 Tbid. ii. 177; Dictionnaire des Hommes Marquans, ii. 379. 


400 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book Bats 
109, 


discussing the order of the day; regretting that there 
should be Anti-National Repasts in Opera-halls; that 
his Majesty should still hesitate about accepting the 
Rights of Man, and hang conditions and peradventures 
on them,—Mirabeau steps up to the President, expe- 
rienced Mounier as it chanced to be; and articulates, 
in bass under-tone: ‘‘ Mounier, Paris marche sur nous 
(Paris is marching on us).’’—‘‘ May be (Je n’en sais 
rien) !’’— Believe it or disbelieve it, that is not my 
concern; but Paris, I say, is marching on us. Fall 
suddenly unwell; go over to the Chateau; tell them 
this. There is not a moment to lose.’”,—‘‘ Paris march- 
ing on us?” responds Mounier, with an atrabiliar ac- 
cent: “Well, so much the better! We shall the 
sooner be a Republic.’ Mirabeau quits him, as one 
quits an experienced President getting blindfold into 
deep waters; and the order of the day continues as 
before. 

Yes, Paris is marching on us; and more than the 
women of Paris! Scarcely was Maillard gone, when 
M. de Gouvion’s message to all the Districts, and such 
tocsin and drumming of the générale, began to take 
effect. Armed National Guards from every District ; 
especially the Grenadiers of the Centre, who are our 
old Gardes Frangaises, arrive, in quick sequence, on 
the Place de Gréve. An ‘immense people’ is there ; 
Saint-Antoine, with pike and rusty firelock, is all 
crowding thither, be it welcome or unwelcome. The 
Centre Grenadiers are received with cheering: “It is 


ae 


Chap. V. USHER MAILLARD. 401 


October 5th. 


not cheers that we want,” answer they gloomily ; “the 
Nation has been insulted; to arms, and come with us 
for orders!” Ha, sits the wind so? Patriotism and 
Patrollotism are now one! 

The Three Hundred have assembled; ‘all the Com- 
mittees are in activity; ’ Lafayette is dictating de- 
spatches for Versailles, when a Deputation of the Cen- 
tre Grenadiers introduces itself to him. The Deputation 
makes military obeisance ;, and thus speaks, not with- 
out a kind of thought in it: ‘“‘ Won Général, we are 
deputed by the Six Companies of Grenadiers. We do 
not think you a traitor, but we think the Government 
betrays you; it is time that this-end. We cannot 
turn our bayonets against women crying to us for 
bread. The people are miserable, the source of the 
mischief is at Versailles: we must go seek the King, 
and bring him to Paris. We must exterminate (exter- 
miner) the Regiment de Flandre and the Gardes-du- 
Corps, who have dared to trample on the National 
Cockade. Ifthe King be too weak to wear his crown, 
let him lay it down. You will crown his Son, you will 
name a Council of Regency: and all will go better.” ® 
Reproachful astonishment paints itself on the face of 
Lafayette ; speaks itself from his eloquent chivalrous 
lips: in vain. ‘‘ My General, we would shed the last 
drop of our blood for you; but the root of the mis- 
chief is at Versailles; we must go and bring the King 
to Paris ; all the people wish it, towt le pewple le veut.” 


5 Deux Amis, iii. 161. 
Vor, I.—26 


402 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Booka 


My General descends to the outer staircase ; and 
harangues: once more in vain. ‘‘ To Versailles! To 
Versailles!’ Mayor Bailly, sent for through floods 
of Sansculottism, attempts academic oratory from his 
gilt state-coach; realizes nothing but infinite hoarse 
cries of: ‘Bread! To Versailles!’—and gladly 
shrinks within doors. Lafayette mounts the white 
charger; and again harangues, and reharangues: 
with eloquence, with firmness, indignant demonstra- 
tion ; with all things but persuasion. ‘To Versailles ! 
To Versailles!’’ So lasts it, hour after hour ;—for the 
space of half a day. 

The great Scipio-Americanus can do nothing; not 
so much as escape. ‘‘ Morbleu, mon Général,” cry 
the Grenadiers serrying their ranks as the white 
charger makes a motion that way, ‘you will not leave 
us, you will abide with us!”’ A perilous juncture: 
Mayor Bailly and the Municipals sit quaking within 
doors; my General is prisoner without: the Place de 
Gréve, with its thirty thousand Regulars, its whole 
irregular Saint-Antoine and Saint-Marceau, is one mi- 
natory mass of clear or rusty steel; all hearts set, with 
a moody fixedness, on one object. Moody, fixed are 
all hearts: tranquil is no heart,—if it be not that of 
the white charger, who paws there, with arched neck, 
composedly champing his bit; as if no World, with its 
Dynasties and Eras, were now rushing down. The 
drizzly day bends westward; the cry is still: “To 
Versailles!” 


Chap. V. USHER MAILLARD. 403 
Oetober Sth. 


Nay now, borne from afar, come quite sinister cries ; 
hoarse, reverberating in long-drawn hollow murmurs, 
with syllables too like those of “‘ Lanterne!’’ Or else, 
irregular Sansculottism may be marching off, of itself; 
with pikes, nay with cannon. The inflexible Scipio 
does at length, by aide-de-camp, ask of the Municipals: 
Whether or not he may go? A Letter is handed out 
to him, over armed heads; sixty thousand faces. flash 
fixedly on his, there is stillness and no bosom breathes, 
till he have read. By Heaven, he grows suddenly 
pale! Dothe Municipals permit? ‘Permit, and even 
order,’—since he can no other. Clangor of approval 
rends the welkin. To your ranks, then; let us march! 

It is, as we compute, towards three in the afternoon. 
Indignant National Guards may dine for once from 
their haversack: dined or undined, they march with 
one heart. Paris flings-up her windows, ‘claps hands,’ 
as the Avengers, with their shrilling drums and shalms 
tramp by; she will then sit pensive, apprehensive, and 
pass rather a sleepless night. On the white charger, 
Lafayette, in the slowest possible manner, going and 
coming, and eloquently haranguing among the ranks, 
rolls onward with his thirty thousand. Saint-Antoine, 
with pike and cannon, has preceded him; a mixed 
multitude, of all and of no arms, hovers on his flanks 
and skirts; the country once more pauses agape: 
Paris marche sur nous. 


6 Deux Amis, iii. 165. 


r 


CHAPTER VI. 
TO VERSAILLES. 


For, indeed, about this same moment, Maillard has 
halted his draggled Menads on the last hill-top; and 
now Versailles, and the Chateau of Versailles, and far 
and wide the inheritance of Royalty opens to the 
wondering eye. From far on the right, over Marly 
and Saint-Germain-en-Laye; round towards Ram- 
bouillet, on the left: beautiful all; softly embosomed ; 
as if in sadness, in the dim moist weather! And near 
before us is Versailles, New and Old; with that broad 
frondent Avenue de Versailles between,—stately-fron- 
dent, broad, three hundred feet as men reckon, with 
its four Rows of Elms; and then the Chdteau de Ver- 
sailles, ending in royal Parks and Pleasances, gleam- 
ing Lakelets, Arbors, Labyrinths, the Ménagerie, and 
Great and Little Trianon. High-towered dwellings, 
leafy pleasant places; where the gods of this lower 
world abide: whence, nevertheless, black Care cannot 
be excluded; whither Menadic Hunger is even now 
advancing, armed with pike-thyrsi ! 

Yes, yonder, Mesdames, where our straight minidee 
Avenue, joined, as you note, by two frondent brother 


Avenues from this hand and from that, spreads out 
404 


_— Dae 


Chap. VI. if Ss. 
oa ie TO VERSAILLES 405 


into Place Royal and Palace Forecourt,—yonder is the 
Salle des Menus. Yonder an august Assembly sits 
regenerating France. Forecourt, Grand.Court, Court 
of Marble, Court narrowing into Court you may 
discern next, or fancy: on the extreme verge of which 
that glass-dome, visibly glittering like a star of hope, 
is the—lil-de-Boeuf! Yonder, or nowhere in the 
world, is bread baked for us. But, O Mesdames, 
were not one thing good: That our cannons, with 
Demoiselle Théroigne and all show of war, be put to 
the rear! Submission beseems petitioners of a Na- 


tional Assembly; we are strangers in Versailles,— 


whence, too audibly, there comes even now a sound 
as of tocsin and générale! Also to put on, if possible, 
a cheerful countenance, hiding our sorrows; and even 
to sing? Sorrow, pitied of the Heavens, is hateful, 
suspicious to the Earth.—So counsels shifty Maillard ; 
haranguing his Menads, on the heights near Versailles. 

Cunning Maillard’s dispositions are obeyed. The 
draggled Insurrectionists advance up the Avenue, ‘in 
three columns,’ among the four Elm-rows; ‘singing 
Henri Quatre,’ with what melody they can; and 
shouting Vive le Roi. Versailles, though the Elm- 
rows are dripping wet, crowds from both sides, with: 
““Vivent nos Parisiennes, Our Paris ones forever!” 

Prickers, scouts have been out towards Paris, as the 
rumor deepened: whereby his Majesty, gone to shoot 
in the Woods of Meudon, has been happily discovered, 


1 See Hist. Parl. iii. 70-117; Deux Amis, iii. 166-177, &e. 


406 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Rooke a 


and got home; and the générale and tocsin set a-sound- 
ing. The Bodyguards are already drawn up in front 
of the Palace Grates; and look down the Avenue de 
Versailles; sulky in wet buckskins. Flandre too is 
there, repentant of the Opera-Repast. Also Dragoons 
dismounted are there. Finally Major Lecointre, and 
what he can gather of the Versailles National Guard ; 
—though it is to be observed, our Colonel, that same 
sleepless Count d’Estaing, giving neither order nor 
ammunition, has vanished most improperly ; one sup- 
poses, into the CHil-de-Boeuf. Red-coated Swiss stand 
within the Grates, under arms. There likewise, in 
their inner room, ‘all the Ministers,’ Saint-Priest, 
Lamentation Pompignan and the rest, are assembled 
with M. Necker: they sit with him there; blank, 
expecting what the hour will bring. 


President Mounier, though he answered Mirabeau 
with a tant mieux, and affected to slight the matter, 
had his own forebodings. Surely, for these four weary 
hours he has reclined not on roses! The order of the day 
is getting forward: a Deputation to his Majesty seems 
proper, that it might please him to grant ‘ Acceptance 
pure and simple’ to those Constitution-Articles of 
ours; the ‘mixed qualified Acceptance,’ with its per- 
adventures, is satisfactory to neither gods nor men. 

So much is clear. And yet there is more, which no 
man speaks, which all men now vaguely understand. 
Disquietude, absence of mind is on every face; Mem- 


Chap. VI. [ 7 ERS 
Chap. Vi. TO VERSAILLES. 407 


bers whisper, uneasily come and go: the order of the 
day is evidently not the day’s want. Till at length, 
from the outer gates, is heard a rustling and justling, 
shrill uproar and squabbling, muffled by walls; which 
testifies that the hour iscome! Rushing and crushing 
one hears now; then enter Usher Maillard, with a 
Deputation of fifteen muddy dripping Women,—hav- 
ing, by incredible industry, and aid of all the macers, 
persuaded the rest to wait out of doors. National 
Assembly shall now, therefore, look its august task 
directly in the face: regenerative Constitutionalism 
has an unregenerate Sansculottism bodily in front of 
it; crying, ‘“ Bread! Bread!” 

Shifty Maillard, translating frenzy into articulation ; 
repressive with the one hand, expostulative with the 
other, does his best; and really, though not bred to 
public speaking, manages rather well:—In the present 
dreadful rarity of grains, a Deputation of Female Cit- 
izens has, as the august Assembly can discern, come 
out from Paris to petition. Plots of Aristocrats are 
too evident in the matter; for example, one Miller has 
been bribed ‘by a bank-note of 200 livres’ not to 
grind,—name unknown to the Usher, but fact proy- 
able, at least indubitable. Further it seems, the 
National Cockade has been trampled on; also there 
are Black Cockades, or were. All which things will 
not an august National Assembly, the hope of France, 
take into its wise immediate consideration ? 

And Menadic Hunger, irrepressible, crying ‘“ Black 


408 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. eae ee 
10d. 


Cockades,” crying ‘‘ Bread, Bread,” adds, after such 
fashion: Will it not ?—Yes, Messieurs, if a Deputation 
to his Majesty, for the ‘ Acceptance pure and simple,’ 
seemed proper,—how much more now, for ‘ the afflict- 
ing situation of Paris; for the calming of this effer- 
vescence! President Mounier, with a speedy Deputa- 
tion, among whom we notice the respectable figure of 
Doctor Guillotin, gets himself forward on march. Vice- 
President shall continue the order of the day; Usher 
Maillard shall stay by him to repress the women. It is 
four o'clock, of the miserablest afternoon, when Mounier 
steps out. 

O experienced Mounier, what an afternoon ; the last 
of thy political existence! Better had it been to ‘fall 
suddenly unwell,’ while it was yet time. For, behold, 
the Esplanade, over all its spacious expanse, is covered 
with groups of squalid dripping Women ; of lankhaired 
male Rascality, armed with axes, rusty pikes, old mus- 
kets, iron-shod clubs (batons ferrés, which end in knives 
or sword-blades, a kind of extempore billhook) ;—look- 
ing nothing but hungry revolt. Therain pours: Gardes- 
du-Corps go caracoling through the groups ‘ amid hisses ;’ 
irritating and agitating what is but dispersed here to re- 
unite there. 

Innumerable squalid women beleaguer the President 
and Deputation ; insist on going with him: has not his 
Majesty himself, looking from the window, sent out to 
ask, What we wanted? ‘Bread, and speech with the 
King (Du pain, et parler au Roi),” that was the 


.* 
*y 


a Vee 


| 


. ei ae ve 


rn 


Chap. VI. TO VERSAILLES. 409 
October 5th. 


answer. ‘T'welve women are clamorously added to the 
Deputation ; and march with it, across the Esplanade ; 
through dissipated groups, caracoling Bodyguards and 
the pouring rain. 

President Mounier, unexpectedly augmented by 
Twelve women, copiously escorted by Hunger and 
Rascality, is himself mistaken for a group: himself 
and his Women are dispersed by caracolers; rally 
again with difficulty, among the mud.’ Finally 
the Grates are opened; the Deputation gets access, 
with the Twelve women too in it; of ‘which latter 
Five shall even see the face of his Majesty. — Let 
wet Menadism, in the best spirits it can, expect their 
return. 

2 Mounier: Exposé Justificatif (cited in Deux Amis, iii. 185). 


CHAPTER VII. 
AT VERSAILLES. 


But already Pallas Athene (in the shape of Demoi- 
selle Théroigne) is busy with Flandre and the dis- 
mounted Dragoons. She, and such women as are 
fittest, go through the ranks; speak with an earnest 
jocosity ; clasp rough troopers to their patriot bosom, 
crush down spontoons and musketoons with soft arms: 
can a man, that were worthy of the name of man, attack 
famishing patriot women ? 

One reads that Théroigne had bags of money, which 
she distributed over Flandre :—furnished by whom ? 
Alas, with money-bags one seldom sits on insurrection- 
ary cannon. Calumnious Royalism! Théroigne had 
only the limited earnings of her profession of unfortu- 
nate-female ; money she had not, but brown locks, the 
figure of a Heathen Goddess and an eloquent tongue 
and heart. 


Meanwhile Saint-Antoine, in groups and troops, is 
continually arriving; wetted, sulky; with pikes and 
impromptu billhooks: driven thus far by popular fixed- 
idea. So many hirsute figures driven hither, in that 


manner: figures that have come to do they know not 
~ 410 


ee Ye 


ALE 


Chap. VII. AT VERSAILLES. 411 


October dth. 


what; figures that have come to see it done! Distin- 
guished among all figures, who is this, of gaunt stature, 
with leaden breastplate, though a small one ;! bushy in 
red grizzled locks ; nay with long tile-beard? It is 
Jourdan, unjust dealer in mules; a dealer no longer, 
but a Painter’s Model, playing truant this day. From 
the necessities of Art comes his long tile-beard : whence 
his leaden breastplate (unless indeed he were some 
Hawker licensed by leaden badge) may have come, will 
perhaps remain forever a Historical Problem. Another 
Saul among the people we discern: ‘ Pére Adam, 
Father Adam,’ as the groups name him; to us better 
known as bull-voiced Marquis Saint-Huruge; hero of 
the Veto; a man that has had losses, and deserved 
them. The tall Marquis, emitted some days ago from 
limbo, looks peripatetically on this scene from under his 


umbrella, not without interest. All which persons and 


things, hurled together as we see; Pallas Athene, busy 
with Flandre; patriotic Versailles National Guards, 
short of ammunition, and deserted by D’Estaing their 
Colonel, and commanded by Lecointre their Major; 
then caracoling Bodyguards, sour, dispirited with their 
buckskins wet; and finally this flowing sea of in--~ 
dignant Squalor,—may they not give rise to occur- 
rences ? 


Behold, however, the Twelve She-deputies return 
from the Chateau. Without. President Mounier, in- 
1 See Weber, ii. 185-231. 


412 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book 


deed; but radiant with joy, shouting “ Life to the King 


and his House.’ 
dames? News of the best! Five of us were admitted 


Apparently the news are good, Mes- 


to the internal splendors, to the Royal Presence. This 
slim damsel, ‘ Louison Chabray, worker in sculpture, 
aged only seventeen,’ as being of the best looks and 
address, her we appointed speaker. On whom, and 
indeed on all of us, his Majesty looked nothing but 
graciousness. Nay when Louison, addressing him, was 
like to faint, he took her in his royal arms, and said 
gallantly, ‘“‘ It was well worth while (Ale en valut bien 
la peine).’’ Consider, 0 Women, what a King! His 
words were of comfort, and that only: there shall be 
provision sent to Paris, if provision is in the world ; 
grains shall circulate free as air; millers shall grind, 
or do worse, while their millstones endure ; and nothing 
be left wrong which a Restorer of French Liberty can 
right. 

Good news these; but, to wet Menads, all-too in- 
credible! There seems no proof, then? Words of 
comfort,—they are words only; which will feed noth- 
ing. O miserable People, betrayed by Aristocrats, 
who corrupt thy very messengers! In his royal 
arms, Mademoiselle Louison? In his arms? Thou 
shameless minx, worthy of a name—that shall be 
nameless! Yes, thy skin is soft: ours is rough with 
hardship; and well wetted, waiting here in the rain. 
No children hast thou hungry at home ; only alabaster 
dolls, that weep not! The traitress! To the Lan- 


nw 


Sr 


a ae ee ae 


ac 


N - 


Chap. VII. ‘AT VERSAILLES. 413 
October 5th. 


terne!—And so poor Louison Chabray, no assever- 
ation or shrieks availing her, fair slim damsel, late 
in the arms of Royalty, has a garter round her neck, 
and furibund Amazons at each end; is about to perish 
so,—when two Bodyguards gallop up, indignantly 
dissipating ; and rescue her. The miscredited Twelve 
hasten back to the Chateau, for an ‘ answer in writing.’ 

Nay, behold, a new flight of Menads, with + M. 
Brunout Bastille Volunteer,’ as impressed-command- 
ant, at the head of it. These also will advance to 
the Grate of the Grand Court, and see what is toward. 
Human patience, in wet buckskins, has its limits. 
Bodyguard Lieutenant M. de Savonniéres for one 
moment lets his temper, long provoked, long pent, 
give way. He not only dissipates these latter 
Menads; but caracoles and cuts, or indignantly 
flourishes, at M. Brunout, the impressed-command- 
ant; and, finding great relief in it, even chases him; 
Brunout flying nimbly, though in a pirouette manner, 
and now with sword also drawn. At which sight of 
wrath and victory, two other Bodyguards (for wrath 
is contagious, and to pent Bodyguards is so solacing) 
do likewise give way; give chase, with brandished 
sabre, and in the air make horrid circles. So that 
poor Brunout has nothing for it but to retreat with 
accelerated nimbleness, through rank after rank ; 
Parthian-like, fencing as he flies; above all, shout- 
ing lustily, “ On nous laisse assassiner, They are 


getting us assassinated |” 


414 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book ie 


Shameful! Three against one! Growls come 
from the Lecointrian ranks; bellowings,—lastly shots. 
Savonniéres’ arm is raised to strike: the bullet of 
a Lecointrian musket shatters it; the brandished 
sabre jingles down harmless. Brunout has escaped, 
this duel well ended: but the wild howl of war is 
everywhere beginning to pipe ! 

The Amazons recoil; Saint-Antoine has its cannon 
pointed (full of grapeshot); thrice applies the lit 
flambeau; which thrice refuses to catch,—the touch- 
holes are so wetted; and voices cry: ‘ Arrétez, il 
nest pas temps encore, Stop, it is not yet time!” ? 
Messieurs of. the Garde-du-Corps, ye had orders not 
to fire; nevertheless two of you limp dismounted, and 
one war-horse lies slain. Were it not well to draw 
back out of shot-range; finally to file off,—into the 
interior? If in so filing off, there did a musketoon 
or two discharge itself .at these armed shopkeepers, 
hooting and crowing, could man wonder? Draggled 
are your white cockades of an enormous size; would 
to Heaven they were got exchanged for tricolor ones ! 
Your buckskins are wet, your hearts heavy. Go, and 
return not! 

The Bodyguards file off, as we hint; giving and 
receiving shots; drawing no life-blood ; leaving bound- 
less indignation. Some three times in the thickening 
dusk, a glimpse of them is seen, at this or the other 
Portal: saluted always with execrations, with the 


2 Deux Amis, ii. 192-201. 


aw St ey ea 
ee 


Chap. VII. AT VERSAILLES. 415 


_ October dth. 


whew of lead. Let but a Bodyguard show face, he 
is hunted by Rascality;—for instance, poor ‘M. de 
Moucheton of the Scotch Company,’ owner of the 
slain war-horse; and has to be smuggled off by Ver- 
sailles Captains. Or rusty firelocks belch after him, 
shivering asunder his—hat. In the end, by superior 
Order, the Bodyguards, all but the few on immediate 
duty, disappear; or as it were abscond; and march, 
under cloud of night, to Rambouillet.’ 

We remark also that the Versaillese have now got 
ammunition: all afternoon, the official Person could 
find none; till, in these so critical moments, a patri- 
otic Sublieutenant set a pistol to his ear, and would 
thank him to find some,—which he thereupon succeeded 
in doing. Likewise that Flandre, disarmed by Pallas 
Athene, says openly, it will not fight with citizens ; 
and for token of peace has exchanged cartridges with 
the Versaillese. 

Sansculottism is now among mere friends; and can 
‘circulate freely ;’ indignant at Bodyguards ;—com- 
plaining also considerably of hunger. 


3 Weber, ubi supra. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
THE EQUAL DIET. 


But why lingers Mounier; returns not with his 
Deputation? It is six, it is seven o'clock ; and still 
no Mounier, no Acceptance pure and simple. 

And, behold, the dripping Menads, not now in 
deputation but in mass, have penetrated into the 
Assembly: to the shamefulest interruption of public 
speaking and order of the day. Neither Maillard 
nor Vice-President can restrain them, except within 
wide limits; not even, except for minutes, can the 
lion-voice of Mirabeau, though they applaud it: but 
ever and anon they break-in upon the regeneration 
of France with cries of: ‘Bread; not so much dis- 
coursing! Du pain; pas tant de longs discours!”’ 
—So insensible were these poor creatures to bursts 
of parliamentary eloquence ! 


One learns also that the royal Carriages are getting 
yoked, as if for Metz. Carriages, royal or not, have 
verily showed themselves at the back Gates. They 
even produced, or quoted, a written order from our 
Versailles Municipality,—which is a Monarchic not 


a Democratic one. However, Versailles Patrols drove 
416 


Sy NAS Nw PA 
NR ee 


Chap. VIII. THE : : 
ed ane HE EQUAL DIET 417 


them in again; as the vigilant Lecointre had strictly 
charged them to do. 

A busy man, truly, is Major Lecointre, in these 
hours. For Colonel d’Estaing loiters invisible in the 
(Kil-de-Boeuf, invisible, or still more questionably 
visible for instants: then also a too loyal Municipality 
requires supervision : no order, civil or military, taken 
about any of these thousand things! Lecointre is at 
the Versailles Townhall: -he is at the Grate of the 
Grand Court; communing with Swiss and Body- 
guards. He is in the ranks of Flandre; he is here, 
he is there: studious to prevent bloodshed ; to prevent 
the Royal Family from flying to Metz; the Menads 
from plundering Versailles. 

At the fall of night, we behold him advance to those 
armed groups of Saint-Antoine, hovering all-too grim 
near the Salle des Menus. They receive him ina half- 
circle; twelve speakers behind cannons with lighted 
torches in hand, the cannon-mouths towards Lecointre: 
a picture for Salvator! He asks, in temperate but 
courageous language: What they, by this their journey 
to Versailles, do specially want? The twelve speakers 
reply, in few words inclusive of much: ‘“ Bread, and 
the end of these brabbles; Du pain, et la fin des af- 
faires.” When the affairs will end, no Major Le- 
cointre, nor no mortal, can say; but as to bread, he 
inquires, How many are you ?—learns that they are 
six hundred, that a loaf each will suffice; and rides 
off to the Municipality to get six hundred loaves. 

Vou. I.—27 


418 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book vil. 


Which loaves, however, a Municipality of Monarchic 
temper will not give. It will give two tons of rice 
rather,—could you but know whether it should be 
boiled or raw. Nay when this too is accepted, the 
Municipals have disappeared ;—ducked under, as the 
Six-and-twenty Long-gowned of Paris did; and, leay- 
ing not the smallest vestige of rice, in the boiled or 
raw state, they there vanish from History ! 

Rice comes not ! one’s hope of food is balked ; even 
one’s hope of vengeance: is not M. de Moucheton of 
the Scotch Company, as we said, deceitfully smuggled 
off? Failing all which, behold only M. de Moucheton’s 
slain war-horse, lying on the Esplanade there! Saint- 
Antoine, balked, esurient, pounces on the slain war- 
horse; flays it; roasts it, with such fuel, of paling, 
gates, portable timber as can be come at, not without 
shouting; and, after the manner of ancient Greek 
Heroes, they lifted their hands to the daintily readied 
repast ; such as it might be.' Other Rascality prowls 
discursive; seeking what it may devour. Flandre 
will retire to its barracks; Lecointre also with his | 
Versaillese,—all but the vigilant Patrols, charged to 
be doubly vigilant. 

So sink the shadows of night, blustering, rainy ; 
and all paths grow dark. Strangest Night ever seen 
in these regions,—perhaps since the Bartholomew 
Night, when Versailles, as Bassompierre writes of it, 
was a chétif chdteau. O for the Lyre of some Or- 

1 Weber; Deux Amis, &e. 


Chap. VIII. 
Chap. VITI. THE EQUAL DIET. 419 


pheus, to constrain, with touch of melodious strings, 
these mad masses into Order! For here all seems 
fallen asunder, in wide-yawning dislocation. The 
highest, as in down-rushing of a World, is come in 
contact with the lowest: the Rascality of France be- 
leaguering the Royalty of France; ‘iron-shod batons’ 
lifted round the diadem, not to guard it! With denun- 
ciations of bloodthirsty Anti-National Bodyguards, are 
heard dark growlings against a Queenly Name. 

The Court sits tremulous, powerless; varies with the 
varying temper of the Esplanade, with the varying 
color of the rumors from Paris. Thick-coming ru- 
mors; now of peace, now of war. Necker and all the 
Ministers consult; with a blank issue. The Mil-de- 
Boeuf is one tempest of whispers:—We will fly to 
Metz; we will not fly. The royal Carriages again at- 
tempt egress,—though for trial merely ; they are again 
driven in by Lecointre’s Patrols. In six hours nothing 
has been resolved on; not even the Acceptance pure 
and simple. 

In six hours? Alas, he who, in such circumstances, 
cannot resolve in six minutes, may give up the enter- 
prise: him Fate has already resolved for. And Men-- 
adism, meanwhile, and Sansculottism takes counsel 
with the National Assembly; grows more and more 
tumultuous there. Mounier returns not; Authority 
nowhere shows itself: the Authority of France lies, 
for the present, with Lecointre and Usher Maillard.— 
This then is the abomination of desolation ; come sud- 


420 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. | 
109. 


denly, though long foreshadowed as inevitable! For, 
to the blind, all things are sudden. Misery which, 
through long ages, had no spokesman, no helper, will 
now be its own helper and speak for itself. The dia- 
lect, one of the rudest, is, what it could be, this. 

At eight o’clock there returns to our Assembly not 
the Deputation ; but Doctor Guillotin announcing that 
it will return; also that there is hope of the Accept- 
ance pure and simple. He himself has brought a 
Royal Letter, authorizing and commanding the freest 
‘circulation of grains.’ Which Royal Letter Men- 
adism with its whole heart applauds. Conformably to 
which the Assembly forthwith passes a Decree; also 
received with rapturous Menadic plaudits :—Only 
could not an august Assembly contrive farther to “ fix 
the price of bread at eight sous the half-quartern ; 
butchers’-meat at six sous the pound;”’ which seem 
fair rates? Such motion do ‘a multitude of men and 
women,’ irrepressible by Usher Maillard, now make; 
does an august Assembly hear made. Usher Maillard 
himself is not always perfectly measured in speech ; 
but if rebuked, he can justly excuse himself by the 
peculiarity of the circumstances.” 

But finally, this Decree well passed, and the disorder 
continuing ; and Members melting away, and no Pres- 
ident Mounier returning,—what can the Vice-President 
do but also melt away? The Assembly melts, under 
such pressure, into deliquium; or, as it is officially 


* Moniteur (in Hist. Parl. iii. 105). 


Ne ae 


Chap. VIII. 
Soaps ak THE EQUAL DIET. 421 


called, adjourns. Maillard is despatched to Paris, 
with the ‘ Decree concerning Grains’ in his pocket ; 
he and some women, in carriages belonging to the 
King. Thitherward-slim Louison Chabray has already 
set forth, with that ‘ written answer ’ which the Twelve 
She-deputies returned in to seek. Slim sylph, she has 
set forth, through the black muddy country: she has 
much to tell, her poor nerves so flurried; and travels, 
as indeed today on this road all persons do, with ex- 
treme slowness. President Mounier has not come, nor 
the Acceptance pure and simple; though six hours 
with their events have come; though courier on cou- 
rier reports that Lafayette is coming. Coming, with 
war or with peace? It is time that the Chateau also 
should determine on one thing or another; that the 
Chateau also should show itself alive, if it would con- 
tinue living! 

Victorious, joyful after such delay, Mounier does ar- 
rive at last, and the hard-earned Acceptance with him ; 
which now, alas, is of small value. Fancy Mounier’s 
surprise to find his Senate, whom he hoped to charm 
by the Acceptance pure and simple, all gone; and in 
its stead a Senate of Menads! For as Erasmus’s Ape - 
mimicked, say with wooden splint, Erasmus shaving, 
so do these Amazons hold, in mock majesty, some con- 
fused parody of National Assembly. They make nio- 
tions; deliver speeches; pass‘enactments; productive 
at least of loud laughter. All galleries and benches 
are filled; a Strong Dame of the Market is in Mou- 


422 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book Ve 


nier’s Chair. Not without difficulty, Mounier, by aid 
of macers and persuasive speaking, makes his way to 
the Female-President ; the Strong Dame, before abdi- 
cating, signifies that, for one thing, she and indeed her 
whole senate male and female (for what was one roasted 
war-horse among so many ‘) are suffering very consid- 
erably from hunger. 

Experienced Mounier, in these circumstances, takes 
a twofold resolution : To reconvoke his Assembly Mem- 
bers by sound of drum; also to procure a supply of 
food. Swift messengers fly, to all bakers, cooks, 
pastrycooks, vintners, restorers; drums beat, accom- 
panied with shrill vocal proclamation, through all 
streets. They come: the Assembly Members come; 
what is still better, the provisions come. On tray and 
barrow come these latter; loaves, wine, great store of 
sausages. The nourishing baskets circulate harmo- 
niously along the benches; nor, according to the 
Father of Epics, did any soul lack a fair share of vict- 
ual (dutro¢g éetons, an equal diet); highly desirable at 
the moment.* 

Gradually some hundred or so of Assembly Mem- 
bers get edged in, Menadism making way a little, 
round Mounier’s chair; listen to the Acceptance pure 
and simple; and begin, what is the order of the night, 
‘discussion of the Penal Code.’ All benches are 
crowded; in the dusky galleries, duskier with un- 
washed heads, is a strange ‘coruscation,—of im- 


3 Deux Amis, iii. 208. 


eae 


ns 


Chap. VIII. 'H : 
es oe THE EQUAL DIET 423 


promptu billhooks.* It is exactly five months this day 
since these same galleries were filled with high-plumed 
jewelled Beauty, raining bright influences; and now? 
To such length have we got in regenerating France. 
Methinks the travail-throes are of the sharpest!— 
Menadism will not be restrained from occasional re- 
marks; asks, ‘‘What is the use of Penal Code? The 
thing we want is Bread.’’ Mirabeau turns round with 
lion-voiced rebuke; Menadism applauds him; but 
recommences. é 

Thus they, chewing tough sausages, discussing the 
Penal Code, make night hideous. What the issue will 
be? Lafayette with his thirty thousand must arrive 
first: him, who cannot now be distant, all men 
expect, as the messenger of Destiny. 

4 Courrier de Provence (Mirabeau’s Newspaper), No. 50, p. 19. 


CHAPTER Ix. 
LAFAYETTE. 


Towarps midnight lights flare on the hill; Lafay- 
ette’s lights! The roll of his drums comes up the 
Avenue de Versailles. With peace, or with war? 
Patience, friends! With neither. Lafayette is come, 
but not yet the catastrophe. 

He has halted and harangued so often, on the 
march ; spent nine hours on four leagues of road. At 
Montreuil, close on Versailles, the whole Host had to 
pause; and, with uplifted right hand, in the murk of 
night, to these pouring skies, swear solemnly to respect 
the King’s Dwelling; to be faithful to King and 
National Assembly. Rage is driven down out of sight, 
by the laggard march; the thirst of vengeance slaked 
in weariness and soaking clothes. Flandre is again 
drawn out under arms: but Flandre, grown so pa- 
triotic, now needs no ‘exterminating. The wayworn 
Battalions halt in the Avenue: they have, for the 
present, no wish so pressing as that of shelter and 
rest. 

Anxious sits President Mounier; anxious the ChA- 
teau. There is a message coming from the Chateau, 


that M. Mounier would please to return thither with a 
424 


Chap. IX. LAFAYETTE. 425 
October 5th-6th. 


fresh Deputation, swiftly ; and so at least unite our two 
anxieties. Anxious Mounier does of himself send, 
meanwhile, to apprise the General that his Majesty 
has been so gracious as to grant us the Acceptance 
pure and simple. The General, with a small advance 
column, makes answer in passing; speaks vaguely 
some smooth words to the National President,—glances, 
only with the eye, at that so mixtiform National As- 
sembly; then fares forward towards the Chateau. 
There are with him two Paris Municipals; they were 
chosen from the Three Hundred for that errand. He 
gets admittance through the locked and padlocked 
Grates, through sentries and ushers, to the Royal 
Halls. 

The Court, male and female, crowds on his passage, 
to read their doom on his face; which exhibits, say 
Historians, a mixture ‘of sorrow, of fervor and valor,’ 
singular to behold.t. The King, with Monsieur, with 
Ministers and Marshals, is waiting to receive him: 
He ‘is come,’ in his highflown chivalrous way, ‘ to 
offer his head for the safety of his Majesty’s.’ The 
two Municipals state the wish of Paris: four things, 


of quite pacific tenor. First, that the honor of _ 


guarding his sacred person be conferred on patriot 
National Guards ;—say, the Centre Grenadiers, who as 
Gardes Frangaises were wont to have that privilege. 
Second, that provisions be got, if possible. Third, 


1 Mémoire de M. le Comte de Lally-Tollendal (Janvier 1790), pp. 161- 
165. 


426 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Ee 
109. 


that the Prisons, all crowded with political delinquents, 
may have judges sent them. Fourth;.that it would 
please his Majesty to come and live in Paris. To all 
which four wishes, except the fourth, his Majesty 
answers readily, Yes; or indeed may almost say that 
he has already answered it. To the fourth he can 
answer only, Yes or No; would so gladly answer, Yes 
and No!—But, in any case, are not their dispositions, 
thank Heaven, so entirely pacific? There is time for 
deliberation. The brunt of the danger seems past ! 

Lafayette and D’Estaing settle the watches; Centre 
Grenadiers are to take the Guard-room they of old 
occupied as Gardes Francaises ;—for indeed the Gardes- 
du-Corps, its late ill-advised occupants, are gone most- 
ly to Rambouillet. That is the order of this night; 
sufficient for the night is the evil thereof. Whereupon 
Lafayette and the two Municipals, with highflown 
chivalry, take their leaye. 

So brief has the interview been, Mounier and his 
Deputation were not yet got up. So brief and satis- 
factory. A stone is rolled from every heart. The 
fair Palace Dames publicly declare that this Lafayette, 
detestable though he be, is their savior for once. Even 
the ancient vinaigrous Jantes admit it; the King’s 
Aunts, ancient Graille and Sisterhood, known to us 
of old. Queen Marie-Antoinette has been heard 
often say the like. She alone, among all women and 
all men, wore a face of courage, of lofty calmness and 
resolve, this day. She alone saw clearly what she 


ben ia? 
fee a 


) \ tale 


aA 


Chap. 1X. 
Octaber d5th-6th. Ee are anh 


meant to do; and Theresa’s ‘Daughter dares do what 
she means, were all France threatening her: abide 
where her children are, where her husband is. 


Towards three in the morning all things are settled: 
the watches set, the Centre Grenadiers put into their 
old Guard-room, and harangued ; the Swiss, and few 
remaining Bodyguards harangued. The wayworn 
Paris Battalions, consigned to ‘the hospitality of 
Versailles,’ lie dormant in spare-beds, spare-barracks, 
coffeehouses, empty churches. <A troop of them, on 
their way to the Church of Saint-Louis, awoke poor 
Weber, dreaming troublous, in the Rue Sartory. 


Weber has had his waistcoat-pocket full of balls all 


day; ‘two hundred balls, and two pears of powder’! 
For waistcoats were waistcoats then, and had flaps 
down to mid-thigh. So many balls he has had all 
day ; but no opportunity of using them: he turns over 
now, execrating disloyal bandits; swears a prayer or 
two, and straight to sleep again, 

Finally the National Assembly is harangued; which 
thereupon, on motion of Mirabeau, discontinues the 
Penal Code, and dismisses for this night. Menadism, 
Sansculottism has cowered into guardhouses, barracks 
of Flandre, to the light of cheerful fire; failing that, 
to churches, officehouses, sentry-boxes, wheresoever 
wretchedness can find a lair. The troublous Day has 
brawled itself to rest: no lives yet lost but that of 
one war-horse. Insurrectionary Chaos lies slumbering 


428 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Bars ie 


round the Palace, like Ocean round a Diving-bell,— 
no crevice yet disclosing itself. . 

Deep sleep has fallen promiscuously on the high and 
on the low; suspending most things, even wrath and 
famine. Darkness covers the Earth. But, far on the 
North-east, Paris flings-up her great yellow gleam ; 
far into the wet black Night. For all is illuminated 
there, as in the old July Nights; the streets deserted, 
for alarm of war; the Municipals all wakeful; Patrols 
hailing, with their hoarse Who-goes. There, as we 
discover, our poor slim Louison Chabray, her poor 
nerves all fluttered, is arriving about this very hour. 
There Usher Maillard will arrive, about an hour 
hence, ‘towards four in the morning.’ They report, 
successively, to a wakeful Hétel-de-Ville what comfort 
they can; which again, with early dawn, large com- 
fortable Placards shall impart to all men. 

Lafayette, in the Hétel de Noailles, not far from 
the Chateau, having now finished haranguing, sits 
with his Officers consulting: at five o'clock the 
unanimous best counsel is, that a man so tost and 
toiled for twenty-four hours and more, fling himself 
on a bed, and seek some rest. 


Thus, then, has ended the First Act of the Insur- 
rection of Women. How it will turn on the morrow ? 
The morrow, as always, is with the Fates! But his 
Majesty, one may hope, will consent to come honor- 
ably to Paris; at all events, he can visit Paris. Anti- 


re BA 


Chap. IX LAFAYETTE. 429 


October 5th-6th. 


National Bodyguards, here and elsewhere, must take 
the National Oath; make reparation to the Tricolor ; 
Flandre will swear. There may be much swearing ; 
much public speaking there will infallibly be: and 
so, with harangues and vows, may the matter in some 
handsome way wind itself up. 

Or, alas, may it not be all otherwise, wnhandsome ; 
the consent not honorable, but extorted, ignominious ? 
Boundless Chaos of Insurrection presses slumbering 
round the Palace, like Ocean round a Diving-bell; 
and may penetrate at any crevice. Let but that 
accumulated insurrectionary mass find entrance! Like 
the infinite inburst of water; or say rather, of inflam- 
mable, self-igniting fluid; for example, ‘turpentine- 
and-phosphorus oil,’—fluid known to Spinola San- 
terre ! 


CHAPTER X. 
THE GRAND ENTRIES. 


THE dull dawn of a new morning, drizzly and chill, 
had but broken over Versailles, when it pleased 
Destiny that a Bodyguard should look out of window, 
on the right wing of the Chateau, to see what prospect 
there was in Heaven and in Earth. Rascality male 
and female is prowling in view of him. His fasting 
stomach is, with good cause, sour; he perhaps cannot 
forbear a passing malison on them; least of all can 
he forbear answering such. 

Ill words breed worse: till the worst word come; 
and then the ill deed. Did the maledicent Bodyguard, 
getting (as was too inevitable) better malediction than 
he gave, load his musketoon, and threaten to fire; 
nay actually fire? Were wise who wist! It stands 
asserted ; to us not credibly. But be this as it may, 
menaced Rascality, in whinnying scorn, is shaking at 
all Grates: the fastening of one (some write, it was 
a chain merely) gives way ; Rascality is in the Grand 
Court, whinnying louder still. 

The maledicent Bodyguard, more Bodyguards than 


he do now give fire; a man’s arm is shattered. 
430 


ates THE GRAND ENTRIES. 431 
Lecointre will depose! that ‘the Sieur Cardine, a 
National Guard without arms, was stabbed.’ But 
see, sure enough, poor Jeréme |’ Héritier, an unarmed 
National Guard he too, ‘cabinet-maker, a saddler’s 
son, of Paris,’ with the down of youthhood still on 
his chin,—he reels death-stricken; rushes to the 
pavement, scattering it with his blood and brains !— 
Alleleu! Wilder than Irish wakes rises the howl; 
of pity, of infinite revenge. In few moments, the 
Grate of the inner and inmost Court, which they 
‘name Court of Marble, this too is forced, or sur- 
prised, and bursts open: the Court of Marble too 
is overflowed: up the Grand Staircase, up all stairs 
and entrances rushes the living Deluge!. Deshuttes 
and Varigny, the two sentry Bodyguards, are trodden 
down, are massacred with a hundred pikes. Women 
snatch their cutlasses, or any weapon, and storm-in 
Menadic :—other women lift the corpse of shot Jeréme ; 
lay it down on the Marble steps; there shall the livid 
face and smashed head, dumb forever, speak. 

Wo now to all Bodyguards, mercy ig none for them! 
Miomandre de Sainte-Marie pleads with soft words, 
on the Grand Staircase, ‘descending four steps :’—to_ 
the roaring tornado. His comrades snatch him up, 
by the skirts and belts; literally, from the jaws of 
Destruction ; and slam-to their Door. This also will 
stand few instants; the panels shivering in, like pot- 
sherds. Barricading serves not: fly fast, ye Body- 

1 Déposition de Lecointre (in Hist. Parl, iii. 111-115). 


432 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book hte 


guards: rabid Insurrection, like the Hellhound Chase, 
uproaring at your heels! : 


The terror-struck Bodyguards fly, bolting and bar- 
ricading; it follows. Whitherward? Through hall 
on hall: wo, now! towards the Queen’s Suite of 
Rooms, in the farthest room of which the Queen is 
now asleep. Five sentinels rush through that long 
Suite; they are in the Anteroom knocking loud: 
“Save the Queen1 Trembling women fall at their 
feet with tears: are answered: ‘Yes, we will die; 
save ye the Queen!” 

Tremble not, women, but haste: for, lo, another 
voice shouts far through the outermost door, ‘Save 
the Queen!’ and the door is shut. It is brave 
Miomandre’s voice that shouts this second warning. 
He has stormed across imminent death to do it; 
fronts imminent death, having done it. Brave Tardi- 
vet du Repaire, bent on the same desperate service, 
was borne down with pikes; his comrades hardly 
snatched him in again alive. Miomandre and Tardi- 
vet: let the names of these two Bodyguards, as the 
names of brave men should, live long. 

Trembling Maids-of-Honor, one of whom from afar 
caught glimpse of Miomandre as well as heard him, 
hastily wrap the Queen; not in robes of state. She 
flies for her life, across the Nil-de-Boeuf; against the 
main door of which too Insurrection batters. She is 
in the King’s Apartment, in the King’s arms; she 


VA NS 


Sa pont. Uhl fa 


CR ee THE GRAND ENTRIES. 433 
clasps her children amid a faithful few. The Im- 
perial-hearted bursts into mother’s tears: “O my 
friends, save me and my children; O mes amis, sawvez- 
mot et mes enfans!”’ The battering of Insurrectionary 
axes clangs audible across the Ciil-de-Boeuf. What an 
hour ! 


Yes, Friends ; a hideous fearful hour; shameful alike 
to Governed and Governor; wherein Governed and 
Governor ignominiously testify that their relation is at 
an end. Rage, which had brewed itself in twenty 
thousand hearts for the last four-and-twenty hours, 


has taken fire: Jeréme’s brained corpse lies there as 


live-coal. It is, as we said, the infinite Element burst- 
ing in; wild-surging through all corridors and conduits. 

Meanwhile the poor Bodyguards have got hunted 
mostly into the iil-de-Boeuf. They may die there, at 
the King’s threshold; they can do little to defend it. 
They are heaping tabourets (stools of honor), benches 
and all movables against the door; at which the axe 
of Insurrection thunders.—But did brave Miomandre 
perish, then, at the Queen’s outer door? No, he was 


fractured, slashed, lacerated, left for dead; he has_- 


nevertheless crawled hither; and shall live, honored of 
loyal France. Remark also, in flat contradiction to much 
which has been said and sung, that Insurrection did not 
burst that door he had defended; but hurried else- 
whither, seeking new Bodyguards.’ 


2 Campan, ii. 75-87. 
Vou. I.—28 


434 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Bonk ya 


Poor Bodyguards, with their Thyestes Opera-Repast : 
Well for them that Insurrection has only pikes and axes ; 
no right sieging-tools! It shakes and thunders. Must 
they all perish miserably, and Royalty with them ? 
Deshuttes and Varigny, massacred at the first inbreak, 
have been beheaded in the Marble Court; a sacrifice 
to Jerdme’s manes: Jourdan with the tile-beard did 
that duty willingly ; and asked, If there were no more ? 
Another captive they are leading round the corpse, with 
howl-chantings: may not Jourdan again tuck-up his 
sleeves ? 

And louder and louder rages Insurrection within, 
plundering if it cannot kill; louder ~and louder it 
thunders at the (Hil-de-Boeuf: what can now hinder its 
bursting-in ?—On a sudden it ceases; the battering has 
ceased! Wild-rushing; the cries grow fainter; there 
is silence, or the tramp of regular steps ; then a friendly 
knocking: “ We are the Centre Grenadiers, old Gardes 
Frangaises: Open to us, Messieurs of the Garde-du- 
Corps ; we have not forgotten how you saved us at Fon- 
tenoy!’’? The door is opened; enter Captain Gondran 
and the Centre Grenadiers: there are military em- 
bracings; there is sudden deliverance from death into 
life. 

Strange Sons of Adam! It was to ‘exterminate’ 
these Gardes-du-Corps that the Centre Grenadiers left 
home: and now they have rushed to save them from 
extermination. The memory of common peril, of old 


3 Toulongeon, i. 144. 


Chap. X. THE GRAND ENTRIES. 435 
October 6th. 


help, melts the rough heart ; bosom is clasped to bosom, 
not in war. The King shows himself, one moment, 
through the door of his Apartment, with: ‘Do not 
hurt my Guards!”—*Soyons fréres, Let us be 
brothers !”’ cries Captain Gondran; and again dashes 
off, with levelled bayonets, to sweep the Palace clear. 

Now too Lafayette, suddenly roused, not from sleep 
(for his eyes had not yet closed), arrives ; with passion- 
ate popular eloquence, with prompt military word of 
command. National Guards, suddenly roused, by 
sound of trumpet and alarm-drum, are all arriving. 
The death-melly ceases: the first sky-lambent blaze 
of Insurrection is got damped down; it burns now, if 
unextinguished yet flameless, as charred coals do, 
and not inextinguishable. The King’s Apartments 
are safe. Ministers, Officials, and. even some loyal 
National Deputies are assembling round their Majes- 
ties. The consternation will, with sobs and confusion, 
settle down gradually, into plan and counsel, better or 


worse. 


But glance now, for a moment, from the royal win- 
dows! A roaring sea of human heads, inundating 
both Courts; billowing against all passages: Menadic 
women; infuriated men, mad with revenge, with love 
of mischief, love of plunder! Rascality has slipped 
its muzzle; and now bays, three-throated, like the Dog 
of Erebus. Fourteen Bodyguards are wounded ; two 
massacred, and as we saw, beheaded; J ourdan asking, 


436 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. aa 
10d. 


‘Was it worth while to come so far for two?’ Hap- 
less Deshuttes and Varigny! Their fate surely was 
sad. Whirled down so suddenly to the abyss; as men 
are, suddenly, by the wide thunder of the Mountain 
Avalanche, awakened not by them, awakened far off 
by others! When the Chateau Clock last struck, they 
two were pacing languid, with poised musketoon ; 
anxious mainly that the next hour would strike. It 
has struck; to them inaudible. Their trunks lie 
mangled: their heads parade, ‘ on pikes twelve feet long,’ 
through the streets of Versailles; and shall, about noon, 
reach the Barriers of Paris,—a too ghastly contradiction 
to the large comfortable Placards that have been posted 
there ! 

The other captive Bodyguard is still circling the 
corpse of Jeréme, amid Indian war-whooping ; bloody 
Tilebeard, with tucked sleeves, brandishing his bloody 
axe; when Gondran and the Grenadiers come in sight. 
‘Comrades, will you see a man massacred in cold 
blood ?’’—“ Off, butchers !”” answer they ; and the poor 
Bodyguard is free. Busy runs Gondran, busy run 
Guards and Captains ; scouring all corridors ; dispersing 
Rascality and Robbery; sweeping the Palace clear. 
The mangled carnage is removed; Jer6me’s body to the 
Townhall, for inquest: the fire of Insurrection gets 
damped, more and more, into measurable, manageable 
heat. 

Transcendent things of all sorts, as in the general 
outburst of multitudinous Passion, are huddled together ; 


Eas THE GRAND ENTRIES. 437 
the ludicrous, nay the ridiculous, with the horrible. 
Far over the billowy sea of heads, may be seen Rascal- 
ity, caprioling on horses from the Royal Stud. The 
Spoilers these ; for Patriotism is always infected so, with 
a proportion of mere thieves and scoundrels. Gondran 
snatched their prey from them in the Chateau ; where- 
upon they hurried to the Stables, and took horse there. 
But the generous Diomedes’ steeds, according to Weber, 


~ disdained such scoundrel-burden; and, flinging-up 


their royal heels, did soon project most of it, in para- 
bolic curves, to a distance, amid peals of laughter ; 
and were caught. Mounted National Guards secured 
the rest. 

Now too is witnessed the touching last flicker of 
Etiquette; which sinks not here, in the Cimmerian 
World-wreckage, without a sign; as the house-cricket 
might still chirp in the pealing of a Trump of Doom. 
‘Monsieur,’ said some Master of Ceremonies (one 
hopes it might be De Brézé), as Lafayette, in these 
fearful moments, was rushing towards the inner Roy- 
al Apartments, ‘‘ Monsieur; le Roi vous accorde les 
grandes entrées, Monsieur, the King grants you the 
Grand Entries,’—not finding it convenient to refuse _ 
them !* ay 


£Toulongeon, i. App. 120. 


CHAPTER XI. 
FROM VERSAILLES. 


However, the Paris National Guard, wholly under 
arms, has cleared the Palace, and even occupies the 
nearer external spaces; extruding miscellaneous Pa- 
triotism, for most part, into the Grand Court, or even 
into the Forecourt. 

The Bodyguards, you can observe, have now of a 
verity ‘hoisted the National Cockade:’ for they step 
forward to the windows or balconies, hat aloft in hand, 
on each hat a huge tricolor ; and fling over their bando- 
leers in sign of surrender; and shout Vive la Nation. 
To which how can the generous heart respond but with, 
Vive le Roi; vivent les Gardes-du-Corps ? His Maj- 
esty himself has appeared with Lafayette on the bal- 
cony, and again appears: Vive le Roi greets him from 
all throats; but also from some one throat is heard, 
“‘ Le Rot @ Paris, The King to Paris!” 

Her Majesty too, on demand, shows herself, though 
there is peril in it: she steps out on the balcony, with 
her little boy and girl. ‘No children, Point d’en- 
fans !”’ cry the voices. She gently pushes back her 
children ; and stands alone, her hands serenely crossed 


on her breast: ‘‘ Should I die,” she had said, “TI will 
438 


chap. XI. FROM VERSAILLES. 439 
do it.”’ Such serenity of heroism has its effect. La- 
fayette, with ready wit, in his highflown chivalrous 
way, takes that fair queenly hand, and, reverently 
kneeling, kisses it: thereupon the people do shout 
Vive la Reine. Nevertheless, poor Weber ‘ saw’ (or 
even thought he saw; for hardly the third part of poor 
Weber’s experiences, in such hysterical days, will stand 
scrutiny) ‘one of these brigands level his musket at 
her Majesty,’/—with or without intention to shoot ; for 
another of the brigands ‘ angrily struck it down.’ 

So that all, and the Queen herself, nay the very 
Captain of the Bodyguards, have grown National ! 
The very Captain of the Bodyguards steps out now 
with Lafayette. On the hat of the repentant man is 
an enormous tricolor; large as a soup-platter or sun- 
flower ; . visible to the utmost Forecourt. He takes the 
National Oath with a loud voice, elevating his hat; at 
which sight all the army raise their bonnets on their 
bayonets, with shouts. Sweet is reconcilement to the 
heart of man. Lafayette has sworn Flandre ; he swears 
the remaining Bodyguards, down in the Marble Court; 
the people clasp them in their arms :—O my brothers, 
why would ye force us to slay you? Behold, there is 
joy over you, as over returning prodigal sons !—The™ 
poor Bodyguards, now National and tricolor, exchange 
bonnets, exchange arms; there shall be peace and fra- 
ternity. And still “ Vive le Roi;”’ and also ‘ Le 
Roi @ Paris,’ not now from one throat, but from all 
throats as one, for it is the heart’s wish of all mortals. 


440 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Bee 


Yes, The King to Paris: what else? Ministers 
may consult, the National Deputies wag their heads: 
but there is now no other possibility. You have forced 
him to go willingly. ‘At one o'clock!” Lafayette 
gives audible assurance to that purpose; and universal 
Insurrection, with immeasurable shout, and a discharge 
of all the fire-arms, clear and rusty, great and small, 
that it has, returns him acceptance. What a sound; 
heard for leagues: a doom-peal!—That sound too rolls 
away; into the Silence of Ages. And the Chateau 
of Versailles stands ever since vacant, hushed-still ; 
its spacious Courts grassgrown, responsive to the hoe 
of the weeder. “Times and generations roll on, in their 
confused Gulf-current; and buildings, like builders, 
have their destiny. 

Till one o’clock, then, there will be three parties, 
National Assembly, National Rascality, National Roy- 
alty, all busy enough. Rascality rejoices ; women trim 
themselves with tricolor. Nay motherly Paris has sent 
her Avengers sufficient ‘cartloads of loaves;’ which 
are shouted over, which are gratefully consumed. The 
Avengers, in return, are searching for grain-stores ; 
loading them in fifty wagons; that soa National King, 
probable harbinger of all blessings, may be the evident 
bringer of plenty, for one. 

And thus has Sansculottism made prisoner its King ; 
revoking his parole. The Monarchy has fallen; and not 
so much as honorably: no, ignominiously ;. with strug- 
gle, indeed, oft-repeated ; but then with unwise strug- 


- 


ar an 


Chap. XT. ' FROM VERSAILLES. AAI 
October 6th. 


gle; wasting its strength in fits and paroxysms; at 
every new paroxysm foiled more pitifully than before. 
Thus Broglie’s whiff of grapeshot, which might have 
been something, has dwindled to the pot-valor of an 
Opera Repast, and O Richard, O mon Roi. Which, 
again, we shall see dwindle to a Favras Conspiracy, a 
thing to be settled by the hanging of one Chevalier. 

Poor Monarchy! But what save foulest defeat can 
await that man, who wills, and yet wills not? Ap- 
parently the King either has a right, assertible as such 
to the death, before God and man; or else he has no 
right. Apparently, the one or the other; could he but 
know which! May Heaven pity him! Were Louis 
wise, he would this day abdicate.—Is it not strange so 
few Kings abdicate ; and none yet heard of has been 
known to commit suicide? Fritz the First, of Prus- 
sia, alone tried it; and they cut the rope.’ 

As for the National Assembly, which decrees this 
morning that it ‘is inseparable from his Majesty,’ and 
will follow him to Paris, there may one thing be noted: 
its extreme want of bodily health. After the Four- 
teenth of July there was a certain sickliness observ- 
able among honorable Members; so many demanding 
passports, on account of infirm health. But now, for 
these following days, there is a perfect murrain: Pres- 


1 Calumnious rumor, current long since, in loose vehicles (Hdin- 
burgh Review on Mémoires de Bastille, for example), concerning Fried- 
yich Wilhelm and his ways, then so mysterious and miraculous to 
many ;—not the least truth in it! (Note of 1868.) 


442 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Book vi 


ident Mounier, Lally Tollendal, Clermont Tonnere, 
and all Constitutional Two-Chamber Royalists need- 
ing change of air; as most No-Chamber Royalists 
had formerly done. 

For, in truth, it is the second Emigration this that 
has now come; most extensive among Commons Depu- 
ties, Noblesse, Clergy: so that ‘to Switzerland alone 
there go sixty thousand.’ They will return in the 
day of accounts! Yes, and have hot welecome.—But 
Emigration on Emigration is the peculiarity of France. 
One Emigration follows another; grounded on reason- 
able fear, unreasonable hope, largely also on childish 
pet. The highflyers have gone first, now the lower 
flyers; and ever the lower will go, down to the 
crawlers. Whereby, however, cannot our National 
Assembly so much the more commodiously make the 
Constitution ; your Two-Chamber Anglomaniacs being 
all safe, distant on foreign shores? Abbé Maury is 
seized and sent back again: he, tough as tanned 
leather, with eloquent Captain Cazalés and some 
others, will stand it out for another year. 

But here, meanwhile, the question arises: Was 
Philippe d’Orléans seen, this day, ‘in the Bois de 
Boulogne, in gray surtout;’ waiting under the wet 
sere foliage, what the day might bring forth? Alas, 
yes, the Eidolon of him was,—in Weber’s and other 
such brains. The Chatelet shall make large inquisi- 
tion into the matter, examining a hundred and seventy 
witnesses, and Deputy Chabroud publish his Report ; 


Chap. XI. FROM VERSAILLES. 443 
October 6th. 


but disclose nothing farther.2 What, then, has 
caused these two unparalleled October Days? For 
surely such dramatic exhibition never yet enacted 
itself without Dramatist and Machinist. | Wooden 
Punch emerges not, with his domestic sorrows, into 
the light of day, unless the wire be pulled: how can 
human mobs? Was it not D’Orléans, then, and 
Laclos, Marquis Sillery, Mirabeau and the sons, of 
confusion; hoping to drive the King to Metz, and 
gather the spoil? Nay was it not, quite contrari- 
wise, the (Hil-de-Boeuf, Bodyguard Colonel de Guiche, 
Minister Saint-Priest and highflying Loyalists; hop- 
ing also to drive him to Metz, and try it by the sword 


of civil war? Good Marquis Toulongeon, the His- 


torian and Deputy, feels constrained to admit: that it 
was both.® 

Alas, my Friends, credulous incredulity is a strange 
matter. But when a whole Nation is smitten with. 
Suspicion, and sees a dramatic miracle in the very 
operation of the gastric juices, what help is there? 
Such Nation is already a mere hypochondriac bundle 
of diseases; as good as changed into glass; atrabiliar, 


decadent ; and will suffer crises. Is not Suspicion it- __ 


self the one thing to be suspected, as Montaigne feared 


only fear ? 


Now, however, the short hour has struck. His 


2 Rapport de Chabroud (Monitewr, du 31 Decembre 1789). 
3 Toulongeon, i. 150, 


444 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. noo 


Majesty is in his carriage, with his Queen, sister 
Elizabeth and two royal children. Not for another 
hour can the infinite Procession get marshalled and 
under way. The weather is dim drizzling; the mind 
confused; the noise great. 

Processional marches not a few our world has seen ; 
Roman triumphs and ovations, Cabiric cymbal-beat- 
ings, Royal progresses, Irish funerals; but this of the 
French Monarchy marching to its bed remained to be 
seen. Miles long, and of breadth losing itself in 
vagueness, for all the neighboring country crowds to 
see. Slow; stagnating along, like shoreless Lake, 
yet with a noise like Niagara, like Babel and Bedlam. 
A splashing and a tramping; a hurrahing, uproaring, 
musket-volleying ;—the truest segment of Chaos seen 
in these latter Ages! Tull slowly it disembogue itself 
in the thickening dusk, into expectant Paris, through 
a double row of faces all the way from Passy to the 
Hotel-de- Ville. 

Consider this: Vanguard of National troops; with 
trains of artillery; of pikemen and _ pikewomen, 
mounted on cannons, on carts, hackney coaches, or 
on foot ;—tripudiating, in tricolor ribbons from head 
to heel; loaves stuck on the points of bayonets, green 
boughs stuck in gun-barrels.4 Next, as main-march, 
‘fifty cart-loads of corn,’ which have been lent, for 
peace, from the stores of Versailles. Behind which 
follow stragglers of the Garde-du-Corps; all humili- 


4Mercier: Nouveau Paris, iii. 21. 


Tae obs 


Chap. XI. FROM VERSAILLES. 445 
October 6th. 


ated, in Grenadier bonnets. Close on these comes 
the Royal Carriage; come Royal Carriages: for 
there are a Hundred National Deputies too, among 
whom sits Mirabeau,—his remarks not given. Then 
finally, pellmell, as rear-guard, Flandre, Swiss, Hun- 
dred Swiss, other Bodyguards, Brigands, whosoever 
cannot get before. Between and among all which 
masses flows without limit Saint-Antoine and the 
Menadic Cchort. Menadic especially about the 
Royal Carriage; tripudiating there, covered with 
tricolor; singing ‘allusive songs;’ pointing with one 
hand to the Royal Carriage, which the allusions hit, 
and pointing to the Provision-wagons with the other 
hand, and these words: ‘‘ Courage, Friends! We shall 
not want bread now; we are bringing you the Baker, 
the Bakeress and Baker’s-boy (le Boulanger, la Bou- 
langére et le petit Mitron).”° 

The wet day draggles the tricolor, but the joy is 
unextinguishable. Is not all well now? “AA, 


>? 


Madame, notre bonne [eine,” said some of these 
Strong-women some days hence, ‘‘ Ah, Madame, our 
good Queen, don’t be a traitor any more (ne soyez 
plus traitre), and we will all love you!” Poor Weber 
went splashing along, close by the Royal Carriage, 
with the tear in his eye: ‘their Majesties did me the 
‘honor,’ or I thought they did it, ‘to testify, from 
‘time to time, by shrugging of the shoulders, by looks 
‘directed’ to Heaven, the emotions they felt.’ Thus, 


5 Toulongeon, i. 134-161; Dewx Amis, iii. c.9; &c. &e. 


446 THE INSURRECTION OF WOMEN. Booka 


like frail cockle, floats the royal Life-boat, helmless, 
on black deluges of Rascality. iF 

Mercier, in his loose way, estimates the Procession 
and assistants at two hundred thousand. He says 
it was one boundless inarticulate Haha ;—transcend- 
ent World-Laughter; comparable to the Saturnalia 
of the Ancients. Why not? Here too, as we said, 
is Human Nature once more human; shudder at it 
whoso is of shuddering humor; yet, behold, it is 
human. It has ‘swallowed all formulas;’ it tripu- 
diates even so. For which reason they that collect 
Vases and Antiques, with figures of Dancing Bac- 
chantes ‘in wild and all-but impossible positions,’ 
may look with some interest on it. 


Thus, however, has the slow-moving Chaos, or 
modern Saturnalia of the Ancients, reached the Bar- 
rier ; and must halt, to be harangued by Mayor Bailly. 
Thereafter it has to lumber along, between the double 
row of faces, in the transcendent heaven-lashing Haha; 
two hours longer, towards the Hétel-de-Ville. Then 
again to be harangued there, by several persons; by 
Moreau de Saint-Méry among others; Moreau of the 
Three-thousand orders, now National Deputy for: St. 
Domingo. To all which poor Louis, ‘who seemed to 
experience a slight emotion’ on entering this Town- 
hall, can answer only that he ‘comes with pleasure, 
with confidence among his people.” Mayor Bailly, 
in reporting it, forgets ‘confidence:’ and the poor 


bs bill a 


Chap. XI. FROM VERSAILLES. 447 
October 6th. 


Queen says eagerly: “Add, with confidence.’-— 
‘‘Messieurs,’’ rejoins Mayor Bailly, ‘“‘ you are hap- 
pier than if I had not forgotten.” 

Finally, the King is shown on an upper balcony, by 
torchlight, with a huge tricolor in his hat: ‘and all 
the people,’ says Weber, ‘ grasped one another’s hand ;’ 
—thinking now surely the New Era was born. Hardly 
till eleven at night can Royalty get to its vacant, long- 
deserted Palace of the Tuileries ; to lodge there, some- 
what in strolling-player fashion. It is Tuesday the 
6th of October 1789. 

Poor Louis has Two other Paris Processions to 


_make: one ludicrous-ignominious like this; the other 


not ludicrous nor ignominious, but serious, nay sub- 


lime. 


on 


5m = ; 
ROOT a « 
_ THE FEAST OF PIKES. 


CHAPTER I. 
IN THE TUILERIES. 


THE victim having once got his stroke-of-grace, the 
catastrophe can be considered as almost come. There 
is small interest now in watching his long low moans: 
notable only are his sharper agonies, what convulsive 
struggles he may make to cast the torture off from 
him; and then finally the last departure of life itself, 
and how he lies extinct and ended, either wrapt like 
Czesar in decorous mantle-folds, or unseemly sunk 
together, like one that had not the force even to 
die. . 

Was French Royalty, when wrenched forth from it 
tapestries in that fashion, on that Sixth of October 
1789, such a victim? Universal France, and Royal 
Proclamation to all the Provinces, answers anxiously, 
No. Nevertheless one may fear the worst. Royalty. 
was beforehand so decrepit, moribund, there is little 
life in it to heal an injury. How much of its strength, 
which was of the imagination merely, has fled; Ras- 
cality having looked plainly in the King’s face, and 
not died! When the assembled crows can pluck up 


their scarecrow, and say to it, Here shalt thou stand 
453 


454 THE FEAST OF PIKES. ESN 


and not there; and can treat with it, and make it, 
from an infinite, a quite finite Constitutional scarecrow, 
—what is to be looked for? Not in the finite Consti- 
tutional scarecrow, but in what still unmeasured, in- 
finite-seeming force may rally round it, is there thence- 
forth any hope. For it is most true that all available 
Authority is mystic in its conditions, and comes ‘ by 
the grace of God.’ 

Cheerfuller than watching the death-struggles of 
Royalism will it be to watch the growth and gam- 
bollings of Sansculottism; for, in human _ things, 
especially in human society, all death is but a death- 
birth: thus if the sceptre is departing from Louis, it 
is only that, in other forms, other sceptres, were it even 
pike-sceptres, may bear sway. In a prurient element, 
rich with nutritive influences, we shall find that Sans- 
culottism grows lustily, and even frisks in not ungrace- 
ful sport: as indeed most. young creatures are sportful ; 
nay, may it not be noted further, that as the grown 
cat, and cat species generally, is the cruelest thing 
known, so the merriest is precisely the kitten, or 
growing cat? 


But fancy the Royal Family risen from its truckle- 
beds on the morrow of that mad day: fancy the 
Municipal inquiry, ‘“‘ How would your Majesty please 
to lodge ?’”—and then that the King’s rough answer, 
“Hach may lodge as he can, I am well enough,” is 
congeed and bowed away, in expressive grins, by the 


Chap. I. IN THE TUILERIES. A455 
October. 


Townhall Functionaries, with obsequious upholsterers 
at their back; and how the Chateau of the Tuileries 
is repainted, regarnished into a golden Royal Resi- 
dence; and Lafayette with his blue National Guards 
lies encompassing it, as blue Neptune (in the language 
of poets) does an island, wooingly. Thither may the 
wrecks of rehabilitated Loyalty gather, if it will be- 
come Constitutional; for Constitutionalism thinks no 
evil; Sanculottism itself rejoices in the King’s 
countenance. The rubbish of a Menadic Insurrec- 
tion, as in this ever-kindly world all rubbish can 
and must be, is swept aside; and so again, on 
clear arena, under new conditions, with something 
even of a new stateliness, we begin a new course 
of action. 

Arthur Young has witnessed the strangest scene: 
Majesty walking unattended in the Tuileries Gardens ; 
and miscellaneous tricolor crowds, who cheer it, and 
reverently make way for it: the very Queen com- 
mands at lowest respectful silence, regretful avoid- 
ance.’ Simple ducks, in those royal waters, quackle 
for crumbs from young royal fingers: the little Dau- 
phin has a little railed garden, where he is seen delv- 
ing, with ruddy cheeks and flaxen curled hair; also 
a little hutch to put his tools in, and’ screen himself 
against showers. What peaceable simplicity! Is it 
peace of a Father restored to his children? Or of 
a Taskmaster who has lost his whip? Lafayette and 


1 Arthur Young’s Travels, i. 264-280. 


456 THE FEAST OF PIKES. se 


the Municipality and universal Constitutionalism assert 
the former, and do what is in them to realize it. Such 
Patriotism as snarls dangerously and shows teeth, 
Patrollotism shall suppress; or far better, Royalty 
shall soothe down the angry hair of it, by gentle pat- 
tings; and, most effectual of all, by fuller diet. Yes, 
not only shall Paris be fed, but the King’s hand be 
seen in that work. The household goods of the Poor 
shall, up to a certain amount, by royal bounty, be 
disengaged from pawn, and that insatiable Mont de 
Piété shall disgorge ; rides in the city with their Vive- 
le-Rot need not fail: and so, by substance and show, 
shall Royalty, if man’s art can popularize it, be 
popularized.? 

Or, alas, is it neither restored Father nor diswhipped 
Taskmaster that walks there; but an anomalous com- 
plex of both these, and of innumerable other hetero- 
geneities: reducible to no:rubric, if not to this newly- 
devised one: King Louis Restorer of French Liberty ? 
Man indeed, and King Louis like other men, lives in 
this world to make rule out of the ruleless; by his 
living energy, he shall force the absurd itself to 
become less absurd. But then if there be no living 
energy ; living passivity only? King Serpent, hurled 
into its unexpected watery dominion, did at least bite, 
and assert credibly that he was there: but as for the 
poor King Log, tumbled hither and thither as thou- 
sandfold chance and other will than his might direct, 


2 Deux Amis, iii. ec. 10. 


Ni 


NT NS he Se 


Chap. I. IN THE TUILERIES. 457 


October. 


how happy for him that he was indeed wooden; and, 
doing nothing, could also see and suffer nothing! It 
is a distracted business. he 

For his French Majesty, meanwhile, one of the 
worst things is, that he can get no hunting. Alas, 
no hunting henceforth; only a fatal being-hunted ! 
Scarcely, in the next June weeks, shall he taste again 
the joys of the game-destroyer; in next June, and 
never more. He sends for his smith-tools; gives, in 
the course of the day, official or ceremonial business 
being ended, ‘a few strokes of the file, quelques coups 
de lime.’* Innocent brother mortal, why wert thou 
not an obscure substantial maker of locks; but 
doomed in that other far-seen craft, to be a maker 
only of world-follies, unrealities ; things self-destruc- 
tive, which no mortal hammering could rivet into 
coherence ! 

Poor Louis is not without insight, nor even without 
the elements of will; some sharpness of temper, spurt- 
ing at times from a stagnating character. If harm- 
less inertness could save him, it were well; but he 
will slumber and painfully dream, and to do aught 
is not given him. Royalist Antiquarians still show. 
the rooms where Majesty and suite, in these extraor- 
dinary circumstances, had their lodging. Here sat 
the Queen; reading,—for she had her library brought 
hither, though the King refused his; taking vehement 


® Le Chateau des Tuileries, ou récit &c., par Roussel (in Hist. Parl. 
iv. 195-219). 


458 THE FEAST OF PIKES. noe 
109, 


counsel of the vehement uncounselled ; sorrowing over 
altered times; yet with sure hope of better: in her 
young rosy Boy has she not the living emblem of» 
hope? It is a murky, working sky; yet with golden 
gleams—of dawn, or of deeper meteoric night? Here 
again this chamber, on the other side of the main 
entrance, was the King’s: here his Majesty break- 
fasted, and did official work; here daily after break- 
fast he received the Queen; sometimes in pathetic 
friendliness ; sometimes in human sulkiness, for flesh 
is weak ; and when questioned about business, would 
answer: ‘‘Madame, your business is with the chil- 
dren.” Nay, Sire, were it not better you, your 
Majesty’s self, took the children? So asks impartial 
History ; scornful that the thecker vessel was not also 
the stronger; pity-struck for the porcelain-clay of 
humanity rather than for the tile-clay,—though indeed 
both were broken! 

So, however, in this Medicean Tuileries, shall the 
French King and Queen now sit for one-and-forty 
months; and see a wild-fermenting France work out 
its own destiny, and theirs. Months bleak, ungenial, 
of rapid vicissitude; yet with a mild pale splendor, 
here and there: as of an April that were leading to 
leafiest Summer; as of an October that led only to 
everlasting Frost. Medicean Tuileries, how changed 
since it was a peaceful Tile-field! Or is the ground 
itself fate-stricken, accursed; an Atreus’ Palace; for 
that Louvre window is still nigh, out of which a 


core 


Se 
et 


Chap. I. IN THE TUILERIES. A59 
October. 


-Capet, whipt of the Furies, fired his signal of the 


Saint Bartholomew! Dark is the way of the Eternal 
as mirrored in this world of Time: God’s way is in 
the sea, and His path in the great deep. 


CHAPTER II. 
IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 


To believing Patriots, however, it is now clear that 
the Constitution will march, marcher,—had it once 
legs to stand on. Quick, then, ye Patriots, bestir 
yourselves, and make it; shape legs for it! In the 
Archevéché, or Archbishop’s Palace, his Grace him- 
self having fled; and afterwards in the Riding-hall, 
named Manége, close on the Tuileries: there does 
a National Assembly apply itself to the miraculous 
work. Successfully, had there been any heaven- 
scaling Prometheus among them; not successfully, 
since there was none! . There, in noisy debate, for 
the sessions are occasionally ‘ scandalous,’ and as many 
as three speakers have been seen in the Tribune at 
once,—let us continue to fancy it wearing the slow 
months. 

Tough, dogmatic, long of wind is Abbé Maury; 
Ciceronian pathetic is Cazalés. Keen-trenchant, on 
the other side, glitters a young Barnave; abhorrent 
of sophistry; sheering, like keen Damascus sabre, all 
sophistry asunder,—reckless what else he sheer with 
it. Simple seemest thou, O solid Dutch-built Pétion ; 


if solid, surely dull. Nor lifegiving is that tone of. 
460 


Chap. IT. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 461 
Oct.Nov. 


thine, livelier polemical Rabaut. With ineffable seren- 
ity sniffs great Sieyes, aloft, alone ; his Constitution 
ye may babble over, ye may mar, but can by no pos- 
sibility mend: is not Polity a science he has exhausted ? 
Cool, slow, two military Lameths are visible, with their 
quality sneer, or demi-sneer; they shall gallantly re- 
fund their Mother’s Pension, when the Red Book is 
produced ; gallantly be wounded in duels. A Marquis 
Toulongeon, whose Pen we yet thank, sits there; in 
stoical meditative humor, oftenest silent, accepts what 
Destiny will send. Thouret and Parlementary Duport 
produce mountains of Reformed Law; liberal, Anglo- 
maniac; available and unavailable. Mortals rise 


and fall. Shall goose Gobel, for example,—or Gobel, 


for he is of Strasburg German breed,—be a Consti- 
tutional: Archbishop ? 

Alone of all men there, Mirabeau may begin to dis- 
cern clearly whither all this is tending. Patriotism, 
accordingly, regrets that his zeal seems to be getting 
cool. In that famed Pentecost-Night of the Fourth 
of August, when new Faith rose suddenly into mirac- 
ulous fire, and old Feudality was burnt up, men re- 
marked that Mirabeau took no hand in it; that, in 
fact, he luckily happened to be absent. But did he 
not defend the Veto, nay Veto Absolu; and tell ve- 
hement Barnave that six hundred irresponsible sen- 
ators would make of all tyrannies the insupportablest ? 
Again, how anxious was he that the King’s Ministers 
should have seat and voice in the National Assembly : 


462 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
1789-90. 


—doubtless with an eye to being Minister himself! 
Whereupon the National Assembly decides, what is 
very momentous, that no Deputy shall be Minister ; 
he, in his haughty stormful manner, advising us to 
make it, ‘no Deputy called Mirabeau.”? A man of 
perhaps inveterate Feudalisms; of stratagems; 00 
often visible leanings towards the Royalist side: a man 
suspect; whom Patriotism will unmask! Thus, in 
these June days, when the question, Who shall have 
right to declare war? comes on, you hear hoarse 
Hawkers sound dolefully through the streets, ‘‘ Grand 
Treason of Count Mirabeau, price only one sou ;’’— 
because he pleads that it shall be not the Assembly, 
but the King! Pleads; nay prevails: for in spite of 
the hoarse Hawkers, and an endless Populace raised 
by them to the pitch even of ‘Lanterne,’ he mounts 
the Tribune next day; grim-resolute; murmuring 
aside to his friends that speak of danger: ‘‘ I know it: 
I must come hence either in triumph, or else torn in 
fragments:’’ and it was in triumph that he came. 
A man stout of heart ; whose popularity is not of 
‘the populace, ‘pas populaciére ;’ whom no clamor of 
unwashed mobs without doors, or of washed mobs 
within, can scare from his way! Dumont remembers 
hearing him deliver a Report on Marseilles; ‘every 
‘word was interrupted on the part of the Cété Droit 
‘by abusive epithets; calumniator, liar, assassin, 
‘scoundrel (scélérat): Mirabeau pauses a moment, 


1 Monitewr, Nos. 65, 86 (29th September, 7th November, 1789). 


Chap. II. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 463 
Dee. 1789. 


‘and, in a honeyed tone, addressing the most furious, 
‘says: “I wait, Messieurs, till these amenities be 
‘exhausted.’ ’? A man enigmatic, difficult to un- 
mask! For example, whence comes his money? Can 
the profit of a Newspaper, sorely eaten into by Dame 
Le Jay; can this, and the eighteen francs a-day your 
National Deputy has, be supposed equal to this expen- 
diture? House in the Chaussée d’Antin; Country- 
house at Argenteuil ; splendors, sumptuosities, orgies ; 
—living as if he had a mint! All saloons, barred 
against Adventurer Mirabeau, are flung wide-open to 
King Mirabeau, the cynosure of Europe, whom female 
France flutters to behold,—though the Man Mirabeau 
is one and the same. As for money, one may conjec- 
ture that Royalism furnishes it; which if Royalism 
do, will not the same be welcome, as money always is 
to him? 

‘Sold,’ whatever Patriotism thinks, he cannot readily 
be: the spiritual fire which is in that man; which shin- 
ing through such confusions is nevertheless Conviction, 
and makes him strong, and without which he had no 
strength,—is not buyable nor saleable; in such trans- 


ference of barter, it would vanish and not be. Perhaps 


‘paid and not sold, payé pas vendu:’ as poor Riva-— 
rol, in the unhappier converse way, calls himself ‘sold 
and not paid’! A man travelling, comet-like, in 
splendor and nebulosity, his wild way ; whom telescopic 
Patriotism may long watch, but, without higher math- 


2 Dumont, Souvenirs, p. 278. 


464 THE FEAST OF PIKES. ~ Book I. 
1789-90. 


ematics, will not make out. A questionable, most 
blamable man; yet to us the far notablest of all. With 
rich munificence, as we often say, in a most blinkard, 
bespectacled, logic-chopping generation, Nature has 
gifted this man with an eye. Welcome is his word, 
there where he speaks and works; and growing ever 
welcomer; for it alone goes to the heart of the busi- 
ness: logical cobwebbery shrinks itself together; and 
thou seest a thing, how it is, how it may be worked 
with. 

Unhappily our National Assembly has much to do: 
a France to regenerate; and France is short of so 
many requisites, short even of cash. These same 
Finances give trouble enough; no choking of the De- 
ficit; which gapes ever, Give, give! To appease the 
Deficit we venture on a hazardous step, sale of the 
Clergy’s Lands and superfluous Edifices; most haz- 
ardous. Nay, given the sale, who is to buy them, 
ready-money having fled? Wherefore, on the 19th 
day of December, a paper-money of ‘Assignats,’ of 
Bonds secured, or assigned, on that Clerico-National 
Property, and unquestionable at least in payment of 
that,—is decreed: the first of a long series of like 
financial performances, which shall- astonish mankind. 
So that now, while old rags last, there shall be no lack 
of circulating medium: whether of commodities to 
circulate thereon, is another question. But, after all, 
does not this Assignat business speak ‘volumes for 
modern science? Bankruptcy, we may say, was come, 


Chap. II. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 465 


Dee. 1789. 


as the end of all Delusions needs must come: yet how 
gently, in softening diffusion, in mild succession, was it 
hereby made to fall ;—like no all-destroying avalanche; 
like gentle showers of a powdery impalpable snow, 
shower after shower, till all was indeed buried, and yet 
little was destroyed that could not be replaced, be dis- 
pensed with! To such length has modern machinery 
reached. Bankruptcy, we said, was great; but indeed 
Money itself is a standing miracle. 

On the whole, it is a matter of endless difficulty, 
that of the Clergy. Clerical property may be made 
the Nation’s, and the Clergy hired servants of the 


State; but if so, is it not an altered-Church? Adjust- 


ment enough, of the most confused sort, has become 
unavoidable. Old landmarks, in any sense, avail not 
in a new France. Nay literally, the very Ground is 
new divided; your old particolored Provinces become 
new uniform Departments Eighty-three in number ;— 
whereby, as in some sudden shifting of the Earth’s 
axis, no mortal knows his new latitude at once. The 
Twelve old Parlements too, what is to be done with 
them? The old Parlements are declared to be all ‘in 
permanent vacation,’—till once the new equal-justice, 
of Departmental Courts, National Appeal-Court, of 
elective Justices, Justices of Peace, and other Thouret- 
and-Duport apparatus be got ready. They have to sit 
there, these old Parlements, uneasily waiting; as it 
were, with the rope round their neck; crying as they 


ean, Js there none to deliver us? But happily the 
Vou, I.—30 


466 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
1789-90. 


answer being, None, none, they are a manageable 
class, these Parlements. They can be bullied, even, 
into silence; the Paris Parlement, wiser than most, 
has never whimpered. They will and must sit there, 
in such vacation as is fit; their Chamber of Vacation 
distributes in the interim what little justice is going. 
With the rope round their neck, their destiny may be 
succinct! On the 13th of November 1790, Mayor 
Bailly shall walk to the Palais de Justice, few even 
heeding him; and with municipal seal-stamp and a 
little hot wax, seal up the Parlementary Paper-rooms, 
—and the dread Parlement of Paris pass away, into 
Chaos, gently as does a Dream! So shall the Parle- 
ments perish, succinctly; and innumerable eyes be 
dry. 

Not so the Clergy. For, granting even that Relig- 
ion were dead; that it had died, half-centuries ago, 
with unutterable Dubois; or emigrated lately to Al- 
sace, with Necklace-Cardinal Rohan; or that it now 
walked as goblin vevenant, with Bishop Talleyrand of 
Autun; yet does not the Shadow of Religion, the 
Cant of Religion, still linger? The Clergy have 
means and material: means, of number, organization, 
social weight; a material, at lowest, of public igno- 
rance, known to be the mother of devotion. Nay 
withal, is it incredible that there might, in simple 
hearts, latent here and there like gold-grains in the 
mud-beach, still dwell some real Faith in. God, of so 
singular and tenacious a sort that even a Maury or a 


Chap, 11. IN THE SALLE DE MANRGE. 467 


Talleyrand could still be the symbol for it ?—Enough, 
the. Clergy has strength, the Clergy has craft and 
indignation, It is a most fatal business this of the 
Clergy. VA weltering hydra-coil, which the National 
Assembly has stirred up about its ears ; hissing, sting- 
ing; which cannot be appeased, alive; which cannot 
be trampled dead! Fatal, from first to last! Scarcely 
after fifteen months’ debating, can a Civil Constitution 
of the Clergy be so much as got to paper; and then 
for getting it into reality? Alas, such Civil Constitu- 
tion is but an agreement to disagree. It divides 
France from end to end, with a new split, infinitely 
complicating all the other splits :—Catholicism, what 
of it there is left, with the Cant of Catholicism, raging 
on the one side, and sceptic Heathenism on the other ; 
both, by contradiction, waxing fanatic. What endless 
jarring, of Refractory hated Priests, and Constitu- 
tional despised ones; of tender consciences, like the 
King’s, and consciences hot-seared, like certain of his 
People’s: the whole to end in Feasts of Reason and a 
War of La Vendée! So deep-seated is Religion in 
the heart of man, and holds of all infinite passions. 
If the dead echo of it still did so much, what could _ 
not the living voice of it once do? j 

Finance and Constitution, Law and Gospel: this 
surely were work enough; yet this is not all. In fact, 
the Ministry, and Necker himself, whom ‘a brass in- 
scription, ‘fastened by the people over his door-lintel,’ 
testifies to be the ‘ Ministre adoré,’ are dwindling into 


z q i Book I. 
468 THE FEAST OF PIKES es 


clearer and clearer nullity. Execution or legislation, 
arrangement or detail, from their nerveless. fingers all 
drops undone ; all lights at last on the toiled shoulders 
of an august Representative Body. Heavy-laden 
National Assembly! It has to hear of innumerable 
fresh revolts, Brigand expeditions ; of Chateaus in the 
West, especially of Charter-chests, Chartiers, set on 
fire: for there too the overloaded Ass frightfully re- 
calcitrates. Of Cities in the South full of heats and 
jealousies ; which will end in crossed sabres, Marseilles 
against Toulon, and Carpentras beleaguered by Avi- 
gnon ;—of so much Royalist collision in a career of 
Freedom: nay of Patriot collision, which a mere differ- 
ence of velocity will bring about! Of a Jourdan Coup- 
téte, who has skulked thitherward, to those southern 
regions, from the claws of the Chatelet; and will raise 
whole scoundrel regiments. 

Also it has to hear of, Royalist Camp of Jalés: 
Jalés mountain-girdled Plain, amid the rocks of the 
Cevennes ; whence Royalism, as is feared and hoped, 
may dash down like a mountain deluge, and submerge 
France! <A singular thing this Camp of Jalés; ex- 
isting mostly on paper. For the Soldiers at Jalés, 
being peasants or National Guards, were in heart 
sworn Sansculottes ; and all that the Royalist Captains 
could do, was, with false words, to keep them, or rather 
keep the report of them, drawn up there, visible to all 
imaginations, for a terror and a sign,—if peradventure 
France might be reconquered by theatrical machinery, 


Ch . re 4 a v 9 7. 
Gaps IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE 469 


by the picture of a Royalist Army done to the life !? 
Not till the third summer was this portent, burning 
out by fits and then fading, got finally extinguished ; 
was the old Castle of Jalés, no Camp being visible to 
the bodily eye, got blown asunder by some National 
Guards. 

Also it has to hear not only of Brissot and his 
Friends of the Blacks, but by and by of a whole St. 
Domingo blazing skyward; blazing in literal fire, and 
in far worse metaphorical; beaconing the nightly 
main. -Also of the shipping interest, and the landed 
interest, and all manner of interests, reduced to dis- 
tress. Of Industry everywhere manacled, bewildered ; 
and only Rebellion thriving. Of sub-officers, soldiers 
and sailors in mutiny by land and water. Of soldiers, 
at Nanci, as we shall see, needing to be cannonaded 
by a brave Bouillé. Of sailors, nay the very galley- 
slaves, at Brest, needing also to be cannonaded, but 
with no Bouillé to doit. For indeed, to say it in a 
word, in those days there was no Avng in Israel, and 
every man did that which was right in his own eyes.‘ 

Such things has an august National Assembly to 
hear of, as it goes on regenerating France. Sad and 
stern: but what remedy? Get the Constitution ready ; 
and all men will swear to it: for do not ‘ Addresses of 


3 Dampmartin, Evénemens, i. 208. 

4See Deux Amis, iii. c. 14; iv. ¢. 2, 3, 4,7, 9,14. Expédition des 
Volontaires de Brest sur Lannion; Les Lyonnais Sawveurs des Dauphi- 
nois ; Massacre au Mans ; Troubles du Maine (Pamphlets and Excerpts, 


in Hist. Parl. iii. 251; iv. 162-168), &c. 


rE : : Book I. 
470 THE FEAST OF PIKES Hoole 


adhesion ’ arrive by the cartload? In this manner, by 
Heaven's blessing, and a Constitution got-ready, shall 
the bottomless fire-gulf be vaulted in, with rag-paper ; 
and Order will wed Freedom, and live with her there, 
—till it grow too hot for them. O Cété Gauche, 
worthy are ye, as the adhesive Addresses generally 
say, to ‘fix the regards of the Universe ;’ the regards 
of this one poor Planet, at lowest !— 

Nay, it must be owned, the Cété Droit makes a still 
madder figure. An irrational generation; irrational, 
imbecile, and with the vehement obstinacy character- 
istic of that; a generation which will not learn. 
Falling Bastilles, Insurrections of Women, thousands 
of smoking Manorhouses, a country bristling with no 
crop but that of Sansculottic steel: these were tolerably 
didactic lessons; but them they have not taught. There 
are still men, of whom it was of old written, Bray them 
ina mortar! Or, in milder language, They have wed- 
ded their delusions: fire nor steel, nor any sharp- 
ness of Experience, shall sever the bond; till death do 
us part! On such may the heavens have mercy ; for 
the Earth, with her rigorous Necessity, will have none. 

Admit, at the same time, that it was most natural. 
Man lives by hope: Pandora, when her box of gods’- 
gifts flew all out, and became gods’-curses, still retained 
Hope. How skall an irrational mortal, when his high- 
place is never so evidently pulled down, and he, being 
irrational, is left resourceless, part with the belief that 
it will be rebuilt? It would make all so straight 


Chap. I IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 471 
d —W. 


again; it seems so unspeakably desirable: so reason- 
able,—would you but look at it aright! For, must 
not the thing which was continue to be; or else the 
solid World dissolve? Yes, persist, O infatuated 
Sansculottes of France! Revolt against constituted 
Authorities ; hunt out your rightful Seigneurs, who at 
bottom so loved you, and readily shed. their blood for 
you,—in country’s battles as at Rossbach and _ else- 
where; and, even in preserving game, were preserving 
you, could ye but have understood it: hunt them out, 
as if they were wild wolves; set fire to their ChAteaus 
and Chartiers as to wolf-dens ; and what then? Why, 
then turn every man his hand against his fellow! In 
confusion, famine, desolation, regret the days that are 
gone; rueful recall them, .recall us with them. To 
repentant prayers we will not be deaf. 

So, with dimmer or clearer consciousness, must the 
Right Side reason and act. An inevitable position 


-perhaps: but a most false one for them. Evil, be 


thou our good : this henceforth must virtually be 
their prayer. The fiercer the effervescence grows, 
the sooner will it pass; for, after all, it is but some 
mad effervescence; the World is solid, and cannot 
dissolve. 

For the rest, if they have any positive industry, 
it is that of plots, and backstairs conclaves. Plots 
which cannot be executed; which are mostly theoretic 
on their part;-—for which nevertheless this and the 
other practical Sieur Augeard, Sieur Maillebois, Sieur 


472 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
1789-90. 


Bonne Savardin, gets into trouble, gets imprisoned, 
and escapes with difficulty. Nay there is a poor 
practical Chevalier Favras, who, not without some 
passing reflex on Monsieur himself, gets hanged for 
them, amid loud uproar of the world. Poor Favras, 
he keeps dictating his last will ‘at the Hotel-de-Ville, 
through the whole remainder of the day,’ a weary 
February day; offers to reveal secrets, if they will 
save him; handsomely declines since they will not; 
then dies, in the flare of torchlight, with politest 
composure; remarking, rather than exclaiming, with 
outspread hands: “People, I die innocent; pray for 
me.’’°® Poor Favras;—type of so much that has 
prowled indefatigable over France, in days now end- 
ing; and, in freer field, might have earned instead 
of prowling,—to thee it is no theory ! 

In the Senate-house again, the attitude of the Right 
Side is that of calm unbelief. Let an august National 
Assembly make a Fourth-of-August Abolition of Feud- 
ality; declare the Clergy State-servants, who shall 
have wages; vote suspensive Vetoes, new Law-Courts ; 
vote or decree what contested thing it will; have it 
responded to from the four corners of France, nay, 
get King’s Sanction, and what other Acceptance were 
conceivable,—the Right Side, as we find, persists, 
with imperturbablest tenacity, in considering, and 
ever and anon shows that it still considers, all these 
so-called Decrees as mere temporary whims, which 


5 See Deux Amis, iy. c. 14,7; Hist. Parl. vi. 384. 


Chap. 1. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 473 


indeed stand on paper, but in practice and fact are 
not, and cannot be. Figure the brass head of an 
Abbé Maury flooding forth jesuitic eloquence in this 
strain; dusky D’Espréménil, Barrel Mirabeau (prob- 
ably in liquor), and enough of others, cheering him 
from the Right; and, for example, with what visage 
a seagreen Robespierre eyes him from the Left. And 
how Sieyes ineffably sniffs on him, or does not deign 
to sniff; and how the Galleries groan in spirit, or 
bark rabid on him: so that to escape the Lanterne, 
on stepping forth, he needs presence of mind, and 
a pair of pistols in his girdle! For he is one of the 
toughest of men. 

Here indeed becomes notable one great difference 
between our two kinds of civil war; between the 
modern lingual or Parliamentary-logical kind, and 
the ancient or manual kind in the steel battlefield ; 
—much to the disadvantage of the former. In the 
manual kind, where you front your foe with drawn 
weapon, one right stroke is final; for, physically 
speaking, when the brains are out the man does 
honestly die, and trouble you no more. But how 
different when it is with arguments you fight! Here 
no victory yet definable can be considered as final. 
Beat him down with Parliamentary invective, till 
sense be fled; cut him in two, hanging one half on 
this dilemma-horn, the other on that; blow the brains 
or thinking-faculty quite out of him for the time: it 
skills not; he rallies and revives on the morrow; to- 


fe ‘ " Book I. 
ATA THE FEAST-OF PIKES Book I. 


morrow he repairs his golden fires! The thing that 
will logically extinguish him is perhaps still a desid- 
eratum in Constitutional civilization. For how, till 
a man know, in some measure, at what point he 
becomes logically defunct, can Parliamentary Business 
be carried on, and Talk cease or slake? 

Doubtless it was some feeling of this difficulty ; 
and the clear insight how little such knowledge yet 
existed in the French Nation, new in the Constitu- 
tional career, and how defunct Aristocrats would con- 
tinue to walk for unlimited periods, as Partridge the 
Almanac-maker did,—that had sunk into the deep 
mind of People’s-friend Marat, an eminently practical 
mind; and had grown there, in that richest putrescent 
soil, into the most original plan of action ever sub- 
mitted to a People. Not yet has it grown; but it 
has germinated, it is growing; rooting itself into 
Tartarus, branching towards Heaven: the second 
season hence, we shall see it risen out of the bottom- 
less Darkness, full-grown, into disastrous Twilight,— 
a Hemlock-tree, great as the world; on or under 
whose boughs all the People’s-friends of the world 
may lodge. ‘Two hundred and Sixty thousand Aris- 
tocrat heads :’ that is the precisest calculation, though 
one would not stand on a few hundreds; yet we never 
rise as high as the round Three hundred thousand. 
Shudder at it, O People; but it is as true as that ye 
yourselves, and your People’s-friend, are alive. These 
prating Senators of yours hover ineffectual on the 


Chap, I. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. 475 
i — SU, 


barren letter, and will never save the Revolution. 
A Cassandra-Marat cannot do it, with his single 
shrunk arm; but with a few determined men it 
were possible. “Give me,” said-the People’s-friend, 
in his cold way, when young Barbaroux, once his 
pupil in a course of what was called Optics, went 
to see him, “Give me two hundred Naples Bravoes, 
armed each with a good dirk, and a muff on his left 
arm by way of shield:’ with them I will traverse 
France, and accomplish the Revolution.”*® Nay, be 
grave, young Barbaroux; for thou seest there is no 


_jesting in those rheumy eyes, in that soot-bleared 


figure, most earnest of created things; neither indeed 
is there madness, of the strait-waistcoat sort. 

Such produce shall the Time ripen in cavernous 
Marat, the man forbid; living in Paris cellars, lone 
as fanatic Anchorite in his Thebaid ; say, as far-seen 
Simon on his Pillar,—taking peculiar views therefrom. 
Patriots may smile; and, using him as bandog now 
to be muzzled, now to be let bark, name him, as 
Desmoulins does, ‘Maximum of Patriotism’ and 
*Cassandra-Marat:’ but were it not singular if this 
dirk-and-muff plan of his (with superficial modifica- 
tions) proved to be precisely the plan adopted ? 

After this manner, in these circumstances, do august 
Senators regenerate France. Nay, they are, in very 
deed, believed to be regenerating it; on account of 
which great fact, main fact of their history, the 


6 Mémoires de Barbaroux (Paris, 1822), p. 57. 


ff f Book I. 
476 THE FEAST OF PIKES Soe 


wearied eye can never be permitted wholly to ignore 
them. 


But, looking away now from these precincts of the 
Tuileries, where Constitutional Royalty, let Lafayette 
water it as he will, languishes too like a cut branch ; 
and august Senators are perhaps at bottom only per- 
fecting their ‘theory of defective verbs,—how does 
the young Reality, young Sansculottism thrive? 
The attentive observer can answer: It thrives bravely ; 
putting forth new buds; expanding the old buds into 
leaves, into boughs. Is not French Existence, as 
before, most prurient, all Joosened, most nutrient for 
it? Sansculottism has the property of growing by 
what other things die of: by agitation, contention, 
disarrangement ; nay in a word, by what is the symbol 
and fruit of all these: Hunger. 

In such a France as this, Hunger, as we have re- 
marked, can hardly fail. The Provinces, the South- 
ern Cities feel it in their turn; and what it brings: 
Exasperation, preternatural Suspicion. In Paris some 
halcyon days of abundance followed the Menadic In- 
surrection, with its Versailles grain-carts, and recovered 
Restorer of Liberty; but they could not continue. 
The month is still October, when famishing Saint- 
Antoine, in a moment of passion, seizes a poor Baker, 
innocent ‘ Frangois the Baker ;’7 and hangs him, in Con- 
stantinople wise ;—but even this, singular as it may 

T 21st October 1789 (Moniteur, No. 76). 


Chap. II. IN THE SALLE DE MANEGE. AT 
October 21st. 


seem, does not cheapen bread! Too clear it is, no 
Royal bounty, no Municipal dexterity can adequately 
feed a Bastille-destroying Paris. Wherefore, on view 
of the hanged Baker, Constitutionalism in sorrow and 
anger demands ‘ Lot Martiale,’ a kind of Riot Act ;— 
and indeed gets it most readily, almost before the sun 
goes down. 

This is that famed Martial Law, with its Red Flag, 
its ‘ Drapeau Rouge,’ in virtue of which Mayor Bailly, 
or any Mayor, has but henceforth to hang out that new 
Oriflamme of his; then to read or mumble something 
about the King’s peace ; and, after certain pauses, serve 
any undispersing Assemblage with musket-shot, or 
whatever shot will disperse it. A decisive Law; and 
most just on one proviso: that all Patrollotism be of 
God, and all mob-assembling be of the Devil ;—other- 
wise not so just. Mayor Bailly, be unwilling to use it! 
Hang not out that new Oriflamme, flame not of gold 
but of the want of gold! The thrice-blessed Revo- 
lution is done, thou thinkest ? If so, it will be well with 
thee. 

But now let no. mortal say henceforth that an august 
National Assembly wants riot: all it ever wanted was 
riot enough to balance Court-plotting ; all it now wants, 
of Heaven or of Earth, is to get its theory of defective 
verbs perfected. 


CHAPTER III. 
THE MUSTER. 


Wirtn Famine and a Constitutional theory of defec- 
tive verbs going on, all other excitement is conceivable. 
A universal shaking and sifting of French Existence 
this is: in the course of which, for one thing, what a 
multitude of low-lying figures are sifted to the top, and 
set busily to work there ! 

Dogleech Marat, now far-seen as Simon Stylites, we 
already know; him and others, raised aloft. The mere 
sample these of what is coming, of what continues com- 
ing, upwards from the realm of Night !—Chaumette, by 
and by Anaxagoras Chaumette, one already descries: 
mellifluous in street-groups; not now a seaboy on the 
high and giddy mast: a mellifluous tribune of the com- 
mon people, with long curling locks, on bournestone of 
the thoroughfares ; able sub-editor too; who shall rise, 
—to the very gallows. Clerk Tallien, he also is be- 
come sub-editor; shall become able-editor ; and more. 
Bibliopolic Momoro, Typographic Prudhomme see 
new trades opening. Collot d’Herbois, tearing a 
passion to rags, pauses on the Thespian boards; 
listens, with that black bushy head, to the sound 


of the world’s drama: shall the Mimetic become Real ? 
478 


Chap. III. t ER. ik 
oa THE MUSTER A479 


Did ye hiss him, O men of Lyons?’ Better had ye 
clapped ! 

Happy now, indeed, for all manner of mimetic, half- 
original men! Tumid blustering, with more or less of 
sincerity, which need not be entirely sincere, yet the 
sincerer the better, is like to go far. Shall we say, the 
Revolution-element works itself rarer and rarer; so 
that only lighter and lighter bodies will float in it; 
till at last the mere blown-bladder is your only swim- 
mer? Limitation of mind, then vehemence, prompti- 
tude, audacity, shall all be available; to which add 
only these two: cunning and good lungs. Good for- 
tune must be presupposed. Accordingly, of all classes 
the rising one, we observe, is now the Attorney class: 
witness Bazires, Carriers, Fouquier-Tinvilles, Basoche- 
Captain’ Bourdons: more than enough. Such figures 
shall Night, from her wonder-bearing bosom, emit; 
swarm after swarm. Of another deeper and deepest 
swarm, not yet dawned on the astonished eye; of pil- 
fering Candle-snuffers, Thief-valets, disfrocked Capu- 
chins, and so many Heéberts, Henriots, Ronsins, Ros- 
signols, let us, as long as possible, forbear speaking. 

Thus, over France, all stirs that has what the 
Physiologists call irritability in it: how much more all 
wherein irritability has perfected itself into vitality, 
into actual vision, and force that can will! All stirs; 
and if not in Paris, flocks thither. Great and greater 
waxes President Danton in his Cordeliers Section ; 


1 Buzot, Mémoires (Paris, 1823), p. 90. 


480 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
1789-90. 


his rhetorical tropes are all ‘ gigantic:’ energy flashes 
from his black brows, menaces in his athletic figure, 
rolls in the sound of his voice ‘reverberating from 
the domes :’ this man also, like Mirabeau, has a natu- 
ral eye, and begins to see whither Constitutionalism is 
tending, though with a wish in it different from Mira- 
beau’s. 

Remark, on the other hand, how General Dumouriez 
has quitted Normandy and the Cherbourg Breakwater, 
to come—whither we may guess. It is his second or 
even third trial at Paris, since this new Era began ; but 
now it is in right earnest, for he has quitted all else. 
Wiry, elastic, unwearied man; whose life was but a 
battle and a march! No, not a creature of Choiseul’s ; 
“the creature of God and of my sword,’’—he fiercely 
answered in old days. Overfalling Corsican batteries, 
in the deadly fire-hail ; wriggling invincible from under 
his horse, at Closterkamp. of the Netherlands, though 
tethered with ‘crushed stirrup-iron and nineteen 
wounds ;’ tough, minatory, standing at bay, as for- 
lorn hope, on the skirts of Poland; intriguing, battling 
in cabinet and field; roaming far out, obscure, as 
King’s spial, or sitting sealed up, enchanted in Bas- 
tille; fencing, pamphleteering, scheming and strug- 
gling from the very birth of him,?—the man has come 
thus far. How repressed, how irrepressible! Like 
some incarnate spirit in prison, which indeed he was ; 
hewing on granite walls for deliverance ; striking fire- 


2 Dumouriez, Mémoires, i. 28, &e. 


Chap. IIT. 
“chap THE MUSTER. 481 


flashes from them. And now has the general earth- 
quake rent his cavern too? ‘'T'wenty years younger, 
what might he not have done! But his hair has a 
shade of gray ; his way of thought is all fixed, military. 
He can grow no further, and the new world is in such 
growth. We will name him, on the whole, one of Hea- 
ven’s Swiss; without faith ; wanting above all things 
work, work on any side. Work also is appointed. him ; 
and he will do it. 


Not from over France only are the unrestful flock- 
ing towards Paris; but from all sides of Europe. 
Where the carcass is, thither will the eagles gather. 
Think how many a Spanish Guzman, Martinico 
Fournier named ‘Fournier / Américain,’ Engineer 
Miranda from the very Andes, were flocking or had 
flocked. Walloon Pereyra might boast of the strang- 
est parentage: him, they say, Prince Kaunitz the 
Diplomatist heedlessly dropped; like ostrich-egg, to 
be hatched of Chance,—into an ostrich-eater! Jew- 
ish or German Freys do business in the great Cess- 
pool of Agio; which Cesspool this Assegnat-fiat has 
quickened, into a Mother of dead-dogs. Swiss 
Claviére could found no Socinian Genevese Colony 
in Ireland; but he paused, years ago, prophetic, be- 
fore the Minister’s Hotel at Paris; and said, it was 
borne on his mind that he one day was to be Minister, 
and laughed.* Swiss Pache, on the other hand, sits 


3 Dumont, Souvenirs sur Mirabeau, p. 399. 
Vor. I.—s1 


482 THE FEAST OF PIKES. ‘Book I. 
1789-90. 


sleekheaded, frugal; the wonder of his own alley, and 
even of neighboring ones, for humility of mind, 
and a thought deeper than most men’s: sit there, 
Tartuffe, till wanted! Ye Italian Dufournys, Flemish 
Prolys, flit hither all ye bipeds of prey! Come whose- 
soever head is hot; thou of mind wngoverned, be it 
chaos as of undevelopment or chaos as of ruin; the 
man who cannot get known, the man who is too well 
known; if thou have any vendible faculty, nay if 


thou have but edacity and loquacity, come! They 


come; with hot unutterabilities in their heart; as 
Pilgrims towards a miraculous shrine. Nay how 
many come as vacant Strollers, aimless, of whom 
Europe is full, merely towards something! For be- 
nighted fowls, when you beat their bushes, rush to- 
wards any light. Thus Frederick Baron Trenck too 
is here; mazed, purblind, from the cells of Magde- 
burg; Minotauric cells, and his Ariadne lost! Sin- 
gular to say, Trenck, in these years, sells wine; not 
indeed in bottle, but in wood. 

Nor is our England without her missionaries. She 
has her life-saving Needham ;* to whom was solemnly 
presented a ‘civic sword,’—long since rusted into 


* A trustworthy gentleman writes to me, three years ago, with a 
feeling which I cannot but respect, that his Father, ‘the late Ad- 
miral Nesham’ (not Needham, as the French Journalists give it) 
is the Englishman meant; and furthermore that the sword is ‘not 
rusted at all,’ but still lies, with the due memory attached to it, in 


his (the son’s) possession, at Plymouth, in a clear state. _ (Note of ae ie 


1857.) 


- 


_— 


Chap. IIT. ) ; 
fet THE MUSTER 483 


nothingness. Her Paine: rebellious Staymaker ; 
unkempt; who feels that he, a single Needleman, 
did, by his Common-Sense Pamphlet, free America ; 
—that he can and will free all this World; perhaps 
even the other. Price-Stanhope Constitutional Asso- 
ciation sends over to congratulate;® welcomed by 
National Assembly, though they are but a London 
Club; whom Burke and Toryism eye askance. 

On thee too, for country’s sake, O Chevalier John 
Paul, be a word spent, or misspent! In faded naval 
uniform, Paul Jones lingers visible here; like a wine- 
skin from which the wine is all drawn. Like the 
ghost of himself! Low is~his once loud bruit; 
scarcely audible, save, with extreme tedium, in min- 
isterial antechambers, in this or the other charitable 
dining-room, mindful of the past. What changes; 
culminatings and declinings! Not now, poor Paul, 
thou lookest wistful over the Solway brine, by the 
foot of native Criffel, into blue mountainous Cum- 
berland, into blue Infinitude; environed with thrift, 
with humble friéndliness ; thyself, young fool, longing 
to be aloft from it, or even to be away from it. Yes, 
beyond that sapphire Promontory, which men name St. _ 
Bees, which is not sapphire either, but-dull- sandstone, 
when one gets close to it, there is a world. “Which world 
thou too shalt taste of !—From yonder White Haven 
rise his smoke-clouds; ominous though ineffectual. 
Proud Forth quakes at his bellying sails; had not the 

5 Moniteur, 10 Novembre, 7 Decembre, 1789, 


4 iS S. Book I. 
484 THE FEAST OF PIKES oes 


wind suddenly shifted. Flamborough reapers, home- 
going, pause on the hillside: for what sulphur-cloud 
is that that defaces the sleek sea; sulphur-cloud spit- 
ting streaks of fire? A sea cock-fight it is, and of 
the hottest; where British Serapis and French-Amer- 
ican Bon Homme Richard do lash and throttle each 
other, in their fashion; and lo the desperate valor 
has suffocated the deliberate, and Paul Jones too is of 
the Kings of the Sea! 

The Euxine, the Meotian waters felt thee next, and 
long-skirted Turks, O Paul; and thy fiery soul has 
wasted itself in thousand: contradictions ;—to no pur- 
pose. For, in far lands, with scarlet Nassau-Siegens, 
with sinful Imperial Catherines, is not the heart 
broken, even as at home with the mean? Poor Paul! 
hunger and dispiritment track thy sinking footsteps: 
once, or at most twice, in this Revolution-tumult the 
figure of thee emerges; mute, ghostlike, as ‘with 
stars dim-twinkling through.’ And then, when the 
light is gone quite out, a National Legislature grants 
‘ceremonial funeral’! As good had been the natural 
Presbyterian Kirkbell, and six feet of Scottish earth, 
among the dust of thy loved ones.—Such world lay 
beyond the Promontory of St. Bees. Such is the life 
of sinful mankind here below. 


But of all strangers far the notablest for us is Baron 
Jean Baptiste de Clootz;—or, dropping baptisms and 
feudalisms, World-Citizen Anacharsis Clootz, from 


Chap. III. THE MUSTER. A485 
1789-90. 


Cleves. Him mark, judicious Reader. Thou hast 
known his Uncle, sharpsighted, thoroughgoing Cor- 
nelius de Pauw, who mercilessly cuts down cherished 
illusions ; and of the finest antique Spartans will make 
mere modern cutthroat Mainots.° The like stuff is in 
Anacharsis: hot metal; full of scoriz, which should 
and could have been smelted out, but which will not. 
He has wandered over this terraqueous Planet; seek- 
ing, one may say, the Paradise we lost long ago. He 
has seen English Burke; has been seen of the Por- 
tugal Inquisition; has roamed, and fought, and writ- 
ten; is writing, among other things, ‘ Evidences of 
the Mahometan Religion.’ But now, like his Scy- 
thian adoptive godfather, he finds himself in the 
Paris Athens; surely, at last, the haven of his soul. 
A dashing man, beloved at Patriotic dinner-tables ; 
with gayety, nay with humor; headlong, trenchant, 
of free purse; in suitable costume; though what 
mortal ever more despised costumes? Under all cos- 
tumes Anacharsis seeks the man; not Stylites Marat 
will more freely trample costumes, if they hold no 
man. This is the faith of Anacharsis: That there 
is a Paradise discoverable; that all costumes ought to. 
hold men. O Anacharsis, it is a headlong, swiftgoing 
faith. Mounted thereon, meseems, thou art bound 
hastily for the City of Nowhere; and wilt arrive! 

At best, we may say, arrive in good riding attitude ; 
which indeed is something. 


6 De Pauw, Recherches sur les Grecs, &c. 


486 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
\ - 1789-90. 


So many new persons and new things have come to 
occupy this France. Her old Speech and Thought, 
and Activity which springs from these, are all chang- 
ing; fermenting towards unknown issues. To the dull- 
est peasant, as he sits sluggish, overtoiled, by his 
evening hearth, one idea has come: that of Cha- 
teaus burnt; of Chateaus combustible. How altered 
all Coffeehouses, in Province or Capital; The Antre 
de Procope has now other questions than the Three 
Stagyrite Unities to settle; not theatre-controversies, 
but a world-controversy: there, in the ancient pigtail 
mode, or with modern Brutus’ heads, do well-frizzed 
logicians hold hubbub, and Chaos umpire sits. The 
ever-enduring melody of Paris Saloons has got a new 
groundtone: ever-enduring; which has been heard, 
and by the listening Heaven too, since Julian the 
Apostate’s time and earlier; mad now as formerly. 


Ex-Censor Suard, Hx-Censor, for we have freedom 
of the Press; he may be seen there; impartial, even 
neutral. Tyrant Grimm rolls large eyes, over a ques- 
tionable coming Time. Atheist Naigeon, beloved- 
disciple of Diderot, crows, in his small difficult way, 
heralding glad dawn.’ But on the other hand, how 
many Morellets, Marmontels, who had sat all their life 

hatching Philosophe eggs, cackle now, in a state bor- 


7 Naigeon, Adresse a I’ Assemblée Nationale (Paris, 1790), sur la li- 
berté des opinions. 


Chap: III. THE MUSTER. 487 
1789-90. 


dering on distraction, at the brood they have brought 
out!® It was so delightful to have one’s Philosophe 
Theorem demonstrated, crowned in the saloons: and 
now an infatuated people will not continue speculative, 
but have Practice ! 

There also observe Preceptress Genlis, or Sillery, or 
Sillery-Genlis,—for our husband is both Count and 
Marquis, and we have more than one title. Preten- 
tious, frothy ; a puritan yet ¢reedless ; darkening coun- 
sel by words without wisdom! For, it is in that thin 
element of the Sentimentalist and Distinguished-Fe- 
male that Sillery-Genlis works; she would gladly be 
sincere, yet can grow no sincerer than sincere-cant: 
sincere-cant of many forms, ending in the devotional 
form. For the present, on a neck still of moderate 
whiteness, she wears as jewel a miniature Bastille, cut 
on mere sandstone, but then actual Bastille sandstone. 
M. le Marquis is one of D’Orléans’s errandmen ; in 
National Assembly, and elsewhere. Madame, for her 
part, trains up a youthful D’Orléans generation in 
what superfinest morality one can; gives meanwhile 
rather enigmatic account of fair Mademoiselle Pamela, 
the Daughter whom she has adopted. Thus she, in~ 
Palais-Royal Saloon ;—whither, we remark, D’Orléans 
himself, spite of Lafayette, has returned from that Eng- 
lish ‘mission’ of his: surely no pleasant mission: for 
the English would not speak to him; and Saint Han- 


8 See Marmontel, Mémoires, passim; Morellet, Mémoires, &c. 


488 THE FEAST OF PIKES. Book I. 
1789-90. 


nah More of England, so unlike Saint Sillery-Genlis 
of France, saw him shunned, in Vauxhall Gardens, 


like one peststruck,® and his red-blue impassive visage 
waxing hardly a shade bluer. 


9 Hannah More’s Life and Correspondence, ii. c. 5. 


. i J 


END OF VOL. I. 


a 

3 

z 

; a 
uw 

e 

z 

PS 

rs 

o 

& 

° 

J 

> 

< 

o 


DATE DUE 


3 32e2b 000548 3751 | 


|BDC 161 .c3 1892 ee | 
Carlyle, Thomas, 1795-1881. 


| The French revolution 


| DC 161 .C3 1892 v.i 


Carlyle, Thomas, 1795-1881. 


| 
| 


The French revolution 


Friedsam Library and Resource Center 
St. Bonaventure University 


St. Bonaventure, New York 14778 


i . 


