HISf'ORY

OP

FRIEDRICH II. OF PRUSSIA,

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

V.Y

THOMAS CARLY£e.

IN TEN VOLUMES.
VOL. I,

LONDON: HALL,

Limited.

THE SHILLINa EDITION OF

THOMAS CARLYLE’S WORKS

COMPLETE.

SARTOR RESARTUS, 1 Vol. With Portrait of Thomas
Cailyle.

FRENCH REVOLUTION. A History. 3 Vols.

PAST AND PRESENT, 1 Vol.

ON HEROES AND HERO WORSHIP, AND THE
HEROIC IN HISTORY, 1 Vol.

THE LIFE OF SCHILLER, AND EXAMINATION OF
HIS WORKS, 1 Vol.

OLIVER CROxMWELLhS LETTERS AND SPEECHES,
6 Vols. With Portrait of Olucr Ciomwell.

CRITICAL AND MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS, 7 Vols.

WILHELM MEISTER, 3 Vols.

LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS.

LIFE OF JOHN STERLING.

HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE GREAT, 10 Vols.

TRANSLATIONS FROM MUSA^US, TIECK, * AND
RICHTER, 2 Vols.

THE EARLY KINGS OF NORWAY ; Essay on the Poi traits
of Knox.

Reprinted from Stereotype PlateB,

OCTOUER i888.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

BOOK L

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE, 171*.

CHAP. PAGB

T. Proem : Friedrich’s History from the Dist-
ance WE ARE at I

1. Friedrich then, and Friedrich now, p. 4.

2. Eighteenth Century, 7.

3. English Prepossessions, 9.

4. Encouragements, Discouragements, 13.

II. Friedrich’s Birth i8

ni. Father and Mother : the Hanoj^erian Con-
nexion . . . . \ . .20

IV. Father’s Mother .o . . , . • 29

V. King Friedrich 1 38

BOOK 11.

OF BRANDENBURG AND THE HOHENZOLLERNS. 928-14x7

I. B^annibor : Henry the Fowler . -47

II. Preussen ; Saint Adalbert . . *54

HI. Markgraves of Brandenburg . . .. .59

End oi the First Shadowy Line, p. 59.

Second Shadowy Line,

Substantial Markgraves . Gumpae of the Contemporary
Kaisers, 61.

tv.’ Albert the Bear 63

V. Conrad of Hohenzollbrn, and Kaiser Bar-

barossa 68

Conhui has become Buiggraf of Ndmberg (a.d. 1170),
p. 7a.

Of the HohensoUem Burggraves generally, 74.

a

iv CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

ciikp. V «*agb

VI. 'toE Teutsch Ritters, or Teutonic Order . 77

Head of Teutsch Order moves, to Venice, p. 78.

Teutsch Order itself goes to Preussen, 80.

The stuff Teutsch Ritters were made of. Conrad of
Thilringen: Saint Ehzabeth ; Town of Marburg, 84.

VII. Margraviate of Culmbach : Baireuth, An-

SPACH 88

Burggraf Friedrich III., and the Anarchy of Nineteen
Years, p. 90.

Kaiser Rudolf and Burggraf Friedrich III., 94.

VIII. Ascanier Markgraves in Brandenburg . 96

Of Berlin City, p. 96.

Markgraf Otto IV., or Otto with the Arrow, 98.*:

IX. Burggraf Friedrich IV. . . . .100

Contested Elections in the Reich : Kaiser Albert I., after
whom Six Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, p. loi.
mm Of Kaiser Henry VII. and the Luxemburg Kaisers, 103.

Henry’s Son Johann is King of Bohemia; and Ludwig the
Bavarian, with a Contested Election, is Kaiser, 105.

X. Brandenburg lapses to the Kaiser . .109

XI. Bavarian Kurfursts IN Brandenburg . .113

A Resuscitated Ascanier; the False Waldemar, p, 113.
Margar|t with the Pouch-mouth, 115,

XII. Brandenburg in Kaiser Karl’s Time : End o?

the Bavarian Kurfursts . . .118

End of Resuscitated Waldemar ; KurHirst Ludwig sells
out, p. 120.

Second, and then Third and Last, of the Bavarian Kur-
ftirsts in Brandenburg, 122.

XIII. Luxemburg Kurfursts IN Brandenburg . 12^

XIV. Burggraf Friedrich VI 125

Sigismund is Kurflirst of Brandenburg, but is King of
Hungary also, p. 126. «

Cousin Jobst has Brandenburg in Pawn, xa3.

Brandenburg in the hands of the Pawnbrokers ; Rupert
of the Pfalz is Kaiser, 130. '

Sigismund, with a struggle, becomes Kaiser, 132.

Brandenburg is pawned for the last time, 134.

The Seven Intercalary or Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, 137.

BOOK III.

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG, 1^9-1713,

u Kurfurst Friedrich I. . . . .138

u. Matinees du Roi de Prusse .

142

CONTENTS OF VOLUME h

chAP. ^ ^ J P 4 C 1 .

III. Kurfurst Friedrich IF. . . • # • ^47

IV. Kurfurst Albert Achilles, AND HIS SuccElfsoR 153

Johann the Cicero is Fourth Kurfliist, and leaves Two
notable Sons, p. 157.

V. Of THE Baireuth-Anspach Branch . .159

Two Lines in Culnibach or Baireuth-Anspach : the Gera
Bond of 1598, p. 160.

The Elder Line of Culmbach ; Friedrich and his Three
notable Sons there, 162.

Friedrich’s Second Son, Margraf George of Anspach, 164.

VI. Hochmeister Albert, Third notable Son of

•Friedrich 173

VII. Albert Alcibiades 18 1

VIII. Historical Meaning of the Reformation . 186

IX. Kurfurst Joachim 1 190

Of Joachim’s Wife and Brother-in-law, p, 191.

X. Kurfurst Joachim II. . . . . .19s

Joachim gets Co-infeftment in Preiissen, p, 200.

Joachim makes 'Heritage-Brotherhood' with the Duke
of Liegnitz, 201.

XI. Seventh Kurfurst, Johann George^ . .205

XII. Of Albert Friedric^, the Second Duke of

Preussen ...... 208

Of Duke Albert Friedrich’s Marriage: who his Wife
was, and what her possible Dowry, p. 210.

Margraf George FriecMch comes to iVeussen, to ad-
minister, 212.

XIII. Ninth Kurfurst, Johann Sigismumd . . 214

How the Cleve Heritage dropped, and many sprang to
pick it up, p. 215.

The Kaiser’s Thoughts about it, and the World’s, 219.

^iv. Symptoms of a Great War coming . .220

First Symptom ; DonauwOrth, 1608, p. 221.

Second Symptom ; Seizure ot Jtilich by the Kaiser, and
Siege and Recapture of it by the Protestant parties,

1610. Whereupon ‘Catholic League,’ to balance
Evangelical Union, 222.

Symptom Third ; a Dinner-scene at Diisseldorf, 1613 ;
Spaniards and Dutch shoulder-arms in Cleve, 224.

Symptom Fourth, and Catastrophe upon the heels 01 it,

227.

Wlmt became of the Cleve-Jtilich Heritage, and of the
Freussen one, 229.

XV Tenth Kurfurst, George Wilhelm

• -*31

CONTENTS

CHAP,

XVI. Ti^irty-Years War

Second Act, or Epoch, 1624-1629. A secon^l Uncle put
to the Ban, and Pommem snatched a^ay, p. 235.
Third Act, and what the KurfUrst suffered in it, 238.

XVII. Duchy of Jagerndorf . . i-'

Duke of jagerndorf, Electors Uncle; is put under Ban,

p. 241.

xviii. Friedrich Wilhelm, the Great Kurfurst,
Eleventh of the Series
What became of Pommem at the Peace ; final Glance
into Cleve-JUlich, p. 246.

The Great Kurfurst's Wars ; what he achieved in War
and Peace, 247. •

XIX. King Friedrich I. again . . . ,

How Austria settled the Silesian Claims, p. 259.

His real Character, 262.

XX. Death of King Friedrich I

The Twelve Hohenzollem Electors, p. 269.
Genealogical Diagram; the Two Culmbach Lines,
270 a.

F VOLUME I.

BOOK IV.

FRIEDRICH’S APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. i7X3*x7a3

1. Childhood ; Double Educational Element .

First Educational Element, the French one, p. 272.

ii. The German Element

Of the Dessauer, not yet ‘Old,’ p. 278.

III. Friedrich Wilhelm is King ....

IV. His Majesty’s Ways

V. Friedrich Wilhelm’s One War .

The Devil in harness: Creutz the Finance-Minister,
p. 31a.

VI. The Little Drummer

PAoa

*33

241

243

258

264

271

277

283

295

301

314

MAP,

Clbvb*}ulich, Baireutu*Anspach

OF

FR-EDERICK THE GREAT.

BOOK I.

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE. 1712.

CHAPTER I.

PROEM ! FRIEDRICH^S HISTORY IROM THE DISTANCE WE ARE AT.

About fourscore years ago, there used to be seen sauntering
on the terraces of Sans Souci, for a short time in the afternoon,
or you might have met him elsewhere at an earlier hour, riding
or driving in a rapid business manner on the open roads or
through the scraggy woods and avenues of that intricate am-
phibious Pojsdam region, a highly interesting lean little old
man, of alert though slightly stooping figure ; whose name
aiijong strangers was King Friedrich the Second^ or Frederick
the Great of Prussia, and at home among the common people,
who much loved and esteemed him, was Vater Fritz , — Father
Fred, — a name of familiarity which had not bred contempt in
that instance. He is a King every inch of him, though without
the trappings of a King. Presents himself in a Spartan sim-
plicity of vesture ; no crown but an old military cocked-hat, —
generally old, or trampled and kneaded into absolute softness,
ifnew;-^no scftptrebut one like Agamemnon’s, a walking-stick
cut from the woods, which serves also as a riding-stick (with
which he hits the horse ‘between the ears/ say authors); —

VOL. I. a

a BIRTH AN:^ parentage. Boole I.

a^d for ibjal robes, a mere soldier’s blue coat with red facing,
coat likely to be old, and sure to have a good deal of Spanish
snuff on the breast of it ; rest of the apparel dim, unobtrusive
in colour or cut, ending in high over-knee military boots, which
may be brushed (and, I hope, kept soft with an underhand sus-
picion of oil), but are not permitted to be blackened or var-
nished; Day and Martin with their soot-pots forbidden to
approach.

The man is not of godlike physiognomy, any more than of
imposing stature or costume : close-shut mouth with thin lips,
prominent jaws and nose, receding brow, by no means of Olym-
pian height ; head, however, is of long form, and has superla-
tive gray eyes in it. Not what is called a beautiful man ; nor
yet, by all appearance, what is called a happy. On the con-
trary, the face bears evidence of many sorrows, as they are
termed, of much hard labour done in this world ; and seems
to anticipate nothing but more still coming. Quiet stoicism,
capable enough of what Joy there were, but not expecting any
worth mention ; great unconscious and some conscious pride,
well tempered futh a cheery mockery of humour, — are written
on that old face ; which carries its chin well forward, in spite
of the slight stoop about the neck ; snuffy nose rather flung
into the air, under its old cocked-hat, — like an old snuffy lion
on the watch ; and sifch a pair of eyes as no man or lion or
lynx of that Century bore elsewhere, according to all the tes-
timony we have. ‘Those eyes,’ says Mirabeau, ‘which, at the

* bidding of his great soul, fascinated you with seduction or
‘ with terror (^poriaient, au grd de son dme hdroique^ lasiduction

* ou la terrem).'^ Most excellent potent brilliant eyes, swift-
darting as the stars, stedfast as the sun ; gray, we said, of the
azure -gray colour; large enough, not of glaring size; the har
bitual expression of them vigilance and penetrating sense, ra-
pidityresting on depth. Which is an excellent combination ; and
gives us the notion of a lambent outer radiance springing from
some great inner sea of light and fire in the man. The voice,
if he speak to you, is of similar physiognomy : clear, melodious
and sonorous ; all tones are in it, from that of ingenuous in-
quiry, graceful sociality, light-flowing banter (rather prickly for
most part), up to definite word of command, up to desolating

* Mirabeau, Histoire Secrite de la Cour de Berlin, Lettre 88">« (24 Septeaxbre
i7S€),p. xaS (in edition of Fans, i8ax).

Chap. I. PROEM: FROM '^IS DISTANCE. 3

word of rebuke and reprobation ; a voice * the cleared ^nd most
‘ agreeable in conversation I ever heard/ says witty Dr. Moore.*
‘ He speaks a great deal/ continues the doctor ; * yet those who

* hear him, regret that he does not speak a good deal more.

* His observations are always lively, very often just; and few

* men possess the talent of repartee in greater perfection.*

Just about threescore and ten years ago,* his speakings and
his workings came to finis in this World of Time; and he van-
ished from all eyes into other worlds, leaving much inquiry
about him in the minds of men; — which, as my readers and
I may feel ^o well, is yet by no means satisfied. As to his
speech, indeed, though it had the worth just ascribed to it and
more, and though masses of it were deliberately put on paper
by himself, in prose and verse, and continue to be printed and
kept legible, what he spoke has pretty much vanished into the
inane ; and except as record or document of what he did, hardly
now concerns mankind. But the things he did were extremely
remarkable ; and cannot be forgotten by mankind. Indeed,
they bear such fruit to the present hour as all the Newspapers
are obliged to be taking note of, sometimes ti an unpleasant
degree. Editors vaguely account this man the ‘ Creator of the
Prussian Monarchy;’ which hns since grown so large in the
world, and troublesome to the Editorial mind in this and other
countries. He was indeed the first who, in a highly public
manner, notified its creation ; announced to all men that it
was, in very deed, created; standing on its feet there, and
would go a great way, on the impulse it had got from him and
others. As it has accordingly done ; and may still keep doing
to lengths little dreamt of by the British Editor in our time ;
whose prophesyings upon Prussia, and insights into Prussia, in
it»past, or present or future, are truly as yet inconsiderable,
in proportion to the noise he makes with them ! The more is
the pity for him, — and for myself too in the Enterprise now on
hand.

It is of this Figure, whom we see by the mind’s eye in
those Potsdam regions, visible for the last time seventy years
ago, that we ar^ now to treat, in the way of solacing ingenuous

* Moore, of Society and Manners in France^ Switzerland and Germany

ILondon, 1779), 246.

* A.D. 1856,— 17th August 1786.

4 BIRTH AND^ PARENTAGE. Bookl.

htiman Airiosity. We are to try for some Historical Conception
of this Man and King ; some answer to the questions, What
was he, then? Whence, how? And what did he achieve and
suffer in the world?” — such answer as may prove admissible
to ingenuous mankind, especially such as may correspond to
the Fact (which stands there, abstruse indeed, but actual and
unalterable), and so be sure of admissibility one day.

An Enterprise which turns out to be, the longer one looks
at it, the more of a formidable, not to say unmanageable nature !
Concerning which, on one or two points, it were good, if con-
veniently possible, to come to some preliminary understanding
with the reader. Here, flying on loose leaves, are certain in-
cidental utterances, of various date : these, as the topic is
difficult, I will merely label and insert, instead of a formal Dis-
course, which were too apt to slide into something of a Lamen-
tation, or otherwise take an unpleasant turn.

I. Friedrich then^ and Friedrich now.

This was a|man of infinite mark to his contemporaries;
who had witnessed surprising feats from him in the world ; very
questionable notions and ways, which he had contrived to main-
tain against the world and its criticisms. As an original man
has always to do ; much more an original ruler of men. The
world, in fact, had tried hard to put him down, as it does, un-
consciously or consciously, with all such ; and after the most
conscious exertions, and at one time a dead-lift spasm of all its
energies for Seven Years, had not been able. Principalities
and powers. Imperial, Royal, Czarish, Papal, enemies innu-
merable as the sea-sand, had risen against him, only one helper
left among the world’s Potentates (and that one only while thJjre
should be help rendered in return) ; and he led them all such
^a dance as had astonished mankind and them.

No wonder they thought him worthy of notice. Every ori-
ginal man of any magnitude is; — ^nay, in the longrun, who or
what else is ? But how much more if your original man was a
king over men ; whose movements were polar, and carried from
day to day those of the world along with them. The Samson
Agonistes, — ^were his life passed like that of Samuel Johnson
in dirty garrets, and the produce of it only some bits of written
pjtper, — the Agonistes, and how he will comport himself in the

Cliap. I.

PROEM !

NOW.AND THEN.

Philistine mill; this is always a spectacle of truly cpivand tra-
gic nature. The rather, if your Samson, royal or other, is not
yet blinded or subdued to the wheel ; much more if iK'Vanquish
his enemies, not by suicidal methods, but march out at last
flourishing his miraculous fighting implement, and leaving theit
mill and them in quite ruinous circumstances. As this King
Friedrich fairly managed to do.

For he left the world all bankrupt, we may say ; fallen into
botto||less abysses of destruction; he still in a paying condi-
tion, and with footing capable to carry his affairs and him.
When he died, in 1786, the enormous Phenomenon since called
French Revolution was already growling audibly in the
depths of the world; meteoric-electric coruscations heralding
it, all round the horizon. Strange enough to note, one of Fried-
rich’s last visitors was Gabriel Honord Riquetti, Comte dc Mi-
rabeau. These two saw one another; twice, for half an hour
each time. The last of the old Gods and the first of the modern
Titans; — before Pelion leapt on Ossa; and the foul Earth tak-
ing fire at last, its vile mephitic elements went up in volcanic
thunder. This also is one of the peculiarities |)f Friedrich, that
he is hitherto the last of the Kings ; that he ushers-in the French
Revolution, and closes an Epjch of World-History. Finishing-
off forever the trade of King, think many ; who have grown
profoundly dark as to Kingship and him.

The French Revolution maybe said to have, for about half
a century, quite submerged Friedrich, abolished him from the
memories of men ; and now on coming to light again, he is
found defaced under strange mud-incrustations, and the eyes
of mankind look at him from a singularly changed, what we
«iust call oblique and perverse point of vision. This is one of
the difficulties in dealing with his History ; — especially if you
happen to believe both in the French Revolution and in him;
that is to say, both that Real Kingship is eternally indispens-
able, and also that the destruction of Sham Kingship (a fright-
ful process) is occasionally so.

On the breaking-out of that formidable Explosion, and
Suicide of his Century, Friedrich sank into comparative ob-
scurity ; eclipsed amid the ruins of that universal earthquake,
the very dust of which darkened all the air, and made of day
a disastrous midnight. Black midnight, broken only by the

6 BIRTH ANI| PARENTAGE. Booki.

blaze ^f%onflagrations ; — wherein, to our terrified imaginations,
were 'seen, not men, French and other, but ghastly portents,
stalking wrathful, and shapes of avenging gods. It must be
owned the figure of Napoleon was titanic; especially to the
generation that looked on him, and that waited shuddering to
be devoured by him. ih general, in that French Revolution,
all was on a huge scale ; if not greater than anything in human
experience, at least more grandiose. All was recorded in bul-
letins, too, addressed to the shilling-gallery ; and there were
fellows on the stage with such a breadth of sabre, extent of
whiskerage, strength of windpipe, and command •of men and
gunpowder, as had never been seen before. How they bellowed,
stalked and flourished about; counterfeiting Jove’s thunder to
an amazing degree 1 Terrific Drawcansir figures, of enormous
whiskerage, unlimited command of gunpowder; not without
sufficient ferocity, and even a certain heroism, stage-heroism,
in them ; compared with whom, to the shilling-gallery, and
frightened excited theatre at large, it seemed as if there had
been no generals or sovereigns before; as if Friedrich, Gus-
tavus, Cromwell|, William Conqueror and Alexander the Great
were not worth speaking of henceforth.

All this, however, in half a century is considerably altered.
The Drawcansir equipments getting gradually torn off, the
natural size is seen better; translated from the bulletin style
into that of fact and history, miracles, even to the shilling-
gallery, are not so miraculous. It begins to be apparent that
there lived great men before the era of bulletins and Agamem-
non. Austerhtz and Wagram shot away more gunpowder, —
gunpowder probably in the proportion of ten to one, or a hun-
dred to one ; but neither of them was tenth-part such a beating
to your enemy as that of Rossbach, brought about by strategic
art, human ingenuity and intrepidity, and the loss of 165 men.
Leuthen, too, the battle of L euthen (though so few English
readers ever heard of it) may very well hold up its head beside
any victory gained by Napoleon or another. For the odds were
not far from three to one ; the soldiers were of not far from
equal quality ; and only the General was consummately supe-
rior, and the defeat a destruction. Napoleon did indeed, by
immense expenditure of men and gunpowder, overrun Europe
for a time : but Napoleon never, by husbanding and wisely ex-
pending his men and gunpowder, defended a little Prussia

Chap. I. PROEM ; EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. 7

against all Europe, year after year for seven years ling, till
Europe had enough, and gave-up the enterprise as one it could
not manage. So soon as the Drawcansir equipments are well
tom off, and the shilling-gallery got to silence, it will be found
that there were great kings before Napoleon, — and likewise an
Art of War, grounded on veracity and human courage and in-
sight, not upon Drawcansir rodomontade, grandiose Dick-Tur-
pinism, revolutionary madness, and unlimited expenditure of
men and gunpowder. ‘ You may paint with a very big brush,
and yet not be a great painter,* says a satirical friend of mine!
This is becoming more and more apparent, as the dust-whirl-
wind, and huge uproar of the last generation, gradually dies
away again.

2. Eighteenth Century.

One of the grand difficulties in a History of Friedrich is,
all along, this same, That he lived in a Century which has no
History and can have little or none. A Century so opulent in
accumulated falsities, — sad opulence descending on it by in-
heritance, always at compound interest, and always largely
increased by fresh acquirement on such immensity of standing
capital ; — opulent in that bad way as never Century before
was ! Which had no longer the consciousness of being false,
so false had it grown ; and was so steeped in falsity, and im-
pregnated with it to the very bone, that — in fact the measure
of the thing was full, and a French Revolution had to end it.
To maintain much veracity in such an clement, especially for
a king, wa^ no doubt doubly remarkable. But now, how ex-
tricate the man from his Century? How show the man, who
is^a Reality worthy of being seen, and yet keep his Century,
as a Hypocrisy worthy of being hidden and forgotten, in the
due abeyance ?

To resuscitate the Eighteenth Century, or call into men’s
view, beyond what is necessary, the poor and sordid person-
ages and transactions of an epoch so related to us; can be no
purpose of mine on this occasion. The Eighteenth Century,
it is well known, does not figure to me as a lovely one ; need-
ing to be kept in mind, or spoken of unnecessarily. To me
the Eighteenth Century has nothing grand in it, except that
grand universal Suicide, named French Revolution, by which

8

Book!.

BIRTH ANE^ PARENTAGE.

it leitn^ated its otherwise most worthless existence with at
least one worthy act ; — setting fire to its old home and self ;
and going up in flames and volcanic explosions, in a truly me-
morable and important manner. A very fit termination, as I
thankfully feel, for such a Century. Century spendthrift, fraudu-
lent-bankrupt ; gone at length utterly insolvent, without real
money of performance in its pocket, and the shops declining
to take hypocrisies and speciosities any farther ; — ^what could
the poor Century do, but at length admit, “Well, it is so. I
am a swindler-century, and have long been ; having learned the^
trick of it from my father and grandfather ; knowiilfe hardly any*
trade but that in false bills, which I thought foolishly might
last forever, and still bring at least beef and pudding to the
favoured of mankind. And behold it ends ; and I am a de-
tected swindler, and have nothing even to eat. What remains
but that I blow my brains out, and do at length one true ac-
tion ?” Which the poor Century did ; many thanks to it, in
the circumstances.

For there was need once more of a Divine Revelation to
the torpid frivolous children of men, if they were not to sink
altogether into the ape condition. And in that whirlwind of
the 13 niverse, — lights obliterated, and the torn wrecks of Earth
and Hell hurled aloft into the Empyrean; black whirlwind,
which made even apes serious, and drove most of them mad,
— there was, to men, a voice audible ; voice from the heart of
things once more, as if to say: “Lying is not permitted in this
Universe. The wages of lying, you behold, are death. Lying
means damnation in this Universe; and Beelzebub, never so
elaborately decked in crowns and mitres, is 7wt God I This
was a revelation truly to be named of the Eternal, in our poor
Eighteenth Century ; and has greatly altered the complexion of
said Century to the Historian ever since.

Whereby, in short, that Century is quite confiscate, fallen
bankrupt, given up to the auctioneers; — ^Jew-brokers sorting
out of it at this moment, in a confused distressing manner,
what is still valuable or saleable. And, in fact, it lies massed
up in our minds as a disastrous wrecked inanity, not useful to
dwell upon ; a kind of dusky chaotic background, on which
the figures that had some veracity in them, — a small com-
pany, and ever growing smaller as our demands rise in strict-
ness, — are delineated for us. — “And yet it is the Century

9

Chap. I. PROEM: ENGLISH PREPOSSESSIONS.

of our own Grandfathers ?** cries the reader. Yes, ftader I
truly. It is the ground out of which we ourselves have sprung;
whereon now we have our immediate footing, and first of all
strike down our roots for nourishment ; — and, alas, in large
sections of the practical world, it (what we specially mean by
ti) still continues flourishing all round us! To forget it quite
is not yet possible, nor would be profitable. What to do with
it, and its forgotten fooleries and ‘ Histories,’ worthy only of
forgetting ? — Well ; so much of it as by nature adheres; what
of it cannot be disengaged from our Hero and his operations ;
approximate!^ so much, and no morel Let that be our bar-
gain in regard to it.

3 . English Prepossessions,

With such wagonloads of Books and Printed Records as
exist on the subject of Friedrich, it has always seemed possi-
ble, even for a stranger, to acquire some real understanding of
him; — ^though practically, here and now, I have to own, it
proves difficult beyond conception. Alas, theJBooks are not
cosmic, they arc chaotic ; and turn out unexpectedly void of
instruction to us. Small use ii^ a talent of writing, if there be
not first of all the talent of discerning, of loyally recognising;
of discriminating what is to be written ! Books born mostly of
Chaos, — which want all things, even Index, — are a painful
object. In sorrow and disgust, you wander over those multi-
tudinous Books : you dwell in endless regions of the superficial,
of the nugatory ; to your bewildered sense it is as if no insight
into the real4ieart of Friedrich and his affairs were anywhere
to be had. Truth is, the Prussian Dryasdust, otherwise an
honest fellow, and not afraid of labour, excels all other Dryas-
dusts yet known ; I have often sorrowfully felt as if there were
not in Nature, for darkness, dreariness, immethodic platitude,
anything comparable to him. He writes big Books wanting in
almost every quality ; and does not even give an Index to them.
He has made of Friedrich’s History a wide-spread, inorganic,
trackless matter ; dismal to your mind, and barren as a con-
tinent of Brandenburg sand ! — Enough, he could do no other ;
I have striven to forgive him. Let the reader now forgive me ;
and think sometimes what probably my raw-material was ! —

Curious enough, Friedrich lived in the Writing Era, — morn-

lo BIRTH AND PARENTAGE. BoolcL

ing of tflat strange Era which has grown to such a noon for us ;
— and his favourite society, all his reign, was with the literary
or writing sort. Nor have they failed to write about him, they
among the others, about him and about him ; and it is notable
how little real light, on any point of his existence or environ-
ment, they have managed to communicate. Dim indeed, for
most part a mere epigrammatic sputter of darkness visible, is
the ‘picture’ they have fashioned to themselves of Friedrich
and his Country and his Century. Men not ‘of genius,’ appa-
rently? Alas, no; men fatally destitute of true eyesight, and
of loyal heart first of all. So far as I have noticed, there was
not, with the single exception of Mirabeau for one hour, any
man to be called of genius, or with an adequate power of hu-
man discernment, that ever personally looked on Friedrich.
Had many such men looked successively on his History and
him, we had not found it now in such a condition. Still alto-
gether chaotic as a History ; fatally destitute even of the Indexes
and mechanical appliances: Friedrich’s self, and his Country,
and his Century, still undeciphered ; very dark phenomena, all
three, to the intelligent part of mankind.

In Prussia there has long l^en a certain stubborn though
planless diligence in digging for the outward details of Fried-
rich’s Life-History; though as to organising them, assorting
them, or even putting labels on them ; much more as to the
least interpretation or human delineation of the man and his
affairs, — you need not inquire in Prussia, In France, in Eng-
land, it is still worse. There an immense ignorance prevails
even as to the outward facts and phenomena of Friedrich’s life ;
and instead of iht Prussian no-interpretation, you find, in these
vacant circumstances, a great promptitude to interpret. Whereby
judgments and prepossessions exist among us on that subject,
especially on Friedrich’s character, which are very ignorant in-
deed.

To Englishmen, the sources of knowledge or conviction
about Friedrich, I have observed, are mainly these two. First,
for his Public Character ; it was an all-important fact, not to
it, but to this country in regard to it. That Geprge II., seeing
good to plunge head-foremost into German Politics, and to take
Maria Theresa’s side in theAustrian-Succession Warof 1 740-48,
— needed to begin by assuring his Parliament and Newspapers,

Chap. I. PROEM : ENGLISH PREPOSSESSIONS. ii

profoundly dark on the matter, that Friedrich was a robfler and
villain for taking the other side. Which assurance, resting on
what basis we shall see by and by, George’s Parliament and
Newspapers cheerfully accepted, nothing doubting. And they
have reechoed and reverberated it, they and the rest of us, ever
since, to all lengths, down to the present day ; as a fact quite
agreed upon, and the preliminary item in Friedrich’s charac-
ter. Robber and villain to begin with ; that was one settled
point.

Afterwards when George and Friedrich came to be allies,
and the grand fightings of the Seven-Years War took place,
George’s Parliament and Newspapers settled a second point, in
regard to Friedrich: **One of the greatest soldiers ever born.”
This second item the British Writer fully admits ever since :
but he still adds to it the quality of robber, in a loose way ; —
and images to himself a royal Dick Turpin, of the kind known
in Review-Articles, and Disquisitions on Progress of the Spe-
cies, and labels it Frederick; very anxious to collect new bab-
blement of lying Anecdotes, false Criticisms, hungry French
Memoirs, which will confirm him in that impossible idea. Had
such proved, on survey, to be the character of Friedrich, there
is one British Writer whose cpriosity concerning him would
pretty soon have died away ; nor could any amount of unwise
desire to satisfy that feeling in fellow-creatures less seriously
disposed have sustained him alive, in those baleful Historic
Acherons and Stygian Fens, where he has had to dig and to
fish so long, far away from the upper light ! — Let me request
all readers to blow that sorry chaff entirely out of their minds ;
and to believe nothing on the subject except what they get some
evidence for.

m Second English source relates to the Private Character.
Friedrich’s Biography or Private Character, the English, like
the French, have gathered chiefly from a scandalous libel by
Voltaire, which used to be called Vie Privde du Roi de Prusse
(Private Life of the King of Prussia) libel undoubtedly writ-
ten by Voltaire, in a kind of fury ; but not intended to be pub-
lished by him ; nay burnt and annihilated, as he afterwards

* First printed, fwin a stolen copy, at Geneva, 1784 ; first proved to be Voltaire’s
(which some of his aamirers had striven to doubt), Paris, 1788 , stands avowed ever
since, in all the Editions of his Works (ii. 9-113 of the Edition by Baudouin Freres,
97 vols., Paris, 1825-1834), under the title Mimoires pour sorvtrd la Vie de M. de
V o/taire. — ^with patches of repetition in the thing called Commentaire Ilhtarigne,
which follows il>ui. at great length.

12 BIRTH AN® PARENTAGE. Bookl.

imagirild. No line of which, that cannot be otherwise proved,
has a right to be believed ; and large portions of which can be
proved to be wild exaggerations and perversions, or even down-
right lies, — written in a mood analogous to the Frenzy of John
Dennis. This serves for the Biography or Private Character
of Friedrich ; imputing all crimes to him, natural and unna-
tural ; — offering indeed, if combined with facts otherwise known,
or even if well considered by itself, a thoroughly flimsy, incred-
ible and impossible image. Like that of some flaming Devil’s
Head, done in phosphorus on the walls of the black-hole, by an
Artist whom you had locked-up there (not quite without reason)
overnight.

Poor Voltaire wrote that Vie Privh in a state little inferior
to the Frenzy of John Dennis, — how brought about we shall
see by and by. And this is the Document which English read-
ers are surest to have read, and tried to credit as far as pos-
sible. Our counsel is. Out of window with it, he that would
know Friedrich of Prussia ! Keep it awhile, he that would
know Francois Arouet de Voltaire, and a certain numerous un-
fortunate clas% of mortals, whom Voltaire is sometimes capable
of sinking to be spokesman for, in this world ! — Alas, go where
you will, especially in these irreverent ages, the noteworthy
Dead is sure to be found lying under infinite dung, no end of
calumnies and stupidities accumulated upon him. For the class
we speak of, class of ‘ flunkies doing saturnalia below stairs,’
is numerous, is innumerable ; and can well remunerate a * vocal .
flunky’ that will serve their purposes on such an occasion ! —

Friedrich is by no means one of the perfect demigods; and
there are various things to be said against him with good ground.
To the last, a questionable hero ; with much in him whichione
could have wished not there, and much wanting which one
could have wished. But there is one feature which strikes you
at an early period of the inquiry. That in his way he is a Real-
ity ; that he always means what he speaks ; grounds his ac-
tions, too, on what he recognises for the truth ; and, in short,
has nothing whatever of the Hypocrite or Phantasm. Which
some readers will admit to be an extremely rare phenomenon.

We perceive that this man was far indeed from trying to
deal swindler-like with the facts around him ; that he honestly
recognised said facts wherever they disclosed themselves, and

GbAp. I.

PROEM: ENCOURAGEMENTS.

*3

was very anxious also to ascertain their existence where still
hidden or dubious. Ppr he knew well, to a quite uncommon
degree, and with a merit all the higher as it was an unconscious
one, how entirely inexorable is the nature of facts, whether re-
cognised or not, ascertained or not ; how vain all cunning of
diplomacy, management and sophistry, to save any mortal who
does ui?/ stand on the truth of things, from sinking, in the long-
run, Sinking to the very Mudgods, with all his diplomacies,
possessions, achievements ; and becoming an unnameable ob •
ject, hidden deep in the Cesspools of the Universe. This 1 iiopa
to make manifest ; this which I long ago discerned for myself,
with pleasure, in the physiognomy of Friedrich and liis life.
Which indeed was the first real sanction, and has all along been
my inducement and encouragement, to study his life and him.
How this man, officially a King withal, comported himself in
the Eighteenth Century, and managed ^6?/ to be a Liai and
Charlatan as his Century was, deserves to be seen a little by
men and kings, and may silently have didactic meanings in it.

' He that was honest with his existence has always meaning
for us, be he king or peasant. He that merely^shammed and
grimaced with it, however much, and with whatever noise and
trumpet-blowing, he may have cooked and eaten in this world,
cannot long have any. Some men do enormously (let us
call it cooking, what a man does in obedience to his hunger
merely, to his desires and passions merely), — roasting whole
continents and populations, in the flames of war or other dis-
cord ; — witness the Napoleon above spoken of. For the appe-
tite of man in that respect is unlimited ; in truth, infinite ; and
the smallest ^f us could eat the entire Solar System, had we the
chance given, and then cry, like Alexander of Macedon, because
we»had no more Solar Systems to cook and eat. It is not the
extent of the man’s cookery that can much attach me to him ,*
but only the man himself, and what of strength he had to
wrestle with the mud-elements, and what of victory he got for
his own benefit and mine.

4. Encouragements^ Discouragements.

French Resolution having spent itself, or sunk in France
and elsewhere to what we see, a certain curiosity reawakens as
to what of great or manful we can discover on the other side

14

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE.

Book I.

of that%till troublefd atmosphere of the Present and immediate
Past, Curiosity quickened, or which should be quickened, by
the great and all-absorbing question, How is that same exploded
Past ever to settle down again ? Not lost forever, it would ap-
pear : the New Era has not annihilated the old eras : New Era
could by no means manage that ; — never meant that, had it
known its own mind (which it did not) : its meaning was and

is, to get its own well out of them ; to readapt, in a purified
shape, the old eras, and appropriate whatever was true and nof
combustible in them : that was the poor New Era’s meaning,
in the frightful explosion it made of itself and it» possessions,
to begin with !

And the question of questions now is ; What part of that
exploded Past, the ruins and dust of which still darken all the
air, will continually gravitate back to us ; be reshaped, trans-
formed, readapted, that so, in new figures, under new condi-
tions, it may enrich and nourish us again ? What part of it,
not being incombustible, has actually gone to flame and gas in
the huge world -conflagration, and is now gaseous^ mounting
aloft ; and will^know no beneficence of gravitation, but mount,
and roam upon the waste winds forever, — Nature so ordering

it, in spite of any industry of Aft ? This is the universal ques-
tion of afflicted mankind at present ; and sure enough it will
be long to settle.

On one point we can answer : Only what of the Past was
true will come back to us. That is the one asbestos which sur-
vives all fire, and comes out purified ; that is still ours, blessed
be Heaven, and only that. By the law of Nature, nothing more
than that ; and also, by the same law, nothing less than that.
Let Art struggle how it may, for or against, — as foolish Art is
seen extensively doing in our time, — there is where the limits
of it will be. In which point of view, may not Friedrich, if he
was a true man and King, justly excite some curiosity again ;
nay some quite peculiar curiosity, as the last Crowned Reality
there was antecedent to that general outbreak and abolition ?
To many it appears certain there are to be no Kings of any
sort, no Government more ; less and less need of them hence-
forth, New Era having come. Which is a very wonderful no-
tion ; important if true ; perhaps still more imjjortant, just at
present, if untrue I My hopes of presenting, in this Last of the
Kings, an exemplar to my contemporaries, I confess, are not high.

C?uip. I.

PROEM: DISCOURAGEMENTS.

IS

On the whole, it is evident the difficulties to a History of
Friedrich are great and many : and the sad certainty is at last
forced upon me that no good Book can, at this time, especially in
this country, be written on the subject. Wherefore let the reader
put up with an indifferent or bad one ; he little knows how much
worse it could easily have been ! — Alas, the Ideal of History,
as my friend Sauerteig knows, is very high ; and it is not one
serious man, but many successions of such, and whole serious
generations of such, that can ever again build up History to-
wards its old dignity. We must renounce ideals. We must
sadly take up^with the mournfulest barren realities ; — dismal
continents of Brandenburg sand, as in this instance ; mere tum-
bled mountains of marine-stores, without so much as an Index
to them !

Has the reader heard of Sauerteig’s last batch of Spring-
wurzeln^ a rather curious valedictory Piece ? * All History is

an imprisoned Epic, nay an imprisoned Psalm and Prophecy,’
says Sauerteig there. I wish, from my soul, he had ^/>impri-
soned it in this instance ! But he only says, in magniloquent
language, how grand it would be if disimprisoned ; — and hurls
out, accidentally striking on this subject, the following rough
sentences, suggestive though unpractical, with which I shall
conclude :

* Schiller, it appears, at one time thought of writing an Epic

* Poem upon Friedrich the Greats “upon some action ofFried-
‘ rich's,” Schiller says. Happily Schiller did not do it. By

* oversetting fact, disregarding reality, and tumbling time and
‘ space topsyturvy, Schiller with his fine gifts might no doubt

* have writtep a temporary “ epic poem,” of the kind read and

* admired by many simple persons. But that would have helped

* little, and could not have lasted long. It is not the untrue
‘ imaginary Picture of a man and his life that I want from my
' Schiller, but the actual natural Likeness, true as the face it-
‘ self, nay truer^ in a sense. Which the Artist, if there is one,

* might help to give, and the Botcher (P/uscher) never can !

* Alas, and the Artist does not even try it ; leaves it altogether
‘ to the Botcher, being busy otherwise ! —

‘ Men surely will at length discover again, emerging from
' these dismal bewilderments in which the modern Ages reel

* and stagger this long while, that to them also, as to the most

* ancient men, all Pictures that cannot be credited are — Pic-

Boole I.

16 BIRTH AI^ PARENTAGE.

‘ ture$%Df an idle nature ; to be mostly swept out of doors. Such

* veritably, were it never so forgotten, is the law ! Mistakes

* enough, liefs enough will insinuate themselves into our most

* earnest portrayings of the True : but that we should, deliber-
‘ ately and of forethought, rake together what we know to be

* not true, and introduce that in the hope of doing good with

* it ? I tell you, such practice was unknown in the ancient ear-
‘ nest times ; and ought again to become unknown except to
‘ the more foolish classes !* That is Sauerteig’s strange notion,
not now of yesterday, as readers know : — and he goes then into
‘ Homer’s Iliad,’ the ‘ Hebrew Bible,’ ‘terrible Hebrew veradfy
of every line of it;’ discovers an alarming ‘kinship of Fiction
to lying ;* and asks, If anybody can compute ‘ the damage we
‘ poor moderns have got from our practices of fiction in Lite-

* rature itself, not to speak of awfully higher provinces ? Men
‘will either see into all this by and by,’ continues he; ‘or

* plunge head foremost, in neglect of all this, whither they little

* dream as yet I —

‘ But I think all real Poeis, to this hour, are Psalmists and
‘ Iliadists after their sort ; and have in them a divine impa-
‘ tience of liesf a divine incapacity of living among lies. Like-
‘ wise, which is a corollary, that the highest Shakspeare pro-
‘ ducible is properly the fittest Historian producible; — and
‘ that it is frightful to see the Gelehrte Dummkopf' (what we
here may translate, Dryasdust) ‘ doing the function of History,

‘ and the Shakspeare and the Goethe neglecting it. “ Inter-
‘ preting events interpreting the universally visible, entirely
‘ fwdubitable Revelation of the Author of this Universe : how
‘ can Dryasdust interpret such things, the dark chaotic dullard,

‘ who knows the meaning of nothing cosmic or noble, nor ever
‘ will know ? Poor wretch, one sees what kind of meaning he
‘ educes from Man’s History, this long while past, and has got
‘ all the world to believe of it along with him. Unhappy Dryas-
‘ dust, thrice-unhappy world that takes Dryasdust’s reading of
‘ the ways of God ! But what else was possible ? They that
‘ could have taught better were engaged in fiddling ; for which
‘ there are good wages going. And our damage therefrom, our
‘ damage t — yes, if thou be still human and not cormorant, —
‘ perhaps it will transcend all Californias, English National
‘ Debts, and show itself incomputable in continents ofi Bui*

* lion ! —

Chap. I. PROEM: ENCOURAGEMENTS. 17

* Believing that mankind are not doomed wholly to rfog-like

* annihilation, I believe that much of this will mend. I be-
‘ lieve that the world will not always waste its inspirtd men in
‘ mere fiddling to it. That the man of rhythmic nature will
‘ feel more and more his vocation towards the Interpretation of
‘ Fact ; since only in the vital centre of that, could we once get
‘ thither, lies all real melody ; and that he will become, he, once

* again the Historian of Events, — ^bewildered Dryasdust hav-

* ing at last the happiness to be his servant, and to have some
‘ guidance from him. Which will be blessed indeed. For the

* present, Dr)Kisdust strikes me like a hapless Nigger gone mas*
‘ terless : Nigger totally unfit for self-guidance ; yet without
‘ master good or bad ; and whose feats in that capacity no god

* or man can rejoice in.

* History, with faithful Genius at the top and faithful Indus-

* try at the bottom, will then be capable of being written. His-
‘ tory will then actually be written, — the inspired gift of God

* employing itself to illuminate the dark ways of God. A thing

* thrice-pressingly needful to be done ! Whereby the modern
‘ Nations may again become a little less godless^and again have
‘ their "epics” (of a different from the Schiller sort), and again
‘ have several things they are §till more fatally in want of at

* present !’ —

So that, it would seem, there will gradually among man-
kind, if Friedrich last some centuries, be a real Epic made of
his History? That is to say (presumably), it will become a
perfected Melodious Truth, and duly significant and duly beau-
tiful bit of Belief, to mankind ,* the essence of it fairly evolved
from all the chaff, the portrait of it actually given, and its real
harpionies with the laws of this Universe brought out, in bright
and dark, according to the God’s Fact as it was; which poor
Dryasdust and the Newspapers never could get sight of, but
were always far from ! —

Well, if so, — and even if not quite so ^ — it is a comfort to
reflect that every true worker (who has blown away chaff &c.),
were his contribution no bigger than my own, may have brought
the good result nearer by a handbreadth or two. And so we
will end these pftludings, and proceed upon our Problem, cour-
teous reader.

VOL. !.

c

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE,

BookL

l8

CHAPTER II.

Friedrich’s birth.

Friedrich of Brandenburg-Hohenzollern,w1io came by
course of natural succession to be Friedrich II. of Prussia, and
is known in these ages as Frederick the Great, was born in the
palace of Berlin, about noon, on the 24th of January 1712.
A small infant, but of great promise or possibility ; and thrice
and four times welcome to all sovereign and other persons in
the Prussian Court, and Prussian realms, in those cold winter
days. His Father, they say, was like to have stifled him with
his caresses, so overjoyed was the man ; or at least to have
scorched him in the blaze of the fire ; when happily some much
suitabler female nurse snatched this little creature from the
rough paternal paws, — and saved it for the benefit of Prussia
and mankind. If Heaven will but please to grant it length of
life! For thcro. have already been two little Princekins, who
are both dead ; this Friedrich is the fourth child; and only one
little girl, wise Wilhelmina, of^lmost too sharp wits, and not
too vivacious aspect, is otherwise yet here of royal progeny.
It is feared the Hohenzollcrn lineage, which has flourished here
with such beneficent effect for three centuries now, and been
in truth the very making of the Prussian Nation, may be about
to fail, or pass into some side branch. Which change, or any
change in that respect, is questionable, and a thing desired by
nobody.

Five years ago, on the death of the first little Prince, there
had surmises risen, obscure rumours and hints, that the Prin-
cess Royal, mother of the lost baby, never would have healthy
children, or even never have a child more : upon which, as
there was but one pther resource, — a widowed Grandfather,
namely, and except the Prince Royal no son to him, — said
Grandfather, still only about fifty, did take the necessary steps :
but they have been entirely unsuccessful ; no new son or child,
only new affliction, new disaster has resulted from that third
marriage of his,. And though the Princess Royal has had an-
other little Prince, that too has died within the year ,* — Skilled,
some say on the other hand, by the noise of the cannon firing

Chap.ir. FRIEDRICH'g BIRTH. 19

for joy over it Yes ; and the first baby Prince, thesft same
parties farther say, was crushed to death by the weighty dress
you put upon it at christening time, especially by the little
crown it wore, which had left a visible black mark upon the
poor soft infantas brow ! In short, it is a questionable case ;
undoubtedly a questionable outlook for Prussian mankind ; and
the appearance of this little Prince, a third trump-card in the
Hohenz^Uern game, is an unusually interesting event. The joy
over him, not in Berlin Palace only, but in Berlin City, and
over the Prussian Nation, was very great and universal; — still
testified in manifold dull, unreadable old pamphlets, records
official and volunteer, — which were then all ablaze like the bon-
fires, and are now fallen dark enough, and hardly credible even
to the fancy of this new Time.

The poor old Grandfather, Friedrich 1. (the first King of
Prussia), — for, as we intimate, he was still alive, and not very
old, though now infirm enough, and laden beyond his strength
with sad reminiscences, disappointments and chagrins, — ^had
taken much to Wilhelmina, as she tells us and would amuse
himself whole days with the pranks and prattle of the little
child. Good old man : he, we need not doubt, brightened up
into unusual vitality at sight of^his invaluable little Brother of
hers ; through whom he can look once more into the waste dim
future with a flicker of new hope. Poor old man : he got his
own back half-broken by a careless nurse letting him fall ; and
has slightly stooped ever since, some fifty and odd years now :
much against his will ; for he would fain have been beautiful ;
and has struggled all his days, very hard if not very wisely, to
make his existence beautiful, — ^to make it magnificent at least,
and regardless of expense ; — and it threatens to come to little.
Courage, poor Grandfather : here is a new second edition of a
F riedrich, the first having gone off with so little effect : this
one’s back is still unbroken, his life’s seedfield not yet filled
with tares and thorns: who knows but Heaven will be kinder
to this one? Heaven was much kinder to this one. Him
Heaven had kneaded of more potent stuff : a mighty fellow
this one, and a strange; related not only to the Upholsteries

^ Forster, FriedrSh Wilhelm /., Kdnig von Preussen (Potsdam, 1834), i. 126
(who quotes Morgenstern, a contemporary reporter). But see also Preuss, Friedrich
der Grosse mit seinen Vervoandten uttd Freundeniji&chxi, 1838), pp. sjg-Bo,

^ Mimoires de Fridirigne Sophie Wilhelmtne de Prusse, Margrave de Bareith,
Saeut de Fridiricde-Grand (Lwidon, 1812), L 5,

20 BIRTH ANi) PARENTAGE. ' Bookl.

and HSralds* Colleges, but to the Sphere -harmonies and the
divine and demonic powers ; of a swift far-darting nature this
one, like an Apollo clad in sunbeams and in lightnings (after
his sort) ; and with a back which all the world could not suc-
ceed in breaking! — Yes, if, by most rare chance, this were
indeed a new man oi genius, born into the purblind rotting
Century, in the acknowledged rank of a king there, — man of
genius, that is to say, man of originality and veracity ; capable
of seeing with his eyes, and incapable of not believing what he
sees; — then truly! — But as yet none knows; the poor old
Grandfather never knew. •

Meanwhile they christened the little fellow, with immense
magnificence and pomp of apparatus ; Kaiser Karl, and the
very Swiss Republic being there (by proxy), among the gossips ;
and spared no cannon -volleyings, kettle - drummings, metal
crown, heavy cloth-of-silver, for the poor soft creature’s sake ;
all of which, however, he survived. The name given him was
Karl Friedrich (Charles Frederick) ; Karl perhaps, and perhaps
also not, in deljf.ate compliment to the chief gossip, the above-
mentioned Kaiser, Karl or Charles VI. ? At any rate, the Karl,
gradually or from the first, dropped altogether out of practice,
and went as nothing : he himself, or those about him, never
used it ; nor, except in some dim English pamphlet here and
there, have I met with any trace of it. Friedrich {RichAxi-Peace,
a name of old prevalence in the Hohenzollern kindred), which
he himself wrote FrMdric in his French way, and at last even
FMiric (with a very singular sense of euphony), is throughout,
and was, his sole designation, ,

Sunday 31st January 1712, age then precisely one week:
then, and in this manner, was he ushered on the scene, and
labelled among his fellow-creatures. We must now look round
a little ; and see, if possible by any method or exertion, what
kind of scene it was.

CHAPTER III.

FATHER AND MOTHER : THE HANOVERIAN CONNEXION*

Friedrich Wilhelm, Crown-Prince of Prussia, son of Fried*
rich 1 , and Father of this little infant who will one day be

Ctop. m. FATHER AND«*MOTHER. 31

Friedrich II., did himself make some noise in the w6rld as
second King of Prussia ; notable not as Friedrich’s father alone ;
and will much concern us during the rest of his life. He is, at
this date, in his twenty-fourth year : a thick-set, sturdy, florid,
brisk young fellow ; with a jovial laugh in him, yet of solid
grave ways, occasionally somewhat volcanic ; much given to
soldiering, and out-of-door exercises, having little else to do at
present. He has been manager, or, as it were, Vice- King, on
an occasional absence of his Father; he knows practically
what the state of business is ; and greatly disapproves of it, as
is thought. Cut being bound to silence on that head, he keeps
silence, and meddles with nothing political. He addicts him-
self chiefly to mustering, drilling and practical military duties,
while here at Berlin; runs out, often enough, wife and perhaps
a comrade or two along with him, to hunt, and take his ease,
at Wusterhausen (some fifteen or twenty milesi southeast of Ber-
lin), where he has a residence amid the woody moorlands.

But soldiering is his grand concern. Six years ago, sum-
mer 1 706,2 at A very early age, he went to the wars, — grand
Spanish-Succession War, which was then beetling very fierce
in the Netherlands ; Prussian troops always active on the Marl-
borough-Eugene side. He h^d just been betrothed, was not
yet wedded ; thought good to turn the interim to advantage in
that way. Then again, spring 1 709, after his marriage and
after his Father’s marriage, ‘the Court being full of intrigues,’
and nothing but silence recommendable there, a certain re-
nowned friend of his, Leopold, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, of
whom we shall yet hear a great deal, — who, still only about
thirty, had*already covered himself with laurels in those wars
(Blenheim, Bridge of Casano, Lines of Turin, and other glories),
but had now got into intricacies with the weaker sort, and was
out of command, — agreed with Friedrich Wilhelm that it would
be well to go and serve there as volunteers, since not other-
wise.3 A Crown-Prince of Prussia, ought he not to learn sol-
diering, of all things ; by every opportunity? Which Friedrich
Wilhelm did, with industry; serving zealous apprenticeship
under Marlborough and Eugene, in this manner; plucking

> English miles, — as always unless the contrary be stated. The German Meile
is about five miles Blaglish ; German Stunde about three.

^ FSrster, i. xi6.

3 Varnhagen von Ense, Filrst Leopold von Anhalt-Dessan (in Bio^aphische
Donkmale, ad edition, Berlin, 1845), p. 185. Thaten ttnd Leben des vjelpferiihmteni,
Fiirstms Leoppldi von AnhaU-Vessc^u (Leipzig, 1748), p. 73. Forster, i. jtag.

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE.

Book 1.

knowldlge, as the bubble reputation, and all else in that field
has to be plucked, from the cannon’s mouth. Friedrich Wil-
helm kept by Marlborough, now as formerly ; friend Leopold
being commonly in Eugene’s quarter, who well knew the worth
of him, ever since Blenheim and earlier. Friedrich Wilhelm
saw hot service, that campaign of 1709; siege ofTournay, and
far more ; — stood, among other things, the fiery Battle of Mal-
plaquet, one of the terriblest and deadliest feats of war ever
done. No want of intrepidity and rugged soldier- virtue in the
Prussian troops or their Crown-Prince ; least of all on that ter-
rible day, nth September 1709; — of which he keeps the an-
niversary ever since, and will do all his life, the doomsday of
Malplaquet always a memorable day to him.^ He is more and
more intimate with Leopold, and loves good soldiering beyond
all things. Here at Berlin he has already got a regiment of
his own, tallish fine men ; and strives to make it in all points
a very pattern of a regiment.

For the rest, much here is out of joint, and far from satis-
factory to him. Seven years ago^ he lost his own brave Mother
and her love ; of which we must speak farther by and by. In
her stead he has got a fantastic, melancholic, ill-natured Step-
mother, with whom there was nqver any good to be done ; who
in fact is now fairly mad, and kept to her own apartments. He
has to see here, and say little, a chagrined heartworn Father
flickering painfully amid a scene much filled with expensive
futile persons, and their extremely pitiful cabals and mutual
rages ; scene chiefly of pompous inanity, and the art of so-
lemnly and with great labour doing nothing. Such waste of
labour and of means : what can one do but be silent ? The
other year, Preussen {Prussia Proper, province lying far east-
ward, out of sight) was sinking under pestilence and black ruin
and despair : the Crown-Prince, contrary to wont, broke silence,
and begged some dole or subvention for these poor people ; but
there was nothing to be had. Nothing in the treasury, your
Royal Highness : — Preussen will shift for itself ; sublime dra-
maturgy, which we call his Majesty’s Government, costs so
much I And Preussen, mown away by death, lies much of it
vacant ever since; which has completed the Crown-Prince’s
disgust ; and, I believe, did produce some change of ministry,
or other ineffectual expedient, on the old Father’s part. Upon

♦ Fiirstpr. i. 138. ® ist February 1703.

FATHER and/mother. 23

which the Crown-Prince locks up his thoughts again. He has
confused whirlpools, of Court-intrigues, ceremonials, and trou-
blesome fantasticalities, to steer amongst ; which he much dis-
likes, no man more ; having an eye and heart set on the prac-
tical only, and being in mind as in body something of the
genus robusimit of the genus ferox withal. He has been wed*
ded six years ; lost two children, as we saw ; and now again
he has two living.

His wife, Sophie Dorothee of Hanover, is his cousin as
well. She i» brother’s-daughter of his Mother, Sophie Char-
lotte : let the reader learn to discriminate these two names.
Sophie Charlotte, late Queen of Prussia, was also of Hanover ;
she probably had sometimes, in her quiet motherly thought,
anticipated this connexion for him, while she yet lived. It is
certain Friedrich Wilhelm was carried to Hanover in early
childhood : his Mother, — that Sophie Charlotte, a famed Queen
and lady in her day, "daughter of Electress Sophie, and Sister
of the George who became George I, of England by and by,—
took him thither ; some time about the beginmng of 1693, his
age then five ; and left him there on trial ; alleging, and ex-
pecting, he might have a better breeding there. And this, in
a Court where Electress Sophie was chief lady, and Elector
Ernst, fit to be called Gentleman Ernst,® the politest of men,
was chief lord, — and where Leibnitz, to say nothing of lighter
notabilities, was flourishing, — seemed a reasonable expecta-
tion. Nevertheless, it came to nothing, this articulate purpose
of the visit ; though perhaps the deeper silent purposes of it
might not be quite unfulfilled.

Gentleman Ernst had lately been made ‘ Elector’ {Kurfiirsi,
instead of Herzog)^ — his Hanover no longer a mere Sovereign
Duchy, but an Electorate henceforth, new * Ninth Electorate,*
by Ernst’s life-long exertion and good luck ; — ^which has spread
a fine radiance, for the time, over court and people in those
parts ; and made Ernst a happier man than ever, in his old
age. Gentleman Ernst and Electress Sophie, we need not

^ * Her Highness' (the Electress Sophie) *has the character of the mer^ debon-

^ rtaire Princess of Germany ; a lady of extraordinary virtues and accomplishments ;

^ mistress of the Italian, French, High and Low Dutch, and English languages,

^ which she speaks to perfection. Her husband’ (Elector Ernst) ‘ has the title of the
Gentleman of Germany ; a graceful and’ &c. &c. W. Carr, Remarks c/the Govern^
vtents of the severall Paris of Germame, Denmark, Swe€dla^td[^Km%tvtA9xa, z688),
p. 147* See also Kcr of Kersland (still more emphatic on this point, safims%

Book I.

34 BIRTH Alfo PARENTAGE.

doubt, fwere glad to see their burly Prussian grandson, — a ro-
bust, rather mischievous boy of five years old ; — and anything
that brought her Daughter oftener about her (an only Daughter
too, and one so gifted) was sure to be welcome to the cheery
old Electress, and her Leibnitz and her circle. Eor Sophie
Charlotte was a bright presence, and a favourite with sage
and gay.

Uncle George again, * Kurprins Georg Ludwig’ (Electoral
Prince and Heir- Apparent), who became George I. of England ;
he, always a taciturn, saturnine, somewhat grim-visaged man,
not without thoughts of his own but mostly inarticulate thoughts,
was, just at this time, in a deep domestic intricacy. Uncle
George the Kurprinz was painfully detecting, in these very
months, that his august Spouse and cousin, a brilliant not un-
injured lady, had become an indignant injuring one ; that she
had gone, and was going, far astray in her walk of life ! Thus
all is not radiance at Hanover either, Ninth Elector though
we are ; but, in the soft sunlight, there quivers a streak ot the
blackness of very Erebus withal. Kurprinz George, I think,
though he too is said to have been good to the boy, could not
take much interest in this burly Nephew of his just now !

Sure enough, it was in this year 1693, that the famed
Kdnigsmark tragedy came ripening fast towards a crisis in
Hanover ; and next year the catastrophe arrived. A most
tragic business ; of which the little Boy, now here, will know
more one day. Perhaps it was on this very visit, on one visit it
credibly was, that Sophie Charlotte witnessed a sad scene in
the Schloss of Hanover : high words rising, where low cooings
had been more appropriate ; harsh words, mutually recriirli-
native, rising ever higher ; ending, it is thought, in things, or
menaces and motions towards things (actual box on the ear,
some call it), — never to be forgotten or forgiven ! And on
Sunday ist of July 1694, Colonel Count Philip Kdnigsmark,
Colonel in the Hanover Dragoons, was seen for the last time
in this world. From that date, he has vanished suddenly
underground, in an inscrutable manner ; never more shall the
light of the sun, or any human eye behold that handsome
blackguard man. Not for a hundred and fifty years shall
human creatures know, or guess with the smallest certainty,
what has become of him.

And shortly after Kdnigsmark’s disappearance, there is

Oaf. lit FATHER AND inOTHER. 25

this sad phenomenon visible : A once very radiant Pftncess
(witty, haughty-minded, beautiful, not wise or fortunate) now
gone ablaze into angry tragic conflagration ; gettiiig locked
into the old Castle of Ahlden, in the moory solitudes of Liine-
burg Heath : to stay there till she die, — thirty years as it
proved, — and go into ashes and angry darkness as she may.
Old peasants, late in the next century, will remember that they
used to see her sometimes driving on the Heath, — beautiful
lady, long black hair, and the glitter of diamonds in it ; some-
times the reins in her own hand, but always with a party of
cavalry round her, and their swords drawn.7 ‘ Duchess of
Ahlden,’ that was her title in the eclipsed state. Born Princess
of Zelle ; by marriage. Princess of Hanover (Kurprinzessin ) ;
would have been Queen of England, too, had matters gone
otherwise than they did. — Her name, like that of a little
Daughter she had, is Sophie Dorothee : she is Cousin and
Divorced Wife of Kurprinz George ; divorced, and as it were
abolished alive, in this manner. She is little Friedrich Wil-
helm’s Aunt-in-law ; and her little Daughter comes to be his
Wife in process of time. Of him, or of tho^e belonging to
him, she took small notice, I suppose, in her then mood, the
crisis coming on so fast. In he^ happier innocent days she had
two children, a King that is to be, and a Queen ; George II.
of England, Sophie Dorothee of Prussia ; but must not now
call them hers, or ever see them again.

This was the Konigsmark tragedy at Hanover ; fast ripen-
ing towards its catastrophe while little Friedrich Wilhelm was
there. It has been, ever since, a rumour and dubious fright-
ful mystery ^o mankind : but within these few years, by curious
accidents (thefts, discoveries of written documents, in various
countries, and diligent study of them), it has at length become
a certainty and clear fact, to those who are curious about it.
Fact surely of a rather horrible sort ; — ^yet better, I must say,
than was suspected : not quite so bad in the state of fact as
in that of rumour. Crime enough is in it, sin and folly on
both sides ; there is killing too, but not assassination (as it
turns out) ; on the whole there is nothing of atrocity, or no-
thing that was not accidental, unavoidable ; — and there is a
certain greatness of decorum on the part of those Hanover

7 Die Herzogin von Ahlden (Leipag, 1852), p. 22. Divorce was, a8th December
1694; death, 13th November 1726,— age then

26 BIRTH aSiD parentage. Book I.

Prinds and official gentlemen, a depth of silence, of polite
stoicism, which deserves more praise than it will get in our
times. Enough now of the Konigsmark tragedy ;® contempo-
raneous with Friedrich Wilhelm’s stay at Hanover, but not
otherwise much related to him or his doings there.

He got no improvement in breeding, as we intimated ;
none at all ; fought, on the contrary, with his young Cousin
(afterwards our George II.), a boy twice his age, though of
weaker bone ; and gave him a bloody nose. To the scandal
and consternation of the French Protestant gentlewomen and
court-dames in their stiff silks : “ Ahee, your Electoral High-
ness !” This had been a rough unruly boy from the first dis-
covery of him. At a very early stage, he, one morning while
the nurses were dressing him, took to investigating one of his
shoe-buckles ; would, in spite of remonstrances, slobber it about
in his mouth ; and at length swallowed it down, — beyond mis-
take ; and the whole world cannot get it up I Whereupon,
wild wail of nurses ; and his ‘ Mother came screaming,’ poor
mother : — it is the same small shoe-buckle which is still shown,
with a tickef a^td date to it, ‘31 December 1692,’ in the Berlin
Kunstkammer ; for it turned out harmless, after all the scream-
ing ; and a few grains of rhulyirb restored it safely to the light
of day ; henceforth a thricc-memorable shoe-buckle .9

Another time, it is recorded, though with less precision of
detail, his Governess the Dame Montbail having ordered him
to do something which was intolerable to the princely mind.

® A considerable dreary mass of books, pamphlets, lucubrations, false all and of
no worth or of less, have accumulated on this dark subject, during the last hundred-
and-fifty years : nor has the process yet stopped, — as it now well might. For there
have now two things occurred in regard to it First • In the year 1847, a Swedish
Professor, named Palmblad, groping about for other objects in the College Library
of Lund (which is in the country of the KOnigsmark connexions), came upon a Box
of Old Letters^ — Letters undated, signed only with initials, and very enigmatic till
well searched into, — which have turned out to be the very Autographs of the Princess
and her KOnigsmark ; throwing of course a henceforth indisputable light on their re-
lation Second thing: A cautious exact old gentleman, of diplomatic habits (under-
stood to be ‘ Count von Schuleuburg-Klostcrrode of Dresden’), has, since that event,
unwcariedly gone into the whole matter , and has brayed it everywhere, and pounded
it small , sifting, with sublime patience, not only those Swedish Autographs, but the
whole mass of lying books, pamphlets, hints and notices, old and recent ; and bring-
ing out (truly in an intricate and thnee-weansome, but for the first time in an au-
thentic way) what real evidence theie is. In which evidence the facts, or essential
fact, he at last indisputable enough. His Book, thick Pamphlet rather, is that same
Herzogin von Ahlden (Leipzig, 1852) cited above. The drdhry wheelbarrowful of
others I had rather not mention again ; but leave Count von Schulenburg to mention
and describe them, — ^which he does abundantly, so many as had accumufated up to
that date of 1852, to the affliction more or less of sane mankind.

» Fdrstcr, i. 74. Erman, Mimoires deSo-^te Charlotte (Berlin, x8ox), p. X3a

Chap. III. FATHER AND IklOrHER. 27

the princely mind resisted in a very strange way : the pAncely
body, namely, flung itself suddenly out of a third-story win-
dow, nothing but the hands left within ; and hanging on there
by the sill, and fixedly resolute to obey gravitation rather than
Montbail, soon brought the poor lady to terms. Upon which,
indeed, he had been taken from her, and from the women altO’
gether, as evidently now needing rougher government. Always
an unruly fellow, and dangerous to trust among crockery. At
Hanover he could do no good in the way of breeding ; sage
Leibnitz himself, with his big black periwig and large patient
nose, could hsPve put no metaphysics into such a boy. Sub-
lime Thiodicie (Leibnitzian * justification of the ways of God*)
was not an article this individual had the least need of, nor
at any time the least value for. “Justify? What doomed
dog questions it, then ? Are you for Bedlam, then ?” — and
in maturer years his rattan might have been dangerous ! For
this was a singular individual of his day ; human soul still in
robust health, and not given to spin its bowels into cobwebs.
He is known only to have quarrelled much with Cousin George,
during the year or so he spent in those parts. »

But there was another Cousin at Hanover, just one other,
little Sophie Dorothee (called a§er her mother), a few months
older than himself; by all accounts, a really pretty little child,
whom he liked a great deal better. She, I imagine, was his
main resource, while on this Hanover visit ; with her were
laid the foundations of an intimacy which ripened well after-
wards. Some say it was already settled by the parents that
there was to be a marriage in due time. Settled it could
hardly be ; for Wilhelmina tells us,io her Father had a ‘ choice
of three* allowed him, on coming to wed ; and it is otherwise
discernible there had been eclipses and uncertainties, in the
interim, on his part. Settled, no ; but hoped and vaguely
prefigured, we may well suppose. And at all events, it has
actually come to pass ; * Father being ardently in love with
the Hanover Princess,* says our Margravine, * and much pre-
ferring her to the other two,’ or to any and all others. Wedded,
with great pomp, 28th November 1706 — and Sophie Doro-

thee, the same that was his pretty little Cousin at Hanover
twenty years ago, she is mother of the little Boy now born

*0 Memoires de la Margrave de Bareitli, i. i.

U Forster, i. nj.

28

BIRTH A^D PARENTAGE.

Bookl.

and Christened, whom men are to call Frederick the Great in
coming generations.

Sophie Dorothee is described to us by courtier contempo-
raries as * one of the most beautiful princesses of her day :*
Wilhelmina, on the other hand, testifies that she was never
strictly to be called beautiful, but had a pleasant attractive
physiognomy ; which may be considered better than strict
beauty. Uncommon grace of figure and look, testifies Wil-
helraina ; much dignity and soft dexterity, on social occasions ;
perfect in all the arts of deportment ; and left^an impression
on you at once kindly and royal. Portraits of her, as Queen
at a later age, are frequent in the Prussian Galleries ; she is
painted sitting, where I best remember her. A serious, comely,
rather plump, maternal-looking Lady ; something thoughtful
in those gray still eyes of hers, in the turn of her face and
carriage of her head, as she sits there, considerately gazing
out upon a world which would never conform to her will. De-
cidedly a handsome, wholesome and affectionate aspect of face.
Hanoverian in type, that is to say, blond, florid, slightly pr<h
fuse ; — yet the better kind of Hanoverian, little or nothing of
the worse or at least the worst kind. The eyes, as I say, are
gray, and quiet, almost sad ; expressive of reticence and re-
flection, of slow constancy rather than of speed in any kind.
One expects, could the picture speak, the querulous sound of
maternal and other solicitude ; of a temper tending towards
the obstinate, the quietly unchangeable ; — loyal patience not
wanting, yet in still larger measure royal impatience well con-
cealed, and long and carefully cherished. This is what I read
in Sophie Dorothee’s Portraits, — probably remembering what
I had otherwise read, and come to know of her. She too will
not a little concern us in the first part of this History. I find,
for one thing, she had given much of her physiognomy to the
Friedrich now born. In his Portraits as Prince-Royal, he
strongly resembles her ; it is his mother’s face informed with
youth and new fire, and translated into the masculine gender :
in his later Portraits, one less and less recognises the mother.

Friedrich Wilhelm, now in the sixth year of wedlock, is
still very fond of his Sophie Dorothee, — ** fi'iecken'* {Feekin^
diminutive of Sophie)^ as he calls her ; she also having, and
continuing to have, the due wife’s regard fpr her solid, honest,

Clap. IV. FATHER’S Mcfc-HER, 29

if somewhat explosive bear. He troubles her a little no\> and
then, it is said, with whiffs of jealousy; but they are whiffs only,
the product of accidental moodinesses in him, or of tiansient
aspects, misinterpreted, in the court-life of a young and pretty
woman. As the general rule, he is beautifully goodhumoured,
kind even, for n bear; and, on the whole, they have begun
their partnership under good omens. And indeed we may say,
in spite of sad tempests that arose, they continued it under
such. She brought him gradually no fewer than fourteen chil-
dren, of whom ten survived him and rame to maturity : and it
is to be admitted their conjugal relation, though a royal, was
always a human one ; the main elements of it strictly observed
on both sides ; all quarrels in it capable of being healed again,
and the feeling on both sides true, however troublous. A rare
fact among royal wedlocks, and perhaps a unique one in that
epoch.

The young couple, as is natural in their present position,
have many eyes upon them, and not quite a paved path in tnis
confused court of Friedrich I. But they are true ^o one another ;
they seem indeed to have held well aloof from all public busi-
ness or private cabal ; and go along silently expecting, and per-
haps silently resolving this and that in the future tense ; but
with moderate immunity from paternal or other criticisms, for
the present. The Crown-Prince drills or hunts, with his Grum-
kows, Anhalt-Dessaus : these are harmless employments ; — and
a man may have within his own head what thoughts he pleases,
without offence so long as he keeps them there. Friedrich the
old Grandfather lived only thirteen months after the birth of
his grandson: Friedrich Wilhelm was then King; thoughts
then, to any length, could become actions on the part of Fried-
rich Wilhelm.

CHAPTER IV.

father’s mother.

Friedrich Wilhelm’s Mother, as we hinted, did not live to
see this marriage which she had forecast in her maternal heart.
She died, rather 'suddenly, in 1705,1 at Hanover, whither she

1 xst February (Erman, p. 241 ; Forster, i. 1x4): bom^ aoth October x66S ; wedded,
»8th September 1684 ; died, xst February 1705.

30 BIRTH AllD PARENTAGE. Book!.

had g%ne on a visit ; shortly after parting with this her one boy
and child, Friedrich Wilhelm, who is then about seventeen;
whom she had with effort forced herself to send abroad, that
he might see the world a little, for the first time. Her sorrow
on this occasion has in it something beautiful, in so bright and
gay a woman : shows us the mother strong in her, to a touch-
ing degree. The rough cub, in whom she noticed rugged per-
verse elements, * tendencies to avarice,’ and a want of princely
graces, and the more brilliant qualities in mind and manner,
had given her many thoughts and some uneasy ones. But he
was evidently all she had to love in the world ; a rugged crea-
ture inexpressibly precious to her. For days after his depar-
ture, she had kept solitary ; busied with little ; indulging in her
own sad reflections without stint. Among the papers she had
been scribbling, there was found one slip with a heart sketched
on it, and round the heart “Parti” (Gone): My heart is
gone! — poor lady, and after what a jewel! But Nature is
very kind to all children and to all mothers that are true
to her.

Sophie Chjyrlotte’s deep sorrow and dejection on this part-
ing was the secret herald of fate to herself. It had meant ill
health withal, and the gloom of broken nerves. All autumn and
into winter she had felt herseff indefinitely unwell ; she deter-
mined, however, on seeing Hanover and her good old Mother
at the usual time. The gloomy sorrow over Friedrich Wilhelm
had been the premonition of a sudden illness which seized her
on the road to Hanover, some five months afterwards, and
which ended fatally in that city. Her death was not in the
light style Friedrich her grandson ascribes to she died
without epigram, and though in perfect simple courage, with
the reverse of levity.

Here, at first hand, is the specific account of that event;
which, as it is brief and indisputable, we may as well fish from
the imbroglios, and render legible, to counteract such notions,
and illuminate for moments an old scene of things. The writ-
ing, apparently a quite private piece, is by * M. de la Bergerie,
Pastor of the French Church at Hanover,* respectable Edict-of-
Nantes gentleman, who had been called in on the occasion; —
gives an authentic momentary picture, thou^ a feeble and

^ Mimoins de Brandehourg (Preuss's Edition of CEuvres^ Berlin, 1847 et seqq.),
t. xia.

FATHER’S MOTHER.

Ctup. IV.

vacant one, of a locality at that time very interesting tc^ Eng-
lishmen. M. de la Bergerie privately records :

‘ The night between the last of Jamiaty and the first of February

* 1705, between one and two o’clock in the morning, 1 was called to

* the Queen of Prussia, who was then dangerously ill.

* Entering the room, I thicw myself at the foot of her bed, testifying

* to her in words my profound grief to see her in this state. After which
‘ I took occasion to say, *‘She might know now that Kings and Queens
‘ are mortal equally with all other men ; and that they are obliged to
‘ appear before the throne of the majesty of God, to give an account
‘ of their deeds done, no less than the meanest of their subjects.” To

* which her Majtsty replied, ‘‘I know it well ( 5 ^ /<? sais bien)J ^^ — I went

* on to say to her, “Madam, your Majesty must also recognise in this
‘ hour the vanity and nothingness of the things here below, for which,

* it may be, you have had too much interest ; and the importance of
‘ the things of Heaven, wdiidi perhaps you have neglected and con-

* temned.” Thereupon the Queen answered, “True {Cela estvrcd)V*

* “Nevertheless, Madam,” said I, “does not your Majesty place really

* your trust in God? Do you not very earnestly {dien sirieusement) crave

* pardon of Him for all the sins you have committed? Do not you fly
« \n'a’t-elle pas recours) to the blood and merits of Jesus Christ, without

* which it is impossible for us to stand before God?” The Queen ans-
‘ wered, “Owf (Yes).” — While this was going on, h8r Brother, Duke
‘ Ernst August, came into the Queen’s room,’ — perhaps with his eye
upon me and my motions? *As they -wished to speak together, I with-

* drew by order. ’

This Duke Ernst August, age now 31, is the youngest
Brother of the family ; there never was any Sister but this dying
one, who is four years older. Ernst August has some tincture
of soldiership at this time (Marlborough Wars, and the like),
as all his kii^dred had ; but ultimately he got the Bishopric of
Osnabriick, that singular spiritual heirloom, or ^^z^heirloom of
the family ; and there lived or vegetated without noise. Poor
soul, he is the same Bishop of Osnabriick, to whose house,
twenty -two years hence, George I., struck by apoplexy, was
breathlessly galloping in the summer midnight, one wish now
left in him, to be with his brother ; — and arrived dead, or in
the article of death. That was another scene Ernst August
had to witness in his life. I suspect him at present of a thought
that M. de la Bergerie, with his pious commonplaces, is likely
to do no good. '•Other trait of Ernst August’s life; or of the
Schloss of Hanover that night, — or where the sorrowing old
Mother sat, invincible though weeping, in some neighbouring

32 BIRTH aIiD parentage. Book I.

room5— I cannot give. M. de la Bergerie continues his nar-
rative :

* Some time after, I again presented myself before the Queen’s bed,

‘ to see if I could have occasion to speak to her on the matter of her

* salvation. But Monseigneur the Duke Ernst August then said to me,

* That it was not necessary ; that the Queen was at peace with her God

* {itait Hen avec son Dieu ),* — Which will mean also that M. de la Ber-
gerie may go home? However, he still writes:

‘ Next day the Prince told me, That observing I was come near the
‘ Queen’s bed, he had asked her if she wished I should still speak to
‘ her; but she had replied, that it was not necessary in any way'(«w//d'-

* mefti)f that she already knew all that could be said td her on such an
‘ occasion ; that she had said it to herself, that she was still saying it,

‘ and that .she hoped to be well with her God.

‘ In the end a faint coming upon the Queen, which was what ter-

* minated her life, I threw myself on my knees at the other side of

* her bed, the curtains of which were open ; and I called to God with

* a loud voice, * ‘ That He would rank his angels round this great Princess,

‘ to guard her from the insults of Satan; that He would have pity on

* her soul ; that He would wash her with the blood of Jesus Christ her

* heavenly Spouse; that, having forgiven her all her sins, He would

* receive her to his glory.” And in that moment she expired.’® — Age
thirty-six and sollie months. Only Daughter of Electress Sophie ; and
Father’s Mother of Frederick the Great.

She was, in her time, a highly distinguished woman ; and
has left, one may say, something of her likeness still traceable
in the Prussian Nation, and its form of culture, to this day.
Charlottenburg (Charlotte’s-town, so called by the sorrowing
Widower), where she lived, shone with a much-admired French
light under her presidency, — French essentially, Versaillese,
Sceptico-Cal\inistic, reflex and direct, — illuminating the dark
North; and indeed has never been so bright since. The light
was not what we can call inspired ; lunar rather, not of the
genial or solar kind : but, in good truth, it was the best then
going ; and Sophie Charlotte, who was her Mother’s daughter
in this as in other respects, had made it her own. They were
deep in literature, these two Royal Ladies ; especially deep in
French theological polemics, with a strong leaning to the ra-
tionalist side.

They had stopped in Rotterdam once, on a certain journey
homewards from Flanders and the Baths of Aix-la-Chapelle,
to see that admirable sage, the doubter Bayle. Their sublime

3 Ennan, p. 34s.

Chap, rv FATHER’S M*THER. 33

messenger roused the poor man, in his garret there, 'A the
Bompies, — after dark: but he had a headache that night; was
in bed* and could not come. He followed them next day;
leaving his paper imbroglios, his historical, philosophical, anti-
theological marine -stores; and suspended his never-ending
scribble, on their behalf; — but would not accept a pension,
and give it up.^

They were shrewd, noticing, intelligent and lively women;
persuaded that there was some nobleness for man beyond what
the tailor imparts to him; and even very eager to discover it,
had they knoi*n how. In these very days, while our little Fried-
rich at Berlin lies in his cradle, sleeping most of his time, sage
Leibnitz, a rather weak but hugely ingenious old gentleman,
with bright eyes and long nose, with vast black peruke and
bandy legs, is seen daily in the Linden Avenue at Hanover
(famed linden Alley, leading from Town Palace to Country
one, a couple of miles long, rather disappointing when one sees
it), daily driving or walking towards Herrenhausen, where the
Court, where the old Electress is, who will have a touch of
dialogue with him to diversify her day. Not v^y edifying dia-
logue, we may fear ; yet once more, the best tnat can be had
in present circumstances. Here is some lunar reflex of Ver-
sailles, which is a polite court ; ^direct rays there are from the
oldest written Gospels and the newest ; from the great unwrit-
ten Gospel of the Universe itself; and from one’s own real
effort, more or less devout, to read all these aright. Let us not
condemn that poor French element of Eclecticism, Scepticism,
Tolerance, Theodicea, and Bayle of the Bompies versus the
College of S jumur. Let us admit that it was profitable, at least
that it was inevitable; let us pity it, and be thankful for it, and
rejoice that we are well out of it. Scepticism, which is there
beginning at the very top of the world-tree, and has to descend
through all the boughs with terrible results to mankind, is as
yet pleasant, tinting the leaves with fine autumnal red.

Sophie Charlotte partook of her Mother’s tendencies ; and
carried them with her to Berlin, there to be expanded in many
ways into ampler fulfilment. She too had the sage Leibnitz
often with her, at Berlin ; no end to her questionings of him ;
eagerly desirous*lo draw water from that deep well,-— a wet
rope, with cobwebs sticking to it, too often all she got^ endless

^ Krman, pp. ixx, xxa. Date is X700 (late in the autumn probably^

VOU I. n

34

BIRTH AID PARENTAGE.

Book t

rope, land the bucket never coming to view. Which, however,
she took patiently, as a thing according to Nature. She had
her learned Beausobres and other Reverend Edict-of-Nantes
gentlemen, famed Berlin divines ; whom, if any Papist notabi-
lity, Jesuit Ambassador or the like, happened to be there, she
would set disputing with him, in the Soiree at Charlottenburg.
She could right well preside over such a battle of the Cloud-
Titans, and conduct the lightnings softly, without explosions.
There is a pretty and very characteristic Letter of hers, still
pleasant to read, though turning on theologies now fallen dim
enough; addressed to Father Vota, the famous Jesuit, King’s-
confessor, and diplomatist, from Warsaw, who had been doing
his best in one such rencontre before her Majesty (date March
1703), — seemingly on a series of evenings, in the intervals of
his diplomatic business ; the Beausobre champions being intro-
duced to him successively, one each evening, by Queen Sophie
Charlotte. To all appearance the fencing had been keen; the
lightnings in need of some dextrous conductor. Vota, on his
way homeward, had written to apologise for the sputterings of
fire struck out of him in certain pinches of the combat ; says,
It was the rou|h handling the Primitive Fathers got from these
Beausobre gentlemen, who indeed to me, Vota in person, under
your Majesty’s fine presidcnc^r. were politeness itself, though
they treated the Fathers so fil. Her Majesty, with beautiful
art, in this Letter, smooths the raven plumage of Vota ; — and,
at the same time, throws into him, as with invisible needle-
points, an excellent dose of acupuncturation, on the subject of
the Primitive Fathers and the Ecumenic Councils, on her own
score. Let us give some Excerpt, in condensed ^tate :

‘IIow can St. Jerome, for example, be a key to Scripture?’ she in-
sinuates ; citing from Jerome this remarkable avowal of his method of
composing books; ‘especially of his method in that Book, Commentary
‘ on the Galatians^ where he accuses both Peter and Paul of simulation
‘ and even of hypociisy. The great St. Augustine has been charging

* him with this sad fact, ’ says her Majesty, who gives chapter and verse

‘ and Jerome answers ; “I followed the Commentaries of Origen, of”’
— five or six different peisons, who turned out mostly to be heretics be-
fore Jerome had quite done with them in coming years! — ‘ “And to

* confess the honest truth to you,” continues Jerome, “I read all that ;
‘ and after having crammed my head with a great fmany things, I sent

* lor my amanuensis, and dictated to him now my own thoughts,

* Epist. 38% edit. Paris.* And Jerome's answer, ‘ Ibid. Epist-

Chap. IV,

FATHER’S MOTHER.

3S

‘ those of others, without much recollecting the order, nor sometimes
‘ the words, nor even the sense.” In another place (in the Book itself

* farther on*^), he says : do not myself write ; I have an amanuensis,

‘ and I dictate to him what comes into my mouth. If I wish to reflect

* a little, to say the thing better or a better thing, he knits his brows,

* and the whole look of him tells me sufficiently that he cannot endure

* to wait.” ’ — Here is a sacred old gentleman, whom it is not safe to
depend on for interpreting the Scriptures, thinks her Majesty; but does
not say so, leaving Father Vota to his reflections.

Then again, coming to Councils, she quotes St. Gregory Nazianzen
upon him; who is truly dreadful in regaid to Ecumenic Councils of the
Church, — ^and indeed may awaken thoughts of Deliberative Assemblies
generally, in the modern constitutional mind. ‘He says,f No CouncU
‘ ever was successful ; so many mean human passions getting into con-
‘ flagration there; with noise, with violence and uproar, “more like

* those of a tavern or still worse place, ” — these are his words. He, for

* his own share, had resolved to avoid all such “rendezvousing of the
‘ Geese and Cranes, flocking together to throttle and tatter one another
‘ in that sad manner.”^ Nor had St. Theodoret much opinion of the

* Council of Nice, except as a kind of miracle. “Nothing good to be

* expected from Councils,” says he, “except when God is pleased to
‘ interpose, and destroy the machinery of the Devil.” *

•

— ^With more of the like sort ; all delicate, as invisible needle-
points, in her Majesty’s hand.® ^ What is Father Vota to say?
— he modern reader looks through these chinks into a strange
old scene, the stuff of it fallen obsolete, the spirit of it not, nor
worthy to fall. .

These were Sophie Charlotte’s reunions ; very charming in
their time. At which how joyful for Irish Toland to be present,
as was several times his luck. Toland, a mere broken heretic
in his own country, who went thither once as Secretary to some
Embassy (Embassy of Macclesfield’s, 1701, announcing that
the English Crown had fallen Hanover- wards), and was no
doubt glad, poor headlong soul, to find himself a gentleman
and Christian again, for the time being, — admires Hanover and
Berlin very much ; and looks upon Sophie Charlotte in parti-

* ^Commeniary ok the Galatians, chap. iiL*
t * Greg-. Nazian. de Vita sna*

® IfCtter undated (dateable ‘LOtzelburg, March 1703/) i*; to be found entire, with
all its adjuncts, in Erman, pp. 346-55. It was subsequently translated by Toland,
and puUished here, as an excellent Polemical Piece, — entirely forgotten in our time
M Letter against PS^ery by Sophia Charlotte the late Queen ^ Prussia : Being
&c. &c. London, 1713). But the finest Duel ©fall was probably that betureen Beau-
sobre and Toland himself (reported by Beausobre, in something of a crowing manner,
\\\ Erman, pp. 903-41, ‘ October xjox'), of whxu Tdatid aoi^es no metflSMi any-
where.

36 BIRTH aAd PARENTAGE. Book I.

cularSis the pink of women. Something between an earthly
Queen and a divine Egeria ; “ Serena” he calls her ; and, in
his high-flown fashion, is very laudatory. ‘ The most beauti-
ful Princess of her time,* says he, — meaning one of the most
beautiful : her features are extremely regular, and full of viva-
city ; copious dark hair, blue eyes, complexion excellently fair;
— ‘ not very tall, and somewhat too plump,’ he admits else-
where. And then her mind, — for gifts, for graces, culture,
where will you find such a mind ? ‘Her reading is infinite, and
she is conversant in all manner of subjects ‘ knows the ab-
strusest problems of Philosophy;* says admiring Toland : much
knowledge everywhere exact, and handled as by an artist and
queen ; for ‘her wit is inimitable,’ ‘her justness of thought, her
delicacy of expression,’ her felicity of utterance and manage-
ment, are great. Foreign courtiers call her “the Republican
Queen.” She detects you a sophistry at one glance ; pierces
down direct upon the weak point of an opinion : never in my
whole life did I, Toland, come upon a swifter or sharper in-
tellect. And then she is so good withal, so bright and cheer^
ful ; and ‘ has (♦■he art of uniting what to the rest of the world
are antagonisms, mirth and learning,’ — say even, mirth and
good sense. Is deep in musiq. too ; plays daily on her harpsi-
chord, and fantasies, and even composes, in an eminent man-
ncr.6 Toland’s admiration, deducting the highflown temper
and manner of the man, is sincere and great.

Beyond doubt a bright airy lady, shining in mild radiance
in those Northern parts ; very graceful, very witty and ingeni-
ous ; skilled to speak, skilled to hold her tongue, — ^which latter
art also was frequently in requisition with her. She did not
much venerate her Husband, nor the Court population, male or
female, whom he chose to have about him : his and their ways
were by no means hers, if she had cared to publish her thoughts.
Friedrich L, it is admitted on all hands, was ‘an expensive
Herr ;’ much given to magnificent ceremonies, etiquettes and
solemnities ; making no great way anywhither, and that always
with noise enough, and with a dust vortex of courtier intrigues
and cabals encircling him, — ^from which it is better to stand

^ An Account of iko Courts o/Prttssia and Hanover^ scM to a Minister of State
in Holland by Mr. Toland (London, *705), p. 322. Toland’s other Book, which has
reference to her, is of didactic nature (^immortaliw of the soul,' ‘ origin of idolatry,'

), but with much fine panegyric direct and oblique : Letters to Serena (‘ Serena^
being Queen), a tlun 8vo, London, 1704.

caup.IV. FATHER’S MbTHER. 37

quite to windward. Moreover, he was slightly crooked^ most
sensitive, thin of skin and liable to sudden flaws of temper*
though at heart very kind and good. Sophie Charlotte is she
who wrote once, * Leibnitz talked to me of the infinitely little

* {de rinjiniment petit ) : mo7t Dieu^ as if I did not know enough

* of that 1’ Besides, it is whispered, she was once near marry-
ing to Louis XIV. *s Dauphin ; her Mother Sophie, and her
Cousin the Dowager Duchess of Orleans, cunning women both,
had brought her to Paris in her girlhood, with that secret ob-
ject ; and had very nearly managed it. Queen of France that
might have l^en ; and now it is but Brandenburg, and the dice
have fallen somewhat wrong for us ! She had Friedrich Wil-
helm, the rough boy ; and perhaps .nothing more of very pre-
cious property. Her first child, likewise a boy, had soon died,
and there came no third : tedious ceremonials, and the infin-
itely little, were mainly her lot in this world.

All which, however, she had the art to take up not in the
tragic way, but in the mildly comic, — often not to take up at all,
but leave lying there ; — and thus to manage in a handsome and
softly victorious manner. • With delicate femgje tact, with fine
female stoicism too ; keeping all things within limits. She was
much respected by her Husband^ much loved indeed ; and greatly
mourned for by the poor man : the village Lutzelburg (Little-
town), close by Berlin, where she had built a mansion for her-
self, he iondly named Charlottenburg (Charlottc’s-town), after
her death, which name both House and Village still bear. Leib-
nitz found her of an almost troublesome sharpness of intellect ;

* wants to know the why even of the why,’ says Leibnitz. That
is the way^of female intellects when they are good ; nothing
equals their acuteness, and their rapidity is almost excessive.
Samuel Johnson, too, had a young-lady friend once with the
acutest intellect I have ever known.”

On the whole, we may pronounce her clearly a superior wo-
man, this Sophie Charlotte ; notable not for her Grandson alone,
though now pretty much forgotten by the world, — as indeed all
things and persons have, one day or other, to be 1 A Life of
her, in feeble watery style, and distracted arrangement, by one
Erman^ a Berlin Frenchman, is in existence, and will repay a

7 Monsieur Erman, Historiographe de Brandebourg, Memoires p&ur servir ii
THistcire de Sophie Charlotte^ Reine de FreussOf lus dans ies Siances &*c. (x vol.
8vo, Berlin, i8oi.)

38

BIRTH Alto PARENTAGE.

Bookl.

cursoi^ perusal ; curious traits of her, in still looser form, are
filso to be found in Pollnitz but for our purposes here is
enoughi and more than enough.

CHAPTER V.

KING FRIEDRICH I.

The Prussian royalty is now in its twelfth year when this
little Friedrich, who is to carry it to such a height, comes into
the world. Old Friedrich the Grandfather achwved this dig-
nity, after long and intricate negotiations, in the first year of
the Century; i6th November 1700, his ambassador returned
triumphant from Vienna ; the Kaiser had at last consented :
We are to wear a crown royal on the top of our periwig ; the
old Electorate of Brandenburg is to become the Kingdom of
Prussia ; and the Family of Hohenzollern, slowly mounting
these many centuries, has reached the uppermost round of the
ladder.

Friedrich, the old Gentleman who now looks upon his little
Grandson (destined to be Third King of Prussia) with such
interest, — is not a very memorable man ; but he has had his
adventures too, his losses and fiis gains': and surely among the
latter, the gain of a crown royal into his House gives him, if
only as a chronological milestone, some place in Hislory. He
was son of him they call the Great Elector, Friedrich Wilhelm
by name ; of whom the Prussians speak much, in an eagerly
celebrating manner, and whose strenuous toilsome work in this
world, celebrated or not, is still deeply legible in the actual life
and affairs of Germany. A man of whom we must yet find
some opportunity to say a word. From him and a beautiful
and excellent Princess Luise, Princess of Orange, — Dutch Wil-
liam, our Dutch William’s aunt, — this crooked royal Friedrich
came.

He was not born crooked ; straight enough once, and a fine
little boy of six months old or so ; there being an elder Prince
now in his third year, also full of hope. But in a rough jour-
ney to Kdnigsberg and back (winter of 1657, as is guessed),
one of the many rough jolting journeys this feithful Electress

* Carl Ludwig Freiherr von POUnitz, Memoiren znr Lehem- und Regio'imf^s^
CetchtekU der vier letzten Re^nten des I'reussischcn Staats (was puMished in
French also), a vols. xamo, Berlin, 179s.

Chap.V.

KING FRIEDrIcH I.

39

#

made with her Husband, a careless or unlucky nurse, who had
charge of pretty little Fritzchen, was not sufficiently attentive to
her duties on the worst of roads. The ever-jolting carriage gave
some bigger jolt, the child fell backwards in her arms — did
not quite break his back, but injured it for life : — and with his
back, one may perceive, injured his soul and history to an al-
most corresponding degree. For the weak crooked boy, with
keen and fine perceptions, and an inadequate case to put them
in, grew up with too thin a skin : — that may be considered as
the summary ^f his misfortunes ; and, on the whole, there is
no other heavy sin to be charged against him.

He had other loads laid upon him, poor youth : his kind
pious Mother died, his elder Brother died, he at the age of
seventeen saw himself Heir- Apparent ; — and had got a Step-
mother with new heirs, if he should disappear. Sorrows enough
in that one fact, with the venomous whisperings, commentaries
and suspicions, which a Court population, female and male, in
little Berlin Town, can contrive to tack to it. Does not the new
Sovereign Lady, in her heart, wish you were dead, my Prince ?
Hope it, perhaps ,? Health, at any rate, weak ; and, by the
aid of a little pharmacy — ye Heavens !

Such suspicions are now understood to have had no basis
except in the waste brains of courtier men and women ; but
their existence there can become tragical enough. Add to
which, tfie Great Elector, like all the Hohenzollerns, was a
choleric man ; capable of blazing into volcanic explosions,
when affronted by idle masses of cobwebs in the midst of his
serious businesses I It is certain, the young Prince Friedrich
had at one time got into quite high, shrill and mutually min-
atory terms with his Stepmother ; so that once, after some such
shrill dialogue between them, pnding with “You shall repent
this. Sir !” — he found it good to fly off in the night, with only
his Tutor or Secretary and a valet, to Hessen-Cassel to an
Aunt ; who stoutly protected him in this emergency ; and whose
Daughter, after the difficult readjustment of matters, became
his Wife, but did not live long. And it is farther certain the
same Prince, during this his first wedded time, dining one day
with his Stepn»ther, was taken suddenly ill. Felt ill, after
his cup of coffee ; retired into another room in violent spasms,

' Johann WegfUhrer, Leven der KuffarsUn Luise, gehonten Prinzessin von
Nassan^Oranimt Gemahhn Friedrich Wilhelm dnQros^en (Leipzig, 1838), p. X07,

40 BIRTH AliD PARENTAGE. ^akl.

evidently in an alarming state, and secretly in a most alarmed
one : his Tutor or Secretary, one Dankelmann, attended him
thither ; and as the Doctor took some time to arrive, and the
symptoms were instant and urgent. Secretary Dankelmann
produced * from a pocketbook some drug of his own, or of the
Hessen-Cassel Aunt,’ emetic I suppose, and gave it to the poor
Prince ; — who said often, and felt ever after, with or without
notion of poison, That Dankelmann had saved his life. In
consequence of which adventure he again quitted Court with-
out leave ; and begged to be permitted to remain safe in the
country, if Papa would be so good.^ •

Fancy the Great Elector’s humour on such an occurrence ;
and what a furtherance to him in his heavy continual labours,
and strenuous swimming for life, these beautiful humours and
transactions must have been I A crookbacked boy, dear to
the Great Elector, pukes, one afternoon ; and there arises
such an opening of the Nether Floodgates of this Universe:
in and round your poor workshop, nothing but sudden dark-
ness, smell of sulphur ; hissing of forked serpents here, and
the universal aHeleu of female hysterics there ; — to help a man
forward with his work ! 0 reader, we will pity the crowned

head, as well as the hatted agid even hatless one. Human
creatures will not go quite accurately together, any more than
clocks will ; and when their dissonance once rises fairly high,
and they cannot readily kill one another, any Great Elector
who is third party will have a terrible time of it. ♦

Electress Dorothee, the Stepmother, was herself somewhat
of a hard lady ; not easy to live with, though so far above
poisoning as to have * despised even the suspicion’ of it.’ She
was much given to practical economics, dairy-farming, market-
gardening, and industrial and commercial operations such as
offered ; and was thought to be a very strict reckoner of money.
She founded the Dorotheenstadt, now oftener called the Neu*
stadt, chief quarter of Berlin ; and planted, just about the time
of this unlucky dinner, ‘ a.d. i68o or so,’* the first of the cele-
brated Lindens^ which (or the successors of which, in a stunted
condition) are still growing there. Unter-den-Linden : it is now
the gayest quarter of Berlin, full of really fine^ edifices : it was

® POllnit^ Mftnoirtn, i. tgi-S.

® N icolai, Jiesi.hnibun£ der konisUchcn ResuUnzitMte Berlin und Potsdam ( Ber-
Ib, 2786), i. 273.

Chaj?. V.

KING FRIEEfRICH I.

41

#

then a sandy outskirt of Electress Dorothea’s dairy*farm ; good
for nothing but building upon, thought Electress Dorothee.
She did much dairy-and-vegetable trade on the great scale ;
— was thought even to have, underhand, a commercial interest
in the principal Beerhouse of the city.^ People did not love
her : to the Great Elector, who guided with a steady bridle-
hand, she complied not amiss ; though in him too there rose
sad recollections and comparisons now and then : but with a
Stepson of unsteady nerves it became evident to him there
could never be soft neighbourhood. Prince Friedrich and his
Father came |jradually to some understanding, tacit or express,
on that sad matter ; Prince Friedrich was allowed to live, on
his separate allowance, mainly remote from Court. Which
he did, for perhaps six or eight years, till the Great Elector’s
death ; henceforth in a peaceable manner, or at least without
open explosions.

His young Hessen-Cassel Wife died suddenly in 1683;
and again there was mad rumour of poisoning ; which Elec-
tress Dorothee disregarded as below her, and of no conse-
quence to her, and attended to industrial operations that would
pay. That poor young Wife, when dying, exacted a promise
from Prince Friedrich that he* would not wed again, but be
content with the Daughter she had left him : which promise,
if ever seriously given, could not be kept, as we have seen.
Prince Friedrich brought his Sophie Charlotte home about
fifteen months after. With the Stepmother and with the Court
there was armed neutrality under tolerable forms, and no open
explosion farther.

In a secf'et way, however, there continued to be difficulties.
And such difficulties had already been, that the poor young
man, not yet come to his Heritages, and having, with probably
some turn for expense, a covetous unamiable Stepmother, had
fallen into the usual difficulties ; and taken the methods too
usual. Namely, had given ear to the Austrian Court, which
offered him assistance, — somewhat as an aged Jew will to a
young Christian gentleman in quarrel with papa, — upon con-
dition of his signing a certain bond : bond which much sur-
prised Prince Friedrich when he came to understand it 1 Of
which we sh;|ll hear more, and even much more, in the course
of time

♦ Horn, Leben Friedrich WiVusbns des Grossen KurfUrsten von Brandenburg
iBerlb, *814).

4 a BIRTH Alio PARENTAGE. Bo<*l.

V

Neither after his accession (year 1688 ; his Cousin Dutch
William, of the glorious and immortal memory, just lifting
anchor towards these shores) was the new Elector’s life an
easy one. We may say, it was replete with troubles rather ;
and unhappily not so much with great troubles, which could
call forth antagonistic greatness of mind or of result, as with
never-ending shoals of small troubles, the antagonism to which
is apt to become itself of smallish character. Do not search
into his history ; you will remember almost nothing of it (I
hope) after never so many readings ! Garrulous Pcillnitz and
others have written enough about him ; but it aft runs off from
you again, as a thing that has no affinity with the human skin.
He had a court 'rernpli d'intrigues^ full of never-ending ca*
bals,’^* — about what ?

One question only are wc a little interested in : How he
came by the Kingship? How did the like of him contrive
to achieve Kingship ? We may answer : It was not he tha^
achieved it ; it was those that went before him, who had gra-
dually got it, — ■•hs is very usual in such cases. All that he did
was to knock at the gate (the Kaiser’s gate and the world’s),
and ask, “/r it achieved, thcit?” Is Brandenburg grown ripe
for having a crown ? Will it be needful for you to grant Bran-
denburg a crown ? Which question, after knocking as loud
as possible, they at last took the trouble to answer, ** Yes, it
will be needful.” —

Elector Friedrich’s turn for ostentation, — or, as we may in-
terpret it, the high spirit of a Hohenzollern working through
weak nerves and a crooked back, — had early set^^him a-think-
ing of the Kingship; and no doubt, the exaltation of rival
Saxony, which had attained that envied dignity (in a very un-
enviable manner, in the person of Elector August made King
of Poland) in 1697, operated as a new spur on his activities.
Then also Duke Ernst of Hanover, his father-in-law, was strug-
gling to become Elector Ernst; Hanover to be the Ninth Elec-
torate, which it actually attained in 1698; not to speak of
England, and quite endless prospects there for Ernst and Han-
over. These my lucky neighbours are all rhing ; all this the
Kaiser has granted to my lucky neighbours : why is there no
promotion he should grant me, among them ! —

* Fdrster, i. 74 (quoting M^nwires du Comte de DoHim); fifec. &c.

.ChAp^V.

KINC FRIEDfelCH I,

#

Elector Friedrich had 30,000 excellent troops ; Kaiser Leo-
pold, the ‘little man in red stockings,* had no end of Wars*
Wars in Turkey, wars in Italy; all Dutch William’s wars and
more, on our side of Europe; — and here is a Spanish-Succes-
sion War, coming dubiously on, which may prove greater than
ali the rest together. Elector Friedrich sometimes in his own
high person (a courageous and high though thin-skinned man),
otherwise by skilful deputy, had done the Kaiser service, often
signal service, in all these Wars ; and was never wanting in the
time of need, in the post of difficult}' with those famed Prussian
Troops of his.^ A loyal galkint Elector this, it must be owned ;
capable withal of doing signal damage, if we irritated him too
far! Why not give him this promotion, since it costs us abso-
lutely nothing real, not even the price of a yard of ribbon with
metal cross at the end of it? Kaiser Leopold himself, it is said,
had no particular objection; but certain of his ministers had;
and the little man in red stockings, — much occupied in hunt-
ing, for one thing, — let them have their way, at the risk of an-
gering Elector Friedrich. Even Dutch William, anxious for it,
in sight of the future, had not yet prevailed. •

The negotiation had lasted some seven years, without re-
sult. There is no doubt but tke Succession War, and Marl-
borough, would have brought it to a happy issue : in the mean
while, it is said to have succeeded at last, somewhat on the
sudden, by a kind of accident. This is the curious mythical
account ; incorrect in some unessential particulars, but in the
main and singular part of it well-founded. Elector Friedrich,
according to Pollnitz and others, after failing in many methods,
had sent loctooo thalers 15,000/.) to give, by way of —
bribe we must call it, — to the chief opposing Hofrath at Vienna.
The money was offered, accordingly ; and was refused by the
opposing Hofrath ; upon which the Brandenburg Ambassador
wrote that it was all labour lost ; and even hurried off home-
wards in despair, leaving a Secretary in his place. The Bran-
denburg Court, nothing despairing, orders in the mean while.
Try another with it, — some other Hofrath, whose name they
wrote in cipher, which the blundering Secretary took to mean
no Hofrath, but tfee Kaiser’s Confessor and Chief Jesuit, Pater
Wolf. To him accordingly he hastened with the cash, to him
with the respectful Electoral request ; who received both, it is
said, especially the 15,000/., with a Gloria in excelsis^ and went

44 BIllTH AND PARENTAGE. Booki*

%

forthwith and persuaded the Kaiser.® — Now here is the inexac-
titude, say modern Doctors of History; an error no less than
threefold, i®. Elector Friedrich was indeed advised, in cipher,
by his agent at Vienna, to write in person to — ** Who is that
cipher, then?” asks Elector Friedrich, rather puzzled. At Vi-
enna that cipher was meant for the Kaiser ; but at Berlin they
take it for Pater Wolf ; and write accordingly, and are ans-
wered with readiness and animation. 2®. Pater Wolf was not
official Confessor, but was a Jesuit in extreme favour with the
Kaiser, and by birth a nobleman, sensible to human decora-
tions. 3°. He accepted no bribe, nor was any Sent; his bribe
was the pleasure of obliging a high gentleman who conde-
scended to ask, and possibly the hope of smoothing roads for
St. Ignatius and the Black Militia, in time coming. And thus
at last, and not otherwise than thus, say exact Doctors, did
Pater Wolf do the thing. 7 Or might not the actual death of
poor King Carlos II. at Madrid, ist November 1700, for whose
heritages all the world stood w’atching with swords half drawn,
considerably assist Pater Wolf? Done sure enough the thing
was; and before November ended, Friedrich’s messenger re-
turned with Yes” for answer, and a Treaty signed on the i6th
of that month.® •

To the huge joy of Elector Friedrich and his Court, almost
the very nation thinking itself glad. Which joyful Potentate
decided to set out straightway and have the coronation done ;
though it was midwinter ; and Kdnigsberg (for Prussia is to be
our title, ‘ King in Prussia,* and Kdnigsberg is Capital City
there) lies 450 miles off, through tangled shaggy forests, boggy
wildernesses, and in many parts only corduroy ro^s. We order
* 30,000 posthorses,’ besides all our own large stud, to be got
ready at the various stations: our boy Friedrich Wilhelm, rug-
ged boy of twelve, rough and brisk, yet much * given to blush*
withal (which is a feature of him), shall go with us ; much more,
Sophie Charlotte our august Electress-Queen that is to be : and
we set out, on the 1 7th of December 1 700, last year of the
Century ; ‘in 1800 carriages :* such a cavalcade as never
crossed those wintry wildernesses before. Friedrich Wilhelm
went in the third division of carriages (for 1^00 of them could

® POllnitz, Memoiren, 1 . 310.

7 G. A H. Stenzel, GeschtcAte des PreusstscAenSiaatsiKamhvLrg, x84x), iii. Z04.

Berliner Monatsckrift. year 1799); &c.

Pullnitz (i. 3x8) gives the Treaty (oate corrected by his Editor, ii. 589).

Cbap. V.

KING FRIEDRICH I

45

not go quite together); our noble Sophie Charlotte in tfie se-
cond ; a Margraf of Rrandenburg-Schwedt, chief Margraf, our
eldest Half-Brother, Dorothee’s eldest Son, sitting on the coach-
box, in correct insignia, as similitude of Driver. So strict are
we in etiquette ; etiquette indeed being now upon its apothe-
osis, and after such efforts. Six or seven years of efforts on
Elector Friedrich’s part; and six or seven hundred years, un-
consciously, on that of his ancestors.

The magnificence of Friedrich’s processionings into Kdnigs-
berg, and through it or in it, to be crowned, and of his coro-
nation ceremofiials there : what pen can describe it, what pen
needl Folio volumes with copper-plates have been written on
it ; and are not yet all pasted in bandboxes, or slit into spills.9
* The diamond buttons of his Majesty’s coat’ (snuff-coloured or
purple, I cannot recollect) 'cost 1,500/. apiece;’ by this one
feature judge what an expensive Herr. Streets were hung with
cloth, carpeted with cloth, no end of draperies and cloth ; your
oppressed imagination feels as if there was cloth enough, of
scarlet and other bright colours, to thatch the Arctic Zone.
With illuminations, .cannon -salvos, fountains, running wine.
Friedrich had made two Bishops for the nonce. Two of his
natural Church-Superintendents^ made into Quasi-Bishops, on
the Anglican model, — which was always a favourite with him,
and a pious wish of his ; — ^but they remained mere cut branches,
these two, and did not, after their haranguing and anointing
functions, take root in the country. He himself put the crown
on his head: "King here in my own right, after all!” — and
looked his royalest, we may fancy ; the kind eyes of him almost
partly fierce ibr moments, and ‘ the cheerfulness of pride’ well
blending with something of awful.

In all which sublimities, the one thing that remain^ for hu-
man memory is not in these Folios at all, but is considered to
be a fact not the less : Electress Charlotte’s, now Queen Char-
lotte’s, very strange conduct on the occasion. For she cared
not much about crowns, or upholstery magnificences of any
kind; but had meditated from of old on the infinitely little;
and under these genuflexions, risings, sittings, shiftings, grim-
acings on all parts, and the endless droning eloquence of

® British Museum, short of very many necessary Books on this subject, offers the
due Coronation Folio, with its prints, upholstery Catalogues, and official harangues
upon nothing, to ingenuous human curiosity.

46 ' BIRTH AND PARENTAGE. Book!.

Bish(}]ps invoking Heaven, her ennui, not ill-humoured or offen-
sively ostensible, was heartfelt and transcendent. At one turn
of the proceedings. Bishop This and Chancellor That droning
their empty grandiloquences at discretion, Sophie Charlotte was
distinctly seen to smuggle out her snuff-box, being addicted to
that rakish practice, and fairly solace herself with a delicate
little pinch of snuff. Rasped tobacco, tahac rdpi, called by
mortals rdpi or rapee : there is no doubt about it ; and the
new King himself noticed her, and hurled back a look of due
fulminancy, which could not help the matter, and was only lost
in air. A memorable little action, and almost S 5 mbolic in the
first Prussian Coronation. “ Yes, we are Kings, and are got
so near the stars, not nearer ; and you invoke the gods, in that
tremendously longwinded manner; and I — Heavens, I have
my snuff-box by me, at least I” Thou wearied patient Heroine ;
cognisant of the infinitely little 1 — This symbolic pinch of snuff
is fragrant all along in Prussian History. A fragrancy of hum-
ble verity in the middle of all royal or other ostentations ; in-
exorable, quiet protest against cant, done with such simplicity ;
Sophie Charloq,e’s symbolic pinch of snuff. She was always
considered something of a Republican Queen.

Thus Brandenburg Electorate has become Kingdom of
Prussia ; and the Hohenzollcrns have put a crown upon their
head. Of Brandenburg, what it was, and what Prussia was ;
and of the Hohenzollcrns and what they were, and how they
rose thither, a few details, to such as are dark about these mat-
ters, cannot well be dispensed with here.

BOOK II.

OF BRANDENBURG AND THE HOHENZOLLERNS,
928-1417.

CHAPTER I.

BRANNIBOR : HENRY THE FOWLER.

The Brandenburg Countries, till they become related to the
Hohcnzollern Family which now rules there, have no History
that has proved memorable to mankind. There has indeed
been a good deal written under that title ; but there is by no
means much kno\vh, and of that again ther? is alarmingly
little that is worth knowing or remembering.

•

Pytheas, the Marseilles Travelling Commissioner, looking
out for new channels of trade, somewhat above 2,000 years ago,
saw the country actually lying there ; sailed past it, occasion-
ally landing; and made report to such Marseillese ‘ Chamber
of Commerce’ as there then was : — report now lost, all to a
few indistinct and insignificant fractions.^ This was ‘about
the year 327 before Christ,’ while Alexander of Macedon was
busy conquering India. Beyond question, Pytheas, the first
writing or Civilised creature that ever saw Germany, gazed
with his Greek eyes, and occasionally landed, striving to speak
and inquire, upon those old Baltic Coasts, north border of the
now Prussian Kingdom ; and reported of it to mankind we
know not what, Which brings home to us the fact that it ex-
isted, but almost nothing more : A Country of lakes and woods,
of marshy jungles, sandy wildernesses ; inhabited by bears,
otters, bisons, woVes, wild swine, and certain shaggy Germans
of the Suevic type, as good as inarticulate to Pytheas. After

^ Mimoirts defAcad4mie dea Inscriptions, t. xix. 46, xzxvii. 439> ftc.

48 OF BRANDENBURG. Book il

^ A.D. 6oai

v^hich all direct notice of it ceases for above three hundred
years. We can hope only that the jungles were getting cleared
a little, and the wild creatures hunted down ; that the Germans
were increasing in number, and becoming a thoughtless shaggy.
These latter, tall Suevi Semnones, men of blond stern aspect
(pculi truces ccerulei) and great strength of bone, were known
to possess a formidable talent for fighting Drusus Germani-
cus, it has been guessed, did not like to appear personally
among them : some ‘gigantic woman prophesying to him across
the Elbe’ that it might be dangerous, Drusus contented himself
with erecting some triumphal pillar on his own fafe side of the
Elbe, to say that they were conquered.

In the Fourth Century of our era, when the German popu-
lations, on impulse of certain ‘Huns expelled from the Chinese
frontier,* or for other reasons valid to themselves, began flow-
ing universally southward, to take possession of the rich Roman
world, and so continued flowing for two centuries more; the old
German frontiers generally, and especially those Northern Bal-
tic countries, were left comparatively vacant ; so that new im-
migrating poptyiations from the East, all of Sclavic origin, easily
obtained footing and supremacy there. In the Northern parts,
these immigrating Sclaves were of the kind called Vandals, or
Wends : they spread themselves as far west as Hamburg and the
Ocean, south also far over the Elbe in some quarters; while
other kinds of Sclaves were equally busy elsewhere. With what
difficulty in settling the new boundaries, and what inexhaustible
funds of quarrel thereon, is still visible to every one, though no
Historian was there to say the least word of it. ‘All of Sclavic
origin ;’ but who knows of how many kinds : Wends here in the
North, through the Lausitz (Lusatia) and as far asThiiringen;
not to speak of Polacks, Bohemian Czechs, Huns, Bulgars, and
the other dim nomenclatures, on the Eastern frontier. Five-
hundred years of violent unrecorded fighting, abstruse quarrel
with their new neighbours in settling the marches. Many names
of towns in Germany ending in its (Meuselwitz, Mollwitz), or
bearing the express epithet Windisch (Wendish), still give in-
dication of those old sad circumstances ; as does the word
Slave, in all our Western languages, meaning captured Scla*
vonian. What long-drawn echo of bitter rage and hate lies in .
that small etymology !

* Tacitus, Dt Morihts Gtnnanortm, c. 45.

HENRY THE FOWLER.

Chap. I*

#

These things were ; but they have no History ; why should
they have any ? Enough that in those Baltic regions, there
are for the time (Year 600, and till long after Charlemagne is
out) Sclaves in place of Suevi or of Holstein Saxons and Angli ;
that it is now shaggy Wends who have the task of taming the
jungles, and keeping down the otters and wolves. Wends lat-
terly in a waning condition, much beaten upon by Charlemagne
and others ; but never yet beaten out. And so it has- to last,
century after century; Wends, wolves, wild swine, all alike
dumb to us. Dumb, or sounding only one huge unutterable
message (seerrihigly of tragic import), like the voice of their old
Forests, of their old Baltic Seas : — perhaps more edifying to
us so. Here at last is a definite date and event :

‘A.D. 928, Henry the Fowler, marching across the frozen
bogs, took Brannibor, a chief fortress of the Wends — first
mention in human speech of the place now called Branden-
burg : Bor or * Burg of the Brenns’ (if there ever was any Tribe
of Brenns, — Brennus^ there as elsewhere, being name fox King
or Leader) ; ‘ Burg of the Woods,* say others, — ^who as little
know. Probably, at that time, a town of clay hhts, with ditch
and palisaded sod-wall round it ; certainly ‘ a chief fortress of
the Wends,’ — ^who must have b§en a good deal surprised at
sight of Henry on the rimy winter morning near a thousand
years ago.

This is the grand old Henry, called ‘ the Fowler’ {Heinrich
der Vogler\ because he was in his Vogelheerdc (Falconry or
Hawk-establishment, seeing his Hawks fly) in the upland Hartz
Country, when -messengers came to tell him that the German
Nation, through its Princes and Authorities assembled at Fritz-
lar, had made him King ; and that he would have dreadful work
henceforth. Which he undertook ; and also did, — this of Bran-
nibor only one small item of it, — ^warring right manfully all his
days against Chaos in that country, no rest for him thenceforth
till he died. The beginning of German Kings ; the first, or
essentially the first sovereign of united Germany, — Charle-
magne’s posterity to the last bastard having died out, and only
Anarchy, Italian and other, being now the alternative.

‘ A v^^high King,^ says one whose Note-books I have got, *an
^ authentically noble human figure, visible still in clear outline in the

" ^ * '^^^,Reicks^HUtorie (Frankfurth und Leipzig; 1737), p. 63. Michaelis,
Chur- imd Filrstltchm Hduser tn Deutschland (Lemgo, X759, 60, *85), i. 055, -

VOL. 1. E

OF BRANDENBURG, Book it

• 9 ^

* gray dawn of Modem History. The F ather of whatever ^od has since

* been in Germany. He subdued his Dukes ^ Schwaben, Baiern (S wabia,

* Bavaria) and others, who were getting too hereditary^ smd inclined to

* disobedience. He managed to get back Lorraine ; made tmce with

* the Hungarians, who were excessively invasive at that time. Truce
*■ with the Hungarians ; and then, having gathered strength, made
‘dreadful beating of them ; two beatings, — one to each ^if, for the
‘ invasive Savagery had split itself, for better chance of plunder; £rst

* beating was at Sondershausen, second was at Merseburg, Year 933;

* — ^which settled them considerably. Another beating from Henry’s

* son, and they never came back. Beat Wends, before this, — “Bran-
‘ nibor through frozen bogs” five years ago. Beat Sgjavic Meisseners
‘ (Misnians); Bohemian Czechs, and took Prag; Wends again, with
‘ huge slaughter ; then Danes, and made “King Worm tributary”

‘ (King Corm the Hard, our Knut^s or Canute’s great-grandfather,

‘ Year 931); — ^last of all, those invasive Hungarians as above. Had

* sent the Hungarians, when they demanded tribute or black-mail of

* him as heretofore, Truce being now out, — a mangy hound ; There is

* your black-mail, Sirs ; make much of that !

‘ He had “the image of St. Michael painted on his standard;” con-
‘ trary to wont. He makes, or ;v-makes, Markgrafs (Wardens of the

* Marches), to be under his Dukes, — and not too hereditary. Who his

* Markgraves wore? Dim History counts them to the number of six;^

‘ which take in their order :

‘ I®. Sleswig, looking over into the Scandinavian countries, and the
‘ Norse S ea-kings. This Markgraviate did not last long under that title.

‘ I guess, it became Stade-and-Ditmarsch afterwards.

‘ a®. Soltwedel, — which grows to be Markgraviate of Brandenburg
‘ by and by. Soltwedel, now called Salzwedel, an old Town still ex-
‘ tant, sixty miles to west and north of Brandenburg, short way south
‘ of the Elbe, was as yet headquarters of this second Markgraf ; and

* any Warden we have at Brandenburg is only a deputy of him or some

‘ other. »

‘ 3®. Meissen (which we call Misnia), a country at that time still full

* of Wends.

‘ 4°. Lausitz, also a very Wendish country (called in English maps
‘ Zusatia , — which is its name in Monk-Latin, not now a spoken lan-

* guage). Did not long continue a Markgraviate ; fell to Meissen
‘ (Saxony), fell to Brandenburg, Bohemia, Austria, and had many tos

* and fros. Is now (since the Thirty- Y ears- W ar time) mostly S axon again.

‘5®, Austria (GEsterreich, Eastern -Kingdom, Eastemrey as we

^ ♦ Kohler, Reichs-Historie, p. 66 . This is by no means KShler's chief Book ; but
this too is good, and does^ in a solid effective way, what it attempts. He seems to
me by far the best Histoncal Genius the Germans have ye\. produced, though I do
not find much mention of him in their Literary Histories and Catalogues. A man ot
unple learning, and also of strong cheerful human sense and human nonesty ; whom
>5 » thrice-pleasant to meet witk in those ghastly solitude^ populous duefiy with
doleniicmatuieii.

HENRY THE FOWLER.

Chap, 1 ,

51

928.

* might say) ; to look after the Hungarians, and their valurble'daimf

* to black-mail.

*6®. Antwerp (*‘At-the- Wharf,” ''On-t*- Wharf,” so to speak),
‘ against the French ; which function soon fell obsolete.

‘ These were Henryks six Markgraviates (as my best authority enu-
' merates them) j and in this way he had militia captains ranked all round

* his borders, against the intrusive, Sclavic element.

^He fortified Towns; all Towns are to be walled and warded,— to

* be Bur^s in fact ; and the inhabitants Burghtrs^ or men capable of
‘ defending Burgs. Everywhere the ninth man is to serve as soldier in
‘ his Town ; other eight in the country are to feed and support him :

* B^eergerdthe (War-tackle, what is called Heriot in our old Books) de-

* scends to the eldest son of a fighting man who had served, as with us.

* '‘All robbers are made soldiers” (unless they prefer hanging); and
‘ 7 veaponshows and drill are kept up. This is a man who will make

some impression upon Anarchy, and its Wends and Huns. His
‘ standard was St. Michael, as we have seen, — whose sword is derived
‘ from a very high quarter ! A pious man ; — ^founded Quedlinburg Ab-
‘ bey, and much else in that kind, having a pious Wife withal, Mech-
‘ tildis, who took the main hand in that of Quedlinburg ; whose Life
Ms in Leibnitz,* not the legiblest of Books. — On the whole, p right
'gallant King and “Fowler.” Died, a.d. 936 (at Mcmmleben, a
‘ Monastery on the Unstrut, not far from Schulpfort^, age sixty; had
' reigned only seventeen years, and done so much. Lies buried in
‘ Quedlinburg Abbey any Tomb? I know no Life of him but Gund^

‘ Itng^s^ which is an extremely inextricable Piece, and requires mainly
‘ to be forgotten. — Hail, brave Henry: across the Nine dim Centuries,

* we salute thee, still visible as a valiant Son of Cosmos and Son of Hea-
‘ ven, beneficently sent us; as a man who did in grim earnest “serve
‘ God” in his day, and whose works accordingly bear fruit to our day,

' and to all days !’—

So far my rough Note-books ; which require again to be
shut for the present, not to abuse the reader’s patience or lead
him from his road.

This of Markgrafs (Grafs of the Marches, marked Places,
or Boundaries) was a natural invention in that state of circum-
stances. It did not quite originate with Henry ; but was much
perfected by him, he first recognising how essential it was. On
all frontiers he had his Graf (Zonnt, Reeve, G reeve, whom some
think to be only Grau, Gray, or Senior, the hardiest, wisest
steel-^^y' man he could discover) stationed on the March,
strenuously doing watch and ward there : the post of difficulty,
of peril, and naturally of honour too, nothing of a sinecure by

* LenmiUi Scriptores Rerum Brunswicensinm, &c. (Hanover, 1707), i. 196.

S3 OF BRANDENBURG. Bookm

9^

any means* Which post, like every other, always had a ten-
dency to become hereditary, if the kindred did not fail in fit
men. And hence have come the innumerable Markgraves,
Marquises, and suchlike, of modern times : titles now become
chimerical, and more or less mendacious, as most of our titles
are, — ^like so many Burgs changed into ‘ Boroughs,’ and even
into * Rotten Boroughs,’ with Defensive Burghtxs of the known
sort : very mournful to discover. Once Norroy was not all
pasteboard ! At the heart of that huge whirlwind of his, with
its dusty heraldries, and fantasmal nomenclatures now become
mendacious, there lay, at first, always an earne^.t human fact.
Henry the Fowler was so happy as to have the fact without any
mixture of mendacity : we are in the sad reverse case ; reverse
case not yet altogether complete ^ but daily becoming so, — one
of the saddest and strangest ever heard ofi if we thought of it!
— But to go on with business.

Markgraviates there continued to be ever after, — Six in
Henry’s time : — but as to the number, place, arrangement of
them, all this varied according to circumstances outward and
inward, chiefly^ according to the regress or the reintrusion of
the circumambient hostile populations ; and underwent many
changes. The sea-wall you build, and what main floodgates
you establish in it, will depend on the state of the outer sea.
Markgraf of Slcswig grows into Markgraf of DiUnarsch and
Stadej retiring over the Elbe, if Norse Piracy get very trium»-
phant. Antwerp falls obsolete ; so does Meissen by and by.
Lausitz and Salzwedel, in the third century hence, shrink both
into Brandenburg; which was long only a subaltern station,
managed by deputy from one or other of these. ^ A Markgraf
that prospered in repelling of his Wends and Huns had evid-
ently room to spread himself, and could become very great,
and produce change in boundaries : observe what CEsierreich
(Austria) grew to, and what Brandenburg; Meissen too, which
became modern Saxony, a state once greater than it now is.

In old Books are Lists of the primitive Markgraves of Bran*-
denburg, from Henry’s time downward ; two sets, * Markgraves
of the Witekind race,’ and of another -.6 but they are altogether
uncertain, a shadowy intermittent set of Markgraves, both the
Witekind set and the Non-Witekind ; and ttuly, for a couple

® Habner, GeneaUgische TaUUen (Leipzig, *7aS-8)i >• 17a# »73* A Book of rare
tttceiiOOce in its kind.

Chap.l. HENRY THE FOWLER. S3

998. «

of centuries, seem none of them to have been other than subal-
tern Deputies, belonging mostly to Lausitz or Salzwedel; of
whom therefore we can say nothing here, but must leave the
first two hundred years in their natural gray state, — perhaps
sufficiently conceivable by the reader.

But thus, at any rate, was Brandenburg {Bor or Burg of
the Brenns, whatever these are) first discovered to Christendom,
and added to the firm land of articulate History ; a feat worth
putting on record. Done by Henry the Fowler, in the Year
of Grace 92 — while (among other things noticeable in this
world) our Knut’s great-grandfather, Gormo Durus, * Henry’s
Tributary,’ was still King of Denmark ; when Harald Bluetooth
(Blaatand) was still a young fellow, with his teeth of the natural
colour ; and Swen with the Forked Beard {Tvaeskaeg^ Double-
beard, * Twa-shag') was not born ; and the Monks of Ely had
not yet (by about a hundred years) begun that singing, 7 nor
the tide that refusal to retire, on behalf of this Knut, in our
English part of his dominions.

That Henry appointed due Wardenship in^Brannibor was
in the common course. Sure enough, some Markgraf must take
charge of Brannibor, — he of the Lausitz eastward, for example,
or he of Salzwedel westward :-^that Brannibor, in time, will
itself be found the fit place, and have its own Markgraf of Bran-
denburg ; this, and what in the next nine centuries Bran-
denburg will grow to, Henry is far from surmising. Branden-
burg is fairly captured across the frozen bogs, and has got a
warden and ninth-man garrison settled in it : Brandenburg, like
other things,, will grow to what it can.

Henry’s son and successor, if not himself, is reckoned to
have founded the Cathedral and Bishopric of Brandenburg, —
his Clergy and he always longing much for the conversion of
these Wends and Huns ; which indeed was, as the like still is,
the one thing needful to rugged heathens of that kind.

Without note or comment, in the old Book oj Ely (date before the Conqticst) is
preserved this stave giving picture, if we consider it, of the Fen Country all a lake
(as It was for half the year, till drained, six centunes after), with Ely Monastery

like an island in tne distance ; and the music of its nones or vespers sounding
soft and far over the solitude, eight hundred years ago and more.

Merie sigijjen the l^uneches binnen Merry genially) sang the Monks in

Tha Cnut c^ing rew therby ; As Knnt King routed (rew) there-hy:

Roweth cnites near the lant, Eo7v,/ello7vs \knights,), near the iatid^

And hero we thes Muneches saeng. And hear we these Monks' s song.

See Bentham’s History oJ Ely (Cambridge, 1771), p. 94*

54

OF BRANDENBURG.

Bookll.

997 *

CHAPTER II.

PREUSSEN ; SAINT ADALBERT.

Five-hundred miles, and more, to the east of Brandenburg,
lies a Country then as now called Preussen (Prussia Proper),
inhabited by Heathens, where also endeavours at conversion
are going on, though without success hitherto. Upon which we
are now called to cast a glance.

It is a moory flat country, full of lakes and woods, like
Brandenburg ; spreading out into grassy expanses, and bosky
wildernesses humming with bees ; plenty of bog in it, but plenty
also of alluvial mud ; sand too, but by no means so high a
ratio of it as in Brandenburg ; tracts of Preussen are luxuri-
antly grassy, frugiferous, apt for the plough ; and the soil gener-
ally is reckoned fertile, though lying so far northward. Part
of the great plain or flat which stretches, sloping insensibly,
continuously, in vast expanse, from the Silesian Mountains to
the amber-regions of the Baltic ; Preussen is the seaward, more
alluvial part of<this, — extending west and east, on both sides
oi the Weichsel ( Vistula), from the regions of the Oder river
to the main stream of the Memfl. Bordering-on-Russia its name
signifies : Bor~Russia, B’russia, Prussia ; or — some say it was
only on a certain inconsiderable river on those parts, river Reus-
sen, that it ‘bordered,’ and not on the great Country, or any
part of it, which now in our days is conspicuously its next neigh-
bour. Who knows ? —

In Henry the Fowler’s time, and long afterwards, Preussen
was a vehemently Heathhn country ; the natives a Miscellany
of rough Serbic Wends, Letts, Swedish Goths, or Dryasdust
knows not what ; — very probably a sprinkling of Swedish Goths,
from old time, chiefly along the coasts. Dryasdust knows only
that these Preussen were a strong-boned, iracund herdsman-
and-fisher people ; highly averse to be interfered with, in their
religion especially. Famous otherwise, through all the cen-
turies, for the amber they had been used to fish, and sell in
foreign parts.

Amber, science declares, is a kind of petrified resin, distilled
by pines that were dead before the days of Adam ; which is
now thrown up, in stormy weather, on that remote coast, and
is there fished out by the amphibious people, — ^who can like-

Chap. II. PREUSSEl^r : SAINT ADALBERT. 55

997 - *

wise get it by running mine-shafts into the sandhills on their
coast ; — by whom it is sold into the uttermost parts of the Earth,
Arabia and beyond, from a very early period of time. No
doubt Pytheas had his eye upon this valuable product, when
he ventured into survey of those regions, — which are still the
great mother of amber in our world. By their amber-fishery,
with the aid of dairy-produce and plenty of beef and leather,
these Heathen Preussen, of uncertain miscellaneous breed, con-
trived to support existence in a substantial manner; they figure
to us as an inarticulate, heavy-footed, rather iracund people.
Their knowledge of Christianity was trifling, their aversion to
knowing anything of it was great.

As Poland, and the neighbours to the south, were already
Christian, and even the Bohemian Czechs were mostly con-
verted, pious wishes as to Preussen, we may fancy, were a con-
stant feeling : but no effort hitherto, if efforts were made, had
come to anything. Let some daring missionary go to preach
in that country, his reception is of the worst, or perhaps he is
met on the frontier with menaces, and forbidden to preach at
all ; except sorrow and lost labour, nothing has yet proved at-
tainable. It was very dangerous to go ; — and with what like-
lihood of speeding ? Efforts, we may suppose, are rare ; but
the pious wish being continual and universal, efforts can never
altogether cease. From Henry the Fowler’s capture of Bran-
nibor, count seventy years, we find Henry’s great-grandson
reigning as Elective Kaiser, — Otto III., last of the direct * Saxon
Kaisers,’ Otto Wonder of the World ; — and alongside of Otto’s
great transactions, which were once called Mirabilia Mundi
and are nom fallen so extinct, there is the following small trans-
action, a new attempt to preach in Preussen, going on, which,
contrariwise, is still worth taking notice of.

About the year 997 or ’6, Adalbert, Bishop of Prag, a very
zealous, most devout man, but evidently of hot temper, and
liable to get into quarrels, had determined, after many painful
experiences of the perverse ungovernable nature of corrupt man-
kind, to give up his nominally Christian flock altogether; to
shake the dust off his feet against Prag, and devote himself to
converting those Prussian Heathen, who, across the frontiers,
were living in such savagery, and express bondage to the Devil,
worshipping mere stocks and stones. In this enterprise he was

I# ^ OF BRANDENBURG, Booklf.

V 997*

encouraged by the Chrii^tian potentates who lay contiguous;
especially by the Duke of Poland, to whom such next-neigh*
hours, for all reasons, were an eye-sorrow.

Adalbert went, accordingly, with staff and scrip, two monks
attending him, into that dangerous country : not in fear, he ;
a devout high -tempered man, verging now on fifty, his hair
getting gray, and face marred with innumerable troubles and
provocations of past time. He preached zealously, almost
fiercely, — though chiefly with his eyes and gestures, I should
think, having no command of the language. At Dantzig, among
the Swedish-Goth kind of Heathen, he had sortie success, or
affluence of attendance ; not elsewhere that we hear of. In the
Pillau region, for example, where he next landed, an amphibi-
ous Heathen lout hit him heavily across the shoulders with the
flat of his oar; sent the poor Preacher to the ground, face fore-
most, and suddenly ended his salutary discourse for that time.
However, he pressed forward, regardless of results, preaching
the Evangel to all creatures who were willing or unwilling
and pressed at last into the Sacred Circuit, the *Romovat or
Place of Oak-trees, and of Wooden or Stone Idols (Bangputtis,
Patkullos, and f know not what diabolic dumb Blocks), which
it was death to enter. The Heathen Priests, as we may con-
ceive it, rushed out ; bcckonefl him, with loud unintelligible
bullyings and fierce gestures, to begone ; hustled, shook him,
shoved him, as he did not go ; then took to confused striking,
struck finally a death-stroke on the head of poor Adalbert : so
that * he stretched out both his arms’ (Jesus, receive me thou 1),

‘ and fell with his face to the ground, and lay dead there, — in
‘ the form of a crucifix,’ say his Biographers ; only tjie attendant
monks escaping to tell.

Attendant monks, or Adalbert, had known nothing of their
being on forbidden ground. Their accounts of the phenomenon
accordingly leave it only half-explained : How he was surprised
by armed Heathen Devil’s-servants in his sleep; was violently
set upon, and his ‘ beautiful bowels {pulchra viscera) were run-
through with seven spears but this of the * Romova,’ or Sacred
Bangputtis Church of Oak-trees, perhaps chief Romova of the
Country, rashly intruded into, with consequent strokes, and
fall in the form of a crucifix, appears now fo be the intel-
ligible account.' We will take it for the real manner of Adal-

* Bailie^ Vm dtt Saints (Paris, 1739), iu* 739. Bpllandus, Acta SancUrttm,

Chap. II. PREUSSEN: SAINT ADALBERT. S 7

997 >

bert’s exit; — no doubt of the essential transaction, or that it
was a very flaming one on both sides. The'date given is 23d
April 997 ; date famous in the Romish Calendar since.

He was a Czech by birth, son of a Heathen Bohemian man
of rank; his name (Adalbert, Albert, BrightAxi-Nobleness) he
got * at Magdeburg, whither he had gone to study’ and seek
baptism ; where, as generally elsewhere, his fervent devout ways
were admirable to his fellow-creatures. A 'man of genius,’ we
may well say: one of Heaven’s bright souls, born into the
muddy darkness of this world ; — laid hold of by a transcendent
Message, in tl*s due transcendent degree. He entered Prag,
as Bishop, not in a carriage and six, but ‘ walking barefoot
his contempt for earthly shadows being always extreme. Ac-
cordingly, his quarrels with the saculum were constant and
endless ; his wanderings up and down, and vehement arguings,
in this world, to little visible effect, lasted all his days. We
can perceive he was short-tempered, thin of skin : a violently
sensitive man. For example, once in the Bohemian solitudes,
on a summer afternoon, in one of his thousandfold pilgrimings
and wayfarings, he had lain down to rest, his one or two monks
and he, in some still glade, ‘ with a stone for his pillow’ (as
was always his custom even in J^rag), and had fallen sound
asleep. A Bohemian shepherd chanced to pass that way, war-
bling something on his pipe, as he wended towards looking
after his flock. Seeing the sleepers on their stone pillows, the
thoughtless Czech mischievously blew louder, — started Adal-
bert broad awake upon him ; who, in the fury of the first mo-
ment, shrieked : “ Deafness on thee ! Man cruel to the human
sense of hearing 1 ” or words to that effect. Which curse, like
the most of Adalbert’s, was punctually fulfilled : the amazed
Czech stood deaf as a post, and went about so all his days
after; nay, for long centuries (perhaps down to the present
time, in remote parts), no Czech blows into his pipe in the
woodlands, without certain precautions, and preliminary fu-
glings of a devotional nature.® — From which miracle, as indeed
from many other indications, I infer an irritable nervous-sys-
tem in poor Adalbert ; and find this death in the Romova was
probably a furious^mixture of Earth and Heaven.

AprilU tom. iU. {jiie 23^*; in Edition Venetiis^ 1738), pp. 174-205 Voigt, CtschichU
(KOnigsberg, i827-'39), i 266*70.

* BoUandus, ubi suptik.

S8

OF BRANDENBURG.

Book It.
997 *

At all events, he lies there, beautiful though bloody, ‘in the
form of a crucifix ;* zealous Adalbert, the hot spirit of him now at
last cold; — and has clapt his mark upon the Heathen country,
protesting to the last. This was in the year 997, think the best
Antiquaries. It happened at a place called Fischhausen^ near
Pillau, say they ; on that narrow strip of country which lies
between the Baltic and the Frische Haf (immense Lake, Wash
as we should say, or leakage of shallow water, one of two such,
which the Baltic has spilt out of it in that quarter), — near the
Fort and Haven of Pillau; where there has been much sti^
since ; where Napoleon, for one thing, had some*lough fighting,
prior to the Treaty of Tilsit, fifty years ago. The place, — or
if not this place, then Gnesen in Poland, the final burial-place
of Adalbert, which is better known, — has ever since had a
kind of sacredness; better or worse expressed by mankind:
in the form of canonisation, endless pilgrimages, rumoured
miracles, and suchlike. For shortly afterwards, the neighbour-
ing Potentate, Boleslaus Duke of Poland, heart-struck at the
event, drew sword on these Heathens, and having (if I re-
member) gained some victory, bargained to have the Body of
Adalbert delivered to him at its weight in gold. Body, all cut
in pieces, and nailed to poles,«had long ignominiously withered
in the wind ; perhaps it was now only buried overnight for the
nonce? Being dug up, or being cut down, and put into the
balance, it weighed — less than was expected. It was as light
as gossamer, said pious rumour. Had such an excellent odour
too ; — and came for a mere nothing of gold I This was Adal-
bert’s first miracle after death; in life he had done many hun-
dreds of them, and has done millions since, — chiefly upon para-
lytic nervous -systems, and the element of pious rumour; —
which any Devil’s- Advocate then extant may explain if he canf
Kaiser Otto, Wonder of the World, who had known St. Adah
bert in life, and much honoured him, * made a pilgrimage to
his tomb at Gnesen in the year 1000;* — and knelt there, we
may believe, with thoughts wondrous enough, great and sad
enough.

There is no hope of converting Preussen, then? It will
never leave off its dire worship of Satan, thfen? Say not. Ne-
ver ; that is a weak word. St. Adalbert has stamped his life
upon it, in the form of a crucifix, in lasting protest against
that.

Chap. 111. MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG. 59

lOSJ.

CHAPTER III.

MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG.

Meanwhile our first enigmatic set of Markgraves, or
Deputy-Markgraves, at Brandenburg, are likewise faring ill.
Whoever these valiant steel-gray gentlemen might be (which
Dryasdust does not the least know, and only makes you more
uncertain the more he pretends to tell), one thing is very evid-
ent, they had^o peaceable possession of the place, nor for
above a hundred years, a constant one on any terms. The
Wends were highly disinclined to conversion and obedience :
once and again, and still again, they burst up ; got temporary
hold of Brandenburg, hoping to keep it ; and did frightful
heterodoxies there. So that to our distressed imagination
those poor * Markgraves of Witekind descent,* our first set in
Brandenburg, become altogether shadowy, intermittent, enig-
matic, painfully actual as they once were. Take one instance,
omitting others ; which happily proves to be thf finish of that
first shadowy line, and introduces us to a new set very slightly
more substantial.

*

End of the First Shadowy Line,

In the year 1023, near a century after Henry the Fowler's
feat, the Wends bursting up in never-imagined fury, get hold
of Brandenburg again, — for the third and, one would fain hope,
the last time. The reason was, words spoken by the then
Markgraf of Brandenburg, Dietrich or Theodoric, last of the
Witekind Markgraves ; who hearing that a Cousin of his
(Markgraf or Deputy-Markgraf like himself) was about wed-
ding his daughter to ‘ Mistevoi King of the Wends,’ said too
earnestly : “ Don’t I Will you give your daughter to a dog ?”
Word * dog’ was used, says my authority. 1 Which threw
King Mistevoi into a paroxysm, and raised the Wends. Their
butchery of the German population in poor Brandenburg, espe-

> See Michaelis, Chur- und FUrsilickm H&ttser^ i. 257-9; Pauli, Allgemeine
rreu^Uche Staats-Gesch^hte{lAsXi^, iTeo-'dp), i. i-i8a (the * standard work' on Prus-
quartos, intolerable to human nature): Kloss, Vater*
ianducfu Gemdlde (Berlin, 1833), »• 59-io8 (a Bookseller’s-compilation, with some
^nous Excerpts):— under which lie modem Sagittarius, ancient Adam of Bremen,
^tt^rus Merseburgensis, Wttichifidus Corieiensis, Amoidus Lubecemis, &c. &&
to all lengths and bi eadths.

6» OF BRANDENBURG. nook It.

dally of the Ptiests ; their burning of the Cathedral, and of
Church and State generally, may be conceived. The
ungsberg^ — in our time Marienberg^ pleasant Hill near Bran-
denburg, with its gardens, vines, and whitened cottages : — on
the top of this Harlungsberg the Wends ‘ set up their god
Triglaph a threeheaded Monster of which I have seen prints,
beyond measure ugly. Something like three whale’s-cubs com-
bined by boiling, or a triple porpoise dead-drunk (for the dull
eyes are inexpressible, as well as the amorphous shape) : ugliest
and stupidest of all false gods. This these victorious Wends
set up on the Harlungsberg, Year 1023 ,* and worshipped after
their sort, benighted mortals, — with joy, for a time. The Ca-
thedral was in ashes, Priests all slain or fled, shadowy Mark-
graves the like ; Church and State lay in ashes ; and Triglaph,
like a Triple Porpoise under the influence of laudanum, stood
(I know not whether on his head or on his tail) aloft on the
Harlungsberg, as the Supreme of this Universe, for the time
being.

^ Seco 7 id Shadowy Line.

Whereupon the Ditmarsch-Stade Markgrafs (as some de-
signate them) had to interfere these shadowy Deputies of the
Witekind breed having vanished in that manner. The Dit-
marschers recovered the place ; and with some fighting, did in
the main at least keep Triglaph and the Wends out of it in
time coming. The Wends were fiercely troublesome, and'
fought much ; but I think they never actually got hold of
Brandenburg again. They were beginning to get notions of
conversion : well prcached-to and well beaten-upon, you can-
not hold-out for ever. Even Mistevoi at one time professed
tendencies to Christianity ; perhaps partly for his Bride’s sake,
the dog, we may call him, in a milder sense I But he re-
lapsed dreadfully, after that insult ; and his son worse. On
the other hand, Mistevoi’s grandson was so zealous he went
about with the Missionary Preachers, and interpreted their
German into Wendish ; “ Oh, my poor Wends, will you hear,
then, will you understand ? This solid Earth is but a shadow :
Heaven forever or else Hell forever, that is the reality I" Such
^ difference between right and wrong’ no Wend had heard ot
before ; quite tremendously * important if true 1 ’ — And doubt-
less it impressed many. There are heavy Ditmarsch strokes

Chap, III. MARKGRAVES OF BRANDENBURG.

txy>>

for the unimpressible. By degrees all got converted, though
many were killed first ; and, one way or other, the Wends are
preparing to efface themselves as a distinct people.

This Stade-and~Ditmarsch family (of Anglish or Saxon
breed, if that is an advantage) seem generally to have fur*,
nished the Salzwedel Office as well, of which Brandenburg
was an offshoot, done by deputy, usually also of their kin.
They lasted in Brandenburg rather more than a hundred
years ; — with little or no Book-History that is good to read ;
their History inarticulate rather, and stamped beneficently on
the face of th-kigs. Otto is a common name among them.
One of their sisters, too, Adelhcid (Adelaide, Nobleness) had
a strange adventure with ‘ Ludwig the Springer :* romantic
mythic man, famous in the German world, over whom my
readers and I must not pause at this time.

In Salzwedel, in Ditmarsch, or wherever stationed, they
had a toilsome fighting life : sore difficulties with their
marschers too, with the plundering Danish populations ; Mark-
graf after Mavkgraf getting killed in the business. 'Erschlagen,
slain fighting with the Heathen,’ say the old Bpoks, and pass
on to another. Of all which there is now silence forever. So
many years men fought and planned and struggled there, all
forgotten now except by the gods ; and silently gave away
their life, before those countries could become foncible and
habitable ! Nay, my friend, it is our lot too ; and if we would
win honour in this Universe, the rumour of Histories and
Morning Newspapers, — ^which have to become wholly zero,
one day, and fall dumb as stones, and which were not per-
haps very wisp even while speaking, — will help us little ! —

Substantial Marh^aves : Glimpse of the Contemporary
Kaisers.

The Ditmarsch-Stade kindred, much slain in battle with
the Heathen, and otherwise beaten upon, died out, about the
year 1130 (earlier perhaps, perhaps later, for all is shadowy
still) ; and were succeeded in the Salzwedel part of ‘their func-
tion by a kindred called ' oi Ascanien and Ballenstadt the
Ascanier or Anhdlt Markgraves ; whose History, and that of
Brandenburg, becomes henceforth articulate to us ; a History
ttot doubtful or shadowy any longer ; but ascertainablcj if

«a OF BRANDENBURG. BookH.

1130.

reckoned worth ascertaining. Who succeeded in Ditmarsch,
let us by no means inquire. The Empire itself was in some
disorder at this time, more abstruse of aspect than usual ; and
these Northern Markgrafs, already become important people,
and deep in general politics, had their own share in the con-
fusion that was going.

It was about this same time that a second line of Kaisers
had died out : the Frankish or Salic line, who had succeeded
to the Saxon, of Henry the Fowler’s blood. For the Empire
too, though elective, had always a tendency to become here-
ditary, and go in lines : if the last Kaiser left ar son not unfit,
who so likely as the son ? But he needed to be fit, otherwise
it would not answer, — otherwise it might be worse for him I
There were great labours in the Empire too, as well as on the
Sclavic frontier of it : brave men fighting against anarchy (ac-
tually set in pitched fight against it, and not always Strong
enough), — toiling sore, according to their faculty, to pull the
innumerable crooked things straight. Some agreed well with
the Pope, — as Henry II., who founded Bamberg Bishopric,
and much elsc^ of the like '? “ a sore saint for the crown,” as
was said of David I., his Scotch congener, by a descendant.
Others disagreed very much indeed ; — Henry IV.’s scene at
Canossa, with Pope Hildebrand and the pious Countess (year
1077, Kaiser of the Holy Roman Empire waiting, three days,
in the snow, to kiss the foot of excommunicative Hildebrand),
has impressed itself on all memories ! Poor Henry rallied
out of that abasement, and dealt a stroke or two on Hilde-"
brand ; but fell still lower before long, his very Son going
against him ; and came almost to actual want »of bread, had
not the Bishop of Lidge been good to him. Nay, after death,
he lay four years waiting vainly even for burial, — ^but indeed
cared little about that.

Certainly this Son of his, Kaiser Henry V., does not shine
in filial piety : but probably the poor lad himself was hard
bested. He also came to die, a.d. 1125, still little over forty,
and was the last of the Frankish Kaisers. He ‘left ilsxitReichs-
Insignien' (Crown, Sceptre and Coronation gear) ‘to his Widow
and young Friedrich of Hohenstauffen,* a sifter’s son of his,— -

ALBERT THE BEAR.

Chap. IV.

6J

TI30.

hoping the said Friedrich might, partly by that help, follow as
Kaiser. Which Friedrich could not do ; being wheedled, both
the Widow and he, out of their insignia, under false pretences,
and otherwise left in the lurch. Not Friedrich, bat one Lothar,
a stirring man who had grown potent in the Saxon countries,
was elected Kaiser. In the end, after waiting till Lothar was
done, Friedrich’s race did succeed, and with brilliancy, — Kaiser
Barbarossa being that same Friedrich’s son. In regard to which
dim complicacies, take this Excerpt from the imbroglio of Manu-
scripts, before they go into the fire ;

* By no me^s to be forgotten that the Widow we here speak of,

* Kaiser Henry V.’s Widow, who brought no heir to Henry V., was

* our English Henry Beauclerc^s daughter, — ^grand-daughter therefore

* of William Conqueror, — the same who, having (in 1127, the second

* year of her widowhood) married Godefroi Count of Anjou, produced
‘ our Henry II. and our Plantagcnets ; and thereby, through her vic-
‘ torious Controversies with King Stephen (that noble peer whose
‘ breeches stood him so cheap), became very celebrated as “the Em-

* press Maud,” in our old History -Books. Mathildis, Dowager of

* Kaiser Henry V., to whom he gave his Reichs-Insignia at dying :
‘ she is the “Empress Maud” of English Books; a^jd relates herself

* In this manner to the Hohenstauffen Dynasty, and intricate German

* vicissitudes. Be thankful for any hook whatever on which fo hang
. * half an acre of thrums in fixed position, out of your way ; the small-
‘ est flint-spark, in a world all black and unremembcrable, will be wel-

* come.* —

And so we return to Brandenburg and the * A seamen and Bal*
lenstddt' series of Markgraves.

• CHAPTER IV.

ALBERT THE BEAR.

This Ascanien, happily, has nothing to do with Brute of
Troy or the pious ^Eneas's son ; it is simply the name of a most
ancient Castle (etymology unknown to me, ruins still dimly
traceable) on the north slope of the Hartz Mountains ; short
way from Aschersleben, — the Castle and Town of Aschersleben
arc, so to speak, a second edition of Ascanien. Ballenstadt is
still older ; Ballerfstadt was of age in Charlemagne’s time ; and
is still a respectable little Town in that upland range of coun-
try, The kindred, called Grafs and ultimately Herzogs (Dukes)

54 OF BRANDENBURG. BooJtft.

Iff*.

of * Ascanien and Bailenstadt/ are very famous in old German
History, especially down from this date. Some reckon that
they had intermittently been Markgrafs, in their region, long
before this ; which is conceivable enough : at all events it is
very plain they did now attain the Office in Salzwedel (straight*
way shifting it to Brandenburg ) ; and held it continuously, it
and much else that lay adjacent, for centuries, in a highly con**
spicuous manner.

In Brandenburg they lasted for about two-hundred years ;
in their Saxon dignities, the younger branch of them did not
die out (and give place to the Wettins that no^ are) for five- ^
hundred. Nay they have still their representatives on the Earth :
Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, celebrated “Old Dessauer," come
of the junior branches, is lineal head of the kin in Friedrich
Wilhelm’s time (while our little Fritzchen lies asleep in his
cradle at Berlin) ; and a certain Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, Co-
lonel in the Prussian Army, authentic Prince, but with purse
much shorter than pedigree, will have a Daughter by and by,
who will go to Russia, and become almost too conspicuous, as
Catharine II., |here ! —

‘ Brandenburg now as afterwards,* says one of my old Papers, ‘was

* officially reckoned Saxon ; part*of the big Duchy of Saxony; where

* certain famed Bt Hungs, lineage of an old “Count Bilking” (connected

* or not with Billlngs-g^aia in our country, I do not know) had long
‘ borne sway. Of which big old Billungs I will say nothing at all

‘ this only, that they died out; and a certain Albert, “Count of Asca-

* nien and BallensUidt” (say, of Anhalt, in modem terms), whose mo- ’

* ther was one of their daughters, came in for the northern part of their
‘ inheritance. He made a clutch at the Southern too, but did not long

* retain that. Being a man very swift and very sharp, at once nimble

* and strong, in the huge scramble that there then was, — Uncle Billung

* dead without heirs, a Salic line of emperors going or gone out, and a
‘ Ilohenstatiffen not yet come in, — he made a rich game of it for him-
‘ self; the rather as Lothar, the intermediate Kaiser, was his cousin,

* and there were other good cards which he played well.

‘This is he they call “Albert the Bear {Albrecht der Bar) 'P first

* of the Ascanien Markgraves of Brandenburg ; — ^first wholly definite-

* Markgraf of Brandenburg that there is ; once a very shining figure in

* the world, though now fallen dim enough again. It is evident he had

* a quick eye, as well as a strong hand ; and could#pick what way was
‘ straightest among crooked things. He got the Northern part of what
‘ is still called Saxony, and kept it in his family ; got the Brandenburg

* Countries withal, got the Lausitz; w^ the shining figure and great^

ALBERT THE BEAR;

ClAp, IV.

7t4»>

‘ man of the North in his day. The Markgrafdom of Salmmlel (which
‘ soon became of Brandenburg) he very naturally acquired (a., d. 114a
‘ or earlier) ; very naturally, considering what Saxon and other honours
‘ and possessions he had already got hold of.*—

We can only say, it was fhe luckiest of events for Brandenburg,
and the beginning of all the better destinies it has had. A con-
spicuous Country ever since in the world, and which grows ever
more so in our late times.

He had many wars ; inextricable coil of claimings, quar-
reilings and agreeings : fought much, — fought in Italy, too,

‘ against the Pagans’ (Saracens, that is). Cousin to one Kaiser,
the Lothar above named ; then a chief stay of the Hohenstauf-
fen, of the two Hohenstauffens who followed ; a restless, much-
managing, wide-warring man. He stood true by the great Bar-
barossa, second of the Hohenstauffen, greatest of all the Kaisers ;
which was a luck for him, and perhaps a merit. He kept well
with three Kaisers in his time. Had great quarrels with * Henry
the Lion’ about that ‘ Billung’ Saxon Heritage ; Henry carry-
ing off the better part of it from Albert. Except that same
Henry, head of the Guclphs or Welfs, who hat! not Albert’s
talent, though wider lands than Albert, there was no German
prince so important in that time..

He transferred the Markgrafdom to Brandenburg, probably
as more central in his wide lands ; Salzwedel is henceforth the
led Markgrafdom or March, and soon falls out of notice in the
world. Salzwedel is called henceforth ever since the ‘ Old
Marck {Alte March, AUmarck)'^ the Brandenburg countries
getting the name of ‘ New Marck.’ Modern Nemnarh, modern
‘ Middle -Marck’ (in which stands Brandenburg itself in our
time), * C/cher-Mnrek' {Outside Marck, — word Uckeris still seen
in Ukraine, for instance) : these are posterior Divisions, fallen-
upon as Brandenburg (under Albert chiefly) enlarged itself, and
needed new Official parcellings into departments.

Under Albert the Markgrafdom had risen to be nn Elector-
ate withal. The Markgraf of Brandenburg was now further-
more the Kurfurst of Brandenburg ; officially * Arch-treasurer
of the Holy Romaa Empire and one of the Seven who have
a right (which became about this time an exclusive one for those
Seven) to choose, to kieren the Romish ’ Kaiser ,* and who are
therefore called Kur Princes, KurfUrste or Electors, as the high-

VOL* I. F

66

OF BRANDENBURG.

Book If.

est dignity except the Kaiser’s own. In reference to which ab-
struse matter, likely to concern us somewhat, will the unin-
structed English reader consent to the following Excerpt, slightly
elucidatory of KurfUrsis and their function ?

*Furst (Prince) I suppose is equivalent originally to our noun of

* number, First, The old verb kierm (participle erkoren still in use,

* not to mention ** Val-^^/r” and other instances) is essentially the same

* word as our choose^ being written kiesen as well as Merm, Nay, say

‘ the etymologists, it is also written (to kiss ^ — to with such

‘ emphasis!), and is not likely to fall obsolete in that form. — The other
‘ Six Electoral Dignitaries, who grew to Eight by degrees, and may be

* worth noting once by the readers of this Book, are :

^ 1®. Three Ecclesiastical, Mainz^ Coln^ Trier (Mentz, Cologne,

* Treves), Archbishops all, with sovereignty and territory more or less

* considerable ; — who used to be elected as Popes are, theoretically by

* their respective Chapters and the Heavenly Inspirations, but practi-
‘ cally by the intrigues and pressures of the neighbouring Potentates,

* especially France and Austria.

*2®. Three Secular, Sachsen y PfalZy Bohinen (Saxony, Palatinate,

* Bohemia) j of which the last, Bbkmeny since it fell from being a King-
‘ dom in itself, to being a Province of Austria, is not very vocal in the
‘ Diets. These fix, with Brandenburg, are the Seven Kurfiirsts in old

* time ; Septemvirs of the Country, so to speak.

* But now PfalZy in the Thirty- Years War (under our Prince Ru-

* pert’s Father, whom the Gerraams call the “Winter-King”), got ab-

* rogated, put to the ban, so far as an indignant Kaiser could ; and the
*• vote and Kur of Pfalz was given to bis Cousin oiBatern (Bavaria), —

* so far as an indignant Kaiser could. However, at the Peace of West-

* phalia (1648) it was found incompetent to any Kaiser to abrogate

* Pfalz or the like of Pfalz, a Kurfurst of the Empire. So, after jargon
‘ inconceivable, it was settled. That must be reinstated, though with

* territories much clipped, and at the bottom of the list, not the top as

* formerly ; and that Baierny who could not stand to be balked after

* twenty-years possession, must be made Eighth Elector, The Ninthy
‘ we saw (Year 1692), was Gentleman Ernst oi Hanover, There never

* was any Tenth; and the Holy Pbmische Reichy which was a grand ob-

* ject once, but had gone about in a superannuated and plainly crazy
‘ state for some centuries back, was at last put out of pain, by Napoleon,

* “6th August 1806,” and allowed to cease from this T^orli’'

None of Albert’s wars are so comfortable to reflect on as
those he had with the anarchic Wends ; whom he now fairly
beat to powder, and either swept away, or ^se damped-down
into Christianity and keeping of the peace. Swept them away
otherwise ; * peopling their lands extensively with Colonists from
* Ms. ^nes m#.

cup. IV. ALBERT THE BEAR. «7

1170. *

< Holland, whom an inroad of the sea had rendered homeless
* there.* Which surely was a useful exchange. Nothing better
is known to me of Albert the Bear than this his introducing
large numbers of Dutch Netherlanders into those countries ^
men thrown-out of work, who already knew how to deal with
bog and sand, by mixing and delving, and who first taught
Brandenburg what greenness and cow-pasture was. The Wends,
in presence of such things, could not but consent more and
more to efface themselves, — either to become German, and
grow milk and cheese in the Dutch manner, or to disappear
from the world.

The Wendish Princes had a taste for German wives ; in
which just taste the Albert genealogy was extremely willing to
indulge them. Affinities produce inheritances ; by proper mar-
riage-contracts you can settle on what side the most contingent
inheritance shall at length fall. Dim but pretty certain lies a
time coming when the Wendish Princes also shall have effaced
themselves; and all shall be German - Brandenburgish, not
Wendish any more. — The actual Inhabitants of Brandenburg,
therefore, are either come of Dutch Bog-farmer j, or are simple
Lower Saxons (‘Anglo-Saxon,’ if you like that better), Platt-
Teutsch of the common type ; ^n unexceptionable breed of
people. Streaks of Wendish population, extruded gradually
into the remoter quagmires, and more inaccessible, less valu-
able sedgy moors and sea-strands, are scattered about ; Meck-
lenburg, which still subsists separately after a sort, is reckoned
peculiarly Wendish. In Mecklenburg, Pommern, Pommerellen
(Little Pomerania), are still to be seen physiognomies of a
Wendish or Vandalic type (more of cheek than there ought to
be, and less of brow; otherwise good enough physiognomies of
their kind) : but the general mass, tempered with such admix-
tures, is of the Platt-Deutsch, Saxon or even Anglish character
we are familiar with here at home. A patient stout people ;
meaning considerable things, and very incapable of speaking
what it means.

Albert was a fine tall figure himself ; der Sch 'dne, “ Albert
the Handsome,” was his name as often as “Albert the Bear.”
That latter epithej he got, not from his looks or qualities, but
merely from his heraldic cognisance : a Bear on his shield. As
was then the mode of names ; surnames being scant, and not
yet fixedly in existence. Thus too his contemporaries, Henry

68 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookii,

IZ7O1

the Lion of Saxony and Welfdom, William the Lion of Scotland,
were not, either of them, specially leonine men : nor had the
Plantagenets^ or Geoffrey of Anjou, any connexion with the
Plant of Broom, except wearing a twig of it in their caps on
occasion. Men are glad to get some designation for a grand
Albert they are often speaking of, which shall distinguish him
from the many small ones. Albert “the Bear, der Bar will
do as well as another.

It was this one first that made Brandenburg peaceable and
notable. We might call him the second founder of Branden-
burg ; he, in the middle of the Twelfth Centurf, completed for
it what Henry the Fowler had begun early in the Tenth. After
two-hundred and fifty years of barking and worrying, the Wends
are now finally reduced to silence ; their anarchy well buried,
and wholesome Dutch cabbage planted over it : Albert did se-
veral great things in the world; but this, for posterity, remains
his memorable feat. Not done quite easily; but done: big
destinies of Nations or of Persons are not founded gratis in
this world. He had a sore toilsome time of it, coercing, war-
ring, managing among his fellow-creatures, while his dayswork
lasted, — fifty years or so, for it began early. He died in his
Castle of Ballenstadt, peaceably among the Hartz Mountains
at last, in the year 1 1 70, age about sixty-five. It was in the
time while Thomas h Becket was roving about the world, com-
ing home excommunicative, and finally getting killed in Can-
terbury Cathedral; — while Abbot Samson, still a poor little
brown Boy, came over from Norfolk, holding by his mother’s
hand, to St. Edrnundsbury ; having seen < Safanas with out-
spread wings* fearfully busy in this world. #

CHAPTER V.

CONRAD OF HOIIENZOLLERN ; AND KAISER BARBAROSSA.

It was in those same years that a stout young fellow, Con-
rad by name, far off in the southern parts of Germany, set out
from the old Castle of Hohenzollern, where he was but junior,
and had small outlooks, upon a very great q?*rand in the world.
From Hohenzollern; bound now towards Gelnhausen, Kaisers-
lautern, or whatever temporary lodging the great Kaiser Bar-
barossa might be known to have, who was a wandering man,

aap.V. CONRAD OF HOHENZOLLERN.

X170.

his business lying everywhere over half the world, and needing
the master’s eye. Cpnrad’s purpose is to find Barbarossa, and
seek fortune under him.

This is a very indisputable event of those same years. The
exact date, the figure, circumstances of it were, most likely,
never written anywhere but on Conrad’s own brain, and are
now rubbed out forevermore; but the event itself is certain;
and of the highest concernment to this Narrative. Somewhere
about the year 1170, likeliest a few years before that,i this
Conrad, riding down from Hohenzollern, probably with no great
stock of luggage about him, — ^little dreams of being connected
with Brandenburg on the other side of the world ; but zs un-
consciously more so than any other of the then sons of Adam.
He is the lineal ancestor, twentieth in direct ascent, of the little
Boy now sleeping in his cradle at Berlin ; let him wait till nine-
teen generations, valiantly like Conrad, have done their part,
and gone out, Conrad will find he is come to this ! A man’s
destiny is strange always ; and never wants for miracles, or
will want, though it sometimes may for eyes to discern them.

Hohenzollern lies far south in Scliwaben (Suabia), on the
sunward slope of the Rauhe-Alp»Country ; no great way north
from Constance and its Lake; but well aloft, near the springs
of the Danube ; its back leaning on the Black Forest ; it is per-
haps definable as the southern summit of that same huge old
Hercynian Wood, which is still called the Schwarswald (Black
Forest), though now comparatively bare of trees. 2 Fanciful
Dryasdust, doing a little etymology, will tell you the name Zol-
lent is equivalent to Tollery or Place of Tolls. Whereby Ho-
henzoUern comes to mean the High or Upper Tollery; — and
gives one the notion of antique pedlars climbing painfully, out
of Italy and the Swiss valleys, thus far ; unstrapping their pack-
horses here, and chaffering in unknown dialect about toll. Poor
souls ; — it may be so, but we do not know, nor shall it concern

* Rentsch, Brattdenhur^isckerCeder-Hein{yiz\tQ\\:Cn.^ 1682), pp. 273-6. ~See also
Johann Ulrich Pregitzern, TeutscherRegierungs- undEhren-Sptegei, vorbildend^c.
des Hanses Hohenzollern (Berlin, 1703), pp. 90-3. A learned and painful Book: by
a Tubingen Professor, who is deeply read in the old Histones, and gives Portraits
and other Engravings or some value.

* ‘Tliere are stfll considerable spottings of wood {pine mainly, and “black”

‘ enough) , Holz-handel (timber-trade) stUl a considerable branch of business there ;

* —and on the streams of the country are cunning contrivances noticeablt, for float-

* ing down the article into the Necku river, and thence into the Rhine and to Hol-
*land.* {Tourist' s Note.)

70

THE HOHENZOLLERNS.

Book It.
1170.

1^. This only is known : That a human kindred, probably oi
some talent for coercing anarchy and guiding mankind, had,
centuries ago, built its Burg- there, and done that function in a
small but creditable way ever since; — ^kindred possibly enough
derivable from ‘Thassilo,* Charlemagne, King Dagobert, and
other Kings, but certainly from Adam and the Almighty Maker,
who had given it those qualities ; — and that Conrad, a junior
member of the same, now goes forth from it in the way we see.
“Why should a young fellow that has capabilities,” thought
Conrad, “stay at home in hungry idleness, with no estate but
his javelin and buff jerkin, and no employment but his hawks,
when there is a wide opulent world waiting only to be con-
quered?” This was Conrad’s thought; and it proved to be a
very just one.

It was now the flower- time of the Romish Kaisership of
Germany ; about the middle or noon of Barbarossa himself,
second of the Hohcnstauffens, and greatest of all the Kaisers
of that or any other house. Kaiser fallen unintelligible to most
modern readers, and wholly unknown, which is a pity. No
King so furnislied-out with apparatus and arena, with personal
faculty to rule and scene to do it in, has appeared elsewhere.
A magnificent magnanimous ^man ; holding the reins of the
world, not quite in the imaginary sense ; scourging anarchy
down, and urging noble effort up, really on a grand scale. A
terror to evildoers and a praise to welldoers in this world, pro-
bably beyond what was ever seen since. Whom also we salute
across the centuries, as a choice Beneficence of Heaven. * En-
camped on the Plain of Roncaglia’ (when he entered Italy, as
he too often had occasion to do), *his shield was* hung out on
a high mast over his tent and it meant in those old days,
“ Ho, every one that has suffered wrong; here is a Kaiser come
to judge you, as he shall answer it to M's Master,” And men
gathered round him; and actually found some justice, — if they
could discern it when found. Which they could not always do ;
neither was the justice capable of being perfect always. A fear-
fully difficult function, that of Friedrich Redbeard. But an in-
exorably indispensable one in this world ; — though sometimes
dispensed with (to the huge joy of Anarchy, Mj^ich sings Halle-
lujah through all its Newspapers) for a season I

Kaiser Friedrich had immense difficulties with his Popes,
with his Milanese, and the like ; — besieged Milan six times

Chap.V. CONRAD OF HOHENZOLLERN. 71

XX70.

over, among other anarchies had indeed a heavy-laden hard
time of it, his task being great and the greatcbt. He made
Gebhardus, the anarchic Governor of Milan, ‘lie chained under
his table, like a dog, for three days.’ For the man was in
earnest, in that earnest time : — and let us say, they are but
paltry sham-men who are not so, in any time ; paltry, and far
worse than paltry, however high their plumes may be. Of
whom the sick world (Anarchy, both vocal and silent, having
now swoln rather high) is everywhere getting weary. — Geb-
hardus, the anarchic Governor, lay three days under the Kai-
ser’s table ; a? it would be well if every anarchic Governor, of
the soft type and of the hard, were made to do on occasion ;
asking himself, in terrible earnest, “ Am I a dog, then ; alas,
am not I a dog ?” Those were serious old times.

On the other hand, Kaiser Friedrich had his Tourneys,
his gleams of bright joyances now and then ; one great gather-
ing of all the chivalries at Mainz, which lasted for three weeks
long, the grandest Tourney ever seen in this world. Geln-
hausen, in the Wetterau (ruin still worth seeing, on its Island
in the Kinzig river), is understood to have hfeen one of his
Houses ; Kaiserslautern (Kaiser’s Limpid^ from its clear
spring-water) in the Pfalz (what^we call Palatinate), another.
He went on the Crusade in his seventieth year ;•’ thinking to
himself, “ Let us end with one clear act of piety — he cut his
way through the dangerous Greek attorneyisms, through the
hungry mountain passes, furious Turk fanaticisms, like a gray
old hero : “ Woe is me, my son has perished, then ?” said he
once, tears wetting the beard now white enough ; “My son is
slain ! — But Christ still lives; let us on, my men I” And gained
great victories, and even found his son ; but never returned
home ; — died, some unknown sudden death, * in the river Cyd-
nus,’ say the most.^ Nay German Tradition thinks he is not
yet dead ; but only sleeping, till the bad world reach its worst,
W’hen he will reappear. He sits within the Hill near Salzburg
yonder, — says German Tradition, its fancy kindled by the
strange noises in that Hill (limestone Hill) from hidden waters,
and by the grand rocky look of the place : — A peasant once,
stumbling into th^ interior, saw the Kaiser in his stone cavern ;

* A.D. 1x89; Saladin having, to the universal sorrow, taken Jerusalem.

^ Kiihler (p. 188), and the Authorities cited by him. Bunau’s Deutsche Kaiser*
Reichs-Historie 2738-'43), L, is the express Book on Barbarossa: an

elaborate, instructive Volume.

72 .. THE HOHENZOLLERNS. B(^klt

XtJO,

‘Kaiser sat at a marble table, leaning on his elbow ,* winking,
only half asleep ; beard had grown through the table, and
streamed out on the floor ; he looked at the peasant one mo-
ment ; asked him something about the time it was ; then
drooped his eyelids again : Not yet time, but will be soon 1^
He is winking as if to awake. To awake, and set his shield
aloft by the Roncalic Fields again, with : Ho, every one that
is suffering wrong ; — or that has strayed guideless, devil-ward,
and done wrong, which is far fataler 1

•

Conrad has become Burggraf of Nurnherg (A.r>. 1170 ).

This was the Kaiser to whom Conrad addressed himself ;
and he did it with success ; which may be taken as a kind of
testimonial to the worth of the young man. Details we have
absolutely none : but there is no doubt that Conrad recom-
mended himself to Kaiser Rcdbeard, nor any that the Kaiser
was a judge of men. Very earnest to discern men’s worth and
capabilities ; having unspeakable need of worth, instead of un-
worth, in thostf under him ! We may conclude he had found
capabilities in Conrad ; found that the young fellow did effective
services as the occasion rosf, and knew how to work, in a
swift, resolute, judicious and exact manner. Promotion was
not likely on other terms ; still less, high promotion.

One thing farther is known, significant for his successes :
Conrad found favour with ‘ the Heiress of the Vohburg Family,*
desirable young heiress, and got her to wife. The Vohburg
Family, now much forgotten everywhere, and never heard of
in England before, had long been of supreme ftnportance, of
immense possessions, and opulent in territories, and we need
not add, in honours and offices, in those Franconian Nurnberg
regions ; and was now gone to this one girl. I know not that
she had much inheritance after all ; the vast Vohburg proper-
ties lapsing all to the Kaiser, when the male heirs were out.
But she had pretensions, tacit claims ; in particular, the Voh-
burgs had long been habitual or in effect hereditary Burggrafs
of Nurnberg ; and if Conrad had the talent for that office, he
now, in preference to others, might have a cl^nce for it. Sure
enough, he got it ; took root in it, he and his ; and, in the

^ Riesebeck's Trertteh (English Translation, London, 1787), i. X4a BQsching,
V^iks-Sagent &c. (Leipzig, xSao), t. 333; &c. &c.

KAISER BARBAROSSA. ’

Ouip-V.

ti

1170,

course of centuries, branched up from it, high and wide, over
the adjoining countries; waxing towards still higher destinies.
That is the epitome of Conrad’s history ; history now become
very great, but then no bigger than its neighbours, and very
meagerly recorded ; of which the reflective reader is to make
what he can.

There is nothing clearly known of Conrad more than these
three facts : That he was a cadet of Hohenzollern (whose fa-
ther’s name, and some forefathers’ names are definitely known
in the family archives, but do not concern us) ; that he mar-
ried the Heiress of the Vohburgs, whose history is on record
in like manner ; and that he was appointed Burggraf of Niirn-
bcrg, year not precisely known, — but before 1 1 70, as would
seem. * In a Reichstag (Diet of the Empire) held at Regens-
burg in or about 1170,’ he formally complains, he and certain
others, all stanch Kaiser’s-friends (for in fact it was with the
Kaiser’s knowledge, or at his instigation), of Henry the Lion’s
high procedures and malpractices ; of Henry’s League with
the Pope, League with the King of Denmark, and so forth ;
the said Henry having indeed fallen into oppotition, to a dan-
gerous degree ; — :and signs himself Burggraf of Nurnberg^ say
the old Chronicles.® The old IJocument itself has long since
perished, I conclude : but the Chronicles may be accepted as
reporters of so conspicuous a thing ; which was the beginning
of long strife in Germany, and proved the ruin of Henry the
Lion, supreme Welf grown over-big, — and cost our English
Henry IL, whose daughter he had married, a world of trouble
and expense, we may remark withal. Conrad therefore is
already Burggraf of Niirnberg, and a man of mark, in 1170 ;
and his marriage, still more his first sally from the paternal
Castle to seek his fortune, must all be dated earlier.

More is not known of Conrad : except indeed that he did
not perish in Barbarossa’s grand final Crusade. For the anti-
quaries have again found him signed to some contract, or other-
wise insignificant document, a.d. 1200. Which is proof posi-
tive that he did not die in the Crusade ; and proof probable
that he was not of it, — few, hardly any, of those stalwart 1 50,000
champions of thei Cross having ever got home again. Conrad,
by this time, might have sons come to age ; fitter for arms and
fatigues than he : and indeed at Niirnberg, in Deutschland

® Rentsch, p. 376 (who Aventinus^ Triti/teim, Ac.).

74 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookir.

ZX70.

generally, as Official Prince of the Empire, and man of weight
and judgment, Conrad’s services might be still more useful, and
the Kaiser’s interests might require him rather to stay at home
in that juncture. Burggraf of Nurnberg he continued to be ; he
and his descendants, first in a selective, then at length in a di'*
rectly hereditary way, century after century ; and so long as
that office lasted in Nurnberg (which it did there much longer
than in other Imperial Free-Cities), a Comes de Zolre of Con-
rad’s producing was always the man thenceforth.

Their acts, in that station and capacity, as Burggraves and
Princes of the Empire, were once conspicuous though in Ger-
man History ; and indeed are only so dim now, because the
History itself is, and was always, dim to us on this side of the
sea. They did strenuous work in their day ; and occasionally
towered up (though little driven by the poor wish of * towering*
or * shining’ without need) into the high places of Public His-
tory. They rest now from their labours, Conrad and his suc-
cessors, in long series, in the old Monastery of Heilsbronn (be-
tween Nurnberg and Anspach), with Tombs to many of them,
which were very legible for slight Biographic purposes in my
poor friend Rentsch’s time, a hundred and fifty years ago ; and
may perhaps still have some quasi-use, as ‘ sepulchral brasses,*
to another class of persons. *One or two of those old buried
Figures, more peculiarly important for our little Friend now
sleeping in his cradle yonder, we must endeavour, as the Nar-
rative proceeds, to resuscitate a little, and render visible for
moments.

Of the HohenzoUern Burggraves generally.

As to the Office, it was more important than perhaps the
reader imagines. We already saw Conrad first Burggraf, among
the magnates of the country, denouncing Henry the Lion. Every
Burggraf of Nurnberg is, in virtue of his office, ‘ Prince of the
Empire :’ if a man happened to have talent of his own, and
solid resources of his own (which are always on the growing
hand with this family), here is a basis from which he may go
far enough. Burggraf of Nurnberg : that means again Graf
(judge, defender, manager, g'reeve) of the Kaiser’s Burg or
Castle, — in a word Kaiser’s Representative and Alter Ego , —
in the old Imperial Free-Town of Nurnberg ; with much adja-
cent very complex territory, also, to administer for the Kaiser.

KAISER BARBAROSSA.

Cbap.V.

tijo.

A flourishing extensive City, this old NUrnberg, with valuable
adjacent territory, civic and imperial, intricately intermixed ;
full of commercial industries, opulences, not without democratic
tendencies. Nay it is almost, in some senses, the London and
Middlesex of the Germany that then was, if we will consider
it I

This is a place to give a man chances, and try what stuff
is in him. The office involves a talent for governing, as well
as for judging ; talent for fighting also, in cases of extremity,
and what is still better, a talent for avoiding to fight. None
but a man of dbmpetent 'superior parts can do that function ; I
suppose, no imbecile could have existed many months in it, in
the old earnest times. Conrad and his succeeding Hohcnzol-
lerns proved very capable to do it, as would seem ; and grew
and spread in it, waxing bigger and bigger, from their first
planting thpre by Kaiser Barbarossa, a successful judge of men.
And ever since that time, from * about the year 1170,’ down to
the year 1815, — when so much was changed, owing to another
(temporary) ‘Kaiser’ of new type, Napoleon his name, — the
Hohenzollerns have had a footing in Frankenl^nd; and done
sovereignty in and round Nurnberg, with an enlarging Terri-
tory in that region. Territory at last of large compass ,* which,
under the names Margrafdom of Anspach, and of Baireuth^ or
in general Margrafdom of Culmbachy which includes both, has
become familiar in History.*

For the House went on steadily increasing, as it were, from
the first day ; the Hohenzollerns being always of a growing,
gaining nature ; — as men are that live conformably to the laws
of this Universe, and of their place therein ; which, as will ap-
pear from good study of their old records, though idle rumour,
grounded on no study, sometimes says the contrary, these Ho-
henzollerns eminently were. A thrifty, stedfast, diligent, clear-
sighted, stout-hearted line of men ; of loyal nature withal, and
even to be called just and pious, sometimes to a notable de-
gree. Men not given to fighting, where it could be avoided ;
yet with a good swift stroke in them, where it could not ;
princely people jfter their sort, with a high, not an ostenta-
tious turn of mind. They, for most part, go upon solid prud-
ence ; if possible, are anxious to reach the goal without tread-

* See Map at p. 214.

76 ‘ THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Book II.

XZ7O.

ing on any one ; are peaceable, as I often say, and by no means
quarrelsome, in aspect and demeanour ; yet there is generally
in the Hohenzollerns a very fierce flash of anger, capable of
blazing out in cases of urgency : this latter also is one of the
most constant features I have noted in the long series of them.
That they grew in Frankenland, year after year, and century „
after century, while it was their fortune to last, alive and active
there, is no miracle, on such terms.

Their old big Castle of Plassenburg (now a Penitentiary,
with treadmill, and the other furnishings) still stands on its
Height, near Culmbach, .looking down over the ^pleasant meet-
ing of the Red and White Mayn Rivers and of their fruitful
valleys ; awakening many thoughts in the traveller. Anspach
Schloss, and still more Baireuth Schloss (Mansion, one day, of
our little Wilhelmina of Berlin, Fritzkin’s sister, now prattling
there in so old a way ; where notabilities have been, one and
another; which Jean Paul, too, saw daily in his walks, while
alive and looking skyward) : these, and many other castles and
things, belonging now wholly to Bavaria, will continue memor-
able for Hohenfollern history.

The Family did its due share, sometimes an excessive one,
in religious beneficences and foundations ; which was not quite
left-off in recent times, though much altering its figure. Erlan-
gen University, for example, was of Wilhelmina’s doing. Er-
langen University ; — and also an Opera-House of excessive
size in Baireuth. Such was poor Wilhelmina’s sad figure of
‘ religion.’ In the old days, their largest bequest that I recol-
lect was to the Teutsche Ritter, Order of Teutonic Knights, very
celebrated in those days. Junior branches from Hohenzollern,
as from other families, sought a career in that chivalrous de-
vout Brotherhood now and then ; one pious Burggraf had three
sons at once in it ; he, a very bequeathing Herr otherwise,
settled one of his mansions, Virnsperg, with rents and incom-
ings, on the Order. Which accordingly had thenceforth a Com*
thurei (Commandery) in that country ; Comthurei of Virnsperg
the name of it ; the date of donation is a.d. 1294 ; and two of
the old Herr’s three Ritter sons, we can remark, were succes-
sively Comthurs (Commanders, steward-prefects) of Virnsperg,
the first two it had.7

This was in 1294 ; the palmy period, or culmination time

Rcntsch, p, 388.

aap.vi. THE TEUTONIC ORDER. 77

XI9O.

of the Teutsches Ritteriimm, Concerning which, on wider ac-
counts, we must now say a word.

CHAPTER VI.

THE TEUTSCH RITTERS OR TEUTOI^IC ORDER,

Barbarossa’s Army of Crusaders did not come home again,
any more than Barbarossa. They were stronger than Turk or
Saracen, but not than Hunger and Disease ; Leaders did not
know then, as 8ur little Friend at Berlin came to know, that ‘ an
Army, like a serpent, goes upon its belly* After fine fighting
and considerable victories, the end of this Crusade was, it took
to ‘besieging Acre,’ and in reality lay perishing as of murrain
on the beach at Acre, without shelter, without medicine, with-
out food. Not even Richard Coeur-de-Lion, and his best prowess
and help, could avert such issue from it,

Richard’s Crusade fell-in with the fag-end of Barbarossa’s ;
and it was Richard chiefly that managed to take Acre ; — at
least so Richard flattered himself, when he pulled poor Leopold
of Austria’s standard from the towers, and trailed it through the
gutters: “Your standard? have taken Acre?” Which
turned out ill for Richard afterwards. And Duke Leopold has
a bad name among us in consequence ; much worse than he
deserves. Leopold had stuff in him too. He died, for example,
in this manner : falling with his horse, I think in some siege
or other, he had got his leg hurt ; which hindered him in fight-
ing. Leg could not be cured : “ Cut it off, then 1” said Leo-
pold. This also the leech could not do ; durst not, and would
not ; so that Leopold was come quite to a halt. Leopold or-
dered out two squires ; put his thigh upon a block, the sharp
edge of an axe at the right point across his thigh : “ Squire
first, hold you that axe ; steady ! Squire sepond, smite you on
it with forge-hammer, with all your strength, heavy enough I”
Squire second struck, heavy enough, and the leg flew off ; but
Leopold took inflammation, died in a day or two, as the leech
had predicted. That is a fact to be found in current authors
(quite exact or not quite), that surgical operation :i such a man
cannot have his flag trailed through the gutters by any Coeur-
de-Lion. — But we return to the beach at Acre, and the poor
> Mcntxel, Geschkhte der Deutschen (Stuttgard and Tiibingcn, 1837), p. 309.

7S THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookil,

XXQO.

Crusaders, dying as of murrain there. It is the year 1 1 90,
Acre not yet taken, nor these quarrels got to a height.

“The very Templars, Hospitallers, neglect us,’* murmured
the dying Germans ; “ they have perhaps enough to do, and
more than enough, with their own countrymen, whose speech
is intelligible to them? For us, it would appear, there is no
help 1 ’* Not altogether none. A company of pious souls, —
compassionate Lubeck ship-captains diligently forwarding it,
and one Walpot von Bassenheim, a citizen of Bremen, taking
the lead, — formed themselves into a union for succour of the
sick and dying ; ‘ set up canvas tents,’ medicinal assuagements,
from the Lubeck ship-stores ; and did what utmost was in
them, silently in the name of Mercy and Heaven. 'This
Walpot was not by birth a nobleman,* says one of the old
Chroniclers, ‘but his deeds were noble.’ This pious little
union proved unconsciously the beginning of a great thing.
Finding its work prosper here, and gain favour, the little union
took vows on itself, strict chivalry forms, and decided to be-
come permanent. “ Knights Hospitallers of our dear Lady of
Mount Zion,” tjiat or something equivalent was their first title,
under Walpot their first Grand-Master ; which soon grew to
be “ German Order of St. May” {Tcutsche Ritter oi the Marie’-
Orden)t or for shortness Teutsches Ritterthumj under which
name it played a great part in the world for above three cen-
turies to come, and eclipsed in importance both the Templars
and Hospitallers of St. John.

This was the era of Chivalry Orders, and Geliibdej time
for Bodies of Men uniting themselves by a Sacred Vow, ‘ Ge-
Itibde / — which word and thing have passed o\ser to us in a
singularly dwindled condition : “ CluU' we now call it ; and
the vow, if sacred, does not aim very high I Templars and
Hospitallers were already famous bodies ; the latter now al-
most a century old. Walpot’s new Gelubde was of similar
intent, only German in kind, — the protection, defence and so-
lacement of Pilgrims, with whatever that might involve.

Head oj Teutsch Order moves to Venice^

•

The Teutsch Ritters earned character in Palestine, and
began to get bequests and recognition ; but did not long con-
tinue there, like their two rival Orders. It was not in Pales-

THE TEUTONIC ORDER,

79

Chap. VI.
xato-39.

tine, whether the Orders might be aware of it or not, that their
work could now lie. Pious Pilgrims certainly there still are in
great numbers ; to these you shall do the sacred rites : but
these, under a Saladin bound by his word, need little protec-
tion by the sword. And as for Crusading in the armed fashion,
that has fallen visibly into the decline. After Barbarossa,
Cceur-de-Lion and Philippe Auguste have tried it with such
failure, what wise man will be in haste to try it again ? Zealous
Popes continue to stir-up Crusades ; but the Secular Powers
are not in earnest as formerly ; Secular Powers, when they do
go, *take Constantinople,* ‘conquer Sicily,' never take or con-
quer anything in Palestine. The Teutsch Order helps vali-
antly in Palestine, or would help ; but what is the use of help-
ing ? The Teutsch Order has already possessions in Europe,
by pious bequest and otherwise ; all its main interests lie there ;
in fine, after less than thirty years, Hermann von der Salza, a
new sagacious Teutschmeister or Hockmeister (so they call the
head of vthe Order), fourth in the series; a far-seeing, nego-
tiating man, finds that Venice will be a fitter place of lodging
for him than Acre : and accordingly during his long Master-
ship (a.d. 1210-39), is mostly to be found there, and not
at Acre or Jerusalem.

He is very great with the busy Kaiser, Friedrich II., Bar-
barossa’s grandson ; who has the usual quarrels with the Pope,
and is glad of such a negotiator, statesman as well as armed
monk. The usual quarrels this great Kaiser had, all along, and
some unusual. Normans ousted from Sicily, who used to be
so Papal ; a Kaiser not gone on the Crusade, as he had vowed ;
Kaiser at last suspected of freethinking even : — in which mat-
ters Hermann much serves the Kaiser. Sometimes he is ap-
pointed arbiter between the Pope and Kaiser ; — does not give
it in the Kaiser’s favour, but against him, where he thinks the
Kaiser is wrong. He is reckoned the first great Hochmeister,
this Hermann von der Salza, a Thiiringer by birth, who is
fourth in the series of Masters : perhaps the greatest to be found
there at all, though many were considerable. It is evident that
no man of his time was busier in important public affairs, or
with better acceQ^ance, than Hermann. His Order, both Pope
and Emperor so favouring the Master of it, was in a vigorous
state of growth all this while; Hermann well proving that he
could help it better at Venice than at Acre.

THE HOHENZOLLEENS. Book a

But if tjie Crusades are ended, — as indeed it turned out,
only one other worth speaking of, St. Louis’s, having in earnest
come to effect, or rather to miserable non-effect, and that not
yet for fifty years ; — if the Crusades are ended, and the Teutsch
Order increases always in possessions, and finds less and less
work, what probably will become of the Teutsch Order Grow
fat, become luxurious, incredulous, dissolute, insolent ; and need
to be burnt out of the way? That was the course of the Tem-
plars, and their sad end. They began poorest of the poor,
‘two Knights to one Horse,’ as their Seal bore; and they at
last took fire on very opposite accounts. “To "carouse like a
Templar that had become a proverb among men ,* that was
the way to produce combustion, ‘ spontaneous’ or other ! Where-
as their fellow Hospitallers of St. John, chancing upon new
work (Anti-Turk garrison-duty, so we may call it, successively
in Cyprus, Rhodes, Malta, for a series of ages), and doing it
well, managed to escape the like. As did the Teutsch Order
in a still more conspicuous manner,

TeJttsch Order itself goes to Preusseru

Ever since St. Adalbert fejl massacred in Prussia, stamp-
ing himself as a Crucifix on that Heathen soil, there have been
attempts at conversion going on by the Christian neighbours,
Dukes of Poland and others: intermittent fits of fighting and
preaching for the last two hundred years, with extremely small
result. Body of St. Adalbert was got at light weight, and the
poor man canonised ; there is even a Titular Bishop of Prussia ;
and pilgrimages wander to the shrine of Adalbert in Poland,
reminding you of Prussia in a tragic manner ; but what avails
it? Missionaries, when they set foot in the country, are killed
or flung out again. The Bishop of Prussia is titular merely ;
lives in Liefland (Livonia), properly Bishop of Ptg'a, among
the Bremen trading -settlers and converted Lieflanders there,
which is the only safe place, — if even that were safe without
aid of armed men, such as he has there even now. He keeps
his Schwertbriider (Brothers of the Sword), a small Order of
Knights, recently got-up by him, for express behoof of Liefland
itself ; and these, fighting their best, are sometimes troublesome
to the Bishop, and do not much prosper upon Heathendom, or
gain popularity and resources in the Christian world. No hope

ea?.vi. THE TEUTONIC ORDER, «j

1338 .

in Schwerthriider iox Prussia; — and in massacred Mission*
aries what hope ? The Prussian population continues Heathen,
untamable to Gospel and Law ; and after two centuries of effort#,
little or no real progress has been made.

But now, in these circumstances, in the year 1226, the
Titular Bishop of Prussia, having well considered the matter
and arranged it with the Polish Authorities, opens a commu-
nication with Hermann von der Salza, at Venice, on the sub-
ject; “Crusading is over in the East, illustrious Hochmeister;
no duty for a Teutsch Order there at present: what is the use
of crusading fhr off in the East, when Heathenism and the
Kingdom of Satan hangs* on our own borders, close at hand,
in the North? Let the Teutsch Order come to Preussen ; head
a Crusade there. The land is fruitful ; flows really with milk
and honey, not to sp ak of amber, and was once called the
Terrestrial Paradise" — ^by I forget whom.® In fact, it is clear,
the land should belong to Christ; and if the Christian Teutsch
Ritterdom could conquer it from Satanas for themselves, it
would be well for all parties. Hermann, a man of sagacious
clear head, listens attentively. The notion is perhaps not quite
new to him : at all events, he takes up the notion ; negotiates
upon it, with Titular Bishop, wijj^h Pope, Kaiser, Duke of Po-
land, Teutsch Order; and in brief, about two years afterwards
(a.d. 1228), having done the negotiatings to the last item, he
produces his actual Teutsch Ritters, ready, on Prussian ground.

Year 1228, thinks Dryasdust, after a struggle. Place where,
proves also at length discoverable in Dryasdust, — not too far
across the north Polish frontier, always with * Masovia* (the
now Warsaw region) to fall back upon. But in what number;
how; nay almost when, to a year, — do not ask poor Dryas-
dust, who overwhelms himself with idle details, and by reason
of the trees is unable to see the wood.^ — The Teutsch Ritters
straightway build a Burg for headquarters, spread themselves
on this hand and that; and begin their great task. In the
name of Heaven, we may still say in a true sense ; as they,
every Ritter of them to the heart, felt it to be in all manner of
senses.

The Prussian* were a fierce fighting people, fanatically Anti-
Christian : the Teutsch Ritters had a perilous never-resting

2 Voigt (if he had an Index I) knows.

3 Ibid. ii. tf7, 184, xga.

VOL. 1. G

£C ' ' THE HOHENZOLLERNS> Book It,

1923 .

time of it, especially for the first fifty years. They built and
burnt innumerable stockades for and against ; built wooden
Forts which are now stone Towns. They fought much and pre-
valently ; galloped desperately to and fro, ever on the alert. In
peaceabler ulterior times they fenced-in the Nogat and the
Weichsel with dams, whereby unlimited quagmire might be-
come grassy meadow, — as it continues to this day. Marien-
burg {Mary's Burg), still a town of importance in that same
grassy region, with its grand stone Schloss still visible and
even habitable; this was at length their Headquarter. But
how many Burgs of wood and stone they buift, in different
parts; what revolts, surprisals, furious fights in woody boggy
places, they had, no man has counted. Their life, read in Dry-
asdust's newest chaotic Books (which are of endless length,
among other ill qualities), is like a dim nightmare of unintel-
ligible marching and fighting: one feels as if the mere amount
of galloping they had would have carried the Order several
times round the Globe. What multiple of the Equator was it,
then, O Dryasdust? The Herr Professor, little studious of
abridgment, defes not say.

But always some preaching, by zealous monks, accompa*
nied the chivalrous fighting, ^nd colonists came in from Ger-
many ; trickling in, or at times streaming. Victorious Ritter-
dom offers terms to the beaten Heathen ; terms not of tolerant
nature, but which will be punctually kept by Ritterdom. When
the flame of revolt or general conspiracy burnt -up again too
extensively, there was a new Crusade proclaimed in Germany
and Christendom ; and the Hochmeister, at Marburg or else-
where, and all his marshals and ministers were busy, — gener-
ally with effect. High personages came on crusade to them,
bttocar King of Bohemia, Duke of Austria and much else, the
great man of his day, came once (a.d. 1255); Johann King of
Bohemia, in the next century, once and again. The mighty
Ottocar,* with his extensive far-shining chivalry, 'conquered
Samland in a month ;’ tore-up the Romova where Adalbert had
been massacred, and burnt it from the face of the Earth. A
certain Fortress was founded at that time, in Ottocar’s presence ;
and in honour of him they named it King's fortress, “ Konigs-
berg:” it is now grown a big-domed metropolitan City, — where
we of this Narrative lately saw a Coronation going on, and

♦ Voigt, iil 80*87.

Ch»p.VI. THE TEUTONIC ORDER. §3

1228.

Sophie Charlotte furtively taking a pinch of snuff. Among King
Ottocar’s esquires or subaltern junior officials on this occasion,
is one Rudolfs heir of a poor Swiss Lordship and gray Hill-
Castle, csXlQdHapsburgt rather in reduced circumstances, whom
Ottocar likes for his prudent hardy ways ; a stout, modest, wise
young man, — who may chance to redeem Hapsburg a little, if
he live? How the shuttles fly, and the life-threads, always, in
this ‘ loud-roaring Loom of Time T —

Along with Ottocar too, as an ally in the Crusade, was
Otto III. AscanierMarkgraf and Elector of Brandenburg, great-
grandson of Albert the Bear ; — named Otto the Pious in con-
sequence. He too founded a Town in Prussia, on this occasion,
and called it Brandenburg; which is still extant there, a small
Brandenburg the Second; for these procedures he is called
Otto the Pious in History. His Wife, withal, was a sister of
Ottocar’s;® — which, except in the way of domestic felicity, did
not in the end amount to much for him ; this Ottocar having
flown too high, and melted his wings at the sun, in a sad way,
as we shall see elsewhere.

•

None of the Orders rose so high as the Teutonic in favour
with mankind. It had by dcgrj^cs landed possessions far and
wide over Germany and beyond ; I know not how many dozens
of Baileys (rich Bailliwicks, each again with its dozens of Com-
thureiSf Coramanderies, or subordinate groups of estates), and
Baillies and Commanders to match ; — and was thought to de-
serve favour from above. Valiant servants, these; to whom
Heaven had vouchsafed great labours and unspeakable bless-
ings. In some fifty or fifty-three years they had got Prussian
Heathenism brought to the ground; and they endeavoured to
tie it well down there by bargain and arrangement. But it
would not yet lie quiet, nor for a century to come ; being still
secretly Heathen ; revolting, conspiring ever again, ever on
weaker terms, till the Satanic element had burnt itself out, and
conversion and composure could ensue.

Conversion and complete conquest once come, there was a
happy time for Prussia : ploughshare instead of sword ; busy
sea-havens, Gernjan towns, getting built ; churches everywhere
rising ; grass growing, and peaceable cows, where formerly had
been quagmire and snakes. And for the Order a happy time ?

^ Michaelis, I ajo ; HUbner, t. X74.

H the HOHENZOLLERNS. foofcli.

1332.

A rich, not a happy. The Order was victorious ; Livonian
* Sword-Brothers,’ * Knights of Dobryn,* minor Orders and Au-
thorities all round, were long since subordinated to it or incor-
porated with it ,* Livonia, Courland, Lithuania, are all got tamed
under its influence, or tied down and evidently tamable. But
it was in these times that the Order got into its wider troubles
outward and inward ,* quarrels, jealousies, with Christian neigh-
bours, Poland, Pomniern, who did not love it and for cause ;
— ^wider troubles, and by no means so evidently useful to man-
kind. The Order’s wages, in this world, flowed higher than ever,
only perhaps its work was beginning to run low ! But we will
not anticipate.

On the whole, this Teutsch Ritterdom, for the first century
and more, was a grand phenomenon ; and flamed like a bright
blessed beacon through the night of things, in those Northern
Countries. For above a century, we perceive, it was the rally-
ing-place of all brave men who had a career to seek on terms
other than vulgar. The noble soul, aiming beyond money, and
sensible to more than hunger in this world, had a beacon burn-
ing (as we sayj, if the night chanced to overtake it, and the
earth to grow too intricate, as is not uncommon. Better than
the career of stump-oratory, I^should fancy, and i/s Hesperides
Apples, golden and of gilt horse- dung. Better than puddling
away one’s poor spiritual gift of God {/oan, not gift), such as it
may be, in building the lofty rhyme, the lofty Review-Article,
for a discerning public that has sixpence to spare I Times alter
greatly. — ^Will the reader take a glimpse of Conrad von Thiir-
ingen’s biography, as a sample of the old >ways of proceeding ?
Conrad succeeded Hermann von der Salza as Grand-Master,
and his history is memorable as a Teutonic Knight.

77ie stuff Teutsch Ritters were made of, Conrad of Thiiringen:

Saint Elizabeth ; Town of Marburg,

Conrad, younger brother of the Landgraf of Thiiringen, —
which Prince lived chiefly in the Wartburg, romantic old Hill-
Castle, now a Weimar-Eisenach property and show-place, then
an abode of very earnest people, — ^was probabfy a child-in-arms,
in that same Wartburg, while Richard Cceur-de-Lion was get-
ting home from Palestine and into troubles by the road : this
will date Conrad for us. His worthy elder brother was Hus-

Chap. VI. CONRAD OF THURINGEN. 85

xa 33 .

band of the lady since called Saint Elizabeth, a very pious but
also very fanciful young woman ; — and I always guess his going
on the Crusade, where he died straightway, was partly the fruit
of the life she led him ; lodging beggars, sometimes in his very
bed, continually breaking his night’s rest for prayer, and devo-
tional exercise of undue length ; ‘ weeping one moment, then
smiling in joy the next ;* meandering about, capricious, melo*
dious, weak, at the will of devout whim mainly I However,
that does not concern us.^ Sure enough her poor Landgraf
went crusading, Year 1227 (Kaiser Friedrich II. 's Crusade,
who could ncft put it off longer) ; poor Landgraf fell ill by the
road, at Brindisi, and died, — not to be driven farther by any
cause.

Conrad, left guardian to his deceased Brother’s children,
had at first much quarrel with Saint Elizabeth, though he after-
wards took far other thoughts. Meanwhile he had his own
apanage, * Landgraf by rank he too ; and had troubles enough
with that of itself. For instance : once the Archbishop of
Mainz, being in debt, laid a heavy tax on all Abbeys under
him ; on Reichartsbronn, an Abbey of Conrad*s, among others.
“ Don’t pay it I” said Conrad to the Abbot. Abbot refused
accordingly ; but was put undej* ban by the Pope ; — obliged to
comply, and even to be * whipt thrice’ before the money could
be accepted. Two whippings at Erfurt, from the Archbishop,
there had been ; and a third was just going on there, one morn-
ing, when Conrad, travelling that way, accidentally stept in to
matins. Conrad flames into a blazing whirlwind at the pheno-
menon disclosed. ‘‘Whip my Abbot? And he is to pay, then,
— ^Archbishop of Beelzebub ?” — and took the poor Archbishop
by the rochets, and spun him hither and thither ; nay was for
cutting him in two, had not friends hysterically busied them-
selves, and got the sword detained in its scabbard and the Arch-
bishop away. Here is a fine coil like to be, for Conrad.

Another soon follows ; from a quarrel he had with Fritzlar,
an Imperial Free-Town in those parts, perhaps a little stiff upon
its privileges, and high towards a Landgraf. Conrad marches,
one morning (Year 1232), upon insolent Fritzlar; burns the

* Many Lives of Ac Saint. See, in particular, Lihellus de Dictis Qaatuor An-
cillarufH, &c. — (that is, Report of the evidence got from Elizabeth's Four Maids, by
an Official Person, Devil's-Advocate or whatever he was, missioned by the Pope to
question them, when her Canonisation came to be talked of. A curious piece) in
Mcnckenii Scriptores Rerum Germantcarum (Lipsi®, 1728-30), ii. dd. ; where also
are other details.

86 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Wn,

x«3a.

environs ; but on' looking practically at the ramparts of the
place, thinks they are two high, and turns to go home again.
Whereupon the idle women of Fritzlar, who are upon the ram-
parts gazing in fear and hope, burst into shrill universal jubi
lation of voice, — and even into gestures, and liberties with their
dress, which are not describable in History ! Conrad, suddenly
once more all flame, whirls round ; storms the ramparts, slays
what he meets, plunders Fritzlar with a will, and leaves it blaz-
ing in a general fire, which had broken-out in the business.
Here is a pair of coils for Conrad ; the like of which can issue
only in Papal ban or worse. ‘

Conrad is grim and obstinate under these aspects ; but se-
cretly feels himself very wicked ; knows not well what will come
of it. Sauntering one day in his outer courts, he notices a cer-
tain female beggar ; necessitous female of loose life, who tremul-
ously solicits charity of him. Necessitous female gets some
fraction of coin, but along with it bullying rebuke in very libe-
ral measure ; and goes away weeping bitterly, and murmuring
about ** want that drove me to those courses.” Conrad retires
into himself : What is her real sin, perhaps, to mine ?” Con-
rad * lies awake all that night ;* mopes about, in intricate dark-
ness, days and nights ; rises o^e morning an altered man. He
makes ‘ pilgrimage to Gladbach,’ barefoot ; kneels down at the
church-door of Fritzlar with bare back, and a bundle of rods
beside him. “ Whip me, good injured Christians, for the love
of Jesus !” — in brief, reconciles himself to Christian mankind,
the Pope included ; takes the Teutsch-Ritter vows upon him
and hastens off to Preussen, there to spend himself, life and life’s
resources thenceforth, faithfully, till he die. The^ one course
left for Conrad. Which he follows with a great strong step, —
with a thought still audible to me. It was of such stuff that
Teutsch Ritters were then made ; Ritters evidently capable of
something.

Saint Elizabeth, who went to live at Marburg, in Hessen-
Cassel, after her Husband’s death, and soon died there, in a
most melodiously pious sort,^ made the Teutsch Order guar-
dian of her Son. It was from her and the Grand-Mastership
of Conrad that Marburg became such a metropolis of the Order;
the Grand-Masters often residing there, many of them coveting

y A.D. 1234 (Voigt, U. 37 S- 4 ® 3 )* ® A.P. 1231 ; age 24.

Ciiat>.YI. CONRAD OF THURINGEN. H;

J»34*

burial there, and much business bearing date of the place. A
place still notable to the ingenuous Tourist, who knows his
whereabout. Philip the Magnanimous, Luther’s friend, memor-
able to some as Philip with the Two Wives, lived there, in that
old Castle, — which is now a kind of Correction -House and Gar-
rison, idle blue uniforms strolling about, and unlovely physiog-
nomies with a jingle of iron at their ankles, — ^where Luther has
debated with the Zwinglian Sacramenters and others, and much
has happened in its time. Saint Elizabeth and her miracles
(considerable, surely, of their kind) were the first origin of Mar-
burg as a To<^n : a mere Castle, with adjoining Hamlet, before
that.

Strange gray old silent Town, rich in so many memories ;
it stands there, straggling up its rocky hill-edge, towards its old
Castles and edifices on the top, in a not unpicturesque manner;
flanked by the river Lahn and its fertile plains ; very silent,
except for the delirious screech, at rare intervals, of a railway
train passing that way from Frankfurt- on -Mayn to Cassel.
‘ Church of St. Elizabeth,’ — high, grand Church, built by Con-
rad our Hochmeister, in reverence of his once l^errestrial Sister-
in-law, — stands conspicuous in the plain below, where the Town
is just ending. St. Elizabeth’s Shrine was once there, and pil-
grims wending to it from all lands. Conrad himself is buried
there, as are many Hochmeisters ; their names, and shields of
arms, Hermann’s foremost, though Hermann’s dust is not there,
are carved, carefully kept legible, on the shafts of the Gothic
arches, — ^from floor to groin, long rows of them ; — and produce,
with the other tombs, tomb-paintings by Durer and the like,
thoughts impressive almost to pain. St. Elizabeth’s loculus
was put into its shrine here, by Kaiser Friedrich II. and all
manner of princes and grandees of the Empire, * one million
two hundred thousand people looking on,* say the old records,
perhaps not quite exact in their arithmetic. Philip the Mag-
nanimous, wishing to stop * pilgrimages nowhither, ’ buried the
loculus away, it was never known where ; under the floor of
that Church somewhere, as is likeliest. Enough now of Mar-
burg, and of its Teutsch Ritters too.

They had on^ or two memorable Hochmeisters and Teutsch-
meisters ; whom we have not named here, nor shall.9 There

' s In onr excellent K&'h\er*sMaH^zMusiijg^m^n{'J^\xrahtrg, 1729 ct seqg. ii.382;
v. 102 ; viii. 380 ; &c ) are valuable glimpses into the Teutonic Ortier,— as xnto nun*

88 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. BookTi.

1246.

Is one Hochmeister, somewhere about the fiftieth on the list,
and properly the last Hochmeister, Albert of Hohenzollern-
Culmbach by name, who will be very memorable to us by
and by.

Or will the reader care to know how Culmbach came into
the possession of the Hohenzollerns, Burggraves of Niirnberg?
The story may be illustrative, and will not occupy us long.

CHAPTER VII.

MARGRAVIATE OF CULMBACH : BAIREUTH, ANSPACH.

In the Year 1248, in his Castle of Plassenburg, — which is
now a Correction-House, looking down upon the junction of
the Red and White Mayn, — Otto Duke of Meran, a very great
potentate, more like a King than a Duke, was suddenly clutched
hold of by a certain wedded gentleman, name not given, ‘ one
of his domestic^ or dependents,* whom he had enraged beyond
forgiveness (signally violating the Seventh Commandment at
his expense) ; and was by the said wedded gentleman there
and then cut down, and donS to death, ' Lamentably killed,
jammerlich erstochen,' says old Rentsch.i Others give a dif-
ferent colour to the homicide, and even a different place ; a
controversy not interesting to us. Slain at any rate he is ;
still a young man ; the last male of his line. Whereby the
renowned Dukes of Meran fall extinct, and immense proper-
ties come to be divided among connexions and claimants.

Meran, we remark, is' still a Town, old Castle now abol-
ished, in the Tyrol, towards the sources of the Etsch (called
Adige by Italian neighbours). The Merans had been lords
not only of most of the Tyrol ; but Dukes of ‘ the Voigtland
— ^Voigtland, that is Bailliedand, wide country between Niirn-
berg and the Fichtelwald ; why specially so called, Dryasdust
dimly explains, deducing it from certain Counts von Reuss,
those strange Reusses who always call themselves Henry ^ and

rtreds of other things. The special Book upon it is Voigt’s, often cited here : Nbe
heavy Volumes ; grounded on faithful reading, but with a fatal defect of almost cveiy
other quality.

» P. 393. Kohler, Reichs-Hhtorie, p. 245. Hollo, AUc GescJtichie der Stadi
Bturtuth (Ikureuth, 1833), pp. 34-3?.

Chap.vn. BAIREUTH, ANSPACH. 89

now amount to Henry the Eightieth and Odd, with side-branches
likewise called Henry ; whose nomenclature js the despair of
mankind, and 'morse than that of the Naples Larzaroni who
candidly have no names ! — Dukes of Voigtland, I say; likewise
of Dalmatia ; then also Markgraves of Austria ; also Counts
of Andechs, in which latter fine country (north of Miinchen a
day’s ride), and not at Plassenburg, some say, the man was
slain. These immense possessions, which now (a.d. 1248)
all fall asunder by the stroke of that sword, come to be divided
among the slain man’s connexions, or to be snatched-up by
active neighboifrs, and otherwise disposed of.

Active Wurzburg, active Bamberg, without much connexion,
snatched-up a good deal : Count of Orlamiinde, married to the
eldest Sister of the slain Duke, got Plassenburg and most of
the Voigtland : a Tyrolese magnate, whose Wife was an Aunt
of the Duke’s, laid hold of the Tyrol, and transmitted it to
daughters and their spouses, — the finish of which line we shall
see by and by : — in short, there was much property in a dis-
posable condition. The Hohenzollern Burggraf of Niirnberg,
who had married a younger Sister of the Duke’s two years
before this accident, managed to get at least Baireuth and
some adjacencies ; big Orlamiint^e, who had not much better
right, taking the lion’s share. This of Baireuth proved a
notable possession to the Hohenzollern family : it was Conrad
the first Burggraf s great-grandson, Friedrich, counted * Fried-
rich III.’ among the Burggraves, who made the acquisition in
this manner, a.d. 1248.

Onolzbach {On'z~bach or ‘-brook,’ now called Anspach) they
got, some fourscore years after, by purchase and hard money
down (* 24,000 pounds of farthings,’ whatever that may be),®
which proved a notable twin possession of the family. And
then, in some seven years more (a.d. 1338), the big Orlamiinde
people, having at length, as was too usual, fallen considerably
insolvent, sold Plassenburg Castle itself, the Plassenburg with
its Town of Culmbach and dependencies, to the Hohenzollern
Burggraves,* who had always ready-money about them. Who
in this way got most of the Voigtland, with a fine Fortress, into
hand ; and had, independently of Niirnberg and its Imperial
properties, an important Princely Territory of their own. Mar*

» A.D. X331: Stadt Anspach, by J. B. Fischer (Anspach, 1786), p. 196.

* Rentsen, p. 157.

9© THE HOHENZQLLERNS. BooTta

X3S4-7>

jgraviate or Principality of Culmbach (Plassenburg being only
the Castle) was the general title ; but more frequently in later
times* Jbeing oftenest split in two between brothers unacquainted
with primogeniture, there were two Margraviates made of it: one
of Baireuth, called also * Margraviate On the Hill and one of
Anspach, ‘ Margraviate Under the Hill of which, in their mo-
dern designations, we shall by and by hear more than enough*

Thus are the Hohenzollern growing, and never declining :
by these few instances judge of many. Of their hard labours,
and the storms they had to keep under controf, we could also
say something: How the two young Sons of the Burggraf once
riding out with their Tutor, a big hound of theirs, in one of the
streets of Nurnberg, accidentally tore a child; and there arose
wild mother^s-wail ; and ‘ all the Scythe-smiths turned out,*
fire-breathing, deaf to a poor Tutor’s pleadings and explain-
ings ; and how the Tutor, who had ridden forth in calm hum-
our with two Princes, came galloping home with only one, —
the Smiths having driven another into boggy ground, and
there caught amd killed him ;•* with the Burggraf ’s commentary
on that sad proceeding (the same Friedrich III. who had mar-
ried Meran’s Sister) ; and tlje amends exacted by him, strict
and severe, not passionate or inhuman. Or again how the
Niirnbergers once, in the Burggraf ’s absence, built a ringwall
round his Castle ; entrance and exit now to depend on the
Niirnbergers withal ! And how the Burggraf did not fly out
into battle in consequence, but remedied it by imperturbable
countenance and power of driving. With enough of the like
sort ; which readers can conceive. •

Bur^af Friedrich IIL; a?id the Anarchy of Nineteen
Years,

This same Friedrich III., Great-grandson of Conrad the
first Burggraf, was he that got the Burggraviate made here-
ditary in his family (a.d. 1273) ; which thereby rose to the
fixed rank of Princes, among other advantages it was gaining.
Nor did this acquisition come gratis at all,.*but as the fruit of
good service adroitly done ; service of endless importance as
it proved. Friedrich’s life had fallen in times of huge anarchy;

* Rentsch, p. 306 (Pate not given ; guess, about xajo).

a»p.vn. BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH III. 91

xa7X.

the Hohenstauffen line gone miserably out, — Boy Conradin, its
last representative, perishing on the scaffold even (by a des-
perate Pope and a desperate Duke of Anjou) Germans, Si-
cilian Normans, Pope and Reich, all at daggers-drawn with
one another ; no Kaiser, nay as many as Three at once ! Which
lasted from 1254 onwards ; and is called '‘the Interregnum,**
or Anarchy “ of Nineteen Years,** in German History.

Let us at least name the Three Kaisers, or Triple-elixir of
No- Kaiser ; though, except as chronological landmarks, we
have not much to do with them. First Kaiser is William
Count of Holland, a rough fellow. Pope’s protegee. Pope even
raising cash for him ; till William perished in the Dutch peat-
bogs (horse and man, furiously pursuing, in some fight there,
and getting swallowed up in that manner) ; which happily
reduces our false Kaisers to two : Second and Third, who are
both foreign to Germany.

Second Kaiser is Alphonso King of Castille, Alphonso the
Wise, whose saying about Ptolemy’s Astronomy, “ That it
seemed a crank machine ; that it was pity the Creator had
not taken advice 1” is still remembered by mankind; — this
and no other of his many sayings and doings. He was wise
enough to stay at home ; and except wearing the title, which
cost nothing, to concern himself very little about the Holy
Roman Empire, — some clerk or two dating ‘ Toleti (At To-
ledo),’ did languidly a bit of official writing now and then, and
that was all. Confused crank machine this of the German
Empire too, your Majesty ? Better stay at home, and date
‘ Toleti:

The Thirdtfalse Kaiser, — futile call him rather, wanting
clear majority, — ^was the English Richa;^d of Cornwall ,* younger
Son of John Lackland ; and little wiser than his Father, to
judge by those symptoms. He had plenty of money, and was
liberal with it; — ^no other call to Germany, you would say,
except to get rid of his money ; in which he succeeded. He
lived actually in Germany, twice over for a year or two : —
Alphonso and he were alike shy of the Pope, as Umpire ; and
Richard, so far as his money went, found some gleams of au-
thority and comfoiitable flattery in the Rhenish provinces ; at
length, in 1263, money and patience being both probably out,
he quitted Germany for the second and last time ; came home

* At Naples, 25th October xa68.

9 i THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookii,

za7t«

to Berkhamstead in Hertfordshire here,^ more fool than he
went. Till his death (a.d. 1271), he continued to call himself,
and was by many persons called, Kaiser of the Holy Roman
Empire ,* — needed a German clerk or two at Berkhamstead,
we can suppose : but never went back ; preferring pleasant
Berkhamstead, with troubles of Simon de Montfort or what-
ever troubles there might be, to anything Germany had to
offer him.

These were the Three futile Kaisers : and the late Kaiser
Conrad’s young Boy, who one day might have swept the ground
clear of them, perished, — bright young Confadin, bright and
brave, but only sixteen, and Pope’s captive by ill luck, — ^per-
ished on the scaffold ; ' throwing out his glove’ (in symbolical
protest) amid the dark mute Neapolitan multitudes, that wintry
morning. It was October 25th, 1268, — Dante Alighieri then
a little boy at Florence, not three years old ; gazing with strange
eyes as the elders talked of such a performance by Christ’s
Vicar on Earth. A very tragic performance indeed, which
brought -on the Sicilian Vespers by and by; for the Heavens
never fail to pay debts, your Holiness ! —

Germany was rocking down towards one saw Aot what, —
an Anarchic Republic of Prjnces, perhaps, and of Free Barons
fast verging towards robbery ? Sovereignty of multiplex Princes,
with a Peerage of intermediate Robber Barons? Things are
verging that way. Such Princes, big and little, each wrench-
ing-off for himself what lay loosest and handiest to him, found
it a stirring game, and not so much amiss. On the other hand,
some voice of the People, in feeble whimperings of a strange
intensity, to the opposite effect, are audible to this day. Here
are Three old Minstrels {Minnesdnger) picked from Manesse’s
Collection by an obliging hand, who are of this date, and shall
speak each a word :

N®. I loquitur (in cramp doggerel, done into speech) ; ‘To thee,
‘ O Lord, we poor folk make moan ; the Devil has sown his seeds in

* this land 1 Law thy hand created for protection of thy children : but

* v/here now is Law? Widows and orphans weep that the Princes do
‘ not unite to have a Kaiser.*

N°. 2 : ‘The Princes grind in the Kaiser’s nrfll: to the Reich they

* fling the siftings ; and keep to themselves the meal. Not much in
‘ haste, they, to give us a Kaiser.*

8 Gough’s Camden, i. 339.

Chikp.vn. BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH III. 95

tm

N®. 3 : * Like the Plague of Frogs, there they are come out ; de-
* filing the Reich’s honour. Stork, when wilt thou appear, then,’ and
with thy stiff mandibles act upon them a little?^

It was in such circumstances, that Friedrich IIL, Burggraf
of Niirnberg, who had long moaned and striven over these
woes of his country, came to pay that visit, late in the night
(1st or 2d' of October 1273), to his Cousin Rudolf Lord of
Hapsburg, under the walls of Basel; a notable scene in His-
tory. Rudolf was besieging Basel, being in some feud with the
Bishop there, of^which Friedrich and another had been pro-
posed as umpires; and Friedrich now waited on his Cousin, in
this hasty manner, — not about the Basel feud, but on a far
higher quite unexpected errand, — to say, That he Rudolf was
elected Kaiser, and that better times for the Holy Roman Em-
pire were now probable, with Heaven’s help.® We call him
Cousin ; though what the kindred actually was, a kindred by
mothers, remains, except the general fact of it, disputable by
Dryasdust. The actual visit, under the walls of Basel, is by
some considered romantic. But that Rudolf, tough steel-gray
man, besieging Basel on his own quarrel, on the terms just
stated, was altogether unexpectedly apprised of this great news,
and that Cousin Friedrich of Niirnberg had mainly contributed
to such issue, is beyond question.9 The event was salutary, like
life instead of death, to anarchic Germany; and did eminent
honour to Friedrich’s judgment in men,

Richard of Cornwall having at last died, and his futile Ger-
man clerks having quitted Berkhamstead for ever, — Alphonso
of Castille, not now urged by rivalry, and seeing long since
what a crank ftiachine the thing was, had no objection to give
it up; said so to the Pope, — who was himself anxious for a
settled Kaiser, the supplies of Papal German cash having run
almost dry during these troubles. Whereupon ensued earnest
consultations among leading German men ; Diet of the Empire,
sternly practical (we may well perceive), and with a minimum
of talk, the Pope too being held rather well at a distance : the
result of which was what we see.^® Mainly due to Friedrich
of Niirnberg, say all Historians; conjoining with him the then
Archbishop of MtBinz, who is officially President Elector (lite^

7 Mentzel, Geschkhie der DeuiscFieft, p, 345.

* Rentsch, pp. 299, 285, 298.

* K6hlcr, pp. 249, 251. Hgth. September 1273,

94 the HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookll.

rally Convener of Electors) : they two did it. Archbishop of
Mainz had himself a pleasant accidental acquaintance with Ru-
dolf, — a night’s lodging once at Hapsburg, with escort over the
Hills, in dangerous circumstances ; — and might the more rea-
dily be made to understand what qualities the man now had;
and how, in justness of insight, toughness of character, and
general strength of bridle-hand, this actually might be the ade-
quate man.

Kaiser Rudolf and Burggraf Friedrich III,

t

Last time we saw Rudolf, near thirty years ago, he was
some equerry or subaltern dignitary among the Ritters of King
Ottocar, doing a Crusade against the Prussian Heathen, and
seeing his master found Konigsberg in that country. Changed
times now 1 Ottocar King of Bohemia, who (by the strong hand
mainly, and money to Richard of Cornwall, in the late trou-
bles) has become Duke of Austria and much else, had himself
expected the Kaisership ; and of all astonished men, King Ot-
tocar was probably the most astonished at the choice made.
A dread sovereign, fierce, and terribly opulent, and everyway
resplendent to such degree ; and this threadbare Swiss gentle-
man-at-arms, once * my domestic’ (as Ottocar loved to term it),
preferred to me! Flat insanity, King Ottocar thought ; refused
to acknowledge such a Kaiser; would not in the least give
up his unjust properties, or even do homage for them or the
others.

But there also Rudolf contrived to be ready for him. Ru-
dolf invaded his jich Austiian temtories ; smote down Vienna,
and all resistance that there was forced Ottocar to beg par-
don and peace. “No pardon, nor any speech of peace, till you
first do homage for all those lands of yours, whatever we may
find them to be!” Ottocar was very loath; but could not help
himself. Ottocar quitted Prag with a resplendent retinue, to
come into the Danube country, and do homage to * my do-
mestic’ that once was. He bargained that the sad ceremony
should be at least private; on an Island in the Danube, be-
tween the two retinues or armies ; and in a tent, so that only
official select persons might see it. The Isf&hd is called Canu
berg (near Vienna, I conclude), in the middle of the Donau

u i376<KdhIer, p. 953).

Chap.vir. BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH III. ^>5

tai?!.

River: there Ottocar accordingly knelt; he in great pomp of
tailorage, Rudolf in mere buff jerkin, practical leather and iron ;
hide it, charitable canvas, from all but a fe^ I Alas, pre-
cisely at this moment, the treacherous canvas rushes down, —
hung so on purpose, thinks Ottocar; and it is a tent indeed,
but a tent without walls ; and all the world sees me in this scan-
dalous plight I

Ottocar rode home in deep gloom ; his poor Wife, too, up-
braided him : he straightway rallied into War again ; Rudolf
again very ready to meet him. Rudolf met him, Friedrich of
Niimberg there- among the rest under the Reichs-Banner ; on
the Marchfeld by the Donau (modern Wagram near by) ; and
entirely beat and even slew and ruined Ottocar. 12 Whereby
Austria fell now to Rudolf, who made his sons Dukes of it ;
which, or even Archdukes, they are to this day. Bohemia, Mo-
ravia, of these also Rudolf would have been glad ; but of these
there is an heir of OttocaFs left ; these will require time and
luck.

Prosperous though toilsome days for Rudolf ; who proved
an excellent bit of stuff for a Kaiser; and founds no rest, prov-
ing what stuff he was. In which prosperities, as indeed he
continued to do iii the perils and toils, Burggraf Friedrich III,
of Niirnberg naturally partook : hence, and not gratis at all,
the Hereditary Burggrafdom, and many other favours and ac-
cessions he got. F or he continued Rudolf’s steady helper, friend
and first-man in all things, to the very end. Evidently one of
the most important men in Germany, and candour will lead us
to guess one of the worthiest, during those bad years of Inter-
regnum, and Jhe better ones of Kaisership. After Conrad his
great-grandfather he is the second notable architect of the Fa-
mily House; — founded by Conrad; conspicuously built-up by
this Friedrich III., and the first story of it finished, so to speak.
Then come two Friedrichs as Burggrafs, his son and his grand-
son’s grandson, ‘Friedrich IV.* and ‘Friedrich VI.,’ by whom
it was raised to the second story and the third, — thenceforth
one of the high houses of the world.

That is the .glimpse we can give of Friedrich first Here-
ditary Burggraf, ^nd of his Cousin Rudolf first Hapsburg Kaiser,
The latest Austrian Kaisers, the latest Kings of Prussia, they
are sons of these two men.

** a6th August 1278 (Kahler, p. 253),

96 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bor-kll.

sa}8a

' CHAPTER VIII.

" ASCANIER MARKGRAVES BRANDENBURG.

We have said nothing of the Ascanier Markgraves, Electors
of Brandenburg, all this while ; nor, in these limits, can we now
or henceforth say almost anything. A proud enough, valiant
and diligent line of Markgraves ; who had much fighting and
other struggle in the world, — steadily enlarging their border
upon the Wends to the north ; and adjusting it, with minted
success, against the Wettin gentlemen, who are Markgraves
farther east (in the Lausitz now), who bound us to the south
too {Meissen^ Misnia), and who in fact came in for the whole
of modern Saxony in the end. Much fighting, too, there was
with the Archbishops of Magdeburg, now that the Wends are
down : standing quarrel there, on the small scale, like that of
Kaiser and Pope on the great ; such quarrel as is to be seen in
all places, and on all manner of scales, in that era of the Chris-
tian World.

None of ojjir Markgraves rose to the height of their Pro-
genitor, Albert the Bear ; nor indeed, except massed-up, as
** Albert’s Line,” and with a History ever more condensing it-
self almost to the form of Idbel, can they pretend to memora-
bility with us. What can Dryasdust himself do with them ?
That wholesome Dutch cabbages continued to be more and
more planted, and peat-mire, blending itself with waste sand,
became available for Christian mankind, — intrusive Chaos, and
especially Divine Ti'iglaph and his ferocities being well held
aloof^ ; — this, after all, is the rfeal History of ou^ Markgraves ;
and of this, by the nature of the case, Dryasdust can say no-
thing. “New Mark,” which once meant Brandenburg at large,
is getting subdivided into Mid-Mark, into C/i^/:^nnark (closest
to the Wends) ; and in Old Mark and New much is spreading,
much getting planted and founded. In the course of centuries
there will grow gradually to be * seven cities ; and as many
towns,’ says one old jubilant Topographer, ‘ as there are days
in the year,’ — struggling to count-up 365 of them.

Q/" Berlin City. ^

In the year (guessed to be) 1 240, one Ascanier Markgraf
•fortifies Berlin that is, first makes Berlin a German Burg

Chap.vaL ASCANIER MARKGRAVES. $7

tfjS-

and inhabited outpost in those parts : — the very name, some
think, means ‘Little Rampart* {IVehrlm)^ built there, on the
banks of the Spree, against the Wends, and peopled with Dutch ;
of which latter fact, it seems, the old dialect of the place yields
traces. 1 How it rose afterwards to be chosen for Metropolis,
one cannot say, except that it had a central situation for the
now widened principalities of Brandenburg : the place other-
wise is sandy by nature, sand and swamp the constituents of
it ; and stands on a sluggish river the colour of oil. Wendish
fishermen had founded some first nucleus of it long before ; and
called their fishing-hamlet Coin, which is said to be the general
Wendish title for places founded on piles, a needful method
where your basis is swamp. At all events, ** Coin” still desig-
nates the oldest quarter in Berlin ; and " Coin on the Spree”
(Cologne, or Coin on the Rhine, being very different) continued,
almost to modern times, to be the Official name of the Capital.

How the Dutch and Wends agreed together, within their
rampart, inclusive of both, is not said. The river lay between ;
they had two languages ; peace was necessary : it is probable
they were long rather on a taciturn footing I But in the oily
river you do catch various fish ; Coin, amid its quagmires and
straggling sluggish waters, can be rendered very strong. Some
husbandry, wet or dry, is possible^ to diligent Dutchmen. There
is room for trade also ; Spree Havel Elbe is a direct water-road
to Hamburg and the Ocean ; by the Oder, which is not very
far, you communicate with the Baltic on this hand, and with
Poland and the uttermost parts of Silesia on that. Enough,
Berlin grows ; becomes, in about 300 years, for one reason and
another. Capital City of the country, of these many countries.
The Markgraves or Electors, after quitting Brandenburg, did
not come immediately to Berlin; their next Residence was Tan-
gemiiinde {Mouth of the Tanger, where little Tanger issues into
Elbe) ; a much grassier place than Berlin, and which stands on
a Hill, clay-and-sand Hill, likewise advantageous for strength.
That Berlin should have grown, after it once became Capital,
is not a mystery. It has quadrupled itself, and more, within

* Nicolai, Beschreii^g der KSnigUchen. Residenzsi&die Berlin und Potsdam
(Berlin, 1786), i. pp. 16, 17 of ‘Einleitung/ Nicolai rejects the Wehrlin etymology;
admits that the name was evidently appellative, not proper, ‘ The Berlin,’ * To the
Berhn finds in the world two objects, one of them at Halle, still called *The Berlin
and thinks it must have meant (m some langu^e of extinct mortals) ‘Wild Pasture-
ground,*— ‘The Scridfsl as we should call it.— Possible ; perhaps likely.

VOU 1. H

98 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. BodtlL

i>7t.

the last hundred years, and I think doubled itself within the
last thirty.

Markgraf Otto 1 V,, or Otto with the Arrow,

One Ascanier Markgraf, and one only, Otto IV. by title,
was a Poet withal ; had an actual habit of doing verse. There
are certain so-called Poems of his, still extant, read by Dryas-
dust, with such enthusiasm as he can get up, in the old Collect
tion of Minne- singers, made by Manesse the Zurich Biirger-
meister, while the matter was much fresher than it now is. 2
Madrigals all ; ^//«;/<?-Songs, describing the passion of love ;
how Otto felt under it, — ^well and also ill ; with little peculiar-
ity of symptom, as appears. One of his lines is,

^Ich wiinsch ich were tot, I wish that I were dead

— the others shall remain safe in Manesse’s Collection,

This same Markgraf Otto IV., Year 1278, had a dreadful
quarrel with the See of Magdeburg, about electing a Brother
of his. The Chapter had chosen another than Otto's Brother ;
Otto makes \^ar upon the Chapter. Comes storming along ;
“ will stable my horses in your Cathedral,” on such and such
a day ! But the Archbishop chosen, who had been a fighter
formerly, stirs-up the Magdeburgers, by preaching ("Horses
to be stabled here, my Christian brethren”), by relics, and
quasi-miracles, to a furious condition ; leads them out against
Otto, beats Otto utterly ; brings him in captive, amid hooting
jubilations of the conceivable kind : " Stable ready; but where
are the horses, — Serene child of Satanas I” Archbishop makes
a Wooden Cage for Otto (big beams, spars stoift enough, mere
straw to lie on), and locks him up there. In a public situation
in the City of Magdeburg ; — visible to mankind so, during cer-
tain months of that year 1278. It was in the very time while
Ottocar was getting finished in the Marchfeld ; much mutiny
still abroad, and the new Kaiser Rudolf very busy.

Otto’s Wife, all streaming in tears, and flaming in zeal,
what shall she do ? " Sell your jewels,” so advises a certain

old Johann von Buch, discarded Ex-official : " Sell your jewels,
Madam ; bribe the Canons of Magdeburg wit^f extreme secrecy,

* Riidigervon Mane'?se,who fought the Austrians, too, made his Col-

lection ) in the latter half of the fourteenth centur^^ ; it was printed, after many narrow
rirks of destruction in the interim, in 1758, — Bodmer and IJicitmger editing at Zu-
rich, a Yols. 4to.

Cbap.Vlii. OTTO WITH THE ARROW. 99

1278.

none knowing of his neighbour ; they will consent to ransom on
terms possible.” Poor Wife bribed as was bidden ; Canons voted
as they undertook ; unanimous for ransom, — high, but humanly
possible. Markgraf Otto gets out on parole. But now, How
raise such a ransom, our very jewels being sold ? Old Johann
vonBuch again indicates ways and means, — miraculous old gen-
tleman : — Markgraf Otto returns, money in hand ; pays, and
is solemnly discharged. The title of the sum I could give ex-
act ; but as none will in the least tell me what the value is, I
humbly forbear.

“ We are clear, then, at this date ?" said Markgraf Otto
from his horse, just taking leave of the Magdeburg Canonry.
“ Yes,” answered they. — “ Pshaw, you don’t know the value
of a Markgraf I” said Otto. ** What is it, then ?” — “ Rain gold
ducats on his war-horse and him,” said Otto, looking up with
a satirical grin, “ till horse and Markgraf are buried in them,
and you cannot see the point of his spear atop 1 ” — That would
be a cone of gold coins equal to the article, thinks our Mark-
graf ; and rides grinhing away.* — The poor Archbishop, a va-
liant pious man, finding out that late strangely unanimous vote
of his Chapter for ransoming the Markgraf, took it so ill, that
he soon died of.a broken heart, say the old Books. Die he did,
before long ; — ^and still Otto’s Brother was refused as succes-
sor. Brother, however, again survived ; behaved always wisely ;
and Otto at last had his way. “ Makes an excellent Arch-
bishop, after all 1 ” said the Magdeburgers, Those were rare
times, Mr. Rigmarole.

The same Otto, besieging some stronghold of his Magde-
burg or other demies, got an arrow shot into the skull of him ;
into, not through ; which no surgery could extract, not for a
year to come. Otto went about, sieging much the same, with
the iron in his head ; and is called Otto mit dem Pfeile^ Otto
Sagittarius^ or Otto with the Arrow, in consequence. A Mark-
graf who writes Madrigals ; who does Sieges with an arrow in
his head ; who lies in a wooden cage, jeered by the Magde-
burgers, and proposes such a cone of ducats : I thought him
the memorablest of those forgotten Markgraves ; and that his
jolting Life-pilgriftSftge might stand as the general sample. Mul-
tiply a year of Otto by 200, you have, on easy conditions, some
imagination of a History of the Ascanier Markgraves. Forget-

8 Michaelis, i. 271 ; Pauli, 1. 3x6 ; Kloss ; &c.

THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Eo<*n.

XZJ%.

table otherwise ; or it can be read in the gross, darkened with
endless details, and thrice-dreary, half-intelligible traditions, in
Pauli’s fatal Quartos, and elsewhere, if any one needs. — The
year ofthat Magdeburg speech about the cone of ducats is 1 278 :
King Edward the First, in this country, was walking about, a
prosperous man of forty, with very Long Shanks, and also with
a head of good length.

Otto, as had been the case in the former Line, was a fre-
quent name among those Markgraves : ‘ Otto the Pious’ (whom
we saw crusading once in Preussen, with King Ottocar his
Brother-in-law), ‘ Otto the Tall,* * Otto the Short (Parvus ) ;’ I
know not how many Ottos besides him ‘with the Arrow.’ Half
a century after this one of the Arrow (under his Grand-Nephew
it was), the Ascanier Markgraves ended, their Line also dying
out.

Not the succcssfulest of Markgraves, especially in later
times. Brandenburg was indeed steadily an Electorate, its
Markgraf a Kurfiirst, or Elector of the Empire ; and always
rather on the Increase than otherwise. But the Territories were
apt to be much split-up to younger sons ; two or more Mark-
graves at once, the eldest for^Elector, with other arrangements ;
which seldom answer. They had also fallen into the habit of
borrowing money ; paw»ning, redeeming, a good deal, with
Teutsch Ritters and others. Then they puddled considerably,
—and to their loss, seldom choosing the side that proved win-
ner, — in the general broils of the Reich, which at that time, as
we have seen, was unusually anarchic. None of the success-
fulest of Markgraves latterly. But they were regretted beyond
measure in comparison with the next set that came ; as we shall
see.

CHAPTER IX.

BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH IV.

Brandenburg and the Hohenzollern Family of Niimberg
have hitherto no mutual acquaintanceship ii^atever ; they go,
each its own course, wide enough apart in the world ; — little
dreaming that they are to meet by and by, and coalesce, wed
for better and worse, and become one flesh. As is the way in

CONTESTED ELECTIONS.

lOI

Chap. IX.
zaps.

all romance. * Marriages,* among men, and other entities of
importance, * are, evidently, made in Heaven.*

Friedrich IV. of Nurnberg, Son ofthat Friedricu III., Kaiser
Rudolf s successful friend, was again a notable increaser of his
House ; which finally, under his Great-grandson, named Fried-
rich VI., attained the Electoral height. Of which there was al-
ready some hint. Well ; under the first of these two Friedrichs,
some slight approximation, and under his Son, a ti;ansient ex-
press introduction (so to speak) of Brandenburg to Hohenzol-
lern took place, without immediate result of consequence; but
under the second of them occurred the wedding, as we may call
it, or union * for better or worse, till death do us part.* — How
it came about ? Easy to ask. How ! The reader will have to
cast some glances into the confused i?^/c^j-History of the time ;
— timid glances, for the element is of dangerous, extensive sort,
mostly jungle and shaking bog ; — and we must travel through
this corner of it, as on shoes of swiftness, treading lightly.

Contested Elections in the Reich: Kaiser Albert L; after
whom Six Non-IIapbiirg Kaisers*

The Line of Rudolf of Hapsburg did not at once succeed
continuously to the Empire, as Ithe wont had been in such
cases, where the sons were willing and of good likelihood. After
such a spell of anarchy, parties still ran higher than usual in
the Holy Roman Empire ; and wide-yawning splits would not yet
coalesce to the old pitch. It appears too the posterity of Ru-
dolf, stiff, inarticulate, proud men, and of a turn for engrossing
and amassingf were not always lovely to the public. Albert,
Rudolf's eldest son, for instance, Kaiser Albert I., — ^who did
succeed, though not at once, or till after killing Rudolf’s im-
mediate successor,! — Albert was by no means a prepossessing
man, though a tough and hungry one. It must be owned, he
had, a harsh ugly character; and face to match: big-nosed,
loose-lipped, blind of an eye : not Kaiser-like at all to an Elec-
toral Body. homo monoculus^ et vultu rtistico; non potest

“ esse Imperator (A one-eyed fellow, and looks like a clown;
“ he cannot be B»peror) 1" said Pope Boniface VIII., when con-
sulted about him.^

Adolf of Nas<uiu; slain by Albert's own hand; * Battle' ofHasenbiihel ^neaf
Worms, ad July 1298’ (KOhler, p. 265).

* XplUer, pp. 267-73 ; and Jtisf, 156-60,

THE HOHENZOLLERNS. .Boovit.

xa^S.

Enough, from the death of Rudolf, a . d . 1291, there inter*
vened a hundred-and-fifty years, and eight successive Kaisers
singly or in line, only one of whom (this same Albert of the un-
lovely countenance) was a Hapsburger, — before the Family,
often trying it all along, could get a third time into the Impe-
rial saddle. Where, after that, it did sit steady. Once in for
the third time, the Hapsburgers got themselves ‘ elected’ (as
they still called it) time after time; always elected, — with but
one poor exception, which will much concern my readers by
and by, — to the very end of the matter. And saw the Holy
Roman Empire itself expire, and as it were both saddle and
horse vanish out of Nature, before they would dismount. Nay
they still ride there on the shadow of a saddle, so to speak;
and are Kaisers ofAustrld' at this hour. Steady enough of
scat at last, after many vain trials !

For during those Hundrcd-and-fifty years, — among those six
intercalary Kaisers, too, who followed Albert, — they were al-
ways trying ; always thinking they had a kind of quasi right
to it ; whereby the Empire often fell into trouble at Election-
time. For they were proud stout men, our Hapsburgers, though
of taciturn unconciliatory ways; and Rudolf had so fitted them
out with fruitful Austrian Dul^doms, which they much increased
by marriages and otherwise, — Styria, Carinthia, the Tyrol, by
degrees, not to speak of their native Hapsburg much enlarged,
and claims on Switzerland all round it, — they had excellent
means of battling for their pretensions and disputable elections.
None of them succeeded, however, for a Hundred -and -fifty
years, except that same one-eyed, loose-lipped unbeautiful Al-
bert I. ; a Kaiser dreadfully fond of earthly gootls, too. Who
indeed grasped all round him, at property half his, or wholly
not his; Rhine-tolls, Crown of Bohemia, Landgraviate ofThii-
ringen, Swiss Forest Cantons, Crown of Hungary, Crown of
France even ; — getting endless quarrels on his hands, and much
defeat mixed with any victory there was. Poor soul, he had
six-and-twenty children by one wife ; and felt that there was
need of apanages! He is understood (guessed, not proved) to
have instigated two assassinations in pursuit of these objects ;
and he very clearly underwent one in his owi?$erson. Assassi-
nation first was of Dietzman the Thiiringian Landgraf, an Anti-
Albert champion, who refused to be robbed by Albert, — for
whom the great Dante is (with almost palpable absurdity) fa-

aap.ix. KAISER HENRY VIL loj

bled to have written an Epitaph still legible in the Church at
Leipzig.* Assassination second was of Wenzel, the poor young
Bohemian King, Ottocar’s Grandson and last heir. Sure enough,
this important young gentleman ‘ was murdered by some one
at Olmiitz next year’ (1306, a promising event for Albert then),
‘ but none yet knows who it was.’^

Neither of which suspicious transactions came to any re-
sult for Albert ; as indeed most of his unjust graspings proved
failures. He at one time had thoughts of the Crown of France ;
“ Yours /salemnly declare!” said the Pope. But that came to
nothing; — only to France’s shifting of the Popes to Avignon,
more under the thumb of France. What his ultimate success
with Tell and the Forest Cantons was, we all know! A most
clutching, strong-fisted, dreadfully hungry, tough and unbeau-
tiful man. Whom his own Nephew, at last, had to assassinate,
at the Ford of the Reuss (near Windisch Village, meeting of the
Reuss and Aar; ist May 1308): “Scandalous Jew pawnbroker
of an Uncle, wilt thou flatly keep from me my Father’s herit-
age, then, intrusted to thee in his hour of death.? Regardless
of God and man, and of the last look of a tfying Brother?
Uncle worse than pawnbroker ; for it is a heritage with no pawn
on it, with much the reverse!” thought the Nephew, — and stab-
bed said Uncle down dead; having gone across with him in
the boat ; attendants looking on in distraction from the other
side of the river. Was called Johannes Parricida in conse-
quence ; fled out of human sight that day, he and his henchmen,
never to turn-up again till Doomsday. F or the pursuit was tran-
scendent, regardless of expense ; the cry for legal vengeance very
great (on the part of Albert’s daughters chiefly), though in vain,
or nearly so, in this world.*

Of Kaiser Henry VII. and the Luxemburg Kaisers.

Of the other six Kaisers not Hapsburgers we are bound to
mention one, and dwell a little on his fortunes and those of
the family he founded ; both Brandenburg and our Hohenzol-
lerns coming to be much connected therewith, as time went on.
This is Albert*«wiext successor, Henry Count of Luxemburg ;

• Menckenii Scripiores, I J FrederUus Admorsus (by Tentzel).

♦ Kohler, p. ?7o.

* Kohler, p. 272. Hormayr, (Esierreichiseker Plutarch^ oder Ldfen nnd
tfissf iSfc. (la Bkadchen; Wien, X807,— a superior Book), u 65.

the hohenzollerns,

called among Kaisers Henry VIL He isfoundef« he alone among
these Non-Hapsburgers, of a small intercalary of Kaisers,
‘the Luxemburg Line;* who amount indeed only to Four, him-
self included ; and are not otherwise of much memorability, if
we except himself; though straggling about like well -rooted
briers, in that favourable ground, they have accidentally hooked
themselves upon World-History in one or two points. By acci-
dent a somwhat noteworthy line, those Luxemburg Kaisers : —
a celebrated place, too, or name of a place, that Luxembourg'*
of theirs, with its French Marshals, grand Parisian Edifices,
lending it new lustre : what, thinks the reader, is the meaning
of Liizzenburg, Luxemburg, Luxembourg? Merely Z«/2rtf/burg,
wrong pronounced ; and that again is nothing but Littlehox^
ough : such is the luck of names ! —

Heinrich Graf von Luxemburg was, after some pause on
the parricide of Albert, chosen Kaiser, * on account of his re-
nowned valour,’ say the old Books, — and also, add the shrewder
of them, because his Brother, Archbishop of Trier, was one of
the Electors, and the Pope did not like either the Austrian or the
F rench candidate then in the field. Chosen, at all events, he was,
27th November 1308 clearly, and by much, the best Kaiser
that could be had. A puissan^ soul, who might have done great
things, had he lived. He settled feuds; cut-off oppressions
from the Reichstddte (Free Towns) ; had a will of just sort, and
found or made a way for it. Bohemia lapsed to him, the old
race of Kings having perished out, — the last of them far too
suddenly ‘ at Olmiitz,’ as we saw lately I Some opposition there
was, but much more favour especially by the Bohemian People ;
and the point, after some small ‘ Siege of Prag’*and the like,
was definitely carried by the Kaiser. The now Burggraf of
Nurnberg, Friedrich IV., son of Rudolf’s friend, was present
at this Siege of Prag;7 a Burggraf much attached to Kaiser
Henry, as all good Germans were. But the Kaiser did nof
live.

He went to Italy, our Burggraf of Nurnberg and many
more along with him, to pull the crooked Guelf-Ghibelline
Facts and Avignon Pope a little straight, if possible ; and was
vigorously doing it, when he died on a suddtffr ; * poisoned in
sacramental wine,’ say the Germans ! One of the crowning
summits of human scoundrelism, which painfully stick in the
< Kohler, p. 374. 7 X3zo (Rentsch, p. 31 x).

Chap. IX. JOHANN JCING OF BOHEMIA. , I05

X3»>-

miBd. It Is certain lie arrived well at Buonconvento near
Sienna, on the 24th September 1313, in full march towards
the rebellious King of Naples, whom the Pope much counte-
nanced. At Buonconvento, Kaiser Henry wished to enjoy
the communion ;.and a Dominican monk, whose dark rat-eyed
look men afterwards bethought them of, administered it to
him in both species (Council of Trent not yet quite prohibiting
the liquid species, least of all to Kaisers, who are by theory a
kind of * Deacons to the Pope,* or something else®) ; — admin-
istered it in both species : that is certain, and also that on
the* morrow Henry was dead. The Dominicans endeavoured
afterwards to deny ; which, for the credit of human nature,
one wishes they had done with effect.^ But there was never
any trial had ; the denial was considered lame ; and German
History continues to shudder, in that passage, and assert.
Poisoned in the wine of his sacrament : the Florentines, it is
said, were at the bottom of it, and had hired the rat-eyed Do-
minican ; — ** O Italia^ 0 Firenze f* That is not the way to
achieve Italian Liberty, or Obedience to God ; that is the way
to confirm, as by frightful stygian oath, Italian Slavery, or con-
tinual Obedience, under varying forms, to the Other Party I
The voice of Dante, then alive, among men, proclaims, sad
and loving as a mother’s voice, and implacable as a voice of
Doom, that you are wandering, and have wandered, in a ter-
rible manner ! —

Peter, the then Archbishop of Mainz, says there had not
for hundreds of years such a death befallen the German Em-
pire ; to which Kohler, one of the wisest moderns, gives his
assent : ♦It tfould not enough be lamented,’ says he, ‘that so
‘ vigilant a Kaiser, in the flower of his years, should have been
‘ torn from the world in so devilish a manner : who, if he
* had lived longer, might have done Teutschland unspeakable
‘ benefit.’!®

Henry s Son Johann is King of Bohemia ; afid Ludwig the
Bavarian^ with a Contested Election^ is Kaiser.

Henry VII. having thus perished suddenly, his Son Johann,
scarcely yet coSfe of age, could not follow him as Kaiser, ac-

« Voltaire, Essat sur les Mceur^, c. 67, § Henri VII {^Ot7ivres, xxi. 184).

® Kohler, p. a8t (Ptolomey of Lucca, himself a Dominican, is one of the accusing
q[>irits: Muratori, 1 . xi. \ Ptolomceus LucensiSt a . d . 1313).

w Kohler, |q>. aSa-s.

lo<5 THE HOHENZOLLERNS, Booktt

cording to the Father’s thought; though in due time he pro^
secuted his advancement otherwise to good purpose, and proved
a very stirring man in the world. By his Father’s appoint-
ment, to whom as Kaiser the chance had fallen, he was already
King of Bohemia, strong in his right and in the favour of the
natives ; though a titular Competitor, Henry of the Tyrol,
beaten-off by the late Kaiser, was still extant: whom, however,
and all other perils Johann contrived to weather ; growing up
to be a far-sighted stout-hearted man, and potent Bohemian
King, widely renowned in his day. He had a Son, and then
two Grandsons, who were successively Kaisers, after a sort ;
making up the ‘ Luxemburg Four’ we spoke of. He did Cru-
sades, one or more, for the Teutsch Ritters, in a shining man-
ner ; — unhappily with loss of an eye ; nay ultimately, by the
aid of quack oculists, with loss of both eyes. An ambitious
man, not to be quelled by blindness ; man with much negoti-
ation in him ; with a heavy stroke of fight too, and temper
nothing loath at it ; of which we shall see some glimpse by
and by.

The pity wSts, for the Reich if not for him, he could not him-
self become Kaiser. Perhaps we had not then seen Henry VII. ’s
fine enterprises, like a fleet of half-built ships, go mostly to
planks again, on the waste sea, had his Son followed him.
But there was, on the contrary, a contested election ; Austria
in again, as usual, and again unsuccessful. The late Kaiser’s
Austrian competitor, ‘Friedrich the Fair, Duke of Austria,*
the parricided Albert’s Son, was again one of the parties.
Against whom, with real but not quite indisputable majority,
stood Ludwig Duke of Bavaria : ‘ Ludwig IV.,* ^ Ludwig der
Baier (the Bavarian)’ as they call him among Kaisers. Con-
test attended with the usual election expenses ; war-wrestle,
namely, between the parties till one threw the other. There
was much confused wrestling and throttling for seven years
or more (1315-1322). Our Nurnberg Burggraf, Friedrich IV.,
held with Ludwig, as did the real majority, though in a lan-
guid manner, and was busy he as few were ; the Austrian
Hapsburgs also doing their best, now under, now above. Jo-
hann King of Bohemia was on Ludwig’s side afryet. Ludwig’s
own Brother, Kur-Pfalz (ancestor of all the Electors, and their
numerous Branches, since known there), an elder Brother, was,

• out of spite’ as men thought, decidedly against Ludwig.

107

Chap, IX. JOHANN KING OF BOHEMIA.

1399,

In the eighth year came a Fight that proved decisive. Fight
at Miihldorf on the Inn, 28th September 1322, — far down in
those Danube Countries, beyond where Marlboiough ever was,
where there has been much fighting first and last ; Burggraf
Friedrich was conspicuously there. A very great Battle, say
the old Books, — says Hormayr, in a new readable Book,
giving minute account of it. Ludwig rather held aloof rear-
ward ; committed his business to the Hohenzollern Burggraf
and to one Schweppermann, aided by a noble lord called Rinds-
maul {^Cowmouth,' no less), and by others experienced in such
work. Friedrich the Hapsburger der Schone^ Duke of Austria,
and self-styled Kaiser, a gallant handsome man, breathed mere
martial fury, they say : he knew that his Brother Leopold was
on march with a reinforcement to him from the Strasburg quar-
ter, and might arrive any moment; but he could not wait, — per-
haps afraid Ludwig miglit run he rashly determined to beat
Ludwig without reinforcement. Our rugged fervid Hormayr
(thougji imitating Tacitus and Johannes von Muller over-much)
will instruct fully any modern that is curious about this big Bat-
tle: what furious charging, worrying; how it ‘Ifstcd ten hours,*
how the blazing Handsome Friedrich stormed about, and ‘ slew
alx)ve fifty with his own hand.’ ^ To us this is the interesting
point : At one turn of the Battle, tenth hour of it now ending,
and the tug of war still desperate, there arose a cry of joy over
all the Austrian ranks, ** Help coming 1 Help !” — and Fried-
rich noticed a body of Horse, ‘in Austrian cognisance’ (such
the cunning of a certain man), coming in upon his rear. Aus-
trians and Friedrich never doubted but it was Brother Leopold
just getting ©n the ground ; and rushed forward doubly fierce.
Doubly fierce ; and were doubly astonished when it plunged
in upon them, sharp-edged, as Burggraf Friedrich of Niirn-
berg, — and quite ruined Austrian Friedrich ! Austrian Fried-
rich fought personally like a lion at bay ; but it availed nothing.
Rindsmaul (not lovely of lip, Cowvtouth so-called) disarmed
him : “ I will not surrender except to a Prince !” — so Burggraf
Friedrich was got to take surrender of him ; and the Fight,
and whole Controversy with it, was completely won.i*

U Jiormsiyv^ (Ji^tt^yrichiseker Plutarch, u. 31-7.

** Jedem Mann ein Ey ( One egg to every man ),

"Demfrommen SchTvej[>permann zwey (Two to the excellent Schweppermann):
Tradition still repeats this old rhyme, as the Kaiser's Address to his Army, or his
Head Captains, at supper, after such a day’s woik,--ni a co\intry already eaten to
the bouei

I«8 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bookii,

Poor Leopold, the Austrian Brother, did not arrive till the
morrow ; and saw a sad sight, before flying off again. Fried-
rich the Fair sat prisoner in the old Castle of Traussnitz (Oder
Pfalz, Upper Palatinate, or Niirnberg country) for three years ;
whittling sticks ; — Tourists, if curious, can still procure speci-
mens of them at the place, for a consideration. There sat
Friedrich, Brother Leopold moving Heaven and Earth, — and
in fact they said, the very Devil by art magic,^® — to no pur-
pose, to deliver him. And his poor Spanish Wife cried her
eyes, too literally, out, — sight gone in sad fact.

Ludwig the Bavarian reigned thenceforth, — though never
on easy terms. How grateful to Friedrich of Niirnberg we
need not say. For one thing he gave him all the Austrian
Prisoners ; whom Friedrich, judiciously generous, dismissed
without ransom except that they should be feudally subject to
him henceforth. This is the third Hohenzollern whom we
mark as a conspicuous acquirer in the Hohenzollern family,
this Friedrich IV., builder of the second story of the House.
If Conrad, original Burggraf, founded the House, then (figura-
tively speaking^ the able Friedrich III., who was Rudolf of
Hapsburg’s friend, built it one story high ; and here is a new
Friedrich, his Son, who has ad^ed a second story. It is aston-
ishing, says Dryasdust, how many feudal superiorities the An-
spach and Baireuth people still have in Austria ; — they maintain
their own Lehnprobst, or Official Manager for fief-casualties, in
that country : — all which proceed from this Battle of Miihl-
dorf. 14 ' Battle fought on the 28th of September 1322 : — eight
years after Bannockburn ; w’hile our poor Edward II. and Eng-
land with him were in such a welter with their S^pencers and
their Gavestons : eight years after Bannockburn, and four-
and-twenty before Crecy. That will date it for English readers.

Kaiser Ludwig reigned some twenty-five years more, in a
busy and even strenuous, but not a successful way. He had
good windfalls, too ; for example, Brandenburg, as we shall see.
He made friends ; reconciled himself to his Brother Kur-Pfalz
and junior Cousinry there, settling handsomely, and with final-
ity, the debateable points between them. Elt^mies, too, he
made ; especially Johann the Luxemburger, King of Bohemia,
on what ground will be seen shortly, who became at last in-

w Kohler, p. 288. ” Rentsch, p. 313; Pauli; ^c.

Chap.x. BRANDENBURG TO THE KAISER. 10$
1319*

veterate to a high degree. But there was one supremely sore
element in his lot : a Pope at Avignon to whom he could by
no method make himself agreeable. Pope who put him under
ban, not long after that Muhldorf victory ; and kept him so ;
inexorable, let poor Ludwig turn as he might Ludwig’s Ger-
man Princes stood true to him ; declared, in solemn Diet, the
Pope’s ban to be mere spent shot, of no avail in Imperial Poli-
tics. Ludwig went vigorously to Italy ; tried setting-up a Pope
of his own ; but that did not answer, nor of course tend to mol-
lify the Holiness at Avignon.

In fine, Ludwig had to carry this cross on Lis back, in a
sorrowful manner, all his days. The Pope at last, finding
Johann of Bohemia in a duly irritated state, persuaded him
into setting-up an Anti- Kaiser, — ^Johann’s second Son as Anti-
Kaiser, — who, though of little account, and called Pfaffen-
Kaiser {Parsons’ Kaiser) by the public, might have brought
new troubles, had that lasted. We shall see some ultimate
glimpses of it farther on.

CHAPTER X.

BRANDENBURG LAPsSs TO THE KAISER,

Two years before the victory at Miihldorf, a bad chance
befell in Brandenburg : the Ascanier Line of Markgraves or
Electors ended. Magniloquent Otto with the Arrow, Otto the
Short, Hermann the Tall, all the Ottos, Hermanns and others,
died by course of nature ; nephew Waldemar himself, a stir-
ring man, died prematurely (a. d. 1319), and left only a young
cousin for successor, who died few months after ^ the Line of
Albert the Bear went out in Brandenburg. They had lasted
there about Two-hundred years. They had not been, in late
times, the successfulest Markgraves ; territories much split-up
among younger sons, joint Markgraves reigning, which seldom
answers ; yet to the last they always made stout fight for them-
selves ; walked the stage in a high manner ,* and surely might
be said to quit it creditably, leaving such a Brandenburg be-
hind them, chiSlly of their making, during the Two Centuries
that had been given them before the night came.

* September 1330 (Pauli, I 391). Michaelis, I 360*377.

iW tHE liOlIEN^OLLEllNS, fioofcfJ.

1393.

There were plenty of Ascanicr Cousins still extant in those
parts, Saxon dignitaries, Anhalt dignitaries, lineal descendants
of Albert the Bear ; to some of whom, in usual times, Albert’s
inheritance would naturally have been granted. But the times
were of battle, uncertainty, contested election : and the As-
caniers, I perceive, had rather taken Friedrich of Austria’s
side, which proved the losing one. Kaiser Ludwig Baier
would appoint none of these ; Anti-Kaiser Friedrich’s appoint-
ments, if he made any, could be only nominal, in those distant
Northern parts. Ludwig, after his victory of Miihldorf, pre-
ferred to consider the Electorate of Brandenburg as lapsed,
lying vacant, ungoverned these three years ; and now become
the Kaiser’s again. Kaiser, in consequence, gave it to his Son ;
whose name also is Ludwig : the date of the Investiture is
1323 (year after that victory of Muhldorf) ; a date unfortunate
to Brandenburg. Wc come now into a Line ot Bavarian
Markgraves, and then of Luxemburg ones ; both of which are
of fatal significance to Brandenburg.

The Ascanicr Cousins, high Saxon dignitaries some of them,
gloomed mere (JKsappointment, and protested hard ; but could
not mend the matter, now or afterwards. Their Line went out
in Saxony too, in course of tiipe ; gave place to the Wettins^
who are still there. The Ascanicr had to be content with the
more pristine state of acquisitions, — high pedigrees, old castles
of Ascanien and Ballenstadt, territories of Anhalt or what else
they had ; — and never rose again to the lost height, though the
race still lives, and has qualities besides its pedigree. We said
the ‘ Old Dcssauer,’ Leopold Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, was the
head of it in Friedrich Wilhelm’s time ; and to thfe day he has
descendants. Catharine II. of Russia was of Anhalt-Zerbst, a
junior branch. Albert the Bear, if that is of any use to him,
has still occasionally notable representatives.

Ludwig junior, Kaiser Ludwig the Bavarian’s eldest son,
Was still under age when appointed Kurfiirst of Brandenburg
in 1323 : of course he had a ' Siateholdcr' (Viceregent, Siati-
halter ) ; then, and afterwards in occasional absences of his, a
series oi such. Kaiser’s Councillors, Burggra^' Friedrich IV.
among them, had to take some thought 01 Brandenburg in its
new posture. Who these Brandenburg Statthalters were, is
heartily indifferent even to Dryasdust,— except th«it one 01 them

Chap.3t. BRANDENBURG TO THE KAISER. lit

for some time was a HohenzoIIern : which circumstance Dryas-
dust marks with the due note of admiration. ‘ What he did there/
Dryasdust admits, ‘ is not written anywhere good, we will
hope, and not evil ; — but only the Diploma nominating him (of
date 1 346, not in Ludwig’s minority, but many years after that
ended*) now exists by way of record. A difficult problem he, like
the other regents and viceregents, must have had ,* little dream-
ing that it was intrinsically for a grandson of his own, and long
line of grandsons. The name of this temporary Statthalter,
the first HohenzoIIern who had ever the least concern with Bran-
denburg, is Burggraf Johann II., eldest Son of our distinguished
Miihldorf friend Friedrich IV. ; and Grandfather (through an-
other Friedrich) of Burggraf Friedrich VI., — which last gen-
tleman, as will be seen, did doubtless reap the sowings, good
and bad, of all manner of men in Brandenburg. The same
Johann II. it was who purchased I^lassenburg Castle and Ter-
ritory (cheap, for money down), w'here the Family afterwards
had its chief residence. Hof, Town and Territory, had fallen
to his Father in those parts ; a gift of gratitude from Kaiser
Ludwig : — most of the Voigtland is now Hoher^ollern.

Kaiser Ludwig the Bavarian left his sons Electors of Bran-
denburg ; — ‘Electors, Kurfiirsts,* now becomes the commoner
term for so important a Country ; — Electors not in easy circum-
stances. But no son of his succeeded Ludwig as Kaiser, — suc-
cessor in the Reich was that Pfaffen- Kaiser, Johann of Bohe-
mia’s son, a Luxemburger once more. No son of Ludwig’s ;
nor did any descendant, — except, after four hundred years, that
unfortunate Kaiser Karl VII., in Maria Theresa’s time. He
was a descendant. Of whom we shall hear more than enough.
The unluckiest of all Kaisers, that Karl VII. ; less a Sovereign
Kaiser than a bone thrown into the ring for certain royal dogs,
Louis XV., George II, and others, to worry about ; — watch-
dogs of the gods ; apt sometimes* to run into hunting instead
of warding. — We will say nothing more of Ludwig the Baier,
or his posterity, at present : we will glance across to Preussen,
and see, for one moment, what the Teutsch Ritters are doing
in their new G?ntury. It is the year 1330 ; Johann II. at
Nurnberg, as yet only coming to be Burggraf, by no means
yet administering in Brandenburg ; and Ludwig junior seven
years old in his new dignity there.

* Kentsch, p.

143 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Book it..

i33«^

^ The Teutsch Ritters, after infinite travail, have subdued
heathen Preussen ; colonised the country with industrious Ger-
man immigrants ; banked the Weichsel and the Nogat, sub-
duing their quagmires into meadows, and their waste streams
into deep ship-courses. Towns are built, Konigsberg {King
Ottocar’s town), Thoren (Thorn, City of the Gates), with many
others : so that the wild population and the tame now lived
tolerably together, under Gospel and Liibeck Law ; and all was
ploughing and trading, and a rich country; which had made
the Teutsch Ritters rich, and victoriously at their ease in com-
parison. But along with riches and the ease of victory, the
common bad consequences had ensued. Ritters given up to
luxuries, to secular ambitions ; ritters no longer clad in austere
mail and prayer ; ritters given up to wantonness of mind and
conduct ; solemnly vowing, and quietly not doing ; without re-
morse or consciousness of wrong, daily eating forbidden fruit ;
ritters swelling more and more into the fatted-ox condition, for
whom there is but one doom. How far they had carried it,
here is one symptom that may teach us.

In the yeaF 1330, one Werner von Orseln was Grandmas-
ter of these Ritters. The Grandmaster, who is still usually the
best man they can get, and who by theory is sacred to them
as a Grand-Lama or Pope among Cardinal-Lamas, or as an
Abbot to his Monks, — Grandmaster Werner, we say, had lain
down in Marienburg one afternoon of this year 1330, to take
his siesta, and was dreaming peaceably after a moderate repast,
when a certain devil-ridden mortal, Johann von Endorf, one of
his Ritters, long grumbling about severity, want of promotion
and the like, rushed in upon the good old man ; raahim through,
dead for a ducat — and consummated a parricide at which the
very cross on one’s white cloak shudders ! Parricide worse,
a great deal, than that at the Ford of Reuss upon one-eyed
Albert.

We leave the shuddering Ritters to settle it, sternly venge-
ful ; whom, for a moment, it has struck broad-awake to some
sense of the very questionable condition they are getting into.

» Voigt, iv. 474. 45 *.

Cbat». 3 CI.

ms*

BAVARIAN KURFURSTS,

CHAPTER XL

. BAVARIAN KURFURSTS IN BRANDENBURG.

Young Ludwig Kurfiirst of Brandenburg, Kaiser Ludwig’s
eldest son, having come of years, the Tutors or Statthalters
went home, — not wanted except in cases of occasional absence
henceforth ; — and the young man endeavoured to manage on
his own strength. His success was but indifferent ; he held
on, however, for a space of twenty years, better or worse,

* He helped King Edward III. at the Siege of Cambray (a.d.

* 1339) whose French politics were often connected with the
Kaiser’s : it is certain, Kurfurst Ludwig ‘ served personally
with 600 horse’ (on good payment, I conclude) ‘ at that Siege
of Cambray — and probably saw the actual Black Prince, and
sometimes dined with him, as English readers can imagine.
In Brandenburg he had many checks and difficult passages,
but was never quite beaten out, which it was easy to have been.

A man of some ability, as we can gather, though not of
enough : he played his game with resolution, no! without skill ;
but from the first the cards were against him. His Father’s
affairs going mostly ill were no^help to his, which of them-
selves went not well. The Brandenburgers, mindful of their
old Ascanier sovereigns, were ill-affected to Ludwig and the
new Bavarian sort. The Anhalt Cousinry gloomed irreconcil-
able ; were never idle, digging pitfalls, raising troubles. From
them and others Kurfurst Ludwig had troubles enough ; which
were fronted by him really not amiss ; which wc wholly, or all
but wholly, omit in this place.

A Resuscitated Ascanier ; the False Waldemar,

The wickedest and worst trouble of their raising was that
of the resuscitated Waldemar (a.d. 1345): “False Walde-
mar,” as he is now called in Brandenburg Books. Waldemar
was the last, or as good as the last, of the Ascanier Mark-
graves ; and he, two years before Ludwig ever saw those coun-
tries, died in his bed, twenty-five good years ago ; and war.
buried, and seemingly ended. But no ; after twenty-five years,
Waldemar reappears ; ** Not buried or dead, only sham-buried,

1 Michaelis, i. 379.

VOL. I.

3

114

THE HOHENZOLLERNS.

Hook If.

sham-dead ; have been in the Holy Land all this while, doing
pilgrimage and penance ; and am come to claim my own again,
— ^which strangers are much misusing l”2

Perkin Warbeck, Post-mortem Richard II., Dimitri of Rus-
sia, Martin Guerre of the Causes Cillhres: it is a common
story in the world, and needs no commentary now. Post*
mortem Waldemar, it is said, was a Miller’s Man, * of the name
of Jakob Rehback who used to be about the real Waldemar
in a menial capacity, and had some resemblance to him. He
showed signets, recounted experiences, which had belonged to
the real Waldemar. Many believed in his pretension, and
took arms to assert it ; the Reich being in much internal battle
at the time ; poor Kaiser Ludwig, with his Avignon Popes and
angry Kings Johann, wading in deep waters. Especially the
disaffected Cousinry, or Princes of Anhalt, believed and battled
for Post-mortem Waldemar ; who were thought to have got him
up from the first. Kurfurst Ludwig had four or five most sad
years with him ; — all the worse when the Pfaffen-Kaiser (King
Johann’s son) came on the stage, in the course of them (a.d,
1 346), and Ktiser Ludwig, yielding not indeed to him, but to
Death, vanished from it two years after leaving Kurfurst
Ludwig to his own shifts with the Pfaffen-Kaiser. Whom he
could not now hinder from ^cceeding to the Reich. He tried
hard; set up, he and others, an Anti- Kaiser {Gunther oj
Schwartzburg, temporary Anti-Kaiser, whom English readers
can forget again) : he bustled, battled, negotiated, up and
down ; and ran across, at one time, to Preussen to the Teutsch
Ritters, — presumably to borrow money : — but it all would not
do. The Pfaffen-Kaiser carried it, in the Diet jnd out of the
Diet : Karl IV. by title ; a sorry enough Kaiser, and by nature
an enemy of Ludwig’s.

It was in this whirl of intricate misventures that Kurfurst
Ludwig had to deal with his False Waldemar, conjured from
the deeps upon him, like a new goblin, where already there
were plenty, in the dance round poor Ludwig. Of which
nearly inextricable goblin-dance; threatening Brandenburg,
for one thing, with annihilation, and yet leading Brandenburg
abstrusely towards new birth and higher destinies, — how will
it be possible (without raising new ghosts, in a sense) to give

3 Michaelis, i. 370.

* Elected, 13x4; AlQhldorf, and Election 1393; died, 1347, age 6 a

Ctep-W. BAVARIAN KURFURSTS.

^ 345 *

readers any intelligible notion ? — Here, flickering on the edge
of conflagration after duty done, is a poor Note which perhaps
the reader had better, at the risk of superfluity, nill in part
take along with him :

< Kaiser Henry VIL, who died of sacmmental wine, First of the

* Luxemburg Kaisers, left Johann still a boy of fifteen, who could not

* become the second of them, but did in time produce the Second, who

* again produced th» Third and Fourth.

‘ Johann was already King of Bohemia ; the important young gen-
‘ tleman, Ottocar’s grandson, whom we saw “murdered atOlmiitz none

* yet knows by whom, ” had left that throne vacant, and it lapsed to the
‘ Kaiser; who, the Nation also flouring, duly put in his son Johann.

* There was a competitor, “Duke of the Tyrol,” who claimed on loose

* grounds; “My wife was Aunt of the young murdered King,” said
‘he; “wherefore” — ! — Kaiser, and Johann after him, rebutted this
‘ competitor ; but he long gave some trouble, having great wealth and
‘ means. He produced a Daughter, Margaret Heiress of the Tyrol, —
‘ with a terrible mouth to her face, and none of the gentlest hearts in

* her body : — that was perhaps his principal feat in the world. He died
‘ 1331 ; had styled himself “King of Bohemia” for twenty years, — ever
‘ since 1308 ;— but in the last two years of his life he gave it up, and
‘ ceased from troubling, having come to a beautiful Sgrecment with
‘ Johann.

‘Johann, namely, wedded his eldest Son to this competitor’s fine

* Daughter with the mouth (Year 132-^ : “In this manner do not Bo-
‘ hernia and the Tyrol come together in my blood and in yours, and
‘ both of us are made men?” said the two contracting parties. — Alas,

* no : the competitor Duke, father of the Bride, died some two years

* after, probably with diminished hopes of it ; and King Johann lived

* to see the hope expire dismally altogether. There came no children,
‘ there came no— In fact Margaret, after a dozen years of wedlock, in
‘ unpleasant circumstances, broke it off as if by explosion ; took herself
‘ and her Tyrol irrevocably over to Kaiser Ludwig, quite away from King

* Johann,— who, his hopes of the Tyrol expiring in such dismal manner,

‘ was thenceforth the bitter enemy of Ludwig and wliat held of him.’

Tyrol explosion was in 1342. And now, keeping these
preliminary dates and outlines in mind, we shall understand
the big-mouthed Lady better^ and the consequences of her in
the world.

Margaret with the Pouch’tnoutJu

What principally raised this dance of the devils round poor
Ludwig, I perceive, was a marriage he had made, three years
before Waldemar emerged ; of which, were it only lor the sake

THE HOHENZOLLERHS.

ti6 THE HOHENZOLLERHS.

of the Bride’s name, some mention is permissible* Margaret of
the Tyrol, commonly called, by contemporaries and posterity,.
Mau/^aseke (Moutbpoke, Pocket-mouth), she was the bride ; —
marriage done at Innspruck, 1342, under furtherance of fa^
ther Ludwig the Kaiser : — such a mouth as we can fancy, and
a character corresponding to it. This, which seemed to the
two Ludwigs a very conquest of the golden-fleece under con-
ditions, proved the beginning of their worst days to both of
them.

Not a lovely bride at all, this Maultasche ; who is verging
now towards middle life withal, and has had enough to cross
her in the world. Was already married thirteen years ago ;
not wisely nor by any means too well. A terrible dragon of a
woman. Has been in nameless domestic quarrels ; in wars
and sieges with rebellious vassals ; claps you an iron cap on

her head, and takes the field when need is : furious she-beai
of the Tyrol. But she has immense possessions, if wanting in
female charms. She came by mothers from that Duke of
Meran whom we saw get his death (for cause), in the Plassen
burg a hundred years ago.^ Her ancestor was Husband to an
Aunt of that homicided Duke : from him, principally from him,
she inherits the Tyrol, Cajinthia, Styria ; is herself an only
child, the last of a line : hugest Heiress now going. So that,
in spite of the mouth and humour, she has not wanted for
wooers, — especially prudent Fathers wooing her for their sons.

In her Father’s lifetime, Johann King of Bohemia, always
awake to such symptoms of things, and having very peculiar
interests in this case, courted and got her for his Crown-
Prince (as we just saw), a youth of great outiooks, outlooks
towards Kaisership itself perhaps ; to whom she was wedded,
thirteen years ago, and duly brought the Tyrol for Heritage :
but with the worst results. Heritage, namely, could not be
had without strife with Austria, which likewise had claims.
Far worse, the marriage itself went awry : Johann’s Crown-
Prince was ' a soft-natured Herr,* say the Books : why bring
your big she-bear into a poor deer’s den ? Enough, the mar-
riage came to nothing, except to huge brawlings far enough
away from us : and Margaret Pouch-mouth has now divorced
her Bohemian Crown-Prince as a Nullity ; and again weds, on
similar terms, Kaiser Ludwig’s son, our Brandenburg KurfUrst,

* Antea, p. 88.

Chap.3a. BAVARIAN KURFURSTS.

1345 -

— who hopes possibly that he now may succeed as Kaiser, on
the strength of his Father and of the Tyrol. Which turned
out far otherwise.

The marriage was done in the Church of Innspruck, loth
February 1342 (for we love to be particular), * Kaiser Lud-
wig/ happy man, * and many Princes of the Empire, looking
on little thinking what a coil it would prove. * At the high
altar she stript-off her veil’ (symbol of wifehood or widow-
hood), ‘and put on a jungfernkranz (maiden’s-garland),* sym-
bolically testifying how happy Ludwig junior still was. They
had a son by and by ; but their course otherwise, and indeed
this-wise too, was much chequered.

Kingjohann, seeing the Tyrol gone in this manner, gloomed
terribly upon his Crown-Prince ; flung him aside as a Nullity,
“ Go to Moravia, out of sight, on an apanage, you ; be Crown-
Prince no longer !” — And took to fighting Kaiser Ludwig ;
colleagued diligently with the hostile Pope, with the King of
France ; intrigued and colleagued far and wide ; swearing by
every method everlasting enmity to Kaiser Ludwig ; and set-
up his son Karl as Pfaffen-Kaiser. Nay, perhaps he was at
the bottom of Post-obit Waldemar too. In brief, he raised, he
mainly, this devils’ -dance, in wlpch, Kaiser I-udwig having
died, poor Kurfurst Ludwig, with Maultasche hanging on him,
is sometimes near his wits* end.

Johann’s poor Crown-Prince, finding matters take this turn,
retired into Mdhre^i (Moravia) as bidden; ‘ Margrave of Mah-
ren;’ and peaceably adjusted himself to his character of Nullity
and to the loss of Maultasche ; — chose, for the rest, anew
Princess in wdfllock, with more moderate dimensions of mouth ;
and did produce sons and daughters on a fresh score. Pro-
duced, among others, one Jobst, his successor in the apanage
or Margrafdom; who, as yobst^ or Jodocus, of Mdhren^ made
some noise for himself in the next generation, and will turn-up
again in reference to Brandenburg in this History.

As for Margaret Pouch-mouth, she, with her new Husband
as with her old, continued to have troubles, pretty much as the
sparks fly upwards. She had fierce siegings after this, and ex-
plosive procedures, — little short of Monk Schwartz, who was just
inventing gunpowder at the time. We cannot hope she lived
in Elysian harmony with Kurfurst Ludwig ; — the reverse, in
fact; and oftenest with the whole breadth of Germany between

THE HOHENZOLLERNS.

ri8

Book tt

* 345 *

them, ht in Brandenburg, she in the Tyrol. Nor did Ludwig
junior ever come to be Kaiser, as his Father and she had hoped ;
on the contrary. King Johann of Bohemia’s people, — it was
they that next got the Kaisership and kept it ; a new provoca-
tion to Maultasche.

Ludwig and she had a son, as we said ; Prince of the Tyrol
and appendages, titular Margraf of Mahren and much else, by
nature ; but alas, he died about ten ; a precocious boy, — ^fancy
the Wild weeping of a maternal She*bearl And the Father had
already died a malicious world whispering that perhaps she
poisoned them both. The proud woman, now old too, pursed
her big coarse lips together at such rumour, and her big coarse
soul, — in a gloomy scorn appealing beyond the world; in a
sorrow that the world knew not of. She solemnly settled her
Tyrol and appendages upon the Austrian Archdukes, who were
children of her Mother’s Sister ; whom she even installed into the
actual government, to make matters surer. This done, she re-
tired to Vienna, on a pension from them, there to meditate and
pray a little, before Death came; as it did now in a short year
or two. Tyrol and the appendages continue with Austria from
that hour to this, Margaret’s little boy having died.

Margaret of the Pouch-mouth, rugged dragoon-major of a
woman, with occasional steel cap on her head, and capable of
swearing terribly in Flanders or elsewhere, remains in some
measure memorable to me. Compared with Pompadour, Duch-
ess of Cleveland, of Kendal and other high-rouged unfortunate-
females, whom it is not proper to speak of without necessity,
though it is often done, — Maultasche rises to the rank of His-
torical. She brought the Tyrol and appendages permanently to
Austria ; was near leading Brandenburg to annihilation, raising
such a goblin-dance round Ludwig and it, yet did abstrusely
lead Brandenburg towards .a far other goal, which likewise has
proved permanent for it.

CHAPTER XII.

BRANDENBURG IN KAISER KARL’S TIME; END OF THE BAVARIAN
KURFURSTS.

Kaiser Ludwig died in 1347, while the False Waldemar
was still busy. We saw Karl IV., Johann of Bohemia’s second

< In 136T, died KurfUrst Ludwig;; 1363, the Boy ; 1366, Maultasche herself.

Caiap.xn. BRANDENBURG IN KARUS TIME. ng

1347 -

son, come to the Kaisership thereupon, Johann’s eldest Nullity
being omitted. This F ourth Karl, — other three Karls are of the
Charlemagne set, Karl the Bald, the Fat, and suchlike, and lie
under our horizon, while Charles Fifth is of a still other set,
and known to everybody, — this Karl IV. is the Kaiser who dis-
covered the Well of Karlsbad (Bath of Karl), known to Tour-
ists of this day; and made the Golden Bull, which I forbid all
Englishmen to take for an agricultural Prize Animal, the thing
being far other, as is known to several.

There is little farther to be said of Karl in Reichs-History.
An unesteemed creature ; who strove to make his time peace-
able in this world, by giving from the Holy Roman Empire
with both hands to every bull-beggar, or ready-payer who ap-
plied. Sad sign what the Roman Empire had come and was
coming to. The Kaiser’s shield, set up aloft in the Roncalic
Plain in Barbarossa’s time, intimated, and in earnest too, “Ho,
everyone that has suffered wrong!” — intimates now, “Ho,
every one that can bully me, or has money in his pocket I”
Unadmiring posterity has confirmed the nickniftne of this Karl
IV. ; and calls him P/affen-Kaiser, He kept mainly at Prag,
ready for receipt of cash, and holding well out of harm’s way.
In younger years he had been iftuch about the French Court;
in Italy he had suffered troubles, almost assassinations ; much
blown to and fro, poor light wretch, on the chaotic winds of
his Time,— steering towards no star.

Johann, King of Bohemia, did not live to see Karl an ac-
knowledged Kaiser. Old Johann, blind for some time back,
had perished two years before that event ; — bequeathing a He-
raldic Symbol to the World’s History and to England’s, if no-
thing more. Poor man, he had crusaded in Preussen in a
brilliant manner, being fond of fighting. He wrung Silesia,
gradually by purchase and entreaty {pretio ac prece), from the
Polish King;i joined //firmly to Bohemia and Germany, — un-
consciously waiting for what higher destinies Silesia might have.
For Maultasche and the Tyrol he brought sad woes on Bran-
denburg ; and yet was unconsciously leading Brandenburg, by
abstruse courses, whither it had to go. A restless, ostentatious,
far-grasping, strong-handed man; who kept the world jn a stir
wherever he was. All which has proved voiceless in the World’s
1 X337'4Z (Kohler, p. 309).

m THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Boalcit,

1349 *

memory; while the casual Shadow of a Feather he once wore
has proved vocal there. World’s memory is very whimsical now
and then.

Being much implicated with the King of France, who with
the Pope was his chief stay in these final Anti-Ludwig opera^
tions, Johann, — in 1346, Pfaffen-Kaiser Karl just set on foot,
— had led his chivalry into France, to help against the Eng**
lish Edwards, who were then very intrusive there. Johann was
blind, but he had good ideas in war. At the Battle of Crecy,
24th August 1346, he advised we know not what; but he actu-
ally fought, though stone-blind. ‘ Tied his bridle to that of the
Knight next him ; and charged in,* — like an old blind war-
horse kindling madly at the sound of the trumpet ; — and was
there, by some English lance or yew, laid low. They found
him on that field of carnage (field of honour, too, in a sort) ;
his old blind face looking, very blindly, to the stars : on his
shield was blazoned a Plume of three ostrich-feathers with * Ich
dim (I serve)’ written under; — with which emblem every Eng-
lish reader is familiar ever since I This Editor himself, in very
tender years, noticed it on the Britannic Majesty’s war-drums ;
and had to inquire of children of a larger growth what the mean-
ing might be.

That is all I had to say ortCing Johann and his Ich dien,**
Of the Luxemburg Kaisers (four in number, two sons of Karl
still to come) ; who, except him of the sacramental wine, with
*/c/i dim' for son, arc good for little; and deserve no memory
from mankind except as they may stick, not easily extricable,
to the history of nobler men ; — of them also I could wish to be
silent, but must not. Must at least explain how they came in,
as * Luxemburg Kurfursts’ in Brandenburg ; and how they went
out, leaving Brandenburg not annihilated, but very near it.

End of Resuscitated Waldcmar; Kurfiirst Ludwig sells out

Imaginary Waldemar being still busy in Brandenburg, it
was natural for Kaiser Karl to find him genuine, and keep-up
that goblin-dance round poor Kurfiirst Ludwig, the late Kaiser’s
son, by no means a lover of Karl’s. Considerable support was
managed to be raised for Waldemar, Kaiser Karl regularly in-
feofied him as real Kurfiirst, so far as parchment could do it ;
and in case of his decease, says Karl’s diploma farther, the

Chap* XII. BRANDENBURG IN KARUS TIME. tHi

t349>

Princes of Anhalt shall succeed, — Ludwig in any case is to be
zero henceforth. War followed, or what they called war : much
confused invading, bickering and throttling, for ♦wo years to
come. ‘ Most of the Towns declared for Waldemar, and their
old Anhalt line of Margraves ;* Ludwig and the Bavarian sort
are clearly not popular here. Ludwig held-out strenuously, how-
ever; would not be beaten. He had the King of Denmark for
Brother-in-law ; had connexions in the Reich : perhaps still bet-
ter he had the Reichs^Insignia, lately his Father’s, still in hand.
He stood obstinate siege from the Kaiser’s people and the An-
halters ; shouted-in Denmark to help ; started an Anti- Kaiser,
as we said, — temporary Anti-Kaiser Gunther of Schwartzburg,
whom the reader can forget a second time : — in brief, Ludwig
contrived to bring Kaiser Karl, and Imaginary Waldemar with
his Anhalters, to a quietus and negotiation, and to get Bran-
denburg cleared of them. Year 1349, they went their ways;
and that devils’-dance, which had raged five years and more
round Ludwig, was fairly got laid or lulled again.

Imaginary Waldemar, after some farther ineffectual wrig-
glings, retired altogether into private life, at the* Court of Des-
sau; and happily died before long. Died at the Court of Des-
sau ; the Anhalt Cousins treating him to the last as Head
Representative of Albert the Bear, and real Prince Waldemar ;
for which they had their reasons. Portraits of this False Wal-
demar still turn-up in the German Printshops ? and represent
a very absurd fellow, much muffled in drapery, mouth partially
open, eyes wholly and widely so, — never yet recovered from
his astonishment at himself and things in general! How it
fared with po«r Brandenburg, in these chaotic throttlings and
vicissitudes, under the Bavarian Kurfiirsts, we can too well
imagine; and that is little to what lies ahead for it.

However, in that same year 1349, temporary quietus hav-
ing come, Kurfiirst Ludwig, weary of the matter, gave it over
to his Brother : “ Have not I an opulent Maultasche, Gorgon-
,Wife, susceptible to kindness, in the Tyrol ; have not I in the
Reich elsewhere resources, appliances ?” thought Kurfiirst Lud-
wig. And gave the thing over to his next Brother, Brother
whose name also is Ludwig (as their Father’s also had been,
three Ludwigs at once, for our dear Germans shine in nomencla-

* Tn Rloss {Vaierldndisehe Getn&lde^ ii. 29), a sorry Compilation, a 1 x>vc referred
to, without value except for the old Excerpts, &c., there is a Copy of it.

Ui THE HOHEKZOLLEEKS. bode ti

X3ciii*

ture) : •* Ludwig ihe Romani' this new one ; — ^the*elder Btother,
our acquaintance, being Ludwig simply, distinguishable too as
Knrjurst Ludwig, or even as Ludwig Senior at this stage of the
affair. Kurfiirst Ludwig, therefore, Year I 349 » washes his hands
of Brandenburg while the quietus lasts ; retaining only the £lec*>
torship and Title ; and goes his ways, resolving to take his ease
in Bavaria and the Tyrol thenceforth. How it fared with him
there, with his loving Gorgon and him, we will not ask farther.
They had always separate houses to fly to, in case of extrem-
ity I They held out, better or worse, twelve years more ; and
Ludwig left his little Boy still surviving him, in I36i,

Second, and then Third and last^ of the Bavarian Kurfursts
in Brandenburg,

In Brandenburg, the new Markgraf Ludwig, who we say is
called ** the Roman'" {Ludwig der Rbmer^ having been in Rome)
to distinguish him, continued warring with the Anarchies, fif-
teen years in a rather tough manner, without much victory on
either side ; — niade his peace with Kaiser Karl however, de-
livering-up iht ReichsTnsignia j and tried to put down the do-
mestic Robbers, who had got on foot, ‘ many of them persons
of quality — till he also di?d, childless, a.d. 1365; having
been Kurfiirst too, since his Brother’s death, for some four
years.

Whereupon Brandenburg, Electorship and all Titles with
it, came to Otto, third son of Kaiser Ludwig, who is happily
the last of these Bavarian Electors. They were an unlucky
set of Sovereigns, not hitherto without desert ; and the unlucky
Country suffered much under them. By far the unluckiest, and
by far the worst, was this Otto ; a dissolute, drinking, entirely
worthless Herr ; under whom, for eight years, confusion went
worse confounded ; as if plain Chaos were coming ; and Bran-
denburg and Otto grew tired of each other to the last degree.

In which state of matters, a.d. 1373, Kaiser Karl offered
Otto a trifle of ready-money to take himself away. Otto ac-
cepted greedily ; sold his Electorate and big Mark of Branden-
burg to Kaiser Karl for an old song, — 200,000 thalers (about
30,000/., and only half of it ever paid) — withdrew to his
Schloss of Wolfstein in Bavaria ; and there, on the strength of
* Michaelis, L aSa. < Ib. i. 283.

l*top.xnt LUXEMBURG KURFURSTS. laj

1373 *

that or otlie» sums, * rolled deep as possible in every sort of
debauchery/ And so in few years puddled himself to death ;
foully ending the Bavarian set of Kurfiirsts. They had lasted
fifty years ; with endless trouble to the Country and to them-
selves ; and with such mutual profit as we have seen

CHAPTER XIIL

LUXEMBURG KURFURSTS IN BRANDENBURG,

If Brandenburg suffered much under the Bavarian Kur-
fiirsts for Fifty years, it was worse, and approached to the state
of worst, under the Luxemburgers, who lasted for some Forty
more. Ninety years of anarchy in all ; which at length brought
it to great need of help from the Fates ! —

Karl IV. made his eldest Boy Wenzel, still only about twelve,
Elector of Brandenburg / Wenzel shall be Kaiser and King of
Bohemia, one day, thinks Karl ,* — which actually came to pass,
and little to Wenzel’s profit, by and by. In ihe mean while
Karl accompanied him to Brandenburg ; which country Karl
liked much at the money, and indeed ever after, in his old days,
he seemed rather to busy himself with it. He assembled some
kind of Std7tde (States) twice over ; got the Country * incor-
porated with Bohemia’ by them, and made tight and handy so
far. Brandenburg shall rest from its woes, and be a silent por-
tion of Bohemia henceforth, thinks Karl, — if the Heavens so
please. Karl, a futile Kaiser, would fain have done something
to * encourage trade’ in Brandenburg ; though one sees not what
it was he dfd, if anything. He built the Schloss of Tanger-
munde, and oftenest lived there in time coming ; a quieter
place than even Prag for him. In short, he appears to have
fancied his cheap Purchase, and to have cheered his poor old
futile life with it, as with one thing that had been successful.
Poor old creature : he had been a Kaiser on false terms, “Ho,
every one that dare bully me, or that has money in his pocket
— a Kaiser that could not but be futile 1 In five-years time he
died ;« and doubtless was regretted in Brandenburg and even
in the Reich, in comparison with what came next.

1 1373 (bom 1361).

^ * King of Bohemia, 1346, on his Father's death ; Kaiser (acknowledged on Lud-
wig the Baier's death), 1347 ; died, 1378, age 62.

124 "THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Book ii.

1373 -

In Brandenburg he left, instead of one indifferent o)c even
bad governor steadily tied to the place and in earnest to make
the best of it, a fluctuating series of governors holding loose,
and not in earnest ; which was infinitely worse. These did
not try to govern it ; sent it to the Pawnbroker, to a fluctuat-
ing series of Pawnbrokers ; under whom, for the next Five-and-
thirty years, Brandenburg tasted all the fruits of Non-govern-
ment, that is to say, Anarchy or Government by the Pawn-
broker ; and sank faster and faster, towards annihilation as it
seemed. That was its fate under the Luxemburg Kurfiirsts,
who made even the Bavarian and all others be regretted.

One thing Kaiser Karl did, which ultimately proved the sav-
ing of Brandenburg : made friendship with the Hohenzollern
Burggraves. These, Johann II., temporary * StaUhalter'
hann, and his Brother, who were Co-regents in the Family Do-
main, when Karl first made appearance, — had stood true to
Kaiser Ludwig and his Son, so long as that play lasted at all ;
nay one of thes^ Burggraves was talked of as Kaiser after Lud-
wig’s death, but had the wisdom not to try. Kaiser Ludwig
being dead, they still would not recognise the P/affeu-JCaiser
Karl, but held gloomily out. t So that Karl had to march in
force into the Niirnberg country; and by great promises, by
considerable gifts, and the * example of the other Princes of the
Empire, ’3 brought them over to do homage.

After which, their progress, and that of their successor
(Johann’s son, Friedrich V.), in the grace of Karl, was some-
thing extraordinary. Karl gave his Daughter to this Friedrich
V.’s eldest Son ; appointed a Daughter of FriedHch’s for his
own Second Prince, the famed Sigismund, famed that is to be,
— which latter match did not take effect, owing to changed
outlooks after Karl’s death. Nay there is a Deed still extant
about marrying children not yet born : Karl to produce a Prin-
cess within five years, and Burggraf Friedrich V. a Prince, for
that purpose But the Burggraf never had another Prince ;
though Karl produced the due Princess, and was ready, for his
share. Unless indeed this strange eager-looking Document,
not dated in the old Books, may itself relate to the above wed-

B ' Hallow>eve, 1347, on the Field ofNdmberg,’ Agreement was come to(Renlsch,

* Kentsch, p. 336,

Chap, XIV. BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH VI. 125

ding which did come to pass ? — Years before that. Karl had
made his much-esteemed Burggraf Friedrich V. < Captain-Gene-
ral of the Reich ;* ‘ Imperial Vicar* {Substitute, if need were),
and much besides ; nay had given him the Landgraviate of
Elsass {Alsace ), — so far as lay with him to give, — of which
valuable country this Friedrich had actual possession so long
as the Kaiser lived. “ Best of men,** thought the poor light
Kaiser ; “ never saw such a man !’*

Which proved a salutary thought, after all. The man had
a little Boy Fritz (not the betrothed to Karl’s Princess), still
chasing butterflies at Culmbach, when Karl died. In this Boy
lie new destinies for Brandenburg : towards him, and not to-
wards annihilation, are Karl and the Luxemburg Kurfiirsts and
Pawnbrokers unconsciously guiding it.

CHAPTER XIV.

BURGGRAF FRIEDRICH VI. ^

Karl left three young Sons, Wenzel, Sigismund, Johann;
and also a certain Nephew much older; all of whom now more
or less concern us in this unforAnate History.

Wenzel the eldest Son, heritable Kurfurst of Brandenburg
as well as King of Bohemia, was as yet only seventeen, who
nevertheless got to be Kaiser,^ — and went widely astray, poor
soul. The Nephew was no other than Margrave Jobst of Mo-
ravia (son bf Maultasche’s late Nullity there), now in the vigour
of his years ^nd a stirring man; to him, for a time, the chief
management in Brandenburg fell, in these circumstances. Wen-
zel, still a minor, and already Kaiser and King of Bohemia,
gave-up Brandenburg to his two younger Brothers, most of it
to Sigismund, with a cutting for Johann, to help their apan-
ages ; and applied his own powers to govern the Holy Roman
Empire, at that early stage of life.

To govern the Holy Roman Empire, poor soul; — or rather
• to drink beer, and dance with the girls ;’ in which, if defective
in other things, Wenzel had an eminent talent. He was one
of the worst Kaisers, and the least victorious on record. He
would attend to nothing in the Reich; “the Prag white beer,

* *378, oa his Father’s death.

m the HOHENZOLLERNS. Book II.

imd girls'* of various complexion, being much prefemblei as hB
was heard to say. He had to fling his poor Queen's Confessor
into the River Moldau, — ^Johann of Nepomuk, Sam/ so-called,
if he is not a fable altogether; whose Statue stands on Bridges
ever since, in those parts. Wenzers Bohemians revolted against
him ; put him in jail; and he broke prison, a boatman's daugh-
ter helping him out, with adventures. His Germans were dis-
gusted with him; deposed him from the Kaisership;^ chose
Rupert of the Pfalz ; and then after Rupert's death, 3 chose Wen-
zel’s own Brother Sigismund, in his stead, — left Wenzel to
jumble about in his native Bohemian element, as King there,
for nineteen years longer, still breaking pots to a ruinous ex-
tent.

He ended, by apoplexy, or sudden spasm of the heart ; ter-
rible Zisca, as it were, killing him at secondhand. For Zisca,
stout and furious, blind of one eye and at last of both, a kind
of human rhinoceros driven mad, had risen out of the ashes
of murdered Huss, and other bad Papistic doings, in the in-
terim ; and was tearing-up the world at a huge rate. Rhino-
ceros Zisca was ‘on the Weissenberg, or a still nearer Hill of
Prag since called Zisca-Berg (Zisca Hill) ; and none durst whis-
per of it to the King. A servant waiting at dinner inadvert-
ently let-slip the word; — **ZisJa there? Deny it, slave 1" cried
Wenzel frantic. Slave durst not deny, Wenzel drew his sword
to run at him, but fell down dead ; that was the last pot broken
by Wenzel. The hapless royal ex-imperial Phantasm self-broken
in this manner.4 Poor soul, he came to the Kaisership too
early ; was a thin violent creature, sensible to the charms and
horrors of created objects; and had terrible rhinoceros Ziscas
and unruly horned-cattle to drive. He was one of the worst
Kaisers ever known, — could have done Opera-singing much
better ; — and a sad sight to Bohemia, Let us leave him there :
he was never actual Elector of Brandenburg, having given it
up in time ; never did any ill to that poor Country,

Sigismund is KurfUrst of Brandenburg, but is King of
Hungary also.

The real KurfUrst of Brandenburg all this while was Sigis-
mund Wenzel’s next Brother, under tutelage oi Cousin Jobst

* asth May 1400 (KOhler, p. 331). » 1410 (ib, pu 33^

* 30th July X419 (Hormayr, vu. 1x9).

Ctop,xiv. SIGISMUND AND BURGGRAVES. 127

1378.

or otherwise;— real and yet imaginary, for he never himself
governed, but always had Jobst of Mahren or some other in
his place there, Sigismund, as above said, was i •> have mar-
ried a Daughter of Burggraf Friedrich V. ; and he was himself,
as was the young lady, well inclined to this arrangement. But
the old people being dead, and some offer of a King’s Daugh-
ter turning-up for Sigismund, Sigismund broke off; and took
the King’s Daughter, King of Hungary’s, — not without regret
then and afterwards, as is believed. At any rate, the Hunga-
rian charmer proved a wife of small merit, and a Hungarian
successor she had was a wife of light conduct even ; Hungarian
charmers, and Hungarian affairs, were much other than a com-
fort to Sigismund.

As for the disappointed Princess, Burggraf Friedrich’s
Daughter, she said nothing that we hear; silently became a
Nun, an Abbess : and through a long life looked out, with her
thoughts to herself, upon the loud whirlwind of things, where
Sigismund (oftenest like an imponderous rag of conspicuous
colour) was riding and tossing. Her two Brothers also, joint
Burggraves after their Father’s death, seemed to have reconciled
themselves without difficulty. The elder of them was already
Sigismuud’s Brother-in-law; married to Sigismund’s and Wen-
zel’s sister, — ^by such predestinatfbn as we saw. Burggraf Jo-
hann III. was the name of this one : a stout fighter and manager
for many years ; much liked, and looked to, by Sigismund. As
indeed were both the Brothers, for that matter ; always, toge-
ther or in succession, a kind of right-hand to Sigismund. Fried-
rich the younger Burggraf, and ultimately the survivor and
inheritor (Johann having left no sons), is the famed Burggraf
Friedrich VI., the last and notablest of all the Burggraves. A
man of distinguished importance, extrinsic and intrinsic ; chief
or among the very chief of German public men in his time ; —
and memorable to Posterity, and to this History, on still other
grounds 1 But let us not anticipate.

Sigismund, if apanaged with Brandenburg alone, and wed-
ded to his first love, not a King’s Daughter, might have done
tolerably well there ; — better than Wenzel, with the Empire and
Bohemia, did. But delusive Fortune threw her golden apple
at Sigismund too; and he, in the wide high world, had to play
strange pranks. His Father-in-law died in Hungary, Sigis-
mund’s first wife his only child. Father-in-law bequeathed

!2E

THE HOHENZOLLERNS.

Book H.
» 3 ® 7 .

Hungary to Sigismund who plunged into a strange sea there-
by ; got troubles without number, beatings not a few, — and had
even to take boat, and sail for his life down to Constantinople,
at one time. In which sad adventure Burggraf Johann escorted
him, and as it were tore him out by the hair of the head. These
troubles and adventures lasted many years ; in the course of
which, Sigismund, trying all manner of friends and expedients,
found in the Burggravcs of Niirnberg, Johann and Friedrich,
with their talents, possessions and resources, the main or al-
most only sure support he got.

No end of troubles to Sigismund, and to Brandenburg
through him, from this sublime Hungarian legacy I Like a re-
mote fabulous golden-fleece, which you have to go and conquer
first, and which is worth little when conquered. Before ever
setting out (a.d. 1387), Sigismund saw too clearly he would
have cash to raise : an operation he had never done with, all
his life afterwards. He pawned Brandenburg to Cousin Jobst
of Mahrcn; got ‘ 20,000 Bohemian gulden,’ — I guess, a most
slender sum, if Dryasdust would but interpret it. This was the
beginning of Pawnings to Brandenburg ; of which when will
the end be? Jobst thereby came into Brandenburg on his own
right for the time, not as Tutor or Guardian, which he had
hitherto been. Into Brandenburg; and there was no chance
of repayment to get him out again.

Cousin Jobst has Brandenburg in Fawn,

Jobst tried at first to do some governing; but finding all
very anarchic, grew unhopeful ; took to making*matters easy
for himself. Took, in fact, to turning a penny on his pawn-
ticket ; alienating crown domains, winking hard at robber-bar-
ons, and the like ; — and after a few years, went home to Mo-
ravia, leaving Brandenburg to shift for itself, under a Statthalter'
( Viceregent^ more like a hungry land-steward), whom nobody
took the trouble of respecting. Robber-castles flourished ; all
else decayed. No highway not unsafe ; many a Turpin with
sixteen quarters, and styling himself Edle Herr (noble Gentle-
man), took to “living from the saddle;” — ^what are Hamburg
pedlars made for but to be robbed?

The Towns suffered much ; any trade they might have had|

0 1387 (Siglsmund's age then twenty).

Oiap-XlV. BRANDENBURG IN PAWN. 129

1398.

going to wreck in this manner. Not to speak of private feudsi
whi’ch abounded ad libitum. Neighbouring potentates, Arch-
bishop of Magdeburg and others, struck-in also c.t discretion,
as they had gradually got accustomed to do, and snapped away
(abzwackten) some convenient bit of territory, or, more legiti-
mately, they came across to coerce, at their own hand, this or
the other Edle Herr of the Turpin sort, whom there was no
other way of getting at, when he carried matters quite too high.
‘Droves of six-hundred swine,’ — I have seen (by reading in
those old Books) certain noble Gentlemen, ‘ of Putlitz,’ I think,
driving them openly, captured by the stronger hand ; and have
heard the short querulous squeak of the bristly creatures : “What
is the use of being a pig at all, if I am to be stolen in this way,
and surreptitiously made into ham?” Pigs do continue to be
bred in Brandenburg: but it is under such discouragements.
Agriculture, trade, well-being and well-doing of any kind, it is
not encouragement they are meeting here. Probably few coun-
tries, not even Ireland, have a worse outlook, unless help
come.®

Jobst came back in 1398, after eight-years absence; but
no help came with Jobst. The Neumark part of Brandenburg,
which was Brother Johann’s portion, had fallen home to Sigis-
mund, Brother Johann having died: but Sigismund, far from
redeeming old pawn -tickets with the Newmark, pawned the
Newmarktoo, — the second Pawnage of Brandenburg. Pawned
the Newmark to the Teutsch Ritters ‘for 63,000 Hungarian
gold gulden’ (I think, about 30,000/.): and gave no part of it
to Jobst; had not nearly enough for himself and his Hungarian
occasions. •

Seeing which, and hearing such squeak of pigs surreptiti-
ously driven, with little but discordant sights and sounds every-
where, Jobst became disgusted with the matter; and resolved
to wash his hands of it, at least to have his money out of it
again. Having sold what of the Domains he could to persons
of quality, at an uncommonly easy rate, and so pocketed what
ready-cash there was among them, he made-over his pawn-
ticket, or properly he himself repawned Brandenburg to the
Saxon Potentate, a speculative moneyed man, Markgraf of
Meissen, “ Wilhelm the Rich” so-called. Pawned it to Wilhelm
the Rich, — sum not named ; and went home to Moravia, there

* Pauli, I 54z-6xa. Michaelis, i. 283-285*

VOU 1.

K

. THE HOHENZOLLERNS.

to wait (tvents. This is the third Brandenbui^ pawning:
us frope there may be a fourth and last

Braftdenburg in the hands of the Paivnbrokers ; Etifert of
the Pfalz is Kaiser^

And so we have now reached that point in Brandenburg
History when, if some help do not come, Brandenburg will
not long be a country, but will either get dissipated in pieces
and stuck to the edge of others where some government is, or
else go waste again, and fall to the bisons and wild bears.

Who now is Kurfurst of Brandenburg, might be a question.
•* I ^/^questionably 1 ” Sigismund would answer, with astonish-
ment. “ Soft, your Hungarian Majesty,’* thinks Jobst : “till
my cash is paid, may it not probably be another ?’’ This ques-
tion has its interest : the Electors just now (a.d. 1400) are
about deposing Wenzel ; must choose some better Kaiser. If
they wanted another scion of the House of Luxemburg ; a
mature old gentleman of sixty; full of plans, plausibilities, pre-
tensions, — ^Jobst is their man. Jobst and Sigismund were of
one mind as to Wenzel’s going ; at least Sigismund voted
clearly so, and Jobst said n9thing counter : but the Kurfursts
did not think of Jobst for successor. After some stumbling,
they fixed upon Rupert Kur-Pfalz (Elector Palatine, Ruprecht
von der Pfalz) as Kaiser.

Rupert of the Pfalz proved a highly respectable Kaiser ;
lasted for ten years (1400-14 10), with honour to himself and
the Reich. A strong heart, strong head, but short of means.
He chastised petty mutiny with vigour ; could ifot bring down
the Milanese Visconti, who had perched themselves sp high
on money paid to Wenzel ; could not heal the schism of the
Church (Double or Triple Pope, Rome -Avignon affair), or
awaken the Reich to a sense of its old dignity and present
loose condition. In the late loose times, as Antiquaries re-
mark ,7 most Members of the Empire, Petty Princes even and
Imperial Towns, had been struggling to set-up for themselves;
and were now concerned chiefly to become Sovereign in their
own Territories. And Schilter informs us, it was about this
period that most of them attained such rather unblessed ePn-
bummation ; Rupert of himself not able to help it, with all his

7 KOhkr, p. 334 ; who quotes Schilter.

<?«!), XIV. KAISER Rupert, AND burggraf. 131

X410.

willingness. The People called him “ Rupert Klemm (Rupert
Smith' s-vicey* from his resolute ways ; which nickname, — given
him not in hatred, but partly in satirical goodwill, — is itself a
kind of history. From Historians of the Reich he deserves
honourable regretful mention.

He had for Empress a Sister of Burggraf Friedrich’s;
which high lady, unknown to us otherwise, except by her Tomb
at Heidelberg, we remember for her Brother’s sake, Kaiser
Rupert, — great-grandson of that Kur-Pfalz who was Kaiser
Ludwig’s elder brother, — is the culminating point of the Elec-
tors Palatine ; the Highest that Heidelberg produced. An-
cestor of those famed Protestant “ Palatines of all the Pala-
tines or Pfalzes that reign in these late centuries. Ancestor of
the present Bavarian Majesty ; Kaiser Ludwig’s race having
died out. Ancestor of the unfortunate Winterkonig^ Friedrich
King of Bohemia, who is too well known in English History ;
^ancestor also of Charles XII. of Sweden, a highly creditable
fact of the kind to him. Fact indisputable : A cadet of Pfalz-
Zweibriick (Deux^Ponts, as the French chll it), ^irect from Ru-
pert, went to serve in Sweden in his soldier business ; distin-
guished himselfin soldiering ; — had a Sister of the great Gustaf
Adolf to wife ; and from her a^ renowned Son, Karl Gustaf
(Christina’s Cousin), who succeeded as King ; who again had
a Grandson made in his own likeness, only still more of ircfx
in his composition. — Enough now of Rupert Smith' s-vice j who
died in 1410, and left the Reich again vacant.

Rupert’s funeral is hardly done, when, over in Preussen,
far off in the Memel region, place called Tannenberg, where
there is still ‘h churchyard to be seen,’ if little more, the Teutsch
Ritters had, unexpectedly, a terrible Defeat : consummation of
their Polish Miscellaneous quarrels of long standing ; and the
end of their high courses in this world. A ruined Teutsch Rit-
terdom, as good as ruined, ever henceforth. Kaiser Rupert
died 1 8th May ; and on the 1 5th July, within two months, was
fought that dreadful “ Battle of Tannenberg,” — Poland and
Polish King, with miscellany of savage Tartars and revolted
Prussians, versus Teutsch Ritterdom ; all in a very high mood
of mutual rage ; the very elements, ‘ wild thunder, tempest and
rain-deluges,’ playing chorus to them on the occasion.® Ritter-
dom fought lionlike, but with insufficient strategic and other

• Voifft, vii. 8a. Bfisching, (Hamburg, 1770), 4 i. 1038.

tit THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Book If.

MX**

wisdom; and was driven nearly distracted to see its pride
tripped into the ditch by such a set. Vacant Reich could not
in the least attend to it ; nor can we farther at present.

Sigismundy with a struggle^ becomes Kaiser*

Jobst and Sigismund were competitors for the Kaisership ;
Wenzel, too, striking- in with claims for reinstatement : the
House of Luxemburg divided against itself. Wenzel, finding
reinstatement not to be thought of, threw his weight, such as
it was, into the scale of Cousin Jobst ; remembering angrily
how Brother Sigismund voted in the Deposition case, ten years
ago. The contest was vehement, and like to be lengthy. Jobst,
though he had made-over his pawn-ticket, claimed to be Elector
of Brandenburg ; and voted for Himself. The like, with still
more emphasis, did Sigismund, or Burggraf Friedrich acting
for him : Sigismund, sure, is Kur-Brandenburg, though under
pawn!” argued Friedrich, — and, I almost guess, though that
is not said, produced from his own purse, at some stage of the
ousiness, the actual money for Jobst, to close his Brandenburg
pretension.

Both were elected (majority contested in this manner) ; and
old Jobst, then above seventy, was like to have given much
trouble : but happily in three months he died ;9 and Sigismund
became indisputable. Jobst was the son of Maultasche’s Nul-
lity ; him too, in an involuntary sort, she was the cause of. Ip
his day Jobst made much noise in the world, but did little or
no good in it. * He was thought a great man,* says one sati-
rical old Chronicler ; ♦ and there was nothing great about him
‘ but the beard.*

* The cause of Sigismund*s success with the Electors,’ says
Kdhler, * or of his having any party among them, was the faith-

* ful and unwearied diligence which had been used for him by
‘ the above-named Burggraf Friedrich VI. of Niirnberg, who
‘ took extreme pains to forward Sigismund to the Empire ;
‘ pleading that Sigismund and Wenzel would be sure to agree

* well henceforth, and that Sigismund, having already such ex-

* tensive territories (Hungary, Brandenburg and so forth) by

* inheritance, would not be so exact about the/?^/V^j-Tolls and

* other Imperial Incomes. This same Friedrich also, when the

^ * Jodocus Darltaiust axst July 14x1.

KAISER SIGISMUND.

Chap. XIV.

^33

1414.

* Election fell out doubtful, was Sigismund*s best support in

* Germany, nay almost his right-hand, through whom he did

* whatever was done.'^o

Sigismund is Kaiser, then, in spite of Wenzel. King of
Hungary, after unheard-of troubles and adventures, ending some
years ago in a kind of peace and conquest, he has long been.
King of Bohemia, too, heat last became ; having survived Wen-
zel, who was childless. Kaiser of the Holy Roman Empire,
and so much else : is not Sigismund now a great man ? Truly
the loom he weaves upon, in this world, is very large. But the
weaver was of headlong, high-pacing, flimsy nature ; and both
warp and woof were gone dreadfully entangled ! —

This is the Kaiser Sigismund who held the Council of Con-
stance ; and ‘ blushed visibly,* when Huss, about to die, alluded
to the Letter of Safeconduct granted him, which was issuing in
such fashion.il Sigismund blushed ; but could not conveni-
ently mend the matter, — so many matters pressing on him just
now. As they perpetually did, and had done. An always-hop-
ing, never-resting, unsuccessful, vain and empty Kaiser. Spe-
cious, speculative ; given to eloquence, diplomaciy, and the windy
instead of the solid arts ; — always short of money for one thing.
He roamed about, and talked eloquently ; — aiming high, and
generally missing ; — how he weift to conquer Hungary, and had
to float down the Donau instead, with an attendant or two, in
a most private manner, and take refuge with the Grand Turk:
this we have seen, and this is a general emblem of him, Hun-
gary and even the Reich have at length become his ; but have
brought small triumph in any kind ; and instead of ready-money,
debt on debt Majesty has no money, and his Majesty’s
occasions need it more and more.

He is now (a.d. 1414) holding this Council of Constance,
by way of healing the Church, which is sick of Three simultane-
ous Popes and of much else. He finds the problem difficult ;
finds he will have to run into Spain, to persuade a refractory
Pope there, if eloquence can (as it cannot) : all which requires
money, money. At opening of the Council, he ‘ officiated as
deacon ;* actually did some kind of litanying ‘ with a surplice
over him,’A2 though Kaiser and King of the Romans. But this
passage of his opening speech is what I recollect best of him

Kfihlcr, p. 337,

25th December 14x4 (KOhler, p. 340).

n iSth June 1415,

jU the HOHENZOLLERNS, Soofcit.

8th July *4**.

there : Right ^Reverend Fathers, daU operant ut ilia nefanda
schisma eradiceiur^' exclaims Sigismund, intent on having the
Bohemian Schism well dealt with, — ^which he reckons to be of
the feminine gender. To which a Cardinal mildly remarking,
“ Domine^ schisma est generis neutrius (Schisma is neuter, your
Majesty),*’ — Sigismund loftily replies, “ Ego sum Rex Romanus
et super gramniaticam (I am King of the Romans, and above
Grammar'! For which reason I call him in my Note-books
Sigismund super Grammaticam, to distinguish him in the im-
broglio of Kaisers.

Brandenburg is pawned for the last time.

How Jobst’s pawn-ticket was settled I never clearly heard ;
but can guess it was by Burggraf Friedrich’s advancing the
money, in the pinch above indicated, or paying it afterwards to
Jobst’s heirs whoever they were. Thus much is certain : Burg-
graf Friedrich, these three years and more (ever since 8th July
141 1 ) holds Sigismund’s Deed of acknowledgment ‘for 100,000
gulden lent at various times :’ and has likewise got the Elec-
torate of Brancfenburg in pledge for that sum ; and does him-
self administer the said Electorate till he be paid. This is the
important news ; but this is lyt all.

The new journey into Spain requires new moneys ; this
Council itself, with such a pomp as suited Sigismund, has cost
him endless moneys. Brandenburg, tom to ruins in the way we
saw, is a sorrowful matter ; and, except the title of it, as a feather,
in one’s cap, is worth nothing to Sigismund. And he is still short
of money ; and will forever be. Why could not he give up Bran-
denburg altogether ; since, instead of paying, he instill making
new loans from Burggraf Friedrich ; and the hope of ever pay-
ing were mere lunacy ! Sigismund revolves these sad thoughts
too, amid his world-wide diplomacies, and efforts to heal the
Church. “ Pledged for 100,000 gulden,” sadly ruminates Sigis-
mund ; “ and 50,000 more borrowed since, by little and little;
and more ever needed, especially for this grand Spanish jour-
ney t” these were Sigismund’s sad thoughts : — “ Advance me,
in a round sum, 250,000 gulden more,” said he to Burggraf
Friedrich, “ 250,000 more, for my manifold occasions in this
time ; — that will be 400,000 in whole — and take the Elec-
ts Wolfgang Mentzel, Geschichte der Deutschen^ L 477.

M Rontsch, pp. 75, 357.

aap.xiv. LAST PAWNING OF BRANDENBURG. 135

iftb April 14 * 7 -

torate of Brandenburg to yourself, Land, Titles, Sovereign Elec-
torship and all. and make me rid of it 1 ” That was the settle-
ment adopted, in Sigismund’s apartment at Constance, on the
30th of April 1415 ; signed, sealed and ratified, — and the
money paid. A very notable event in World-History ; virtu-
ally completed on the day we mention.

The ceremony of Investiture did not take place till two
years afterwards, when the Spanish journey had proved fruit-
less, when much else of fruitless had come and gone, and Kaiser
and Council were probably more at leisure for such a thing.
Done at length it was by Kaiser Sigismund in utmost gala, with
the Grandees of the Empire assisting, and august members of
the Council and world in general looking on ; in the big Square
or Marketplace of Constance, 17th April 1417 ; — is to be found
described in Rentsch, from Nauclerus and the old Newsmongers
of the time. Very grand indeed : much processioning on horse-
back, under powerful trumpet-peals and flourishes; much stately
kneeling stately rising, stepping backwards (done well, sierlicht
on the Kurfiirst’s part) ; liberal expenditure of -iloth and pomp ;
in short, ‘above 100,000 people looking on from roofs and
windows, and Kaiser Sigismund in all his glory. Sigismund
was on a high Platform m the 'Marketplace, with stairs to it
and from it ; the illustrious Kaiser, — red as a flamingo, ‘with
scarlet mantle and crown of gold,* — a treat to the eyes of simple
mankind.

What sum of modern money, in real purchasing power, this
‘ 400,000 Hungarian Gold Gulden’ is, I have inquired in the
likely quarters without result ; and it is probable no man ex-
actly knows. The latest existing representative of the ancient
Gold Gulden is the Ducat, worth generally about a Half-sove-
reign in English. Taking the sum at that latest rate, it amounts
to 200,000/. ; and the reader can use that as a note of memory
for the sale-price of Brandenburg with all its lands and hon-
ours, — multiplying it perhaps by four or six to bring out its
effective amount in current coin. Dogcheap, it must be owned,
for size and capability ; but in the most waste condition, full
of mutiny, injustice, anarchy and highway robbery ; a purchase
that might have proved dear enough to another man than Burg*
graf Friedrich.

W Ait^fneine Preussische Staatt'Geschichte, ii. 74. Rentschy pp. 76-^?.

136 THE HOHENZOLLERNS. Bock a

x4x7*

But so, at any rate, moribund Brandenburg has got its Ho-
henzollerh Kurfiirst ; and started on a new career it little dreamt
of; — and we can now, right willingly, quit Sigismund and the
Reichs-History ; leave Kaiser Sigismund to sink or swim at his
own will henceforth. His grand feat in life, the wonder of his
generation, was this same Council of Constance ; which proved
entirely a failure ; one of the largest wmd-eggs ever dropped
with noise and travail in this world. Two-hundred thousand
human creatures, reckoned and reckoning themselves the elixir
of the Intellect and Dignity of Europe ; Two-hundred thousand,
nay some, counting the lower menials and numerous unfortun-
ate-females, say Four-hundred thousand, — were got congregated
into that little Swiss Town ; and there as an Ecumenic Coun-
cil, or solemnly-distilled elixir of what pious Intellect and Valour
could be scraped together in the world, they laboured with all
their select might for four-years space. That was the Council
of Constance. And except this transfer of Brandenburg to
Friedrich of Hohenzollern, resulting from said Council in the
quite reverse and involuntary way, one sees not what good re-
sult it had. «

They did indeed burn Huss ; but that could not be called
a beneficial incident ; that seemed to Sigismund and the Coun-
cil a most small and insignificant one. And it kindled Bohe-
mia, and kindled rhinoceros Zisca, into never-imagined flame
of vengeance ; brought mere disaster, disgrace, and defeat on
defeat to Sigismund, and kept his hands full foy the rest of his
life, however small he had thought it. As for the sublime four-*
years deliberations and debates of this Sanhedrim of the Uni-
verse, — eloquent debates, conducted, we may say,^ under such
extent of wig as was never seen before or since, — they have
fallen wholly to the domain of Dryasdust ; and amount, for
mankind at this time, to zero phis the Burning of Huss. On
the whole, Burggraf Friedrich’s Electorship, and the first Ho-
henzollern to Brandenburg, is the one good result.

Adieu, then, to Sigismund. Let us leave him at this his
culminating point, in the Marketplace of Constance ; red as a
flamingo ^ doing one act of importance, though unconsciously
and against his will. — I subjoin here, for refreshment of the
reader’s memory, a Synopsis, or bare arithmetical List, of those
Intercalary Non-Hapsburg Kaisers, which, now that its original
small duty is done, may as well be printed as burnt ;

a^av. XIV.

NON-HAPSBURG I^ISERS*

137

The Seven Intercalary or Non-Hap^tirg Kaisers,

Rudolf of Hapsburg dfed A.D. 1291, after a reign of eighteen vigor-
ous years, very useful to the Empire after its Anarchic Interregnum, He
was succeeded, not by any of his own sons or kindred, but by

I®. Adolf of Nassau, 1291-1298. A stalwart but necessitous Herr;
much concerned in the French projects of our Edward Longshanks:
mtles stipendiarius Eduardi, as the Opposition party scornfully termed
him. Slain in battle by the Anti-Kaiser, Albrecht or Albert eldest son
of Rudolf, who thereupon became Kaiser.

Alljert I. (of Hapsburg, he), 1298-1308. Parricided, in that latter
year, at the Ford of the Reuss.

2® («). Henry VII. of Luxemburg, 1308-1313; poisoned (1313) in
sncramental wine. The first of the Luxemburgers ; who are marked
here, in their older, by the addition of an alphabetic letter.

3®. Imdwig der Baier, 13 14-1347 (Duke oiOber-Baiern^ Upper Ba-
varia; progenitor of the subseftuent Kurfursts of Baicrn, who are Cousins
of the Pfalz Family).

4® (//). Karl IV., 1347-1378, Son of Johann of Bohemia (Johann
Tih-dien\ and Grandson of Henry VII. Nicknamed the P/aJfcn-Kau
ser (Parsons’-Kaiser). Kailsbad; the Golden Bull; Castle ol Tanger-
nuinde. *

5® (f). Wenzel (or Wenceslaus), 1378-1400, Karl’s eldest Son.
Elected 1378, still very young; deposed in 1400, Kaiser Rupert suc-
ceeding. Continued King of Bohcmia*till his death (by Zisca at second*
hand) nineteen years after. Had been Kaiser for twenty-two years.

6®. Rupert of the Pfalz, 1400-1410; called Rupert AVf'ww (Pinceis,
Smith’s-vice) ; Brother-in-law to Burggraf Fiiedrich VI. (afterwards
Kuifurst Friedrich I.), who marched with him to Italy and often else-
whither, Burggraf Johann the elder Brother-in-law being then oftenest
in Hungary with Sigismund, Karl IV. ’s second Son.

7® {d). Sigismund, 1410-1437, Wenzel’s younger Brother; the fourth
and last of the Luxemburgers, seventh and last of the Intercalary Kai-
sers. Sold Brandenburg, after thrice or oftener pawning it. Sigismund
super Grammaticam.

Super-Grammaticam died 9th December 1437 ; left only a Daughter,
wedded to the then Albert Duke of Austria ; which Albert, on the
strength of this, came to the Kingship of Bohemia and of Hungary, as
his Wife’s inheritance, and to the Empire by election. Died thereupon
in few months: ‘three crowns, Bohemia, Hungary, the Reich, in that
‘ one year, 1438,’ say the old Historians ; ‘and then next year he quitted
‘ them all, for a fourth and more lasting crown, as is hoped.’ Kaiser
Albert II., 1438-1439: After whom all are Hapsburgers, — excepting,
it that is an exception, the unlucky Karl VII. alone (1742*1745), who
descends from Ludwig the Baier.

BOOK HI.

THE HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG,
1412-1713.

CHAPTER I.

KURFURST FRIEDRICH I.

Bhrggraf Friedrich, on his first coming to Brandenburgs
found but a cool reception as Statthalter.i He came as the re-
presentative ofrlaw and rule ; and there had been many help-
ing themselves by a rulelcss life, of late. Industry was at a low
ebb, violence was rife; plunder, disorder everywhere; too much
the habit for baronial gentlemen to “ live by the saddle,’* as
they termed it, that is by highway robbery in modern phrase.

The Towns, harried and plundered to skin and bone, were
glad to see a Statthalter, and did homage to him with all their
heart. But the Baronage or Squirearchy of the country were'
of another mind. These, in the late anarchies, had set-up for
a kind of kings in their own right : they had their feuds ; made
war, made peace, levied tolls, transit-dues ; liveef much at their
own discretion in these solitary countries ; — rushing out from
their stone towers (‘ walls fourteen feet thick’), to seize any herd
of * six-hundred swine,’ any convoy of Liibeck or Hamburg mer-
chant-goods, that had not contented them in passing. What
were pedlars and mechanic fellows made for, if not to be plun-
dered when needful ? Arbitrary rule, on the part of these Noble
Robber-Lords ! And then much of the Crown-Domains had
gone to the chief of them, — ^pawned (and the pawn-ticket lost, so
to speak), or sold for what trifle of ready-money was to be had,

1 [yohaHttistage* (24 June) * 1412/ he first set foot in Brandenburg, with due es-
cort, in due state : only Statthalter (Viceregent) as yet : Pauli, i. 594, u. 58 ; Stenzel,
Hcschichte des Preussischen Stoats (Hamburg, x83o*z85i), I 167-169.

KURFURST FRIEDRICH I.

139

Oap. 1 *

z4i^^

in Jobst and Company’s time. To these gentlemen, a Statt-
halter coming to inquire into matters was no welcome pheno-
menon. Your Edle Herr (Noble Lord) of Putlitz, Noble Lords
of Quitzow, Rochow, Maltitz and others, supreme in their grassy
solitudes this long while, and accustomed to nothing greater
than themselves in Brandenburg, how should they obey a Statt-
halter ?

Such was more or less the universal humour in the Squire-
archy of Brandenburg ; not of good omen to Burggraf Fried-
rich. But the chief seat of contumacy seemed to be among
the Quitzows, Putlitzes, above spoken of ; big Squires in the
district they call the Priegnitz, in the Country of the sluggish
Havel River, north-west from Berlin a fifty or forty miles. These
refused homage, very many of them ; said they were ** incor-
porated with Bdhmen said this and that ; — much disinclined
to homage ; and would not do it. Stiff surly fellows, much defi-
cient in discernment of what is above them and what is not: —
a thick-skinned set ; bodies clad in buff leather ; minds also cased
in ill habits of long continuance.

Friedrich was very patient with them ; hopeS to prevail by
gentle methods. He * invited them to dinner * had them often
at dinner for a year or more :* but could make no progress in
that way. **Who is this we have got for a Governor?” said
the noble lords privately to each other : A Niirnberger Tand
(Nurnberg Plaything, — wooden image, such as they make at
Niimberg)," said they, grinning, in a thick-skinned way : " If
it rained Burggraves all the year round, none of them would
come to luck in this Country — and continued their feuds, toll-
levyings, plunderings and other contumacies.

Seeing matters come to this pass after waiting above a year,
Burggraf Friedrich gathered his Frankish men-at-arms; quietly
made league with the neighbouring Potentates, Thiiringen and
others ; got some munitions, some artillery together, — especially
one huge gun, the biggest ever seen, * a twenty-four pounder’
no less ; to which the peasants, dragging her with difficulty
through the clayey roads, gave the name of Faule Grete (Lazy,
or Heavy Peg) ; a remarkable piece of ordnance. Lazy Peg
he had got from the Landgraf of Thiiringen, on loan merely ;
but he turned her to excellent account of his own. I have often
inquired after Lazy Peg’s fate in subsequent times ; but could
never learn anything distinct ; — the German Dryasdust is a duU

J 40 H0HEN20LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book in*

14x4.

dog, and $eldom carries anything human in those big wallets
of his I —

Equipped in this way, Burggraf Friedrich (he was not yet
Kurfurst, only coming to be) marches for the Havel Country
(early days of 14 14) makes his appearance before Quitzow’s
strong-house of Friesack, walls fourteen feet thick : “You Diet-
rich von Quitzow, are you prepared to live as a peaceable sub-
ject henceforth : to do homage to the Laws and me?” — “ Never !”
answered Quitzow, and pulled-up his drawbridge. Whereupon
Heavy Peg opened upon him, Heavy Peg and other guns ; and,
in some eight -and -forty hours, shook Ouitzow’s impregnable
Friesack about his ears. This was in the month of February
1414, day not given : Friesack was the name of the impreg-
nable Castle (still discoverable in our time) ; and it ought to be
memorable and venerable to every Prussian man. Burggraf
Friedrich VI., not yet quite become Kurfurst Friedrich I., but
in a year’s space to become so, he in person was the beneficent
operator ; Pleavy Peg, and steady Human Insight, these vrere
clearly the chief implements.

Quitzow b 5 ng settled, — for the country is in military occu-
pation of Friedrich and his allies, and except in some stone
castle a man has no chance, — straightway Putlitz or another
mutineer, with his drawbridge up, was battered to pieces, and
his drawbridge brought slamming down. After this manner,
in an incredibly short period, mutiny was quenched ; and it be-
came apparent to Noble Lords, and to all men, that here at
length was a man come who would have the Laws obeyed again,
and could and would keep mutiny down.

«

Friedrich showed no cruelty ; far the contrary. Your mutiny
once ended, and a little repented of, he is ready to be your gra-
cious Prince again : Fairplay and the social wine-cup, or inex-
orable war and Lazy Peg, it is at your discretion which. Bran-
denburg submitted ; hardly ever rebelled more. Brandenburg,
under the wise Kurfurst it has got, begins in a small degree to
be cosmic again, or of the domain of the gods ; ceases to be
chaotic and a mere cockpit of the devils.

There is no doubt but this Friedrich also, like his ancestor
Friedrich III,, the First Hereditary Burggraf, was an excellent

s Michaelis, i. 287 : Stenzel, i. i68 (where, t j.itrary to wont, is an insignificant
arror or two). Pauli (ii. 58) as usual, lost in water.

Chap. I. KURFURST FRIEDRICH 1 . 141

1420.

citizen of his country: a man conspicuously important in all
German business in his time. A man setting up for no parti-
cular magnanimity, ability or heroism, but uncons^-iously exhi-
biting a good deal ; which by degrees gained universal recog-
nition. He did not shine much as Reichs-Generalissimo, under
Kaiser Sigismund, in his expeditions against Zisca ; on the con-
trary, he presided over huge defeat and rout, once and again,
in that capacity ; and indeed had represented in vain that, with
such a species of militia, victory was impossible. He repre-
sented and again represented, to no purpose ; whereupon he de-
clined the office farther ; in which others fared no better. 3

The offer to be Kaiser was made him in his old days ; but
he wisely declined that too. It was in Brandenburg, by what
he silently founded there, that he did his chief benefit to Ger-
many and mankind. He understood the noble art of govern-
ing men ; had in him the justice, clearness, valour and patience
needed for that. A man of sterling probity, for one thing. Which
indeed is the first requisite in said art ; — if you will have your
laws obeyed without mutiny, sec well that they Ije pieces of God
Almighty’s Law : otherwise all the artillery in the world will not
keep down mutiny.

Friedrich ‘ travelled much ovqr Brandenburg looking into
everything with his own eyes ; — making, I can well fancy, in-
numerable crooked things straight. Reducing more and more
that famishing dogkennel of a Brandenburg into a fruitful arable
field. His portraits represent a square-headed, mild-looking
solid gentleman, with a certain twinkle of mirth in the serious
eyes of him. Except in those Hussite wars for Kaiser Sigis-
mund and the Reich, in which no man could prosper, he may
be defined as constantly prosperous. To Brandenburg he was,
very literally, the blessing of blessings ; redemption out of death
into life. In the ruins of that old Friesack Castle, battered down
by Heavy Peg, Antiquarian Science (if it had any eyes) might
look for the taproot of the Prussian Nation, and the beginning
of all that Brandenburg has since grown to under the sun.

Friedrich, in one capacity or another, presided over Bran-
denburg near thirty years. He came thither first of all in 1 41 2 ;
was not completely Kurfiirst in his own right till 1415 ; nor
publicly installed, ‘with 100,000 looking on from the roofs and
windows* in Constance yonder, till 1417, — age then some forty-

* Hormayr, (EsterrekhtKher Plutarckf vii. X09>Z58, $ Zuca*

148 HOHENZOLLERNS.IN BRANDENBURG. Bootm.

five. His Brandenburg residence, when he happ^ed to have
time for residing or sitting still, was Tangermunde, ‘the Castle
built by Kaiser Karl IV. He died there, 21st September 1440 ;
laden tolerably with years, and still better with memories of
hard work done. Rentsch guesses by good inference he was
born about 1372, As I count, he is seventh in descent from
that Conrad, Burggraf Conrad L, Cadet of Hohenzollern, who
came down from the Rauhe Alp, seeking service with Kaiser
Redbeard, above two centuries ago : Conrad’s generation and
six others had vanished successively from the world-theatre in
that ever- mysterious manner, and left the stage clear, when
Burggraf Friedrich the Sixth came to be First Elector. Let
three centuries, let twelve generations farther come and pass,
and there will be another still more notable Friedrich, — our
little Fritz, destined to be Third King of Prussia, officially named
Friedrich II., and popularly Frederick the Great. This First
Elector is his lineal ancestor, twelve times removed.*

CHAPTER II.

MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE,

Eleven successive Kurfursts followed Friedrich in Bran-
denburg. Of whom and their births, deaths, wars, marriages,
negotiations and continual multitudinous stream of smaller or
greater adventures, much has been written, of a dreary con-
fused nature ; next to nothing of which ought to be repeated
here. Some list of their Namesl with what rememberable hu-
man feature or event (if any) still speaks to uc in them, we
must try to give. Their Names, well dated, with any actions,
incidents, or phases of life, wdiich may in this way get to ad-
here to them in the reader’s memory, the reader can insert,
each at its right place, in the grand Tide of European Events,
or in such Picture as the reader may have of that. Thereby
with diligence he may produce for himself some faint twilight
notion of the Flight of Time in remote Brandenburg, — con-
vince himself that remote Brandenburg was present all along,
alive after its sort, and assisting, dumbly or otherwise, in the
great World-Drama as that went on.

We have to say in general, the history of Brandenburg

* Rentsch, pp. 349-378; Hflbner, 1. 176.

a^p.ti. MATINEES DU ROl DE PRUSSE. 143

under the Hohenzollerns has very little in it to excite a vulgar
curiosity, though perhaps a great deal to interest an intelligent
one. Had it found treatment duly intelligent ; — which, how-
ever, how could it, lucky beyond its neighbours, hope to do I
Commonplace Dryasdust, and voluminous Stupidity, not worse
here than elsewhere, play their part. ,

It is the history of a State, or Social Vitality, growing from
small to great ; steadily growing henceforth under guidance :
and the contrast between guidance and no-guidance, or mis-
guidance, in such matters, is again impressively illustrated
there. « This we see well to be the fact ; and the details of this
would be of moment, were they given us : but they are not ; —
how could voluminous Dryasdust give them ? Then, on the
other hand, the Phenomenon is, for a long while, on so small
a scale, wholly without importance in European politics and
affairs, the commonplace Historian, writing of it on a large
scale, becomes unreadable and intolerable. Witness grandi-
loquent Pauli our fatal friend, with his Eight watery Quartos ;
which gods and men, unless driven by necessity, have learned
to avoid l^ The Phenomenon of Brandenburg is small, re-
mote ; and the essential particulars, too delicate for the eye of
Dryasdust, are mostly wanting, drowned deep in details of the
unesseiitial. So that we are well content, my readers and I,
to keep remote from it on this occasion.

On one other point I must give the reader warning. A
rock of offence on which if he heedlessly strike, I reckon he
will split ; at least no help of mine can benefit him till he be
got off again,* Alas, offences must come ; and must stand, like
rocks of offence, to the shipwreck of many ! Modern Diyas-
dust, interpreting the mysterious ways of Divine Providence in
this Universe, or what he calls writing History, has done un-
countable havoc upon the best interests of mankind. Hapless
godless dullard that he is ; driven and driving on courses that
lead only downward, for him as for us I But one could for-
give him all things, compared with this doctrine of devils which
he has contrived to get established, pretty generally, among
his unfortunate fellow-creatures for the time ! — I must insert
the following quotation, readers guess from what author :

• Carl Friedric^ Pauli, Allsemeim Preusstschi Staats’-Ceschichte^ often
«uough cited here.

44 HOHENZOLLERNS in BRANDENBURG. Bookiil.

* In an impudent Pamplilet, forged by I know not wboiU) and pub-

* lished in 1766, under the title of Matinees du Roi de Prusse^ purport-

* ing to be Morning Conversations” of Frederick the Great with his

* Nephew the Heir- Apparent, every line of which betrays itself as false
‘ and spurious to a reader who has made any direct or effectual study
‘ of Frederick or his manners or affairs, — ^it is set forth, in the way of

* exordium to these pretended royal confessions, that notre mcAson'^

* our Family of Hohenzollem, ever since the first origin of it among

* the ‘Swabian mountains, or its first descent therefrom into the Castle

* and Imperial Wardenship of Numberg, some six-hundred years ago

* or more, has consistently travelled one road, and this a very notable

* one. “We, as I myself the royal Frederick still do, have all along

* proceeded,” namely, “in the way of adroit Macchiavellism, as skilful

* gamblers in this world’s business, ardent gatherers of this world’s

* goods ; and in brief as devout worshippers of Beelzebub, the grand

* regulator and rewarder of mortals here below. Which creed we, the

* Hohenzollems, have found, and I still find, to be the true one ; learn

* it you, my prudent Nephew, and let all men learn it. By holding

* steadily to that, and working late and early in such spirit, we are

* come to what you now see ; — and shall advance still farther, if it

* please Beelzebub, who is genenally kind to those that serve him well.’*

* Such is the d<y:trine of this impudent Pamphlet; “original Manu-

* scripts” of which are still purchased by simple persons, — who have

* then nobly offered them to me, thrice over, gratis or nearly so, as a

* priceless curiosity. A new printed edition of which, probably the

* fifth, has appeared within few Jears. Simple persons consider it a

* curious and interesting Document ; rather ambiguous in origin per-

* haps, but probably authentic in substance, and throwing unexpected

* light on the character of P" rederick whom men call the Great. In
‘ which new light they are willing a meritorious Editor should share.

* Who wrote that Pamphlet I know not, and am in no condition to
‘ guess. A certain snappish vivacity (very unlike the style of Frederick

* whom it personates) ; a wearisome grimacing, gesticulating malice and

* smartness, approaching or reaching the sad dignity of what is called
< “wit” in modern times; in general the rottenness of matter, and the

* epigrammatic unquiet graciosity of manner in this thing, and its ela-

* borately fwhuman turn both of expression and of thought, are visible

* characteristics of it. Tliought, we said, — if thought it can be called ;

* thought all hamstrung, shrivelled by inveterate rheumatism, on the

* part of the poor ill-thriven thinker ; nay tied (so to speak, for he is of

* epigrammatic turn withal), as by cross ropes, right shoulder to left

* foot ; and forced to advance, hobbling and jerking along, in that sad

* guise ; not in the way of walk, but of saltation and dance ; and this

* towards a false not a true aim, rather nowhither than somewhither:

* -.-Here were features leading one to think of an illustrious Prince de

* Ligne as perhaps concerned in the afiair. The Bibliographical Dic-

* tionaries, producing no evidence, name quite another person, or series

Cap. It. MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE. 145

J440.

* of persons,* highly unmemorable otherwise. Whereupon you proceed

* to said other person’s acknowledged Works (as tliey are called) ; and

* find there a style bearing no resemblance whatever ; and are left in a

* dubious state, if it were of any moment. In the absence of proof, I

* am unwilling to charge his Highness de Ligne with such an action ;

* and indeed am little careful to be acquainted wdth the individual who

* did it, who could and would do it. A Prince of Coxcombs I can dis*

* cern him to have been ; capable of shining in the eyes of insincere

* foolish persons, and of doing detriment to them, not benefit ; a man

* without reverence for truth or human excellence ; not knowing in fact
‘ what is true from what is false, what is excellent from what is sham-

* excellent and at the top of the mode ; an apparently polite and know-

* ing man, but intrinsically an impudent, dark and merely modish-in -

* solent man ; — ^who, if he fell-in with Rhadamanthus on his travels,
‘ would not escape a horse-whipping. Him we will willingly leave to

* that beneficial cliance, which indeed seems a certain one sooner or

* later ; and address ourselves to consider the theory itself, and the facts

* it pretends to be grounded^on.

‘ As to the theory, I must needs say, nothing can be falser, more

* heretical or more damnable. My own poor opinion, and deep con-

* viction on that subject is well known, this long while. And, in fact,

* the summary of all I have believed, and have beep trying as I could
' to teach mankind to believe again, is even that same opinion and con-

* viction, applied to all provinces of things. Alas, in this his sad theory

* about the world, our poor impudent Pamphleteer is by no means sin-

* gular at present; nay rather he has iff^ manner the whole practical part

* of mankind on his side just now 5 the more is the pity for us all !—

* It is very certain, if Beelzebub made this world, our Pamphleteer,

* and the huge portion of mankind that follow him, are right. But if

* God made the world ; and only leads Beelzebub, as some ugly muz*

* zled bear is led, a longer or shorter temporary dance in thi.s divine
‘ world, and always draws him home again, and peels the unjust gains
‘ off him, and^ucks him in a certain hot Lake, with sure intent to lodge
‘ him there to all eternity at last, — then our Pamphleteer, and the huge

* portion of mankind that follow him, are wrong.

‘ More I will not say; being indeed quite tired of speaking on that

* subject. Not a subject which it concerns me to speak of; much as

* it concerns me, and all men, to know the truth of it, and silently in
< every hour and moment to do said truth. As indeed the sacred voice
‘ of their own soul, if they listen, will conclusively admonish all men ;

* and truly if »Vdo not, there will be little use in my logic to them. For

* my own share, I want no trade with men who need to be convinced

* of that fact. If I am in their premises, and discover such a thing of

* A certain ** N. de Bonneville” (afterwards a Revolutionary spiritual-mouiite*
bank, for some time) is now the favourite Name proves, on investigation, to bs an
impossible one. Barbier {Dictionnaire des Anonymes\ in a helpless dOubtinc: man-
ner, gives still others.

VOL, I. ‘ L

146 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Beokiii.

*440.

* them, I will quit their premises ; if they are in mine, I ydll, as old '

* Samuel advis^, count my spoons. Ingenious gentlemen who believe

* that Beelzebub made this world, are not a class of gentlemen I can

* get profit from. Let them keep at a distance, lest mischief fall out

* between us. They are of the set deserving to be called, — and this

* not in the way of profane swearing, but of solemn wrath and pity, 1

* say of virtuous anger and inexorable reprobation, — ^the damned set,

‘ For, in very deed, they are doomed and damned, by Nature’s oldest

* Act of Parliament, they, and whatsoever thing they do or say or think ;

* unless they can escape from that devil-element. Which I still hope
‘ they may ! —

‘ But with regard to the facts themselves, notre maison,” I take

* leave to say, they too are without basis of truth. They are not so

* false as the theory, because nothing can in falsity quite equal that,

* Notre maison^** this Pamphleteer may learn, if he please to make

* study and inquiry before speaking, did not rise by worship of Beelze-

* bub at all in this world ; but by a quite opposite line of conduct. It

* rose, in fact, by the course which all, except fools, stockjobber stags,

* cheating gamblers, forging Pamphleteers and other temporary crea-

* tures of the damned sort, have found from of old to be the one way

* of permanently rising : by steady service, namely, of the Opposite of '

* Beelzebub. By«conforming to the Laws of this Universe ; instead of
^ trying by pettifogging to evade and profitably contradict them. The

* Hohenzollems too have a History still articulate to the human mind,

‘ if you search sufficiently; and this is what, even with some emphasis,

* it will teach us concerning theif adventures, and achievements of suc-

* cess in the field of life. Resist the Devil, good reader, and he will

* flee from you 1’ —

So ends our indignant friend.

How the Hohenzollems got their big Territories, and came
to what they are in the world, will be seen. Probably they
were not, any of them, paragons of virtue. They did not w^alk
in altogether spcckless Sunday pumps, or much clear-starched
into consciousness of the moral sublime ; but in rugged prac-
tical boots, and by such roads as there were. Concerning
their moralities, and conformities to the Laws of the Road and
of the Universe, there will much remain to be argued by pam-
phleteers and others. Men will have their opinion, Men of
more wisdom and of less ; Apes by the Dead-Sea also will
have theirs. But what man that believed in such a Universe
as that of this Dead-Sea Pamphleteer could consent to live in
it at all ? Who that believed in such a Universe, and did not
design to^iive like a Papin’s-Digester, or Porcus Epicun^ in an

KtJRFURST FRIEDRICH 11 .

*47

Chap. III.

144a*

extremely ugly manner in it, could avoid one of two things :
Going rapidly into Bedlam, or else blowing his brains out ?
“ It will not do for me at any rate, this infinite Doghouse ;
not for me, ye Dryasdusts, and omnipotent Dog-monsters and
Mud-gods, whoever you are. One honourable thing I can do :
take leave of you and your Dog-establishment. PInough V* —

CHAPTER III.

KURFURST FRIEDRICH II.

The First Friedrich’s successor was a younger son, Fried-
rich II. ; who lasted till 1471, above thirty years ; and proved
likewise a notable manager and governor. Very capable to
assert himself, and his just rights, in this world. He was but
Twenty-seven at his accession ; but the Berlin Burghers, at-
tempting to take some liberties with him, found he was old
enough. He got the name Ironteeth^ Friedrich Ferratis Den-
iibus^ from his decisive ways then and afterwards. He had
his share of brabbling with intricate litigant neighbours ; quar-
rels now and then not to be settled without strokes. His worst
war was with Pommern, — just clhims disputed there, and much
confused bickering, sieging and harassing in consequence ; of
which quarrel we must speak anon. It was he who first built
the conspicuous Schloss or Palace at Berlin, having got the
ground for it (same ground still covered by the actual fine
Edifice, which is a second edition of Friedrich’s) from the re-
pentant Biughers ; and took up his chief residence there. ^

But his principal achievement in Brandenburg History is
his recovery of the Province called the Neumark to that Elec-
torate. In the thriftless Sigismund times, the Neumark had
been pledged, had been sold; Teutsch Ritterdom, to whose
dominions it lay contiguous, had purchased it with money
down. The Teutsch Ritters were fallen moneyless enough
since then ; they offered to pledge the Neumark to Friedrich,
who accepted, and advanced the sum ; after a while the Teutsch
Ritters, for a small farther sum, agreed to sell Neumark.* Into
which Transaction, with its dates and circumstances, let us
cast one glance, for our behoof afterwards. The Teutsch Rit-

* Z442-Z45X (Nicolai, i. 8i). » Michaclis, i, 301.

14S HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Kookltl.

ters were an opulent domineering Body in Sigismund’s early
time; but they are now come well down in Friedrich II.’sl
And are coming ever lower. Sinking steadily, or with des**
perate attempts to rise, which only increase the speed down-
wards, ever since that fatal Tannenberg Business, 15 th July
1410. Here is the sad progress of their descent to the bot-
tom ; divided into three stages or periods ;

‘ Period First is of Thirty years : 1410-1440. A peace with Poland

* soon followed that Defeat of Tannenberg ; humiliating peace, with

* mulct in money, and slightly in territory, attached to it. Which

* again was soon followed by war, and ever again j each new peace

* more humiliating than its foregoer. Teutsch Order is steadily sink-

* ing, — ^into debt, among other things ; driven to severe finance-mea-

* sures (ultimately even to ‘debase its coin”), which produce irritation

* enough. Poland is gradually edging itself into the territories and the

* interior troubles of Preussen ; prefatory to greater operations that lie
‘ ahead there.

^Second Period^ of Fourteen years. So it had gone on, from bad

* to worse, till 1440; when the general population, through its Heads,

‘ the Landed Gcnt^ and the Towns, wearied out with fiscal and other

* oppressions from its domineering Ritterdom brought now to such a

* pinch, began everywhere to stir themselves into vocal complaint.

‘ Complaint emphatic enough : ‘‘Where will you find a man that has
‘ not suffered injury in his rights,* perhaps in his person? Our friend?
‘ they have invited as guests, and under show of hospitality have mur^
‘ dered them. Men, for the sake of their beautiful wives, have been
‘ thrown into the river like dogs,” — and enough of the like sort.® No
‘ want of complaint, nor of complainants ; Town of Thom, Town of
‘ Dantzig, Kulm, all manner of Towns and Baronages, proceeded now
‘ to form a Bund, or general Covenant for complaining ; to repugn, in
‘ hotter and hotter form, against a domineering Ritter^m with back
‘ so broken; in fine, to colleague with Poland, — what was most omin-
‘ ous of all. Baronage, Burgherage, they were German mostly by
‘ blood, and by culture were wholly German ; but preferred Poland to

* aTeutsch Ritterdom of that nature. Nothing but brabblings, scufflings,
objurgations ; a great outbreak ripening itself. Teutsch Ritterdom has

‘ to hire soldiers ; no money to pay them. It was in these sad years
‘ that the Teutsch Ritterdom, falle?i moneyless, offered to pledge the
‘ Neumark to our Kurfui-st ; 1444, that operation was consummated.*

* All this goes on, in hotter and hotter form, for ten years longer.

^Period 77 «W begins, early in 1454, with an important special ca-

* tastrophe j and ends, in the Thirteenth year after, with a still more

* Voijrt, vU. 747; quoting, evidently, not an express manifesto, hut one manu'
ClCtured by the old Chroniclers.

* Pauli, u. i87,*<-does not name the sum.

149

Chap, ill * KUkrURST FRIEDRICH It

14SS,

* important universal one of the same nature. Prussian Brntc^^ or Anti-

* Oppression Covenant of the Towns and Landed Gentry, rising in tem-

* perature for fourteen years at this rate, reached at last the igniting

* point, and burst into fire. February 4th, 1454, the Town of Thom,

‘ darling first-child of Teutsch Ritterdom, — child 223 years old at this
‘ time,* and grown veiy big, and now very angry, — suddenly took its old

* parent by the throat, so to speak, and hurled him out to the dogs ; to

* the extraneous Polacks first of all. Town of Thom, namely, sent tliat

* day its * ‘Letter of Renunciation” to the Hochmeister over at Marien-

* burg ; seized in a day or two more the Hochmeister’s Official Envoys,

* Dignitaries of the Order; led them through the streets, amid universal

* storm of execrations, hootings and unclean projectiles, straight to jail ;

* and besieged the Hochmeister’s Burg {Bastille of Thom, with a few

* Ritters in it), all the artillery and all the throats and hearts of the

* place raging deliriously upon it. So that the poor Ritters, who had
‘ no chance in resisting, were in few days obliged to surrender ;« had to
‘ come out in bare jerkin ; and Thom ignominiously dismissed them

* into space forevermore, — with actual “kicks,” I have read in some
‘ Books, though others veil that sad feature. Thom threw out its old

parent in this manner ; swore fealty to the King of Poland ; and in-

* vited other Towns and Knightages to follow the example. To which

* all were willing, wherever able.

‘ War Jiereupon, which blazed up over Preussen^at large, — Prussian

* Covenant and Ring of Poland versus Teutsch Ritterdom, — and lasted
‘ into the thirteenth year, before it could go out again ; out by lack of
‘ fuel mainly. One of the fellest wans on record, especially for burning
‘and ruining; above “300,000 fighting-men” are calculated to have

* perished in it ; and of towns, villages, farmsteads, a cipher which

* makes the fancy, as it were, black and ashy altogether. Ritterdom

* showed no lack of fighting energy; but that could not save it, in the
‘ pass things were ' got to. Enormous lack of wisdom, of reality and
‘ human veracity, there had long been; and the hour was now come.
‘ Finance went out, to the last coin. Large mercenary armies all along ;
‘ and in the end not the colour of moneys to pay them with ; mercena-
‘ ries became desperate; “besieged the Hochmeister and his Ritters in
‘ Marienburg — finally sold the Countiy they held ; formally made it

* over to the King of Poland, to get their pay out of it. Hochmeister
‘ had to see such things, and say little. Peace, or extinction for want
‘ of fuel, came in the year 1466. Poland got to itself the whole of that
‘ fine German Country, henceforth called “ West Preussen” to distinguish

• ‘ Founded 1831, as a wooden Burg, just across the river, on the Heathen side.

* mably round the stem of an immense old Oak that grew handy there, — Seven

* Barges always on the river (Weichsel), to fly to our own side if quite overwhelmed.*
(hk and Seven Barges is still the Town's-Arms of I’horn. See KcJhler, MUnzbelus^
UgimgeUf xxii. X07 ; quoting Dusburg (a Priest of the Order) and his old Ckrouua
Terree Pruscue, written in 1326.

^ 8th Februsury 1454, says Voigt (idii. 361) ; x6th, says Kfihler {MSttaBelustisruH-
xxii 1x0).

rso il9H(|£NZ0LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book ill.

»4S5-

* it, "ivliich goes from the left bank of the Wekhsel to the borders of

* Brandenburg and Neumark; — ^would have got Neumark too, had not

* Kurfurst Friedrich been there to save it. The Teutsch Order had to

* go across the Weichsel, ignominiously driven ; to content itself with

‘ Preussen,” the Kbnigsberg-Memel country, and even to do

* homage to Poland for that. Which latter was the bitterest clause of
‘ all : but it could not be helped, more than the others. In this man-

* ner did its revolted children fling out Teutsch Ritterdom ignomini*

* ously to the dogs, to the Polacks, first of all, — Thom, the eldest

* child, leading off or setting the example.*

And so the Teutsch Ritters are sunk beyond retrieval; and
West Preussen, called subsequently ‘ Royal Preussen,’ not hav-
ing homage to pay as the ‘ Ducal’ or East Preussen had, is
German no longer, but Polish, Sclavic ; not prospering by the
change.^ And all that fine German country, reduced to rebel
against its unwise parent, was cut away by the Polish sword,
and remained with Poland, which did not prove very wise either ;
till — till, in the Year 1773, it w^as cut back by the German
sword ! All readers have heard of the Partition of Poland ; but
of the Partition of Preussen, 307 years before, all have not
heard. •

It was in the second year of that final tribulation, marked
above as Period Third, that the Teutsch Ritters, famishing for
money, completed the Neuma A transaction with Kurfurst Fried-
rich; Neumark, already pawned to him ten years before, they
in 1455, for a small farther sum, agreed to sell; and he, long
carefully steering towards such an issue, and dextrously keep-
ing out of the main broil, failed not to buy. Friedrich could
thenceforth, on his own score, protect the Neumark; keep up
an invisible but impenetrable wall between it an(| the neigh-
bouring anarchic conflagrations of thirteen years ; and the Neu-
mark has ever since remained with Brandenburg, its original
owner.

As to Friedrich’s Pomeranian quarrel, this is the figure of
it. Here is a scene from Rcntsch, which falls-out in Friedrich’s
time ; and which brought much battling and broiling to him and
his. Symbolical withal of much that befell in Brandenburg,
from first to last. Under the Hohenzollerns as before, Bran-

7 What Thom had sunk to, out of its palmy state, see in Nanke’s Waftdentngen
iiSiifrM^mttf^(Hamburjg& Altona, 1800), it. 177-300:— a pleasant little Book, treat-
ing mainly of Natural History ; but drawing you, by its innocent simplicity and ge-
niality, to read with thhnks whatever is in iu

KURFURST FRIEDRICH IL

Cbay. Ill*

X464.

tst

denburg grew by aggregation, by assimilation ; and we see here
how difficult the process often was.

Pommern {Pomerania)^ long Wendish, bu^ peaceably so
since the time of Albert the Bear, and growing ever more Ger-
man, had, in good part, according to Friedrich’s notion, if there
were force in human Treaties and Imperial Laws, fallen fairly
to Brandenburg, — that is to say, the half of it, Stettin-Pommern
had fairly fallen, — in the year 1464, 'when Duke Otto of Stet-
tin, the last Wendish Duke, died without heirs. In that case
by many bargains, some with bloody crowns, it had been set-
tled, If the Wendish Dukes died out, the country was to fall
to Brandenburg ; — and here they were dead. * At Duke Otto’s

* burial, accordingly, in the High Church of Stettin, when the
‘ coffin was lowered into its place, the Stettin Biirgermeister,
‘ Albrecht Glinde, took sword and helmet, and threw the same
‘ into the grave, in token that the Line was extinct. But Franz

* von Eichsted,’ apparently another Burgher instructed for the
nonce, ‘jumped into the grave, and picked them out again;

* alleging. No, the Dukes of IVo/^^as f-I*ommcrn were of kin;
‘ these tokens we must send to his Grace at V#olgast, with offer

* of our homage, said Franz von Eichsted. — And sent they
were, and accepted by his Grace. And perhaps half-a-score of
bargains, with bloody crowns totsome of them ; and yet other
chances, and centuries, with the extinction of new Lines, — had
to supervene, before even Stettin-Pommern, and that in no com-
plete state, could be got.9 As to Pommern at large, Pommern
not denied to be due, after such extinction and re-extinction of
native Ducal Lines, did not fall home for centuries more; and
what struggles and inextricable armed-litigations there were for
it, readers cJf Brandenburg-History too wearisomely know. The
process of assimilation not the least of an easy one ! —

This Friedrich was second son: his Father’s outlook for
him had, at first, been towards a Polish Princess and the crown
of Poland, which was not then so elective as afterwards ; and
with such view his early breeding had been chiefly in Poland ;
Johann, the eldest son and heir-apparent, helping his Father at
home in the meanwhile. But these Polish outlooks went to
nothing, the young Princess having died; so that Friedrich

8 Rentsch,p. xxo (whose printer has put Iiis date awry) ; Stenzel (i. 233) calls the
man *Loren» Eikstetten, a resolute Gentleman.'

9 X648, by Treaty of Westphalia.

iS» K^HENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bwlttt

cime home ; possessed merely of the Polish language, and of
what talents the gods had given him, which were considerable.
And now, in the meanwhile, Johann, who at one time promised
well in practical life, had taken to Alchemy; and was busy with
crucibles and speculations, to a degree that seemed question-
able. Father Friedrich, therefore, had to interfere, and deal
with this ‘Johann the Alchemist’ {Johannes Alchemistat so the
Books still name him) ; who loyally renounced the Electorship,
at his Father’s bidding, in favour of Friedrich; accepted Bair-
euth (better half of the Culmbach Territory) for apanage ; and
there peacefully distilled and sublimated at discretion ; the go-
vernment there being an easier task, and fitter for a soft spe-
culative Herr. A third Brother, Albert by name, got Anspach,
on the Father’s decease; very capable to do any fighting there
might be occasion for, in Culmbach.

As to the Burggrafship, it was now done, all but the Title.
The First Friedrich, once he was got to be Elector, wisely
parted with it. The First Friedrich found his Electorship had
dreadfully real duties for him, and that this of the Burggrafship
had fallen mostlj^ obsolete; so he sold it to the Nurnbergers
for a round sum : only the Principalities and Territories are
retained in that quarter. About which too, and their feudal
duties, boundaries and tolls, ^ith a jealous litigious Niirnberg
for neighbour, there at length came quarrelling enough. But
Albert the third Brother, over at Anspach, took charge of all
that; and nothing of it fell in Johann’s way.

The good Alchemist died, — performed his last sublimation,
poor man, — six or seven years before his Brother Friedrich ;
age then sixty-three. ^ Friedrich, with his Iron Teeth and fa-
culties, only held-out till fifty-eight, — i oth February 1471. The
manner of his end was peculiar. In that War with Pommern,
he sat besieging a Pomeranian town, Uckermiinde the name
of it: when at dinner one day, a cannon-ball plunged down
Upon the table, with such a crash as we can fancy; — which
greatly confused the nerves of Friedrich; much injured his
hearing, and even his memory thenceforth. In a few months
afterwards he resigned, in favour of his Successor; retired to
Plassenburg, and there died in about a year more.

t4th Novembtr 14^4.

Michaelis, I 303.

e!Hp. W. KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES.

CHAPTER IV.

KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES, AND HIS SUCCESSOR.

Neither Friedrich nor Johann left other than daughters;
so that the united Heritage, Brandenburg and Culmbach both,
came now to the third Brother, Albert ; who has been in Culm-
bach these many years already. A tall, fiery, tough old gen-
tleman, of formidable talent for fighting, who was called the
^'Achilles of Germany* in his day; being then a very blazing
far-seen character, dim as he has now grown. i This Albert
Achilles was the Third Elector; Ancestor he of all the Bran-
denburg and Culmbach Hohenzollern Princes that have since
figured in the world. After him there is no break or shift in
the succession, down to the little Friedrich now born; — Fried-
rich the old Grandfather, first King^ was the Twelfth KurfUrsL

We have to say, they followed generally in their Ancestors*
steps, and had success of the like kind, more or less; Hohen-
zollerns all of them, by character and bchavijur as well as by
descent. No lack of quiet energy, of thrift, sound sense. There
was likewise solid fairplay in general, no founding of yourself
on ground that will not carry ; — and there was instant, gentle
but inexorable, crushing of mutiny, if it showed itself ; which,
after the Second Elector, or at most the Third, it had alto-
gether ceased to do. Young Friedrich II., upon whom those
Berlin Burghers had tried to close their gates, till he should
sign some ‘ Capitulation’ to their mind, got from them, and not
quite in ill-humour, that name Ironteeth : — ** Not the least a
Nose-of-waXf this one! No use trying here, then!” — which,
with the humour attached to it, is itself symbolical of Fried-
rich and these Hohenzollern Sovereigns. Albert, his Brother,
had plenty of fighting in his time : but it was in the Niirnberg
and other distant regions ; no fighting, or hardly any, needed
in Brandenburg henceforth.

With Niirnberg, and the Ex-Burggrafship there, now when
a new generation began to tug at the loose clauses of that Bar-
gain with Friedrich I., and all Free -Towns were going high
upon their privileges, Albert had at one time much trouble, and
at length actual furious War ; — other Free-Towns countenancing
and assisting Nurnberg in the affair; numerous petty Princes,

1 Born 14x4; Kurfurst 1471-86.

154 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book ill.

X 471 #

feudal Lords of the vicinity, doing the like by Albert. Twenty
years ago, all this ; and it did not last, so furious was it. ‘Eight
victories,* they count on Albert’s part, — furious successful skir-
mishes, call them ; — in one of which, I remember, Albert plunged
in alone, his Ritters being rather shy; and laid about him
hugely, hanging by a standard he had taken, till his life was
nearly beaten out.^ Eight victories ; and also one defeat, where-
in Albert got captured, and had to ransom himself. The cap-
tor was one Kunz of Kauffungen, the Niirnberg hired General
at the time : a man known to some readers for his Stealing of
the Saxon Princes (Prinzenraub^ they call it) ; a feat which cost
Kunz his head.^ Albert, however, prevailed in the end, as he
was apt to do; and got his Nurnbergers fixed to clauses satis-
factory to him.

In his early days he had fought against Poles, Bohemians
and others, as Imperial general. He was much concerned, all
along, in those abstruse armed-litigations of the Austrian House
with its dependencies ; and diligently helped the Kaiser, —
Friedrich III., rather a weakish, but an eager and greedy Kai-
ser, — through m\)st of them. That inextricable Hungarian-Bo-
hemian-Polish Donnybrook (so we may call it) which Ausftria
had on hand, one of Sigismund's bequests to Austria ; distress-
ingly tumultuous Donnybrook, which goes from 1440 to 1471,
fighting in a fierce confused manner; — the Anti-Turk Hunni-
ades, the Anti-Austrian Corvinus, the royal Majesties George
Podiebrad, Ladislaus Posthumus, Ludwig Ohne Haut (Ludwig
No-Skin), and other Ludwigs, Ladislauses and Vladislauses,
striking and getting struck at such a rate : — Albert was gener-
ally what we may call chief-constable in all that ; giving a knock
here and then one there, in the Kaiser’s name.* Almost from
boyhood, he had learned soldiering, which he had never after-
wards leisure to forget. Great store of fighting he had, — say
half a century of it, off and on, during the seventy and odd
years he lasted in this world. With the Donnybrook we spoke
of; with the Nurnbergers; with the Dukes of Bavaria (endless
bickerings with these Dukes, Ludwig Beardy, Ludwig Superbus,
Ludwig Gibbosus or Hunchback, against them and about them,
on his own and the Kaiser’s score) ; also with the French, al-

a Z449 ( Rentsch, p. 399).

® Carlyle’s Miscellanies (London, 1872), vii, J Pritizenrauh.

< Hormayr, ii. X38, 140 ($ Hunyady Corvtn)', Rentsch, pp. 389-422; Michaelh,
1304-13.

Chap, nr/ KURFURST ALBERT ACHILLES. 155

ready clutching at Lorraine ; also with Charles the Rash of
Burgundy ; — lastly with the Bishop of Bamberg, who got him
excommunicated and would not bury the dead.

Kurfiirst Albert’s Letter on this last emergency, to his Vice-
gerent in Culmbach, is a famed Piece still extant (date 1481)
and his plan in such emergency, is a simple and likely one ;

* Carry the dead bodies to the Parson’s house ; let him see

* whether he will not bury them by and by ! — One must fence-
‘ off the Devil by the Holy Cross,’ says Albert, — appeal to
Heaven with what honest mother-wit Heaven has vouchsafed
one, means Albert. * These fellows' (the Priests), continues he,

* would fain have the temporal sword as well as the spiritual.

* Had God wished there should be only one sword, he could

* have contrived that as well as the two. He surely did not

* want for intellect {Er war gar ein weiser Maitn )^' — want of
intellect it clearly was not ! — In short, they had to bury the
dead, and do reason ; and Albert hustled himself well clear of
this broil, as he had done* of many.

Battle enough, poor man, with steel and other vreapons:
— and we see he did it with sharp insight, gocid forecast ; now
and then in a wildly leonine or aquiline manner. A tall hook-
nosed man, of lean, sharp, rather taciturn aspect ; nose and
look are very aquiline ; and there is a cloudy sorrow in those
old eyes, which seems capable of sudden effulgence to a danger-
ous extent. He was a considerable diplomatist too: very great
with the Kaiser, old Friedrich III. (Max’s father, Charles V.’s
Great-Grandfather and managed many things for him. Man-
aged to get the thrice-lovely Heiress of the Netherlands and
Burgundy, Daughter of that Charles the Rash, with her Seven-
teen Provinces, for Max, 7 — who was thought thereupon by
everybody to be the luckiest man alive ,* though the issue con-
tradicted it before long.

Kurfurst Albert died in i486, March ii, aged seventy-two.
It was some months after Bosworth Fight, where our Crooked
Richard got his quietus here in England and brought the Wars
of the Roses to their finale : — a little chubby Boy, the son of

* Rentsch, p. <09.

® How admirable Albert Is, not to say 'almost divine,' to the Kaiser's then Secre-
tary, oily-mouthed iEneas Sylvius, afterwards Pope, Rentsch can testify (pp. 401,
586) ; quoting >Eneas’s eulogies and gossipries {JIutoria Rerum Frederic i Imperci-
teris, I conclude, though no book is named). Oily diligent iSneas, in his own young
years and in Albert's prime, had of course seen much of this ' miracle* of Arms ana
Art,— 'miracle* and 'almost divine/ so to speak. 3477.

3156 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG/ Book III,

148^

poor parents at Eisleben in Saxony, Martin Luther the name
of him, was looking into this abstruse Universe, with those
strange eyes of his, in what rough woollen or linsey-woolsey
short-clothes we do not know.®

Albert’s funeral was very grand ; the Kaiser himself, and
all the magnates of the Diet and Reich attending him from
Frankfort to his last resting-place, many miles of road. For
he died at the Diet, in Frankfort-on-Mayn ; having fallen ill
there while busy, — perhaps too busy for that age, in the harsh
spring weather, — electing Prince Maximilian (‘lucky Max,’
who will be Kaiser too before long, and is already deep in ilU
luck, tragical and other !) to be King of the Romans. The
old Kaiser had ‘ looked in on him at Onolzbach* (Anspach),
and brought him along ; such a man could not be wanting on
such an occasion. A man who ‘ perhaps did more for the
German Empire than for the Electorate of Brandenburg,’ hint
some. The Kaiser himself, Friedrich III., was now getting
old ; anxious to see Max secure, and to set his house in order.
A somewhat anxious, croaky, close-fisted, ineffectual old Kai-
ser ;9 distinguisfied by his luck in getting Max so provided for,
and bringing the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands to
his House. He is the first of the Hapsburg Kaisers who had
what has since been called tlie ‘Austrian lip’ — ^protrusive under-
jaw, with heavy lip disinclined to shut. He got it from his
Mother, and bequeathed it in a marked manner ; his posterity
to this day bearing traces of it. Mother’s n^ime was Cimbur-
gis, a Polish Princess, * Duke of Masovia’s daughter ;’ a lady
who had something of the Maidtasche in her, in character as
well as mouth. — In old Albert, the poor old Kaiser has lost
his right hand ; and no doubt muses sadly as he rides in the
funeral procession.

Albert is buried at Heilsbronn in Frankenland, among his
Ancestors, — burial in Brandenburg not yet common for these
new Kurfiirsts ; — his skull, in an after-time, used to be shown
there, laid on the lid of the tomb ; skull marvellous for strength,
and ‘ for having no visible sutures,’ says Rentsch. Pious Bran-
denburg Officiality at length put an end to that profanation,
and restored the skull to its place, — marvellous enough, with
what had once dwelt in it, whether it had sutures or not.

* Born loth November 1483. »

® Sen KOhter {^MUtabelmitgungtH, vl 393-40* ; tl 89-96, &c.) for a vivid account
af Jum.

qmp.iv. KURFUE5T ALBERT ACHILLAS. 157

1499-

Johann the Ckero is Fourth Kutfursft and leaves Two ^
notable Sons.

Albert’s eldest Son, the Fourth Kurfurst, was Johannes Ci-
cero ( 1486 - 1499 ); Johannes was his natural name, to which the
epithet ** Cicero of Germany {Cicero Germanicey* was added
by an admiring public. He had commonly administered the
Electorate during his Father’s absences ; and done it with
credit to himself. He was an active man, nowise deficient as
a Governor ; creditably severe on highway robbers, for one
thing, — destroys you ‘fifteen baronial robber-towers’ at a
stroke ; was also concerned in the Hungarian-Bohemian Don^
nybrookt and did that also well. But nothing struck a discern-
ing public like the talent he had for speaking. Spoke ‘ four

* hours at a stretch in Kaiser Max’s Diets, in elegantly-flowing

* Latin ;* with a fair share of meaning, too ; — and had bursts of
parliamentary eloquence in him that were astonishing to hear.
A tall, square-headed man, of erect, cheerfully composed as-
pect, head flung rather back if anything : his^ursts of parlia-
mentary eloquence, once glorious as the day, procured him the
name “Johannes Cicero/' and that is what remains of them :
for they are sunk now, irretrievaUle he and they, into the belly
of eternal Night; the final resting-place, I do perceive, of much
Ciceronian ware in this world. Apparently he had, like some
of his Descendants, what would now be called ‘ distinguished
literary talents,’ — insignificant to mankind and us. I find he
was likewise called der Grosse, “John Great;'' but on in-
vestigation proves to be mere “John the Big," a name
coming from his tall stature and ultimate fatness of body.

For the rest, he left his family well off, connected with high
Potentates all around ; and had increased his store, to a fair
degree, in his time. Besides his eldest Son who followed as
Elector, by name Joachim I., a burly gentleman of whom much
is written in Books, he left a second Son, Archbishop of Mag-
deburg, who in time became Archbishop of Mainz and Cardinal
of Holy Church, — and by accident got to be forever memor-

Ulrich von Hutten’s grand ‘Panegyric’ upon this Albert on his first Entrance
into Mainz (9th October 1514), — ‘entrance with a zetmue of 2000 horse, mainly fur-
nished by the Brandenburg and Culm bach kindred,' say the old Books, —ih in Uiric/u

HvtUn LquiUs Ge-nnani Opera (Mfinch’s edition ; Berlin, 1821), i. 376-3x0.

fSt HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiit.

^ 499 *

aMe in Church-History, as we shall see anon. Archbishop of
Mainz means withal Kur-Mainz^ Elector of Mainz ; who is
Chief of the Seven Electors, and as it were their President or
* Speaker.* Albert was the name of this one ; his elder Brother,
the then Kur-Brandenburg, was called Joachim. Cardinal Al-
bert Kur-Mainz, like his brother Joachim Kur-Brandenburg,
figures much, and blazes widely abroad, in the busy reign of
Karl V., and the inextricable Lutheran-Papal, Turk-Christian
business it had.

But the notable point in this Albert of Mainz was that of
Leo X. and the Indulgences, Pope Leo had permitted Albert
to retain his Archbishopric of Magdeburg and other dignities
along with that of Mainz ; which was an unusual favour. But
the Pope expected to be paid for it, — to have 30,000 ducats
(15,000/.), almost a King’s ransom at that time, for the * Pal-
lium’ to Mainz ; Pallium^ or little Bit of woollen Cloth, on sale
by the Pope, without which Mainz could not be held. Albert,
• with all his dignities, was dreadfully short of money at the
time. Chapter fof Mainz could or would do little or nothing,
having been drained lately; Magdeburg, Halberstadt, the like.
Albert tried various shifts ; tried a little stroke of trade in
relics, — gathered in the Maipz district * some hundreds of frac-
tional sacred bones, and three whole bodies,* which he sent to
Halle for pious purchase ; — ^but nothing came of this branch.
The 15,000/. remained unpaid; and Pope Leo, building St.
Peter’s, ‘ furnishing a sister’s toilet,’ and doing worse things,
was in extreme need of it. What is to be done ? “I could
borrow the money from the Fuggers of Augsburg,” said the
Archbishop hesitatingly; “but then — ?” — “ I cUuld help you
to repay it !” said his Holiness ; “ Could repay the half of it,
— if only we had (but they always make such clamour about
these things) an Indulgence published in Germany !” — “Well;
it must be!” answered Albert at last, agreeing to take the
clamour on himself, and to do the feat ; being at his wits’-end
for money. He draws out his Full-Power, which, as first Spi-
ritual Kurfiirst, he has the privilege to do ; nominated (1516)
one Tetzel for Chief Salesman, a Priest whose hardness of face,
and shiftiness of head and hand, were kno.wn to him ; and —
here is one Hohenzollern that has a place in History I Poor
man, it was by accident, and from extreme tightness for money.

n Pauli, V. 496-499; Rentsch, p. 869.

aap.v. BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH. 159

z5x6>z552.

He was by no means a violent Churchman ; he had himself
inclinations towards Luther, even of a practical sort, as the
thing went on. But there was no help for it.

Cardinal Albert, Kur-Mainz, shows himself a copious dex-
trous public speaker at the Diets and elsewhere in those times ;
a man intent on avoiding violent methods ; — uncomfortably fat
in his later years, to judge by the Portraits. Kur-Dranden-
burg, Kur-Mainz (the younger now officially even greater than
the elder), these names are perpetually turning up in the Ger^
man Histories of that Reformation-Period ; absent on no great
occasion ; and they at length, from amid the meaningless bead-
roll of Names, wearisomely met with in such Books, emerge
into Persons for us as above.

CHAPTER V.

OF THE BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH.

Albert Achilles the Third Elector had, Jjefore his acces-
sion, been Margraf of Anspach, and since his Brother the Al-
chemist’s death, Margraf ofBaircuth too, or of the whole Prin-
cipality, — * Margraf of Culmbach’ we will call it, for brevity’s
sake, though the bewildering old Books have not steadily any
name for it.^ After his accession, Albert Achilles naturally held
both Electorate and Principality during the rest of his life.
Which was an extremely rare predicament for the two Coun-
tries, the big and the little.

No other Elector held them both, for nearly a hundred
years ; nor tifcen, except as it were for a moment. The two
countries. Electorate and Principality, Hohenzollern both, and
constituting what the Hohenzollerns had in this world, continued
ii^imately connected ; with affinity and clientship carefully kept
up, and the lesser standing always under the express protection
and as it were cousinship of the greater. But they had their
separate Princes, Lines of Princes ; and they only twice, in the

> A certsdn subaltern of this express title, * Margraf of Culmbach' (a Cadet, with
some temporary apanage there, who was once in the service of him they call the
Winter-King, and may again be transiently heard-of by us here), is the altogether
mysterious Personage who prints himself ^Marquis de JLulenbacK in Bromley^s CoU
lection of Royal Letters (London, 1787), pp. 52, &c. :~one of the most curious Books
on the Thirty-Years War ; ‘edited’ witn a composed stupidity, and cheerful infinitude
of ignorance, which still farther distinguish it The Bromley Originals, well worth a
real editing, turn out, on inquiry, to nave been ‘ sold ar Autographs, and dispersed
b^ond recovery, about fifty years ago.’

||fev\HOHEKZ0LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book lit.

' i$x5>«$sa-

tiiniB of these Twelve Electors, came even temporarily under
the same head* And as to ultimate union, Brandenburg-Bair-
euth and Brandenburg -Anspach were not incorporated with
Brandenburg-Proper, and its new fortunes, till almost our own
day, namely in 1791 ; nor then either to continue; having fallen
to Bavaria, in the grand Congress of Vienna, within the next
Five-and-twenty years. All which, with the complexities and
perplexities resulting from it here, we must, in some brief way,,
endeavour to elucidate for the reader.

Two Lines in Culmhach or BairctUh- Anspach : The Gera
JBofid ^1598.

Culmbach the Elector left, at his death, to his Second Son,
—properly to two sons, but one of them soon died, and the
other became sole possessor ; — Friedrich by name ; who, as
founder of the Elder Line of Brandenburg-Culmbach Princes,
must not be forgotten by us. Founder of the First or Elder
Line, for there a^e two Lines ; this of Friedrich’s having gone
out in about a hundred years ; and the Anspach-Baireuth ter-
ritories having fallen home again to Brandenburg ; — where,
however, they continued only during the then Kurfurst's life,
Johann George (1525-1598), Seventh Kurfiirst, was he to whom
Brandenburg-Culmbach fell home, — nay, strictly speaking, it
was but the sure prospect of it that fell home, the thing itself
did not quite fall in his time, though the disposal of it did, 2 —
to be conjoined again with Brandenburg-Proper. Conjoined for
the short potential remainder of his own life ; a^d then to be
disposed of as an apanage again ; — ^which latter operation, as
Johann George had three-and-twcnty children, could be no dif-
ficult one.

Johann George, accordingly (Year 1598), split the Terri-
tory in two ; Brandenburg -Baireuth was for his second soti,
Brandenburg-Anspach for his third : hereby again were two
new progenitors of Culmbach Princes introduced, and a New
Line, Second or ‘Younger Line* they call it (Line mostly split
in two^ as heretofore) ; which, — after complex adventures in its
split condition, Baireuth under one head, Anspach under an-
other,— continues active down to our little Fritz’s time and far-

S ‘ Dbposal,' 2598 ; thing itseli, 2603, in his Son’s time.

Ctap. V, BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH. idt

Z5x6-i55a.

then As will become but too apparent to us in the course of
this History ! —

From of old these Territories had been frequently divided :
each has its own little capital, Town of Anspach, Town of
Baireuth,* suitable for such arrangement Frequently divided;
though always under the closest cousinship, and ready for re-
uniting, if possible. Generally under the Elder Line too, under
Friedrich's posterity, which was rather numerous and often in
need of apanages, they had been in separate hands. But the
understood practice was not to divide farther ; Baireuth by it-
self, Anspach by itself (or still luckier if one hand could get
hold of both), — and especially Brandenburg by itself, uncut by
any apanage ; this, I observe, was the received practice. But
Johann George, wise Kurfiirst as he was, wished now to make
it surer ; and did so by a famed Deed, called the Gera Bond
{Gerazsche Vertra£;)t dated 1598,*^ the last year of Johann
George’s life.

Hereby, in a Family Conclave held at that Gera, a little
town in Thuringen, it was settled and indissolubly fixed. That
their Electorate, unlike all others in German;^, shall continue
indivisible ; Law of Primogeniture, here if nowhere else, is to
be in full force; and only the Culmbach Territory (if other-
wise unoccupied) can be split off for younger sons. Culmbach
can be split off ; and this again withal can be split, if need be,
into two (Baireuth and Anspach) ; but not in any case farther.
Which Household Law was strictly obeyed henceforth. Date
of it 1598 ; principal author, Johann George, Seventh Elector.
This Gera Bond" the reader can note for himself as an ex-
cellent piec^of Hohenzollem thrift, and important in the Bran-
denburg annals. On the whole, Brandenburg keeps continually
growing under these Twelve Hohcnzollerns, we perceive; slower
or faster, just as the Burggrafdom had done, and by similar
methods. A lucky outlay of money (as in the case of Friedrich
Ironteeth in the Neumark) brings them one Province, lucky
inheritance another : good management is always there, which
is the mother of good luck.

And so there goes on again, from Johann George down-
wards, a new stream of Culmbach Princes, called the Younger
or New Line, -r-properly two contemporary Lines, of Baireuthers

* Populations about the same; 16,000 to 17,000 iii our time.

^ Michaelis, i. 345,

VOL. r.

M

llOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURCJ. Book lit

^ ^ 15*^15^.

altli Anspachcrs; — always in close affinity to Brandenburg,
and with ultimate reversion to Brandenburg, should both Lines
feiil ; but with mutual inheritance if only one. They had intricate
fortunes, service in foreign armies, much wandering about,
sometimes considerable scarcity of cash : but, for a hundred-
and-fifty years to come, neither Line by any means failed, —
rather the contrary, in fact.

Of this latter or New Cuhnbach Line, or split Line, espe-
cially of the Baireuth part of it, our little Wilhelmina, little
Fritz’s Sister, who became Margravine there, has given all the
world notice. From the Anspach part of it (at that time in
sore scarcity of cash) came Queen Caroline, famed in our
George the Second’s time.^ From it too came an unmoment-
ous Margraf, who married a little Sister of Wilhelmina’s and
Fritz’s ; of whom we shall hear. There is lastly a still more
unmomentous Margraf, only son of said Unmomentous and his
said Spouse ; who again combined the two Territories, Bair-
euth having failed of heirs ; and who, himself without heirs,
and with a fraiy[ Lady Craven as Margravine, — died at Ham-
mersmith, close by us, in 1 806 ; and so ended the troublesome
affair. He had already, in 1791, sold off to Prussia all tem-
porary claims of his ; and let Prussia have the Heritage at once
without waiting farther. Prussia, as we noticed, did not keep
it long ; and it is now part of the Bavarian Dominion ; — for
the sake of editors and readers, long may it so continue !

Of this Younger Line, intrinsically rather insignificant to
mankind, we shall have enough to write in time and place ; we
must at present direct our attention to the Elder Line.

T/ie Elder Lme of Culmbach: Friedrich and his Three
notable Sons there*

Kurfiirst Albert Achilles’s second son, Friedrich (1460-
15 36), 6 the founder of the Elder Culmbach Line, ruled his
country well for certain years, and was *a man famed for
strength of body and mind ;’ but claims little notice from us,
except for the sons he had. A quiet, commendable, honour-
able man, — with a certain pathetic dignity, visible even in the
eclipsed state he sank into. Poor old gentleman, after grand

i See a Synoptic Diagram of these Genealogies, infra, p, 2700*

^ Rentsch, pp. 593-6(;^.

V. 6AI&£Uf ri-AMSPACrt BRAKdtt. ‘ 1^3

.f5t6-jfssa*

eiiough feats in war and peace, he fell melancholy, fell imbe*
cile, blind, soon after middle life ; and continued so for twenty
years, till he died. During which dark state, say the old Books,
it was a pleasure to see with what attention his Sons treated
him, and how reverently the eldest always led him out to din-
ner.7 They live and dine at that high Castle of Plassenburg,
where old Friedrich can behold the Red or White Mayn no
more. Alas, alas, Plassenburg is now a Correction- House,
where male and female scoundrels do beating of hemp j and
pious Friedrich, like eloquent Johann, has become a forgotten
object. He was of the German Reichs- Array, who marched
to the Netherlands to deliver Max from durance ; Max, the
King of the Romans, whom, for all his luck, the mutinous Flem-
ings had put under lock-and-key at one time.® That is his one
feat memorable to me at present.

He was Johann Cicero’s Half-hT^/bth^r, child by a second
wife. Like his Uncle Kurfiirst Friedrich II., he had married
a Polish Princess ; the sharp Achilles having perhaps an eye
to crowns m that direction, during that Hunjarian-iiohemian-
Polish Donnybrook. But if so, there again came nothing of a
crown with it ; though it was not without its good results for
Friedrich’s children by and by.

He had eight Sons that reached manhood ; five or six of
whom came to something considerable in the world, and Three
are memorable down to this day. One of his daughters he
married to the Duke of Liegnitz in Silesia ; which is among the
first links I notice of a connexion that grew strong with that
sovereign Duchy, and is worth remarking by my readers here.
Of the Three notable Sons it is necessary that we say some-
thing, Casimir, George, Albert are the names of these Three.

Casimir, the eldest,^ whose share of heritage is Baireuth,
was originally intended for the Church ; but inclining rather to
secular and military things, or his prospects of promotion alter-
ing, he early quitted that ; and took vigorously to the career of
arms and business. A truculent-looking Herr, with thoughtful
eyes, and hanging under-lip : — hat of enviable softness ; loose
disk of felt flung carelessly on, almost like a nightcap artifici-

Rentsch, p. 6t2.

'® 1482 (Pauli, ii. 389): his beautiful young Wife, ‘thrown from her horse,’ had
perished in a thrice< 4 ragic way, short while before ; and the Seventeen Provinces were
unruly under the guardianship of Max. ® S48x'ZS27.

i6^ H0HEN20LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiti.

w

ally extended, so admirably soft; — and the look of the man
Casimir, between his cataract of black beard and this semi-
nightcap, is carelessly truculent. He had much fighting with
the Niirnbergers and others; laid it right terribly on, in the
way of strokes, when needful. He was especially truculent upon
the Revolt of Peasants in ihoSx Bauernkrieg Them in
their wildest rage he fronted ; he, that others might rally to
him: ** Unhappy mortals, will you shake the world to pieces,
then, because you have much to complain of?” and hanged the
ringleaders of them literally by the dozen, when quelled and
captured. A severe, rather truculent Herr. His brother George,
who had Anspach for heritage, and a right to half those prison-
ers, admonished and forgave his half; and pleaded hard with
Casimir for mercy to the others, in a fine Letter still extant
which produced no effect on Casimir. For the dog’s sake, and
for all sakes, “let not tie dog learn to eat leather'" (of which
his indispensable leashes and muzzles are made) ! That was a
proverb often heard on the occasion, in Luther’s mouth among
the rest. ^

Casimir died in 1527, age then towards fifty. For the last
dozen years or so, when the Father’s malady became hopeless?
he had governed Culmbach, both parts of it ; the Anspach part,
which belonged to his next brother George, going naturally, in
almost all things, along with Baireuth ; and George, who was
commonly absent, not interfering, except on important occa-
sions. Casimir left one little Boy, age then only six, name
Albert; to whom George, henceforth practical sovereign of
Culmbach, as his Brother had been, was appointed Guardian.
This youth, very full of fire, wildfire too much of it, exploded
dreadfully on Germany by and by Alcibiades the name

they gave him) ; nay, towards the end of his nonage, he had
been rather sputtery upon his Uncle, the excellent Guardian
who had charge of him.

FriedricHs Second Son, Margraf George of A ftspach.

Uncle George of Anspach, Casimir’s next Brother, had al-
ways been of a peaceabler disposition than Casimir ; not indeed
without heat of temper, and sufficient vivacity of every kind.
As a youth, he had aided Kaiser Max in two of his petty wars ;

w In Rentsch, p. 627. ,

Chap.v. BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH, 165

but was always rather given *to reading Latin,* to Learning,
and ingenious pursuits. His Polish Mother, who, we perceive,
had given Casimir*’ his name, proved much more important
to George. At an early age he went to his Uncle Vladislaus,

King of Hungary and Bohemia: for Alas, after all, we

shall ha^^e to cast a glance into that unbeautiful Hungarian-
Bohemian scramble, comparable to an * Irish Donnybrook,*
where Albert Achilles long walked as Chief- Constable. It be-
hoves us, after all, to point out some of the tallest heads in it ;
and whitherward, bludgeon in hand, they seem to be swaying
and struggling. — Courage, patient reader 1

George, then, at an early age went to his Uncle Vladislaus,
King of Hungary and Bohemia : for George’s Mother, as we
know, was of royal kin ; daughter of the Polish King, Casimir
IV. (late mauler of the Teutsch Ritters) ; which circumstance
had results for George and us. Daughter of Casimir IV. the
Lady was ; and therefore of the Jagellon blood by her father,
which amounts to little ; but by her mother she was Grand-
daughter of that Kaiser Albert II. who ‘got Three Crowns in
one year, ^and died the next ;* whose posterity have ever since,
— up to the lips in trouble with their confused competitive ac-
companiments, Hunniades, Corvinus, George Podiebrad and
others, not to speak of dragon Turks coiling ever closer round
you on the frontier, — been Kings of Hungary and Bohemia;
^wo of the crowns (the heritable two) which were got by Kaiser
Albert in that memorable year. He got them, as the reader
may remember, by having the daughter of Kaiser Sigismund
to wife, — Sigismund Super-Grammaticam, whom we left stand-
ing, red as a^flamingo, in the marketplace of Constance a hun-
dred years ago. Thus Time rolls on in its many-coloured man-
ner, edacious and feracious.

It is in this way that George’s Uncle, Vladislaus, Albert’s
daughter’s son, is now King of Hungary and Bohemia : the
last King Vladislaus they had ; and the last King but one, of
any kind, as we shall see anon. Vladislaus was heir of Poland
too, could he have managed to get it ; but he gave up that to
his brother, to various younger brothers in succession ; having
his hands full with the Hungarian and Bohemian difficulty.
He was very fond of Nephew George ; well recognising the in-
genuous, wise and loyal nature of the young man. He appointed
George tutor of his poor son Ludwig; whom he left at the early

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book lit

age of ten, in an evil world, and evil position there. ♦ Bom
without Skin,* they say, that is, bom in the seventh month;—
called Ludwig Ohne Haut (Ludwig A^<?-Skin), on that account.
Bom certainly, I can perceive, rather thin of skin; and he
would have needed one of a rhinoceros thickness !

George did his function honestly, and with success : Lud-
wig grew up a gallant, airy, brisk young King, in spite of diffi-
culties, constitutional and other ; got a Sister of the great Kaiser
Karl V. to wife; — determined (a.d. 1526) to have a stroke at
the Turk dragon ; which was coiling round his frontier, and
spitting fire at an intolerable rate. Ludwig, a fine young man
of twenty, marched away with much Hungarian chivalry, right
for the Turk (Summer 1526); George meanwhile going busily
to Bohemia, and there with all his strength levying troops for
reinforcement. Ludwig fought and fenced, for some time, with
the Turk outskirts ; came at last to a furious general battle with
the Turk (29th August 1526), at a place called Mohacz, far
east in the flats of the Lower Donau ; and was there tragically
beaten and ended. Seeing the Battle gone, and his chivalry
all in flight, Ludwig too had to fly ; galloping for life, he came
upon bog which proved bottomless, as gcod as bottomless ; and
Ludwig, horse and man, vanished in it straightway from this
world. Hapless young man, like a flash of lightning suddenly
going down there — and the Hungarian Sovereignty along with
him. For Hungary is part of Austria ever since; having, with
Bohemia, fallen to Karl V.*s Brother Ferdinand, as now the
nearest convenient heir of Albert with his Three Crowns. Up
to the lips in difficulties to this day ! —

George meanwhile, with finely-appointed reinforcements,
was in full march to join Ludwig; but the sad news of Mohacz
met him : he withdrew, as soon as might be, to his own terri-
tory, and quitted Hungarian politics. This, I think, was George’s
third and last trial of war. He by no means delighted in that
art, or had cultivated it like Casimir and some of his brothers. —

George by this time had considerable property ; part of it
important to the readers of this History. Anspach we already
know ; but the Duchy of Jagerndorf, — that and its pleasant val-
leys, fine hunting-grounds and larch-clad heights, among the
Giant Mountains oi Silesia, — ^that is to us the memorable terri-
tory. George got it in this manner:

Ctap.v, BAH&UTH-ANSPACH BRANCH. 167.

XS16-XSS».

Some ten or fifteen years ago, the late King Vladislaus, our
Uncle of blessed memory, loving George, and not having royal
moneys at command, permitted him to redeem with his own
cash certain Hungarian Domains, pledged at a ruinously cheap
rate, but unredeemable by Vladislaus. George did so ; years
ago, guess ten or fifteen. George did not like the Hungarian
Domains, with their Turk and other inconveniences ; he pro-
posed to exchange them with King Vladislaus for the Bphe-
mian-Silesian Duchy of Jagerndorf; which had just then, by
failure of heirs, lapsed to the King. This also Vladislaus, the
beneficent cashless Uncle, liking George more and more, per-
mitted to be done. And done it was ; I see not in what year ;
only that the ultimate investiture (done, this part of the affair,
by Ludwig Ohne Haut, and duly sanctioned by the Kaiser)
dates 1524, two years before the fatal Mohacz business.

From the time of this purchase, and especially till Brother
Casimir’s death, which happened in 1527, George resided oft-
ener at Jagerndorf than at Anspach. Anspach, by the side of
Baireuth, needed no management ; and in Jagerndorf much pro-
bably required the hand of a good Governor to put it straight
again. The , Castle of Jagerndorf, which towers up there in a
rather grand manner to this day, George built : ‘ the old Castle
of the Schellenbergs’ (extinct predecessor Line) now gone to
ruins, * stands on a Hill with larches on it, some miles off.*
Margraf George was much esteemed as Duke of Jagerndorf.
What his actions in that region were, I know not ; but it seems
he was so well thought of in Silesia, two smaller neighbouring
Potentates, the Duke of Oppeln and the Duke of Ratibor, who
had no heir^ of their body, bequeathed, with the Kaiser's as-
sent, these towns and territories to George — in mere love to
their subjects (Rentsch intimates), that poor men might be
governed by a wise good Duke, in the time coming. The Kai-
ser would have got the Duchies otherwise.

Nay the Kaiser, in spite of his preliminary assent, proved
extortionate to George in this matter ; and exacted heavy sums
for the actual possession of Oppeln and Ratibor. George, go-
ing so zealously ahead in Protestant affairs, grew les^ and less
a favourite with Kaisers. But so, at any rate, on peaceable

n RentscK pp. 623, 127-131. Kaiser is Ferdinand, Karl V.'s Brcthcr,— es yet
only King of Bohemia and Hungary, but supreme in regard! tq SVfCh points. His
lent is dated ’x/th June 1531’ in Rentscb,

m HOHENZOLLERNS IK BRANDENBURG. Book m.

unquestionable grounds, grounds valid as Imperial Law and
ready-money, George is at last Lord of these two little Coun-
tries, in the plain of South-Silesia, as of Jagerndorf among the
Mountains hard by. George has and holds the Duchy of Ja-
gerndorf, with these appendages (Jagerndorf since 1524, Rati-
bor and Oppeln since spme years later) ; and lives constantly,
or at the due intervals, in his own strong Mountain-Castle of
Jagerndorf there, — ^we have no doubt, to the marked benefit of
good men in those parts. Hereby has Jagerndorf joined itself
to the Brandenburg Territories: and the reader can note the
circumstance, for it will prove memorable one day.

In the business of the Reformation, Margraf George was
very noble. A simple-hearted, truth-loving, modestly valiant
man ; rising unconsciously, in that great element, into the he-
roic figure. George the Pious (der Fromme)^' “ George the
Confessor {Bekenner),'' were the names he got from his coun-
trymen. Once this business had become practical, George
interfered a little more in the Culmbach Government ; his bro-
ther Casimir, whb likewise had Reformation tendencies, rather
hanging back in comparison to George.

In 1525 the Town-populations, in the Culmbach region, big
Niirnberg in the van, had gone^uite ahead in the new Doctrine ;
and were becoming irrepressibly impatient to clear-out the old
mendacities, and have the Gospel preached freely to them. This
was a questionable step ; feasible perhaps for a great Elector
of Saxony ; — ^but for a Margraf of Anspach ? George had come
home from Jagerndorf, some three-hundred miles away, to look
into it for himself; found it, what with darkness allwound, what
with precipices menacing on both hands, and zealous, inconsider-
ate Town-populations threatening to take the bit between their
teeth, a frightfully intricate thing. George mounted his horse,
one day this year, day not dated farther, and * with only six
attendants’ privately rode off, another two-hundred miles, a
good three-days ride, to Wittenberg ; and alighted at Dr. Mar-
» tinus Lutherus’s door.12 ^ notable passage ; worth thinking
of. But such visits of high Princes, to that poor house of the
Doctor’s, were not then uncommon, Luther cleared the doubts
of George ; George returned with a resolution taken ; Ahead
then, ye poor Voigtland Gospel populations I I must lead you,

Rentsch, p. 625.

. BAIREUTH-ANSRACH BRAI^CH. i6$

15th JUM 1530*

we must on I” — And perils enough there proved to be, and
precipices on each hand : Bauern-Kricg^ that is to say Pea-
sants’- War, Anabaptistry and Red-Republic, on the one hand ;
ReichS’Acht, Ban of Empire, on the other. But George, eagerly,
solemnly attentive, with ever new light rising on him, dealt
with the perils as they came ; and went steadily on, in a simple,
highly manful and courageous manner.

He did not live to see the actual Wars that followed on
Luther’s preaching : — he was of the same age with Luther,
born few months later, and died two years before Luther —
but in all the intermediate principal transactions George is
conspicuously present; * George of Brandenburg,’ as the Books
call him, or simply ‘ Margraf George.*

At the Diet of Augsburg (1530), and the signing of the
Augsburg Confession there, he was sure to be. He rode thither
with his Anspach Knightage about him, ‘ four-hundred cava-
liers,* — Seckendorfs, Huttens, Flanscs and other known kin-
dreds, recognisable among the lists — and spoke there, not
bursts of parliamentary eloquence, but things that had mean-
ing in them. One speech of his, not in the Diet, but in the
Kaiser’s Lodging (15th June 1530 ; no doubt, in Anton Fug-
ger*s house, where the Kaiser ‘ lodged for year and day* this
time, but without the * fires of ciifnamon’ they talk of on other
occasions^®), is still very celebrated. It was the evening of
the Kaiser Karl Fifth’s arrival at the Diet ; which was then
already, some time since, assembled there. And great had
been the Kaiser’s reception that morning ; the flower of Ger-
many, all the Princes of the Empire, Protestant and Papal alike,
riding out to >«ieet him, in the open country, at the Bridge of
the Lech. With highflown speeches and benignities, on both
sides ; — only that the Kaiser willed all men, Protestant and
other, should in the mean while do the Popish litanyings, wax-
light processionings and idolatrous stage-performances with
him on the morrow, which was Corpus^Christi Day ; and the
Protestants could not nor would. Imperial hints there had
already been, from Innspruck ; benign hopes, of the nature of

w 4th March 1484—27111 Dec. 1543, I loth November 1483— -iSth Febniary 1546,
George ; j Luther.

Rentsch, p. 633.

•s See Miscellanies (iu. 199 n.). The House is at present an Inn, *GasU

haus zu den drei Mohrtn'^ where tourists lodge, 'ind arc still shown the room which
the Kaiser occupied on such visits.

|,fd H0HEN20LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book m.

X5i6<x5sii

commands, That loyal Protestant Princes would in the interim
avoid open idiscrepancies, — ^perhaps be so loyal as keep their
chaplains, peculiar divine-services, private in the interim ? These
were hints ; — and now this of the Corpus-Christi, a still more
pregnant hint ! Loyal Protestants refused it, therefore ; flatly
declined, though bidden and again bidden. They attended in
a body, old Johann of Saxony, young Philip of Hessen, and the
rest ; Margraf George, as spokesman, with eloquent simplicity
stating their reasons, — to somewhat this effect :

Invinciblest all-gracious Kaiser, loyal are we to your high
Majesty, ready to do your bidding by night and by day. But
it is your bidding under God, not against God. Ask us not,
O gracious Kaiser ! I cannot, and we cannot ; and we must
not, and dare not. And “ before I would deny my God and
his Evangel,’* these are George’s own words, “ I would rather
kneel down here before your Majesty, and have my head struck
off,” — ^hitting his hind-head, or neck, with the edge of his hand,
by way of accompaniment ; a strange radiance in the eyes of
him, voice risen into musical alt : “ Ehe Ich wolte meinen Gott
** undsein Evangelium verldugnen^ ehe wolte Ich hier vorEurer
“ Majestdt niderknien, und mir den Kopf abhauen
** Nit Kop ab, lover Fbrstt nit Kop ab r answered Charles in
his Flemish-German ; “Not Head off, dear Fiirst, not head off 1'*
said the Kaiser, a faint smile enlightening those weighty gray
eyes of his, and imperceptibly animating the thick Austrian

underlip.

Speaker and company attended again on the morrow ; Mar-
graf George still more eloquent. Whose Speech flew over Ger-
many, like fire over dry flax ; and still exists, — both Speeches
now oftenest rolled into one by inaccurate editors. And the
Corpus-Christi idolatries were forborne the Margraf and his
company this time ; — the Kaiser himself, however, walking,
nearly roasted in the sun, in heavy purple-velvet cloak, with a
big wax-candle, very superfluous, guttering and blubbering in
the right hand of him, along the streets of Augsburg. Kur-
Brandenburg, Kur-Mainz, high cousins of George, were at this
Diet of Augsburg ; Kur- Brandenburg (Elector Joachim I.,
Cicero’s son, of whom we have spoken, and shall speak again)

Rentsch, p. 637. Marheineke, GeschictUe der Teutschen Reformation (Berlin,
1831), ii. 487-

>7 As by Rentsch, ubi suprh.

BAIREUTH-ANSPACH BRANCH.

171

CSwtp. V.

I5i6-x5sak

being often very loud on the conservative side ; and eloquent
Kur-Mainz going on the conciliatory tack. Kur-Brandenburg,
in his zeal, had ridden on to Innspruck, to meet the Kaiser
there, and have a preliminary word with him. Both these
high Cousins spoke, and bestirred themselves, a good deal, at
this Diet. They had met the Kaiser on the plains of the Lech,
this morning ; and, no doubt, gloomed unutterable things on
George and his Speech. George could not help it.

Till his death in 1543, George is to be found always in the
front line of this high Movement, in the line where Kur-Sach-»
sen, John the Steadfast {der Bestdndige), and young Philip the
Magnanimous of Hessen were, and where danger and diffi-
culty were. Readers of this enlightened gold-nugget genera-
tion can form to themselves no conception of the spirit that
then possessed the nobler kingly mind. “ The command of
God endures through Eternity, Verbum Dei Manet In Mter-^
mint,'' was the Epigraph and Life-motto which John the Stead-
fast had adopted for himself ,* V. D. M. these initials

he had engraved on all the furnitures of his existence, on his
standards, pictures, plate, on the very sleeves of his lackeys,
— and I can , perceive, on his own deep heart first of all.
V. D. M. L E. : — or might it not be read withal, as Philip of
Hessen sometimes said (Philip, Still a young fellow, capable
of sport in his magnanimous scorn), “ Verbum Diaboli Manet
In Episcopis, The Devil’s Word sticks fast in the Bishops” ?

We must now take leave of Margraf George and his fine
procedures in that crisis of World-History. He had got Ja-
gerndorf, whioh became important for his Family and others;
but what was that to the Promethean conquests (such we may
call them) which he had the honour to assist in making for his
Family, and for his Country, and for all men ; — very uncon-
scious he of ‘bringing fire from Heaven,’ good modest simple
man ! So far as I can gather, there lived, in that day, few
truer specimens of the Honest Man. A rugged, rough-hewn,
rather blunt-nosed physiognomy ; cheek-bones high, cheeks
somewhat bagged and wrinkly ; eyes with a due shade of
an;aety and sadness in them ; affectionate simplicity, faith-
fulness, intelligence, veracity looking out of every feature of
him. Wears plentiful white beard short-cut, plentiful gold-
chains, ruffs, ermines ; — a hat not to be approved of, in com-

172 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book m.

15x6-1559.

parison with brother Casimir*s ; miserable inverted-colander of
a hat ; hanging at an angle of forty-five degrees ; with band
of pearls round the top not the bottom of it ; insecure upon the
fine head of George, and by no means to its embellishment.

One of his Daughters he married to the Duke of Liegnitz ;
a new link in that connexion. He left one Boy, George Fried-
rich ; who came under Alcibiades^ his Cousin of Baireuth’s
tutelage ; and suffered much by that connexion, or indeed
chiefly by his own conspicuously Protestant- turn, to punish
which, the Alcibiades connexion was taken as a pretext. In
riper years, George Friedrich got his calamities brought well
under ; and lived to do good work, Protestant and other, in
the world. To which we may perhaps allude again. The Line
of Margraf George the Pious ends in this George Friedrich,
who had no children ; the Line of Margraf George, and the
Elder Culmbach Line altogether (1603), Albert Alcibiades,
Casimir’s one son, having likewise died without posterity,

*Of the younger Brothers,’ says my Authority, ‘some four were in
‘ the Chuich ; of whom rose to be Prelates ; — ^here are the four :

‘ I®. One, Wilhelm by name, was Bishop of Riga, in the remote
‘ Prussian outskirts, and became Protestant ; — among the first great
‘ Prelates who took that heretical course ; being favoured by circum-
‘ stances to cast out the “V.D. {Verbum Diaboli),” as Philip read it.

* He is a wise-looking man, with magnificent beard, with something
‘ of contemptuous patience in the meditative eyes of him. He had great
‘ troubles with his Riga people, — ^as indeed was a perennial case be-
‘ tween their Bishop and them, of whatever creed he might be.

‘ 2®. The other Prelate held fast by the Papal Orthodoxy ; he had

* got upon the ladder of promotion towards Magdeburg; hoping to fob
‘ low his Cousin JsTur-Mainz, the eloquent conciliatory Cardinal, in that
‘ part of his pluralities. As he did, — ^little to his comfort, poor man;

* having suffered a good deal in the sieges and religious troubles of his

* Magdeburgers ; who ended by ordering him away, having openly de-
‘ dared themselves Protestant, at length. He had to go ; and occupy
‘ himself complaining, soliciting Aulic- Councils and the like, for the
‘ rest of his life.

‘ 3®. The Frobsi of Wurzburg {Frovosty kind of Head-Canon there) ;

* orthodox Papal he too ; and often gave his Brother George trouble.

‘ 4®. A still more orthodox specimen, the youngest member of the

* family, who is likewise in orders: Gumbrecht(“Gumbertus, aCanoni-

* cus of” Something or other, say the Books); who went early to Rome,
‘ and Ijecame one of his Holiness Leo Tenth’s Chamberlains ; — stood

* the “Sack of Rome” (Constable de Bourbon’s), and was captured

Chat,. VI. HOCHMEISTER ALBERT. 173

f there and ransomed but died still young (1528). These three were
* Catholics, he of Wurzburg a rather virulent one. *

Catholic also was ^ohannes^ a fifth Brother, who followed the sol-
diering and diplomatic professions, oftenest in Spain ; did Government-
messages to Diets, and the like, for Karl V. ; a high man and well seen
of his Kaiser; — ^he had wedded the young Wido^v of old King Ferdi-
nand in Spain ; which proved, seemingly, a troublous scene for poor
Johannes. What we know is, he was appointed Commandant of Va-
lencia; and died there, still little turned of thirty, — by poison it is sup-
posed, — and left his ydung Widow to marry a third time.

These are the Five minor Brothers, four of them Catholic,
sons of old blind Friedrich of Plassenburg ; who are not, for
their own sake, memorable, but are mentionable for the sake
of the three major Brothers. So many orthodox Catholics,
while Brother George and others went into the heresies at such
a rate ! A family much split by religion : — and blind old Fried-
rich, dim of intellect, knew nothing of it ; and the excellent
Polish Mother said and thought, we know not what. A di-
vided Time ! —

Johannes of Valencia, and these Chief Priests, were all men
of mark ; conspicuous to the able-editors of their day : but the
only Brother now generally known to mankind is Albert, Hoch-
meister of the Teutsch Ritterdom ; by whom Preussen came
into the Family. Of him we must now speak a little.

CHAPTER VI.

HOCHMEISTER ALBERT, THIRD NOTABLE SON OF FRIEDRICH,

Albert wae born in 1490 ; George’s junior by six years,
Casimir’s by nine. He too had been meant for the Church ;
but soon quitted that, other prospects and tendencies opening.
He had always loved the ingenuous arts ; but the activities too
had charms for him. He early shone in his exercises spiritual
and bodily ; grew tall above his fellows, expert in arts, espe-
cially in arms ; — rode with his Father to Kaiser Max’s Court;
was presented by him, as the light of his eyes, to Kaiser Max ;
who thought him a very likely young fellow ; and bore him
in mind, when the Mastership of the Teutsch Ritterdom fell
vacant. 1

The Teutsch Ritterdom, ever since it got its back brokc^n

1 Rentsch, pp. 840-863.

174 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book tit

zsas.

in that Battle of Tannenberg in 1410, and was driven out of
West-Preussen with such ignominious kicks, has been lying
bedrid, eating its remaining revenues, or sprawling about in
helpless efforts to rise again, which require no notice from us.
Hopeless of ever recovering West-Preussen, it had quietly paid
its homage to Poland for the Eastern part of that Country ;
quietly for some couple of generations. But, in the third or
fourth generation after Tannenberg, there began to rise mur-
murs, — in the Holy Roman Empire first of all. ** Preussen is
a piece of the Reich,” said hot, inconsiderate people ; “ Preus-
sen could not be alienated without consent of the Reich !” To
which discourses the afflicted Ritters listened only too gladly ;
their dull eyes kindling into new false hopes at sound of them.
The point was, To choose as Hochmeister some man of Ger-
man influence, of power and connexion in the Country, who
might help them to their so-called right. With this view, they
chose one and then another of such sort ; — and did not find it
very hopeful, as we shall see.

Albert was, chosen Grand-Master of Preussen, in February
1 5 1 1 ; age then twenty-one. Made his entry into Kfinigsberg,
November next year ; in grand cavalcade, ‘dreadful storm of
rain and wind at the time,’— poor Albert all in black, and full
of sorrow, for the loss of his Mother, the good Polish Princess,
who had died since he left home. Twenty months of prepar-
ation he had held since his Election, before doing anything :
for indeed the case was intricate. He, like his predecessor in
office, had undertaken to refuse that Homage to Poland ; the
Reich generally, and Kaiser Max himself, in a loose way of
talk, encouraging him t “A piece of the Reich,* said they all ;
“ Teutsch Ritters had no power to give it away in that man-
ner." Which is a thing more easily said, than made good in
the way of doing.

Albert’s predecessor, chosen on this principle, was a Saxon
Prince, Friedrich of Meissen ; cadet of Saxony ; potently enough
connected, he too ; who, in like manner, had undertaken to
refuse the Homage. And zealously did refuse it, though to his
cost, poor man. From the Reich, for all its big talking, he
got no manner of assistance ; had to stave-off a Polish War as
he could, by fair-speaking, by diplomacies and contrivances ;
and died at middle age, worn down by the sorrows of that sad
position.

Chip, VI. HOCHMEISTER ALBERT. 175

An idea prevails, in ill-informed circles, that our new
Grand-Master Albert was no better than a kind of cheat ; that
he took this Grand-Mastership of Preussen ; and then, in gaiety
of heart, surreptitiously pocketed Preussen for his own behoof.
Which is an idle idea ; inconsistent with the least inquiry, or
real knowledge how the matter stood. 2 By no means in gaiety
of heart did Albert pocket Preussen ; nor till after as tough a
struggle to do other with it as could have been expected of
any man.

One thing not suspected by the Teutsch Ritters, and least
of all by their young Hochmeister, was, That the Teutsch Rit*
ters had well deserved that terrible downcome at Tannenberg,
that ignominious dismissal out of West-Preussen with kicks.
Their insolence, luxury, degeneracy had gone to great lengths.
Nor did that humiliation mend them at all ; the reverse rather.
It was deeply hidden from the young Hochmeister as from
them, That probably they were now at length got to the end
of their capability : and ready to be withdrawn from the scene,
as soon as any good way offered ! — Of cours<i, they were re-
luctant enough to fulfil their bargain to Poland ; very loath
they to do Homage now for Preussen, and own themselves
sunk to the second degree. For Jhe Ritters had still their old
haughtiness of humour, their deep-seated pride of place, gone
now into the unhappy conscious state. That is usually the last
thing that deserts a sinking House : pride of place, gone to
the conscious state ; — as if, in a reverse manner, the House
felt that it ’deserved to sink.

For the rest, Albert’s position among them was what Fried-
rich of Sachsdh’s had been ; worse, not better ; and the main
ultimate difference was, he did not die of it, like Friedrich of
Sachsen ; but found an outlet, not open in Friedrich’s time, and
lived. To the Ritters, and vague Public which called itself
the Reich, Albert had promised he would refuse the Homage
to Poland ; on which Ritters and Reich had clapt their hands :
and that was pretty much all the assistance he got of them.
The Reich, as a formal body, had never asserted its right to
Preussen, nor indeed spoken definitely on the subject ; it was
only the vague Public that had spoken, in the name of the
Reich. From the Reich, or from any individual of it, Kaiser
or Prince, when actually applied to, Albert could get simply

2 Voigt, ix. 740749 ; Pauli, iv. 404-407.

i>€ H0HEN20LLERNS W BRANDENBURG

tiotbing* From what Ritters were in Preussen, he might per-
haps expect promptitude to fight, if it came to that ; which was
not much as things stood. But from the great body of the
Ritters, scattered over Germany, with their rich territories (Gal-
leys, bailliwicks), safe resources, and comfortable ‘Teutsch-
meister* over them, he got flat refusal “We will not be con-
cerned in the adventure at all ; we wish you well through it 1”
Never was a spirited young fellow placed in more impossible
position.

His Brother Casimir (George was then in Hungary), his
Cousin Joachim Kur- Brandenburg, Friedrich Duke of Lieg-
nitz, a Silesian connexion of the Family,^ consulted, advised,
negotiated to all lengths ; Albert’s own effort was incessant.
*' Agree with King Sigismund,” said they ; “ Uncle Sigismund,
your good Mother’s Brother ; a King softly inclined to us aU I”
— “ How agree ?” answered Albert : “ He insists on the Hom-
age, which I have promised not to give !” Casimir went and
came, to Konigsberg, to Berlin ; went once himself to Cracow,
to the King, this errand : but it was a case of “ Yes and
No not to be solved by Casimir.

As to King Sigismund, he was patient with it to a degree ;
made the friendliest paternal professions; — testifying withal.
That the claim was undeniable ; and could by him, Sigismund,
never be foregone with the least shadow of honour, and of
course never would : “My dear Nephew can consider whether
his dissolute, vain-minded, half-heretical Ritterdom, nay whe-
ther this Prussian fraction of it, is in a condition to take Po-
land by the beard in an unjust quarrel ; or can hope to do
Tannenberg over again in the reverse way, 4)y Beelzebub’s
help ?”—

For seven years, Albert held out in this intermediate
state, neither peace nor war ; moving Heaven and Earth to
raise supplies, that he might be able to defy Poland, and begin

3 The titles Hochmeuter and Teuischmeister are defined, in many Books and in
all manner of Dictionaries, as meaning the same thing. But that is not quite the
case. They were at first synonymous, so far as I can see ; and after Albert’s time,
they again became so ; but at the date where We now are, and for a long while back,
they represent different entities, and indeed oftenest, since the Prussian Decline be-
gan, antagonistic ones. Teutschmeister, Sub-president over the German affairs and
possessions of the Order resides at Mergentheim in that Country : Hochmeister is
Chief President of the whole, but resident atMarienburg inPreussen : and feels there
acutely where the shoe pinches. — much too acutely, thinks the Teutschmeister in his
soft list-slippers, at Mergentheim in the safe Wdrzburg renon.

f * Duke Friedrich II. :* comes by mothers from Kurmrst Friedrich I. ; marfles
Margraf George's Daughter even now, 15x9 (Hiibner, tt. X79, zoo, xox).

BOCBMEISTER ALBERT. 177

war. The Reich answers, “We have really nothing for you.”
Teutschmeister answers again and again, “ I tell you we have
nothing 1 ” ' In the end, Sigismund grew impatient; made (De-
cember 1519) some movements of a hostile nature. Albert
did not yield ; eager only to procrastinate till he were ready.
By superhuman efforts, of borrowing, bargaining, soliciting,
and galloping to and fro, Albert did, about the end of next
year, get-up some appearance of an Army ; ‘ 14,000 German
mercenaries horse and foot,* so many in theory ; who, to the
extent of 8,000 in actual result, came marching towards him
(October 1520) ; to serve ‘for eight months.* With these he
will besiege Dantzig, besiege Thom ; will plunge, suddenly,
like a fiery javelin, into the heart of Poland, and make Poland
surrender its claim. Whereupon King Sigismund bestirred
' himself in earnest ; came out with vast clouds of Polish chi-
valry ; overset Albert’s 8,000 ; — who took to eating the country,
instead of fighting for it ; being indeed in want of all things.
One of the gladdest days Albert had yet seen, was when he
got the 8,000 sent home again, ^

What then is to be done ? * Armistice for four years,* Si-
gismund was still kind enough to consent to that: “ Truce for
four years ; try everywhere, my poor Nephew ; after that, your
mind will perhaps become pliaift.’* Albert tried tho Reich
again : “ Four years, O Princes, and then I must do it, or be
eaten 1 ’* Reich, busy with Lutheran -Papal, Turk -Christian
quarrels, merely shrugged its shoulders upon Albert. Tcutsch-
meister did the like ; everybody the like. In Heaven or Earth,
then, is there no hope for me ? thought Albert. And his stock
of ready-monoy — ^we will not speak of that I

Meanwhile Dr. Osiander of Anspach had come to him ; and
the pious young man was getting utterly shaken in his religion.
Monkish vows. Pope, Holy Church itself, what is one to think,
Herr Doctor? Albert, religious to an eminent degree, was
getting deep into Protestantism. In his many journeyings, to
NUraberg, to Brandenburg, and up and down, he had been at
Wittenberg too ; he saw Luther in person more than once
there ; corresponded with Luther ; in fine believed in the truth
of Luther, The Culmbach Brothers were both, at least George
ardently was, inclined to Protestantism, as we have seen ; but
Albert was foremost of the three in this course. Osiander and
flights of zdalous Culmbach Preachers made many converts in

VOL. I. N

*78 HOHENZOLLERNS III BRANDENBURG. Bookai.

Preussen. la these circumstances the Four Years came to a
close.

Albert, we may believe, is greatly at a loss ; and deep deli-
berations, Culmbach, Berlin, Liegnitz, Poland all called in, are
held : — a case beyond measure intricate. You have given your
word; word must be* kept, — ^and cannot, without plain hurt,
or ruin even, to those that took it of you. Withdraw, there-
fore ; fling it up ! — Fling it up ? A valuable article to fling
up ; fling it up is the last resource. Nay, in fact, to whom
will you fling it up ? The Prussian Ritters themselves are
getting greatly divided on the point ; and at last on all manner
of points, Protestantism ever more spreading among them. As
for the German Brethren, they and their comfortable Teutsch*
meister, who refused to partake in the dangerous adventure at
all ; are they entitled to have much to say in the settlement of
it now ? —

Among others, or as chief oracle of all, Luther was con-
sulted. ** What would you have me do towards reforming the
Teutsch Order inquired Albert of his oracle. Luther's ans-
wer was, as may be guessed, emphatic. * Luther,’ says one
reporter, ‘has in his Writings declared the Order to be “a

* thing serviceable neither to God nor man,” and the constitu-

* tion of it “a monstrous, fftghtful, hermaphroditish, neither

* secular nor spiritual constitution.” We do not know what

Luther’s answer to Albert was ; — ^but can infer the purport of
it : That such a Teutsch Ritterdom was not, at any rate, a
thing long for this world ; that white cloaks with black crosses
on them would not, of themselves, profit any Ritterdom ; that
solemn vows and high supramundane professions, followed by
such practice as was notorious, are an afflicting, not to say a
damnable, spectacle on God’s Earth ; — ^that a young Herr had
better marry ; better have done with the wretched Babylonian
Nightmare of Papistry altogether; better shake oneself awake,
in God’s name, and see if there are not still monitions in the
eternal sky as to what it is wise to do, and wise not to do !
— This I imagine to have been, in modern language, the pur-
port of Dr. Luther’s advice to Hochmeister Albrecht on the
present interesting occasion. ^

It is certain, Albert, before long, took this course ; Uncle'
Siglsmund and the resident Officials of the Ritterdom having

* C J. Weber, Das RUitrmssn (Stuttsart, 18377, iil ao6. *

0 ^ n. HOCHMEISTER^ALBERT. 179.

inade agreement to it as the one fnracticable course. The
manner as follows : i®. Instead of Elected Hochmeister, let us
be Hereditary Duke of Preussen, and pay homage for it to
Uncle Sigismund in that character. 2®. Such of the resident
Officials of the Ritterdom as are prepared to go along with us,
we will in like manner constitute permanent Feudal Proprie-
tors of what they now possess as Life-rent, and they shall be
Subvassals under us as Hereditary Duke. 3®. In all which
Uncle Sigismund and the Republic of Poland engage to main-
tain us against the world.

That is, in sum, the Transaction entered into, by King
Sigismund I. of Poland, on the one part, and Hochmeister
Albert and his Ritter Officials, such as went along with him
(which of course none could do that were not Protestant), on
the other part : done at Cracow, 8th April 1525.® Whereby
Teutsch Ritterdom, the Prussian part of it, vanished from the
world ; dissolving itself, and its ‘ hermaphrodite constitution,*
like a kind of Male Nunnery, as so many female ones had
done in those years. A Transaction giving rise to endless
criticism, then and afterwards. Transaction •plainly not re-
concileable with the letter of the law ; and liable to have logic
chopped upon it to any amount, and to all lengths of time.
The Teutschmeister and his German Brethren shrieked mur-
der ; the whole world, then, and for long afterwards, had much
to say and argue.

To us, now that the logrc-chaif is all laid long since, the
question is substantial, not formal. If the Teutsch Ritterdom
was actually at this time dead^ actually stumbling about as a
mere galvanised Lie beginning to be putrid, — then, sure enough,
it behoved that somebody should bury it, to avoid pestilential
effects in the neighbourhood. Somebody or other ; — first flay-
ing the skin off, as was natural, and taking that for his trouble.
AE turns, in substance, on this latter question ! If, again, the
Ritterdom was not dead — ? —

® Rentsch, p, 8^a— Here, certified by Rentscb, Voigt and others, is a worn*out
patch of Paper, which is perhaps worth printing :

X490, May 17, Albert ie bom. 1520, November 17, give it up.

*51 X, Fcbmary 14, Hochmeister. xsai, April 10, Truce for Four Years.

X5X9, December, King Sigismund’s first X523, Tune, Albert consults Luther.

hostile movements. X5a4, November, sees Luther.

S5910, October, Carman Mercenaries ar- 1525, April 8, Peace of Cracow and Albert
rive. to be Duke of Prussia.

«, November, try Siege of Dantzig.

#So HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. BookiH,

And truly It struggled as hard as Partridge the Almanao
maker to rebut that fatal accusation ; complained (Teutsch*
meister and German-Papist part of it) loudly at the Diets ; got
Albert and his consorts put to the Ban (geachtef), fiercely men*
aced by the Kaiser Karl V. But nothing came of all that ;
nothing but noise. Albert maintained his point ; Kaiser Karl
always found his hands full otherwise, and had nothing but
stamped parchments and menaces to fire-off at Albert. Teutsch
Rilterdom, the Popish part of it, did enjoy its valuable bailli*
wicks, and very considerable rents in various quarters of Ger-
many and Europe, having lost only Preussen ; and walked
about, for three centuries more, with money in its pocket, and
a solemn white gown with black cross on its back, — ^the most
opulent Social Club in existence, and an excellent place for
bestowing younger sons of sixteen quarters. But it was, and
continued through so many centuries, in every essential respect,
a solemn Hypocrisy ; a functionless merely eating Phantasm, of
the nature of goblin, hungry ghost or ghowl (of which kind
there are many) ; — till Napoleon finally ordered it to vanish ;
its time, even is Phantasm, being come.

Albert, I can conjecture, had his own difficulties as Regent
in Preussen.7 Protestant Theology, to make matters worse for
him, had split itself furiously into ' doxies j and there was an Osi^
anderism (Osiander being the Duke’s chaplain), much flamed-
upon by the more orthodox ism, “ Foreigners,” too, German-
Anspach and other, were ill seen by the native gentlemen ; yet
sometimes got encouragement. One Funccius, a shining Niirn-
berg immigrant there, son-in-law of Osiander, who from The-
ology got into Politics, had at last (1564) to be beheaded, —
old Duke Albert himself ‘ bitterly weeping’ about him ; for it
was none of Albert’s doing. Probably his new allodial Ritter
gentlemen were not the most submiss, when made hereditary?
We can only hope the Duke was a Hohenzollern, and not
quite unequal to his task in this respect. A man with high
bald brow ; magnificent spade-beard ,* air much pondering,
almost gaunt, — ^gaunt kind of eyes especially, and a slight cast
in them, which adds to his severity of aspect. He kept his
possession well, every inch of it ; and left all safe at his decease
in 1568. His age was then near eighty. It was the tenth

7 X535-X568.

ALBERT ALCIBIADES. jSt

ir$x^x55aL

year of our Elizabetli as Queen ; invincible Armada not yet
built ; but Alba very busy, cutting-off high heads in Brabant ;
and stirring-up the Dutch to such fury as was needful for ex-
ploding Spain and him.

This Duke Albert was a profoundly religious man, as all
thoughtful men then were. Much given to Theology, to Doc-
tors of Divinity ; being eager to know God's Laws in this Uni-
verse, and wholesomely certain ot damnation if he should not
follow them. Fond of the profane Sciences too, especially of
Astronomy : Erasmus Reinhold and his Tahulce Pruienicm were
once very celebrated ; Erasmus Reinhold proclaims gratefully
how these his elaborate Tables (done according to the latest
discoveries, 1551 and onwards) were executed upon Duke Al-
bert’s high bounty ; for which reason they are dedicated to
Duke Albert, and called ‘ PruteniccB* meaning Prussian.^ The
University of Konigsberg was already founded several years
before, in 1544.

Albert had not failed to marry, as Luther counselled : by
his first Wife he had only daughters ; by his second, one son,
Albert Friedrich, who, without opposition 0/ difficulty, suc-
ceeded his Father. Thus was Preussen acquired to the Hohen-
lollern Family; for, before long, the Electoral branch managed
to get Mitbelehnung (Co-infeftm«nt), that is to say, Eventual
Succession ; and Preussen became a Family Heritage, as An-
spach and Baireuth were.

CHAPTER VIL

ALBERT ALCIBIADES,

One word must be spent on poor Albert, Casimir s son, •
already mentioned. This poor Albert, whom they call Alcibi-
odes, made a great noise in that epoch ; being what some de-
fine as the ‘ Failure of a Fritz who has really* features of him
we are to call * Friedrich the Great,* but who burnt away his
splendid qualities as a mere temporary shine for the able-edit-
ors, and never came to anything.

A high and gallant young fellow, left fatherless in child-
hood ; perhaps he came too early into power : — ^he came, at
any rate, in very volcanic times, when Germany was all in

» Rentsch, p. 855.

• 1522-1557.

lS 2 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book HI.

ccmvulsion; the Old Religion and the New having at length
broken out into open battle, with huge results to be hoped and
feared ; and the largest game going on, in sight of an adven-
turous youth. How Albert staked in it ; how he played to
immense heights of sudden gain, and finally to utter bank-
ruptcy, I cannot explain here : some German delineator of
human destinies, ‘Artist’ worth the name, if there were any,
might find in him a fine subject.

He was ward of his Uncle George ; and the probable fact
is, no guardian could have been more faithful. Nevertheless,
on approaching the years of majority, of majority but not dis-
cretion, he saw good to quarrel with his Uncle ; claimed this
and that, which was not granted : quarrel lasting for years.
Nay matters ran so high at last, it was like to come to war
between them, had not George been wiser. The young fellow
actually sent a cartel to his Uncle ; challenged him to mortal
combat, — at which George only wagged his old beard, we sup-
pose, and said nothing. Neighbours interposed, the Diet itself
interposed; and the matter was got quenched again. Leaving
Albert, let us nope, a repentant young man. We said he was
full of fire, too much of it wildfire.

His profession was Arms ; he shone much in war ; went
slashing and fighting through those Schmalkaldic broils, and
others of his time ; a distinguished captain ; cutting his way
towards something high, he saw not well what. He had great
comradeship with Moritz of Saxony in the wars : two sworn
brothers they, and comrades in arms : — ^it is the same dextrous
Moritz, who, himself a Protestant, managed to get his too Pro-
testant Cousin’s Electorate of Saxony into his «hand, by luck
of the game ; the Mdritz, too, from whom Albert by and by
got his last defeat, giving Moritz his death in return. That
was the finale of their comradeship. All things end, and no-
thing ceases changing till it end.

He was by position originally on the Kaiser’s side ; had
attained great eminence, and done high feats of arms and gene-
ralship in his service. But being a Protestant by creed, he
changed after that Schmalkaldic downfall (rout of Muhlberg,
24th April 1547), which brought Moritz an Electorate, and
nearly cost Moritz’s too Protestant Cousin his life as well as
lands.* The victorious Kaiser growing now very high in his

• Account of it in De Wette, Lehcnsseschicht* dcrJf£rzo(pe bu Sachsen (Weimar,
1770), PP. 3a-35-

Chap. VII. ALBERT ^LCIBIADES; J1S3

I55«-

ways> there arose complaints against him from all sides, very
loud from the Protestant side ; and Moritz and Albeit took to
arms, with loud manifestos and the other phenomena.

This was early in 1552, five years after Mvihlberg Rout Qr„
Battle* The there victorious Kaiser was now suddenly almost
ruined ; chased like a partridge into the Innspruck Mountains,
-—could have been caught, only Moritz would not ; ** had no
cage to hold so big a bird,’* he said. So the Treaty of Passau
was made, and the Kaiser came much down from his lofty
ways. Famed Treaty of Passau (2 id August 1552), which
was the finale of these broils, and hushed them up for a Four-
score years to come. That was a memorable year in German
Reformation History.

Albert, meanwhile, had been busy in the interior of the
country; blazing aloft in Frankenland, his native quarter, with
a success that ast(^ished all men. For seven months he was
virtually King of Germany ; ransomed Bamberg, ransomed
Wurzburg, Niirnberg (places he had a grudge at) ; ransomed
all manner of towns and places, — especially rich Bishops and
their towns, with Verbum Diaboli sticking i% them, — at enor-
mous sums. King of the world for a brief season ; — must have
had some strange thoughts to himself, had they been recorded
for us. A pious man, too ; no^ in the least like ‘ Alcibiades,’
except in the sudden changes of fortune he underwent. His
Motto, or old rhymed Prayer, which he would repeat on getting
into the saddle for military work, — a rough rhyme of his own
composing, — is still preserved. Let us give it, with an Eng-
lish facsimile, or roughest mechanical pencil-tracing, — by way
of glimpse ijjto the heart of a vanished Time and its Man-at-
arms

I>as wait der Herr fesus Christy Guide it the Lord Jesus Christ,^

Mit dem Vater, der iiber uns isi : And the Father, who over us is :

If^er starker ist ah dieser Mann, He that is stronger than that

Man,®

Her komm und thut ein Leid mir Let him do me a hurt when he
an, can.

He was at the Siege of Metz (end of that same 1552),
and a principal figure there. Readers have heard of the Siege
of Metz: How Henry II. of France fished-pp those ‘Three

* Rcntscli, p. 644. 4 Read ‘ Chris’ or ‘ Chriz,’ for the rhyme’s sake.

Sic,

^.<^;kOH£NZOLL£RNS IK BRAKOEKBURa fiookffi,

Bishoprics* (Mete, Toul, Verdun, constituent part of LorraintJi
a covetable firaction of Teutschland) from the troubled sea of
German things, by aid of Moritz now Kur-Sachsen^ and of Al-
bert; and would not throw them in agaiUi according to bar-
gain, when Peace, the Peace of Passau ^me. How Kaiser
Karl determined tt) have them back before the year ended, cost
what it might ; and Henry II. to keep them, cost what it might.
How Guise defended, with all the Chivalry of France ; and
Kaiser Karl besieged,® with an Army of 100,000 men, under
Duke Alba for chief captain. Siege protracted into mid-win-
ter ; and the ‘sound of his cannon heard at Strasburg,*, which
is eighty miles off, ‘ in the winter nights.’^

It had depended upon Albert, who hung in the distance
with an army of his own, whether the Siege could even begin ;
but he joined the Kaiser, being reconciled again; and the
trenches opened. By the valour of Guise and his Chivalry, —
still more perhaps by the iron frosts and by the sleety rains of
Winter, and the hungers and the hardships of a hundred-thou-
sand men, digging vainly at the ice-bound earth, or trampling
it when sleety in^o seas of mud, and themselves sinking in it,
of dysentery, famine, toil and despair, as the)^ cannonaded day
and night, — Metz could not be taken. “ Impossible I’* said
the Generals with one voice,^ after trying it for a couple of
months. “ Try it one other ten days,*’ said the Kaiser with a
gloomy fixity ; “let us all die, or else do it 1 ” They tried, with
double desperation, another ten days ; cannon booming through
the winter midnight far and wide, fourscore miles round : “Can-,
not be done, your Majesty ! Cannot, — ^the winter and the mud,
and Guise and the walls ; man’s strength canno^do it in this
season. We must march away I” Karl listened in silence ;
but the tears were seen to run down his proud face, now not
so young as it once was : “ Let us march, then I” he said, in
a low voice, after some pause.

Alcibiades covered the retreat to Diedenhof {Thionville they
now call it) : outmanoeuvred the French, retreated with suc-
cess ; he had already captured a grand Due d’Aumale, a Prince
of the Guises, — valuable ransom to be looked for there. It was
thought he should have made his bargain better with the Kaiser,

J 19th October 1552 and onwards.

* Kohler, Reichs-Historief p. 453;— and more especially MOmhelusitgttngm
(Ndrnberg, 1739-17^0), ix. isi’Xao. The Year of this Volume, and c the Numb«r in
question, ts 1737 ; tne MUnste or Medal * recreated upon' is of Henri XL

ctop-vii. ALBERT ALCIBIADES. i«S

ESii6*i55a«

before staiting; but lie had neglected that. Albert's course was
downward thencefbrth ; Kaiser Karl’s too. The French keep
these ‘Three Bishoprics {JTrois Evkh^s),' and Teutschland
laments the loss of them, to this hour. Kaiser Karl, as some
write, never smiled, tgain ; — abdicated, not long after ; retired
into the Monastery of St. Just, and there soon died. That is
the siege of Metz, where Alcibiades was helpful. His own bar-
gain with the Kaiser should have been better made before*
hand.

Dissatisfied with any bargain he could now get ; dissatis*
fied with the Treaty of Passau, with such a finale and hushing
up of the Religious Controversy, and in general with himself
and with the world, Albert again drew sword ; went loose at a*
high rate upon his Bamberg-Wiirzburg enemies, and, having
raised supplies there, upon Moritz and those Passau-Treatiers.
He was beaten at last by Moritz, ‘ Sunday, 9th July 1553,* at
a place called Sievershausen in the Hanover Country, where
Moritz liimself perished in the action. — Albert fled thereupon
to France. No hope in France. No luck in other small and
desperate stakings of his : the game is done. Albert returns
to a Sister he had, to her Husband’s Court in Baden ; a broken,
bare and bankrupt man ; — soon dies there, childless, leaving
the shadow of a name.® •

His death brought huge troubles upon Baireuth and the
Family Possessions. So many neighbours, Bamberg, Wurz-
burg and the rest, were eager for retaliation ; a new Kaiser
greedy for confiscating. Plassenburg Castle was besieged, bom-
barded, taken by famine and burnt ; much was burnt and torn
to waste. Na3i had it not been for help from Berlin, the Family
had gone to utter ruin in those parts. For this Alcibiades had,
in his turn, been Guardian to Uncle George’s Son, the George
Frfedrich we once spoke of, still a minor, but well known after-
wards ; and it was attempted, by an eager Kaiser Ferdinand,
to involve this poor youth in his Cousin’s illegalities, as if Ward

• Here, chiefly from K 5 hler {Jdiinzlelustigungettt iii. 414-416), is the chronology
of Albert’s operations ;

Seizure of Nilmberg &c., nth May to 22d June 1552; Innspruck (with Treaty of
Passau) follows. Then Siege of Metz, October to December 1552 ; Bamberg, Wflrz-
burg and Numberg ransomed again, April 1553 ; Battle of Sievershausen, 9th Jtily
1533. Wfirzburg &c. explode against him; Ban of the Empire, 4th May 1554. To
ranee thereupon ; returns, hoping to negotiate, end of 1556 ; dies at Pforzheim, at
his Sister’s, 8th Janua^ i557.*~'Sec Pauli, iii. 120-138. See also Dr. Kapp, Erinner-
ungen an di^eni^HMarkgrafen (a reprint from the ArchvvfUtGtschichitund
AUerthum^nde in Ober-FrankeUt Year 1841 j.

^i:86 HOHENZ^OLLERNS IN BRANDENBUKG. Bookia

155 ®.

and'Guardian bad been one person. Baireuth which had been
Akibiades’s, Anspach which was the young man's own, nay
Jagerndorf with its Appendages, were at one time all in the
clutches of the hawk, — had not help from Berlin been there.
But in the end, the Law had to be allowed its course ; George
Friedrich got his own Territories back (all but some surrepti*
tious nibblings in the Jagerndorf quarter, to be noticed else-
where), and also got Baireuth, his poor Cousin's Inheritance ;
— sole heir, he now, in Culmbach, the Line of Casimir being
out.

One owns to a kind of love for poor Albert Alcibiades. In
certain sordid times, even a ‘ Failure of a Fritz’ is better than
some Successes that are going. A man of some reaKnoble-
ness, this Albert ; though not with wisdom enough, not with
good fortune enough. Could he have continued to * rule the
situation’ (as our French friends phrase it) ; to march the fana-
tical Papistries, and Kaiser Karl, clear out of it, home to Spain
and San Justo a little earlier ; to wave the coming Jesuitries
away, as with a^^flaming sword ; to forbid beforehand the dole-
ful Thirty- Years War, and the still dolefuler spiritual atrophy
(the flaccid Pedantry, ever rummaging and rearranging among
learned marine-stores, which thinks itself Wisdom and Insight;
the vague maunderings, flutings ; indolent, impotent day-dream-
ing and tobacco-smoking, of poor Modern Germany) which has
followed therefrom, — Ach GoU, he might have been a * Success
of a Fritz’ three times over ! He might have been a German
Cromwell ; beckoning his People to fly, eagle-like, straight to-
wards the Sun ; instead of screwing about it in (hat sad, uncer-
tain, and far too spiral manner ! — But it lay not in him ; not in
his capabilities or opportunities, after all ; and we but waste
time in such speculations.

CHAPTER VIIL

HISTORICAL MEANING OF THE REFORMATION.

The Culmbach Brothers, we observe, play a more import-
ant part in that era than their seniors and chiefs of Branden-
burg. These Culmbachers, Margraf George and Albert of
Preussen at the head of them, march valiantly forward in the

<3«ip.vill. MEANING OF THE REFORMATION. 187

95x6-X55a. (

Refonnatiin business ; while Kur- Brandenburg^ Joachim I.,
their senior Cousin, is talking loud at Diets, galloping to Inn«
spruck and the like, zealous on the Conservative side; and
Cardinal Albert, Kur-Mainn, his eloquent brother, is eager to
make matters smooth and avoid violent methods.

The Reformation was the great Event of that Sixteenth
Century ; according as a man did something in that, or did
nothing and obstructed doing, has he much claim to memory,
or no claim, in this age of ours. The more it becomes appar*
ent that the Reformation was the Event then transacting itself,
was the thing that Germany and Europe either did or refused
to do, the more does the historical significance of men attach
itself to the phases of that transaction. Accordingly we notice
henceforth that the memorable points of Brandenburg History,
what of it sticks naturally to the memory of a reader or student,
connect themselves of their own accord almost all, with the
History of the Reformation. That has proved to be the Law
of Nature in regard to them, softly establishing itself ; and it
is ours to follow that law.

Brandenburg, not at first unanimously, by no means too in-
considerately, but with overwhelming unanimity when the mat-
ter became clear, was lucky enohgh to adopt the Reformation ;
— and stands by it ever since in its ever-widening scope, amid
such difficulties as there might be. Brandenburg had felt some-
how, that it could do no other. And ever onwards through the
times even of our little Fritz and farther, if we will understand
the word * Reformation,’ Brandenburg so feels ; being, at this
day, to an honourable degree, incapable of believing incredi-
bilities, of adopting solemn shams, or pretending to live on
spiritual moonshine. Which has been of uncountable advant-
age to Brandenburg : — how could it fail ? This was what we
must call obeying the audible voice of Heaven. To which same
* voice,* at that time, all that did not give ear, — what has be-
come of them since ; have they not signally had the penalties
to pay !

‘ Penalties :* quarrel not with the old phraseology, good
reader ; attend rather to the thing it means. The word was
heard of old, with a right solemn meaning attached to it, from
theological pulpits and such places ; and may still be heard
there with a half meaning, or with no meaning, though it has

i88 HOHCNZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book in.

rather become obsolete to modern ears. But the thing should
not have fallen obsolete ; the thing is a grand and solemn truth,
expressive of a silent Law of Heaven, which continues forever
valid. The most untheological of men may still assert the
thing; and invite all men to notice it, as a silent monition and
prophecy in this Universe ; to take it, with more of awe than
they are wont, as a correct reading of the Will of the Eternal
in respect of such matters ; and, in their modern sphere, to bear
the same well in mind. For it is perfectly certain, and may
be s^en with eyes in any quarter of Europe at this day.

Protestant or not Protestant? The question meant every-
where: “Is there anything of nobleness in you, O Nation, or
is there nothing? Are there, in this Nation, enough of heroic
men to venture forward, and to battle for God’s Truth versus
the Devil’s Falsehood, at the peril of life and more? Men who
prefer death, and all else, to living under Falsehood, — ^who,
once for all, will not live under Falsehood; but having drawn
the sword against it (the time being come for that rare and
important step), throw away the scabbard, and can say, in
pious clearness, with their whole soul : Come on, then 1 Life
under Falsehood is not good for me; and we will try it out'
now. Let it be to the death between us, thenT’

Once risen into this divifie white-heat of temper, were it
only for a season and not again, the Nation is thenceforth con-
siderable through all its remaining history. What immensities
of dross and crypto-poisonous matter will it not burn-out of it-
self in that high temperature, in the course ot a few years I
Witness Cromwell and his Puritans, — making England habit-
able even under the Charles-Second terms for a oouple of cen-
turies more. Nations are benefited, I believe, for ages, by being
thrown once into divine white -heat in this manner. And no
Nation that has not had such divine paroxysms at any time is
apt to come to much.

That was now, in this epoch, the English of “ adopting
Protestantism ;” and we need not wonder at the results which
it has had, and which the want of it has had. For the want
of it is literally the want of loyalty to the Maker of this Uni-
verse, He who wants that, what else has he, or can he have?
If you do not, you Man or you Nation, love the Truth enough,
but try to make a chapman-bargain with Truth, instead of giv-
ing yourself wholly soul and body and life to her, Truth will

Ctap-VIll. MEANING OF THE REFORMATION. 189

not live^ith you, Truth will dei^rt from you ; and only Logic,
‘Wit* (for example, ‘London Wit‘), Sophistry, Virth, the dEs-
thetic Arts, and perhaps (for a short while) Look-keeping by
Double Entry, will abide with you. You will follow falsity, and
think it truth, you unfortunate man or nation. You will right
surely, you for one, stumble to the Devil ; and are every day
and hour^ little as you imagine it, making progress thither.

Austria, Spain, Italy, France, Poland, — the offer of the
Reformation was made everywhere; and it is curious to see
what has become of the nations that would not hear it. In all
countries were some that accepted ; but in many there were
not enough, and the rest, slowly or swiftly, with fatal difficult
•industry, contrived to burn them out. Austria was once full
of Prctotants; but the hide-bound Flemish-Spanish Kaiser-
element presiding over it, obstinately, for two centuries, kept
saying, “No; we, with our dull obstinate Cimburgis underlip
and lazy eyes, with our ponderous Austrian depth of Habitu-
ality and indolence of Intellect, we prefer st^dy Darkness to
uncertain new Light 1” — and all men may see where Austria
how is. Spain still more ; poor Spain, going about, at this
time, making its pronunciamientosf all the factious attor-
neys in its little towns assembliftg to pronounce virtually this,
“ The Old is a lie, then ; — good Heavens, after we so long tried
hard, harder than any nation, to think it a truth ! — and if it be
not Rights of Man, Red Republic and Progress of the Species,
we know not what now to believe or to do ; and are as a people
stumbling on steep places, in the darkness of midnight !” —
They refused^ Truth when she came; and now Truth knows
nothing of them. All stars, and heavenly lights, have become
veiled to such men ; they must now follow terrestrial ignes fatui^
and think them stars. That is the doom passed upon them.

Italy too had its Protestants ; but Italy killed them ; man-
aged to extinguish Protestantism. Italy put up silently with
Practical Lies of all kinds ; and, shrugging its shoulders, pre-
ferred going into Dilettantism and the Fine Arts. The Italians,
instead of the sacred service of Fact and Performance, did
Mudc, Painting, and the like : — till even that has become im-
possible for them; and no noble Nation, sunk from virtue to
viriU, ever offered such a spectacle before. He that will prefer
Dilettantism in this world tor his outfit, shall have.it; but all

HOH£NZQLLER^S IK BRANDEKBURG. B<»6kiit.

Z5<^X5S««

the gods will depart from him; and manful veracity, ^amest^
ness of purpose, devout depth of soul, shall no more be his*
He can if he like make himself a soprano, and sing for hire;
—and probably that is the real goal for him.

But the sharpest-cut example is France; to which we con-
stantly return for illustration. France, with its keen int^ect,
saw the truth and saw the falsity, in those Protestant times ;
and, with its ardour of generous impulse, was prone enough to
adopt the former. France was within a hairsbreadth of becom-
ing actually Protestant. But France saw good to massacre
Protestantism, and end it in the night of St. Bartholomew 1572.
The celestial Apparitor of Heaven’s Chancery, so we may speak,
the Genius of Fact and Veracity, had left his Writ of Sum-
mons; Writ was read; — and replied to in this manner. The.
Genius of Fact and Veracity accordingly withdrew ; — was
staved-off, got kept away, for two-hundred years. But the writ
of Summons had been served ; Heaven’s Messenger could not
stay away for ever. No ; he returned duly ; with accounts run
up, on compound interest, to the actual hour, in 1792; — and
then„ at last, there had to be a Protestantism ;” and we know
of what kind that was ! —

Nations did not so understand it, nor did Brandenburg
more than the others ; but the question of questions for t}iom
at that time, decisive of their history for half a thousand years
to come, was, Will you obey the heavenly voice, or will you
not?

CHAPTER IX. u'

KURFUR^ JOACHIM I.

Brandenburg, in the matter of the Reformation, was at
first, — with Albert Oif Mainz, Tetzel’s friend, on the one side,
and Pious George of Anspach, Kop on the other, —
certainly a divided house. But, after the‘ first act, it conspicu-
ously ceased to be divided ; nay Kiir-Brandenburg and Kur-
Mainz themselves had known tendencies to the Reformation^
and were well aware that the Church could not stand as it was.
Nor did the cause want partisans in Berlin, in Brandenburg,-^
hardly to be repressed from breaking into dame, while Khr-
fdiBt Jf^achim was so prudent and conservative. Of this loud

Ctafrix. KURFURST JOACHIM I. 191

Kurfiirst Joachim L, here and there mentioned already, let us
now say a more es^press word.^

Joachim I., Big John’s son, hesitated hither and thither
for some time, trying if it would not do to follow the Kaiser
Karl V.’s lead; and at length, crossed in his temper perhaps
by the speed his friends were going at, declared formally
against any farther Reformation ; and in his own family and
country was strict upon the point. He is a man, as I judge,
by no means without a temper of his own; very loud occasion-
ally in the Diets and elsewhere ; — reminds me a little of a cer-
tain King Friedrich Wilhelm, whom my readers shall know by
and by. A big, surly, rather bottle-nosed man, with thick lips,
abstruse wearied eyes, and no eyebrows to speak of: not a
beautiful man, when you cross him overmuch.

Of Joachinh Wife and Brotherdn law*

His wife was a Danish Princess, Sister of poor Christian IL,
King of that Country : dissolute Christian, wJ|o took up with
a huxter- woman’s daughter, — ‘mother sold gingerbread,’ it
would appear, ‘at Bergen in Norway,* where Christian was
Viceroy ; Christian made acceptable love to the daughter,
(Dovekin, Columbina)t*^\s he called her. Nay he
made the gingerbread mother a kind of prime-minister, said
the angry public, justly scandalised at this of the “Dovekin.”
He wasn^iied, meanwhile, to Karl V.’s own Sister; but con-
tinued that other connexion.® He had rash notions, now for
the Reformation, now against it, when he got to be King; a
very rash, unwise, explosive man. He made a ‘ Stockholm
Blutbad' still famed in History (kind of open, ordered or per-
mitted, Massacre of eighty or a hundred of his chief enemies
there), ‘Bloodbath,* so they name it; in Stockholm, where in-
deed he was lawful King, and not without unlawful enemies,
had a bloodbath been the way to deal with them. Gustarvus
Vasa was a young fellow there, who dextrously escaped this
Bloodbath, and afterwards came to something.

In Denmark and Sweden, rash Christian made ever more

J *484* *499» *S3S! Wrth, accession, aeath of Joachim.

* axe the dates of this poor Christian, in a lump. Bovn, X48x ; King, 15x3
(Dovekin before^; married, 15x5; turned off, 1523; invades, taken prisoner, 153a;
dies, tss 9 > and tb^, Cousin's Son, succeeded.

^ 19a HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bao&nt

mernies; at length be was forced to nm, and they chose an^
other King or successive pair of Kings. Christian fled to Kaiser
Karl at Brussels ; complained to Kaiser Karl, his Brother*in«
layv, — ^whose Sister he had not used well. Kaiser Karl listened
to his complaints, with hanging underlip, with heavy, deep,
undecipherable eyes ; evidently no help from KarL

Christian, after that, wandered about with inexecutable
speculations, and projects to recover his crown or crowns ; shel-
tering often with Kurfiirst Joachim, who took a great deal of
trouble about him, first and last ; or with the Elector of Saxony,
Friedrich the Wise, or after him, with Johann the Steadfast
(“V. D.M.I.-<E.” whom we saw at Augsburg), who were his
Mother*s Brothers, and beneficent men. He was in Saxony,
on such terms, coming and going, when a certain other Flight
thither took place, soon to be spoken of, which is the cause of
our mentioning him here. — In the end (a.d. 1532) he did get
some force together, and made sail to Norway ; but could do
no execution whatever there ; — on the contrary, was frozen-in
on the coast during winter; seized, carried to Copenhagen,
and packed into the * Castle of Sonderburg,* a grim sea-lodging
on the shore of Schleswig, — prisoner for the rest of his life,
which lasted long enough. Six-and-twenty years of prison;
the first seventeen years of h strict and hard, almost of the
dungeon sort ; the remainder, on his fairly abdicating, was in
another Castle, that of Callundborg in the Island of Zealand,
‘with fine apartments and conveniences,* and even * a good
bouse of liquor now and then,* at discretion of the old soul.
That was the end of headlong Christian II. ; he lasted in this
manner to the age of seventy-eight.* ^

His Sister Elizabeth at Brandenburg is perhaps, in regard
to natural character, recognisably of the same kin as Christian ;
but her behaviour is far different from his. She too is zealous
for the Reformation ; but she has a right to be so, and her no-
tions that way are steady ; and she has hitherto, though in a
difficult position, done honour to her creed. Surely Joachim is
difficult to deal with ; is very positive now that he has declared
himself : ** In my house at least shall be nothing farther of that

‘k

9 Kfihler, xi. 47,^8 ; Holberg, D&netnarckiscke Stoats- wut

Xeietu-Ifistsru (Copenhagen, X73X. net tne big, Book by Holberg), p. 34X; Buddftui,
ASfgtmsinetHisioruckttZsxicoa (Leipzig, Z709), fCHristianus 11 .

Atop. IX. , KU^EURST JOACHIM I. ,53

1598*

unblessed stuff.” Poor Lndy, I see domestic difficulties very
thick upon her; nothing but division, the very c’.iildren ranging
themselves in parties. She can pray to Heaven; she must do
her wisest.

She partook once, by some secret opportunity, of the ‘com-
munion under both kinds one of her Daughters noticed and
knew; told Father of it. Father knits-up his thick lips; rolls
his abstruse dissatisfied eyes, in an ominous manner: the poor
Lady, probably possessed of an excitable imagination too, trem-
bles for herself. “It is thought, Durchlaucht vtiVi wall
you up for life, my Serene Lady; dark prison for life, which
probably may not be long !” These surmises were of no credi-
bility : but there and then the poor Lady, in a shiver of terror,
decides that she must run; goes off actually, one night (‘ Mon-
day after the which we find is 24th March) in the year

1528,^ in a mean vehicle under cloud of darkness, with only
one maid and groom, — driving for life. That is very certain :
she too is on flight towards Saxony, to shelter with her uncle
Kurfiirst Johann, — unless for reasons of state he sciuple? On
the dark road her vehicle broke down ; a spotce given way, —
“ Not a bit of rope to splice it,” said the improvident groom.
“Take my lace- veil here,” said the poor Princess; and in this
guise she got to Torgau (I co«ld guess, her poor Brother’s
lodging), — and thence, in short time, to the fine Schloss of
Lichtenberg hard by; Uncle Johann, to whom she had zeal-
ously left an option of refusal, having as zealously permitted
and invited her to continue there. Which she did for many
years.

Nor did she get the least molestation from Husband Joa-
chim; who I conjecture had intended, though a man of a cer-
tain temper, and strict in his own house, something short of
walling-up for life ; — ^poor Joachim withall “However, since

* Pauli Gi. $84) ; who cites Seckendorf, and this fraction of a Letter of Luther’s,
to one *Linekus' or Lincke, written on the Friday following (28th March 1528):

‘The Electress’ {Margravine he calls her) ‘has fled fiom Berlin, by help of her
‘ Brother the King of Denmark’ (poor Christian II ) ‘to our Prince' (Job um the Stead-
fast), ‘because her Elector had (determined to wall her up, as is reported, on account

* of the Eucharist under both species. Pray for our Prince ; tJie pious man and
*Jpectionaie soul gets a great deal qf trouble with his kindred.' Or thus in the Ori-
ginal :

* Marchionissa a^ugit a Berlin, auxilto fratris, Regis Daniee, ad nostrum
‘ PmtMpem, auodMarchio statuerat earn immurare (ut dicUur) Oropter Eucha-

* ristiam utnusque speciei. Ora pro nostro Principe ; der fromme Mann und herz-
‘ liche Mensch ist doch ja wohl geplagct’ (SeckendoH^ Historia JLutheranismi, ii.

2 69, No. 8, p. xaa).

VOL. I.

O

194 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book III.

*S3S

you are gone, Madam, go!’* Nor did he concern himself with
Christian II. farther, but let him lie in prison at his leisure.
As for the Lady, he even let his children visit her at Lichten-
berg ; Crypto-Protestants all ; and, among them, the repentant
Daughter who had peached upon her.

Poor Joachim, he makes a pious speech on his death-bed,
solemnly warning his Son against these newfangled heresies;
the Son being already possessed of them in his heart.^ What
could Father do more? Both Father and Son, I suppose, were
weeping. This was in 1 5 3 5, this last scene ; things looking now
more ominous than ever. Of Kurfiirst Joachim I will remem-
ber nothing farther, except that once, twenty-three years before,
he ‘held a Tourney in Neu-Ruppin,* year 1512; Tourney on
the most magnificent scale, and in Ne\^-Ruppin,® a place we
shall know by and by.

As to the Lady, she lived eighteen years in that fine Schloss
of Lichtenberg; saw her children as wc said; and, silently or
otherwise, rejoiced in the creed they were getting. She saw
Luther’s self S9metimes ; ‘ had him several times to dinner ;’
he would call at her Mansion, when his journeys lay that way.
She corresponded with him diligently ; nay once, for a three
months, she herself went across and lodged with Dr. Luther and
his Kate ; as a royal Lady might with a heroic Sage, — though
the Sage’s income was only Twenty-four pounds sterling annu-
ally. There is no doubt about that visit of three months ; one
thinks of it, as of something human, something homely, in-
genuous and pretty. Nothing in surly Joachim’s history is half
so memorable to me, or indeed memorable at all in the stage*
we are now come to. ^

The Lady survived Joachim twenty years; of these she
spent eleven still at Lichtenberg, in no over-haste to return.
However, her Son, the new Elector, declaring for Protestant-
ism, she at length yielded to his invitations : came back (1546),
and ended her days at Berlin in a peaceable and venerable
manner. Luckless Brother Christian is lying under lock-and-
key all this while ; smuggling out messages, and so on ; — like
a voice from the land of Dreams or of Nightmares, painful,
impracticable, coming now and then.

> Speech given in Rcntsch, pp. 434*439*

* Pauli, ii, 466.

Chap. X.
15x6-1552.

KURFURST JOACHIM II.

*9S

CHAPTER X.

KURFURST JOACHIM 11 .

Joachim II., Sixth Elector, no doubt after painful study,
and intricate silent consideration ever since his twelfth year
when Luther was first heard of over the world, came gradu-
ally, and before his Father’s death had already come, to the
conclusion of adopting the Confession of Augsburg, as the true
Interpretation of this Universe, so far as we had yet got; and
did so, publicly, in the year 1539.1 To the great joy of Berlin
and the Brandenburg populations generally, who had been of
a Protestant humour,, hardly restrainable by Law, for some
years past. By this decision Joachim held fast, with a stout,
weighty grasp ; nothing spasmodic in his way of handling the
matter, and yet a heartiness which is agreeable to see. He
could not join in the Schmalkaldic War; seeing, it is probable,
small chance for such a War, of many chiefs and little counsel ;
nor was he willing yet to part from the Kaiser itarl V., who was
otherwise very good to him.

He had fought personally for this Kaiser, twice over, against
the Turks ; first as Brandenburg Captain, learning his art ; and
afterwards as Kaiser’s Generalissimo, in 1542. He did no good
upon the Turks, on that latter occasion ; as indeed what good
was to be done, in such a quagmire of futilities as Joachim’s
element there was? ‘Too sumptuous in his dinners, too much
wine withal !’ hint some calumniously.^ * Hector of Germany !’
say others. H« tried some small prefatory Siege or scalade of
Pesth ; could not do it ; and came his ways home again, as the
best course. Pedant Chroniclers give him the name Hector,
‘Joachim Hector,* — to match that of Cicero and that oi Achilles,
A man of solid structure, this our Hector, in body and mind ;
extensive cheeks, very large heavy-laden face ; capable of ter-
rible bursts of anger, as his kind generally were.

The Schmalkaldic War went to water, as the Germans
phrase it : Kur-Sachsen, — that is, Johann Friedrich the Mag-
nanimous, Son of Johann “ V.D.M.I.iE,,” and Nephew of Fried-
rich the Wise, — had his sorrowfully valid reasons fqr the War ;
large force too, plenty of zealous copartners, Philip of Hessen

* Rentscb, p. 452. 3 Paulus Jovius, &c. See Pauli, iii. 70-73.

196 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book m

*54f

and others ; but no generalship, or not enough, for such a busi-
ness. Big Army, as is apt enough to happen, fell short of food ;
Kaiser Karl hung on the outskirts, waiting confidently till it
came to famine. Johann Friedrich would attempt nothing deci-
sive while provender lasted ; — and having in the end, strangely
enough, and somewhat deaf to advice, divided his big Army
into three separate parts, — ^Johann Friedrich was himself, with
one of those parts, surprised at Muhlberg, on a Sunday whi&n
at church (24th April 1547); and was there beaten to sudden
ruin, and even taken captive, like to have his head cut off, by
the triumphant angry Kaiser. Philip of Hessen, somewhat
wiser, was home to Marburg, safe with his part, in the interim.
— Elector Joachim II. of Brandenburg had good reason to re-
joice in his own cautious reluctances on this occasion. How-
ever, he did now come valiantly up, hearing what severities
were in the wind.

He pleaded earnestly, passionately, he and Cousin or al-
ready ‘Elector’ Moritz,* — who was just getting Johann Fried-
rich’s Electorship fished-away from him out of these troubles,*
— for Johann Friedrich of Saxony’s life, first of all. Fof Jo-
hann’s life first; this is a thing not to be dispensed with, your
Majesty, on any terms whatever ; a sine qud non, this life to
Protestant Germany at largc^^ To which the Kaiser indicated,
“He would see ; not immediate death at any rate ; we will
see.’* A life that could not and must not be taken in this man-
ner ; this was the first point. Then, secondly, that Philip of
Hessen, now home again at Marburg, — not a bad or disloyal
man, though headlong, and with two wives, — might not be
forfeited ; but that peace and pardon might be granted him, on
his entire submission. To which second point the Kaiser ans-
wered, “ Yes, then, on his submission.” These were the two
points. These pleadings went on at Halle, where the Kaiser
now lies, in triumphantly victorious humour, in the early days
of June, Year 1547. Johann Friedrich of Saxony had been,
by some Imperial Court-Council or other, — Spanish merely, I
suppose, — doomed to die. Sentence was signified to him while
he sat at chess : “ Can wait till we end the game,” thought
Johann said he to his comrade, “Let us go
on, then !’* Sentence not to be executed till one see.

With Philip of Hessen things had a more conclusive as-

* Pauli, iii. zos. * KurfUrst, 4th June 1547.

Chap. X. KURFURST JOACHIM II. 197

folibJuiiez547* 0'

pect. Philip had accepted the terms procured for him ; which
had been laboriously negotiated, brought to paper, and now
wanted only the sign-manual to them : ‘ Ohna einigen Ge/iing^
niss (without any imprisonment),* one of the chief clauses. And
so Philip now came over to Halle ; was met and welcomed by
his two friends, Joachim and Moritz, at Naumburg, a stage
before Halle; — clear now to make his submission, and beg
pardon of the Kaiser, according to bargain. On the morrow,
19th June I547» the Papers were got signed. And next day,
20th June, Philip did, according to bargain, openly beg par-
don of the Kaiser, in his Majesty’s Hall of Audience (Town
House of Halle, I suppose); ‘knelt at the Kaiser’s feet pub-
‘ licly on both knees, while his Kanzler read the submission
* and entreaty as agreed upon ;’ and, alas, then the Kaiser
said nothing at all to him I Kaiser looked haughtily, with im-
penetrable eyes and shelf-lip, over the head of him ; gave him
no hand to kiss ; and left poor Philip kneeling there. An
awkward position indeed ; — which any German Painter that
there were, might make a Picture of, I have sometimes thought.
Picture of some real meaning, more or less,-^if for symbolic
Towers of 3abel, mediaeval mythologies, and extensive smear-

ings of that kind, he could find leisure I Philip having

knelt a reasonable time, and finding there was no help for it,
rose in the dread silence (some say, with too sturdy an expres*
sion of countenance) ; and retired from the affair, having at
least done his part of it.

The next practical thing was now supper, or as we of this
age should call it, dinner. Uncommonly select and high sup-
per : host the#Duke of Alba ; where Joachim, Elector Moritz,
and another high Official, the Bishop of Arras, were to wel-
come poor Philip after his troubles. How the grand supper
went, I do not hear : possibly a little constrained ; the Kaiser’s
Strang^ silence sitting on all men’s thoughts ; not to be spoken
of in the present company. At length the guests rose to go
away. Philip’s lodging is with Moritz (who is his son-in-law, as
learned readers know) : “ You Philip, your lodging is mine ;
my lodging is yours, — I should say I Cannot we ride together ?’*
— “Philip is not permitted to go,” said Imperial Officiality;
“Philip is to continue here, and we fear go to prison.” —
“ Prison ?” cried they all : “ Ohne einigen Gejdttgniss (with-
out any imprisonment) 1” — “ As we read the words, it is * Ohne

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book ill.

. iS»6-7552.

EWIGEN Gefangniss (without eternal imprisonment),* ” answer
the others. And so, according to popular tradition, which has
little or no credibility, though printed in many Books, their
false Secretary had actually modified it.

** No intention of imprisoning his Durchlaucht of Hessen
forever; not forever 1” answered they. And Kurfiirst Joachim,
in astonished indignation, after some remonstrating and argu-
ing, louder and louder, which profited nothing, blazed out into
a very whirlwind of rage ; drew his sword, it is whispered with
a shudder, — drew his sword, or was for drawing it, upon the
Duke of Alba ; and would have done, God knows what, had
not friends flung themselves between, and got the Duke away,
or him away.® Other accounts bear, that it was upon the Bi-
shop of Arras he drew his sword ; which is a somewhat dif-
ferent matter. Perhaps he drew it on both ; or on men and
things in general ; — for his indignation knew no bounds. The
heavy solid man ; yet with a human heart in him after all,
and a Hohenzollern abhorrence of chicanery, capable of rising
to the transcendent pitch ! His wars against the Turks, and
his other Hectorships, I will forget ; but this, of a face so ex-
tensive kindled all into divine fire for poor Philip's sake, shall
be memorable to me.

Philip got out by and by, though with difficulty; the Kaiser
proving very stiff in the matter ; and only yielding to obstinate
pressures, and the force of time and events. Philip got away ;
and then how Johann Friedrich of Sachsen, after being led
about for five years, in the Kaiser's train, a condemned mafi,
liable to be executed any day, did likewise at last get away,
with his head safe and Electorate gone : these ate known His-
torical events, which we glanced at already, on another score.

For, by and by, the Kaiser found tougher solicitation than
this of Joachim’s. The Kaiser, by his high carriage in this
and other such matters, had at length kindled a new War
round him ; and he then soon found himself reduced to ex-
tremities again ; chased to the Tyrol Mountains, and obliged
to comply with many things. New War, of quite other em-
phasis and management tnan the Schmalkaldic one ; managed
by Elector Moritz and our poor friend Albert Alcibiades as
principals. A Kaiser chased into the mountains, capable of
being seized by a little spurring ; — ** Capture him ?” said Al-

^ Pauli, iiL 103.

Chap. X. KURFURST JOACHIM If 1$^

1548.

bert. I have no cage big enough for such a bird ans-
wered Moritz ; and the Kaiser was let run. How he ran then
towards Treaty of Passau (1552), towards Siege of Metz and
other sad conclusions, ‘Abdication’ the finale of them ; these
also are known phases in the Reformation History, as hinted
at above.

Here at Halle, in the year 1547, the great Kaiser, with
Protestantism manacled at his feet, and many things going
prosperous, was at his culminating point. He published his
Interim (1548, What you troublesome Protestants are to do,
in the mean time, while the Council of Trent is sitting, and till
it and I decide for you) ; and in short, drove and reined-in the
Reich with a high hand and a sharp whip, for the time being.
Troublesome Protestants mostly rejected the Interim ; Moritz
and Alcibiades, with France in the rear of them, took to arms
in that way ; took to ransoming fat Bishoprics {^'Verbum Dia-
boU Manet,"' we know where !) took to chasing Kaisers into
the mountains ; — and times came soon round again. In all
these latter broils Kurfiirst Joachim II., decjily j’^tcrested, as
we may fancy, strove to keep quiet *, and to prevail, by weight
of influence and wise counsel, rather than by fighting with his
Kaiser.

One sad little anecdote I itecollect of Joachim : an Acci-
dent, which happened in those Passau-Interim days, a year or
two after that drawing of the sword on Alba. Kurfiirst Joa-
chim unfortunately once fell through a staircase, in that time;
being, as I guess, a heavy man. It was in the Castle of Grim-
nitz, one of his many Castles, a spacious enough old Hunting-
seat, th0 rep^rs of which had not been well attended to. The
good Herr, weighty of foot, was leading down his Electress to
dinner Obe day in this Schloss of Grimnitz ; broad stair climbs
round a grand Hall, hung with stag-trophies, groups of wea-
pons, and the like hall-furniture. An unlucky timber yielded ;
yawning chasm in the staircase ; Joachim and his good Prin-
cess sank by gravitation ; Joachim to the floor with little hurt;
his poor Princess (horrible to think of), being next the wall,
came upon the stag-horns and boar-spears down below 1® The
poor Lady’s hurt was indescribable : she walked lame all the
rest of her days ; and Joachim, I hope (hope, but not with
confidence),7 loved her all the better for it. This unfortunate

Pauli, iii xz2. 7 ib. iii 194.

4«>, vHOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. BoAJit

x5z6-Z59«.

old Schloss of Grimnitz, some thirty miles northward of Ber-
lin, was, — ^by the Eighth Kurfiirst, Joachim Friedrich, Grand-
son of this one, with great renown to himself and to it, — con-
verted into an Endowed High School : the famed Joachimsthal
Gymnasium^ still famed, though now under some change of
circumstances, and removed to Berlin itself.®

Joachim’s first Wife, from whom descend the following
Kurfiirsts, was a daughter of that Duke George of Saxony,
Luther’s celebrated friend, “ If it rained Duke-Georges nine
days running.**

Joachim gcfs Co-vifeftment in Preussen.

This second Wife, she of the accident at Grimnitz, was
Hedwig, King Sigismund of Poland’s daughter ; which con-
nexion, it is thought, helped Joachim well in getting what they
call the Mitbelehnung of Preussen (for it was he that achieved
this point) from King Sigismund.

Mitbelehnung (Co-infcftment) in Preussen ; — whereby is
solemnly acknowtedged the right of Joachim and his Posterity
to the reversion of Preussen, should the Culmbach Line of
Duke Albeit happen to fail. It was a thing Joachim long
strove for ; till at length his father-in-law did, some twenty
years hence, concede it him.9 Should Albert’s Line fail, then,
the other Culmbachers get Preussen ; should the Culmbachers
all fail, the Berlin Brandenburgers get it. The Culmbachers
are at this time rather scarce of heirs : poor Alcibiades diedt
childless, as we know, and Casimir’s Line is extinct ; Duke
Albert himself has left only one Son, who no\^ succeeds in
Preussen ; still young, and not of the best omens. Margraf
George the Pious, he left only George Friedrich ; an excellent
man, who is now prosperous in the world, and wedded long
since, but has no children. So that between Joachim’s Line
and Preussen there are only two intermediate heirs ; — and it
was a thing eminently worth looking after. Nor has it wanted
that. And so Kurfiirst Joachim, almost at the end of his
course, has now made sure of it.

8 Nicolai, p. 725.

8 Date, Lublin, 19th July 1568; Pauli, iil I77'i79, 193; Rentscb, p. 457 ; Stcnxcl,
L 34tf 342*

KURFURST JOACHIM II. 3ui

Joachim makes * Heritage’Brotherkood* with the Duke of
Liegnitz.

Another feat of like nature Joachim 11 . had long ago achieved;
which likewise in the long-run proved important in his Family,
and in the History of the world: an * Erbverbriidenmg' so
they term it, with the Duke of Liegnitz, — date 1537. Erbver-
briiderung (‘Heritage-Brotherhood,’ meaning Covenant to suc-
ceed reciprocally on Failure of Heirs to either) had in all times
been a common paction among German Princes well affected
to each other. Friedrich II., the then Duke of Liegnitz, w^e
have transiently seen, was related to the Family; he had been
extremely helpful in bringing his young friend Albert of Preus-
sen’s affairs to a good issue, — whose Niece, withal, he had
wedded : — in fact, he was a close friend of this our Joachim’s;
and there had long been a growing connexion between the two
Houses, by intermarriages and good offices.

The Dukes of Liegnitz were Sovereign-Princes, come of the
old Piasts of Poland ; and had perfect right to enter into this
transaction of an Erbverbruderung with whom they liked. True,
they had, above two-hundred years before, in the days of King
Johann Ich-dien (a.d. 1329), voluntarily constituted themselves
Vassals of the Crown of Bohemia but the right to dispose
of their Lands as they pleased had, all along, been carefully
acknowledged, and saved entire. And, so late as 1521, just
sixteen years ago, the Bohemian King Vladislaus the Last, our
good Margraf George’s friend, had expressly, in a Deed still
extant, confirmed to them, with all the emphasis and amplitude
that Law-Phraseology could bring to bear upon it, the right to
disp6se of said Lands in any manner of way : * by written tes-
‘ lament, or by verbal on their deathbed, they can, as they see

* wisest, give away, sell, pawn, dispose of, and exchange {ver^

* geben, verkaufen, versetzen^ verschaffen, verwechscln) these

* said lands,’ to all lengths, and with all manner of freedom.
Which privilege had likewise been confirmed, twice over (1522,
1524), by Ludwig the next King, Ludwig Ohne-Haut, who per-
ished in the bogs of Mohaez, and ended the native Line of Bo-
Jiemian-Hungarian Kings. Nay, Ferdinand, King of the Ro-
nians, Karl V.'s Brother, afterwards Kaiser, who absorbed that

Pauli, lu. 32 .

302 -HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book in.

i8th Oct. 1537.

Bohemian Crown among the others, had himself, by implica-
tion, sanctioned or admitted the privilege, in 1529, only eight
years ago.^i The right to make the Erbverbriiderung could
not seem doubtful to anybody.

And made accordingly it was ; signed, sealed, drawn-out
on the proper parchments, i8th October 1537 ; to the follow-
ing clear effect : * That if Duke Friedrich’s Line should die

* out, all his Liegnitz countries, Liegnitz, Brieg, Wohlau, should
‘ fall to the Hohenzollern Brandenburgers ; and that, if the

* Line of Hohenzollern Brandenburg should first fail, then

* all and singular the Bohemian Fiefs of Brandenburg (as
‘ Crossen, Ziillichau and seven others there enumerated) should

* fall to the House of Liegnitz.’^^ It seemed a clear Paction,
questionable by no mortal. Double-marriage between the two
Houses (eldest Son, on each side, to suitable Princess on the
other) was to follow ; and did follow, after some delays, 1 7th
February 1545. So that the matter seemed now complete;
secure on all points, and a matter of quiet satisfaction to both
the Houses anc^to their friends.

But Ferdinand, King of the Romans, King of Bohemia and
Hungary, and coming to be Emperor one day, was not of that
sentiment. Ferdinand had once implicitly recognised the privi-
lege, but Ferdinand, now whbn he saw the privilege turned to
use, and such a territory as Liegnitz exposed to the possibility
of falling into inconvenient hands, explicitly took other thoughts ,*
and gradually determined to prohibit this Erbverbriiderung,
The States of Bohemia, accordingly, in 1544 (it is not doubt-
ful, by Ferdinand’s suggestion), were moved to make inquiries
as to this Heritage-Fraternity of Liegnitz. ^3 X)n which hint
King Ferdinand straightway informed the Duke of Liegnitz
that the act was not justifiable, and must be revoked. The
Duke of Liegnitz, grieved to the heart, had no means of resisting.
Ferdinand, King of the Romans, backed by Kaiser Karl, with
the States of Bohemia barking at his wink, were too strong for
poor Duke Friedrich of Liegnitz. Great corresponding between
Berlin, Liegnitz, Prag ensued on this matter : but the end was
a summons to Duke Friedrich, — summons from King Ferdi-
nand in March 1546, * To appear in the Imperial Hall {Kaiser-
hof) at Breslau,' and to submit that Deed of Erbverbriiderung
to the examination of the States there. The States, already up

n Stenzel, i. 323. Ib, i. 320. w jb. i. 322.

tfap. X. KURFURST JOACHIM II. 403

8th May 1548.

to the affair, soon finished their examination of it (8th May
1546). The deed was annihilated ; and Friedrich was ordered,
furthermore, to produce proofs within six months that his sub-
jects too were absolved of all oaths or the like regarding it, and
that in fact the Transaction was entirely abolished and reduced
to zero. Friedrich complied, had to comply ; very much cha-
grined, he returned home ; and died next year, — it is supposed,
of heartbreak from this business. He had yielded outwardly ;
but to force only. In a Codicil appended to his last Will, some
months afterwards (which Will, written years ago, had treated
the Erbverbriiderung as a Fact settled), he indicates, as with
his last breath, that he considered the thing still valid, though
overruled by the hand of power. Let the reader mark this
matter ; for it will assuredly become memorable, one day.

The hand of power, namely, Ferdinand, King of the Ro-
mans, had applied in like manner to Joachim of Brandenburg
to surrender his portion of the Deed, and annihilate on his side
too this Erbverbriiderung. But Joachim refused steadily, and
all his successors steadily, to give up this Bit Written Parch-
ment ; kept the same, among their precious documents, against
some day that might come (and I suppose it lies in the Archives
of Berlin even now) ; silently, or in words, asserting that the
Deed of Heritage-Brothership w 3 s good, and that though some
hands might have the power, no hand could have the right to
abolish it on those terms.

How King Ferdinand permitted himself such a procedure?
Ferdinand, says one of his latest apologists in this matter,
* considered the privileges granted by his Predecessors, in re-
‘ spect to rigfits of Sovereignty, as fallen extinct on their
‘ death. Which, — if Reality and Fact would but likewise be
so kind as ‘consider’ it so, — ^was no doubt convenient for Fer-
dinand !

, Joachim was not so great with Ferdinand as he had been
with Charles the Imperial Brother. Joachim and Ferdinand
had many debates of this kind, some of them rather stiff, Jag-
erndorf, for instance, and the Baircuth-Anspach confiscations,
in George Friedrich’s minority. Ferdinand, now' Kaiser, had
snatched Jagerndorf from poor young George Friedrich, son
of excellent Margraf George whom we knew ; “ Part of the
spoils of Albert Alcibiades,” thought Ferdinand, “ and a good

Stcni»l, L 333.

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookni.

I5i6-i55a.

windfall,” — tl^ough young George Friedrich had merely been
the Ward of Cousin Aloibiades, and totally without concern in
those political explosions. “ Excellent windfall,” thought Fer-
dinand; and held his grip. But Joachim, in his weighty steady
way, intervened ; Joachim, emphatic in the Diets and else-
where, made Ferdinand quit grip, and produce Jagerndorf
again. Jagerndorf and the rest had all to be restored ; and,
except some filchings in the Jagerndorf Appendages (Ratibor
and Oppeln, ‘ restored’ only in semblance, and at length juggled
away altogether), everything came to its right owner again.
Nor would Joachim rest till Alcibiades’s Territories too were
all punctually given back, to this same George Friedrich ; to
whom, by law and justice, they belonged. In these points
Joachim prevailed against a strong-handed Kaiser, apt to ‘con-
sider one’s rights fallen extinct’ now and then. In this of Lieg-
nitz all he could do was to keep the Deed, in steady protest
silent or vocal.

But enough now of Joachim Hector, Sixth Kurfiirst, and of
his workings and his strugglings. He walked through this
world, treading as softly as might be, yet with a strong weighty
step ; rending the jungle steadily asunder ; well seeing whither
he was bound. Rather an expensive Herr ; built a good deal,
completion of the Schloss at Berlin one example and was not
otherwise afraid of outlay, in the Reich’s Politics, or in what
seemed needful : If there is a harvest ahead, even a distant
one, it is poor thrift to be stingy of your seed-corn !

Joachim was always a conspicuous Public Man, a busy Poli-
tician in the Reich ; stanch to his kindred, and by no means
blind to himself or his own interests. Stanch also, we must grant,
and ever active, though generally in a cautious, weighty, never
in a rash swift way, to the great Cause of Protestantism, and to
all good causes. He was himself a solemnly devout man ; deep
awe-stricken reverence dwelling in his view of this Universe.
Most serious, though with a jocose dialect commonly, having
a cheerful wit in speaking to men. Luther’s Books he called
his Seelenschatz (Soul’s-treasure) ; Luther and the Bible were
his chief reading. Fond of profane learning too, and of the
useful or ornamental Arts ; given to music, and * would him-
seli sing aloud’ when he had a melodious leisure-hour. Excel-

Kcntsch, pp, X29, 130. '6 Nicolai, p. 8a.

20 $

ijhap.xi. KURFURST JOHANN GEORGE.

» 547 »

lent old gentleman : he died, rather suddenly, but with much
nobleness, 3d January 1571 ; age sixty-six. Old Rentsch’s
account of this event is still worth reading Joachim’s death-
scene has a mild pious beauty which does not depend on creed.

He had a Brother too, not a little occupied with Politics,
and always on the good side ; a wise pious man, whose fame
was in all the churches : “Johann of Ciistrin,” called also “Jo-
hann the Wise^** who busied himself zealously in Protestant
matters, second only in piety and zeal to his Cousin, Margraf
George the Pious ; and was not so held back by official con-
siderations as his Brother the Elector now and then. Johann
of Ciistrin is a very famous man in the old Books : Johann was
the first that fortified Custrin ; built himself an illustrious
Schloss, and ‘ roofed it with copper,’ in Custrin (which is a
place we shall be well acquainted with by and by) ; and lived
there, with the Neumark for apanage, a true man’s life
mostly with a good deal of business, warlike and other, on his
hands ; with good Books, good Deeds, and occasionally good
Men, coming to enliven it, — according to the^erms then given.

CHAPTER XI.

SEVENTH KURFURST, JOHANN GEORGE.

Kaiser Karl, we said, was very good to Joachim ; who
always strove, sometimes with a stretch upon his very con-
science, to keep well with the Kaiser. The Kaiser took Joachim’s
young Prince^long with him to those Schmalkaldic Wars (not
the comfortable side for Joachim’s conscience, but the safe side
for an anxious Father) ; Kaiser made a Knight of this young
Prince, on one occasion of distinction ; he wrote often to Papa
about him, what a promising young hero he was, — seems really
to have liked the young man. It was Johann George, Elector
afterwards. Seventh Elector. — This little incident is known to
me on evidence.^ A small thing that certainly befell, at the
siege of Wittenberg (a.d. 1547), during those Philip-of-Hessen
Negotiations, three-hundred and odd years ago.

The Schmalkaldic War having come all to nothing, the
Saxon Elector sitting captive with sword overhead in the way
Rentsch, p. 458. * Ib. p. 465*

2#6 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Booklil.

*547.

we saw, Saxon Wittenberg was besieged, and the Kaiser was
in great hurry to get it. Kaiser in person, and young Johann
George for sole attendant, rode round the place one day, to take
a view of the works, and judge how soon, or whether ever, it
could be compelled to give in. Gunners noticed them from
the battlements ; gunners Saxon-Protestant most likely, and in
just gloom at the perils and indignities now lying on their pious
Kurfiirst Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous. “Lo, you!
Kaiser’s self riding yonder, and one of his silk Junkers, Sup-
pose we gave the Kaiser’s self a shot> then ?” said the gunner,
or thought : It might help a better man from his life-perils,
if such shot did — !” — In fact the gun flashed off, with due
outburst, and almost with due effect. The ball struck the
ground among the very horses* feet of the two riders ; so that
they were thrown, or nearly so, and covered from sight with a
cloud of earth and sand ; — and the gunners thought, for some
instants, an unjust, obstinate Kaiser’s life was gone ; and a
pious Elector’s saved. But it proved not so. Kaiser Karl and
Johann George both emerged, in a minute or two, little the
worse ; — Kaiser *^Karl perhaps blushing somewhat, and flurried
this time, I think, in the impenetrable eyes ; and his Cimburgis
lip closed for the moment ; — and galloped out of shot-range.
“ I never forget this little incident,” exclaims Smelfungus: “It
is one of the few times I can get, after all my reading about
that surprising Karl V., I do not say the least understanding
or practical conception of him and his character and his affairs,
but the least ocular view or imagination of him, as a fact among
facts I” Which is unlucky for Smelfungus. — ^Johann George,
still more emphatically, never to the end of his dife forgot this
incident. And indeed it must be owned, had the shot taken
effect as intended, the whole course of human things would
have been surprisingly altered ; — and for one thing, neither
Friedrich the Greats nor the present History of Friedrich, had
ever risen above ground, or troubled an enlightened public or
me !

Of Johann George, this Seventh Elector, 2 who proved a
good Governor, and carried on the Family Affairs in the old
style of slow steady success, I will remember nothing more,
except that he had the surprising number of Three-and-Twenty

* *5*5 ; *57*-*S98.

- Chap.xr. KUKFURST JOHANN GEORGE. 207

J568-1603.

childreh ; one of them posthumous, though he died at the age
of seventy-three. —

He is Founder of the New Culmbach Line : two sons of
these twenty-three children, he settled, one in Baireuth, the
other in Anspach ; from whom come all the subsequent Heads
of that Principality, till the last of them died in Hammersmith
in 1 806, as above said.* He was a prudent, thrifty Herr ; no
mistresses, no luxuries allowed ; at the sight of a new-fashioned
coat, he would fly out on an unhappy youth, and pack him
from his presence. Very strict in point of justice : a peasant
once appealing to him, in one of his inspection-journeys through
the country, “ Grant me justice, Durchlaucht, against So-and-
so ; I am your highness’s born subject !” — ** Thou shouldst
have it, man, wert thou a born Turk !” answered Johann George.
— There is something anxious, grave and, as it were, surprised
in the look of this good Herr. He made the Gera Bond above
spoken of ; — founded the Younger Culmbach Line, with that
important Law of Primogeniture strictly superadded. A con-
spicuous thrift, veracity, modest solidity, looks through the
conduct of this Herr ; — a determined Protestant he too, as in-
deed all the following were and are.*

Of Joachim Friedrich, his eldest Son, who at one time was
Archbishop of Magdeburg, — called home from the wars to fill
that valuable Heirloom, which had suddenly fallen vacant by
an Uncle’s death, and keep it warm ; — and who afterwards, in
due course, carried on a Idbliche Regiemng of the old style
and physiognomy, as Eighth Kurfiirst, from his fiftieth to his
sixtieth year (5598-1608) P of him we already noticed the fine
* JoachimsAkidX Gymnasium,* or Foundation for learned pur-
poses, in the old Schloss of Grimnitz, where his serene Grand-
mother got lamed ; and will notice nothing farther, in this
place, except his very great anxiety to profit by the Prussian
Miibelehnung, — ^that Co-infeftment in Preussen, achieved by
his Grandfather Joachim II., which was now about coming to
its full maturity. Joachim Friedrich had already married his
eldest Prince to the daughter of Albert Friedrich, Second Duke

3 Rentsch, {Christian to Baireuth; yoachim Ernst to Anspach );—see

Genealogical Diagram, infrh, p. 270a.

♦ Ib, pp 470, 471.

s Born, 1547 ; Magdeburg, 1566-98 (when his Third Son got it,— very unlucky in
the Thirty-Years War afterwards).

208 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Baoknt

1568.

of Preussen, who it was by this time evident would be the last
Duke there of his Line. Joachim Friedrich, having himself
fallen a widower, did next year, though now counting fifty-six
— — But it will be better if we explain first, a little, how mat»
ters now stood with Preussen.

CHAPTER XII.

OF ALBERT FRIEDRICH, THE SECOND DUKE OF PREUSSEN.

Duke Albert died in 1568, laden with years, and in his
latter time greatly broken-down by other troubles. His Prus-
sian Raths (Councillors) were disobedient, his Osianders and
Lutheran-Calvinist Theologians were all in fire and flame against
each other : the poor old man, with the best dispositions, but
without power to realise them, had much to do and to suffer.
Pious, just and honourable, intending the best ; but losing his
memory, and incapable of business, as he now complained.
In his sixtieth •year he had married a second time, a young
Brunswick Princess, with whose foolish Brother, Eric, he had
much trouble ; and who at last herself took so ill with the in-
solence and violence of thesg intrusive Councillors and Theo-
logians, that the household life she led beside her old Husband
and them became intolerable to her ; and she withdrew to
another residence, — a little Hunting-seat at Neuhausen, half
a dozen miles from Konigsberg ; — and there, or at Labiau still
farther off, lived mostly, in a separate condition, for the rest
of her life. Separate for life; — nevertheless ^hey happened
to die on the same day ; 20th March 1568, they were simul-
taneously delivered from their troubles in this world. ^

Albert left one Son ; the second child of this last Wife ;
his one child by the former Wife, a daughter now of good
years, was married to the Duke of Mecklenburg. Son's name
was Albert Friedrich ; age, at his Father’s death, fifteen, A
promising young Prince, but of sensitive abstruse temper ; —
held under heavy tutelage by his Raths and Theologians ; and
spurting-up against them, in explosive rebellion, from time to
time. He now (1568) was to be sovereign Duke of Preussen,
and the one representative of the Culmbach Line in that fine

1 Hfibner, tab. i8x ; Stcnzcl, i. 34a.

(jljap. Xll. ALBERT FRIEDRICH. ^09

X568.

Territory ; Margraf George Friedrich of Anspach, the only
other Culmbacher, being childless, though wedded.

We need not doubt, the Brandenburg House, — old Kur-
fiirst Joachim II. still alive, and thrifty Johann George the
Heir- Apparent, — kept a watchful eye on those emergencies.
But it was difficult to interfere directly ; the native Prussian
Raths were very jealous, and Poland itself was a ticklish Sove-
reignty to deal with. Albert Friedrich being still a Minor, the
Polish King, Sigismund, proposed to undertake the guardian-
ship of him, as became a superior lord to a subject vassal on
such an occasion. But the Prussian Raths assured his Ma-
jesty, “Their young Prince was of such a lively intellect, he
was perfectly fit to conduct the affairs of the Government”
(especially with such a.Body of expert Councillors to help him),
“and might be at once declared of age.” Which was accord-
ingly the course followed ; Poland caring little for it ; Bran-
denburg digesting the arrangement as it could. And thus it
continued for some years, even under new difficulties that
arose ; the official Clique of Raths being the r^al Government
of the Country; and poor young Albert Friedrich bursting out
occasionally into tears against them, occasionally into futile
humours of a fiery nature, Osiander-Theology, and the battle
of the *doxieSt ran very high ; n«r was Prussian Officiality a
beautiful thing.

These Prussian Raths, and the Prussian Riiterschoft gene-
rally (Knightage, Land -Aristocracy), which had its Stdnde
(States, or meetings of Parliament after a sort), were all along
of a mutinous, contumacious humour. The idea had got into
their minds, That they were by birth what the ancient Ritters
by election had been ; entitled, fit or not fit, to share the Go-
vernment promotions among them : “ The Duke is hereditary
ia his office ; why not we? All Offices, are they not, by na-
ture, ours to share among us ?” The Duke’s notion, again,
was to have the work of his Offices effectually done ; small
matter by whom : the Ritters looked less to that side of the
question ; — regarded any “ Foreigner” (German-Anspacher, or
other Non-Prussian), whatever his merit, as an intruder, usurper,
or kind of thief, when seen in office. Their contentions, con-
tumacies and pretensions were accordingly manifold. They
had dreams of an ‘Aristocratic Republic, with the Sovereign
reduced to zero,’ like what their Polish neighbours grew to.

VOL. I. r

aio HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiit

1568-1603.

They had various dreams ; and individuals among them broke
out, from time to time, into high acts of insolence and mutiny.
It took a hundred-and-fifty years of Brandenburg horse-break-
ing, sometimes with sharp manipulation and a potent curb-bit,
to dispossess them of that notion, and make them go steadily
in harness. Which also, however, was at last got done by the
HohenzoUems.

hf Duke Albert FricdrlclCs Marriage: who his Wife was,
and what her possible Dowry.

In a year or two, there came to be question of the marry-
ing of young Duke Albert Friedrich. After due consultation,
the Princess fixed upon was Maria Eleonora, eldest Daughter
of the then Duke of Cleve : to him a proper Embassy was sent
with that object; and came back with Yes for answer. Duke
of Cleve, at that time, was Wilhelm, called ‘the Rich* in His-
tory-Books ; a Sovereign of some extent in those lower Rhine
countries. Whom I can connect with the English reader's
memory in no ^readier way than by the fact. That he was
younger brother, one year younger, of a certain “Anne of
Cleves — a large fat Lady, who was rather scurvily used in
this country; being called, Henry VIII. and us, a “great
Flanders mare,*’ unsuitable for espousal with a King of delicate
feelings ! This Anne of Cleves, who took matters quietly and
lived on her pension, when rejected by King Henry, was Aunt
of the young Lady now in question for Preussen. She was
still alive here in England, pleasantly quiet, ‘ at Burley on the
Hill,* till Maria Eleonora was seven years old ;«.r-who possibly
enough still reads in her memory some fading vestige of new
black frocks or trimmings, and brief court-mourning, on the
death of poor Aunt Anne over seas. — Another Aunt is mote
honourably distinguished ; Sibylla, Wife of our noble Saxon
Elector, Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous, who lost his
Electorate and almost his Life for religion’s sake, as we have
seen ; by whom, in his perils and distresses, Sibylla stood
always, like a very true and noble Wife.

Duke Wilhelm himself was a man of considerable mark in
his day. His Duchy of Cleve included not only Cleve-Proper,
but Jiilich {fuliers)t Berg, which latter pair of Duchies were a

ALBERT FRIEDRICri.

2lt

C 3 iap. XII.

X568-z6o3.

better thing than Cleve-Proper : — ^Jiilich, Berg and various other
small Principalities, which, gradually aggluinerating by mar-
riage, heritage and the chance of events in successive centuries,
had at length come all into Wilhelm’s hands; so that he got
the name of Wilhelm the Rich among his contemporaries. He
seems to have been of a headlong, blustery, uncertain disposi-
tion ; much tossed about in the controversies of his day. At
one time he was a Protestant declared ; not without reasons
various kinds. The Duchy of Geldern (what we call Guelders)
had fallen to him, by express bequest of the last Owner, whose
Line was out ; and Wilhelm took possession. But the Kaiser
Karl V. quite refused to let him keep possession. Whereupon
Wilhelm had joined with the French (it was in the Moritz-Al-
cibiades time) ; had declared war, and taken other high mea-
sures : but it came to nothing, or to less. The end was, Wil-
helm had to * come upon his knees’ before the Kaiser, and beg
forgiveness ; quite renouncing Geldern, which accordingly has
gone its own different road ever since. Wilhelm was zealously
Protestant in those days ; as his people are, as he still is,
at the period we treat of. But he went into Papistry, not long
after ; and made other sudden turns and misventures : to all
appearance, rather an abrupt, blustery, uncertain Herr. It is
to him that Albert Friedrich, tlfe young Duke of Preussen,
guided by his Council, now (Year 1 572) sends an Embassy, de-
manding his eldest Daughter, Maria Eleonora, to wife.

Duke Wilhelm answered Yea; ‘sent a Counter-Embassy,*
with whatever else was necessary ; and in due time the young
Bride, with her Father, set out towards Preussen, such being
the arrangemenf, there to complete the matter. They had got as
far as Berlin, warmly welcomed by the Kurfiirst Johann George ;
when, from Kbnigsberg, a sad message reached them : namely,
that the young Duke had suddenly been seized with an invin-
cible depression and overclouding of mind, not quite to be
characterised by the name of madness, but still less by that of
perfect sanity. His eagerness to see his Bride was the same
as formerly; but his spiritual health was in the questionable
state described. The young Lady paused for a little, in such
mood as we may fancy. She had already lost two offers. Bride-
grooms snatched away by death, says Pauli ;2 and thought it
might be ominous to refuse the third. So she decided to go

* Pauli, iv. 51a.

iiis HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book tit

1603.

on ; dashed aside her father’s doubts ; sent her unhealthy Bride-
groom ‘ a flower-garland as love-token,’ who duly responded;
and Father Wilhelm and she proceeded, as if nothing were
wrong. The spiritual state of the Prince, she found, had not
been exaggerated to her. His humours and ways were strange,
questionable ; other than one could have wished. Such as he
was, however, she wedded him on the appointed terms ; — hop-
ing probably for a recovery, which never came.

The case of Albert’s malady is to this day dim ; and strange
talcs are current as to the origin of it, which the curious in
Physiology may consult ; they are not fit for reporting here.*
It seems to have consisted in an overclouding, rather than a
total ruin of the mind. Incurable depression there was ; gloomy
torpor alternating with fits of vehement activity or suffering;
great discontinuity at all times : — evident unfitness for business.
It was long hoped he might recover. And Doctors in Divinity
and in Medicine undertook him : Theologians, Exorcists, Phy-
sicians, Quacks ; but no cure came of it, nothing but mutual
condemnations,^ violences and even execrations, from the said
Doctors and their respective Official patrons, lay and clerical.
Must have been such a scene for a young Wife as has seldom
occurred, in romance or reality ! Children continued to be born ;
daughter after daughter; buf no son that lived.

Margraf George Friedrich comes to Pretissen to administer.

After five-years space, in 1578,^ cure being now hopeless,
and the very Council admitting that the Duke was incapable of
business, — George Friedrich of Anspach-Baireuth came into
the country to take charge of him ; having already, he and the
other Brandenburgers, negotiated the matter with the King of
Poland, in whose power it mostly lay.

George Friedrich was by no means welcome to the Prussian
Council, nor to the Wife, nor to the Landed Aristocracy ; —
other than welcome, for reasons we can guess. But he proved,
in the judgment of all fair witnesses, an excellent Governor ;
and, for six-and-twenty years, administered the country with
great and lasting advantage to it. His Portraits represent to
us a large ponderous figure of a man, very fat in his latter
years; with an air of honest sense, dignity, composed solidity;
—very fit for the task now on hand.

» Pauli, iv. 476.

4 Ib. iv. 476, 481, 483.

ALBERT FRIEDRICH;

213

Cliap* XII.

1603.

He resolutely, though in mild form, smoothed- down the
flaming fires of his Clergy ; commanding now this controversy
and then that other controversy concnio et de inconcreto*
or whatever they were) to fall strictly silent ; to carry them-
selves on by thought and meditation merely, and without words.
He tamed the mutinous Aristocracy, the mutinous Biirgermeis-
ters, Town-Council of Kdnigsberg, whatever mutiny there was.
He drained bogs, says old Rentsch ; he felled woods, made
roads, established inns. Prussia was well governed till George’s
death, which happened in the year 1603.^ Anspach, in the
mean while, Anspach, Baireuth and Jagerndorf, which were
latterly all his, he had governed by deputy ; no need of visiting
those quiet countries, except for purposes of kindly recreation,
or for a swift general^pervision, now and then. By all ac-
counts, an excellent, steadfast, wise and just man, this fat
George Friedrich; worthy of the Father that produced him
Kop abt lover Forst, nit Kop abr )^ — and that is saying

much.

By his death without children much territory fell home to
the Elder House ; to be disposed of as was seftled in the Gera
Bond five years before. Anspach and Baireuth went to two
Brothers of the now Elector, Kurfiirst Joachim Friedrich, sons
of Johann George of blessed memory : founders, they, of the
* New Line,* of whom we know. Jagerndorf the Elector himself
got ; and he, not long after, settled it on one of his own sons,
a new Johann George, who at that time was fallen rather land-
less and out of a career: “Johann George of Jagerndorf,” so
called thenceforth ; whose history will concern us by and by.
Preussen was <0 be incorporated with the Electorate, — were
possession of it once had. But that is a ticklish point ; still
ticklish in spite of rights, and liable to perverse accidents that
may arise.

Joachim Friedrich, as we intimated once, was not wanting
to himself on this occasion. But the affair was full of intrica-
cies ; a very wasps'-nest of angry humours ; and required to be
handled with delicacy, though with force and decision. Joa-
chim Friedrich’s eldest Son, Johann Sigismund, Electoral Prince
of Brandenburg, had already, in 1594, married one of Albert
Friedrich the hypochondriac Duke of Preussen’s daughters;

* Rentsch, pp. 666-68S.

.Wi4 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. B«*in.

^ x6o8*

and there was a promising family of children ; no lack of chil-
dren. Nevertheless prudent Joachim Friedrich himself, now a
widower, age towards sixty, did farther, in the present emer-
gency, marry another of these Princesses, a younger Sister of
his Son’s Wife, — seven months after George Friedrich’s death,
— ^to make assurance doubly sure. A man not to be balked, if
he can help it. By virtue of excellent management, — Duchess,
Prussian Stdnde (States), and Polish Crown, needing all to be
contented, — Joachim Friedrich, with gentle strong pressure,
did furthermore squeeze his way into the actual Guardianship
of Preussen and the imbecile Duke, which was his by right.
This latter feat he achieved in the course of another year
(nth March 1605) and thereby fairly got hold of Preussen;
which he grasped, ‘ knuckles-white,* as.?ye may say ; and which
his descendants have never quitted since.

Good management was very necessary. The thing was diffi-
cult ; — and also was of more importance than we yet altogether
see. Not Preussen only, but a still better country, the Duchy
of Cleve, Clcve-Iiilich, Duke Wilhelm’s Heritage down in the
Rhineland, — H^iritage turning out now to be of right his eldest
, Daughter’s here, and likely now to drop soon, — is involved in
the thing. This first crisis, of getting into the Prussian Admi-
nistratorship, fallen vacant, oi»r vigilant Kurfiirst Joachim Fried-
rich has successfully managed ; and he holds his grip, knuckles-
white. Before long, a second crisis comes ; where also he will
have to grasp decisively in, — ^he, or those that stand for him,
and whose knuckles ca 7 i still hold. But that may go to a new
Chapter.

CHAPTER XIII.

NINTH KURFURST, JOHANN SIGISMUND.

In the summer of 1 608 (23d May 1 608) Johann Sigismund’s
(and his Father’s) Mother-in-law, the poor Wife of the poor
imbecile Duke of Preussen, died.^' Upon which Johann Sigis-
mund, Heir- Apparent of Brandenburg and its expectancies, was
instantly dispatched from Berlin, to gather-up the threads cut

Stenrcl, i. 358.

' Maria Eleonora, DiiTce Wilhelm ofCIeve’s eldest Daughter; 1550, 1573, ifoS
(Ifubner, t. 286},

Chap XIII. KURFURST JOHANN SIGISMUND. 21 $

1609. *

loose by that event, and see that the matter took no damage.
On the road thither news reached him that his own Father, old
Joachim Friedrich, was dead (i 8th July i6o8): that he him-
selt was now Kurfiirst and that numerous threads were loose
at both ends of his affairs.

The ** young man,” — not now so young, being full thirty-
five and of fair experience, — ^was in difficulty, under these over-
whelming tidings ; and puzzled, for a little, whether to advance
or to return. He decided to advance, and settle Prussian mat-
ters, where the peril and the risk were ; Brandenburg business
he could do by rescripts.

His difficulties in Preussen, and at the Polish Court, were
in fact immense. But after a space of eight or nine months,
he did, by excellent ^ssanagement, not sparing money judici-
ously laid-out on individuals, arrive at some adjustment, better
or worse, and got Preussen in hand ;•'* legal Administrator of
the imbecile Duke, as his Father had been. After which he
had to run for Brandenburg, without loss of time : great mat-
ters being there in the wind. Nothing wron^in Brandenburg,
indeed ; but the great Cleve Pleritage is dropping, has dropped ;
over in ClevQ, an immense expectancy is now come to the
point of deciding itself.

•

the Cleve Heritage dropped^ a?id many sprajtg to
pick it tp,

Wilhelm of Cleve, the explosive Duke, whom wc saw at
Berlin and K<*nigsberg at the wedding of this poor Lady now
deceased, had in the marriage-contract, as he did in all subse-
quent contracts and deeds of like nature, announced a Settle-
ment of his Estates, which was now become of the highest
moment for Johann Sigismund. The Country at that time called
Duchy of Cleve, consisted, as we said above, not only of Cleve-
Proper, but of two other still better Duchies, Julich and Berg;
then of the Grafschaft (County) of Ravensberg, County of Mark,

Lordship “of In fact, it was a multifarious agglomerate

of many little countries, gathered by marriage, heritage and
luck, in the course ot centuries, and now united in the hand of
this Duke Wilhelm. It amounted perhaps to two Yorkshires

* 1572, i6o8'i6i 9. * ajth April 1609. Stenrel, i. 37a

»r6 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bootin.

ilSog,

in extent.* > A naturally opulent Country, of fertile meadows,
shipping capabilities, metalliferous hills ; and, at this time, in
consequence of the Dutch-Spanish War, and the multitude of
Protestant refugees, it was getting filled with ingenious indus-
tries ; and rising to be, what it still is, the busiest quarter of
Germany. A Country lowing with kine ; the hum of the flax-
spindle heard in its cottages, in those old days, — ‘ much of the
linen called Hollands is made in Jiilich, and only bleached,
stamped and sold, by the Dutch,* says Biisching. A Country,
in our days, which is shrouded at short intervals with the due
canopy of coal-smoke, and loud with sounds of the anvil and
the loom.

This Duchy of Cleve, all this fine agglomerate of Duchies,
Duke Wilhelm settled, were to be inherited in a piece, by his
eldest (or indeed, as it soon proved, his only) Son and the heirs
of that Son, if there were any. Failing heirs of that only Son,
then the entire Duchy of Cleve was to go to Maria Eleonora as
eldest Daughter, now marrying to Friedrich Albert, Duke of
Prussia, and to tneir heirs lawfully begotten : heirs female, if
there happened to be no male. The other Sisters, of whom
there were three, were none of them to have the least pretence
to inherit Cleve or any part ofjt. On the contrary, they were,
in such event, of the eldest Daughter or her heirs coming to
inherit Cleve, to have each of them a sum of ready-money paid^
by the said inheritrix of Cleve or her heirs ; and on receiving
that, were to consider their claims entirely fulfilled, and to ceasfe
thinking of Cleve for the future.

This Settlement, by express privilege of Kaiser Karl V.,
nay of Kaiser Maximiliah before him, and the Laws of the
Reich, Duke Wilhelm doubted not he was entitled to make ;
and this Settlement he made ; his Lawyers writing down the
terms, in their wearisome way, perhaps six times over ; and
struggling by all methods to guard against the least misunder-
standing. Cleve with all its appurtenances, Jiilich, Berg and
the rest, goes to the eldest Sister and her heirs, male or female •
If she have no heirs, male or female, then, but not till then, the
next Sister steps into her shoes in that matter : but if she have,
then, we repeat for the sixth and last time, no Sister or Sister's

4 See Bdsching, Erdiesekreihung, v. 642-734.

^ * 900 f<Ko about too, 000/. : Pauli, vl 542; iii. 504.

Ctep.xni. KURFURST JOHANN SIGISMUND. 817

1609.

Representative has the least word to say to it, but takes her
100,000/., and ceases thinking of Cleve.

The other three Sisters were all gradually married ; — one
of them to Pfalz-Neuburg, an eminent Prince, in the Bavarian
region called the Ober- Pfalz (Upper Palatinate), who, or at
least whose eldest Son, is much worth mentioning and remem-
bering by us here ; — and, in all these marriage-contracts, Wil-
helm and his Lawyers expressed themselves to the like effect,
and in the like elaborate sixfold manner : so that Wilhelm and
they thought there could nowhere in the world be any doubt
about it.

Shortly after signing the last of these marriage-contracts,
or perhaps it was in the course of signing them, Duke Wilhelm
had a stroke of palsy. ;He had, before that, gone into Papistry
again, poor man. The truth is, he had repeated strokes ; and
being an abrupt, explosive Herr, he at last quite yielded to
palsy ; and sank slowly out of the world, in a cloud of semi-
insanity, which lasted almost twenty years.^ Duke Wilhelm
did leave a Son, Johann Wilhelm, who succeeded h^m as Duke.
But this Son also proved explosive ; went half and at length
wholly insane. Jesuit Priests, and their intrigues to bring back
a Protestant country to the bosom of the Church, wrapped the
poor man, all his days, as in a burning Nessus’-Shirt ; and he
did little but mischief in the world. He married, had no chil-
dren ; he accused his innocent Wife, the Jesuits and he, of in-
fidelity. Got her judged, not properly sentenced ; and then
strangled her, he and they, in her bed : — * Jacobea of Baden
(1597)1’ ^ thnce-tragic history. Then he married again;
Jesuits being extremely anxious for an Orthodox heir ; but again
there came no heir ; there came only new blazings of the Nes-
sus’-Shirt, In fine, the poor man died (Spring 1609), and
made the world rid of him. Died 25th March 1609 ; that is
the precise date ; — about a month before our new Elector, Jo-
hann Sigismund, got his affairs winded-up at the Polish Court,
and came galloping home in such haste. There was pressing
need of him in the Cleve regions.

For the painful exactitude of Duke Wilhelm and his Law-
yers has profited little ; and there are claimants on claimants
rising for that valuable Cleve Country. As indeed Johann

^ Died 35th January 1592, age 76.

3i 8 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Booktll.

1609,

Sigismund had anticipated, and been warned from all quarters
to expect. For months past, he has had his faculties bent, with
lynx-eyed attention, on that scene of things ; doubly and trebly
impatient to get Preussen soldered-up, ever since this other
matter came to the bursting point. What could be done by the
utmost vigilance of his Deputies, he had done. It was the 25th
of March when the mad Duke died : on the 4th of April, Jo-
hann Sigismund’s Deputy, attended by a Notary to record the
act, * fixed-up the Brandenburg Arms on the Government-House
of Cleve ;*7 on the 5th, they did the same at Diisseldorf ; on
the following days, at Jiilich and the other Towns. But already
on the 5th, they had hardly got done at Diisseldorf, when there
appeared — young Wolfgang Wilhelm, Heir- Apparent of that
eminent Pfalz-Neuburg, he in person, to put up the Pfalz-Neu-
burg Arms 1 Pfalz-Neuburg, who married the Second Daughter,
he is actually claiming, then ; — the whole, or part ? Both are
sensible that possession is nine points in law.

Pfalz- Neuburg’s claim was for the whole Duchy. ** All my
serene Mother’ Sc.'” cried the young Heir of Pfalz-Neuburg :

Properly all mine !” cried he. ** Is not she nearest of kin ?
Second Daughter, true ; but the Daughter ; not Daughter ^a
Daughter, as you are (as your serene Electrcss is), O Durch-
laucht of Brandenburg : — consider, besides, you are female, I
am male 1 ” That was Pfalz-Neuburg’s logic : none of the best,
I think, in forensic genealogy. His tenth point was perhaps
rather weak ; but he had possession, co-possession, and the
nine points good. The other Two Sisters, by their Sons or
Husbands, claimed likewise ; but not the whole ; “ Divide it,”
said they : ‘*that surely is the real meaning of *fCarl V.’s Deed
of Privilege to make such a Testament. Divide it among the
Four Daughters or their representatives, and let us all have
shares !”

Nor were these four claimants by any means all. The Saxon
Princes next claimed ; two sets of Saxon Princes. First the
minor set, Gotha-Weimar and the rest, the Ernestine Line so-
called ; representatives of Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous,
who lost the Electorate for religion’s sake at Miihlberg in the
past century, and from major became minor in Saxon Gene-
alogy. “ Magnanimous Johann Friedrich,” said they, ‘‘had
to wife an Aunt of the now deceased Duke of Cleve ; Wife

7 Pauli, vi. 566.

Chap-XiiT. KURFURST JOHANN SIGISMUND. 219

1609,

Sibylla (sister of the Flanders Mare), of famous memory, our
lineal Ancestress. In favour of whom Father, the then
reigning Duke of Cleve, made a marriage-contract of precisely
similar import to this your Prussian one : he, and barred all
his descendants, if contracts are to be valid.’* This is the claim
of the Ernestine Line of Saxon Princes ; not like to go for
much, in their present disintegrated condition.

But the Albertine Line, the present Elector of Saxony, also
claims : “Here is a Deed,** said he, “executed by Kaiser Fried-
rich III. in the year 1483,® generations before your Kaiser
Karl ; Deed solemnly granting to Albert, junior of Sachsen,
and to his heirs, the reversion of those same Duchies, should
the Male Line happen to fail, as it was then likely to do. How
could Kaiser Max revoke his Father’s deed, or Kaiser Karl his
Great-grandfather’s ? Little Albert, the Albert of the Prinzen^
raubt he who grew big, and fought lionlike for his Kaiser in
the Netherlands and Western Countries ; he and his have
clearly the heirship of Cleve by right : and we, now grown
Electors, and Seniors of Saxony, demand it wfa grateful House
of Hapsburg, —and will study to make ourselves convenient in
return.’* —

“ Nay, if that is your rule, that old Laws and Deeds are
to come in bar of new, we,” cry sfmultitude of persons, — French
Dukes of Nevers, and all manner of remote, exotic figures among
them, — “v/e are the real heirs I Ravensberg, Mark, Berg, Ra-
venstein, this patch and the other of that large Duchy of yours,
were they not from primeval time expressly limited to heirs-
male ? Heirs-rnale ; and we now are the nearest heirs-male
of said patches and portions ; and will prove it 1 ” — In short,
there never was such a Lawsuit, — so fat an affair for Ihe attor-
ney species, if that had been the way of managing it, — as this
of Cleve was likely to prove.

The KaisePs Thoughts about if, and the World* s.

What greatly complicated the affair, too, was the interest
the Kaiser took in it. The Kaiser could not well brook a power-
ful Protestant in that country ; still less could his Cousin the
Spaniard. Spaniards, worn to the ground, coercing that world-
famous Dutch Revolt, and astonished to find that they could

® Pauli, ubi suprJi ; Hubner, t. 986.

»30 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Cooklll.

1609.

not coerce it at all, had resolved at this time to take breath
before trying farther. Spaniards and Dutch, after Fifty years
of such fighting as we know, have made a Twelve-years Truce
(1609) : but the baffled Spaniard, panting, pale in his futile
rage and sweat, has not given-up the matter ; he is only taking
breath, and will try it again. Now Cleve is his road into Hol-
land, in such adventure ; no success possible if Cleve be not
in good hands. Brandenburg is Protestant, powerful ; Bran-
denburg will not do for a neighbour there.

Nor will Pfalz-Neuburg. A Protestant of Protestants, this
Palatine Neuburg too, — junior branch, possible heir in time
coming, of Kur-Pfalz (Elector Palatine) himself, in the Rhine
Countries ; of Kur-Pfalz, who is acknowledged Chief Protest-
ant : official * President’ of the * Evangelical Union’ they have
lately made among them in these menacing times ; — Pfalz-Neu-
burg too^ this young Wolfgang Wilhelm, if he do not break-off
kind, might be very awkward to the Kaiser in Cleve -Jiilicb.
Nay Saxony itself ; for they are all Protestants : — unless per-
haps Saxony mig^ become pliant, and try to make itself useful
to a munificent Imperial House ?

Evidently what would best suit the Kaiser and Spaniards,
were this. That no strong Power whatever got footing in Cleve,
to grow stronger by the possession of such a country ; — better
than best it would suit, if he, the Kaiser, could himself get it
smuggled into his hands, and there hold it fast ! Which pri-
vately was the course resolved upon at head-quarters. — In this
way the ** Succession Controversy of the Cleve Duchies” is com-
ing to be a very high matter ; mixing itself up with the grand
Protestant-Papal Controversy, the general armed-lawsuit of man-
kind in that generation. Kaiser, Spaniard, Dutch, English,
French Henri IV. and all mortals, are getting concerned in
the decision of it.

CHAPTER XIV.

SYMPTOMS OF A GREAT WAR COMING.

Meanwhile Brandenburg and Neuburg both hold grip of
Cleve in that manner, with a mutually menacing iiiquiring ex-
pression of countenance ; each grasps it (so to speak) convul-
sively with the one hand, and has with the other hand his

Chap. XIV. A GREAT WAR COAIiNG. . 24 i

1609.

sword by the hilt, ready to fly out. But to understand this
Brandenburg-Neuburg phenomenon and the then significance
of the Cleve-Jiilich Controversy, we must take the following
bits of Chronology along with us. For the German Empiie,
with Protestant complaints, and Papist usurpations and severi-
ties, v/as at this time all a continent of sour thick smoke,
already breaking out into dull-red flashes here and there, —
symptoms of the universal conflagration of a Thirty-Years War,
which followed. Symf>tom First is that of Donauworth, and
dates above a year back.

First Symptom ; Donattworth^ 1 608.

Donauworth, a Protestant Imperial Frec-town, in the Ba-
varian regions, had been, for some fault on the part of the
populace against a flaring Mass-procession which hadmo busi-
ness to be there, put under Ban of the Empire ; had been seized
accordingly (December 1607), and much cuffed, and shaken
about, by Duke Maximilian of Bavaria, as emeutor of the said
Ban;i — who, what was still worse, would by no means give-up
the Town when he had done with it ; Town being handy to
him, and the man being stout and violently Papist. Hence
the * Evangelical Union’ which tv^e saw, — which has not taken
Donauwdrth yet. Nor ever will I Donauworth never was re-
taken ; but is Bavarian at this hour. A Town nameable in
History ever since. Not to say withal, that it is where Marl-
borough did * the Lines of Schellenberg’ long after : Schellen-
berg (‘Jingle-Hill,’ so to render it) looks down across the
Danube or Donau River, upon Donauworth, — its ‘ Lines,’ and
other histories, now much abolished, and quiet under grass.

But now all Protestantism sounding everywhere, in angry
mournful tone, “ Donauworth ! Give up DonauwSrth I” — and
an ‘Evangelical Union,* with moneys, with theoretic contin-
gents of force, being on foot for that and the like objects ; —
we can fancy what a scramble this of Cleve-Jiilich was like to
be ; and especially what effect this duelling attitude of Bran-
denburg and Neuburg had on the Protestant mind. Protestant
neighbours, Landgraf Moritz of Hessen-Cassel at their head,
intervene in tremulous haste, in the Cleve-Jiilich affair : “ Peace,
O friends ! Some bargain ; peaceable joint-possession ; any

^ Michaelis, U. ax6; Buddsl LtAicon, I 853.

isa H0HENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book lU.

z6za

temporary bargain, till we see I Can two Protestants fall to
slashing one another, in such an aspect of the Reich and its
Jesuitries ?” — And they did agree (Dortmund, loth May 1609),
the first of their innumerable ‘agreements,’ to- some temporary
joint-possession ; — the thrice-thankful Country doing homage
to both, * with oath to the one that sAa// be found genuine.’
And they did endeavour to govern jointly, and to keep the
peace on those terms, though it was not easy.

For the Kaiser had already said (or his Aulic Council and
Spanish Cousin, poor Kaiser Rodolf caring too little about
these things,® had already said), Cleve must absolutely not go
into wrong hands. For which what safe method is there, but
that the Kaiser himself become proprietor ? A Letter is yet
extant, from the Aulic Council to their Vice-Chancellor, who
had been sent to negotiate this matter with the parties ; Letter
to the effect, That such result was the only good one ; that it
must be achieved ; ‘ that he must devise all manner of quirks
(a//^ Spitzfindigkeiten atiffordern sollte)^ and achieve it.^ This
curious Letter of^» sublime Aulic Council, or Imperial Hof^
Ratht to its Vice-Kanzler^ still exists.

And accordingly quirks did not prove undevisdble on be-
half of the Kaiser. “ Since you cannot agree,” said the Kaiser,
“ and there are so many of you«who claim (we having privately
stirred-up several of you to the feat), there will be nothing for
it, but the Kaiser must put the Country under sequestration,
and take possession of it with his own troops, till a decision
be arrived at, — which probably will not be soon I”

Second Symptom ; Seizure of Jiilich by the Kaiser^ and Siege
and Recapture of it by the Protestant Parties y 1610.
Whereupon * Catholic League^ to balance ‘ Evangelical
Unionl

And the Kaiser forthwith did as he had said ; sent Arch-
duke Leopold with troops, who forcibly took the Castle of J u-

* Rodolf II. (Kepler’s too insolvent ‘Patron’), 1576-16x2 ; then Matthias, Rodolf ’s
Brother, x6i2-z6i9, rather tolerant to Protestants , — then Ferdinand II. his Uncle’s
Son, X619-X637, much the reverse of tolerant, by whom mainly came the Thirty-Years
War, — ^were the Kaisers of this Period.

Ferdinand III., Son of II. (1637-1657), who finished out the Thirty-Years War,
partly by fighting of lus own in young days (Battle of NOrdlingen his grandest feat),
was Father of

Kaiser Leopold (1658-1705), — ^whose Two Sons wete

Kaiser Joseph (X705-17ZZ) and Kaiser Karl VI. (1711-1710), Maria Theresa's
Father. a Pauli, ui. 505.

Chap-XiV. A GREAT WAR COMING. aaj

l6xa

lich ; commanding all other castles and places to surrender
and sequestrate themselves, in like fashion ; threatening Bran-
denburg and Neuburg, in a dreadfql manner, with Reichs-Achi
(Ban of the Empire), if they presumed to show contumacy.
Upon which Brandenburg and Neuburg, ranking themselves
together, showed decided contumacy ; ‘ tore-down the Kaiser’s
Proclamation,’* having good help at their back.

And accordingly, ‘on the 4th of September 1610,’ after a
two-months siege, they, or the Dutch, French, and Evangelical-
Union Troops bombarding along with them, and * many Eng-
lish volunteers* to help, retook Jiilich, and packed Leopold
away again.^ The Dutch and the French were especially
anxious about this Cleve business, — poor Henri IV. was just
putting those French trjoops in motion towards Jiilich, when
Ravaillac, the distracted Devil’s-Jesuit, did his stroke upon
him ; so that another than Henri had to lead in that expedi-
tion. The actual Captain at the Siege was Prince Christian
of Anhalt, by repute the first soldier of Germany at that period :
he had a horse shot under him, the business being very hot
and furious ; — he had still worse fortune in the course of years.
There were ‘ many English volunteers’ at this Siege ,* English
nation hugely interested in it, though their King would not
act except diplomatically. It was*thc talk of all the then world,
— the evening song and the morning prayer of Protestants
especially, — till it was got ended in this manner. It deserves
to rank as Symptom Second in this business ; far bigger flare of
dull-red in the universal smoke-continent, than that of Donau-
wdrth had been. Are there no memorials left of those ‘English
volunteers,’ theft Alas, they might get edited as Bromley’s
Royal Letters are ; — and had better lie quiet I

‘ Evangelical Union,’ formed some two years before, with
what cause we saw, has Kur-Pfalz 7 at the head of it : but its
troops or operations were never of a very forcible character.
Kur-Brandenburg now joined it formally, as did many more ;
Kur-Sachsen, anxious to make himself convenient in other
quarters, never would. Add to these phenomena, the now de-

4 Pauli, ill. 534. Emperor^s Proclamation, !n Dflsseldorf, 33d July 1609, — taken
down solemnly, zst August x6oo.

* Ib. iii. 527.

' ® In Carlyle’s Mutcellanies (vii. § *Two Hundred and Fifty Yearg ago: a Frag-

ment about Duels') is one small scene belonging to them.

7 Winter-King’s Father ; died 9th September z6xo, few days after this recapture
of Jiilich.

424 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Boot lit

z6if.

dsive appearance of a “ Catholic Liga** (League of Catholic
Princes), which, by. way of counterpoise to the ** Union,’* had
been got^up by Duke Maximilian of Bavaria several months
ago ; and which now, under the same guidance, in these bad
circumstances, took a great expansion of figure. Duke Maxi-
milian, Donauworth Max,” finding the Evangelical Union
go so very high, and his own Kaiser like to be good for little
in such business (poor hypochondriac Kaiser Rodolf IL, more
taken-up with turning-looms and blow-pipes than with matters
political, who accordingly is swept-out of Jiilich in such sum-
mary way), — Donauworth Max has seen this a necessary in-
stitution in the present aspect. Both * Union* and ‘ League*
rapidly waxed under the sound of the Jiilich cannon, as was
natural.

Kur-Sachsen, for standing so well aloof from the Union,
got from the thankful Kaiser written Titles for these Duchies
of Cleve and J ulich ; Imperial parchments and infeftments of
due extent ; but never any Territory in those parts. He never
offered fight for fcis pretensions ; and Brandenburg and Ncu-
burg, — Neuburg especially, — always answered him, “ No 1 ”
with sword half-drawn. So Kur-Sachsen faded out again, and
took only parchments by the adventure. Practically there
was no private Competitor of^lnoment to Brandenburg, except
this Wolfgang Wilhelm of Pfalz-Neuburg ; he alone having
clutched hold. — But we hasten to Sy 7 nptom Thirds which par-
ticularly concerns us, and will be intelligible now at last. ,

Symptom Third; a Dinner scene at DilsscMorf^ 1613;

Spaniards and Dutch shoulder-arms in Cleve,

Brandenburg and Neuburg stood together against third
parties ; but their joint-government was apt to fall in two, when
left to itself, and the pressure of danger withdrawn. ‘ They
governed by the Raths and Stdnde of the Country ;* old me-
thods and old official men : each of the two had his own Vice-
Regent (Siatthalter) present on the ground, who jointly pre-
sided as they could. Jarrings were unavoidable ; but how
mend it ? Settle the litigated Territory itself, and end their
big lawsuit, they could not; often as they tried it, with the

Chw.xiv. A GREAT WAR COMING. aaj

x6i3*

whole world encouraging and urging them .8 The meetings
they had, and the treaties and temporary bargains they made,
and kept, and could not keep, in tl^ese and In the following
years and generations, pass our power of rccording .9

In 1613 the Brandenburg Slatihalter \f2LS Ernst, the Elec-
tor’s younger Brother ; Wolfgang Wilhelm in person, for his
Father, or rather for himself as heir of his Mother, represented
Pfalz-Neuburg. Ernst of Brandenburg had adopted Calvinism
as his creed; a thing hateful and horrible to the Lutheran
mind (of which sort was Wolfgang Wilhelm), to a degree now
altogether inconceivable. Discord arose in consequence be-
tween the Statthalters, as to official appointments, sacred and
secular : “You are for promoting Calvinists !” — “And you, I
see, are for promoting Lutherans !” — J ohann Sigismund him-
self had to intervene : Wolfgang Wilhelm and he had their
meetings, friendly colloquies ; — the final colloquy of which is
still memorable ; and issues in Symptom Third,

We said, a strong flame of choler burnt ift^ll these Hohen-
iollerns, though they held it well down. Johann Sigismund, an
excellent man of business, knew how essential a mild tone is ;
nevertheless he found, as this colloquy went on, that human
patience might at length get too much. The scene, a^'ter some
examination, is conceivable in this wise: Place Dusseldorf,
Elector’s apartment in the Schloss there; time late in the Year
1613, Day not discoverable by me. The two sat at dinner, after
much colloquy all morning: Johann Sigismund, a middle-aged,
big-headed, stern-faced, honest-looking man ; hair cropped, I
observe ; and e^^elids slightly contracted, as if for sharper vi-
sion into matters : Wolfgang Wilhelm, of features fallen dim
to me ; an airy gentleman, well out of his teens, but, I doubt,
not of wisdom sufficient ; evidently very high and stiff in his
ways.

His proposal, by way of final settlement, and end to all
these brabbles, was this, and he insisted on it : “ Give me your

** Old Sit Henry Wotton, Provost of Eton in his old days, remembers how he
Drent Ambassador on this errand, — as on many others equally bootless , — and writes
himself * Legates,' not only ‘thrice to Venice, twice to* &c. &c., but also ‘once to
* Holland in the Juliers mutter lsg»te/ in yuUacensi negatia) seeKeii^ma: IVottmi-
€tna (London, 1673), Preface. It was ‘ in 16x4,' say the Biographies vaguely. His
Despatches, are they in the Paper-OiSce still? His good old Book deserves new
editinc^ his good old genially pious life a proper elucidation, by some faithful mao.

» Map of a©ve-jalich, at p. 2x4.

VOL. X. Q

226 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBQRG. Book ill.

* 1613.

eldest Ptincess to wife ; let her dowry be your whole claim on
Cleve-Jiilich; I will marry her on that condition, and we shall
be friends !** Here evidently is a gentleman that does not want
for conceit in himself: — consider too, in Johann Sigismund’s
opinion, he had no right to a square inch of these Territories,
though for peace’s sake a joint share had been allowed him for
the time! “ On that condition, jackanapes?” thought Johann
Sigismund; “ My girl is not a monster ; nor at a loss for hus-
bands fully better than you, I should hope !” This he thought,
and could not help thinking ; but endeavoured to say nothing
of it. The young jackanapes went on, insisting. Nature at
last prevailed; Johann Sigismund lifted his hand (princely eti-
quettes melting all into smoke on the sudden), and gave the
young jackanapes a slap over the face*. Veritable slap ; which
opened in a dreadful manner the eyes of young Pfalz-Neuburg
to his real situation; and sent him off high-flaming, vowing
never-imagined vengeance. A remarkable slap ; well testified
to, — though the old Histories, struck blank with terror, re-
verence and ast(^^lishment, can for most part only symbol it in
dumb-show;^® — a slap that had important consequences in this
world.

For now Wolfgang Wilhelm, flaming-off in never-imagined
vengeance, posted straight ft> Munchen, to Max of Bavaria
there ; declared himself convinced, or nearly so, of the Roman-
Catholic Religion; wooed, and in a few weeks (loth Novem-
ber 1613) wedded Max’s younger Sister; and soon after, at
Diisseldorf, pompously professed such his blessed change of
Belief, — ^with immense flourish of trumpeting, and jubilant pam-
phleteering, from Holy Church. His poor old Father, the
devoutest of Protestants, wailed aloud his “ Ichabodl the glory
is departed 1” — holding ‘ weekly fast and humiliation’ ever after,
— and died in few months of a broken heart. The Catholic
League has now a new Member on those terms.

w Pufendorf Brandenh, lib. iv. §t6, p. 2x3), and many others, are in this

^se. Tobias {Htstoria Facts JVestphaltc<e^ lib x. §9, p. 26) is e;cplicit:

* NequCf ut infida regwndi societas est, Brandenhurgio et Neoburgio diu cofwenie-

* bat; eorumque mrgia, ciim fnatritnanii fasdere p^ari posse propinqui tpsorum

* credidtssent^ aerms exarsere; inter epu las, quibus futurum generum Septemvir

* (the “Sevensman,” or Elector, '*Onc of The Seven'^) exciptebat, hujus enim filia

* Wolfgango sperewatur, db nescio quos sermones ed inter utrumque altercatiotu

* proveetd, nt Elector irte impotentior, nullA dignitatis, hospitii, cognationis, <5/^

* finitatisve verecundiA cokibitus, intenderit Neoburgio manus, et contrd tendenti*

* os verberaverit, Ita, quee apud Concordes vincula caritatis, incitamenta irarum

* apud i^fensos erant,* (Cited in KOhler, MUnzbelustigungen, xxL 341 ; who refers

to li^assor, Hisioirc de A///.)— Pauli (iii. 542) becomes quite vaporous,

u Kohler, ubi suprk.

Chap. XIV. A GREAT WAR COMInC. ^2f

t6z8.

And on the other hand, Johann Sigismund, nearly with the
like haste (25th December 1613), declared himself convinced
of Calvinism, his younger Brother’s creed — ^which continues
ever since the Brandenburg Court-creed, that of the People
being mostly Lutheran. Men said, it was to please the Dutch,
to please the Jiilichers, most of whom are Calvinist. Apologetic
Pauli is elaborate, but inconclusive. It was very ill taken at
Berlin, where even popular riot arose on the matter. In Prussia
loo it had its drawbacks.^®

And now, all being full of mutation, rearrangement and
infinite rumour, there marched next year (1614), on slight pre-
text, resting on great suspicions, Spanish troops into the Jiilich-
Cleve country, and, countenanced by Neuburg, began seizing
garrisons there. Whereupon Dutch troops likewise marched,
countenanced by Brandenburg, and occupied other fortresses
and garrisons : and so, in every strong-place, there were eithe>
Papist-Spaniards or Calvinist-Dutch; who stood there, front-
ing one another, and could not by treatying be got out again ;
—like clouds positively electric versus cloud% negatively. As
indeed was getting to be the case of Germany in general ; case
fatally visible in every Province, Principality and Parish there ;
till a thunderstorm, and succession of thunderstorms, of Thirty-
Years continuance, broke out. Of which these huge rumours
and mutations, and menacings of war, springing out of that
finally colloquy and slap in the face, are to be taken as the
Third premonitory Symptom. Spaniards and Dutch stand
electrically fronting one another in Cleve for seven years, till
their Truce is out, before they clash together ; Germany does
not wait so long by a couple of years.

Symptom Fourth^ and Catastrophe upon the heels of it

Five years more (1618), and there will have come a Fourth
Sympton, biggest of all, rapidly consummating the process ; —
Symptom still famed, of the following external figure : Three
Official Gentlemen descending from a window in the Castle of
Prag : hurled out by impatient Bohemian Protestantism, a
depth of seventy feet, — happily only into dung, and without
loss of life. From which follows a ** King of Bohemia” elected
there, King not unknown to us ; — * thunderclouds’ all in one

15 Fauti. iii. 546. *3 Ib. iii. 544 ; MIchacUs, i. 349.

M2B HOHENZOLLERNS in BRANDENBURG. Baoknu

16x8.

huge clash# and the ‘continent of sour smoke’ blaming all into
a continent of thunderous fire: Thirty-Yeapis War, as they
now call it ! Such a confiagration as poor Germany never saw
before or since.

These were the preliminary Symptoms of that dismal
business. ‘As to the primsLTy causes of it,* says one .of my
Authorities, * these lie deep, deep almost as those of Original
‘ Sin. But the proximate causes seem to me to have been these
‘ two : Ptrst, that the Jesuit -Priests and Principalities had
‘ vowed and resolved to have, by God’s help and by the Devil’s
‘ (this was the peculiarity of it), Europe made Orthodox again:

‘ and then Secondly, The fact that a Max of Bavaria existed
‘ at that time, whose fiery character, cunning but rash head,

‘ and fanatically Papist heart disposed him to attempt that en-
' terprise, him with such resources and capacities, under their
' bad guidance.’

Johann Sigismund did many swift decisive strokes of busi*
ness in his time, Jrusinesses of extensive and important nature ;
but this of the slap to Neuburg has stuck best in the idle me-
mory of mankind. Diisseldorf, Year 1613 : it was precisely irt
the time when that same Friedrich, not yet by any means * King
of Bohemia,* but already Kum Pfalz (Cousin of this Neuburg,
and head man of the Protestants), was over here in England,
on a fine errand ; — namely, had married the fair Elizabeth
(14th February 1613), James the First’s Princess; “Gopdy
Palsgrave,*’ as her Mother floutingly called her, not liking the
connexion. What kind of a ‘King of Bohemia’ this Friedrich
made, five or six years after, and what sea of troubles he and
his entered into, we know ; the “ Winter^Kmig'* (Winter-King,
fallen in times of frost, or built of mere frost, a snow-Ving alto-
gether soluble again) is the name he gets in German Histories.
But here is another hook to hang Chronology upon.

This brief Bohemian Kingship had not yet exploded on the
Weissenberg of Prag,^^ when old Sir Henry Wotton being sent
as Ambassador ‘ to lie abroad* (as he wittily called it, to his
cost) in that Business, saw, in the City of Lintz, in the pic-
turesque green country by the shores of the Donau there, an
ingenious person, who is now recognisable as one of the re-
tnarkablest of mankind, Mr. John Kepler, namely : Kepkr as

Battle there, Sunday 8 th November 1690.

ci«p.xtv. A GREAT WAR COMING. 229

i<5ao.

Wotton writes him ; addressing the great Lord Bacon (unhap-
pily without strict date of any kind) on that among other sub-
jects. Mr. John’s now ever-memorable watching of those Mo-
Hons of the Star Mars}^ with ‘calculations repeated seventy
times/ and also with Discovery of the Planetary Laws of this
Universe, some ten years ago, appears to be unknown to Wot-
ton and Bacon; but there is something else of Mr. John’s de*
vising!® which deserves attention from an Instaurator of Philo*
sophy :

*He hath a little black Tent (of what stuff is net much importing)/
says the Ambassador, ‘ which he can suddenly set up where he will in

* a Field ; and it is convertible (like a windmill) to all quarters at plea.

* sure ; capable of not much more than one man, as I conceive, and

* perhaps at no ipreat ease 5 exactly close and dark, — ^save at one hole,

* about an inch and a half in the diameter, to which he applies a long
‘ perspective Trunk, with the convex glass fitted to the said hole, and

* the concave talven out at the other end, which extendeth to about the

* middle of this erected Tent : through which the visible radiations of

* all the Objects without are intromitted, falling upon a Paper, which
' is accommodated to receive them ; and so he tHiceth them with his

* pen in their natural appearance ; turning his little Tent round by de-

* grees, till he hath designed the whole Aspect of the Field. — In fact
he hath a Camera Obscura^ and is exhibiting the same for the delecta-
tion of Imperial gentlemen lounging^that way. Mr. John invents such
toys, writes almanacks, practises medicine, for good reasons; his en-
couragement from the Holy Roman Empire and mankind being only a
pension of 18/. a year, and that hardly ever paid. An ingenious per-
son, truly, if there ever was one among Adam’s Posterity. Just turned
of fifty, and ill-off for cash. This glimpse of him, in his little black
tent with perspective glasses, while the Thirty-Years War blazQS out,
is welcome as aflate.

What became of the Cleue-Jillich Heritage^ and of the
Preussen one.

In the Cleve Duchies joint government had now become
more difficult than ever : but it had to be persisted in, — sunder
mutual offences, suspicions and outbreaks hardly repressed ; —
no final Bargain of Settlement proving by any method possible.

De Motibus Stella Mariis; Prag, 1609.

19 It seems, Baptista Porta (of Naples, dead some years before) must have given
him the essential hint,— of whom, or whose hint, Mr. John does not happen to inform
hb Excellency at present.

n Rciiquue IVottoniano! {lAineiOXif *67*), p. 300.

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookm.

Treaties enough, and conferences, and pleadings, manifesto*
ings : — Could not some painful German collector of Statistics^
try to give us the approximate quantity of impracticable treaties,
futile conferences, manifestos, correspondences ; in brief, some
authentical cipher (say in round millions) of idle Words spoken
by official human creatures, and approximately (in square miles)
the extent of Law-Stationery and other Paper written, first and
last, about this Controversy of the Cleve Duchies ? ’ In that form
it might have a momentary interest.

When the Winter-King’s explosion took place, and his
own unfortunate Pfalz (Palatinate) became the theatre of war
(Tilly, Spinola, versus Pfalzers, English, Dutch), involving all
the neighbouring regions, Cleve-Jiilich did not escape its fate.
The Spaniards and the Dutch, who had long sat in gloomy
armed-truce, occupying with obstinate precaution the main For-
tresses of these Julich-Clevc countries, did now straightway, their
Twelve-Years truce being out (1621),^^ fall to fighting and be-
sieging one another there; the huge War, which proved of
Thirty Years, bei|fg now all a-blaze. What the country suffered
in the interim may be imagined.

In 1624, in pity to all parties, some attempt at practical
Division of the Territory was again made: Neuburg to have
Berg and Jiilich, Brandenburg to have Cleve, Mark, Ravens-
berg and the minor appurtenances : and Treaty to that effect
was got signed (nth May 1624). But it was not well kept,
nor could be ; and the statistic cipher of new treaties, mani-
festos, conferences, and approximate written area of Law-Paper
goes on increasing.

It was not till forty-two years after, in 1666,' as will be more
minutely noticeable by and by, that an effective partition could
be practically brought about. Nor in this state was the Law-
suit by any means ended, — as we shall wearisomely see, in
times long following that. In fact there never was, in the Ger-
man Chanceries or out of them, such a Lawsuit, Armed or
Wigged, as this of the Cleve Duchies first and last. And the
sentence was not practically given, till the Congress of Vienna
( 1 8 1 5) in our own day gave it ; and the thing Johann Sigismund
had claimed legally in 1609 was actually handed -over to Jo-

w Crowned at Prag, 4th November n.s. 1619 ; beaten to ruin there, and obliged
to gallop (almost before dinner done), Sunday 8th Npvember x6ao.

* 5 * Pauli, vl 578-580,

Ci»p.xr. KURFURST GEORGE WILHELM. *31

x6ao.

hann Sigismund’s Descendant in the seventh generation, after
two-hundred and six years. Handed-over to him then, — and a
liberal rate of interest allowed. These litigated Duchies are
now the Prussian Province Jiilich-Berg-Cleve, and the nucleus
of Prussia’s possessions in the Rhine country.

A year before Johann Sigismund’s death, Albert Friedrich,
the poor eclipsed Duke of Prussia, died (8th August i6i8):
upon which our swift Kurfiirst, not without need of his dexte-
rities there too, got peaceable possession of Prussia; — nor has
his Family lost hold of that, up to the present time. Next year
(23d December 1619), he himself closed a swift busy life (la-
bour enough in it for him perhaps, though only an age of forty-
nine) ,* and sank to his long rest, his works following him,— -
unalterable thenceforth, not unfruitful some of them.

CHAPTER XV.

TENTH KURFURST, GEORGE WILiJeLM.

3y far the unluckiest of these Electors, whether the most
unworthy of them or not, was George Wilhelm, Tenth Elector,
who now succeeded Johann Sijismund his Father. The Fa-
ther’s eyes had closed when this great flame was breaking out;
and the Son’s days were all spent amid the hot ashes and fierce
blazings of it.

The position of Brandenburg during this sad Thirty-Years
War was passive rather than active ; distinguished only in the
former Way, and as far as possible from being glorious or vic-
torious. Never since the Hohenzollerns came to that Country
had Brandenburg such a time. Difficult to have mended it ;
impossible to have quite avoided it ; — and Kurfiirst George
Wilhelm was not a man so superior to all his neighbours, that
he could clearly see his way in such an element. The perfect
or ideal course was clear : To have frankly drawn sword for
his Religion and his Rights, so soon as the battle fairly opened ;
and to have fought for these same, till he got either them or
died. Alas, that is easily said and written ; but it is, for a
George Wilhelm especially, difficult to do I His capability in
all kinds was limited ; his connexions, with this side and thati

HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookm.

' iSaa

were very intricate. Gustavus and the Winter-King were his
Brothers-in-law ; Gustavus wedded to his Sister, he to Winter-
King’s, His relations to Poland, feudal superior of Preussen,
were delicate ; and Gustavus was in deadly quarrel with Po-
land. And then Gustavus’s sudden laying-hold of Pommern,
which had just escaped from Wallenstein and the Kaiser ? It
must be granted, poor George Wilhelm’s case demanded cir-
cumspectness.

One can forgive him for declining the Bohemian -King
speculation, though his Uncle of Jagerndorf and his Cousins of
Liegnitz were so hearty and forward in it. Pardonable in him
to decline the Bohemian speculation ; — though surely it is very
sad that he found himself so short of ‘butter and fire-wood*
when the poor ex-King, and his young Wife, then in a specially-
interesting state, came to take shelter with him But when
Gustavus landed, and flung-out upon the winds such a banner
as that of his, — truly it was required of a Protestant Governor
of men to be able to read said banner in a certain degree. A
Governor, not toq^V^perfect, would have recognised this Gus-
tavus, what his purposes and likelihoods were ; the feeling
would have been, checked by due circumspectness : “ Up, my
men, let us follow this man ; let us live and die in the Cause
this man goes for ! Live otherwise with honour, or die other-
wise with honour, we cannot, in the pass things have come
for* --And thus, at the very worst, Brandenburg would have
had only one class of enemies to ravage it ; and might have
escaped with, arithmetically speaking, half\h!t harrying it got
in that long Business.

But Protestant Germany, — sad shame to it,' which proved
lasting sorrow as well, — was all alike torpid ; Brandenburg not
an exceptional case. No Prince stood up as beseemed ; or
only one, and he not a great one ; Landgraf Wilhelm of Hes-
sen, who, and his brave Widow after him, seemed always to
know what hour it was. Wilhelm of Hessen all along ; — and
a few wild hands, Christian of Brunswick, Christian of Anhalt,
Johann George of Jagerndorf, who stormed -out tumultuously
at first, but were soon blown away by the Tilly-Wallenstein
iradc‘Winds and regulated armaments ; — the rest sat still, and

• {^Geschichte des Dreissigj&hngen Krieges, — ^ trivial modem Doolcl Jflves

a notable memoiial from the Brandenburg Raths, concerning these their difficulties
of housekeeping. Their real object, we perceive, was to get nd ol a Guest so danger-
ouH as the £x>King, under Ban of the Empire, had now become.

THIRTY-YEARS WAR.

*33

ciuip.xvr.

X$AO.

tried all they could to keep out of harm's way. The Evan-
gelical Union" did a great deal of manifestoing, pathetic, in-
dignant and other ; held solemn Meetings at Heilbronn, old
Sir Henry Wotton going as Ambassador to them ; but never
got any redress. Had the Evangelical Union shut-up its ink-
horns sooner ; girt-on its fighting-tools when the time came,
and done some little execution with them then, instead of none
at all, — we may fancy the Evangelical Union would have better
discharged its function. It might have saved immense wretch-
edness to Germany. But its course went not that way.

In fact, had there been no better Protestantism than that
of Germany, all was over with Protestantism ; and Max of Ba-
varia, with fanatical Ferdinand II. as Kaiser over him, and
Father Lammerlein at his right hand and Father Hyacinth at
his left, had got their own sweet way in this world. But Pro-
testant Germany was not Protestant Europe, after all. Over
seas there dwelt and reigned a certain King in Sweden; there
farmed, and walked musing by the shores of the Ouse in Hunt-
ingdonshire, a certain man ; — there was a Gustav Adolf over
seas, an Oliver Cromwell over seas ; and ‘ a company of poor
men* were found capable of taking Lucifer by the beard, — who
accordingly, with his Lammerleins, Hyacinths, Habernfeldts
and others, was forced to withdraw, after a tough struggle ! —

CHAPTER XVI.

THIRTY-YEARS WAR.

The enormous Thirty-Years War, most intricate of modern
Occurrences in the domain of Dryasdust, divides itself, after
some unravelling, into Three principal Acts or Epochs ; in
all of which, one after the other, our Kurfiirst had an inter-
est mounting progressively, but continuing to be a passive
interest.

Act First goes from 1620 to 1624 ; and might be entitled
'*The Bohemian King Made and Demolished." Personally
the Bohemian King was soon demolished. His Kingship may
be said to have gone-ofi by explosion ; by one Fight, namely,
done on the Weissenbcrg near Prag (Sunday 8th November
162.0), while he sat at dinner in the City, the boom of the

934 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Boofclli.

z6a4«

cannon coming in with interest upon his high guests and him.
He had to run, in hot haste, that night, leaving many of his
important papers, — and becomes a Winter-King. Winter-
King’s account was soon settled. But the extirpating of his
Adherents, and capturing of his Hereditary Lands, Palatinate
and Upper-Palatinate, took three years more. Hard fighting
for the Palatinate ; Tilly and Company against the * Evan-
‘ gelical- Union Troops, and the English under Sir Horace
‘ Vere.* Evangelical- Union Troops, though marching about
there, under an Uncle of our Kurfurst (Margraf Joachim Ernst,
that lucky Anspach Uncle, founder of ‘the Line'), who pro-
fessed some skill in soldiering, were a mere Picture of an Army ;
would only “ observe,” and would not fight at all. So that the
whole fighting fell to Sir Horace and his poor handful of English ;
of whose grim posture ‘ in Frankendale’^ and other Strongholds,
for months long, there is talk enough in the old English His-
tory-Books.

Then there were certain stem War-Captains, who rallied
from the Weisser|Jp.erg Defeat ; — Christian of Brunswick, the
chief of them, titular Bishop of Halberstadt, a high-flown, fiery
young fellow, of terrible fighting gifts ; he flamed-up consider-
ably,. with ‘ the Queen of Bohemia’s glove stuck in his Hat :*
“Bright Lady, it shall stick ^here, till I get you your own
again, or die !”2 Christian of Brunswick, George of Jagern-
dorf (our Kurfurst’s Uncle), Count Mansfeldt and others, made
stormy fight once and again, hanging upon this central “ Frank-
endale” Business, till they and it became hopeless. For the
Kaiser and his Jesuits were not in doubt ; a Kaiser very proud,
unscrupulous ; now clearly superior in force, — ahd all along of
great superiority in fraud.

Christian of Brunswick, Johann George and Mansfeldt were
got rid of : Christian by poison ; Johann George and Mans-
feldt by other methods, — chiefly by playing upon poor King
James of England, and leading him by the long nose he was
found to have. The Palatinate became the Kaiser’s for the

time being ; Upper Palatinate (Ober-Pfalz) Duke Max of Ba-

•

' Frankenthal, a little Town in the Palatinate, N.W. from Mannheim a short
way.

2 1621-1623, age not yet twenty-five : died (by poison), 1626, having again become
supremely important just then. ‘*Goites Freund, derPfaffen Feind (God’s Friend,
Priests’ Foe)/' ** AllesftirRuhm U7td Jkr{AW. forGlory and Her,”— the brightEli:m-
beth. become £x-Queen), were mottoes of his.— Puddaus %n voce (i. 649) ; Michaelis,
i tio.

THIRTY-YEARS WAR.

*3S

Chap. XVI.
i 6 ao>x 64 o.

varia, lying contiguous to it, had easily taken. “ Incorporate
the Ober-Pfalz with your Bavaria,” said the Kaiser, “ you, illus-
trious, thrice-serviceable Max ! And let Lammerlein and Hya-
cinth, with their Gospel of Ignatius, loose upon it. Nay, as a
still richer reward, be yours the forfeited Kur (Electorship) of
this mad Kur-Pfalz, or Winter-King. I will hold his Rhine-
Lands, his Unter-Pfalz : his Electorship and Ober-Pfalz, I say,
are yours, Duke, henceforth Kurfurst Maximilian !”^ Which
was a hard saying in the ears of Brandenburg, Saxony and
the other Five, and of the Reich in general ; but they had all to
comply, after wincing. For the Kaiser proceeded with a high
hand. He had put the Ex-King under Ban of the Empire
(never asking ‘ the Empire’ about it)r ; put his Three principal
Adherents, Johann George of Jagerndorf one of them, Prince
Christian of Anhalt (once captain at the Siege of Juliers) an-
other, likewise under Ban of the Empire and in short had
flung about, and was flinging, his thunderbolts in a very Olym-
pian manner. Under all which, what could Brandenburg and
the others do ; but whimper some tremblii^g protest, Clear
against Law!” — and sit obedient? The Evangelical Union
did not now any more than formerly draw out its fighting-tools.
In fact, the Evangelical Union now fairly dissolved itself ;
melted into a deliquium of terrcs: under these thunderbolts that
were flying, and was no more heard of in the world.—

Second Act, or Epoch, 1624-1629. A second Uncle put to the
Ban, and Fommern simtched away*

Except in the * Nether- Saxon Circle' (distant North-west
region, with its Hanover, Mecklenburg, with its rich Ham
burgs, Lubecks, Magdeburgs, all Protestant, and abutting on
the Protestant North), trembling Germany lay ridden over as
the Kaiser willed. Foreign League got up by P'rance, King
James, Christian IV. of Denmark (James’s Brother-in-law, with
whom he had such ‘ drinking* in Somerset House, long ago, on
Christian’s visit hither^*), went to water, or worse. Only the
* Nether-Saxon Circle' showed some life ; was levying an army;
and had appointed Christian of Brunswick its Captain, till he

9 KSWer, ReicJis-Hisiorie, p. 520. '» 22d Jan, 1691 {Hfid, p. 518).

® Old Histones oi James I. t Wilson, &c.)

*36 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiii.

was got pdsoned ; — upon which the drinking King of Den-
mark took the command.

Act Second goes from 1624 to 1627 or even *29 ; and con-
tains drunken Christian’s Exploits. Which were unfortunate,
almost to the ruin of Denmark itself, as well as of the Nether-
Saxon Circle ; — till in the latter of these years he slightly ral-
lied, and got a supportable Peace granted him (Peace of Liibeck,
1629) ; after which he sits quiet, contemplative, with an evil
eye upon Sweden now and then. The beatings he got, in quite
regular succession, from Tilly and Consorts, are not worth men-
tioning : the only thing one now remembers of him is his alarm-
ing accident on the ramparts of Hameln, just at the opening
of these Campaigns. At 'Hameln, which was to be a strong
post, drunken Christian rode out once, on a summer afternoon
(1624), to see that the ramparts were all right, or getting all
right ; — and tumbled, horse and self (self in liquor, it is thought),
in an ominous alarming manner. Taken up for dead ; — nay
some of the vague Histories seem to think he was really dead :
— but he lived to/bc often beaten after that, and had many
moist years more.

Our Kurfiirst had another Uncle put to the Ban in this Se-
cond Act, — Christian Wilhelm %\rchbishop of Magdeburg, ‘for
assisting the Danish King ;* nor was Ban all the ruin that fell
on this poor Archbishop. What could an unfortunate Kurfiirst
do, but tremble and obey ? There was still a worse smart got
by our poor Kurfurst out of Act Second ; the glaring injustice
done him in Pommern. ^

Does the reader remember that scene in the High Church
of Stettin a hundred-and-fifty years ago ? How the Burger-
meister threw sword and helmet into the grave of the last Duke
of Pommern-Stettin there ; and a forward Citizen picked them
out again in favour of a Collateral Branch ? Never since, any
more than then, could Brandenburg get Pommern according to
claim. Collateral Branch, in spite of Friedrich Ironteeth, in
spite even of Albert Achilles and some fighting of his, con-
trived, by pleading at the Diets and stirring-up noise, to main-
tain its pretensions : and Treaties without end ensued, as
usual ; Treaties refreshed and new-signed by every Successor
ot Albert, to a wearisome degree. The sum oi which always
was : “ Pommern does actual homage to Brandenburg ; vassal

rHIRTY*YEARS WAR,

cawp. XVI.

zo-x2th May 1631.

5 ^ 33 ^

of Brandenburg ; — and falls home to it, if the now Extant Line
go extinct” Nay there is an ErbverbrUderung (Heritage-Fra-
ternity) over and above, established this long time, and weaii-
somely renewed at every new Accession. Hundreds of Treaties,
oppressive to think of : — and now the last Duke, old Bogislaus,
is here, without hope of children ; and the fruit of all that hag-
gling, actual Pommern to wit, will at last fall home ? Alas,
no ; far otherwise.

For the Kaiser having so triumphantly swept-off the Win-
ter-King, and Christian IV. in the rear of him, and got Ger-
many ready for converting to Orthodoxy, — wished now to have
some hold of the Seaboard, thereby to punish Denmark ; nay
thereby, as is hoped, to extend the blessings of Orthodoxy into
England, Sweden, Holland, and the other Heretic States, in
due time. P'or our plans go far ! This is the Kaiser’s fixed
wish, rising to the rank of hope now and then : all Europe shall
become Papist again by the help of God and the Devil. So
the Kaiser, on hardly any pretext, seized Mecklenburg from the
Proprietors, —“Traitors, how durst you join^anish Christian?”
— and made Wallenstein Duke of it. Duke of Mecklenburg,
“ Admiral of the East Sea (Baltic) and set to ‘ building ships
of war in Rostock,’ — his plans going far.^ This done, he seized
Pommern, which also is a fin^ Sea-country, — stirring-up Max
of Bavaria to make some idle pretence to Pommern, that so
the Kaiser might seize it ‘in sequestration till decided on.* Un-
der which hard treatment, George Wilhelm had to sit sad and
silent, — though the Stralsunders would not. Hence the world-
famous Siege of Stralsund (1628) ; fierce Wallenstein declaring,
“ I will have ftie Town, if it hung by a chain from Heaven
but finding he could not get it ; owing to the Swedish succour,
to the stubborn temper prevalent among the Townsfolk, and
also greatly to the rains and peat-bogs.

A second Uncle of George Wilhelm's, that unlucky Arch-
bishop of Magdeburg above-mentioned, the Kaiser, once more
by his own arbitrary will, put under Ban of the Empire, in this
Second Act : “ Traitor, how durst you join with the Danes ?”
The result of which was Tilly’s Sack of Magdeburg (io-i2th
May 1631), a transaction never forgettable by mankind. — As
for Pommern, Gustav Adolf, on his intervening in these mat-
ters, landed there : Pommern was now seized by Gustav Adolf,

® Kohler, Rekfu-’Historie, pp. 524, 523.

ajS HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. BookiiL

>630-1640,

as a landing-place and place-of-arms, indispensable for Sweden
in the present emergency ; and was so held thenceforth. Pom-
mern will not fall to George Wilhelm at this time.

Third Act^ and what the Kurfurst suffered in it

And now we are at Act Third: — Landing of Gustav Adolf
* in the Isle of Usedom, 24th June 1630,’ and onward for Eight-
een Years till the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648 ; — on which,
as probably better known to the reader, we will not here go
into details. In this Third Act too, George Wilhelm followed
his old scheme, peace at any price ; — as shy of Gustav as he
had been of other Champions oi the Cause ; and except com-
plaining, petitioning and manifestoing, studiously did nothing.

Poor man, it was his fate to stand in the range of these
huge collisions, — Bridge of Dessau, Siege of Stralsund, Sack
of Magdeburg, Battle of Leipzig, — where the Titans were bowl-
ing rocks at one another ; and he hoped, by dextrous skipping,
to escape share o^he game. To keep well with his Kaiser,-—
and such a Kaiser to Germany and to him, — this, for George
Wilhelm, was always the first commandment. If the Kaiser
confiscate your Uncles, against law ; seize your Pommern ; rob
you on the public highways, — peorge Wilhelm, even in such
case, is full of dubitations. Nay his Prime -Minister, one
Schwartzenberg, a Catholic, an Austrian Official at one time,
— Progenitor of the Austrian Schwartzenbergs that now are,
— was secretly in the Kaiser’s interest, and is even thought to
have been in the Kaiser’s pay, all along.

Gustav, at his first landing, had seized Pommern, and swept
it clear of Austiians, for himself and for hi^ own wants ; not too
regardful of George Wilhelm’s claims on it. He cleared-out
Frankfurt-on-Oder, Ciistrin and other Brandenburg Towns, in
a similar manner, — by cannon and storm, when needful ; — drove
the Imperialists and Tilly forth of these countries. Advancing,
next year, to save Magdeburg, now shrieking under Tilly’s bom-
bardment, Gustav insisted on having, if not some bond of union
from his Brother-in-law of Brandenburg, at least the temporary
cession of two Places of War for himself, Spandau and Ciis-
trin, indispensable in any farther operation. Which cession
Kurfurst George Wilhelm, though giving all his prayers to the

THIRTY-YEARS WAR.

Chap. XVI.
3d May 1631.

2S9

Good Cause, could by no means grant. Gustav had to insist,
with more and more emphasis ; advancing at last, with mili-
tary menace, upon Berlin itself. He was mec by George Wil-
helm and his Council, *in the woods of Cdpenick,’ short way
to the east of that City : there George Wilhelm and his Coun-
cil wandered about, sending messages, hopelessly consulting ;
saying among each other, ** Que faire; its ont des canons^
What can one do ; they have got cannon ?”7 For many hours
so ,* round the inflexible Gustav, — who was there like a fixed
milestone, and to all questions and comers had only one ans-
W’er I — “ Que faire; ils ont des canons f This was the 3d May
1631. This probably is about the nadir-point of the Brandcn*
burg-Hohenzollern History. The little Friedrich, who became
Frederick the Great, in writing of it, has a certain grim banter
in his tone ; and looks rather with mockery on the perplexities
of his poor Ancestor, so fatally ignorant of the time of day it
had now become.

On the whole, George W^ilhelm did what is to be called no-
thing, in the Thirty-Years War ; his functi^ji was only that of
suffering. He followed always the bad lead of Johann George,
Elector of Saxony ; a man of no strength, devoutness or ade-
quate human worth ; who proved, on these negative grounds,
and without flagrancy of positivs badness, an unspeakable curse
to Germany. Not till the Kaiser fulminated forth his Restitu-
tion-Edict, and showed he was in earnest about it (1629-1631),
** Restore to our Holy Church what you have taken from her
since the Peace of Passau !” — could this Johann George pre-
vail upon himself to join Sweden, or even to do other than hate
it for reasons fie saw. Seized by the throat in this manner, and
ordered to deliver, Kur-Sachsen did, and Brandenburg along
with him, make Treaty with the Swede.® In consequence of
which they two, some months after, by way of cooperating
with Gustav on his great march Vienna-ward, sent an invading
force into Bohemia, Brandenburg contributing some poor 3,000
to it ; who took Prag, and some other open Towns ; but
‘did almost nothing there,* say the Histories, ‘except dine
‘ and drink.* It is clear enough they were instantly scattered

7 CEuvres deFrSdtric le Grand (Berlin, 1846-1856 et seqq. : Mimoiresde Brande*

i. 38. For the rest, Friedrich's Account of the Transaction is very loose and
scanty: see Pauli (iv. 568) and his minute details.

8 8th February 1631 (Kbhler, Reichs-Historie, pp. 536-53x)*

440 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookm,

1638-1640.

homed at the first glimpse of Wallenstein dawning on the hori*
zon aga(in in those parts.

Gustav having vanished (Field of Liitzen, 6th November
1632^0), Oxenstiern, with his high attitude, and ‘Presidency*
of the ‘ Union of Heilbronn,* was rather an offence to Kur-
Sachsen, who used to be foremost man on such occasions. Kur-
Sachsen broke away again ; made his Peace of Prag,ii whom
Brandenburg again followed ; Brandenburg and gradually all
the others, except the noble Wilhelm of Hessen-Cassel alone.
Miserable Peace ; bit of Chaos clouted up, and done over with
Official varnish ; — ^which proved to be the signal for continuing
the War beyond visible limits, and rendering peace impos-
sible.

After this, George Wilhelm retires from the scene ; lives in
Custrin mainly ; mere miserable days, which shall be invisible
to us. He died in 1640; and, except producing an active
brave Son very unlike himself, did nothing considerable in the
world. “ Que faire ; Us ont des canons f*

Among the innumerable sanguinary tussellings of this War
are counted Three great Battles, Leipzig, Liitzen, Ndrdlingen.
Under one great Captain, Swedish Gustav, and the two or
three other considerable Captains, who appeared in it, high
passages of furious valour, of fine strategy and tactic, are on
record. But on the whole, the grand weapon in it, and to-
wards the latter times the exclusive one, was Hunger. The
opposing Armies tried to starve one another ; at lowest, tried
each not to starve. Each trying to eat the country, or at any
rate to leave nothing eatable in it : what that wiil mean for the
country, we may consider. As the Armies too frequently, and
the Kaiser’s Armies habitually, lived without commissariat, often
enough without pay, all horrors of war and of being a seat of
war, that have been since heard of, arc poor to those then prac-
tised. The detail of which is still horrible to read. Germany,
in all eatable quarters of it, had to undergo the process ; — tor-
tured, torn to pieces, wrecked, and brayed as in a mortar under
the iron mace of war. 12 Brandenburg saw its towns sieged and

9 October 1633 (Steruel, i. 503),

Pauli, IV. 576. n 1635, 20th May (Stenzel, i. 513).

19 Curious incidental details of the state it was reduced to, in the Rhine andDaUtube
Countries, turn-up in the Earl of Arundel and Surrey’s Travels ( ‘Arundel of the Mar-
bles’) as A fnbassador Extraordinary to tkt Emj^ror Ferdinando //. in 1636(0
snaU Volume, or Pamphlet, London, 1637).

Chap. XVII. DUCHY OF JAGERNDORF. S4>

x630-]:(S40.

sacked, its country populations driven to despair, by the one
party and the other. Three times,— first in the Wallenstein
Mecklenburg period, while fire and sword were the weapons,
and again, twice over, in the ultimate stages of the struggle,
when starvation had become the method, — Brandenburg fell
to be the principal theatre of conflict, where all forms of the
dismal were at their height. In 1638, three years after that
precious * Peace of Prag,’ the Swedes (Banier versus Gallas)
starving-out the Imperialists in those North-Western parts, the
ravages of the starving Gallas and his Imperialists excelled all
precedent ; and the * famine about Tangermiinde had risen so

* high that men ate human flesh, nay human creatures ate their

* own children. ’^3 « Que fairs s Us out dcs canons T

CHAPTER XVII.

DUCHY OF JAGERNDORF.

Thus unfortunate George Wilhelm faileJ> in getting Pom-
mern when due; Pornmern, firmly held by the Swedes, was far
from him. But that was not the only loss of territory he had.
jagerndorf, — we have heard of Johann George of jagerndorf,
Uncle of this George Wilhelm, how old Joachim Friedrich put
him into Jagerndorf, long since, when it fell home to the Elec-
toral House. Jagerndorf is now lost; Johann George is under
Reichs-Acht (Ban of Empire), ever since the Winter-King’s ex-
plosion, and the thunderbolts that followed ; and wanders land-
less ; — nay he ij long since dead, and has six-feet of earth for
a territory, far away in Transylvania, or the Riesen-Gebirge
(Giant-Mountains) somewhere. Concerning whom a word now.

Duke of Jagerndorf Electors Unclc^ is put under Ban.

Johann George, a frank-hearted valiant man, concerning
whom only good actions, and no bad one, are on record, had
notable troubles in the world; bad troubles to begin with, and
worse to end in. He was second Son of Kurfiirst Joachim
Friedrich, who had meant him for the Church. ^ The young
fellow was Coadjutor ofStrasburg, almost from the time of get-
ting into short-clothes. He was then, still very young, elected

1638: Pauli, iv. 604. 1 X577-X624 : Rentsch, p. 486.

VOL, T. B

24» HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book in.

x 62 o*j 64 o

Bishop there (1592); Bishop of Strasburg,— but only by the
Protestant part of the Canons ; the Catholic part, unable to
submit longer, and thinking it a good time for revolt against
a Protestant population and obstinately heterodox majority,
elected another Bishop, — one * Karl of the House of Lorraine ;*
and there came to be dispute, and came even to be fighting
needed. Fighting ; which prudent Papa would not enter into,
except faintly at second-hand, through the Anspach Cousins,
or others that were in the humour. Troublesome times for the
young man; which lasted a dozen years or more. At last a
Bargain was made ( 1 604 ) ; Protestant and Catholic Canons
splitting the difference in some way ; and the House of Lorraine
paying Johann George a great deal of money to go home again.s
Poor Johann George came out of it in that way; second-
best, think several.

He was then (1606) put into Jagerndorf, which had just
fallen vacant; our excellent fat friend, George Friedrich of An-
spach, Administrator of Preussen, having lately died, and left
it vacant, as we*saw. George Friedrich’s death yielded fine
apanages, three of them in all : Anspach, second Baireuth,

and this third of Jagerndorf for a still younger Brother. There
was still a fourth younger Brother, Uncle of George Wilhelm;
Archbishop of Magdeburg thi§ one ; who also, as we have seen,
got into Reicks-Acht, into deep trouble in the Thirty -Years
War. He was in Tilly’s thrice-murdcrous Storm of Magdeburg
(loth May 1631); was captured, tumbled about by the wild
soldiery, and nearly killed there. Poor man, with his mitre and
rochets left in such a state ! In the end he even became Catholic^
— from conviction, as was evident, and bewilderment of mind ;
— and lived in Austria on a pension ; occasionally publishing
polemical pamphlets.-’* —

As to Johann George, he much repaired and beautified the
Castle of Jagerndorf, says Rentsch: but he unfortunately went
ahead into the Winter-King’s adventure; which, in that sad
battle ofthe Weissenberg, made total shipwreck of itself, draw-
ing Johann George and much else along with it. Johann George
was straightway tyrannously put to the Ban, forfeited of life
and lands Johann George disowned the said Ban ; stood out

* CEuvres computes de Voltaire^ 97 vols. (Paris, 1825-32), xxxuL 284.— -KShler
{JRekks-Uistorie^ p. 487) gives the autiientic particulars.

* 1587; 1628; 1665 (Rentsch, pp. pos-oxo).

* 22d January 1621 (KOhler, Eetchs-Hutork, p« 5x8; and rectify Hhhner, tab.

Chap-xvili. KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. 243

x694.

fiercely for self and Winter-King'; and did good fighting in the
Silesian strongholds and mountain-passes : but was forced to
seek temporary shelter in Siebenbiirgen (Transylvania) ; and
died far away, in a year or two (1624), while returning to try
it again. Sleeps, I think, in the “ Jablunka Pass;” the dumb
Giant-Mountains {Riesen-Gedirge) shrouding-up his sad ship-
wreck and him.

Jagerndorf was thus seized by Ferdinand II. of the House
of Hapsburg; and though it was contrary to all law that the
Kaiser should keep it, — ^poor Johann George having left Sons
very innocent of treason, and Brothers, and an Electoral Ne-
phew, very innocent ; to whom, by old compacts and new, the
Heritage in defect of him was to fall, — neither Kaiser Ferdi-
nand II. nor Kaiser Ferdinand III. nor any Kaiser would let-
go the hold; but kept Jagerndorf fast clenched, deaf to all
pleadings, and monitions of gods or men. Till at length, in the
fourth generation afterwards, one “ Friedrich the Second,” not
unknown to us, — a sharp little man, little in stature, but large
in faculty and renown, who is now called “Frederick the Great,”
— clutched hold of the Imperial fist (so to speak), seizing his
opportunity in 1740; and so wrenched and twisted said close
fist, that not only Jagerndorf dropped out of it, but the whole
of Silesia along with JagernddJrf, there being other claims
withal. And the account was at last settled, with compound
interest, — as in fact such accounts are sure to be, one way or
other. And so we leave Johann George among the dumb Giant-
Mountains again.

CHAPTER XVIII.

FRIEDRICH WILHELM, THE GREAT KURFURST, ELEVENTH OF
THE SERIES.

Brandenburg had again sunk very low under the Tenth
Elector, in the unutterable troubles of the times. But it was
gloriously raised up again by his Son Friedrich Wilhelm, who
succeeded in 1640. This is he whom they call the ‘‘Great
Elector {Grosse Kurfurst ) ;” of whom there is much writing
and celebrating in Prussian Books. As for the epithet, it is
not uncommon among petty German populations, and many
times does not mean too much : thus Max of Bavaria, with
his Jesuit Lambkins and Hyacinths, is, by Bavarians, called

i44 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book m.

1640*1688.

‘‘Maximilian the Great.** Friedrich Wilhelm, both by his in-
trinsic qualities and the success he met with, deserves it better
than most. His success, if we look where he started add where
he ended, was beyond that of any other man in his day. He
found Brandenburg annihilated, and he left Brandenburg sound
and flourishing; a great country, or already on the way to-
wards greatness. Undoubtedly a most rapid, clear-eyed, active
man. There was a stroke in him swift as lightning, well-aimed
mostly, and of a respectable weight withal ; which shattered
asunder a whole world of impediments for him, by assiduous
repetition of it for fifty years. 1

There hardly ever came to sovereign power a young man
of twenty under more distressing, hopeless -looking circum-
stances. Political significance Brandenburg had none ; a mere
Protestant appendage dragged about by a Papist Kaiser. His
Father's Prime-Minister, as we have seen, was in the interest
of his enemies ; not Brandenburg’s servant, but Austria’s. The
very Commandants of his Fortresses, Commandant ofSpandau
more especially, •fcfuscd to obey Friedrich Wilhelm, on his ac-
cession; ‘‘were bound to obey the Kaiser in the first place.”
He had to proceed softly as well as swiftly ; with the most
delicate hand to get him of Spandau by the collar, and put him
under lock-and-key, him as a* warning to others.

For twenty years past, Brandenburg had been scoured by
hostile armies, which, especially the Kaiser’s part of which,
committed outrages new in human history. In a year or two
hence, Brandenburg became again the theatre of business;
Austrian Gallas advancing thither again (1^44), with intent
'to shut-up Torstenson and his Swedes in Jutland,’ where they
had been chastising old Christian IV., now meddlesome again,
for the last time, and never a good neighbour to Sweden. Gal-
las could by no means do what he intended ; on the contrary,
he had to run from Torstenson, what feet could do ; was hunted,
he and his Merode-B ruder (beautiful inventors of the “ Maraud-
ing” Art), ‘ till they pretty much all died (crepirten)* says Kdh-
ler.2 No great loss to society, the death of these Artists ; but
%ve can fancy what their life, and especially what the process
of their dying, may have cost poor Brandenburg again 1 —
Friedrich Wilhelm’s aim, in this as in other emergencies,

> 1620; 1640; 1688.

• Reichs'Historiet p. 556 ; Pauli, v. 24.

aap. 3tvin. KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. ^^45

1644.

was sun-clear to hitnself, but for most part dim to everybody
else. He had to walk very warily, Sweden on one hand of
him, suspicious Kaiser on the other; he had to wear semblance's,
to be ready with evasive words ; and advance noiselessly by
many circuits. More delicate operation could not be imagined.
But advance he did ; advance and arrive. With extraordinary
talent, diligence and felicity the young man wound himself out
of this first fatal position ; got those foreign Armies pushed out
of his Country, and kept them out. His first concern had been
to find some vestige of revenue, to put that upon a clear foot-
ing ; and by loans or otherwise to scrape a little ready-money
together. On the strength of which a small body of soldiers
could be collected about him, and drilled into real ability to
fight and obey. This as a basis ; on this followed all manner
of things ; freedom from Swedish-Austrian invasions, as the first
thing.

He was himself, as appeared by and by, a fighter of the
first quality, when it came to that ; but never was willing to
fight if he could help it. Preferred rather V shift, manceuvre
and negotiate ; which he did in a most vigilant, adroit and mas-
terly manner. But by degrees he had grown to have, and could
maintain it, an Army of 24,000 men ; among the best troops
then in being. With or without»his will, he was in all the great
Wars of his time, — the lime of Louis XIV., who kindled Europe
four times over, thrice in our Kurfurst’s day. The Kurfiirst’s
Dominions, a long straggling country, reaching from Memel to
Wesel, could hardly keep out of the way of any war that might
rise. He madj himself available, never against the good cause
of Protestantism and German Freedom, yet always in the place
and way where his own best advantage was to be had. Louis
XIV. had often much need of him ; still oftener, and more
pressingly, had Kaiser Leopold, the little Gentleman ‘in scarlet
stockings, with a red feather in his hat,’ whom Mr. Savage
used to see majestically walking about, with Austrian lip that
said nothing at all.3 His 24,000 excellent fighting-men, thrown

^ A Comfileat History of Germany, by Mr. Savage (8vo, London, 1702), p. 553.
who this Mr. Savage was, we have no trace. Prefixed to the volume the Portrait
of a solid Gentleman of forty ; gloomily polite, with ample wig^ and cravat, ~in all
likelihood some studious subaltern Diplomatist in the Succes'>ion War. His little
Book i.s very lean and barren ; but faithfully compiled,— and might have some illu-
mination in it, where utter darkness is so prevalent. Most likely, Addison picked
his story of the Siege 0/ Weinsberg (‘Women carrying out their Husbands on their
back,’ — one of his best Spectators) out of this poor Book.

246 HOIPNZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookitt.

^ 1640-1688.

in at the right time, were often a thing that could turn the
balance in great questions. They required to be allowed for at
a high rate, — ^which he well knew how to ddjust himself for ex-
acting and securing always.

What became of Pommern at the Peace; final Glance into
Cleve-Jiilich.

When the Peace of Westphalia (1648) concluded that
Thirty-Years Conflagration, and swept the ashes of it into order
again, Friedrich Wilhelm’s right to Pommern was admitted by
everybody ; and well insisted on by himself : but right had to
yield to reason of state, and he could not get it. The Swedes
insisted on their expenses ; the Swedes held Pommern, had all
along held it, — in pawn, they said, for their expenses. Nothing
for it but to give the Swedes the better half of Pommern.
i^(i?r^-Pommern (so they call it, “ Swedish Pomerania” thence-
forth), which lies next the Sea; this, with some Towns and
cuttings over and above, was Sweden’s share: Friedrich Wil-
helm had to put-u{> with //?W<?r-Pommern, docked furthermore
of the Town of Stettin, and of other valuable cuttings, in favour
of Sweden. Much to Friedrich Wilhelm’s grief and just anger,
could he have helped it.

They gave him Three secularised Bishoprics, Magdeburg,
Halberstadt, Minden, with other small remnants, for compen-
sation ; and he had to be content with these for the present.
But he never gave -up the idea of Pommern ; much of tlie
effort of his life was spent upon recovering Fore-Pommern ;
thrice-eager upon that, whenever lawful oppoKunity offered.
To no purpose then ; he never could recover Swedish Pom-
mern ; only his late descendants, and that by slowish degrees,
could recover it all. Readers remember that Biirgermeister
of Stettin, with the helmet and sword flung into the grave and
picked out again ; — and can judge whether Brandenburg got
its good-luck quite by lying in bed ! —

Once, and once only, he had a voluntary purpose towards
War, and it remained a purpose only. Soon after the Peace
of Westphalia, old Pfalz-Neuburg, the same who got the slap
on the face, went into tyrannous proceedings against the Pro-
testant part of his subjects in Jiilich-Cleve ; who called to
Friedrich Willielm for help. Friedrich Wilhelm, a zealous

Chap. xvui. KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. 24 f

1648.

Protestant, made remonstrances, retaliations : ere long the
thought struck him, ** Suppose, backed b> the Dutch, we threw-
out this fantastic old gentleman, his Papistri^'s, and pretended
claims and self, clear out of it ?” This was Friedrich Wilhelm’s
thought ; and he suddenly marched troops into the Territory,
with that view. Put Europe was in alarm, the Dutch grew
faint : Friedrich Wilhelm saw it would not do. He had a con-
ference with old Pfalz-Neuburg : “Young gentleman, we re-
member how your Grandfather made free with us and our
august countenance ! Nevertheless we — ” In fine, the ‘ sta-
tistic of Treaties* was increased by One; and there the matter
rested till calmer times.

In 1666, as already said, an effective Partition of these
litigated Territories was accomplished : Prussia to have the
Duchy of Cleve-Proper, the Counties of Mark and Ravens-
berg, with other Patches and Pertinents ; Neuburg, what was
the better share, to have Jiilich Duchy and Berg Duchy.^
Furthermore, if either of the Lines failed, in no sort was a
collateral to be admitted ; but Brandenl^urg was to inherit
Neuburg, or Neubuig Brandenburg, as tlfe case might bc.^
A clear Bargain this at last ; and in the times that had come,
it proved executable so far. But if the reader fancies the
Lawsuit was at last out in this way, he will be a simple reader 1
In the days of our little Fritz, the Line of Pfalz-Neuburg was
evidently ending ; but that Brandenburg and not a collateral
should succeed it, there lay the quarrel, — open still, as if it
had never been shut ; and we shall hear enough about it ! —

Ti^e Great iturfursfs Wars: what he achieved in War and
Peace,

Friedrich Wilhelm’s first actual appearance in War, Polish-
Swedish War (1655-1660), was involuntary in the highest de-
gree ; forced upon him for the sake of his Preussen, which
bade fair to be lost or ruined, without blame of his or its.
Nevertheless, here too he made his benefit of the affair. The
big King of Sweden had a standing quarrel with his big Cou-
sin of Poland, which broke-out into hot War ; little Preussen
lay between them, and was like to be crushed in the collision.
Swedish King was Karl Gustav, Christina’s Cousin, Charles

^ See Map at p. 214. ® Pauli, v. xso-isp.

148 h6hENZ0LLERNS in BRANDENBURG. Boofciil.

1S40-Z6S8L

Twelfth’s Grandfather ; a great and mighty man, lion of the
North in his time : Polish King was one J ohn Casimir ; chival-
rous enough, and with clouds of forward Polish chivalry about
him, glittering with barbaric gold. Frederick III., Danish
King for the time being, he also was much involved in the
ching. Fain would Friedrich Wilhelm have kept out of it, but
he could not. Karl Gustav as good as forced him to join: he
joined ; fought along with Karl Gustav an illustrious Battle ;
“Battle of Warsaw,” three days long (28-30th July 1656), on
the skirts of Warsaw, — crowds * looking from the upper win-
dows’ there ; Polish chivalry, broken at last, going like chaff
upon the winds, and John Casimir nearly ruined.

Shortly after which, Friedrich Wilhelm, who had shone
much in the Battle, changed sides. An inconsistent, treach-
erous man ? Perhaps not, O reader ; perhaps a man advanc-
ing * in circuits,’ the only way he has ; spirally, face now to
east, now to west, with his own reasonable private aim sun-
clcar to him all the while ?

John Casimir 2^j«freed to give-up the * Homage of Preussen’
for this service ; a grand prize for Friedrich Wilhelm.® What
the Teutsch Ritters strove for in vain, and lost their existence
in striving for, the shifty Kurfiirst has now got : Ducal Prussia,
which is also called East Pruss^, is now a free sovereignty, —
and will become as “ Royal” as the other Polish part. Or
perhaps even more so, in the course of time I — Karl Gustav,
in a high frame of mind, informs the Kurfiirst, that he has
him on his books, and will pay the debt one day I

A dangerous debtor in such matters, this Kajl Gustav. In
these same months, busy with the Danish part of the Contro-
versy, he was doing a feat of war, which set all Europe in
astonishment. In January 1658, Karl Gustav marches his
Army, horse, foot and artillery, to the extent of twenty-thou-
sand, across the Baltic ice, and takes an Island without ship-
ping, — Island of Fiinen, across the Little Belt ; three miles of
ice ; and a part of the sea open, which has to be crossed on
planks. N ay, forward from F linen, when once there, he achieves
ten whole miles more of ice ; and takes Zealand itself,^ — to the
wonder of all mankind. An imperious, stern-browed, swift-strik-

® Tireatv of La'oiaii, loth November 1656 (Pauli, v. 73-75): aoth November
(Stenzcl, iv. 128, — who always uses Netu Style's.

^ Holberg’s D&HemarkUche Retchs-Histonc, pp. 406-409.

Chap. XVIII. KURPURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. 349

X64O-16BB,

ing man ; who had dreamed of a new Goth Empire : The mean
Hypocrites and Fribbles of the South to be coerced again by
noble Norse valour, and taught a new lesson. Has been known
to lay his hand on his sword while apprising an Ambassador
(Dutch High-Mightiness) what his royal intentions were : ** Not
the sale or purchase of groceries, observe you, Sir ! My aims
go higher!” — Charles Twelfth’s Grandfather, and somewhat
the same type of man.

But Karl Gustav died, short while after ;® left his big wide-
raging Northern Controversy to collapse in what way it could.
Sweden and the fighting-parties made their ‘ Peace of Oliva'
(Abbey of Oliva, near Dantzig, ist May 1660); and this of
Preussen was ratified, in all form, among the other points.
No homage more ; nothing now above Ducal Prussia but the
Heavens ; and great times coming for it. This was one of
the successfulest strokes of business ever done by Friedrich
Wilhelm ; who had been forced, by sheer compulsion, to em-
bark in that big game. — * Royal Prussia,’ the Western or Polish
Prussia : this too, as all Newspapers know,Vias, in our times,
gone the same road as the other. Which probably, after all,
it may have had, in Nature, some tendency to do ? Cut away,
for reasons, by the Polish sword, in that Battle of Tannenberg,
long since ; and then, also for r^iasons, cut back again ! That
is the fact ; — not unexampled in human History.

Old Johann Casimir, not long after that Peace of Oliva,
getting tired of his unruly Polish chivalry and their ways, ab-
dicated ; — retired to Paris ; and * lived much with Ninon de
I’Enclos and h^ circle,’ for the rest of his life. He used to
complain of his Polish chivalry, that there was no solidity in
them ; nothing but outside glitter, with tumult and anarchic
noise ; fatal want of one essential talent, the talent of Obeying ;
and has been heard to prophesy that a glorious Republic, per-
sisting in such courses, would arrive at results which would
surprise it.

Onward from this time, Friedrich Wilhelm figures in the
world ; public men watching his procedure ; Kings anxious to
secure him, — Dutch printsellers sticking-up his Portraits for a
hero-worshipping Public. Fighting hero, had the Public known
it, was not his essential character, though he had to fight a
8 13th February 1660, age 38.

^50 H0HEN20LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookllt,

im.

Ipreat deal He was essentially an Industrial man ; great in
organising, regulating, in constraining chaotic heaps to become
cosmic for him. He drains bogs, settles colonies in the waste-
places of his Dominions, cuts canals ; unweariedly encourages
trade and work. The Friedrich- Wilhelm' s Canals which still
carries tonnage from the Oder to the Spree,9 is a monument
of his zeal in this way; creditable, with the means he had.
To the poor French Protestants, in the Edict-of-Nantes Affair,
he was like an express Benefit of Heaven ; one Helper ap-
pointed, to whom the help itself was profitable. He munifi-
cently welcomed them to Brandenburg ; showed really a noble
piety and human pity, as well as judgment ; nor did Branden-
burg and he want their reward. Some 20,000 nimble French
souls, evidently of the best French quality, found a home
there ; — made * waste sands about Berlin into potherb gar-
dens and in the spiritual Brandenburg, too, did something
of horticulture, which is still noticeable.

Certainly this Elector was one of the shiftiest of men. Not
;in unjust man either. A pious, god-fearing man rather, staunch
to his Protestantism and his Bible ; not unjust by any means,
— nor, on the other hand, by any means thick-skinned in his
interpretings of justice : Fairplay to myself always ; or occa-
sionally even the Height of Fairplay I On the whole, by con-
stant energy, vigilance, adroit activity, by an ever-ready insight
and audacity to seize the passing fact by its right handle, he
fought his way well in the world ; left Brandenburg a flourish-
ing and greatly-increased Country, and his own name famous
enough.

A thickset stalwart figure ; with brisk eyes, Snd high strong
irregularly-Roman nose. Good bronze Statue of him, by Schlu-
ter, once a famed man, still rides on the Lange-Brucke (Long-
Bridge) at Berlin ; and his Portrait, in huge frizzled Louis-
Quatorze wig, is frequently met with in German Galleries.
Collectors of Dutch Prints, too, know him : here a gallant,
eagle-featured little gentleman, brisk in the smiles of youth,
with plumes, with truncheon, caprioling on his war-charger,
view of tents in the distance ; — there a sedate, ponderous,

9 Executed, x662*68; fifteen English miles long (Busching, ErdbescJireibung, vi.
8x93).

*0 Erman (weak Biographer of Queen Sophie-Charlotte, already cited), Mimoircs
paur servtr d VHtsiotre dcs Frangais dans les Etais du Roi de Pmtsf

(Berlm, 1782-94), 8 tt. 8vo.

Chap.XVnL KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. ^51

wrinkly old man, eyes slightly puckered (eyes busier than
mouth) ; a face well-ploughed by Time, and not found unfruit-
ful; one of the largest, most laborious, potent taces (in an ocean
of circumambient periwig) to be met with in that Century.
There are many Histories about him, too ; but they are not
comfortable to read. 12 He also has wanted a sacred Poet ;
and found only a bewildering Dryasdust.

His Two grand Feats that dwell in the Prussian memory
are perhaps none of his greatest, but were of a ‘kind to strike
the imagination. They both relate to what was the central
problem of his life, — the recovery of Pommern from the Swedes.
Exploit First is the famed ‘Battle oi FehrbelHn (Ferry ofBel-
\een),' fought on the i8.th June 1675. Fehrbellin is an incon-
siderable Town still standing in those peaty regions, some five-
and-thirty miles north-west of Berlin ; and had for ages plied
its poor Ferry over the oily-looking, brown, sluggish stream
called Rhin, or Rhein in those parts, without the least notice
from mankind, till this fell out. It is a plajp of pilgrimage to
patriotic Prussians, ever since Friedrich Wilhelm’s exploit there.
The matter went thus :

Friedrich Wilhelm was fighting, far south in Alsace, on
Kaiser Leopold’s side, in the Lpuis-Fourteenth War; that se-
cond one, which ended in the treaty of Nimwegen. Doing his
best there, — when the Swedes, egged-on by Louis XIV., made
war upon him ; crossed the Pomeranian marches, troop after
troop, and invaded his Brandenburg Territory with a force
which at length amounted to some 16,000 men. No help for
the moment ; Fl-iedrich Wilhelm could not be spared from his
post. The Swedes, who had at first professed well, gradually
went into plunder, roving, harrying, at thcii own will ; and a
melancholy time they made of it for Friedrich Wilhelm and his
People. Lucky if temporary harm were all the ill they were
likely to do; lucky if — ! He stood steady, however; in his
solid manner, finishing the thing in hand first, since that was

u Both Prints are Butch ; the Younger, my copy of the Younger, has lost the
Engraver’s Name (Kurfurst’s age is twenty-seven); the Elder is hy Masson, i<)83,
when Friedrich Wilhelm was sixty-three.

G. D. Geyler, Leben und Thaten Friedrich Wilhelms des Grossen (Frankfort
and Leipzig, 1703), folio. Franz Horn, Das Leben Friedrich Wilhelms <^s Grossen
(Berlin, 1814). Pauli, Siaats-GesekUhte, Band v. (Halle, 1764). Pufendorf, De re-
bus gesits Frtderici Wilkehnt Magni Ekctoris Brandenburgensis Commentaria
(Lips, ct BeroL 1733, fol.>.

252 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book HI.

Z640.X68S.

feasible. He then even retired into winter-quarters, to rest his
men; and seemed to have left the Swedish 16,000 autocrats
of the situation ; who accordingly went storming about at a
great rate.

Not so, however ; very far indeed from so. Having rested
his men for certain months, Friedrich Wilhelm silently in the
first days of J une (1675) them under march again ; marches,

his Cavalry and he as first instalment, with best speed ftom
Schweinfurt,!® which is on the river Mayn, to Magdeburg; a
distance of two-hundred miles. At Magdeburg, where he rests
three days, waiting for the first handful of foot and a field-piece
or two, he learns that the Swedes are in three parties wide
asunder ; the middle party of them within forty miles of him.
Probably stronger, even this middle one, tljan his small body
(of ‘Six-thousand Horse, Twelve-hundred Foot and three guns’) ;
— stronger, but capable perhaps of being surprised, of being
cut in pieces, before the others can come up ? Rathenau is the
nearest skirt of this middle party: thither goes the Kurfiirst,
softly, swiftly, in |fle June night (i6th-i7th June 1675);
into Rathenau, by brisk stratagem ; tumbles-out the Swedish
Horse-regiment there, drives it back towards Fehrbellin.

He himself follows hard; — swift riding enough, in the sum-
mer-night, through those damp Havel lands, in the old Hohen-
2ollern fashion : and indeed old Freisack Castle, as it chances,
— Freisack, scene of Dietrich von Quitzow and Lasry Peg long
since, — is close by ! Follows hard, we say : strikes-in upon this
midmost party (nearly twice his number, but Infantry for the
most part) ; and after fierce fight, done with good talent on
both sides, cuts it into utter ruin, as proposed. Thereby he has
left the Swedish Army as a mfere head and tail without body;
has entirely demolished the Swedish Army.^^ Same feat intrin-
sically as that done by Cromwell, on Hamilton and the Scots,
in 1648. It was, so to speak, the last visit Sweden paid to
Brandenburg, or the last of any consequence ; and ended the
domination 01 the Swedes in those quarters. A thing justly to
be forever remembered by Brandenburg ; — on a smallish mo-
dern scale, the Bannockburn, Sempach, Marathon, of Bran-
denburg.^^

13 Stenzel, ii. 347. Ib. ii. 350*357*

See Pauli, v. 161-169; Stenzel, ii. 335, 340-347, 354^ Kausler, Atlas des pint
mimorabUs Batailles, Combats etSiigeSy ox Atlas der merkwUrdigsten Schlachten^
Treffen ukd BolagerungeH (German and French, Carlsruhe and Freiburg, 1831), p,
417, Blatt 6a.

Ctap.xvni. KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. 353

i640>i<S68.

Exploit Second was four years later ; in some sort a corol-
lary to this ; and a winding-up of the Swedish business. The
Swedes, in farther prosecution of their Louis-Fourteenth specu-
lation, had invaded Preussen this time, and were doing sad
havoc there. It was in the dead of winter, Christmas 1678,
more than four-hundred miles off; and the Swedes, 10 say no-
thing of their other havoc, were in a case to take Kdnigsberg,
and ruin Prussia altogether, if not prevented. Friedrich Wil-
helm starts from Berlin, with the opening Year, on his long
march; the Horse-troops first. Foot to follow at their swiftest;
he himself (his Wife, his ever-true “ Louisa,” accompanying,
as her wont was) travels, towards the end, at the rate of ‘ sixty
miles a day.’ He gets in still in time, finds Konigsberg un-
scathed. Nay it is even said, the Swedes are extensively fall-
ing sick ; having, after a long famine, found infinite * pigs;' near
Insterburg,’ in those remote regions, and indulged in the fresh
pork over-much.

I will not describe the subsequent manoeuvres, which would
interest nobody: enough if I say that on ^e i6th of January
1679, it had become of the highest moment for Friedrich Wil-
helm to get from Carwe (Village near Elbing) on the shore of
the Frische Ilaf, where he was, through Konigsberg, to Gilge
on the Curische Haft where tl^p Swedes are, — in a minimum
of time. Distance, as the crow flies, is about a hundred miles ;
road, which skirts the two Hafs^^ (wide shallow WasheSt as we
should name them), is of rough quality, and naturally circuit-
ous. It is ringing frost today, and for days back: — Friedrich
Wilhelm hastily gathers all the sledges, all the horses of the
district; mounts some Four-thousand men in sledges; starts,
with the speed of light, in that fashion. Scours along all day,
and after the intervening bit of land, again along; awakening
the ice-bound silences. Gloomy Frische Haf, wrapt in its Win-
ter cloud-coverlids, with its wastes of tumbled sand, its poor
frost-bound fishing-hamlets, pine-hillocks, — desolate-looking,
stern as Greenland or more so, says Busching, who travelled
there in winter-time,^^ — hears unexpected human noises, and
huge grinding and trampling ; the Four-thousand, in long fleet
of sledges, scouring across it, in that manner. All day they rush
along, — out of the rimy hazes of morning into the olive-coloured

Pauli, V. 3i5-a22 ; Stenzcl, 11 392-397;

17 Uuschinft’s (Halle, 1789), vi. z6o.

2$4 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiii.

1679.

clouds of evening again,— with huge loud-grinding rumble ; —
and do arrive in time at Gilge. A notable streak of things,
shooting across those frozen solitudes, in the New-Year 1679;
—little short of Karl Gustav’s feat, which we heard of, in the
other or Danish end of the Baltic, twenty years ago, when he
took Islands without ships.

This Second Exploit, — suggested or not by that prior one
of Karl Gustav on the ice, — is still a thing to be remembered
by Hohenzollerns and Prussians. The Swedes were beaten here,
on Friedrich Wilhelm’s rapid arrival; were driven into disas-
trous rapid retreat Northward; which they executed in hunger
and cold; fighting continually, like Northern bears, under the
grim sky; Friedrich Wilhelm sticking to their skirts,— holding
by their tail, like an angry bearward with steel whip in his
hand. A thing which, on the small scale, reminds one of Na-
poleon’s experiences. Not till Napoleon’s huge fighting-flight,
a Hundred -and -thirty -four years after, did I read of such a
transaction in those parts. The Swedish invasion of Preussen
has gone utterly toA'uin.

And this, then, is the end of Sweden, and its bad neigh-
bourhood on these shores, where it has tyrannously sat on our
skirts so long? Swedish Pommcrnthe Elector already had: last
year, coming towards it ever siace the Exploit of Fehrbellin, he
had invaded Swedish Pommern ; had besieged and taken Stettin,
nay Stralsimd too, where Wallenstein had failed ; — cleared
Pommern altogether of its Swedish guests. Who ha*d tried next
in Preussen, with what luck we see. Of Swedish Pommern
the Elector might now say ; “ Surely it is mino-; again mine,
as it long was ; well won a second time, since the first would
not do!” But no: — Louis XIV. proved a gentleman to his
Swedes. Louis, now that the Peace of Nimwegen had come,
and only the Elector of Brandenburg was still in harness, said
steadily, though anxious enough to keep well with the Elector :
** They are my allies, these Swedes ; it was on my bidding they
invaded you: can I leave them in such a pass? It must not
be I” So Pommern had to be given back. A miss which was
infinitely grievous to Friedrich Wilhelm. The most victorious
Elector cannot hit always, were his right never so good.

Another miss which he had to put up with, in spite of his
rights, and his good services, was that oi the Silesian Duchies.
The Heritage-Fraternity with Liegnitz had at length, in 1675,

Chap.xvni. KURFURST FRIEDRICH WILHELM. 255

x675*

come to fruit. The last Duke of Liegnit-? was dead: Duchies
of Liegnitz, of Brieg, Wohlau, are Brandenburg’s, if there were
right done ! But Kaiser Leopold in the scarlet stockings will
not hear of Heritage-Fraternity. “ Nonsense I” answers Kaiser
Leopold : A thing suppressed ar once, ages ago ; by Imperial
power ; flat zero of a thing at this time ; — and you, I again bid
you, return me your Papers upon it !” This latter act of duty
Friedrich Wilhelm would not do ; but continued insisting
Jagerndorf, at least, O Kaiser of the world,” said he; “Ja«.
gerndorf, there is no colour for your keeping that!” To which
the Kaiser again answers, “Nonsense!” — and even falls upon
astonishing schemes about it, as we shall see ; — but gives no-
thing. Ducal Preussen is sovereign, Cleve is at Peace, Hinter-
Pommern ours; — this Elector, has conquered much: but the
Silesian Heritages and Vor-Pommern, and some other things,
he will have to do without. Louis XIV., it is thought, once
offered to get him made King;!^ but that he declined for the
present.

His married and domestic life is very finVand human ; espe-
cially with that Oranien- Nassau Princess, who was his first
Wife (1646-1667): Princess Louisa of Nassau-Orange; Aunt
to our own Dutch William, King William III., in time coming.
An excellent wise Princess ; from whom came the Orange Herit-
ages, which afterwards proved difficult to settle : — Orange was
at last exchanged for the small Principality of Neufchatel in
Switzerland, which is Prussia’s ever since. “Oranienburg
{prange-Burg),'* a Royal Country-house, still standing, some
Twenty miles ijorthwards from Berlin, was this Louisa’s place :
she had trimmed it up into a little jewel, of the Dutch type, —
potherb gardens, training-schools for young girls, and the like;
— a favourite abode of hers, when she w’as at liberty for recrea-
tion. But her life was busy and earnest : she was helpmate,
not in name only, to an ever-busy man. They were married
young ; a marriage of love withal. Young Friedrich Wilhelm’s
courtshijj^ Wedding in Holland ; the honest trustful walk and
conversion of the two Sovereign Spouses, their journeyings
together, their mutual hopes, fears and manifold vicissitudes ;
till Death, with stern beauty, shut it in : — all is human, true
and whdleaome in it ; interesting to look upon, and rare among
sovereign persons.

w Pauli, V. 391.

>9 Ib. vii. 215.

as6 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookm.

1640-1685.

Not but that he had his troubles with*his womankind. Even
with this his first Wife, whom he loved truly, and who truly
loved him, there were scenes ,* the Lady having a judgment of
her own about everything .hat passed, and the Man being
choleric withal. Sometimes, I have heard, ‘ he would dash
his hat at her feet,’ saying symbolically, “ Govern you, then.
Madam I Not the Kurfiirst-Hat ; a Coif is my wear, it seems !” 2 o
Yet her judgment was good ; and he liked to have it on the
weightiest things, though her powers of silence might halt now
*and then. He has been known, on occasion, to run from his
Privy-Council to her apartment, while a complex matter was
debating, to ask her opinion, hers too, before it was decided.
Excellent Louisa ; Princess full of beautiful piety, good-sense
and affection ; a touch of the Nassau-Heroic in her. At the
moment of her death, it is said, when speech had fled, he felt,
from her hand which lay in his, three slight, slight pressures ;
“ Farewell 1” thrice mutely spoken in that manner, — not easy
to forget in this world.

His second Dorothea, — who planted the Lindens in
Berlin, and did other husbandries, of whom we have heard,
fell far short of Louisa in many things ; but not in tendency
to advise, to remonstrate, and plaintively reflect on the finished
and unalterable. Dreadfully tj^rifty lady, moreover ; did much
in dairy produce, farming of town-rates, provision-taxes : not
to speak again of that Tavern she was thought to have in Ber-
lin, and to draw custom to in an oblique manner ! What scenes
she had with Friedrich her stepson, we have seen. “Ah, I
have not my Louisa now ; to whom now shall I run for advice
or help !” would the poor Kurfiirst at times exSaim.

He had some trouble, considerable trouble now and then,
with mutinous spirits in Preussen ; men standing on antique
Prussian franchises and parchments ; refusing to see that the
same were now antiquated, incompatible, not to say impossible,
as the new Sovereign alleged ; and carrying themselves very
stiffly at times. But the Hohenzollerns had been used to such
things ; a Hohenzollern like this one would evidently take his
measures, soft but strong, and ever stronger to the needful pitch,
with mutinous spirits. One Burgermeister of Konigsberg, after
much stroking on the back, was at length seized in open Hall,

* Ffirster, Friedrich Wilhelm KSnig von Preussen (Potsdam, 1834), L X77.

** Wegfuhrer, Ltben der KurfUrstin Luise (Leipzig, 1838), p. 175.

Ottp-XVlll. KURFURSt FRIEDRICH WILHELM, ac?

*« 67 .

by Electoral writ, — soldiers having first gently barricaded the
principal streets, and brought cannon to bear upon them. This
Biirgermeister, seized in such brief way, lay prisoner for life ;
refusing to ask his liberty, though it was thought he might have
had it on asking.^

Another gentleman, a Baron von Kalkstein, ©fold Teutsch-
Ritter kin, of very high ways, in the Provincial Estates {Stande)
and elsewhere, got into lofty almost solitary opposition, and at
length into mutiny proper, against the new ** Non-Polish Save-
reign'' and flatly refused to do homage at his accession in that
new capacity.®* Refused, Kalkstein did, for his share ; fled to
Warsaw ; and very fiercely, in a loud manner, carried on his
mutinies in the Diets and Court-Conclaves there ,* his plea being,
or plea for the time, “ Poland is our liege lord” (which it was
not always), “and we cannot be transferred to you, except by
our consent asked and given,” which too had been a little neg-
lected on the former occasion of transfer. So that the Great
Elector knew not what to do with Kalkstein ^ and at length (as
the case was pressing) had him kidnapped by his Ambassador
at Warsaw ; had him ‘ rolled into a carpet’ there, and carried
swiftly in the Ambassador’s coach, in the form of luggage, over
the frontier, into his native Province, there to be judged, and,
in the end (since nothing else would serve him), to have the
sentence executed, and his head cut off. For the case was
pressing l®^ — These things, especially this of Kalkstein, with a
boisterous Polish Diet and parliamentary eloquence in the rear
of him, gave rise to criticisms ; and required management on
the part of the €reat Elector.

Of all his Ancestors, our little Fritz, when he grew big, ad-
mired this one. A man made like himself in many points. He
seems really to have loved and honoured this one. In the year
1750 there had been a new Cathedral got finished at Berlin ;
the ancestral bones had to be shifted over from the vaults of
the old one, — the burying-place ever since Joachim II., that
Joachim who drew his sword on Alba. * King Friedrich, with

* some attendants, witnessed the operation, January 1750.

* When the Great Kurfurst’s coffin came, he made them open

• it ; gazed in silence on the features for some time, which were

• perfectly recognisable ; laid his hand on the hand long deadj

W Horn, Das Lebtn Ftisdrich Wilhelms det Grossen (Berlin, 18x4), p. 68L
•• Suprii, pp, 84^ sqq, ** Horn, pp. So-Ss.

VOL. I.

25^ H0HENZ0LLERN3 IN BRANDENBURG. Boofclll.

1640-1611.

‘ and said» ** Messieurs, cclui-ci a fait de grandes chases (This
‘ on^ did a great work) I"

He died 29th April 1688 looking with intense interest
upon Dutch William’s preparations to produce a Glorious Re-
volution in this Island ; being always of an ardent Protestant
feeling, and a sincerely religious man. Friedrich, Crown-Prince,
age then thirty-one, and already married a second time, was of
course left Chief Heir ; — who, as we see, has not declined the
Kingship, when a chance for it offered. There were four Half
brothers of Friedrich, too, who got apanages, appointments.
They had at one time confidently looked for much more, their
Mother being busy ; but were obliged to be content, and con-
form to the Gera Bond and fundamental Laws of the Country.
They are entitled Margraves ; — two of Whom left children. Mar-
graves of Brandenburg -Schwedt, Heermeisters (Head of the
Malta- Knighthood) at Sonnenburg, Statthalters in Magdeburg,
or I know not what ; whose names tum-up confusedly in the
Prussian Books ; and, except as temporary genealogical puzzles,
are not of much ihoment to the Foreign reader. Happily there
is nothing else in the way of Princes of the Blood, in our little
Friedrich’s time ; and happily what concern he had with these,
or how he was related to them, will not be abstruse to us, if
occasion rise.

CHAPTER XIX.

KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN,

We said the Great Elector never could work his Silesiart
Duchies out of Kaiser Leopold’s grip : to all his urgencies the
little Kaiser in red stockings answered only in evasions, re-
fusals ; and would quit nothing. We noticed also what quar-
rels the young Electoral Prince, Friedrich, afterwards King,
had got into with his Stepmother ; suddenly feeling poisoned
after dinner, running to his Aunt at Cassel, coming back on
treaty, and the like. These are two facts which the reader
knows : and out of these two grew a third, which it is fit he
should know.

In his last years, the Great Elector, worn-out with labour,
and harassed with such domestic troubles over and above, had

See Preuss, I 3701

Chap. XIX. KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN. 25 ^

1685.

evidently fallen much under his Wife’s management ; cutting-
out large apanages (clear against the Gera Bond) for ksr chil-
dren ; — ^longing probably for quiet in his family at any price.
As to the poor young Prince, negotiated back from Cassel, he
lived remote, and had fallen into open disfavour, — with a very
ill effect upon his funds, for one thing. His father kept him
somewhat tight on the money-side, it is alleged ; and he had
rather a turn for spending money handsomely. He was also
in some alarm about the proposed apanages to his Half-Bro-
thers, the Margraves above mentioned, of which there were
rumours going,

Ifow Austria settled the Silesian Claims*

Now in these circumstances the Austrian Court, who at this
time (1685) greatly needed the Elector’s help against Turks
and others, and found him very urgent about these Silesian
Duchies of his, fell upon what I must call a very extraordinary
shift for getting rid of the Silesian question. “ Serene High-
ness,” said they, by their Ambassador at B^in, *‘to end these
troublesome talks, and to liquidate all claims, admissible and
inadmissible, about Silesia, the Imperial Majesty will give you
an actual bit of Territory, valuable, though not so large as you
expected 1 ” The Elector listen? with both ears : What Terri-
tory, then ? The * Circle of Schwiebus,’ hanging on the north-
western edge of Silesia, contiguous to the Elector’s own Do-
minions in these Frankfurt-on-Oder regions ; this the generous
Imperial Majesty proposes to give in fee-simple to P'riedrich
Wilhelm, and ^ to end the matter. Truly a most small patch
of Territory in comparison ; not bigger than an English Rut-
landshire, to say nothing of soil and climate I But then again
it was an actual patch of territory ; not a mere parchment sha-
dow of one : this last was a tempting point to the old harassed
Elector. I^uch friendly offer they made him, I think, in 1685,
at the time they were getting 8,000 of his troops to march
against the Turks for them ; a very needful service at the mo-
ment. ** By the bye, do not march through Silesia, you ! — Or
march faster I” said the cautious Austrians on this occasion ;

** Other roads will answer better than Silesia 1 ” said they.^
Baron Freytag, their Ambassador at Berlin had negotiated the

* Pauli, V. 337, 339.

H 0 HEN 20 LLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Book in.

1640^x688.

affair so far : ** Circle ofSchwicbus/*said Frey tag, "and let us
have done with these thorny talks !*’

But Baron Freytaghad been busy, in the mean while, with
the young Prince ; secretly offering sympathy, counsel, help ;
of all which the poor Prince stood in need enough. " We will
help you in that dangerous matter of the Apanages,” said Frey-
tag ; "Help you in all things,” — (I suppose he would say), —
" necessary pocket-money is not a thing your Highness need
want 1 ” And thus Baron Freytag, what is very curious, had
managed to bargain beforehand with the young Prince, That
directly on coming to power, he would give-up Schwiebus again,
should the offer of Schwiebus be accepted by Papa. To which
effect Baron Freytag held a signed Bond, duly executed b/the
young man, before Papa had concluded at all. Which is very
curious indeed ! —

Poor old Papa, worn-out with troubles, accepted Schwiebus
in liquidation of all claims (8th April 1686), and a few days
after set his men on march against the Turks : — and, exactly
two months befor^and, on the 8th of February last, the Prince
had signed his secret engagement. That Schwiebus should be
a mere phantasm to Papa ; that he, the Prince, would restore
it on his accession. Both these singular Parchments, signed,
sealed and done in the due legal form, lay simultaneously in
Freytag’s hand ; and probably enough they exist yet, in some
dusty corner, among the solemn sheepskins of the world. This
is literally the plan hit upon by an Imperial Court, to assist a
young Prince in his pecuniary and other difficulties, and get
rid of Silesian claims. Plan actually not unlikf that of swind-
ling money-lenders 'to a young gentleman in difficulties, and
of manageable turn, who has got into their hands.

The Great Elector died two years after ; Schwiebus then in
his hand. The new Elector, once instructed as to the nature
of the affair, refused to give-up Schwiebus declared the trans-
action a swindle : — and in fact, for seven years more, retained
possession of Schwiebus. But the Austrian Court insisted, with
emphasis, at length with threats (no insuperable pressure from
Louis, or the Turks, at this time) ; the poor cheated Elector
had, at last, to give-up Schwiebus, in terms of his promise.®
He took act that it had been a surreptitious transaction, palmed
upon him while ignorant, and while without the least authority

* Z9th September 1689 (Pauli, vU. 74). * 3xst December 269^

Chap Xix. KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN. *61

*688-17*3.

or power to make such a promise ; that he was not bound by
it, nor would be, except on compulsion thus far : and as to
binding Brandenburg by it, how could he, at that period of his
history, bind Brandenburg ? Brandenburg was not then his to
bind, any more than China was.

His Raths had advised Friedrich against giving-up Schwio
bus In that manner. But his answer is on record : “I must,
** I will and shall keep my own word. But my rights on
“ Silesia, which I could not, and do not in these unjust cir-
** cumstances, compromise, I leave intact for my posterity to
** prosecute. If God and the course of events order it no other-
** wise than now, we must be content. But if God shall one
** day send the opportunity, those that come after me will know
** what they have to do in such case.*’^ And so Schwiebus
was given up, the Austrians paying back what Brandenburg
had laid out in improving it, * 2 $0,000 gulden (25,000/.);’ —
and the Hand of Power had in this way, finally as it hoped,
settled an old troublesome account of Brandenburg’s. Settled
the Silesian-Duchies Claim, by the tempomry Phantasm of a
Gift of Schwiebus. That is literally the Liegnitz-Jagerndorf
case; and the reader is to note it and remember it. For it
will turn-up again in History. The Hand of Power is very
strong ; but a stronger may porhaps get hold of its knuckles
one day, at an advantageous time, and do a feat upon it.

The ‘eventual succession to East-Friesland,’ which had
been promised by the Reich, some ten years ago, to the Great
Elector, * for what he had done against the Turks, and what
‘ he had suffered from those Swedish Invasions, in the Com-
‘ mon Cause this shadow of Succession, the Kaiser now said,
should not be haggled with any more ; but be actually realised,
and the Imperial sanction to it now given, — effect to follow if
the Friesland Line died out. Let this be some consolation for
the loss of Schwiebus and your Silesian Duchies, Here in
Friesland is the ghost of a coming possession ; there in Schwie-
bus was the ghost of a going one : phantasms you shall not
want for ; but the Hand of Power parts not with its realities,
however come by.

* Fauli, vil 15c*

86s riOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiii. (

I688-X7X3.

His real Character .

Poor Friedrich led a conspicuous life as Elector and King;
but no public feat he did now concerns us like this private one
of Schwiebus. Historically important, this, and requiring to
be remembered, while so much else demands mere oblivion
from us. He was a spirited man ; did soldierings, fine Siege
of Bonn (July — October 1689), sieges and campaignings, in
person, — valiant in action, royal especially in patience there,
— during that Third War of Louis-Fourteenth’s, the Treaty-of-
Ryswick one. All through the Fourth, or Spanish Succession-
War, his Prussian Ten-Thousand, led by fit generals, showed
eminently what stuff they were made of. Witness Leopold of
Anhalt-Dessau (still a young Dessauer) on the field of Blen-
heim ; — Leopold had the right wing there, and saved Prince
Eugene who was otherwise blown to pieces, while Marlborough
stormed and conquered on the left. Witness the same Des-
sauer on the field ©f Hochstadt the year before,® how he man-
aged the retreat tfeere. Or see him at the Bridge of Cassano
(1705) ; in the Lines of Turin (1706) wherever hot service
was on hand. At Malplaquet, in those murderous inexpugn-
able French Lines, bloodiest of obstinate Fights (upwards of
Thirty- thou sand left on the ground), the Prussians brag that it
was they who picked their way through a certain peat-bog,
reckoned impassable ; and got fairly in upon the French wing,
— to the huge comfort of Marlborough, and little Eugene his
brisk comrade on that occasion. Marlborough knew well the
worth of these Prussian troops, and also how to stroke his
Majesty into continuing them in the field.

He was an expensive King, surrounded by cabals, by War-
tenbergs male and female, by* whirlpools of intrigues, which,
now that the game is over, become very forgettable. But one
finds he was a strictly honourable man ; with a certain height
and generosity of mind, capable of other nobleness than the
upholstery kind. He had what we may call a hard life of it ;
did and suffered a good deal in his day and generation, not at
all in a dishonest or unmanful manner. In fact, he is quite
recognisably a Hohenzollern, — with his back half broken.

• Varnhagen von £nse, Biograpkisc^ Denkmale (Berlin, 1845), *55*

« Pfs weitberflhmten FOrsteus LcopoMi von Anhalt-Dessau Lehen und Thaien
(I cip.eig, 1742, anonymous, by one Michael Ranfft\ pp. 53, 6x,

Chap. XIX. KING FRIEDRICH I. AGAIN. 863

x688*Z713*

Readers recollect that sad accident : how the Nurse, in one
of those headlong journeys which his Father and Mother were
always making, let the poor child fall or jerk backward ; and
spoiled him much, and indeed was thought to have killed him,
by that piece of inattentjon. He was not yet Hereditary Prince,
he was only second son : but the elder died ; and he became
Ele<;tor, King ; and had to go with his spine distorted, — dis-
tortion not glaringly conspicuous, tHbugh undeniable ; — and to
act the Hohenzollern so. Nay who knows but it was this very
jerk, and the half-ruin of his nervous system, — this doubled
wish to be beautiful, and this crooked-back capable of being
hid or decorated into straightness, — that first set the poor
man on thinking of expensive ornamentalities, and Kingships
in particular ? History will forgive the Nurse in that case.

Perhaps History has dwelt too much on the blind side of
this expensive King. Toland, on entering his country, was
struck rather with the signs of good administration everywhere.
No sooner have you crossed the Prussian Border, out of West-
phalia, says Toland, than smooth highways, well-tilled fields,
and a general air of industry and rcgularitj-, are evident : solid
milestones, brass-bound, and with brass inscription, tell the
traveller where he is ; who finds due guidance of fingerposts,
too, and the blessing of habitable inns. The people seem all
to, be busy, diligently occupied ; villages reasonably swept and
whitewashed; — never was a better set of Parish Churches ;
whether new-built or old, they are all in brand-new repair.
The contrast with Westphalia is immediate and great ; but in-
deed that was a sad country, to anybody but a patient Toland,
who knows tffe causes of phenomena. No inns there, except
of the naturally savage sort. ‘ A man is very happy if he finds

* clean straw to sleep on, without expecting sheets or cover-

* ings ; let him readily dispense with plates, forks and napkins,

* if he can get anything to eat.’ * He must be content to have
‘ the* cows, swine and poultry for his fellow-lodgers, and to go

* in at the same passage that the smoke comes out at, for

* there’s no other vent for it but the door ; which makes for-

* eigners commpnly say that the people of Westphalia enter

* their houses by the chimney.* And observe withal : * This

* is the reason why their beef and hams are so finely prepared

* and ripened ; for the fireplace being backwards, the smoke

* must spreud over all the house before it gets to the doox ;

If4 li^pENZOtLER^ IN BRAifiiENSURG.

^ which makes everything within of a russet or sable colour*
* not excepting the hands and faces of the meaner sort.’T If
Prussia yield to Westphalia in ham, in all else she is strikingly
superior.

He founded Universities, this poor King ; University of
Halle; Royal Academy of Berlin, Leibnitz presiding: he fought
for Protestantism ; — did what he could for the cause of Cosmos
versus Chaos, after his fashion. The magnificences of his
Charlottenburgs, Oranienburgs and numerous Country-houses
make Toland almost poetic. An affable kindly man withal,
though quick of temper ; his word sacred to him. A man of
many troubles, and acquainted with ‘ the infinitely little (/’/«-
finiment petit)^* as his Queen termed it.

CHAPTER XX.

DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH I.

Old King Frie^ich I. had not much more to do in the
world, after witnessing the christening of his Grandson of like
name. His leading forth or sending forth of troops, his multi-
plex negotiations, solemn ceremonials, sad changes of ministry,
sometimes transacted ‘ with tears,* are mostly ended ; the ever-
whirling dust -vortex of intrigues, of which he has been the
centre for a five-and-twenty years, is settling down finally to-
wards everlasting rest. No more will Marlborough come and
dextrously talk him over, — proud to ‘ serve as cupbearer,’ on
occasion, to so high a King, — for new bodies ^f men to help
in the next campaign : we have ceased to be a King worthy
of such a cupbearer, and Marlborough’s campaigns too are all
ended.

Much is ended. They are doing the sorrowful Treaty of
Utrecht; Louis XIV. himself is ending; mournfully shrunjc into
the corner, with his Missal and his Maintenon ; looking back
with just horror on Europe four times set ablaze for the sake
of one poor mortal in big periwig, to no purpose. Lucky if
perhaps Missal-work, orthodox litanies, and even Protestant
Dragonades, can have virtue to wipe-out such a score against
a man I Unhappy Louis: the sun-bright gold has become dim

7 An Account of the Courts of Prussia and Hanover^ by Mr. Toland (cited al-
ready), p. 4.

Ctop.xx. DEATH or KING FRIEDRICH I. 365

as copper ; we rose in storms, and we are s^^tting in watery
clouds. The Kaiser himself (Karl VI., Leopold’s Son, Jo-
seph I.’s younger Brother) will have to conform to this Treaty
of Utrecht: what other possibility for him?

The English, always a wonderful Nation, fought and sub-
sidied from side to side of Europe for this Spanish-Succcssion
business ; fought ten years, such fighting as they never did be-
fore or since, under ‘John Duke of Marlbi7/*ough,’ who, as is
well known, ‘ beat the French thorough and thorough.* French
entirely beaten at last, not without heroic difficulty and as noble
talent as was ever shown in diplomacy and war, are ready to
do your will in all things; in this of giving-up Spain, among
others : — ^whereupon the English turn round, with a sudden new
thought, “ No, we will mot have our will done;- it shall be the
other way, the way it was, — now that we bethink ourselves,
after all this fighting for our ■will!” And make Peace .on those
terms, as if no war had been; and accuse the great Marlbor-
ough of many things, of theft for one. A wondc^’ful People ;
and in their Continental Politics (which indeed consist chiefly
of Subsidies) thrice wonderful. So the Treaty of Utrecht is
transacting itself ; which that of Rastadt, on the part of Kaiser
and Empire, unable to get on without Subsidies, will have to
follow : and after such quantitj^is of powder burnt, and cour-
ageous lives wasted, general As-you-were is the result arrived
at.

Old Friedrich’s Ambassadors are present at Utrecht, jan-
gling and pleading among the rest; at Berlin too the dispatch
of business goe#; lumbering on ; but what thing, in the shape
of business, at Utrecht or at Berlin, is of much importance to
the old man? Seems as if Europe itself were waxing dim, and
sinking to stupid sleep, — as we, in our poor royal person, full
surely are. A Crown has been achieved, and diamond buttons
worth 1500/. apiece; but what is a Crown, and what are but-
tons, after all? — I suppose the tattle and singeries of little Wil-
helmina, whom he would spend whole days with; this and
occasional visits to a young Fritzchen’s cradle, who is thriving
moderately, and will speak and do aperies one day, — are his
main solacements in the days that are passing. Much of this
Friedrich’s life has gone-off like the smoke of fireworks, has
faded sorrowfully, and proved phantasmal. Here is an old
Autograph Note, written by him at the side of that Cradle, and

3«6 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG. Bookiii.

1688^X7x3.

toudiing on a slight event there ; which, as it connects two
venerable Correspondents and their Seventeenth Century with
a grand Phenomenon of the Eighteenth, we will insert here.
The old King addresses his older Mother-in-law, famed Elec-
tress Sophie of Hanover, in these terms (spelling corrected) ;

* Cluirlotienhurgy den 30 Augitsi 17x8.

‘ E10, Chtirf. Durchlaucht werden sich zweifelsohne mit uns crfreiteny

* doss der kldnc Pnntz^^xmz) Fritz nuhnmero (nunmehr) 6 Z^/z«^'(Zahne)

* had und ohne die geringste incommoditet (-tat). Daraus kann man auch

* die predestination sehen^ dass alle seine Briider haben daran sterhen

* musseny dieser aber bekommt sie ohne Miihe wie seine Schwester, Gott

* ei'halte ihn uns noch lange zum trohst (Trost), in dessen Schutz ich die-

* selbe ergcbe und lebenslang verbleibe,

* Ew, Churf. DurchL gehorsamster Diener und treuer Sohn^

‘Friedrich

Of which this is the literal English:

‘Your Electoral Serenity will doubtless rejoice with us that the
‘ little Prince Fritz hg^ now got his sixth tooth without the least incom-
‘ moditS. And therein we may trace a predestination, inasmuch as his
* Brothers died of teething’ (Not of cannon-sound and weight of head-
gear^ then^ your Majesty thinks t That were a painful thought /) ; ‘ and
‘ this one, as his (Wilhelmina) ‘did, gets them’ {the teeth) *with-
‘ out trouble. God preserve him long for a comfort to us : — to whose
‘ protection I commit Dieselbc' ( 'four Electoral Highness, in the third
person), ‘and remain lifelong. Your Electoral Highness’s most obedient
‘ Servant and true Son,

‘Friedrich Rei;.*

One of Friedrich Rex’s worst adventures^ was his latest;
commenced some five or six years ago (1708), and now not
far from terminating. He was a Widower, of weakly constitu-
tion, towards fifty; his beautiful ingenious “Serena,” with all
her Theologies, pinch-of-snuff Coronations and other earthly
troubles, was dead ; and the task of continuing the* Hohenzol-
lern progeny, given-over to Friedrich Wilhelm the Prince Royal,
was thought to be in good hands. Majesty Friedrich with the
weak back had retired, in 1 708, to Karlsbad, to rest from his
cares ; to take the salutary waters, and recruit his weak nerves
a little. Here, in the course of confidential promenadings, it
was hinted, it was represented to him by some pickthank of a
courtier. That the task of continuing the Hohenzollern progeny

* Fr^ss, Friedrich der Qrosse {Historisehe Skizze, Berlin, 1838), p. 38a

Chap. 3tx. DEATH OF KING FRIEDRICH t 267

S7o8-z7Z3*

did not seem to prosper in the present good hands ; that Sophie
Dorothec, Princess Royal, had already borne two royal infants
which had speedily died ; that in fact it was to be gathered
from the medical men, if not from their words, then from their
looks and cautious innuendos, that Sophie Dorothee, Princess
Royal, would never produce a Prince or even Princess that
would live : which task, therefore, did now again seem to de-
volve upon his Majesty, if his Majesty had not insuperable
objections? Majesty had no insuperable objections; old Ma-
jesty listened to the flattering tale ; and, sure enough, he
smarted for it in a signal manner.

By due industry, a Princess was fixed upon for Bride, Prin-
cess Sophie Louisa of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, age now twenty-
four : she was got as Wife, and came home to Berlin in all
pomp ; — but good came not with her to anybody there. Not
only did she bring the poor old man no children, which was a
fault to be overlooked, considering Sophie Dorothee's success ;
but she brought a querulous, weak and self-sufficient female
humour; found his religion heterodox, — he4leing Calvinist, and
perhaps even lax-Calvinist, she Lutheran as the Prussian Na-
tion is, and strict to the bone : — ^heterodox wholly, to the length
of no salvation possible; and times rose on the Berlin Court
such as had never been seen before I “No salvation possible,
says my Dearest? Hah! And an innocent Court -Mask or
Dancing Soirde is criminal in the sight of God and of the
Queen? And we are children of wrath wholly, and a frivolous
generation ; and the Queen will see us all — 1” —

The end was, his Majesty, through sad solitary days and
nights, repented bitterly that he had wedded such a She-Do-
minic; grew quite estranged from her; the poor Shc-Dominic
giving him due return in her way, — namely, living altogether in
her own apartments, upon orthodoxy, jealousy and other bad
nourishment. Till at length she went quite mad ; and, except
the due medical and other attendants, nobody saw her, or spoke
of her, at Berlin. Was this a cheering issue of such an adven-
ture to the poor old expensive Gentleman? He endeavoured
to digest in silence the bitter morsel he had cooked for him-
self ; but reflected oftem, as an old King might. What dirt have
1 eaten!

In this way stands that matter in the Schloss of Berlin,
when little Friedrich, who will one day be called the Great, is

868 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBTJRG. Eookm.

X688-X7I3.

bom. Habits of the expensive King, hours of rising, modes of
dressing, and so forth, are to be found in Pollnitz but we
charitably omit them all. Even from foolish Pollnitz a good
eye will gather, what was above intimated, that this feeble-
backed, heavy-laden old King was of humane and just dispo-
sition ; had dignity in his demeanour ; had reticence, patience ;
and, though hot-tempered like all the Hohenzollerns, that he
bore himself like a perfect gentleman for one thing ; and tot-
tered along his high-lying lonesome road not in an unmanful
manner at all. Had not his nerves been damaged by that fall
in infancy, who knows but we might have had something else
to read of him than that he was regardless of expense in this
world !

His last scene, of date February 1713, is the tragical ulti-
matum of that fine Karlsbad adventure of the Second marriage,
— Third marriage, in fact, though the First, anterior to ** Se-
rena,” is apt to be forgotten, having lasted short while, and
produced only a Daughter, not memorable except by accident.
This Third marriage, which had brought so many sorrows to
him, proved at length the death of the old man. For he sat
one morning, in the chill February days of the Year 1713, in
his Apartment, as usual ; weak of nerves, but thinking no spe-
cial evil; when, suddenly with huge jingle, the glass-door of
his room went to sherds ; and there rushed in — bleeding and
dishevelled, the fatal “White Lady” {JVeisse JF'rau), who is
understood to walk that Schloss at Berlin, and announce Death
to the Royal inhabitants. Majesty had fainted, or was fainting.
“ Weisse Frau? Ohmo, your Majesty!” — not that; but indeed

something almost worse. Mad Queen, in her Apartments,

had been seized, that day, when half or quarter dressed, with
unusual orthodoxy or unusual jealousy. Watching her oppor-
tunity, she had whisked into the corridor, in extreme deshabille ;
and gone, like the wild roe, towards Majesty’s Suite of Rooms;
through Majesty’s glass-door, like a catapult ; and emerged as
we saw, — in petticoat and shift, with hair streaming, eyes glit-
tering, arms cut, and the other sad trimmings. O Heaven, who
could laugh? There are tears due to Kings and to all men.

* Pollnitz, Memoiren zur Lebens-und Regiemn^-Gcschichte der Vier letztenRe-
f^uten des Fr^ussischen Stunts (Berlin, 1791). A vague, luexact, but not quite un-
instructive or uninteresting Book ; Printea also in French, which was the Original,
same place and time.

Chap. XX. DEAtH OF KING FRIEDRICH I. 269

sg5th Feb. 1713.

It was deep misery; deep enough ''sin and misery,” as Calvin
well says, on the one side and the other I The poor old ing
was carried to bed ; and never rose again, bat died in a few
days. The date of the Weisse Frau's death, one might have
hoped, was not distant either; but she lasted, in her sad state,
for above twenty years coming.

Old King Friedrich’s death-day was 2Sth February 1713;
the unconscious little Grandson being then in his Fourteenth
month. To whom, after this long voyage round the world, we
now gladly return.

By way of reinforcement to any recollection the rearlcr may have of these
Twelve Hohenzollern Kurfurbts, I will append a continuous list of them, with here
and there an indication.

The Tiuelve Hohenzollern Electors.

1®. Friedrich I. (as Burggraf, was Friedrich VI.) : bom, it is in-
ferred, 1372 (Rentsch, p. 350); accession, i8th April 1417; died aist
September 1440. Had come to Brandenburg, 141^, as Statthalter. The
Quitzows and Heavy Peg.

a®. Friedrich II.: 19th November 1413; 21st September 1440;
lothFebr. 147a. Friedrich tames the Berlin Burghers. Spoke
Polish, was to have been Polish King. Cannon-shot upon his dinner -
table shatters his nerves so, that he abdicates, and soon dies. Johannes
Alchyimsta his elder Brother; Albert Achilles his younger.

3®. Albert (Achilles) : 24thNovember 1414; loth February 1471;
iith March i486. Third son of PTiedrich I.; is lineal Progenitor of
all the rest. ^

Eldest Son, yohann Cicero, follows as Kurfiirst ; a Younger Sonj Friedrich (by
a different Mother), got Culmbach, and produced the Elder Line there. (See
Genealogical Diagram, p. 270 nc.)

4®. Johann (Cicero) : 2d August 1455 ; 1 ith March i486 ; 9th Jan.
1499. Big John. Friedrich of Culmbach^s elder (Half-) Brother.

5®. Joachim I. : 21st February 1484 ; 9th January 1499 ; i ith July
1535. Loud in the Reformation times; finally declares peremptorily
for the Conservative side. Wife (Sister of Christian 11 . of Denmark)
runs away.

Younger Brother Albert Kur-Mainr, whom Hutten celebrated : bom 1490 ; Arch-
bimop of Magdeburg and Halberstadt 15x3, of Mainz 15x4; died X543: set
Tetzel, and the Indulgence, on foot.

6®. Joachim II. (Hector): 9tli January 1505; 11th July 1535} 3d

8^0 HOHENZOLLERNS IN BRANDENBURG, fiookllj.

1535*1713.

January 1571, Sword drawn on Alba once. Erbverbriiderung ytiih
Xiiegnitz. Staircase at Grimnitz. A weighty industrious Kurfurst.

Declared himself Protestant, 1539. First Wife (mother of his Successor) was
Daughter to Duke George of Saxony, Luther's **If it rained Duke Georges."
— jonann ofCUstrin was a younger Brother of his: died ten days after Joachim;
left no Son.

7®. Johann George: nth September 1515; 3d January 1571;
8th January 1598. Cannon-shot, at Siege of Wittenberg, upon Kaiser
Karl and him. Gera Bond.

Married a Silesian Duke of T.iegnit/s Daughter (result of the ErbrterhrUderung
there,— Antea, p. aot). Had twenty-three children. It was to him th.at 13air-
euth and Anspach fell home . he settled them on his second and his third sons,
Christian and Joachim Ernst , founders of the New Line of Baireuth and An-
spach. (See Genealogical Diagram, p. 270a.)

8®. Joachim Friedrich : 27th January 1 546 ; 8th January 1 598 5
18th July 1608. Archbishop of Magdeburg, first of all, — to keep the
place filled. Joachimsthal School at old Castle of Grimnitz. Very
vigilant for Preussen ; which was near falling due.

Two of his Younger Sons, Johann George (1577-1624) to whom he gave ydgern-
dorf, and that Archbishop of Magdeburg, who was present in Tilly's storm,
got both wrecked in the Thirty-Years War ; — not without results, in the Jagem-
dorf case.

9®. Johann Sigismund: 8th November 1572; 18th July 1608;
asd December 1619. Preussen: Cleve; Slap on the face to Neuburg.

10®. George Wilhelm: 3d November 1595; 22d November
1619; 21st November 1640. Tl^e unfortunate of the Thirty- Y^ears
War. **Que faire ; ils ont des canons

II®. Friedrich Wilhelm : 6th February 1620; a ist November
1640; 29th April 1688. The Great Elector.

12®. Friedrich III. : ist July 1657; 29th April 1688; 25th Feb*
ruary 1713. First King (i8th January 1701). ^

tokpa^,iDi 769 .

BOOK IV.

FRIEDRICH'S APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE.

1713-1723-

• CHAPTER L

CHILDHOOD : DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT.

Of Friedrich’s childhood, there is not, after all our reading,
much that it would interest the English public to hear tell of.
Perhaps not much of knowable that deser\48s anywhere to be
known. Books on it, expressly handling it, and Books on Fried-
rich Wilhelm's Court and History, of which it is always a main
element, are not wanting : but they are mainly of the sad sort
which, with pain and difficulty,^teach us nothing. Books done
by pedants and tenebrific persons, under the name of men ;
dwelling not on things, but, at endless length, on the outer
husks of things : of unparalleled confusion, too ; — not so much
as an Index granted you ; to the poor half-peck of cinders, hid-
den in these wagonloads of ashes, no sieve allowed 1 Books
tending really to fill the mind with mere dust-whirlwinds, — if
the mind did not straightway blow them out again ; which it
does. Of these let us say nothing. Seldom had so curious a
Phenomenon worse treatment from the Dryasdust species.

Among these Books, touching on Friedrich’s childhood, and
treating of his Father’s Court, there is hardly above one that
We can characterise as fairly human : the Book written by his
little Sister Wilhelmina, when she grew, to size and knowledge
of good and evil p — and this, of what flighty uncertain nature
it is, the world partly knows. A human Book, however, not
a pedant one : there is a most shrill female soul busy with in-

* Mimoires de FrSdSrtqui SophU Wilhelmine de Prussia Margrave deBareitk
(Brunswiclt^ Paris et Lonores, 18x2), s vols, Svo.

4?a APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Wiv.

» 7 * 3 -* 7 * 3 ‘

tense earnestness here ; looking, and teaching us to look. We
fincL it a veracious Book, done with heart, and from eyesight
and msight ; of a veracity deeper than the superficial sort. It
is full of mistakes, indeed ; and exaggerates dreadfully, in its
shrill female way ; but is above intending to deceive : deduct
the due subtrahend, — say perhaps twenty-five per cent, or in
extreme cases as high as seventy-five, — you will get some hu-
man image of credible actualities from Wilhelmina. Practically
she is our one resource on this matter. Of the strange King
Friedrich Wilhelm and his strange Court, with such an Keir-
Apparent growing up in it, there is no real light to be had, ex-
cept what Wilhelmina gives, — or kindles dark Books of others
into giving. For that, too, on long study, is the result of her,
here and there. With so flickery a wax-taper held over Fried-
rich’s childhood, — and the other dirty tallow-dips all going out
in intolerable odour, — judge if our success can be very trium**
phant t

We perceive th*? little creature has got much from Nature ;
not the big arena only, but fine inward gifts, for he is well-born
in more senses than one ; — and that in the breeding of him
there are two elements noticeable, widely diverse : the French
and the German. This is per^piaps the chief peculiarity ; best
worth laying hold of, with the due comprehension, if our means
allow.

First Educational Element, the French one.

His nurses, governesses, simultaneous and successive, mostly
of French breed, are duly set down in the Prussian Books, and
held in mind as a point of duty by Prussian men ; but, in foreign
parts, cannot be considered otherwise than as a group, and
merely with generic featuRs. He had a Frau von Kamecke
for Head Governess, — the lady whom Wilhelmina, in her famed
MlmoireSf always writes Kamken; and of whom, except the
floating gossip found ip that Book, there is nothing to be re-
membered. Under her, as practical superintendent, Sous-gou^
vemante and quasi-mother, was the Dame de Roucoulles, a
more important person for us here. Dame de Roucoulles* once
de Montbail, the same respectable Edict-of-Nantes French lady
who, five-and-twenty years ago, had taken similar charge of

Chap, I. DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT. ^175

»7t3-X7a3-

Friedrich Wilhelm ; a fact that speaks well for the character oz"
her performance in that office. She had done her first edidon
of a Prussian Prince in a satisfactory manner ; and not wilS)ut
difficult accidents and singularities, as we have heard : the like
of which were spared her in this her second edition (so we may
call it) ; a second and, in all manner of ways, an improved
one. ^The young Fritz swallowed no shoebuckles ; did not Lap
out of window, hanging-on by the hands ; nor achieve anything
of turbulent, or otherwise memorable, in his infantine historj'- ;
the course of which was in general smooth, and runs, happily
for it, below the ken of rumour. The Boy, 't is said, and is
easily credible, was of extraordinary vivacity ; quick in appre-
hending all things, and gracefully relating himself to them. One
of the prettiest, vividest little boys ; with eyes, with mind and
ways, of uncommon brilliancy ; — only he takes less to soldier-
ing than the paternal heart could wish ; and appears to find
other things in the world fully as notable as loud drums, and
stiff men drawn-up in rows. Moreover, he is apt to be a little
unhealthy now and then, and requires ca^ from his nurses,
over whom the judicious Roucoulles has to oe very vigilant.

Of this respectable Madame de Roucoulles I have read, at
least seven times, what the Prussian Books say of her by way
of Biography ; but it is always given in their dull tombstone
style ; it has moreover next to*no importance ; and I, — alas,
I do not yet too well remember it ! She was from Normandy;
of gentle blood, never very rich ; Protestant, in the Edict-of-
Nantes time ; and had to fly her country, a young widow, with
daughter and mother-in-law hanging on her ; the whole of them
almost peniyless. However, she was kindly received at the
Court of Berlin, as usual in that sad case ; and got some prac-
tical help towards living in her new country. Queen Sophie
Charlotte had liked her society ; and finding her of prudent in-
telligent turn, and with the style of manners suitable, had given
her Friedrich Wilhelm to take charge of. She was at that time
Madame de Montbail ; widow, as we said ; she afterwards
wedded Roucoulles, a refugee gentleman of her own Nation,
who had gone into the Prussian Army, as was common for the
like of him. She had again become a widow, Madame de Rou-
coulles this time, with her daughter Montbail still about her,
when, by the grateful good sense of Friedrich Wilhelm, she was
again intrusted as we see ; — and so had the honour of gover-

VOL. I, T

a74 .APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. ^ookiv.

* ijxyiTZi,

niessing Frederick the Great for the first seven years of his life.
Respectable lady, she oversaw his nurses, pap-boats,— ‘ beer-
sou'^ and bread,* he himself tells us once, was his main diet in
boyhood, — ^beer-scups, dress-frocks, first attempts at walking ;
and then also his little bits of intellectualities, moralities ; his
incipiencies of speech, demeanour, and spiritual development ;
and did her function very honestly, there is no doubt.

Wilhelmina mentions her, at a subsequent period ; and we
have a glimpse of this same Roucoulles, gliding about among
the royal young-folk, ‘with only one tooth left’ (figuratively
speaking), and somewhat given to tattle, in Princess Wilhel-
mina’s opinion. Grown very old now, poor lady ; and the
dreadfulest bore, when she gets upon Hanover and her experi-
ences, and Queen Sophie Charlotte’s, in that stupendously mag-
nificent court under Gentleman Ernst. Shun that topic, if you
love your peace of mind I® — She did certainly superintend the
Boy Fritzkin for his first sevjen years ; that is a glory that can-
not be taken from her. And her pupil, too, we agreeably per-
ceive, was always grateful for her services in that capacity. Once
a-week, if he wcre*in Berlin, during his youthful time, he was
sure to appear at the Roucoulles Soiree, and say and look vari-
ous pleasant things to his cher Maman (dear Mamma),” as
he used to call her, and to the respectable small party she had.
Not to speak of other more substantial services, which also were
not wanting.

Roucoulles and the other female souls, mainly French,
among whom the incipient Fritz now was, appear to have*done
their part as well as could be looked for. Respectable Edict-
of-N antes French ladies, with high head-gear, wide hoops ; a
clear, correct, but somewhat barren and meagre species, tight-
laced and high-frizzled in mind and body. It is not a very fer-
tile element for a young soul : not very much of silent piety in
it ; and perhaps of vocal piety more than enough in proportion.
An element founding on what they call * enlightened Protest-
antism,’ * freedom of thought,* and the like, which is apt tq be-
come loquacious, and too conscious of itself ; tending, on the
whole, rather to contempt of the false, than to deep or very
effective recognition of the true.

But it is, in some important senses, a clear and pure ele-
ment withal At lowest, there are no conscious semi-falsitiesf,

• Mimifir€9 (above cited).

Chap. I. DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT. 275

J713-I733.

or Vblunteer hypocrisies, taught the poor Boy ; honour, clear-
ness, truth of word at least ; a decorous dignified bearing; yiri-
ousthin good things, are honestly inculcated and exemplified;
nor is any bad, ungraceful or suspicious thing permitted there,
if recognised for such. It might have been a worse element;
and we must be thankful for it. Friedrich, through life^ car-
ries deep traces of this French-Protestant incipiency ; a very
big wide-branching royal tree, in the end ; but as small and
flexible a seedling once as any one of us.

The good old Dame de Roucoulles just lived to witness his
accession ; on which grand juncture and afterwards, as he had
done before, he continued to express, in graceful and useful
ways, his gratitude and honest affection to her and hers. Tea-
services, presents in cut-glass and other kinds, with Letters that
were still more precious to the old Lady, had come always at
due intervals : and one of his earliest kingly gifts was that of
some suitable small pension for Montbail, the elderly daughter
of this po6r old Roucoulles,* who was just singing her Diniittas,
as it were, still in a blithe and pious manner. For she saw
now (in 1 740) her little nurseling grown to be a brilliant man
and King ,* King gone out to the Wars, too, with all Europe
inquiring and wondering what the issue would be. As for her,
she closed her poor old eyes, at this stage of the business ;
piously, in foreign parts, far from her native Normandy ; and
did not see farther what the issue was. Good old Dame, I
have, as was observed, read ^me seven times over what they
call biographical accounts of her ; but have seven times (by
Heaven’s favour^ I do partly believe) mostly forgotten them
again ; and would not, without cause, inflict on any reader the
like sorrow. To remember one worthy thing, how many thou-
sand unworthy things must a man be able to forget I

From this Edict-of-Nantes environment, which taught our
young Fritz his first lessons of human behaviour, — a polite sharp

> ftreuss, Friedrich derGrosse, eine Lehensgeschichie (s vols Berlin, 1833-1834),

V. (Urkundenbuch, p. 4). CEuvres de Frederic (same Pi euss’s Edition, Berlin, 1846-
1850, &C.), xvi. 184, T91. — The Herr Doctor J D E. Preuss, ‘Historiographer of
Brandenburg,’ devoted wholly to the study of Friedrich for five-and-twenty years
past, and for above a dozen years busily engaged in editing the Oeuvres de FrSdMCf
— ^has, besides that Lebemgeschtchtc just cited, three or four smaller Books, of indis-
tinctly different titles, on the same subject A meritoriously exact man ; acquainted
with the outer details of Friedrich’s Biography (had he any way of arranging, organ-
ising or setting them forth) as few men ever were or will be. We sliall mean always
this Lebensgeschtchte here, when no other title is given ; and (Euvres de Fr^ddrie
•hall signify his Edition unless the contrary be stated.

276 APPRENTICESHIP. FIRST STAGE. Bookiv.

17I3**723.

little Boy, we do hope and understand, — he learned also to clothe
hi§^its of notions, emotions, and garrulous utterabilities, in
the French dialect. Learned to speak, and likewise, what is
more important, to in French ; which was otherwise quite
domesticated in the Palace, and became his second mother-
tongue. Not a bad dialect ; yet also none of the best. Very
lean and shallow, if very clear and convenient ; leaving* much
in poor Fritz unuttered, unthought, unpractised, which might
otherwise have come into activity in the course of his life. He
learned to read very soon, I presume ; but he did not, now or
afterwards, ever learn to spell. He spells indeed dreadfully
ill, at his first appearance on the writing stage, as we shall see
by and by ; and he continued, to the last, one of the bad spellers
of his day. A circumstance which I -never can fully account
for, and will leave to the reader’s study.

From all manner of sources, — from inferior valetaille, Prus-
sian Officials, Royal Majesty itself when not in gala, — he learned,
not less rootedly,^he corrupt Prussian dialect of German ; and
used the same, all his days, among his soldiers, native officials,
common subjects and wherever it was most convenient ; speak-
ing it, and writing and mis-spelling it, with great freedom,
though always with a certaip aversion and undisguised con-
tempt, which has since brought him blame in some quarters.
It is true, the Prussian form of German is but rude ; and pro-
bably Friedrich, except sometimes in Luther’s Bible, never read
any German Book, What, if we will think of it, could he know
of his first mother-tongue ! German, to this.day, is a frightful
dialect for the stupid, the pedant and dullard sort ! Only in
the hands of the gifted does it become supremely good. It had
not yet been the language of any Goethe, any Lessing ; though
it stood on the eve of becoming such. It had already been the
language of Luther, of Ulrich Hutten, Friedrich Barbarossa,
Charlemagne and others. And several extremely important
things had been said in it, and some pleasant ones even*sung
in it, from an old date, in a very appropriate manner, — had
Crown-Prince Friedrich known all that. But he could not rea-
sonably be expected to know : — and the wiser Germans now
forgive him for not knowing, and are even thankful that he did
not.

c%ap< n.

I7t3-X723.

THE GERMAN ELEMENT.

277

CHAPTER IL

THE GERMAN ELEMENT.

So that, as we said, there are two elements for young K ritz,
and higiily diverse ones, from both of which he is to draw
nourishment, and assimilate what he can. Besides that Edict-
of-Nantes French element, and in continual contact and con-
trast with it, which prevails chiefly in the Female Quarters of
the Palace, — there is the native German element for young
Fritz, of which the centre is Papa, now come to be King, and
powerfully manifesting himself as such. An abrupt peremptory
young King; and German to the bone. Along with whom,
companions to him in his social hours, and fellow-workers in
his business, are a set of very rugged German sons of Nature ;
differing much from the French sons of Art. Baron Grumkow,
Leopold Prince of Anhalt-Dessau (not yet called the * O/dDes-
sauer,’ being under forty yet). General Glasenap, Colonel Der-
schau. General Flans ; these, and the other^ameless Generals
and Officials, are a curious counterpart to the Camases, the
Hautcharmoys and Forcades, with their nimble tongues and
rapiers ; still more to the Beausobres, Achards, full of ecclesi-
astical logic, made of Bayle and*Calvin kneaded together ; and
to the high-frizzled ladies rustling in stiff silk, with the shadow
of Versailles and of the Dragonades alike present to them.

Born Hyperboreans thescp others ; rough as hemp, and stout
of fibre as hemp; native products of the rigorous North. Of
whom, after alPour reading, we know little. — O Heaven, they
have had long lines of rugged ancestors, cast in the same rude
stalwart mould, and leading their rough life there, of whom we
know absolutely nothing ! Dumb all those preceding busy gene-
rations; and this of Friedrich Wilhelm is grown almost dumb.
Grim semi-articulate Prussian men ; gone all to pipeclay and
moustache for us. Strange blond-complexioned, not unbeau-
tiful Prussian honourable women, in hoo4)s, brocades, and un-
intelligible head-gear and hair-towers , — ack Gott^ they too are
gone; and their musical talk, in the French or German lan-
guage, that also is gone; and the hollow Eternities have swal-
lowed it, as their wont is, in a very surprising manner I —

Grumkow, a cunning, greedy-hearted, long-headed fellow,

278 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Boole tV.

I7i3-i7a3.

of the old Pomeranian Nobility by birth, has a kind of super-
ficial polish put upon his Hyperboreanisms ; he has been in
foreign countries, doing legations, diplomacies, for which, at
least for the vulpine parts of which, he has a turn. He writes
and speaks articulate grammatical French; but neither in that,
nor in native Pommerish Platt-Deutsch, does he show us much,
except the depths of his own greed, of his own astucitie^s and
stealthy audacities. Of which we shall hear more than enough
by and by.

Of the DessaueTy not yet ‘ OW

As to the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, rugged man, whose very
face is the colour of gunpowder, he also knows French, and
can even write in it, if he like, — having duly had a Tutor of
that nation, and strange adventures with him on the grand tour
and elsewhere ; — but does not much practise writing, when it
can be helped. His children, I have heard, he expressly did
not teach to read or write, seeing no benefit in that effeminate
art, but left them to pick it up as they could. His Princess, all
rightly ennobled noV, — whom he would not but marry, though
sent on the grand tour to avoid it, — was the daughter of one
Fos an Apothecary at Dessau; and is still a beautiful and pru-
dent kind of woman, who seems to suit him well enough, no
worse than if she had been bdirn a Princess. Much talk has
been of her, in princely and other circles ; nor is his marriage
the only strange thing Leopold has done. He is a man to keep
the world’s tongue wagging, not tsqo musically always ; though
himself of very unvocal nature. Perhaps the biggest mass of
inarticulate human vitality, certainly one of tKe biggest, then
going about in the world. A man of vast dumb faculty ; dumb,
but fertile, deep ; no end of ingenuities in the rough head of
him: — as much mother-wit there, I often guess, as could be
found in whole talking parliaments, spouting themselves away
in vocables and eloquent wind !

A man of dreadful impetuosity withal. Set upon his wiH as
the one law of Nature ; storming forward with incontrollable
violence: a very whirlwind of a man. He was left a minor;
his Mother guardian. Nothing could prevent him from marry-
ing this Fos the Apothecary’s Daughter ; no tears nor contriv-
ances of his Mother, whom he much loved, and who took skilful
measures. Fourteen months of travel in Italy ; grand tour, with

THt: GERMAN ELEMENT.

279

Obap. n.
x7X3-i7a3-

eligible French Tutor, — ^whom he once drew sword upon, get-
ting some rebuke from him one night in Venice, and \^ld
have killed, had not the man been nimble, at once dexftous
and sublime : — it availed not. The first thing he did, on reen-
tering Dessau, with his Tutor, was to call at Apothecary Fos’s,
and see the charming Mamsell ; to go and see his Mother, was
the second thing. Not even his grand passion for war could
eradicate Fos: he went to Dutch William’s wars; the wise
mother still counselling, who was own aunt to Dutch William,
and liked the scheme. He besieged Namur; fought and be-
sieged up and down, — ^with insatiable appetite for fighting and
sieging ; with great honour, too, and ambitions awakening in
him; — campaign after campaign: but along with the flamy-
thundery ideal bride, figuratively called Bellona, there was al-
ways a soft real one, Mamsell Fos of Dessau, to whom he
continued constant. The Government of his Dominions he left
cheerfully to his Mother, even when he came of age : “I am
for learning War, as the one right trade ; do with all things
as you please, Mamma, — only not with JMamsell, not with
her!” —

Readers .may figure this scene too, and shudder over it.
Some rather handsome male Cousin of Mamsell, Medical Gra-
duate or whatever he was, had appeared in Dessau: — “Seems
to admire Mamsell much ; of course, in a Platonic way,” said
rumour. — “ He ? Admire ?” thinks Leopold ; — thinks a good deal
of it, not in the philosophic mood. As he was one day passing
Fos’s, Mamsell and the Mecfical Graduate are visible, standing
together at the^ window inside. Pleasantly looking out upon
Nature, — of course quite casually, say some Histories with a
sneer. In fact, it seems possible this Medical Graduate may
have been set to act shoeing-horn ; but he had better not. Leo-
pold storms into the House, “ Draw, scandalous canaille, and
defend yourself!” — ^And in this, or some such way, a confident
tradition says, he killed the poor Medical Graduate there and
then. One tries always to hope not : but Varnhagen is positive,
though the other Histories say nothing of it. God knows. The
man was a Prince; no Reichshofrath, Speyer-Wetzlar
or other Supreme Court, would much trouble itself, except with
formal shakings of the wig, about such a peccadillo. In fine,
it was better for Leopold to marry the Miss Fos; which he
actually did (1698, in his twenty-second year), ‘ with the left

Uo . APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE, ^ooki^

»7t3-»723‘

hand/ — and then with the right and both hands ; having got
hei^roperly ennobled before long, by his splendid military
senses. She made, as we have hinted, an excellent Wife to
him, for the fifty or sixty ensuing years.

This is a strange rugged specimen, this inarticulate Leo-
pold ; already getting mythic, as we can perceive, to the polished
vocal ages ; which mix all manner of fables with the consider-
able history he has. Readers will see him turn-up again in
notable forms. A man hitherto unknown except in his own
country ; and yet of very considerable significance to all Euro-
pean countries whatsoever ; the fruit of his activities, without
his name attached, being now manifest in all of them. He in-
vented the iron ramrod ; he invented the equal step ; in fact,
he is the inventor of modern military tactics. Even so, if we
knew it: the Soldiery of every civilised country still receives
from this man, on parade-fields and battle-fields, its word of
command ; out of his rough head proceeded the essential of
all that the innumerable Drill-sergeants, in various languages,
daily repeat and enforce. Such a man is worth some transient
glance from his fellow- creatures, — especially with a little Fritz
trotting at his foot, and drawing inferences from him.

Dessau, we should have said for the English reader’s be-
hoof, was and still is a little independent Principality ; about
the size of Huntingdonshire, but with woods instead of bogs ;
— revenue of it, at this day, is 60,000/., was perhaps not 20,
or even 10,000 in Leopold’s first time. It lies some fourscore
miles south-west of Berlin, attainaibie by post-horses in a day.
Leopold, as his Father had done, stood by Prufsia as if wholly
native to it. Leopold’s Mother was Sister of that fine Louisa,
the Great Elector’s first Wife; his Sister is wedded to the Mar-
graf ofSchwedt, Friedrich Wilhelm’s half-uncle. Lying in such
neighbourhood, and being in such affinity to the Prussian
House, the Dessauers may be said to have, in late times, their
headquarters at Berlin. Leopold and Leopold’s sons, as his
father before him had done, without neglecting their Dessau
and Principality, hold by the Prussian Army as their main em-
ployment. Not neglecting Dessau either; but going thither in
winter, or on call otherwise ; Leopold least of all neglecting it,
who neglects nothing that can be useful to him.

He is General Field-Marshal oi the Prussian Armies, the
foremost man in war -matters with this new King; and well

Chap. II. > THE GERMAN ELEMENT. 2Sf

i7*3-*7»3-

worthy to be so. He is inventing, or brooding in the way to
invent, a variety of things, — “iron ramrods,” for one; ^very
great improvement on the fragile ineffective wooden impltoent,
say all the Books, but give no date to it,* that is the first thing;
and there will be others, likewise undated, but posterior, re-
quiring mention by and by. Inventing many things; — and
alwjiys well practising what is already invented, and known for
Certain. In a word, he is drilling to perfection, with assiduous
rigour, the Prussian Infantry to be the wonder of the world.
He has fought with them, too, in a conclusive manner; and is
at all times ready for fighting.

He was in Malplaquet with them, if only as volunteer on
that occasion. He commanded them in Blenheim itself; stood,
in the right or Eugene wing of that famed Battle of Blenheim,
fiercely at bay, when the Austrian Cavalry had all fled ; — fiercely
volleying, charging, dextrously wheeling and manoeuvering ;
sticking to his ground with a mastiff-like tenacity, — till Marl-
borough, and victory from the left, relieved him and others.
He was at the Bridge of Cassano ; where fiugene and Vend6me
came to handgrips; — where Mirabeau’s Grandfather, Col-d'Ar^
gent^ got his six-and-thirty wounds, and was ‘ killed’ as he used
to term it.^ “ The hottest fire I ever saw,” said Eugene, who
had not seen Malplaquet at that time. While Col-d’ Argent sank
collapsed upon the Bridge, and the horse charged over him,
and again charged, and beat and were beaten three several
times, — Anhalt-Dessau, impatient of such fiddling hither and
thither, swashed into the Stream itself with his Prussian Foot;
swashed throygh it, waistdeep or breastdeep ; and might have
settled the matter, had not his cartridges got wetted. Old King
Friedrich rebuked him angrily for his impetuosity in this mat-
ter, and the sad loss of men.

Then again he was at the Storming of the Lines of Turin,
—Eugene’s feat of 1706, and a most volcanic business ; — ^was
the first man that got over the entrenchment there. Foremost
wan ; face all black with the smoke of gunpowder, only chan-
neled here and there with rivulets of sweat ; — not a lovely phe-
nomenon to the French in the interior I Who still fought like
madmen, but were at length driven into heaps, and obliged to
run. A while before they ran, Anhalt-Dessau, noticing some
Captain posted with his company in a likely situation, stept

1 Carlyle's Miscellanies, v. § Mirabcatt

APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. fioolclV.

I7i3-X7a3-

aside to him for a moment, and asked, ^‘Am I wounded, think
you ?-^-No ? Then have you anything to drink ?” and deliberately
‘dranfika glass of aquavitae,* the judicious Captain carrying a
pocket-pistol of that sort, in case of accident; and likewise ‘ eat,

* with great appetite, a bit of bread from one of the soldiers*

* havresacks; saying. He believed the heat ofthejob was done,

* and that there was no fear now.** — •

A man that has been in many wars ; in whose rough head
are schemes hatching. Any religion he has is of Protestant
nature ; but he has not much, — on the doctrinal side, very little.
Luther’s Hymn, jeste Burg ist unser Gott, he calls God
Almighty’s grenadier -march.** On joining battle, he audibly
utters, with bared head, some growl of rugged prayer, far from
orthodox at times, but much in earnest : that lifting of his hat
for prayer, is his last signal on such occasions. He is very cun-
ning as required, withal ; not disdaining the serpentine method
when no other will do. With Friedrich Wilhelm, who is his
second-cousin (Mother*s grand-nephew, if the reader can count
that), he is from of oid on the best footing, and contrives to be
his Mentor in many things besides War. Till his quarrel with
Grumkow, of which we shall hear, he took the lead in political
advising, too ; and had schemes, or was thought to have, of
which Queen Sophie was in mucji terror.

A tall, strong-boned, hairy man ; with cloudy brows, vigil-
ant swift eyes; has ‘a bluish tint of skin,’ says Wilhelmina,

* as if the gunpowder still stuck to him.* He wears long mous-
taches ; triangular hat, plume and other equipments, . are of
thrifty practical size. Can be polite enough in speef^h ; but hides
much of his meaning, which indeed is mostly inarticulate, and
not always joyful to the bystander. He plays rough pranks,
too, on occasion ; and has a big horse-laugh in him, where there
is a fop to be roasted, or the like. We will leave him for the
present, in hope of other meetings.

Remarkable men, many of those old Prussian soldiers : o^
whom one wishes, to no purpose, that there had more know-
ledge been attainable. But the Books are silent ; no painter,
no genial seeing-man to paint with his pen, was there. Grim
hirsute Hyperborean figures, they pass mostly mute before

* 8 Des •wiUhtr&mJUtn LeojH>ldi &»c. (Anonymous, by cited above), pp. 4a-

43 * S8»

pRiiDRictt Wilhelm is kin< 5 . 185

I7i3-*7a3»

US : burly, surly ; in moustaches, in dim uncertain garniture,
of which the buff-belts and the steel are alone conspj^ous.
Growling in guttural Teutsch what little articulate meaning
they had : spending, of the inarticulate, a proportion in games
of chance, probably too in drinking beer ; yet having an im-
mense overplus which they do not so spend, but endeavour to
utt§r in such working as there may be. So have the Hyper-
boreans lived from of old. From the times of Tacitus and
Pytheas, not to speak of Odin and Japhet, what hosts of them
have marched across Existence, in that manner ; — and where
is the memory that would, even if it could, speak of them
all!—

We will hope tlie mind of our little Fritz has powers of
assimilation. Bayle-Calvin logics, and shadows of Versailles,
on this hand, and gunpowder Leopolds and inarticulate Hyper-
boreans on that : here is a wide diversity of nutriment, all
rather tough in quality, provided for the young soul. Innu-
merable unconscious inferences he mu^fc have drawn in his
little head ! Prince Leopold’s face, with the whiskers and blue
skin, I find he was wont, at after periods, to do in caricature,
under the figure of a Cat’s ; — horror and admiration not the
sole feelings raised in him by the Field-Marshal. — P'or bodily
nourishment he had ‘beer-soup;’ a decided Spartan tone prevail-
ing, wherever possible, in the breeding and treatment of him.

And we need not doubt, by far the most important element
of his education was the Unconscious Apprenticeship he con-
tinually serve^ to such a Spartan as King Friedrich Wilhelm.
Of whose works and ways he could not help taking note, angry
or other, every day and hour ; nor in the end, if he were in-
telligent, help understanding them, and learning from them.
A harsh Master and almost half-mad, as it many times seemed
to the poor Apprentice ; yet a true and solid one, whose real
wisdom was worth that of all the others, as he came at length
t% recognise.

CHAPTER III.

FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING.

With the death of old King Friedrich, there occurred at
once vast changes in the Court of Berlin ; a total and universal

2 U APPRENTICESHIP. FIRST STAGE. BookiV.

1713*1723.

change in the mode of living and doing business there. Fried-
rich Wilhelm, out of filial piety, wore at his father’s funeral
the gnkad French peruke and other sublimities of French cos'-
tume ; but it was for the last time : that sad duty once done,
he flung the whole aside, not without impatience, and on no
occasion wore such costume again. He was not a friend to
French fashioAs, nor had ever been ; far the contrary. In^his
boyhood, say the Biographers, there was once a grand em-
broidered cloth-of-gold, or otherwise supremely magnificent,
little Dressing-gown given him ; but he would at no rate put
it on, or be concerned with it ; on the contrary, stuffed it indig-
nantly ‘ into the fire ;* and demanded wholesome useful duffel
instead.

He began his reform literally at the earliest moment. Being
summoned into the apartment where his poor Father was in
the last struggle, he could scarcely get across for Kammcr-
junker^ KammerherrUy Goldsticks, Silversticks, and the other
solemn histrionic fui^tionaries, all crowding there to do their
sad mimicry on the occasion : not a lovely accompaniment in
Friedrich Wilhelm’s eyes. His poor Father’s death-struggle
once done, and all reduced to everlasting rest there, Friedrich
Wilhelm looked in silence over the Unutterable, for a short
space, disregardful of the Goldsticks and their eager new
homaging ; walked swiftly away from it to his own room, shut
the door with a slam ; and there, shaking the .tears from his
eyes, commenced by a notable duty* — the duty nearest hand,
and therefore first to be done, as it seemed to him. It was
about one in the afternoon, 25th February 1713 ; his Father
dead half-an-hour before; “Tears at a Father’s deathbed,
must they be dashed with rage by such a set of greedy His-
trios ?” thought Friedrich Wilhelm. He summoned these his
Court-people, that is to say, summoned their Ober-Hofmar^
schall and representative ; and through him signified to them,
That, till the Funeral was over, their service would continue ;
and that on the morrow after the Funeral they were, every soul
of them, discharged ; and from the highest Goldstick down to
the lowest Page-in-waiting, the King’s House should be swept
entirely clean of them ; — said House intending to start afresh
upon a quite new footing. 1 Which spread such a consternation

t F&rster. i. 174; PCllniU, MemoireHy ii. 4.

Chap. III. FRifeDRICH WILHELM IS KING. 285

X7X3-X723.

among the courtier people, say the Histories, as was never
seen before*. s

The thing was done, however ; and nobody durst Whisper
discontent with it ; this rugged young King, with his plangent
metallic voice, with his steady-beaming eyes, seeming dread-
fully in earnest about it, and a person that might prove dan-
gei^us if you crossed him. He reduced his Household accord-
ingly, at once, to the lowest footing of the indispensable ; and
discharged a whole regiment of superfluous official persons,
court-flunkies, inferior, superior and supreme, in the most ruth-
less manner. He does not intend keeping any Ober-Hofmar-
schallt or the like idle person, henceforth ; thinks a minimum
of Goldsticks ought to suffice every man.

Eight Lackeys, in the ante-chambers and elsewhere, these,
with each a Jdgerbursch (what we should call an Under-keeper)
to assist when not hunting, will suffice : Lackeys at * eight tha-
lers monthly,* which is six shillings a week. Three active Pages,
sometimes two, instead of perhaps three-dozen idle that there
used to be. In King Friedrich’s time, Jiiere were wont to be
a Thousand saddle-horses at corn and hay : but how many of
them were in actual use ? Very many of them were mere ima
ginary quadrupeds ; their price and keep pocketed by some
knavish Stallmeiste?', Equerry or Head-groom, Friedrich Wil-
helm keeps only Thirty Horses ; but these are very actual, not
imaginary at all ; their corn not running into any knave’s
pocket ; but lying actually in the mangers here ; getting ground
for you into actual fourfooted speed, when, on turf or highway,
you require $uch a thing. About thirty for the saddle, with a
few carriage -teams, are what Friedrich Wilhelm can employ
in any reasonable measure ; and more he will not have about
him.

In the like ruthless humour he goes over his Pension-list ;
strikes three-fourths of that away, reduces the remaining fourth
to the very bone. In like humour, he goes over every depart-
•nent of his Administrative, Household and other Expenses ;
shears everything down, here by the Hundred thalers, there by
the Ten, willing even to save half a thaler. He goes over all
this three several times ; — his Papers, the three successive
Lists he used on that occasion, have been printed.* He has

® Rfidenbeck, BeiirSge zur Bcreicherung der Lehensheschreibungen Friedrich
WUkelvis /. und Friedrichs des Grossen CBerUn, 1836), pp, 99-127.

aS6 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Boole iv.

*7*3-X7a3.

satisfied hiinself, in about two months, what the effective mini-
mum^s ; and leaves it so. Reduced to below the fifth of what
it was ? 55,000 thalers^ instead of 276,000.3

By degrees he went over, went into and through, every de-
partment of Prussian Business, in that fashion ; steadily, warily,
irresistibly compelling every item of it, large and little, to take
that same character of perfect economy and solidity, of utility
pure and simple. Needful work is to be rigorously well done ;
needless work, and ineffectual or imaginary workers, to be ri-
gorously pitched out of doors. What a blessing on this Earth ;
worth purchasing almost at any price I The money saved is
something, nothing if you will ; but the amount of mendacity
expunged, has any one computed that? Mendacity not of
tongue ; but the far feller sort, of hand*, and of heart, and
of head ; short summary of all Devil’s -worship whatsoever.
Which spreads silently along, once you let it in, with full purse
or with empty ; some fools even praising it : the quiet dry-rot
of Nations 1 To expunge such is greatly the duty of every
man, especially of e\«ry King. Unconsciously, not thinking
of Devil* s-worship, or spiritual dry-rot, but of money chiefly,
and led by Nature and the ways she has with us, it was the
task of Friedrich Wilhelm’s life to bring about this beneficent
result in all departments of Prussian Business, great and little,
public and even private. Year after year, he brings it to per-
fection ; pushes it unweariedly forward every day and hour.
So that he has Prussia, at last, all a Prussia made after his
own image ; the most thrifty, hardy, rigorous and Spartan
country any modern King ever ruled over ; and himself (if
he thought of that) King indeed. He that models Nations
according to his own image, he is a King, though his sceptre
were a walking-stick ; and pr(j^perly no other is.

Friedrich Wilhelm was wondered at, and laughed at, by in-
numerable mortals for his ways of doing ; which indeed were
very strange. Not that he figured much in what is called Pub-
lic History, or desired to do so; for, though a vigilant rulei^’
he did not deal in protocolling and campaigning, — he let a
minimum of that suffice him. But in court soirdes, where ele-
gant empty talk goes on, and of all materials for it scandal is
found incomparably the most interesting, I suppose there turned-
up no name oftener than that of his Prussian Majesty ; and

5* Stenzcl, Ui, 337.

Chap. III. FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING,

1713-1783.

during these Twenty-seven years of his Reign, his wild pranks
and explosions gave food for continual talk in such qua^A.

For he was like no other King that then existed, ^r had
ever been discovered. Wilder Son of Nature seldom came into
the artificial world ; into a royal throne there, probably never.
A wild man, wholly in earnest, veritable as the old rocks, — and
with a terribfe volcanic fire in him too. He would have been
strange anywhere ; but among the dapper Royal gentlemen of
the Eighteenth Century, what was to be done with such an
Orson of a King? — Clap him in Bedlam, and bring out the
ballot-boxes instead? The modern generation, too, still takes
its impression of him from these rumours, — still more now from
Wilhelmina’s Book ,* which paints the outside savagery of the
royal man, in a most striking manner ; and leaves the inside
vacant, undiscovered by Wilhelmina or the rumours.

Nevertheless it appears there were a few observant eyes
even of contemporaries, who discerned in him a surprising
talent for * National Economics’ at least. One Leipzig Pro-
fessor, Saxon, not Prussian by nation oj^ interest, recognises
in Friedrich Wilhelm ** den grossen Wirtk (the great Manager,
Husbandry-man, or Landlord) of the epoch and lectures on
his admirable ‘works, arrangements and institutions’ in that
kind.4 Nay the dapper Royal gentlemen saw, with envy, the
indubitable growth of this mad savage Brother ; and ascribed
it to “ his avarice,” to his mean ways, which were in such
contrast to they: sublime ones. That he understood National
Economics has now becoifie very certain. His grim semi-arti-
culate Papers and Rescripts, on these subjects, are still almost
worth reading, by a lover of genuine human talent in the dumb
form. For spelling, grammar, penmanship and composition,
they resemble nothing else extant ; are as if done by the paw
of a bear ; indeed the utterance generally sounds more like
the growling of a bear than anything that could be handily
spelt or parsed. But there is a decisive human sense in the
hgart of it ; and there is such a dire hatred of empty bladders,
unrealities and hypocritical forms and pretences, what he calls
“wind and humbug {Wind und blauer Dunsty' as is very
strange indeed. Strange among all mankind ; doubly and
trebly strange among the unfortunate species called Kings in
our time. To whom, — ^for sad reasons that could be given, —

< RddoolieeVs BetfrSjie *4)»'~Year, or Name of Lecturer, not mentioned.

a»8 APPRENTICESHIP. FIRST STAGE. Bookiv.

I7i3”*7a3.

and blue vapour {blauer Duns/),** artistically managed
rules of Acoustics and Optics, seem to be all >ve have
left us\* —

It must be owned that this man is inflexibly, and with a
fierce slow inexorable determination, set upon having realities
round him. There is a divine idea of fact put ipto him ; the
genus sham was never hatefuler to any man. Let it keep^^ out
of his way, well beyond the swing of that rattan of his, or it
may get something to remember ! A just man, too ; would
not wrong any man, nor play false in word or deed to any
man. What is Justice but another form of the reality we love;
a truth acted out ? Of all the humbugs or “ painted vapours*’
known, Injustice is the least capable of profiting men or kings !
A just man, I say ; and a valiant and veracious ; but rugged
as a wild-bear ; entirely inarticulate, as if dumb. No bursts
of parliamentary eloquence in him, nor the least tendency that
way. His talent for Stump-Oratory may be reckoned the mi-
nimum conceivable, or practically noted as zero, A man who
would not have ris^ in modern Political Circles ; man un-
choosable at hustings or in caucus ; man forever invisible, and
very unadmirable if seen, to the Able-Editor and those that
hang by him. In fact, a kind of savage man, as we say ; but
highly interesting, if you can read dumb human worth ; and
of inexpressible profit to the Prussian Nation,

For the first ten years of his reign, he had a heavy, ,con-
tinual struggle, getting his finance afid other branches of admin-
istration extricated from their strangling imbroglios of coiled
nonsense, and put upon a rational footing. His labour in
these years, the first of little Fritz’s life, must have been great ;
the pushing and pulling strong and continual. The good plan
itself, this comes not of its own accord ; it is the fruit of ‘ ge-
nius* (which means transcendent capacity of taking trouble,
first of all) : given a huge stack of tumbled thrums, it is not in
your sleep that you will find the vital centre of it, or get Ijie
first thrum by the end ! And then the execution, the realising,
amid the contradiction, silent or expressed, oi men and things ?
Explosive violence was by no means Friedrich Wilhelm’s me^
thod ; the amount of slow stubborn broad-shouldered strength,
in all kinds, expended by the man, strikes us as very great.
The amount of patience even, though patience is not reckoned
his forte.

diap.ni. FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING. 2^9

X7i3-i7a3.

That of the Riiter-Dienst (Knights'-Service), for examp^
" which is but on% small item of his business, the commutin^^
the old feudal duty of his Landholders to do Service in 4Var-
time, into a fixed money payment : nothing could be fairer,
more clearly advantageous to both parties ; and most of his
* Knighis* gladly accepted the proposal : yet a certain factious
set of them, the Magdeburg set, stirred-up by some seven or
eight of their* number, ‘‘hardly above seven or eight really
against me,’* saw good to stand out ; remonstrated, recalci-
trated ; complained in the Diet (Kaiser too happy to hear of
it, that he might have a hook on Friedrich Wilhelm) ; and for
long years that paltry matter was a provocation to him.^' But
if your plan zs just, and a bit of Nature’s plan, persist in it
like a law of Nature. This secret too was known to Friedrich
Wilhelm. In the space of ten years, by actual human strength
loyally spent, he had managed many things ; saw all things in
a course towards management. All things, as it were, fairly
on the road ,* the multiplex team pulling one way, in rational
human harness, not in imbroglios of coilsd thrums made by
the Nightmares.

How he introduced a new mode of farming hi$ Domain Lands,
which are a main branch of his revenue, and shall be farmed on
regular lease henceforth, and npt wasted in peculation and indo-
lent mismanagement as heretofore new modes of levying his
taxes and revenues of every kind How he at last concentrated,
and harmonised Into one eas^-going effective General Directory^
the multifarious conflicting Boards, that were jolting and jang-
ling in a dark iwe-and-wont manner, and leaving their work half-
done, when he first came into power :9 How he insisted on
having daylight introduced to the very bottom of every busi-
ness, fair-and-square observed as the rule of it, and the shortest
road adopted for doing it: How he drained bogs, planted co-
lonies, established manufactures, made his own uniforms of
Prussian wool, in a Lagerhaus of his own : How he dealt with
tlfe Jew Gompert about farming his Tobacco; — how, from
many a crooked case and character he, by slow or short me-
thods, brought out something straight ; would take no denial

® 1717-25* Ffirster, ii. 162-165, iv. 31-34; Stenzel, ui. 316-319; ^Samuel Budiholz,
Reueste Preussisch-Brandei^urgtsclte Geschichte 1775), i. 297.

® Fiirster, ii. ao6, 226. *9®» ^ 95 *

f Completed igth January 1723 (Ib. it 172).

• Dohtn, DenfytuUhiii^keitm mtimrZeit (Lemgo und Hanover, 18x4-1819), tv, eel.

VOL. I, U .

ago APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Bookiv,

what was his, nor make any demand of what was not ; and
did prove really a terror to evil-doers of various kinds, espe-
ci^3|,to prevaricators, defalcators, imaginary workers, and
slippery unjust persons : How he urged diligence on all mor-
tals, would not have the -very Applewomen sit * without knit-
ting’ at their stalls ; and brandished his sticjk, or struck it
fiercely down, over the incorrigibly idle : — All this, as well as
his ludicrous explosions and unreasonable violences, is on re-
cord concerning Friedrich Wilhelm, though it is to the latter
chiefly that the world has directed its unwise attention, in
judging of him. He was a very arbitrary King. Yes, but
then a good deal of his arbiitium^ or sovereign will, was that
of the Eternal Heavens as well ; and did exceedingly behove
to be done, if the Earth would prosper. , Which is an immense
consideration in regard to his sovereign will and him ! He
was prompt with his rattan, in urgent cases ; had his gallows
also, prompt enough, where needful. Let him see that no
mistakes happen, as certainly he means that none shall I
Yearly he made^his country richer ; and this not in money
alone (which is of very uncertain value, and sometimes has no
value at all, and even less), but in frugality, diligence, punctu-
ality, veracity, — the grand fountains from which money, and
all real values and valours spring for men. To Friedrich Wil*
helm, in his rustic simplicity, money had no lack of value ;
rather the reverse. To the homespun man it was a success of
most excellent quality, and the chief symbol of success in all
kinds. Yearly he made his own* revenues, and his people’s
along with them and as the source of them, larger : and in all
states of his revenue, he had contrived to make his expendi-
ture less than it ; and yearly saved masses of coin, and * re-
posited them in barrels in the cellars of his Schloss,’ — where
they proved very useful, one day. hjuch in Friedrich Wilhelm
proved useful, beyond even his expectations. As a Nation’s
Husband he seeks his fellow among Kings, ancient and mo-
dern. Happy the Nation which gets such a Husband, onp^
in the half-thousand years. The Nation, as foolish wives and
Nations do, repines and grudges a good deal, its weak whims
and will being thwarted very often ; but it advances steadily,
with consciousness or not, in the way of well-doing ; and after
long times the harvest of this diligent sowing becomes mani*
fi^st to the Nation and to all Nations.

FRIEfaRICH WILHELM IS KING.

291

Chap. III.

Strangfe as it sounds in the Republic of Letters, we are
tempted to call Friedrich Wilhelm a man of genius ; — ^ge^rtR
fated and promoted to work in National Husbandry, j^ot in
writing Verses or three-volume Novels. A silent genius. His
melodious stanza, which he cannot bear to see halt in any syl-
lable, is a rough fact reduced to order ; fact made to stand
firn^ on its feet, with the world-rocks under it, and looking free
towards all the winds and all the stars. He goes about sup-
pressing platitudes, ripping-off futilities, turning deceptions
inside out. The realm of Disorder, which is Unveracity,
Unreality, what we call Chaos, has no fiercer enemy. Honest
soul, and he seemed to himself such a stupid fellow often ; no
tongue-learning at all ; little capable to give a reason for the
faith that was in him. He cannot argue in articulate logic,
only in inarticulate bellowings, or worse. He must do a thing,
leave it undemonstrated ; once done, it will itself tell what kind
of thing it is, by and by. Men of genius have a hard time, I
perceive, whether born on the throne or off it ; and must ex-
pect contradictions next to unendurable, — Jjie plurality of block-
heads being so extreme I

J find, except Samuel Johnson, no man of equal veracity
with Friedrich Wilhelm in that epoch : and Johnson too, with
all his tongue-learning, had not logic enough. In fact, it de-
pends on how much conviction you have. Blessed be Heaven,
there is here and there a man born who loves truth as truth
should be lovedf with all his heart and all his soul ; and hates
untruth with a corrcspondTng perfect hatred. Such men, in
polite circles, ^hich understand that certainly truth is better
than untruth, but that you must be polite to both, are liable to
get to the end of their logic. Even Johnson had a bellow in
him ; though Johnson could at any time withdraw into silence,
his kingdom lying all under his own hat. How much more
Friedrich Wilhelm, who had no logic whatever ; and whose
kingdom lay without him, far and wide, a thing he could not
withdraw from. The rugged Orson, he needed to be right.
From utmost Memel down to Wescl again, ranked in a strag-
gling manner round the half-circumference of Europe, all man-
ner of things and persons were depending on him, and on his
being right, not wrong, in his notion.

A man of clear discernment, very good natural eyesight f
3tad irrefragably confident in what his eyes told him, in what

292 APPRENTICESHIP. FIRST STAGE. Kookiv.

i7X3-x7a3*

(lis belief was ; — yet of huge simplicity withal. Capable of being
epi^ed about, and led by the nose, to a strangd degree, if there
were^^n artist dextrous enough, daring enough ! His own na-
tural judgment was good, and, though apt to be hasty and head-
long, was always likely to come right in the end ; but internally,
we may perceive, his modesty, self-distrust, anriety and other
unexpected qualities, must have been great. And then his ex-
plosiveness, impatience, excitability ; his conscious dumb ignor-
ance of all things beyond his own small horizon of personal
survey I An Orson capable enough of being coaxed and tickled,
by some first-rate conjuror ; — ^first-rate ; a second-rate might
have failed, and got torn to pieces for his pains. But Secken-
dorf and Grumkow, what a dance they led him on some matters,
—as we shall see, and as poor Fritz and others will see !

He was full of sensitiveness, rough as he was and shaggy
of skin. His wild imaginations drove him hither and thither
at a sad rate. He ought to have the privileges of genius. His
tall Potsdam Regiment, his mad-looking passion for enlisting
tall men ; this also geems to me one of the whims of genius, —
an exaggerated notion to have his * stanza’ polished to the last
punctilio of perfection ; and might be paralleled in the history
of Poets. Stranger * man of genius,* or in more peculiar cir-
cumstances, the world never saw !

Friedrich Wilhelm, in his CrGwn-Prince days, and now still
more when he was himself in the sovereign place, had seen all
along, with natural arithmetical intellect, That«^his strength in
this world, as at present situated,* would very much depend
upon the amount of potential-battle that lay in^.him, — on the
quantity and quality of Soldiers he could maintain, and have
ready for the field at any time. A most indisputable truth, and
a heartfelt one in the present instance. To augment the quan-
tity, to improve the quality, in this thrice-essential particular :
here lay the keystone and crowning summit of all Friedrich
Wilhelm’s endeavours ; to which he devoted himself, as only
the best Spartan could have done. Of which there will be othc»
opportunities to speak in detail. For it was a thing world-not-
able ; world-laughable, as was then thought ; the extremely seri-
ous fruit of which did at length also become notable enough.

In the Malplaquet time, once on some occasion, it is said,
two English Officers, not well informed upon the matter, and
provoking enough in their cont^ptuous ignorance, were rea-

Chap. in. FRIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING. 293

17 * 3 -* 7 * 3 »

soiling with one another in Friedrich Wilhelm's hearing, as to
the warlike powers of the Prussian State, and Whether the IlfBg
of Prussia could on his own strength maintain a standin^army
of 1 5,000 Without subsidies, do you think, so many as
15,000 ? Friedrich Wilhelm, incensed at the thing and at the
tone, is reported to have said with heat : “ Yes, 30,000 T’lo
whereat the military men slightly wagged their heads, letting
the matter drop for the present. But he makes it good by de-
grees ,' twofold or threefold ; — and will have an army of from
seventy to a hundred-thousand before he dies,ii the best-drilled
of fighting men ; and what adds much to the wonder, a full
Treasury withal. This is the Brandenburg Spartan King ; ac-
quainted with National Economics. Alone of existing Kings
he lays-by money annually ; and is laying-by many other and
far more precious things, for Prussia and the little Boy he has
here.

Friedrich Wilhelm's passion for drilling, recruiting and per-
fecting his army attracted much notice : 3 #ughing satirical no-
tice, in the hundred mouths of common rumour, which he re-
garded little ; and notice iracund and minatory, when it led him
into collision with the independent portions of mankind, now
and then. This latter sort vjas not pleasant, and sometimes
looked rather serious ; but this too he contrived always to di-
gest in some tolerable manner. He continued drilling and re-
cruiting, — we nfay say not J^is Army only, but his Nation in all
departments of it, — as no man before or since ever did : in-
creasing, by ef'ery devisable method, the amount of potential-
battle that lay in him and it.

In a military, and also in a much deeper sense, he may be
defined as the great Drill-sergeant of the Prussian Nation. In-
deed this had been the function of the Hohenzollcrns all along;
this difficult, unpleasant and indispensable one of drilling. From
the first appearance of Burgfraf Friedrich, with good words and
iffith Heavy Peg, in the wreck of anarchic Brandenburg, and
downwards ever since, this has steadily enough gone on. And
not a little good drilling these populations have had, first and
last ; just orders given them (wise and just, which to a respect-

PCrster, i. 138. , . . ^ ,

‘72,000 field-troops, 30,000 garrisop-lroops* {^GestSnanisse €ines CBsterreuh^
is^hen Vatemns, Breslau, 1788, i. 64),

^94 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. BooIcIV.

*7»3-i7«S‘

able degree were Heaven’s orders as well) : and certainly Heavy
for instance, — Heavy Peg, bringing Quitzow’s strong House
abouf^his ears, — ^was a respectable drummer’s-cat to enforce
the same. This has been going on these Three-hundred years.
But Friedrich Wilhelm completes the process ; finishes it off to
the last pitch of perfection. Friedi*ich Wilhelm carries it through
every fibre and cranny of Prussian Business, and so far as pos-
sible, of Prussian Life ; so that Prussia is all a drilled phalanx,
ready to the word of command ; and what we see in the Army
is but the last consummate essence of what exists in the Nation
everywhere. That was Friedrich Wilhelm’s function, made
ready for him, laid to his hand by his Hohenzollern foregoers ;
and indeed it proved a most beneficent function.

For I have remarked that, of all things, a Nation needs first
to be drilled ; and no Nation that has not first been governed
by so-called “ Tyrants,” and held tight to the curb till it be-
came perfect in its paces and thoroughly amenable to rule and
law, and heartily respectful of the same, and totally abhorrent
of the want of the same, ever came to much in this world. Eng-
land itself, in foolish quarters of England, still howls and exe-
crates lamentably over its William Conqueror, and rigorous line
of Normans and Plantagenets ; but without them, if you will
consider well, what had it ever be^n ? A gluttonous race of Jutes
and Angles, capable of no grand combinations ; lumbering about
in potbellied equanimity; not dreaming of heroic toil and silence
and endurance, such as leads to the Igigh places Sf this Universe,
and the golden mountain-tops where dwell the Spirits of the
Dawn. Their very ballotboxes and suffrages, Vhat they call
their “ Liberty,” if these mean “ Liberty,” and are such a road
to Heaven, Anglo-Saxon highroad thither, — could never have
been possible for them on such terms. How could they ? No-
thing but collision, intolerable interpressure (as of men not per-
pendicular), and consequent battle often supervening, could
have been appointed those undrilled Anglo-Saxons ; their pot-
bellied equanimity itself continuing liable to perpetual intemij?
tions, as in the Heptarchy time. An enlightened Public does
not reflect on these things at present ; but will again, by and
by. Looking with human eyes over the England that now is,
and over the America and the Australia, from pole to pole ;
and then listening to the Constitutional litanies of Dryasdust,
and hi$ lamentations on the old Norman and Plantagenet Kings,

Chap. IV. HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS. 595

I7I3-1733*

and his recognition of depjlrted merit and causes of effects,—
the mind of min is struck dumb I

CHAPTER IV.

HIS majesty’s ways.

Friedrich Wilhelm’s History is one oi Economics; which
study, so soon as there are Kings again in this world, will be
precious to them. In that happy state of matters, Friedrich
Wilhelm’s History will well reward study; and teach by ex-
ample, in a very simple and direct manner. In what is called
the Political, Diplomatic, * Honour-to-be’ department, there is
not, nor can ever be, 'much to be said of him; this Economist
King having always kept himself well at home, and looked
steadily to his own affairs. So that for the present he has, as
a King, next to nothing of what is called History; and it is
only as a fellow-man, of singular faculty, and in a most pecu-
liar and conspicuous situation, that he 4»an be interesting to
mankind. To us he has, as Father and daily teacher and mas-
ter of young Fritz, a continual interest; and we must note the
master’s ways, and the main phenomena of the w^orkshop as
they successively turned up, for the sake of the notable Appren-
tice serving there.

He was n8t tall of stgiture, this arbitrary King: a florid-
complexioned stout-built man ; of serious, sincere, authoritative
face; his attitudes and equipments very Spartan in type. Man
of short firm stature; stands (in Pesne’s best Portraits of him)
at his ease, and yet like a tower. Most solid ; * plumb and rather
more ;‘ eyes steadfastly awake ; cheeks slightly compressed, too,
which fling the mouth rather forward ; as if asking silently,
** Anything astir, then ? All right here ?” Face, figure and bear-
ing, all in him is expressive of robust insight, and direct deter-
‘Inination ; of healthy energy, practicality, unquestioned autho-
rity, — a certain air of royalty reduced to its simplest form. The
face, in Pictures by Pesne and others, is not beautiful or agree-
able; healthy, genuine, authoritative, is the best you can say
of it. Yet it may have been, what it is described as being,
originally handsome. High enough arched brow, rather copious
cheeks and jaws; nose smallisbi inclining to be stumpy; larg^

3 L 96 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Bookiv.

gray eyes, Bright with steady fire and life, often enough gloomy
sqgd. severe, but capable of jolly laughter too. Eyes ‘ naturally

a kind of laugh in them,* says Pollnitz; — which laugh can
blaze-^ut into fearful thunderous rage, if you give him provo-
cation. Especially if you lie to him ; for that he hates above
all things. Look him straight in the face : he j^ncies he can
see in yottr eyes, if there is an internal mendacity in xpu :
wherefore you must look at him in speaking; such is his stand-
ing order.

His hair is flaxen, falling into the ashgray or darker; fine
copious flowing hair, while he wore it natural. But it soon got
tied into clubs, in the military style ; and at length it was alto-
gether cropped away, and replaced by brown, and at last by
white, round wigs. Which latter also, though bad wigs, be-
came him not amiss, under his cocked-hat and cockade, says
Pollnitz. ^ The voice, I guess, even when not loud, was of clang-
orous and penetrating, quasi-metallic nature ; and I learn ex-
pressly once, that it had a nasal quality in it.^ His Majesty
spoke through the nose ; snuffled his speech, in an earnest
ominously plangent Scanner. In angry moments, which were
frequent, it must have been — unpleasant to listen to. For the
rest, a handsome man of his inches ; conspicuously well-built
in limbs and body, and delicately finished-off to the very ex-
tremities. His feet and legs, says^Pdllnitz, were very fine. The
hands, if he would have taken care of them, were beautifully
white ; fingers long and thin ; a hand at once nimble to grasp,
delicate to feel, and strong to clutcff and hold : what may be
called a beautiful hand, because it is the usefule^t.

Nothing could exceed his Majesty’s simplicity of habitudes.
But one loves especially in him his scrupulous attention to
cleanliness of person and of environment. He washed like a very
Mussulman, five times a day ; loved cleanliness in all things,
to a superstitious extent ; which trait is pleasant in the rugged
man, and indeed of a piece with the rest of his character. He
is gradually changing all his silk and other cloth room-furni-*
ture ; in his hatred of dust, he will not suffer a floor-carpet„
even a stuffed chair ; but insists on having all of wood, where
the dust may be prosecuted to destruction. 3 Wife and woman-
kind, and those that take after them, let such have stuffing and

1 Pollnitz, Memoiren (Berlin, 1791), ii. 568. 8 Bttsching, BeiirUge, i 568.

* FOrster, i. aoS,

HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS.

297

Chap. IV.
irxwas-

sofas . he, for his part, sits on mere wooden chairs; — sits, and
also thinks and acts, after the manner of a Hyperborean S^-
tan, which he was. He ate heartily, but as a rough farmer and
hunter eats ; country messes, good roast and boiled ; despising
the French Cook, as an entity without meaning for him. His
favourite dish^t dinner was bacon and greens, rightly dressed ;
wha^ could the French Cook do for such a man ? He ate with
rapidity, almost with indiscriminate violence : his object not
quality but quantity. He drank too, but did not get drunk :
at the Doctor’s order he could abstain ; and had in later years
abstained. Pbllnitz praises his fineness of complexion, the ori-
ginally eminent whiteness of his skin, which he had tanned and
bronzed by hard riding and hunting, and otherwise worse dis-
coloured by his manner of feeding, and digesting : alas, at last
his waistcoat came to measure, I am afraid to say how many
Prussian ells, — a very considerable diameter indeed

For some years after his accession he still appeared occa-
sionally in ♦ burgher dress,* or unmilitary clothes ; ‘ brown Eng-
lish coat, yellow waistcoat* and the other iiidispensables. But
this fashion became rarer with him every year; and ceased
altogether (say Chronologists) about the year 1719: after which
he appeared always simply as Colonel of the Potsdam Guards
(his own Lifeguard Regiment) in simple Prussian uniform :
close military coat ; blue, with red cuffs and collar, buff waist-
coat and breeches ; white linen gaiters to the knee. He girt
his sword about^the loins, ^ell out of the mud; walked always
with a thick bamboo in his hand. Steady, not slow of step ;
with his triangular hat, cream-white round wig (in his older
days), and face tending to purple, — the eyes looking out mere
investigation, sharp swift authority, and dangerous readiness to
rebuke and set the cane in motion : — it was so he walked abroad
in this earth ; and the common run of men rather fled his ap-
proach than courted it.

For, in fact, he was dangerous ; and would ask in an alarm-
irjg manner, “Who are you?’* Any fantastic, much more any
suspicious-looking person, might fare the worse. An idle lounger
at the street-corner he has been known to hit over the crown ;
and peremptorily dispatch: “ Home, Sirrah, and take to some
work!** That the Applcwomen be encouraged to knit, while
waiting for custom; — encouraged and quietly constrained, and
4 F6rster i. 163.

^98 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. BooTcIV.

been ^ut forth ; very curious to read.®

Dandiacal figures, nay people looking like Frenchmen, idle
flaunting women even, — ^better for them to be going. •* Who
are you?’* and if you lied or prevaricated Efblickemich ge^
rode an. Look me in the face, then !”), or even stumbled, hesi-
tated, and gave suspicion of prevaricating, it might be worse
for you. A soft answer is less effectual than a prompt clear
one, to turn away wrath. ‘‘A Candidatus Theologies, your Ma-
jesty,’* answered a handfast threadbare youth one day, when
questioned in this manner. — “Wherefrom?” “Berlin, your
Majesty.** — “Hm, na, the Berliners are a good-for-nothing
set.** “ Yes, truly, too many of them ; but there are exceptions ;
I know two.” — “ Two? which then?” “ Your Majesty and my-
self!** — Majesty bursts into a laugh: the Candidatus was got
examined by the Consistorium^ and Authorities proper in that
matter, and put into a chaplaincy.

This King did not love the French, or their fashions, at all.
We said he dismissed the big Peruke, — put it on for the last
time at his Father’s funeral, so far did filial piety go ; and then
packed it aside, dismissing it, n^y banishing and proscribing
it, never to appear more. The Peruke, and, as it were, all that
the Peruke symbolised. For this was a Kin^^ come into the
world with quite other aims than tkat of wearing big perukes,
and, regardless of expense, playing burst-frog to the ox of Ver-
sailles, which latte;: is itself perhaps a rather fiseless animal.
Of Friedrich Wilhelm’s taxes upon wigs ; of the old ** Wig-
inspectors,** and the feats they did, plucking off men’s periwigs
on the street, to see if the government-stamp were there, and
to discourage wiggery, at least all but the simple scratch or
useful Welsh-wig, among mankind : of these, and of other simi-
lar things, I could speak; but do not. This little incident, which
occurred once ifi the review-ground on the outskirts of Berlin,
will suffice to mark his temper in that respect. It was in the
spring of 1 7 1 9 ; our little Fritz then six years old, who of course
heard much temporary confused commentary, direct aipid ob-'
lique, triumphant male laughter, and perhaps rebellious lemale
sighs, on occasion of such a feat.

® lo Rttdonbcck, p. 15,

HIS MAJESTY’S WAYS.

299

Chap. IV.
i7x»'*7«3*

Count Rotjjenburg, Prussian by birth,® an accomplishgi
and able person in the diplomatic and othet lines of busing
but much used to Paris and its ways, had appeared laftly in
Berlin, as French Envoy, — and, not unnaturally, in high French
costume ; cocked-hat, peruke, laced coat, and the other trim*
mings. He, affid a group of dashing followers and adherents,
wer(? accustomed to go about in that guise ; very capable of
proving infectious to mankind. What is to be done with them?
thinks the anxious Father of his People. They were to appear
at the ensuing grand Review, as Friedrich Wilhelm understood.
Whereupon Friedrich Wilhelm took his measures in private.
Dressed up, namely, his Scavenger-Executioner people (what
they call Profossen in Prussian regiments) in an enormous ex-
aggeration of that costume ; cockcd-hats about an ell in dia-
meter, wigs reaching to the houghs, with other fittings to match :
these, when Count Rothenburg and his company appeared upon
the ground, Friedrich Wilhelm summoned out, with some trum-
pet-peal or burst of field-music ; and they solemnly crossed
Count Rothenburg’s field of vision ; the jft*angest set of Phan-
tasms he had seen lately. Awakening salutary reflections in
him.7 Fancy that scene in History ; Friedrich Wilhelm for
comic-symbolic Dramaturgist. Gods and men (or at least
Houyhnm horses) might have^saluted it with a Homeric laugh,
— so huge and vacant is it, with a suspicion of real humour
too : — but the men were not permitted, on parade, more than
a silent grin, or general irrepressible rustling murmur; and
only the gods laughed inextinguishably, if so disposed. The
Scavenger-Executioners went back to their place ; and Count
Rothenburg took a plain German costume, so long as he con-
tinued in those parts.

Friedrich Wilhelm has a dumb rough wit and mockery, of
that kind, on many occasions ; not without geniality in its
Brobdignag exaggeration and simplicity. Like a wild-bear of
the woods taking his sport ; with some sense of humour in the
rough skin of him. Very capable of seeing through sumptuous
costumes ; and respectful of realities alone. Not in French
sumptuosity, but in native German thrift, does this King see
his salvation ; so has Nature constructed him ; and the world

* Buchholz, Nettesie Preussisch-BrandenburgiscJ^ Gesckic/tie, I a8.

Fdrster, i. 165 ; Fassntann, Leben und 'Fhaten des allerdttrchl&uchit^ten
Kb'uigs von Pransen Predertci WtVteltnt (Hamburg und Breslau, 1735), pp. 233,

JUO APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Bookiv.

which has long lost its Spartans, will see again an original
iSWth-German Spartan ; and shriek a good ileal over him ;
Natuifi keeping her own counsel the while, and as it were,
laughing in her sleeve at the shrieks of the flunky world. For
Nature, when she makes a Spartan, means a good deal by it ;
and does not expect instant applauses, but on^y gradual and
lasting. •

‘For my own part,* exclaims a certain Editor once, ‘I perceive
‘ well there was never yet any great Empire founded, Roman, English,

‘ down to Prussian or Dutch, nor in fact any great mass of work got
‘ achieved under the Sun, but it was founded even upon this humble*

‘ looking quality of Thrift, and became achievable in virtue of the same.

* Which will seem a strange doctrine, in these days of gold-nuggets,

* railway-fortunes, and miraculous sumptuosities regardless of expense.

‘ Earnest readers are invited to consider it, nevertheless. Though new,

* it is very old ; and a sad meaning lies in it to us of these times ! Thai

* you have squandered in idle fooleries, building where there was no

* basis, your Hundred-thousand Sterling, your Eight-hundred Million

* Sterling, is to me a comparatively small matter. You may still again

* become rich, if you hj,ye at last become wise. But if you have wasted
‘ your capacity of strenuous, devoutly-valiant labour, of patience, p^r-
‘ severance, self-denial, faith in the causes of effects ; alas, if your once
‘ just judgment of what is worth something and what is worth nothing,

* has been wasted, and your silent steadfast reliance on the general ve-
‘ racities, of yourself and of things, ^ no longer there, — ^then indeed

* you have had a loss ! Y ou are, in fact, an entirely bankrupt individual ;
‘ as you will find by and by. Yes; and though you had California in

* fee-simple ; and could buy all the upholsteries, groc7jries, funded-pro-
‘ perties, temporary (very temporary) limded properties of the world,

‘ at one swoop, it would avail you nothing. Henceforth for you no

* harvests in the Seedfield of this Universe, which reserves its salutary
‘ bounties, and noble heaven-sent gifts, for quite other than you ; and
‘ I would not give a pin’s value for all you will ever reap there. Mere
‘ imaginary harvests, sacks of nuggets and the like ; empty as the east-
‘ wind ; — with all the Demons laughing at you ! Do you consider that
‘ Nature too is a swollen flunky, hungry for vails ; and can be taken-in
‘ with your sublime airs of sumptuosity, and the large balance you ac-

* tually have in Lombard -street? Go to the— General Cesspool, wiili

* your nuggets and your ducats I*

The flunky world, much stript of its plush and fat perquis-
ites, accuses Friedrich Wilhelm bitterly of avarice and the cog-
nate vices. But it is not so ; intrinsically, in the main, his
procedure is to be defined as honourable thrift, — ^verging to-
wards avarice here and there ; as poor human virtues usually

Chup.v. FRiEDkICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR. 301

X7i3-X7a3-

lean to one side or the other ! He can be magnificent enoiigh
too, and grudges no expense, when the occasion seems worllty.
If the occasion is inevitable, and yet not quite worthy, i have
known him have recourse to strange shifts. The Czar Peter,
for example, used to be rather often in the Prussian Dominions,
oftenesl on business of his own : such a man is to be royally
defrayed while with us ; yet one would wish it done cheap.
Posthorses, * two-hundred and eighty-seven at every station,* he
has from the Community ; but the rest of his expenses, from
Memel all the way to Wesel ? Friedrich Wilhelm’s marginal
response to his Finan::-Directorium, requiring orders once on
that subject, runs in the following strange tenour: *‘Yes, all
the way (except Berlin, which I take upon myself) ; and ob-
serve, you contrive to do it for 6,000 thalers (900/.),” — which
is uncommonly cheap, about i/. per mile ; — “ won’t allow you
one other penny {nit einen Pfennig gebe meltr dasu) ; but you
arc {sollen Sie)f this is the remarkable point, ‘*to give-out in
the worfd that it costs me from Thirty to Forty Thousand I”®
So that here is the Majesty of Prussia, viho beyond all men
abhors lies, giving orders to tell one ? Alas, yes ; a kind of
lie, <1* fib (white fib, or gfay)^ the pinch of Thrift compel-
ling ! But what a window into the artless inner-man of his
Majesty, even that gray fib ; — ^not done by oneself, but ordered
to be done by the servant, as S' that were cheaper !

« Verging upon avarice,* sure enough : but, unless we are
unjust and unkind, he can 1^ no means be described as a Miser
King. He collects what is his ; gives you accurately what is
yours. For w^iges paid he will see work done ; he will ascer-
tain more and more that the work done be work needful for
him ; and strike it off, if not. A Spartan man, as we said, —
though probably he knew as little of the Spartans as the Spar-
tans did of him. But Nature is still capable of such products :
if in Hellas long ages since, why not in Brandenburg now ?

CHAPTER V.

IfRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR*

One of Fritz’s earliest strong impressions from the outer
World chanced to be of War, — so it chanced, though he had

* 17x7: Fdrster, I 2x3.

jda AtPRMNTiCfiSHlf*. f-lkst StAGE. Bookiv.

»7*3-i7a3«

shown too little taste that way, and could not, as yet, under-
sHKjid such phenomena ; — and there must hive been much
semi-^ticulate questioning and dialoguing with Dame de Rou-
coulles,^ on his part, about the matter now going on.

In the year 1715, little Fritz’s third year, came grand doings,
not of drill only, but of actual war and fighting : the “ Stral-
sund Expedition,” Friedrich Wilhelm’s one feat in that lj;ind.
Huge rumour of which fills naturally the maternal heart, the
Berlin Palace drawing-rooms ; and occupies, with new vivid
interests, all imaginations young and old. For the actual battle-
drums are now beating, the big cannon-wains are creaking
under way ; and military men take farewell, and march, tramp,
tramp ; Majesty in grenadier-guard uniform at their head : horse,
foot and artillery ; northward to Stralsund on the Baltic shore,
where a terrible human Lion has taken up his lair lately. Charles
XII. of Sweden, namely ; he has broken out of Turkish Bender
or Demotica, and ended his obstinate torpor, at last ; has rid-
den fourteen or sixteen days, he and a groom or two, through
desolate steppes an^ mountain wildernesses, through crowded
dangerous cities ; — ‘ came by Vienna and by Cassel, then
through Pommern leaving his • royal train of two-thousand
persons’ to follow at its leisure. He, for his part, has ridden
without pause, forward, ever forward, in darkest incognito, the
indefatigable man; — and finallyj'on Old-Hallowmas Eve (22d-
iith November 1714), far in the night, a Horseman, with two
others still following him, travel -splashed, and ‘white* with
snow,’ drew bridle at the gate of Slralsund ; and, to the sur-
prise of the Swedish sentinel there, demanded .instant admis-
sion to the Governor. The Governor, at first a little surly of
humour, saw gradually how it was ; sprang out of bed, and
embraced the knees of the snowy man ; Stralsund in general
sprang out of bed, and illuminated itself, that same Hallow-
Eve : — and in brief, Charles XII., after five years of eclipse,
has reappeared upon the stage of things ; and menaces the
world, in his old fashion, from that City. From which it bs-
comes urgent to many parties, and at last to Friedrich Wilhelm
himself, that he be dislodged.

The root of this Stralsund story belongs to the former reign,
as did the grand apparition of Charles XII. on the theatre of
F.uropean History, and the terror and astonishment he created

Ch»p.V. fRIEDRlCH WILHELM’S ONE ,WaR. 3dJ

I7X>

there* He is now thirty-three years old ; and only the wind-
ing-up, both ofihim and of the Stralsund story, falls within ^ifr
present field. Fifteen years ago, it was like the bursting of a
cataract of bombshells in a dull ballroom, the sudden appear-
ance of this young fighting Swede among the luxurious Kings
and Kinglets of the North, all lounging about and languidly
minuetting in tnat manner, regardless of expense ! Friedrich
IV. of Denmark rejoicing over red-wine ; August the Strong
gradually producing his * three-hundred and fifty-four bastards
these and other neighbours had confidently stept in, on various
pretexts ; thinking to help themselves from the young man’s
properties, who was still a minor ; when the young minor sud-
denly developed himself as a major and maximus, and turned
out to be such a Fire-JCing among them 1

lu consequence of which there had been no end of Northern
troubles ; and all through the Louis-Fourteenth or Marlborough
grand * Succession War,’ a special * Northern War’ had burnt or
smouldered on its own score; Swedes versus Saxons, Russians
and Danes, bickering in weary intricate ^ontest, and keeping
those Northern regions in smoke if not on fire. Charles XII.,
for the last five years (ever since Pultawa, and the summer of
1709), had lain obstinately dormant in Turkey; urging the
Turks to destroy Czar Peter. Which they absolutely could not,
though they now and then tr^d ; and Viziers not a few lost
their heads in consequence. Charles lay sullenly dormant ;
Danes meanwhile operating upon his Holstein interests and
adjoining territories ; Saxohs, Russians, battering continually
at Swedish Pogimern, continually marching thither, and then
marching home again, without success, — always through the
Brandenburg Territory, as they needs must. Which latter cir-
cumstance Friedrich Wilhelm, while yet only Crown -Prince,
had seen with natural displeasure, could that have helped it. But
Charles XII. would not yield a whit ; sent orders peremptorily,
from his bed at Bender or Demotica, that there must be no sur-
regder. Neither could the sluggish enemy compel surrender.

So that, at length, it had grown a feeble wearisome welter
of inextricable strifes, with worn-out combatants, exhausted of
all but their animosity ; and seemed as if it would never end.
Inveterate ineffective war ; ruinous to all good interests in those
parts. What miseries had Holstein from it, which last to our

1 Mimoira de BanUh (Wilhelmina's Cook, irondres, i8t>), I tix.

i 6 f APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. teookiv.

X7*3-i7a3*

Own day ! Mecklenburg also it involved in sore troubles, which
lafefed long enough, as we shall see. ^ But BraiWenburg, above
all, m?y be impatient ; Brandenburg, which has no business
with it except that of unlucky neighbourhood. One of Fried-
rich Wilhelm’s very first operations, as King, was to end this
ugly state of matters, which he had witnessed wsth impatience,
as Prince, for a long while. o

He had hailed even the Treaty of Utrecht with welcome, in
hopes it might at least end these Northern brabbles. This the
Treaty of Utrecht tried to do, but could not: however, it gave
him back his Prussian Fighting Men ; which he has already
increased by six regiments, raised, we may perceive, on the
ruins of his late court-Hunkies and dismissed goldsticks ; — with
these Friedrich Wilhelm will try to enddt himself. These he
at once ordered to form a Camp on his frontier, close to that
theatre of contest ; and signified now with emphasis, in the be-
ginning of 1713, that he decidedly wished there were peace in
those Pommern regions. Negotiations in consequence ;* very
wide negotiations, L^?uis XIV. and the Kaiser lending hand, to
pacify these fighting Northern Kings and their Czar : at length
the Holstein Government, representing their sworn ally, Charles
XII., on the occasion, made an offer which seemed promising.
They proposed that Stettin and its dependencies, the strong
frontier Town, and, as it were, kdy of Swedish Pommern, should
be evacuated by the Swedes, and be garrisoned by neutral
troops, Prussians and Holsteiners^ in equal Aumber; yrhich
neutral troops shall prohibit any hostile attack of Pommern from
without, Sweden engaging not to make any attack through Pom-
mern from within.. That will be as good as peace in Pommern,
till we get a general Swedish Peace. With which Friedrich
Wilhelm gladly complies.’

Unhappily, however, the Swedish Commandant in Stettin
would not give up the place, on any representative or secondary
authority ; not without an express order in his King’s own hand.
Which, as his King was far away, in abstruse Turkish circum-
stances and localities, could not be had at the moment ; and
involved new difficulties and uncertainties, new delay which
might itself be fatal. The end was, the Russians and Saxons
had to cannonade the man out by^regular siege « they then gave

^ loth June 17x3 : Buchholz, i. ax.

>> aad June 17x3: Ibid. i. ax.

Chap.v. 'FRIKDiRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR, 305

1 /^ 4 *

Up the Town to Prussia and Holstein ; but required first to be
paid their expenses incurred in siegingit, — 400,000 thalerif^s
they computed and demonstrated, or somewhere about 6p, 000/.
of our money.

Friedrich Wilhelm paid the money (Holstein not having a
groschen) ; togk possession of the Town, and dependent towns
and forts ; intending well to keep them till repaid. This was
in October 1713 ; and ever since, there has been actuaf tran-
quillity in those parts : the embers of the Northern War may
still burn or smoulder elsewhere, but here they arc quite ex-
tinct. At first, it was a joint possession of Stettin, Holsteiners
and Prussians in equal number; and if Friedrich Wilhelm had
been sure of his money, so it would have continued. But the
Holsteiners had paid, nothing ; Charles XI I. 's sanction never
could be expressly got, and the Holsteiners were mere depend-
ents of his. Better to increase our Prussian force, by degrees ;
and, in some good way, with a minimum of violence, get the
Holsteiners squeezed out of Stettin: Friedrich Wilhelm has so
ordered and contrived. The Prussian foj;ce having now gra-
dually increased to double in this important garrison, the Hol-
steiners are quietly disarmed, one night, and ordered to depart,
under penalties ; — which was done. Holding such a pawn-
ticket as Stettin, buttoned in our own pocket, we count now
on being paid our 60,000/, bfefore parting with it.

Matters turned out as Friedrich William had dreaded they
might. Here 4s Charles XII. come back; .inflexible as cold
Swedish iron; will not heaf of any Treaty dealing with his pro-
perties in that^manner ; Is he a bankrupt, then, that you will
sell his towns by auction ? Charles does not, at heart, believe
that Friedrich Wilhelm ever really paid the 60,000/.; Charles
demands, for his own part, to have his own Swedish Town of
Stettin restored to him ; and has not the least intention, or
indeed ability, to pay money. Vain to answer : “ Stettin, for
the present, is not a Swedish Town ; it is a Prussian Pawn-
ticket !” — ^There was much negotiation, correspondence ; Louis
XIV. and the Kaiser stepping in again to produce settlement.
To no purpose, Louis, gallant old Bankrupt, tried hard to
take Charles’s part with effect. But he had, himself, no money
now ; could only try finessing by ambassadors, try a little
menacing by them ; neither of which profited. Friedrich Wil-
helm, wanting only peace on his borders, after fifteen years of

VOL, I, 1C

jo6 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. ' Cookiv.

extraneous uproar there, has paid 60,000/. in hard cash to
it ; repay him that sum, with promise otf peace on his
bordei^ he will then quit Stettin ; till then not. Big words
from a French Ambassador in big wig, will not suffice : *' Bully-
ing goes for nothing {Bange machcn gilt nicht),** — the thing
covenanted for will need to be done I Poor L^uis the Great,
whom we now call ** BankrupUQxQ.2X^' died while these affairs
were pending ; while Charles, his ally, was arguing and battling
against all the world, with only a grandiloquent Ambassador
to help him from Louis. “ J'ai trop abni la guerre,'* said
Louis at his death, addressing a new small Louis (five years
old), his great-grandson and successor: ** I have been too fond
of war ; do not imitate me in that, ne wlimites pas en cela,"*
Which counsel also, as we shall sec, was considerably lost in
air.

Friedrich Wilhelm had a true personal regard for Charles
XII., a man made in many respects after his own heart ; and
would fain have peijjiuaded him into softer behaviour. But it
was to no purpose. Charles would not listen to reasons of
policy ; or believe that his estate was bankrupt, or that his
towns could be put in pawn. Danes, Saxons, Russians, even
George 1 . of England (George having just bought, of the Danish
King, who had got hold of it, a great Hanover bargain, Bre-
men and Verden, on cheap terms, from the quasi-bankrupt
estate of poor Charles), — have to combine against him, and
see to put him down. Among whom Prussia, at length’ actu-
ally attacked by Charles in the Stettin regions„has reluctantly
to take the lead -in that repressive movement. On the 28th
of April 1 7 1 S, Friedrich Wilhelm declares war against Charles ;
is already on march, with a great force, towards Stettin, to
coerce and repress said Charles. No help for it, so sore as it
-goes against us : “Why will the very King whom I most re-
spect compel me to be his enemy ?” said Friedrich Wilhelm.^

One of Friedrich Wilhelm’s originalities is his farewell
Order and Instruction, to his Three chief Ministers, on this
occasion. Ilgen, Dohna, Prinzen, tacit dusky figures, whom
we meet in Prussian Books, and never gain the least idea of,
except as of grim, rather cunning, most reserved antiquarian

* xst September 1715.

* (Eftvru^dt Fridiric {.Hisioirt de Brandehonrf^, I 132 ; nuchliolz/L 28.

Chap.v. FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR. 307

X7<5*

gentlemen, — a kind of human iron-safes, solemnly filled (under
triple and quadruple patent-locks) with what, alas, has now^^Jll
grown waste-paper, dust and cobweb, to us : — these thjee re-
served cunning Gentlemen are to keep a thrice-watchful eye on
all subordinate boards and persons, and see well that nobody
nod or do ami#.s. Brief weekly report to his Majesty will be
expected; staffettes, should pses of hot haste occur : any ques-
tions of yours are ‘ to be put on a sheet of paper folded down,
to which I can write marginalia ;* if nothing particular is pass-
ing, * nit scitreibeit, you don’t write.’ Pay out no money, ex-
cept what falls due by the Books ; none ; — if an extraordinary
case for payment arise, consult my Wife, and she must sign
her order for it. Generally in matters of any moment, con-
sult my Wife ; but her only, * except her and the Privy Coun-
cillors, no mortal is to poke into my affairs I say no mortal,
*sohst kein Mensch*

‘ My Wife shall be told of all things,* he says elsewhere,

' and counsel asked of her.* The rugged Paterfamilias, but
the human one ! < And as I am a man^ continues he, * and

* may be shot dead, I command you and all to take care ot
‘ Fritz {fur Fritz zu sorgen), as God shall rewai*d you. And

* I give you all, Wife to begin with, my curse {imiimt Fluch\

* that God may punish you in Time and Eternity, if you do not,

‘ after my death,’ — do wliat^ O Heavens.^ — ‘bury me in the
‘ vault of the Schlosskirche,’ Palace-Church at Berlin ! ‘And
‘ you shall make no grand to-do (kein Fes tin) on the occasion.

‘ On your body and life, no festivals and ceremonials, except

* that the regipients one after the other fire a volley over me.’
Is not this an ursine man-of-genius, in some sort, as we once
defined him ? He adds suddenly, and concludes : ‘ I am as-
‘ sured you will manage everything with all the exactness in
‘ the world ; for which I shall ever zealously, as long as I live.

‘ be your friend.’®

Russians, Saxons affected to intend joining Friedrich Wil-
kelm in his Pommern Expedition ; and of the latter there did,
under a so-called Field-Marshal von Wackerbarth, of high
plumes and titles, some four-thousand, — of whom only Colonel
von Seckendorf, commanding one of the horse-regiments, is
remarkable to us, — come and serve. The rest, and all the

361I1 April X715 : Cosmars und Klaproths StaatsratJi, s. 823 (in Stcnz-1, iii.

*69).

3od APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. Bookiv.

»7I3-I793*

Russians, he was as well pleased to have at a distance. Some
^teen-thousand Danes joined him, too, with t4ie King of Den-
mark^at their head ; very furious, all, against the Swedish-iron
Hero ; but they were remarked to do almost no real service,
except at sea a little against the Swedish ships. George 1.
also had a fleet in the Baltic ; but only * to protect English
commerce.* On the whole, the Siege of Stralsund, to ^yhich
the Campaign pretty soon reduced itself, was done mainly by
Friedrich Wilhelm. He staid two months in Stettin, getting
all his preliminaries completed ; his good Queen, Wife “ Fee-
kin,*’ was with him for some time, I know not whether now
or afterwards. In the end of June, he issued from Stettin ;
took the interjacent outpost places ; and then opened ground
before Stralsund, where, in a few days more, the Danes joined
him. It was now the middle of July: a combined Army of
well-nigh Forty-thousand against Charles ; who, to man his
works, musters about the fourth part of that number .7

Stralsund, with its outer lines and inner, with its marshes,
ditches, ramparts qpd abundant cannon to them, and leaning,
one side of it, on the deep sea, which Swedish ships command
as yet, is very strong. Wallenstein, we know, once tried it
with furious assault, with bombardment, sap and storm ; swore
he would have it, ** though it hung by a chain from Heaven;”
but could not get it, after all his volcanic raging ; and was
driven away, partly by the Swedes and armed Townsfolk, chiefly
by the marsh-fevers and continuous rains. Stualsund has been
taken, since that, by Prussian sieging ; as old men, from the
Great Elector’s time, still remember.s To Lov-is Fourteenth’s
menacing Ambassador, Friedrich Wilhelm seems to intimate
that indeed big bullying words will not take it, but that Prus-
sian guns and men, on a just ground, still may.

The details of this Siege of Stralsund are all on record,
and had once a certain fame in the world ; but, except as a
distant echo, must not concern us here. It lasted till mid-
winter, under continual fierce counter-movements and desper-
ate sallies from the Swedish Lion, standing at bay there against
all the world. But Friedrich Wilhelm was vigilance itself ;
and he had his Anhalt-Dessaus with him, his Borcks, Bud-
denbrocks, Finkensteins, veteran men and captains, who had

7 Pauli, 85*xox ; Buchholz, L 3X-39 ; FSrster, ii. 34-39 ; Stenzel, ill 972-31^^.
x>th-x5th October 1678 (Pauli, v. 203, 30^

Chap.v. FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR. 3C9

19th Dec. 17x5.

learned their art under Marlborough and Eugene. The Lion
King’s fierce Allies, and desperate valour, could not av'Sil.
Point after point was lost for him. Koppen, a Prussianp Lieu-
tenant-Colonel, native to the place, who has bathed in those
waters in his youth, remembers that, by wading to the chin,
you could get Hound the extremity of Charles’s main outer line.
Koppen states his project, gets it approved of ; — wades accord-
ingly, with a select party, under cloud of night (4th of Novem-
ber, eve of Gunpowder-day, a most cold-hot job) ; other ranked
Prussian battalions awaiting intently outside, with shouldered
firelock, invisible in the dark, what will become of him. * Kdp-
pen wades successfully ; seizes the first battery of said line, —
masters said line with its batteries, the outside battalions and
he. Irrepressibly, with horrible uproar from without and from
within ; the flying Swedes scarcely getting up the Town draw-
bridge, as he chased them. That important line is lost to
Charles.

Next they took the Isle of Riigen ffom him, which shuts
up the harbour. Leopold of Anhalt-Dessa», our rugged friend,
in Danish boats, which were but ill navigated, contrives, about
a week after that Koppen feat, to effect a landing on Riigen at
nightfall ; beats off the weak Swedish party ; — entrenches, pa-
lisades himself to the teeth, and lies down under arms. That
latter was a wise precaution. For, about four in the morning,
Charles comes in person, with eight pieces of cannon and four-
thousand hbrse^and foot : ^Charles is struck with amazement
at the palisade and ditch Mein Gott^ who would have ex-
pected this I” he was heard murmuring) ; dashes, like a fire-
flood, against ditch and palisade ; tears at the pales himself,
which prove impregnable to his cannon and him. He storms
and rages forward, again and again, now here, now there ; but
is met everywhere by steady deadly musketry; and has to
retire, fruitless, about daybreak, himself wounded, and leaving
his eight cannons, and four-hundred slain.

• Poor Charles, there had been no sleep for him that night,
and little for very many nights : * on getting to horse, on the
‘ shore at Stralsund, he fainted repeatedly ; fell out of one

• faint into another ; but such was his rage, he always reco-

• vered himself, and got on horseback again. ’9 Poor Charles ;
a bit of right royal Swedish-German stuff, after his kind ; and

Buchholz, I. 36.

310 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. iSookiV.

X7I3‘»7*3*

tragically ill bested now at last ! This is his exit he is now
ntaking, — still in a consistent manner. It is fifteen years now
since ,he waded ashore at Copenhagen, and first heard the
bullets whistle round him. Since which time, what a course
has he run ; crashing athwart all manner of ranked armies,
diplomatic combinations, right onward, like cannon-ball ;
tearing off many solemn wigs in those Northern parts, and
scattering them upon the winds, — even as he did his own full-
bottom wig, impatiently, on that first day at Copenhagen, find-
ing it unfurthersome for actual business in battle. ‘

In about a month hence, the last important hornwork is
forced ; Charles, himself seen fiercely fighting on the place, is
swept back from his last hornwork ; and the general storm,
now altogether irresistible, is evidently at hand. On entreaty
from his followers, entreaty often renewed, with tears even (it
is said) and on bended knees, Charles at last consents to go.
He left no orders for surrender ; would not name the word ;
‘left only ambiguous vague orders.’ But on the 19th Decem-
ber 1715, he does a^^tually depart ; gets on board a little boat,
towards a Swedish frigate, which is lying above a mile out ;
the whole road to which, between Riigen and the mainland, is
now solid ice, and has to be cut as he proceeds. This slow
operation, which lasted all day, was visible, and its meaning
well known, in the besiegers’ lines. The King of Denmark
saw it ; and brought a battery to bear upon it ; his thought
had always been, that Charles should be captured or killed in
Stralsund, and not allowed to get away. Friedrich Wilhelm
was of quite another mind, and had even used s^.cret influences
to that effect ; eager that Charles should escape. It is said,
he remonstrated very passionately with the Danish King and
this battery of his ; nay, some add, since remonstrances did
not avail, and the battery still threatened to fire, Friedrich
Wilhelm drew-up a Prussian regiment or two at the muzzles of
it, and said. You shall shoot us first, then.^i Which is a plea-
sant myth at least ; and symbolical of what the reality was. 9
Charles reached his frigate about nightfall, but made little
way from the place, owing to defect of wind. They say, he
even heard the chamade beating in Stralsund next day, and
that a Danish frigate had nearly taken him ; both which state-
ments are perhaps also a little mythical. Certain only that .he

^ Kohler, MUnsbclmtigunseHf xiv. 2x3. Bucliholz, p. 138 a.

Chap.V. FRIEDRICH WILHELM'S ONE WAR. 311.

*7x5.

vanished at this point into Scandinavia ; and general Europe
never saw binf more. Vanished into a cloud of untenaWe
schemes, guided by Alberoni, Baron Gortz and others^ wild
schemes, financial, diplomatic, warlike, nothing not chimerical
in them but his own unquenchable real energy ; — and found
his death {by# assassination, as appears) in the trenches of
Fre^erickshall, among the Norway Hills, one winter night,
three years hence. Assassination instigated by the Swedish
Official Persons, it is thought. The bullet passed through
both his temples ; he had clapt his hand upon the hilt of his
sword, and was found leant against the parapet, in that atti-
tude, — gone upon a long march now. So vanished Charles
Twelfth ; the distressed Official Persons and Nobility explod-
ing upon him in that -rather damnable way, — anxious to slip
their muzzles* at any cost whatever, A man of antique charac-
ter ; true as a child, simple, even bashful, and of a strength
and valour rarely exampled among men. Open-hearted Antique
populations would have much worshipped such an Appearance ;
— Voltaire, too, for the artificial Modernsf has made a myth
of him, of another type ; one of those impossible cast-iron gen-
tlemen, heroically mad, such as they show in the Playhouses,
pleasant but not profitable, to an undiscerning Public. ^2 xhe
last of the Swedish Kings died in this way ; and the un-
muzzled Official Persons have-not made much of kinging it in
his stead. Charles died ; and, as we may say, took the life of
Sweden along with him ; ^r it has never shone among the
Nations since, or been much worth mentioning, except for its
misfortunes, spasmodic impotences and unwisdoms,

Stralsund instantly beat the chamade, as we heard ; and
all was surrender and subjection in those regions. Surrender ;
not yet pacification, not while Charles lived : nor for half-a-
century after his death, could Mecklenburg, Holstein-Gottorp,
and other his confederates, escape a sad coil of calamities be-
queathed by him to them. Friedrich Wilhelm returned to
]^rlin, victorious from his first, which was also his last Prus-
sian War, in January 1716 ; and was doubtless a happy man,

* to be buried in the Schlosskirche (under penalty of God’s
curse),* but to find his little Fritz and Feekin, and all the world.

See Adlerfeld {Military History of Charles XII. London, 1740, 3 vols,, *from
the Swedish,' through the French) and Kohler {MimfU/elusttgungen, uoi suprh), for
ttome authentic traits of his life and him.

312 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. ISookTV.

»7»3-*7a3*

n^erry to see him, and all things put square again, abroad as
at Rome, He forbade the ' triumphal entry* which Berlin was
prepai^ng for him ; entered privately ; and ordered a thanks-
giving sermon in all the churches next Sunday.

The Devil in Harness : Creutz the Financh-Minister,

%

In the King’s absence nothing particular had occurred,—
except indeed the walking of a dreadful Spectre, three nights
over, in the corridors of the Palace at Berlin ; past the doors
where our little Prince and Wilhelmina slept : bringing with
it not airs from Heaven, we may fear, but blasts from the Other
place ! The stalwart sentries shook in their paces, and became

* half-dead* from terror. * A horrible noise, one night,* says
Wilhelmina, * when all were buried in sleep : all the world

* started up, thinking it was fire ; but they were much sur-

* prised to find that it was a Spectre.* Evident Spectre, seen
to pass this way, * and glide along that gallery, as if towards
‘ the apartments of 4he Queen's Ladies.* Captain of the Guard
could find nothing in that gallery, or anywhere, and withdrew
again : — but lo, it returns the way it went ! Stalwart sentries
were found melted into actual deliquium of swooning, as the
Preternatural swept-by this second time. ‘ They said. It was
‘ the Devil in person ; raised b]^' Swedish wizards to kill the

* Prince -Royal. Poor Prince- Royal ; sleeping sound, we
hope ; little more than three years ^old at this time, and know
ing nothing of it I — All Berlin talked of the affair. Peopl
dreaded it might be a ‘ Spectre* of Swedish tendencies ; aiming
to burn the Palace, spirit- off the Royal Children, and do one
knew not what ?

Not that at all, by any means t The Captain of the Guard,
reinforcing himself to defiance even of the Preternatural, does,
on the third or fourth apparition, clutch the Spectre ; finds him
to be — a prowling Scullion of the Palace, employed here he
will not say how ; who is straightway locked in prison, and ^
exorcised at least. Exorcism is perfect ; but Berlin is left guess-
ing as to the rest, — secret of it discoverable only by the Queen*s
Majesty and some few most interior parties. To the following
effect.

Spectre-Scullion, it turns out, had been employed by Grun*

Wilhelmina, Mhnoires de Bareitk, L i8.

Ch/vo.v. FRIEDRICH WILHELM’S ONE WAR. 315

kow, as spy upon one of the Queen^s Maids of Honour, — sus-
pected by hiill to be a No-maid of Dishonour, and of ill iftfen-
tions too, — who lodges in that part of the Palace : •f whom
Herr Grumkow wishes intensely to know, “Has she an intrigue
with Creutz the new Finance-Minister, or has she not ?” “Has,
beyond doubi !” the Spectre-Scullion hopes he has discovered,
before exorcism. Upon which Grumkow, essentially illumin-
ated as to the required particular, manages to get the Spectre-
Scullion loose again, not quite hanged ; glozing the matter off
to his Majesty on his return : for the rest, ruins entirely the
Creutz speculation ,* and has the No-maid called of Honour, —
with whom Creutz thought to have seduced the young King also,
and made the young King amenable, — dismissed from Court
in a peremptory irrefragable manner. This is the secret of
the Spectre- Scullion, fully revealed by Wilhelmina many years
after.

This one short glance into the Satan’s Invisible-World of
the Berlin Palace, we could not but affbrd the reader, when an
actual Goblin of it happened to be walking in our neighbour-
hood. Such an In visible- World of Satan exists in most human
houses, and in all human Palaces; — with. its imps, familiar-
demons, spies, go-betweens, and industrious bad-angels, con-
tinually mounting and descending by their Jacob’s>-Ladder, or
Palace Backstairs : operated upon b)' Conjurors of the Grum-
kow-Creutz or other sorts. Tyrannous Mamsell Leti,i^ treacher-
ous Mamseli •Ramcn, vq^et- surgeon Eversmann, and plenty
more : readers of Wilhelmina’s Book are too well acquainted
with them. •Nor are expert Conjurors wanting ; capable to
work strange feats with so plastic an element as Friedrich
Wilhelm’s mind. Let this one short glimpse of such Subter-
ranean-World be sufficient indication to the reader’s fancy.

Creutz was not dismissed, as some people had expected he
might be. Creutz continues Finance-Minister ; makes a great
^gure in the fashionable Berlin world in these coming years,
and is much talked of in the old Books, — though, as he works
mostly underground, and merely does budgets and finance- mat-

** Leti, Governess to Wilhelmina, but soon dismissed for insolent cruelty and other
bad conduct, was daughter of thatGregonoLetif ‘Protestant Italian’ Refugee, ‘His-
toriographer of Amsterdam,' &c. &c ), who once bad a pension in this country and
u lio wrote History-Hooks, ^ Life of Cromwell one of them, so regardless of the differ*
ence between true and false.

314 APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE. BookiV.

J7I3-I723*

ters with extreme talent and success, we shall hope to hear al-
most* nothing more of him. Majesty, while Crowr^Prince, when
he first ^got his regiment from Papa, had found this Creutz

* Auditor’ in it ; a poor but handsome fellow, with perhaps seven
shillings a week to live upon ; but with such a talent for ar-
ranging, for reckoning and recording, in brief fcr controlling
finance, as more and more charmed the royal mind.^^ ^

One of Majesty’s first acts was to appoint him Finance-
Minister and there he continued steady, not to be overset
by little flaws of wind like this of the Spectre-Scullion’s raising.
It is certain he did, himself, become rich ; and helped well to
make his Majesty so. We are to fancy him his Majesty’s bottle-
holder in that battle with the Finance Nightmares and Imbrog-
lios, when so much had to be subjugated, and drilled into step,
in that department. Evidently a long-headed cunning fellow,
much of the Grumkow type ; — standing very low in Wilhel-
mina’s judgment ; and ill-seen, when not avoidable altogether,
by the Queen’s Majesty. The man was a poor Country Bailiffs

* {Afntmann'Sf kind of . Tax-manager’s) son ; from Auditor of a

* regiment,’ Papa’s own regiment, ‘he had risen to be Director
‘ of Finance, and a Minister of State. His soul was as low

* as his birth ; it was an assemblage of all the vices, ’^7 says
Wilhelmina, in the language of exaggeration. — Let him stand
by his budgets ; keep well out of WJhclmina’s and the Queen’s
way ; — and very especially beware of coming on Grumkow’s
field again,

' CHAPTER VI. ^

THE LITTLE DRUMMER.

Tills Siege of Stralsund, the last military scene of Charles
XII., and the first ever practically heard of by our little Fritz,
who is now getting into his fourth year, and must have thought
a great deal about it in his little head, — Papa and even Mamma
being absent on it, and such a marching and rumouring going *
on all round hin>. — proved to be otherwise of some importance
to little Fritz.

15 Mauvillon (‘Elder Mauvillon,’ Anonymous), Hisioire de Fridiric GuiliotuMi
/, par M. de M * * • (Amsterdam et Leipzig, 1741), i. 47. A vague flimsy Compiia-
tion; — gives abundant ‘ State-Papers’ (to such as -want them), and echoes ofold^
Newspaper rumour. Very copious on Creutz.

w 4th May 1713: Preuss, i. 349 n. 17 Wilhelmina, i. x6.

Chap.VL THE LITTLE DRUMMER. 315

1715*

Most of his Tutors were picked up by the careful Papa in
this Stralsund* business. Duhan de Jandnn, a young French
gentleman, family-tutor to General Count Dohna (a cousin of
our Minister Dohna’s), but fonder of fighting than of teaching
grammar ; whom Friedrich Wilhelm found doing soldier s work
in the trenchgs, and liked the ways of ; he, as the foundation-
stone of tutorage, is to be first mentioned. And then Count
Fiifk von Finkenstein, a distinguished veteran, high in com-
mand (of whose qualities as Head-Tutor, or occasional travel-
ling-guardian, Friedrich Wilhelm had experience in his own
young days!) ; and Lieutenant-Colonel Kalkstein, a prisoner-of-
war from the Swedish side, whom Friedrich Wilhelm, judging
well of him, adopts into his own service with this view : these
Three come all from Stralsund Siege ; and were of vital mo-
ment to our little Fritz in the subsequent time. Colonel Seck-
endorf, again, who had a command in the Four- thousand
Saxons here, and refreshed into intimacy a transient old ac-
quaintance with Friedrich Wilhelm, — iS not he too of terrible
importance to Fritz and him? As we sh*ll see in time! —

For the rest, here is another little incident. We said it had
been a disappointment to Papa that his little Fritz showed al-
most no appetite for soldiering, but found other sights more
interesting to him than the diill-ground. Sympathise, then, with
the earnest Papa, as he returns home one afternoon, — date not
given, but to ail appearai^e of that year 1715, when there was
such war-rumouring, and marching towards Stralsund ; — and
found the little Fitz, with Wilhelmina looking over him, strut-
ting about, and assiduously beating a little drum.

The paternal heart ran over with glad fondness, invoking
Heaven to confirm the omen. Mother was told of it; the phe-
nomenon was talked of, — beautifulest, hopefulest of little drum-
mers. Painter Pesne, a French Immigrant, or Importee, of the
last reign, a man of great skill with his brush, whom History
yet thanks on several occasions, was sent for ; or he heard of
the incident, and volunteered his services. A Portrait of little
Fritz drumming, with Wilhelmina looking on; to which, pro-
bably for the sake of colour and pictorial effect, a Blackamoor,

' Bidgrapkisches Lexikon alter Helden und Militair personen, welcke sick ii$
PreussischenDietistenberumht gemacht /ta6eH(^\o\s,^txhn^ 1788), i. 418, § Finken-
sttfin.— A praiseworthy, modest, highly correct Book, of its kmd; which wc shall, in
future, call MUttair-Lexikon, when referring to it.

3i6 apprenticeship, FIRST STAGE. ’ Bookiv.

i7»3-*7*3.

aside with parasol in hand, grinning approbation, has been
added, — ^was sketched, and dextrously worked* out in oil, by
Paintei^Pesne. Picture approved by mankind there and then.
And it still hangs on the wall, in a perfect state, in Charlotten-
burg Palace ; where the judicious tourist may see it without
difficulty, and institute reflections on it. «

A really graceful little Picture ; and certainly, to Prus^an
men, not without weight of meaning. Nor perhaps to Picture-
Collectors and Cognoscenti generally, of whatever country, — if
they could forget, for a moment, the coreggiosity of Coreggio,
and the learned babble of the Sale-room and varnishing Auc-
tioneer; and think, “Why it is, probably, that Pictures exist
in this world, and to what end the divine art of Painting was
bestowed, by the earnest gods, upon poor* mankind?” I could
advise it, once, for a little! Flaying of Saint Bartholomew,
Rape of Europa, Rape of the Sabines, Piping and Amours of
goat-footed Pan, Romulus suckled by the Wolf : all this, and
much else of fabulous, •distant, unimportant, not to say impos-
sible, ugly and unworthy, shall pass without undue severity of
criticism, in a Household of such opulence as ours, where much
goes to waste, and where things are not on an earnest footing
for this long while past ! As Created Objects, or as Phantasms
of such, pictorially done, all this shall have much worth, or
shall have little. But I say, Here V^ithal is one not phantasmal ;
of indisputable certainly, homegrown, just commencing business,
who carried it far I ^ *

Fritz is still, if not in ‘long-clothes,* at least in longish and
flowing clothes, of the petticoat sort, which look as of dark-
blue velvet, very simple, pretty and appropriate ; in a cap of
the same ; has a short raven’s feather in the cap ; and looks
up, with a face and eyes full ofbeautiful vivacity and child’s en-
thusiasm, one of the beautifulest little figures, while the little
drum responds to his bits of drumsticks. Sister Wilhelmina,
taller by some three years, looks on in pretty marching attitude,
and with a graver smile. Blackamoor, and accompaniments
elegant enough; and finally the figure of a grenadier^ on guard,
seen far off through an opening, — make up the background.

We have Engravings of this Picture ; which are of clumsy
poor quality, and misrepresent it much : an excellent Copy in
oil, what might be called almost a facsimile and the perfection
of a Copy, is now (1854) in Lord Ashburton’s Collection here

Chap. VI.' THE LITTLE DRUMMER, 317

»7iS*

in England. In the Berlin Galleries, — ^which are made up, like
other Gallerict, of goat-footed Pan, Europa’s Bull, Romulus's
She- Wolf, and the coreggiosity of Coreggxo ; and con^in, for
instance, no Portrait of Frederick the Great; no Likenesses at
all, or next to none at all, of the noble series of Human Reali*
tie^, or of an^ part of them, who have sprung not from the idle
brains of dreaming Dilettanti, but from the Head of God Al-
mi|hty, to make this poor authentic Earth a little memorable
for us, and to do a little work that may be eternal there : — in
those expensive Halls of ‘ High Art’ at Berlin, there were, to
my experience, few Pictures more agreeable than this of Pesne’s.
Welcome, like one tiny islet of Reality amid the shorckss sea
of Phantasms, to the reflective mind, seriously loving and seek-
ing what is worthy and memorable, seriously hating and avoid-
ing what is the reverse, and intent not to play the dilettante in
this world.

The same Pesne, an excellent Artist, has painted Fiiedrich
as Prince-Royal ; a beautiful young mail with wm/-looking en-
thusiastic eyes of extraordinary brillianoy, smooth oval face;
considerably resembling his Mother. After which period, au-
thentic Pictures of Friedrich are sought for to little purpose,
f’or it seems he never sat to any Painter, in his reigning days ;
and the Prussian Chodowiecki,^ Saxon Graff, English Cunning-
ham had to pick-up his phygiognoray from the distance, inter-
mittently, as they could. Nor is Rauch’s grand equestrian
Sculpture a thing to be bglieved, or perhaps pretending much
to be so. The commonly-received Portrait of Friedrich, which
all German l^nners can draw at once, — the cocked-hat, big
eyes and alert air, reminding you of some uncommonly brisk
Invalid Drill-sergeant or Greenwich Pensioner, a« much as of
a Royal Hero, — is nothing but a general extract and average
of all the faces of Friedrich, such as has been tacitly agreed
upon ; and is definable as a received pictorial-myth, by no
means as a fact, or credible resemblance of life,
o But enough now of Pictures. This of the Little Drummer,
the painting and the thing painted which remain to us, may
be taken as Friedrich’s first appearance on the stage of the
world ; and welcomed accordingly. It is one of the very few
visualities or definite certainties we can lay hold of, in those

. *5 '?x<y[ixmriC^Kodov-yetski ; — and endeavour to make some acquaintance with this
** Prussian Hogarth,** who has real worth and originality.

3i8 apprenticeship. FIRST STAGE. " Bookiv.

1713-1723.

young years of his, and bring conclusively home to our ima-
gination, out- of the waste Prussian dust-clouds 6f uninstructif e
garruli^ which pretend to record them for us. Whether it
came into existence as a shadowy emanation from the Stral-
sund Expedition, can only be matter of conjecture. To judge
by size, these figures must have been painted about the year
1715 ; Fritz some three or four years old, his sister Wil|iel-
mina seven.

It remains only to be intimated, that Friedrich Wilhelm, for
his part, had got all he claimed from this Expedition : namely,
Stettin with the dependent Towns, and quietness in Pommern.
Stettin was, from of old, the capital of his own part of Pom-
mern ; thrown-in along with the other parts of Pommern, and
given to Sweden (from- sheer necessity, it was avowed), at the
Peace of Westphalia, sixty years ago or more : — and now, by
good chance, it has come back. Wait another hundred years,
and perhaps Swedish Pommern altogether will come back!
But from all this Friodrich Wilhelm is still far. Stettin and
quiet are all he dreams of demanding there.

Stralsund he did not reckon his ; left it with the Danes,,
to hold in pawn till some general Treaty. Nor was there far-
ther outbreak of war in those regions ; though actual Ti'eaty
cf Peace did not come till 1720, 'and make matters sure. It
was the new Queen of Sweden, Ulrique Eleonora (Charles's
younger Sister, wedded to the youngs Landgraf of Hessen-C^s-
sel), — much aided by an English Envoy, — who made this Peace
with Friedrich Wilhelm. A young English Envo^, called Lord
Carteret, was very helpful in this matter ; one of his ‘first feats
in the diplomatic world. For which Peace’* Friedrich Wilhelm
was so thankful, good pacific armed-man, that happening to
have a Daughter born to him just about that time, he gave
the little creature her Swedish Majesty’s name ; a new ** Ul-
rique,” who grew to proper stature, and became* notable in
Sweden, herself, by and by.^

* Stockholm, 2 1 St January 1720 ; in Mauvillon (i. 380-417) the Document itself at
hrge.

* Louisa Ulrique, born 24th July 1720 ; Queen of Sweden in time coming.

END OF VOL. L
