e

ddd i iigsspssstblbs,

EEE. titties
HYFJJJFy;

WIE. MME Mien ty ty
VIII

tie
Gee

serene
VE i Lee
SOLES or tetra rp
oi

Lig ae oe iy oes Ge Beige Ae,
Gp yyy YY YI

ee e Yi yy ee 4
ty YEE)

RAR

SN

SERS
RK

SOROS

RRARARY

Litas LE es Leagues

SANHAAABAAABB

AAO ONS

Ys:
WE
G
ee
Z
Be

SOON

SA
SN

Vig ty
IG, a
ty
ye Bi Gp Z By iy ee : Dale Ys é 5 Ly Z

seg Wee Zs es YY: Ls

tj . ;
ty Yj ies ty oie
Me ELLE Yi tify
Z GEE Me os

“eI any
egooe ee LIE tj yyy

CY tj

“YYY|__@P@]i#?VVW@# (Wah

(My
bis
PTT

~
RRR

A
AS Sh

SN

SS SS SSR SS

N
WV

se"
SMM
CLASSE

Le eee

ee ra tt rs iy

4
1
y
«
‘
‘
_
.
r

er eee

hin tts ne oh

ae a ee eee ee eS eres
1 ~~ ‘

-p CAs arse

Lan)
uae
aud) ae
<
isan
ver

rs

ee ae

Se s4
cae!

5 Wy
My
i
44

LL

ee

NY
NNN
EAS
NAY
NS

SOU. Sidtl, hb)

FRIEDRICH If KONIGws PREUSSEN.

: 7utatts 73.

> Peo) IT 7 c_3 = 13 7 ~71,! 5 9
ron Cunningham's Engraved Picture of what is called Friedrich’s Last Review(Z
ses &

Ze Grand retournan

rés les Mane wres,accompagné de
eneraus: Picture containmg 39 excellent, Portrarts besides this of Friedrich, Joseph Conningham pinzit, and J’hClements, scalpszt, Berlin, 1787)

HISTORY

FRIEDRICH THE SECOND.

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

BY

THOMAS CARLYLE.

IN SIX VOLUMES.

VOL. VI.

NEW YORK:
HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,

FRANRLIN SQUARE,

» 4 a x *]

i 20 bake

at i
yj
rea y
x 4
et F

2 ‘ ° ; é

at
4

BRM DIE LR, Becaie,

: Kh ; e

re

a

hE ar a

Mi
; Brie,
ad ye

a

CONTENTS OF VOL. VI.

BOOK XxX.

FRIEDRICH YS NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED: THE SEVEN-YEARS’ WAR
GRADUALLY ENDS.

25th April 1760—15th February 1763.

ONAPTER PAGE
PN URTH CAMPAIGN OPENS tics css cccceracek sec che edeeds ccddeatcvbacnesas 1
Rie MeTEORICH BESIEGER IORESDEN: ccccisasccevecssuhsares ac cieeeseecet sce 18

Capture of Glatz (26th July 1760), p. 25.

Dialogue of Friedrich and Henri (from their Private Corre-
spondence: June 7th—July 29th, 1760), 28.

Duke Ferdinand’s Battle of Warburg (31st July 1760), 31.

EMT AG ETA LITECNIT 2. ym coes osc ohceebcetaneyne vases sdcavies selebeess cesses 34
Loudon is trying a Stroke-of-Hand on Breslau, in the Glatz
Fashion, in the Interim (July 30th—August 3d), p. 35.
Friedrich on March, for the Third Time, to rescue Silesia
(August Ist-15th), 39.
Battle, in the Neighbourhood of Liegnitz, does ensue (Friday
morning, 15th August 1760), 45.

IV. DAUN IN WRESTLE WITH FRIEDRICH IN THE SILESIAN Hitts' 59

The Russians make a Raid on Berlin, for Relief of Daun,
and their own Behoof (October 3d-12th, 1760), p. 66.

RATE OR) 1 ORG AIS os dt sisted aise ins So ofove tie sb wacbesOveaevadkavennns 76
Fight of Kloster Kampen (Night of October 15th—-16th);
Wesel not to be had by Duke Ferdinand, p. 103.

ey IPE QUARTERS 17G0-G1o\.. sccnscpus vas cha caéulsesiowssancnvant ed 107

King Friedrich in the Apel House at Leipzig (8th Decem-
ber 1760—17th March 1761), p. 112.

Interview with Herr Professor Gellert (Thursday, 18th De-
cember 1760), 114.

Dialogue with General Saldern (in the Apel House, Leipzig,
21st January 1761), 120.

There are some War-movements during Winter; general
financiering Difficulties. Choiseul proposes Peace, 124.

iv CONTENTS.

CHAPTER
VII. SrxtwH CAMPAIGN OPENS: CAMP OF BUNZELWITZ......+0csce00e
Of Ferdinand’s Battle of Vellinghausen (15th-16th July) ;
and the Campaign 1761, p. 151.
Third Siege of Colberg, 159.

VIII. Loupon Ppounces vpoN SCHWEIDNITZ, ONE NIGHT (LAST OF
SEPEEMBERETG1 )..6 UA. seevekes Gaspelos Rots dedeh Paras ane x8

IX. TrairorR WARKOTSCH .........-. pei, ae teekees ahuzs da) cee meee

X. Friepricu In Brestau; HAS News FROM PETERSBURG....
The Pitt Catastrophe: how the Peace-Negotiation went off
by Explosion; how Pitt withdrew (3d October 1761), and

there came a Spanish War nevertheless, p. 181.

Tiff of Quarrel between King and Henri (March—April
1762), 190.

Bright News from Petersburg (certain, January 19th); which
grow ever brighter; and become a Star-of-day for Fried-
rich, 194.

What Colonel Hordt and the Others saw at Petersburg (Jan-
uary—July 1762), 205.

XL Severe .Clawep sian Opwns sic.. cd cosh cbhiesan toon eee ee
XII. Srece or ScHWEIDNITz; SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS...........
XIII. PEAcE OF HUBERTSBURG......cccsccccccacee ick td eee eae twas

BOOK. Xx:
AFTERNOON AND EVENING OF FRIEDRICH’S LIFE. 1763-1786:
fF PEEBERATORY i.osvesco'sd.aac bees ceed uns capctuue pan se kis oes cua ea erin eee eee

AL, REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA coc Scccpnengesecaeantoeteneee

Landrath Niissler and the King (30th March —3d April
1763), p. 271.

Kriegsrath Roden and the King (6th-13th June 1763), 274.

Of Friedrich’s new Excise-System, 282.

The Neue Palais, in Sans-Souci Neighbourhood, is founded
and finished (1763-1770), 293.

*¢ Obituary in Friedrich’s Circle till 1771,” 297.

Ti ST ROCSLES TN POLAND a1): fess (oodipeaens« 0s sds <a ee agnor i
King of Poland dies; and there ensue huge Anarchies in that
Country, p. 303.
Ex-Lover Poniatowski becomes King of Poland (7th Sep-
tember 1764), and is crowned without Loss of his Hair,
320.
For several Years the Dissident Question cannot be got set-

163
169
179

218
231
249

261
268

CONTENTS. Vv

OUAPTEEB- PAGE
tled; Confederation of Radom (23d June 1767— 5th
March 1768) pushes it into Settlement, 323.
Confederation of Bar ensues, on the per-contra Side (March
28th, 1768); and, as first Result of its Achievements (Oc-
tober 6th, 1768), a Turk-Russian War, 326.

TV. PARTITION OF POLAND........csscssssccesescoeeceesonscresseessesenens 336

First Interview between Friedrich and Kaiser Joseph (Neisse,
25th-28th August 1769), p. 337.

Next Year, there is a Second Interview; Friedrich making
a Return-Visit during the Kaiser’s Moravian Reviews
(Camp of Miahrisch-Neustadt, 3d-7th September 1770),
344.

Russian-Turk War, First Two Campaigns, 355.

Prince Henri has been to Sweden; is seen at Petersburg in
Masquerade (on or about Newyear’s Day 1771); and does
get Home, with Results that are important, 363.

What Friedrich did with his new Acquisition, 372.

Mie ik, CAP TER ON MASCELLANINGs. civiees chedsectesnne std tcqsdeavanttens 382

Herr Doctor Zimmermann, the famous Author of the Book
‘On Solitude,’? walks reverentially before Friedrich’s
Door in the Dusk of an October Evening; and has a
Royal Interview next Day, p. 384.

Sister Ulrique, Queen-Dowager of Sweden, revisits her na-
tive Place (December 1771—August 1772), 391.

Wilhelmina’s Daughter, Elizabeth Frederike Sophie, Duch-
ess of Wiirtemberg, appears at Ferney (September 1773),
399.

No. 1. Doctor Burney has sight of Voltaire (July 1770),
408.

No. 2. A Reverend Mr. Sherlock sees Voltaire, and even
dines with him (April 1776), 410.

General or Fieldmarshal Conway, direct from the London
Circles, attends one of Friedrich’s Reviews (August—Sep-
tember 1774), 415.

Exuberant Sherlock and Eleven other English are presented
to Friedrich, on a Court Occasion (8th October 1777);
and Two of them get spoken to, and speak each a Word.
Excellency Hugh Elliot is their Introducer, 428.

ome EBT PEATE AND VVON TS ced cre cn tens decd ine ved cedwecsseode cectevanoeruias 439
Pree WEE Canis ys MOLD Bs TA WSTTT sc «ip ssn. nol dds os oe cae Gewnesveedneadasantis 470
VIII. Tue Furstensunp: FRriepricn’s LAst YEARS ..........eseeees 493

Prince de Ligne, after Ten Years, sees Friedrich a Second
Time; and reports what was said, p. 501.

V1 CONTENTS.

OHAPTER PAGE
How General von der Marwitz, in early Boyhood, saw Fried-
rich the Great Three Times (1782-85), 511.
: General Bouillé, home from his West-Indian Exploits, visits
Friedrich (August 5th-11th, 1784), 516.

IX. Friepricyn’s Last ILLNESS AND DEATH. .ccecccccicces lededee ue - 528
GENERAL CONTENTS AND INDEX TO THE Work....... Fe ert Sees 5
POS TULE “OF SLEBONTES Wovens aakksverientesssinvccess hoacind Rachie sh E. aGtnoeek 99 a.

5S IRCA Uden ek rahe ee ee hc nee eed SRA in. eee ib.
BcunzELWITZ—BuURKERSDORF—REICHENBACH COUNTRY.......cce0ee 236 a.
For THE Tuirp SILESIAN OR SEVEN-YEARS’ WAR. ..........-eee00e 260 a.
KINGDOM OF PRUSSIA......cccs008. Senora Pye eel 4 eae ueins He aha eae 544 a4
Friepricu II., Konic von PRevssen, AETATIS 73.......+- .-. Frontispiece.

From Cunningham’s Engraved Picture of what is called Friedrich’s
Last Review (‘‘ Frédéric le Grand retournant @ Sans-Souci apres
les Maneuvres, accompagné de ses Généraux :” Picture containing
thirty-nine excellent Portraits besides this of Friedrich: Joseph
Cunningham, pinxit, and J. F. CJements, sculpsit, Berlin, 1787).
See Vol. VL, p. 531.

25th April—15th June 1760.

BOOK XxX.

FRIEDRICH IS NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED: THE SEVEN-
YEARS WAR GRADUALLY ENDS.

25th April 1760—15th February 1763.

CHAPTER I.
FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS.

TuERE were yet, to the world’s surprise and regret, Three
Campaigns of this War; but the Campaign of 1760, which we
are now upon, was what produced or rendered possible the other
two ;—was the crisis of them, and is now the only one that can
require much narrative from us here. I]l-luck, which, Friedrich
complains, had followed him like his shadow, in a strange and
fateful manner, from the day of Kunersdorf and earlier, does not
yet cease its sad company; but, on the contrary, for long months
to come, is more constant than ever, baffling every effort of his
own, and from the distance sending him news of mere disaster
and discomfiture. It is in this Campaign, though not till far on
in it, that the long lane does prove to have a turning, and the
Fortune of War recovers its old impartial form. After which,
things visibly languish: and the hope of ruining such a Friedrich
becomes problematic, the effort to do it slackens also; the very
will abating, on the Austrian part, year by year, as of course the
strength of their resources is still more steadily doing. To the
last, Friedrich, the weaker in material resources, needs all his
talent,—all his luck too. But, as the strength, on both sides, is
fast abating,—hard to say on which side faster (Friedrich’s talent
being always a fied quantity, while all else is fluctuating and
vanishing),—what remains of the once terrible Affair, through
Campaigns Sixth and Seventh, is like a race between spent horses,
little to be said of it in comparison. Campaign 1760 is the last
of any outward eminence or greatness of event. Let us diligently
follow that, and be compendious with the remainder.

Vor. VI.—A

2 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
25th April—15th June 1760.

Friedrich was always famed for his Marches; but, this Year,
they exceeded all calculation and example; and are still the
admiration of military men. Can there by no method be some -
distant notion afforded of them to the general reader? They
were the one resource Friedrich had left, against such over-
whelming superiority in numbers; and they came out like sur-
prises in a theatre,—unpleasantly surprising to Daun. Done
with such dexterity, rapidity, and inexhaustible contrivance and
ingenuity, as overset the schemes of his enemies again and again,
and made his one army equivalent in effect to their three.

Evening of April 25th, Friedrich rose from his Freyberg can-
tonments; moved back, that is, northward, a good march; then
encamped himself between Elbe and the Hill-Country; with
freer prospect and more elbow-room for work coming. His left
is on Meissen and the Elbe; his right, at a Village called the
Katzenhiuser, an uncommonly strong camp, of which one often
hears afterwards; his centre camp is at Schlettau,* which also
_ is strong, though not to such a degree. ‘This line extends from
Meissen southward about 10 miles, commanding the Reich-ward
Passes of the Metal Mountains, and is defensive of Leipzig, Tor-
gau and the Towns thereabouts.!. Katzenhiuser is but a mile
or two from Krégis—that unfortunate Village where Finck got
his Maxen Order: ‘ Hr wetss,—You know I can’t stand haying
difficulties raised ; manage to do it.”’

Friedrich’s task, this Year, is to defend Saxony; Prince Henri
having undertaken the Russians,—Prince Henri and Fouquet,
the Russians and Silesia. Clearly on very uphill terms, both of
them: so that Friedrich finds he will have a great many things
to assist in, besides defending Saxony. He lies here expectant
till the middle of June, above seven weeks; Daun also, for the
last two weeks, having taken the field in a sort. In a sort;—
but comes no nearer; merely posting himself astride of the
Elbe, half in Dresden, half on the opposite or northern bank
of the River, with Lacy thrown out ahead in good force on that
vacant side; and so waiting the course of other people’s enter-
prises.

Well to eastward and rearward of Daun, where we have seen

* Map at end of Book XX. 1 Tempelhof, iv. 16 et seq.

Cuap. I.] - FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 3]
25th April—15th June 1760.

Loudon about to be very busy, Prince Henri and Fouquet have
spun themselves out into a long chain of posts, in length 300 miles
or more “from Landshut, along the Bober, along the Queiss and
Oder, through the Neumark, abutting on Stettin and Colberg, to
the Baltic Sea.”? On that side, in aid of Loudon or otherwise,
Daun can attempt nothing; still less on the Katzenhiuser-
Schlettau side can he dream of an attempt: only towards Bran-
denburg and Berlin,—the Country on that side, 50 or 60 miles
of it, to eastward of Meissen, being vacant of troops,—is Daun’s
road open, were he enterprising, as Friedrich hopes he 1s not.
For some two weeks, Friedrich,—not ready otherwise, it being
difficult to cross the River, if Lacy with his 30,000 should think
of interference,—had to leave the cunctatory Feldmarschall this
chance or unlikely possibility. At the end of the second week
(“June 14th,” as we shall mark by and by), the chance was
withdrawn.

Daun and his Lacy are but one, and that by no means the
most harassing, of the many cares and anxieties which Friedrich
has upon him in those Seven Weeks, while waiting at Schlettau,
reading the omens. Never hitherto was the augury of any Cam-
paign more indecipherable to him, or so continually fluctuating
with wild hopes, which proved visionary, and with huge prac-
tical fears, of what he knew to be the real likelihood. ‘‘ Peace
coming?” It is strange how long Friedrich clings to that fond
hope: ‘‘ My Edelsheim is in the Bastille, or packed home in dis-
grace: but will not the English and Choiseul make Peace? It
is Choiseul’s one rational course; bankrupt as he is, and reduced
to spoons and kettles. In which case, what a beautiful effect
might Duke Ferdinand produce, if he marched to Eger, say to
Eger, with his 50,000 Germans (Britannic Majesty and Pitt so
gracious), and twitched Daun by the skirt, whirling Daun home
to Bohemia in a hurry!’’ Then the Turks; the Danes,—‘“‘ Might
not the Danes send us a trifle of Fleet to Colberg (since the En-
elish never will), and keep our Russians at bay ?’”—‘ At lowest
these hopes are consolatory,” says he once, suspecting them, all
(as, no doubt, he often enough does), ‘“‘and give us courage to

? Tempelhof, iv. 21-24.

4 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
25th April—15th June 1760.

look calmly for the opening of this Campaign, the very idea of
which has made me shudder !”°

Meanwhile, by the end of May, the Russians are come across

the Weichsel again, lie in four camps on the hither side; start
about June 1st ;—Henri waiting for them, in Sagan Country
his headquarter; and on both hands of that, Fouquet and he
spread out, since the middle of May, in their long thin Chain
of Posts, from Landshut to Colberg again, like a thin wall of
300 miles. ‘To Friedrich the Russian movements are, and have
been, full of enigma: ‘Going upon Colberg? Going upon Glo-
gau; upon Breslau?” That is a heavy-footed certainty, audibly
trampling forward on us, amid these fond visions of the air!
Certain too, and visible to a duller eye than Friedrich’s; Lou-
don in Silesia is meditating mischief. ‘ The inevitable Russians,
the inevitable Loudon; and nothing but Fouquet and Henri on
guard there, with their long thin chain of posts, infinitely too
thin to do any execution !” thinks the King. To whom their
modes of operating are but little satisfactory, as seen at Schlet-
tau from the distance. ‘‘ Condense yourself,’ urges he always
on Henri; “go forward on the Russians; attack sharply this
Corps, that Corps, while they are still separate and on march !”
Henri did condense himself, ‘took post between Sagan and
Sprottau; post at Frankfurt,”—poor Frankfurt, is it to have a
Kunersdorf or Zorndorf every year, then? No; the cautious
Henri never could see his way into these adventures ; and did
not attack any Corps of the Russians. Took post at Landsberg
ultimately,—the Russians, as usual, having Posen as place-of-
arms,—and vigilantly watched the Russians, without coming to
, Strokes at all. A spectacle growing gradually intolerable to the
King, though he tries to veil his feelings.

Neither was Fouquet’s plan of procedure well seen by Fried-
rich in the distance. Ever since that of Regiment Manteuffel,
which was a bit of disappointment, Loudon has been quietly
industrious on a bigger scale. Privately he cherishes the hope,
being a swift vehement enterprising kind of man, to oust Fou-
quet; and perhaps to have Glatz Fortress taken, before his Rus-

% «To Prince Henri:” in Schdning, ii. 246 (8d April 1760); ib. 263 (of
the Danish outlook); &c. &e.

Cnap. I.] FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. | 5
25th April—15th June 1760.

sians come! In the very end of May, Loudon, privately aiming
for Glatz, breaks in upon Silesia again,—a long way to eastward
of Fouquet, and as if regardless of Glatz. Upon which, Fouquet,
in dread for Schweidnitz and perhaps Breslau itself, hastened
down into the Plain Country, to manceuvre upon Loudon; but
found no Loudon moving that way; and, in a day or two, learned
that Landshut, so weakly guarded, had been picked up by a big
corps of Austrians; and in another day or two, that Loudon
(June 7th) had blocked Glatz,—Loudon’s real intention now
clear to Fouquet. As it was to Friedrich from the first; whose
anger and astonishment at this loss of Landshut were great,
when he heard of it in his Camp of Schlettau. ‘ Back to
Landshut,” orders he (11th June, three days before leaving
Schlettau); “neither Schweidnitz nor Breslau are in danger:
it is Glatz the Austrians mean” (as Fouquet and all the world
now see they do!); “‘ watch Glatz; retake me Landshut in-
stantly !” :

The tone of Friedrich, which is usually all friendliness to
Fouquet, had on this occasion something in it which offended
the punctual, and rather peremptory Spartan mind. Fouquet
would not have neglected Glatz; pity he had not been left to
his own methods with Landshut and it. Deeply hurt, he read
this Order (16th June); and vowing to obey it, and nothing but
it, used these words, which were remembered afterwards, to his
assembled Generals: ‘‘ Meine Herren, it appears, then, we must
take Landshut again. Loudon, as the next thing, will come on
us then with his mass of force; and we must then, like Prus-
sians, hold out as long as possible, think of no surrender on open
field, but if even beaten, defend ourselves to the last man. In
case of a retreat, I will be one of the last that leaves the field:
and should I have the misfortune to survive such a day, I give
you my word of honour never to draw a Prussian sword more.’’*
This speech of Fouquet’s (June 16th) was two daws after Fried-
rich got on march from Schlettau. June 17th, Fouquet got to
Landshut; drove out the Austrians more easily than he had
calculated, and set diligently, next day, to repair his works,
writing to Friedrich: ‘‘ Your Majesty’s Order shall be executed

* Stenzel, v. 239.

6 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th-18th June 1760

here, while a man of us lives.” Fouquet, in the old Crown-
Prince time, used to be called Bayard by his Royal friend.
His Royal friend, now darker of face and scathed by much ill-
weather, has just quitted Schlettau, three days before this re-
covery of Landshut; and will not have gone far till he again
hear news of Fouquet.

Night of June 14th-15th, Friedrich, “between Zehren and
Zabel,’’ several miles down stream,—his bridges now all ready,
out of Lacy’s cognisance,—has suddenly crossed Elbe ; and next
afternoon pitches camp at Broschwitz, which is straight towards
Lacy again. 'To Lacy’s astonishment; who is posted at Moritz-
burg, with headquarter in that beautiful Country-seat of Polish
Majesty,—only 10 miles to eastward, should Friedrich take that
road. Broschwitz is short way north of Meissen, and lies on
the road either to Grossenhayn or to Radeburg (Radeburg only
four miles northward of Lacy), as Friedrich shall see fit, on the
morrow. For the Meissen north road forks off there, in those
two directions: straight northward is for Grossenhayn, right
hand is for Radeburg. Most interesting to Lacy, which of these
forks, what is quite optional, Friedrich will take! Lacy is an
alert man; looks well to himself; warns Daun; and will not
be caught if he can help it. Daun himself is encamped at
Reichenberg, within two miles of him, inexpugnably entrenched
as usual; and the danger surely is not great: nevertheless both
these Generals, wise by experience, keep their eyes open.

The /%rst great Feat of Marching now fo'lows, on Friedrich’s
part; with little or no result to Friedrich; but worth remem-
bering, so strenuous, so fruitless was it,—so barred by ill-news
from without! Both this and the Second stand recorded for
us, in brief intelligent terms by Mitchell, who was present in
both; and who is perfectly exact on every point, and intelligible
throughout,—if you will read him with a Map; and divine for
yourself what the real names are, out of the inhuman blotchings
made of them, not by Mitchell’s blame at all.5

Tuesday, June 17th, second day of Friedrich’s stay at Brosch-
witz, Mitchell, in a very confidential Dialogue they had together,

® Mitchell, Memoirs and Papers, ii. 160 et seq.

Cuap. I.] ? FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. y
18th June 1760.

learned from him, under seal of secrecy, That it was his purpose
to march for Radeburg tomorrow morning, and attack Lacy and
his 30,000, who lie encamped at Moritzburg out yonder; for
which step his Majesty was pleased further to show Mitchell
a little, what the various inducements were: “One Russian
Corps is aiming as if for Berlin; the Austrians are about be-
sieging Glatz,—pressing need that Fouquet were reinforced in
his Silesian post of difficulty. Then here are the Reichs-people
close by; can be in Dresden three days hence, joined to Daun:
80,000 odd there will then be of Enemies in this part: I must
beat Lacy, if possible, while time still is !’—and ended by say-
ing: ‘*Succeed here, and all may yet be saved; be beaten here,
I know the consequences: but what can I do?) The risk must
be run; and it is now smaller than it will ever again be.”
Mitchell, whose account is a fortnight later than the Dialogue
itself, does confess, ‘‘ My Lord, these reasons, though unhappily
the thing seems to have failed, ‘appear to me to be solid and
unanswerable.’”” Much more do they do to Tempelhof, who
sees deeper into the bottom of them than Mitchell did; and
finds that the failure is only superficial.6 The real success,
thinks Tempelhof, would be, Could the King manceuvre himself
into Silesia, and entice a cunctatory Daun away with him thither.
A cunctatory Daun to preside over matters there, in his super-
stitiously cautious way; leaving Saxony free to the Reichsfolk,
—whom a Hiilsen, left with his small remnant in Schlettau,
might easily take charge of, till Silesia were settled? ‘The
plan was bold, was new, and completely worthy of Friedrich,”
votes Tempelhof; “and it required the most consummate deli-
cacy of execution. ‘To lure Daun on, always with the prospect
opened to him-of knocking you on the head, and always by your
rapidity and ingenuity to take care that he never got it done.”
This is Tempelhof’s notion: and this, sure enough, was actually
Friedrich’s mode of management in the weeks following; though
whether already altogether planned in his head, or only gradually
planning itself, as is more likely, nobody can say. We will look
a very little into the execution, concerning which there is no
dubiety :
6 Mitchell, ii. 160 (Despatch, ‘‘ June 30th, 1760"); Tempelhof, iv. 44.

8 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
/19th June 1760.

Wednesday, 18th June, ‘“ Friedrich,” as predicted to Mitchell, the
night before, “did start punctually, in three columns, at 3 a.m.” (Sun
just rising), “and, after a hot march, got encamped on the southward
side of Radeburg: ready to cross the Rodern Stream there, tomorrow,
as if intending for the Lausitz” (should that prove needful for alluring
~ Lacy),—‘ and in the mean while, very inquisitive where Lacy might be.
One of Lacy’s outposts, those Saxon light horse, was fallen in with ;
was chased home, and Lacy’s camp discovered, that night. At Berns-
dorf, not three miles to southward or right of us; Daun only another
three to south of him. Let us attack Lacy tomorrow morning; wind
round to get between Daun and him,’—with fit arrangements; rapid as
light! In the King’s Tent, accordingly, his Generals are assembled to
take their Orders; brief, distinct, and to be done with brevity. And all
are on the move for Bernsdorf at 4 next morning ; ; when, behold,—

Thursday 19th, “ At Bernsdorf, there is no Lacy to be found.
Cautious Daun has ordered him in,—and not for Lacy’s sake, as ap-
pears, but for his own: ‘ Hitherward, you alert Lacy; to cover my
right flank here, my Hill of Reichenberg,—lest it be not impregnable
enough against that feline enemy!’ And there they have taken post,
say 60,000 against 30,000; and are palisading to a quite extraordinary
degree. No fight possible with Lacy or Daun.”

This is what Mitchell counts the failure of Friedrich’s enterprise :
and certainly it grieved Friedrich a good deal. Who, on riding out to
reconnoitre Reichenberg (Quintus Icilius and Battalion Quintus part
of his escort, if that be an interesting circumstance), finds Reichenberg
a plainly unattackable post; finds, by Daun’s rate of palisading, that
there will be no attack from Daun either. No attack from Daun ;—
and, therefore, that Hiilsen’s people may be sent home to Schlettau
again; and that he, Friedrich, will take post close by, and wearisomely
be content to wait for some new opportunity.

Which he does for a week to come; Daun sitting impregnable, en-
trenched and palisaded ‘to the teeth,—rather wishing to be attacked, you
would say ; or hopeful sometimes of doing something of the Hochkirch
sort again (for the country is woody, and oie enemy audacious) ;—at all
events, very clear not to attack. A man erring, sometimes to a notable
degree, by over-caution. ‘Could hardly have failed to overwhelm
Friedrich’s small force, had he at once, on Friedrich’s crossing the
Elbe, joined Lacy, and gone out against him,” thinks Tempelhof, point-
ing out the form of operation too.® Caution is excellent; but not quite
by itself. Would caution alone do it, an Army all of Druidic whin-
stones, or innocent clay-sacks, incapable of taking hurt, would be the
proper one!—Daun stood there; Friedrich looking daily into him,—

7 Tempelhof, iv. 47-49. 8 Ibid. iy. 42, 48.

~ Cuap. I] FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. i]
25th June 1760.

visibly in ill-humour, says Mitchell; and no wonder ; gloomy and surly
words coming out of him, to the distress of his Generals: “ which I
took the liberty of hinting, one evening, to his Majesty ;” hint gra-
ciously received, and of effect perceptible, at least to my imagining.

Wednesday, June 25th, After nearly a week of this, there rose, to-
wards sunset, all over the Reichenberg, and far and wide, an exuber-
ant joy-firing: “ For what in the world?” thinks Friedrich. Alas,
your Majesty,—since your own messenger has not arrived, nor indeed
ever will, being picked up by Pandours,—here, gathered from the Aus-
trian outposts or deserters, are news for you, fatal enough! Landshut
is done; Fouquet and his valiant 13,000 are trodden out there. Indig-
nant Fouquet has obeyed you, not wisely but too well. He has kept
Landshut six nights and five days. On the morning of the 6th day,
here is what befel :

“ Landshut, Monday 23d June, About a quarter to 2 in the morning,
Loudon, who had gathered 31,000 horse and foot for the business, and
taken his measures, fired aloft, by way of signal, four howitzers into
the gray of the summer morning ; and burst loose upon Fouquet, in va-
rious columns, on his southward front, on both flanks, ultimately in his
-rear too; columns all in the height of fighting humour, confident as
three to one,—and having brandy in them, it is likewise said. Fou-
quet and his people stood to arms, in the temper Fouquet had vowed
they would: defended their Hills with an energy, with a steady skill,
which Loudon himself admired; but their Hill-works would have
needed thrice the number ;—Fouquet, by detaching and otherwise, has
in arms only 10,680 men. Toughly as they strove, after partial suc-
cesses, they began to lose one Hill, and then another; and in the
course of hours, nearly all their Hills. Landshut Town Loudon had
taken from them, Landshut and its roads: in the end, the Prussian po-
sition is become permeable, plainly untenable ;—Austrian force is moy-
ing to their rearward to block the retreat.

“Seeing which latter fact, Fouquet throws out all his Cavalry, a
poor 1,500, to secure the Passes of the Bober; himself forms square
with the wrecks of his Infantry; and, at a steady step, cuts way for
himself with bayonet and bullet. With singular success for some time,
in spite of the odds. And is clear across the Bober; when lo, among
the knolls ahead, masses of Austrian Cavalry are seen waiting him, be-
setting every passage! [ven these do not break him; but these, with
infantry and cannon coming up to help them, do. Here, for some
time, was the fiercest tug of all,—till a bullet having killed Fouquet’s
horse, and carried the General himself to the ground, the spasm ended.
The Lichnowski Dragoons, a famed Austrian regiment, who had
charged and again charged with nothing but repulse on repulse, now

10 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

25th June—2d July 1760.
broke in, all in a foam of rage; cut furiously upon Fouquet himself;
wounded Fouquet thrice; would have killed him, had it not been for
the heroism of poor Trautschke, his Groom” (let us name the gallant
fellow, even if unpronounceable), “ who flung himself on the body of his
Master, and took the bloody strokes instead of him; shrieking his loud-
est, ‘Will you murder the Commanding General, then! Which
brought up the Colonel of Lichnowski; a Gentleman and Ritter, ab-
horrent of such practices. To him Fouquet gave his sword ;—kept
his vow never to draw it again.

“The wrecks of Fouquet’s Infantry were, many of them, massacred,
no quarter given; such the unchivalrous fury that had risen. His
Cavalry, with the loss of about 500, cut their way through. ‘They and
some stragglers of Foot, in whole about 1,500 of both kinds, were what
remained of those 10,680 after this bloody morning’s work. ‘There had
been about six hours of it ; ‘all over by 8 o’clock.’””*

Fouquet has obeyed to the letter: ‘‘ Did not my King wrong me 2%”
Fouquet may say to himself. Truly, Herr General, your King’s Order
was a little unwise ; as you (who were on the ground, and your King
not) knew it to be. An unwise Order ;—perhaps not inexcusable in
the sudden circumstances. And perhaps a still more perfect Bayard
would have preferred obeying such a King in spirit, rather than in let-
ter, and thereby doing him vital service against his temporary will?
It is not doubted but Fouquet, left to himself and his 13,000, with the
Fortresses and Garrisons about him, would have maintained himself in
Silesia till help came. ‘The issue is,—Fouquet has probably lost this
fine King his Silesia, for the time being; and beyond any question, has
lost him 10,000 Prussian-Spartan fighters, and a fine General whom he
could ill spare !— —In a word, the Gate of Silesia is burst open; and
Loudon has every prospect of taking Glatz, which will keep it so.

What a thunderbolt for Friedrich! One of the last pillars
struck away from his tottering affairs. ‘‘ Inevitable, then?
We are over with it, then?” One may faney Friedrich’s reflex-
ions. But he showed nothing of them to anybody; in a few
hours, had his mind composed, and new plans on the anvil. On
the morrow of that Austrian Joy-Firing,—morrow, or some
day close on it (ought to have been dated, but is not),—there

° Hofbericht von deram 23 Junius 1760 bey Landshuth vorgefallenen Ac-
tion (in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 669-671); Helden- Geschichte, vi., 258-284 ;
Tempelhof, iv. 26-41; Stenzel, v. 241 (who, by oversight, — this Volume
being posthumous to poor Stenzel,—protracts the action to ‘‘half-past 7
tn the evening’’).

Cua. I.] FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 11
25th June—2d July 1760.

went from him, to Maedeburg, the Order: ‘‘ Have me such and

such quantities of Siege-Artillery in a state of readiness.”!” Al-
ready meaning, it is thought, or contemplating as possible a cer-
tain Siege, which surprised everybody before long! A most
inventive, enterprising being; no end to his contrivances and
unexpected outbreaks; especially when you have him jammed
into a corner, and fancy it is all over with him!

“To no other General,” says Tempelhof, ‘‘ would such a no-
tion of besieging Dresden have occurred; or if it had suggest-
ed itself, the hideous difficulties would at once have banished it
again; or left it only as a pious wish. But it is strokes of this
kind that characterise the great man. Often enough they have
succeeded, been decisive of great campaigns and wars, and be-
come splendid in the eyes of all mankind; sometimes, as in this
case, they have only deserved to succeed, and to be splendid in
the eyes of judges. How get these masses of enemies lured
away, so that you could try such a thing? ‘There lay the diffi-
culty; insuperable altogether, except by the most fine and ap-
propriate treatment. Of a truth, it required a connected series
of the wisest measures, and most secret artifices of war ;—and,
withal, that you should throw over them such a veil as would
lead your enemy to see in them precisely the reverse of what
they meant. How all this was to be set in action, and how the
Enemy’s own plans, intentions, and moods of mind were to be
used as raw material for attainment of your object, — studi-
ous readers will best see in the manceuvres of the King in his
now more than critical condition; which do certainly exhibit
the completest masterpiece in the Art of leading Armies that
Europe has ever seen.”

Tempelhof is well enough aware, as readers should continue
to be, that, primarily, and onward for three weeks more, not
Dresden, but the getting to Silesia on good terms, is Friedrich’s
main enterprise: Dresden only a supplement or substitute, a
second string to his bow, till the first fail. But, in effect, the
two enterprises or strings coincide, or are one, till the first of
them fail; and Tempelhof’s eulogy will apply to either. The
initiatory step to either is a Second Feat of Marching ;—still

10 Tempelhof, iv. 51.

12 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
2d July 1760.

notabler than the former, which has had this poor issue. Sol-
diers of the studious or scientific sort, if there are yet any such
among us, will naturally go to Tempelhof, and fearlessly en-
counter the ruggedest Documents and Books, if Tempelhof leave
them dubious on any point (which he hardly will): to ingenuous
readers of other sorts, who will take a little pains for under-
standing the thing, perhaps the following intermittent far-off
glimpses may suffice.!?

On ascertaining the Landshut disaster, Friedrich falls back a little ;
northward to Gross-Dobritz: ‘“ Possibly Daun will think us cowed by
what has happened; and may try something on us?” Daun is by no
means sure of this cowed phenomenon, or of the retreat it has made ;
and tries nothing on it; only rides up daily to it, to ascertain that it is
there ; and diligently sends out parties to watch the North-eastward
parts, where run the Silesian Roads. After about a week of this, and
some disappointments, Friedrich decides to march in earnest. There
had, one day, come report of Lacy’s being detached, Lacy with a strong
Division, to block the Silesian roads; but that, on trial, proved to be
false. ‘* Pshaw, nothing for us but to go ourselves!” concludes Fried-
rich,—and, July 1st, sends off his Bakery and Heavy Baggage ; indi-
cating to Mitchell, ‘‘ Tomorrow morning at 3!”—Here is Mitchell’s own
account; accurate in every particular, as we find :'*

Wednesday, July 2d. “From Gross-Dobritz to Quosdorf” —(to
Quosdorf, a poor Hamlet there, not Quolsdorf, as many write, which is
a ‘Town far enough from there)—‘‘the Army marched, accordingly.
In two columns; baggage, bakery and artillery in a third; through 2
Country extremely covered with wood. Were attacked by some Uhlans
and Hussars; whom a few cannon-shot sent to the road again. March
lasted from 3 in the morning to 3 in the afternoon ;” twelve long hours.
* Went north-eastward a space of 20 miles, leaving Radeburg, much
more leaving Reichenberg, Moritzburg and the Daun quarters well to
the right, and at last quite to rearward; crossed the Roder, crossed the
‘Pulsnitz,” small tributaries or sub-tributaries of the Elbe in those parts;
‘crossed the latter (which divides Meissen from the Lausitz) partly by
the Bridge of Krakau, first Village in the Lausitz. Headquarter was
the poor Hamlet of Quosdorf, a mile farther on. ‘This march had been
carefully kept secret,’ says Mitchell; ‘and it was the opinion of the

‘1 Mitchell, ii. 162 et seq.; and Tempelhof (iv. 50-53 et seq.), as a sci-
entific check on Mitchell, or unconscious fellow-witness with him,—agree-
ing beautifully almost always.

12 Mitchell, ii. 164; Tempelhof, iv. 54,

Cuap. I.] FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. _ 13
2d-8th July 1760.
most experienced Officers, that, had the Enemy discovered the King
of Prussia’s design, they might, by placing their light troops in the
roads with proper supports, have rendered it extremely difficult, if not
impracticable.’ ”

Daun very early got to know of Friedrich’s departure, and whither-
ward; which was extremely interesting to Daun: “ Aims to be in
Silesia before me; will cut out Loudon from his fine prospects on
Glatz?” —and had instantly reinforced, perhaps to 20,000, Lacy’s
Division; and ordered Lacy, who is the nearest to Friedrich’s March,
to start instantly on the skirts of said March, and endeavour diligently
to trample on the same. For the purpose of harassing said March,
Lacy is to do whatever he with safety can (which we see is not much:
‘‘a few Uhlans and Hussars”); at lowest, is to keep it constantly in
sight: and always encamp as near it as he dare ;'*—Daun himself gird-
ing up his loins; and preparing, by a short cut, to get ahead of it in a
day or two. Lacy was alert enough, but could not do much with safety:
a few Uhlans and Hussars, that was all; and he is now encamped some-
where to rearward, as near as he dare.

Thursday,3d July. “ A rest-day ; Army resting about Krakau, after
such a spell through the woody moors. ‘The King, with small escort,
rides out reconnoitering, hither, thither, on the southern side or Lacy
quarter : to the top of the Keulenberg (Bludgeon Mill), at last,—which
is ten or a dozen miles from Krakau and Quosdorf, but commands an
extensive view. ‘Towns, village-belfries, courses of streams: a country
of mossy woods and wild agricultures, of bogs, of shaggy moor. South-
ward 10 miles is Radeberg” (not Radeburg, observe); “ yonder is the
town of Pulsnitz on our stream of Pulsnitz; to south-east, and twice
as far, is Bischofswerda, chasmy Stolpen (too well known to us before
this) : behind us, Konigsbrtick, Kamenz and the road from Grossenhayn
to Bautzen: these and many other places memorable to this King are
discoverable from Bludgeon Hill. But the discovery of discoveries to
him is Lacy’s Camp,—not very far off, about a mile behind Pulsnitz;
clearly visible, at Lichtenberg yonder. Which we at once determine
to attack ; which, and the roads to which, are the one object of interest
just now,—nothing else visible, as it were, on the top of the Keulen-
berg here, or as we ride homeward, meditating it with a practical view.
‘March at midnight,’ that is the practical result arrived at, on reaching
home.”

Friday, July 4th. “ Since the stroke of midnight we are all on march
again; nothing but the baggages and bakeries left” (with Quintus to
watch them, which I see is his common function in these marches):
“¢ King himself in the Vanguard,—who hopes to give Lacy a salutation.'*

*3 Tempelhof, iv. 54. 4 Thid. iv. 56.

14 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

2d-8th July 1760.
‘The march was full of defiles.’ says Mitchell: and Mitchell, in his
carriage, knew little what a region it was, with boggy intricacies, lake-
lets, tangly thickets, stocks and stumps; or what a business to pass
with heavy cannon, baggage-wagons, and columns of men! Such a
march: and again not far from 20 miles of it: very hot, as the morning
broke, in the breathless woods. Had Lacy known what kind of ground
we had to march in, and been enterprising—! thinks Tempelhof. The
march being so retarded, Lacy got notice of it, and vanished quite
away,—to Bischofswerda, I believe, and the protecting neighbourhood
of Daun. Nothing of him left when we emerge, simultaneously from
this hand and from that, on his front and on his rear. to take him as in
a vice, as in the sudden snap of a fox-trap ;—fox quite gone. Hardly
a few hussars of him to be picked up; and no chase possible, after
such a march.”

Friedrich had done everything to keep himself secret: but Lacy has
endless Pandours prowling about; and, I suppose, the Country-people
(in the Lausitz here, who ought to have luyalty) are on the Lacy side.
Friedrich has to take his disappointment. He encamps here, on the
Heights, headquarter Pulsnitz,—till Quintus come up with the baggage,
which he does punctually, but not till nightfall, not till midnight the last
of him.

Saturday, July 5th. “ To the road again at 3 a.m. Again to north-
ward, to Kloster (Cloister) Marienstern, a 15 miles or so,—headquarter
in the Cloister itself. Daun had set off for Bautzen, with his 50 or
60,000, in the extremest push of haste, and is at Bautzen this night;
ahead of Friedrich, with Lacy as rearguard of him, who is also ahead
of Friedrich, and safe at Bischofswerda. A Daun hastening as never
before. This news of a Daun already at Bautzen awakened Friedrich’s
utmost speed: ‘ Never do, that Daun be in Silesia before us! Indis-
pensable to get ahead of Bautzen and him, or to be waiting on the flank
of his next march" Accordingly,

Sunday. July 6th, “ Friedrich, at 3 a.m., is again in motion; in
three columns, streaming forward all day: straight eastward, Daun-
ward. Intends to cross the Spree, leaving Bautzen to the right; and
take post somewhere to north-east of Bautzen, and on the flank of Daun.
The windless day grows hotter and hotter; the roads are of loose sand,
full of jungles and impediments. ‘This was such a march for heat and
difficulty as the King never had before. In front of each Column went
wagons with a few pontoons ; there being many brooks and little streams
to cross. The soldier, for his own health’s sake, is strictly forbidden to
drink ; but as the burning day rose higher, in the sweltering close march,
thirst grew irresistible. Crossing any of these Brooks, the soldiers
pounce down, irrepressible, whole ranks of them; lift water, clean or

————— ee

Cuap. I. FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 15
2d-8th July 1760.

dirty ; drink it greedily from the brim of the hat. Sergeants may wag
their tongues and their cudgels at discretion: ‘showers of cudgel-
strokes, says Archenholtz ; Sergeants going like threshers on the poor
men ;—‘ though the upper Officers had a touch of mercy, and affected
not to see this disobedience to the Sergeants and their cudgels,’ which
was punishable with death. War is not an over-fond Mother, but a
sufficiently Spartan one, to her Sons. ‘There dropt down, in the march
that day, 105 Prussian men, who never rose again. And as to inter-
cepting Daun by such velocity,—Daun too is on march; gone to Gor-
litz, at almost a faster pace, if at a far heavier,—like a cart-horse on
gallop; faring still worse in the heat: ‘200 of Daun’s men died on the
road this day, and 300 more were invalided for life.”!®

“Before reaching the Spree, Friedrich, who is in the Vanguard,
hears of this Gorlitz March, and that the bird is flown. For which he
has, therefore, to devise straightway a new expedient: ‘ Wheel to the
right; cross Spree farther down, holding towards Bautzen itself,’ orders
Friedrich. And settles within two miles of Bautzen; his left being at
Doberschiitz,—on the strong ground he held after Hochkirch, while
Daun, two years ago, sat watching so quiescent. Daun knows what
kind of march these Prussians, blocked out from relief of Neisse, stole
on him then, and saved their Silesia, in spite of his watching and block-
ing ;—and has plunged off, in the manner of a cart-horse scared into
galloping, to avoid the like.” What a Sabbath-day’s journey, on both
sides, for those Sons of War! Nothing in the Roman times, though
they had less baggage, comes up to such modern marching: nor is this
the fastest of Friedrich’s, though of Daun’s it unspeakably is.‘ Fried-
rich, having missed Daun, is thinking now to whirl round, and go into
Lacy,—which will certainly bring Daun back, even better.

“This evening, accordingly, Ziethen occupies Bautzen , sweeps out
certain) Lacy precursors, cavalry in some strength, who are there. Lacy
has come on as far as Bischofswerda: and his Horse-people seem to be
wide ahead; provokingly pert upon Friedrich’s outposts, who determ-
ines to chastise them, the first thing tomorrow. ‘Tomorrow, as is very
needful, is to be a rest-day otherwise. For Friedrich’s wearied people,
a rest-day; not at all for Daun’s, who continues his heavy-footed gal-
loping yet another day, and another, till he get across the Queiss, and
actually reach Silesia.

Monday, July 7th. “ Rest-day, accordingly, in Bautzen neighbour-
hood; nothing passing but a curious Skirmish of Horse,—in which
Friedrich, who had gone westward reconnoitering, seeking Lacy, had
the main share, and was notably situated for some time. Godau, a
small town or village, six miles west of Bautzen, was the scene of this

16 Tempelhof, iv. 58; Archenholtz, ii.68; Mitchell, ii. 166.

16 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

7th July 1760.
notable passage: actors in it were Friedrich himself, on the Prussian
part; and,on the Austrian, by degrees Lacy’s Cavalry almost in whole.
Lacy’s Cavalry, what Friedrich does not know, are all in those neigh-
bourhoods: and no sooner is Godau swept clear of them, than they re-
turn in greater numbers, needing to be again swept; and, in fact, they
gradually gather in upon him, in a singular and dangerous manner, after
his first successes on them, and before his Infantry have time to get up
and support,

“‘ Friedrich was too impatient, in this provoking little haggle, arrest-
ing himhere. He had ordered on the suitable Battalion with cannon ;
but hardly considers that the Battalion itself is six miles off,—not to
speak of the Order, which is galloping on horseback, not going by elec-
tricity :—the impatient Friedrich had slashed in at once upon Godau,
taken above 100 prisoners ; but is astonished to see the slashed people
return. with Saxon-Dragoon regiments, all manner of regiments, rein-
forcing them. And has some really dangerous fencing there ;—issuing
in dangerous and curious pause of both parties; who stand drawn up,
scarcely beyond pistol-shot, and gazing into one another, for I know not
how many minutes; neither of them daring to move off, lest, on the
instant of turning, it be charged and overwhelmed. As the impatient
Friedrich, at last, almost was,—had not his Infantry just then got in,
and given their cannon-salvo. He lost about 200, the Lacy people
hardly so many; and is now out of a considerable personal jeopardy,
which is still celebrated in the Anecdote-Books, perhaps to a mythical
extent. * Two Uhlans’ (Saxon-Polish Light-Horse) ‘ with their trucu-
lent pikes. are just plunging in,’ say the Anecdote-Books: ‘ Friedrich’s
Page, who had got unhorsed, sprang to his feet, bellowed in Polish to
them: ‘‘ What are you doing here, fellows?” ‘ Excellenz” (for the
Page is not in Prussian uniform, or in uniform at all, only well-dressed),
“ Eixcellenz, our horses ran away with us,” answer the poor fellows;
and whirl back rapidly.”” The story, says Retzow, is true.’®

This is the one event of July 7th,—and of July 8th withal; which
day also, on news of Daun that come, Friedrich rests. Up to July 8th,
it is clear Friedrich is shooting with what we called the first string of
his bow,—intent, namely, on Silesia. Nor, on hearing that Daun is
forward again, now hopelessly ahead, does he quit that enterprise ; but,
on the sontrary. tomorrow morning, July 9th, tries it by a new method,
as we shall see: method cunningly devised to suit the second string
as well ‘“ How lucky that we have a second string, in case of fail-
ure !”"-— ,

Tuesday, 8th July. “News that. Daun reached Gorlitz yester-
night. and is due tonight at Lauban, fifty miles ahead of us :—no hope

16 Retzow, ii. 215.

Ee

Cuap. I.] FIFTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 17
8th July 1760.

now of reaching Daun. Perhaps a sudden clutch at Lacy, in the oppo-
site direction, might be the method of recalling Daun, and reaching
him? ‘That is the method fallen upon.

“Sun being set, the drums in Bautzen sound tattoo,—audible to list-
ening Croats in the Environs ;—beat tattoo, and, later in the night,
ether passages of drum-music, also for Croat behoof (general-march I
think it is); indicating That we have started again, in pursuit of Daun.
And, in short, every precaution being taken to soothe the mind of Lacy
and the Croats, Friedrich silently issues, with his best speed, in Three
columns, by Three roads, towards Lacy’s quarters, which go from that
village of Godau westward, in a loose way, several miles. In three
columns, by three routes, all to converge, with punctuality, on Lacy.
Of the columns, two are of Infantry, the leftmost and the rightmost, on
each hand, hidden as much as possible; one is of Cavalry in the mid-
dle. Coming on in this manner—like a pair of triple pincers, which
are to grip simultaneously on Lacy, and astonish him, if he keep quiet.
But Lacy is vigilant, and is cautious almost in excess. Learning by
his Pandours that the King seems to be coming this way, Lacy gathers
himself on the instant ; quits Godau, by one in the morning ; and retreats
bodily, at his fastest step, to Bischofswerda again; nor by any means
stops there.”"’

For the third time! ‘Three is lucky,” Friedrich may have
thonght: and there has no precaution, of drum-music, of secre-
cy or persuasive finesse, been neglected on Lacy. But Lacy has
ears that hear the grass grow: our elaborately accurate triple-
pincers, closing simultaneously on Bischofswerda, after eighteen
miles of sweep, find Lacy flown again; nothing to be caught of
him but some 80 hussars. All this day and all next night,
Lacy is scouring through the western parts at an extraordinary
rate; halting for a camp, twice over, at different places,—Diirre
Fuchs (Thirsty Fox), Diirre Biihle (Thirsty Sweetheart), or wher-
ever it was; then again taking wing, on sound of Prussian par-
ties to rear; in short, hurrying towards Dresden and the Reichs-
folk, as if for life.

Lacy’s retreat, I hear, was ingeniously done, with a minimum
of disorder in the circumstances: but certainly it was with a
velocity as if his head had been on fire; and, indeed, they say he
escaped annihilation by being off in time. He put up finally,
not at Thirsty Sweetheart, still less at Thirsty Fox, successive

17 Tempelhof, iv. 61-68.

18 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-29th July 1760.

Hamlets and Public Houses in the sandy Wilderness which lies
to north of Elbe, and is called Dresden Heath; but further on,
in the same Tract, at Weisse Hirsch (White Hart); which looks
close over upon Dresden, within two miles or so; and is a kind
of Height, and military post of advantage. Next morning, July
10th, he crosses Dresden Bridge, comes streaming through the
City; and takes shelter with the Reichsfolk near there :—to-
wards Plauen Chasm; the strongest ground in the world; hard-<
ly strong enough, it appears, in the present emergency.
Friedrich’s first string, therefore, has snapt in two; but, on
the instant, he has a second fitted on :—may that prove luckier!

CHAPTER II.
FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN.

From and after the Evening of Wednesday July 9th, it is
upon a Siege of Dresden that Friedrich goes ;— turning the
whole war-theatre topsy-turvy ; throwing Daun, Loudon, Lacy,
everybody out, in this strange and sudden manner. One of the
finest military feats ever done, thinks Tempelhof. Undoubtedly
a notable result so far, and notably done; as the impartial reader
(if Tempelhof be a little inconsistent) sees for himself. These
truly are a wonderful series of marches, opulent in continual
promptitudes, audacities, contrivances ;—done with shining tal-
ent, certainly; and also with result shining, for the moment.
And in a Fabulous Epic I think Dresden would certainly have
fallen to Friedrich, and his crowd of enemies been left in a tum-
bled condition.

But the Epic of Reality cares nothing for such considerations ;
and the time allowable for the capture of Dresden is very brief.
Had Daun, on getting warning, been as prompt to return as he
was to go, frankly fronting at once the chances of the road, he
might have been at Dresden again perhaps within a week,—no
Siege possible for Friedrich, hardly the big guns got up from
Magdeburg. But Friedrich calculated there would be very con-
siderable fettling and haggling on Daun’s part; say a good
Fortnight of Siege allowed ;—and that, by dead-lift effort of all

Cuap. IT. ] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 19
10th-29th July 1760.
hands, the thing was feasible within that limit. On Friedrich’s
part, as we can fancy, there was no want of effort; nor on his
people’s part,—in spite of his complainings, say Retzow and the
Opposition party; who insinuate their own private belief of im-
possibility from the first. Which is not confirmed by impartial
judgments,—that of Archenholtz, and others better. The truth
is, Friedrich was within an inch of taking Dresden by the first
assault,—they say he actually could have taken it by storm, the
first day; but shuddered at the thought of exposing poor Dres-
den to sack and plunder; and hoped to get it by capitulation.
One of ‘the rapidest and most furious Sieges anywhere on rec-
ord. Filled Europe with astonishment, expectancy, admiration,
horror :—must be very briefly recited here. ‘The main chrono-
logical epochs, salient points of crisis, and successive phases of
occurrence, will sufficiently indicate it to the reader’s fancy.

“Tt was Thursday Evening, 10th July, when Lacy got to his Reichs-
folk, and took breath behind Plauen Chasm. Maguire is Governor of
Dresden. ‘The consternation of garrison and population was extreme.
To Lacy himself it did not seem conceivable that Friedrich could mean
a Siege of Dresden. Friedrich, that night, is beyond the River, in
Daun’s old impregnability of Reichenberg : ‘ He has no siege-artillery,’
thinks Lacy ; ‘no means, no time.’

‘“‘ Nevertheless, Saturday, next day after tomorrow,—behold, there is
Hiilsen, come from Schlettau to our neighbourhood, on our Austrian
side of the River. And at Kaditz yonder, a mile below Dresden, are
not the King’s people building their Pontoons; in march since 2 in the
morning,—evidently coming across, if not to besiege Dresden, then to
attack us; which is perhaps worse! We outnumber them,—but as to
trying fight in any form? Zweibriick leaves Maguire an additional
10,000 ;—every help and encouragement to Maguire; whose garrison
is now 14,000: ‘ Be of courage, Excellenz Maguire! Nobody is better
skilled in siege-matters. Feldmarschall and relief will be here with
despatch !’— and withdraws, Lacy and he, to the edge of the Pirna
Country, there to be well out of harm’s way. Lacy and he, it is thought,
would perhaps have got beaten, trying to save Dresden from its misery.
Lacy’s orders were, Not on any terms to get into fighting with Fried-
rich, but only to cover Dresden. Dresden, without fighting, has proved
impossible to cover, and Lacy leaves it bare.”

““¢ At Kaditz,’ says Mitchell,‘ where the second bridge of boats took

1 Tempelhof, iv. 65.

20 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

14th July 1760,
a great deal of time, I was tandhle by his Majesty, when news to the
above effect came across from General Hilsen. The King was highly
pleased; and, turning to me, said: “ Just what | wished! They have
saved me a very long march” (round by Dippoldiswalde or so, in upon
the rear of them) ‘by going of will.” And immediately the King
got on horseback: ordering the Army to follow as fast as it could.”?
_ Through Preisnitz, Plauen-ward, goes the Army; circling round the
Western and the Southern side of Dresden” (a dread spectacle from the
walls) ; “across Weistritz Brook and the Plauen Chasm” (comfortably
left vacant); “and encamps on the South-eastern side of Dresden, at
Gruna, behind the Great Garden; ready to begin business on the mor-
row. Gruna, about a mile to south-east of Dresden Walls, is head-
quarter during this Siege.

“Through the night, the Prussians proceed to build batteries, the
best they can ;—there is no right siege-artillery yet; a few accidental
howitzers and 25-pounders, the rest mere field-guns ;—but tomorrow
morning, be as it may, business shall begin. Prince von Holstein”
(nephew of the Holstein Beck, or “ Holstein Silver-Plate,’ whom we
lost long ago), “ from beyond the River, encamped at the White Hart
yonder, is to play upon the Neustadt simultaneously.

Sunday 14th, “ At 6 a.m., cannonade began; diligent on Holstein’s
part and ours; but of inconsiderable effect. Maguire has been sum-
moned ; ‘ Will’ (with such a garrison, in spite of such trepidations from
the Court and others) ‘defend himself to the last man.’ Free-Corps
people” (not Quintus’s, who is on the other side of the River),° “ with
regulars to rear, advance on the Pirna Gate; hurl in Maguire’s Out-
parties; and had near got in along with them,—might have done so,
they and their supports, it is thought by some, had storm seemed the
recommendable method.

“For four days, there is livelier and livelier cannonading ; new bat-
teries getting opened in the Moschinska Garden, and other points; on
the Prussian part, great longing that the Magdeburg artillery were here.
The Prussians are making diligently ready for it, in the mean while
(refitting the old Trenches, ‘old Envelope’ dug by Maguire himself in
the Anti-Schmettau time; these will do well enough) :—the Prussians
reinforce Holstein at the Weisse Hirsch, throw a new bridge across to
him; and are busy day and night. Maguire, too, is most industrious,
resisting and preparing: Thursday shuts up the Weistritz Brook (a dam
being ready this long while back, needing only to be closed), and lays
the whole South side of Dresden under water. Many rumours about
Daun: coming, not coming ;—must for certain come, but will possibly
be slowish.”

® Mitchell, ii. 168. 3 Tempelhof, iv. 67.

Cuap. II.] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 21
19th July 1760.

Thursday 18th. “ Joy.to every Prussian soul: here are the heavy
guns from Magdeburg. ‘These, at any rate, are come; beds for them
all ready ; and now the cannonading can begin in right earnest. As it
does with a vengeance. To Mitchell, and perhaps others, ‘the King
of Prussia says He will now be master of the Town in a few days.
And the disposition he has made of his troops on the other side of the
River is intended not only to attack Dresden on that side’ (and defend
himself from Daun), ‘but also to prevent the Garrison from retiring.’
.. . © This morning, Thursday 18th, the Suburb of Pirna, the one street
left of it, was set fire to, by Maguire; and burnt out of the way, as the
others had been. Many of the wretched inhabitants had fled to our
camp: “Let them lodge in Plauen, no fighting there, quiet artificial
water-expanses there instead.” Many think the Town will not be
taken; or “that, if it should, it will cost very dear,—so determined
seems Maguire.” ”* ‘“* And, in effect, from this day onwards, the Siege
became altogether fierce, and not only so, but fiery as well; and, though
lasting in that violent form only four, or at the very utmost seven, days
more, had near ruined Dresden from the face of the world.”

Friday 19th, “‘ Maguire, touched to the quick by these new artilleries
of the Prussians this morning, found good to mount a gun or two on the
leads of the Kreuz-Kirche” (Protestant High Church, where, before
now, we have noticed Friedrich attending quasi-divine service more
than once) ;—‘‘ that is to say, on the crown of Dresden; from which
there is view into the bottom of Friedrich’s trenches and operations.
Others say, it was only two or three old Saxon cannon, which stand
there, for firing on gala-days; and that they hardly fired on Friedrich
more than once. For certain, this is one of the desirablest battery sta-
tions,—if only Friedrich will leave it alone. Which he will not for a
moment; but brings terrific howitzers to bear on it; cannonballs, gre-
nadoes ; tears it to destruction, and the poor Kreuz-Kirche along with
it. Kirche speedily all in flames, street after street blazing up round it,
again and again for eight-and-forty hours coming; hapless Dresden,
during two days and nights, a mere volcano henceforth.” ‘“ By mistake,
all that, and without order of mine, says Friedrich once ;—meaning, I
think, all that of the Kreuz-Kirche: and perhaps wishing he could
mean the bombardment altogether,°-—who nevertheless got, and gets,
most of the credit of the thing from a shocked outside world.

“This morning,” same Friday 19th, “Daun is reported to have
arrived; vanguard of him said to be at Schonfeld, over in Thirsty-—
Sweetheart Country yonder: which Friedrich, going to reconnoitre,

* Mitchell, iii. 170, 171.
§ Schéning, ii. 861: ‘To Prince Henri at Giessen” (Frankfurt Country),
‘623d Suly 1760.”

ee

22 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-29th July 1760.

finds tragically indisputable: ‘ There, for certain ; only five miles from
Holstein’s post at the White Hart, and no River between ;—as the
crow flies, hardly five from our own Camp. Perhaps it will be some
days yet before he do anything?’ So that Friedrich persists in his |
bombardment only the more: ‘ By fire-torture, then! Let the bom-
barded Royalties assail Maguire, and Maguire give in ;—it is our one
chance left; and succeed we will and must!’ Cruel, say you?—Ah,
yes, cruel enough, not merciful at all. The soul of Friedrich, I per-
ceive, is not in a bright mood at this time, but in a black and wrathful,
worn almost desperate against the slings and arrows of unjust Fate:
‘Ahead,I say! If everybody will do miracles, cannot we perhaps still
manage it, in spite of Fate?’ Mitchell is very sorry; but will forget
and forgive those inexorable passages of war.” i

“T cannot think of the bombardment of Dresden without horror,”
says he; “nor of many other things [have seen. Misfortunes naturally
sour men’s temper” (even royal men’s); “and long continued, without
interval, at last extinguish humanity.” ‘‘ We are now in a most criti-
cal and dangerous situation, which cannot long last: one lucky event,
approaching to a miracle, may still save all: but the extreme caution
and circumspection of Marshal Daun—!’’*

If Daun could be swift, and end the miseries of Dresden,
surely Dresden would be much obliged to him. It was ten
days yet, after that of the Kreuz-Kirche, before Dresden quite
got rid of its Siege: Daun never was a sudden man. By a kind
of accident, he got Holstein hustled across the River that first
night (July 19th),—not annihilated, as was very feasible, but
pushed home, out of his way. Whereby the North side of Dresden
is now open; and Daun has free communication with Maguire.

Maguire rose thereupon to a fine pitch of spirits; tried several
things, and wished Daun to try; but with next to no result.
For two days after Holstein’s departure, Daun sat still, on his
safe Northern shore; stirring nothing but his own cunctations
and investigations, leaving the bombardment, or cannonade, to
take its own course. One attempt he did make in concert with
Maguire (night of Monday 21st), and one attempt only, of a
serious nature; which, like the rest, was unsuccessful. And
would not be worth mentioning,—except for the poor Regiment
Bernburg’s sake; Bernburg having got into strange case in con-
sequence of it.

6 Mitchell, ii. 184, 185.

~ Cuap. IT] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 23

22d July 1760. |

“This Attempt” (Night of 21st-22d July) “was a combined sally
and assault,—Sally by Maguire’s people, a General Nugent heading
them, from the South or Plauen side of Dresden, and Assault by 4,000
of Daun’s from the North side,—upon Friedrich’s Trenches. Which
are to be burst in upon, in this double way, and swept well clear, as
may be expected. Friedrich, however, was aware of the symptoms,
and had people ready waiting,—especially, had Regiment Berndurg,
Battalions Ist and 2d; a Regiment hitherto without stain.

“* Bernburg accordingly, on General Nugent’s entering their trenches
from the south side, falls altogether heartily on General Nugent; tum-
bles him back, takes 200 prisoners, Nugent himself one of them” (who
is considered to have been the eye of the enterprise, worth many hund-
reds this night): “all this Bernburg, in its usually creditable manner,
does, as expected of it. But after, or during all this, when the Daun
people from the north come streaming in, say four to one, both south
and north, Bernburg looked round for support; and seeing none, had,
after more or less of struggle, to retire as a defeated Bernburg,—Aus-
trians taking the battery, and ruling supreme there for some time. Till
Wedell, or somebody with fresh Battalions, came up; and, rallying
Bernburg to him, retook their Battery, and drove out the Austrians,
with a heavy loss of prisoners.’

“T did not hear that Bernburg’s. conduct was liable to the least fair
censure. But Friedrich’s soul is severe at this time ; demanding mira-
cles from everybody: ‘ You runaway Bernburg, shame on you !’—and
actually takes the swords from them, and cuts off their Hat-tresses:
‘There!’ Which excited such an astonishment in the Prussian Army
as was seldom seen before. And affected Bernburg to the length almost
of despair, and breaking of heart,—in a way that is not ridiculous to me
at all, but beautiful and pathetic. Of which there is much talk, now
and Jong afterwards, in military circles. The sorrows of these poor
Bernburgers, their desperate efforts to wash out this stigma, their actual
washing of it out, not many weeks hence, and their magnificent joy on
the occasion,—these are the one distinguishing point in Daun’s relief
of Dresden, which was otherwise quite a cunctatory, sedentary matter.”

Daun built three Bridges,—he had a broad stone one already,—
but did little or nothing with them; and never himself came
across at all. Merely shot out nocturnal Pandour Parties, and
ordered up Lacy and the Reichsfolk to do the like, and break
the night’s rest of his Enemy. He made minatory movements,
one at least, down the River, by his own shore, on Friedrich’s

7 Tempelhof, iv. 79.

24 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-29th July 1760.

Ammunition Boats from Torgau, and actually intercepted cer-
tain of them, which was something; but, except this, and vague
flourishings of the Pandour kind, left Friedrich to his own course.

Friedrich bombarded for a day or two farther; cannonaded,
out of more or fewer batteries, for eight, or I think ten days
more. Attacks from Daun there were to be, now on this side,
now on that; many rumours of attack, but, except once only
(midnight Pandours attempting the King’s lodging, “a Farm-
house near Gruna,” but to their astonishment rousing the whole
Prussian Army “in the course of three minutes”®), rumour was
mainly all. For guarding his siege-lines, Friedrich has to alter
his position; to shift slightly, now fronting this way, now the
other way; is “called always at midnight” (against these noc-
turnal disturbances), and ‘never has his clothes off’ Never-
theless, continues his bombardment, and then his cannonading,
till his own good time, which I think is till the 26th. His
‘‘ricochet-battery,” which is good against Maguire’s people,
innocent to Dresden, he continued for three days more ;—while
gathering his furnitures about Plauen Country, making his ar-
rangements at Meissen ;—did not march till the night of June
29th. Altogether calmly; no Daun or Austrian molesting him
in the least; his very sentries walking their rounds in the
trenches, till daylight; after which they also marched, unmo-
lested, Meissen-ward.

Unfortunate Friedrich has made nothing of Dresden, then.
After such a June and July of it, since he left the Meissen
Country; after all these intricate manceuverings, hot fierce
marchings and superhuman exertions, here is he returning to
Meissen Country, poorer than if he had stayed. Fouquet lost,
Glatz unrelieved—Nay, just before marching off, what is this
new phenomenon? Is this by way of “ Happy journey to you !”
Towards sunset of the 29th, exuberant joy-firing rises far and
wide from the usually quiet Austrian lines,—‘“ Meaning what,
once more?”? Meaning that Glatz is lost, your Majesty; that,

§ Archenholtz, ii. 81 (who is very vivid, but does not date); Rodenbeck,
ii. 24 (quotes similar account by another Eye-witness, and guesses it to be
‘night of July 22d-23d”).

Cuap. II.] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 25
29th July 1760.

instead of a siege of many weeks (as might have been expected
with Fouquet for Commandant), it has held out, under Fou-
~quet’s Second, only a few hours; and is gone without remedy!
Certain, though incredible. Imbecile Commandant, treacherous
Garrison (Austrian deserters mainly), with stealthy Jesuits act-
ing on them: no use asking what. Here is the sad Narrative,
in succinct form:

Capture of Glatz (26th July 1760).

“ Loudon is a swift man, when he can get bridle; but the curb-hand
of Daun is often heavy on him. Loudon has had Glatz blockaded since
June 7th; since June 23d, he has had Fouquet rooted away, and the
ground clear fora siege of Glatz. But had to abstain altogether, in the
mean time; to take camp at Landshut, to-march and maneuvre about,
in support of Daun, and that heavy-footed gallop of Daun’s which then
followed: on the whole, it was not till Friedrich went fur Dresden that
the Siege- Artillery, from Olmititz, could be ordered forward upon Glatz ;
not for a fortnight more that the Artillery could come; and, in spite of
Loudon’s utmost despatch, not till break of day, July 26th, that the
batteries could open. After which, such was Loudon’s speed and for-
tune,—and so diligent had the Jesuits been in those seven weeks,—the
‘Siege,’ as they call it, was over in less than seven hours.

**One Colonel D’O” (Piedmontes by nation, an incompetent person,
known to loud Trenck during his detention here) “* was Commandant
of Glatz, and-had the principal Fortress,—for there are two, one on
each side the Neisse River ;—his Second was a Colonel Quadt, by birth
Prussian, seemingly not very competent he either, who had command
of the Old Fortress, round which lies the Town of Glatz; a little Town,
abounding in Jesuits ;—to whose Virgin, if readers remember, Friedrich
once gave a new gown; with small effect on her, as would appear.
The Quadt-D’O garrison was 2,400,—and, if tales are true, it had been
well bejesuited during those seven weeks.’ At four in the morning,
July 26th, the battering began on Quadt; Quadt, I will believe, respond- —
ing what he could,—especially from a certain Arrowhead Redoubt (or
Fléche) he has, which ought to have been important to him. After
four or five hours of this, there was mutual pause,—-as if both parties
had decided upon breakfast before going farther.

“ Quadt’s Fortress is very strong, mostly hewn in the rock; and he
has that important outwork of a Fléche ; which is excellent for enfilad-
ing, as it extends well beyond the glacis; and, being of rock like the
rest, is also abundantly defensible. Loudon’s people, looking over into

° Quvres de Frédéric, vy. 55.

Vou. VI.—B

‘ ;
26 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

29th July 1760.
this Fléche, find it negligently guarded; Quadt at breakfast, as would
seem :—and directly send for Harsch, Captain of the Siege, and even
for Loudon, the General-in-Chief. Negligently guarded, sure enough ;
nothing in the Fléche but a few sentries, and these in the horizontal
position, taking their unlawful rest there, after such a morning’s work.
‘Seize me that,’ eagerly orders Loudon; ‘hold that with firm grip!’
Which is done; only to step in softly, two battalions of you, and lay
hard hold. Incompetent Quadt, figure in what a flurry, rushing out
to recapture his Fléche,—explodes instead into mere anarchy, whole
Companies of him flinging down their arms at their Officers’ feet, and
the lke. So that Quadt is totally driven in again, Austrians along
with him; and is obliged to beat chamade ;—D’O following the exam-
ple, about an hour after, without even a capitulation. Was there ever
seen sucha defence! Major Unruh, one of a small minority, was Prus-
sian, and stanch: here is Unruh’s personal experience,—testimony on
D‘O’s Trial, I suppose,—and now pretty much the one thing worth
reading on this subject.

“Major Unruh testifies: ‘At four in the morning, 26th July 1760,
the Enemy began to cannonade the Old Fortress’ (that of Quadt) , ‘ and
about nine, | was ordered with 150 men to clear the Envelope from
Austrians. Just when I had got to the Damm-Gate, halt was called.
I asked the Commandant, who was behind me, which way I should
march; to the Crown-work or to the Envelope? Being answered,
To the Envelope, | found on coming out at the Field-Gate nothing but
an Austrian Lieutenant-Colonel and some men. He ealled to me,
“There had been chamade beaten, and I was not to run into destruction
(mich unglucklich machen)!” I offered him Quarter: and took him
in effect prisoner, with 20 of his best men; and sent him to the Com-
mandant, with request that he would keep my rear free, or send me re-
inforcement. I shot the Enemy a great many people here; chased him
from the Field-Gate, and out of both the Envelope and the Redoubt
called the Crane’ (that is the Fléche itself, only that the Austrians are
mostly not now there, but gone ¢hrough into the interior there !)— Re-
turning to the Field-Gate, I found that the Commandant had beaten
ehamade a second time; there were marching in, by this Field-Gate,
two battalions of the Austrian Regiment Andlau ; I had to yield myself
prisoner, and was taken to General Loudon. He asked me, “‘ Don’t you
know the rules of war, then; that you fire after chamade is beaten 2”
I answered in my heat, * J knew of no chamade, what poltroonery or
what treachery had been going on, I knew not!” Loudon answered,
‘You might deserve to have your head laid at your feet, Sir! Am I
here to inquire which of you shows bravery, which poltroonery?’’"? A
blazing Loudon, when the fire is up!—

1° Seyfarth, ii. 652.

~

Cuar. IL] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 27
30th July 1760.

After the Peace, D’O had Court-martial, which sentenced him to
death, Friedrich making it perpetuel imprisonment: “ Perhaps not a
traitor, only a blockhead!” thought Friedrich. He had been recom-
mended to his post by Fouquet. What Trenck writes of him is, other-
wise, mostly lies. ,

Thus is the southern Key of Silesia (one of the two southern
Keys, Neisse being the other) lost to Friedrich, for the first time ;
and Loudon is like to drive a trade there. ‘ Will absolutely
nothing prosper with us, then?” Nothing, seemingly, your
Majesty! Heavier news Friedrich scarcely ever had. But
there is no help. This too he has to carry with him as he can
into the Meissen Country. Unsuccessful altogether ; beaten on
every hand. Human talent, diligence, endeavour, is it but as
lightning smiting the Serbonian Bog? Smite to the last, your
Majesty, at any rate; let that be certain. As it is, and has
been. ‘That is always something, that is always a great thing.

Friedrich intends no pause in those Meissen Countries. July
30th, on his march northward, he detaches Hiilsen with the old
10,000 to take Camp at Schlettau as before, and do his best for
defence of Saxony against the Reichsfolks, numerous, but in-
competent; he himself, next day, passes on, leaving Meissen a
little on his right, to Schieritz, some miles farther down,—in-
tending there to cross Elbe, and make for Silesia without loss
of an hour. Need enough of speed thither; more need than
even Friedrich supposes! Yesterday, July 30th, Loudon’s Van-
guard came blockading Breslau, and this day Loudon himself;
—though Friedrich heard nothing, anticipated nothing, of that
dangerous fact, for a week hence or more.

Soltikof’s and Loudon’s united intentions on Silesia he has
well known this long while ; and has been perpetually dunning
Prince Henri on the subject, to no purpose,—only hoping always
there would probably be no great rapidity on the part of these
discordant Allies. Friedrich’s feelings, now that the country is
visible, and indeed all through the Summer in regard to the Sol-
tikof-Loudon Business, and the Fouquet-Henri method of dealing
with it, have been painful enough, and are growing ever more so.
Cautious Henri never would make the smallest attack on Sol-

28 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

3lst July 1760.
tikof, but merely keep observing him ;—the end of which, what
can the end of it be? urges Friedrich always: ‘‘Condense your-
selves; go in upon the Russians, while they are in separate
corps ;”—and is very ill-satisfied with the languor of procedures
there. As is the Prince with such reproaches, or implied re-
proaches, on said languor. Nor is his humour cheered, when
the King’s bad predictions prove true. What has it come to?
These Letters of King and Prince are worth reading,—if indeed
you can, in the confusion of Schéning (a somewhat exuberant
man, loud rather than luminous);—so curious is the Private
Dialogue going on there at all times, in the background of the
stage, between the Brothers. One short specimen, extending
through the June and July just over; specimen distilled faith-
fully out of that huge jumbling sea of Schéning, and rendered
legible, the reader will consent to.

Dialogue of Friedrich and Henri (from their Private Correspond-
ence: June 7th—July 29th, 1760).

Friedrich (June 7th; before his first crossing Elbe: Henri at Sagan;
he at Schlettau, scanning the waste of fatal possibilities). * * “ Em-
barrassing? Not a doubt of that!” ‘I own, the circumstances both
of us are in are like to turn my head, three or four times a-day.” ‘‘ Lou-
don aiming for Neisse, don’t you think? Fouquet all in the wrong.”
— One has nothing for it but to watch where the likelihood of the
biggest misfortune is, and to run thither with one’s whole strength.”

Henri. * * “TI confess I am in great apprehension for Colberg :
—‘shall one make thither, think you? Russians, 8,000 as the first
instalment of them, have arrived; got to Posen under Fermor, June
Ist :—so the Commandant of Glogau writes me (see enclosed).’”

Friedrich (June 9th). “ Commandant of Glogau writes impossibili-
ties: Russians are not on march yet, nor will be for above a week.”

“T cross Elbe, the 15th. I am compelled to undertake something
of decisive nature, and leave the rest to chance. For desperate dis-
orders desperate remedies. My bed is not one of roses. Heaven aid
us: for human prudence finds itself fall short in situations so cruel and
desperate as ours.””??

Henri. “ Hm, hm, ha” (Nothing but carefully-collected rumours, and
wire-drawn auguries from them, on the part of Henri; very intense

1i Schdning, ii. 8313 (‘* Meissen Camp, 7th June 1760”); ibid. ii. 317
(‘* 9th June”).

Cuap. II.] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 29
31st July 1760.

inspection of the chicken-bowels,—hardly ever without a shake of the
head). ws

Friedrich (June 26th; has heard of the Fouquet disaster), * *
“Yesterday my heart was torn to pieces” (news of Landshut, Fou-
quet’s downfall there), ‘‘and I felt too sad to be in a state for writing
you a sensible Letter; but today, when I have come to myself a little
again, I will send you my reflections. After what has happened to
Fouquet, it is certain Loudon can have no other design but on Breslau”
(he designs Glatz first of all): ‘it will be the grand point, therefore,
especially if the Russians too are bending thither, to save that Capital
of Silesia. Surely the Turks must be in motion :—if so, we are saved ;
if not so, we are lost! Today I have taken this Camp of Dobritz, in
order to be more collected, and in condition to fight well, should occa-
sion rise,—and in case all this that is said and written to me about the
Turks is true” (which nothing of it was), “to be able to profit by it
when the time comes.”"?”

Henri (simultaneously, June 26th: Henri is forward from Sagan,
through Frankfurt, and got settled at Landsberg, where he remains
through the rest of the Dialogue). * * ‘“ Tottleben, with his Cos-
sacks, scouring about, got a check from us,—nothing like enough.”
“¢ By all my accounts, Soltikof, with the gross of the Russians, is march-
ing for Posen. The other rumours and symptoms agree in indicating
a separate Corps, under Fermor, who is to join Tottleben, and besiege
Colberg: if both these Corps, the Colberg and the Posen one, act in
concert, my embarrassment will be extreme.” * * “T have just had
news of what has befallen General Fouquet. Before this stroke, your
affairs were desperate enough ; now I see but too well what we have
to look for.”"* (How comforting !)

Friedrich. ‘‘ Would to God your prayers for the swift capture of
Dresden had been heard; but unfortunately I must tell you, this stroke
has failed me.” * * ‘* Dresden has been reduced to ashes, third part
of the Altstadt lying burnt ;— contrary to my intentions; my orders
were, To spare the City, and play the Artillery against the works.
My Minister Graf von Finck will have told you what occasioned its
being set on fire.”’**

Henri (July 26th; Dresden Siege gone awry). * * “Tam to keep
the Russians from Frankfurt, to cover Glogau, and prevent a besieging
of Breslau!. All that, forms an overwhelming problem ;—which I, with
my whole heart, will give up to somebody abler for it than I am.”"*

12 Schdning, ii. 341 (‘‘ Gross-Dobritz, 26th June 1760”),
13 Tbid. ii. 8339 (‘‘ Landsberg, 26th June 1760”).

14 Thid. ii. 361 (‘¢ 2d-3d July”).

18 Tbid. ii. 369-371 (‘* Landsberg, 26th July”).

30 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3lst July 1760.
Friedrich (29th July; quits the Trenches of Dresden this night).
* * “YT have seen with pain that you represent everything to your-
self on the black side. 1 beg you, in the name of God, my dearest
Brother, don’t take things up in their blackest and worst shape :—it is
this that throws your mind into such an indecision, which is so lament-
able. Adopt a resolution rather, what resolution you like, but stand by
it, and execute it with your whole strength. I conjure you, take a fixed
resolution ; better a ba\than none at all.” * * ‘ What is possible
to man, I will do; neither care nor consideration nor effort shall be
spared, to secure the result of my plans. The rest depends on circum-
stances. Amid such a number of enemies, one cannot always do what
one will, but must let them prescribe.”'®

An uncomfortable little Gentleman; but full of faculty, if one
can manage to get good of it! Here, what might have preceded
all the above, and been preface to it, is a pretty passage from
him; a glimpse he has had of Sans-Souci, before setting out on
those gloomy marchings and cunctatory hagglings. Henri writes
(at Torgau, April 26th, just back from Berlin and farewell of
friends) :

‘‘T mean to march the day after tomorrow. I took arrange-
ments with General Fouquet” (about that long fine-spun Chain
of Posts, where we are to do such service?)— “the Black
Hussars cannot be here till tomorrow, otherwise I should have
marched a day sooner. My Brother” (poor little invalid Fer-
dinand) “charged me to lay him at your feet. I found him
weak and thin, more so than formerly. Returning hither, the
day before yesterday, I passed through Potsdam; I went to
Sans-Souci” (April 24th, 1760) :—‘‘allis green there; the Gar-
den embellished, and seemed to me excellently kept. Though
these details cannot occupy you at present, I thought it would
give you pleasure to hear of them for a moment.”!7 Ah, yes;
all is so green and blessedly silent there: sight of the lost
Paradise, actually i, visible for a moment yonder, far away,
while one goes whirling in this manner on the illimitable wrack-
ing winds !|—

Here finally, from a distant part of the War-Theatre, is an-
other Note; which we will read while Friedrich is at Schicritz.

16 Schoning, ii. 370-2 (‘‘ Leubnitz, before Dresden, 29th July 1760”).
7 Thid. ii. 263 (‘‘Torgau, 26th April 1760”).

Cuap. II.] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 31
dist July 1760.

At no other place so properly; the very date of it, chief date
(July 31st), being by accident synchronous with Schieritz:

Duke Ferdinand’s Battle of Warburg (31st July 1760).

Duke Ferdinand has opened his difficult Campaign ; and especially,
—just while that Siege of Dresden blazed and ended,—has had three
sharp Fights, which were then very loud in the Gazettes, along with it.
Three once famous Actions ; which unexpectedly had little or no result,
and are very much forgotten now. So that bare enumeration of them
is nearly all we are permitted here. Pitt has furnished 7,000 new En-
glish, this Campaign,—there are now 20,000 English in all, and a Duke
Ferdinand raised to 70,000 men. Surely, under good omens, thinks
Pitt; and still more think the Gazetteers, judging by appearances.
Yes: but if Broglio have 130,000, what will it come to? Broglio is
two to one; and has, before this, proved himself.a considerable Captain.

Fight first is that of Korbach (July 10th): of Broglio, namely, who
has got across the River Ohm in Hessen (to Ferdinand’s great disgust
with the General Imhof in command there), and is streaming on to seize
the Diemel River, and menace Hanover; of Broglio, in successive sec-
tions, at a certain “ Pass of Korbach,” versus the Hereditary Prince
(Erbprinz of Brunswick), who is waiting for him there in one good
section,—and who beautifully hurls back one and another of the Broglio
sections ; but cannot hurl back the whole Broglio Army, a// marching
by sections that way ; and has to retire, back-foremost, fencing-sharply,
still in a diligently handsome manner, though with loss.'* That is the
Battle of Korbach, fought July 10th,—while Lacy streamed through
Dresden, panting to be at Plauen Chasm, safe at last.

Fight second (July 16th) was a kind of revenge on the Erbprinz’s
part: Affair of Emsdorf, six days after, in the same neighbourhood ;
beautiful too, said the Gazetteers; but of result still more insignificant.
Hearing of a considerable French Brigade posted not far off, at that
Village of Emsdorf, to guard Broglio’s meal-carts there, the indignant
Erbprinz shoots off for that; light of foot—English horse mainly, and
Hill Scots (Berg-Schotten so-called, who have a fine free stride, in
summer weather) ;—dashes in upon said Brigade (Dragoons of Bauffre-
mont and other picked men), who stood firmly on the defensive; but
were cut up, in an amazing manner, root and branch, after a fierce
struggle, and as it were brought home in one’s pocket. To the ad-
miration of military circles,—especially of messrooms, and the junior
sort. ‘* Elliot’s light horse” (part of the new 7,000), ‘“‘ what a regi-
ment! Unparalleled for willingness, and audacity of fence; lost 125

18 Mauvillon, ii. 105.

£

32 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3lst July 1760.
killed,’—in fact, the loss chiefly fell on Eiliot.1? The Berg-Schotten
too,—I think it was here that these kilted fellows, who had marched
with such a stride, “came home mostly riding:” poor Bauffremont
Dragoons being entirely cut up, or pocketed as prisoners, and their
horses ridden in this unexpected manner! But we must not linger,—
hardly even on Warburg, which was the third and greatest; and has
still points of memorability, though now so obliterated.

“ Warburg,” says my Note on this latter, “is a pleasant little Hessian
Town, some twenty-five miles west of Cassel, standing on the north or
left bank of the Diemel, among fruitful knolls and hollows. The fa-
mous‘ Batile of Warburg, —if you try to inquire in the Town itself, from
your brief railway-station, it is much if some intelligent inhabitant, at
last, remembers to have heard of it! The thing went thus: Chevalier
Du Muy, who is Broglio’s Rearguard or Reserve, 30,000 foot and horse,
with his back to the Diemel, and eight bridges across it in case of acci-
dent, has his right flank leaning on Warburg, and his left on a Village
of Ossendorf, some two miles to north-west of that. Broglio, Prince
Xavier of Saxony, especially Duke Ferdinand, are all vehemently and
mysteriously moving about, since that Fight of Korbach; Broglio in-
tent to have Cassel besieged, Du Muy keeping the Diemel for him ;
Ferdinand eager to have the Diemel back from Du Muy and him.

“ Two days ago (July 29th), the Erbprinz crossed over into these
neighbourhoods, with a strong Vanguard, nearly equal to Du Muy; and,
after studious reconnoitering and survey had, means, this morning (July
31st), to knock him over the Diemel again, if he can. No time to be
lost; Broglio near and in such force. Duke Ferdinand too, quitting
Broglio for a moment, is on march this way ; crossed the Diemel, about
midnight, some ten miles farther down, or eastward; will thence bend
southward, at his best speed, to support the EXrbprinz, if negessary, and
beset the Diemel when got;—Erbprinz not, however, in any wise, to
wait for him; such the pressure from Broglio and others. A most
busy swift-going scene, that morning ;—hardly worth such describing
at this date of time.

“The Erbprinz, who is still rather to north-eastward, that is to right-
ward, not directly frontward, of Du Muy’s lines; and whose plan of
attack is still dark to Du Muy, commences” (about 8 a.m., I should
guess) “by launching his British Legion so-called,—which is a com-
posite body, of Free-Corps nature, British some of it ( Colonel Beck-
with’s people,’ for example), not British by much the most of it, but an

19 Mauvillon, ii. 109 (Prisoners got ‘‘ were 2,661, including General and
Officers 179,” with all their furnitures whatsoever, ‘‘400 horses, 8 can-
non,’’ &c.).

SS. - e e

Cuap. IT. ] FRIEDRICH BESIEGES DRESDEN. 33
31st July 1760.

aggregate of wild strikers, given to plunder too:—by launching his
British Legion upon Warburg Town, there to take charge of Du Muy’s
right wing. Which Legion, ‘ with great rapidity, not only pitched the
French all out, but clean plundered the poor Town;’ and is a sad sore
on Du Muy’s right, who cannot get it attended to, in the ominous as-
pects elsewhere visible. For the Erbprinz, who is a strategic creature,
comes on, in the style of Friedrich, not straight towards Du Muy, but
sweeps out in two columns, round northward ; privately intending upon
Du Muy’s left wing and front—left wing, right wing (by British Le-
gion), and front, all three ;—and is well aided by a mist which now fell,
and which hung on the higher ground, and covered his march, for an
hour or more. This mist had not begun when he saw, on the knoll-
tops, far off on the right, but indisputable as he flattered himself,—some-
thing of Ferdinand emerging! Saw this; and pours along, we can
suppose, with still better step and temper. And bursts, pretty simul-
taneously, upon Du Muy’s right wing and left wing, coercing his front
the while ; squelches both these wings furiously together; forces the co-
erced centre, mostly. horse, to plunge back into the Diemel, and swim.
Horse could swim; but many of the Foot, who tried, got drowned.
And, on the whole, Du Muy is a good deal wrecked” (1,500 killed,
2,200 prisoners, not to speak of cannon and flags), “and, but for his
eight bridges, would have been totally ruined.

, “The fight was uncommonly furious, especially on Du Muy’s left ;
‘ Maxwell’s Brigade’ going at it, with the finest bayonet-practice, mus-
ketry, artillery practice ; obstinate as bears. On Du Muy’s right, the
British Legion, left wing, British too by name, had a much easier job.
But the fight generally was of hot and stubborn kind, for hours, perhaps
two or more ;—and some say, would not have ended so triumphantly,
had it not been for Duke Ferdinand’s Vanguard, Lord Granby and the
English Horse ; who, warned by the noise ahead, pushed on at the top
of their speed, and got in before the death. Granby and the Blues had
gone at the high trot, for above five miles; and, I doubt not, were in
keen humour when they rose to the gallop and slashed in. Mauvillon
says, ‘It was in this attack that Lord Granby, at the head of the Blues,
his own regiment, had his hat blown off; a big bald circle in his head
rendering the loss more conspicuous. But he never minded; stormed
still on,’ bare bald head among the helmets and sabres; ‘and made it
very evident that had he, instead of Sackville, led at Minden, there
had been a different story to tell. The English, by their valour,’ adds
he, ‘ greatly distinguished themselves this day. And accordingly they
suffered by far the most; their loss amounting to 590 men :’ or, as others
count,—out of 1,200 killed and wounded, 800 were English.”*°

© Mauvillon, ii 114. Or better, in all these three cases, as else where
B2

34 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Ist-7th Aug. 1760.
This of Granby and the bald head is mainly what now renders War-
burg memorable. For, in a year or two, the excellent Reynolds did a
Portrait. of Granby; and by no means forgot this incident; but gives
him bare-headed, bare and bald; the oblivious British connoisseur not
now knowing why, as perhaps he ought. The Portrait, 1 suppose, may
be in Belvoir Castle; the artistic Why of the baldness is this Battle
of Warburg, as above. An Affair otherwise of no moment. Ferdi-
nand had soon to quit the Diemel, or to find it useless for him, and-to
try other methods,—fencing gallantly, but too weak for Broglio; and,
on the whole, had a difficult Campaign of it, against that considerable
Soldier with forces so superior.

CHAPTER III.
BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ.

FRIEDRICH stayed hardly one day in Meissen Country; Silesia,
in the jaws of destruction, requiring such speed from him. His
new Series of Marches thitherward, for the next two weeks es-
pecially, with Daun and Lacy, and at last with Loudon too, for
escort, are still more singular than the foregoing; a fortnight
of Soldier History such as is hardly to be paralleled elsewhere.
Of his inward gloom one hears nothing. But the Problem itself
approaches to the desperate ;. needing daily new invention, new
audacity, with imminent destruction overhanging it throughout.
A. March distinguished in Military Annals ;—but of which it is
not for us to pretend treating. Military readers will find it in
Tempelhof, and the supplementary Books from time to time cited
here. And, for our own share, we can only say, that Friedrich’s
labours strike us as abundantly Herculean; more Alcides-like
than ever,—the rather as hopes of any success have sunk lower
than ever. A modern Alcides, appointed to confront Tartarus
itself, and be victorious over the Three-headed Dog. Daun,
Lacy, Loudon coming on you simultaneously, open-mouthed, are
a considerable Tartarean Dog! Soldiers judge that the King’s

Tempelhof’s specific Chapter on Ferdinand (Tempelhof, iv. 101-122).
Ferdinand’s Despatch (to King George), in Knesebeck, ii. 96-98 ;—or in
the Old Newspapers (Gentleman's Magazine, xxx. 386, 387), where also is
Lord Granby’s Despatch.

Cuap. IIT. ] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 35
Ist-7th Aug. 1760.

resources of genius were extremely conspicuous on this occasion;
and to all men it is in evidence that seldom in the Arena of this
Universe, looked on by the idle Populaces and by the eternal
Gods and Antigods (called Devils), did a Son of Adam fence
better for himself, now and throughout.

This, his Third march to Silesia in 1760, is judged to be the
most forlorn and ominous Friedrich ever made thither; real
peril, and ruin to Silesia and him, more imminent than even in
the old Leuthen days. Difficulties, complicacies very many,
Friedrich can foresee: a Daun’s Army and a Lacy’s for escort
to us; and such a Silesia when we do arrive. And there is one
complicacy more which he does not yet know of; that of Loudon
waiting ahead to welcome him, on crossing the Frontier, and in-
crease his escort thenceforth !—Or rather, let us say, Friedrich,
thanks to the despondent Henri and others, has escaped a great
Silesian Calamity ;—of which he will hear, with mixed emotions,
on arriving at Bunzlau on the Silesian Frontier, six days after
setting out. | Since the loss of Glatz (July 26th), Friedrich has
no news of Loudon; supposes him to be trying something upon
Neisse, to be adjusting with his slow Russians; and, in short,
to be out of the dismal account-current just at present. ‘That is
not the fact_in regard to Loudon; that is far from the fact.

Loudon is trying a Stroke-of-Hand on Breslau, in the Glatz
Fashion, in the Interim (July 80th—August 3d).

Hardly above six hours after taking Glatz, swift Loudon, no
Daun now tethering him (Daun standing, or sitting, ‘in relief
of Dresden” far off), was on march for Breslau—Vanguard of
him “ marched that same evening (July 26th):” in the liveliest
| hope of capturing Breslau ; especially if Soltikof, to whom this
of Glatz ought to be a fine symbol and pledge, make speed to
codperate. Soltikof is in no violent enthusiasm about Glatz;
anxious rather about his own magazine at Posen, and how to
get it carted out of Henri’s way, in case of our advancing towards
some Silesian Siege. “If we were not ruined last year, it wasn’t
Daun’s fault!” growls he often; and Montalembert has need of
all his suasive virtues (which are wonderful to look at, if any-

36 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Ist-7th Aug. 1760.

body cared to look at them, all flung into the sea in this manner)
for keeping the barbarous man in any approach to harmony.
The barbarous man had, after haggle enough, adjusted himself
for besieging Glogau ; and is surely to hear, on the sudden (order
from Petersburg reinforcing Loudon), that it is Breslau instead.
“Excellence, it is not Cunctator Daun this time, it is fiery Lou-
don.” ‘Well, Breslau, then!” answers Soltikof at last, after
much suasion. And marches thither;! faster than usual, quick-
ened by new temporary hopes, of Montalembert’s raising or one’s
own; ‘‘ What a place-of-arms, and place of victual, would Bres-
lau be for us, after all!”’

And really mends his pace, mends it ever more, as matters
grow stringent; and advances upon Breslau at his swiftest:
‘*To rendezvous with Loudon under the walls there,—within
the walls very soon, and ourselves chief proprietor !”—as may
be hoped. Breslau has a garrison of 4,000, only 1,000 of them
stanch; and there are, among other bad items, 9,000 Austrian
Prisoners in it. A big City with weak walls: another place to
defend than rockhewn little Glatz,—if there be no better than a
D’O for Commandant in it! But perhaps there is.

“* Wednesday 30th July, Loudon’s Vanguard arrived at Breslau; next
day Loudon himself ;—and besieged Breslau very violently, according
to his means, till the Sunday following. ‘Troops he has plenty, 40,000
odd, which he gives out for 50 or even 60,000; not to speak of Soltikof,
‘ with 75,000’ (read 45,000), striding on in a fierce and dreadful manner
to meet him here. ‘ Better surrender to Christian Austrians, had not
you?’ Loudon’s Artillery is not come up, it is only struggling on from
Glatz; Soltikof of his own has no Siege-Artillery ; and Loudon judges
that heavy-footed Soltikof, waited on by an alert Prince Henri, is a
problematic quantity in this enterprise. ‘Speedy oneself; speedy and
fiery!’ thinks Loudon: ‘ by violence of speed, of bullying and bombard-
ment, perhaps we can still do it!’ And Loudon tried all these things
to a high stretch; but found in Tauentzien the wrong man. 3

“Thursday 31st, Loudon, who has two bridges over Oder, and the
Town begirt all round, summons Tauentzien in an awful-sounding tone:
‘ Consider, Sir: no defence possible ; a trading Town, you ought not to
attempt defence of it: surrender on fair terms, or I shall, which God
forbid, be obliged to burn you and it from the face of the world!’

a Tempelhof, iv. 87-89 (‘‘ Rose from Posen, July 26th’’).

Crap. IIT. ] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 37
Ist-3d Aug. 1760. i

‘Pooh, pooh,’ answers T'auentzien, in brief polite terms; ‘you your,
selves had no doubt it was a Garrison, when we besieged you here, on
the heel of Leuthen; had you? Go to!'"— Fiery Loudon cannot try
storm, the Town having Oder and a wet ditch round it. He gets his
bombarding batteries forward, as the one chance he has, aided by bully-
ing. And tomorrow,

“Friday, August 1st, sends, half officially, half in the friendly way,
dreadful messages again: a warning to the Mayor of Breslau (which
was not signed by Loudon), ‘ Death and destruction, Sir, unless—!—
warning to the Mayor; and, by the same private half-official messen-
ger, a new summons to Tauentzien : ‘ Bombardment infallible ; universal
massacre by Croats; I will not spare the child in its mother’s womb.’
‘I am not with child,’ said Tauentzien, ‘nor are my soldiers! What
is the use of such talk?’ And about 10 that night, Loudon does accord-
ingly break out into all the fire of bombardment he is master of. Kin-
dles the Town in various places, which were quenched again by Tauen-
tzien’s arrangements; kindles especially the King’s fine Dwelling-house
(Palace they call it), and adjacent streets, not quenchable till Palace and
they are much ruined. Will this make no impression? Far too little.

‘Next morning, Loudon sends a private messenger of conciliatory
tone: ‘Any terms your Excellency likes to name. Only spare me the
general massacre, and child in the mother’s womb!’ From all which
Tauentzien infers that you are probably short of ammunition ; and that
his outlooks are improving. That day he gets guns brought to bear on
General Loudon’s own quarter; blazes into Loudon’s sitting-room, so
that Loudon has to shift elsewhither. No bombardment ensues that
night; nor next day anything but desultory cannonading, and much noise
and motion ;—and at night, Sunday 3d, everything falls quiet, and, to
the glad amazement of everybody, Loudon has vanished.””?

Loudon had no other shift left. This Sunday his Russians
are still five days distant; alert Henri, on the contrary, is, in a
sense, come to hand. Crossed the Katzbach River this day, the
Vanguard of him did, at Parchwitz; and fell upon our Bakery;

2 Tempelhof, iv. 90-100; Archenholtz, ii. 89-94; Hofbericht von der Be-
lagerung von Breslau im August 1760 (in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 688-698);
also in Helden-Geschichte, vi. 299-309: in Anonymous of Hamburg (iv. 115--
124), that is, in the Old Newspapers, extremely particular account, How
‘not only the finest Horse in Breslau, and the finest House” (King’s Palace),
“‘but the handsomest Man, and, alas, also the prettiest Girl’ (poor Jungfer
Miiller, shattered by a bomb-shell on the streets), ‘“were destroyed in this
short Siege,” —world-famous for the moment. Preuss, ii. 246.

38 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Aug. 1760.

which has had to take the road. ‘‘ Guard the Bakery, all hands
there,” orders Loudon; “off to Striegau and the Hills with it ;”
—and is himself gone thither after it, leaving Breslau, Henri
and the Russians, to what fate may be in store for them. Henri
has again made one of his winged marches, the deft creature,
though the despondent; ‘‘ march of 90 miles in three days” (in
the last three, from Glogau, 90; in the whole, from Landsberg,
above 200), “and has saved the State,’’ says Retzow. ‘‘‘ Made
no camping, merely bivouacked; halting for a rest four or five
hours here and there ;”? and, on August 5th, is at Lissa (this
side the Field of Leuthen); making Breslau one of the gladdest
of cities.

So that Soltikof, on arriving (village of Hundsfeld, August 8th),
by the other side of the River, finds Henri’s advanced guards en-
trenched over there, in Old Oder; no Russian able to get within
five miles of Breslau,—nor able to do more than cannonade in
the distance, and ask with indignation, ‘‘ Where are the siege-
guns, then; where is General Loudon? Instead of Breslau cap-
turable, and a sure Magazine for us, here is Henri, and nothing
but steel to eat!” And the Soltikof risen into Russian rages,
and the Montalembert sunk in difficulties: readers can imagine
these. Indignant Soltikof, deaf to suasion, with this dangerous
Henri in attendance, is gradually edging back; always rather
back, with an eye to his provisions, and to certain bogs and
woods he knows of. But we will leave the Soltikof-Henri end
of the line, for the opposite end, which is more interesting.—To
Friedrich, till he got to Silesia itself, these events are totally un-
known. His cunctatory Henri, by this winged march, when the
moment came, what a service has he done !—

Tauentzien’s behaviour, also, has been superlative at Breslau;
and was never forgotten by the King. A very brave man, testi-
fies Lessing of him; true to the death: “Had there come but
three, to rally with the King under a bush of the forest, Tauen-
tzien would have been one.’’ ‘Tauentzien was on the ramparts
once, in this Breslau pinch, giving orders; a bomb burst beside
him, did not injure him. ‘‘ Mark that place,” said Tauentzien ;

3 Retzow, ii. 230 (very vague); in Tempelhof (iv. 89, 90, enn clear and
specific account.

- sT

Cuap. ITT.) BATILE OF LIEGNITZ. 39
Ist-7th Aug. 1760.

and clapt his hat on it, continuing his orders, till a more perma-
nent mark were put. In that spot, as intended through the next
thirty years, he now lies buried.*

Frvedrich on March, for the Third Time, to rescue Silesia
(August 1st-L5th).

August 1st, Friedrich crossed the Elbe at Zehren, in the Schie-
ritz vicinity, as near Meissen as he could; but it had to be some
six miles father down, such the liabilities to Austrian disturb-
ance. All are across that morning by 5 o'clock (began at 2);
whence we double back eastward, and camp that night at Dall-
witz,—are quietly asleep there, while Loudon’s bombardment
bursts out on’Breslau, far away! At Dallwitz we rest next
day, wait for our Bakeries and Baggages; and, Sunday August
3d, at 2 in the morning, set forth on the forlornest adventure in
the world.

The arrangements of the March, foreseen and settled before-
hand to the last item, are of a perfection beyond praise ;—as is
still visible in the General Order, or summary of directions given
out; which, to this day, one reads with a kind of satisfaction
like that derivable from the Forty-seventh of Euclid: clear to
the meanest capacity, not a word wanting in it, not a word .
superfluous, solid as geometry. ‘The Army marches always in
Three Columns, left Column foremost: our First: Line of Battle”
(in case we have fighting) ‘“‘is this foremost Column; Second
Line is the Second Column; Reserve is the Third. All Gener-
als’ chaises, money-wagons, and regimental Surgeons’ wagons re-
main with their respective Battalions; as do the Heavy Batter-
les with the Brigades to which they belong. When the march
is through woody country, the Cavalry regiments go in between
the Battalions” (to be ready against Pandour operations and
accidents).

“With the First Column, the Ziethen Hussars and Free-
Battalion Courbiere have always the vanguard; Mohring Hus-
sars and Free-Battalion Quintus’ (speed to you, learned friend!)
“the rearguard. With the Second Column always the Dragoon
regimewts Normann and Krockow have the vanguard ; Regiment

* Militair- Lexikon, iv. 72-75; Lessing’s Werke; &c. &e.

40 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
. Ist-7th Aug. 1760.
Czetteritz” (Dragoons, poor Czetteritz himself, with his lost Manu-
script, is captive since February last) ‘“‘the rearguard. With the
Third Column always the Dragoon regiment Holstein as head,
and the ditto Finkenstein to close the Column.”—*“ During every
march, however, there are to be of the Second Column 2 Bat-
talions joined with Column Third; so that the Third Column
consist of 10 Battalions, the Second of 6, while on march.

‘¢ Ahead of each Column go three Pontoon Wagons; and daily
are 50 work-people allowed them, who are immediately to lay
Bridge, where it is necessary. ‘The rearguard of each Column
takes up these Bridges again; brings them on, and returns them
to the head of the Column, when the Army has got to camp. In
the Second Column are to be 500 wagons, and also in the Third
500; so shared that each battalion gets an equal number. The
battalions—’> * * This may serve as specimen.

The March proceeded through the old Country ; a little to left of the
track in June past: Roder Water, Pulsnitz Water; Kamenz neighbour-
hood, Bautzen neighbourhood,—Bunzlau on Silesian ground. Daun, at
Bischofswerda, had foreseen this March; and, by his Light people, had
spoiled the Road all he could; broken all the Bridges, half-felled the
Woods (to render them impassable). Daun, the instant he heard of the
_ actual March, rose from Bischofswerda: forward, forward always, to
be ahead of it, however rapid; Lacy, hanging on the rear of it, willing
to give trouble with his Pandour harpies, but studious above all that it
should not whirl round anywhere and get upon his, Lacy’s, own throat.
One of the strangest marches ever seen. ‘‘An onlooker, who had ob-
served the march of these different Armies,” says Friedrich, “ would
have thought that they all belonged to one leader. Feldmarschall
Daun’s he would have taken for the Vanguard, the King’s for the main
Army, and General Lacy’s for the Rearguard.”® Tempelhof says:
“It is given only to a Friedrich to march on those terms; between
Two hostile Armies, his equals in strength, and a Third” (Loudon’s,
in Striegau Country) “ waiting ahead.”

The March passed without accident of moment; had not, from Lacy
or Daun, any accident whatever. On the second day, an Aide-de-
Camp of Daun’s was picked up, with Letters from Lacy (back of the
cards visible to Friedrich). Once,—it is the third day of the March

5 In Tempelhof (iv. 125, 126) the entire Piece.
6 (Huvres de Frédéric, v. 56.

Crap. III.] BATILE OF LIEGNITZ. 41
7th Aug. 1760.

(August 6th, village of Rothwasser to be quarter for the night),—on com-
ing toward Neisse River, some careless Officer, trusting to peasants, in-
stead of examining for himself and building a bridge, drove his Artillery-
wagons into the so-called ford of Neisse; which nearly swallowed the
foremost of them in quicksands. Nearly, but not completely; and
caused a loss of five or six hours to that Second Column. So that
darkness came on Column Second in the woody intricacies ; and several
hundreds of the deserter kind took the opportunity of disappearing alto-
gether. An unlucky, evidently too languid Officer; though Friedrich
did not annihilate the poor fellow, perhaps did not rebuke him at all,
but merely marked it in elucidation of his qualities for time coming.
“This miserable village of Rothwasser” (headquarters after the danger-
ous fording of Neisse), says Mitchell, ‘stands in the middle of a wood,
almost as wild and impenetrable as those in North America. There
was hardly ground enough cleared about it for the encampment of the
troops.”’ Thursday, August 7th, Friedrich,—traversing the old Coun-
try, but more direct, by Konigsbriick and Kamenz this time,—is at
Bunzlau altogether. ‘ Bunzlau on the Bober;” the Silesian Bunzlau,
not the Bohemian or any of the others. It is some 30 miles west of
Liegnitz, which again lies some 40 north-west of Schweidnitz and the
Strong Places. Friedrich has now done 100 miles of excellent march-
ing; and he has still a good spell more to do,—dragging “2,000 heayy
wagons” with him, and across such impediments within and without.
Readers that care to study him, especially for the next few days, will
find it worth their while.

Tempelhof gives, as usual, a most clear Account, minute to a degree;
which, supplemented by Mitchell and a Reimann Map, enables us as it
were to accompany, and to witness with our eyes. Hitherto a March
toilsome in the extreme, in spite of everything done to help it; starting
_at 3 or at 2 in the morning; resting to breakfast in some shady place,
while the sun is high, frugally cooking under the shady woods,—* Bur-
schen abzukochen here,” as the Order pleasantly bears. All encamped
now, at Bunzlau in Silesia, on Thursday evening, with a very eminent
week’s work behind them. “In the last five days, above 100 miles of
road, and such road; five considerable rivers in it”—Bober, Queiss,
Neisse, Spree, Elbe; and with such a wagon-train of 2,000 teams.*®

Proper that we rest a day here; in view of the still swifter marchings
and sudden dashings about, which lie ahead. It will be by extremely
nimble use of all the limbs we have,—hands as well as feet,—if any
good is tocome of usnow! Friedrich is aware that Daun already holds
Striegau ‘‘as an outpost” (Loudon thereabouts, unknown to Friedrich),
“these several days ;” and that Daun personally is at Schmottseifen, in

7 Mitchell, ii. 190; Tempelhof, iv.131.  ® Tempelhof, iv. 123-150.

42 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

9th-Lith Aug 1760.
our own old Camp there, twenty or thirty miles to south of us, and has
his Lacy to leftward of him, partly even to rearward: rather in advance
of us, both of them,—if we were for Landshut;* which we are not.
“ Be swift enough, may not we cut through to Jauer, and get ahead’ of
Daun?” counts Friedrich: ** To Jauer, south-east of us, from Bunzlau
here, is 40 miles; and to Jauer it is above 30 east for Daun: possible
to be there before Daun! Jauer ours, thence to the Heights of Strie-
gau and Hohenfriedberg Country, within wind of Schweidnitz, of Bres-
lau: magazines, union with Prince Henri, all secure thereby?’ So
reckons the sanguine Friedrich; unaware that Loudon, with his corps
of 35,000, has been summoned hitherward ; which will make important
differences! Loudon, Beck with a smaller Satellite Corps, both these,
unknown to Friedrich, lie ready on the east of him: Loudon’s Army on
the east; Daun’s, Lacy’s on the south and west; three big Armies,
with their Satellites, gathering in upon this King: here is a ‘Three-
headed Dog, in the 'Tartarus of a world he now has! On the fourth
side of him is Oder, and the Russians, who are also perhaps building
Bridges, by way of a supplementary or fourth head.

August 9th (Bunzlau to Goldberg), Friedrich, with his Three
Columns and perfect arrangements, makes a long march: from Bunz-
lau at 3 in the morning; and at 5 the afternoon arrives in sight of the
W®tzbach Valley, with the little Town of Goldberg some miles to right.
Katzbach River is here; and Jauer, for to-morrow, still fifteen miles
ahead. But on reconnoitering here, all is locked and bolted: Lacy
strong on the Hills of Goldberg; Daun visible across the Katzbach;
Daun, and behind him Loudon, inexpugnably posted: Jauer an impossi-
bility!’ We have bread only for eight days; our Magazines are at
Schweidnitz and Breslau: what is to be done? Get through, one way
or other, we needs must! Friedrich encamps for the night; expecting
an attack. If not attacked, he will make for Liegnitz leftward; cross
the Katzbach there, or farther down at Parchwitz :—Parchwitz, Neu-
markt, Leuthen, we have been in that country before now :—Courage!

August 10th-11th (to Liegmtz and back). At 5 a.m., Sunday Au-
gust 10th, Friedrich, nothing of attack having come, got on march again:
down his own left bank of the Katzbach, straight for Liegnitz; unop-
posed altogether; not even a Pandour having attacked him overnight.
But no sooner is he under way, than Daun too rises; Daun, Loudon,
close by, on the other side of Katzbach, and “like a Fourth column to
our Three,” keep step with us, on our right; Lacy’s light people hover-
ing on our rear :—three truculent fellows in buckram; fancy the feelings
of the wayworn solitary fourth, whom they are gloomily dogging in this
way! The solitary fourth does his fifteen miles to Liegnitz, unmolested

* See Map at p. 99 a.

Cuapr. IIT.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 43
lith Aug. 1760.

by them; encamps on the Heights which look down on Liegnitz over
the south; finds, however, that the Loudon-Daun people have likewise
been diligent ; that they now lie stretched out on their right bank, three
or four miles up-stream or to rearward, and what is far worse, seven
miles downwards, or ahead; that, in fact, they are a march nearer
Parchwitz than he ;—and that there is again no possibility. “ Perhaps
by Jauer, then, still? Out of this, and at lowest, into some vicinity of
bread, it does behove us to be!” At 11 that night Friedrich gets on
march again; returns the way he came. And,

August 11th, At daybreak, is back to his old ground; nothing now
to oppose him but Lacy, who is gone across from Goldberg, to linger
as rear of the Daun-Loudon march. Friedrich steps across on Lacy,
thirsting to have a stroke at Lacy; who vanishes fast enough, leaving
the ground clear. Could but our baggage have come as fast as we!
But our baggage, Quintus guarding and urging, has to groan on for five
hours yet; and without it, there is no stirring. Five mortal hours;
—by which time, Daun, Lacy, Loudon are all up again; between us
and Jauer, between us and everything helpful ;—and Friedrich has to
encamp in Seichau,—‘ a very poor Village in the Mountains” (writes
Mitchell, who was painfully present there), “ surrounded on all sides by
Heights ; on several of which, in the evening, the Austrians took camp,
separated from us by a deep ravine only.”

Outlooks are growing very questionable to Mitchell and every-
body. ‘Only four-days provisions” (in reality six), whisper the
Prussian Generals gloomily to Mitchell and to one another:
“‘ Shall we have to make for Glogau, then, and leave Breslau to
its fate? Or perhaps it will be a second Maxen to his Majesty
and us, who was so indignant with poor Finck?” My friends,
no; a Maxen like Finck’s it will never be: a very different
- Maxen, ifany! But we hope better things.

Friedrich’s situation, grasped in the Three-lipped Pincers in
this manner, is conceivable to readers. Soltikof, on the other
side of Oder, as supplementary or fourth lip, is very impatient
with these three. ‘‘ Why all this dodging, and fidgeting to and
fro? You are above three to one of your enemy. Why don’t
you close on him at once, if you mean it at all? The end is,
He will be across the Oder; and it is I that shall have the brunt
to bear: Henri and he will enclose me between two fires!”
And in fact, Henri, as we know, though Friedrich does not or

° Mitchell, ii. 194.

44 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
1ith Aug. 1760.

only half does, has gone across Oder, to watch Soltikof, and
guard Breslau from any attempts of his,—which are far from “is
thoughts at this moment ;—a Soltikof fuming violently at the
thought of such cunctations, and of being made cat’s-paw again.
“Know, however, that I understand you,” violently fumes Sol-
tikof, “and that I won’t. I fall back into the Trebnitz Bog-
Country, on my own right bank here, and look out for my own
safety.” —“ Patience, your noble Excellenz,” answer they always;
“‘oh, patience yet a little! Only yesterday (Sunday 10th, the
day after his arrival in this region), we had decided to attack
and crush him; Sunday very early :!° but he skipped away to
Liegnitz. Oh, be patient yet a day or two: he skips about at
such a rate!’? Montalembert has to be suasive as the Muses
and the Sirens. Soltikof gloomily consents to another day or
- two. And even, such his anxiety lest this swift King skip over
upon fin, pushes out a considerable Russian Division, 24,000
ultimately, under Czernichef, towards the King’s side of things,
towards Auras on Oder, namely,—there to watch for oneself
these interesting Royal movements; or even to join with Lou-
don out there, if that seem the safer course, against them. Of
Czernichef at Auras we shall hear farther on,—were these Royal
movements once got completed a little.

Morning of August 12th, Friedrich has, in his bad lodging at Seichau,
laid a new plan of route: “ Towards Schweidnitz let it be; round by
Pombsen and the south-east, by the Hill-roads, make a sweep flank-
ward of the enemy !”—and has people out reconnoitering the Hill-roads.
Hears, however, about 8 o’clock, That Austrians in strength are coming
between us and Goldberg! ‘‘ Intending to enclose us in this bad pot
of a Seichau; no crossing of the Katzbach, or other retreat to be lett
us at all?” Friedrich strikes his tents; ranks himself: is speedily in
readiness for dispute of such extremity ;—sends out new patrols, how-
ever, to ascertain. “ Austrians in strength” there are not on the side
indicated ;—whereupon he draws in again. But, on the other hand,
the Hill-roads are reported absolutely impassable for baggage ; Pomb-
sen an impossibility, as the other places have been. So Friedrich sits
down again in Seichau to consider ; does not stir all day. T’o Mitchell’s
horror, who, “ with great labour,” burns all the legationary ciphers and

1° Tempelhof, iv. 137, 148-150.

Cuav. 1I.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 45
13th-14th Aug. 1760.

papers (‘impossible to save the baggage if we be attacked in this hollow
pot of a camp”),and feels much relieved on finishing."!

Towards sunset, General Bilow, with the Second Line (second
column of march), is sent out Goldberg-way, to take hold of the pas-
sage of the Katzbach: and at 8 that night, we all march, recrossing
there about 1 in the morning; thence down our left bank to Liegnitz
for the second time,—sixteen hours of it in all, or till noon of the 13th.
Mitchell had been put with the Cavalry part; and ‘“ cannot but observe
to: your Lordship what a chief comfort it was in this long, dangerous
and painful March,” to have burnt one’s ciphers and dread secrets quite
out of the way.

And thus, Wednesday August 13th, about noon, we are in our
old Camp; Headquarter in the southern suburb of Liegnitz (a
wretched little Tavern, which they still show there, on mythical
terms): main part of the Camp, I should think, is on that range
of Heights, which reaches two miles southward, and is now called
“‘ Siegesberg (Victory Hill),” from a modern Monument built on
it, after nearly 100 years. Here Friedrich stays one day,—more
exactly, 30 hours;—and his shifting, next time, is extremely
memorable.

Battle, in the Neighbourhood of Inegnitz, does ensue (Friday
morning, 15th August 1760).

Daun, Lacy and Loudon, the Three-lipped Pincers, have of
course followed, and are again agape for Friedrich, all in scien-
tific postures: Daun in the Jauer region, seven or eight miles
south; Lacy about Goldberg, as far to south-west; Loudon
“between Jeschkendorf and Koischwitz,” north-eastward, some-
what closer on Friedrich, with the Katzbach intervening. ‘That
Czernichef, with an additional 24,000, to rear of Loudon, is
actually crossing Oder at Auras, with an eye to junction, Fried-
rich does not hear till to-morrow.!?

The scene is rather pretty, if one admired scenes. Liegnitz,
a square, handsome, brick-built Town, of old standing, in good
repair (population then, say 7,000), with fine old castellated
edifices and aspects: pleasant meeting, in level circumstances,

11 Mitchell, ii. 144; Tempelhof, iv. 144.
12 Tempelhof, iv. 148-151; Mitchell, ii. 197.

46 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XX.
18th-14th Aug. 1760.

of the Katzbach valley with the Schwartzwasser (Black-water)
ditto, which forms the north rim of Liegnitz; pleasant mixture
of green poplars and brick towers,—as seen from that “ Victory
Hill” (more likely to be ‘“‘Immediate-Ruin Hill!”) where the
King now is. Beyond Liegnitz and the Schwartzwasser, north-
westward, right opposite to the King’s, rise other Heights, called
of Pfaffendorf, which guard the two streams after their uniting.
Kloster Wahlstatt, a famed place, lies visible to south-east, few
miles off. Readers recollect one Bliicher “ Prince of Wahlstatt,”
so named from one of his Anti-Napoleon victories gained there?
Wahlstatt was the scene of an older Fight, almost six centuries
older,'’—a then Prince of Liegnitz versus hideous Tartar multi-
tudes, who rather beat him; and has been a Cloister Wahlstatt
ever since. Till Thursday 14th, about 8 in the evening, Fried-
rich continued in his Camp of Liegnitz. We are now within
reach of a notable Passage of War.

Friedrich’s Camp extends from the Village of Schimmelwitz,
fronting the Katzbach for about two miles, north-eastward, to
his Headquarter in Liegnitz Suburb: Daun is on his right and
rearward, now come within four or five miles; Loudon to his
left and frontward, four or five, the Katzbach separating Fried-
rich and him; Lacy lies from Goldberg north-eastward, to within
perhaps a like distance rearward: that is the position on Thurs-
day 14th.* Provisions being all but run out; and three Armies,
90,000 (not to count Czernichef and his 24,000 as a fourth)
watching round our 30,000, within a few miles; there is no
staying here, beyond this day. If even this day it be allowed
us? This day, Friedrich had to draw out, and stand to arms for
some hours; while the Austrians appeared extensively on the
Heights about, apparently intending an attack; till it proved
to be nothing: only an elaborate reconnoitering by Daun; and
we returned to our tents again.

Friedrich understands well enough that Daun, with the facts
now before him, will gradually form his plan, and also, from the
lie of matters, what his plan will be: many are the times Daun
bas elaborately reconnoitered, elaborately laid his plan; but
found, on coming to execute, that his Friedrich was off in the

13 April 9th, 1241 (Kohler, Reichs-Historie). * Plan at p. 99 a,

Cuap. IID] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 47
13th-14th Aug. 1760.

interim, and the plan gone to air. Friedrich has about 2,000
wagons to drag with him in these swift marches: Glogau Maga-
zine, his one resource, should Breslau and Schweidnitz prove
unattainable, is forty-five long miles north-westward. ‘‘ Let us
lean upon Glogau withal,” thinks Friedrich ; ‘and let us be out
of this straightway! March tonight; towards Parchwitz, which
is towards Glogau too. Army rest till daybreak on the Heights
of Pfaffendorf yonder, to examine, to wait its luck: let the empty
meal-wagons jingle on to Glogau; load themselves there, and
jingle back to us in Parchwitz neighbourhood, should Parchwitz
not have proved impossible to our manceuverings,—let us hope
it may not!”— — Daun and the Austrians having ceased re-
connoitering, and gone home, Friedrich rides with his Generals,
“through Liegnitz, across the Schwartzwasser, to the Pfaffendorf
Heights. ‘*‘ Here, Messieurs, is our first halting-place to be.
here we shall halt till daybreak, while the meal-wagons jingle
on!” And explains to them orally where each is to take post,
and how to behave. Which done, he too returns home, no
doubt a wearied individual; and at 4 of the afternoon, lies down
to try for an hour or two of sleep, while all hands are busy
packing, according to the Orders given.

It is a fact recorded by Friedrich himself, and by many other
people, That, at this interesting juncture, there appeared at the
King’s gate, King hardly yet asleep, a staggering Austrian Offi-
cer, Irish by nation, who had suddenly found good to desert the
Austrian Service for the Prussian—(“‘ Sorrow on them: a pack
of ”’—what shall I say ?)—Irish gentleman, bursting with intelli-
gence of some kind, but evidently deep in liquor withal. ‘“ Im-
possible; the King is asleep,” said the Adjutant on duty; but
produced only louder insistance from the drunk Irish gentleman.
‘* As much as all your heads are worth; the King’s own safety,
and not a moment to lose!” What is to be done? They awaken
the King: ‘The man is drunk, but dreadfully in earnest, your
Majesty.” ‘Give him quantities of weak tea’ (Tempelhof calls
it tea, but Friedrich merely warm water); ‘‘ then examine him,
and report if it is anything.” Something it was: ‘ Your Majesty
to be attacked, for certain, this night!”” what his Majesty already
guessed :—something, most likely little; but nobody to this.day

48 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Aug. 1760.

knows. Visible only, that his Majesty, before sunset, rode out
reconnoitering with this questionable Irish gentleman, now in a
very flaccid state; and altered nothing whatever in prior arrange-
ments ;—and that the flaccid Irish gentleman staggers out of sight,
into dusk, into rest and darkness, after this one appearance on
the stage of History." .

From about 8 in the evening, Friedrich’s people got on march,
in their several columns, and fared punctually on; one column
through the streets of Liegnitz, others to left and to right of that;
to left mainly, as remoter from the Austrians and their listening
outposts from beyond the Katzbach River;—where the camp-
fires are burning extremely distinct tonight. The Prussian camp-
fires, they too are all burning uncommonly vivid; country people
employed to feed them; and a few hussar sentries and drummers
to make the customary sounds for Daun’s instruction, till a cer-
tain hour. . Friedrich’s people are clearing the North Suburb of
Liegnitz, crossing the Schwartzwasser: artillery and heavy wag-
ons all go by the Stone-bridge at Topferberg (Potter-hill) there ;
the lighter people by a few pontoons farther down that stream,
in the Pfaffendorf vicinity. About 1 in the morning, all, even
the right wing from Schimmelwitz, are safely across.

Schwartzwasser, a River of many tails (boggy most of them,
Schneile or Swz/t Deichsel hardly an exception), gathering itself
from the southward for twenty or more miles, attains its maxim-
um of north at a place called Waldau, not far north-west of
Toépferberg.* Towards this Waldau, Lacy is aiming all night ;
thence to pounce on our “left wing,”—which he will find to con-
sist of those empty watch-fires merely. Down from Waldau,
past Tépferberg and Pfaffendorf (Priest-town, or as we should
call it, ‘ Preston”), which are all on its northern or left bank,
Schwartzwasser’s course is in the form of an irregular horse-
shoe; high ground to its northern side, Liegnitz and hollows to
its southern; till in an angular way it do join Katzbach, and
eo with that, northward for Oder the rest of its course. On
the brow of these horseshoe Heights,—which run parallel to
Schwartzwasser one part of them, and nearly parallel to Katz-
bach another (though above a mile distant, these latter, from 72),

14-(Euvres de Frédéric, v. 63; Tempelhof, iv. 154. * Plan at p. 99 a.

Cuap III.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 49
15th Aug. 1760.

—Friedrich plants himself: in Order of Battle; slightly altering -
some points of the afternoon’s program, and correcting his Gen-
erals, ‘‘ Front rather so and so; see where their fires are, yonder!”
Daun’s fires, Loudon’s fires; vividly visible both :—and, singu-
lar to say, there is nothing yonder either but a few sentries and
deceptive drums! All empty yonder too, even as our own Camp
is; all gone forth, even as we are; we resting here, and our meal-
wagons jingling on Glogau-way !

Excellency Mitchell, under horse-escort, among the lighter
baggage, is on Kuchelberg Heath, in scrubby country, but well
north behind Friedrich’s centre: has had a dreadful march; one
comfort only, that his ciphers are all burnt. The rest of us lie
down on the grass;—among others, young Herr von Archen-
holtz, ensign or lieutenant in Regiment Yorcade: who testifies
that it is one of the beautifullest nights, the lamps of Heaven
shining down in an uncommonly tranquil manner; and that
almost nobody slept. The soldier-ranks all lay horizontal, mus-
ket under arm; chatting pleasantly in an undertone, or each in
silence revolving such thoughts as he had. The Generals amble
like observant spirits, hoarsely imperative.’® Friedrich’s line, we
observed, is in the horse-shoe shape (or parabolic, straighter than
horse-shoe), fronting the waters. Ziethen commands in that
smaller Schwartzwasser part of the line, Friedrich in the Kata
bach part, which is more in risk. And now, things being
moderately in order, Friedrich has himself sat down,—I think,
towards the middle or convex part of his lines,—by a watchfire
he has found there; and, wrapt in his cloak, his many thoughts
melting into haze, has sunk into a kind of sleep. Seated on a
drum, some say; half-asleep by the watchfire, time half-past 2,
—when a Hussar Major, who has been out by the Bienowitz,
the Pohlschildern way, northward, reconnoitering, comes dash-
ing up full speed: “The King? where is the King?” ‘“ What
is it, then?” answers the King for himself. ‘‘ Your Majesty, the
Enemy in force, from Bienowitz, from Pohlschildern, coming on
our Left Wing yonder; has flung back all my vedettes; is with-
in 500 yards by this time!”

Friedrich springs to horse; has already an Order speeding

15 Archenholtz, ii. 100-111.

Vor. VI.—C

50 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Aug. 1766.

forth, “‘ General Schenkendorf and his Battalion, their cannon,
to the crown of the Wolfsberg, on our left yonder; swift!’ How
excellent that every battalion (as by Order that we read) ‘‘ has
its own share of the heavy cannon always at hand!” ejaculate
the military critics. Schenkendorf, being nimble, was able to
astonish the Enemy with volumes of case-shot from the Wolfs-
berg, which were very deadly at that close distance. Other
arrangements, too minute for recital here, are rapidly done; and
our Left Wing is in condition to receive its early visitors,—Lou-
don or whoever they may be. It is still dubious to the History-
Books whether Friedrich was in clear expectation of Loudon
here; though of course he would now guess it was Loudon. But
there is no doubt Loudon had not the least expectation of Fried-
rich; and his surprise must have been intense, when, instead of

vacant darkness (and some chance of Prussian baggage, which he
had heard of), Prussian musketries and case-shot opened on him.

Loudon had, as per order, quitted his Camp at Jeschkendorf,

about the time Friedrich did his at Schimmelwitz; and, leaving
the lights all burning, had set forward on his errand; which was
(also identical with Friedrich’s), To seize the Heights of Pfaffen-
dorf, and be ready there when day broke. Scouts having in-

formed him that the Prussian Baggage was certainly gone through.
to Tépferberg,—more his scouts did not know, nor could Loudon
guess,— We will snatch that Baggage!” thought Loudon; and
with such view has been speeding, all he could; no vanguard
ahead, lest he alarm the Baggage-escort: Loudon in person, with

the Infantry of the Reserve, striding on ahead, to devour any
Baggage-escort there may be. Friedrich’s reconnoitering Hussar
parties had confirmed this belief: ‘‘ Yes! yes!’ thought Loudon.

And now suddenly, instead of Baggage to capture, here, out of

the vacant darkness, is Friedrich in person, on the brow of the

Heights where we intended to form !—

Loudon’s behaviour, on being hurled back with his Reserve in
tliis manner, everybody says, was magnificent. Judging at once
what the business was, and that retreat would be impossible
without, ruin, he hastened instantly to form himself, on such
ground as he had,—highly unfavourable ground, uphill in part,

Cuap. III.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 51
15th Aug. 1760.

and room in it only for Five Battalions (5,000) of front ;—and
came on again, with a great deal of impetuosity and good skill;
again and ever again, three times in all. Had partial successes;
edged always to the right to get the flank of Friedrich; but
could. not, Friedrich edging conformably. From his right-hand,
or north-east part, Loudon poured in, once and again, very furi-
ous charges of Cavalry; on every repulse, drew out new Battal-
ions from his left and centre, and again stormed forward: but
found it always impossible. Had his subordinates all been Lou-
dons, it is said, there was once a fine chance for him. By this
edging always to the north-eastward on his part and Friedrich’s,
there had at last a considerable gap in Friedrich’s Line estab-
lished itself,—not only Ziethen’s Line and Friedrich’s Line now
fairly fallen asunder, but, at the Village of Panten, in Friedrich’s
own Line, a gap where anybody might get in. One of the Aus-
trian Columns was just entering Panten when the Fight began;
in Panten that Column has stood cogitative ever since; well to
left of Loudon and his struggles; but does not, till the eleventh
hour, resolve to push through. At the eleventh hour;—and lo, in
the nick of time, Mollendorf (our Leuthen-and-Hochkirch friend)
got his eye on it; rushed up with infantry and cavalry; set Pan-
ten on fire, and blocked out that possibility and the too cogitative
Column.

Loudon had no other real chance: his furious horse-charges
and attempts were met everywhere by corresponding counter-
fury. Bernburg, poor Regiment Bernburg, see what a figure it
is making! Left almost alone, at one time, among those horse-
charges; spending its blood like water, bayonet-charging, pla-
tooning as never before; and on the whole, stemming invincibly
that horse-torrent,—not unseen by Majesty, it may be hoped;
_who is here where the hottest pinch is. On the third repulse,
which was worse than amy before, Loudon found he had enough;
and tried it no farther. Rolled over the Katzbach, better or
worse; Prussians catching 6,000 of him, but not following far-
ther; threw up a fine battery at Bienowitz, which sheltered his
retreat from horse:—and went his ways, sorely but not dis-
-honourably beaten, after an hour and half of uncommonly stiff
fighting, which had been very murderous to Loudon. Loss of

52 FRIEDRICH NOT TO’ BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Aug. 1760.

10,000 to him: 4,000 killed and wounded; prisoners 6,000;
82 cannon, 28 flags, and other items; the Prussian loss being
1,800 in whole.’ By 5 o’clock, the Battle, this Loudon part
of it, was quite over; Loudon (35,000) wrecking himself against
Friedrich’s Left Wing (say half of his Army, some 15,000) in
such conclusive manner. Friedrich’s Left Wing alone has been
engaged hitherto. And now it will be Ziethen’s turn, if Daun
and Lacy still come on.

By 11 last night, Daun’s Pandours, creeping stealthily on,
across the Katzbach, about Schimmelwitz, had discerned with
amazement that Friedrich’s Camp appeared to consist only of
watchfires; and had shot off their speediest rider to Daun,
accordingly ; but it was one in the morning before Daun, busy
marching and marshalling, to be ready at the Katzbach by day-
light, heard of this strange news; which probably he could not
entirely believe till seen with his own eyes. What a spectacle!
One’s beautiful Plan exploded into mere imbroglio of distraction;
become one knows not what! Daun’s watchfires too had all been
left burning; universal stratagem, on both sides, going on; pro-
ducing,—tragically for some of us,—a Z'ragedy of Errors, or the
Mistakes of a Night! Daun sallied out again, in his collapsed,
upset condition, as soon as possible: pushed on, in the track of
Friedrich; warning Lacy to push on. Daun, though within five
miles all the while, had heard nothing of the furious Fight and
cannonade; ‘south-west wind having risen,” so Daun said, and
is believed by candid persons,—not by the angry Vienna people,
who counted it impossible: ‘‘ Nonsense; you were not deaf; but
you loitered and haggled, in your usual way; perhaps not sorry
that the brilliant Loudon should get a rebuff!”

Emerging out of Liegnitz, Daun did see, to north-eastward, a,
vast pillar or mass of smoke, silently mounting, but could do
nothing with it. ‘‘Cannon-smoke, no doubt; but fallen entirely
silent, and not wending hitherward at all. Poor Loudon, alas,
must have got beaten!’ Upon which Daun really did try, at
least upon Ziethen; but could do nothing. Poured cavalry across
the Stone-bridge at the Tépferberg; who drove in Ziethen’s

1© Tempelhof, iv. 159.

Cuap. III.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 53
15th Aug. 1760.

picket there; but were torn to pieces by Ziethen’s cannon.
Ziethen across the Schwartzwasser is alert enough. How form
in order of battle here, with Ziethen’s batteries shearing your
columns longitudinally, as they march up? Daun recognises the
impossibility ; wends back through Liegnitz to his Camp again,
the way he had come. ‘Tide-hour missed again; ebb going un-
commonly rapid! Lacy had been about Waldau, to try farther
up the Schwartzwasser on Ziethen’s right: but the Schwartz-
wasser proved amazingly boggy; not accessible on any point to
heavy people,—‘‘ owing to bogs on the bank,” with perhaps poor
prospect on the other side too!

And, in fact, nothing of Lacy, more than of Daun, could man-
age to get across: nothing except two poor Hussar regiments;
who, winding up far to the left, attempted a snatch on the Bag-
gage about Hummeln,—Hummeln, or Kuchel of the Scrubs.
And gave a new alarm to Mitchell, the last of several during
this horrid night; who has sat. painfully blocked in his carriage,
with such a Devil’s tumult going on to eastward, and no sight,
share or knowledge to be had of it. Repeated hussar attacks
there were on the Baggage here, Loudon’s hussars also trying:
but Mitchell’s Captain was miraculously equal to the occasion ;
and had beaten them all off. Mitchell, by magnanimous choice
of his own, has been in many Fights by the side of Friedrich ;
but this is the last he will ever be in or near:—this miraculous
one of Liegnitz, 3 to 44 a.m. Friday August 15th, 1760.

Never did such a luck befal Friedrich before or after. He
was clinging on the edge of slippery abysses, his path hardly a
foot’s-breadth, mere enemies and avalanches hanging round on
every side: ruin likelier at no moment of his life;—and here
_is precisely the quasi-miracle which was needed to save him.
Partly by accident too; the best of management crowned by the
luckiest of accidents.!7

Friedrich rested four hours on the Battle-field,—if that could
be called rest, which was a new kind of diligence highly wonder-

17 Tempelhof, iv. 151-171; Archenholtz, ubi supra; Hofbericht von der
Schlacht so am 15 August 1760, bey Liegnitz, vorgefallen (Seyfarth, Beylay~,
ii. 698-703); &c. &e.

54 | ~ FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Aug. 1760.

ful. Diligence of gathering up accurately the results of the
Battle; packing them into portable shape; and marching off
with them in one’s pocket, so to speak. Major-General Saldern
had charge of this, a man of many talents; and did it consum-
mately. The wounded, Austrian as well as Prussian, are placed
in the empty meal-wagons; the more slightly wounded are set
on horseback, double in possible cases: only the dead are left
lying: 100 or more meal-wagons are left, their teams needed
for drawing our 82 new cannon;—the wagons we split up, no
Austrians to have them; useable only as firewood for the poor
Country-folk. The 4 or 5,000 good muskets lying on the field,
shall not we take them also? Lach cavalry soldier slings one
of them across his back, each baggage-driver one: and the mus-
kets too are taken care of. About 9 a.m., Friedrich, with his .
6,000 prisoners, new cannon-teams, sick-wagon teams, trophies,
properties, is afoot again. One of the succinctest of Kings.

I should have mentioned the joy of poor Regiment Bernburg;
which rather affected me. Loudon gone, the miracle of Battle
done, and this miraculous packing going on,—Friedrich riding
about among his people, passed along the front of Bernburg, the
eye of him perhaps intimating, ‘I saw you, Biirsche ;” but no
word coming from him. The Bernburg Officers, tragically tress-
less in their hats, stand also silent, grim as blackened stones (all
Bernburg black with gunpowder): ‘In us also is no word;
unless our actions perhaps speak?” But a certain Sergeant,
Fugleman, or chief Corporal, stept out, saluting reverentially:
“Regiment Bernburg, Jhro Majestit— ?”—*‘ Hm; well, you did
handsomely. Yes, you shall have your side-arms back ; all shall
be forgotten and washed out!” ‘And you are again our Gra-
cious King, then?” says the Sergeant, with tears in his eyes.—
““ Gewiss, Yea, surely!”'® Upon which, fancy what a peal of
sound from the ecstatic throat and heart of this poor Regiment.
Which I have often thought of; hearing mutinous blockheads,
“olorious Sons of Freedom’’ to their own thinking, ask their
natural commanding Officer, “Are not we as good as thou?
Are not all men equal?” Not a whit of it, you mutinous block-
heads; very far from it indeed!

18 Tempelhof, iy. 162-164.

Cuap. III. ] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 55
16th Aug. 1760.

_ This was the breaking of Friedrich’s imprisonment in the
deadly rock-labyrinths; this success at Liegnitz delivered him
into free field once more. For twenty-four hours more, indeed,
the chance was still full of anxiety to him; for twenty-four hours
Daun, could he have been rapid, still had the possibilities in
hand ;—but only Daun’s Antagonist was usually rapid. About
9 in the morning, all road-ready, this latter Gentleman “gave
three Salvoes, as Joy-fire, on the Field of Liegnitz;” and, in the
above succinct shape,—leaving Ziethen to come on, “ with the
prisoners, the sick-wagons, and captured cannon,” in the after-
noon,—marched rapidly away. For Parchwitz, with our best
speed: Parchwitz is the road to Breslau, also to Glogau,—to
Breslau, if it be humanly possible! Friedrich has but two-days
bread left: on the Breslau road, at Auras, there is Czernichef
with 24,000; there are, or there may be, the Loudon Remnants
rallied again, the Lacy Corps untouched, all Daun’s Force, had
Daun made any despatch at all. Which Daun seldom did. A
man slow to resolve, and seeking his luck in leisure.

All judges say, Daun ought now to have marched, on this en-
terprise of still intercepting Friedrich, without loss of a moment.
But he calculated Friedrich would probably spend the day in
Te-Deum-ing on the Field (as is the manner of some); and that,
by tomorrow, things would be clearer to one’s own mind. Daun
was inno haste; gave no orders,—did not so much as send Czer-
nichef a Letter. Czernichef got one, however. Friedrich sent
him one; that is to say, sent him one ¢o intercept. Friedrich,
namely, writes a Note addressed to his Brother Henri: “ Austri-
ans totally beaten this day; now for the Russians, dear Brother;
and swift, do what we have agreed on!’!9_ Friedrich hands this
to a Peasant, with instructions to let himself be taken by the
Russians, and give it up to save his life. Czernichef, it is thought,
got this Letter; and perhaps rumour itself, and the delays of
Daun, would, at any rate, have sent him across. Across he at
once went, with his 24,000, and burnt his Bridge. A vanished
Czernichef ;—though Friedrich is not yet sure of it: and as for
the wandering Austrian Divisions, the Loudons, Lacys, all is

dark to him.
19 (Huvres de Frédéric, v. 67.

56 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
17th-27th Aug. 1760.

So that, at Parchwitz, next morning (August 16th), the ques-
tion, “To Glogau? To Breslau?” must have been a kind of
sphinx-enigma to Friedrich; dark as that, and, in case of error,
fatal. After some brief paroxysm of consideration, Friedrich’s
reading was, “To Breslau, then!” And, for hours, as the march
went on, he was noticed ‘riding much about,” his anxieties
visibly great. ‘Till at Neumarkt (not far from the Field of
Leuthen), getting on the Heights there,—towards noon, I will
guess,—what a sight! Before this, he had come upon Austrian
Out-parties, Beck’s or somebody’s, who did not wait his attack :
he saw, at one point, ‘‘ the whole Austrian Army on march (the
tops of its columns visible among the knolls, three miles off, im-
possible to say whitherward);” and fared on all the faster, I sup-
pose, such a bet depending ;—and, in fine, galloped to the Heights
of Neumarkt for a view: ‘‘ Dare we believe it? Not an Aus-
trian there!’ And might be, for the moment, the gladdest of
Kings. Secure now of Breslau, of junction with Henri: fairly
winner of the bet ;—and can at last pause, and take breath, very
needful to his poor Army, if not to himself, after such a mortal
spasm of sixteen days! Daun had taken the Liegnitz accident
without remark; usually a stoical man, especially in other peo-
ple’s misfortunes; but could not conceal his painful astonishment
on this new occasion,—astonishment at unjust fortune, or at his
own sluggardly cunctations, is not said.

Next day (August 17th), Friedrich encamps at Hermannsdorf,
headquarter the Schloss of Hermannsdorf, within seven miles of
Breslau; continues a fortnight there, resting his wearied people,
himself not resting much, watching the dismal miscellany of en-
tanglements that yet remain, how these will settle into groups,
—especially what Daun and his Soltikof will decide on. In
about a fortnight, Daun’s decision did become visible ; Soltikof’s
not in a fortnight, nor ever clearly at all. Unless it were To
keep a whole skin, and gradually edge home to his victuals. As
essentially it was, and continued to be; creating endless negotia-
tions, and futile overtures and messagings from Daun to his bar-
barous Friend, endless suasions and trouble from poor Montalem-
bert,—of which it would weary every reader to hear mention,
except of the result only.

Cuap. III.] BATTLE OF LIEGNITZ. 57
17th-27th Aug. 1760.

Friedrich, for his own part, fs little elated with these bits of
successes at Liegnitz or since; and does not deceive himself as
to the difficulties, almost the impossibilities, that still lie ahead.
In answer to D’Argens, who has written (“at midnight,” starting
out of bed, “the instant the news came’’), in zealous congratula-
tion on Liegnitz, here is a Letter of Friedrich’s; well worth
reading,—though it has been oftener read than almost any other
of his. A Letter which D’Argens never saw in the original
form; which was captured by the Austrians or Cossacks ;2°
which got copied everywhere, soon stole into print, and is ever
since extensively known.

Friedrich to Marquis D’ Argens (at Berlin).
‘¢Hfermannsdorf, near Breslau, 27th August 1760.

“Tn other times, my dear Marquis, the Affair of the 15th would have
settled the Campaign; at present it is but a scratch. There will be
needed a great Battle to decide our fate: such, by all appearance, we
shall soon have; and then you may rejoice, if the event is favourable to
us. Thank you, meanwhile, for all your sympathy. It has cost a deal
of scheming, striving, and much address to bring matters to this point.
Don’t speak to me of dangers; the last Action costs me only a Coat”
(torn useless, only one skirt left, by some rebounding cannon-ball ?)
“and a Horse” (shot under me): “that is not paying dear for a victory.

“In my life, 1 was never in so bad a posture as in this Campaign.
Believe me, miracles are still needed if I am to overcome all the diffi-
culties which I still see ahead. And one is growing weak withal.
* Herculean’ labours tu accomplish at an age when my powers are for-
saking’ me, my weaknesses increasing, and, to speak candidly, even hope,
the one comfort of the unhappy, begins to be wanting. You are not
enough acquainted with the posture of things to know all the dangers
that threaten the State: I know them, and conceal them; I keep all
the fears to myself, and communicate to the Public only the hopes, and
the trifle of good news I may now and then have. If the stroke I am
meditating succeed” (stroke on Daun’s Anti-Schweidnitz strategies, of
which anon), “then, my dear Marquis, it will be time to expand one’s
joy; but till then, let us not flatter ourselves, lest some unexpected bit
of bad news depress us too much.

“T live here” (Schloss of Hermannsdorf, a 7 miles west of Breslau)

20 See (uvres de Frédéric, xix. 198 (D’Argens himself, ‘19th October”
following), and ib. 191 n.; Roddenbeck, ii. 31, 36 ;—mention of it, in Vol-
taire, Montalembert, &c.

C2

58 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

17th-27th Aug. 1760.
“like a Military Monk of La Trappe: endless businesses, and these
done, a little consolation from my Books. I know not if I shall outlive
this War: but should it so happen, I am firmly resolved to pass the re-
mainder of my life in solitude, in the bosom of Philosophy and Friend-
ship. When the roads are surer, perhaps you will write me oftener.
I know not where our winter-quarters this time are to be! My House
in Breslau is burnt down in the Bombardment” (Loudon’s, three weeks
ago). ‘Our enemies grudge us everything, even daylight, and air to
breathe: some nook, however, they must leave us; and if it be a safe
one, it will be a true pleasure to have you again with me.

“Well, my dear Marquis, what has become of the Peace with France”
(English Peace)! “Your Nation, you see, is blinder than you thought:
those fools will lose their Canada and Pondichery, to please the Queen
of Hungary and the Czarina. Heaven grant Prince Ferdinand may
pay them for their zeal! And it will be the innocent that suffer, the
poor officers and soldiers, not the Choiseuls and’— * * “ But here
is business come on me. Adieu, dear Marquis; I embrace you.—F.””!

_ Two Events, of opposite complexion, a Russian and a Saxon,
Friedrich had heard of while at Hermannsdorf, before writing
as above. The Saxon Event is the pleasant one, and comes first:

Hilsen on the Durrenberg, August 20th. “ August 20th, at Strehla,
in that Schlettau-Meissen Country, the Reichsfolk and Austrians made
attack on Hiilsen’s Posts, principal Post of them the Diirrenberg ( Dry-
fill) there,—in a most extensive manner ; filling the whole region with
vague artillery-thunder, and endless charges, here, there, of foot and
horse ; which all issued in zero and minus quantities; Hiilsen standing
beautifully to his work, and Hussar Kleist especially, at one point, cut-
ting in with masterly execution, which proved general overthrow to the
Reichs Project ; and left Hilsen master of the field and of his Diirren-
berg, plus 1,217 prisoners and one Prince among them, and one cannon:
a Hiilsen who has actually given a kind of beating to the Reichsfolk
and Austrians, though they were 30,000 to his 10,000, and had counted
on making a new Maxen of it.’*? Friedrich writes a glad laudatory
Letter to Htilsen: ‘‘ Right,so; give them more of that when they ap-
ply next !’?9

This is a bit of sunshine to the Royal mind, dark enough otherwise.

21 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 191.

2 Archenholtz, ii. 114; Bericht von der am 20 August 1760 bey Strehla
vorgefallenen Action (Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 703-719).

‘3 Letter in Schdning, ii. 396, ‘‘ Hermsdorf” (Hermannsdorf), ‘‘ 27th Au-
gust 1760.”

Cnap. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 59
30th Aug.—18th Sept. 1760.

Had Friedrich got done here, right fast would he fly to the relief of
Hiilsen, and recovery of Saxony. Hope, in good moments, says, “ Hiil-
sen will be able to hold out till then!” Fear answers, ‘“‘ No, he cannot,
unless you get done here extremely soon!”—The Russian Event, full
of painful anxiety to Friedrich, was a new Siege of Colberg. That is
the sad fact; which, since the middle of August, has been becoming
visibly certain.

Second Siege of Colberg, August 26th. “Under siege again, that
poor Place; and this time the Russians seem to have made a vow that
take it they will. Siege by land and by sea; land-troops direct from
Petersburg, 15,000 in all (8,000 of them came by ship), with endless
artillery ; and near 40 Russian and Swedish ships-of-war, big and lit-
tle, blackening the waters of poor Colberg. August 26th” (the day be-
fore Friedrich’s writing as above), “ they have got all things adjusted,—
the land-troops covered by redoubts to rearward, ships moored in their
battering-places ;—and begin such a bombardment and firing of redhot
balls, upon Colberg, as was rarely seen. ‘To which, one can only hope
old Heyde will set a face of gray-steel character, as usual; and prove a
difficult article to deal with, till one get some relief contrived for him.”**

CHAPTER IV.
DAUN IN WRESTLE WITH FRIEDRICH IN THE SILESIAN HILLS.

In spite of Friedrich’s forebodings, an extraordinary recoil, in
all Anti-Friedrich affairs, ensued upon Liegnitz ; everything tak-
ing the backward course, from which it hardly recovered, or in-
deed did not recover at all, during the rest of this Campaign.
Details on the subsequent Daun-Friedrich movements,—which
went all aback for Daun, Daun driven into the Hills again,
Friedrich hopeful to cut off his bread, and drive him quite
through the Hills, and home again,—are not permitted us. No
human intellect in our day could busy itself with understanding
these thousandfold marchings, manceuverings, assaults, surprisals,
sudden facings about (retreat changed to advance); nor could the
powerfullest human memory, not exclusively devoted to study
the Art Military under Friedrich, remember them when under-

*4 Archenholtz, ii. 116: in Helden-Geschichte (vi. 73-83), ‘* Tagebuch of
Siege, 26th August—18th September,” and other details.

60 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
30th Aug.—18th Sept. 1760. -

stood. For soldiers, desirous not to be sham-soldiers, they are
a recommendable exercise ; for them I do advise Tempelhof and
the excellent German Narratives and Records. But in regard
to others—A.sample has been given: multiply that by the ten,
by the three-score and ten; let the ingenuous imagination get
from it what will suffice. Our first duty here to poor readers
is to elicit from that sea of small things the fractions which are
cardinal, or which give human physiognomy and memorability
to it; and carefully suppress all the rest.

Understand, then, that there is a general going-back on the
Austrian and Russian part. Czernichef we already saw at once
retire over the Oder. Soltikof bodily, the second day after, deaf
to Montalembert, lifts himself to rearward; takes post behind
bogs and bushy grounds more and more inaccessible ;! followed
_ by Prince Henri with his best impressiveness for a week longer,
till he seem sufficiently remote and peaceably-minded: ‘ Making
home for Poland, he,’’ thinks the sanguine King; ‘leave Goltz
with 12,000 to watch him. ‘The rest of the Army over hither!”
Which is done, August 27th; General Forcade taking charge,
instead of Henri,—who is gone, that day or next, to Breslau, for
his health’s sake. ‘‘Prince Henri really ill,” say some; ‘ Not
“so ill, but in the sulks,” say others :—partly true, both theories,
it is now thought; impossible to settle in what degree true.
Evident it is, Henri sat quiescent in Breslau, following regimen,
in more or less pathetic humour, for two or three months to
come: went afterwards to Glogau, and had private theatricals ;
and was no more heard of in this Campaign. Greatly to his
Brother’s loss and regret; who is often longing for “your re-
covery” (and return hither), to no purpose.

Soltikof does, in his heart, intend for Poland; but has to see
the Siege of Colberg finish first; and, in decency even to the
Austrians, would linger a little: ‘‘ Willing I always, if only you
pxove feasible!”” Which occasions such negotiating, and mes-
saging across the Oder, for the next six weeks, as—as shall be
omitted in this place. By intense suasion of Montalembert,
Soltikof even consents to undertake some sham movement on

’ “ August 18th, to Trebnitz, on the road to Militsch” (Tempelhof, iv.
167).

Cuap. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 61
30th Aug. 1760.

Glogau, thereby to alleviate his Austrians across the River;
and staggers gradually forward a little in that direction :—sham
merely: for he has not a siege-gun, nor the least possibility on
Glogau; and Goltz with the 12,000 will sufficiently take care
of him in that quarter.

Friedrich, on junction with Forcade, has risen to perhaps
50,000; and is now in some condition against the Daun-Lou-
don-Lacy Armies, which cannot be double his number. These
still hang about, in the Breslau-Parchwitz region; gloomy of
‘humour; and seem to be aiming at Schweidnitz,—if that could
still prove possible with a Friedrich present. Which it by no
means does; though they try it by their best combinations ;—by
‘a powerful Chain of Army-posts, isolating Schweidnitz, and
uniting Daun and Loudon;” by “a Camp on the Zobtenberg, as
crown of the same ;”—and put Friedrich on his mettle. Who,
after survey of said Chain, executes (night of August 30th) a
series of beautiful manceuvres on it, which unexpectedly conclude
its existence: —“‘ with unaccountable hardihood’’ (as Archenholtz
has it, physiognomically true to Friedrich’s general style just now,
if a little incorrect as to the case in hand), “sees good to march
direct, once for all, athwart said Chain; right across its explosive
cannonadings and it,—counter-cannonading, and marching rapid-
ly on; such a march for insolence, say the Austrians!’ ‘Till, in
this way, the insolent King has Schweidnitz under his protective
hand again; and forces the Chain to coil itself wholly together,
and roll into the Hills for a safe lodging. Whither he again fol-
lows it: with continual changes of position, vying in inaccessi-
bility with your own; threatening your meal-wagons ; trampling
on your skirts in this or the other dangerous manner; marching
insolently up to your very nose, more than once (‘‘ Dittmansdorf,
September 18th,” for a chief instance), and confusing your best
schemes. ?

This “insolent” style of management, says Archenholtz, was

? Archenholtz (ii. 115-116); who is in a hurry, dateless, and rather con-
fuses a subsequent day (September 18th) with this ‘‘ night of August 30th.”
See Retzow, ii. 26; and still better, Tempelhof, iv. 203.

3 Tempelhof, iv. 193-231; &c. &e.: in Anonymous of Hamburg, iv. 222-
235, ‘‘ Diary of the Austrian Army” (38d-8th September).

62 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
18th Sept. 1760.

practised by Julius Caesar on the Gauls; and since his time by
nobody,—till Friedrich, his ae scholar and admirer, revived
it “‘against another enemy.” ‘‘Itis of excellent aieioy .” adds
Tempelhof; ‘‘it disheartens your adversary, and especially his
common people, and has the reverse effect on your own; con-
fuses him in endless apprehensions, and details of self-defence ;
so that he can form no plan of his own, and his overpowering
resources become useless to him.” Excellent efficacy,—only
you must be equal to doing it; not unequal, which might be
very fatal to you!

For about five weeks, Friedrich, eminently practising this
style, has a most complex multifarious Briarean wrestle with
big Daun and his Lacy-Loudon satellites; who have a trouble-
some time, running hither, thither, under danger of slaps, and
finding nowhere an available mistake made. ‘The scene is that
intricate Hill-Country between Schweidnitz and Glatz (kind of
glacis from Schweidnitz to the Glatz Mountains): Daun, gener-
ally speaking, has his back on Glatz, Friedrich on Schweidnitz;
and we hear of encampings at Kunzendorf, at Bunzelwitz, at
Burkersdorf,—places which will be more famous in a coming
Year. Daun makes no complaint of his Lacy-Loudon or other
satellite people; who are diligently circumambient all of them,
as bidden; but are unable, like Daun himself, to do the least
good; and have perpetually, Daun and they, a bad life of it be-
side this Neighbour. The outer world, especially the Vienna
outer world, is naturally a little surprised: ‘ How is this, Feld-
marschall Daun? Can you do absolutely nothing with him,
then; but sit pinned in the Hills, eating sour herbs !”

In the Russians appears no help. Soltikof on Glogau, we
know what that amounts to! Soltikof is evidently intending
home, and nothing else. ‘To all Austrian proposals,—and they
have been manifold, as poor Montalembert knows too well,—the
answer of Soltikof was and is: ‘“‘ Above 90,000 of you circling
about, helping one another to do Nothing. Happy were you,
not a doubt of it, could we be wiled across to you, to get wor-
ried in your stead!” Daun begins to be extremely ill off; pro-
visions scarce, are far away in Bohemia; and the roads daily
more insecure, Friedrich aiming evidently to get command of

Cuar. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. | 63
18th Sept.—4th Oct. 1760.

them altogether. Think of such an issue to our once-flourishing
Campaign 1760! Daun is vigilance itself against such fatality ;
and will do anything except risk a Fight. Here, however, is the
fatal posture: Since September 18th, Daun sees himself con-
siderably cut off from Glatz, his provision-road more and more
insecure ;—and for fourteen days onward, the King and he
have got into a dead-lock, and sit looking into one another’s
faces; Daun in a more and more distressed mood, his provender
becoming so uncertain, and the Winter season drawing nigh.
The sentries are in mutual view: each Camp could cannonade
the other; but what good were it? By a tacit understanding
they don’t. The sentries, outposts, and vedettes forbear mus-
ketry; on the contrary, exchange tobaccos sometimes, and have
a snatch of conversation. Daun is growing more and more
unhappy. ‘To which of the gods, if not to Soltikof again, can
he apply?

Friedrich himself, successful so far, is abundantly dissatisfied
with such a kind of success ;—and indeed seems to be less thank-
ful to his stars than in present circumstances he ought. Pro-
foundly wearied we find him, worn down into utter disgust in
the Small War of Posts: ‘‘ Here we still are, nose to nose,” ex-
claims he (see Letters to Henri), ‘both of us in unattackable
camps. ‘This Campaign appears to me more unsupportable than
any of the foregoing. ‘Take what trouble and care I like, I can’t
advance a step in regard to great interests; I succeed only in
trifles.’ ‘Oh for good news of your health: I am without all
assistance here; the Army must divide again before long, and I
have none to intrust it to.’’*

And to D’Argens, in the same bad days: “Yes, yes, I escaped
a great danger there’ (at Liegnitz). “In a common War, it
would have signified something; but in this it is a mere skir-
mish; my position little improved by it. I will not sing Jere-
miads to you, nor speak of my fears and anxieties, but can as-
sure you they are great. The crisis I am in has taken another
shape; but as yet nothing decides it, nor can the development
of it be foreseen. I am getting consumed by slow fever; I am
like a living body losing limb after limb. Heaven stand by us:

* Sch6ning, ii. 416.

64 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
18th Sept.—4th Oct. 1760.

we need it much.”> * * “You talk always of my person, of
my dangers. Need I tell you, it is not necessary that I live; but
it is that I do my duty, and fight for my Country to save it if
possible. In many Jittle things I have had luck: I think of tak-
ing for my motto, Maximus in minimis, et minimus in maaximis. A
worse Campaign than any of the others: I know not sometimes
what will become of it. But why weary you with such details
of my labours and my sorrows? My spirits have forsaken me.
All gaiety is buried with the Loved Noble Ones whom my heart
was bound to. Adieu.”

Or, again, to Henri: ‘Berlin? Yes; I am trying something
in bar of that. Have a bad time of it, in the interim. ‘ Our
means, my dear Brother, are so eaten away; far too short for
opposing the prodigious number of our enemies set against us:—
if we must fall, let us date our destruction from the infamous
Day of Maxen! ”

Is in such health, too, all the while: ‘‘Am a little better,
thank you; yet have still the’—what shall we say (dreadful
biliary affair) ?—*‘hémorrhoides aveugles: nothing that, were it
not for the disquietudes I feel: but all ends in this world, and
so will these.” * * ‘TJ flatter myself your health is recover-
ing. Tor these three days in continuance I have had so terrible
a cramp, I thought it would choke me;—it is now a little gone.
No wonder the chagrins and continual disquietudes I live in
should undermine and at length overturn the robustest consti-
tution.’”6 |

Friedrich, we observe, has heard of certain Russian-Austrian
intentions on Berlin; but, after intense consideration, resolves
that it will behove him to continue here, and try to dislodge
Daun, or help Hunger to dislodge him; which will be the rem-
edy for Berlin and all things else. There are news from Colberg
of welcome tenor; could Daun be sent packing, Soltikof, it is
probable, will not be in much alacrity for Berlin !—September
18th, at Dittmannsdorf, was the first day of Daun’s dead-lock :

5 Guvres de Frédéric, xix. 193 C‘‘ Dittmannsdorf, 18th September,” day
after, or day of finishing, that cannonade).

® Schoning, it. 419: ‘*2d October.” Ibid. ii. 410; ‘*16th September.”
Tbid. ii. 408.

Cuar IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 65
18th Sept.—4th Oet. 1760.

ever since, he has had to sit, more and more hampered, pinned
to the Hills, eating sour herbs; nothing but Hunger ahead, and
a retreat (battle we will not dream of), likely to be very ruinous,
with a Friedrich sticking to the wings of it. Here is the Note
on Colberg:

September 18th, Colberg Siege raised. “The same September 18th,
what a day at Colberg too! Itis the twenty-fourth day of the continual
bombardment there. Colberg is black ashes, most of its houses ruins,
not a house in it uninjured. But Heyde and his poor Garrison, busy
day and night, walk about in it as if fire-proof; with a great deal of
battle still left in them. The King, I know not whether Heyde is
aware, has contrived something of relief; General Werner coming :—
the fittest of men, if there be possibility. When, see, September 18th,
uneasy motion in the Russian entrenchments (for the Russians too are
entrenched against attack): Something that has surprised the Russians
yonder. Climb, some of you, to the highest surviving steeple, highest
chimney-top if no steeple survive :— Youder is Werner come to our
relief, oh God the Merciful !’

“Werner, with 5,000, was detached from Glogau (September 5th),
from Goltz’s small Corps there; has come as on wings, 200 miles in
thirteen days. And attacks now, as with wings, the astonished Rus-
sian 15,000, who were looking for nothing like him,—with wings, with
claws, and with beak; and in a highly aquiline manner, fierce, swift,
skilful, storms these entrenched Russians straightway, scatters them to
pieces,—and next day is in Colberg, the Siege raising itself with great
precipitation ; leaving all its artilleries and furnitures, rushing on ship-
board all of it that can get-—the very ships-of-war, says Archenholtz,
hurrying dangerously out to sea, as if the Prussian Hussars might pos-
sibly take them. A glorious Werner! A beautiful defence, and ditto
rescue; which has drawn the world’s attention.’””

Heyde’s defence of Colberg, Werner’s swift rescue of it, are very
celebrated this Autumn. Medals were struck in honour of them at
Berlin, not at Friedrich’s expense, but under Friedrich’s patronage; who
purchased silver or gold copies, and gave them about. Veteran Heyde
had a Letter from his Majesty, and one of these gold Medals ;—what an
honour! I do not hear that Heyde got any other reward, or that he
needed any. A beautiful old Hero, voiceless in History ; though very
visible in that remote sphere, if you care to look.

That is the news from Colberg; comfortable to Friedrich ;

7 Seyfarth, ii.634; Archenholtz, ii. 116: in Helden- Geschichte (vi. 73-83),
Tagebuch of Siege.

66 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Oct. 1760.

not likely to inspire Soltikof with new alacrity in behalf of
Daun. It remains to us only to add, that Friedrich, with a view
to quicken Daun, shot out (September 24th, after nightfall, and
with due mystery) a Detachment towards Neisse,—4,000 or so,
who call themselves 15,000, and affect to be for Mahren ulti-
mately. ‘For Mihren, and my bit of daily bread!” Daun
may well think; and did for some time think, or partly did.
Pushed off one small detachment really thither, to look after
Miihren ; and (September 29th) pushed off another bigger ; Lacy
namely, with 15,000, pretending to be thither,—but who, the
instant they were out of Friedrich’s sight, have whirled, at a
rapid pace, quite into the opposite direction: as will shortly be
seen! Daun has now other irons in the fire. Daun, ever since
this fatal Dead-lock in the Hills, has been shrieking hoarsely to
the Russians, day and night; who at last-take pity on him,—or
find something feasible in his proposals.

The Russians make a Raid on Berlin, for Relief of Daun,
and thar own Behoof (October 8d—12th, 1760).

Powerful entreaties, influences are exercised at Petersburg,
and here in the Russian Camp: “ Noble Russian Excellencies,
for the love of Heaven, take this man off my windpipe! <A sally
into Brandenburg: oh, could not you? Lacy shall accompany ;
seizure of Berlin, were it only for one day!” Soltikof has fallen
sick,—and, indeed, practically vanishes from our affairs, at this
point;—Fermor, who has command in the interim, finally con-
sents: ‘‘Our poor siege of Colberg, what an end is come to it!
What an end is the whole Campaign like to have! Let us at
least try this of Berlin, since our hands are empty.” The joy
of Daun, of Montalembert, and of everybody in Austrian Court
and Camp may be conceived.

Russians to the amount of 20,000, Czernichef Commander ;
Tottleben, Second in command, a clever soldier, who knows Ber-
lin: these are to start from Sagan Country, on this fine Expedi-
tion, and to push on at the very top of their speed. September
20th, Tottleben, with 3,000 of them as Vanguard, does accord-
ingly cross Oder, at Beuthen in Sagan Country; and strides for-
ward direct upon Berlin: Lacy, with 15,000, has started from

Cnap. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 67
3d Oct. 1760.

Silesia, we saw how, above a week later (September 29th), but
at a still more furious rate of speed. Soltikof,—theoretically
Soltikof, but practically Fermor, should the dim German Books
be ambiguous to any studious creature,—with the Main Army
(which by itself is still a 20,000 odd), moves to Frankfurt, to
support the swift Expedition, and be within two marches of it.
Here surely is a feasibility! Berlin, for defence, has nothing but
weak palisades; and of effective garrison 1,200 men.

And feasible, in a sort, this thing did prove; indisputably
delivering Daun from strangulation in the Silesian Mountains;
filling the Gazetteer mind with loud emotion of an empty nature;
and very much affecting many poor people in Berlin and neigh-
bourhood. Making a big Chapter in Berlin Local History ;
though compressible to small bulk for strangers, who have no
specific sympathies in that locality.

“Friday, 3d October 1760, Tuottleben, with his hasty Vanguard of
3,000, preceded by hastier rumour, comes circling round Berlin envi- —
rons; takes post at the Halle Gate” (west side of the City); “ summons
Rochow” (the same old Commandant of Haddick’s time ;—* requires
instant admittance ; ransom of Four million Thalers, and other impos-
sible things. Berlin has been putting itself in some posture ; repairing
its palisades, throwing up bits of redoubts in front of the gates; and,
though sounding with alarms and uncertainties, shows a fine spirit of
readiness for the emergency. Rochow is still Commandant, the same
old Rochow who shrunk so questionably in Haddick’s time :* but Rochow
has no Court to tremble for at present; Queen and Royal Family, Ar-
chives, Principal Ministries, Directorium in a body, went all to Magde-
burg again, on the Kunersdorf Disaster last year, and are safe from such
insults. The spirit of the population, it appears, even of the rich classes,
some of whom are very rich, is extraordinary. Besides Rochow, more-
over, there are, by accident, certain Generals in Berlin: Seidlitz and
two others, recovering from their Kunersdorf hurts, who step into the
breach with heart admirably willing, if with limbs still lame. Then
there is old Fieldmarshal Lehwald” (Anti-Russian at Gross Jagersdorf,
but dismissed as too old), “ who is official Governor of Berlin, who suc-
ceeded poor Keith in that honourable office: all these were strong for
defence ;—and do not now grudge, great men as they are, to take each
his Gate of Berlin, his small redoubt thrown up there, and pass the night
and the day in doing his utmost with it.

“ Rochow refuses the surrender and the Four-millions pure specie ;

68 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
4th-7th Oct. 1760.
and Tottleben, about 3 p.m. in an intermittent way, and about 5 in a
constant, begins bombarding,—grenadoes, red-hot balls, what he can ,—
and continues the same till 3 next morning. Without result to speak
of; Seidlitz and Consorts making good counter-play ; the poor old 1,200
of Garrison growing almost young again with energy, under their Seid-
litzes; and the population zealously cooperating, especially quenching
all fires that rose. What greatly contributed withal was the arrival of
Prince Eugen overnight. Eugen of Wiirtemberg’ (cadet of that bad
Duke) “ had been engaged driving home the Swedes, but instantly quit-
ted that with a 5,000 he had; and has marched this day,—his Vanguard
has, mostly Horse, whom the Foot will follow tomorrow,—a distance of
forty miles, on this fine errand. Delicate manceuvering, by these wea-
ried horsemen, to enter Berlin amid uncertain jostlings, under the shine
of Russian bombardment; ecstatic welcome to them, when they did get
in,—instant subscription for fat oxen to them ; a just abundance of beef
to them, of generous beer I hope not more than an abundance: phenom-
ena which, with others of the like, could be dwelt on, had we room.®

* Tottleben, under these omens, found it would not do; wended off
towards his Czernichef next morning ; eastward again as far as Cope-
nik, Prince Eugen attending him in a minatory manner: and, in Berlin
for the moment, the bad ten hours were over. For four days more, the
fate of things hung dubious; hope soon fading again, but not quite going
out till the fifth day. And this, in fact, was mainly all of bombardment
that the City had to suffer, though its fate of capture was not to be
averted. Is not Tottleben gone? Yes; but Lacy, marching at a rate
he never did before (except from Bischofswerda), is arrived in the envi-
rons this same evening, cautious but furious. ‘The King is far away ;
what are Eugen’s 5,000 against these ?

“On the other hand, Hilsen, leaving his Saxon affairs to their chance,
—which, alas, are about extinct, at any rate; except Wittenberg, all
Saxony gone from us!—Hiilsen is on winged march hitherward with
about 9,000. ‘ How would the King come on wings, like an eagle from
the Blue, if he were but aware!’ thought everybody, and said. Hiilsen
did arrive on the 8th; so that there are now 14,000_of us. Hiilsen did;
—but no King could; the King is just starting (October 4th, the King,
on these bad rumours about Saxony, about Berlin, quitted the attempt
on Daun; October 7th, got on march hitherward ; has finished his first
march hitherward,—Daun gradually preparing to attend him in the dis-
tance),—when Hiilsen arrives. And here are all their Lacys, Czerni-
chefs fairly assembled ; five to two of us,—35,000 of them against our
14,000.

§ Tempelhof, iv. 266-290; Archenholtz, ii. 122-148; Helden- Geschichte,
vi. 103-149, 350-352 ;. &e. &e.

Cuar. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 69
9th-12th Oct. 1760.

-“ Hulsen and Eugen, drawn out in their skilfullest way, manceuvered
about, all this Wednesday 8th; attempted, did not attempt ; found on
candid examination, ‘That 14,000 versus 35,000 ran a great risk of being
worsted ; that, in such case, the fate of the City might be still more
frightful; and that, on the whole, their one course was that of with-
drawing to Spandau, and leaving poor Berlin to capitulate as it could.
Capitulation starts again with Tottleben that same night ; Gotzkowsky,
a magnanimous Citizen and Merchant-Prince, stepping forth with beau-
tiful courageous furtherances of every kind ; and it ends better than one
could have hoped: Ransom—not of Four-millions pure specie (which
would have been 600,000/ ): ‘Gracious Sir, it is beyond our utmost
possibility !"—but of One and a Half million in modern Ephraim coin;
with a 30,0002. of douceur-money to the common man, Russian and
Austrian, for his forbearance ;—‘ for the rest, we are at your Excel-
lency’s mercy, in a manner!’ And so,

“ Thursday, October 9th, About 7 in the morning, Tottleben marches
in, exactly six days since he first came circling to the Halle Gate, and
began bombarding. ‘Tottleben, knowing Friedrich, knew the value of
despatch ; and, they say, was privately no enemy to Berlin, remember-
ing old grateful days here. For Tottleben has himself been in diffi-
culties; indeed, was never long out of them, during the long stormy life
he had. Not a Russian at all; though I suppose Father of the now
Russian Tottlebens whom one hears of. this one was a poor Saxon
Gentleman, Page once to poor old drunken Weissenfels, whom, for a
certain fair soul’s sake, we sigh to remember! Weissenfels dying,
Tottleben became a soldier of Polish Majesty’s ;—acceptable soldier,
but disagreed with Brihl, for which nobody will like him worse. Dis-
agreed with Briihl; went into the Dutch service (may have been in
Fontenoy for what I know); was there till Aix-la-~Chapelle, till after
Aix-la-Chapelle; kindly treated, and promoted in the Dutch Army ;
but with outlooks, I can fancy, rather dull. Outlooks probably dull in
such an element,—when, being a handsome fellow in epaulettes (Major-
General, in fact, though poor), he, diligently endeavouring, caught the
eye of a Dutch West-Indian Heiress; soft creature with no end of
money ; whom he privately wedded, and ran away with. To the hor-
ror of her appointed Dutch Lover and Friends, who prosecuted the
poor Major-General with the utmost rigour, not of Law only. And
were like to be the ruin of his fair West-Indian and him; when Fried-
rich, about 1754 as I guess, gave him shelter in Berlin; finding no in-
supportable objection in what the man had done. The rather, as his
Heiress and he were rich. ‘Tottleben gained general favour in Berlin
society ; wished, in 1756, to take service with Friedrich on the break-
ing out of this War. ‘A Colonel with me, yes,’ said Friedrich. But

70 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th-12th Oct. 1760.
Tottleben had been Major-General among the Dutch, and could not
consent to sink ; had to go among the Russians for a Major-Generalcy ;
and there and elsewhere, for many years coming. had many adventures,
mostly troublesome, which shall not be memorable to us here.?®
‘“‘ Lacy, who, after hovering about in these vicinities for four days,
had now actually come up, so soon as Eugen and Hiilsen withdrew,—
was deeply disgusted at the Terms of Capitulation: angry to find that
Tottleben had concluded without him; and, in fact, flew into open rage
at the arrangements Tottleben had made for himself and for others.
‘No admittance. except on order from his Excellency! said the Rus-
sian Sentry to Lacy’s Austrians: upon which Lacy forced the Gate,
and violently marched in. ‘Took lodging, to his own mind, in Fried-
richstadt quarter; and was fearfully truculent upon person and prop-
erty during his short stay A scandal to be seen, how his Croats and
loose hordes went openly ravening about, bent on mere housebreaking, _
street-robbery. and insolent violence. ‘So that Tottleben had fairly to
fire upon the vagabonds once or twice. and force, on the unwilling
Lacy, some coercion of them within limits. For the three days of his
continuance,—it was but three days in all,—Lacy was as the evil genius
of Berlin; Tottleben and his Russians the good. Their discipline was
so excellent ; all Cossacks and loose rabble strictly kept out beyond the
Walls. To Bachmann, Russian Commandant, the Berliners, on his de-
parture, had gratefully got ready a money-gift of handsome amount:
‘By no means,’ answered Bachmann: ‘your treatment. was. according
to the mildness of our Sovereign Czarina. For myself, if I have served
you in anything, the fact that for three days I have been Commandant
of the Great Friedrich’s Capital is more than a reward to me.’
‘““'Tottleben and Lacy, during those three days of Russian and Aus-
trian joint dominion, had a stormy time of it together. ‘ Destroy the
Lager-Haus, said Lacy: Lager-Haus, where they manufacture their
soldiers’ uniforms ; it is the parent of all cloth-manufacturing in Prus-
sia ; set up by Friedrich-Wilhelm,—not on free-trade principles. ‘The
Lager-Haus,’ say you? ‘I doubt, it is now private property ; screened
_ by our Capitulation ;—which it proves to be. ‘ You shall blow up the
Arsenal!’ said Lacy, with vehemence and truculence, A noble edifice,
as travellers yet know: fancy its fragments flying about among the
populous streets, plunging through the roofs of Palaces, and great
houses all round. Lacy was inexorable ; Tottleben had to send a Rus-
sian Party (one wishes they had been Croats) on this sad errand.
They proceeded to the Powder Magazine for explosive material, as
preliminary; they were rash in handling the gunpowder there, which
blew up in their hands; sent itself and all of them into the air; and

* Sketch of Tottleben’s Life, in Rédenbeck, ii. 69-72.

CHAE. IV; } : DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 71
9th-12th Oct. 1760.

saved the poor Arsenal: ‘ Not powder enough now left for our own
artillery uses,’ urged Tottleben.

** Saxon and Austrian Parties were in the Palaces about,—at Pots-
dam, at Charlottenburg, Schonhausen (the Queen’s), at Friedrichsfeld
(the Margraf Karl’s), some of whom behaved well, some horribly ill.
In Charlottenburg, certain Saxon Briihl-Dragoons, who by their con-
duct might have been Dragoons of Attila, smashed the furnitures, the
doors, cutting the Pictures, much maltreating the poor people, and,
what was reckoned still more tragical, overset the poor Polignac Col-
lection of Antiques and Classicalities; not only knocking off noses and
arms, but beating them small, lest reparation by cement should be pos-
sible. Their Officers, Pirna people, looking quietly on. A scandalous
proceeding thought everybody, friend or foe,—especially thought Fried-
rich ; whose indignation at this ruin of Charlottenburg came out in way
of reprisal by and by. At Potsdam, on the other hand, Prince Ester-
hazy, with perhaps Hungarians among his people, behaved like a very
Prince; received from the Castellan an Attestation that he had scru-
pulously respected everything; and took, as souvenir, only one Picture
of little value; Prince de Ligne, who was under him, carrying off, still
more daintily, one goose-quill, immortal by having been a pen of the
Great Friedrich’s.

“'Tottleben, with no feeling other than Official tempered by Human,
was in great contrast with Lacy, and very beneficent to Berlin, during
the three days it lay under the ¢ridulda, or harrow of War. But the
Tutelary Angel of Berlin, then and afterwards for weeks and months,
till all scores got settled, was the Gotzkowsky mentioned above.”
Whom we shall see again helpful at Leipzig; a man worth marking,
in these tumults. “If Tottleben was the tempora! Armed King, this
Gotzkowsky was the Spiritual King, Papa or Universal Father, armed
only with charities, pieties, prayers, ever shiningly attended by self-
sacrifices on Gotzkowsky’s part; which averted woes innumerable
(Lager-Haus only one of a long list); and which ‘ surpassed all belief,
write the Berlin Magistracy, as if in tears over such heroism. Truly
a Prince of Merchants, this Gotzkowsky, not for his vast enterprises,
and the mere 1,500 workmen he employs, but for the still greater heart
that dwells in him. Had begun as a travelling Pedlar; used to call at
Reinsberg, with female haberdasheries exquisitely chosen (‘gallanterie-
wares’ the Germans call them), for the then Princess Royal; not un-
noticed by Friedrich, who recognised the broad sense, solidity, and
great thoughts of the man. Of all which Friedrich has known far
more since then, in various branches of Prussian commerce improved
by Gotzkowsky’s managements. A truly notable Gotzkowsky; be-
came bankrupt at last, one is sorry to hear; and died in affliction and

72 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th-12th Oct. 1760.
neglect,—short of the humblest wages for so much good work done in
the world !'°
‘“‘Gotzkowsky’s House was like a general store-room for everybody’s
preciosities ; his time, means, self, were the refuge of all the needy. In
Zorndorf time, when this Czernichef” (if readers can remember), “* who
is now so supreme,—Czernichef, Soltikof, and others,—had nothing for
it but to lodge in the cellars of burnt Cistrin, Gotzkowsky, with ready
money, with advice, with assuagement, had been their Deus ex Ma-
chind: and now Czernichef remembers it ; and Gotzkowsky, as Papa,
has to go with continual prayers, negotiations, counsellings, expedients,
and be the refuge of all unjustly suffering men. Berlin has immensi-
ties of trade in war-furnitures : the capitals circulating are astonishing
to Archenholtz; million on the back of million; no such city in Ger-
many, for trade. The desire of the Three-days Lacy government is
towards any Lager-Haus; any mass of wealth, which can be construed
as Royal or connected with Royalty. Ephraim and Itzig, mint-masters
of that copper-coinage; rolling in foul wealth by the ruin of their neigh-
bours; ought not these to bleed? Well, yes,—if anybody; and copi-
ously if you like! I should have said so: but the generous Gotzkow-

sky said in his heart,‘ No;’ and again pleaded and prevailed. Ephraim *

and Itzig, foul swollen creatures, were not broached at all; and their
gratitude was, That, at a future day, Gotzkowsky’s day of bankruptcy,
they were hardest of any on Gotzkowsky.

Archenholtz and the Books are enthusiastically copious upon Gotz-
kowsky and his procedures; but we must be silent. This Anecdote
only, in regard to Freedom of the Press,—to the so-called ‘air we
breathe, not having which we die!’ Would modern Friends of Prog-
ress believe it? Because, in former stages of this War, the Berlin
Newspapers have had offensive expressions (scarcely noticeable to the
microscope, in our day, and below calculation for smallness) upon the
Russian and Austrian Sovereigns or Peoples,—the Able Editors (there
are only 'T'wo) shall now in person, here in the Market-place of Berlin,
actually run the gauntlet for it,—‘run the rods (Gassen-laufen’), as
the fashion now is ;—which is worse than gaunilet, not to speak of the
ignominy. ‘That is the barbaric Russian notion: ‘ Who are you, ill-in-
formed insolent persons, that give a loose to your tongue in that man-
ner? Strip to the waistband, swift! Here is the true career opened
for you: on each hand, one hundred sharp rods ranked waiting you ;
run your courses there,—no hurry more than you like!’ The alterna-
tive of death, I suppose, was open to these Editors; Roman death at
least, and martyrdom for a new Faith (Faith in the Loose Tongue),

*° Preuss, ii. 257, &c. &e.; Geschichte eines Patriotischen Kaufmanns (Ber-
lin, 1769, by Gotzkowsky himself).

~ .
—

—

—_— ee ee

Cuap. IV.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. ~ 73
12th Oct. 1760.

very sacred to the Democratic Ages now at hand. But nobody seems
to have thought of it; Editors and Public took the thing as a sorrow
incident to this dangerous Profession of the Tongue Loose (or looser
than usual) ; which nobody yet knew to be divine. The Editors made
passionate enough lamentation, in the stript state; one of them, with
loud weeping, pulled off his wig, showed ice-gray hair; ‘I am in my
68th year!’ But it seems nothing would have steaded them, had not
Gotzkowsky been busy interceding. By virtue of whom there was
pardon privately in readiness: to the ice-gray Editor complete pardon ;
to the junior, quasi-complete ; only a few switches to assert the princi-
ple, and dismissed with admonition.”"?

The pleasant part of the fact is, that Gotzkowsky’s powerful
intercessions were thenceforth no farther needed. The same day,
Saturday, October 11th, a few hours after this of the Gassen-
laufen, news arrived full gallop: ‘“‘ The King is coming!” After
which it was beautiful to see how all things got to the gallop;
and in a no-time Berlin was itself again. That same evening,
Saturday, Lacy took the road, with extraordinary velocity, to-
wards Torgau Country, where the Reichsfolk, in Hiilsen’s ab-
sence, are supreme; and, the second evening after, was got 60
miles thitherward. His joint dominion had been of Two days.
On the morning of Sunday 12th, went Tottleben, who had busi-
nesses, settlements of ransom and the like, before marching.
Tottleben, too, made uncommon despatch; marched, as did all
these invasive Russians, at the rate of thirty miles a day; their
Main Army likewise moving off from Frankfurt to a safer dis-
tance. Friedrich was still five marches off; but there seemed
not a moment to lose.

The Russian spoilings during the retreat were more horrible
than ever: “ The gallows gaping for us; and only this one op-
portunity, if even this!” thought the agitated Cossack to him-
self. Our poor friend Niissler had a sad tale to tell of them ;!?
as who had not? ‘Terror and murder, incendiary fire and other
worse unnameable abominations of the Pit. One old Half-pay
gentleman, whom I somewhat respect, desperately barricaded

11 F[elden-Geschichte, vi. 103-148; Roédenbeck, ii. 41-54; Archenholtz,
ji. 180-147; Preuss, ubi supra; &e. &e.

12 In Biisching, Beytrage, i. 400, 401, account of their sacking of Niiss-
ler’s pleasant home and estate, ‘‘ Weissensee, near Berlin.”

Vor. VI.—D

74 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
17th Oct. 1760.

himself, amid his domestics and tenantries, Wife and Daughters
assisting: ‘“‘ Human Russian Officers can enter here; Cossacks
no, but shall kill us first. Not a Cossack till all of us are lying
dead!”!3_ And kept his word; the human Russians owning it
to be proper. )

In Guben Country, ‘at Gross-Muckro, October 15th,” the
day after passing Guben, Friedrich first heard for certain, That
the Russians had been in Berlin, and also that they were gone,
and that all was over. He made two marches farther,—not
now direct for Berlin, but direct for Saxony and it ;—to Liib-
ben, 50 or 60 miles straight south of Berlin; and halted there
some days, to adjust himself for a new sequel. ‘These are the
things,” exclaims he, sorrowfully, to D’Argens, ‘‘ which I have
been in dread of since Winter last; this is what gave the dismal
tone to my Letters to you. It has required not less than all my
philosophy to endure the reverses, the provocations, the outrages,
and the whole scene of atrocious things that have come to pass.’’!4
Friedrich’s grief about Berlin we need not paint; though there
were murmurs afterwards, “‘ Why did not he start sooner?”
which he could not, in strict reason, though aware that these
savageries were on march. He had hoped the Eugen-Hiilsen
appliances, even should all else fail, might keep them at bay.
And indeed, in regard to these latter, it turned only on a hair.
Montalembert calculating, vows, on his oath, ‘‘Can assure you,
M. Ambassadeur, puis bien vous assurer comme si j’etais devant
Dieu, as if I stood before God,”!® that, from first to last, it was
my doing; that, but for me, at the very last, the Russians, on
sight of Hiilsen and Eugen, and no Lacy come, would have
marched away !

Friedrich’s orderings and adjustings, dated Liibben, where his
| Army rested after this news from Berlin, were manifold; anda
good deal still of wrecks from the Berlin Business fell to his
share. For instance, one thing he had at once ordered: ‘‘ Your
Dill of a Million-and-half to the Russians, don’t pay it, or any
part of it! When Bamberg was ransomed, Spring gone a year,

13 Archenholtz, ii. 150.
14 (uvres de Frédéric, xix. 199; ‘*22d Oct.” 1° Montalembert, ii. 108.

Cuap. 1V.] DAUN AND FRIEDRICH. 75
17th Oct. 1760.

—Reich and Kaiser, did they respect our Bill we had on Bam-
berg? Did not they cancel it, and flatly refuse!” Friedrich is
positive on the point, ‘‘ Reprisal our clear remedy!” But Berlin
itself was in alarm, for perhaps another Russian visit; Berlin
and Gotzkowsky were humbly positive the other way. Upon
which a visit of Gotzkowsky to the Royal Camp: ‘ Merchants’
Bills are a sacred thing, Your Majesty!” urged Gotzkowsky.
Who, in his zeal for the matter, undertook dangerous visits to
the Russian Quarters, and a great deal of trouble, peril and ex-
pense, during the weeks following. Magnanimous Gotzkowsky,
‘‘in mere bribes to the Russian Officials, spent about 6,000/. of
his own,”’ for one item. But he had at length convinced his
Majesty that Merchants’ Bills were a sacred thing, in spite of
Bamberg and desecrative individualities ; and that this Million-
and-half must be paid. Friedrich was struck with Gotzkowsky
and his view of the facts. Friedrich, from his own distressed
funds, handed to Gotzkowsky the necessary Million-and-half,
commanding only profound silence about it; and to Gotzkowsky
himself a present of 150,000 thalers (20,000/. odd) ;!° and so the
matter did at last end.

It had been a costly business to Berlin, and to the King, and
to the poor harried Country. ‘To Berlin, bombardment of ten
hours; alarm of discursive siege-work in the environs for five
days; foreign yoke for three days; lost money to the amounts
above stated; what loss in wounds to body or to peace of mind,
or whether any loss that way, nobody has counted. The Berlin
people rose to a more than Roman height of temper, testifies
D’Argens;'7 so that perhaps it was a gain. ‘The King’s Maga-
zines and War-furnitures about Berlin are wasted utterly,—
Arsenal itself not blown up, we well know why ;—and much
Hunnish ruin in Charlottenburg, with damage to Antiques,—
for which latter clause there shall, in a few months, be reprisal,
if it please the Powers !

Of all this, Montalembert declares, ‘“‘ Before God, that he,
Montalembert, is and was the mainspring.” And indeed, Tem-

16 Archenholtz, ii. 146.
17 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 195-199: ‘‘D’Argens to the King: Berlin,
19th October 1760,’’—an interesting Letter of details.

76 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
17th Oct. 1760.

pelhof, without censure of Montalembert and his vocation, but
accurately computing time and circumstance, comes to the same
conclusion;—as thus: ‘‘ October 8th, seeing no Lacy come, Czerni-
chef, had it not been for Montalembert’s eloquence, had fixed for
returning to Cépenik: whom cautious Lacy would have been
obliged to imitate. Suppose Czernichef had, October 9th, got to
Cépenik,—Eugen and Hiilsen remain at Berlin; Czernichef
could not have got back thither before the 11th; on the 11th
was news of Friedrich’s coming; which set all on gallop to the
right about.”!8 So that really, before God, it seems Montalem-
bert must have the merit of this fine achievement :—the- one
fruit, so far as I can discover, of his really excellent reasonings,
eloquences, patiences, sown broadcast, four or five long years,
on such a field as fine human talent never had before. I declare
to you, M. PAmbassadeur, this excellent vulture-swoop on Ber-
lin, and burning or reburning of the Peasantry of the Mark, is
due solely to one poor zealous gentleman !— .

What was next to follow out of ¢his,—in Torgau neighbour-
hood, where Daun now stands expectant,—poor M. de Mont-
alembert was far from anticipating; and will be in no haste to
claim the merit of before God or man.

CHAPTER V.
BATTLE OF TORGAU.

Arter Hiilsen’s fine explosion on the Diirrenberg, August
20th, on the incompetent Reichs Generals, there had followed
nothing eminent ; new futilities, attemptings and desistings, ad-
vancings and recoilings, on the part of the Reich ; Hiilsen solidly
maintaining himself, in defence of his Torgau Magazine and Sax-
on interests in those regions, against such overwhelming odds,
till relief and reinforcement for them and him should arrive;
and gaining time, which was all he could aim at in such cir-
cumstances. Had the Torgau Magazine been bigger, perhaps
Hiilsen might have sat there to the end. But having solidly
eaten out said Magazine, what could Hiilsen do but again move

18 ‘Tempelhof, iv. 277.

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 77
20th Oct.—3d Nov. 1760.

rearward?! Above all, on the alarm from Berlin, which called
him off double-quick, things had to go their old road in that
quarter. Weak Torgau was taken, weak Wittenberg besieged.
Leipzig, Torgau, Wittenberg, all that Country, by the time the
Russians left Berlin, was again the Reich’s. I¢ugen and Hiilsen,
hastening for relief of Wittenberg, the instant Berlin was free,
found Wittenberg a heap of ruins, out of which the Prussian
garrison, very hunger urging, had issued the day before, as pris-
oners of war. Nothing more to be done by Eugen, but take
post, within reach of Magdeburg and victual, and wait new Or-
der from the King.

The King is very unquestionably coming on; leaves Liibben
thitherward October 20th.? With full fixity of purpose as usual ;
but with as gloomy an outlook as ever before. Daun, we said,
is now arrived in those parts: Daun and the Reich together are
near 100,000; Daun some 60,000,—Loudon having stayed be-
hind, and gone southward, for a stroke on Kosel (if Goltz will
permit, which he won’t at all!),—and the Reich 35,000. Sax-
ony is all theirs; cannot they maintain Saxony? Not a Town
or a Magazine now belongs to Friedrich there, and he is in
number as 1 to 2. ‘Maintain Saxony; indisputably you can!”
that is the express Vienna Order, as Friedrich happens to know.
The Russians themselves have taken Camp again, and wait visi-
bly, about Landsberg and the Warta Country, till they see Daun
certain of executing said Order; upon which they intend, they
also, to winter in those Elbe Prussian parts, and conjointly to
crush Friedrich into great confinement indeed. Friedrich is
aware of this Vienna Order; which is a kind of comfort in
the circumstances. The intentions of the hungry Russians, too,
are legible to Friedrich; and he is much resolved that said
“Order shall be impossible to Daun. ‘Were it to be possible,
we are landless. Where are our recruits, our magazines, our
resources for a new Campaign? We may as well die, as suffer

1 Hofbericht von dem Riickzug des General-Lieutenants von Hiilsen aus dem
Lager bey Torgau (in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii, 755-784).

2 Rédenbeck, ii. 85: in Anonymous of Hamburg (iv. 241-245) Friedrich’s
Two Marches, towards and from Berlin (7th-17th October, to Liibben ;
thence, 20th October—8d November, to Torgau).

y:

78 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
20th Oct.—3d Nov. 1760.

that to be possible!” Such is Friedrich’s fixed view. He says
to D’Argens:

‘You, as a follower of Epicurus, put a value on life; as for
me, I regard death from the Stoic point of view. Never shall I
see the moment that forces me to make a disadvantageous Peace;
no persuasion, no eloquence, shall ever induce me to sign my
dishonour. Either I will bury myself under the ruins of my
Country, or if that consolation appears too sweet to the Destiny
that persecutes me, I shall know how to put an end to my mis-
fortunes when it is impossible to bear them any longer. I have
acted, and continue to act, according to that interior voice of
conscience and of honour which directs all my steps: my con-
duct shall be, in every time, conformable to those principles.
After having sacrificed my youth to my Father, my ripe years
to my Country, I think I have acquired the right to dispose of
my old age. I have told you, and I repeat it, Never shall my
hand sign a humiliating Peace. Finish this Campaign I cer-
tainly will, resolved to dare all, and to try the most desperate
things either to succeed or to find a glorious end (fin glorteuse).”%

Friedrich had marched from Liibben, after three-days settling
of affairs, October 20th; arrived at Jessen, on the Elbe, within
wind of Wittenberg, in two days more. ‘‘ He formed a small
magazine at Diiben,” says Archenholtz; ‘and was of a velocity,
a sharpness,”—like lightning, in a manner! Friedrich is un-
commonly dangerous when crushed into a corner, in this way:
and Daun knows that he is. Friedrich’s manceuverings upon
Daun— all readers can anticipate the general type of them.
The studious military reader, if England boasts any such, will
find punctual detail of them in Tempelhof and the German Books.
For our poor objects, here isa Summary which may suffice:

From Libben, having winded up these bad businesses,—and rein-
forced Goltz, at Glogau, to a 20,000 for Silesia’s sake, to look towards
Kosel and Loudon’s attempts there,—Friedrich gathered himself into
proper concentration: and with all the strength now left to him, pushed
forward (20th October) towards Wittenberg, and recovery of those lost

3 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 202 (‘* Kemberg, 28th October 1760,” a week
and a day before Torgau).

ee ee ee ee a ee a ee ee

eS eee

pa a

a a

Cuap. V. | BATTLE OF TORGAU. 79
26th Oct. 1760.

Saxon Countries. To Wittenberg from Liibben is some 60 miles;—
can be doné, nearly, in a couple of days. With the King, after Goltz
is furnished, there are about 30,000; Eugen and Hiilsen, not idle for
their own part, wait in those far Western or Ultra-Wittenberg regions
(in and beyond Dessau Country), to join him with their 14,000, when
they get signal. Joined with these, he will be 44,000; he will then
cross HK]be somewhere, probably not where Daun and the Reich im-
agine, and be in contact with his Problem; with what a pitch of will-
ingness nobody need be told! Daun, in Torgau Country, has one of
the best positions; nor is Daun a man for getting flurried.

The poor Reichs Army, though it once flattered itself with intending
to dispute Friedrich’s passage of the Elbe, and did make some detach-
ings and maneuverings that way, on his approach to Wittenberg (Oc-
tober 22d-23d),—took a safer view, on his actual arrival there, on his
re-seizure of that ruined place, and dangerous attitude on the right bank
below and above. Safer view, on salutary second thoughts ;—and fell
back Leipzig-way, southward to Diiben, 30 or 40 miles. Whence rap-
idly to Leipzig itself, 30 or 40 more, on his actually putting down his
bridges over Elbe. Friedrich’s crossing-place was Schanzhaus, in
Dessau Country, between Roslau and Klikau, 12 or 15 miles below
Wittenberg ; about midway between Wittenberg and the inflow of the
Mulda into Elbe.* He crossed, October 26th, no enemy within wind
at all; Daun at Torgau in his inexpugnable Camp, Reichsfolk at Dii-
ben, making towards Leipzig at their best pace. And is now wholly
between Elbe and Mulda; nothing but Mulda and the Anhalt Countries
and the Halle Country now to rear of him.

At Jonitz, next march southward, he finds the Eugen-Hilsen people
ready. We said they had not been idle while waiting signal: of which
here is one pretty instance. Eugen’s Brother, supreme Reigning Duke
of Wiirtemberg,—whom we parted with at Fulda, last Winter, on sore
terms ; but who again, zealous creature, heads his own little Army in
French-Austrian service, in still more eclipsed circumstances (“ No
subsidy at all, this Year, say your august Majesties? Well, 1 must do
without: a volunteer; and shall need only what I can make by forced
contributions!” which of course he is diligent to levy wherever possi-
ble),—has latterly taken Halle Country in hand, very busy raising con-
tributions there: and Eugen hears, not without interest, that certain
regiments or detachments of his, pushed out, are lying here, there, su-
perintending that salutary work,—within clutch, perhaps, of Kleist the
Hussar! Eugen despatches Kleist upon him; who pounces with his
usual fierce felicity upon these people. ‘To such alarm of his poor
Serenity and poor Army, that Serenity flies off homeward at once, and

* Map at p. 99 a.

80 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

29th Oct. 1760.
out of these Wars altogether; where he never had other than the re-
verse of business to be, and where he has played such a farce-tragedy
for four years back. Eugen has been heard to speak,—theoretically,
and in excited moments,—of ** running such a fellow through the body,
were one near him:” but it is actually Eugen in person that sends him
home from these Wars: which may be counted a not unfraternal or
unpatriotic procedure ; being of indisputable benefit to the poor Sover-
eign man himself, and to everybody concerned with him,

Hearing that Friedrich was across, Daun came westward that same
day (October 26th), and planted himself at Eilenburg ; concluding that
the Reichsfolk would now be in jeopardy first of all. Which was partly
the fact; and indeed this Daun movement rather accelerated the com-
pletion of it. Without this the Reichs Army might have lived another
day. It had quitted Diiben (which is well ahead of Kilenburg), and
gone for Leipzig, at 1 in the morning, so soon as news could reach it,
at the gallop, That Friedrich was across. And now Friedrich, seeing
Daun out in this manner, judged that a junction was contemplated ; and
that one could not be too swift in preventing it. October 29th, with
one diligent march, Friedrich posted himself at Diiben; there, between
Daun and the Reichsfolk, detached Hiilsen with a considerable force to
visit these latter in Leipzig itself; and began with all diligence forming
‘Ca small Magazine in Diiben,” Magdeburg and the current of the Elbe
being hitherto his only resource in that kind. By the time of Hiilsen’s
return, this little operation will be well forward, and Daun will have
declared himself a little.

Hiilsen, evening of Octobor 30th, found Leipzig in considerable emo-
tion, the Reichsfolk taking refuge in it: not the least inclined to stand
a push, when Hiilsen presented himself. Night of 30th—31st, there was
summoning and menacing ; Reich endeavouring to answer in firm style;
but all the while industriously packing up to go By 5 in the morning,
things had come to extremity ;—morning, happily for some of us, was
dark mist. But about 5 o’clock, Hiilsen (or Hiilsen’s Second) coming
on with menace of fire and sword upon these poor Reichspeople, found
the Reichspeople wholly vanished in the mist. Gone bodily; in full
march for the spurs of the Metal-Mountain Range again ;—concluding,
for the fourth time, an extremely contemptible Campaign. Daun, with
the King ahead of him, made not the least attempt to help them in their
Leipzig difficulty ; but retired to his strong Camp at Torgau; feels his
work to lie there,—as Friedrich perceives of him, with some interest.

Hiilsen left a little garrison in Leipzig (friend Quintus a part
of it) ;* and returned to the King; whose small Magazine at
* Tempelhof, iv. 290.

Cnap. V.]} BATTLE OF TORGAU. 81
2d Noy. 1760.

Diiben, and other small affairs there,—Magdebure with boats,
and the King with wagons, having been so diligent in carrying
erain thither,—are now about completed. From Daun’s~re-
turning to Yorgau, Friedrich infers that the cautious man has
got Order from Court to maintain Torgau at all costs,—to risk
a battle rather than go. ‘Good: he shall have one!” thinks
Friedrich. And, November 2d, in four columns, marches towards
- Torgau; to Schilda, that night, which is some seven miles on
the southward side of Torgau. ‘The King, himself in the van-
guard as usual, has watched with eager questioning eye the
courses of Daun’s advanced parties, and by what routes they re-
treat; discerns for certain that Daun has no views upon Diiben
or our little Magazine; and that the tug of wrestle for Torgau,
which is to crown this Campaign into conquest of Saxony, or
shatter it into zero like its foregoers on the Austrian part, and
will be of death-or-life nature on the Prussian part, ought to
ensue tomorrow. Forward, then!

This Camp of Torgau is not a new place to Daun. It was
Prince Henri’s Camp, last Autumn; where Daun tried all his
efforts to no purpose; and though hugely outnumbering the
Prince, could make absolutely nothing of it. Nothing, or less ;
and was flowing back to Dresden and the Bohemian Frontier,
uncheered by anything, till that comfortable Maxen Incident
turned up. Daun well knows the strength of this position.
Torgau and the Block of Hill to West, called Hill of Siptitz:—
Hiilsen, too, stood here this Summer; not to mention Finck
and Wunsch, and their beating the Reichspeople here. A Hill
and Post of great strength; not unfamiliar to many Prussians,
nor to Friedrich’s studious considerations, though his knowledge
of it was not personal on all points ;—as ‘Tomorrow taught him,
somewhat to his cost.

“Tourists, from Weimar and the Thiiringian Countries,” says a Note-
book, sometimes useful to us, “have most likely omitted Rossbach, in
their screaming railway flight eastward ; and done little in Leipzig but
endeavour to eat dinner, and, still more vainly, to snatch a little sleep
in the inhuman dormitories of the Country. Next morning, screaming
Dresdenward, they might, especially if military, pause at Oschatz, a

‘

82 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

2d Nov. 1760.
stage or two before Meissen, where again are objects of interest. You
can look at Hubertsburg, if given that way,—a Royal Schloss, memo-
rable on several grounds ;—at Hubertsburg, and at other features, in
the neighbourhood of Oschatz. ‘This done, or this left not done, you
strike off leftward, that is northward, in some open vehicle, for survey
of Torgau and its vicinities and environs. Not above fifteen miles for
you; a drive singular and pleasant; time enough uO return and be in
Dresden for dinner.

“Torgau is a fine solid old Town; Prussian military now abudan
in it. a ancient Heathen times, I suppose, it meant the Gauw, or Dis-
trict, of Thor; Capital of that Gau,—part of which, now under Chris-
tian or quasi-Christian circumstances, you have just been traversing,
with Elbe on your right hand. Innocent rural aspects of Humanity,
Boor’s life, Gentry’s life, all the way, not in any holiday equipment; on
the contrary, somewhat unkempt and scraggy, but all the more honest
and inoffensive. ‘There is sky, earth, air, and freedom for your own
reflexions: a really agreeable kind of Gau; pleasant, though in part
ugly. Large tracts of it are pine-wood, with pleasant Villages and fine
arable expanses interspersed. Schilda and many Villages you leave to
right and left. Old-fashioned Villages, with their village industries
visible around ; labouring each in its kind,—not too fast; probably with
extinct tobacco-pipe hanging over its chin (halt-rauchend, ‘ smoking
cold,’ as they phrase it).

‘*Schilda has an absurd celebrity among the Germans: it is the
Gotham of Teutschland ; a fountain of old broad-grins, and homely and
hearty rustic banter; welling up from the serious extinct Ages to our
own day; ‘ Schiltbiirger’ (Inhabitant of Schilda) meaning still, among
all the Teutsch populations, a man of calmly obstinate whims and de-
lusions, of notions altogether contrary to fact, and agreeable to himself
only; resolutely pushing his way through life on those terms: amid
horse-laughter, naturally, and general wagging of beards from surround-
ing mankind. Extinct mirth, not to be growled at or despised, in Ages
running to the shallow, which have lost their mirth, and become all one
snigger of mock-mirth. Jor it is observable, the more solemn is your
background of dark, the brighter is the play of all human genialities
and coruscations on it,—of genial mirth especially, in the hour for
mirth. Who the Doctor Bordel of Schilda was, I do not know: but
they have had their Bordel, as Gotham had ;—probably various Bor-
dels; industrious to pick up those Spiritual fruits of the earth. For the
records are still abundant and current; fully more alive than those of
Gotham here are.—And yonder, then, is actually Schilda of the absurd
fame. A small, cheerful-looking human Village, in its Island among
the Woods ; you see it lying to the left :—a clean brick-slate congeries,

shy PEERS

ym

Cnap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 83
2d Nov. 1760.

with faint smoke-canopy hanging over it, indicating frugal dinner-ket-
tles on the simmer ;—and you remember kindly those good old grin-
nings, over good Schiltburger, good Wise Men of Gotham, and their
learned Chroniclers, and unlearned Peasant Producers, who have con-
tributed a wrinkle of human Fun to the earnest face of Life.

“After Schilda, and before, you traverse long tracts of Pine Forest,
all under forest management; with long straight stretches of sandy
road (one of which is your own), straight like red tape-strings, inter-
secting the wide solitudes: dangerous to your topographies,—for the
finger-posts are not always there, and human advice you can get none.
Nothing but the stripe of blue sky overhead, and the brown one of tape
(or sand) under your feet: the trecs poor and mean for most part, but
so innumerable, and all so silent, watching you all like mute witnesses,
mutely whispering together; no voice but their combined whisper or
big forest sough audible to you in the world :—on the whole, your soli-
tary ride there proves, unexpectedly, a singular deliverance from the
mad railway, and its iron bedlamisms and shrieking discords and pre-
cipitances ; and is soothing, and pensively welcome, though sad enough,
and in outward features ugly enough. No wild boars are now in these
woods, no chance of a wolf :’—what concerns us more is, that Fried-
rich’s columns, on the 3d of November, had to march-up through these
long lanes, or tape-stripes of the Torgau Forest; and that one impor-
tant column, one or more, took the wrong turn at some point, and was
dangerously wanting at the expected moment !—

“ Torgau itself stands near Elbe; on the shoulder, eastern or Elbe-
ward shoulder, of a big mass of Knoll, or broad Height, called of Siptitz,
the main Eminence of the Gau. Shoulder, I called it, of this Height
of Siptiz; but more properly it is on a continuation, or lower ulterior
height dipping into Elbe itself, that Torgau stands. Siptitz Height,
nearly a mile from Elbe, drops down into a straggle of ponds; after
which, on a second or final rise, comes Torgau dipping into Elbe.
Not a shoulder strictly, but rather a cheek, with neck intervening ;—
neck gowtry for that matter, or quaggy with ponds! The old Town
stands high enough, but is enlaced on the western and southern side by
a set of lakes and quagmires, some of which are still extensive and un-
drained. The course of the waters hereabouts, and of Elbe itself, has
had its intricacies: close to north-west, Torgau is bordered, in a strag-
gling way, by what they call Old Elbe; which is not now a fluent en-
tity, but a stagnant congeries of dirty waters and morasses. The Hill
of Siptitz abuts in that aqueous or quaggy manner; its fore feet being,
as it were, at or in Elbe River, and its sides, to the South and to the
North for some distance each way. considerably enveloped in ponds
and boggy difficulties.

84 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
2d Noy. 1760.

“Plenty of water all about, but I suppose mostly of bad quality; at
least ‘Torgau has declined drinking it, and been at the trouble to lay a
pipe, or Rohrgraben, several miles long, to bring its culinary water from
the western neighbourhoods of Siptitz Height. Along the southern
side of Siptitz Height goes leisurely an uncomfortable kind of Brook,
called the ‘ Rohrgraben (Pipe-Ditch) ;’ the meaning of which unex-
pected name you find to be, That there is a Service-Pipe laid cun-
ningly at the bottom of this Brook ; lifting the Brook at its pure upper
springs, and sending it along, in secret tubular quasi-bottled condition ;
leaving the fouler drippings from the neighbourhood to make what
‘brook’ they still can, over its head, and keep it out of harm’s way till
Torgau get it. This is called the Rohrgraden, this which comes run-
ning through Siptitz Village, all along by the southern base of Siptitz
Hill; to the idle eye, a dirtyish Brook, ending in certain notable Ponds
eastward: but to the eye of the inquiring mind, which has piercéd
deeper, a Tube of rational Water, running into the throats of Torgau,
while the so-called Brook disembogues at discretion into the Entefang
(Duck-trap), and what. Ponds or reedy Puddles there are,”’—of which,
in poor Wunsch’s fine bit of fighting, last Year, we heard mention.
Let readers keep mind of them.

The Hill Siptitz, with this 26hrgraben at the southern basis of
it, makes a very main figure in the Battle now imminent. _ Siptitz
Height is, in fact, Daun’s Camp; where he stands entrenched to
the utmost, repeatedly changing his position, the better to sus-
tain Friedrich’s expected attacks. It is a blunt broad-backed
Elevation, mostly in vineyard, perhaps on the average 200 feet
above the general level, and of five or six square miles in area:
length, east to west, from Grosswig neighbourhood to the envi-
rons of Torgau, may be about three miles; breadth, south to
north, from the Siptitz to the Zinna neighbourhoods, above half
that distance. ‘The Height is steepish on the southern side, all
along to the south-west angle (which was Daun’s left flank in
the great Action coming), but swells up with easier ascent on
the west, north and other sides. Let the reader try for some
conception of its environment and it, as the floor or arena of a
ereat transaction this day.

Daun stands fronting southward along these Siptitz Heights,
looking towards Schilda and his dangerous neighbour ; heights,
woods, ponds, and inaccessibilities, environing his Position and
him. One of the strongest positions imaginable; which, under

- eo

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 85
3d Nov. 1760.

Prince Henri, proved inexpugnable enough to some of us. A
position not to be attacked on that southern front, nor on either
of its flanks :—where can it be attacked? Impregnable, under
Prince Henri in far inferior force: how will you take it from
Daun in decidedly superior? A position not to be attacked at
all, most military men would say ;—though One military man,
in his extreme necessity, must and will find a way into it.

One fault, the unique military man, intensely pondering, dis-
covers that it has: it is too small for Daun; not area enough for
manceuvering 65,000 men in it; who will get into confusion if
properly dealt with. A most comfortable light-flash, the eureka
of this terrible problem. ‘ We will attack it on rear and on
front simultaneously; that is the way to handle it!’ Yes;
simultaneously, though that is difficult, say military judges;
perhaps to Prussians it may be possible. It is the opinion of
military judges who have studied the matter, that Friedrich’s
plan, could it have been perfectly executed, might have got not
only victory from Daun, but was capable to fling his big Army
and him pellmell upon the Elbe Bridge, that is to say, in such
circumstances, into Elbe River, and swallow him bodily at a
frightful rate! That fate was spared poor Daun.

Monday, 3d November 1760, at half-past six in the morning,
Friedrich is on march for this great enterprise. The march
goes northward, in Three Columns, with a Fourth of Baggage ;
through the woods, on four different roads; roads, or combina-
tions of those intricate sandy avenues already noticed. North-
ward all of it, at first; but at a certain point ahead (at crossing
of the Eilenburg-Torgau Road, namely), the March is to divide
itself in two. Half of the force is to strike off rightward there
with Ziethen, and to issue on the south side of Siptitz Hill;
other half, under Friedrich himself, to continue northward, long
miles farther, and then at last bending round, issue,—simultane-
ously with Ziethen, if possible,—upon Siptitz Hill from the north
side.* Weare about 44,000 strong, against Daun, who is 65,000.

Simultaneously with Ziethen, so far as humanly possible: that
is the essential point! Friedrich has taken every pains that it

* See Map and Plan at p. 99 a.

86 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

. shall be correct, in this and all points; and to take double assur-
ance of hiding it from Daun, he yesternight, in dictating his Or-
ders on the other heads of method, kept entirely to himself this
most important Ziethen-portion of the Business. And now, at
starting, he has taken Ziethen in lis carriage with him a few
mniles, to explain the thing by word of mouth. At the Eilenburg
road, or before it, Ziethen thinks he is clear as to everything ;
dismounts ; takes in hand the mass intrusted to him; and strikes
off by that rightward course; ‘ Rightward, Herr Ziethen ; right-
ward till you get to Klitschen, your first considerable island in
this sea of wood; at Klitschen strike to the left into the woods
again,—your road is called the Butter-Strasse (Butter Street) ;
goes by the north-west side of Siptitz Height; reach Siptitz by
the Butter Street, and then do your endeavour !”

With the other Half of his Army, specially with the First
Column of it, Friedrich proceeds northward on his own part of
the adventure. Three Columns he has, besides the Baggage one:
in number about equal to Ziethen’s ; if perhaps otherwise, rather
the chosen Half; about 8,000 grenadier and footguard people,
with Kleist’s Hussars, are Friedrich’s own Column. Friedrich’s
Column marches nearest the Daun positions; the Baggage-col-
umn farthest ; and that latter is to halt, under escort, quite away
to left or westward of the disturbance coming; the other Two
Columns, Hiilsen’s of foot, Holstein’s mostly of horse, go through
intermediate tracks of wood, by roads more or less parallel; and
are all, Friedrich’s own Column, still more the others, to leave
Siptitz several miles to right, and to end, not at Siptitz Height,
but several miles past it, and then wheeling round, begin business
from the northward or rearward side of Daun, while Ziethen at-
tacks or menaces his front,—simultaneously, if possible. Fried-
rich’s march, hidden all by woods, is more than twice as far as
Ziethen’s,—some 14 or 15 miles in all; going straight north-
ward 10 miles; thence bending eastward, then southward through
woods; to emerge about Neiden, there to cross a Brook (Strie-
bach), and strike home on the north side of Daun. The track of
march is in the shape somewhat of a shepherd’s crook ; the long
handle of it, well away from Siptitz, reaches up to Neiden, this is
the straight or wooden part of said crook; after which comes the

~ Cuapr. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 87
3d Nov. 1760.

bent, catching, or iron part,—intended for Daun and his fierce
flock. Ziethen has hardly above six miles; and ought to be de-
liberate in his woodlands, till the King’s party have time to get
round.

The morning, I find, is wet; fourteen miles of march: fancy
such a Promenade through the dripping Woods; heavy, toil-
some, and with such errand ahead! ‘The delays were considera-
ble; some of them accidental. Vigilant Daun has Detachments
watching in these Woods :—a General Ried, who fires cannon
and gets off: then a General St. Ignon and the St. Ignon Regi-
ment of Dragoons; who, being between Column First and Column
Second, cannot get away; but, after some industry by Kleist and
those of Column Two, are caught and pocketed, St. Ignon him-
self prisoner among the rest. ‘This delay may perhaps be con-
sidered profitable: but there were other delays absolutely with-
out profit. For example, that of having difficulties with your
artillery-wagons in the wet miry lanes; that of missing your
road, at some turn in the solitary woods,—which latter was the
sad chance of Column Third, fatally delaying it for many hours.

Daun, learning by those returned parties from the Woods
what the Royal intentions on him are, hastily whirls himself
round, so as to front north, and there receive Friedrich: best
line northward for Friedrich’s behoof; rear line or second-best
will now receive Ziethen or what may come. Daun’s arrange-
ments are admitted to be prompt and excellent. Lacy, with his
20,000,—who lay, while Friedrich’s attack was expected from
south, at Loswig, as advanced guard, east side of the Grosse Teich
(supreme pond of all, which is a continuation of the Duck-trap,
Entefang, and hangs like a chief goitre on the goitry neck of
Torgau),—Lacy is now to draw himself north and westward,
and looking into the Entefang over his left shoulder (so to speak),
be rearguard against any Ziethen or Prussian party that may
come. Daun’s baggage is all across the Elbe, all in wagons since
yesterday; three Bridges hanging for Daun and it, in case of
adverse accident. Daun likewise brings all or nearly all his
cannon to the new front, for Friedrich’s behoof: 200 new pieces
hither; Archenholtz says 400 in whole; certainly such a weight
of artillery as never appeared in Battle before. Unless Fried-

88 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Noy. 1760.

rich’s arrangements prove punctual, and his stroke be empha
Friedrich may happen to fare badly.

On the latter point, of emphasis, there is no dubiety for Fried-
rich: but on the former,—things are already past doubt, the
wrong way! For the last hour or so of Friedrich’s march, there
has been continual storm of cannonade and musketry audible
from Ziethen’s side :—‘‘ Ziethen engaged!” thinks everybody;
and quickens step here, under this marching music from the dis-
tance. Which is but a wrong reading or mistake, nothing more:
the real phenomenon being as follows: Ziethen punctually got
to Klitschen at the due hour; struck into the Butter Strasse,
calculating his paces; but, on the edge of the Wood, found a
small Austrian party, like those in Friedrich’s route; and, push-
ing into it, the Austrian party replied with cannon before run-
ning. Whereupon Ziethen, not knowing how inconsidervble it
was, drew out in battle-order; gave it a salvo or two; drove it
back on Lacy, in the Duck-trap direction,—a long way east of
Butter Street, and Ziethen’s real place ;—unlucky that he fol-
lowed it so far! Ziethen followed it; and got into some languid
dispute with Lacy: dispute quite distant, languid, on both sides,
and consisting mainly of cannon; but lasting in this way many
precious hours. ‘This is the phenomenon which friends in the
distance read to be, ‘‘ Ziethen engaged!” Engaged, yes, and alas
with what? What Ziethen’s degree of blame -was, I do not
know. Friedrich thought it considerable :—‘ Stupid, stupid,
mien lieber /’”” which Ziethen never would admit ;—and, beyond
question, it was of high detriment to Friedrich this day. Such
accidents, say military men, are inherent, not to be avoided, in
that double form of attack: which may be true, only that Fried-
rich had no choice left of forms just now.

About noon, Friedrich’s Vanguard (Kleist and Hussars), about
1 o’clock Friedrich himself, 7 or 8,000 Grenadiers, emerged from
the Woods about Neiden. This Column, which consists of choice
troops, is to be Front-line of the Attack. But there is yet no
Second Column under Hiilsen, still less any Third under Hol-
stein, come in sight: and Ziethen’s cannonade is but too audible.
Friedrich halts; sends Adjutants to hurry on these Columns;—

tere

—

i ee ee

yee te Ye Sega. ast eth RAY go tye

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 89
3d Nov. 1760.

and rides out reconnoitering, questioning peasants; earnestly
surveying Daun’s ground and his own. Daun’s now right wing
well eastward about Zinna, had been Friedrich’s intended point
of attack; but the ground, out there, proves broken by boggy
brooks and remnant stagnancies of the Old Elbe; Friedrich
finds he must return into the Wood again; and attack Daun’s
left. Daun’s left is carefully drawn down en potence, or gallows-
shape there; and has, within the Wood, carefully built by Prince
Henri last year, an extensive Abatis, or complete western wall,
—only the north part of which is perhaps now passable, the
Austrians having in the cold time used a good deal of it as fire-
wood lately. ‘here, on the north-west corner of Daun, across
that weak part of the Abatis, must Friedrich’s attack lie. But
Friedrich’s Columns are still fatally behind,—Holstein, with all
the cavalry we have, so precious at present, is wandering by
wrong paths; took the wrong turn at some point, and the Ad-
jutant can hardly find him at all, with his precept of ‘‘ Haste,
Haste !”

We may figure Friedrich’s humour under these ill omens.
Ziethen’s cannonade becomes louder and louder; which Fried-
rich naturally fancies to be death or life to him,—not to mean
almost nothing, as it did. “ Mei Gott, Ziethen is in action, and
I have not my Infantry up!’ cried he. And at length decided
to attack as he was: Grenadiers in front, the chosen of his In-
fantry; Ramin’s Brigade for second line; and, except about 800
of Kleist, no Cavalry at all. His battalions march out from
Neiden hand, through difficult brooks, Streibach and the like,
by bridges of Austrian build, which the Austrians are obliged
to quit in hurry. ‘The Prussians are as yet perpendicular to
Daun, but will wheel rightward, into the Domitsch Wood again;
and then form,—parallel to Daun’s north-west shoulder; and
to Prince Henri’s Abatis, which will be their first obstacle in
charging. ‘Their obstacles in forming were many and intricate ;
ground so difficult, for artillery especially: seldom was seen such
expertness, such willingness of mind. And seldom lay ahead of
men such obstacles after forming! Think only of one fact:
Daun, on sight of their intention, has opened 400 pieces of artil-

§ Tempelhof, iv. 303.

90 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX
3d Nov. 1760.

lery on them, and these go raging and thundering into the hem
of the Wood, and to whatever issues from it, now and for hours
to come, at a rate of deafening uproar and of sheer deadliness,
which no observer can find words for.
Archenholtz, a very young officer of fifteen, who came into it
perhaps an hour hence, describes it as a thing surpassable only
by Doomsday: clangorous rage of noise risen to the infinite;
the boughs of the trees raining down on you, with horrid crash;
the Forest, with its echoes, bellowing far and near, and reverber-

. . . ry. \
ating in universal deathpeal ; comparable to the ‘'rump of Doom.

Friedrich himself, who is an old hand, said to those about him:
“What an infernal fire (Adllisches L’euer)! Did you ever hear
such a cannonade before? I never.”® Friedrich is between the
Two Lines of his Grenadiers, which is his place during the at-
tack: the first Line of Grenadiers, behind Prince Henri’s Abatis,
is within 800 yards of Daun; Ramin’s Brigade is to rear of the
Second Line, as a Reserve. Horse they have none, except the
800 Kleist Hussars; who stand to the left, outside the Wood,
fronted by Austrian Horse in hopeless multitude. Artillery
they have, in effect, none: their Batteries, hardly to be got across
these last woody difficulties of trees growing and trees felled, did
rank outside the Wood, on their left; but could do absolutely
nothing (gun-carriages and gunners, officers and men, being alike
blown away); and when Tempelhof saw them afterwards, they
never had been fired at all. ‘The Grenadiers have their muskets,
and their hearts and their right-hands.

With amazing intrepidity, they, being at length all ready in
rank within 800 yards, rush into the throat of this Fire-volecano;
in the way commanded,—which is the alone way: such a prob-
lem as human bravery seldom had. The Grenadiers plunge
forward upon the throat of Daun; but it is into the throat of
his iron engines and his tearing billows of cannon-shot that most
of them go. Shorn down by the company, by the regiment, in
those terrible 800 yards,—then and afterwards. Regiment Stut-
terheim was nearly all killed and wounded, say the Books. You
would fancy it was the fewest of them that ever got to the length
of selling their lives to Daun, instead of giving them away to his

§ ‘Tempelhof, iv. 804; Archenholtz, ii. 164.

4

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 91
3d Nov. 1760.

400 cannon. Butitis not so. ‘The Grenadiers, both Lines of '
them, still in quantity, did get into contact with Daun. And
sold him their lives, hand to hand, at a rate beyond example in
such circumstances;—Daun having to hurry up new force in
streams upon them; resolute to purchase, though the price, for
a long while, rose higher and higher.

At last the 6,000 Grenadiers, being now reduced to the tenth
man, had to fall back. Upon which certain Austrian Battalions
rushed down in chase, counting it Victory come: but were se-
verely admonished of that mistake ; and driven back by Ramin’s
people, who accompanied them into their ranks, and again gave
Daun a great deal of trouble before he could overpower them.
This is Attack First, issuing in failure first: one of the stiffest
bits of fighting ever known. Began about 2 in the afternoon ;
ended, I should guess, rather after 3.

Daun, by this time, is in considerable disorder of line; though
his 400 fire-throats continue belching ruin, and deafening the
world, without abatement. Daun himself had got wounded in
the foot or leg during this Attack, but had no time to mind it:
a most busy, strong and resolute Daun; doing his very best.
Friedrich, too, was wounded,—nobody will tell me in which of
these attacks ;—but I think not now, at least will not speak of
it now. What his feelings were, as this Grenadier Attack went
on,—a struggle so unequal, but not to be helped, from the delays
that had risen,—nobody, himself least of all, records for us: only
by this little symptom: Two Grandsons of the Old Dessauer’s
are Adjutants of his Majesty, and well loved by him; one of
them now at his hand, the other heading his regiment in this
charge of Grenadiers. Word comes to Friedrich that this latter
one is shot dead. On which, Friedrich, turning to the Brother,
and not hiding his emotion as was usual in such moments, said:
‘All goes ill today; my friends are quitting me. I have just
heard that your Brother is killed (Tout va mal aujour@hut; mes
amis me quittent. On vient de m’annoncer la mort de votre frere) 17?
Words which the Anhalt kindred, and the Prussian military
public, treasured up with a reverence strange to us. Of Anhalt
perhaps some word by and by, at a fitter season,

7 Preuss, ii. 226.

92 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

Shortly after 3, as I reckon the time, Hiilsen’s Column did
arrive: choice troops these too, the Pomeranian Manteujfel, one
regiment of them ;—young Archenholtz of /orcade (first Battal-
ion here, second and third are with Ziethen, making vain noise)
was in this Column; came, with the others, winding to the
Wood's edge, in such circuits, poor young soul; rain pouring,
if that had been worth notice; cannon-balls plunging, boughs
crashing, such a Todes-Posaune, or Doomsday-Thunder, broken
loose :—they did emerge steadily, nevertheless, he says, “like
sea-billows or flow of tide, under the smoky hurricane.” Pretty
men are here too, Manteuffel Pommerners; no hearts stouter.
With these, and the indignant Remnants which waited for them,
a new assault upon Daun is set about. And bursts out, on that
same north-west corner of him; say about half-past 3. The
rain is now done, “blown away by the tremendous artillery,”
thinks Archenholtz, if that were any matter.

The Attack, supported by a few more Horse (though Column
Three still fatally lingers), and, I should hope, by some practica-
ble weight of Field-batteries, is spurred by a grimmer kind of
indignation, and is of fiercer spirit than ever. Think how Man-
teuffel of Foot will blaze out; and what is the humour of those
once-overwhelmed Remnants, now getting air again! Daun’s
line is actually broken in this point, his artillery surmounted
and become useless; Daun’s potence and north front are reeling
backwards, Prussians in possession of their ground. ‘‘ The field
to be ours!” thinks Friedrich, for some time. If indeed Ziethen
had been seriously busy on the southern side of things, instead
of vaguely cannonading in that manner! But resolute Daun,
with promptitude, calls in his Reserve from Grosswig, calls in
whatsoever of disposable force he can gather; Daun rallies,
rushes again on the Prussians in overpowering number; and,
in spite of their most desperate resistance, drives them back,
ever back; and recovers his ground.

A very desperate bout, this Second one; probably the toughest
of the Battle: but the result again is Daun’s; the Prussians
palpably obliged to draw back. Friedrich himself got wounded
here ;—poor young Archenholtz too, on/y wounded, not killed,
as so many were :—Friedrich’s wound was a contusion on the

y*. 42

— ee a

~~ ee ee

—— ee

Cuar. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 93
3d Noy. 1760.

breast; came of some spent bit of case-shot, deadened farther by
a famed pelisse he wore,—‘‘ which saved my life,” he said after-
wards to Henri. ‘The King himself little regarded it (mention-
ing it only to Brother Henri, on inquiry and solicitation), during
the few weeks it still hung about him. ‘The Books intimate
that it struck him to the earth, void of consciousness for some
time, to the terror of those about him; and that he started up,
disregarding it altogether in this press of business, and almost as
if ashamed of himself, which imposed silence on people's tongues.
In military circles there is still, on this latter point, an Anecdote;
which I cannot confirm or deny, but will give for the sake of
Berenhorst and his famed Book on the Art of War. Berenhorst,
—a natural son of the Old Dessauer’s, and evidently enough a
chip of the old block, only gone into the articulate-speaking or
intellectual form,—was, for the present, an Adjutant or Aide-
de-camp of Friedrich’s; and at this juncture was seen bending
over the swooned Friedrich, perhaps with an over-pathos or elab-
orate something in his expression of countenance; when Fried-
rich re-opened his indignant eyes: ‘‘ Was macht Hr her?” cried
Friedrich: ‘‘ Er sammle Fuyards! What have you to do here?
Go and gather runaways” (be of some real use, can’t you) !—
which unkind cut struck deep into Berenhorst, they say; and
could never after be eradicated from his gloomy heart. It is
certain he became Prince Henri’s Adjutant soon after, and that
in his Kriegskunst, amidst the clearest orthodox admiration, he
manifests, by little touches up and down, a feeling of very fell
and pallid quality against the King; and belongs, in a peculiarly
virulent though taciturn way, to the Opposition Party. His
Book, next to-English Lloyd’s (or perhaps superior, for Beren-
horst is of much the more cultivated intellect, highly condensed
too, though so discursive and far-read, were it not for the vice
of perverse diabolic temper), seemed, to a humble outsider like
myself, greatly the strongest-headed, most penetrating, and hu-
manly illuminative, I had had to study on that subject. Who
the weakest-headed was (perhaps Jomini, among the widely-cir-
culating kind?), I will not attempt to decide, so great is the
crush in that bad direction. ‘To return.

This Second Attack is again a repulse to the indignant Fried-

94 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

rich ; though he still persists in fierce effort to recover himself:

and indeed Daun’s interior, too, it appears, is all in a whirl of

confusion ; his losses too having been enormous :—when, see,

here at length, about half-past 4, Sun now down, is the tardy
Holstein, with his Cavalry, emerging from the Woods. Comes

wending on yonder, half a mile to north of us; straight eastward
or Elbe-ward (according to the order of last night), leaving us
and our death-struggles unregarded, as a thing that is not on his
tablets, and is no concern of Holstein’s. Friedrich ha!ts him,

not quite too late; organises a new and third Attack. Simul-
taneous universal effort of foot and horse upon Daun’s Front;

Holstein himse:f, who is almost at Zinna by this time, to go upon
Daun’s right wing. This is Attack Third; and is of sporadic
intermittent nature, in the thickening dusk and darkness: part
of it successful, none of it beaten, but nowhere the success com-
plete. Thus, in the extreme west or leftmost of Friedrich’s
attack, Spaen Dragoons,—one of the last Horse Regiments of

Holstein’s Column,—Spaen Dragoons, under their Lieutenant-
Colonel Dalwig (a beautiful manceuverer, who has stormed
through many fields, from Moéllwitz onwards), cut in, with an.
admired impetuosity, with an audacious skill, upon the Austrian
Infantry Regiments there; broke them to pieces, took two of

them in the lump prisoners ; bearded whole torrents of Austrian

cavalry rushing up to the rescue,—and brought off their mass

of prisoner regiments and six cannon ;—the Austrian rescuers

being charged by some new Prussian party, and hunted home

again.’ ‘‘Had these Prussian Horse been on their ground at 2

o'clock, and done as now, it is very evident,” says ‘Tempelhof,

‘‘what the Battle of Torgau had by this time been !”

Near by, too, farther rightwards, if in the bewildering indis-
tinctness I might guess where (but the where is not so important
io us), Bayreuth Dragoons, they of the 67 standards at Striegau
long since, plunged into the Austrian Battalions at an unsur-
passable rate; tumbled four regiments of them (Regiment Kaiser,
Regiment Newperg,—nobody now cares which four) heels over
head, and in few minutes took the most of them prisoners ;
bringing them home too, like Dalwig, through crowds of rescu-

8 Tempelhof, iv. 305,

Cuar. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 95
3d Nov. 1760.

ers. Kastward, again, or Elbe-ward, Holstein has found such
intricacies of ground, such boggy depths and rough steeps, his
Cavalry could come to no decisive sabering with the Austrian;
but stood exchanging shot ;—nothing to be done on that right
wing of Daun.

Daun’s left flank, however, does appear, after Three such At-
tacks, to be at last pretty well ruined: Tempelhof says, ‘‘ Daun’s
whole Front Line was tumbled to pieces; disorder had, sympa-
thetically, gone rearward, even in those eastern parts; and on
the western and north-western the Prussian Horse Regiments
were now standing in its place.” But indeed such charging and
recharging, pulsing and repulsing, has there been hereabouts for
hours past, the rival Hosts have got completely interpenetrated ;
Austrian parties, or whole regiments, are to rear of those Prus-
sians who stand ranked here, and in victorious posture, as the
Night sinks. Night is now sinking on this murderous day:
‘* Nothing more to be made of it; try it again tomorrow!’ thinks
the King; gives Hiilsen charge of bivouacking and rearranging
these scattered people; and rides with escort north-westward to
Elsnig, north of Neiden, well to rear of this bloody arena,—in a
mood of mind which may be figured as gloomy enough.

Daun, too, is home, to Torgau,—I think, a little earlier,—to
have his wound dressed, now that the day seems to him secure.
Buccow, Daun’s second, is killed; Daun’s third is an Irish Graf
O’ Donnell, memorable only on this one occasion; to this O’Don-
nell, and to Lacy, who is firm on his ground yonder, untouched
all day, the charge of matters is left. Which cannot be a difficult
one, hopes Daun. Daun, while his wound is dressing, speeds off
a courier to Vienna. Courier did enter duly there, with glorious
trumpeting postillions, and universal Hep-hep-hurrah; kindling
that ardently loyal City into infinite triumph and illumination,
—for the space of certain hours following.

Hiilsen meanwhile has been doing his best to get into proper
bivouac for the morrow; has drawn back those eastward horse
regiments, drawn forward the infantry battalions ; forward, I
think, and well rightward, where, in the daytime, Daun’s left
flank was. On the whole, it is north-westward that the general
Prussian Bivouac for this night is; the extremest sowth-western-

96 _FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov.1760.

most portion of it is Infantry, under General Lestwitz; a gallant
useful man, who little dreams of becoming famous, this dreary
uncertain night

It is 6 o’clock. Damp dusk has thickened down into utter
darkness, on these terms :—when, lo, cannonade and musketade
from the south, audible in the Lestwitz-Hiilsen quarters: seri-
ously loud; red glow of conflagration visible withal,—some un-
fortunate Village going up (“ Village of Siptitz, think you”);
and need of Hiilsen at his fastest! Hiilsen, with some readiest
Foot Regiments, circling round, makes thitherward; Lestwitz
in the van. Let us precede him thither, and explain a little
what it was.

Ziethen, who had stood all day making idle noises,—of what
a fatal quality we know, if Ziethen did not,—waiting for the
King’s appearance, must have been considerably displeased with
himself at nightfall, when the King’s fire gradually died out
farther and farther north, giving rise to the saddest surmises.
Ziethen’s Generals, Saldern and the Leuthen Mollendorf, are full
of gloomy impatience, urgent on him to try something. “ Push
westward, nearer the King? Some stroke at the enemy on their
south or south-western side, where we have not molested them
all day? No getting across the Rohrgraben on them, says your
Excellenz?  Siptitz Village, and their Battery there, is on our
side of the Rohrgraben: —um Gottes Willen, something, Herr
General!” Zicthen does finally assent: draws leftward, west-
ward; unbuckles Saldern’s people upon Siptitz; who go like
sharp hounds from the slip; fasten on Siptitz and the Austrians
there, with a will; wrench these out, force them to abandon
their Battery, and to set Siptitz on fire, while they run out of it.
Comfortable bit of success, so far,—were not Siptitz burning,
so that we cannot get through. ‘Through, no: and were we
through, is not there the Rohrgraben ?”* thinks Ziethen, not see-
ing his way.

How lucky that, at this moment, Mollendorf comes in, with
a discovery to westward; discovery of our old friend “the But-
ter Street,”—it is nothing more,—where Ziethen should have
marched this morning: there would he have found a solid road

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 97
3d Nov. 1760.

across the Réhrgraben, free passage by a bridge between two
bits of ponds, at the Schdfere: (Sheep-Farm) of Siptitz yonder.
‘There still,” reports Mollendorf, “the solid road is; unbeset
hitherto, except by me Mollendorf!” Thitherward all do hast-
en, Austrians, Prussians: but the Prussians are beforehand;
Mollendorf is master of the Pass, deploying himself on the other
side of it, and Ziethen and everybody hastening through to sup-
port him there, and the Austrians making fierce fight in vain.
The sound of which has reached Hiilsen, and set Lestwitz and
him in motion thither. !

For the thing is vital, if we knew it. Close ahead of Mdllen-
dorf, when he is through this Pass, close on Millendorf’s left,
as he wheels round on the attacking Austrians, is the south-
west corner of Siptitz Height. South-west corner, highest point
of it; summit and key of all that Battle area; rules it all, if you
get cannon thither. It hangs steepish on the southern side, over
the Rohrgraben, where this Méllendorf-Austrian fight begins ;
but it is beautifully accessible, if you bear round to the west
side,—a fine saddle-shaped bit of clear ground there, in shape
like the outside or seat of a saddle; Domitsch Wood the crup-
per part; summit of this Height the pommel, only nothing like
so steep :—it is here (on the southern saddle-flap, so to speak),
gradually mounting westward to the crupper-and-pommel part,
that the agony now is.

And here, in utter darkness, illuminated only by the musketry
and cannon blazes, there ensued two hours of stiff wrestling in
its kind: not the fiercest spasm of all, but the final which de-
cided all. Lestwitz, Hiilsen, come sweeping on, led by the sound
and the fire; ‘ beating the Prussian march, they,” sharply on all
their drums,—Prussian march, rat-tat-tan, sharply through the
gloom of Chaos in that manner; and join themselves, with no
mistake made, to Méllendorf’s, to Ziethen’s, left and the saddle-
flap there, and fall on. The night is pitch-dark, says Archen-
holtz; you_cannot see your hand before you. Old Hiilsen’s
bridle-horses were all shot away, when he heard this alarms far
off: no horse left; and he is old, and has his own bruises. He
seated himself on a cannon; and so rides, and arrives; right

Vor. VI.—E

98 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

welcome the sight of him, doubt not! And the Fight rages
still for an hour or more.

To an observant Méllendorf, watching about all day, the im-
portance and all-importance of Siptitz Summit, if it can be got,
is probably known; to Daun it is alarmingly well known, when
he hears of it. Daun is zealously urgent on Lacy, on O’Don-
nell; who do try what they can; send reinforcements, and the
like; but nothing that proves useful. O’Donnell is not the man
for such a crisis: Lacy, too, it is remarked, has always been
more expert in ducking out of Friedrich’s way than in fighting
anybody.® In fine, such is the total darkness, the difficulty, the
uncertainty, most or all of the reinforcements sent halted short,
in the belly of the Night, uncertain where ; and their poor friends
got altogether beaten and driven away.

About 9 at night, all the Austrians are rolling off, eastward,
eastward. Prussians goading them forward what they could
(firing not quite done till 10); and that all-important pommel
of the saddle is indisputably won. ‘The Austrians settled them-
selves, in a kind of half-moon shape, close on the suburbs of
Torgau; the Prussians in a parallel half-moon posture, some
furlongs behind them. The Austrians sat but a short time; not
a moment longer than was indispensable. Daun perceives that
the key of his ground is gone from him; that he will have to
send a second Courier to Vienna. And, above all things, that
he must forthwith get across the Elbe and away. Lucky for
him that he has Three Bridges (or Four, including the ‘Town
Bridge), and that his Baggage is already all across and standing
on wheels. With excellent despatch and order Daun winds
himself across,—all of him that is stll coherent; and indeed, in
the distant parts of the Battle-field, wandering Austrian parties
were admonished hitherward by the River’s voice in the great
darkness,—and Daun’s loss in prisoners, though great, was less
than could have been expected: 8,000 in all.

Till towards one in the morning, the Prussians, in their half-
moon, had not learned what he was doing. About one they
pushed into Torgau, and across the Town Bridge; found 26
pontoons,—all the rest packed off except these 26 ;—and did not

° Archenholtz’s sour remark.

hes hae iy ame ieliiaal

848): in Helden-Geschichte, or in Anonymous of Hamburg (iv. 245-300), the
Daun Despatches, the Lists, &c.

98 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

welcome the sight of him, doubt not! And the Fight rages
still for an hour or more.

To an observant Mdéllendorf, watching haut all day, the im-
portance and all-importance of Siptitz Summit, if it can be got,
is probably known; to Daun it is alarmingly well known, when
he hears of it. Daun is zealously urgent on Lacy, on O’Don-
nell; who do try what they can; send reinforcements, and the
like; but nothing that proves useful. O’Donnell is not the man
for such a crisis: Lacy, too, it is remarked, has always been
more expert in ducking out of Friedrich’s way than in fighting
anybody.® In fine, such is the total darkness, the difficulty, the
uncertainty, most or all of the reinforcements sent halted short,
in the belly of the Night, uncertain where ; and their poor friends
got altogether beaten and driven away.

About 9 at night, all the Austrians are rolling off, eastward,
eastward. Prussians goading them forward what they could
(firing not quite done till 10); and that all-important pommel
of the saddle is indisputably won. The Austrians settled them-
selves, in a kind of half-moon shape, close on the suburbs of
Torgau; the Prussians in a parallel half-moon posture, some
furlongs behind them. The Austrians sat but a short time; not
a moment longer than was indispensable. Daun perceives that
the key of his ground is gone from him; that he will have to
send a second Courier to Vienna. And, above all things, that
he must forthwith get across the Elbe and away. Lucky for
him that he has Three Bridges (or Four, including the ‘Town
Bridge), and that his Baggage is already all across and standing
on wheels. With excellent despatch and order Daun winds
himself across,—all of him that is stll coherent; and indeed, in
the distant parts of the Battle-field, wandering Austrian parties
were admonished hitherward by the River’s voice in the great
darkness,—and Daun’s loss in prisoners, though great, was less
than could have been expected: 8,000 in all.

Till towards one in the morning, the Prussians, in their half-
moon, had not learned what he was doing. About ‘one they
pushed into Torgau, and across the Town Bridge; found 26
pontoons,—all the rest packed off except these 26 ;—and did not

®° Archenholtz’s sour remark.

ee eee

ae ee ee ee

—— ee
— wo hy

ae

—— eee eo ee

Le ee Te

ee a a

ras

es
Yo terS

ge :
1g SI

Y R)
WFR Gy sfeschhendort
FEM?

* C7 j F
; ay \ ie
D NS eee
Sig ie sil /
= Q TIS FAIS!
hy : Gk,
i Sy Bagi Seifers
oe ’
he hy, ue
rr ee

ile
BATTLE OF LIECNITZ.
iS ™* AUGUST, 1760.
a.a. Prussian Camp, lett with fires burning.
b.b.b. Prussian Mam Army. c.c. Liethens Diviswn.

ATTLE OF TORGAU.

Bre NOVEMBER 1760.

a.a. Prussian (amp at Schilda.
b.b.b. Austrian Army. Calc: Reargudr

rn

prrevurivys CALA ULLU LULU poveux wan VxxUv py wEnwny aw y ewenwe Vew acuw

° Archenholtz’s sour remark.

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 99
3d Novy. 1760.

follow farther. Lacy retreated by the other or left bank of the
River, to guard against- attempts from that side. Next day
there was pursuit of Lacy; some prisoners and furnitures got
from him, but nothing of moment: Daun and Lacy joined at
Dresden; took post, as usual, behind their inaccessible Plauen
Chasms. Sat there, in view of the chasing Prussians, without
farther loss than this of Torgau, and of a Campaign gone to
water again. What an issue, for the third time !!0—

On Torgau-field, behind that final Prussian half-moon, there
reigned, all night, a confusion which no tongue can express.
Poor wounded men by the hundred and the thousand, weltering
in their blood, on the cold wet ground ; not surgeons or nurses,
but merciless predatory sutlers, equal to murder if necessary,
waiting on them and on the happier that were dead. ‘‘ Unut-
terable!’ says Archenholtz; who, though wounded, had crawled
or got carried to some village near. The living wandered about
in gloom and uncertainty ; lucky he whose haversack was still
his, and a crust of bread in it: water was a priceless luxury,
almost nowhere discoverable. Prussian Generals roved about
with their Staff-Officers, seeking to re-form their Battalions; to
little purpose. ‘They had grown indignant, in some instances,
and were vociferously imperative and minatory; “but in the
dark who needed mind them?—they went raving elsewhere,
and, for the first time, Prussian word-of-command saw itself
futile.” Pitch darkness, bitter cold, ground trampled into mire.
On Siptitz Hill there is nothing that will burn: farther back, in
the Domitsch Woods, are numerous fine fires, to which Austri-
ans and Prussians alike gather: ‘‘ Peace and truce between us ;
tomorrow morning, we will see which are prisoners, which are
captors.” So pass the wild hours, all hearts longing for the
dawn, and what decision it will bring.

Friedrich, at Elsnig, found every hut full of wounded, and
their surgeries, and miseries silent or loud. He himself took

10 Tempelhof, iv. 291-818; Archenholtz, ii. 159-174; Retzow, ii. 299 et
seq.; Umsténdliche Beschreibung des &c. (in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 823-
848): in Helden-Geschichte, or in Anonymous of Hamburg (iv. 245-300), the
Daun Despatches, the Lists, &e.

10U FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

shelter in the little Church; passed the night there. Busy about
many things;—“ using the altar,” it seems, “by way of writing-
table” (self or secretaries kneeling, shall we fancy, on those new
terms?), “and the stairs of it as seat.’ Of the final Ziethen-
Lestwitz effort he would scarcely hear the musketry or cannon-
ade, being so far away from it. At what hour, or from whom
first, he learned that the Battle of Torgau had become Victory
in the night-time, I know not: the Anecdote-Bogks send him
out in his cloak, wandering up and down before daybreak ;
standing by the soldiers’ fires; and at length, among the Woods,
in the faint incipiency of dawn, meeting a Shadow which proves
to be Ziethen himself in the body, with embraces and congratu-
lations :—evidently mythical, though dramatic. Reach him the
news soon did; and surely none could be welcomer. Head-
quarters change from the altar-steps in Elsnig Church to secular
rooms in Torgau. Ziethen has already sped forth on the skirts
of Lacy; whole Army follows next day; and, on the War-thea-
tre it is, on the sudden, a total change of scene. Conceivable to
readers without the details.

Hopes there were of getting back Dresden itself; but that,
on closer view, proved unattemptable. Daun kept his Plauen
Chasm, his few square miles of ground beyond; the rest of Sax-
ony was Friedrich’s, as heretofore. Loudon had tried hard on
Kosel for a week ; storming once, and a second time, very fierce-
ly, Goltz being now near; but could make nothing of it; and,
on wind of Goltz, went his way.1! The Russians, on sound of
Torgau, shouldered arms, and made for Poland. Daun, for his
own share, went to Vienna this Winter; in need of surgery, and
other things. ‘The population ‘there is rather disposed to be
grumbly on its once heroic Fabius; wishes the Fabius were a lit-
tle less cunctatory. But Imperial Majesty herself, one is proud
to relate, drove out, in Old Roman spirit, some miles, to meet
him, her defeated ever-honoured Daun, and to inquire graciously
about his health, which is'so important to the State.!

~Torgau was Daun’s last Battle: Daun’s last Battle; and,

~ 1! Hofbericht von der Belagerung von Kosel, im October 1760 (Seyfarth,

Beylagen, ii. 798-1004): began, ‘‘October 21st;” ended, ‘‘at daybreak, Oc-
tober 27th.” 12 Archenholtz, ii. 179.

a

F

Cuap. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 101
3d Nov. 1760.

what is more to the joy of readers and their Editor here, was
Friedrich’s last,—so that the remaining Two Campaigns may
fairly be condensed to an extreme degree; and a few Chapters
more will deliver us altogether from this painful element !—

Daun lost at Torgau, by his own account, “about 11,000

' men,”—should have said, according to Tempelhof, and even to

neutral persons, “above 12,000 killed and wounded, plus 8,000
prisoners, 45 cannon, 29 flags, 1 standard (or horse-flag),’”!$
which brings him to at least 20,000 minus ;—the Prussian loss,
heavy enough too, being, by ‘Tempelhof’s admission, ‘ between
13 and 14,000, of whom 4,000 prisoners.’’ The sore loss, not
so computable in arithmetic,—but less sore to Daun, perhaps,
than to most people,—is that of being beaten, and having one’s
Campaign reduced to water again. No Conquest of Saxony,
any more than of Silesia, possible to Daun, this Year. In Si-
lesia, thanks to Loudon, small thanks to Loudon’s Chief, they
have got Glatz: Kosel they could not get; fiery Loudon himself
stormed and blazed to no purpose there, and had to hurry home
on sight of Goltz and relief. Glatz is the net sum-total. Daun
knows all this; but in a stoical arithmetical manner, and refuses
to be flurried by it.

Friedrich, as we said, had hoped something might be done in
Saxony on the defeated Daun ;—perhaps Dresden itself be got
back from him, and his Army altogether sent to winter in Bohe-
mia again? But it proved otherwise. Daun showed not the
least disposition to quit his Plauen Chasm, or fall into discour-
agement: and after some weeks of diligent trial, on Friedrich’s
part, and much running about in those central and Hill-ward
parts, Friedrich found he would have to be content with his
former allotment of Saxon territory, and to leave the Austrians
quiet in theirs. Took winter-quarters accordingly, and let the
Enemy take. Cantoned himself, in that Meissen-Freyberg Coun-
try, in front of the Austrians and their impassable Plauens and
Chasms ;—pretty much as in the past Year, only that the Two
Armies lay at a greater distance, and were more peaceable, as
if by mutual consent.

'3 Tempelhof, iv. 213; Kausler, p. 726.

102 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Nov. 1760.

Headquarter of the King is Leipzig; where the King did not
arrive till December 8th,—such adjusting and arranging has he
had, and incessant running to and fro. He lived in the ‘ Apel
House, Vew Neumarkt, No. 16;’”!* the same he had occupied in
1757, in the Rossbach time. ‘Ach! how lean your Majesty has
grown!” said the Mistress of it, at sight of him again (mythically,
I should fancy, though it is in the Anecdote-Books). ‘‘ Lean, ja
wohl,” answered he: ‘and what wonder, with Three Women”
(Theresa, Czarina, Pompadour) “ hanging on the throat of me
all this while!’? But we propose to look in upon him ourselves,
in this Apel House, on more authentic terms, by and by. Read,
meanwhile, these Two bits of Autograph, thrown off incidentally,
at different places, in the previous busy journeyings over Meissen-
Freyberg Country:

1. Friedrich to Marquis D’Argens (at Berlin).
‘* Meissen, 10th November 1760.

* * “T drove the enemy to the Gates of Dresden; they occupy
their Camp of last Year; all my skill is not enough to dislodge them,”
—(Chasm of Plauen, “a place impregnable, were it garrisoned by chim-
ney-sweeps,” says the King once). ‘We have saved our reputation
by the Day of Torgau: but don’t imagine our enemies are so disheart-
ened as to desire Peace. Duke Ferdinand’s affairs are not in a good
way” (missed Wesel, of which presently ;—and, alas also, George II.
died, this day gone a fortnight, which is far worse for us, if we knew
it!)—“ I fear the French will preserve through Winter the advantages
they gained during the Campaign.

“In a word, I see all black, as if I were at the bottom of a tomb.
Have some compassion on the situation I am in; conceive that I dis-
guise nothing from you, and yet that I do not detail to you all my em-
barrassments, my apprehensions and troubles. Adieu, dear Marquis;
write to me sometimes,—don’t forget a poor devil, who curses ten
times a day his fatal existence, and could wish he already were in
those Silent Countries from which nobody returns with news.”?®

2. The Second, of different complexion, is a still more interest-
ing little Autograph, date elsewhere, farther on, in those wander-
ings. Madame Camas, Widow of the Colonel Camas whom we
knew twenty years ago, is ‘‘ Queen’s Ober-Hofineisterinn (Lady in
Chief ),”—to whom the King’s Letters are always pretty:

14 Rodenbeck, ii. 65. 1S (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 204, 5.

Cuapr. V.] BATTLE OF TORGAU. 103
2d Nov. 1760.

Friedrich to Madame Camas (at Magdeburg, with the Queen’s Majesty).
‘Neustadt, 18th November 1760.

“*T am exact in answering, and eager to satisfy you” (in that matter
of the porcelain): “ you shall have a breakfast-set, my good Mamma;
six coffee-cups, very pretty, well diapered, and tricked out with all the
little embellishments which increase their value. On account of some
pieces which they are adding to the set, you will have to wait a few
days; but I flatter myself this delay will contribute to your satisfaction,
and produce for you a toy that will give you pleasure, and make you
remember your old Adorer. It is curious how old people’s habits agree.
For four years past I have given up suppers, as incompatible with the
Trade I am obliged to follow; and in marching days, my dinner con-
sists of a cup of chocolate.

“We hurried off, like fools, quite inflated with our Victory, to try if
we could not chase the Austrians out of Dresden: they made a mock-
ery of us from the tops of their mountains. So I have withdrawn, like
a bad little boy, to conceal myself, out of spite, in one of the wretched-
est villages in Saxony. And here the first thing will be to drive the
Circle gentlemen” (Reichs Army) “out of Freyberg into Chemnitz,
and get ourselves room to quarter and something to live upon. It is, I
swear to you, a dog of a life” (or even a she-dog, chienne de vie), “‘ the
like of which nobody but Don Quixote ever led before me. All this
tumbling and toiling, and bother and confusion that never ceases, has
made me so old that you would scarcely know me again. On the right
side of my head the hair is all gray; my teeth break and fall out; I
have got my face wrinkled like the falbalas of a petticoat; my back
bent like a fiddle-bow ; and spirit sad and downcast like a monk of La
Trappe. I forewarn you of all this, lest, in case we should meet again
in flesh and bone, you might feel yourself too violently shocked by my
appearance. ‘There remains to me nothing but the heart,—which has
undergone no change, and which will preserve, so long as I breathe,
its feelings of esteem and of tender friendship for my good Mamma.
Adieu.”*®— — To which add only this on Duke Ferdinand, ‘‘ whose
affairs,” we just heard, “are not in a good way :”

Fight of Kloster Kampen (Night of October 15th-16th); Wesel
not to be had by Duke Ferdinand.

After Warburg (July 31st, while Friedrich was on the eve of cross-
ing Elbe on new adventures, Dresden Siege having failed him), Duke
Ferdinand made no figure to the Gazetteers ; fought no Battle farther ;

16 (Huvres de Frédéric, xviii. 144.

=

104 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

3d Nov. 1760.
and has had a Campaign, which is honourable only to judges of a higher
than the Gazetteer sort. __

By Warburg Ferdinand had got the Diemel; on the north bank of
which he spread himself out, impassable to Broglio, who lay trying on
the opposite bank :—‘‘ No Hanover by this road.” Broglio thereupon
drew back a little; pushed out circuitously from his right wing, which
reaches far eastward of Ferdinand, a considerable Brigade,—circuit-
ously, round by the Weser-Fulda Country, and beyond the embouchure
of Diemel,—to try it by that method. Got actually a few miles into
Hanoverian territory, by that method ; laid hold of Gottingen, also of
Miinden, which secures a road thither: and at Gottingen there, ‘‘ ever
since August 4th,” Broglio has been throwing up works, and shooting
out hussar parties to a good distance ;—intending, it would seem, to
maintain himself, and to be mischievous, in that post. Would, in fact,
fain entice Ferdinand across the Weser, to help Gottingen. ‘ Across
Weser, yes ;—and so leave Broglio free to take Lippstadt from me, as
he might after a short siege,” thinks Ferdinand always; ‘“ which would
beautifully shorten Broglio’s communication” (quite direct. then, and
without interruption, all the way to Wesel), “ and make Hanover itself,
Hanover and Brunswick, the central Seat of War!” Which Ferdinand,
grieved as he is for Gottingen, will by no means consent to.

Ferdinand, strong only as one to two, cannot hinder Broglio, though
he tries variously ; and is much at a loss, seeing Broglio irrepressibly
busy this way, all through August and on into September ;—has heard,
however, from Wesel, through secret partisans there, That Wesel, con-
sidered altogether out of risk, is left in a very weak condition ; weak in
garrison, weak even in gunners. Reflecting upon which, in his diffi-
culties, Ferdinand asks himself, ‘‘ A sudden stroke at Wesel, 200 miles
away, might it not astonish Broglio, who is so busy on us just here ?”
—and, September 22d, despatches the Hereditary Prince on that errand.
A man likely for it,if there be one in the world :—unable to do it, how-
ever, as the issue told. Here is what I find noted.

*¢ September 22d,the Erbprinz, with a chosen Corps of 15,000, mostly
English, left these Diemel regions towards Wesel, at his speediest.
September 29th, Erbprinz and vanguard, Corps rapidly following, are
got to Dorsten, within 20 miles of Wesel. A most swift Erbprinz ;
likely for such work. And it is thought by judges, Had he had either
siege-artillery or scaling apparatus, he might really have attacked Wesel
with good chance upon it. But he has not evena ladder ready, much less
asiege-gun. Siege-guns are at Bielefeld” (come from Bremen, [ sup-
pose, by English boating, up the Weser so far); ‘‘ but that is six-score
miles of wheel-carriage ; roads bad, and threatening to be worse, as it is
equinoctial weather. There is nothing for it but to wait for those guns,

a” eee re

Cuap. V.] BATILE OF TORGAU. 105
3d Nov. 1760.

“The Erbprinz, hopefully waiting, does his endeavour in the interim ;
throws a bridge over the Rhine, pounces upon Cleve garrison (prisoners,
with their furnitures), pounces upon this and that; ‘spreads terror’ on
the French thereabouts ‘ up to Diisseldorf and Koln,—and on Broglio
himself, so far off, the due astonishment. ‘ Wesel to be snatched,—ye
Heavens! Our Netherlands road cut off: Diisseldorf, Koln, our Rhine
Magazines, all and sundry, fallen to the hawks,—who, the lighter-winged
of them, might pay visits in France itself!’ Broglio has to suspend his
Gottingen operations, and detach Marquis de Castries with (say ulti-
mately, for Castries is to grow and gather by the road) 35,000 to relieve
Wesel. Castries marches double-quick ; weather very rainy ;—arrives
in those parts, October 13th ;—hardly a gun from Bielefeld come to
hand yet, Erbprinz merely filling men with terror. And so,

“* October 14th, after two weeks and a day, the Hereditary Prince
sees, not guns from Bielefeld, but Castries pushing into Wesel a 7,000
of additional garrison,—and the Enterprise on Wesel grown impossible,
Impossible, and probably far more; Castries in a condition to devour
us, if he prove sharp. It behoves the Hereditary Prince to be himself
sharp ;—which he undoubtedly was, in this sharp crisis. Next day,
our Erbprinz, taking survey of Castries in his strong ground of Kloster
Kampen, decides, like a gallant fellow, to attack Aim ;—and straightway
does it. Breaks, that same night (October 15th-16th, 1760), stealthily,
through woods and with precautions, into Castries’ Post ;— intending
surprisal, and mere ruin to Castries. And there ensued, not the Sur-
prisal as it turned out, but the Battle of Kloster Kampen; which again
proved unsuccessful, or only half successful, to the Hereditary Prince.
A many-winged, intricate Night-Battle ; to be read of in Books. This
is where the Chevalier D’Assas, he or Somebody, gave the alarm to the
Castries people at the expense of his life. ‘A moi, Auvergne, Ho, Au-
vergne!” shouted D’Assas (if it was D’Assas at all), when the stealthy
English came upon him; who was at once cut down.'’ It is certain,

17 Preuss (ii. 270 n.) asserts it to be proved, in ‘‘ MZiscedlen aus den neuesten
ausléndischen Litteratur (1824, No. 3, p. 409),”’a Book which none of us ever
saw, ‘‘ That the real hero” (equal to a Roman Decius or more) was not Cap-
tain D’Assas, of the Regiment Auvergne, but a poor Private Soldier of it,
called Dubois!”—Is not this a strange turn, after such be-pensioning, be-
painting, singing and celebrating, as rose upon poor D’ Assas, or the Family
of D’Assas, twenty years afterwards (1777-1790) !—Both Dubois and D’As-
sas, I conclude, lay among the slain at Kloster-Kampen, silent they forever :
—and a painful doubt does rise, As to the miraculous operation of Posthu-
mous Rumour and Wonder; and Whether there was any ‘‘ miracle of hero-
ism,” or other miracle at all, and not rather a poor nocturnal accident, —poor
sentry in the edge of the wood, Stee out, on apparition of the stealthy

1 2

106 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

3d Nov. 1760.
Auvergne gave fire; awoke Castries bodily ; and saved him from what
was otherwise inevitable. Surprise now there was none farther; but a
complex Fight, managed in the darkness with uncommon obstinacy ;
ending in withdrawal of the Erbprinz, as from a thing that could not be
done. His loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners, was 1,638; that of
Castries, by his own counting, 2,036: but Kloster Kampen, in the wide-
awake state, could not be won.

“ During the Fight, the Erbprinz’s Rhine-Bridge had burst in two:
his ammunition*was running short ;—and, it would seem, there is no
retreat, either! ‘The EXrbprinz put a bold face on the matter, stood to
Castries in a threatening attitude ; manceuvered skillfully for two days
longer, face still to Castries, till the Bridge was got mended; then,
night of October 18th-19th, crossed to his own side; gathered up his
goods; and at a deliberate pace marched home, on those terms ;—doing
some useful fighting by the road.”'®

Had lost nothing, say his admirers, “but one cannon, which burst.”
One burst cannon left on the field of Kloster Kampen ;—but also, as we
see, his errand along with it; and 1,600 good fighters lost and burst :
which was more important! Criticisms there were on it in England,
perhaps of the unwise sort generally ; sorrow in the highest quarter.
“An unaccountable expedition,” Walpole calls it, ‘on which Prince
Ferdinand suddenly dispatched his Nephew, at the head of a considera-
ble force, towards the frontiers of Holland,”—merely to see the country
there —“ which occasioned much solicitude in England, as the Main
Army, already unequal to that of France, was thus rendered much
weaker. King George felt it with much anxiety.”'® An unaccounta-
ble Enterprise, my poor Gazetteer friends,—very evidently an unsuc-
cessful one, so far as Wesel went. Many English fallen in it, too:
“the English showed here again a ganz ausnehmende Tapferkeit,”
- says Mauvillon; and probably their share of the loss was proportionate.

Clearly enough there is no Wesel to be had. Neither could Broglio,
though disturbed in his Gottingen fortifyings and operations, be ejected
out of Gottingen. Ferdinand, on failure of Wesel, himself marched to
Gottingen, and tried for some days; but found he could not, in such
weather, tear out that firmly-rooted French Post, but must be content to
“mask it,” for the present; and, this done, withdrew (December I3th)
to his winter-quarters near by, as did Broglio to his,—about the time
Friedrich and Daun had finally settled in theirs.

English, ‘‘ Ho, Auvergne, help!” probably firing withal; and getting killed
in consequence? Non nostrum est.

18 Mauvillon, ii. 120-129; Tempelhof, ii. 325-332.

1° Walpole’s George Second, iii. 299.

Cuap. VI. ] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 107
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

Ferdinand’s Campaigns henceforth, which turn all on the de.
fence of Hanover, are highly recommended to professional read-
ers; but, to the laic sort, do not prove interesting in proportion
to the trouble. In fact, the huge War henceforth begins every-
where, or everywhere except in Pitt’s department of it, to burn
lower, like a lamp with the oil getting done; and has less of
brilliancy than formerly. “Let us try for Hanover,” the Belle-
isles, Choiseuls, and wise French heads had said to themselves :
‘“‘ Canada, India, everything is lost; but were dear Hanover well
in our clutch, Hanover would be a remedy for many things!”
Through the remaining Campaigns, as in this now done, that is ©
their fixed plan. Ferdinand, by unwearied effort, succeeded in
defending Hanover,—nothing of it but that inconsiderable slice
or skirt round Gottingen, which they kept long, could ever be
got by the French. Ferdinand defended Hanover; and wore out
annually the big French Armies which were missioned thither,
as in the spasm of an expiring last effort by this poor hag-ridden
France,—at an expense to her, say, of 50,000 men per year.
Which was good service on Ferdinand’s part; but done less and
less in the shining or universally notable way.

So that with him too we are henceforth, thank Heaven, per-
mitted and even bound to be brief. Hardly above two Battles
more from him, if even two:—and mostly the wearied Reader’s
imagination left to conceive for itself those intricate strategies,
and endless manceuverings on the Diemel and the Dill, on the
Ohm River and the Schwalm and the Lippe, or wherever they
may be, with small help from a wearied Editor !—

CHAPTER VI.
WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61.

A MELANCHOLY little event, which afterwards proved unex-:
pectedly unfortunate for Friedrich, had happened in England, ten
days before the Battle of Torgau. Saturday, 25th October 1760,
George II., poor old gentleman, suddenly died. He was in his
77th year; feeble, but not feebler than usual,—unless, perhaps,
the unaccountable news from Kloster Kampen may have been

108 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

too agitating to the dim old mind? On the Monday of this
week he had, ‘‘from a tent in Hyde Park,” presided at a Review
of dragoons; and on Thursday, as his Coldstream Guards were
on march for Portsmouth and foreign service, ‘‘ was in his Por-
tico at Kensington to see them pass;”—full of zeal always in
regard to military matters, and to this War in particular. Sat-
urday, by sunrise he was on foot; took his cup of chocolate ;
inquired about the wind, and the chances of mails arriving;
opened his window, said he would have a turn in the Gardens,
the morning being so fine. It was now between 7 and 8. The
Valet then withdrew with the chocolate apparatus; but had
hardly shut the door, when he heard a deep sigh, and fall of
something,—“ billet. of wood from the fire?” thought he;—upon
which, hurrying back, he found it was the King, who had dropt
from his seat, ‘as if in attempting to ring the bell.” King said
faintly, “Call Amelia,” and instantly died. Poor deaf Amelia
(Friedrich’s old love, now grown old and deaf) listened wildly
for some faint sound from those lips now mute forever. George
Second was no more; his grandson George Third was now
King.!

Intrinsically taken, this seemed no very great event for Fried-
rich, for Pitt, for England or mankind: but it proved otherwise.
The merit of this poor King deceased, who had led his Nation
stumbling among the chimney-pots at such a rate in these mad
German Wars for Twenty Years past, was, That he did now
stand loyal to the Enterprise, now when it had become sane in-
deed; now when the Nation was broad awake, and a Captain
had risen to guide it out of that perilous posture, into never-
expected victory and triumph! Poor old George had stood by
his Pitt, by his Ferdinand, with a perfect loyalty at all turns;
and been devoted, heart and soul and breeches-pocket, to com-
pletely beating Bourbon’s oppressive ideas out of Bourbon’s head.
A little fact, but how important, then and there! Under the
Successor, all this may be different :—ghastly beings, Old Tutors,
Favourites, Mother’s-Favourites, flit, as yet invisible, on the new
back-stairs ;—should Bute and Company get into the fore-ground,
people will then know how important it was. Walpole says:

* Old Newspapers (in Gentleman’s Magazine, xxx. 486-88).

i. ——a

Cuap. VI. ] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 109
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

“The Yorkes” (Ex-Chancellor Hardwicke people) “had long dis-
tasted this War :” yes, and been painfully obliged to hold their tongues:
“but now,” within a month or so of the old King’s death, “ there was
published, under Lord Hardwicke’s countenance, a Tract setting forth
the burden and ill-policy of our German measures. It was called Con-
siderations on the German War ; was ably written, and changed many
men’s minds.” This is the famous “‘ Mauduit Pamphlet :” first of those’
small stones, from the sling of Opposition not obliged to be dormant,
which are now beginning to rattle on Pitt’s Olympian Dwelling-place,
—high really as Olympus, in comparison with others of the kind, but
which unluckily is made of glass like the rest of them! The slinger
of this first resounding little missile, Walpole informs us, was “ one
Mauduit, formerly a Dissenting Teacher,”—son of a Dissenting Minis-
ter in Bermondsey, I hear, and perhaps himself once a Preacher, but at
present concerned with Factorage of Wool on the great scale; got
soon afterwards promoted to be Head of the Customhouse in South-
ampton, so lovely did he seem to Bute and Company. ‘“ How agreea-
ble his politics were to the interior of the Court, soon appeared by a
place” (Southampton Customhouse) “ being bestowed on him by Lord
Bute.” A fortunate Mauduit, yet a stupidly tragical; had such a desti-
ny in English History! Hear Walpole a little farther, on Mauduit, and
on other things then resonant to Arlington Street in a way of their own.
“To Sir Horace Mann” (at Florence) :

“ November 14th, 1760” (tenth night after Torgau). * * ‘We are
all in guns and bonfires for an unexpected victory of the King of Prussia
over Daun; but as no particulars are yet arrived, there are doubters.”

“ December 5th, 1760. I have received the samples of brocadella.”
* * «T shall send you a curious Pamphlet, the only work I almost ever
_ knew that changed the opinions of many. It is called Considerations
on the Present German War,’ and is written by a wholesale Woollen-
Draper” (connected with Wool, in some way; “‘ Factor at Blackwell
Hall,” if that mean Draper :—and a growing man ever after; came to
be “ Agent for Massachusetts,” on the Boston- Tea occasion, and again
did Tracts; was “ President of the’—in short, was a conspicuous Vice-
president, so let us define him, of The general Anti-Penalty or Life-
made-Soft Association, with Cause of civil and religious Liberty all over
the World, and such like; and a Mauduit comfortably resonant in that
way till he died*); “but the materials are supposed to be furnished by
the faction of the Yorkes. The confirmation of the King of Prussia’s

2 <Tondon: Printed for John Wilkie, at the Bible, in St. Paul’s Church-
yard, 1761,” adds my poor Copy (a frugal 12mo, of pp. 144), not adding of
what edition.

3 Chalmers, Biog. Dictionary ; Nichols, Literary Anecdotes ; &c. &e.

110 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Dec. 1760—April 1761.
victory near Torgau does not prevent the disciples of the Pamphlet from
thinking that the best thing which could happen for us would be to have
that Monarch’s head shot off.” (Hear, hear !)—

“There are Letters from the Hague” (what foolish Letters do fly
about, my friend !), “that say Daun is dead of his wounds. — If he is, I
shall begin to believe that the King of Prussia will end successfully at
last.” (Oh!) “It has been the fashion to cry down Daun; but, as
much as the King of Prussia may admire himself” (does immensely, ac-
cording to our Selwyn informations), “I dare say he would have been
glad to be matched with one much more like himself than one so op-

posite as the Marshal.”
“ January 2d, 1761. The German War is not : so popular as you im-
agine, either in the Closet or in the Nation.”* (Enough, enough.)

The Mauduit Pamphlet, which then produced such an effect,
is still to be met on old Collections and on Book-stalls ; but pro-
duces little save weariness to a modern reader. ‘ Hanover not
in real danger,” argues he; “if the French had it, would not
they, all Europe ordering them, have to give it up again?” Give
it up,—gratis, or in return for Canada and Pondichery, Mauduit
does not say. Which is an important omission! But Mauduit’s
grand argument is that of expense; frightful outlay of money,
ageravated by ditto mismanagement of same.

A War highly expensive, he says—(and the truth is, Pitt was
never stingy of money: ‘‘ Nearly the one thing we have in any
plenty ; be frank in use of that, in an Enterprise so ill provided
otherwise, and involving life and death!” thinks Pitt);—‘“‘dread-
fully expensive,” urges Mauduit, and gives some instances of
Commissariat moneys signally wasted,—not by Pitt, but by the
stupidity of Pitt’s War Offices, Commissariat Offices, Offices of
all kinds; not to be cured at once by any Pitt:—How maga-
zines of hay were shipped and re-shipped, carried hither, thither,_
up this river, down that (nobody knowing where the war-horses
would be that were to eat it); till at length, when it had reached
almost the value of bohea tea, the right place of it was found to
be Emden (nearest to Britain from the first, had one but known),
and not a horse would now taste it, so spoiled was the article;
all horses snorted at it, as they would have done at bohea, never

* Walpole, Letters to Sir Horace Mann (Lond. 1843), i. 6, 7.

5

vo ng? Cie

Se Rh » pan 4

Se a a ee ae Te

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 111
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

so expensive.© ‘These things are incident to British warfare ;
also to Swedish, and to all warfares that have their War Offices
in an imaginary state,—state much to be abhorred by every sane
creature; but not to be mended all at once by the noblest of men,
into whose hands they are suddenly thrust for saving his Nation.
Conflagration to be quenched; and your buckets all in hideous
leakage, like buckets of the Danaides :—your one course is, ply
them, pour with them, such as they are.

Mauduit points out farther the enormous fortunes realised by
a swindling set of Army-Furnishers, Hebrews mainly, and un-
beautiful to look on. Alas, yes; this too is a thing incident to
the case; and in a degree to all such cases, and situations of
sudden crisis ;—have not we seen Jew Ephraim growing rich by
the copper money even of a Friedrich? Christian Protestants
there are, withal, playing the same game on a larger scale. Herr
Schimmelmann (‘ AZouldy-man”) the Dane, for instance,—Dane
or Holsteiner,—is coining false money for a Duke of Holstein..
Plén, who has not a Seven-Years War on his hands. Diligently
coining, this Mouldy Individual ; still more successfully, is trad-
ing in Friedrich’s Meissen China (bought in the cheapest market,
sold in the dearest); has at Hamburg his “Auction of Meissen
Porcelain,” steadily going on, a3 a new commercial institution of
that City ;—and, in short, by assiduously labouring in such har-
vest-fields, gathers a colossal fortune, 100,000/., 300,0002., or I
will not remember what. Gets ‘‘ennobled,”’ furthermore, by a
Danish Government prompt to recognise human merit: Ele-
phant Order, Dannebrog Order; no Order good enough for this
Mouldyman of merit ;°—and is, so far as I know, begetting ‘ No-
bles,” that is to say, Vice-Kings and monitory Exemplars, for
the Danish People, to this day. Let us shut down the iron lid
on all that.

Mauduit’s Pamphlet, if it raised in the abhorrent unthinking
English mind some vague notion, as probably it did, that Pitt
was responsible for these things, or was ia a sort the cause or
author of them, might produce some effect against him. ‘‘ What
a splash is this you are making, you Great Commoner ; wetting

5 Mauduit (towards the end) has a story of that tenor,—particulars not
worth verifying. § Preuss, ii. 391, 282, &e.

112 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Dec. 1760—April 176].

everybody’s feet,—as our Mauduit proves ;—while the Conflagra-
tion seems to be going out, if you let it alone!” For the heads
of men resemble—My friend, I will not tell you what they, in
multitudinous instances, resemble.

But thus has woollen Mauduit, from his private camp (“Cle-
ment’s Lane, Lombard Street,” say the Dictionaries), shot, at a
very high object, what pigeon’s-ege or small pebble he had; the
first of many such that took that aim; with weak though loud-
sounding impact, but with results—results on King Friedrich in
particular, which were stronger than the Cannonade of Torgau!
As will be seen. For within year and day,—Mauduit and Com-
pany making their noises from without, and the Butes and Hard-
wickes working incessantly with such rare power of leverage
and screwage in the interior parts,—a certain Quasi-Olympian
House, made of glass, will lie in sherds, and the ablest and no-
blest man in England see himself forbidden to do England any
service farther: ‘‘ Not needed more, Sir! Go you,—and look
at ws for the remainder of your life!”

King Friedrich in the Apel House at Leipzig (8th December
1760—17th March 1761).

Friedrich’s Winter in the Apel House at Leipzig is of cheer-
faller character than we might imagine. Endless sore business
he doubtless has, of recruiting, financiering, watching and provid-
ing, which grows more difficult year by year; but he has subor-
dinates that work to his signal, and an organised machinery for
business such as no other man. And solacements there are
withal: his Books he has about him; welcomer than ever in
such seasons: Friends too,—he is not solitary; nor neglectful of
resources. Faithful D’Argens came at once (stayed till the mid-
dle of March)’: D’Argens, Quintus Icilius, English Mitchell;
these three almost daily bore him company. Till the middle of
January, also, he had his two Nephews with him (Sons of his
poor deceased Brother, the late tragic Prince of Prussia),—the
elder of whom, Friedrich Wilhelm, became King. afterwards;
the second, Henri by name, died suddenly of small-pox within

7 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 212, 218. Sends a Courier to conduct D’Ar-
gens ‘‘ for December 8th;” ‘‘21st March,” D’Argens is back at Berlin.

.

$

’

x) aeore

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 113
18th Dee. 1760.

about seven years hence, to the King’s deep and sore grief, who
liked him the better of the two. ‘Their ages respectively are
now about 16 and 14.8 Their appetite for dancing, and their
gay young ways, are pleasant now and afterwards to the old
Uncle in his grim element.?

Music, too, he had; daily evening Concert, though from him-
self there is no fluting now. One of his Berlin Concert people
who had been sent for, was Fasch, a virtuoso on I know not
what instrument,—but a man given to take note of things about
him. Fasch was painfully surprised to see his King so altered
in the interim past: ‘“‘bent now, sunk into himself, grown old ;
to whom these five years of war-tumult and anxiety, of sorrow
and hard teil, had given a dash of gloomy seriousness and mel-
ancholy, which was in strong contrast with his former vividly
bright expression, and was not natural to his years.”’!°

From D’Argens there is one authentic Anecdote, worth giving.
One evening D’Argens came to him; entering his Apartment,
found him in a situation very unexpected; which has been mem-
orable ever since. ‘One evening” (there is no date to it, except
vaguely, as above, December 1760—March 1761), ‘ D’Argens,
entering the King’s Apartment, found him sitting on the ground
with a big platter of fried meat, from which he was feeding his
dogs. He had a little rod, with which he kept order among
them, and shoved the best bits to his favourites. The Marquis,
in astonishment, recoiled a step, struck his hands together, and
exclaimed: ‘The Five Great Powers of Europe, who have sworn
alliance, and conspired to undo the Marquis de Brandebourg, how
might they puzzle their heads to guess what he is now doing!
Scheming some dangerous plan for the next Campaign, think
they; collecting funds to have money for it; studying about
magazines for man and horse; or he is deep in negotiations to di-
vide his enemies, and get new allies for himself? Nota bit of all
that. He is sitting peaceably in his room, and feeding his dogs!’”!!

8 Henri, born 30th December 1747, died 26th May 1767 ;—Friedrich
Wilhelm, afterwards Friedrich Wilhelm II. (sometimes called Der Dicke,
The Big), born 25th December 1744; King, 17th August 1786; died 16th
November 1797. * Letters, &c. in Schdning.

10 Zelter’s Life of Fasch (cited in Preuss, ii. 278). 11 Preuss, ii. 282.

114 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XX.

18th Dec. 1760.

Interview with Herr Professor Gellert (Vhursday, 18th De-
cember 1760).

Still more celebrated is the Interview with Gellert; though I
cannot say it is now more entertaining to the ingenuous mind.
One of. Friedrich’s many Interviews, this Winter, with the
Learned of Leipzig University; for he is a born friend of the
Muses so-called, and never neglects an opportunity. Wonderful
to see how, in such an environment, in the depths of mere toil
and tribulation, with a whole breaking world lying on his shoul-
ders, as it were,—he always shows such appetite for a snatch of
talk with anybody presumably of sense, and knowledge on some-
thing !

This Winter, say the Books, “he had, in vacant intervals, a
ereat deal of communing with the famed of Leipzig University ;”
this or other famed Professor, — Winkler, Ernesti, Gottsched
again, and others, coming to give account, each for himself, of
what he professed to be teaching in the world: ‘‘on the Natural
Sciences, more especially the Moral; on Libraries, on Rare Books.
Gottsched was able to satisfy the King on one point; namely,
That the celebrated passage of St. John’s Gospel—‘ There are
Three that bear record’—was not in the famous Manuscript of the
Vienna Library; Gottsched having himself examined that im-
portant Codex, and found in the text nothing of said Passage,
but merely, written on the margin, a legible intercalation of it,
in Melancthon’s hand. Luther, in his Version, never had it at
all.”!2, A Gottsched inclined to the Socinian view? Not the
least consequence to Friedrich or us! Our business is exclu-
sively with Gellert here.

“Readers have heard of Gellert; there are, or there were, English
Writings about him, Jzves, or I forget what: and in his native Protest-
ant Saxony, among all classes, especially the higher, he had, in those
years and onwards to his death, such a popularity and real splendour
of authority as no man before or since. Had risen, against his will in
some sort, to be a real Pope, a practical Oracle in those parts. In his
modest bachelor lodging” (age of him five-and-forty gone) “he has
sheaves of Letters daily,—about affairs of the conscience, of the house-
hold, of the heart: from some evangelical young lady, for example,

12 Helden-Geschichte, vi. 596.

~

aie ae

ee

aR

a ees re aed

Sai ee eee NINO

Cuap. VI]. WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. | 115
18th Dec. 1760.

‘Shall I marry Aum, think you, O my Father? and perhaps from her
Papa, ‘Shall she, think you, O my ditto?—Sheaves of Letters: and
of oral consulters such crowds, that the poor Oracle was obliged to ap-
point special hours for that branch of his business. - His class-room (he
lectures on Morals, some Theory of Moral Sentiment, or suchlike) is
crowded with ‘ blue uniforms’ (ingenuous Prussian Officers eager to hear
a Gellert), in these Winters. Rugged Hiilsen, this very season, who
commands in Freyberg Country, alleviates the poor village of Haini-
chen from certain official inflictions, and bids the poor people say, ‘It is
because Gellert was born among you!’ Plainly the Trismegistus of
mankind at that date :—who is now, as usual, become a surprising Tris-
megistus to the new generations !

“He had written certain thin Books, all of a thin languid nature;
but rational, clear; especially a Book of Fables in Verse, which are
watery, but not wholly water, and have still a languid flavour in them
for readers. His Book on Letter-writing was of use to the rising gen-
eration, in its time. Clearly an amiable, ingenious, correct, altogether
good man; of pious mind,—and, what was more, of strictly orthodox,
according to the then Saxon standard in the best circles. This was
the figure of his Life for the last fifteen years of it; and he was now
about the middle of that culminating period. A modest, despondent
kind of man, given to indigestions, dietetics, hypochondria: ‘of neat
figure and dress; nose hooked, but not too much; eyes mournfully blue
and beautiful, fine open brow ;’—a fine countenance, and fine soul of its
sort, poor Gellert: ‘ punctual like the church-clock at divine service, in
all weathers *'*

**A man of some real intellect and melody; some, by no means much;
who was of amiable meek demeanour ; studious to offend nobody, and
to do whatever good he could by the established methods ;—and who,
what was the great secret of his success, was of orthodoxy perfect and
eminent. Whom, accordingly, the whole world, polite Saxon orthodox
world, hailed as its Evangelist and Trismegistus. Essentially a com-
monplace man; but who employed himself in beautifying and illuminat-
ing the commonplace of his day and generation :—infinitely to the sat-
isfaction of said generation. ‘ How charming that you should make
thinkable to us, make vocal, musical, and comfortably certain, what we
were all inclined to think ; you creature plainly divine!’ And the hom-
ages to Gellert were unlimited and continual, not pleasant all of them
to an idlish man in weak health.

“Mitchell and Quintus Icilius, who are often urging on the King that
a new German Literature is springing up, of far more importance than

13 Jérdens, Lexikon Deutscher Dichter und Prosaisten (Leipzig, 1807), ii.
54-68 (§ Gellert).

116 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

18th Dec. 1760.
the King thinks, have spoken much to him of Gellert the Trisme-
gistus ;—and, at length, in the course of a ten days from Friedrich’s
arrival here, actual Interview ensues. The Dialogue, though it is but
dull and watery to a modern palate, shall be given entire, for the sake
of one of the Interlocutors. ‘The Report of it, gleaned gradually from
Gellert himself, and printed, not long afterwards, from his manuscripts
or those of others, is to be taken as perfectly faithful. Gellert, writ-
ing to his inquiring Friend Rabener (a then celebrated Berlin Wit),
describes, from Leipzig, ‘29th January 1760, or about six weeks after
the event: ‘ How, one day about the middle of December, Quintus
Icilius suddenly came to my poor Lodging here, to carry me to the
King.’ Am too ill to go. Quintus will excuse me today; but will re-
turn tomorrow, when no excuse shall avail. Did go accordingly next
day, Thursday 18th December, 4 o’clock of the afternoon ; and con-
tinued till a quarter to 6. ‘Had nothing of fear in speaking to the King,
Recited my Maler zu Athen.’ King said, at parting, he would send
for me again. ‘The English Ambassador’ (Mitchell), ‘an ea eaens
man, was "probably the cause of the King’s wish to see me.’?. . .
‘The King spoke sometimes German, sometimes French; I mostly
German.”* As follows:

King. “‘ Are you (Er) the Professor Gellert ? Gellert. “‘Yea,
Ihro Majestat.’

King. ‘The English Ambassador has spoken highly of you to me.
Where do you come from?’ Gellert, “‘‘ From Hainichen, near
Freyberg.’

King. “‘ Have not you a brother at Freyberg?’

Gellert. “‘*‘ Yea, Ihro Majestat.’

King. “‘ Tell me why we have no good German Authors.’

Major Quintus Icilius (puts in a word). “‘ Your Majesty, you see
here one before you ;—one whom the French themselves have trans-
lated, calling him the German La Fontaine!’

King. “*That is much. Have you read La Fontaine?’

Gellert. “‘ Yes, your Majesty; but have not imitated: I am original
(ich bin ein Original).’

King. “‘ Well, this is one good Author among the Germans; but
why have not we more?’ Gellert. “‘‘ Your Majesty has a prej-
udice against the Germans.’

King. “‘ No; I can’t say that (Nein; das kann ich nicht sagen).’

Gellert. “‘ At least, against German writers.’

King. “‘ Well, perhaps. Why have we no good Historians? Why
does no one undertake a Translation of Tacitus?’

14 Gellert’s Briefwechsel mit Demoiselle Lucius ; herausgegeben von FA.
Ebert (Leipzig, 1823), pp. 629, 631.

a
ny

setae

ee ee ee

Se &~ “eo eo, wise pe eee - ean! <er igptee oene

4

Cua. VI.| WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 117
18th Dec. 1760.

Gellert. ‘Tacitus is-difficult to translate; and the French them-
selves have but bad Translations of him.’

King. “‘ That is true (Da hat Er Recht).’

Gellert. “«* And, on the whole, various reasons may be given why the
Germans have not yet distinguished themselves in every kind of writing.
While Arts and Sciences were in their flower among the Greeks, the
Romans were still busy in War. Perhaps this is the Warlike Era of
the Germans: —perhaps also they have yet wanted Augustuses and
Louis-Fourteenths!’

King. “* How, would you wish one Augustus, then, for all Germany ?
Gellert. “* Not altogether that; I could wish only that every Sover-
eign encouraged men of genius in his own country.’

King (starting a new subject). “* Have you never been out of Sax-
ony ? Gellert. ‘1 have been in Berlin.”

King. “* You should travel.’ Gellert. “‘Ihro Majestat, for
that I need two things,—health and means.’

King. “‘What is your complaint? Is it die gelehrte Krankhett
(Disease of the Learned,” Dyspepsia so-called)? ‘“‘I have myself
suffered from that. I will prescribe for you. You must ride daily, and
take a dose of rhubard every week.’

. Gellert. “‘ Ach, Ihro Majestat: if the horse were as weak as I am,
he would be of no use to me; if he were stronger, I should be too weak
to manage him.’ (Mark this of the Horse, however; a tale hangs by it.)

King. “‘Then you must drive out.’ Gellert. “* For that I
am deficient in the means.’

King. “‘Yes, that is true; that is what Authors (GeleArte) in
Deutschland are always deficient in. I suppose these are bad times,
are not they? Gellert. ‘Ja wohl; and if your Majesty would
grant us Peace (den Frieden geben wolten)—

King. “‘How canI? Have not you heard, then? There are three
of them against me (Es sind ja drei wider mich)!

Gellert. “‘‘I have more to do with the Ancients and their History
than with the Moderns.’

King (changing the topic). “‘ What do you think, is Homer or Virgil
the finer as an Epic Poet?’ Gellert. ““* Homer, as the more
original.’

King. “‘ But Virgil is much more polished (viel polirter).’

Gellert. ‘We are too far removed from Homer’s times to judge of
his language. I trust to Quinctilian in that respect, who prefers Homer.’

King. “‘ But one should not be a slave to the opinion of the An-
cients.’ Gellert. ““* Nor am I that. I follow them only in cases
where, owing to the distance, I cannot judge for myself.’

Major Icilius (again giving a slight fillip or suggestion). ‘“ ‘He,’ the

118 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XX.

18th Dec. 1760.
Herr Professor here, ‘has also treated of German Letter-writing, and
has published specimens.’

King. “‘Sot But have you written against the Chancery Style,
then’ (the painfully solemn style, of ceremonial and circumlocution ;
Letters written so as to be mainly wig and buckram) ?

Gellert. *** Ach ja, that have I, Ihro Majestat !

King. “* But why doesn’t it change? The Devil must be in it (Es
ist etwas Verteufeltes). They bring me whole sheets of that stuff, and
I can make nothing of it!’ Gellert. “ ‘If your Majesty cannot alter
it, still less can I. I can only recommend, where you command.’

King. “* Can you repeat any of your Fables?” Gellert. “‘I
doubt it; my memory is very treacherous.’

King. “* Bethink you a little; I will walk about’ (Gellert bethinks
him, brow puckered. King, seeing the brow unpucker itself). ‘Well,
have you one? Gellert. “** Yes, your Majesty: The Painter.’
Gellert recites (“voice plaintive and hollow ;” somewhat preachy, |
_ should doubt, but not cracked or shrieky);—-we condense him into
prose abridgement for English readers ; German can look at the bottom
of the page :'* .

‘¢¢A prudent Painter in Athens, more intent on excellence than on
money, had done a God of War; and sent for a real Critic to give him his
opinion of it. On survey, the Critic shook his head: ‘‘'Too much Art visi-
ble; won’t do, my friend!” The Painter strove to think otherwise; and
was still arguing, when a young Coxcomb’ (Geck, Gawk) ‘stept in: ‘‘ Gods,
what a masterpiece!” cried he at the first glance: ‘‘ Ah, that foot, those
exquisitely-wrought toe-nails; helm, shield, mail, what opulence of Art!”
The sorrowful Painter looked penitentially at the real Critic, looked at his
brush; and the instant this Geck was gone, struck out his God of War.’”

King. “‘ And the Moral ?’

19 « Bin kluger Maler in Athen,

Der minder, weil man thn bezahlte,

Als weil er Ehre suchte, malte,

Liess einen Kenner einst den Mars
im Bilde sehn,

Und bat sich seine Meinung aus.

Der Kenner sagt ihm fret heraus,

Dass thm das Bild nicht ganz ge-
fallen wollte,

Und dass es, um recht schén zu sein,

Weit minder Kunst verrathen sollte.

Der Maler wandte vieles ein ;

Der Kenner stritt mit ihm aus
Griinden,

Und konnt thn doch nicht iiberwin-
den.
Gleich trat ein junger Gicck herein,
Und nahm das Bild in Augenschein.
‘O,’ rief er, ‘bet dem ersten Blicke,
Ihr Gétter, welch ein Meisterstiicke!
Ach, welcher Fuss! O, wie geschickt
Sind nicht die Nagel ausgedriickt !
Mars lebt durchaus in diesem Bilde.
Wie viele Kunst, wie viele Pracht,
Ist in dem Helm und in dem Schilde,
Und in der Riistung angebracht !’
Der Maler ward beschdmt geriihret,
Und sah den Kenner kléglich an.

—- ss |

a

aes 4,

Bw ihe a Satin Sau

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 119
18th Dec. 1760.

Gellert (still reciting) :

‘¢¢When the Critic does not like thy Bit of Writing, it is a bad sign for
thee; but when the Fool admires, it is time thou at once strike it out.’”

King. “‘ That is excellent; very fine indeed. You have a some-
thing of soft and flowing in your verses; them I understand altogether.
But there was Gottsched, one day, reading me his Translation of Iphi-
genie; I had the French Copy in my hand, and could not understand a
word of him’ (a Swan of Saxony, labouring in vain, that day)! ‘ They
recommended me another Poet, one Peitsch’ (Herr Peitsch of Konigs-
berg, Hofrath, Doctor and Professor there, Gottsched’s Master in Art;
edited by Gottsched thirty years ago; now become a dumb idol, though
at one time a god confessed) ; ‘him I flung away.’

Gellert. “* Ihro Majestat, him [I also fling away.’

King. “‘ Well, if I continue here, you must come again often; bring
your Fadles with you, and read me something.’

Gellert. “*1 know not if I can read well; I have the singing kind
of tone, native to the Hill Country.’

King. “‘Ja, like the Silesians. No, you must read me the Fadles
yourself; they lose a great deal otherwise. Come back soon.”'® (Hatt
Gellert.)

King (to Icilius, as we learn from a different Record). “‘That is
quite another man than Gottsched!’” (EH xeunt omnes.)

The modest Gellert says he ‘remembered Jesus Sirach’s ad-
vice, Press not thyself on Kings,—and never came back ;” nor was
specially sent for, in the hurries succeeding; though the King
never quite forgot him. Next day, at dinner, the King said,
‘He is the reasonablest man of all the German Literary People,
Cest le plus raisonnable de tous les Savans Allemands.” And to
Garve, at Breslau, years afterwards: “Gellert is the only Ger-
man that will reach posterity; his department is small, but he
has worked in it with real felicity.’’ And indeed the King had,

‘Nun,’ sprach er, ‘bin ich iiber- Der junge Geck war kaum hinaus,
Sithret! So strich er seinen Kriegsgott aus.”
Thr habt mir nicht zu viel gethan.’

MORAL.
““Wenn deine Schrift dem Kenner Doch, wenn sie gar des Narrcen Lob
nicht gef dllt, erhailt,
So ist es schon ein béses Zeichen; So ist es Zeit, sie auszustreichen,”—
(Gellert’s Werke: Leipzig, 1840: i. 135.)
6 Gellert’s Briefwechsel mit Demoiselle Lucius (already cited), pp. 632
et seq.

{20 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
21st Jan. 1761.

before that, as practical result of the Gellert Dialogue, managed
to set some Berlin Bookseller upon printing of these eligible
Fables, “for the use of our Prussian Schools;” in which and
other capacities the Lables still serve with acceptance, there and
elsewhere. }”

In regard to Gellert’s Horse-exercise, I had still to remember
that Gellert, not long after, did get a Horse; two successive
Horses; both highly remarkable. ‘The first especially ; which
was Prince Henri’s gift; ‘“‘‘The Horse Prince Henri had ridden
at the Battle of Freyberg” (Battle to be mentioned hereafter) ;
—quadruped that must have been astonished at itself! But a
pretty enough gift from the warlike admiring Prince to his dys-
peptic Great Man. This Horse having yielded to Time, the
very Kurfiirst (grandson of Polish Majesty that now is) sent
Gellert another, housing and furniture complete; mounted on
which, Gellert and it were among the sights of Leipzig ;—well
enough known here to young Goethe, in his College days, who
used to meet the great man and princely horse, and do salutation,
with perhaps some twinkle of scepticism in the corner of his
eye.!§ Poor Gellert fell seriously ill in December 1769; to the
fear and grief of all the world: “estafettes from the Kurfiirst
himself galloped daily, or oftener, from Dresden for the sick
bulletin ;” but poor Gellert died, all the same (13th of that
month); and we have (really with pathetic thoughts, even we)
to bid his amiable existence in this world, his bits of glories and
him, adieu forever.

Dialogue with General Saldern (in the Apel House, Leipzig
21st January 1761).

Four or five weeks after this of Gellert, Friedrich had another
Dialogue, which also is partly on record, and is of more impor-
tance to us here: Dialogue with Major-General Saldern; on a
certain business, delicate, yet profitable to the doer,—nobody so
fit for it as Saldern, thinks the King. Saldern is he who did
that extraordinary feat of packing the wrecks of battle on the

17 Preuss, ii. 274.

18 Dichtung und Wahrheit, Theil ii. Buch 6 (in Goethe’s Werke, xxv. 51
et seq. ).

“4

| ee Lethe peetoee afl:

eS ee ee ee

att (“es

i Pee

ee eee

oy “PY PRs ew + 2a ae

lee Et 8

POE sere ae

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 121
2ist Jan. 1761.

Field of Liegnitz; a fine, clear-flowing, silent kind of man, rapid
and steady, with a great deal of methodic and other good faculty
in him,—more, perhaps, than he himself yet knows of. Him
the King has sent for, this morning; and it is on the business
of Polish Majesty’s Royal Hunting-Schloss at Huber RTE
which is a thing otherwise worth some notice from us.

lor three months long, the King had been representing, in the
proper quarters, what plunderings, and riotous and even disgust-
ing savageries, the Saxons had perpetrated at Charlottenburg,
Schénhausen, Friedrichsfeld, in October last, while masters there
for a few days: but neither in Reichs Diet, where Plotho was
eloquent, nor elsewhere by the Diplomatic method, could he get
the least redress, or one civil word of regret. From Polish _
Majesty himself, to whom Friedrich remonstrated the matter,
through the English Resident at Warsaw, Friedrich had expected
regret; but he got none. Some think he had hoped that Polish
Majesty, touched by these horrors of war, and by the reciproci-
ties evidently liable to follow, might be induced to try something
towards meditating a General Peace: but Polish Majesty did
not; Polish Majesty answered simply nothing at all, nor would
get into any correspondence: upon which Friedrich, possibly a
little piqued withal, had at length determined on retaliation.

Within our cantonments, reflects Friedrich, here is Huberts-
burg Schloss, with such a hunting apparatus in and around it;
Polish Majesty’s Hertzblatt (“lid of the heart,’ as they call it;
breastbone, at least, and pit of his stomach, which inclines to
nothing but hunting): let his Hubertsburg become as our Char-
lottenburg is; perhaps that will touch his feelings! Friedrich
had formed this resolution; and, Wednesday January 21st, sends
for Saldern, one of the most exact, deft-going, and punctiliously
honourable of all his Generals, to execute it. Enter Saldern
accordingly,—royal Audience-room “in the Apel’sche Haus, New
Neumarkt, No. 16,” as above;—to whom (one Kiister, a reliable
creature, reporting for us on Saldern’s behalf) the King says, in
the distinct slowish tone of a King giving orders:

King. “ Saldern, tomorrow morning you go” (Er, He goes) with a
detachment of Infantry and Cavalry, in all silence, to Hubertsburg ; be-
set the Schloss, get all the furnitures carefully packed up and inyoiced:

Vou. VI.—F

122 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

2st Jan. 1761.
1 want nothing with them: the money they bring I mean to bestow on
our Field Hospitals, and will not forget you in disposing of it.”

“¢ Saldern, usually so prompt with his ‘Ja’ on any Order from the King,
looks embarrassed, stands silent,—to the King’s great surprise ;—and
after a moment or two says:

Saldern. “‘ Forgive me, your Majesty: but this is contrary to my
honour and my oath.’

King (still in a calm tone). “‘ You would be right to think so, if I
did not intend this desperate method for a good object. Listen to me:
great Lords don’t feel it in their scalp when their subjects are torn by
the hair; one has to grip their own locks, as the only way to give them
pain.’ (‘‘ These last words the King said in a sharper tone; he again
made his apology for the resolution he had formed; and renewed his
Order. With the modesty usual to him, but also with manliness, Sal-
dern replied :) .

Saldern. ‘Order me, your Majesty, to attack the enemy and his
batteries, I will on the instant cheerfully obey: but against honour,
oath, and duty, I cannot, I dare not!’

“The King,” with voice gradually rising, | suppose, “repeated his
demonstration that the thing was proper, necessary in the circum-
stances; but Saldern, true to the inward voice, answered steadily :

Saldern. ‘‘‘ For this commission your Majesty will easily find another
person in my stead.’

King ( whirling hastily round, with an angry countenance,” but, I
should say, an admirable preservation of his dignity in such extreme
case). “‘ Saldern, Er will nicht reich werden,—Saldern, you refuse
to become rich.’”” And exit, leaving Saldern to his own stiff courses.'®

Nothing remained for Saldern but to fall ill, and retire from the Serv-
ice; which he did: a man honourably ruined, thought everybody ;—
which did not prove to be the case, by and by.

_ This surely is a remarkable Dialogue; far beyond any of the
Gellert kind. An absolute King and Commander-in-Chief, and
of such a type in both characters, getting flat refusal once in his
life (this once only, so far as I know), and how he takes it :—
one wishes Kiister, or somebody, had been able to go into more
details !—Details on the Quintus-Icilius procedure, which fol-
lowed next day, would also have been rather welcome, had
Kiister seen good. It is well known, Quintus Icilius and his
Battalion, on order now given, went cheerfully, next day, in

'® Kiister, Charakterziige des General-Lieutenant v. Saldern (Berlin, 1793),
p. 39-44.

ce a ee a eS ee

eee se ee,

i ae

WD" Qoget hoe

ee eT

Cuar. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 123
21st Jan. 1761.

Saldern’s stead. And sacked Hubertsburg Castle, to the due
extent or farther: 100,000 thalers (15,0002.) were to be raised
from it for the Field-Hospital behoof; the rest was to be Quin-
tus’s own; who, it was thought, made an excellent thing of it
for himself. And in hauling out the furnitures, especially in
selling them, Quintus having an enterprising sharp head in trade
' affairs, ‘it is certain,” says Kiister, assays everybody, “ various
Schdindlichkeiten (scandals) occurred, which were contrary to the
King’s intention, and would not have happened under Saldern.”
What the scandals particularly were, is not specified to me any-
where, though I have searched up and down; much less the
net amount of money realised by Quintus. I know only, poor
Quintus was bantered about it, all his life after, by this merciless
King; and at Potsdam, in years coming, had ample time and
admonition for what penitence was needful.

‘The case was much canvassed in the Army,” says poor Kiis-
ter; ‘‘it was the topic in every tent among Officers and common
Men. And among us Army-Chaplains too,’ poor honest souls,
“‘the question of conflicting duties arose: Your King ordering
one thing, and your own Conscience another, what ought a man
to do? What ought an Army-Chaplain to preach or advise ?
And considerable mutual light in regard to it we struck out from
one another, and saw how a prudent Army-Chaplain might steer
his way. Our general conclusion was, That neither the King
nor Saldern could well be called wrong. Saldern listening to
the inner voice; right he, for certain. But withal the King, in
his place, might judge such a thing expedient and fit; perhaps
Saldern himself would, had Saldern been King of Prussia there
in January 1761.”

Saldern’s behaviour in his retirement was beautiful; and after
the Peace, he was recalled, and made more use of than ever;
being indeed a model for Army arrangements and procedures,
and reckoned the completest General of Infantry now left, far
and near. ‘The outcries made about Hubertsburg, which still
linger in Books, are so considerable, one fancies the poor Schloss
must have been quite ruined, and left standing as naked walls.
Such, however, we by no means find to be the case; but, on the
contrary, shall ourselves see that everything was got refitted
there, and put into perfect order again, before long.

124 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

There are some War-movements during Winter; general finan-
ciering Difficulties. Choiseul proposes Peace.

February 15th, there fell out, at Langensalza, on the Unstrut,
in Gotha Country, a bit. of sharp fighting; done by Friedrich’s
people and Duke Ferdinand’s in concert; which, and still more
what followed on it, made some noise in the quiet months. Not
a great thing, this of Langensalza, but a sudden, and successfully
done; costing Broglio some 2,000 prisoners; and the ruin of a
considerable Post of his, which he had lately pushed out thither,
“to seize the Unstrut,” as he hoped. A Broglio grasping at
more than he could hold, in those Thiiringen parts, as elsewhere!
And, indeed, the Fight of Langensalza was only the beginning
of a series of such; Duke Ferdinand being now upon one of his
erand Winter-Adventures: that of suddenly surprising and ex-
ploding Broglio’s Winter-quarters altogether, and rolling him
back to Frankfurt for a lodging. So that, since the first days
of February, especially since Langensalza day, there rose sud-
denly a great deal of rushing about, in those regions, with hard
bits of fighting, at least of severe campaigning ;—which lasted
two whole months ;—filling the whole world with noise that
Winter; and requiring extreme brevity from us here. It was
specially Duke Ferdinand’s Adventure; Friedrich going on it,
as per bargain, to the Langensalza ‘enterprise, but no farther;
after which it did not much concern Friedrich, nor indeed come
to much result for anybody:

“‘ Strenuous Ferdinand, very impatient of the Gottingen business, and
provoked to see Broglio’s quarters extend into Hessen, so near hand, for
the first time, silently determines to dislodge him. Broglio’s chain of
quarters, which goes from Frankfurt north as far as Marburg, then turns
east to Ziegenhayn; thence north again to Cassel, to Minden with its
Defiles ; and again east, or south-east, to Langensalza even: this chain
has above 150 miles of weak length; and various other grave faults to
the eye of Ferdinand,—especially this, that it is in the form, not of an
elbow only, or joiner’s square, which is entirely to be disapproved, but
even of two elbows; in fact, of the profile of a chair” (if readers had a
Map at hand. ‘“ Foot of the chair is Frankfurt; seat part is from Mar-
burg to Ziegenhayn; back part, near where Ferdinand lies in chief
force, is the Cassel region, on to Minden, which is top of the back,—

<a
ie it el ——

= =

ee

Eee eee eee ee > ee

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. ~ 125
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

still backwards from which, there is a kind of proud curl or overlapping,
down to Langensalza in Gotha Country, which greedy Broglio has like-
wise grasped at! Broglio’s friends say he himself knew the faultiness
of this zigzag form, but had been overruled. Ferdinand certainly knows
it, and proceeds to act upon it.

“In profound silence, namely, ranks himself (February 1st—12th) in
three Divisions, wide enough asunder; bursts up sudden as lightning,
at Langensalza and elsewhere ; kicks to pieces Broglio’s Chair-Profile,
kicks out especially the bottom part, which ruins both foot and back,
these being disjoined thereby, and each exposed to be taken in rear ;
—and of course astonishes Broglio not a little; but does not stéal his
presence of mind.

“So that, in effect, Broglio had instantly to quit Cassel and warm
lodging, and take the field in person; to burn his Magazines ; and, at
the swiftest rate permissible, condense himself, at first partially about
Fulda (well down the leg of his chair), and then gradually all into one
mass near Frankfurt itself;—with considerable losses, loss especially
of all his Magazines, full or half-full. And has now, except Marburg,
Ziegenhayn and Cassel, no post between Gottingen and him. Ferdi-
nand, with his Three Divisions, went storming along in the wild weather,
Granby as vanguard; pricking into the skirts of Broglio. Captured
this and that of Corps, of Magazines that had not been got burnt ; laid
siege to Cassel, siege to Ziegenhayn; blocked Marburg, not having
guns ready: and, for some three or four weeks, was by the Gazetteer
world and general public thought to have done a very considerable feat;
—though to himself, such were the distances, difficulties of the season,
of the long roads, it probably seemed very questionable whether, in the
end, any feat at all.

‘Cassel he could not take, after a month’s siege under the best of
Siege-Captains: Ziegenhayn still less under one of the worst. Pro-
visions, ammunitions, were not to be had by force of wagonry: scant
food for soldiers, doubly scant the food of Sieges ;”’—‘ the road from
Beverungen” (where the Weser-boats have to stop, which is 30 miles
from Cassel, perhaps 60 from Ziegenhayn, and perhaps 100 from the
outmost or southernmost of Ferdinand’s parties) “is paved with dead
horses,” ‘nor has even Cassel nearly enough of ammunition :—in a
word, Broglio, finding the time come, bursts up from his Frankfurt
Position (March 14th-21st) in a sharp and determined manner; drives
Ferdinand’s people back, beats the Erbprinz himself one day (by sur-
prisal, ‘My compliment for Langensalza’), and sets his people running
Ferdinand sees the affair to be over; and deliberately retires; lucky,
perhaps, that he still can deliberately: and matters return to their old
posture. Broglio resumes his quarters, somewhat altered in shape, and

126 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

not quite so grasping as formerly ; and beyond his half-filled Magazines,
has lost nothing considerable, or more considerable than has Ferdinand
himself.’’?°

The vital element in Ferdinand’s Adventure was the Siege of
Cassel; all had to fail, when this, by defect of means, under the
best of management, declared itself a failure. Siege-Captain
was a Graf von Lippe-Biickeburg, Ferdinand’s Ordnance-Master,
who is supposed to be “‘ the best Artillery Officer in the world,”
—and is a man of great mark in military and other circles. He
is Son and Successor of that fantastic Lippe-Biickeburg, by whom
Friedrich was introduced to Free-Masonry long since. He has
himself a good deal of the fantast again, but with a better basis
of solidity beneath it. A man of excellent knowledge and faculty
in various departments; strict as steel, in regard to discipline,
to practice and conduct of all kinds; a most punctilious, silently
supercilious gentleman, of polite but privately irrefragable turn
of mind. A tall, lean, dusky figure; much seen to by neigh-
bours, as he stalks loftily through this puddle of a world, on
terms of his own. Concerning whom there circulates in military
circles this Anecdote, among many others ;—which is set down
as a fact; and may be, whether quite believable or not, a symbol
of all the rest, and of a man not unimportant in these Wars.
‘Two years ago, on King Friedrich’s birthday, 24th January
1759, the Count had a select dinner-party in his tent in Ferdi-
nand’s Camp, in honour of the occasion. Dinner was well over,
and wine handsomely flowing, when somebody at last thought of
asking, ‘ What is it, then, Herr Graf, that whistling kind of noise
we hear every now and then overhead?’ ‘That is nothing,’ said
the Graf, in his calm, dusky way: ‘that is only my Artillery-
people practising; I have bidden them hit the pole of our tent

if they can; unhappily there is not the slightest danger. Push -

the bottles on.’”?!_ Lippe-Biickeburg was Siege-Captain at Cas-
sel; Commandant besieged was Comte de Broglio, the Marshal's
younger Brother, formerly in the Diplomatic line ;—whom we
saw once, five years ago, at the Pirna Barrier, fly into fine fren-
zy, and kick vainly against the pricks. Friedrich says once, to
D’Argens or somebody: “I hope we shall soon have Cassel, and

2° Tempelhof, v. 15-45; Mauvillon, ii. 135-148. ?! Archenholtz, ii. 356.

|

$
7
|
:
7
;
i
?
“
.
.
;
;

ee ee en ee See

ee “Pe 7p ube a ee eee ee

Cuap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 127
_ Dee. 1760—April 1761.

M. le Comte de Broglio prisoner” (deserves it for his fine frenzies,
at Pirna and since) ;—but that comfort was denied us.

Some careless Books say, Friedrich had at first good hopes of
this Enterprise ; and ‘had himself lent 7,000 men to it:” which
is the fact, but not the whole fact. Friedrich had approved, and
even advised this plan of Ferdinand’s, and had agreed to send
7,000 men to co-operate at Langensalza,—which, so far out in
Thiiringen, and pointing as if to the Reichsfolk, is itself an eye-
sorrow to Friedrich. ‘The issue we have seen. His 7,000 went
accordingly, under a General Syburg; met the Ferdinand people
(General Spérken head of these, and Walpole’s “Conway” one
of them); found the Unstrut in flood, but crossed nevertheless ;
dashed in upon the French and Saxons there, and made a bril-
liant thing of it at Langensalza.?* Which done, Syburg instantly
withdrew, leaving Spérken and his Conways to complete the
Adventure; and, and for his part, set himself with his whole
might “to raising contributions, recruits, horses, proviants, over
Thiiringen ;” “ which,” says Tempelhof, ‘‘had been his grand er-
rand there, and in which he succeeded wonderfully.”

Towards the end of Ferdinand’s Affair, Cassel Siege now evi-
dently like to fail, Friedrich organised a small I¢xpedition for
his own behoof: expedition into Voigtland, or Frankenland,
against the intrusive Reichs people,—who have not now a Brog-
lio or Langensalza to look across to, but are mischievous upon
our outposts on the edge of the Voigtland yonder. The expedi-
tion lasted only ten days (April 1st, it left quarters; April 11th,
was home again); a sharp, swift and very pretty expedition ;?3
of which we can here say only that it was beautifully impressive
on the Reichs gentlemen, and sent their Croateries and them
home again; to Bamberg, to Eger, quite over the horizon, in a
considerably flurried state. After which there was no Small-
War farther, and everybody rested in cantonment, making ready
till the Great should come.

The Prussian wounded are all in Leipzig this Winter; a
*2 Bericht von der bey Langensalza am 15 Februar 1761 vorgefallenen Action

(in Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 75); Tempelhof, v. 22-27.
23 Tempelhof, v. 48-57.

128 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Dee. 1760—April 1761.
crowded stirring Town: young Archenholtz, among many others,
going about in convalescent state,—not attending Gellert’s
course, that I hear of,—but noticing vividly to right and left.
Much difficulty about the contributions, Archenholtz observes ;
—of course an ever-increasing difficulty, here as everywhere, in
regard to finance! From Archenholtz chiefly, I present the fol-
lowing particulars; which, though in loose form, and without
date, except the general one of Winter 1760-61, to any of them,
are to be held substantially correct :

* * “Tt is impossible to pay that Contribution,” exclaim the Leip-
zigers: “‘ you said, long since, it was to be 75,000/. on us by the year ;
and this year you rise to 160,000/.; more than double !”—‘“ Perhaps
that is because you favoured the Reichsfolk while here?” answer the
Prussians, if they answer anything: “It is the King’s order. Pay it
you must.”—“ Cannot; simply impossible.” ‘“ Possible, we tell you,
and also certain; we will burn your Leipzig if you don’t!” And they
actually, these Collector fellows, a stony-hearted set, who had a per-
centage of their own on the sums levied, got soldiers drawn out more
than once, pitch-link in hand, as if for immediate burning: but the
Leipzigers thought to themselves, “ King Friedrich is not a Soltikof!”
and openly laughed at those pitch-links. Whereupon about a hundred
of their Chief Merchants were thrown into prison,—one hundred or so,
riddled down in a day or two to Seventeen; which latter Seventeen, as
they stood out, were detained a good many days, how many is not said,
but only that they were amazingly firm. Black-hole for lodging, bread-
and-water for diet, straw for bed: nothing would avail on the Seventeen:
‘¢ Tmpossible,” they answered always ; each unit of them, in sight of the
other sixteen, was upon his honour, and could not think of flinching.
“You shall go for soldiers, then ;—possibly you will prefer that, you
fine powdered velvet gentleen? Up, then, and march; here are your
fire-locks, your seventeen knapsacks: to the road with us; to Magde-
burg, there to get on drill!” Upon which the Seventeen, horror-struck
at such quasi-actual possibility, gave in.

_ “Magnanimous Gotzkowsky, who had come to Leipzig on business
at the time” (which will give us a date for this by and by), “and been
solemnly applied to by Deputation of the Rath, pleaded with his usual
zealous fidelity in their behalf; got various alleviations, abatements ;
gave bills:—‘ Never was seen such magnanimity!’ said the Leipzig
Town-Council solemnly, as that of Berlin, in October last, had done.’’%4

Of course the difficulties, financial and other, are increasing
24 Archenholtz, ii. 187-192.

Cuar. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 129
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

every Winter ;—not on Friedrich’s side only. Here, for instance,
from the Duchy of Gottingen, are some items in the French Ac-
count current, this Winter, which are also furnished by Archen-
holtz : .

“For bed-ticking, 13,000 webs; of shirts ready-made, 18,000; shoes,”
I forget in what quantity ; but “ from the poor little Town of Duderstadt
600 pairs,—liability to instant flogging if they are not honest shoes;
flogging, and the whole shoemaker guild summoned out to see it.”
Hardy women the same Duderstadt has had to produce: 300 of them,
“each with basket on back, who are carrying cannon-balls from the
foundry at Lauterberg to Gottingen, the road being bad.”?* ‘* These
French are in such necessity,” continues Archenholtz, “they spare
neither friend nor foe. The Frankish Circle, for example, pleads pite-
ously in Reichs Diet that it has already smarted by this War to the
length of 2,230,000/., and entreats the Kaiser to bid Most Christian
Majesty cease fis exactions,—but without the least result.” Result!
If Most Christian Majesty and his Pompadour will continue this War,
is it he, or is it you, that can furnish the Magazines? “ Magazine-
furnishings, over all Hessen and this part of Hanover, are enormous.
Recruits too, native Hessian, native Hanoverian, you shall furnish,—and
‘We will hang them, and do, if caught deserting’ (to their own side)!”

I add only one other item from Archenholtz: ‘‘ Mice being busy in
these Hanover Magazines, it is decided to have cats, and a requisition
_ goes out accordingly” (cipher not given): cats do execution for a time,
but cannot stand the confinement,” are averse to the solitary system,
and object (think with what vocality!): ‘‘ upon which Hanover has to
send foxes and weasels.”*° ‘These guardian animals, and the 300
women laden with cannon-balls from the forge, are the most peculiar
items in the French Account current, and the last I will mention.

Difficulty, quasi-impossibility, on the French side, there evi-
dently is, perhaps more than on any other. But Choiseul has
many arts;—and his Official existence, were there nothing more,
demands that he do the impossible now if ever. This Spring
(26th March 1761), to the surprise and joy of mankind, there
came formal Proposal, issuing from Choiseul, to which Maria
Theresa and the Czarina had to put their signatures; regretting
that the British-Prussian Proposal of last Year had, by ill ac-
cident, fallen to the ground, and now repeating it themselves
(real “ Congress at Augsburg,” and all things fair and handsome)

28 Archenholtz, ii. 237, 26 Tbid. ii. 240.
KF 2

al

130 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
' Dec. 1760—April 1761.

to Britannic and Prussian Majesties. Who answer (April 3d)
as before, ‘“ Nothing with more willingness, we!”?7

And there actually did ensue, at Paris, a vivid Negotiating all
Summer; which ended, not quite in nothing, but in less, if we
might say so. Considerably less, for some of us. We shall have
to look what end zz had, and Mauduit will look !—Most people,
Pitt probably among the others, came to think that Choiseul,
though his France is in beggary, had no real view frem the first,
except to throw powder in the eyes of France and mankind, to
ascertain for himself on what terms those English would make
Peace, and to get Spain drawn into his quarrel. A Choiseul with
many arts. But we will leave him and his Peace-Proposals, and
the other rumours and futilities of this Year. They are part of
the sound and smoke which fill all Years; and which vanish into
next to nothing, oftenest into pure nothing, when the Years have
waited a little. Friedrich’s finances, copper and other,.were got
completed; his Armies too were once more put on a passable
footing ;—and this Year will have its realities withal.

Gotzkowsky, in regard to those Leipzig Finance difficulties,
yields me a date, which is supplementary to some of the Archen-
holtz details. I find it was ‘“ January 20th, 1761,”—precisely
while the Saldern Interview, and subsequent wreck of Huberts-
burg, went on,—that “‘ Gotzkowsky arrived in Leipzig,”?° and
got those unfortunate Seventeen out of ward, and the contribu-
tions settled.

And withal, at Paris, in the same hours, there went on a thing
worth noting. That January day, while Icilius was busy on the
Schloss of Hubertsburg, poor old Maréchal de Belleisle—mark
him, reader !—‘‘in the Rue de Lille at Paris,” lay sunk in putrid
fever; and on the fourth day after, “January 26th, 1761,” the
last of the grand old Frenchmen died. ‘ He had been reported
dead three days before,” says Barbier: ‘ the public wished it so;
they laid the blame on him of this apparent” (let a cautious man
write it, “‘“apparent) derangement in our affairs,”’—instead of
thanking him for all he had done and suffered (loss of so much,

27 The ‘‘ Declaration” (of France &c.), with the Answer or ‘‘Counter-
Declaration,” in Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 12-16. 28 Rodenbeck, ii. 77.

Cnap. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 131
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

including reputation and an only Son) to repair and stay the
same. ‘* He was in his 77th year. Many people say, ‘We must
wait three months, to see if we shall not regret him,’ ”—even
him!?9 So generous are Nations.

Marechal Duc de Belleisle was very wealthy: in Vernon Coun-
try, Normandy, he had estates and chateaux to the value of about
24,000/. annually. All these, having first accurately settled for
his own debts, he, in his grand old way, childless, forlorn, but
loftily polite to the last, bequeathed to the King. His splendid
Paris Mansion he expressly left “to serve in perpetuity as a
residence for the Secretary of State in the Department of War:”
a magnificent Town-House it is, ‘hdtel magnifique, at the end of
the Pont-Royal,’”—which, I notice farther, is in our time called
“ Hotel de Chowseul-Praslin,”—a house latterly become horrible
in men’s memory, if my guess is right.

And thus vanishes, in sour dark clouds, the once great Belle-
isle. Grandiose, something almost of great in him, of sublime,
—alas, yes, of too sublime; and of unfortunate beyond propor-
tion, paying the debt of many foregoers! He too is a notability
gone out, the last of his kind. Twenty years ago, he crossed the
(iil-de-Boeuf with Papers, just setting out to cut Teutschland in
Four: and in the Rue de Lille, No. 54, with that grandiose En-
terprise drawing to its issue in universal defeat, disgrace, discon-
tent, and preparation for the General Overturn (Culbute Générale
of 1789), he closes his weary old eyes. Choiseul succeeds him
as War-Minister; War-Minister and Prime-Minister both in one;
—and by many arts of legerdemain, and another real spasm of
effort upon Hanover to do the impossible there, is leading France
with winged steps the same road.

Since March 17th, Friedrich was no longer in Leipzig. He
left at that time, for Meissen-Country, and the Hill Cantonments,
—organised there his little Expedition into Voigtland, for behoof
of the Reichsfolk ;—and did not return. Continued, mostly in
Meissen Country, as the fittest for his many businesses, Army-
regulatings and other. Till the Campaign come, we will remem-
ber of him nothing, but this little Note, and pleasant little Gift,
to his Chére Maman, the day after his arrival in those parts:

*9 Barbier, iv. 373; i. 154.

132 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Dec. 1760-—April 1761.

To Madame Camas (at Magdeburg, with the Queen).
; ‘¢ Meissen, 20th March, 1761.

“T send you, my dear Mamma, a little Trifle, by way of keepsake and
memento” (Snuffbox of Meissen Porcelain, with the figure of a Dog on
the lid). ‘You may use the Box for your rouge, for your patches, or
you may put snuff in it, or bondbons or pills: but whatever use you turn
it to, think always, when you see this Dog, the Symbol of Fidelity,
that he who sends it, outstrips, in respect of fidelity and attachment to
Maman, all the dogs in the world; and that his devotion to you has
nothing whatever in common with the fragility of the material which is
manufactured hereabouts.

‘‘T have ordered Porcelain here for all the world, for Schonhausen”
(for your Mistress, my poor uncomplaining Wife), for my Sisters-in-law ;
in fact, I am rich in this brittle material only. And I hope the receivers
will accept it as current money: for, the truth is, we are poor as can be,
good Mamma; I have nothing left but honour, my coat, my sword, and
porcelain.

‘“‘ Farewell, my beloved Mamma. If Heaven will, I shall one day
see you again face to face: and repeat to you, by word of mouth, what
I have already said and written ; but, turn it and re-turn it as I may, I
shall never, except very incompletely, express what the feelings of my
heart to you are.—F’.””*”

*,.* It was during this Winter, if it ever was, that Friedrich received
the following Letter from an aspiring Young Lady, just coming out, age
seventeen,—in a remote sphere of things. In “Sleepy Hollow” namely,
or the Court of Mirow in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, where we once visited
with Friedrich almost thirty years ago. The poor collapsed Duke has
ceased making dressing-gowns there; and this is his Niece, Princess
Charlotte, Sister to the now reigning Duke.

This Letter, in the translated form, and the glorious results it had for
some of us, are familiar to all English readers for the last hundred years.
Of Friedrich’s Answer to it, if he sent one, we have no trace whatever.
Which is a pity, more or less ;—though, in truth, the Answer could only
have been some polite formality; the Letter itself being a mere breath
of sentimental wind, absolutely without significance to Friedrich or
anybody else,—except always to the Young Lady herself, to whom it
brought a Royal Husband and Queenship of England within a year.
Signature, presumably, this Letter once had; date of place, of day, year,
or even century (except by implication), there never was any: but judi-

°° Given in Lédenbeck, ii. 79; omitted, for I know not what reason, in

(Huvres de frédéric, xviii. 145; cited partly in Preuss, ii, 282.

Cuapr. VI.] WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61. 133

Dec. 1760—April 1761.

cious persons, scanning on the spot, have found that the “ Victory”’ spok-
en of can only have meant Torgau ; and that the aspiring Young Lady,
hitherto a School Girl, not so much as “ confirmed” till a month or two
ago, age seventeen in May last, can only have written it, at. Mirow, in
the Winter subsequent.** Certain it is, in September next, September
1761, directly after George III.’s Wedding, there appeared in the En-
glish Newspapers, what doubtless had been much handed about in so-
ciety before, the following “ Translation of a Letter, said to have been
written by Princess Charlotte of Mecklenburg to the King of Prussia,
on one of his Victories,”—without farther commentary or remark of
any kind; everybody then understanding, as everybody still. So nota-
ble a Document ought to be given in the Original as well (or in what
passes for such), and with some approach to the necessary preliminaries
of time and place :*?

[To his Majesty the King of Prussia (in Leipzig, or Somewhere).

Mirow in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Winter of 1760-61. ]

“ Sire !—Ich weiss nicht, ob ich
uber Ewr. Majestat letzteren Sieg
frohlich oder traurig sein soll,
weil eben der gluckliche Sieg, der
neue Lorbeern um Dero Scheitel
geflochten hat, uber mein Vater-
land Jammer und Elend verbrei-
tet. Ich weiss, Sire,in diesem un-
serm lasterhaft verfeinerten Zeit-
alter werde ich verlacht werden,
dass mein Herz uber das Ungluck
des Landes trauert, dass ich die
Drangsale des Krieges bewevwne,
und von ganzer Seele die Ruck-
kehr des Friedens winsche. Selbst
Sie, Sire, werden vielleicht denken,
es schicke sich besser fur mich,
mich in der Kunst zu gefallen zu
uben, oder mich nur um hausliche
Angelegenheiten zu bekummern.

“ May it please your Majesty,

I am at a loss whether I shall
congratulate or condole with you on
your late victory ; since the same
success that has covered you with
laurels has overspread the Country
of Mecklenburgh with desolation.
I know, Sire, that it seems unbe-
coming my sex, in this age of vi-
cious refinement, to feel for one’s
Country, to lament the horrors of
war, or wish for the return of peace.
I know you may think it more prop-
erly my province to study the art
of pleasing, or to turn my thoughts
to subjects of a more domestic na-
ture: but, however unbecoming it
may be in me, I can’t resist the de-
sire of interceding for this unhappy
people.

31 Ludwig Giesebrecht, — Der Fiirstenhof in Mirow wdhrend der Jahre
1708-1761, in Programm des vercinigten Kéniglichen und Stadt-Gymnasiums
for 1863 (Stettin, 1863), pp. 26-29,—enters into a minute criticism.

32 From Gentleman’s Magazine (for October 1761, xxxi. 447) we take,
verbatim, the Translation ; from Preuss (ii. 186) the ‘*Original,” who does —
not say where he got it, whether from an old German Newspaper or not.

134

Allein dem seye, wie thm wolle,
so fuhlt mein Herz zu sehr fur
diese Unglucklichen,um eine drin-
gende Furbitte fur dieselben zu-
ruck zu halten.

Seat wenigen Jahren hatte die-
ses Land die angenehmste Gestalt
gewonnen. Man traf keine vero-
dete Stellen an. Alles war ange-
baut. Das Landvolk sah vergnugt
aus, und in den Stadten herrschte
Wohlstand und Freude. Aber
welch’ eine Veranderung gegen
eine so angenehme Scene! Ich
bin in partheischen Beschreibun-
gen nicht erfahren, noch wenger
kann itch die Grauel der Verwust-
ung mit erdichteten Schilderun-
gen schrecklicher darstellen. Al-
lein gewiss selbst Krieger, welche
ein edles Herz und Gefuhl be-
siizen, wurden durch den Anblick
dieser Scenen zu Thranen bewegt
werden. Das ganze Land, mein
werthes Vaterland, liegt da gleich
einer Wuste. Der Ackerbau und
die Viehzucht haben aufgehort.
Der Bauer und der Hirt sind Sol-
daten worden, und in den Stadten
sieht man nur Greise, Weiber und
Kinder, vielleicht noch hie und
da einen gungen Mann, der aber
durch empfangene Wunden ein
Kruppel ist und den thn umge-
benden kleinen Knaben die Ge-
schichte einer jeden Wunde mit
einem so pathetischen Heldenton
erzahlt, dass ihr Herz schon der
Trommel folgt, ehe sve recht gehen
konnen. Was aber das Elend auf
den hochsten Gipfel bringt, sind
die ammer abwechselnden Vor-
ruckungen und Zuruckziehungen

FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Dec. 1760—April 1761.

“Tt was but a very few years
ago that this territory wore the
most pleasing appearance. The
Country was cultivated, the peas-
ant looked cheerful, and the towns
abounded with riches and festivity.
What an alteration at present from
such a charming scene! Iam not
expert at description, nor can my
fancy add any horrors to the pic-
ture; but sure even conquerors
themselves would weep at the
hideous prospect now before me.
The whole Country, my dear Coun-
try, lies one frightful waste, pre-
senting only objects to excite ter-
ror, pity, and despair. The busi-
ness of the husbandman and the
shepherd are quite discontinued ;
the husbandman and the shepherd
are become soldiers themselves,
and help to ravage the soil they
formerly occupied. The towns
are inhabited only by old men,
women and children; perhaps here
and there a warrior, by wounds
and loss of limbs, rendered unfit
for service, left at his door; his
little children hang round him, ask
a history of every wound, and grow
themselves soldiers before they
find strength for the field. But
this were nothing, did we not feel
the alternate insolence of either
army, as it happens to advance or
retreat. It is impossible to ex-
press the confusion, even those
who call themselves our friends
create. Even those from whom
we might expect redress, oppress
us with new calamities. From
your justice, therefore, it is that
we hope relief; to you even chil-

Cuap. VI.]
Dec. 1760—April 1761.

beider Armeen, da selbst die, so
sich unsre Freunde nennen, berm
Abzuge alles mitnehmen und ver-
heeren, und wenn sie wieder kom-
men, gleich viel wieder herbei ge-

WINTER-QUARTERS 1760-61.

135

dren and women may complain,
whose humanity stoops to the
meanest petition, and whose pow-
er is capable of repressing the
greatest injustice.

schafft haben wollen. Von Dero
Gerechtigkeit, Sire, hoffen wir
Hulfe in dieser aussersten Noth.
An Sie, Sire, mogen auch Frauen,
ja selbst Kinder thre Klagen bring
gen. Sve, die sich auch zur nie-
drigsten Klasse gutigst herablas-
sen, und dadurch, wenn es moglich
ast, noch grosser werden, als selbst
durch thre Siege, werden die met-
nigen nicht unerhort lassen und,
zur Ehre Dero eigenen Ruhmes,
Bedruckungen und Drangsalen
abhelfen, welche wider alle Men-
schenliebe und wider alle gute
Kriegszucht streiten. Ich bin,
cc.

It is remarked that this Young Lady, so amiably melodious in tone,
though she might address to King Friedrich, seems to be writing to
the wind; and that she gives nothing of fact or picture in regard to
Mecklenburg, especially to Mecklenburg-Streliz, but what is taken
from her own beautiful young brain. All operatic, vague, imaginary,
—some of it expressly untrue.** So that latterly there have been
doubts as to its authenticity altogether !** And in fact the Piece has a
good deal the air of some School-Exercise, Model of Letter-writing,

“T am, Sire, &c.”

33 In Mecklenburg-Schwerin, which had always to smart sore for its Duke
and the line he took, the Swedes, this year, as usual (but, ti// Torgau, with
more hope than usual), had been trying for winter-quarters: and had by
the Prussians, as usual, been hunted out, —Eugen of Wiirtemberg speeding
thither, directly after Torgau; Rostock his winter-quarters ;—who, douot-
less with all rigour, is levying contributions for Prussian behoof. But as
to Mecklenburg-Strelitz,—see, for example, in Schéning, iii. 30 &e., an in-
direct but altogether conclusive proof of the perfectly amicable footing now
and always subsisting there; Friedrich reluctant to intrude even with a
small request or solicitation, on Eugen’s behalf, at this time.

34 ** Boll, Geschichte Meklenburgs mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung der Cul-
turgeschichte (Neubrandenburg, 1856), ii. 803-305 ;”—cited by Giesebrecht,
who himself takes the opposite view.

136 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XX.

25th April—19th Aug. 1761.
Patriotic Aspiration or the like ;—thrown off, shall we say, by the
young Parson of Mirow (Charlotte’s late Tutor), with Charlotte there
to sgn; or by some Patriotic Schoolmaster elsewhere, anywhere, in a
moment of enthusiasm, and wzthout any Charlotte but a hypothetic one?
Certainly it is difficult to fancy how a modest, rational, practical young
person like Charlotte can have thought of so airy a feat of archery into
the blue! Charlotte herself never disavowed it, that I heard of; and
to Colonel Grahame the ex-Jacobite, hunting about among potential
Queens of England, for behoof of Bute and of a certain Young King
and King’s Mother, the Letter did seem abundantly unquestionable and
adorable. Perhaps authentic, after all;—and certainly small matter
whether or not.

CHAPTER VII.
SIXTH CAMPAIGN OPENS: CAMP OF BUNZELWITZ.

To the outward observer, Friedrich stands weil at present, and
seems again in formidable posture. After two such Victories,
and such almost miraculous recovery of himself, who shall say
what resistance he will not yet make? In comparison with
1759 and its failures and disasters, what a Year has 1760 been!
Liegnitz and Torgau, instead of Kunersdorf and Maxen, here
are unexpected phenomena; here is a King risen from the deeps
again,—more incalculable than ever to contemporary mankind.
*“How these things will end?” Fancy of what a palpitating
interest then, while everybody watched the huge game as it went
on; though it is so little interesting now to anybody, looking at
it all finished! Finished; no mystery of chance, or world-hope
or of world-terror now remaining in it; all is fallen stagnant,
dull, distant ;—and it will behove us to be brief upon it.

Contemporaries, and Posterity that will make study, must alike
admit that, among the sons of men, few in any Age have made a
stiffer fight than Friedrich has done and continues to do. But
to Friedrich himself it is dismally evident, that year by year his
resources are melting away; that a year must come when he will
have no resources more. Ebbing very fast, his resources ;—fast
too, no doubt, those of his Enemies, but not so fast. They are
mighty Nations, he is one small Nation. His thoughts, we per-
ceive, have always, in the back-ground of them, a hue of settled

Cuap. VII.] — sIxXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 137
25th April—19th Aug. 1761.

black. Easy to say, ‘Resist till we die;” but to go about, year
after year, practically doing it, under cloudy omens, no end of it
visible ahead, is not easy. Many men, Kings and other, have
had to take that stern posture ;—few on sterner terms than those
of Friedrich at present; and none that I know of with a more
truly stoical and manful figure of demeanour. He is long used
to it! Wet to the bone, you do not regard new showers; the
one thing is, reach the bridge before 7t be swum away.

The usual hopes, about Turks, about Peace, and the like, have
not been wanting to Friedrich this Winter; mentionable as a
trait of Friedrich’s character, not otherwise worth mention.
Hope of aid from the Turks, it is very strange to see how he
nurses this fond shadow, which never came to anything! Hap-
pily, it does not prevent, it rather encourages, the utmost urgency
of preparation: ‘‘The readier we are, the likelier are Turks and
everything!” Peace, at least between France and England,
after such a Proposal on Choiseul’s part, and such a pass as
France is really got to, was a reasonable probability. But in-
deed, from the first year of this War, as we remarked, Peace
has seemed possible to Friedrich every year; especially from
1759 onward, there is always every winter a lively hope of
Peace :—“No slackening of preparation; the reverse, rather ;
but surely the Campaign of next Summer will be cut short, and
we shall all get home only half expended !””!

Practically, Friedrich has been raising new Free-Corps people,
been recruiting, refitting, and equipping, with more diligence than
ever; and, in spite of the almost impossibilities, has two Armies
on foot, some 96,000 men in all, for defence of Saxony and of
Silesia,—Henri to undertake Saxony, versus Daun ; Silesia, with
Loudon and the Russians, to be Friedrich’s heavier share. The
Campaign, of which, by the one party and the other, very great
things had been hoped and feared, seemed once as if it would
begin two months earlier than usual; but was staved ‘off, a long
time, by Friedrich’s dexterities, and otherwise; and in effect did
not begin, what we can call beginning, till two months later than
usual. Essentially it fell, almost all, to Friedrich’s share; and
turned out as little decisive on him as any of its foregoers. The

1 Schéning (in locis).

.

138 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

25th April—19th Aug. 1761.
one memorable part of it now is, Friedrich’s Encampment at
Bunzelwitz; which did not occur till four months after Fried-
rich’s appearance on the Field. And from the end of April,
when Loudon made his first attempt, till the end of August,
when Friedrich took that Camp, there was nothing but a series
of attempts, all ineffectual, of demonstrations, marchings, ma-
neeuverings, and small events; which, in the name of every
reader, demand condensation to the utmost. If readers will be
diligent, here, so far as needful, are the prefatory steps.

Since Fouquet’s disaster, Goltz generally has Silesia in charge;
and does it better than expected. He was never thought to have
Fouquet’s talent in him; but he shows a rugged loyalty of mind,
less egoistic than the fiery Fouquet’s; and honestly flings him-
self upon his task, in a way pleasant to look at: pleasant to the
King especially, who recognises in Goltz a useful, brave, frank
soul;—and has given him, this Spring, the Order of Merit, which
was a high encouragement to Goltz. In Silesia, after Kosel last
Year, there had been truce between Goltz and Loudon; which
should have produced repose to both; but did not altogether,
owing to mistakes that rose. And at any rate, in the end of
April, Loudon, bursting suddenly into Silesia with great increase
to the forces already there, gave notice, as per bargain, That “in
96 hours’’ the Truce would expire. | And waiting punctiliously
till the last of said hours was run out, Loudon fell upon Goltz
(April 25th, in the Schweidnitz-Landshut Country), with his usual
vehemence ;— meaning to get hold of the Silesian Passes, and
extinguish Goltz (only 10 or 12,000 against 30,000), as he had
done Fouquet last Year.

But Goltz took his measures better; seized “‘the Gallows-Hill
of Hohenfriedberg,” seized this and that; and stood in so forcible
an attitude, that Loudon, carefully considering, durst not risk an
assault; and the only result was: Friedrich hastened to relief
of Goltz (rose from Meissen Country, J/ay 3d), and appeared in
Silesia six weeks earlier than he had intended. But again took
Cantonments there (Schweidnitz and neighbourhood) ;—Loudon
retiring wholly, on first tidings of him, home to Bohemia again.
Home in Bohemia; at Braunau, on the western edge of the Glatz

a a ii.

«
Cuap. VII.] = stXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 139
3d May 1761.

Mountains,—there sits Loudon thenceforth, silent for a long
time; silently collecting an Army of 72,000, with strict orders
from Vienna to avoid fighting till the Russians come. Loudon
has very high intentions this Year. Intends to finish Silesia
altogether ;—cannot he, after such a beginning upon Glatz last
year? ‘That is the firm notion at Vienna among men of un-
derstanding: ever-active Loudon the favourite there, against a
Cunctator who has been too cunctatory many times. Liegnitz
itself, was not that (as many opine) a disaster due to cunctation,
not of Loudon’s?

Loudon is to be joined by 60,000 Russians, under a Feld-
marschall Butturlin, not under sulky Soltikof, this Year; junc-
tion to be in Upper Silesia, in Neisse neighbourhood. ‘‘ We take
that Fortress,” say the Vienna people; ‘‘it is next on the file
after Glatz. Neisse taken; thence northward, cleaning the
Country as we go: Brieg, Schweidnitz, Glogau, probably Bres-
lau itself in some good interim: there are but Four Fortresses to
do; and the thing is finished. Let the King, one to three, and
Loudon in command against him, try if he can hinder it!” ‘This
is the Program in Vienna and in Petersburg. And, accordingly,
the Russians have got on march about the end of May; plodding
on ever since, due hereabouts before June end; ‘junction to be
as near Neisse as you can: and no fighting of the King, on any
terms, till the Russians come.” Never were the Vienna people
so certain before. Daun is to do nothing “rash” in Saxony (a
Daun not given that way, they can calculate), but is to guard
Loudon’s game; carefully to reinforce, comfort, and protect the
brave Loudon and his Russians till they win;—after which,
Saxony as rash as you like. This is the Program of the Season:
—readers fee] what an immensity of preliminary higglings, hitch-
ings and manceuverings will now demand to be suppressed by us!
Read these essential Fractions, chiefly chronological ;—and then,
at once, To Bunzelwitz, and the time of close grips in Silesia here.

“ast Year,” says a loose Note, which we may as well take with us, _
Tottleben did not go home with the rest, but kept hovering about, in
eastern Pommern, with a 10,000, all Winter; attempting several kinds
of mischief in those Countries, especially attempting to do something
on Colberg; which the Russians mean to besiege next Summer, with

£0. FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

30th June 1761.
more intensity than ever, for the Third, and, if possible, the last time.
‘Storm their outposts there,’ thinks Tottleben, ‘ especially Belgard, the
chief outpost; girdle tighter and tighter the obstinate little crow’s-nest
of a Colberg, and have it ready for besieging in good time.’ ‘Tottleben
did try upon the outposts, especially Belgard the chief one (January
18th, 1761), but without the least success at Belgard; with a severe
reproof instead, Werner's people being broad awake :* upon which ‘Tot-
tleben and they made a truce, ‘ Peaceable till May 12th; till June Ist,
it proved, about which time” (which time, or afterwards, as the Silesian
crisis may admit!) “ we will look in on them again.”

May 3d, as above intimated, Friedrich hastened off for Silesia, quitted
Meissen that day, with an Army of some 50,000; pressingly intent to
relieve Goltz from his dangerous predicament there. This is one of
Friedrich’s famed marches, done in a minimum of time and with a
maximum of ingenuity ; concerning which I will remember only that,
one night, “ he lodged again at Rodewitz, near Hochkirch, in the same
house as on that Occasion” (what a thirty months to look back upon,
as you sink to sleep!)—“ and that no accident anywhere befel the
March, though Daun’s people, all through Saxony and the Lausitz,
were hovering on the flank,—apprehensive chiefly lest it might mean a
plunge into Bohemia, for relief of Goltz, instead of what it did.” For
six weeks after that hard March, the King’s people got to Cantonments
again, and rested.

Prince Henri is left in Saxony, with Daun in huge-force against him,
Daun and the Reich; between whom and Henri,—Seidlitz being in the
field again with Henri, Seidlitz and others of mark,—there fell out a
oreat deal of exquisite manceuvering, rapid detaching, and occasional
sharp cutting on the small scale; but nothing of moment to detain us
here, or afterwards. We shall say only that Henri, to a wonderful ex-
tent, maintained himself against the heavy overwhelming Daun and his
Austrian and Reichs masses; and that Napoleon, I know not after what
degree of study, pronounced this Campaign of 1761 to be the master-
piece of Henri, and really a considerable thing, “La campagne de 1761
est celle ou ce Prince a vraiment montré des talents supérieurs ; the
Battle of Freyberg” (wait till next Year) “nothing in comparison.’”
Which may well detain soldier-people upon it; but must not us, in any
measure. The result of Henri being what we said,—a drawn game,
or nearly so,—we will, without interference from him, follow Friedrich
and Goltz.

Friedrich and Goltz,—or, alas, it is very soon Friedrich alone; the

2 Account of it, Helden- Geschichte, vi. 670.
> Montholon, Mémoires de Napoléon, vii. 324.

— oe a

es,

ty Se

Vai Sh cea eee

Bar 0 +e

Cuar. VII.].  stXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 141
22d July—lith Aug. 1761.

valiant Goltz soon perishing from his hand! After brief junction in
Schweidnitz Country, Friedrich detached Goltz to his old fortified
Camp at Glogau, there to be on watch. Goltz watching there, lynx-
eyed, skilful, volunteered a Proposal (June 22d): “ Reinforce me to
20,000, your Majesty ; I will attack so and so of those advancing Rus-
sians!” Which his Majesty straightway approved of, and set going.*
Goltz thereupon tasked all his energies, perhaps overmuch ; and it was
thought might at last really have done something for the King, in this
matter of the Russians still in separate Divisions,—a thing feasible if
you have energy and velocity; always unfeasible otherwise. But, alas,
poor Goltz, just when ready to march, was taken with sudden violent
fever, the fruit probably of over-work; and, in that sad flame, blazed
away his valiant existence in three or four days :—gone forever, June
30th, 1761; to the regret of Friedrich and of many.

Old Ziethen was at once pushed on, from Glogau over the frontier,
to replace Goltz; but, I doubt, had not now the requisite velocity :
Ziethen merely maneuvered about, and came home “attending the
Russians,” as Henri, Dohna and others had done. The Russians en-
tered Silesia, from the north-east or Polish side, without difficulty; and
(July 15th-20th) were within reach of Breslau and of an open road to
southward, and to junction with Loudon, who is astir for them there.
About Breslau, they linger and higgle, at their leisure, for three weeks
longer: and if their junction with the Austrians “in Neisse neighbour-
hood” is to be prevented or impeded, it is Friedrich, not Ziethen, that
will have to do it.

Junction in Neisse neighbourhood (Oppeln, where it should have
been, which is some 35 miles from Neisse), Friedrich did, by velocity
and dexterity, contrive to prevent ; but junction somewhere he probably
knows to be inevitable. ‘These are among Friedrich’s famed marches
and maneuverings, these against the swift Loudon and his slow Rus-
sians; but we will not dwell on them. My readers know the King’s
manner in such cases; have already been on two Marches with him,
and even in these same routes and countries. We will say only, that
the Russians were and had been very dilatory ; Loudon much the re-
verse ; and their and Loudon’s Adversary still more. That, for five
days, the Russians, at length close to Breslau (August 6th-11th), kept
vaguely cannonading and belching noise and apprehension upon the
poor City, but without real damage to it, and as if merely to pass the
time ; and had gradually pushed out fore-posts, as far as Oppeln, to-
wards Loudon, up their safe right bank of Oder. That Loudon, on the
first glimpse of these, had made his best speed Neisse-ward ; and did a

4 Goltz’s Letter to the King, ‘*Glogau, 22d June 1761,” is in Tempelhof
Cy. 88-90), who thinks the plan good.

142 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

19th Aug. 1761.
march or two with good hope; but at Miinsterberg (July 22d), on the
morning of the third or fourth day’s march, was astonished to see Fried-
rich ahead of him, nearer Neisse than he; and that in Neisse Country
there was nothing to be done, no Russian junction possible there.

“Try it in Schweidnitz Country, then!” said Loudon. The Rus-
sians leave off cannonading Breslau; cross Oder, about Auras or Leu-
bus (August 11th-12th); and Loudon, after some finessing, marches
back Schweidnitz-way, cautiously, skilfully; followed by Friedrich,
anxious to prevent a junction here too, or at lowest to do some stroke
before it occur. A great deal of cunning marching, shifting and ma-
neuvering there is, for days round Schweidnitz on all sides; encamp-
ings by Friedrich, now Liegnitz headquarter, now Wahlstadt, now
Schonbrunn, Striegau ;—without the least essential harm to Loudon,
or likelihood increasing that the junction can be hindered. No offer
of battle either; Loudon is not so easy to beat as some. The Rus-
sians come on at a snail’s pace, so Loudon thinks it, who is extremely
impatient; but makes no mistakes in consequence, keeps himself safe
(Kunzendorf, on the edge of the Glatz Hills, his main post), and the
roads open for his heavy-footed friends.

In Nicolstadt,a march from Wahlstadt, 16th August, there are 60,000
Russians in front of Friedrich, 72,000 Austrians in rear: what can he,
with at the very utmost 57,000, do against them? Now was the time
to have fallen upon the King, and have consumed him between two
fires, as it is thought might have been possible, had they been simul-
taneous, and both of them done it with a will. But simultaneity was
difficult, and the will itself was wanting, or existed only on Loudon’s
side. Nothing of the kind was attempted on the confederate part, still
less on Friedrich’s;—who stands on his guard, and, from the Heights
about, has at last to witness what he cannot hinder. Sees both Armies
on march; Austrians from the south-east or Kunzendorf-Freyberg side,
Russians from the north-east or Kleinerwitz side, wending in many
columns by the back of Jauer and the back of Liegnitz respectively ;
till (August 18th) they “join hands,” as it is termed, or touch mutually
by their light troops; and on the 19th (Friedrich now off on another
scheme, and not witnessing), fall into one another’s arms, ranked all in
one line of posts.° “Can the Reichshofrath say our junction is not
complete?” And so ends what we called the Prefatory part: and the
time of Close Gripes seems to be come !—

Friedrich has now nothing for it but to try if he cannot pos-
sibly get hold of Kunzendorf (readers may look in their Map*),
and cut off Loudon’s staff of bread ; Loudon’s, and Butturlin’s

5 Tempelhof, v. 58-150. * See Map, p. 236 a.

-

Cuarp. VII-]  sIXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. - 148
20th Aug.—¥th Sept. 1761.

as well; for the whole 130,000 are now to be fed by Loudon,
and no slight task he will find it. By rushing direct on Kun-
zendorf with such a velocity as Friedrich is capable of, it is
thought he might have managed Kunzendorf; but he had to
mask his design, and march by the rear or east side of Schweid-
nitz, not by the west side: ‘‘‘They will think I am making off
in despair, intending for the strong post of Pilzen there, with
Schweidnitz to shelter me in front!” hoped Friedrich (morning
of the 19th), as he marched off on that errand. But on ap-
proaching in that manner, by the bow, he found that Loudon
had been quite sceptical of such despair, and at any rate had,
by the string, made sure of Kunzendorf and the food-sources.
August 20th, at break of day, scouts report the Kunzendorf
ground thoroughly beset again, and Loudon in his place there.
No use marching thitherward farther :—whither now, therefore?

Friedrich knows Pilzen, what an admirable post it really is;
except only that Schweidnitz will be between the enemy and
him, and liable to be besieged by them; which will never do!
Friedrich, on the moment of that news from Kunzendorf, gets
on march, not by the east side (as intended till the scouts came
in), but by the west or exposed side of Schweidnitz:—he stood
waiting, ready for either route, and lost not a moment on his
scouts coming in. All upon the road by 3 a.m., August 20th;
and encamps, still at an early hour, midway between Schweid-
_ nitz and Striegau: right wing of him at Zedlitz (if the reader
look on his Map), left wing at Jauernik ; headquarters, Bunzel-
witz, a poor Village, celebrated ever since in War-annals. And
begins (that same evening, the earlier or rested part of him be-
gins) digging and trenching at a most extraordinary rate, accord-
ing to plan formed; no enemy taking heed of him, or giving the
least molestation.. This is the world-famous Camp of Bunzel-
witz, upon which it is worth while to dwell for a little.

To common eyes, the ground hereabouts has no peculiar mili-
tary streneth: a wavy champaign, with nothing of abrupt or high,
much of it actual plain, excellent for cavalry and their work ;—
this latter, too, is an advantage, which Friedrich has well marked,
and turns to use in his scheme. The area he takes in is perhaps
some seven or eight miles long, by as many broad. On the west

144 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX,
20th Aug.—9th Sept. 1761.

side runs the still-young Striegau Water, defensive more or less;
and on the farther bank of it green little Hills, their steepest
side stream-ward. Inexpugnable Schweidnitz, with its stores of
every kind, especially with its store of cannon and of bread, is on
the left or east part of the circuit; in the intervening space are
peaceable farm-villages, spots of bog; knolls, some of them with
wood. Not a village, bog, knoll, but Friedrich has caught up,
and is busy profiting by. ‘Swift, Bursche, dig ourselves in here,
and be ready for any quotity and quantity of them, if they dare
attack !”’

And 25,000 spades and picks are at work, under such a Field-
I-ngineer as there is not in the world when he takes to that em-
ployment. At all hours, night and day, 25,000 of them: half
the Army asleep, other half digging, wheeling, shovelling; plying
their utmost, and constant as Time himself: these, in three days,
will do a great deal of spade-work. Batteries, redoubts, big and
little; spare not for digging. Here is ground for Cavalry, too;
post them here, there, to bivouac in readiness, should our Bat-
teries be unfortunate. Long Trenches there are, and also short;
Batteries commanding every in-gate, and under them are Mines:
‘¢We will blow you and our Batteries both into the air, in case
of capture!” think the Prussians, the common men at least, if
Friedrich do not. ‘Mines, and that of being blown into the air,”
says ‘Tempelhof, ‘“‘are always very terrible to the common man.”’
In places there are ‘Trenches 16 feet broad, by 16 deep,”’ says an
admiring Archenholtz, who was in it: ‘‘and we have two of those
Flatterminen (scatter-mines,” blowing-up apparatuses) ‘to each
battery.’’® .

*‘Bunzelwitz, Jauernik, Tschechen, and Peterwitz, all forti-
fied,” continues Archenholtz; ‘ Wiirben, in the centre, is like a
citadel, looking down upon Striegau Water. Heavy cannon,
plenty of them, we have brought from Schweidnitz: we have
460 pieces of cannon in all, and 182 mines. Wiirben, our cita-
del and centre, is about five miles from Schweidnitz. Our en-
trenchments’— You already heard what gulfs some of them
were!  “ Before the lines are palisades, storm-posts, the things

we call Spanish Horse (chevaux-de-frise);—woods we have in

* Archenholtz, ii. 262, &e.

PE ee ee ee ee

Cuap. VII.] sIXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 145
20th Aug.—9th Sept. 1761.

abundance in our Circuit, and axes busy for carpentries of that
kind. ‘There are four entrenched knolls; 24 big batteries, capa-
ble of playing beautifully, all like pieces in a concert.’’ Four
knolls elaborately entrenched, clothed with cannon; founded
upon jflatter-mines: try where you will to enter, such torrents
of death-shot will converge-on you, and a concert of 24 big bat-
teries begin their music !—

On the third day, Loudon, looking into this thing, which he
has not minded hitherto, finds it such a thing as he never dreamt
of before. A thing strong as Gibraltar, in a manner;—which it
will be terribly difficult to attack with success! For eight days
more Friedrich did not rest from his spade-work; made many
changes and improvements, till he had artificially made a very
Stolpen of it, a Plauen, or more. _ Cogniazo, the Austrian Veteran,
says: ‘Plauen, and Daun’s often-ridiculed precautions there,
were nothing to it. Not as if Bunzelwitz had been so inaccessi-
ble, as our sheer rocks there; but because it is a masterpiece of
Art, in which the principles of tactics are combined with those
of field-fortifications, as never before.” ‘Tielke grows quite elo-
quent on it: “A masterpiece of judgment in ground,” says he;
‘‘and the treatment of it a model of sound, true, and consum-
mate field engineering.”

Ziethen, appointed to that function, watches on the Heights of
Wiirben, the citadel of the place: keeps a sharp eye to the south-
west. All round, in huge. half-moon on the edge of the Hills
over there, six or more miles from Ziethen, lie the angry Ene-
mies; Austrians south and nearest, about Kunzendorf and Frey-
berg. Russians are on the top of Striegau Hills, which are well
known to some of us; Russian headquarter is Hohenfriedberg,
—who would have thought it, Herr General von Ziethen? Six-
teen years ago, we have seen these Heights in other tenantcy:
Austrian field-music and displayed banners coming down; a
thousand and a thousand Austrian watch-fires blazing out yon-
der, in the silent June night, eve of such a Day! Bayreuth
Dragoons and their No. 67 ;—you will find the Bayreuth Dra-
goons still here in a sense, but also in a sense not. Their fencing

7 Tielke, iii. § Bunzelwitz (which is praised as an attractive Piece) ;
Oesterreichischer Veteran, iv. 79: cited in Preuss, ii. 285.

Vor. VI.—G

146 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
20th Aug.—9th Sept. 1761.

Chasot is gone to Liibeck long since; will perhaps pay Friedrich
a visit by and by: their fiery Gessler is gone much farther, and
will never visit anybody more! Many were the reapers then,
and they are mostly gone to rest. Here is a new harvest; the
old sickles are still here; but the hands that wielded them —!—
‘‘Steady!’’ answers the Herr General; profoundly aware of all
that, but averse to words upon it.

Fancy Loudon’s astonishment, on the third day: ‘While we
have sat consulting how to attack him, there is he,—unattacka-
ble, shall we say?” Unattackable, Loudon will not consent to
think him, though Butturlin has quite consented. ‘ Difficult,
murderous,” thinks Loudon; “but possible, certain, could But-
turlin but be persuaded!’’ And tries all his rhetoric on Buttur-
lin: ““Shame on us!” urges the ardent Loudon: ‘Imperial and
Czarish Majesties; Kriegshofrath, Russian Senate; Vienna, Pe-
tersburg, Versailles, and all the world,—what are they expecting
of us? To ourselves it seemed certain, and here we sit helplessly
gazing!” Loudon is very diligent upon Butturlin: ‘‘Do but be-
lieve that it is possible. A plan can be made; many plans: the
problem is solved, if only your Excellency will believe.” Which
Butturlin never quite will.

Nobody knows better than Friedrich in what perilous crisis he
now stands: beaten here, what army or resource has he left?
Silesia is gone from him; by every likelihood, the game is gone.
This of Bunzelwitz is his last card; this is now his one strong-
hold in the world :—we need not say if he is vigilant in regard
to this. From about the fourth day, when his engineering was
only complete in outline, he particularly expects to be attacked.
On the fifth night he concludes it will be; knowing Loudon’s
way. ‘Towards sunset, that evening (August 25th), all the tents
are struck: tents, cookeries, every article of baggage, his own
among the rest, are sent to Wiirben Heights (to Schweidnitz,
Archenholtz says; but has misremembered): the ground cleared
for action. And horse and foot, every man marches out, and
stands ready under arms.

Contrary to everybody’s eae not a shot was heard,
that night. Nor the next night, nor the next: but the practice

. ae -

-
ee ee ee ee ee ee ee

ae ae — — a

ee ee

Cuap. VII.] stxTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 147
20th Aug.—¥Yth Sept. 1761.

of vigilance was continued. Punctual as mathematics: at a
given hour of the afternoon, tents are all struck; tents and fur-
nitures, field swept clear; and the 50,000 in their places wait
under arms. Next morning, nothing having fallen out, the tents
come back; the Army (half of it at once, or almost the whole
of it, according to aspects) rests, goes to sleep if it can. By
night there is vigilance, is work, and no sleep. It is felt to be a
hard life, but a necessary.

Nor in these labours of detail is the King wanting; far from
it; the King is there, as ear and eye of the whole. For the
King alone there is, near the chief Battery, ‘“‘on the Pfarrberg,
namely, in the clump of trees there,” a small Tent, and a bundle
of straw where he can lie down, if satisfied to do so. If all is
safe, he will do so; perhaps even still he soon awakens again ;
and strolls about among his guard-parties, or warms himself by
their fires. One evening, among the orders, is heard this item:
*¢ And remember, a lock of straw, will you,—that I may not have
to sleep on the ground, as last night!’® Many anecdotes are
current to this day, about his pleasant homely ways and affabili-
ties with the sentry people, and the rugged hospitalities they
would show him at their watchfires. ‘Good evening, children.”
“The same to thee, Fritz.” ‘‘ What is that you are cooking?”
—and would try a spoonful of it, in such company; while the
rough fellows would forbid smoking, “Don’t you know he dis-
likes it?” ‘No, smoke away!” the King would insist.

Mythical mainly, these stories; but the dialect of them true;
and very strange to us. Like that of an Arab Sheik among his
tribesmen ; like that of a man whose authority needs no keeping
up, but is a Law of Nature to himself and everybody. He per-
mits a little bantering even; a rough joke against himself, if it
spring sincerely from the complexion of the fact. The poor men
are terribly tired of this work: such bivouacking, packing, un-
packing; and continual waiting for the tug of battle, which never
comes. Biscuits, meal are abundant enough; but flesh-meat
wearing low; above all, no right sleep to be had. Friedrich’s
own table, I should think, is very sparingly beset (‘‘ A cup of
chocolate is my dinner on marching-days,” wrote he once, this

5 Seyfarth, iii. 16 n.

148 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th-10th Sept. 1761,

Season); certainly his Lodging,—damp ground, and the straw.

sometimes. forgotten,—is none of the best. And thus it has to
last, night after. night and day after day. On September 8th,
General Biilow went out for a little butcher’s-meat; did bring
home “200 head of neat cattle” (I fear, not very fat) “and 300
sheep.” .

Loudon, all this while, is labouring, as.man seldom. did, to
bring Butturlin to the striking place;—who continues flaccid,
Loudon screwing and rescrewing, altogether in vain... Loudon
does not deny the difficulty; but insists on the possibility, the
necessity: Councils of War are held, remonstrances, encourage-
ments. ‘‘ We will lend you a Corps,” answers Butturlin; ‘but
as to our Army codperating,—except in that far-off way, it is
too dangerous !’’ Meanwhile provisions are running low; the
time presses.. A formal Plan, presented by the ardent Loudon,
—Loudon himself to take the deadlier part,—‘‘ Mark it, noble
Russian gentlemen; and you to have the easier !”—surely that
is loyal, and not in the old cat’s-paw way? But in that, too,
there is an offence. Butturlin and the Russians grumble to them-
selves: “And you take all the credit, as you did at Kunersdorf?
A mere adjunct, or auxiliary, we :—and we are a Feldmarschall;
and you, what is your rank and seniority?’ In short, they will
not do it; and in the end coldly answer: ‘A Corps, if you like;
but the whole Army, positively no.” Upon which Loudon goes
home half mad; and has a colic for eight-and-forty hours... ‘This
was September 2d;. the final sour refusal ;—nearly heart-break-
ing to Loudon. Provisions are run. so low withal; the Cam-
paign season all but done; result, nothing: not even an attempt
at a result.

No Prussian, from Friedrich downwards, had doubted but the
attack would be: the grand upshot and fiery consummation of
these dark continual hardships and nocturnal watchings. Thrice
over, on different nights, the Prussians imagined Loudon to have
drawn out, intending actual business;, and thrice over to haye
drawn in again,—instead of once only, as was the fact, and then
taken colic.1° Friedrich’s own notion, that ‘‘ over dinner, glass
in hand,” the two Generals had,.in the enthusiasm of such a

° Tempelhof, v. 172. 10 Tbid. v. 170.

ee

ee ee ee ee a

a

et

> tema? hg tlle

aie “ieee Ga

aoe
i

Cuap. VII.]  stXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 149
10th Sept. 1761.

moment, agreed to do it, but on sober inspection found it too du-
bious,!! appears to be ungrounded. Whether they could in reality
have stormed him, had they all been willing, is still a question;
and must continue one. Wednesday evening, 9th September,
there was much movement noticeable in the Russian camp; also
among the Austrian, there are regiments, foot and horse, coming
- down hitherward: ‘ Meaning to try it, then?” thought Fried-
rich, and got at once under arms. Suppositions were various ;
but about 10 at night, the whole Russian Camp went up in flame;
and, next morning, the Russians were not there.

Russian main Army clean gone; already got to Jauer, as we
hear; and Beck with a Division to see them safe across the
Oder ;—only Czernichef and 20,000 being left, as a Corps of
Loudon’s. Who, with all Austrians, are quiet in their Heights
of Kunzendorf again. And thus, on the twentieth morning, Sep-
tember 10th, this strange Business terminated. Shot of those
batteries is drawn again; powder of those mines lifted out again:
no firing of your heavy Artillery at all, nor even of your light,
after such elaborate charging and shoving of it hither and thither
for the last three weeks. ‘The Prussians cease their bivouacking,
nightly striking of tents; and encamp henceforth in a merely
human manner; their “Spanish Riders” (frisian Horse, Chevaux-
de-Frise, others of us call them), their Storm-pales and elaborate
wooden Engineerings, they gradually burn as fuel in the cold
nights; finding Loudon absolutely quiescent, and that the thing
is over, for the present. One huge peril handsomely staved
away, though so many others impend.

By way of accelerating Butturlin, Friedrich, next day, Septem-
ber 11th, despatched General Platen with some 8,000 (so I will
guess them from Tempelhof’s enumeration by battalions), to get
round the flank of Butturlin, and burn his Magazines. Platen,
a valiant skilful person, did this business, as he was apt to do,
in a shining style; shot dextrously forward by the skirts of But-
turlin; heard of a big Wagenburg or Travelling Magazine of his,
at Gostyn over the Polish Frontier ; in fact, his travelling bread-
basket, arranged as “‘ Wagon-fortress” in and round some Con-

1 (Huvres de Frédéric, v. 125.

150 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th—25th Sept. 1761.

vent there, with trenches, brick-walls, cannon, and defence con-~
sidered strong enough for so important a necessary of the road.
September 15th, Platen, before cock-crow, burst out suddenly on
this Wagon-fortress, with its cannons, trenches, brick-walls and
defensive Russians; stormed into it with extraordinary fury:
“Fixed bayonets,” ordered he, at the main point of their de-
fence, *‘not a shot till they are tumbled out!”—tumbled them
out accordingly, into flight and ruin; took of prisoners 1,845,
seven cannon, and burnt the 5,000 provender wagons, which was
the soul of the adventure; and directly got upon the road again.!?
Detachments of him then fell on Posen, on Posen and other small
Russian repositories in those parts, —hay-magazines, biscuit-
stores, soldiers’ uniforms; distributed or burnt the same ;—
completely destroying the travelling haversack or general road-
bag of Butturlin: a Butturlin that will have to hasten forward
or starve.

Which done, Platen (not waiting the King’s new orders, but
anticipating them, to the King’s great contentment) marched in-
stantly, with his best speed and skilfullest contrivance of routes
and methods, not back to the King, but onward towards Col-
berg,—(which he knows, as readers shall anon, to be much in
need of him at present) ;—and without injury, though begirt all
the way by a hurricane of Cossacks and light people doing their
utmost upon him, arrived there, September 25th; victoriously
cutting in across the Besieging Party: and will again be visible
enough when we arrive there. Indignant Butturlin chased vio-
lently, eager to punish Platen; but could get no hold: found
Platen was clear off, to Pommern,—on what errand Butturlin
knew well, if not so well what to doin consequence. ‘Reinforce
our poor Besiegers there, and again reinforce” (to enormous
amounts, 40,000 of them in the end);—‘‘get bread from them
withal :—and, before long, flow bodily thitherward, for bread to
ourselves and for their poor sake!” That, on the whole, was
what Butturlin did.

Friedrich stayed at Bunzelwitz above a fortnight after Buttur-
lin. ‘*Why did not Friedrich stay altogether, and wait here?”
12 Tempelhof, v. 281-293 ; Helden-Geschichte, vi. 643-649.

Cuap. VII.] SIXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 151
10th—25th Sept. 1761.

said some, triumphantly soon after-> That was not well possible.
His Schweidnitz Magazine is worn low: not above a month’s
provision now left for so many of us. The rate of sickness, too,
gets heavier and heavier in this Bunzelwitz Circuit. In fine, it
is greatly desirable that Loudon, who has nothing but Bohemia
for outlook, should be got to start thither as soon as possible,
and be quickened homeward. September 25th-26th, Friedrich
will be under way again.

And, in the mean while, may not we employ this fortnight of
quiescence in noting certain other things of interest to him and
us, which have occurred, or are occurring, in other parts of the
Field of War? Of Henri in Saxony we undertook to say noth-

ing; and indeed hitherto,—big Daun with his Lacys and Reichs-
folk, lying so quiescent, tethered by considerations (Daun con-
tinually detaching, watching, for support of his Loudon and Rus-
sians and their thrice-important operation, which has just had
such a finish),—there could almost nothing be said. Nothing
hitherto, or even henceforth, as it proves, except mutual vigi-
lances, multifarious bickerings, manceuverings, affairs of posts:
sharp bits of cutting (Seidlitz, Green Kleist, and other sharp
people there); which must not detain us in such speed. But
there are two points, the Britannic-French Campaign, and the
Third Siege of Colberg; which in no rate of speed could be quite
omitted.

Of Ferdinand’s Battle of Vellinghausen (15th-16th July);
and the Campaign 1761.

Vellinghausen is a poor little moory Hamlet in Paderborn
County, near the south or left bank of the Lippe River; lies to
the north of Soest,—some 15 miles to your left-hand there, as
you go by rail from Aachen to Paderborn ;—but nobody now
has ever heard of it at Soest or elsewhere, famous as it once
became a hundred years ago. Ferdinand had taken a singular
position there, in the early days of July 1761. Here is brief
Notice of that Affair, and of some results, or adjuncts, still more
important, which it had:

“This Year, Ferdinand’s Campaign is more difficult than ever; Choi-
seul having made a quite spasmodic effort towards Hanover, while sne-

152 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th—25th Sept. 1761.

gotiating for Peace. Two Armies, counting together 160,000 men, in
great. completeness of equipment, Choiseul has got on foot, against Ferdi-

nand’s of 95,000. Had a fine dashing: plan, too ;—devised by himself ~

(something of a Soldier, he too, and full of what the messrooms call
‘dash’);—not so bad a Plan of the dashing kind, say judges. But it
was marred sadly in one point: That Broglio, on issuing from his Hes-
sian Winter-quarters, is not to be sole General; that Soubise, from the
Lower Rhine Country, is to be Co-General;—such the inexorable will
of Pompadour. This clause of the business Ferdinand, at an early
stage, appears to have guessed or discerned might, for him, be the sav-
ing clause.

“Now, as formerly, Ferdinand’s first grand business is to guard
Lippstadt,—guard it now from these two Generals :—and, singular to
see, instead of opposing the junction of them, he has submitted cheer-
fully to let them join. And in the course of a week or two after taking
the field, is found to be on the western or outmost flank of Soubise,
crushing him up towards Broglio, not otherwise! And has, partly by
accident, taken a position at Vellinghausen which infinitely puzzles
Broglio and Soubise, when they rush into junction at Soest (July 6th),
and study the thing, with their own eyes, ‘ for eight whole days, in con-
cert.” What continual reconnoitering, galloping about of high-plumed
gentlemen together or apart; what memozr-ing, mutual consulting, beat-
ing of brains, to little purpose, during those eight days !—

“ Ferdinand stands in moory difficult ground, length of him about
eight miles, looking eastward; with his left at Vellinghausen and the
Lippe; centre of him is astride of the Ahse (centre partly, and right
wing wholly, are on the south side of Ahse), which is a branch of Lippe;
and in front, he has various little Hamlets, Kirch-Denkern” (Kirch-
Denkern, for there are three or four other Denkerns thereabouts),
“‘Scheidingen, Wambeln, and others; and his right wing is covered
farther by a quaggy brook, which runs into the above-said Ahse, and
is a sub-branch of Lippe. At most of these Villages Ferdinand has
thrown up something of earthworks: there are bogs, rough places,
woods; all are turned to advantage. Ferdinand is in a strongish, but
yet a dangerous position; and will give difficulties, and does give end-
less dubieties, to these high-plumed gentlemen galloping about with
their spyglasses for eight days. One possibility they pretty soon dis-
' cern in him: His left flank rests on Lippe, yes; but his right flank is in
the air, has nothing to rest on ;—here surely is some possibility for us?
A strong Position, that of his; but if driven out of it by any method, he
has no retreat; is tumbled back into the angle where Ahse and Lippe
meet, and into the little Town of Hamm there, where his Magazine is.
What a fate for him, if we succeed !—

~—

ee TL ee Oe

Cuap. VII.]  stxTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 153
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

“Ferdinand, by the incessant reconnoitering and other symptoms,
judges what is coming; concludes he will be attacked in this posture
of his; and on the whole, what critics now reckon very wise and very
courageous of him, determines to stand his chance in it. The consult-
ations of Broglio and Soubise are a thing unique to Jook upon; spread
over volumes of Official Record, and about a volume anda half even of
Bourcet, where it is still almost amusing to read ;'* and ending in help-
less downbreak on both parts. Of strategic faculty nobody supposes
they had much,.and nearly all of it is in Broglio; Soubise being strong
in Court-favour only. Exquisitely polite they both strive to be; and
under the exquisite politeness, what infirmities of temper, splenetic sus-
picions, and in fact mutual hatred lay hidden, could never be accurately
known. ‘Attack him, Sunday next; on the 13th!’ so, at the long last,
both of them had said. And then, on more reflexion, Broglio after-
wards: ‘Or not till the 15th, M. le Prince; till I reconnoitre yet again,
and drive in his outposts?) ‘M. le Maréchal’s will is always mine:
Tuesday, 15th, reconnoitre him, drive him in; be it so, then!’ answers
Soubise, with extreme politeness,—but thinking in his own mind (0
thought to be thinking), ‘Wants to do it himself, or to get the credit of
doing it, as in former cases; and bring me into disgrace!’ Not quite
an insane notion either, on Soubise’s part, say some who have looked
into the Broglio-Soubise Controversy ;—which far be it from any of us,
at this or at any time, to do. Here are the facts that ensued. ©

“Tuesday, July 15th, 1761, Broglio reconnoitered with intensity all
day, drove in all Ferdinand’s outposts; and about six in the evening,
seeing hope of surprise, or spurred by some notion of doing the feat
by himself, suddenly burst into onslaught on Ferdinand’s Position :
‘Vellinghausen yonder, and the woody strengths about,—could not we
get hold of that; it would be so convenient tomorrow morning!’ Gran-
by and the English are in camp about Vellinghausen; and are taken
quite on the sudden: but they drew out rapidly, in a state of bottled
indignation, and fought, all of them,—Pembroke’s Brigade of Horse,
Cavendish’s of Foot, Berg-Schotten, Maxwell’s Brigade, and the others,
in a highly satisfactory way,—‘ mit unbeschreiblicher Tapferkeit,’ says
Mauvillon on this occasion again. Broglio truly has burst out into
enowgnous cannonade, musketade, and cavalry-work, in this part; and
struggles at it, almost four hours,—a furious, and especially a very
noisy business, charging, recharging through the woods there ;—but,

13° Mémoires Tistoriques (that is to say, for most part, Selection of Official
Papers) sur la Guerre que les Francais ont soutenue en Allemagne depuis 1757
jusqauw 1762: Par M. de Bourcet, Lieutenant-Général des Armées du Roi
(3 tomes, Paris, 1792) ;—worthily done; but ocenpied, two-thirds of it, with
this Vellinghausen and the paltry eee of 1761!”
¥ 2

154 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

10th-25th Sept. 1761.
met in this manner, finds he can make nothing of it; and about 10 at
night, leaves off till a new morning.

‘“* Next morning, about 4, Broglio, having diligently warned Soubise
overnight, recommenced ; again very fiercely, and with loud cannonad-
ing; but with result worse than before. Ferdinand overnight, while
Broglio was warning Soubise, had considerably strengthened his left
wing here,—by detachments from the right or Anti-Soubise wing;
judging, with good foresight, how Soubise would act. And accord-
ingly, while poor Broglio kept storming forward with his best ability,
and got always hurled back again, Soubise took matters easy ; ‘ had
understood the hour of attack to be’ so-and-so, ‘had understood’ this and
that; and on the whole, except summoning or threatening, in the most
languid way, one outlying redoubt (‘redoubt of Scheidingen’) on Ferdi-
nand’s right wing, did nothing, or next to nothing, for behoof of his
Broglio. Who, hour after hour, finds himself ever worse bested ;—

those Granby people proving ‘indescribable’ once more” (their Wut-:

genau also, with his Hanoverians, not being absent, as they rather were
last night) ;—‘ and about 10 in the morning, gives up the bad job; and
sets about retiring. If retiring be now permissible; which it is not
altogether. Ferdinand, watching intently through his glass the now
silent Broglio, discerns ‘Some confusion in the Maréchal yonder !’—
and orders a general charge of the left wing upon Broglio; which con-
siderably quickened his retreat; and broke it into flight, and distressful
wreck and capture, in some parts,— Regiment Rouge, for one item,
falling wholly, men, cannon, flags and furniture, to that Maxwell and
his Brigade.

“Ferdinand lost, by the indistinct accounts, ‘from 1,500 to 2,000 :’
Broglio’s loss was ‘above 5,000; 2,000 of them prisoners.’ Soubise,
for his share, ‘ had of killed 24,—O you laggard of a Soubise!'* And
it is a Battle lost to Choiseul’s grand Pair of Armies; a Campaign
checked in mid volley ; and nothing but recriminations, courts-martial,
shrieky jargonings,—and plain incompatibility between the Two Maré-
chaux de France; so that they had to part company, and go each his
own road henceforth. Choiseul remonstrates with them, urges, en-
courages ; writes the ‘admirablest Despatches ;’ to no purpose. ‘ How

14 Mauvillon, ii. 171-189; Tempelhof, v. 207-221; Bourcet, ii. 75 ef*seq.
In Helden-Geschichte (vi. 770-782-792) the French Account, and the En-
glish (or Allied), with Lists, and the like. Slight Letter from Sir Robert
Murray Keith to his Excellency Papa, now at Petersburg, ‘‘ Excellency
first,” as we used to define him, stands in the miserably edited Memoirs and
Correspondence (London, 1849), i. 104-5; and may tempt you to a reading;
but alters nothing, adds little or nothing. Sir R. fights here as a Colonel
of Highlanders, but afterwards became ‘‘Excellency second” of his name.

lA aaa

he te a

—_—

J

a.

A. aeOibe: 4 yen ee

Cuap. VII.]  stXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 155
10th—25th Sept. 1761.

ridiculous and humiliating would it be for us, if, with Two Armies of
such strength, we accomplished nothing, and the whole Campaign were
lost! writes he once to them.

“Which was in fact the result arrived at; the two Generals parting
company for this Campaign (and indeed for all others) ; and each, in
his own way, proving futile. Soubise, with some 30,000, went gascon-
ading about, in the Westphalian, or extreme western parts; taking
Embden (from two Companies of Chelsea Pensioners; to whom he
broke his word, poor old souls;—to whom, and much more to the
Populations there'®),—taking Embden, not taking Bremen; and in fact
doing nothing, except keep the Gazetteers in vain noise: a Soubise
not in force, by himself, to shake Ferdinand ; and who, it is remarked,
now and formerly, always prefers to be at a good distance from that
Gentleman. Broglio, on the other hand, keeps violently pulsing out,
round Ferdinand’s flanks; taking Wolfenbiittel (Broglio’s for two days),
besieging Brunswick (for one day) ;—and, in short, leaving, he too, the
matter as he had found it. A man of difficult, litigious temper, I should
judge; but clearly has something of generalship: ‘does understand tac-
tic, if strategy not,’ said everybody ; ‘ while Soubise, in both capacities,
is plain zero!"® ‘The end, however, was: next Winter, Broglio got
dismissed, in favour of Soubise ;—rest from shrieky jargon having its
value to some of us; and ‘hold of Hanover’ being now plainly a matter
hopeless to France and us.”

In this Battle a fine young Prince of Brunswick got killed;
Erbprinz’s second Brother;—leading on a Regiment of Berg-
Schotten, say the accounts.’ Berg-Schotten, and English gen-
erally, Pembroke’s Horse, Cavendish’s Brigade,—we have men-

15 Letter from a French Protestant Gentleman at Griningen; followed by
confirmatory Letter from &c. &e. (copied into Gentleman's Magazine for
1761), give special details of the altogether U/tra-Soltikof atrocities, per-
petrated by Soubise’s people (doubtless against his will) on the recalcitrant
or disaffected Peasants, on the &e. &e.

'6 Excellency Stanley (see infra) to Pitt, ‘‘Paris, 30th July 1761:” in
Thackeray, ii. 561-2.

17 << The Life of Prince Albert Henry” (had lived only 19 years, poor
youth, not much of a ‘‘ Life!”—but the account of his Education is worth
reading, from a respectable Eyewitness) ‘‘of Brunswick-Luneburg, Brother
to the Hereditary Prince; who so eminently &c. at Fellinghausen §c. §c.
(London, Printed for &e. 1763). Written originally in German by the Rev.
Mr. Hierusalem” (Father of the ‘‘ Young Jerusalem” who killed himself
afterwards, and became, in a sense, Goethe’s Werther and Sorrows). Price,
probably, Two-pence,

156 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

tioned their behaviour; and how Maxwell’s Brigade took one
whole regiment prisoners, in that final charge on Broglio. “What
a glorious set of fellows!”’ said the English people over their beer,
at home. Beer let us fancy it; at the Sign of Zhe Marquis of
Granby, which is now everywhere prevalent and splendent ;—the
beer, we will hope, good. And as this is a thing still said, both
over beer and higher liquors, and perhaps is liable to be too much
insisted on, I will give, from a candid Bystander, who knows the
matter well, what probably is a more solid and circumstantially

correct opinion. Speaking of Ferdinand’s skill of management, —

and of how very composite a kind his Army was, Major Mau-
villon has these words:

“The first in rank,” of Ferdinand’s Force, “were the English; about
a fourth part of the whole Army. Braver troops, when on the field of
battle and under arms against the enemy, you will nowhere find in the
world: that is a truth ;—and with that the sum of their military merits
ends. In the first place, their Infantry consists of such an unselected
hand-over-head miscellany of people, that it is highly difficult to preserve
among them even a shadow of good discipline,”—of Mannszucht, in re-
gard to plunder, drinking and the like; does not mean Kriegszucht,
or drill. ‘Their Cavalry indeed is not so constituted; but a foolish
love for their horses makes them astonishingly plunderous of forage;
and thus they exhaust a district far faster in that respect than do the
Germans.

“ Officers’ Commissions among them are all had by purchase: from
which it follows that their Officers do not trouble their heads about the
service ; and understand of it, very very few excepted, absolutely noth-
ing whatever” (what a charming set of “ Officers !”)—‘‘and this goes from
the Ensign up to the General. ‘Their home-customs incline them to the
indulgences of life; and, nearly without exception, they all expect to
have ample and comfortable means of sleep.” (Hear, hear!) ‘This
leads them often into military negligences, which would sound incredi-
ble, were they narrated to a soldier. ‘To all this is added a quiet natural
arrogance (Uebermuth),’—very quiet, mostly unconscious, and as if in+
born and coming by discernment of mere facts,—“ which tempts them
to despise the enemy as well as the danger; and as they very seldom
think of making any surprisal themselves, they generally take it for
granted that the enemy will as little.

“This arrogance, however, had furthermore a very bad consequence
for their relation to the rest of the Army. It is well known how much
these people despise all Foreigners, This of itself renders their coop-

es ee ———

Ee

i ll

Yee - Ws

Cuap. VII,]  stXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 157
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

erating with Troops of other Nations very difficult. But in this case
there was the circumstance that, as the Army was in English pay, they
felt a strong tendency to regard their fellow-soldiers and copartners as a
sort of subordinate war-valets, who must be ready to put up with any-
thing :—which was far indeed from being the opinion of the others con-
cerned! ‘The others had not the smallest notion of consenting to any
kind of inferior treatment or consideration in respect of them. To the
Hanoverians especially, from known political feelings, they were at
heart, for most part, specially indisposed; and this mode of thinking
’ was capable of leading to very dangerous outbreaks. The Hanoverians,
a dull steady people, brave as need be, but too slow for anything but foot
service, considered silently this War to be their War, and that all the
rest, English as well, were here on their” (and Britannic Majesty’s)
* account.

“Think what difficulties Ferdinand’s were, and what his merit in
quietly subduing them; while to the cursory observer they were invisi-
ble, and nobody noticed them but himself!”?®

Yes, doubtless. He needed to know his kinds of men; to regard
intensely the chemic affinities and natural properties, to keep his phos-
phorescents, his nitres and charcoals well apart; to get out of these
English what they were capable of giving him, namely, heavy strokes,
—and never ask them for what they had not: them or the others; but
treat each according to his kind. Just, candid, consummately polite ;
an excellent manager of men, as well as of war-movements, though Vol-
taire found him shockingly defective in esprit. The English, I think,
he generally quartered by themselves; employed them oftenest under
the Hereditary Prince,—a man of swift execution and prone to strokes
like themselves. ‘‘ Oftenest under the Erbprinz,” says Mauvillon: “till,
after the Fight of Kloster Kampen, it began to be noticed that there was
a change in that respect; and the messrooms whispered, ‘ By accident
or not?’ ”’—which shall remain mysterious to me. In Battle after Bat-
tle he got the most unexceptionable sabering and charging from Lord
Granby and the difficult English element; and never was the least dis-
cord heard in his Camp ;—nor could even Sackville at Minden tempt
him into a loud word.

But enough of English soldiering, and battling with the French.
For about two months prior to this of Vellinghausen, and for more
than two months after, there is going on, by special Envoys be-
tween Pitt and Choiseul, a lively Peace-Negotiation, which is of
more concernment to us than any Battle. ‘Congress at Augs-
burg” split upon formalities, preliminaries, and never even tried

18 Mauvillon, ii. 270-272.

——Ee————— ee eee Pee, ee

158 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

to meet: but France and England are actually busy. Each
Country has sent its Envoy: the Sieur de Bussy, a tricky gen-
tleman, known here of old, is Choiseul’s, whom Pitt is on his
guard against; ‘‘ Mr. Hans Stanley,” a lively, clear-sighted per-
son, of whom I could never hear elsewhere, is Pitt’s at Paris:
and it is in that City, between Choiseul and Stanley, with Pitt
warily and loftily presiding in the distance, that the main stress
of the Negotiation lies. Pitt is lofty, haughty, but very fine and
noble; no King or Kaiser could be more. Sincere, severe, though
most soft-shining; high, earnest, steady, like the stars. Artful
Choiseul, again, flashes out in a cheerily exuberant way; and
Stanley’s Despatches about Choiseul (“‘ce fou plein esprit,” as
Friedrich once christens him),—about Choiseul and the France
then round him, and the effects of Vellinghausen in society, and
the like,—are the liveliest reading one almost anywhere meets
with in that kind.!® Choiseul frankly admits that he has come
to the worse: ready for concessions, but the question is, What ?
Canada is gone, for instance; of Canada you will allow us noth-
ing: but our poor Fisher-people, toiling in the Newfoundland
waters, cannot they have a rock to dry their fish on; “Isle of
Miquelon, or the like?” ‘Not the breadth of a blanket,’’—that
is Pitt’s private expression, I believe; and for certain, that, in
polite official language, is his inexorable determination. ‘You
shaH go home out of those Countries, Messicurs; America is to
be English or Yankee, not Frangcee: that has turned out to be
the Decree of Heaven; and we will stand by that.”

So that Choiseul soon satisfies himself it will be a hard bargain,
this with Pitt; and turns the more assiduously to the Majesty of
Spain (Baby Carlos, our old friend, who has sore grudges of his
own against the English, standing grievances of Campeachy Log-
wood, of bitter Naples reminiscences, and enough else),—turns
to Baby Carlos, time after time, with his pathetic “See, your
_Most Catholic Majesty!” And by rapid degrees induces Most
Catholic Majesty to go wholly into the adyenture with Most
Christian Ditto ;—and to say, at length, or to let Choiseul say

19 In Thackeray, i. 505-579, and especially ii. 520-626, is the Stanley-and-
Pitt Correspondence: Stanley went, ‘‘ 23d May ;” returned (got his pass-
ports for returning), ‘‘ September 20th.”

Cuap. VII.]  stxTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 159
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

for him, by way of cautious first-step (15th July, a date worth
remembering, if the reader please): ‘‘ Might not Most Catholic
Majesty be allowed perhaps to mediate a little in this Business?”
“Most Catholic Majesty!” answers Pitt, with a flash as if from
the empyrean: ‘*Who sent_for Most Catholic Majesty ?”—and
the matter catches fire, totally explodes, and Spain too declares
War; in what way is generally known.

Details are not permitted us. The Catastrophe we shall give
afterwards, and can here say only: ist, That old Earl Marischal,
Friedrich’s Spanish Envoy, is a good deal in England, coming and
going, at this time,—on that interesting business of the Kintore
Inheritance, doubtless,—and has been beautifully treated. Been
pardoned, disattainted, permitted to inherit,—by the King on the
instant, by the Parliament so soon as possible ;?°—and is of a
naturally grateful turn. Secondly, That in the profoundest se-
crecy, penetrable only to eyes near at hand and that see in the
dark, a celebrated Bourbon Family Compact was signed (August
15th, 1761, ten days before the Digging at Bunzelwitz began),
of which the first news to the Olympian man (conveyed by Mari-
schal, as is thought) was like—like news of dead Pythons pre-
tending to revive upon him. And thirdly, That, postponing the
Catastrophe, and recommending the above two dates, 15th July,
15th August, to careful readers, we must hasten to Colberg for
the present.

Third Siege of Colberg.

Readers had, some while ago, a flying Note, which we promised
to take up again; about Tottleben’s procedures, and a Third Siege
of Colberg coming. Siege, we have chanced to see, there accord-
ingly is, and a Platen gone to help against it. Siege, after infi-
nite delays and haggles, has at length come,—uncommonly vivid
during the final days of Bunzelwitz ;—and is, and has been, and
continues to be, much in the King’s thoughts. Probably a mat-
ter of more concernment to him, before, during, and after Bunzel-

20 King’s Patent is of ‘‘30th April 1760” (dated 29th May 1759), “Act
of Parliament to follow shortly ;” ‘‘ August 16th, 1760, Act having passed,
is Marischal’s public Presentation to his Majesty” (late Majesty): Old Ga-
zettes in Gentleman's Magazine (for 1760), xxx. 201, 392.

160 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

witz (though the Pitt Catastrophe, going on simultaneously, is
still more important, if he knew it), than anything else befulling
in the distance. Let us now give a few farther indications on
that matter.

Truce between Werner and Tottleben expired, May 12th; but
for five weeks more nothing practical followed; except diligent
reinforcing, revictualling, and extraordinary fortifying of Colberg
and its environs, on the Prussian part,—Kugen of Wiirtemberg,
direct from Rostock and his Anti-Swede business, Eugen 12,000
strong, with a Werner and other such among them, taking head
charge outside the walls; old Heyde again as Commandant
within: while on the Russian part, under General Romanzow,
there is a most tortoise-like advance,—except that the tortoise
carries all his resources with him, and Romanzow’s, multifarious
and enormous, are scattered over seas and lands, and need end-
less waiting for, in the intervals of crawling.

This is the Romanzow who failed at Colberg once already (on
the heel of Zorndorf in 1758, if readers recollect); and is the
more bound to be successful now. From sea and from land, for
five weeks, there is rumour of a Romanzow in overwhelming
force, and with intentions very furious upon Colberg,—upon the
outposts, under Werner, as first point. Five weeks went, before
anything of Romanzow was visible even to Werner (22d June,
at Cdslin, forty miles to eastward); after which his advance
(such waiting for the ships, for the artilleries, the this and the
that) was slower than ever; and for about eight weeks more,
he haggles along through Céslin, through Corlin, Belgard again,
flowing slowly forward upon Werner’s outposts, like a summer
glacier with its rubbishes; or like a slow lava-tide,—a great
deal of smoke on each side of him (owing to the Cossacks), as
usual. Romanzow’s progress is of the slowest; and it is not till
August 19th that he practically gets possession of Coérlin, Bel-
gard and those outposts on the Persante River, and comes within
sight of Colberg and his problem. By which time, he finds Eugen
of Wiirtemberg encamped and entrenched still ahead of him, still
nearer Colberg, and likely to give him what they call “de la ta-
blature,” or extremely difficult music to play.

“Tt was on August 19th” (very eve of Friedrich’s going into Bunzel-

Cuap. VII.] SIXTH CAMPAIGN: BUNZELWITZ. 161
10th-25th Sept. 1761.

witz), ‘that Romanzow,—Werner, for the sake of ike poor Towns
he holds, generally retiring without bombardment or utter conflagration,
—had got hold of Cérlin and of the River Persante” (with “ Quetzin
and Degow,” if anybody knew them, as his main posts there): ‘and
was actually now within sight of Colberg,—only 7 or 8 miles west of
him, and a river more or less in his way :—when, singular to see, Hugen
of Wiirtemberg has rooted himself into the ground farther inward, en-
vironing Colberg with a fortified Camp as with a second wall; and it
will be a difficult problem indeed!

“ But Sea Armaments, Swedish-Russian, with endless siege-material
and red-hot balls, are finally at hand; and this pitiful Colberg must be
done, were it only by falling flat on it, and smothering it by weight of
numbers and of red-hot iron. The day before yesterday, August 17th,
after such rumouring and such maneuvering as there has been, six
Russian ships-of-war showed themselves in Colberg Roads, and three
of them tried some shooting on Heyde’s workpeople, busy at a redoubt
on the beach; but hit nothing, and went away till Romanzow himself
should come. Romanzow come, there is utmost despatch ; and within
the eight days following, the Russian ships, and then the Swedish as
well, have all got to their moorings,—12 sail of the line, with 42 more
of the frigate and gunboat kind, 54 ships in all ;—and from August 24th,
especially from August 28th, bombardment to the very uttermost is
going on.*'. Bombardment by every method, from sea and from land,
continues diligent for the next fortnight,—with little or no result; so
diligent are Kugen and veteran Heyde.

“September 4th. The Swedish-Russian gunboats have been much
shot down by Heyde’s batteries on the beach; no success had, owing to
Heyde and Eugen: paltry little Colberg as impossible as Bunzelwitz,
it seems? ‘Double our diligence, therefore!’ That is Romanzow’s
and everybody's sentiment here. Romanzow comes closer in, Septem-
ber 4th; besieges in form, since not Colberg, Eugen’s Camp, or brazen
wall of Colberg; and there rises in and round this poor little Colberg
(a 2,000 balls daily, red-hot and other) such a volcano as attracts the
eyes of all the world thither.

“* September 12th. News yesterday of reinforcement, men and prov-
ender, coming from Stettin; is to be at Treptow on the 13th. Werner,
night of the 11th, stealthily sets out to meet it, 2¢ in the first place ; then,
joined with it, to take by rearward a certain inconvenient battery, which
Romanzow is building to westward of us, out that way; to demolish
said battery, and be generally distressful to the rear of Romanzow. At
Treptow, after his difficult night’s mareh, Werner is resting, secure now
of the adventure ;—too contemptuous of his slow Russians, as appeared!

21 Tempelhof, v. 311.

162 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

10th-25th Sept. 1761.
Who, for once. surprise hm; and, at and round Treptow, next morning,
Werner finds himself suddenly in a most awkward predicament. Wer-
ner, one of the rapidest and stormiest of skilful men, plunged valiantly
into the affair; would still have managed it, they say, had not, in some
sudden swoop,—charge, or something of critical or vital nature,—rapid
Werner’s horse got shot, and fallen with him; whereby not only the
charge failed, but Werner himself was taken prisoner. A loss of very
great importance, and grievous to everybody : though, I believe, the re-
inforcement and supply, for this time, got mostly through, and the dan-
gerous battery was got demolished by other means.*? ‘This is Roman-
' zow’s first item of success, this of getting such a Werner snatched out
of the game” (and sent to Petersburg instead, as we shall hear); “and
other items fell to Romanzow thenceforth by the aid of time and hunger.

‘“‘In the way of storming, battering, or otherwise capturing Eugen’s
Camp, not to speak of Heyde’s town, Romanzow finds, on trial after
trial, that he can do as good as nothing; and his unwieldy sea-comrades
(equinoctial gales coming on them, too) are equally worthless. Sep-
tember 19th” (a week after this of Werner, tenth day after Bunzelwitz
had ended), “ Romanzow made his fiercest attempt that way, fiercest
and Jast: furious extremely, from 2 in the morning onwards. had for
some time hold of the important ‘Green Redoubt ,’ but was still more
furiously battered and bayonetted out again, with the loss of above 3,000
men; and tried that no farther. Impossible by that method. But he
can stand between the Eugen-Heyde people and supplies; and by ob-
stinacy hunger them out: this, added to the fruitless bombardment, is
now his more or less fruitful industry.

“Tn the end of September, the effects of Bunzelwitz are felt: Platen,
after burning the Butturlin Magazine at Gostyn, has hastened hither ;
in what style we know. Platen arrives, 25th September; cuts his way
through Romanzow into Kugen’s Camp, raises Eugen to about 15,000 ;?°
renders Eugen, not to speak of Heyde, more impossible than ever.
Butturlin did truly send reinforcements, a 10,000, a 12,000, ‘As many
as you like, my Romanzow!’ And, in the beginning of October, came
rolling thitherward bodily; hoping, they say, to make a Maxen of it
upon those Eugens and Platens: but after a fortnight’s survey of them,
found there was not the least feasibility ;—and that he himself must go
home, on the score of hunger. Which he did, November 2d; leaving
Romanzow reinforced at discretion” (40,000, but with him too provisions
are fallen low), “and the advice, ‘Cut off their supplies: time and
famine are our sole chances here!’ Butturlin’s new Russians, endless
thousands of them, under Fermor and others, infesting the roads from
Stettin, are a great comfort to Romanzow. Nor could any Eugen,

*2 Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 238; ‘Tempelhof, v.314. ** Tempelhof, v. 350.

a, a a

Cup. VIII.] LOUDON POUNCES ON SCHWEIDNITZ. 163
25th-30th Sept. 1761.

—with his Platens. Thaddens, and utmost expenditure of skill and of
valour and endurance, which are still memorable in soldier-annals,?4—
suffice to convey provisions through that disastrous Wilderness of dis-
tances and difficulties.

“From Stettin, which lies south-west, through Treptow, Gollnow, and
other wild little Prussian Towns, is about 100 miles; from Landsberg
south, 150: Friedrich himself is well-nigh 300 miles away: in Stettin
alone is succour, could we hold the intervening Country. But it is
overrun with Russians, more and ever more. A Country of swamps
and moors, winter darkness stealing over it,—illuminated by such a
volcano as we see: a very gloomy waste scene; and traits of stubborn
human valour and military virtue plentiful in it, with utter hardship as
a constant quantity : details not permissible here, only the main features
and epochs, if they could be indicated.

“The King is greatly interested for Colberg ; sends orders to collect
from every quarter supplies at Stettin, and strain every nerve for the
relief of that important little Haven. Which is done by the diligent
Bevern, the collecting part, could only the conveying be accomplished.
But endless Russians are afield. I°ermor with a 15,000 of them waylay-

ing; the conveyance is the difficulty.” *°— —

But now we must return to Bunzelwitz, and pe 25th,
in Headquarters there.

CHAPTER VIII.

LOUDON POUNCES UPON SCHWEIDNITZ, ONE NIGHT (LAST OF SEP-
TEMBER 1761).

Ir was September 25th, more properly 26th,! when Friedrich
quitted Bunzelwitz; we heard on what errand. Early that morn-
ing, he marches with all his goods, first to Pilzen (that fine post
on the east side of Schweidnitz); and from that, straightway,
—south-westward, two marches farther,—to Neisse neighbour-

2& Tagebuch der Unternehmungen des Platenschen Corps vom September bis
_ November 1761 (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 82-76). Bericht von der Unterneh-
mungen des Ti iactcaenk Corps vom Jenner bis zum December 1761 (ibid.
‘T7-147).

25 Bericht von den Unternehmungen der Wiirtembergischen Corps in Pom-
mern, vom May 1761 bis December 1761 (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 147-258).
Tempelhof, v. 313-326. Helden- Geschichte, vi. 669-708.

1 Tempelhof, y. 327.

164 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
30th Sept.—Ist Oct. 1761.

hood (Gross-Nossen, the name of the place); Loudon making
little dispute or none. In Neisse are abundant Magazines:
living upon these, Friedrich intends to alarm Loudon’s rearward
country, and draw him towards Bohemia. As must have grad-
ually followed ; and would at once,—had Loudon been given to
alarms, which he was not. Loudon, very privately, has quite
different game afield. Loudon merely detaches this and the
other small Corps to look after Friedrich’s operations, which
probably he believes to be only a feint:—and, before a week
passes, Friedrich will have news he little expects!

Friedrich, pausing at Gross-Nossen, and perhaps a little sur-
prised to find no Loudon meddling with him, pushes out, first
one party and then another,—Dalwig, Biilow, towards Landshut
Hill-Country, to threaten Loudon’s Bohemian roads ;—who, sin-
cular to say, do not hear the least word of Loudon thereabouts.
A Loudon strangely indifferent to this new Enterprise of ours.
On the third day of Gross-Nossen (Friday, October 2d), Fried-
rich detaches General Lentulus to rearward, or the way we came,
for news of Loudon. Rearward too, Lentulus sees nothing what-
ever of Loudon: but, from the rumour of the country, and from
two Prussian garrison-soldiers, whom he found wandering about,
—he hears, with horror and amazement, That Loudon, by a sud-
den panther-spring, the night before last, has got hold of Schweid-
nitz: now his wholly, since 5 a.m. of yesterday; anda strong Aus-
trian garrison in it by this time! That was the news Lentulus
brought home to his King; the sorest Job’s-post of all this War.

Truly, a surprising enterprise this of Loudon’s; and is allowed
by everybody to have been admirably managed. Loudon has had
it in his head for some time;—ever since that colic of forty-eight
hours, I should guess; upon the wrecks of which it might well
rise as 1 new daystar. He kept it strictly in his own head;
nobody but Daun and the Kaiser had hint of it, both of whom
assented, and agreed to keep silence.

“On Friedrich’s removal towards Neisse and threatening of Bohe-
mia,” says my Note on this subject, “ Loudon’s time had come. Fried-
rich had disappeared to south-westward, Saturday, September 26th:
‘Gone to Pilzen,’ reported Loudon’s scouts; ‘rests there over Sunday.
Gone to Sigeroth, 28th; -gone to Gross-Nossen, Tuesday, September

7
:

Cuar. VIII.] LoupON POUNCES ON SCHWEIDNITZ. 165
30th Sept.—I1st Oct. 1761. |

29th.” That will do, thinks Loudon; who has sat immovable at
Kunzendorf all this while ;—and, Wednesday 30th, instantly proceeds
to business. .

“ Draws out, about 10 a.m. of Wednesday, all round Schweidnitz at
some miles distance, a ring, or complete girdle of Croat-Cossack people ;
blocking up every path and road: ‘ Nobody to pass, this day, towards
Schweidnitz, much less into it, on any pretext.’ ‘That is the duty of
the Croat people. ‘To another active Officer he intrusts the task of
collecting from the neighbouring Villages (outside the Croat girdle) as
many ladders, planks, and the like, as will be requisite; which also is
punctually done. For the Attack itself, which is to be Fourfold, four
picked Officers are chosen, with the 20 best Battalions in the Army :
Czernichef is apprised ; who warmly assents, and offers every help :—
‘800 of your Grenadiers,’ answers Loudon; ‘no more needed.’ Lou-
don’s arrangements for management of the ladders, for punctuality about
the routes, the times, the simultaneity, are those of a perfert artist; no
Friedrich could have done better.

“About 4 in the afternoon, all the Captains and Battalions, with their
ladders and furnitures, everybody with Instruction very pointed and
complete, are assembled at Kunzendorf: Loudon addresses the Troops
in a few fiery words; assures himself of victory by them ; promises
- them 10,000/: in lieu of plunder, which he strictly prohibits. Officers
had better make themselves acquainted with the Four Routes they are
to take in the dark: proper also to set all your watches by the chief
General’s, that there be no mistake as to time.* At 9, all being now
dark, and the Croat girdle having gathered itself closer round the place
since nightfall, the Four Divisions march to their respective starting-
places ; will wait there, silent; and about 2 in the morning, each at its
appointed minute, step forward on their Business. With fixed bayonets
all of them; no musketry permitted till the works are won. Loudon ,
will wait at the Village of Schonbrunn” (not Warkotsch’s Schonbrunn,
of which by and by, and which also is not far),*—‘‘ at Schonbrunn, within
short distance ; give Loudon notice when you are. within 600 yards ;—
there shall, if desirable, be reinforcements, farther orders. Loudon
knows Schweidnitz like his own bedroom. He was personally there,
in Leuthen time, improving the Works. By nocturnal Croat parties,
in the Jatter part of Bunzelwitz time; and since then, by deserters and
otherwise,—he knows the condition of the Garrison, of the Command-
ant, and of every essential point. Has calculated that the Garrison is
hardly third part of what it ought to be,—3,800 in whole, and many of

2 Tempelhof, v. 330.
° In Tempelhof (vy. 332-349) and Archenholtz (ii. 272-280) all these details.
* See Archenholtz, ii. 287; and correct his mistake of the two places.

166 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

30th Sept.—Il1st Oct. 1761.
them loose deserter fellows ; special artillery-men, instead of about 400,
only 191;—most important of all, that Commandant Zastrow is no wizard
in his trade; and, on the whole, that the Enterprise is likely to succeed.

‘‘Zastrow has been getting married lately; and has many things to
think of, besides Schweidnitz. Some accounts say this was his wedding
night,—which is not true, but only that he had meant to give a Ball this
last night of September; and perhaps did give it, dancing over before 2,
let us hope! Something of a jolter-head, seemingly, though solid and
honest. I observe he is a kind of butt, or laughing-stock, of Friedrich’s,
and has yielded some gleams of momentary fun, he and this marriage of
his, between Prince Henri and the King, in the tragic gloom all round.°®
Nothing so surprises me in Friedrich as his habitual inattention to the
state of his Garrisons. He has the best of Commandants and also the
worst: Tauentzien in Breslau, Heyde in Colberg, unsurpassable in the
world; in Glatz a D’O; in Schweidnitz a Zastrow, both of whom cost
him dear. Opposition sneers secretly, ‘It is as they happen to have
come to hand.’ Which has not much truth, though some. ‘Tauentzien
he chose; D’O was Fouquet’s choice, not his; Zastrow he did choose ;
Heyde he had by accident; of Heyde he had never heard till the de-
fence of Colberg began to be a world’s wonder. And in regard to his
Garrisons, it is indisputable they were often left palpably defective in
quantity and quality: and, more than once, fatally gave way at the wrong
moment. We can only say that Friedrich was bitterly in want of men
for the field; that ‘a Garrison-Regiment’ was always reckoned an in-
ferior article; and that Friedrich, in the press of his straits, had often
had to say: ‘ Well, these’ (plainly Helots, not Spartans), ‘these will
have to do!’ For which he severely suffered: and perhaps repented,
—who knows?

“ Zastrow, in spite of Loudon’s precautionary Girdle of Croats, and
the cares of a coming Ball, had got sufficient inkling of something being
in the wind. And was much on the Walls all day, he and his Officers ;
scanning with their glasses and their guesses the surrounding phenom-
ena, to little purpose. At night he sent out patrols; kept sputtering
with musketry and an occasional cannon into the vacant darkness (‘We
are alert, you see, Herr Loudon!’). In a word, took what measures he
could, poor man ;—very stupid measures, thinks Tempelhof, and almost
worse than none, especially this of sputtering with musketry ;—and
hoped always there would be no Attack, or none to speak of. Till, in
fine, between 2 and 3 in the morning, his patrols gallop in, ‘ Austrians
on march!’ and Zastrow, throwing out a rocket or two, descries in mo-
mentary illumination that the Fact is verily here.

“His defence (four of the Five several Forts attacked at once) was

> Schéning, ii. (sceeptus).

Cuar. VIIL.] LoupoN POUNCES ON SCHWEIDNITZ. 167
30th Sept.—I1st Oct. 1761.

of a confused character; but better than could have been expected.
Loudon’s Columns came on with extraordinary vigour and condensed
impetuosity ; stormed the Outworks everywhere, and almost at once
got into the shelter of the Covered-way: but on the Main Wall, or in
the scaling part of their business, were repulsed, in some places twice
or thrice; and had a murderous struggle, of very chaotic nature, in the
dark element. No picture of it in the least possible or needful here.
In one place, a Powder-Magazine blew up with about 400 of them,—
blown (said rumour, with no certainty) by an indignant Prussian artil-
lery-man to whom they had refused quarter: in another place, the 800
Russian Grenadiers came unexpectedly upon a chasm or bridgeless in-
terstice between two ramparts; and had to halt suddenly,—till (says
rumour again, with still less certainty) their Officers insisting with the
rearward part, ‘ Forward, forward!’ enough of front men were tumbled
in to make a roadway! ‘This was the story current ;° greatly exagger-
ated, I have no doubt. What we know is, That these Russians did
scramble through, punctually perform their part of the work ;— and
furthermore that, having got upon the Town-Wall, which was finis to
everything, they punctually sat down there; and, reflectively leaning
on their muskets, witnessed with the gravity and dignity of antique sages,
superior to money or money’s worth, the general plunder which went on
in spite of Loudon’s orders.

“or, in fine, between 5 and 6, that is in about three hours and a half,
Loudon was everywhere victorious; Zastrow, Schweidnitz Fortress, and
all that it held, were Loudon’s at discretion; Loudon’s one care now was
to stop the pillage of the poor Townsfolk, as the most pressing thing.
Which was not done without difficulty, nor completely till after hours
of exertion by cavalry regiments sent in. The captors had fought val-
iantly; but it was whispered there had been.a preliminary of brandy in
them ; certainly, except those poor Russians, nobody’s behaviour was
unexceptionable.”

The capture of Schweidnitz cost Loudon about 1,400 men;
he found in Schweidnitz, besides the Garrison all prisoners or
killed, some 240 pieces of artillery,—‘“‘ 211 heavy guns, 135 hand-
mortars,” say the Austrian Accounts, ‘‘ with stores and munitions”
in such quantities; ‘¢89,760 musket-cartridges, 1,300,600 flints,”7
for two items :—and all this was a trifle compared to the shock
it has brought on Friedrich’s Silesian affairs. For, in present cir-
cumstances, it amounts to the actual conquest of a large portion

_ © Archenholtz, ii. 275.
1 In Helden-Geschichte (vi. 651-665) the Austrian Account, with Lists &e.

168 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
30th Sept.—I1st Oct. 1761.

of Silesia; and, for the first time, of a real prospect of finishing
the remainder next Year. It is judged to have been the hardest
stroke Friedrich had in the course of this War. ‘‘Our strenuous
Campaign, on a sudden rendered wind, and of no worth! The
Enemy to winter in Silesia, after all; Silesia to go inevitably,
—and life along with it!” What Friedrich’s black meditations
were, nobody knows. ‘In the following weeks’’ (not close fol-
lowing, but poor Kiister does not date), ‘‘the King fell ill of gout,
saw almost nobody, never came out; and, it was whispered, the
inflexible heart of him was at last breaking; that is to say, the
very axis of this Prussian world giving way. And for certain,
there never was in his camp and over his dominions such a gloom
as in this October 1761; till at length he appeared on horseback
again, with a cheerful face; and everybody thought to himself,
‘Ha, the world will still roll, then!’ ’’§

This is what Loudon had done, without any Russians, except
Russians to give him eight-and-forty hours colic, and put him on
his own shifts. And the way in which the Kriegshofrath, and
her Imperial Majesty the Kaiserinn, received it, is perhaps still
worth a word. The Kaiser, who had alone known of Loudon’s
scheme, and for good reason (absolute secrecy being the very soul
of it) had whispered nothing of it further to any mortal, was
naturally overjoyed. But the Olympian brow of Maria Theresa,
when the Kaiser went radiant to her with this news, did not
radiate in response; but gloomed indignantly: ‘‘No order from
Kriegshofrath, or me!” Indignant Kriegshofrath called it a
Croatenstrecch (Croat’s-trick); and Loudon, like Prince Eugene
long since, was with difficulty excused this act of disobedience.
Great is Authority ;—and ought to be divinely rigorous, if (as
by no means always happens) it is otherwise of divine quality !

Friedrich’s treatment of Zastrow was in strong contrast of
style. Here is his Letter to that unlucky Gentleman, who is
himself clear that he deserves no blame: “ My dear Major-Gen-
eral von Zastrow,—The misfortune that has befallen me is very
grievous; but what consoles me in it is, to see by your Letter

® Kiister, Lebens-Rettungen Friedrichs des Zweyten (Berlin, 1797), p. 59 Ke.
It is the same innocent reliable Kiister whom we cited, in Saldern’s case,
already.

Cuap. IX. ] TRAITOR WARKOTSCH. 169
5th Oct.—30th Noy. 1761.

that you have behaved like a brave Officer, and that neither you
nor the Garrison have brought disgrace or reproach on your-
selves. I am your well- affectioned King,—F RIeprRIcH.”” And
in Autograph this Postscript: ‘You may, in this occurrence,
say what Francis I., after the Battle of Pavia, wrote to his
Mother: ‘ All is lost except honour.’ As I do not yet com-
pletely understand the affair, I forbear to judge of it; for it is
altogether extraordinary.—F’.’”

And never meddled farther with Zastrow; only left him well
alone for the future. ‘‘Grant me a Court-Martial, then!” said
Zastrow, finding himself fallen so neglected, after the Peace.
‘*No use,” answered Friedrich: ‘I impute nothing of crime to
you; but after such a mishap, it would be dangerous to trust
you with any post or command ;”—and in 1766, granted him,
on demand, his demission instead. The poor man then retired
to Cassel, where he lived twenty years longer, and was no more
heard of. He was half-brother of the General Zastrow who got
killed by a Pandour of long range (bullet through both temples,
from brushwood, across the Elbe), in the first year of this War.

CHAPTER IX.
TRAITOR WARKOTSCH.

Friepricn’s Army was to have cantoned itself round Neisse,
October 3d: but on the instant of this fatal Schweidnitz news,
proceeded (8d—6th October) towards Strehlen instead,—Friedrich
personally on the 5th ;—and took quarters there in the villages
round. General cantonment at Strehlen, in guard of Breslau
and of Neisse both ; Loudon, still immovable at Kunzendorf, at-
tempting nothing on either of those places, and carefully declin-
ing the risk of a Battle, which would have been Friedrich’s game:
all this continued till the beginning of December, when both par-
ties took Winter-quarters ;! cantoned themselves in the neigh-
bouring localities, —Czernichef, with his Russians, in Glatz Coun-
try; Friedrich in Breslau as headquarter ;—and the Campaign

9 Militair- Lexikon, iv. 305, 306 (Letter undated there; date probably,
‘*Gross-Nossen, October 3d’’). * Tempelhof, v. 349.

Vor. VJ.—H

170 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
5th Oct.—30th Nov. 1761.

had ended. Ended in this part, without farther event of the
least notability ;—except the following only, which a poor man
of the name of Kappel has recorded for us. Of which, and the
astounding Sequel to which, we must now say something.

Kappel is a Gentleman’s Groom of those Strehlen parts ; and
shall, in his own words, bring us face to face with Friedrich in
that neighbourhood, directly after Schweidnitz was lost. It is
October 5th, day, or rather night of the day, of Friedrich’s arrival
thereabouts; most of his Army ahead of him, and the remainder
all under way. Friedrich and the rearward part of his Army
are filing about, in that new Strehlen-ward movement of theirs,
under cloud of night, in the intricate Hill-and-Dale Country; to
post themselves to the best advantage for their double object, of
covering Breslau and Neisse both. Kappel loquitur; abridged by
Kiister, whom we abridge:

“* Monday Night, October 5th, 1761, The King, with two or three
attendants, still ahead of his Army, appeared at Schonbrunn, a Schloss
and Village, five or six miles south from Strehlen ;? and did the owner,
Baron von Warkotsch, an acquaintance of his, the honour of lodging
there. Before bedtime,—if indeed the King intended bed at all, mean-
ing to be off in four hours hence,—Friedrich inquired of Warkotsch for
‘a trusty man, well acquainted with the roads in this Country.’ War-
kotsch mentioned Kappel, his own Groom; one who undoubtedly knew
every road of the Country; and who had always behaved as a trusty
fellow in the seven years he had been with him. ‘ Let me see him,’
said the King. Kappel was sent up, about midnight, King still dressed ;
sitting on a sofa, by the fire: Kappel’s look was satisfactory ; Kappel
knows several roads to Strehlen, in the darkest night: ‘It is the foot-
path which goes so-and-so that I want’ (for Friedrich knows this Coun-
try intimately : readers remember his world-famous Camp of Strehlen,
with all the diplomacies of Europe gathered there, through summer, in
the train of Mollwitz). ‘Ja, Ihro Majestat, | know it!’ ‘Be ready,
then, at 4.’

“Before the stroke of 4, Kappel was at the door, on Master’s best
horse; the King’s Groom too, and led horse, a nimble little gray, were
waiting. As 4 struck, Friedrich came down, Warkotsch with him,
‘Unspeakable the honour you have done my poor house!’ Besides the
King’s Groom, there were a Chamberlain, an Adjutant, and two mounted

2 This is the Warkotsch Schénbrann; not the other near Schweidnitz,
as Archenholtz believes: see Archenholtz, ii. 287, and the bit of myth he
has gone into in consequence. ;

Cuar. IX. ] TRAITOR WARKOTSCH. 171
5th Oct.—30th Nov. 1761. —

Chasers (reitende Jager), which latter had each a lighted Jantern: in
all seven persons, including Kappel and the King. ‘Go before us on
foot with your lanterns,’ said the King. Very dark it was. And over-
night the Army had arrived all about; some of them just coming in, on
different roads and paths. ‘The King walked above two miles, and
looked how the Regiments were, without speaking a word. At last, as
the cannons came up, and were still in full motion, the King said:
‘Sharp, sharp, Bursche; it will be March directly.’ ‘March? The
Devil it will; we are just coming into Camp!’ said a canonier, not
knowing it was the King.

“The King said nothing. ~ Walked on still a little while; then or-
dered, ‘ Blow out the lanterns; to horseback now!’ and mounted, as we
all did. Me he bade keep five steps ahead, five and not more, that he
might see me; for it was very dark. Not far from the Lordship Cas-
serey, where there is a Water-mill, the King asked me, ‘ Haven’t you
missed the Bridge here?’ (a King that does not forget roads and topo-
graphies which may come to concern him !)—and bade us ride with the
utmost silence, and make no jingle. As day broke, we were in sight
of Strehlen, near by the Farm of Treppendorf. ‘And do you know
where the Kallenberg lies?’ said the King: ‘It must be to left of the
Town, near the Hills; bring us thither!’

“When we got on the Kallenberg, it was not quite day ; and we had
to halt for more light. After some time, the King said to his Groom,
‘Give me my perspective!’ looked slowly all round for a good while,
and then said, ‘I see no Austrians !'—(ground all at our choice, then;
we know where to choose!) ‘The King then asked me if I knew the
road to’—in fact, to several places, which, in a Parish History of those
parts, would be abundantly interesting ; but must be entirely omitted
here.” * * * “The King called his Chamberlain; gave some sign,
which meant ‘ Beer-money to Kappel !’"—and I got four eight-groschen
pieces” (three shillings odd ; a rich reward in those days) ; “and was
bid tell my Master, ‘ That the King thanked him for the good quarters,
and assured him of his favour.’”

“ Riding back across country, Kappel, some four or five miles home-
ward, came upon the ‘ whole Prussian Army,’ struggling forward in their
various Columns. Two Generals,—one of them Krusemark, King’s
Adjutant (Colonel Krusemark, not General, as Kappel thinks, who came
to know him some weeks after),—had him brought up: to whom he gave
account of himself, how he had been escorting the King, and where he
had left his Majesty. ‘Behind Strehlen, say you? Breslauroad? Devil
knows whither we shall all have to go yet!’ observed Krusemark, and
left Kappel free.’’*

3 Kiister, Lebens-Rettungen, pp. 66-76.

-

172 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
5th Oct.—30th Nov. 1761.

In those weeks, Colberg Siege, Pitt’s Catastrophe, and high
things are impending, or completed, elsewhere: but this is the
one thing noticeable hereabouts. In regard to Strehlen, and
Ftiedrich’s history there, what we have to say turns all upon
this Kappel and Warkotsch: and,—after mentioning only that
Friedrich’s lodging is not in Strehlen proper, but in Woiselwitz,
a village or suburb almost half a mile off, and very negligently
guarded,—we have to record an Adventure which then made a
great deal of noise in the world.

Warkotsch is a rich lord; Schénbrunn only one of five or six
different Estates which he has in those parts; though, not many
years ago, being younger brother, he was a Captain in the Aus-
trian service (Regiment Botta, if you are particular); and lay
in Olmiitz,—with very dull outlooks; not improved, I should
judge, by the fact that Silesia and the Warkotsch connexions
were become Prussian since this junior entered the Austrian
Army. The junior had sown his wild oats, and was already
getting gray in the beard, in that dull manner, when, about
seven years ago, his Elder Brother, to whom Friedrich had
always been kind, fell unwell; and, in the end of 1755, died:
whereupon the junior saw himself Heir; and entered on a new
phase of things. Quitted his Captaincy, quitted his allegiance ;
and was settled here peaceably under his new King in 1756, a
little while before this War broke out. And, at Schénbrunn,
October 5th, 1761, has had his Majesty himself for guest.

Warkotsch was not long in riding over to Strehlen to pay his
court, as in duty bound, for the honour of such a Visit; and
from that time, Kappel, every day or two, had to attend him
thither. The King had always had a favour for Warkotsch’s
late Brother, as an excellent Silesian Landlord and Manager,
whose fine Domains were in an exemplary condition; as, under
the new Warkotsch too, they have continued to be. Always
a gracious Majesty to this Warkotsch as well; who is an old
soldier withal, and man of sense and ingenuity; acceptable to
Friedrich, and growing more and more familiar among Fried-
rich’s circle of Officers now at Strehlen.

a

Cuap, IX.] TRAITOR WARKOTSCH. 173
5th Oct.—30th Nov. 1761.

To Strehlen is Warkotsch’s favourite ride; in the solitary
country, quite a charming adjunct to your usual dull errand out
for air and exercise. Kappel, too, remarks about this time that
he (Kappel) gets once and again, and ever more frequently, a
Letter to carry over to Siebenhuben, a Village three or four
miles off; the Letter always for one Schmidt, who is Catholic
‘ Curate there; Letter under envelope, well sealed,—and consist-
ing of two pieces, if you finger it judiciously. And, what is cu-
rious, the Letter never has any address; Master merely orders,
‘*Punctual; for Curatus Schmidt, you know!” What can this
be? thinks Kappel. Some secret, doubtless; perhaps some in-
trigue, which Madam must not know of,—‘‘ Ach, Herr Baron ;
and at your age,—fifty, I am sure!” Kappel, a solid fellow,
concerned for groom-business alone, punctually carries his Let-
ters; takes charge of the Responses too, which never have any
Address; and does not too much trouble himself with curiosities
of an impertinent nature.

To these external phenomena I will at present only add this
internal one: That an old Brother Officer of Warkotsch’s, a
Colonel Wallis, with Hussars, is now lying at Heinrichau,—say,
10 miles from Strehlen, and about 10 from Schénbrunn too, or
a mile more if you take the Siebenhuben way; and that all these
missives, through Curatus Schmidt, are for Wallis the Hussar
Colonel, and must be a secret, not from Madam alone! Howa
Baron, hitherto of honour, could all at once become turpissimus,
_ the Superlative of Scoundrels? ‘This is even the reason,—the
prize is so superlative.

“Monday Night, November 30th, 1761” (night bitter cold), ‘ Kappel
finds himself sitting mounted, and holding Master’s horse, in Strehlen,
more exactly in Woiselwitz, a Suburb of Strehlen, near the King’s door,
—Mhjesty’s travelling coach drawn out there, symbol that Strehlen is
ending, general departure towards Breslau now nigh. Not to Kappel’s
sorrow, perhaps, waiting in the cold there. Kappel waits, hour after
hour; Master taking his ease with the King’s people, regardless of the
horses and me, in this shivery weather ;—and one must not walk about
either, for disturbing the King’s sleep! Not till midnight does Master
emerge, and the freezing Kappel and quadrupeds get under way Un-
der way, Master breaks out into singular talk about the King’s lodging :
Was ever anything so careless; nothing but two sentries in the King’s

/

174 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

5th Oct.—380th Nov. 1761.
anteroom ; bhiseeen all the soldiers that are in Woiselwitz; Strehlen
not available in less than twenty minutes; nothing but woods, haggly
glens and hills, all on to Heinrichau: How easy to snatch off his Maj-
esty! ‘Um Gottes Willen, my Lord, don’t speak so: think if a patrol-
ling Prussian were to hear it,in the dark!’ Pooh, pooh, answers the
Herr Baron. at's

“At Schonbrunn, in the short hours, Kappel finds Frau Kappel in a
state of unappeasable curiosity: ‘ What can it be? Curatus Schmidt
was here all afternoon; much in haste to see Master; had to go at last,—
for the Church-service, this St. Andrew’s Eve. And only think, though
he sat with My Lady hours and hours, he left this Letter with me: ‘Give
it to your Husband, for my Lord, the instant they come ; and say I must
have an Answer tomorrow morning at 7.” Left it with me, not with
~ My Lady ;—My Lady not to know of it!’ ‘Tush, woman!’ But Frau
Kappel has been, herself, unappeasably running about, ever since she
got this Letter; has applied to two fellow-servants, one after the other,
who can read writing,‘ Break it up, will you” But they would not.
Practical Kappel takes the Letter up to Master’s room; delivers it,
with the Message. ‘What, Curatus Schmidt!’ interrupts My Lady,
who was sitting there: ‘ Herr Good-man, what is that?’ ‘That is a
Letter to me,’ answers the Good-man: ‘What have you to do with
it?” Upon which My Lady flounces out in a huff, and the Herr Baron
sets about writing his Answer, whatever it may be.

‘* Kappel and Frau are gone to bed, Frau still eloquent upon the mys-
tery of Curatus Schmidt, when his Lordship taps at their door; enters
in the dark: ‘ This is for the Curatus, at 7 o’clock tomorrow; I leave
it on the table here: be in time, like a good Kappel! Kappel prom-
ises his Unappeasable that he will actually open this Piece before deliv-
ery of it; upon which she appeases herself, and they both fall asleep.
Kappel is on foot betimes next morning. Kappel quietly pockets his
Letter ; still more quietly, from a neighbouring room, pockets his Mas-
ter’s big Seal (Petschaft), with a view to resealing : he then steps out;
giving his Bursch” (Apprentice or Under-Groom) “ order to be ready
in so many minutes, ‘ You and these two horses’ (specific for speed) ;
and, in the interim, walks over, with Letter and Petschaft, to the Rev-
erend Herr Gerlach’s, for some preliminary business. Kappel is Cath-
olic; Warkotsch, Protestant; Herr Gerlach is Protestant preacher in
the Village of Schonbrunn,—much hated by Warkotsch, whose stand-
ing order is: ‘ Don’t go near that insolent fellow ;? but known by Kap-
pel to be a just man, faithful in difficulties of the weak against the strong.
Gerlach, not yet out of bed, listens to the awful story: reads the horrid
missive ; Warkotsch to Colonel Wallis: ‘ You can seize the King, liv-
_ ing or dead, this night !'—hesitates about copying it (as Kappel wishes,

Cuap. IX.] TRAITOR WARKOTSCH. 175
5th Oct.—30th Nov. 1761.

for a good purpose) ; but is encouraged by his Wife, and soon writes a
Copy. This Copy Kappel sticks into the old cover, seals as usual ; and,
with the Original safe in his own pocket, returns to the stables now.
His Bursch and he mount; after a little, he orders his Bursch: ‘ Bursch,
ride you to Siebenhuben and Curatus Schmidt, with this sealed Let-
ter; you, and say nothing. I was to have gone myself, but cannot; be
speedy, be discreet!’ And the Bursch dashes off for Siebenhuben with
the sealed Copy, for Schmidt, Warkotsch, Wallis and Company’s be-
hoof; Kappel riding, at a still better pace, to Strehlen with the Orig-
inal, for behoof of the King’s Majesty.

*‘ At Strehlen, King’s Majesty not yet visible, Kappel has great diffi-
culties in the anteroom among the sentry people. But he persists, in-
sists: ‘Read my Letter, then!’ which they dare not do; which only
Colonel Krusemark, the Adjutant, perhaps dare. They take him to
Krusemark. Krusemark reads, all aghast; locks up Kappel; runs to
the King; returns, muffles Kappel in soldier’s cloak and cap, and leads
him in. The King, looking into Kappel’s face, into Kappel’s clear sto-
ry and the Warkotsch handwriting, needed only a few questions; and
the fit orders,as to Warkotsch and Company, were soon given: danger-
ous engineers now fallen harmless, blown up by their own petard. One
of the King’s first questions was: ‘But how have I offended Warkotsch?
Kappel does not know; ‘ Master is of strict wilful turn :—Master would
grumble and growl sometimes about the peasant people, and how a no-
bleman has now no power over them, in comparison.’ ‘Are you a Prot-
estant?”’ ‘No, your Majesty, Cathclic.’ ‘See, <hr Herren, said the King
to those about him; ‘ Warkotsch is a Protestant; his Curatus Schmidt
is a Catholic ; and this man is a Catholic: there are villains and honest
people in every creed!’

“At noon, that day, Warkotsch had sat down to dinner, comfortably
in his dressing-gown, nobody but the good Baroness there; when Ritt-
meister Rabenau suddenly descended on the Schloss and dining-room
with dragoons: ‘In arrest, Herr Baron; I am sorry you must go with
me to Brieg!’ Warkotsch, a strategic fellow, kept countenance to Wife
and Rittmeister, in this sudden fall of the thunderbolt: ‘ Yes, Herr Ritt-
meister; it is that mass of Corn I was to furnish’ (showing him an act-
ual order of that kind),‘and I am behind my time with it! Nobody
can help his luck. Take a bit of dinner with us, any way!’ Rittmeis-
ter refused; but the Baroness too pressed him; he at length sat down.
Warkotsch went ‘to dress; first of all, to give orders about his best
horse; but was shocked to find that the dragoons were a hundred, and
that every outgate was beset. Returning half-dressed, with an air of
baffled hospitality: ‘Herr Rittmeister, our Schloss must not be dis-
graced; here are your brave fellows waiting, and nothing of refresh-

176 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

5th Oct.—380th Nov. 1761.
ment ready for them. I have given order at the Tavern in the Village ;
send them down; there they shall drink better luck to me, and have a
bit of bread and cheese.’ Stupid Rabenau again consents :—and in a
few minutes more, Warkotsch is in the Woods, galloping like Epsom,
towards Wallis; and Rabenau can only arrest Madam (who knows noth-
ing), and return in a baffled state.

“ Schmidt too got away. The party sent after Schmidt found him in
the little Town of Nimptsch, half way home again from his Wallis er-
rand; comfortably dining with some innocent hospitable people there.
Schmidt could not conceal his confusion; but pleading piteously a ne-
cessity of nature, was with difficulty admitted to the—to the Abiritt so-
called; and there, by some long pole or rake-handle, vanished wholly
through a never-imagined aperture, and was no more heard of in the up-
per world. ‘The Prussian soldiery does not seem expert in thief-taking.

“Warkotsch came back about midnight that same Tuesday, 500 Wal-
lis Hussars escorting him; and took away his ready moneys, near 5000/.
in gold, reports Frau Kappel, who witnessed the ghastly operation (Hus-
sars in great terror, in haste, and unconscionably greedy as to sharing) ;
—after which our next news of him, the last of any clear authenticity,
is this Note to his poor Wife, which was read in the Law Procedures
on him six months hence: ‘ My Child (Mein Kind),—The accursed
thought I took up against my King has overwhelmed me in boundless
misery. From the top of the highest hill I cannot see the limits of it.
Farewell; I am in the farthest border of Turkey —Warxortscu.’’’

Schmidt and he, after patient trial, were both of them beheaded
and quartered,—in pasteboard effigy,—in the Salt Ring (Great
Square) of Breslau, May 1762 :—in pasteboard, Friedrich liked
it better than the other way. ‘‘ Memetwegen,” wrote he, sanction-
ing the execution, ‘‘ For aught I care; the Portraits will likely
be as worthless as the Originals.”’ Rittmeister Rabenau had
got off with a few days’ arrest, and the remark, “‘ Hr ist ein dum-
mer Teufel (You are a stupid devil)!” Warkotsch’s Estates, all
and sundry, deducting the Baroness’s jointure, which was punc-
tually paid her, were confiscated to the King,—and by him were
made over to the Schools of Breslau and Glogau, which, I doubt
not, enjoy them to this day. Reverend Gerlach in Schénbrunn,
Kappel and Kappel’ Bursch, were all attended to, and properly
rewarded, though there are rumours to the contrary. Hussar-

* Kiister, Lebens-Rettungen, p. 88: Kiister, pp. 65-188 (for the general
Narrative); Tempelhof, v. 346, &c. &.

Cnap. IX.] TRAITOR WARKOTSCH. 177
9th-16th Dec. 1761.

Colonel Wallis got no public promotion, though it is not doubted
the Head People had been well cognisant of his ingenious inten-
tions. Official Vienna, like mankind in general, shuddered to
own him; the great Counts Wallis at Vienna published in the
Newspapers, ‘‘ Our House has no connexion with that gentle-
man ;”—and, in fact, he was of Irish breed, it seems, the name of
him Wallisch (or Walsh), if one cared. Warkotsch died at Raab
(this side the farthest corner of Turkey), in 1769: his poor Bar-
oness had vanished from Silesia five years before, probably to
join him. He had some pension or aliment from the Austrian
Court; small or not so small is a disputed point.

And this is, more minutely than need have been, in authentic
form only too diffuse, the once world-famous Warkotsch Tragedy
or Wellnigh-Tragic Melodrama; which is still interesting and a
matter of study, of pathos and minute controversy, to the patriot
and antiquary in Prussian Countries, though here we might have
been briefer about it. It would, indeed, have “finished the War
at once ;” and on terms delightful to Austria and its Generals
near by. But so would any unit of the million balls and bullets
which have whistled round that same Royal Head, and have,
every unit of them, missed like Warkotsch! Particular Heads,
royal and other, meant for use in the scheme of things, are not
to be hit on any terms till the use is had.

Friedrich settled in Breslau for the Winter, December 9th.
From Colberg bad news meet him in Breslau; bad and ever
worse: Colberg, not Warkotsch, is the interesting matter there,
for a fortnight coming,—till Colberg end, it also irremediable.
The Russian hope on Colberg is, long since, limited to that of
famine. We said the conveyance of Supplies, across such a
Hundred Miles of wilderness, from Stettin thither, with Russians
and the Winter gainsaying, was the difficulty. Our short Note
continues :

“Tn fact, it is the impossibility: trial after trial goes on,in a strenu-
ous manner, but without success. October 13th, Green Kleist tries ;
October 22d, Knobloch and even Platentry. For the next two months,
there is trial on trial made (Hussar Kleist, Knobloch, Thadden, Platen),
not without furious fencing, struggling; but with no success. There

H 2

178. FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th-16th Dee. 1761.
are,in wait at the proper places, 15,000 Russians waylaying. Winter
comes .early, and unusually severe: such marchings, such endeavour-
ings and endurances,—without success! Jor darkness, cold, grim dif-
ficulty, fierce resistance to it, one reads few things like this of Colberg.
‘The snow lies ell-deep,’ says Archenholtz ; ‘snow-tempests, sleet, frost:
a country wasted and hungered out; wants fuel-wood; has not even
salt. The soldier’s bread is a block of ice; impracticable to human
teeth till you thaw it,—which is only possible by night.’ The Russian
ships disappear (17th October); November 2d, Butturlin, leaving rein-
forcements without stint, vanishes towards Poland. The day before
Butturlin went, there had been solemn summons upon Eugen, ‘ Surren-
der honourably, we once more bid you; never will we leave this ground,
till Colberg is ours!’ ‘ Vain to propose it!’ answers Eugen, as before.
The Russians too are clearly in great misery of want; though with
better roads open for them; and Romanzow’s obstinacy is extreme.

“ Night of November 14th—15th, Eugen, his horse-fodder being en-
tirely done, and Heyde’s magazines worn almost out, is obliged to glide
mysteriously, circuituously from his Camp, and go to try the task him-
self. The most difficult of marches, gloriously executed ; which avails
to deliver Eugen, and lightens the pressure on Heyde’s small store.
Eugen, in a way Tempelhof cannot enough admire, gets clear away.
Joins with Platen, collects Provision; tries to serid Provision in, but
without effect. By the King’s order, is to try it himself in a collective
form. Had Heyde food, he would care little.

** Romanzow, who is now in Eugen’s old Camp, summons the Vet-
eran ; they say, it is ‘ for the twenty-fifth time,’—not yet quite the last.
Heyde consults his people : ‘ Kameraden, what think you should I do”
‘Thun Sie’s durchaus mcht, Herr Obrist, Do not a whit of it, Herr
Colonel: we will defend ourselves as long as we have bread and pow-
der.’> It is grim frost ; Heyde pours water on his walls. Romanzow
tries storm; the walls are glass; the garrison has powder, though on
half rations as to bread: storm is of no effect. By the King’s order,
Eugen tries again. December 6th, starts; has again a march of the
most consummate kind; December 12th, gets to the Russian entrench-
ment; storms a Russian redoubt, and fights inexpressibly ; but it will
not do. Withdraws ; leaves Colberg to its fate. Next morning, Heyde
gets his twenty-sixth summons; reflects on it two days ; and then (De-
cember 16th), his biscuit done, decides to ‘ march out, with music play-
ing, arms shouldered, and the honours of war.’ ”® Adieu to the old
Hero; who, we hope, will not stay long in Russian prison.

5 Seyfarth, iii. 28; Archenholtz, ii. 304.

6 Tempelhof, vy. 351-377; Archenholtz, ii. 294-307; especially the Sey-
farth Beylagen above cited.

st oe

eS

_—

ee ae

——— a che

i

ie

Cuap. X.] FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. moe WAS)
Oct. 1761-July 1762.

“What a Place of Arms for us!” thinks Romanzow ;—
“ though, indeed, for Campaign 1762, at this late time of year,
it will not so much avail us.” No;—and for 1768, who knows
if you will need it then !”

Six weeks ago, Prince Henri and Daun had finished their Sax-
on Campaign in a much more harmless manner. November 5th,
Daun, after infinite rallying, marshalling, re-arranging, and coun-
selling with Loudon, who has sat so long quiescent on the Heights
at Kunzendorf, ready to aid and reinforce, did at length (nothing
of ‘rashness” chargeable on Daun) make “a general attack on
Prince Henri’s outposts,’ in the Meissen or Mulda-Elbe Coun
try, “from Rosswein all across to Siebeneichen ;” simultaneous
attack, 15 miles wide, or I know not how wide, but done with
vigour; and, after a stiff strugele in the small way, drove them
all in;—in, all of them, more or less ;—and then did nothing
farther whatever. Henri had to contract his quarters, and stand
alertly on his guard: but nothing came. ‘‘ Shall have to winter
in straiter quarters, behind the Mulda, not astride of it as former-
ly; that is all.’ And so the Campaign in Saxony had ended,
‘“‘ without,in the whole course of it’’ (say the Books), ‘either
party gaining any essential advantage over the other.’”’

CHAPTER X.
FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU; HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG.

SincE December 9th, Friedrich is in Breslau, in some re-
mainder of his ruined Palace there; and is represented to us,
in Books, as sitting amid ruins; no prospect ahead of him but
ruin. Withdrawn from Society; looking fixedly on the gloomi-
est future. Sees hardly anybody; speaks, except it be on busi-
ness, nothing. ‘One day,” I have read somewhere, ‘* General
Lentulus dined with him; and there was not a word uttered at
all.”’ The Anecdote-Books have Dialogues with Ziethen; Zie-
then still trusting in Divine Providence; King trusting only in

7 Seyfarth, iii. 54; Tempelhof, v. 275 ct seq. (ibid. pp. 263-280 for the
Campaign at large, in all breadth of detail).

180 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

the iron Destinies, and the stern refuge of Death with honour:
Dialogues evidently symbolical only. In fact, this is not, or is
not altogether, the King’s common humour. He has his two
Nephews with him (the elder, old enough to learn soldiering, is
to be of next Campaign under him); he is not without society
when he likes,—never without employment whether he like or
not; and in the blackest murk of despondencies has his Turk and
other Illusions, which seem to be brighter this Year than ever.!

For certain, the King is making all preparation, as if victory
might still crown him: though of practical hope he, doubtless
often enough, has little or none. England seems about deserting
him; a most sad and unexpected change has befallen there: great
Pitt thrown out; perverse small Butes come in, whose notions
and procedures differ far from Pitt’s! At home here, the Rus-
sians are in Pommern and the Neumark; Austrians have Sax-
ony, all but a poor strip beyond the Mulda; Silesia, all but a
fraction on the Oder: Friedrich has with himself 30,000; with
Prince Henri 25,000; under Eugen of Wiirtemberg, against the
Swedes, 5,000; in all his Dominions, 60,000 fighting men. To
make head against so many enemies, he calculates that 60,000
more must be raised this Winter. And where are these to come
from; England and its help having also fallen into such dubiety?
Next Year, it is calculated by everybody, Friedrich himself hardly
excepted (in bad moments), must be the finis of this long ago-
nistic tragedy. On the other hand, Austria herself is in sore dif-
ficulties as to cash; discharges 20,000 men,—trusting she may
have enough besides, to finish Friedrich. France is bankrupt,
starving, passionate for Peace; English Bute nothing like so ill
to treat with as Pitt: to Austria no more subsidies from France.
The War is waxing feeble, not on Friedrich’s side only, like a
flame short of fuel. ‘This Year it must go out; Austria will
‘have to kill Friedrich this Year, if at all.

Whether Austria’s and the world’s prophecy would have been
fulfilled? Nobody can say what miraculous sudden shifts, and
outbursts of fiery enterprise, may still lie in this man. Fried-
rich is difficult to kill, grows terribly elastic when you compress

him into a corner. Or Destiny, perhaps, may have tried him

1 Letters to Henri: in Schéning, iii. (sepius).

|

Cuap. X. FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 181
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

sufficiently ; and be satisfied? Destiny does send him a won-
derful star-of-day, bursting out on the sudden, as will be seen!—
—Meanwhile here is the English calamity; worse than any
Schweidnitz, Colberg, or other that has befallen in this blackest
of the night.

The Pitt Catastrophe: how the Peace-Negotiation went off by
Explosion; how Pitt withdrew (3d October 1761), and there

came a Spanish War nevertheless.

In St. James’s Street, “in the Duke of Cumberland’s late
lodgings,’ on the 2d of October 1761, there was held one of the
most remarkable Cabinet-Councils known in English History :
it is the last of Pitt’s Cabinet-Councils, for a long time,—might
as well have been his last of all ;—and is of the highest import-
ance to Friedrich through Pitt. We spoke of the Choiseul Peace-
Negotiation ; of an offer indirectly from King Carlos, ‘Could not
T mediate a little ?”’—offer which exploded said Negotiation, and
produced the Bourbon Family Compact and an additional War
instead. Let us now look, slightly for a few moments, into that
matter and its sequences.

It was July 15th, when Bussy, along with something in his
own French sphere, presented this beautiful Spanish Appendix,
—‘‘apprehensive that War may break out again with Spain,
when we Two have got settled.” . By the same opportunity came
a Note from him, which was reckoned important too: ‘That the
Empress Queen would and did, whatever might become of the
Congress of Augsburg, approve of this Separate Peace between
France and-England,—England merely undertaking to leave the
King of Prussia altogether to himself in future with her Imperial
Majesty and her Allies.” ‘Never, Sir!” answered Pitt, with
emphasis, to this latter Proposition; and to the former about
Spain’s interfering, or whispering of interference, he answered—
by at once returning the Paper, as a thing non-extant, or which
it was charitable to consider so. ‘Totally inadmissible, Sir;
mention it no more!”—and at once called upon the Spanish
Ambassador to disavow such impertinence imputed to his Mas-
ter. Fancy the colloquies, the agitated consultations thereupon,
between Bussy and this Don, in view suddenly of breakers ahead!

182 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

In about a week (July 23d), Bussy had an Interview with Pitt
himself on this high Spanish matter; and got some utterances
out of him which are memorable to Bussy and us. “It is my
duty to declare to you, Sir, in the name of his Majesty,” said
Pitt, “‘that his Majesty will not suffer the disputes with Spain
to be blended, in any manner whatever, in the Negotiation of
Peace between the Two Crowns. ‘To which I must add, that
it will be considered as an affront to his Majesty’s dignity, and
as a thing incompatible with the sincerity of the Negotiation, to
_ make further mention of such a circumstance.”? Bussy did not
go at once, after this deliverance; but was unable, by his argu-
ments and pleadings, by all his oil and fire joined together, to
produce the least improvement on it: “‘’Time enough to treat
of all that, Sir, when the Tower of London is taken sword in
hand !”3 was Pitt’s last word. An expression which went over
the world; and went especially to King Carlos, as fast as it
could fly, or as his Choiseul could speed it: and, in about three
weeks, produced,—it and what had gone before it, by the united
industry of Choiseul and Carlos, finally produced,—the famed
Bourbon Family Compact (August 15th, 1761), and a variety of
other weighty results, which lay in embryo therein.

Pitt, in the interim, had been intensely prosecuting, in Spain
and everywhere, his inquiry into the Bussy phenomenon of July
15th; which he, from the first glimpse of it, took to mean a
mystery of treachery in the pretended Peace-Negotiation, on the
part of Choiseul and Catholic Majesty ;—though other long
heads, and Pitt’s Ambassador at Madrid investigating on the
spot, considered it an inadvertence mainly, and of no practical
meaning. On getting knowledge of the Bourbon Family Com-
pact, Pitt perceived that his suspicion was a certainty ;—and
likewise~that the one clear course was, To declare War on the
Spanish Bourbon too, and go into him at once: ‘‘ We are ready;
fleets, soldiers, in the East, in the West; he not ready anywhere.

? In Thackeray, ii. 554 ;—Pitt next day putting it in writing, ‘‘word for
word,” at Bussy’s request.

* Beatson, ii. 434. Archenholtz (ii. 245) has heard of this expression,
in a slightly incorrect way.

\
ee ee eS ee ee ee ee ee fa

= >

———-

ee en ee

CHAP. X. | FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 183
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

Since he wants War, let him have it, without loss of a moment!”
That is Pitt’s clear view of the case ; but it is by no means Bute
and Company’s,—who discern in it, rather, a means of finishing
another operation they have long been secretly busy upon, by
their Mauduits and otherwise; and are clear against getting into
a new War with Spain or anybody: ‘‘ Have not we enough of
Wars?” say they.

Since September 18th, there had been three Cabinet-Councils
held on this great Spanish question: ‘‘ Mystery of treachery,
meaning War from Spain? Or awkward Inadvertence only,
practically meaning little or nothing?” Pitt, surer of his course
every time, every time meets the same contradiction. Council
of October 2d was the third of the series, and proved to be the
last.

“Twelve Seventy-fours sent instantly to Cadiz,” had been
Pitt’s proposal, on the first emergence of the Bussy phenomenon.
Here are his words, October 2d, when it is about to get consum-
mated: “This is now the time for humbling the whole House
of Bourbon: and if this opportunity is let slip, we shall never
find another! ‘Their united power, if suffered to gather strength,
will baffle our most vigorous efforts, and possibly plunge us in
the gulf ofruin. We must not allow them a moment to breathe.
Self-preservation bids us crush them before they can combine or
collect themselves.”—*‘ No evidence that Spain means war; too
many wars on our hands; let us at least wait!” urge all the
others,—all but one, or one and a half, of whom presently.
Whereupon Pitt: ‘If these views are to be followed, this is the
last time I can sit at this Board. I was called to the Adminis-
tration of Affairs by the voice of the People: to them I have
always considered myself as accountable for my conduct; and
therefore cannot remain in a situation which makes me responsi-
ble for measures I am no longer allowed to guide.”+

Carteret Granville, President of said Council for ten years
past,° now an old red-nosed man of seventy-two, snappishly took
him up,—it is the last public thing poor Carteret did in this
world,—in the following terms: ‘I find the Gentleman is de-

4 Beatson, ii. 438.
5 Came in, ‘‘17th June 1751,”--died, ‘‘ 2d January 1763.”

“4

184 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Oct. 1761—July 1762.
termined to leave us; nor can I say I am sorry for it, since oth-
erwise he would have certainly compelled us to leave him” (Has
ruled us, may not I say, with a rod of iron!) ‘“ But if he be re-
solved to assume the office of exclusively advising his Majesty
and directing the operations of the War, to what purpose are
we called to this Council? When he talks of being responsible
to the People, he talks the language of the House of Commons;
forgets that, at this Board, he is only responsible to the King.
However, though he may possibly have convinced himself of his
infallibility, still it remains that we should be equally convinced, °
before we can resign our understandings to his direction, or join
with him in the measure he proposes.”

Who, besides Temple (Pitt’s Brother-in-law) confirmatory of
Pitt, Bute negatory, and Newcastle silent, the other beautiful
gentlemen were, I will not ask; but poor old Carteret,—the
wine perhaps sour on his stomach (old age too, with German
memories of his own, “A biggish Life once mine, all futile for
want of this same Kingship like Pitt’s!”)—I am sorry old Car-—
teret should have ended so! He made the above Answer;
and Pitt resigned next day.’ ‘ The Nation was thunderstruck,
alarmed and indignant,” says Walpole :® yes, no. wonder ;—but,
except a great deal of noisy jargoning in Parliament and out of
it, the Nation gained nothing for itself by its indignant, thunder-
stricken, and other feelings. Its Pitt is irrecoverable; and it
may long look for another such. These beautiful recalcitrants
of the Cabinet-Council had, themselves, within three months
(think under what noises and hootings from a non-admiring Na-
tion), to declare War on Spain,° not on better terms than when
Pitt advised ; and, except for the ‘ readiness” in which Pitt had
left all things, might have fared indifferently in it.

To Spain and France, the results of the Family Compact

° Biog. Britannica (Kippis’s ; London, 1784), iii. 278. See Thackeray,
i. 589-592.

7 Thackeray, i.592 n. ‘‘October 5th” (acceptance of the resignation, I
suppose ?) is the date commonly given.

8 Memoirs of the Reign of George the Third, i. 82 et seq.

° “2d January 1762,” the English ; ‘‘ 18th January,” the Spaniard (An-
nual Register for 1762, p. 50; or better, Beatson, ii. 443).

~

Cuap. X.] FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 185
Oct. 1761——July 1762.

(we may as well give them at once, though they extend over the
whole next year and farther, and concern Friedrich very little)
were : a War on England (chiefly on poor Portugal for England’s
sake); with a War dy England in return, which cost Spain its
Havanah and its Philippine Islands.

“From 1760 and before, the Spanish Carlos, his orthodox mind per-
haps shocked at Pombal and the Anti-Jesuit procedures, had forbidden
trade with Portugal ; had been drawing out dangerous ‘ militia forces on
the Frontier ;’ and afflicting and frightening the poor Country. But on
the actual arrival of War with England, Choiseul and he, as the first
feasibility discernible, made Demand (three times over, 16th March—
18th April 1762, each time more stringently), on poor Portuguese
Majesty : ‘Give up your objectionable Heretic Ally, and join with us
against him; will you, or will you not?’ ‘To which the Portuguese
Majesty, whose very title is Most Faithful, answered always: ‘ You
surprise me! I cannot; how canI? He is my Ally, and has always
kept faith with me! For certain, No!”° So that there is English re-
inforecement got ready, men, money ; an English General, Lord Tyraw-
ley, General and Ambassador ; with a 5 or 6,000 horse and foot, and
many volunteer officers besides, for the Portuguese behoof.'' In short,
every encouragement to poor Portugal: ‘ Pull, and we will help you by
tracing.’

‘The poor Portuguese pulled very badly : were disgusting to Tyraw-
ley, he to them ; and cried passionately,‘ Get us another General ;’—
upon which, by some wise person’s counsel, that singular Artillery
General, the Graf von der Lippe Biickeburg, who gave the dinner in
his Tent with cannon firing at the pole of it, was appointed ; and*T'y-
rawley came home in a huff.'? Which was probably a favourable cir-
cumstance. Biickeburg understands War, whether Tyrawley do or
not. Duke Ferdinand has agreed to dispense with his Ordnance-Mas-
ter; nay I have heard the Ordnance-Master, a man of sharp speech on
occasion, was as good as idle; and had gone home to Biickeburg, this
Winter: indignant at the many imperfections he saw, and perhaps too
frankly expressing that feeling now and then. What he thought of the
Portuguese Army in comparison is not on record; but may be judged
of by this circumstance, That on dining with the chief Portuguese mili-

10 London Gazette, 5th May 1762, &e. (in Gentleman’s Magazine for 1762,
xxxii. 205, 321, 411).

11 List of all this in Beatson, ii. 491, ili. 323 ;—‘‘ did not get to sea till
12th May 1762” (Gentleman’s Magazine for 1762, p. 239).

12 Varnhagen von Ense, Graf Wilhelm zur Lippe (Berlin, 1845), in Ver-
mischte Schriften, i, 1-118: pp. 33-54, his Portuguese operations.

186 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Oct. 1761—July 1762.
tary man, he found his Portuguese captains and lieutenants waiting as
valets behind the chairs.’*

‘“‘ The improvements he made are said to have been many ;—and Por-
tuguese Majesty, in bidding farewell, gave him a park of Miniature Gold
Cannon by way of gracious symbo]. But, so far as the facts show, he
seems to have got from his Portuguese Army next to no service what-
ever: and, but for the English and the ill weather, would have fared
badly against his French and Spaniards,—42,000 of them, advancing in
Three Divisions, by the Douro and the Tagus, against Oporto and Lis-
bon.

“His War has only these three dates of event. 1°. May 9th, The
northmost of the Three Divisions'* crosses the Portuguese Frontier on
the Douro; summons Miranda, a chief Town of theirs; takes it, before
their first battery is built, takes Braganza, takes Monte Corvo; and
within a week is master of the Douro in that part. ‘ Will be at Oporto
directly !’ shriek all the Wine people (no resistance anywhere, except
by peasants organised by English Officers in some parts); upon which
Seventy-fours were sent. _

**2°, Division Second of the 42,000 came by Beira Country, between
Tagus and Douro, by Tras-os-Montes ; and laid siege to a place called
Almeida” (north-west some 20 odd miles from Ciudad Rodrigo, a name
once known to veterans of us still living), “ which Biickeburg had tried
to repair into strength, and furnish with a garrison. Garrison defended
itself well; but could not be relieved ;—had to surrender, August 25th :
whereby it seems the Tagus is now theirs! Al] the more, as Division
Three is likewise got across from Estremadura, invading Alemtejo:
what is to keep these Two from falling on Lisbon together ?

“3°. Against this, Biickeburg does find a recipe. Despatches Brig-
adier Burgoyne with an English party upon a Town called Valencia
d’Aleantara”’ (not Alcantara Proper, but Valencia of ditto, not very far
from Badajoz), “ where the vanguard of this Third Division is, and their
principal Magazine. Burgoyne and his English did perfectly : broke
into the place, stormed it sword in hand (August 27th); kept the Mag-
azine and it, though ‘ the sixteen Portuguese Battalions’ could not pos-
sibly get up in time. In manner following (say the Old Newspapers) :

«The garrison of Almeida, before which place the whole Spanish
Army had been assembled, surrendered to the Spaniards on the 25th’
(August 25th, as we have just heard), ‘ having capitulated on condition
of not serving against Spain for six months.

*** As a counterbalance to this advantage, the Count de Lippe caused
Valencia d’Alcantara to be attacked, sword-in-hand, by the British troops;

13 Varnhagen (gives no date anywhere).
14 Annual Register for 1762, p. 30.

Crap. X.] FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 187
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

who carried it, after an obstinate resistance. The loss of the British
troops, who had the principal share in this affair, is luckily but incon-
siderable: and consists in Lieutenant Burk of Colonel Frederick’s, one
sergeant, and three privates killed ; two sergeants, one drummer, 18 pri-
vates wounded; 10 horses killed, and 2 wounded’ (Joss not at all con-
siderable, in a War of such dimensions!) ‘The British troops behaved
upon this occasion with as much generosity as courage ; and it deserves
admiration, that, in an affair of this kind, the town and the inhabitants
suffered very little; which is owing to the good order Brigadier Bur-
goyne kept up even in the heat of the action. ‘This success would prob-
ably have been attended with more, if circumstances, that could not well
be expected, had not retarded the march of sixteen Portuguese battal-
ions, and three regiments of cavalry.’’®

“Upon which—upon which, in fact, the War had to end. Rainy
weather came, deluges of rain: Burgoyne, with or without the six-
teen Battalions of Portuguese, kept the grip he had. Valencia d’Al-
cantara and its Magazine a settled business, roads round gone all to
mire,—this Third Division, and with it the 42,000 in general, finding
they had nothing to live upon, went their ways again.” Note, The Bur-
goyne, who begins in this pretty way at Valencia d’Alcantara, is the
same who ended so dismally at Saratoga, within twenty years :—per-
haps, with other War-Offices, and training himself in something suita-
bler than Parliamentary Eloquence, he might have become a kind of
General, and have ended far otherwise than there ?—

“Such was the credit account on Carlos’s side: By gratuitous as-
sault on Portugal, which had done him no offence ; result zero, and pay
your expenses. On the English, or per contra side, again, there were
these three items, two of them specifically on Carlos: Furst, Martinique
captured from the French this Spring (finished, 4th February 1762) :'®
was to have been done in any case, Guadaloupe and it being both on
Pitt’s books for some time, and only Guadaloupe yet got. Secondly,
King Carlos, for Family Compact and fruitless attempt at burglary on
an unoffending neighbour, Debtor: 1°. To Loss of the Havanah (6th
June—13th August 1762),'’ which might easily have issued in loss of
all his West Indies together, and total abolition of the Pope’s meridian
in that Western Hemisphere; and 2°. To Loss of Manilla, with his
Philippine Islands (23d September—6th October 1762),'* which was
abolition of it in the Eastern. After which, happily for Carlos, Peace
came,—Peace, and no Pitt to be severe upon his Indies and him. Car-
los’s War of ten months had stood him uncommonly high.”

18 Old Newspapers (inGentleman’s Magazine for 1762, p. 443).
16 Gentleman's Magazine for 1762, p. 127.
17 Ibid. 408-459, &c. 18 Tbid. xxxiii. 171-177.

188 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Oct. 1761—July 1762.

- All these things the English Public, considerably sullen about
the Cabinet-Council event of October 3d, ascribed to the real
owner of them. The Public said: “‘ These are, all of them,
Pitt’s bolts, not yours,—launched, or lying ready for launching,”
from that Olympian battery which, in the East and in the West,
had already smitten down all Lallys and Montcalms; and had
force already massed there, rendering your Havanahs and Manil-
las easy for you. For which, indeed, you do not seem to care
‘much; rather seem to be embarrassed with them, in your eager-
ness for Peace and a lazy life !’—Manilla was a beautiful work ;!9
but the Manilla Ransom; a million sterling, half of it in bills, —
which the Spaniards, on no pretext at all but the disagreeable-
ness, refused to pay! Havanah, though victorious, cost a good
many men: was thought to be but badly managed. ‘“ What to
do with it?” said Bute, at the Peace: ‘‘ Give us Florida in lieu
of it,’”’—which proved of little benefit to Bute. Enough, enough
of Bute and his performances.

Pitt being gone, Friedrich’s English Subsidy lags: this time,
Friedrich concludes it is cut off;—silent on the subject; no
words will express one’s thoughts on it. Not till April 9th has
poor Mitchell the sad errand of announcing formally that, such
are our pressures, Portuguese War and other, we cannot afford
it farther. Answered by I know not what kind of glance from
Friedrich ; answered, I find, by words few or none from the for-
saken King: ‘Good; that too was wanting,” thought the proud
soul: ‘‘ Keep your coin, since you so need it; I have still cop-
per, and my sword!” The alloy this Year became as 3 to 1:—
what other remedy ?

From the same cause, I doubt not, this Year, for the first time
in human memory, came that complete abeyance of the Gift-
moneys (Douceur Gelder), which are become a standing expecta-
tion, quasi-right, and necessary item of support to every Prussian

19 A Journal of the Proceedings of his Majesty's Forces in the Expedition
to Manilla (London Gazette, April 19th, 1763; Gentleman’s Magazine, xxxiii.
171 et seq.). Written by Colonel or Brigadier-General Draper (suggester,
contriver, and performer of the Enterprise; an excellent Indian Officer, of
great merit with his pen as well,—Bully Junius’s Correspondent afterwards),

". “hea

Cuapr. X.] FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 189
Oct. 1761—July 1762.
Officer, from a Lieutenant upwards: not a word, in the least of-
ficial, said of them this Year; still less a penny of them actually
forthcoming to a worn-out expectant Army. One of the great-
est sins charged upon Friedrich, by Prussian or Prussian-Mili-
tary public opinion: not to be excused at all ;—Prussian-Mili-
tary and even Prussian-Civil opinion having a strange persua-
sion that this King has boundless supply of money, and only out
of perversity refuses it for objects of moment. In the Army as
elsewhere much is gone awry ;2° many rivets loose after such a
climbing of the Alps as there has been, through dense and rare.
It will surprise everybody that Friedrich, with his copper and
other resources, actually raised his additional 60,000; and has
for himself 70,000 to recover Schweidnitz, and bring Silesia to
its old state; 40,000 for Prince Henri and Saxony, with a 10,000
of margin for Sweden and accidental sundries. This is strange,
but it is true.2!_ And has not been done without strivings and
contrivings, hard requisitions on the places liable; and has in-
volved not a little of severity and difficulty,—especially a great
deal of haggling with the collecting parties, or at least with Prince
Henri, who presides in Saxony, and is apt to complain and mourn
over the undoable, rather than proceed to do it. The King’s
Correspondence with Henri, this Winter, is curious enough ; like
a Dialogue between Hope on its feet, and Despair taking to its
bed. ‘You know there are ‘l'wo Doctors in Molicre,” says Fried-
rich to him once; “a Doctor Tant-mieux (So much the Better)
and a Doctor Tant-pis (So much the Worse): these two cannot be
expected to agree!”—Instead of infinite arithmetical details, here
is part of a Letter of Friedrich’s to D’Argens; and a Passage,
one of many, with Prince Henri ;—which command a view into
the interior that concerns us.

The King to D’Argens (at Berlin). «

‘Breslau, 18th January 1762.
* * * “You have lifted the political veil which covered horrors
and perfidies meditated and ready to burst out” (Bute’s dismal proced-
ures, I believe ; who is ravenous for Peace, and would fain force Fried-

20 See Mollendorf’s two or three Letters (Preuss, iv. 407-411).
21 Stenzel, v. 297, 286; Tempelhof, vi. 2, 10, 63.

190 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
rich along with him on terms altogether disgraceful and inadmissible) :°*
‘vou judge correctly of the whole situation | am in, of the abysses which
surround me; and, as I see by what you say, of the kind of hope that
still remains to me. It will not be till the month of February” (Turks,
probably, and Tartar Khan; great things coming then!) “that we can
speak of that; and that is the term I contemplate for deciding whether
I shall hold to Cato” (Cato,—and the little Glass Tube I have!) “or to
Cesar’s Commentaries,” and the best fight one can make.

“The School of patience I am at is hard, long-continued, cruel, nay
barbarous. Ihave not been able to escape my lot: all that human fore-
sight could suggest has been employed, and nothing has succeeded. If
Fortune continues to pursue me, doubtless I shall sink; it is only she
that can extricate me from the situation [am in. Jl escape out of it by
looking at the Universe on the great scale, like an observer from some
- distant Planet; all then seems to me so infinitely small, and I could
almost pity my enemies for giving themselves such trouble about so
very little. What would become of us without philosophy, without this
reasonable contempt of things frivolous, transient, and fugitive, about
which the greedy and ambitious make such a pother, fancying them to
be solid! This is to become wise by stripes, you will tell me; well,
if one do become wise, what matters it how ?—I read a great deal; I
devour my Books, and that brings me useful alleviation. But for my
Books, I think hypochondria would have had me in bedlam before now.
In fine, dear Marquis, we live in troublous times and in desperate situa-
tions :—I have all the properties of a Stage-Hero; always in danger,
always on the point of perishing. One must hope the conclusion will
come; and if the end of the piece be lucky, we will forget the rest. Pa-
tience then, mon cher, till February 20th” (By which time, what far other
veritable star-of-day will have risenon me!) ‘“Adzeu, mon cher.—-F.”*

Tif of Quarrel between King and Henri (March—April 1762.)

In the Spring months, Prince Henri is at Hof in Voigtland, on the
extreme right of his long line of “ Quarters behind the Mulda;” busy
enough, watching the Austrians and Reich; levying the severe contri-
butions ; speeding, all he can, the manifold preparatives ;—conscious to
himself of the greatest vigilance and diligence, but wrapt in despondency
and black acidulent humours; a“ Doctor So much the Worse,” who is
not a comforting Correspondent. From Hof, towards the middle of
March, he becomes specially gloomy and acidulous; sends a series of
Complaints ; also of News, not important, but all rather in your favour,
my dearest Brother, than in mine, if you will please to observe! As thus:

2 See D’Argens’s Letter (to which this is Answer), (fuvres de Frédéric,
xix, 281, 282. 23 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 282, 283.

h
{
4
4
j

Cuap. X.] FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 191
Jan.—July 1762.

Henri (at Hof, 10th-13th March). * * “Sadly off here, my dearest
Brother! Ofour ‘1,284 head of commissariat horses,’ only 180 are come
in; of our ‘287 drivers,’ not one. Will be impossible to open Campaign
at that rate.”—‘‘ Grenadier Battalions Rothenburg and Grant demand
to have picked men to complete them” (of Cantonist, or sure Prussian
sort), * * “T find” (nota bene, Reader!) “there are eight Austrian
regiments going to Silesia” (off my hands, and upon your's, in a sense),
“eight instead of four that I spoke of: intending, probably, for Glatz,
to replace Czernichef” (a Czernichef off for home lately, in a most
miraculous way; as readers shall hear!) “‘—to replace Czernichef, and
the blank he has left there? Eight of them: Your Majesty can have
no difficulty ; but I will detach Platen or somebody, if you order it;
though I am myself perilously ill off here, so scattered into parts, not
capable of speedy junction like your Majesty.”

Friedrich (14th-16th March). ‘‘ Commissariat horses, drivers? I
arranged and provided where everything was to be got. But if my
orders are not executed, nor the requisitions brought in, of course there
is failure. JI am despatching Adjutant von Anhalt to Saxony a second
time, to enforce matters. If I could be for three weeks in Saxony,
myself, I believe I could put all on its right footing; but, as J must not
stir two steps from here, I will send you Anhalt, with orders to the
Generals, to compel them to their duty.”** “As to Grenadier Battal-
ions Grant and Rothenburg, it is absurd.” (Henri falls silent for about
a week, brooding his gloom;—not aware tlrat still worse is coming.
King continues:

King (22d March). ‘“‘ Hight regiments, you said? Here, by enclosed
List, are seventeen of them, names and particulars all given,” which is
rather a different view of the account against Silesia! Seventeen of
them, going, not for Glatz, I should say, but to strengthen our Enemies
hereabouts.

Henri. “ Hm, hah” (answers only in German; dry military reports,
official merely ;—thinks of writing to Chief-Clerk Eichel, who is facto-
tum in these spheres). * * “Artillery recruits are scarce in the ex-
treme ; demand bounty : five thalers, shall we say ?”

King. “Seventeen regiments of them, beyond question, instead of
eight, coming on us: strange that you didn’t warn me better. I have
therefore ordered your Major-General Schmettau hitherward at once.
As he has not done raising the contributions in the Lausitz, you must
send another to do it, and have them ready when General Platen passes
that way hither.”—‘‘‘ Five thalers bounty for artillery men,’ say you?
It is not to be thought of. Artillery men can be had by conscription
where you are.” Henri (in silence, still more indignant) sends military

24 Schoning, iii. 301, 302.

:
|
|
i

192 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
reports exclusively. March 26th, Henri’s gloom reaches the igniting-
point; he writes to Chief-Clerk Eichel :

“ Monsieur, you are aware that Adjutant von Anhalt is on the way
hither. ‘To judge by his orders, if they correspond to the Letters I have
had from the King, Adjutant von Anhalt’s appearance here will produce
an embarrassment, from which I am resolved to extricate myself by a
voluntary retirement from office. My totally ruined (abimée) health,
the vexations I have had, the fatigues and troubles of war, leave in me
fittle regret to quit the employment. I solicit only, from your atten-
tions and skill of management, that my retreat be permitted to take place
with the decency observed towards those who have served the State.
I have not a high opinion of my services; but perhaps I am not mis-
taken in supposing that it would be more a shame to the King than tz
me if he should make me endure all manner of chagrins during my re-
tirement.’’”°

Hichel sinks into profound reflexion ; says nothing. How is this fire
to be got under? Where is the place to trample on it, before opening
door or window, or saying a word to the King or anybody?

Henri (same day, 26th March). ‘‘ My dearest Brother,—In the List
you send me of those seventeen Austrian regiments, several, I am in-
formed, are still in Saxony; and by all the news that I get, there are
only eight gone towards Silesia.”—“ From Leipzig my accounts are,
the Reichs Army is to make a movement in advance, and Prince Xa-
vier with the Saxons was expected at Naumberg the 20th ult. I know
not if you have arranged with Duke Ferdinand for a proportionate suc-
cour, in case his French also should try to penetrate into Saxony upon
me? fam, with the profoundest attachment, your faithful and devoted
servant and Brother.”

King (30th March). ‘Seventeen of them, you may depend; I am
too well informed to be allowed to doubt in any way. What you report
of the Reichsfolk and Saxons moving hither, thither ; that seems to me
a bit of game on their part. ‘They will try to cut one post from you,
then another, unless you assemble a corps and go in upon them. ‘Till
you decide for this resolution, you have nothing but chicanes and prov-
ocations to expect there. As to Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, I don’t
imagine that his Ordexs” (from England) “ would permit him what you
propose” (for relief of yourself): “at any rate, you will have to write
at least thrice to him,—that is to say, waste three weeks, before he will
answer No or Yes. You yourself are in force enough for those fellows:
but so long as you keep on the defensive alone, the enemy gains time,
and things will always go a bad road.” Henri’s patience is already
out; this same day, he is writing to the King.

25 Schoning, ili. 307.

a

Cuap. X.] _ FRIEDRICH IN BRESLAU. 193
Jan.—July 1762.

Henri (30th March). * * “You have hitherto received proofs
enough of my ways of thinking and acting to know that if in reality I
was mistaken about those eight regiments, it can only have been a piece
of ignorance on the part of my spy: meanwhile you are pleased to make
me responsible for what misfortune may come of it. I think I have my
hands full with the task laid on me of guarding 4,000 square miles of
country with fewer troops than you have, and of being opposite an en-
emy whose posts touch upon ours, and who is superior in force. Your
preceding Letters” (from March 16th hitherto), ‘on which I have wish-
ed to be silent, and this last proof of want of affection, show me too
clearly to what fortune I have sacrificed these Six Years of Campaign-
ing.”

King (3d April: Official Orders given in Teutsch; at the tail of
which). ‘Spare your wrath and indignation at your servant, Monseign-
eur! You, who preach indulgence, have a little of it for persons who
have no intention of offending you, or of failing in respect for you; and
deign to receive with more benignity the humble representations which
the conjunctures sometimes force from me. I*.”—Which relieves Ei-
chel of his difficulties, and quenches this sputter.”°

Prince Henri, for all his complaining, did beautifully, this Season
again (though to us it must be silent, being small-war merely) ;—and in
particular, May 12th, early in the morning, simultaneously in many dif-
ferent parts, burst across the Mulda, ten or twenty miles long (or broad
rather, from his right hand to his left), sudden as lightning, upon the su-
pine Serbelloni and his Austrians and Reichsfolk. And hurled them
back, one and all, almost to the Plauen Chasm and their old haunts;
widening his quarters notably.*”_ A really brilliant thing, testifies every-
body, though not to be dwelt on here. Seidlitz was of it (much fine
cutting and careering, from the Seidlitz and others, we have to omit in
these two Saxon Campaigns !)—Seidlitz was of it ; he, and another still
more special acquaintance of ours, the learned Quintus Icilius; who alse
did his best in it, but lost his “‘ Amzusette” (small bit of cannon, ‘ Play-
thing,” so called by Maréchal de Saxe, inventor of the article), and did
not shine like Seidlitz.

Henri’s quarters being notably widened in this way, and nothing but
torpid Serbellonis and Prince Stolbergs on the opposite part, Henri
‘drew himself out thirty-five miles long ;” and stood there, almost look-
ing into Plauen region as formerly. And with his fiery Seidlitzes,
Kleists, made a handsome Summer of it. And beat the Austrians and

26 Plucked up from the waste imbroglios of Schéning (ii. 296-311), by
arranging and omitting. .

27 Bericht von dem Uebergang tiber die Mulde, den der Prinz Heinrich den
12ten May 1762 glucklich ausgefiihrt (in Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 280-291).

Vor. VI.—I

194 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
5th-19th Jan. 1762.

Reichsfolk at Freyberg (October 29th, a fine Battle, and his sole one),
—on the Horse which afterwards carried Gellert, as is pleasantly known+

But we are omitting the news from Petersburg,—which came
the very day after that gloomy Letter to D’ Argens; months be-
fore the Tiff of Quarrel with Henri, and the brilliant better des-
tinies of that Gentleman in his Campaign.

Bright News from Petersburg (certain, January 19th); which
grow ever brighter; and become a Star-of-day for Fried-
rich.

To Friedrich, long before all this of Henri, indeed almost on
the very day while he was writing so despondently to D’Argens,
a new phasis had arisen. Hardly had he been five weeks at
Breslau, in those gloomy circumstances, when,—about the mid-
dle of January 1762 (day not given, though it is forever nota-

»ble),—there arrive rumours, arrive news,—news from Peters.
burg; such as this King never had before! ‘* Among the thou-
sand ill strokes of Fortune, does there at length come one pre-
eminently good? The unspeakable Sovereign Woman, is she
verily dead, then, and become peaceable to me for evermore?”
We promised Friedrich a wonderful star-of-day ; and this is it,
—thouch it is long before he dare quite regard it as such. Pe-
ter, the Successor, he knows to be secretly his friend and ad-
mirer; if only, in the new Czarish capacity and its chaotic en-
vironments and conditions, Peter dare and can assert these feel-
ings? What a hope to Friedrich, from this time onward! Rus-
sia may be counted as the bigger half of all he bad to strive with;
the bigger, or at least the far uglier, more ruinous and incendi-
ary ;—and if this were at once taken away, think what a day-
break when the night was at the blackest!

Pious people say, The darkest hour is often nearest the dawn.
And a dawn this proved to be for Friedrich. And the fact grew
always the longer the brighter ;—and before Campaign time, had
ripened into real daylight and sunrise. The dates should have
been precise; but are not to be had so: here is the nearest we
could come. January 14th, writing to Henri, the King has a
mysterious word about “ possibilities of an uncommon sort,”—

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 195
5th-19th Jan. 1762.

rumours from Petersburg, I could conjecture; though perhaps
they are only Turk or Tartar-Khan affairs, which are higher this
year than ever, and as futile as ever. But, on January 19th, he
has heard plainly,—with what hopes (if one durst indulge them)!
—that the implacable Imperial Woman, infdme Catin du Nord,
is verily dead. Dead; and does not hate me any more. De-
liverance, Peace and Victory lie in the word!—Catin had long
been failing, but they kept it religiously secret within the Court
walls: even at Petersburg, nobody knew till the Prayers of the
Church were required: Prayers as zealous as you can,—the
Doctors having plainly intimated that she is desperate, and that
the thing is over. On Christmas-day 1761 by Russian Style, 5th
January 1762 by European, the poor Imperial Catin lay dead ;—
a death still more important than that of George II. to this King.

Peter III., who succeeded, has long been privately a sworn
friend and admirer of the King; and hastens, not too slowly as
the King had feared, but far the reverse, to make that known to
all mankind. That, and much else,—in a far too headlong man-
ner, poor soul! Like an ardent, violent, totally inexperienced
person (enfranchised schoolboy, come to the age of thirty-four),
who has sat hitherto in darkness, in intolerable compression; as
if buried alive! He is now Czar Peter, Autocrat, not of Him-
self only, but of All the Russias ;—and has, besides the complete
regeneration of Russia, two great thoughts: /irst, That of aveng-
ing native Holstein, and his poor martyr of a Father now with
God, against the Danes ;—and,

Second, what is scarcely second in importance to the first, and
indeed is practically a kind of preliminary to it, That of deliver-
ing the Prussian Pattern of Heroes from such a pattern of foul
combinations, and bringing Peace to Europe, while he settles the
Holstein-Danish business. Peter is Russian by the Mother’s side;
his Mother was Sister of the late Catin, a Daughter, like her, of
Czar Peter called the Great, and of the little brown Catharine
whom we saw transiently long ago. His Holstein Business shall
concern us little; but that with Friedrich, during the brief Six
Months allowed him for it,—for it, and for all his remaining
businesses in this world,—is of the highest importance to Fried-
rich and us.

196 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX,
Jan.—July 1762.

Peter is one of the wildest men ; his fate, which was tragical,
is now to most readers rather of a ghastly-grotesque than of a
lamentable and pitiable character. ew know, or have ever con-
sidered, in how wild an element poor Peter was born and nursed;
what a time he has had, since his fifteenth year especially, when
Cousin of Zerbst and he were married. Perhaps the wildest and
maddest any human soul had, during that Century. I find in
him, starting out from the Lethean quagmires where he had to
grow, a certain rash greatness of idea; traces of veritable con-
viction, just resolution; veritable and just, though rash. ‘That
of admiration for King Friedrich was not intrinsically foolish,
in the solitary thoughts of the poor young fellow; nay it was
the reverse; though it was highly inopportune in the place where
he stood. Nor was the Holstein notion bad; it was generous
rather, noble and natural, though, again, somewhat impracticable
in the circumstances.

The summary of the Friedrich-Peter business is perhaps al-
ready known to most readers, and can be very briefly given; nor
is Peter’s tragical Six Months of Czarship (5th January—9th July
1762) a thing for us to dwell on beyond need. But it is wildly
tragical, strokes of deep pathos in it, blended with the ghastly
and grotesque: it is part of Friedrich’s strange element and en-
vironment: and though the outer incidents are public enough,
it is essentially little known. Had there been an A‘schylus,
had there been a Shakespeare!—But poor Peter’s shocking Six
Months of History has been treated by a far different set of
hands, themselves almost shocking to see: and, to the seriously
inquiring mind, it lies, and will long lie, in a very waste, chaotic,
enigmatic condition. Here, out of considerable bundles now
burnt, are some rough jottings, Excerpts of Notes and Studies,
—which, I still doubt rather, ought to have gone in Auto de Ie
along with the others. Auto de Fe I called it; Act of /aith,
not Spanish-Inquisitional, but essentially Celestial many times,
if you reflect well on the poisonous consequences, on the sinful-
ness and deadly criminality, of Human Babble,—as nobody does
nowadays! I label the different Pieces, and try to make legible;
—hasty readers have the privilege of skipping if they like. The

oe

aa ’
i

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 197
Jan.—July 1762.

first Two are of preliminary or prefatory nature,—perhaps still
more skippable than those that will by and by follow:

1. Genealogy of Peter. “ His grandfather was Friedrich IV., Duke
of Holstein-Gottorp and Schleswig, Karl XII.’s brother-in-law; on
whose score it was (Denmark finding the time opportune for a stroke
of robbery there) that Karl XII., a young lad hardly eighteen, first
- took arms; and began the career of fighting that astonished Denmark
and certain other Neighbours who had been too covetous on a young
King. This his young Brother-in-law, Friedrich of Holstein-Gottorp
(young he too, though Karl’s senior by ten years), had been reinstated
in his Territory, and the Danes sternly forbidden farther burglary there,
by the victorious Karl; but went with Karl in his farther expeditions.
Always Karl’s intimate, and at his right hand for the next two years:
fell in the Battle of Clissow, 19th July 1702; age not yet thirty-one.

“ He left as Heir a poor young Boy, at this time only two years old.
His young Widow Hedwig survived him six years.** Her poor child
grew to manhood; and had tragic fortunes in this world; Danes again
burglarious in that part, again robbing this poor Boy at discretion, so
soon as Karl XII. became unfortunate ; and refusing to restore (have
not restored Schleswig at all) :*°—a grimly sad story to the now Peter,
his only Child! This poor Duke at last died, 18th June 1739, age thirty-
nine; the now Peter then about 11,—who well remembers tragic Papa;
tragic Mamma not, who died above ten years before.*°

“Czar Peter called the Great had evidently a pity for this unfortunate
Duke, a hope in his just hopes; and pleaded, as did various others, and
endeavoured with the unjust Danes, mostly without effect. Did, how-
ever, give him one of his Daughters to wife ;—the result of whom is
this new Czar Peter, called the Third: a Czar who is Sovereign of
Holstein, and has claims of Sovereignty in Sweden, right of heirship in
Schleswig, and of damages against Denmark, which are in litigation to
this day. The Czarina Caton, tenderly remembering her Sister, would
hear of no Heir to Russia but this Peter. Peter, in virtue of his pa-
ternal affinities, was elected King of Sweden about the same time; but
preferred Russia,—with an eye to his Danes, some think. or certain,
did adopt the Russian Expectancy, the Greek religion so-called; and
was,” in the way we saw long years ago, “ married (or to all appearance
married) to Catharina Alexiewna of Anhalt-Zerbst, born in Stettin;*' a
Lady who became world-famous as Czarina of the Russias.

23 Michaelis, ii. 618-629.

*2 a.p, 1864, have at last had to do it, under unexpected circumstances !
39 Michaelis, ii. 617; Hiibner, tt. 227, 229.

31 Herr Preuss knows the house: ‘‘ Now Dr. Lehmann’s” (at that time,

198 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Jan.—July 1762.
“ Peter is an abstruse creature; has lived, all this while, with his
Catharine an abstruse life, which would have gone altogether mad ex-
cept for Catharine’s superior sense. An awkward, ardent, but helpless
kind of Peter, with vehement desires, with a dash of wild magnanimity
even: but in such an inextricable element, amid such darkness, such
provocations of unmanageable opulence, such impediments, imaginary
and real,—dreadfully real to poor Peter,—as made him the unique of
mankind in his time. He ‘ used to drill cats, it is said, and to do the
maddest-looking things (in his late buried-alive condition) ;—and fell
partly, never quite, which was wonderful, into drinking, as the solution
of his inextricabilities. Poor Peter: always, and now more than ever,
the cynosure of vulturous vulpine neighbours, withal; which infinitely
aggravated his otherwise bad case !—
“For seven or eight years, there came no progeny, nor could come;
about the eighth or ninth, there could, and did: the marvellous Czar
Paul that was to be. Concerning whose exact paternity there are still

calumnious assertions widely current: to this individual Editor much a

matter of indifference, though on examining, his verdict is : ‘Calumnies,
to all appearance ; mysteries which decent or decorous society refuses
to speak of, and which indecent is pretty sure to make calumnies out
of.’ Czar Paul may be considered genealogically genuine, if that is
much an object to him. Poor Paul,does not he father himself, were
there nothing more? Only that Peter and this Catharine could have
begotten such a Paul. Genealogically genuine enough, any poor Czar,
that needed to be garrotted so very soon!

2. Of Catharine and the Books upon Peter and Her. “ Catharine
too had an intricate time of it under the Catin; which was consoled to
her only by a tolerably rapid succession of lovers, the best the ground
yielded. In which department it is well known what a Thrice-Greatest
she became: superior to any Charles IJ.; equal almost to an August
the Strong! Of her loves now and henceforth, which are heartily un-
interesting to me,I propose to say nothing further ; merely this, That
in extent they probably rivalled the highest male sovereign figures (and
are to be put in the same category with these, and damned as deep, or a
little deeper) ;—and cost her, in gifts, in magnificent pensions to the
emeritt (for she did things always in a grandiose manner, quietly and yet
inexorably dismissing the emeritus with stores of gold), the considera-
ble sum of 20 millions sterling, in the course of her long reign. One,

the Governor of Stettin’s), ‘in which also Czar Paul’s second Spouse”
(Eugen of Wiirtemberg, a new Governor’s Daughter), ‘‘ who is Mother of
the Czars that follow, was born:” Preuss, ii. 310, 311. Catharine, during
her reign, was pious in a small way to the place of her cradle; sent her
successive Medals &c. to Stettin, which still has them to show.

eee eee ee a ee ee

ee

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 199
Jan.—July 1762.

or at most two, were off on pension, when Hanbury Williams brought
Poniatowski for her, as we transiently saw. Poniatowski will be King
of Poland in the course of events.” * *

“‘ Russia is not a publishing country ; the Books about Catharine are
few, and of little worth. T'ooke,an English Chaplin; Castéra, an un-
known French Hanger-on, with copies from Tooke, or Tooke from him :
these are to be read, as the bad-best, and will yield little satisfactory in-
sight ; Castéra,in particular, a great deal of dubious backstairs gossip
and street rumour, which are not delightful to a reader of sense. In
fine, there has been published, in these very years, a Fragment of early
Autobiography by Catharine herself,—a credible and highly remarka-
ble little Piece ; worth all the others, if it is knowledge of Katharine
you are seeking.*? A most placid, solid, substantial young Lady comes
to light there ; dropped into such an element as might have driven most
people mad. But it did not her; it only made her wiser and wiser in
-her generation. Element black, hideous, dirty, as Lapland Sorcery ;—
in which the first clear duty is to hold one’s tongue well, and keep one’s
eyes open. Stars,—not very heavenly, but of fixed nature, and heaven-
ly to Catharine,—a star or two, shine through the abominable murk :
Steady, patient ; steer silently, in all weathers, towards these !

“ Young Catharine’s immovable equanimity in this distracted envi-
ronment strikes us very much. Peter is careering, tumbling about, on
all manner of absurd broomsticks, driven too surely by the Devil; ter-
rific-absurd big Lapland Witch, surrounded by multitudes smaller, and
some of them less ugly. Will be Czar of Russia, however ;—and is
one’s so-called Husband. These are prospects for an observant, im-
movably steady-going young Woman! The reigning Czarina, old Catin
herself, is silently the Olympian Jove to Catharine, who reveres her
very much. Though articulately stupid as ever, in this Book of Cath-
arine’s, she comes out with a dumb weight, of silence, of obstinacy, of
intricate abrupt rigour, which—who knows but it may savour of dumb

32 Mémoires de l' Impératrice Catharine IT, écrits par Elle-méme (A. Herzen
editing; London, 1859) ;—which we already cited, on occasion of Catha-
rine’s marriage.

Anonymous (Castéra), Vie de Catharine II, Impératrice de Russie (a
Paris, 1797; or reprinted, most of it, enough of it, a Varsovie, 1798), 2
tomes, 8vo. Tooke, Life of Cutharine ITI. (4th edition, London, 1800), 3
voll. 8vo; View of the Russian Empire during &c. (London, 1799), 3 voll. 8vo.
—Hermann, Geschichte des Russischen Staats (Hamburg, 1853 et antea), v.
241-308 et seq. ; is by much the most solid Book, though a dull and heavy.
Stenzel cites, as does Hermann, a Biographie Peters des [1/ten; which no
doubt exists, in perhaps 3 volumes; but, where, when, by whom, or of what
quality, they do not tell me.

200 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
unconscious wisdom in the fat old blockhead? The Book says little of
her, and in the way of criticism, of praise or of blame, nothing whatever ;
but one gains the notion of some dark human female object, bigger than
one had fancied it before.

“Catharine steered towards her stars. Lovers were vouchsafed her,
of a kind (her small stars, as we may call them) ; and, at length, through
perilous intricacies, the big star, Autocracy of all the Russias,—through
what horrors of intricacy, that last! She had hoped always it would be
by Husband Peter that she, with the deeper steady head, would be Au-
tocrat: but the intricacies kept increasing, grew at last to the strangling
pitch ; and it came to be, between Peter and her, ‘ Hither you to Siberia
(perhaps farther), or else 1! And it was Peter that had to go;—in
what hideous way is well enough known; no Siberia, no Holstein thought
to be far enough for Peter :—and Catharine, merely weeping a little for
him, mounted to the Autocracy herself. And then, the big star of stars
being once hers, she had, not in the lover kind alone, but in all unceles-
tial kinds, whole nebule and milky-ways of small stars. A very Semi-
ramis, or the Louis-Quatorze of those Northern Parts. ‘Second Crea-
tress of Russia,’ second Peter the Great in a sense. ‘To me none of
the loveliest objects ; yet there are uglier, how infinitely uglier: object
grandiose, if not great.”— We return to Friedrich and the Death of
Catin.

Colonel Hordt, I believe, was the first who credibly apprised
Friedrich of the great Russian Event. Colonel Hordt, late of
the Free-Corps Hordt, but captive since soon after the Kuners-
dorf time ; and whose doleful'quasi-infernal ‘twenty-five months
and three days’ in the Citadel of Petersburg have changed in one
hour into celestial glories in the Court of that City ;—as readers
shall themselves see anon. By Hordt or by whomsoever, the in-
stant Friedrich heard, by an authentic source, of the new Czar’s
Accession, Friedrich hastened to turn round upon him with the
friendliest attitude, with arms as if ready to open; dismissing all
his Russian Prisoners ; and testifying, in every polite and royal
way, how gladly he would advance if permitted. To which the
Czar, by Hordt and by other channels, imperially responded ;
rushing forward, he, as if with arms flung wide.

January 31st, is Order from the King,°° That our Russian
Prisoners, one and all, shod, clad and dieted, be forthwith set
under way from Stettin: in return for which generosity the

33. In Schéning, iii. 275 (“ Breslau, 31st January 1762”).

_

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. . 201
Jan.—July 1762.

Prussians, from Siberia or wherever they were buried, are, soon
after, hastening home in like manner. Gudowitsh, Peter's fa-
vourite Adjutant, who had been sent to congratulate at Zerbst,
comes round by Breslau (February 20th), and has joyfully benign
audience next day; directly on the heel of whom, Adjutant Col-
onel von der Goltz, who is Kammerherr as well as Colonel, and
understands things of business, goes to Petersburg. February
23d, Czarish Majesty, to the horror of Vienna and glad astonish~
ment of mankind, emits Declaration (Note to all the Foreign
Excellencies in Petersburg), ‘‘’‘That there ought to be Peace
with this King of Prussia; that Czarish Majesty, for his own
part, is resolved on the thing; gives up East Preussen and the
so-called conquests made; Russian participation in such a War
has ceased.” And practically orders Czernichef, who is winter-
ing with his 20,000 in Glatz, to quit Glatz and these Austrian
Combinations, and march homeward with his 20,000. Which
Czernichef, so soon as. arranrements of proviant and the like are
made, hastens to do ;—and des, as far as Thorn; but no farther,
for a reason that will be seen. On the last day of March, Czer-
nichef, off about a week ago from Glatz, and now got into the
Breslau latitude,—came across, with a select Suite of Four, to
pay his court there; and had the honor to dine with his Majesty,
and to be, personally too, a Czernichef agreeable to his Majesty.

The vehemency of Austrian Diplomacies at Petersburg; and
the horror of Kaiserinn and Kriegshofrath, in Vienna, — who
have just discharged 20,000 of their own people, counting on
this Czernichef, and being dreadfully tight for money,—may be
fancied. But all avails nothing. The ardent Czar advances
towards Friedrich with arms flung wide. Goltz and Gudowitsh
are engaged on Treaty of Peace; Czar frankly gives up East
Preussen, ‘Yours again; what use has Russia for it, Royal
Friend?” Treaty of Peace goes forward like the drawing of a
Marriage-settlement (concluded May 5th); and, in a month more,
has changed into Treaty of Alliance ;—Czernichef ordered to
stop short at Thorn; to turn back, and join himself to this he-
roic King, instead of fighting against him. Which again Czerni-
chef, himself an admirer of this King, joyfully does ;—though,
unhappily, not with all the advantage he expected to the King.

12 |

202 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX. _

Jan.—July 1762.

Swedish Peace, Queen Ulrique and the Anti-French Party
now getting the upper hand, had been hastening forward in the
interim (finished, at Hamburg, May 22d): a most small matter
in comparison to the Russian; but welcome enough to Fried-
rich ;—though he said slightly of it, when first mentioned:
“Peace? I know not hardly of any War there has been with
Sweden ;—ask Colonel Belling about it!” Colonel Belling, a
most shining swift Hussar Colonel, who, with a 2,000 sharp
fellows, hanging always on the Swedish flanks, sharp as light-
ning, “nowhere and yet everywhere,” as was said of him, has
mainly, for the last year or two, had the management of this
extraordinary ‘‘ War.” Peace over all the North, Peace and
more, is now Friedrich’s. Strangling imbroglio, wide as the
world, has ebbed to man’s height ; dawn of day has ripened into
sunrise for Friedrich; the way out is now a thing credible and
visible to him. Peter’s friendliness is boundless; almost too
boundless! Peter begs a Prussian Regiment,—dresses himself
in its uniform, Colonel of Jtzenplitz; Friedrich begs a Russian
Regiment, Colonel of Schuwalof: and all is joyful, hopeful ;
marriage-bells instead of dirge ditto and gallows ditto,—unhap-
pily not for very long.

In regard to Friedrich’s feelings while all this went on, take the
following small utterances of his, before going farther: January
27th, 1762 (To Madame Camas,—eight days after the Russian
Event: “I rejoice, my good Mamma, to find you have such
courage; I exhort you to redouble it! All ends in this world;
s0 we may hope this accursed War will not be the only thing
eternal there. Since Death has trussed up a certain Catin of
the Hyperborean Countries, our situation has advantageously
changed, and becomes more supportable than it was. We must
hope that some other good events” (favour of the new Czar
mainly) ‘will happen; by which we may profit to arrive at a
good Peace.”

January 31st (To Minister Finckenstein): ‘“‘ Behold the first
gleam of light that rises;—-Heaven be praised for it! We must
hope good weather will succeed these storms. God grant it.”?3?

End of March (To D’Argens): * * “All that” (at Paris;

34 Preuss, ii. 312.

’

o_O ee ee ees

—

CHAP. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 203
Jan.—July 1762.

about the Pompadourisms, the exe of Broglio and Brother, and
your other news) ‘is very miserable; as well as that discrepancy
between King’s Council and Parlement for and against the Jesu-
its! But, mon cher Marquis, my head is so ill, I can tell you
nothing more,—except that the Czar of Russia is a divine man;
to whom I ought to erect altars.”%°

May 25th (To the same,—Russian Peace three weeks ago):
‘“‘It is very pleasant to me, dear Marquis, that Sans-Souci could
afford you an agreeable retreat during the beautiful Spring days.
If it depended only on me, how soon should I be there beside
you! But to the Six Campaigns there is a Seventh to be added,
and will soon open; either because the Number 7 had once mystic
qualities, or because in the Book of Fate from all eternity the”
— * * “« Jesuits banished from France? Ah, yes :—hearing
of that, I made my bit of plan for them’’ (mean to have my pick
of them as schoolmasters in Silesia here); ‘‘and am waiting only
till I get Silesia cleared of Austrians as the first thing. You
see we must not mow the corn till it is ripe.’’%6

May 28th (To the same): * * ‘Tartar Khan actually astir,
10,000 men of his in Hungary” (I am told); ‘Turk potentially
ditto, with 200,000” (futile both, as ever): ‘* All things show me
the sure prospect of Peace by the end of this Year; and, in the
background of it, Sans-Souci and my dear Marquis! <A sweet
calm springs up again in my soul; and a feeling of hope, to which
for six years I had got unused, consoles me for all I have come
through. ‘Think only what a coil I shall be in, before a month
hence” (Campaign opened by that time, horrid Game begun again);
‘‘and what a pass we had come to, in December last: Country
at its last gasp (agonisait), as if waiting for extreme unction: and
now—~!237 * *

June 8th (To Madame Camas,—Russian Alliance now come):
“‘T know well, my good Mamma, the sincere part you take in the
lucky events that befal us. The mischief is, we are got so low,
that we want at present all manner of fortunate events to raise
us again; and Two grand conclusions of Peace” (the Russian,
the Swedish), ““which might reéstablish Peace throughout, are

35 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 801.

86 Thid. p. 821. 37 Thid. xix. 323.

204 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Jan.—July 1762.

at this moment only a step towards finishing the War less un-
fortunately.”°8

Same day, June 8th (To D’Argens): “Czernichef is on march
to join us. Our Campaign will not open till towards the end
of this month’’ (did open, July Ist); “but think then, what a
pretty noise in this poor Silesia again! In fine, my dear Mar-
quis, the job ahead of me is hard and difficult; and nobody can
say positively how it will all go. Pray for us; and don’t forget
a poor devil who kicks about strangely in his harness, who leads
the life of one damned; and who nevertheless loves you sincere-
ly.—Adieu.”°9 D’Argens (May 24th) has heard, by Letters from
_ very well-informed persons in Vienna, that ‘‘ Imperial Majesty,
for some time past, spends half of her time in praying to the Vir-
gin, and the other half in weeping.” ‘I wish her,” adds the un-
- gallant D’ Argens, ‘‘as punishment for the mischiefs her ambition
has cost mankind these seven years past, the fate of Phiethon’s
Sisters, and that she melt altogether into water !”!°—Take one
other little utterance; and then to Colonel Hordt and the Peters-
burg side of things.

June 19th (still to D’Argens): ‘‘What is now going on in
Russia no Count Kaunitz could foresee; what has come to pass
in England,—of which the hatefullest part” (Bute’s altogether
extraordinary attempts, in the Kaunitz, in the Czar Peter direc-
tion, to force a Peace upon me) “is not yet known to you,—I
had no notion of, in forming my plans! The Governor of a
State, in troublous times, never can be sure. This is what dis-
gusts me with the business, in comparison. A Man of Letters
operates on something certain; a Politician can have almost no
data of that kind.”4! (How easy everybody’s trade but one’s
own!)

Readers know what a tragedy poor Peter’s was. His Czer-
nichef did join the King; but with far less advantage than Czer-
nichef or anybody had anticipated !—It is none of our intention
to go into the chaotic Russian element, or that wildly-blazing
sanguinary Catharine-and-Peter business; of which, at any rate,

88 Ciuvres de Frédéric, xviii. 146-7. ? Tbid xix. B27:
*° Thid, xix. 320 (‘¢24th May 1762”). : ‘t Thid. p. 329.

Crap. Xs HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 205
Jan.—July 1762.

there are plentiful accounts in common circulation, more or less
accurate,—especially M. Rulhiére’s,*? the most succinct, lucid,
and least unsatisfactory, in the accessible languages. Only so
far as Friedrich was concerned are we. But readers saw this
Couple married, under Friedrich’s auspices,—a Marriage which
he thought important twenty years ago; and sure enough the
Dissolution of it did prove important to him, and is a necessary
item here!

Readers, even those that know Rulhiere, will doubtless consent
to a little supplementing from Two other Eye-witnesses of credit.
The first and principal is a respectable Ex-Swedish Gentleman,
whom readers used to hear of; the Colonel Hordt above men-
tioned, once of the Free-Corps Hordt, but fallen Prisoner latter-
ly ;—whose experiences and reports are all the more interesting
to us, as Friedrich himself had specially to depend on them at
present; and doubtless, in times long afterwards, now and then
heard speech of them from Hordt. Our second Eye-witness is
the Reverend Herr Doctor Biisching (of the Hrdbeschriebung, of
the Beytrdge, and many other Works, an invaluable friend to us
all along); who, in his wandering time, has come to be ‘‘ Pastor
of the German Church at Petersburg,” some years back.

What Colonel Hordt and the Others saw at Petersburg
(January—July 1762).

Autumn 1759, in the sequel to Kunersdorf,—when the Russians and
Daun lay so long torpid, uncertain what to do except keep Friedrich
and Prince Henri well separate, and Friedrich had such watchings,
campings, and marchings about on the hither skirt of them (skirt always
veiled in Cossacks, and producing skirmishes as you marched past),—
we did mention Hordt’s capture ;** not much hoping that readers could
remember it in such a press of things more memorable. It was in, or
as prelude to, one of those skirmishes (one of the earliest, and a rather
sharp one, “ at Trebatsch,” in Frankfurt-Lieberose Country, ‘‘ 4th Sep-
tember 1759”), that Hordt had his misfortune : he had been out recon-
noitering, with an Orderly or two, before the skirmish began, was sud-
denly ‘“ surrounded by 200 Cossacks,” and after desperate plunging into

42 Histoire ou Anecdotes sur la Révolution de Russie en l'année 1762 (writ-
ten, 1768; first printed, Paris, 1797: English Translation, London, 1797).
43 Supra, vol. v. p. 429.

ee

40

206 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED, [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
bogs, desperate firing of pistols and the like, was taken prisoner. Was
carted miserably to Petersburg,—such a journey for dead ennui as Hordt
never knew ; and was then tumbled out into solitary confinement in the
Citadel, a place like the Spanish Inquisition ; not the least notice taken
of his requests for a few Books, for leave to answer his poor Wife’s
Letter merely by the words, “ Dear one, I am alive ;”’—and was left
there, to the company of his own reflexions, and a life as if in vacant
Hades, for twenty-five months and three days. After the lapse of that
period, he has something to say to us again, and we transiently look in
upon him there.

The Book we excerpt from is, Mémoires du Comte de Hordt (sec-
ond edition, 2 volumes 12mo, Berlin, 1789). This is Bookseller Pitra*s
redaction of the Hordt Autobiography (Berlin, 1788, was Pitra’s first
edition) : several years after, how many is not said, nor whether Hordt
(who had become a dignitary in Berlin society before Pitra’s feat) was
still living or not, a “ M. Borelly, Professor in’ the Military School,” un-
dertook a second considerably enlarged and improved redaction ;—of
which latter there is an English Translation ; easy enough to read ; but
nearly without meaning, I should fear, to readers unacquainted with the
scene and subject.** Hordt was reckoned a perfectly veracious, intel-
ligent kind of man: but he seldom gives the least date, specification, or
precise detail; and his Book reads, not like the Testimony of an Eye-
witness, which it is, and valuable when you understand it; but more like
some vague Forgery, compiled by a destitute inventive individual, re-
gardless of the Ten Commandments (sparingly consulting even his file
of Old Newspapers), and writing a Book which would deserve the tread-
mill, were there any Police in his trade !— ’

Wednesday, 6th January 1762, Hordt’s vacant Hades ofan existence
in the Citadel of Petersburg was broken by a Joud sound: three minute
guns went off from different sides, close by ; and then whole salvos, peal
after peal: “ Czarina gone overnight, Peter III. Czar in her stead!”
said the Officer, rushing in to tell Hordt; to whom it was as news of
resurrection from the dead. “ Evening of same day, an Aide-de-Camp
of the new Czar came to announce my liberty; equipage waiting to take
me at once to his Russian Majesty. Asked him to defer it till the fol-
lowing day ;—so agitated was I.” And indeed the Czar, busy taking
acclamations, oaths of fealty, riding about among his Troops by torch-
light, could have made little of me that evening.** “ Ultimately, my
presentation was deferred till Sunday,” January 10th, “ that it might be

44 Memoirs of the Count de Hordt: London, 1806: 2 voll. 12mo,—only
the first volume of which (unavailable here) is in my possession.
48 Hermann, Geschichte des Russischen Staats, v. 241.

Cuap. X.] | HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 207
Jan.—July 1762. ;

done with proper splendour, all the Nobility being then usually assem-
bled about his Majesty.”

“ Waited, amid crowds of Nobility, in the Gallery, accordingly. Was
presented in the Gallery, through which the Czar, followed by Czarina
and all the Court, were passing on their way to Chapel. Czar made a
short kind speech (‘ Delighted to do you an act of justice, Monsieur, and
return a valuable servant to the King I esteem’); gave me his hand to
kiss: Czarina did the same. General Korf,” an excellent friend, so
kind to me at Konigsberg while I was getting carted hither, and a Gen-
eral now in high Office here, “‘ who had been my introducer, led me into
Chapel, to the Court’s place (tribune de la Cour). Czar came across
repeatedly” (while public worship was going on; a Czar perhaps too
regardless that way!) “to talk to me; dwelt much on his attachment
to the King. On coming out, the Head Chamberlain whispered me,
‘You dine with the Court.’ Which, of course, I did.

“'Table was of sixty covers; splendid as the Arabian Tales. Czar
and Czarina sat side by side; Korf and I had the honour to be placed
opposite them. Hardly were we seated when the Czar addressed me:
‘You have had no Prussian news this long while. Iam glad to tell you
that the King is well, though he has had such fighting to right and left ;
—but I hope there will soon be an end to all that.’ Words which ev-
erybody listened to like prophecy!” (Peter is nothing of a Politician.)
“* How long have you been in Prison? continued the Czar. ‘ Twenty-
five months and three days, your Majesty.’ ‘Were you well treated?’ ”
Hordt hesitated, knew not what to say; but the Czar urging him, con-
fessed, “‘ He had been always rather badly used ; not even allowed to
buy a few books to read.” At which the Czarina was evidently shock-
ed: “ Cela est bien barbare !” she exclaimed aloud. “I wished much
to return home at once; and petitioned the Czar on that subject, during
coffee, in the withdrawing rooms; but he answered, ‘ No, you must not,
—not tillan express Prussian Envoy arrive!’ I had to stay, therefore ;
and was thenceforth almost daily at Court,’’—but unluckily a little vague,
and altogether dateless as to what I saw there!

Bieren and Munnich, both of them just home from Siberia, are to
drink together (No date: Palace of Petersburg, Spring 1762).—Peter
had begun in a great way: all for liberalism, enlightenment, abolition
of abuses, general magnanimity on his own and everybody’s part. Rul-
hiére did not see the following scene; but it seems to be well enough
vouched for, and Rulhiére heard it talked of in society. ‘ As many as
20,000 persons, it is counted, have come home from Siberian Exile :”
the L’Estocs, the Miinnichs, Bierens, all manner of internecine figures,
as if risen from the dead. “Since the night when Miinnich arrested
Bieren” (readers possibly remember it, and Mannstein’s account of it*®),

4° Supra, vol. iii, p. 194.

208 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX. _

Jan.—July 1762.
“the first time these two met was in the gdy and tumultuous crowd
which surrounded the new Czar. ‘ Come, bygones be bygones,’ said
Peter, noticing them; ‘let us three all drink together, like friends!’—
and ordered three glasses of wine. Peter was beginning his glass to
show the others an example, when somebody came with a message to
him, which was delivered in a low tone; Peter listening drank out his
wine, set down the glass, and hastened off; so that Bieren and Miinnich,
the two old enemies, were left standing, glass in hand, each with his
eyes on the Czar’s glass ;—at length, as the Czar did not return, they
flashed each his eyes into the other’s face; and after a moment’s sur-
vey, set down their glasses untasted, and walked off in opposite direc-
tions.”*” Won't coalesce, it seems, in spite of the Czar’s high wishes.
An emblem of much that befel the poor Czar in his present high course
of good intentions and headlong magnanimities !—We return to Hordt:

The Czar wears a Portrait of Friedrich on his Finger. “Czar
Peter never disguised his Prussian predilections. One evening he
said, ‘ Propose to your friend Keith’ (English Excellency here, whom we
know) ‘to give me a supper at his house tomorrow night. The other
Foreign Ministers will perhaps be jealous ; but I don’t care!’ Supper
at the English Embassy took place. Only ten or twelve persons, of
the Czar’s choosing, were present. Czar very gay and in fine spirits.
Talked much of the King of Prussia. Showed me a signet-ring on his
finger, with Friedrich’s Portrait in it; ring was handed round the ta-
ble.’*8 ‘This is a signet-ring famous at Court, in those months. One
day Peter had lost it (mislaid somewhere), and got into furious explosion
till it was found for him again.*® Let us now hear Biisching, our Geo-
graphical Friend, for a moment:

Herr Pastor Busching does the Homaging for Self and People.
* * “Tn most Countries, it is Official or Military People that administer
the Oath of Homage, on a change of Sovereigns. But in Petersburg,
among the German population, it is the Pastors of their respective
Churches. At the accession of Peter III., I, for the first time” (being
still a young hand rather than an old), “took the Oath from several
thousands in my Church,”—and handed it over, with my own, in the
proper quarter.

“As to the Congratulatory Addresses, the new Czar received the
Congratulations of all classes, and also of the Pastors of the Foreign
Churches, in the following manner. He came walking slowly through
a suite of rooms, in each of which a body of Congratulators were assem-
bled. Court-officials preceded, State-officials followed him. Then
came the Czarina, attended in a similar way. And always on entering
a new room, they received a new Congratulation from the spokesman ~

47 Rulhiére, p. 33. 4° Hordt, ii. 118, 124,129.  *? Hermann, v. 258,

Cup. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 209
Jan.—July 1762.

of the party there. The spokesman of us Protestant Pastors was my
colleague, Senior Trefurt; but the General-in-Chief and Head-of-Po-
lice, Baron von Korf” (Hordt’s friend, known to us above, German, we
perceive, by creed and name), “ thinking it was I that had to make the
speech, and intending to present me at the same time to the Czar, mo-
tioned to me from his place behind the Czar to advance. ButI did not
push forward ; thinking it inopportune and of no importance to me.”—
“ Neither did I share the great expectations which Baron von Korf and
everybody entertained of this new reign. All people now promised
themselves better things, without reflecting” (as they should have done!)
“that the better men necessary to produce these were nowhere forth-
coming !"*"

For the first two or three months, Peter was the idol of all the world:
Such generosities and magnanimities; such zeal and diligence, one
magnanimous improvement following another! He had at once abol-
ished Torture in his Law Courts ; resolved to have a regular Code of
Laws,—and Judges to be depended on for doing justice, He “destroy-
ed monopolies ;” “ lowered the price of salt.” To the joy of everybody,
he had hastened (January 18th, second week of reign) to abolish the
Secret Chancery,—a horrid Spanish-Inquisition engine of domestic Pol-
itics. His Nobility he had determined should be noble: January 28th
(third week of reign just beginning), he absolved the Nobility from all
servile duties to him: “ You can travel when and where you please ;
you are not obliged to serve in my Armies ; you may serve in anybody’s
not at war with me !” under plaudits loud and universal from that Order
of men. And was petitioned by a grateful Petersburg world: *‘ Permit
us, magnanimous Czar, to raise a Statue of your Majesty in solid Gold?”
“Don’t at all!” answered Peter: “Ah, if by good governing I could
raise a memorial in my People’s hearts; that would be the Statue for
me!’’*' Poor headlong Peter !—It was a less lucky step that of inform-
ing the Clergy (date not given), That in the Czarship lay Spiritual Sov-
ereignty as well as Temporal, and that he would henceforth administer |
their rich Abbey Lands and the like :—this gave a sad shock to the up-
per strata of Priesthood, extending gradually to the lower, and ultimate-
ly raising an ominous general thought (perhaps worse than a general
ery) of “Church in Danger! Alas, is our Czar regardless of Holy Re-
ligion, then? Perhaps, at heart still Lutheran, and has no Religion ?”
This, and his too headlong Prussian tendencies, are counted to have
done him infinite mischief.

Herr Busching sees the Czar on Horseback. ‘‘ When the Czar’s
own Regiment of Cuirassiers came to Petersburg, the Czar, dressed in

50 Biisching’s Beytrdye, vi. (‘‘ Author’s own Biography’) 462 et seq.
5! Hermann, v. 248.

210 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
the uniform of the regiment, rode out to meet it, and returning at its
head, rode repeatedly through certain quarters of the Town. His hel-
met was buckled tight with leather straps under the chin; he sat his
horse as upright and stiff as a wooden image; held his sabre in equally
stiff manner . turned fixedly his eyes to the right; and never by a hairs-
breadth changed that posture. In such attitude he twice passed my
house with his regiment, without changing a feature at sight of the
many persons who crowded the windows. ‘To me” (in my privately
austere judgment) “ he seemed so Aleingezstisch, so small-minded a per-
son, that I’—in fact. knew not what to think of it.°?

Hordt sees the deceased Czarina lying in State. “ One day, after
dining at Court, General Korf proposed that we should go and see the
Int de Parade” (Parade-Bed) of the late Czarina, which is in another
Palace. not far off. ‘ Count Schuwalof’’ (not her old lover, who has
died since her, poor old creature; but his Son, a cultivated man, after-
wards Voltaire’s friend) ‘ accompanied us ; and. his rooms being con-
tiguous to those of the dead Lady, he asked us to take coffee with him
afterwards. The Imperial Bier stood in the Grand Saloon, which was
hung all round with black, festooned and garlanded with cloth-of-silver :
the glare of wax-lights quite blinding Bier, covered with cloth-of-gold
trimmed with silver lace, was raised upon steps. A rich crown was on
the head of the dead Czarina. Beside the Bier stood Four Ladies, two
on each hand, in grand mourning. immense crape training on the ground
behind them. Two Officers of the Life-Guard occupied the lowest
steps: on the topmost, at the foot of the bier, was an Archimandrite
(superior kind of Adbdot), who had a Bible before him. from which he
read aloud,—continuously till relieved by another. This went on day
and night without interruption. AJ] round the bier, on stools (¢abourets),
were placed different Crowns and the insignia of various Orders,—those
of Prussia, among others. It being established usage, I had. to my great
repugnance, to kiss the hand of the corpse! We then talked a little to
the Ladies in attendance (with their crape trains), joking about the arti-
cle of hand-kissing; finally we adjourned for coffee to Count Schuwa-
Jof’s apartments, which were of an incredible magnificence.” That .
same evening, farther on,—

“‘] supped with the Czar in his Petit Appartement, Private Rooms”
(a fine free-and-easy nook of space!) ‘‘ The company there consisted
of the Countess Woronzow, a creature without any graces, bodily or
mental, whom the Czar had chosen for his Mistress” (snub-nosed, pock-
marked, fat, and with a pert tongue at times), “‘ whom I liked the less,
as there were one or two other very handsome women there. Some
Courtiers too; and no Foreigners but the English Envoy and myself.

82 Biisching’s Beytrdge, vi. 464.

rc

dmg
¢, ‘

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 211
Jan.—July 1762.

The supper was very gay, and was prolonged late into the night.
These late orgies, however, did not prevent his Majesty from attending
to business in good time next morning. He would appear unexpected-
ly, at an early hour, at the Senate, at the Synod” (Head Consistory),
“making them stand to their duties,”—or pretend to do it. His Maj-
esty is not understood to have got much real work out of either of these
Governing Bodies; the former, the Senate, or secular one, which had
fallen very torpid latterly, was, not long after this, suffered to die out al-
together. Peter himself was a violently pushing man, and never shrank
from labour; always in a plunge of hurries, and of irregular hours In
his final time, people whispered, ‘The Czar is killing himself. sits
smoking, tippling, talking till 2 in the morning; and is overhead in busi-
ness again by 7!

Czarina Elizabeth’s Funeral, as seen by Hordt (much abridged).
‘At 10 in the morning all the bells in Petersburg broke out; and tolled
incessantly” (day or month not hinted at,—nor worth seeking. grim
darkness of universal frost perceptible enough: clangour of bells; and
procession seemingly of miles long,—on this extremely high errand ')
—‘ Minute-guns were fired from the moment the procession set out
from the Castle till it arrived at the Citadel, a distance of two English
miles and a half. Planks were laid all the way; forming a sort of
bridge through the streets, and over the ice of the Neva. All the sol-
diers of the Garrison were ranked in espalier on each side. Three hund-
red grenadiers opened the march ; after them, three hundred priests. in
sacerdotal costume ; walking two-and-two, singing hymns. All the
Crowns and Orders, above mentioned by me, were carried by high Dig-
nitaries of the Court, walking in single file, each a chamberlain behind
him Hearse was followed by the Czar, his black cloak carried by
Twelve Chamberlains, each a lighted taper in the other hand. Prince
George of Holstein” (Czar’s Uncle) ‘‘came next, then Holstein-
Beck” (Czar’s Cousin) ‘‘ Czarina Catherina followed, also on foot,
with a lighted taper, her cloak borne by all her Ladies. Three hund-
red grenadiers closed the procession. Bells tolling. minute-guns firing,
seas of people crowding.”—Thus the Russians buried their Czarina.
Day and its dusky frost-curtains sank ; and Bootes, looking down from
the starry deeps, found one Telluric Anomaly forever hidden from him.
She had left of unworn Dresses, the richest procurable in Nature (five
a-day her usual allowance, and never or seldom worn twice), ‘‘ 15,000
and some hundreds.””*?

Hordt is of the new Czarina Catharine’s Evening Parties. ‘*The
Czarina received company every morning. She received everybody
with great affability and grace. But notwithstanding her efforts to ap-

58 Hermann, vy. 176.

‘ a

212 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX, |

Jan.—July 1762, |
pear gay, one could perceive a deep. background of sadness in her. She —
knew better than anybody the violent (ardente) character of her hus-
band; and perhaps she then already foresaw what would come. She
also had her circle every evening, and always asked the company to
stay supper. One evening, when I was of her party, a confidential
Equerry of the Czar came in, and whispered me That I had been
searched for all over Town, to come to supper at the Countess’s (that
was the usual designation of the Sultana,”’—das Fraulein, spelt in Rus-
sian ways, is the more usual). ‘1 begged to be excused for this time,
being engaged to sup with the Czarina, to whom I could not well state —
the reason for which I was to leave. The Equerry had not gone long,
when suddenly a great noise was heard, the two wings of the door were
flung open, and the Czar entered. He saluted politely the Czarina and
her circle ; called me with that smiling and gracious air which he al-
ways had; took me by the arm, and said to the Czarina: ‘ Excuse me,
Madam, if tonight I carry off one of your guests; it is this Prussian I
had searched for all over the Town.’ The Czarina laughed; I made—
her a deep bow, and went away with my conductor. Next morning I
went to the Czarina; who, without mentioning what had passed last
night, said smiling,‘ Come and sup with me always when there is noth-
ing to prevent it.’”

February 2ist, Hordt at Zarskoe-Zeloe. ‘On occasion of the
Czar’s birthday” (which gives us a date, for once),°* “ there were great
festivities, lasting a week. It began with a grand Te Dewm, at which
the Czar was present, but not the Czarina. She had, that morning, in
obedience to her husband’s will, decorated ‘ the Countess’ with the cor-~
don of the Order of St. Catharine. She was now detained in her Apart-
ment ‘ by indisposition ;? and did not leave it during the eight days the
festivities lasted.” This happened at the Country Palace, Zarskoe-
Zeloe; and is a turning-point in poor Peter’s History.*® From that
day,-his Czarina saw that, by the medium of her Peter, it was not she
that would ever come to be Autocrat ; not she, but a pock-marked, un-
beautiful Person, with Cordon of the Order of St. Catharine,—blessings
on it! From that day, the Czarina sat brooding her wrongs and her
perils,;—wrongs done, very many, and now wrongs to be suffered, who
can say how many! She perceives clearly that the Czar is gone from
her, fixedly sullen at her (not without cause) ;—and that Siberia, or
worse, is possible by and by. The Czarina was helplessly wretched
for some time; and by degrees entered on a Plot ;—assisted by Princess
Dashkof (Sister of the Snub-nosed), by Panin (our Son’s Tutor, “a
genuine Son, I will swear, whatever the Papa may think in his wild
moments !””), by Gregory Orlof (one’s present Lover), and others of less
mark ;—and it ripened exquisitely within the next four months !—

8# Michaelis, i. 627: ‘¢21st February 1728.” °° Hermann, p. 253-

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. * 218
Jan.—July 1762.

Hordt hears the Praises of his King. ‘“ Next day” (nobody can
guess what day) “I dined at Court. I sat opposite the Czar, who
talked of nothing but of his ‘ good friend the King of Prussia.’ He
knew all the smallest details of his Campaigns; all his military ar-
rangements; the dress and strength of all his Regiments; and he de-
clared aloud that he would shortly put all his troops upon the same foot-
ing” (which he did shortly, to the great disgust of his troops).—* Rising
from table, the Czar_himself did me the honour to say,‘Come tomor-
row ; dine with me en petit appartement?’ (on the snug, where we often
play high-jinks, and go to great lengths in liquor and tobacco), ‘I will
show you something curious, which you will like.’ I went at the ac-
customed hour; I found Lieutenant-General Werner” (hidden since his
accident at Colberg last winter, whom a beneficent Czar has summoned
again into the light of noon). “I made a great friendship with this
distinguished General, who was a charming man; and went constantly
about with him, till he left me here,”—Czarish kindness letting Werner
home, and detaining me, to my regret.°°

The Prussian Treaties, first of Peace (May 5th), with all our Con-
quests flung back, and then of Alliance, with yourself and ourselves, as
it were, flung into the bargain,—were by no means so popular in Pe-
tersburg as in Berlin! From May 5th onwards, we can suppose Peter
to be, perhaps rather rapidly, on the declining hand. Add the fatal el-
ement, ‘Church in Danger” (a Czar privately Apostate); his very
Guardsmen indignant at their tight-fitting Prussian uniforms, and at
their no less tight Prussian dri (which the Czar is uncommonly urg-
ent with); and a Czarina Plot silently spreading on all sides, like sub-
terranean mines filled with gunpowder !—

Herr Busching sees the Catastrophe (Friday, 9th July 1762).
“This day being the day before Peter-and-Paul, which is a great Holi-
lay in Petersburg, 1 drove out, between 9 and 10 in the morning, to visit
the sick. On my way from the first house where I had called, I heard
* distant noise like that of a rising thunderstorm, and asked my people
hat it was. They did not know; but it appeared to them like the
Shouting of a Mob (Volksgeschrez), and there were all sorts of rumours
afloat. Some said, ‘The Czar had suddenly resolved to get himself
crowned at Petersburg, before setting out for the war on Denmark.’
Others said,‘ He had named the Czarina to be Regent during his ab-
sence, and that she was to be crowned for this purpose.’ These rumors
were too silly: meanwhile the noise perceptibly drew nearer; and I
ordered my coachman to proceed no farther, but to turn home.

“On getting home, I called my Wife; and told her, That something
extraordinary was then going on, but that I could not learn what; that

86 Hordt, ii. 183-145, 151.

214 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
it appeared to me like some popular Tumult, which was coming nearer
to us every moment! We hurried to the corner room of our house;
threw open the window, which looks to the Church of St. Mary of Ca-

san’ (where an Act of Thanksgiving has just been consummated, ofa —

very peculiar kind!)—‘‘ and we then saw, near this Church, an innu-
merable crowd of people ; dressed and half-dressed soldiers of the foot-
regiments of the Guards, mixed with the populace. We perceived that
the crowd pressed round a common two-seated Hackney Coach drawn
by two horses ; in which, after a few minutes, a Lady dressed in black,
and wearing the Order of St. Catharine, coming out of the church, took
a seat. Whereupon the church-bells began ringing, and the priests,
with their assistants carrying crosses, got into procession, and walked
before the Coach. We now recognized that it was the Czarina Cath-
arine saluting the multitude to right and left, as she fared along.’”®’

Yes, Doctor, that Lady in black is the Czarina; and has come a drive
of twenty miles this morning; and done a great deal of business in Town,
—one day before the set time. In her remote Apartment at Peterhof,
this morning between 2 and 3, she awoke to see Alexei Orlof, called oft-
ener Scarred Orlof (Lover Gregory’s Brother), kneeling at her bed-
side, with the words, ‘‘ Madam, you must come: there is not a moment
to lose !’—who, seeing her awake, vanished to get the vehicles ready.
About 7, she, with the Scarred and her maid and a valet or two, arrived
at the Guards’ Barracks here,—Gregory Orlof, and others concerned,
waiting to receive her, in the fit temper for playing at sharps. She has
spoken a little, wept a little, to the Guards (still only half-dressed, many
of them): *‘ Holy religion, Russian Empire thrown at the feet of Prus-
sia; my poor Son to be disinherited: Alack, ohoo!” Whereupon the
Guards (their Officers already gained by Orlof) have indignantly blazed
up into the fit Hurra-hurra-ing :—and here, since about 9 a.m., we have
just been in the “ Church of St. Mary of Casan” (“ Oh, my friends, Or-
thodox Religion, first of all!’), doing Te-Deums, and the other Divine
Offices, for the thrice-happy Revolution and Deliverance now vouch-
safed us and you! And the Herr Doctor, under outburst of the chimes
of St.Mary,and of the jubilant Soldieries and Populations, sees the
Czarina saluting to right and left; and Priests, with their assistants
and crucifixes (‘‘ behold them, ye Orthodox ; is there anything equal to
true Religion ?’), walking before her Hackney Coach.

‘On the one step of her Coach,” continues the Herr Doctor, “ stood
Grigorei Grigorjewitsh Orlow,” so he spells him, “ and>in front of it,
with drawn sword, rode the Field-marshal and Hetman Count Kirila
Grigorjewitsh Rasomowski, Colonel of the Ismailow Guard, Lieuten-
ant-General (soon to be General-Ordnance-Master) Villebois came gal-

>7 Beytrage, vi. 465: compare Rudhiére, p. 95; Hermann, v. 287.

end

Ciuap. X.] © HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 215
Jau.—July 1762.

loping up; leapt from his horse under our windows, and placed himself
on the other step of the Coach. ‘The procession passed before our
house ; going first to the New stone Palace, then to the Old wooden
Winter Palace. Common Russians shouted mockingly up to us, ‘ Your
god’ (meaning the Czar) ‘is dead!’ And others, ‘ He is gone; we will
have no more of him!’ ”—

About this hour of the day, at Oranienbaum (Orange-Tree, some
twenty miles from here, and from Peterhof guess ten or twelve), Czar
Peter is drilling zealously his brave Holsteiners (2,000 or more, “ the
flower of all my troops”); and has not, for hours after, the least inkling
of all this. Catharine had been across to visit him, on Wednesday, no
farther back; and had kindled Oranienbaum into opera, into illumina-
tion and what not. Thursday (yesterday), Czar and Czarina met at
some Grandee’s festivity, who lives between their two Residences.
This day the Czar is appointed for Peterhof; to-morrow, July 10th
(Peter-and-Paul’s grand Holiday), Czar, Czarina, and united Court were
to have done the Festivities together there,—with Czarina’s powder-
mine of Plot laid under them; which latter has exploded one day soon-
er, in the present happy manner! The poor Czar, this day, on getting
to Peterhof, and finding Czarina vanished, understood too well: he-saw
“big smoke-clouds rise suddenly over Petersburg region,” withal,_—
“‘ Ha, she has cannon going for her yonder; salvoing and homaging!”
—and rushed back to Oranienbaum half mad. Old Miinnich undertook
to save him, by one, by two or even three different methods, “ Only or-
der me, and stand up to it with sword bare !”—but Peter’s wits were
all flying miscellaneously about, and he could resolve on nothing.

Peter and his Czarina never met more. Saturday (tomorrow), he
abdicates ; drives over to Peterhof, expecting, as per bargain, interview
with his Wife; freedom to retire to Holstein, and “ every sort of kind-
ness compatible with his situation :” but is met there instead, on the
staircases, by brutal people, who tear the orders off his coat, at length
the very clothes off his back,—and pack him away to Ropscha, a quiet :
Villa some miles off, to sit silent there till Orlof and Company have
considered. Consideration is: ‘To Holstein? He has an Anti-Dan-
ish Russian Army just now in that neighbourhood ; he will no tbe safe
in Holstein ;—where will he be safe?” Saturday 17th, Peter’s seventh
day in Ropscha, the Orlofs (Scarred Orlof, and Four other miscreants,
one of them a Prince, one a Playactor) came over, and murdered poor
Peter, in a treacherous, and even bungling and disgusting, and altogeth-
er hideous manner. ‘A glass of burgundy” (poisoned burgundy), “ your
Highness?” said they, at dinner with his poor Highness. On the back
of which, the burgundy having failed and been found out, came grap-
gling and hauling, trampling, shrieking, and at last strangulation. Sure-

216 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

Jan.—July 1762.
ly the Devil will reward such a Five of his Elect ?— —But we detain
Herr Biisching: it is still only Friday morning, 9th of the month; and
the Czarina’s Hackney Coach, in the manner of a comet and tail, has
just gone into other streets :

“After this terrible uproar had left our quarter, I hastened to the ©

Danish Ambassador, Count Haxthausen, who lived near me, to bring
him the important news that the Czar was said to be dead. The Count
was just about to burn a mass of Papers, fearing the mob would plunder
his house ; but he did not proceed with it now, and thanked Heaven for
saving his Country. His Secretary of Legation, my friend Schumach-
er, gave me all the money he had in his pockets, to distribute amongst

the poor; andI returned home Directly after, there passed our house, |

at a rate as if the horses were ranning away. a common two-horse coach,
in which sat Head-Tutor (Ober-Hofmevster) von Panin with the Grand
Duke” (famous Czar Paul, that is to be), ‘‘ who was still in his night-
gown,” poor frightened little boy !—

“‘ Not long after, I saw some of the Foot-guards, in the public street
near the Winter Palace, selling, at rates dog-cheap, their new uniforms
after the Prussian cut, which they had stript off, whilst others, singing
merrily, carried about, stuck on the top of their muskets, or on their
bayonets, their new grenadier caps of Prussian fashion.** I saw sev-
eral soldiers, out on errand or otherwise, seizing the coaches they met
in the streets, and driving on in them. Others appropriated the eata-
bles which hucksters carried about in baskets. But, in all this wild tu-
mult, nobody was killed; and only at Oranienbaum a few Holstein sol-
diers got wounded by some low Russians, in their wantonness.

“July 11th, the disorder amongst the soldiers was at its height; yet
still much less than might have been expected. Many of them entered
the houses of Foreigners, and demanded money. Seeing a number of
them come into my house, I hastily put a quantity of roubles and half-
roubles in my pocket, and went out with a servant, especially with a
cheerful face. to meet them,’—and no harm was done.

“ Saturday, July 17th, was the day of the Czar’s death; on the same
17th, the Empress was informed of it; and next day, his body was
brought from Ropscha to the Convent of St. Alexander Newski, near
Petersburg. Here it lay in state three days; nay, an Imperial Mani-
festo even ordered that the last honours and duty be paid to it. July
20th, I drove thither with my Wife; and to be able to view the body
more minutely, we passed twice through the room where it lay” (An
ey broad neckcloth on opi oes you observe » s eee to the

was a touching cireumstance that this happened to bs the ied sc on

°8 Sce in Hermann (v. 293) the Saxon Ambassador’s Report.

i ¢
a ee a

* eam

Cuap. X.] HAS NEWS FROM PETERSBURG. 217
Jan.—July 1762.

which the Czar had fixed to start from Petersburg on his Campaign |
against Denmark.”**

Catharine, one must own with a shudder, has not attained the
Autocracy of All the Russias gratis. Let us hope she would
once,—till driven upon a dire alternative,—have herself shud-
dered to purchase at such a price. A kind of horror haunts one’s
notion of her red-handed brazen-faced Orlofs and her, which all
the cosmetics of the world will never quite cover. And yet, on
the spot, in Petersburg at the moment—! Read this Clipping
from Smelfungus, on a collateral topic:

“In Busching’s Magazine are some Love-letters from the old Mar-
shal Miinnich to Catharine just after this event, which are psychologic-
ally curious. Love-letters, for they partake of that character; though
the man is 82, and has had such breakages and vicissitudes in this
Earth. Alive yet, it would seem; and full of ambitions. Unspeakably
beautiful is this young Woman to him; radiant as ox-eyed Juno, as
Diana of the silver bow,—such a power in her to gratify the avarices,
ambitions. cupidities of an insatiable old fellow: Oh divine young Em-
press. Aurora of bright Summer epochs, rosy-fingered daughter of the
Sun,—grant me the governing of This, the administering of That: and
see what a thing I will make of it (1, an inventive old gentleman), for
your Majesty’s honour and glory, and my own advantage !°°— —In-
numerable persons of less note than Miinnich have their Biographies,
and are known to the reading public and in all barbers’-shops, if that
were an advantage to them. Very considerable, this Miinnich, as a
soldier, for one thing. And surely had very strange adventures; an
original German character withal :—about the stature of Belleisle, for
example; and not quite unhke Belleisle, in some of his ways? Came
originally from the swamps of Oldenburg, or Lower Weser Country ,—
son of a Dewchgrafe (Ditch-Superintendent) there. Requiescant in
oblivious silence, Belleisle and he; it is better than being lied of, and
maundered of, and blotched and blundered of.

“Biographies were once rhythmic, earnest as death or as life, earnest
as transcendant human Insight risen to the Singing pitch ; some Homer,
nay some Psalmist or Evangelist, spokesman of reverent Populations,
was the Biographer. Rhythmic, with exactitude, investigation to the

59 Biisching, vi. 464-467.

6° Biisching, Magazin fiir die neue Historie und Geographie (Halle, Year
1782), xvi. 413-477 (22 Letters, and only thrice or so a word of Response
from ‘‘ma Divinité:’ dates, ‘* Narva, 4th August 1762”... ‘* Petersburg,

«

_ 8d October 1762”).

Vou. VI.—K

218 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th May—lst July. 1762.

very marrow: this, or else oblivion, Biography should now, and at all
times, be ; but is not,—by any manner of means. With what result is
visible enough, if you will look! Human Stupor, fallen into the dis-
honest, lazy, and wnflogged condition, is truly an awful thing.”

Catharine did not persist in her Anti-Prussian determination.
July 9th, the Manifesto had been indignantly emphatic on Prus-
sia; July 22d, in a Note to Goltz from the Czarina, it was all
withdrawn again.®! Looking into the deceased Czar’s Papers,
she found that Friedrich’s Letters to him had contained nothing
of wrong or offensive; always excellent advices, on the contrary,
—advice, among others, To be conciliatory to his clever-witted
Wife, and to make her his ally, not his opponent, in living and
reigning. In Konigsberg (July 16th, seven days after July 9th),
the Russian Governor, just on the point of quitting, emitted
Proclamation, to everybody’s horror: **No; altered all that;
under pain of death, your Oath to Russia still valid!” Which,
for the next ten days, or till his new Proclamation, made such a
Konigsberg of it as may be imagined. The sight of those Letters
is understood to have turned the scale; which had hung waver-
ing till July 22d in the Czarina’s mind. ‘Can it be good,” she
might privately think withal, “‘to begin our reign by kindling a
foolish War again?’? How Friedrich received the news July
9th, and into what a crisis it threw him, we shall soon see. His
Campaign had begun July Ist;—-and has been summoning us
home, into zs horizon, for some time.

CHAPTER XI.
SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS.

Friepricn’s plan of Campaign is settled long since: Recap-
ture Schweidnitz; clear Silesia of the enemy; Silesia and all our
own Dominions clear, we can then stand fencible against the
Austrian perseverances. Peace, one day, they must grant us.
The general tide of European things is changed by these occur-
rences in Petersburg and London. Peace. is evidently near.
France and England are again beginning to negotiate; no Pitt

61 Rodenbeck, ii. 171.

Cuap. XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 219
9th May—Ist July 1762.

now to be rigorous. The tide of War has been wavering at its
summit for two years past; and now, with this of Russia, and
this of Bute instead of Pitt, there is ebb everywhere, and all
Europe determining for peace. Steady at the helm, as hereto-
fore, a Friedrich, with the world-current in his favour, may hope
to get home after all.

Austrian Headquarters had been at Waldenburg, under Lou-
don or his Lieutenants, all Winter. Loudon returned thither
from Vienna, April 7th; but is not to command in chief, this
Year, — Schweidnitz still sticking in. some people’s throats:
‘‘Dangerous; a man with such rash practices, rapidities and
Pandour tendencies!” Daun is to command in Silesia; Loudon,
under him, obscure to us henceforth, and inoffensive to Official
people. Reichs Army shall take charge of Saxony; nominally
a Reichs Army, though there are 35,000 Austrians in it, as the
soul of it, under some Serbelloni, some Stolberg as Chief—(the
fact, I believe, is: Serbelloni got angrily displaced on that
‘‘erossing of the Mulda by Prince Henri, May 13th;” Prince
of Zweibriick had angrily abdicated the year before; and a
Prince von Stolberg is now Generalissimo of Reich and Allies:
but it is no kind of matter),—some Stolberg, with Serbelloni,
Haddick, Maguire, and suchlike, in subaltern places. Cunctator -
Daun, in spite of his late sleepy ways, is to be Headman again:
this surely is a cheering circumstance to Friedrich ; Loudon, not
Daun, being the only man he ever got much ill of hitherto.

Daun arrives in Waldenburg,* May 9th; and to show that he
is not cunctatory, steps out within a week after. May 15th, he
has descended from his Mountains; has swept round by the back
and by the front of Schweidnitz, far and wide, into the Plain
Country, and encamped himself crescent-wise, many miles in
length, Headquarter near the Zobtenberg. Bent fondly round
Schweidnitz; meaning, as is evident, to defend Schweidnitz
against all comers,—his very position symbolically intimating :
‘“‘T will fight for it, Prussian Majesty, if you like !’’

Prussian Majesty, however, seemed to take no notice of him;
and, what was very surprising, kept his old quarters; ‘‘a Canton-
ment or Chain of Posts, ten miles long; Schweidnitz Water on

* See Map, p. 236 x.

220 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th May—I1st July 1762.

his right flank, Oder on his left ;’”’ perfectly safe, as he perceives, -

being able to assemble in four hours, if Daun try anything.!
And, in fact, sat there, and did not come into the Field at all for
five weeks or more ;—waiting till Czernichef’s 20,000 arrive,
who are on march from Thorn since June 2d. Mere small-war
goes on in the interim; world getting all greener and flowrier ;
the Glatz Highlands, to one’s left yonder (Owl-Mountains Hu-
lengebirge so-called), lying magically blue and mysterious:—on
the Plain in front of them, ten miles from the final peaks of
them, is Schweidnitz Fortress, lying full in view, with a picked
Garrison of 12,000 under a picked Captain, and all else of de-
fence or impregnability; and Friedrich privately determined to
take it, though by methods of his own choosing, and which can-
not commence till Czernichef come. Daun, with his right wing,
has hold of those Highland Regions, and cautiously guards them;
can, when he pleases, wend back to Waldenburg Country; and
at once, with his superior numbers, block all passages, and sit
there impregnable. The methods of dislodging him are obscure
to Friedrich himself; but methods there must be, dislodged he
must be, and sent packing. Without that, all siege of Schweid-
nitz is flatly impossible.

June 27th, Friedrich’s Headquarter is Tintz, Czernichef now
nigh :? two days ago (June 25th), Czernichef’s Cossacks “cross-
ed the Oder at Auras,””—with how different objects from those
they used to have! July 1st, Czernichef himself is here, in full
tale and equipment. Had encamped, a day ago, on the Field
of Lissa; where Majesty reviewed him, inspected and manceu-
vered him, with great mutual satisfaction. ‘Field of Lissa ;”
it is where our poor Prussian people encamped on the night of
Leuthen, with their “Nun danket alle Gott,” five years ago, in
memorable circumstances: to what various uses are Earth’s
Fields liable!

Friedrich, by degrees, has considerably changed his opinion,
and bent towards the late Keith’s, about Russian Soldiery: a
Soldiery of most various kinds; from predatory Cossacks and
Calmucks to those noble Grenadiers, whom-we saw sit down on
the Walls of Schweidnitz when their work was done. A per-

1 Tempelhof, vi. 66. ? Ibid. vi. 76.

was wee eS

,y 4 ine

s

s*

Cuar. XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 221
9th May—lIst July 1762.

fectly steady obedience is in these men; at any and all times,
obedient, to the death if needful, and with a silence, with a stead-
fastness as of rocks and gravitation. Which is a superlative
quality in soldiers. Good in Nations too, within limits; and
much a distinction in the Russian Nation: rare, or almost
unique, in these unruly Times. ‘The Russians have privately
had their admirations of Friedrich, all this while; and called
him by I forget what unpronounceable vernacular epithet, signi-
fying ‘*Son of Lightning,’’ or some such thing.? No doubt they
are proud to have a stroke of service under. such a one, since
Father Peter Feodorowitsh graciously orders it: the very Cos-
sacks show an alertness, a vivacity ; and see cheery possibilities
ahead, in Countries not yet plundered out. They stayed with
Friedrich only Three Weeks,—Russia being an uncertain Coun-
try. As we have seen above; though Friedrich, who is vitally

concerned, has not yet seen! But their junction with him, and

review by him in the Field of Lissa, had its uses by and by;
and may be counted an epoch in Russian History, if nothing
more. ‘The poor Russian Nation, most pitiable of loyal Nations,
—strugeling patiently ahead, on those bad terms, under such
Catins and foul Nightmares,—has it, shall we say, quite gone
without conquest. in this mad War? Perhaps, not quite. It
has at least shown Europe that it possesses fighting qualities:
a changed Nation, since Karl XII. beat them easily, at Narva,
8,000 to 80,000, in the snowy morning, long since !—

_ Czernichef once come, and in his place in the Camp of Tintz,
business instantly begins,—business, and a press of it, in right
earnest ;—upon the hitherto idle Daun. July Ist, there is gen-
eral complex Advance everywhere on Friedrich’s part; general
attempt towards the Mountains. Upon which Daun, well awake,
at once rolls universally thitherward again; takes post in front
of the Mountains,—on the Heights of Kunzendorf, to wit (Lou-
don’s old post in Bunzelwitz time); and elaborately spreads him-
self out in defence there. ‘Take him multifariously by the left
flank, get between him and his Magazine at Braunau!” thinks

* Buchholz, Neueste Preussisch- Brandenburgische Geschichte (1775), vol. ii.
(page irrecoverable).

]

222 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Ist-18th July 1762.

Friedrich. Discovering which, Daun straightway hitches back »

into the Mountains altogether, leaving Kunzendorf to Friedrich’s
use as main camp. His outmost Austrians, on the edge of the
Mountain Country, and back as far as suitable, Daun elaborate-
ly posts; and entrenches himself behind them in all the com-
manding points,—Schweidnitz still well in sight; and Braunau
and the roads to it well capable of being guarded. Daun’s Head-
quarter is Tannhausen; Burkersdorf, Ludwigsdorf, if readers can
remember them, are frontward posts :—in his old imperturbable
way, Daun sits there waiting events.

And for near three weeks there ensues a very multiplex se-
ries of rapid movements, and alarming demonstrations, on
* Daun’s front, on Daun’s right flank; with serious extensive ef-
fort (masked in that way) to turn Daun’s left flank, and push
round by Landshut Country upon Bohemia and Braunau. Ef-

fort very serious indeed on that Landshut side: conducted at.

first by Friedrich in person, with General Wied (called also
Neuwied, a man of mark since Liegnitz time) as second under
him; latterly by Wied himself, as Friedrich found it growing
dubious or hopeless. ‘That was Friedrich’s first notion of the
Daun problem. ‘There are rapid marches here, there, round
that western or left flank of Daun; sudden spurts of fierce
fighting, oftenest with a stiff climb as preliminary: but not the
least real success on Daun. Daun perfectly comprehends what
is on foot; refuses to take shine for substance; stands massed,
or grouped, at his own skilful judgment, in the proper points for
Braunau, still more for Schweidnitz; and is very vigilant and
imperturbable.

Kunzendorf Heights, which are not of the Hills, but in front
of them, with a strip of flat still intervening ;—these, we said,
Daun had at once quitted: and these are now Friedrich’s ;—
but\yield him a very complex prospect at present. A line of
opposing Heights, Burkersdorf, Ludwigsdorf, Leuthmannsdorf,
bristling with abundant cannon; behind is the multiplex sea of
Hills, rising higher and higher, to the ridge of the Eulenberg in
Glatz Country 10 or 12 miles southward: Daun, with forces
much superior, calmly lord of all that; infinitely needing to be
ousted, could one but say how! Friedrich begins to perceive

Cuap, XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. _ 228
Ist-18th July 1762.

that Braunau will not do; that he must contrive some other
plan. General Wied he still leaves to prosecute the Braunau
scheme: perhaps there is still some chance in it; at lowest it
will keep Daun’s attention thitherward. And Wied perseveres
upon Braunau; and Braunau proving impossible, pushes past it
deeper into Bohemia, Daun loftily regardless of him. Wied’s
marches and attempts were of approved quality; though unsuc-
cessful.in the way of stirring Daun. Wied’s Light troops went
scouring almost as far as Prag,—especially a 500 Cossacks that
were with him, following their old fashion, in a new Country.
To the horror of Austria; who shrieked loudly, feeling them in
her own bowels; though so quiet, while they were in other peo-
ple’s on her score. This of the 500 Cossacks under Wied, if
this were anything, was all of actual work that Friedrich had
from his Czernichef Allies ;—nothing more of real or actual
while they stayed, though something of imaginary or ostensible
which had its importance, as we shall see.

Friedrich, in the third week, recalls Wied: “ Braunau clearly
impossible ;_ only let us still keep up appearances!” July 18th,
Wied is in Kunzendorf Country again; on an important new
enterprise, or method with the Daun Problem, in which Wied is
to bear a principal hand. That is to say, The discomfiture and
overturn of Daun’s right wing, if we can,—since his left has
proved impossible. ‘This was the Storming of Burkersdorf Heights ;
Friedrich’s new plan. Which did prove successful, and is still
famous in the Annals of War: reckoned by all judges a beautiful
plan, beautifully executed, and once more a wonderful achiev-
ing of what seemed the impossible, when it had become the in-
dispensable. One of Friedrich’s prettiest feats; and the last of
his notable performances in this War. Readers ought not to be
left without some shadowy authentic notion of it; though the
real portraiture or image (which is achievable too, after long
study) is for the professional soldier only,—for whom Tempelhof,
good maps, and plenty of patience, are the recipe.

“The scene is the Wall of Heights, running east and west, parallel
to Friedrich’s Position at Kunzendorf; which form the Face, or deci-
sive beginning, of that Mountain Glacis spreading up ten miles farther,
towards Glatz Country. They, these Heights called of Burkersdorf,

224 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
| Ist-18th July 1762.

are in effect Daun’s right wing ; vitally precious to Daun, who has taken

every pains about them. Burkersdorf Height (or Heights, for there
are two, divided by the Brook Weistritz ; but we shall neglect the east-
ern or lower, which is ruled by the other, and stands or falls along with
it), Burkersdorf Height is the principal : a Hill of some magnitude (short
way south of the Village of Burkersdorf, which also is Daun’s) ; Hill
falling rather steep down, on two of its sides, namely on the north side,
which is towards Friedrich and Kunzendorf, and on the east side, where
Weistritz Water, as yet only a Brook, gushes out from the Mountains,
—hastening towards Schweidnitz or Schweidnitz-Water; towards Lissa
and Leuthen Country, where we have seen it on an important night.
Weistritz, at this part, has scraped the eastern flank of Burkersdorf
Height ; and made for itself a pleasant little Valley there: this is the
one Pass into the Mountains. A Valley of level bottom; where Daun
has a terrific trench and sunk battery level with the ground, capable of
sweeping to destruction whoever enters there without leave.

“ Hast from Burkersdorf Lesser Height (which we neglect for the
present), and a little farther inwards or south, are Two other Heights:
Ludwigsdorf and Leuthmannsdorf; which also need capture, as adjuncts
of Burkersdorf, or second line to Burkersdorf; and are abundantly diffi-
cult, though not so steep as Burkersdorf.

“The Enterprise, therefore, divides itself into two. Wied is to do
the Ludwigsdorf-Leuthmannsdorf part ; Mollendorf, the Burkersdorf.
The strength of guns in these places, especially on Burkersdorf,—we
know Daun’s habit in that particular ; and need say nothing. Man-de-
vouring batteries, abatis; battalions palisaded to the teeth, ‘the pales
strong as masts, and room only for a musket-barrel between ;’ nay, they
are ‘furnished with a lath or cross-strap all along, for resting your gun-
barrel on and taking aim:’—so careful is Daun. The ground itself is
intricate,in parts impracticably steep; everywhere full of bushes, gnarls,
and impediments. Seldom was there such a problem altogether! Fried-
rich’s position, as we say, is Kunzendorf Heights, with Schweidnitz and
his old ground of Bunzelwitz to rear, Czernichef and others lying there,
and Wiirben and the old Villages and Heights again occupied as posts:
—what a tale of Egyptian bricks has one to bake, your Majesty, on cer-
tain fields of this world; and with such insufficiency of raw-material
sometimes !”

By the 16th of July, Friedrich’s plans are complete. Con-
trived, I must say, with a veracity and opulent potency of intel-
lect, flashing clear into the matter, and yet careful of the small-
est practical detail. Jriday 17th, Mollendorf, with men and fur-
nitures complete, circles off north-westward by Wiirben (for the

pom

i

a aco sin atl i

i a a

ihiape hen

Cuap. XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 225
17th July 1762.

benefit of certain onlookers), but will have circled round to

Burkersdorf neighbourhood two days hence ; by which time also
Wied will be quietly in his place thereabouts, with a view to
business on the 20th and 21st. Mollendorf, Wied and every-
thing, are prosperously under way in this manner,—when, on
the afternoon of that same Friday 17th,+ Czernichef steps over,
most privately, to headquarters: with what a bit of news! “A
Revolution in Petersburg” (July 9th, as we saw above, or as
Herr Biisching saw) ; ‘‘ Czar Peter, your Majesty’s adorer, is de-
throned, perhaps murdered; your Majesty’s enemies, in the name
of Czarina Catharine, order me instantly homeward with my
20,000!” This is true news, this of Czernichef. A most un-
expected, overwhelming Revolution in those Northern Parts ;—
not needing to be farther touched upon in this place.

What here concerns us is, Friedrich’s feelings on hearing of
it; which no reader can now imagine. Horror, amazement,
pity, very poignant ; grief for one’s hapless friend Peter, for one’s
still more hapless self! ‘The Sisyphus stone, which we had got
dragged to the top, the chains all beautifully slack these three
months past,—has it leapt away again? And on the eve of

Burkersdorf, and our grand Daun problem!” Truly, the Desti-

nies have been quite dramatic with this King, and have contrived
the moment of hitting him to the heart. He passionately in-
treats Czernichef to be helpful to him,—which Czernichef would
fain be, only how can he? To be helpful; at least to keep the
matter absolutely secret yet for some hours: this the obliging
Czernichef will do. And Friedrich remains, Czernichef having
promised this, in the throes of desperate consideration and un-
certainty, hour after hour,—how many hours I do not know.
It is confidently said,> Friedrich had the thought of forcibly dis-
arming Czernichef and his 20,000 :—in which case he must have
given up the Daun Enterprise; for without Czernichef as a pos-
itive quantity, much more with Czernichef as a negative, it is
impossible. But, at any rate, most luckily for himself, he came
upon a milder thought: stay with us yet three days, merely in
the semblance of Allies, no service required of you, but keeping
* Compare Tempelhof, vi. 99, and Rédenbeck, ii. 164.

* Retzow, ii. 415.
K 2

226 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

20th July 1762.
the matter a dead secret ;—on the fourth day go, with my eter-
nal thanks!” This is his milder proposal; urged with his best
efforts upon the obliging Czernichef: who is in huge difficulty,
and sees it to be at peril of his head, but generously consents. It
is the same Czernichef who got lodged in Ciistrin cellars, on one
occasion: know, O King,—the King, before this, does begin to
know,—that Russians too can have something of heroic, and can
recognise a hero when they see him! In‘this fine way does
Friedrich get the frightful chasm, or sudden gap of the ground
under him, bridged over for the moment; and proceeds pai
Burkersdorf all the same.

Of the Attack itself we propose to say almost nothings It
consists of Two Parts, Wied and Mollendorf, which are intensely
Real; and of a great many more which are Scenic chiefly,—
some of them Scenic to the degree of Drury Lane itself, as we
perceive ;—all cunningly devised, and beautifully playing into
one another, both the real and the scenic. Hvening of the 20th,
Friedrich is on his ground, according to Program. Friedrich,
—who has now his Méllendorf and Wied beside him again, near
this Village of Burkersdorf; and has his. completely-scenic Czer-
nichef, and partly-scenic Ziethen and. others, all in their places
behind him,—quietly crushes Daun’s people out of Burkersdorf
Village; and furthermore, so soon as night has fallen, bursts up,
for his own uses, Burkersdorf old Castle, and its obstinate hand-
ful of defenders, which was a noiser process. Which done, he
diligently sets to trenching, building batteries in that part; will
have forty formidable guns, howitzers a good few of them, ready
before sunrise. And so,

W ednesday, 21st July 1762, All Prussians are in motion, far
and wide; especially Méllendorf and Wied (versus O’Kelly and
Prince de Ligne),which Pair of Prussians may be defined rather
as near and close; these Two being, in fact, the soul of the mat-
ter, and all else garniture and semblance. About 4 in the
morning, Friedrich’s battery of 40 had been raging; the how-
itzers diligent upon O’Kelly and his Burkersdorf Height,—not
much hurting O’Kelly or his Height, so high was. it, but ma-
king a prodigious noise upon O’Kelly ;—others of the cannon
sheering home on those palisades and elaborations, in the Weist-

{
i
‘
<
i
2
e

Cuap. XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 227
21st July 1762.

 ritz Valley in particular, and quite tearing up a Cavalry Regi-
ment which was drawn out there; so that O’Kelly had instant-
ly to call it home, in a very wrecked condition. Why O’Kelly
ever put it there,—except that he saw no place for it in his rug-
ged localities, or no use for it anywhere,—is still a mystery to
the intelligent mind. The howitzers, their shells bursting
mostly in the air, did O'Kelly little hurt, nor for hours yet was
there any real attack on Burkersdorf or him; but the noise, the
horrid death-blaze was prodigious, and kept O'Kelly, like some
others, in an agitated, occupied condition till their own. turn
came.

For it had been ordered that Wied and Méllendorf were not
to attack together: not together, but successively,—for the fol-
lowing reasons. Together; suppose Moéllendorf to prosper on
O’Kelly (whom he is to storm, not by the steep front part as
O’Kelly fancies, but to go round by the western flank and take
him in rear); suppose Méllendorf to be near prospering on Bur-
kersdorf Height,—unless Wied too have prospered, Ludwigs-
dorf batteries and forces will have Mollendorf by the right flank,
and between two fires he will be ruined; he and everything!
On the other hand, let Wied try first: if Wied can manage
Ludwigsdorf, well: if Wied cannot, he comes home again with
small damage; and the whole Enterprise is off for the present.
That was Friedrich’s wise arrangement, and the reason why he
so bombards O’Kelly with thunder, blank mostly. |

And indeed, from 4 this morning and till 4 in the afternoon,
there is such an outburst and blazing series of Scenic Effect,
and thunder mostly blank, going on far and near all over that
District of Country; General This ostentatiously speeding off,
as if for attack on some important place; General That, for at-
tack on some other; all hands busy,—the 20,000 Russians not
yet speeding, but seemingly just about to do it,—and blank
thunder so mixed with not-blank, and scenic effect with bitter
reality,’ as was seldom seen before. And no wisest Daun, not
to speak of his O’Kellys and lieutenants, can, for the life of
him, say where the real attack is to be, or on what hand to turn
himself. Daun in person, I believe, is still at Tannhausen, near

6 Tempelhof, vi. 107, 7 Thid, vi, 105-111.

228 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
2Ist July 1762.

the centre of this astonishing scene; five or six miles from any _

practical part of it. And does order forward, hither, thither,
masses of force to support the De Ligne, the O’Kelly among
others; but who can tell what to support? Daun’s lieutenants
were alert some of them, others less: General Guasco, for in-
stance, who is in Schweidnitz, an alert Commandant, with

12,000 picked men, was drawing out, of his own will, with cer- _

tain regiments to try Friedrich’s rear: but a check was put on
him (some dangerous shake of the fist from afar), when he had
to draw in again. In general the O’Kelly supports sat gazing
dubiously, and did nothing for O’Kelly but roll back along with
him when the time came. But let us first attend to Wied, and
the Ludwigsdorf-Leuthmannsdorf part.

Wied, divided into Three, is diligently pushing up on Lud-
wigsdorf by the slacker eastern ascents ; meets firm enough bat-
talions, potent, dangerous, and resolute in their strong posts; but
endeavours firmly to be more dangerous than they. Dislodges
everything, on his right, on his left; comes in sight of the bat-
teries and ranked masses atop, which seem to him difficult in-
deed ; flatly impossible, if tried on front; but always some Col-
onel Lottum, or quick-eyed man, finds some little valley, little
hollow; gets at the Enemy side-wise and rear-wise; rushes on
with fixed bayonets, double-quick, to codperate with the front:
and, on the whole, there are the best news from Wied, and we
perceive he sees his way through the affair.

Upon which, Mollendorf gets in motion, upon his specific er-
rand. Mollendorf has been surveying his ground a little, during
the leisure hour; especially examining what mode of passage
there may be, and looking for some road up those slacker west-
ern parts: has found no road, but a kind of sheep-track, which
he thinks will do. Mollendorf, with all energy, surmounting
many difficulties, pushes up agcordingly; gets into his sheep-
track; finds, in the steeper part of this track, that horses cannot
- draw his cannon; sets his men to do it; pulls and pushes, he
and they, with a right will;—sees over his left shoulder, at a
certain point, the ranked Austrians waiting for him behind their
cannon (which must have been an interesting glimpse of scenery
for some moments); tugs along, till he is at a point for planting

or | er ee

tm 7H

CHAP. XI] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 229
21st July 1762.

his cannon; and then, under help of these, rushes forward,—in
two parts, perhaps in three, but with one impetus in all,—to
seize the Austrian fruit set before him. Surely, if a precious, a
very prickly pomegranate, to clutch hold of on different sides,
after such a climb! The Austrians make stiff fight; have aba-
tis, multiplex defences; and Moéllendorf has a furious wrestle
with this last remnant, holding out wonderfully,—till at length
the abatis itself catches fire, in the musketry, and they have to
surrender. ‘This must be about noon, as I collect: and Feld-
marschall Daun himself now orders everybody to fall back.
And the tug of fight is over ;—though Friedrich’s scenic effects
did not cease; and in particular, his big battery raged till 5 in
the afternoon, the more to confirm Daun’s rearward resolutions
and quicken his motions. On fall of night, Daun, everybody
having had his orders, and been making his preparations for six
hours past, ebbed totally away; in perfect order, bag and bag-
gage. Well away to southward; and left Friedrich quit of him.®

Quit of Daun forevermore, as it turned out. Plainly free, at
any rate, to begin upon Schweidnitz, whenever he sees good.
Of the behaviour of Wied, Méllendorf, and their people, indeed
of the Prussians one and all, what can be said, but that it was
worthy of their Captain and of the Plannings he had made?
Which is saying a great deal, ‘‘ We got about 14 big guns,”
report they; “above 1,000 prisoners, and perhaps twice as
many that deserted to us in the days following.” Czernichef
was full of admiration at the day’s work: he marched early
next morning,—I trust with lasting gratitude on the part of an
obliged Friedrich.

Some three weeks before this of Burkersdorf, Duke Ferdinand,
near a place called Wilhelmsthal, in the neighbourhood of Cassel,
in woody broken country of Hill and Dale, favourable for stra-
tegic contrivances, had organised a beautiful movement from
many sides, hoping to overwhelm the too careless or too ignorant
French, and gain a signal victory over them: Battle, so-called,

® Tempelhof, vi. 100-115: compare Bericht von der bey Leutmannsdorf

den 2\sten Julius 1762 vorgefallenen Action (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 302-308);
Anderweiter Bericht von der §c. (ibid. 308-314); Archenholtz, &. &.

230 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
21st July 1762.

of Withelmsthal, June 24th, 1762, being the result. Mauvillon
never can forgive a certain stupid Hanoverian, who mistook his
orders; and on getting to his Hill-top, which was the centre of
all the rest, —formed himself with his back to the point of attack;
and began shooting cannon at next to nothing, as if to warn the
French, that they had better instantly make off! Which they

instantly set about, with a will; and mainly succeeded in; noth-

ing all day but mazes of intricate marching, on both sides, with
spurts of fight here and there,—ending in a truly stiff bout be-
tween Granby and a Comte de Stainville, who covered the re-
treat, and who could not be beaten without a great deal of trouble.
The result a kind of victory to Ferdinand; but nothing like what
he expected.®

Soubise leads the French this final Year; but he has a D’Es-
trées with him (our old D’Estrées of Hastenbeck), who much helps
the account current; and though generally on the declining hand
(obliged to give up Gottingen, to edge away farther and farther
out of Hessen itself, to give up the Weser, and see no shift but
the farther side of Fulda, with Frankfurt to rear),—is not often
caught napping as here at Wilhelmsthal. ‘There ensued about
the banks of the Fulda, and the question, Shall we be driven
across it sooner or not so soon? a great deal of fighting and
pushing (Battle called of Lutternberg, Battle of Johannisberg, and
others): but all readers will look forward rather to the Cannonade
of Améneburg, more precisely Cannonade of the Briicken-Mihle
(September 21st), which finishes these wearisome death-wrest-
lings. Peace is coming; all the world can now count on that!

Bute is ravenous for Peace; has been privately taking the most
unheard-of steps:—wrote to Kaunitz, ‘“‘ Peace at once, and we
will vote for your having Silesia;’’ to which Kaunitz, suspecting
trickery in artless Bute, answered, haughtily sneering, ‘‘ No help
needed from your Lordship, in that matter!” After which re-
pulse, or before it, Bute had applied to the Czar’s Minister in
- London: ‘‘Czarish Majesty to have East Preussen guaranteed
to him, if he will insist that the King of Prussia dispense with
Silesia ;” which the indignant Czar rejected with scorn, and at
once made his Royal Friend aware of ;—with what emotion on

* Mauyillon, ii. 227-236; Tempelhof, vi. &c. &e.

ee oe

Cuap. XIT.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 231
7th-16th Aug. 1762.

the Royal Friend’s part we have transiently seen. ‘‘ Horrors
and perfidies!” ejaculated he, in our hearing lately; and re-
garded Bute, from that time, as a knave and an imbecile both
in one; nor ever quite forgave Bute’s Nation either, which was
far from being Bute’s accomplice in this unheard-of procedure.
* No more Alliances with England!” counted he: “ What Alli-
ance can there be with that ever-fluctuating People; today they
have a thrice-noble Pitt ; tomorrow a thrice-paltry Bute, and all
goes heels-over-head on the sudden !’?!°—

Bute, at this rate of going, will manage to get hold of Peace
before long. To Friedrich himself, a Siege of Schweidnitz is
now free; Schweidnitz his, the Austrians will have to quit Si-
lesia. ‘‘Their cash is out: except prayer to the Virgin, what
but Peace can they attempt farther? In Saxony things will
have gone ill, if there be not enough left us to offer them in re-
turn for Glatz. -And Peace and As-you-were. must ensue !”—

Let us go upon Schweidnitz, therefore ; pausing on none of
these subsidiary things; and be brief upon Schweidnitz too.

CHAPTER XII.
SIEGE OF SCHWEIDNITZ: SEVENTIL CAMPAIGN ENDS.

Dawn being now cleared away, Friedrich instantly proceeds
upon Schweidnitz. Orders the necessary Siege Materials to get
under way from Neisse; posts his Army in the proper places, be-
tween Daun and the Fortress,—King’s headquarter Dittmanns-
dorf, Army spread in fine large crescent-shape, to south-west of
Schweidnitz some ten miles, and as far between Daun and it ;—
orders home to him his Upper-Silesia Detachments, ‘‘ Home, all
of you, by Neisse Country, to make up for Czernichef’s departure;
from Neisse onwards you can guard the Siege-Ammunition wag-
ons!” Naturally he has blockaded Schweidnitz, from the first ;
he names Tauentzien Siege-Captain, with a 10 or 12,000 to do
the Siege: ‘‘ Ahead, all of you !”—and in short, August 7th, with
the due adroitness and precautions, opens his first parallel; suf-
fering little or nothing hitherto by a resistance which is rather

10 Preuss, ii. 308; Mitchell, ii. 286.

A

232 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boor XX.
16th Aug. 1762.

vehement.! He expects to have the place in a couple of weeks.

—‘‘one week (huit jours)” he sometimes counts it; but was far
out in his reckoning as to time.

The Siege of Schweidnitz occupied two most laborious, tedious
months ;—-and would be wearisome to every reader now, as it
was to Friedrich then, did we venture on more than the briefest
outline. ‘The resistance is vehement, very skilful :—Command-
ant is Guasco (the same who was so truculent to Schmettau in
the Dresden time); his Garrison is near 12,000, picked from all
regiments of the Austrian Army; his provisions, ammunitions,
are of the amplest; and he has under him as chief Engineer a
M. Gribeauval, who understands “ counter-mining” like no other.
After about a fortnight of trial, and one Event in the neighbour-
hood which shall be mentioned, this of Mining and Countermin-
ing,—though the External Sap went restlessly forward too, and
the cannonading was incessant on both sides,—came to be re-
garded more and more as the real method, and for six or seven
weeks longer was persisted in, with wonderful tenacity of attempt
and resistance. Friedrich’s chief Mining Engineer is also a
Frenchman, one Lefebvre; who is personally the rival of Gri-
beauval (his old class-fellow at College, I almost think); but is
not his equal in subterranean work,—or perhaps rather has the
harder task of it, that of Mining, instead of Counter-mining, or
spoiling Mines. Tempelhof’s account of these two people, and
their underground wrestle here, is really curious reading ;—clear
as daylight to those that will study, but of endless expansion (as
usual in Tempelhof), and fit only to be indicated here.?

The-external Event I promised to mention is an attempt on
Daun’s part (August 16th) to break in upon Friedrich’s position,
and interrupt the Siege, or render it still impossible. Event
called the Battle of Reichenbach, though there was not much of
battle in it ;—in which our old friend the Duke of Brunswick-
Bevern (whom we have seen in abeyance, and merely a Garrison

1 Tempelhof, vi. 126.

2 Thid. vi. 122-219; Bericht und Tagebuch von der Belagerung von Schweid-
nitz vom Tten August bis 9 October 1762 (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 376-479):
Archenholtz, Retzow, &c.

Cuar. XII. ] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 233
16th Aug. 1762.

Commandant, for years back, till the Russians left Stettin to it-
self) again played a shining part.

Daun,—at Tannhausen, 10 miles to south-west of Friedrich,
and spread out among the Hills, with Loudons, Lacys, Becks,
as lieutenants, and in plenty of force, could he resolve on using
it,—has at last, after a month’s meditation, hit upon a plan.
Plan of flowing round by the southern skirt of Friedrich, and
seizing certain Heights to the south-eastern or open side of
Schweidnitz,—Koltschen Height the key one ;* from which he
may spread up at will, Height after Height, to the very Zobten-
berg on that eastern side, and render Schweidnitz an impossibil-
ity. The plan, people say, was good; but required rapidity of
execution,—a thing Daun is not strong in.

Bevern’s behaviour, too, upon whom the edge of the mation
fell, was very good. Bevern, coming on from “Neisse and Up-
per-Silesia, had been much manceuvered upon for various days
by Beck; Beck, a dangerous, alert man, doing his utmost to
seize post after post, and bar Bevern’s way,—meaning especial-
ly, as ultimate thing, to get hold of a Height called Fischerberg,
_ which lies near Reichenbach (in the southern Schweidnitz vicin-
itics),.and is preface to Kéltschen Height and to the whole En-
terprise of Daun. In most of which attempts, especially in this
last, Bevern, with great merit, not of dexterity alone (for the
King’s Orders had often to be disobeyed in the letter, and only
the spirit of them held in view), contrived to outmanceuvre Beck ;
and be found (August 13th) already firm on the Fischerberg,
when Beck, in full confidence, came marching towards it. ‘The
Fischerberg lost to us!” Beck had to report, in disappointment.
‘‘Must be recovered, and my grand Enterprise no longer put

off!” thinks Daun to himself, in still more disappointment
(‘‘ Laggard that I am !’’).—And, on the third day following, the
Battle of Reichenbach ensued. Lacy, as chief, with abundant
force, and Beck and Brentano under him: these are to march,
*‘ Recover me that Fischerberg ; it is the preface to Koltschen,
and all else !’’9

Monday, August 16th, pretty early in the day, Lacy, with his
Becks and Brentanos, appeared in great force on the western

* See Map, p. 236 a. 3 Tempelhof, vi. 144.

234 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
| 16th Aug. 1762.

side of Fischerberg; planted themselves there, about the three
Villages of Peilau (Upper, Nether, and Middle Peilau, a little
way to south of Reichenbach), within cannonshot of Bevern ;
their purpose abundantly clear. Behind them, in the gorges of
the Mountains, what is not so clear, lay Daun and most of his
Army ; intending to push through at once upon Koltschen and
seize the key, were this of Fischerberg had. Lacy, after recon-
noitering a little, spreads his tents (which it is observable Beck
does not); and all Austrians proceed to cooking their dinner.
‘‘ Nothing coming of them till tomorrow !”’ said Friedrich, who
was here; and went his way home, on this symptom of the
Austrian procedures ;—hardly consenting to regard them far-
ther, even when he heard their cannonade begin.

Lacy, the general composure being thus established, and din-
ner well done, suddenly drew out about five in the evening, in
long strong line, before these Hamlets of Peilau, on the western
side of the Fischerberg ; Beck privately pushing round by woods
to take it on the eastern side: and there ensued abundant can-
nonading on the part of Lacy and Brentano, and some idle flour-
ishing about of horse, responded to by Bevern; and, on the part
of Lacy and Brentano, nothing else whatever. More like a the-
atre fight than a real one, says Tempelhof. Beck, however, is
in earnest; has a most difficult march through the tangled path-
less woods; does arrive at length, and begin real fighting, very
sharp for some time; which might have been productive, had
Lacy given the least help to it, as he did not Beck did his
firiest; but got repulsed everywhere. Beck tries in various
places; finds swamps, impediments, fierce resistance from the
Bevern people ;—finds, at length, that the King is awake, and
that reinforcements, horse, foot, riding-artillery, are coming in at
the gallop; and that he, Beck, cannot too soon get away.

None. of the King’s Foot people could get in for a stroke,
though they came mostly running (distance five miles); but the
Horse-charges were beautifully impressive on Lacy’s theatrical
performers, as was the Horse-Artillery, to a still more surpris-
ing degree; and produced an immediate Hxeunt Omnes on the
Lacy part. All off; about 7 p.m.,—Sun just going down in the

* Tempelhof, yi. 146-151.

Cuap. XII.) SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 235
16th Aug. 1762.

autumn sky; and the Battle of Reichenbach a thing finished.
Seeing which, Daun also immediately withdrew, through the
gorges of the Mountains again. And for seven weeks thence-
forth sat contemplative, without the least farther attempt at re-
lief of Schweidnitz. It was during those seven weeks, some
time after this, that poor Madam Daun, going to a Levee at
Schénbrunn one day, had her carriage half filled with symbolic-
al nightcaps, successively flung in upon her by the Vienna peo-
ple ;—symbolical; in lieu of Slashing Articles, and Newspapers
the best Instructors, which they as yet have not.

Next day the Joy-fire of the Prussians taught Guasco what
disaster had happened; and on the fifth day afterwards (August
22d), hearing nothing farther of Daun, Guasco offered to surren-
der, on the principle of Free Withdrawal. ‘‘ No, never,” answer-
ed Tauentzien, by the King’s order: ‘‘ As Prisoners of War it
must be!’? Upon which Guasco stood to his defences again ;
and maintained himself,—Gribeauval and he did,—with an ad-
mirable obstinacy: the details of which would be very wearisome
to readers. Gribeauval and he,I said; for from this time, En-
gineer Lefebvre, though he tried (with bad skill, thinks Tempel-
hof) some bits of assault above ground, took mainly to mining,

and a grand underground invention called Globes de Compression ;

which he reckoned to be the real sovereign method,—unlucky
that he was! Imay at least explain what Globe de Compression
is ; for it becomes famous on this occasion, and no name could
be less descriptive of the thing. Not a glove at all, for that mat-
ter, nor intended to “‘ compress,’’ but to express, and shatter to
pieces in a transcendent degree: it is, in fact, a huge cubical
mine-chamber, filled by a wooden box (till Friedrich, in his hur-
ry, taught Lefebvre that a sack would do as well), loaded with,

‘say, five thousand-weight of powder. Sufficient to blow any

horn-work, bastion, bulwark, into the air,—provided you plant it
in the right place; which poor Lefebvre never can. He tried,
with immense labour, successively some four or almost five of
these “Press Balls’ so-called (or Volcanoes in Little); mining
on, many yards, 15 or 20 feet underground (tormented by Gri-
beauval all the way); then at last, exploding his five thousand-

236 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
16th Aug.—¥th Oct. 1762.

weight,—would produce a “ Funnel,” or crater, of perhaps “30
yards in diameter,” but, alas, ‘150 yards off any bastion.” Fun-
nel of no use to him ;—mere sign to him that he must go down
into it, and begin there again ; with better aim, if possible. And
then Gribeauval’s tormentings ; never were the like! Gribeau-
val has, all round under the Glacis, mine-galleries, or main-roads
for Countermining, ready to his hand (mine-galleries built by
Friedrich, while lately proprietor); there Gribeauval is hearken-
ing the beat of Lefebvre’s picks: ‘‘'‘Ten yards off from us, think
you? Six yards? Get a 30 hundred-weight of chamber ready
for him!’ And will, at the right moment, blow Lefebvre’s gal-
lery about his ears ;—sometimes burst in upon him bodily with
pistol and cutlass, or still worse, with explosive sulphur-balls,
choke-pots, and infinitudes of malodour instantaneously devel-
oped on Lefebvre,—which mean withal, “ You will have to be-
gin again, Monsieur!” Enough to drive a Lefebvre out of his
wits. Twice, or oftener, Lefebvre, a zealous creature, but a thin-
skinned, flew out into open paroxysm; wept, invoked the gods,
threatened suicide: so that Friedrich had to console him, ‘‘ Cour-
age, you will manage it; make chicanes on Gribeauval, as he
does on you,”—and suggested that powder-sack instead of deal-
box, which we just mentioned.

Friedrich’s patience seems to have been great; but in the end
he began to think the time long. He was in three successive
headquarters, Dittmannsdorf, Peterswaldau, Biégendorf, nearer
and nearer ;* at length quite near (Bégendorf within a couple of
_ miles); and wondering Gazetteers reported him on horseback,
examining minutely the parallels and siege-works,—with a sin-
gular indifference to the cannon-balls flying about (‘‘ Not easy to
hit a small object with cannon!”), and intent only on giving
Tauentzien suggestions, admonitions, and new orders. Here,
prior to Bégendorf, are three snatches of writing, which success-
ively have indications for us. King to Prince Henri:

Peterswaldau (King has just shifted hither, August 10th, on the Bev-
ern-Rezchenbach score ; continues here till September 23d), August
13th, 1762. * * “ You are right to say,‘ We ourselves are our best
Allies.’ I am of the same opinion; nevertheless, it is a clear duty and

* See Map, opposite.

et

WEES
PS
{34 Oe

a.
bth,
hy

236 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
16th Aug.—Yth Oct. 1762.

weight,—would produce a “ Funnel,” or crater, of perhaps “30
yards in diameter,” but, alas, “150 yards ofany bastion.” Fun-
nel of no use to him ;—mere sign to him that he must go down
into it, and begin there again; with better aim, if possible. And
then Gribeauval’s tormentings ; never were the like! Gribeau-
val has, all round under the Glacis, mine-galleries, or main-roads
for Countermining, ready to his hand (mine-galleries built by
Friedrich, while lately proprietor); there Gribeauval is hearken-
ing the beat of Lefebvre’s picks: ‘Ten yards off from us, think
you? Six yards? Get a 30 hundred-weight of chamber ready
for him!’ And will, at the right moment, blow Lefebvre’s gal-
lery about his ears ;—sometimes burst in upon him bodily with
pistol and cutlass, or still worse, with explosive sulphur-balls,
choke-pots, and infinitudes of malodour instantaneously devel-
oped on Lefebvre,—which mean withal, ‘“‘ You will have to be-
gin again, Monsieur!” Enough to drive a Lefebvre out of his
wits. ‘Twice, or oftener, Lefebvre, a zealous creature, but a thin-
skinned, flew out into open paroxysm; wept, invoked the gods,
threatened suicide: so that Friedrich had to console him, ‘‘ Cour-
age, you will manage it; make chicanes on Gribeauval, as he
does on you,”—and suggested that powder-sack instead of deal-
box, which we just mentioned.

Friedrich’s patience seems to have been great; but in the end
he began to think the time long. He was in three successive
headquarters, Dittmannsdorf, Peterswaldau, Bégendorf, nearer
and nearer ;* at length quite near (Bégendorf within a couple of
_ miles); and wondering Gazetteers reported him on horseback,
examining minutely the parallels and siege-works,—with a sin-
gular indifference to the cannon-balls flying about (‘‘ Not easy to
hit a small object with cannon!’”), and intent only on giving
Tauentzien suggestions, admonitions, and new orders. Here,
prior to Bégendorf, are three snatches of writing, which success-
ively have indications for us. King to Prince Henri:

Peterswaldau (King has just shifted hither, August 10th, on the Bev-
ern-Rezchenbach score; continues here till September 23d), August
13th, 1762. * * ‘ You are right to say,‘ We ourselves are our best
Allies.’ I am of the same opinion; nevertheless, it is a clear dntv and

* See Map, opposite.

‘Yo VI. p.B0é aw.

E

I | i isdort. E ; S
‘Vi A

1 FSi F
ES hae
Pans
WARN
AN
oy)

RMA Me ==

ANY
ODRAOTT 2
j WS

PAW

Se 2

Nh es
hy on Ne
INSITE

ay
Set

(Ad SWAIN Sie 5 SOS
sy Lig ESSE 2 = 4 Ui:
! ; wt) sy) aS ne < oe
5 ie 54s S fe NH Se i A <
Wes is BIS , Se Ve Ss. LN
[ 7. ZX} Ps S - )
Z e z ra UNF E rey)

SASS
Kae

: yaar

a

a
ve
ail

FAIS
Eaeven
Se

SYz

BUNZELWITZ~- BURKERSOORF - REICHENBACH ; COUNTRY.
:

Cuap. XI.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN OPENS. 237
16th Aug.—9th Oct. 1762.

call of prudence to try and alleviate the burden as much as possible:
and I own to you, that if, after all I have written, the thing fails this
time” (as it does), “I shall be obliged to grant that there is nothing to
be made of those 'T'urks.”—- —“‘ We are now in the press of our crisis
as to Schweidnitz. The Siege advances beautifully : but Beck is come
_ hereabouts, Lacy masked behind him; and I cannot yet tell you (not
till Rezchenbach and the 16th) whether the Enemy intends some big
adventure for disengaging Schweidnitz, or will content himself with dis-
turbing and annoying us.”

Peterswaldau, 9th September. ‘‘ Springs, water-threads coming into
our mines delay us a little: by the 12th” (in 3 days time, little thinking
it would be 30 days!) “I still hope to despatch you a courier with the
news, Allis over! Your Nephew” (Prince of Prussia) “is out today
assisting in a forage; he begins to kindle into fine action. We are
nothing but pygmies in comparison to him” (in point of physical stat-
ure); “imagine to yourself Prince Franz” (of Brunswick ; killed, poor
fellow, at Hochkirch), “ only taller still; this is the figure of him at
present.”

Peterswaldau, September 19th. * * “Our Siege wearies all the
world ; people persecute me to know the end of it; [never get a Berlin
Letter without something on that head ;—and I have no resource myself
but patience. We do all we can: but I cannot hinder the enemy from
defending himself, and Gribeauval from being a clever fellow :—soon,
however, surely soon, soon, we shall see the end. Our weather here is
like December; the Seasons are as mad as the Politics of Europe.
Finally, my dear Brother, one must shove Time on; day follows day,
and at last we shall catch the one that ends our labours. Adieu; je
vous embrasse.”°—Here farther, from the Siege-ground itself, are some
traceries, scratchings by a sure hand, which yield us something of
image. Date is still only “ Before Schweidnitz,” far on in the eighth
week :

September 23d. ‘This morning, before 9, the King” (direct from
Peterswaldau, where he has been lodging hitherto,—must have break-
fasted rather early) “ came into the Lines here :—his quarter is now to
be at Bogendorf near hand, in a Farmhouse there. The Prince of
Prussia was riding with him, and Lieutenant-Colonel von Anhalt” (the
Adjutant whom we have heard of): “ he looked at the Battery” lately
ordered by him; “looked at many things; rode along, a good 100 yards,
inside of the vedettes; so that the Enemy noticed him, and fired vio-
lently,’—King decidedly ignoring. ‘To Captain Beauvrye” (Captain

5 Schoning, ili. 408, 480, 446.

238 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

16th Aug.—9th Oct. 1762.
of the Miners) “he paid a gracious compliment; Major Lefebvre he
rallied a little for losing heart, for bungling his business; but was not
angry wlth him, consoled him rather; bantered him on the shabbiness
of his equipments, and made him a gift of-400 thalers (60/.), to improve
them. Lefebvre, Tauentzien, and” another General “ dined with him:
at Bogendorf today.”®

September 24th, early. “The King on horseback viewed the trench-
es, rode close behind the first parallel, along the midmost communica-
tion-line : the Enemy cannonaded at us horribly (erschrecklich) ; a ball
struck down the Page von Pirch’s horse” (Pirch lay writhing, making
-moan,—plainly over-much, thought the King): “on Pirch’s accident,
too, the Prince of Prussia’s horse made a wild plunge, and pitched its
rider aloft out of the saddle; people thought the Prince was shot, and
everybody was in horror: great was the commotion; only the King
was heard calling with.a clear voice,‘ Pirch, vergiss Er seinen Sattel
nicht,—Pirch, bring your saddle with you!”

This of Pirch and the saddle is an Anecdote in wide circulation ; tak-
en sometimes as a proof of Royal thrift; but is mainly the Royal mode
of rebuking Pirch for his weak behaviour in the accident that had be-
fallen. Pirch,an ingenious handy kind of fellow, famed for his pranks
and trickeries in those Page-days, had many adventures in the world ;
—was, for one while, something of a notability among the French; will
“teach you the Prussian mode of drill,” and actually got leave to try it
“on the German Regiments in our service :”’—died, finally, as Colonel
of one of these, at the Siege of Gibraltar, in 1783.

September 25th. ‘Morning and noon, each time two hours, the King
was in his new batteries; and, with great satisfaction, watched the
working of them. This day there dined with him the Prince of Bern-
burg” (General of Brigade here), “'Tauentzien, Lefebvre, and Dieskau”
(head of the Artillery).

The King is always riding about; has now, virtually, taken charge
of the Siege himself. ‘In Bogendorf, the first night, he dismissed the
Guard sent for him; would have nothing there but six chasers (ager) :”
an alarming case! “After a night or two, there came always, without
his knowledge, a dragoon party of 30 horse ; took post behind Bogendorf
- Church, patrolled towards Kunzendorf, Giesdorf, and had three pickets.”
September 28th. “Gribeauval has sprung a mine last night ;” totally

6 <¢Captain Gotz’s Notebook”? (a conspicuous Captain here, Notebook
still in manuscript, I think): cited in Schédning, iii. 453 et seq.

7 Voltaire’s wondering Report of him (‘‘ Ferney, 7th December 1774”),
and Friedrich’s quiet Answer (‘‘ Berlin, 28th December 1774”): in Geuvres
de Frédéric, xxiii. 297, 301. Rodenbeck (ii. 198-200) has a slight ‘‘Biog-
raphy” of Pirch.

Cuap. XII] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 239
7th-9th Oct. 1762.

blown up Lefebvre again! ‘“ Engineer-Lieutenants Gerhard and Von
Kleist were wounded by our own people; Captain Guyon was shot :”
things all going wrong,—weather, I suspect also, bad. “The King was
in dreadful humour (sehr ungnadig); rated and rebuked to right and
left: ‘If it should last till January, the Attack must go on, Nobody
seems to be able for his business; Lefebvre a blockhead (dummer Teu-
fel), who knows nothing of mining: the Generals, too, where are they?
Every General henceforth is to take his place in the third parallel, at
the head of his Covering-Party’ (most exposed place of all), ‘and stay
his whole twenty-four hours there’ (Prince of Anhalt-Bernburg is Cover-
ing-Party today ; I hope, in his post during this thunder!): ‘Taken the
Place can and must be! We have the misfortune, That a stupid En-
gineer who knows nothing of his art has the direction; and a General
without sense in Sieging has the command. Everybody is at a nonplus,
it appears! Not all our Artillery can silence that Front-frre; not in a
single place can Thirty stupid Miners get into the Fort.’ Today and
yesterday the King spoke neither to General ‘Tauentzien nor to Major
Lefebvre ; Lieutenant-Colonel von Anhalt had to give all the Orders.”
An electric kind of day!

The weather is becoming wet. In fact, there ensue whole
weeks of rain,—the trenches swimming, service very hard.
Guasco’s guns are many of them dismounted; no Daun to be
heard of. Guasco again and again proposes modified capitula-
tions; answer always, ‘‘ Prisoners of War on the common terms.”
Guasco is wearing low: October 7th (Lefebvre sweating and puff-
ing at his last Globe of Expression, hoping to hit the mark this
last time), an accidental grenade from Tauentzien, above ground,
rolled into one of Guasco’s powder-vaults; blew it, and a good
space of Wall along with it, into wreck ; two days after which,
Guasco had finished his Capitulating ;—and we get done with
this wearisome affair. Guasco was invited to dine with the
King; praised for his excellent defence. Prisoners of War his
Garrison and he; about 9,000 of them still on their feet; their
entire loss had been 3,552 killed and wounded; that of the Prus.
sians 3,033. Poor Guasco died, in Kénigsberg, still prisoner,
before the Peace came.

8 Tempelhof, vi. 122-220; Tagebuch von der Belagerung von Schweidnit,
vom Tten August bis 9ten October 1762 (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 376-479);
Tielke, &c. we.

240 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
9th-29th Oct. 1762.

Of Austrian fighting in Silesia, this proved to be the last, in
the present Controversy which has endured so long. No thought
of fighting is in Daun; far the reverse. Daun is getting ill off
for horse-forage in his Mountains; the weather is bad upon him;
we hear “he has had, for some time past, 12,000 labourers’
palisading and fortifying at the Passes of Bohemia: ‘ Truce for
the Winter” is what he proposes. ‘To which the King answers,
‘*No; unless you retire wholly within Bohemia and Glatz Coun-
try:” this at present Daun grudged to do; but was forced to it,
some weeks afterwards, by the sleets and the snows, had there
been no other pressure. In about three weeks hence, Friedrich,
leaving Bevern in command here, and a Silesia more or less ad-
justed, made for Saxony; whither important reinforcements had
preceded him,—reinforcements under General Wied, the instant
it was possible. Saxony he had long regarded as the grand point,,
were Schweidnitz over: “ Recapture Dresden, and they will have
to give us Peace this very Winter!” Daun, also with reinforce-
ments, followed him to Saxony, as usual; but never quite arrived,
or else found matters settled on arriving;—and will not require
farther mention in this History. He died some three years hence,
age 60;°9 an honourable, imperturbable, eupeptic kind. of man,
sufficiently known to readers by this time.

Friedrich did not recapture Dresden; far enough from that,
—though Peace came all the same. Hardly a week after our
recovery of Schweidnitz, Stolberg and his Reichsfolk, especially
his Austrians, became unexpectedly pert upon Henri; pressed
forward (October 15th), in overpowering force, into his Posts
about Freyberg, Pretschendorf, and that south-western Reich-
ward part: ‘“‘No more invadings of Bohemia from you, Monseign-
eur; no more tormentings of the Reich; here is other work for
you, my Prince!”—and in spite of all Prince Henri could do,
drove him back, clear out of Freyberg; north-westward, towards
Hiilsen and his reserves.!° Giving him, in this manner, what

® «¢5th February 1766;” ‘‘born, 24th September 1705” (Hormayr, Oester-
reichischer Plutarch, ii. 80-111).

10 Bericht von dem Angriff so am 15ten October 1762 von der Reichs-Armee
auf die Kéniglich-Preussischen unter dem Prinzen Heinrich geschehen (Seyfarth,
Beylagen, iii. 8362-364). Ausfiihrlicher Bericht von der den 15ten October 1762
bey Brand vorgefallenen Action (Ibid. iii. 350-862). Tempelhof, vi. 238.

- a

Cuap. XIT.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 241
9th-29th Oct. 1762.

soldiers call a slap; slap which might have been more consider-
able, had those Stolberg people followed it up with emphasis.
But they did not; so alert was Henri. Henri at once rallied
beautifully from his slap (King’s reinforcements coming, too, as
we have said); and, in ten-days time, without any reinforcement,
paid Stolberg and Company by a stunning blow: Battle of Frey-
berg (October 29th),—which must not go without mention, were
it only as Prince Henri’s sole Battle, and the last of this War.
Preparatory to which and its sequel, let us glance again at
Duke Ferdinand and the English-French posture,—also for the
last time.

Cannonade at Amoneburg (21st September 1762). “‘ The controver-
sies about right or left bank of the Fulda have been settled long since
in Ferdinand’s favour; who proceeded next to blockade the various
French strongholds in Hessen; Marburg, Ziegenhayn, especially Cas-
sel; with an eye to besieging the same, and rooting the French per-
manently out. ‘To prevent or delay which, what can Soubise and
D’Estrées do but send for their secondary smaller Army, which is in
the Lower-Rhine Country under a Prince de Condé, mostly idle at
present, to come and join them in the critical regions here. Where-
upon new Controversy shifting westward to the Mayn and Nidda-Lahn
Country, to achieve said Junction and to hinder it. Junction was not
to be hindered. The D’Estrées-Soubise people and young Condé
made good maneuvering, handsome fight on occasion; so that in spite
of all the Erbprinz could do, they got hands joined; far too strong for
the Erbprinz thenceforth; and on the last night of August were all
fairly together, headquarter Friedberg in Frankfurt Country (a thirty
miles north of Frankfurt); and were earnestly considering the now not
hopeless question, ‘ How, or by what routes and methods, push to north-
westward, get through to those blockaded Hessian Strong-places, Cas-
sel especially ; and hinder Ferdinand’s besieging them, and quite out-
rooting us there?’

“This is a difficult question, but a vital. ‘Sweep rapidly past Fer-
dinand,—cannot we? Well frontward or westward of him, dexterous-
ly across the Lahn and its Branches (our light people are to rear of
him, on this side of the Fulda, between the Fulda and him): once join-
ed with those light people by such methods, we have Cassel ahead, Fer-
dinand to rear, and will make short work with the blockades,—the block-
ades will have to rise in a hurry!’ This was the plan devised by D’Es-
trées ; and rapidly set about; but it was seen into, at the first step, by
Ferdinand, who proved still more rapid upon it. Campings, counter-

Vor. VI.—L

\

242 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

-9th-29th Oct. 1762.
campings, crossings of the Lahn by D’Estrées people, then recrossings
of it, ensued for above a fortnight; which are not for mention here: in
fine, about the middle of September, the D’Estrées Enterprise had plain-
ly become impossible, unless it could get across the Ohm,—an eastern,
or wide-circling north-eastern Branch of the Lahn,—where, on the right
or eastern bank of which, as better for him than the Lahn itself in this
part, Ferdinand now is. ‘Across the Ohm: and that, how can that be
done, the provident Ferdinand having laid hold of Ohm, and secured
every pass of it, several days ago! Perhaps by a Surprisal; by ex-
treme despatch ?”

“‘ Amoneburg is a pleasant little Town, about thirty miles east of
Marburg,—in which latter we have been, in very old times; looking
after St. Elizabeth, Teutsch Ritters, Philip the Magnanimous, and other
objects. Amoneburg stands on the left or western bank of the Ohm,
with an old Schloss in it, and a Bridge near by ; both of which, Ferdi-
nand, the left or southmost wing of whose Position on the other bank
of Ohm is hereabouts, has made due seizure of. Seizure of the Bridge,
first of all,—Bridge with a Mill at it (which, in consequence, is called
Brucken Mihle, Bridge-Mill),—at the eastern end of this there is a
strong Redoubt, with the Bridge-way blocked and rammed ahead of it ;
there Ferdinand has put 200 men; 500 more are across in Amoneburg
and its old Castle. Unless by surprisal and extreme despatch, there is
clearly no hope! Ferdinand’s headquarter is seven or eight miles to
north-west of this his Briicken-Miihle and extreme left; next to Briick-
en-Miihle is Zastrow’s Division; next, again, is Granby’s; several Di-
visions between Ferdinand and it: ‘ Do it by surprisal, by utmost force
of vehemency!’ say the French. And accordingly,

“© September 21st” (day of the Equinox 1762), “ An hour before sun-
rise, there began, quite on the sudden, a vivid attack on the Briicken-
Mihle and on Amoneburg, by cannon, by musketry, by all methods;
and, in spite of the alert and completely obstinate resistance, would not
cease ; but, on the contrary, seemed to be on the increasing hand, new
cannon, new musketries ; and went on, hour after hour, ever the more
vivid. So that, about 8 in the morning, after three hours of this, Zas-
trow, with his Division, had to intervene: to range himself on the Hill-
top behind this Briiken-Mihle ; replace the afflicted 200 (many of them
hurt, not a few killed) by a fresh 200 of his own; who again needed to
be relieved before long. For the French, whom Zastrow had to imi-
tate in that respect, kept bringing up more cannon, ever more, as if they
would bring up all the cannon of their Army ; and there rose between
Zastrow and them such a cannonade, for length and loudness together,
as had not been heard in this War. Most furious cannonading, musket-
ading ; and seemingly no end to it. Ferdinand himself came over to

Cuar. XII.] = = SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 243
9th-29th Oct. 1762.
ascertain; found it a hot thing indeed. Zastrow had to relieve his 200
every hour: ‘ Don’t go down in rank, you new ones,’ ordered he ;—
‘slide, leap, descend the hill-face in scattered form: rank at the bot-
tom !’—and generally about half of the old 200 were left dead or lamed
by their hour’s work. ‘They intend to have this Bridge from us at any
cost,’ thinks Ferdinand ; ‘and at any cost they shall not!’ And,in the
end, orders Granby forward, in room of Zastrow who has had some
eight hours of it now; and rides home to look after his main quarters.
‘Tt was about 4 in the afternoon when Granby and his English came
into the fire ; and I rather think the French onslaught was, if anything,
more furious than ever :—Despair striding visibly forward on it, or some-
thing too like Despair. Amoneburg they had battered to pieces, Wall
and Schloss, so that the 500 had to ground arms: but not an inch of
way had they made upon the Bridge, nor were like to make. Granby
continued on the old plan, plying all his diligences and artilleries ; need-
ing them all. Fierce work to a degree : ‘200 of you go down on wings’
(in an hour about 100 will come back)! In English Families you will
still hear some vague memory of Amoneburg, How we had built walls |
of the dead, and fired from behind them,—French more and more fu-
rious, we more and more obstinate. Granby had still four hours of it;
sunset, twilight, dusk ; about 8, the French, in what spirits I can guess,
ceased, and went their way. Bridge impossible; game up. They had
lost, by their own account, 1,100 killed and wounded ; Ferdinand prob-
ably not fewer.”??

And in this loud peal, what none could yet know, the French-
English part of the Seven-Years War had ended. ‘The French
attempted nothing farther; hutted themselves where they were,
and waited in the pouring rains: Ferdinand also hutted him-
self, in guard of the Ohm; while his people plied their Siege-
batteries on Cassel, on Ziegenhayn, cannonading their best in the
bad weather ;—took Cassel, did not quite take Ziegenhayn, had
it been of moment ;—and for above six weeks coming (till No-
vember 7th—14th!2), nothing more but skirmishings and small
scufiles, not worth a word from us, fell out between the Two Par-
ties there. That Cannonade of the Briicken-Miihle had been finis.

For supreme Bute, careless of the good news coming in on

1 Manvillon, ii. 251; Helden- Geschichte, vii. 432-439.

12 Preliminaries of Peace signed, ‘‘Paris, November 3d;” known to
French Generals, ‘‘ November 7th;”’ not, officially, to Ferdinand till ‘* No-
vember 14th” (Mauvillon, ii. 257).

244 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
, 29th Oct. 1762.

him from West and from East, or even rather embarrassed by
them, had some time ago started decisively upon the Peace Ne-
gotiation. ‘September 5th,” three weeks before that of Améne-
burg, “the Duke of Bedford, Bute’s Plenipotentiary, set out to-
wards Paris,—considerably hissed on the street here by a sulky
population,” it would seem ;—‘ but sure of success in Paris.
Bute shared in none of the national triumphs of this Year. The
transports of rejoicing which burst out on the news of Hava-
nah’? were a sorrow and distress to him.!3 * Havanah, what
shall we do with it?’ thought he; and for his own share an-
swered stiffly, “ Nothing with it; fling it back to them !’’—till
some consort of his persuaded him Florida would look better.!4
Of Manilla and the Philippines he did not even hear till Peace
was concluded; had made the Most Catholic Carlos a present
of that Colony,—who would not even pay our soldiers their Ma-
nilla Ransom, as too disagreeable. Such is the Bute, such and
no other, whom the satirical Fates have appointed to crown and
finish off the heroic Day’s-work of such a Pitt. Let us, if we
can help it, speak no more of him! Friedrich writes before
leaving for Saxony: ‘The Peace between the English and the
French is much farther off than was thought ;—so many oppo-
sitions do the Spaniards raise, or rather do the French,—busy
duping this buzzard of an English Minister, who has not com-
mon sense.’”5 Never fear, your Majesty: a man with Havan-
ahs and Manillas of that kind to fling about at random, is cer-
tain to bring Peace, if resolved on it !—

We said, Prince Henri rallied beautifully from his little slap,
and loss of Freyberg (October 15th), and that the King was
sending Wied with reinforcements to him. In fact, Prince Henri
of himself was all alertness, and instantly appeared on the Heights
again ; seemingly quite in sanguinary humour, and courting Bat-
tle, much more than was yet really the case. Which cowed Stol-
berg from meddling with him farther, as he might have done.
Not for some ten days had Henri finished his arrangements; and
then, under cloud of night (28¢h-29th October 1762), he did break

‘3 Walpole’s George the Third, ii. 191. 14 Thackeray, ii. 11.
*S Schoning, iii. 480 (To Henri: ‘‘ Peterswaldau, 17th October 1762”).

Cuap. XIL] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 245
29th Oct. 1762.

forward on those Spittelwalds and Michael’s Mounts, and multi-
plex impregnabilities about Freyberg, in what was thought a very
shining manner. The Battle of Freyberg, I think, is five or six
miles long, all on the west, and finally on the south-west side of
Freyberg (north and north-west sides, with so many batteries
and fortified villages, are judged unattackable); and the main
stress, very heavy for some time, lay in the abatis of the Spittel-
wald (where Seidlitz was sublime), and about the roots of St. Mi-
chael’s Mount (the top of it Stolberg, or some foolish General of
Stolberg’s, had left empty; nobody there when we reached the
top), down from which, Freyberg now lying free ahead of us,
and the Spittelwald on our left now also ours, we take Stolberg
in rear, and turn him inside out. The Battle lasted only three
hours, till Stolberg and his Maguires, Campitellis, and Austrians
(especially his Reichsfolk, who did no work at all, except at last ©
running), were all under way; and the hopes of some Saxon
Victory to balance one’s disgraces in Silesia had altogether van-
ished.'¢

Of Austrians and Reichsfolk together I dimly count about
40,000, in this Action ; Prince Henri seems to have been well
under 30,000.!7 I will give Prince Henri’s Despatch to his
Brother (a most modest Piece); and cannot afford to say more
of the matter,—except that ‘‘ Wegfurth,” where Henri gets on
march the night before, lies 8 or more miles west-by-north of
Freyberg and the Spittelwald, and is about as far straight south
from Hainichen, Gellert’s birthplace, who afterwards got the
War-horse now coming into action,—I sometimes think, with
what surprise to that quadruped!

Prince Henri to the King (Battle just done ; King on the road from
Silesia hither, Letter meets him at Lowenberg).
‘‘ Freyberg, 29th October 1762.
** My dearest Brother,—It is a happiness for me to send you the agree-
able news, That your Army has this day gained a considerable advan-

16 Beschreibung der am 29sten October 1762 bey Freyberg vorgefallenen
Schlacht (Seyfarth, Beylagen, iii. 365-376). ‘Tempelhof, vi. 235-258; Hel.
den- Geschichte, vii. 177-181.

17 «©99 battalions, 60 squadrons,” versus ‘‘ 49-battalions, 68 squadrons”
(Schoning, iii. 499).

246 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.

29th Oct. 1762.
tage over the combined Austrian and Reichs Army. I marched yester-
night; I had got on through Wegfurth, leaving Spittelwald’® to my left,
with intent to seize” (storm, if necessary) “the Height of St. Michael,
—when I came upon the Enemy’s Army. I made two true attacks,
and two false : the Enemy resisted obstinately ; but the sustained valour
of your troops prevailed: and, after three hours in fire, the Enemy was
obliged to yield everywhere. I don’t yet know the number of Prison-
ers; but there must be above 4,000 :—the Reichs Army has lost next
to nothing; the stress of effort fell to the Austrian share. We have
got quantities of Cannon and Flags; Lieutenant-General Roth of the
Reichs Army is among our Prisoners. I reckon we have lost from 2
to 3,000 men; among them no Officer of mark. Lieutenant-General
von Seidlitz rendered me the highest services; in a place where the
Cavalry could not act” (border of the Spittelwald, and its impassable
entanglements and obstinacies), “ he put himself at the head of the In-
fantry, and did signal services” (his Battle mainly, scheming and all,
say some ill-natured private accounts) ; ‘‘ Generals Belling and Kleist”
(renowned Colonels known to us, now become Major-Generals) ‘* did
their. very best. All the Infantry was admirable; not one battalion
yielded ground. My Aide-de-Camp” (Kalkreuth, a famous man in the
Napoleon times long after), ‘‘ who brings you this, had charge of assist-
ing to conduct the attack through the Spittelwald” (and did it well, we
can suppose) : “ if, on that ground, you pleased to have the goodness to
advance him, I should have my humble thanks to give you. There are
a good many Officers who have distinguished themselves and behaved
with courage, for whom I shall present similar requests. You will per-
mit me to pay those who have taken cannons and flags” (100 ducats
per cannon, 50 per flag, or whatever the tariff was :—‘‘ By all manner
of means!" his Majesty would answer).

“The Enemy is retiring towards Dresden and rinpolhewanie I
am sending at his heels this night, and shall hear the result. My Aide-
de-Camp is acquainted with all, and will be able to render you account
of everything you may wish to know in regard to our present circum-
stances. General Wied, I believe, will cross Elbe tomorrow” (General
Wied, with 10,000 to help us,—for whom it was too dangerous to wait,
or perhaps there was a spur on one’s own mind 2) ; “his arrival would
be” (not “would have been :” cela viendrait, not even viendra) * very
opportune for me. I am, with all attachment, my dearest Brother,—
your most devoted Servant and Brother,—Henri.”"?

Tomorrow, in cipher, goes the following Despatch :

18 Tempelhof, p. 237. 19 Schoning, iii. 491, 492.

-

Cuar. XII.] SEVENTH CAMPAIGN ENDS. 247
29th Oct.—4th Noy. 1762.
‘* Freyberg, 30th October 1762.

“General Wied” (not yet come to hand, or even got across Elbe)
“informs me, That Prince Albert of Saxony” (pushing hither with re-
inforcement, sent by Daun) “ must have crossed Elbe yesterday at Pir-
na” (did not show face here, with his large reinforcements to them, or
what would have become of us!) ;—‘ and that for this reason he, Wied,
must himself cross; which he will tomorrow. The same day I am to
be joined by some battalions from General Hiilsen; and the day after
tomorrow, when General Wied” (coming by Meissen Bridge, it appears)
** shall have reached the Katzenhauser, the whole of General Hiilsen’s
troops will join me. Directly thereupon I shall—’’?? Or no more of
that second Despatch; Friedrich’s Letter in Response is better worth
giving:

** Lowenberg, 2d November 1762.

“My dear Brother,—The arrival of Kalkreuter” (so he persists in
ealling him), ‘‘ and of your Letter, my dear Brother, has made me twen-
ty” (not to say forty) “ years younger: yesterday I was sixty, today
hardly eighteen. I bless Heaven for preserving you in health (4onne
santé,” so we term escape of lesion in fight); ‘‘ and that things have
passed so happily! You took the good step of attacking those who
meant to attack you; and, by your good and solid measures (disposi-
tions), you have overcome all the difficulties of a strong Post and a vig-
orous resistance. It is a service so important rendered by you to the
State, that I cannot enough express my gratitude, and will wait to do it
in person.

* Kalkreuter will explain what motions I1’— * * “If Fortune
favour our views on Dresden” (which it cannot in the least, at this late
season), ‘‘ we shall indubitably have Peace this Winter or next Spring,
—and get honourably out of a difficult and perilous conjuncture, where
we have often seen ourselves within two steps of total destruction.
And, by this which you have now done, to you alone will belong the
honour of having given the final stroke to Austrian Obstinacy, and laid
the foundations of the Public Happiness, which will be the consequence
of Peace.—F.”"

Two days after this, November 4th, Friedrich is in Meissen ;
November 9th, he comes across to Freyberg; has a pleasant day,
—pleasant survey of the Battlefield, Henri and Seidlitz escorting
as guides. Henri, in. furtherance of the Dresden project, has
Kleist out on the Bohemian Magazines,—‘“ That is the one way
to clear Dresden neighbourhood of Enemies!” thinks Henri al-

20 Schoning, iii. p. 493. 21 Thid. iii. 495, 496.

248 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
24th Nov. 1762.

ways. Kleist burns the considerable magazine of Saatz; finds
the grand one of Leitmeritz too well guarded for him :—upon
which, in such snowdrifts and sleety deluges, is not Dresden
plainly impossible, your Majesty? Impossible, Friedrich admits,

—the rather as he now sees Peace to be coming without that. —

Freyberg has at last broken the back of Austrian Obstinacy.
‘¢Go in upon the Reich,” Friedrich now orders Kleist, the in-
stant Kleist is home from his Bohemian inroad: ‘In upon the
Reich, with 6,000, in your old style! ‘That will dispose the
Reichs Principalities to Peace.”

Kleist marched, November 3d; kept the Reichs in paroxysm,
till December 13th ;—Plotho, meanwhile, proclaiming in the
Reichs Diet: ‘‘Such Reichs Princes as wish for Peace with my
King can have it; those that prefer War, they too can have it!”
Kleist, dividing himself in the due artistic way, flew over the
Voigtland, on to Bamberg, on to Niirnberg itself (which he took,
by sounding ram’s-horns, as it were, having no gun heavier than
a carbine, and held for a week) ;??—fluttering the Reichs Diet
not a little, and disposing everybody for Peace. ‘The Austrians
saw it with pleasure, ‘“ We solemnly engaged to save these poor
people harmless, on their joining us ;—and, behold, it has become
thrice and four times impossible. Let them fall off into Peace,
like ripe pears, of themselves ; we can then turn round and say,
‘Save you harmless? Yes; if you hadn’t fallen off! ”

November 24th, all Austrians make Truce with Friedrich,
Truce till March 1st ;—all Austrians, and what is singular, with
no mention of the Reich whatever. The Reich is defenceless, at
the feet of Kleist and his 6,000. Stolberg is still in Prussian
neighbourhood ; and may be picked up any day! Stolberg hast-
ens off to defend the Reich; finds the Reich quite empty of en-
emies before his arrival;—and at least saves his own skin. A
month or two more, and Stolberg will lay down his Command,
and the last Reichs-Execution Army, playing Farce-Tragedy so
long, make its exit from the Theatre of this World.

2 Helden- Geschichte, vii. 186-194.

Cuap. XIII. ] PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 249
24th Nov. 1762—15th Feb. 1763.

CHAPTER XIII.

PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG.

TxE Prussian troops took Winter-quarters in the Meissen-
Freyberg region, the old Saxon ground, familiar to them for the
last three years: room enough this Winter, ‘‘ from Plauen and
Zwickau, round by Langensalza again ;” ‘Truce with everybody,
and nothing of disturbance till March Ist at soonest. The usual
recruiting went on, or was preparing to go on,—a part of which
took immediate effect, as we shall see. Recruiting, refitting.
“‘Be ready for a new Campaign, in any case: the readier we
are, the less our chance of having one!’’ Friedrich’s headquar-
ter is Leipzig; but till December 5th, he does not get thither.
‘More business on me than ever!” complains he. At Leipzig
he had his Nephews, his D’Argens; for a week or two his Brother
Henri; finally, his Berlin Ministers, especially Herzberg, when
actual Peace came to be the matter in hand. Henri, before that,
had gone home: “ Peace being now the likelihood ;—Home;
and recruit one’s poor health, at Berlin, among friends !”

Before getting to Leipzig, the King paid a flying Visit at Go-
tha ;—probably now the one fraction of these manifold Winter
movements and employments, in which readers could take inter-
est. Of this, as there happens to be some record left of it, here
is what will suffice. From Meissen, Friedrich writes to his bright
Grand-Duchess, always a bright, high and noble creature in his
eyes: “ Authorised by your approval’ (has politely inquired be-
forehand), “‘I shall have the infinite satisfaction of paying my
duties on December 3d” (four days hence), ‘‘and of reiterating
to you, Madame, my liveliest and sincerest assurances of esteem
and friendship.” * * ‘Some of my Commissariat people have
been misbehaving? Strict inquiry shall be had,”!—and we
soon find, was. But the Visit is our first thing.

? To the Grand-Duchess, ‘‘ Meissen, 29th November” (C2uvres de Fréd-
éric, xviii, 199).

L2

250 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
3d Dec. 1762.

The Visit took place accordingly ; Seidlitz,a man known in
Gotha ever since his fine scenic-military procedures there in
1757, accompanied the King. Of the lucent individualities in-
vited to meet him, all are now lost to me, except one Putter, a
really learned Gottingen Professor (deep in Reichs-History and
the like), whom the Duchess has summoned over. By the dim
lucency of Putter, faint to most of us as a rushlight in the aet of
going out, the available part of our imagination must try to fig-
ure, in a kind of Obliterated-Rembrandt way, this glorious Even-
ing; for there was but one,—December 3d—4th,—Friedrich
having to leave early on the 4th. Here is Putter’s record, given
in the third person:

*¢ During dinner, Putter, honourably present among the spec-
tators of this high business, was beckoned by the Duchess to step
near the King” (right hand or left, Putter does not say); but
‘the King graciously turned round, and conversed with Putter.”
The King said:

King. “In German History much is still buried ; many important
Documents lie hidden in Monasteries.” Putter answered “ schicklich—
fitly,” that is all we know of Putter’s answer.

King (thereupon). “ Of Books on Reichs-History I know only the
Pére Barri.”*

Putter. * * “ Foreigners have for most part known only, in regard
to our History, a Latin work written by Struve at Jena.”*

King. “ Struv, Struvius ; him I don’t know.”

_ Putter. “It is a pity Barri had not known German.”

King. “ Barri was a Lorrainer ; Barri must have known German!”
—Then turning to the Duchess, on this hint about the German Lan-
guage, he told her, “ in a ringing merry tone, How, at Leipzig once, he
had talked with Gottsched” (talk known to us) on that subject, and
had said to him, That the French had many advantages ; among others,
that a word could often be used in a complex signification, for which
you had in German to scrape together several different expressions.

- 2 Barri de Beaumarchais, 10 voll. 4to, Paris, 1748: I believe, an extreme-
ly feeble Pillar of Will-o’-Wisps by Night ;—as I can expressly testify Pfef-
fel to be (Pfeffel, Abrégé Chronologique de I’ Histoire d Allemagne, 2 voll. 4to,
Paris, 1776), who has succeeded Barri as Patent Guide through that vast
Sylva Sylvarum and its pathless intricacies, for the inquiring French and
English... —. i : +

> Burkhard Gotthelf Struve, Syntagma Hist. Germanice (1730,.2 voll. fol.).

Cuap. XIII.]. ~~ PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 251
25th Nov. 1762. .

Upon which Gottsched had said, “ We will have that mended (Das
wollen wir noch machen)!” ‘These words the King repeated twice or
thrice, with such a tone that you could well see how the man’s conceit
had struck him,—and in short, as we know already, what a gigantic
entity, consisting of wind mainly, he took this elevated Gottsched to be.
_ Upon which, Putter retires into the honorary ranks again; silent, at
least to us, and invisible ; as the rest of this Royal Evening at Gotha
is.* Here, however, is the Letter following on it two days after:

Friedrich to the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha.
‘‘ Leipzig, 6th December 1762..

‘“ Madame,—I should never have done, my adorable Duchess, if 1
rendered you account of all the impressions which the friendship you
lavished on me has made on my heart. JI could wish to answer it by
entering into everything that can be agreeable to you” (conduct of my
Recruiters or Commissariat people first of all). ‘I take the liberty of
forwarding the Answers which have come in to the two Mémoires you.
sent me. Iam mortified, Madame, if I have not been able to fulfil com-
pletely your desires; but if you knew the situation I am in,I flatter
myself you would have some consideration for it.

“‘T have found myself here” (in Leipzig, as elsewhere) “ overwhelmed
with business, and even to a degree I had not expected. Meanwhile,
if I ever can manage again to run over and pay you in person the hom-
age of a heart which is more attached to you than that of your near.
relations, assuredly I will not neglect the first opportunity that shall
present itself.

‘“ Messieurs the English” (Bute, Bedford and Company, with their
Preliminaries signed, and all my Westphalian Provinces left in a con-
dition we shall hear of) “continue to betray. Poor M. Mitchell has
had a stroke of apoplexy on hearing it. It is a hideous thing (chose
affreuse); but I will speak of it no more. May you, Madame, enjoy
all the prosperities that I wish for you, and not forget a Friend, who
will be till his death, with sentiments of the highest esteem and the
most perfect consideration,—Madame, your Highness’s most faithful
Cousin and Servant,—F rirepricu.’®

‘For a fortnight past, Friedrich has had no doubt that general
Peace is now actually at hand. November 25th, ten days before
this visit, a Saxon Privy-Councillor, Baron von Fritsch, who,
by Order from his Court, had privately been at Vienna on the
errand, came privately next, with all speed, to Friedrich (Meis-

4 “Putter’s Selbstbiographie (Autobiography), p. 406:” cited in Preuss,
li. 277-n. 8 (Huvres de Frédéric, xviii. 201.

252 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
24th Nov. 1762—15th Feb. 1763.

sen, November 25th): “Austria willing for Treaty; is your
Majesty willing?” “Thrice-willing, 1; my terms well known!”
Friedrich would answer,—gladdest of mankind to see general
Pacification coming to this vexed Earth again. ‘The Dance of
the Furies, waltzing itself off, home out of this upper sunlight:
the mad Bellona steeds plunging down, down, towards their
Abysses again, for a season!

This was a result which Friedrich had foreseen as nearly cer-
tain ever since the French and English signed their Prelimin-
aries. And there was only one thing which gave him anxiety:
that of his Rhine Provinces and Strong Places, especially Wesel,
which have been in French hands for six years past, ever since
Spring 1757. Bute stipulates That those places and countries
shall be evacuated by his Choiseul, as soon as weather and pos-
sibility permit; but Bute, astonishing to say, has not made the
least stipulation as to whom they are to be delivered to,—allies
or enemies, it is all one to Bute. ‘Truly rather a shameful
omission, Pitt might indignantly think,—and call the whole
business steadily, as he persisted to do, ‘‘a shameful Peace,” had
there been no other article in it but this;—as Friedrich, with
at least equal emphasis, thought and felt. And, in fact, it had
thrown him into very great embarrassment, on the first emerg-
ence of it.

For her Imperial Majesty began straightway to draw troops
into those neighbourhoods: “‘ We will take delivery, our Allies
playing into our hand!” And Friedrich, who had no disposable
troops, had to devise some rapid expedient; and did. Set his
Free-Corps agents and recruiters in motion: “ Enlist me those
Light people of Duke Ferdinand’s, who are all getting discharged;
especially that Britannic Legion so-called. All to be discharged;
re-enlist them, you; Ferdinand will keep them till you do it.
Be swift!” And it is done ;—a small bit of actual enlistment
among the many prospective that were going on, as we noticed
above. Precise date of it not given; must have been soon after
November 3d. There were from 5 to 6,000 of them; and it was
promptly done. Divided into various regiments; chief command
of them given te a Colonel Bauer, under whom a Colonel Beck-

6 Rodenbeck, ii. 193.

7

i

Cuap. XIII.] PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 253
24th Nov. 1762—15th Feb. 1763.

with whose name we have heard: these, to the surprise of Im-
perial Majesty, and alarm of a pacific Versailles, suddenly ap-
peared in the Cleve Countries, handy for Wesel, for Geldern;
in such posts, and in such force and condition as intimated, “It
shall be we, under favour, that take delivery!” Snatch Wesel
from them, some night, sword in hand: that had been Bauer’s
notion; but nothing of that kind was found necessary; mere
demonstration proved sufficient. ‘l’o the French Garrisons the
one thing needful was to get away in peace; Bauer with his
brows gloomy is a dangerous neighbour. Perhaps the French
Officers themselves rather favoured Friedrich than his enemies.
Enough, a private agreement, or mutual understanding on word
of honour, was come to: and, very publicly, at length, on the
11th and 12th days of March 1763 (Peace now settled every-
where), Wesel, in great gala, full of field-music, military saluta-
tions and mutual dining, saw the French all filing out, and Bauer
and people filing in, to the joy of that poor Town.’

Soon after which, painful to relate, such the inexorable press-
ure of finance, Bauer and people were all paid off, flung loose
again: ruthlessly paid off by a necessitous King! ‘There were
about 6,000 of those poor fellows,—specimens of the bastard
heroic, under difficulties, from every country in the world; Beck-
with and I know not what other English specimens of the law-
less heroic; who were all cashiered, officer and man, on getting
to Berlin. As were the earlier Free-Corps, and indeed the sub-
sequent, all and sundry, “except seven,” whose names will not
be interesting to you. Paid off, with or without remorse, such
the exhaustion of finance; Kleist, Icilius, Count Hordt and others
vainly repugning and remonstrating; the King himself inexora-
ble as Arithmetic. “Can maintain 138,000 of regular, 12,000
of other sorts; not a man more!” Zealous Icilius applied for
some consideration to his Officers: ‘partial repayment of the
money they have spent from their own pocket, in enlistment of
their people now discharged!” Nota doit. The King’s answer
is in autograph, still extant; not in good spelling, but with sense
clear as light: “Seine Officiers haben wie die Raben gestollen Sie
Krigen nichts, Your Officers stole like ravens ;—they get Noth-

7 Preuss, ii. 342.

254 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
Jan. 1763.

ing.” Lessing’s fine play of Minna von Barnhelm testifies to con-
siderable public sympathy for these impoverished Ex~-Military
people. Pathetic truly, in a degree; but such things will hap-
pen. Irregular gentlemen, to whom the world’s their oyster,—
said oyster does suddenly snap-to on them, by a chance. And
they have to try it on the other side, and say little !—But we
are forgetting the Peace-Treaty itself, which still demands a
few words.

- Kleist’s raid into the Reich had a fine effect on the Potentates
there; and Plotho’s Offer was greedily complied with ; the Kai-
ser, such his generosity, giving ‘‘free permission.” We spoke of
Privy-Councillor von Fritsch, and his private little word with
Friedrich, at Meissen, on November 25th. ‘The Electoral-Prince
of Saxony, it seems, was author of that fine stroke; the history
of it this. Since November 3d, the French and English have
had their preliminaries signed; and all Nations are longing for
the like. ‘Let us have a German Treaty for general Peace,”
said the Kurprinz of Saxony, that amiable Heir-Apparent whom
we have seen sometimes, who is rather crooked of back, but has
a sprightly Wife. By all means,” answered Polish Majesty :
‘Cand as I am in the distance, do you in every way further it,
my Son!” Whereupon despatch of Fritsch to Vienna, and thence
to Meissen; with “Yes” to him from both parties. _Plenipoten-
tiaries are named: ‘Fritsch shall be ours: they shall have my
Schloss of Hubertsburg for Place of Congress,”’ said the Prince.
And on Thursday, December 30th, 1762, the Three Dignitaries
met at Hubertsburg, and began business.

This is the Schloss in Torgau Country which Quintus Icilius’s
people, Saldern having refused the job, willingly undertook spoil-
ing; and, as is well known, did it, January 22d, 1761; a thing
Quintus never heard the end of. What the amount of profit, or
the degree of spoil and mischief, Quintus’s people made of it, I
could not learn; but infer from this new event that the wreck
had not been so considerable as the noise was; at any rate, that
the Schloss had soon been restored to its pristine state of brill-
iancy. _ The Plenipotentiaries,—for Saxony, Fritsch; for Aus-

. 8 Preuss, ii. 320.

Cuap. XII]: PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 255
15th Feb. 1763.

tria, a Von Collenbach, unknown to us; for Prussia, one Hertz-
berg, a man experienced beyond his years, who is of great name
in Prussian History subsequently,—sat here till February 15th,
1763, that is for six weeks and five days. Leaving their Proto-
cols to better judges, who report them good, we will much pre-
fer a word or two from Friedrich himself, while waiting the re-
sult they come to.

Friedrich to Prince Henri (home at Berlin).
“ Leipzig, 14th January 1763. * * Am not surprised you find

zig,
Berlin changed for the worse : ‘such a train of calamities must, in the
end, make itself felt in a poor and naturally barren Country, where con-
tinual industry is needed to second its fecundity and keep up produc-
tion. However, I will do what I can to remedy this dearth (Ja disette),
at least as far as my small means permit.” * *

“No fear of Geldern and Wesel: all that has been cared for by Bauer
and the new Free-Corps. By the end of February, Peace will be
signed ; at the beginning of April, everybody will find himself at home,
as in 1756. |

“The Circles are going to separate : indifferent to me, or nearly so;
‘but it is good to be plucking out tiresome burning sticks, stick after
stick. I hope you amuse yourself at Berlin: at Leipzig, nothing but
balls and redouts ; my nephews diverting themselves amazingly. Ma-
dame Friedrich, lately Garden-maid at Seidlitz’ (Village in the Neu-
mark, with this Beauty plucking weeds in it,—little prescient of such a
fortune),‘ now. Wife to an Officer of the Free Hussars, is the principal
heroine of these Festivities.’ ””

Leipzig, 25th January 1763. ‘ Thanks for your care about my ex-
istence. I am becoming very old, dear Brother; in a little while, I
shall be useless to the world and a burden to myself: it is the lot of all
creatures to wear down with age,—but one is not, for all that, to abuse
one’s privilege of falling into dotage.

* You still speak without full confidence of our Negotiation business”
(going on at Hubertsburg yonder). ‘ Most certainly the chapter of
accidents is inexhaustible; and it is still certain there may happen
quantities of things which the limited mind of man cannot foresee ; but,
judging by the ordinary course, and such degrees of probability as hu-
man creatures found their hopes on, I believe, before the month of Feb-
ruary entirely end, our Peace will be completed. In a permanent
Arrangement, many things need settling, which are easier to settle now

9 Schéning, iii. 528.

256 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Feb. 1763.

than they ever will be again. Patience; haste without speed, is a
thriftless method.’

February 5th, the trio at Hubertsburg got their Preliminaries
signed. On the tenth day thereafter, the Treaty itself was
signed and sealed. All other Treaties on the same subject had
been guided towards a contemporary finis: England and France,
ready since the 3d of November last, signed and ended February
10th. February 11th, the Reich signed and ended; February
15th, Prussia, Austria, Saxony; and the Third Silesian or Seven-
Years War was completely finished.!!

It had cost, in loss of human lives first of all, nobody can say
what: according to Friedrich’s computation, there had perished
of actual fighters, on the various fields, of all the nations, 853,000;
of which above the fifth: part, or 180,000, is his own share: and,
by misery and ravage, the general population of Prussia finds
itself 500,000 fewer; nearly the ninth man missing. This is
the expenditure of Life. Other items are not worth enumera-
ting, in comparison ; if statistically given, you can find the most
approved guesses at them by the same Head, who ought to be
an authority.!2 It was a War distinguished by—Archenholtz
will tell you, with melodious emphasis, what a distinguished,
great, and thrice-greatest War it was. There have since been
other far bigger Wars, if size were a measure of greatness;
which it by no means is? I believe there was excellent Hero-
ism shown in this War, by persons I could name; by one per-
son, Heroism really to be called superior, or, in its kind, almost
of the rank of supreme ;—and that in regard to the Military
Arts and Virtues, it has as yet, for faculty and for performance,
had no rival; nor is likely soon to have. The Prussians, as we
once mentioned, still use it as their school-model in those re-
spects. And we—Oh readers, do not at least you and I thank
God to have now done with it !—

Of the Peace-Treaties at Hubertsburg, Paris, and other
places, it is not necessary that we say almost anything. They

10 Schoning, ili. 529.

‘! Copy of the Treaty, in Helden-Geschichte, vii. 624 et seq.; in Sey-
farth, Beylagen, iii. 479-495; in Rousset, in Wenck, in &c. &e.

12 (uvres de Frédéric, v. 230-234; Preuss, iii, 349-351.

Cuap. XIIL.] PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 257
15th Feb. 1763.

are to be found in innumerable Books, dreary to the mind; and
of the 158 Articles to be counted there, not one could be inter-
esting at present. ‘The substance of the whole lies now in Three
Points, not mentioned or contemplated at all in those Docu-
ments, though repeatedly alluded to and intimated by us here.

The issue, as between Austria and Prussia, strives to be, in
all points, simply As-you-were; and, in all outward or tangible
points, strictly is so. After such a tornado of strife as the civ-
ilised world had not witnessed since the Thirty-Years War.
Tornado springing doubtless from the regions called Infernal ;
and darkening the upper world from south to north, and from
east to west for Seven Years long ;—issuing in general As-you-
were! Yes truly, the tornado was Infernal; but Heaven too
had silently its purposes in it. Nor is the mere expenditure of
men’s diabolic rages, in mutual clash as of opposite electrici-
ties, with reduction to equipoise, and restoration of zero and
repose again after seven years, the one or the principal result
arrived at. Inarticulately, little dreamt of at the time by any
by-stander, the results, on survey from this distance, are visible
as Threefold. Let us name them one other time:

1°. There is no taking of Silesia from this man; no clipping
of iim down to the orthodox old limits; he and his Country
have palpably outgrown these. Austria gives up the Problem:
“We have lost Silesia!” Yes; and, what you hardly yet
know,—and what, I perceive, Friedrich himself still less knows,
Teutschland has found Prussia. Prussia, it seems, cannot be
conquered by the whole world trying to do it; Prussia has gone
through its Fire-Baptism, to the satisfaction of gods and men;
and is a Nation henceforth. In and of poor dislocated Teutsch- ‘
land, there is one of the Great Powers of the World henceforth ;
an actual Nation. Anda Nation not grounding itself on extinct
Traditions, Wiggeries, Papistries, Immaculate Conceptions; no,
but_on living Facts,—Facts of Arithmetic, Geometry, Gravita-
tion, Martin Luther’s Reformation, and what it really can be-
lieve in:—to the infinite advantage of said Nation and of poor
Teutschland henceforth. ‘To be a Nation; and to believe as
you are convinced, instead of pretending to believe as you are
bribed or bullied by the devils about you; what an advantage

258° FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
15th Feb. 1763.

to parties concerned! If Prussia follow its star—As it really
tries to do, in spite of stumbling! For the sake of Germany,
one hopes always Prussia will; and that it may get through its
various Child-Diseases, without death: though it has had sad
plunges and crises,—and is perhaps just now in one of its worst
Influenzas, the Parliamentary-Eloquence or Ballot-Box Influen-
za! One of the most dangerous Diseases of National Adoles-
cence; extremely prevalent over the world at this time,—indeed
unavoidable, for reasons obvious enough. ‘ Sie ztur ad astra ;”
all nations certain that the way to Heaven is By voting, by elo-
quently wagging the tongue “ within those walls!” Diseases,
real or imaginary, await Nations like individuals; and are not
to be resisted, but must be submitted to, and got through the
best you can. Measles and mumps; you cannot prevent them
in Nations either. Nay fashions even; fashion of Crinoline, for
instance (how infinitely more, that of Ballot-Box and Fourth-
Estate !),—are you able to prevent even that? You have to be
patient under it, and keep hoping!

2°. In regard to England. Her Jenkins’s-EHar Controversy is
at last settled. Not only liberty of the Seas, but if she were not
wiser, dominion of them; guardianship of liberty for all others
whatsoever: Dominion of the Seas for that wise object. Amer-
ica is to be English, not French; what a result is that, were
there no other! Really a considerable Fact in the History of
the World. Fact principally due to Pitt, as I believe, according
to my best conjecture, and comparison of probabilities and cir-
cumstances. For which, after all, is not everybody thankful,
less or more? Oh my English brothers, Oh my Yankee half-
brothers, how oblivious are we of those that have done us ben-
efit !—

These are the results for England. And in the rear of these,
had these and the other elements once ripened for her, the poor
Country is to get into such merchandisings, colonisings, foreign-
settlings, gold-nuggetings, as lay beyond the drunkenest dreams
of Jenkins (supposing Jenkins addicted to liquor) ;—and, in fact,
to enter on a universal uproar of Machineries, Eldorados, ‘‘ Un-
exampled Prosperities,’’ which make a great noise for themselves
in the very days now come. . Prosperities evidently not of a sub-

Cuap. XIII. ] PEACE OF HUBERTSBURG. 259
16th March 1763.

lime type: which, in the mean while, seem to be covering the at
one time creditably clean and comely face of England with mud-
blotches, soot-blotches, miscellaneous squalors and horrors; to
be preaching into her amazed heart, which once knew better, the
omnipotence of shoddy ; filling her ears and soul with shriekery
and metallic clangour, mad noises, mad hurries mostly nowhith-
er ;—and are awakening, I suppose, in such of her sons as still
go into reflexion at all, a deeper and more ominous set of Ques-
tions than have ever risen in England’s History before. As in
the foregoing case, we have to be patient and keep hoping.

3°. In regard to France. It appears, noble old Teutschland,
with such pieties, and unconquerable silent valours, such opu-
lences human and divine, amid its wreck of new and old confu-
sions, is not to be cut in Four, and made to dance to the piping
of Versailles or another. Far the contrary! To Versailles it-
self, there has gone forth, Versailles may read it or not, the writ-
ing on the wall: ‘Thou art weighed in the balance, and found
wanting” (at last even ‘* found wanting”)! France, beaten,
stript, humiliated ; sinful, unrepentant, governed by mere sinners
and, at best, clever fools (fous pleins d’esprit),—collapses, like a
creature whose limbs fail it; sinks into bankrupt quiescence,
into nameless fermentation, generally into dry-rot. Rotting, none
guesses whitherward ;—rotting towards that thrice-extraordinary
Spontaneous-Combustion, which blazed out in 1789. And has
kindled, over the whole world, gradually or by explosion, this
unexpected Outburst of all the chained Devilries (among other
chained things), this roaring Conflagration of the Anarchies;
under which it is the lot of these poor generations to live,—for I
know not what length of Centuries yet. ‘Go into Combustion,
my pretty child!” the Destinies had said to this belle ’rance, who
is always so fond of shining and out-shining: ‘ Self-Combustion ;
—in that way, won’t you shine, as none of them yet could?”
Shine ; yes, truly,—till you are got to caput mortuum, my pretty
child (unless you gain new wisdom !)—But not to wander far-
ther:

Wednesday, March 16th, Friedrich, all Saxon things being now
settled,—among the rest ‘eight Saxon Schoolmasters” to be a

260 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
30th March 1763.

model in Prussia,—quitted Leipzig, with the Seven-Years War
safe in his pocket, as it were. Drove to Moritzburg, to dinner
with the amiable Kurprinz and still more amiable Wife: ‘ It
was to your Highness that we owe this Treaty!” <A dinner,
which readers may hear of again. At Moritzburg; where, with
the Lacys, there was once such rattling and battling. After
which, rapidly on to Silesia, and an eight days of adjusting and
inspecting there.

Wednesday, March 30th, Friedrich arrives in Frankfurt-on,
Oder, on the way homeward from Silesia: ‘ takes view of the
Field of Kunersdorf” (reflexions to be fancied) ; early in the aft-
ernoon, speeds forward again ; at one of the stages (place called
Tassdorf), has a Dialogue, which we shall hear of; and between
8 and 9 in the evening, not through the solemn receptions and
crowded streets, drives to the Schloss of Berlin. ‘Goes straight
to the Queen’s Apartment,” Queen, Princesses and Court all
home triumphantly some time ago; sups there with the Queen’s
Majesty and these bright creatures,—beautiful supper, had it
consisted only of cresses and salt; and, behind it, sound sleep to
us under our own rooftres once more.!? Next day, ‘‘the King
made gifts to,’ as it were, to everybody; “to the Queen about
5,0002., to the Princess Amelia 1,0002,’’ and so on; and saw
true hearts all merry round him,—merrier, perhaps, than his
own was.

13 Rodenbeck, ii. 211, 212; Preuss, ii. 345, 346; &c. &e.

260 FRIEDRICH NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XX.
30th March 1763.

model in Prussia,—quitted Leipzig, with the Seven-Years War
safe in his pocket, as it were. Drove to Moritzburg, to dinner
with the amiable Kurprinz and still more amiable Wife: ‘ It
was to your Highness that we owe this Treaty!” <A dinner,
which readers may hear of again. At Moritzburg; where, with
the Lacys, there was once such rattling and battling. After
which, rapidly on to Silesia, and an eight days of adjusting and
inspecting there.

Wednesday, March 30th, Friedrich arrives in Frankfurt-on,
Oder, on the way homeward from Silesia: ‘ takes view of the
Field of Kunersdorf” (reflexions to be fancied); early in the aft-
ernoon, speeds forward again; at one of the stages (place called
Tassdorf ), has a Dialogue, which we shall hear of; and between
8 and 9 in the evening, not through the solemn receptions and
crowded streets, drives to the Schloss of Berlin. ‘ Goes straight
to the Queen’s Apartment,” Queen, Princesses and Court all
home triumphantly some time ago; sups there with the Queen’s
Majesty and these bright creatures,—beautiful supper, had it
consisted only of cresses and salt; and, behind it, sound sleep to
us under our own rooftres once more.!? Next day, “the King
made gifts to,” as it were, to everybody; “to the Queen about
5,0002, to the Princess Amelia 1,0002.’’ and so on; and saw
true hearts all merry round him,—merrier, perhaps, than his
own was.

13 Rodenbeck, ii. 211, 212; Preuss, ii. 345, 346; &c. &e.

FOR THE THIRD SILESIAN
OR THE

SEVEN YEARS WAR.

Lonpitade East 1/4 from Greenwich

JW. Lowry feulp:

1763.

BAY Ono XoXck:
AFTERNOON AND EVENING OF FRIEDRICH’S LIFE.
1763-1786.

CHAPTER I.
PREFATORY,

Tue Twelve Hercules-labours of this King have ended here;
what was required of him in World-History is accomplished.
There remain to Friedrich Twenty-three Years more of Life,
which to Prussian History are as full of importance as ever;
but do not essentially concern European History, Europe having
gone the road we now see it in. On the grand World-Theatre,
the curtain has fallen for a New Act; Friedrich’s part, like
everybody’s for the present, is played out. In fact, there is,
during the rest of his Reign, nothing of World-History to be
dwelt on anywhere. America, it has been decided, shall be En-
glish; Prussia be a Nation. ‘The French, as finis of their at-
tempt to cut Germany in Four, find themselves sunk into torpor,
abeyance, and dry rot; fermenting towards they know not what.
Towards Spontaneous Combustion, in the year 1789, and for
long years onwards !

There, readers, there is the next mile-stone for you, in the
History of Mankind! ‘That universal Burning-up, as in hell-

ee

fire, of Human Shams. The oath of Twenty-five Million men, .

which has since become that of all men whatsoever, ‘“‘ Rather
than live longer under lies, we will die !”—that is the New Act
in World-History. New Act,—or, we may call it New Part;
Drama of World-History, Part Third. If Part Second was
1,800 years ago, this I reckon will be Part Tiird. This is the
truly celestial-infernal Event: the strangest we have seen for a
thousand years. Celestial in one part; in the other infernal.
For it is withal, the breaking-out of universal mankind into
Anarchy, into the faith and practice of Vo-Government,—that

262 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
1768.

is to say (if you will be candid), into unappeasable Revolt
against Sham-Governors and Sham-Teachers, — which I do
charitably define to be a Search, most unconscious, yet in deadly
earnest, for true Governors and Teachers. ‘That is the one fact
of World-History worth dwelling on at this day; and Fried-
rich cannot be said to have had much hand farther in that.

Nor is the progress of a French or European world, all silent-
ly ripening and rotting towards such issue, a thing one wishes
to dwell on. Only when the Spontaneous Combustion breaks
out; and, many-coloured, with loud noises, envelopes the whole
world in anarchic flame for long hundreds of years: then has
the Event come; there is the thing for all men to mark, and to
study and scrutinise as the strangest thing they ever saw. Cen-
turies of it yet lying ahead of us; several sad Centuries, sordid-
ly tumultuous, and good for little! Say Two Centuries yet,—
say even Ten of such a process: before the Old is completely
burnt out, and the New in any state of sightliness? Millenni-
um of Anarchies ;—abridge it, spend your heart’s blood upon
abridging it, ye Heroic Wise that are to come! For it is the
consummation of All the Anarchies that are and were ;—which
I do trust always means the death (temporary death) of them!
Death of the Anarchies: or a world once more built wholly on
Fact better or worse; and the lying, jargoning professor of
Sham-Fact, whose name is Legion, who as yet (oftenest little
conscious of himself) goes tumulting and swarming from shore
to shore, become a species extinct, and well known to be gone
down to Tophet !—

There were bits of Anarchies before, little and greater: but
till that of France in 1789, there was none long memorable; all
were pigmies in comparison, and not worth mentioning sepa-
rately. In 1772 the Anarchy of Poland, which had been a con-
siderable Anarchy for about three hundred years, got itself ex-
tinguished, — what we may call extinguished ; — decisive sur-
gery being then first exercised upon it: an Anarchy put in the
sure way of extinction. In 1775, again, there began, over seas,
another Anarchy much more considerable,—little dreaming that
zt could be called an Anarchy; on the contrary, calling itself
Liberty, Rights of Man; and singing boundless Io-Pzeans to if- -

Cuar. I.] PREFATORY. 263
1768.

self, as is common in such cases; an Anarchy which has been
challenging the Universe to show the like, ever since. And
which has, at last, flamed up as an independent Phenomenon,
unexampled in the hideously swec:dal way ;—and does need much
to get burnt out, that matters may begin anew on truer condi-
tions. But neither the Partition of Poland nor the American
War of Independence have much general importance, or, except
as precursors of 1789, are worth dwelling on in History. From
us here, so far as Friedrich is concerned with them, they may
deserve some transient mention, more or less: but World-His-
tory, eager to be at the general Funeral-pile and ultimate Burn-
ing-up of Shams in this poor World, will have less and less to
say of small tragedies and premonitory symptoms.

Curious how the busy and continually watchful and specula-
ting Friedrich, busied about his dangers from Austrian encroach-
ments, from Russian-Turk Wars, Bavarian Successions, and
other troubles and anarchies close by, saw nothing to dread in
France; nothing to remark there, except carelessly from time
to time, its beggarly decaying condition, so strangely sunk in
arts, in arms, in finance; oftenest an object of pity to him, for
he still has a love for France ;—and reads not the least sign of
that immeasurable all-engulfing Wrench Revolution which was in
the wind! Neither Voltaire nor he have the least anticipation
of such a thing. Voltaire and he see, to their contentment, Su-
perstition visibly declining: Friedrich rather disapproves the
heat of Voltaire’s procedures on the Infame. ‘ Why be in such
heat? Other nonsense, quite equal to it, will be almost sure to
follow. Take care of your own skin!” Voltaire and he are
deeply alive, especially Voltaire is, to the horrors and miseries
which have issued on mankind from a Fanatic Popish Supersti-
tion, or Creed of Incredibilities,—which (except from the throat
outwards, from the bewildered tongue outwards) the orthodox
themselves cannot believe, but only pretend and struggle to be-
lieve. This Voltaire calls ‘* The Infamous ;’’ and this—what name
can any of us give it?) The man who believes in falsities is very
miserable. ‘The man who cannot believe them, but only strug-
gles and pretends to believe ; and yet, being armed with the pow-

264 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763.

er of the sword, industriously keeps menacing and slashing all
round, to compel every neighbour to do like him: what is to be
done with such a man? Human Nature calls him a Social
Nuisance; needing to be handcuffed, gagged, and abated. Hu-
man Nature, if it be in a terrified and imperilled state, with the
sword of this fellow swashing round it, calls him ‘‘ Infamous,”
and a Monster of Chaos. He is indeed the select Monster of
that region ; the Patriarch of all the Monsters, little as he dreams
of being such. An Angel of Heaven the poor caitiff dreams
himself rather, and in cheery moments is conscious of being :—
Bedlam holds in it no madder article. And I often think he
will again need to be tied up (feeble as he now is in comparison,
disinclined though men are to manacling and tying), so many
helpless infirm souls are wandering about, not knowing their
right-hand from their left, who fall a prey to him. “L’Jn-
fdme” I also name him,—knowing well enough how little he,
in his poor muddled drugged and stupefied mind, is conscious of
deserving that name. More signal enemy to God, and friend
of the Other Party, walks not the Earth in our day.

Anarchy in the shape of religious slavery was what Voltaire
and Friedrich saw all round them. Anarchy in the shape of
Revolt against Authorities was what Friedrich and Voltaire had
never dreamed of as possible, and had not in their minds the least
idea of. In one, or perhaps two places, you may find in Voltaire
a grim and rather glad forethought, not given out as a prophecy,
but felt as interior assurance in a moment of hope, How these
Priestly Sham Hierarchies will be pulled to pieces, probably on
the sudden, once people are awake to them. Yes, my much-
suffering M. de Voltaire, be pulled to pieces; or go aloft, like the
awakening of Vesuvius, one day,—Vesuvius awakening after ten
centuries of slumber, when his crater is all grown grassy, bushy,
copiously “ tenanted by wolves’? I am told; which, after pre-
monitory grumblings, heeded by no wolf or bush, he will hurl
bodily aloft, ten acres at a time, in a very tremendous manner!!
A thought like this, about the Priestly Sham-Hierarchies, I have
found somewhere in Voltaire: but of the Social and Civic Sham-
Hierarchies (which are likewise accursed, if they knew it, and

1 First modern Eruption of Vesuvius, A.D. 1631, after long interval of rest.

Cuap. I.] . _ PREFATORY. 265
1763.

indeed are junior copartners of the Priestly; and, in a sense,
sons and products of them, and cannot escape being partakers
of their plagues), there is no hint in Voltaire, though Voltaire
stood at last only fifteen years from the Fact (1778-1798); nor
in Friedrich, though he lived almost to see the Fact beginning.

Friedrich’s History being henceforth that of a Prussian King,
is interesting to Prussia chiefly, and to us little otherwise than
as the Biography of a distinguished fellow-man.  Friedrich’s
Biography, his Physiognomy as he grows old, quietly on his own
harvest-field, among his own People: this has still an interest,
and for any feature of this we shall be eager enough; but this
withal is the most of what we now want. And not very much
even of this; Friedrich the unique King, not having as a man
any such depth and singularity, tragic, humorous, devotionally
pious, or other, as to authorise much painting in that aspect.
Extreme brevity beseems us in these circumstances: and indeed
there are,—as has already happened in different parts of this
Enterprise (Nature herself, in her silent way, being always some-
thing of an Artist in such things),—other circumstances, which
leave us no choice as to that of detail. Available details, if we
wished to give them, of Friedrich’s later Life, are not forthcom-
ing: masses of incondite marine-stores, tumbled out on you, dry
rubbish shot with uncommon diligence for a hundred years, till,
for Rubbish-Pelion piled on Rubbish-Ossa, you lose sight of the
stars and azimuths; whole mountain continents, seemingly all
of cinders and sweepings (though fragments and remnants do lie
hidden, could you find them again) :—these are not details that
will be available! Anecdotes there are in quantity; but of un-
certain quality; of doubtful authenticity, above all. One recol-
lects hardly any Anecdote whatever that seems completely credi-
ble, or renders to us the Physiognomy of Friedrich in a convin-
cing manner. So remiss a creature has the Prussian Clio been,
—employed on all kinds of loose errands over the Earth and the
Air; and as good as altogether negligent of this most pressing
errand in her own House. Peace be with her, poor slut; why
should we say one other hard word on taking leave of her te all
eternity !—

Vou. VI.—M

266 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763.

The practical fact is, what we have henceforth to produce
is more of the nature of a loose Appendix of Papers, than of a
finished Narrative. Loose Papers,—which, we will hope, the
reader can, by industry, be made to understand and tolerate:
more we cannot do for him. No continuous Narrative is hence-
forth possible to us. For the sake of Friedrich’s closing Epoch,
we will visit, for the last time, that dreary imbroglio under
which the memory of Friedrich, which ought to have been, in
all the epochs of it, bright and legible, lies buried; and will try
to gather, as heretofore, and put under labels. What dwells
with oneself as human, may have some chance to be humanly
interesting. In the wildest chaos of marine-stores and editorial
shortcomings (provided only the editors speak truth, as these
poor fellows do), this can be done. Part the living from the
dead; pick out what has some meaning, leave carefully what
has none; you will in some small measure pluck up the memory
of a hero, like drowned honour by the locks, and rescue it into
visibility.

That Friedrich, on reaching home, made haste to get out of
the bustle of joyances and exclamations on the streets; proceeded
straight to his music-chapel in Charlottenburg, summoning the
Artists, or having them already summoned; and had there, all
alone, sitting invisible wrapt in his cloak, Graun’s or somebody’s
grand Te-Deum pealed out to him, in seas of melody,—soothing
and salutary to the altered soul, revolving many things,—is a
popular myth, of pretty and appropriate character; but a myth
only, with no real foundation, though it has some loose and ap-
parent.” No doubt, Friedrich had his own thoughts on entering
Berlin again, after such a voyage through the deeps; himself,
- his Country still here, though solitary and in a world of wild
shipwrecks. He was not without piety; but it did not take the
devotional form, and his habits had nothing of the clerical.

What is perfectly known, and much better worth knowing,
is the instantaneous practical alacrity with which he set about
repairing that immense miscellany of ruin; and the surprising
success he had in dealing with it. His methods, his rapid in-

? In Preuss, ii. 46, all the details of it.

Cuap. I.] PREFATORY. 267
1763.

ventions and procedures, in this matter, are still memorable to
Prussia; and perhaps might with advantage be better known
than they are in some other Countries. To us, what is all we
can do with them here, they will indicate that this is still the
old Friedrich, with his old activities and promptitudes; which
indeed continue unabated, lively in Peace as in War, to the end
of his life and reign. :

The speed with which Prussia recovered was extraordinary.
Within little more than.a year (June Ist, 1764), the Coin was all
in order again; in 1765, the King had rebuilt, not to mention
other things, ‘‘in Silesia 8,000 Houses, in Pommern 6,500.’
Prussia has been a meritorious Nation; and, however cut and
ruined, is and was in a healthy state, capable of recovering soon.
Prussia has defended itself against overwhelming odds,—brave
Prussia; but the real soul of its merit, was that of having mer-
ited such a King to command it. Without this King, all its
valours, disciplines, resources of war, would have availed Prus-
sia little. No wonder Prussia has still a loyalty to its great
Friedrich, to its Hohenzollern Sovereigns generally. Without
these Hohenzollerns, Prussia had been, what we long ago saw it,
the unluckiest of German Provinces; and could never have had
the pretension to exist as a Nation at all. Without this par-
ticular Hohenzollern, it had been trampled out again, after ap-
parently succeeding. ‘To have achieved a Friedrich the Second
for King over it, was Prussia’s grand merit.

An accidental merit, thinks the reader? No, reader, you
may believe me, it is by no means altogether such. Nay, I
rather think, could we look into the Account-Books of the Re-
cording Angel for a course of centuries, no part of it is such!
There are Nations in which a Friedrich is, or can be, possible ;
and again there are Nations in which he is not and cannot. To
be practically reverent of Human Worth to the due extent, and
abhorrent of Human Want of Worth in the like proportion, do
you understand that art at all? I fear, not,—or that you are
much forgetting it again! Human Merit, do you really love it
enough, think you ;—human Scoundrelism (brought to the dock
for you, and branded as scoundrel), do you even abhor it enough?

’ Rodenbeck, ii. 234, 261.

268 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1766.

Without. that reverence and its corresponding opposite-pole of
abhorrence, there is simply no possibility left. ‘That, my friend,
is the outcome and summary of all virtues in this world, for a
man or for a Nation of men. It is the supreme strength and
glory of a Nation ;—without which, indeed, all other strengths,
and enormities of bullion and arsenals and warehouses, are no
strength. None, I should say ;—and are oftenest even the re-
verse. |

Nations who have lost this quality, or who never had it, what
Friedrich can they hope to be possible among them? Age after
age, they grind down their Friedrichs, contentedly under the
hoofs of cattle on their highways; and even find it an excellent
practice, and pride themselves on Liberty and Equality. Most
certain it is, there will no Friedrich come to rule there; by and
by, there will none be born there. Such Nations cannot have
a King to command them ; can only have this or the other scan-
dalous swindling Copper Captain, constitutional Gilt Mounte-
bank, or other the like unsalutary entity by way of King; and
the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children in a fright-
ful and tragical manner, little noticed in the Penny Newspapers
and Periodical Literatures of this generation. Oh my friends—!
—But there is plain Business waiting us at hand.

CHAPTER II.
REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA.

Tuat of Friedrich’s sitting wrapped in a cloud of reflexions
Olympian-Abysmal, in the music-chapel at Charlottenburg,
while he had the Ambrosian Song executed for him there, as the
preliminary step, was a loose myth; but the fact lying under it
is abundantly certain. Few Sons of Adam had more reason for
a piously-thankful feeling towards the Past, a piously-valiant
towards the Future. What king or man had seen himself de-
livered from such strangling imbroglios of destruction, such de-
vouring rages of a hostile world? ‘And the ruin worked by
them lay monstrous and appalling all round. Friedrich is now
Fifty-one gone: unusually old for his age; feels himself an old

Es es

Cuap. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 269
1763-1766.

man, broken with years and toils; and here lies his Kingdom in
haggard slashed condition, worn to skin and bone: How is the
King, resourceless, to remedy it? That is now the seemingly
impossible problem. ‘ Begin it,—thereby alone will it ever
cease to be impossible!” Friedrich begins, we may say, on the
first morrow morning. Labours at his problem, as he did in the

* march to Leuthen; finds it to become more possible, day after

day, month after month, the farther he strives with it.

“Why not leave it to Nature?” think many, with the Dismal
Science at their elbow. Well; that was the easiest plan, but it
was not Friedrich’s. His remaining moneys, 25 million thalers
ready for a Campaign which has not come, he destributes to
the most necessitous: ‘‘all his artillery-horses”’ are parted into
plough-teams, and given to those who can otherwise get none:
think what a fine figure of rye and barley, instead of mere win-
dlestraws, beggary and desolation, was realised by that act alone.
Nature is ready to do much; will of herself cover, with some
veil of grass and lichen, the nakedness of ruin: but her victori-
ous act, when she can accomplish it, is that of getting you to go
with her handsomely, and change disaster itself into new wealth.
Into new wisdom and valour, which are wealth in all kinds;
California mere zero to them, zero, or even a frightful mnus
quantity! Friedrich’s procedures in this matter I believe to be
little less didactic than those other, which are so celebrated in
War: but no Dryasdust, not even a Dryasdust of the Dismal
Science, has gone into them, rendered men familiar with them in
their details and results. His Silesian Land-Bank (joint-stock
Moneys, lent on security of Land) was of itself, had I room to
explain it, an immense furtherance.! Friedrich, many tell us,
was as great in Peace as in War: and truly, in the economic
and material provinces, my own impression, gathered painfully
in darkness, and contradiction of the Dismal-Science Doctors, is
much to that effect. A first-rate Husbandman (as his Father
had been); who not only defended his Nation, but made it rich
beyond what seemed possible; and diligently sowed annuals into
it, and perennials which flourish aloft at this day.

Mirabeau’s Monarchie Prussienne, in 8 thick Volumes 8yvo,-—

1 Preuss, iii. 75; CQuvres de Frédéric, vi. 81.

270 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1766.

composed, or hastily cobbled together, some T'wenty years after
this period,—contains the best tabular view one anywhere gets
of Friedrich’s economics, military and other practical methods
and resources :—solid exact tables these are, and intelligent in-
telligible descriptions, done by Mauvillon J’%/s, the same punctual
Major Mauvillon who used to attend us in Duke Ferdinand’s
War ;—and so far as Mirabeau is concerned, the Work consists
farther of a certain small Essay done in big type, shoved into the
belly of each Volume, and eloquently recommending, with re-
spectful censures and regrets over Friedrich, the Gospel of Free
Trade, dear to Papa Mirabeau. The Son is himself a convert ;
far above lying, even to please Papa: but one can see, the thought
of Papa-gives him new fire of expression. ‘They are eloquent,
ruggedly strong Essays, those of Mirabeau Junior upon Free
Trade :—they contain, in condensed shape, everything we were
privileged to hear, seventy years later, from all organs, coach-
horns, jews-harps and scrannel-pipes, pro and contra, on the same
sublime subject: ‘‘God is great, and Plugson of Undershot is
his Prophet. Thus saith the Lord, Buy in the cheapest market,
sell in the dearest!” To which the afflicted human mind listens
what it can ;—and after seventy years, mournfully asks itself and
Mirabeau, *“‘ M. le Comte, would there have been in Prussia, for
example, any Trade at all; any Nation at all, had it always been
left ‘Free? ‘There would have been mere sand and quagmire,
and a community of wolves and bisons, M. le Comte. Have the
goodness to terminate that Litany, and take up another !”—

We said, Friedrich began his problem on the first morrow
morning; and that is literally true, that or even more. Here is
how Friedrich takes his stand amid the wreck, speedy enough to
begin ; this view of our old friend Niissler and him is one of the
Pieces we can give,—thanks to Herr Biisching and his Beytrige
for the last time! Niissler is now something of a Country Gen-
tleman, so to speak; has a pleasant place out to east of Berlin ;
is Landrath (County Chairman) there, “ Landrath of Nether-
Barnim Circle ;” where we heard of the Cossacks spoiling him:
he, as who not, has suffered dreadfully in these tumults. Dere
is Biisching’s welcome Account.

Cuap. IJ.] ‘REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 271
1763-1766.

Landrath Nissler and the King (80th March—38d April
17638).

“ March 30th, 1763, Friedrich, on his return to Berlin, came
by the route of Tassdorf,”—Tassdorf, in Nether-Barnim Circle
(40 odd miles from Frankfurt, and above 15 from Berlin) ;—
‘and changed horses there. During this little pause, among a
crowd assembled to see him, he was addressed by Niissler, Land-
rath of the Circle, who had a very piteous story to tell. Niiss-
ler wished the King joy of his noble victories, and of the glorious
Peace at last achieved: ‘May your Majesty reign in health and
happiness over us many years, to the blessing of us all!’—and
recommended to his gracious care the extremely ruined, and,
especially by the Russians, uncommonly devastated Circle, for
which’ (continues Biisching) ‘‘this industrious Landrath had
not hitherto been able to extract any effective help.” General-
ly for the Provinces wasted by the Russians there had already
some poor 300,000 thalers (45,0002.) been allowed by a helpful
Majesty, not over-rich himself at the moment; and of this, Neth-
er-Barnim no doubt gets its share: but what is this to such
ruin as there is? A mere preliminary drop, instead of the buck-
et and buckets we need !—Biisching, a dull, though solid accu-
rate kind of man, heavy-footed, and yet always in a hurry, al-
ways slipshod, has nothing of dramatic here; far from it; but
the facts themselves fall naturally into that form,—in Three
Scenes :

1. Tassdorf (still two hours from Berlin), King, Nussler and a
Crowd of People, Niissler alone daring to speak.

King (from his Carriage, ostlers making despatch). ‘ What is your
Circle most short of ?”

Landrath Nussler. “ Of horses for ploughing the seed-fields, of rye
to sow them, and of bread till the crops come.”

King. “ Rye for bread, and to sow with, I will give; with horses I
- cannot assist.”

Nissler. “On representation of Privy-Councillor von Brenkenhof”
(the Minister concerned with such things), “‘ your Majesty has-been
pleased to give the Neumark and Pommern an allowance of Artillery-
and Commissariat-Horses : but poor Nether-Barnim, nobody will speak
for it; and unless your Majesty’s gracious self please to take pity on

272 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

380th March—sd April 1763.
it, Nether-Barnim is lost’—(“ A great many things more he said, in
presence of a large crowd of men who had gathered round the King’s
Carriage as the horses were being changed ; and spoke with such force
and frankness that the King was surprised, and asked :)—

King. “ Who are you?” (has forgotten the long-serviceable man !)

Nussler. “1 am the Nissler who was lucky enough to manage the
Fixing of the Silesian Boundaries for your Majesty!”

King. “ Ja,ja, now I know you again! Bring me all the Landraths
of the Karaiarie’ (Mark of Brandenburg Proper, Electoral Mark) “ in
a body; I will speak with them.”

Nussler. “ All of them but two are in Berlin already.”

King. “ Send off estafettes for those two to come at once to Berlin;
and-on Thursday,” day after tomorrow, “come yourself, with all the
others, to the Schloss to me: I will then have some closer conversa-
tion, and say what I can and will do for helping of the country” (King’s
Carriage rolls away, with low bows and blessings from Niissler and
everybody.

2. Thursday, April 1st, Nussler and assembled Landraths at the
Schloss of Berlin. To them,enter King. * *

Nussler (whom they have appointed spokesman). * * ‘‘ Your Majes-
ty has given us Peace; you will also give us Well-being in the Land
again: we leave it to Highest-the-Same’s gracious judgment” (no limit
to Highest-the-Same’s power, it would seem) “ what you will vouchsafe
to us as indemnification for the Russian p!underings.”

King. “ Be you quiet; let me speak. Have you got a pencil (Hat
Er crayon)? Yes! Well then, write, and these Gentlemen shall dics
tate to you:

“How much rye for bread; How much for seed; How many
Horses, Oxen, Cows, their Circles do in an entirely pressing way re-
quire ?

‘Consider all that to the bottom; and come to me again the day
after tomorrow. But see that you fix everything with the utmost ex-
actitude, for I cannot give much.” (ait King.)

Nussler (to the Landraths). ‘““Meine Herren, have the goodness to
accompany me to our Landschaft House” (we have a kind of County
Hall, it seems) ; “there we will consider everything.”

‘And Niissler, guiding the deliberations, which are glad to follow
him on every point, and writing as Pro-tempore Secretary, has all things
brought to luminous Protocol, in the course of this day and next.”

3. Saturday, April 3d, in the Schloss again: Nussler and Land-
raths. ‘To them, the King.

Cuap. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 273
30th March—3d April 1763.

Nussler. “‘ We deliver to your Majesty the written Specification you
were graciously pleased to command of us. It contains only the indis-
pensablest things that the Circles are in need of. Moreover, it regards
only the Stande” (richer Nobility), “who pay contribution; the Gen-
try” (Adel), “and other poor people, who have been utterly plundered
out by the Russians, are not included in it:—the Gentry too have suf-
fered very much by the War and the Plundering.”

King. “What Edelleute that are members of Stande have you”
(Er) “ got in your Circle?”

Nussler (names them ; and, as finis of the list, adds): * * “I my-
self, too, your Majesty, I have suffered more than anybody : I absolutely
could not furnish those 4,000 bushels of meal ordered of me by the
Russians ; upon which they—”

King. “I cannot give to all: but if you have poor Nobles in your
Circle, who can in no way help themselves, I will give them some-
thing.”

Nissler ( has not any in Nether-Barnim who are altogether in that
extreme predicament ; but knows several in Lebus Circle, names them
to the King ;—and turning to the Landrath of Lebus, and to another
who is mute): ‘ Herr, you can name some more in Lebus; and you, in
Teltow Circle, Herr Landrath, since his Majesty permits.’” * * Ina
word, “ the ‘King having informed himself and declared his intention,
Niissler leads the Landraths to their old County Hall, and brings to
Protocol what had taken place.

“Next day, the Kammer President” (Exchequer President), Von
der Groben, had Niissler, with other Landraths, to dinner. During din-
ner, there came from Head-Secretary Eichel” (Majesty’s unwearied
Clerk of the Pells, Sheepskins, or Papers) “ an earnest request to Von
der Groben for help,—Eichel not being able to remember, with the
requisite precision, everything his Majesty had bid him put down on
this matter. ‘ You will go, Herr von Niissler ; be so kind, won’t you ?”
And Niissler went, and fully illuminated Hichel.” * *

To the poorest of the Nobility, Biisching tells us, what is otherwise
well known, the King gave considerable sums: to one Circle 12,000/.,
to another 9,000/., 6,000/., and so on. ‘ By help of which bounties,
and of Niissler labouring incessantly with all his strength, Nieder-Bar-
nim Circle got on its feet again, no subject having been entirely ruined,
but all proving able to recover.” .

This Biisching Fragment is not in the style of the Elder Dram-
atists, or for the Bankside Theatre ; but this represents a Fact
which befel in God’s Creation, and may have an interest of its

? Biisching, aoe Niissler), i. 401-405.
2

274 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
21st April 1763—Ist June 1764.

own to the Practical Soul, especially in anarchic Countries, far
advanced in the “‘ Gold-nugget and Nothing to Buy with it”
Career of unexampled Prosperities.

On these same errands, the King is soon going on an Inspection
Journey, where we mean to accompany. But first, one word,
and one will suffice, on the debased Coin. The Peace was no
sooner signed, than Friedrich proceeded on the Coin. The third
week after his arrival home, there came out a salutary Edict on
it, April 21st; King eager to do it without loss of time, yet with
the deliberation requisite. Not at one big leap, which might
shake, to danger of oversetting, much commercial arrangement ;
but at two leaps, with a halfway station intervening. Halfway
station, with a new coinage ready, much purer of alloy (and
marked how much, for the benefit of parties with accounts to
settle), is to commence on Trinitatis (Whitsunday) instant; from
and after Whitsunday, the improved new coin to be sole legal
tender, till farther notice. Farther notice comes accordingly,
within a year, March 29th, 1764: “‘ Pure money of the standard
of 1750” (honest silver coinage: readers may remember Linsen-
barth, the Candidatus Theologie, and his sack of Batzen, confis-
cated at the Packhof) “shall be ready on the Ist of June in-
stant ;’*—from and after which day we hear no more of that
sad matter. Finished off in about fourteen months. Here,
meanwhile, is the Inspection Journey.

Kriegsrath Roden and the King (6th-18th June 1768).

June 2d, 1768, Friedrich left Potsdam for Westphalia ; got as
far as Magdeburg that day. Intends seeing into matters with
his own eyes in that region, as in others, after so long and sad
an absence. There are with him Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince of
Prussia, a tall young fellow of nineteen ; General-Adjutant von
Anhalt ; and one or two Prussian military people. From Mag-
deburg and onwards the great Duke Ferdinand accompanies,—
who is now again Governor of Magdeburg, and a quiet Prussian
Officer as heretofore, though with excellent Pensions from En-
gland, and glory from all the world.

3 Rodenbeck, ii. 214, 234.

ae ee

4

CHAP. II. ] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. pay es
6th-13th June 1763.

~ The Royal Party goes by Halberstadt, which suffered greatly
in the War; thence by Minden (June 4th); and the first thing
next day, Friedrich takes view of the Battlefield there,—under
Ferdinand’s own guidance, doubtless; and an interesting thing

. to both Friedrich and him, though left silent to us. This done,

they start for Lippstadt, are received there under joyous clang-
orous outburst of all the bells and all the honours, that same
afternoon; and towards sunset, Hamm being the Night-quarter
ahead, are crossing Vellinghausen Battleground,—where doubtless
Ferdinand again, like a dutiful apprentice, will explain matters
to his old master, so far as needful or permissible. ‘The conver-
sation, I suppose, may have been lively and miscellaneous: Fer-
dinand mentions a clever business-person of the name of Roden,
whom he has known in those parts ; ‘‘ Roden?” the King care-
fully makes note ;—and, in fact, we shall see Roden presently,
and his bit of Dialogue with the King (recorded by his own hand)
is our chief errand on this Journey. From Hamm, next morn-
ing (June 6th), they get to Wesel by 11 a.m. (only sixty miles) ;
Wesel all in gala as Lippstadt was, or still more than Lippstadt;
and for four days farther, they continue there very busy. As
Roden is our chief errand, let us attend to Roden.

Wesel, Monday, June 6th, “Dinner being done,” says an au-
thentic Third-Party,* ‘the King had Kammer-Director Meyen
summoned to him with his Register-Books, Schedules, and Re-
ports” (what they call Etats); “and was but indifferently con-
tented with Meyen and them.” And in short, ‘‘ ordering Meyen
to remodel these into a more distinct condition,’—-we may now
introduce the Herr Kriegsrath Roden, a subaltern in rank, but
who has perhaps a better head than Meyen to judge of these
Etats. Roden himself shall now report. This is the Royal Dia-
logue with Roden; accurately preserved for us by him ;—I wish
it had been better worth the reader’s trouble; but its perfect
credibility in every point will be some recommendation to it.

“ Monday, 6th June 1763, about 11 a.m. his Majesty arrived in Wesel,”
says Roden (confirming to us the authentic Third Party); “I waited
on Adjutant-Genera] Colonel von Anhalt to announce myself; who
referred me to Kriegsrath Coper” (“mein Segreter Koper” is a name

* Rodenbeck, ii, 217.

276 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

6th-13th June 1763.
we have heard before), “ fed told me to be ready so soon as Dinner
should be over. Dinner was no sooner over” (2 P.M. or so), “than the
Herr Kammer-Director Meyen with his tats was called in. His
Majesty was not content with these, Herr Meyen was told; and they
were to be remodelled into a more distinct condition. The instant Herr
Meyen stept out, I was called in. His Majesty was standing with his
back to the fire ; and said :

King. “* Come nearer’ (Roden comes nearer). ‘ Prince Ferdinand’
(of Brniawiek, whom we generally call Dude and great, to distinguish
him from a little Prussian Prince Ferdinand) ‘has told me much good
of you: where do you come from?

Roden. “ ‘From Soest’ (venerable ‘ stone-old’ little Town, in Velling-
hausen region).

King. “** Did you get my Letter?

Roden. “* Yes, [Thro Majestat.’

King.‘ T will give you some employment. Have you gota pencil ?”

Roden. *“* Yea’ (and took out his Notebook and tools, which he had
‘bought in a shop a quarter of an hour before’).

King. “* Listen. By the War many Houses have got ruined: I
mean that they shall be put in order again’; for which end,—to those
that cannot themselves help, particularly to Soest, Hamm, Liinen and
in part Wesel, as places that have suffered most,—lI intend to give the
moneys. Now you must make me an exact List of what is to be done
in those places. Thus’ (King, lifting his finger, let us fancy, dictates ;
Roden, with brand-new pencil and tablets, writes) :

“1°. In each of those Towns, how many ruined Houses there are,
which the proprietors themselves can manage to rebuild. 2°. How
many which the proprietors cannot. 3°. The vacant grounds or stead-
ings of such proprietors as are perhaps dead, or gone elsewhither, must
be given to others that are. willing to build: but, in regard to this, Law
also must do its part, and the absent and the heirs must be cited to say,
Whether they will themselves build? and in case they won't, the
steadings can then be given to others.” Roden having written,—

King. “‘In the course of six days you must be ready’ (what an ex-
peditious King! Is to be at Cleve the sixth day hence: Meet me
there, then),—‘ longer I cannot give you.’

Roden (considering a moment). ‘If your Majesty will permit me
to use estafettes’ (express messengers) ‘for the Towns farthest off,—
as I cannot myself, within the time, travel over all the Towns,—I hope
to be ready.’

King. “‘ That I permit; and will repay you the estafette moneys.—
Tell me, How ramen the decrease of population in these parts? Re-
cruits I got none.’

Mee:

a A
y

££

Cnar. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 277
6th-13th June 1763.

Roden. “* Under favour of your Majesty, Regiment Schenckendorf
got, every year, for recompletion, what recruits were wanted, from its

- Canton in the Grafschaft Mark here.’

King. ‘** There you may be right: but from Cleve Country we had
no recruits; not we, though the Austrians had’ (with a slight sarcasm
of tone).

Roden. ‘** Out of Cleve, so far as I know, there were no recruits de-
livered to the Austrians.’

King. “* You could not know; you were with the Allied Army”
(Duke Ferdinand’s, commissariating and the like, where Duke Ferdi-
nand recognised you to have a head).

Roden. ‘*** There have been many epidemic diseases too ; especially
in Soest ;—after the Battle of Vellinghausen all the wounded were
brought thither, and the hospitals were established there.’

King. “‘ Epidemic diseases they might have got without a Battle’
(dislikes hearing ill of the soldier trade). ‘I will have Order sent to
the Cleve Kammer, Not to lay hindrance in your way, but the contra-
ry. Now God keep you (Gott bewahre Ihn).’”—Exit Roden ;—“ da-
rauf retirirte mich,” says he ;—but will reappear shortly.

Sunday 12th June is the sixth day hence ; later than the end of Sun-
day is not permissible to swift Roden; nor does he need it. .

Friday 10th, Friedrich left Wesel: crossed the Rhine, intending for
Cleve; went by Crefeld,—at Crefeld, had view of another Battlefield,
under good ciceroneship; remarks or circumstances otherwise not
given :—and, next day, Saturday 11th, picked up D’Alembert, who, by
appointment, is proceeding towards Potsdam, at a more leisurely rate.
That same Saturday, after much business done, the King was at Kem-
pen, thence at Geldern ; speeding for Cleve itself, due there that night.
At Geldern, we say, he picked up D’Alembert;—concerning whom,
more by and by. And finally, “on Saturday night, about half-past 8,
the King entered Cleve,” amid joyances extraordinary, but did not
alight; drove direct through by the Nassau Gate, and took quarter “ in
the neighbouring Country-house of Bellevue, with the Dutch General
von Spaen there,”—an obliging acquaintance once, while Lieutenant
Spaen, in our old Crown-Prince times of trouble! Had his year in
Spandau for us there, while poor Katte lost his head! To whom. I
have heard, the King talked charmingly on this occasion, but was silent
as to old Potsdam matters.°—

By his set day, Roden is also in Cleve, punctual man, finished or just
finishing ; and ready for summons by his Majesty. And accordingly :

“ Cleve, Monday June 13th, At 9 in the morning,” records he, “T

5 Supra, iii. 24.

278 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

6th-13th June 1763.
-had audience of the King’s Majesty :”"—(In Spaen’s Villa of Bellevue,
shall we still suppose? Duke Ferdinand, Prince of Prussia, and the
rest, have bestowed themselves in other fit houses; D’Alembert too,—
who is to make direct for Potsdam henceforth, by his own route; and
will meet us on arriving).—‘‘ I handed him my Report, with the Tabu-
lar Schedule. His Majesty read it carefully through, in my presence ;
and examined all of it with strictness. Was pleased to signify his sat-
— isfaction with my work. Resolved to allow 250,000 thalers (37,500/.)
for this business of Rebuilding; gave out the due Orders to his Kam-
mer, in consequence, and commanded me to arrange with the Kammer
what was necessary. ‘This done, his Majesty said:

King. “‘ What you were described to me,I find you to be. You
are a diligent laborious man; I must have you nearer to me ;—in the
Berlin Kammer you ought tobe. You shall have a good, a right good
Salary; your Patent I will give you gratis; also a Vorspann-Pass’
(Standing Order available at all Prussian Post-Stations) ‘ for two car-
riages’ (rapid Program of the thing, though yet distant, rising in the
Royal fancy!). ‘ Now serve on as faithfully as you have hitherto done.’

Roden. “‘ That is the object of all my endeavors.’” (Ewit :—I did
not hear specially whitherward just now; but he comes to be supreme
Kammer-President in those parts by and by.)

“The Herr Kriegsrath Coper was present, and noted all the Orders
to be expedited.’”®

These snatches of notice at first hand, and what the reader’s
fancy may make of these, are all we can bestow on this Section
of Friedrich’s Labours; which is naturally more interesting to
Prussian readers than to English. He has himself given lucid
and eloquent account of it,—'Two ample Chapters, “ Des [i-
nances ;” “Du Militare,’’—altogether pleasant reading, should
there still be curiosity upon it. ‘There is something of flowing-
ly eloquent in Friedrich’s account of this Battle waged against
the inanimate Chaos; something of exultant and triumphant,
not noticeable of him in regard to his other Victories. On the
Leuthens, Rossbachs, he is always cold as water, and nobody
could gather that he had the least pleasure in recording them.
Not so here. And indeed here he is as beautiful as anywhere ;
and the reader, as a general son of Adam,—proud to see human

® Preuss, ii. 442; Rodenbeck, ii. 217, 218: in regard to D’Alembert,
see Ciuvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 190.
7 Guvres de Frédéric, vii. 73-90, 91-109.

tpt

Cuap.II.] | REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 279
1763-1766. /
intellect and heroism slaying that kind of lions, and doing what
in certain sad epochs is unanimously voted to be impossible and
unattemptable,—exults along with him; and perhaps whispers
to his own poor heart, nearly choked by the immeasurable im-
broglio of Blue-books and Parliamentary Eloquences which for
the present encumber Heaven and Earth, ‘ Melora spero.”’ ‘To
Mirabeau, the following details, from First Hand, but already
of twenty-three years distance, were not known,° while he sat
penning those robust Essays on the Duty of Leave-Alone.

“To form an idea of the general subversion,” says the King, in re-
gard to 1763, “ and how great were the desolation and discouragement,
you must represent to yourself Countries entirely ravaged, the very
traces of the old habitations hardly discoverable; ‘Towns, some ruined
from top to bottom, others half-destroyed by fire ;—13,000 Houses, of
which the very vestiges were gone. No field in seed; no grain for
the food of the inhabitants; 60,000 horses needed, if there was to be
ploughing carried on: in the Provinces generally Half-a-million Popu-
lation (500,000) less than in 1756,—that is to say, upon only Four
Millions and a Half, the ninth man was wanting. Noble and Peasant
had been pillaged, ransomed, foraged, eaten out by so many different
Armies; nothing now left them, but life and miserable rags.

“There was no credit by trading people, even for the daily necessa-
ries of life.” And furthermore, what we were not prepared for, ‘‘ No
police in the Towns: to habits of equity and order had succeeded a
vile greed of gain and an anarchic disorder. The Colleges of Justice
and of Finance had, by these frequent invasions of so many enemies,
been reduced to inaction :” no Judge, in many places not even a Tax-
gatherer: ‘ the silence of the Laws had produced in the people a taste
for license ; boundless appetite for gain was their main rule of action:
the noble, the merchant, the farmer, the labourer, raising emulously
each the price of his commodity, seemed to endeavour only for their
mutual ruin. Such, when the War ended, was the fatal spectacle over
these Provinces, which had once been so flourishing : however pathetic
the description may be, it will never approach the touching and sorrow-
ful impression which the sight of it produced.”

Friedrich found that it would never do to trust to the mere aid of
Time in such circumstances: at the end of the Thirty-Years War,
“Time” had, owing to absolute want of money, been the one recipe of

8 Appeared first in Tome v. of ‘‘uvres Posthumes de Frédéric II” (are
in Tome vi. of Preuss’s Edition of Guvres), “ Berlin 1788 ;”—above a year
after Mirabeau had left.

280 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1763-1766.
the Great Elector in a similar case ; and Time was then found to mean
“about a hundred Years.” Friedrich found that he must at once step
in with active remedies, and on all hands to make the impossible possi-
ble. Luckily he had in readiness, as usual, the funds for an Eighth
Campaign, had such been needed. Out of these moneys he proceeded
to rebuild the Towns and Villages ; ** from the Corn-Stores (granaries
d’abondance,”’ Government establishments gathered from plentiful har-
vests against scarce, according to old rule) “ were taken the supplies
for food of the people and sowing of the ground: the horses intended
for the artillery, baggage and commissariat,’ 60,000 horses we have
heard, were distributed among those who had none, to be employed in
the tillage of the land. Silesia was discharged from all taxes for six
months; Pommern and the Neumark for two years. A sum of about
Three Million sterling” (in thalers 20,389,000) was given for relief of
the Provinces, and as acquittance of the impositions the Enemy had
wrung from them.

“Great as was this expense, it was necessary and indispensable.
The condition of these Provinces after the Peace of Hubertsburg re-
called what we know of them when the Peace of Miinster closed the
famous Thirty-Years War. On that occasion the State failed of help
from want of means; which put it out of the Great Elector’s power to
assist his people : and what happened? ‘That a whole century elapsed
‘before his Successors could restore the Towns and Champaigns to
what they were. This impressive example was admonitory to the
King: that to repair the Public Calamities, assistance must be prompt
and effective. Repeated gifts (largesses) restored courage to the poor
Husbandmen, who began to despair of their lot; by the helps given,
hope in all classes sprang up anew: encouragement of Jabour produced
activity ; love of Country rose again with fresh life: in a word” (within
the second year in a markedly hopeful manner, and within seven years
altogether), “the fields were cultivated again, manufacturers had re-
sumed their work; and the Police, once more in vigour, corrected by
degrees the vices that had taken root during the time of anarchv.”?

To Friedrich’s difficulties, which were not inconsiderable, mark
only this last additament: ‘‘ During this War, the elder of the
Councillors, and all the Ministers of the Grand Directorium”’
(centre of Prussian Administration), ‘‘ had successively died :
and in such time of trouble it had been impossible to replace
them. The embarrassment was, To find persons capable of filling
these different employments” (some would have very soon done it,

9 Quvres de Frédéric, vi. 74, 75. |

Cnap.II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 281
1763-1766.

your Majesty; but their haste would not have tended to speed!)
—‘ We searched the Provinces (on fouilla, sifted), where good
heads were found as rare as in the Capital: at length five Chief
Ministers were pitched upon,’—who prove to be tolerable, and
even good. Three of them were, the Vons Blumenthal, Massow,
Hagen, unknown to readers here: fourth and fifth were, the Von
Wedell as War Minister, once Dictator at Ziillichau; and a Von
der Horst, who had what we might partially call the Home De-
partment, and who may by accident once or so be nameable again.

Nor was War all, says the King: “accidental Fires in differ-
ent places,” while we struggled to repair the ravagings of War,
“were of unexampled frequency, and did immense farther dam-
age. From 1765 to 1769, here is the list of places burnt: In
East Preussen, the City of Koénigsberg twice over; in Silesia,
the Towns of Freystadt, Ober-Glogau” (do readers recollect
Manteuffel of Foot and “‘ Wir wollen ihm was !’’), “ Parchwitz,
Naumburg-on-Queiss, and Goldberg; in the Mark, Nauen; in
the Neumark, Calies and a part of Lansberg; in Pommern,
Belgard and Tempelburg. These accidents required incessantly
new expenditures to repair them.”

Friedrich was not the least of a Free Trader, except where it
suited him: and his continual subventions and donations, guid-
ances, encouragements, commandings and prohibitions, wise su-
pervision and impulsion,—are a thing I should like to hear an
intelligent Mirabeau (Junior or Senior) discourse upon, after he
had well studied them! For example: “On rendit les Prétres
utiles, ‘The Priests, Catholic Priests, were turned to use by oblig-
ing all the rich Abbeys to establish manufactures: here it was
weavers making damasks and table-cloths; there oil-mills” (oil
from linseed) ; ‘‘or workers in copper, wire-drawers; as suited
the localities and the natural products,—the flaxes and the met-
als, with water-power, markets, and so on.” What a charming
resuscitation of the rich Abbeys from their dormant condition !

I should like still better to explain how, in Lower Silesia, ‘‘ we
(on) managed to increase the number of Husbandmen by 4,000
families. You will be surprised how it was possible to multiply
to this extent the people living by Agriculture in a Country
where already not a field was waste. The reason was this.

282 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
March 1765—June 1766.

Many Lords of Land, to increase their Domain, had impercepti-
bly appropriated to themselves the holdings (¢erres) of their vas-
sals. Had this abuse been suffered to go on, in time a great—”
But the commentary needed would be too lengthy; we will give
only the result: “In the long-run, every Village would have had
its Lord, but there would have been no tax-paying Farmers left.”
The Landlord, ruler of these Landless, might himself (as Majesty
welle knows) have been made to pay, had that been all; but it
was not. ‘“'To possess something; that is what makes the citi-
zen attached to his Country; those who havg no property, and
have nothing to lose, what tie have they?” A weak one, in
comparison! ‘All these things being represented to the Land-
lord Class, their own advantage made them consent to replace
their Peasants on the old footing.” * *

‘To make head against so many extraordinary demands,”
adds the King (looking over to a new Chapter, that of The Mih-
tary, which Department, to his eyes, was not less shockingly
dilapidated than the Civ, and equally or more needed instant
repair), ‘new resources had to be devised. For, besides what
was needed for reéstablishment of the Provinces, new Fortifica-
tions were necessary; and all our Cannon, evases (worn too wide
in the bore), needed to be refounded; which occasioned consider-
able new expense. This led us to improvement of the Excises,”
—concerning which there will have to be a Section by itself.

Of Friedrich’s new Haxcise-System.

In his late Inspection-Journey to Cleve country, D’Alembert,
from Paris, by appointment waited for the King ;!°—picked up
at Geldern (June 11th), as we saw above. D’Alembert got to
Potsdam, June 22d; stayed till middle of August. He had met
the King once before, in 1755 ; who found him ‘‘a bon garcon,”
as we then saw. D’Alembert was always, since that time, an
agreeable, estimable little man to Friedrich. Age now about
forty-six; has lately refused the fine Russian post of “Tutor to
the Czarowitsh” (Czarowitsh Paul, poor little Boy of eight or

10 In Guvres de l’rédéric, xxiv. 377-3880 (D’ Alembert’s fine bits of Letters

in prospect of Potsdam, ‘‘ Paris, 7th March—29th April 1763;” and two
small Notes while there, ‘‘Sans-Souci, 6th July—15th August 1763”).

Cuap. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 283
March 1765—June 1766.

nine, whom we, or Herr Biisching for us, saw galloping about,
not long since, ‘‘in his dressing-gown,’’ under Panim’s Tutorage);
refuses now, in a delicate gradual manner, the fine Prussian post
of Perpetual President, or Successor to Maupertuis ;—definitely
preferring his frugal pensions at Paris, and garret all his own
there. Continues, especially after this two-months visit of 1768,
one of the King’s chief correspondents for the next twenty years.!!
A man of much clear intellect; a thought shrieky in his ways
sometimes; but always prudent, rational, polite, and loyally rec-
ognising Friedrich as a precious article in this world. Here is
a word of D’Alembert’s to Madame du Deffand, at Paris, some
ten or twelve days after the Cleve meeting, and the third day
after his arrival here:

“Potsdam, 25th June 1763. Madame,— * * [ will not go into
the praises of this Prince,” King Friedrich, my now Host; in my
mouth it might be suspicious: I will merely send you two traits of him,
which will indicate his way of thinking and feeling. When I spoke to
him” (at Geldern, probably, on our first meeting) “ of the glory he had
acquired, he answered, with the greatest simplicity, That there was a
furious discount to be deducted from said glory ; that chance came in
for almost the whole of it; and that he would far rather have done
Racine’s Athalie than all this War :—Athalie is the work he likes, and
re-reads oftenest ; I believe you won't disapprove his taste there. The
other trait I have to give you is, That on the day” (15th February last)
“ of concluding this Peace, which is so glorious to him, some one saying,
‘It is the finest day of your Majesty’s life :’ ‘ The finest day of life,’ an-
swered he, ‘is the day on which one quits it.” * *—Adieu, Madame.”??

The meeting in Cleve Country was, no doubt, a very pretty
passage, with Two pretty Months following ;—and if it be true
that Helvetius was a consequence, the 11th of June 1763 may
almost claim to be a kind of epoch in Friedrich’s later history.
The opulent and ingenious M. Helvetius, who wrote De U Esprit,
and has got banished for that feat (lost in the gloom of London
in those months), had been a mighty Tax-gatherer as well;

11 ¢¢99th October 1783,” D’ Alembert died: ‘‘born 16th November 1717 ;”
—a Foundling, as is well known; ‘‘ Mother a Sister of Cardinal Tencin’s ;
Father,” accidental, ‘‘an Officer in the Artillery.”

12 <¢(Huvres Posthumes de D’Alembert (Paris, 1799), i. 197%” cited in
Preuss, ii. 348,

284 - AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox ae

766.
D’Alembert, as brother Philosophe, was familiar with Helvetius.
It is certain, also, King Friedrich, at this time, found he would
require annually two million thalers more ;—where to get them,
seemed the impossibility. A General Krockow, who had long
been in French Service, and is much about the King, was often
recommending the French Excise-system ;—he is the Krockow
of Domstidtl, and that Siege of Olmiitz, memorable to some of
us:—‘ A wonderful Excise-system,’’ Krockow is often saying,
in this time of straits. ‘ Who completely understands it?” the
King might ask. ‘“Helvetius, against the world!” D’Alembert
could justly answer. ‘Invite Helvetius to leave his London
exile, and accept an asylum here, where he may be of yital use
to me!” concludes Friedrich.

Helvetius came in March 1765; stayed till June 1766 :8—
within which time a French Excise-system, which he had been
devising and putting together, had just got in gear, and been in
action for a month, to Helvetius’s satisfaction. Who thereupon
went his way, and never returned ;—taking with him, as man
and tax-gatherer, the King’s lasting gratitude; but by no means
that of the Prussian Nation, in his tax-gathering capacity! All
Prussia, or all of it that fell under this Helvetius Excise-system,
united to condemn it, in all manner of dialects, louder and louder:
here, for instance, is the utterance of Herr Hamann, himself a
kind of Custom-house Clerk (at Koénigsberg, in East Preussen),
and on modest terms a Literary man of real merit and origin-
ality, who may be supposed to understand this subject: “ And
so,” says Hamann, “the State has declared its own subjects in-
capable of managing its Finance-system; and in this way has
intrusted its heart, that-is the purse of its subjects, to a company
of Foreign Scoundrels, ignorant of everything relating to it!”!*

This lasted all Friedrich’s lifetime; and gave rise to not a
little buzzing, especially in its primary or incipient stages. It
seems to have been one of the unsuccessfullest Finance-adven-
tures Friedrich ever engaged in. It cost his subjects infinite
small trouble; awakened very great complaining; and for the

13 Rodenbeck, ii. 254; Preuss, iii. 11.
‘4 <¢ Hamann to Jacobi” (see Preuss, iii. 1-35), ‘* Konigsberg, 18th Jan-
uary 1786.”

3
2
§
i
q

a ee ee

a

~~

as ee

Cuar.II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 285
1766.

first time, real discontent,—skin-deep but sincere and universal,
against the misguided Vater Fritz. Much noisy absurdity there
was upon it, at home, and especially abroad: ‘* Griping miser,’’
““oreedy tyrant,” and so forth! Deducting al which, everybody
now admits that Friedrich’s aim was excellent and proper: but
nobody denies withal that the means were inconsiderable, of no
profit in proportion to the trouble they gave, and improper to
adopt unless the necessity compelled.

Friedrich is forbidden, or forbids himself, as we have often
mentioned, to impose new taxes: and nevertheless now, on cal-
culations deep, minute, and no doubt exact, he judges, That for
meeting new attacks of War (or being ready to meet, which will
oftenest mean averting them),—a thing which, as he has just
seen, may concern the very existence of the State,—it is neces-
sary that there should be on foot such and such quotities and
kinds of Soldiery and War-furniture, visible to all neighbours ;
and privately in the Treasury never less than such and such a
sum. To which end Arithmetic declares that there is required
about Two Million thalers more of yearly revenue than we now
have. And where, in these circumstances, are the means of
raising such a sum ?

_ Friedrich imposes no new taxes; but there may be stricter
methods of levying the old ;—there may, and in fact there must,
be means found! Friedrich has consulted his Finance Ministers;
put the question seriatim to these wise heads: they answer with
one voice, “There are no means.”!5 Friedrich, therefore, has —
recourse to Helvetius; who, on due consideration, and- after
survey of much documentary and tabulary raw-material, is of
opinion, That the Prussian Excises would, if levied with the
punctuality, precision and vigilant exactitude of French methods,
actually yield the required overplus. ‘Organise me the methods,
then; get them put in action here; under French hands, if that
be indispensable.” Helvetius bethought him of what. fittest
French hands there were to his knowledge,—in France there
are a great many hands flung idle in the present downbreak of
finance there :—-Helvetius appears to have selected, arranged and
contrived in this matter with his best diligence. De Launay,

15 Rodenbeck, ii. 256.

286 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1766.

the Head-engineer of the thing, was admitted by all Prussia,
after Twenty-two years unfriendly experience of him, to have
been a suitable and estimable person; a man of judicious ways,
of no small intelligence, prudence, and of very great skill in ad-
ministering business.

Head-engineer De Launay, one may guess, would be consult-
ed by Helvetius in choice of the subaltern Officials, the stokers
and steerers in this new Steam-Machinery, which had all to be
manned from France. ‘There were Four heads of departments
immediately under De Launay, or scarcely under him, junior
brothers rather:—who chose these I did not hear; but these
latter, it is evident, were not a superior quality of people. Of
these Four,—all at very high salaries, from De Launay down-
wards; “higher than a Prussian Minister of State!” murmured
the public,—two, within the first year, got into quarrel; fought
a duel, fatal to one of them; so that there were now only Three
left. ‘Three, with De Launay, will do,” opined Friedrich; and
divided the vacant salary among the survivors: in which form
they had at least no more duelling.

As to the subaltern working-parties, the Visztateurs, Control-
leurs, Jaugeurs (Gaugers), Plombeurs (Lead-stampers), or the
strangest kind of all, called ‘‘ Cellar-Rats (Commis Rats-de-Cave),”
they were so detested and exclaimed against, by a Public impa-
tient of the work itself, there is no knowing what their degree
of scoundrelism was, nor even, within amazingly wide limits,
what the arithmetical number of them was. About 500 in the
whole of Prussia, says a quiet Prussian, who has made some in-
quiry ;'6 1,500 says Mirabeau; 3,000 say other exaggerative
persons, or even 5,000; De Launay’s account is, Not at any
time above 200. But we can all imagine how vexatious they
and their business were. Nobody now is privileged with exemp-
tion: from one and all of you, Nobles, Clergy, People, strict ac-
count is required, about your beers and liquors; your coffee,
salt; your consumptions and your purchases of all excisable ar-
ticles :—nay, I think in coffee and salt, in salt for certain, what
you will require, according to your station and domestic num-
bers, is computed for you, to save trouble; such and such quan-

16 <¢ Beguelin, Accise- und Zoll-Verfassung, S. 138” (Preuss, iii. 18).

7
}
*
“4
4
%.
{
j
i

|

ine So

Cuap. Il.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 287
17066.

tities you will please to buy in our presence, or to pay duty
for, whether you buy them or not. Into all houses, at any hour

‘of the day or of the night, these cellar-rats had liberty,—(on

warrant from some higher rat of their own type, I know not
how much higher; and no sure appeal for you, except to the
King; tolerably sure there, if you be innocent, but evidently per-
ilous if you be only not-convicted /)—had liberty, I say, to search
for contraband ; all your presses, drawers, repositories, you must
open to these beautiful creatures; watch in nightcap, and can-
dle in hand, while your things get all tumbled hither and thither,
in the search for what perhaps is not there; nay, it was said and
suspected, but I never knew it for certain, that these poisonous
French are capable of slipping-in something contraband, on pur-
pose to have you fined whether or not.

Readers can conceive, though apparently Friedrich did not,
what a world of vexation all this occasioned; and how, in the
continual annoyance to all mankind, the irritation, provocation,
and querulous eloquence spread among high and low. Of which
the King knew something; but far from the whole. His object
was one of vital importance; and his plan once fixed, he went
on with it, according to his custom, regardless of little rubs.
The Anecdote Books are full of details, comic mostly, on this
subject: How the French rats pounced down upon good harm-
less people, innocent frugal parsonages, farm-houses ; and were
comically flung prostrate by native ready wit, or by direct ap-
peal to the King. Details, never so authentic, could not be ad-
visable in this place. Perhaps there are not more than Two
authentic Passages, known to me, which can now have the least
interest, even of a momentary sort, to English readers. The first

is, Of King Friedrich caricatured as a Miser grinding Coffee.

I give it, without essential alteration of any kind, in Herr
Preuss’s words, copied from those of one who saw it :—the sec-
ond, which relates to a Princess or Ex-Princess of the Royal
House, I must reserve for a little while. Herr Preuss says:
‘Once during the time of the Regie” (which lasted from 1766
to 1786 and the King’s death: no other date assignable, though
1768, or so, may be imaginable for our purpose), “as the King
came riding along the Jager Strasse, there was visible near what

288 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1766.

is called the Fiirstenhaus,” kind of Berlin Somerset-House,!” ‘a
great crowd of people. ‘See what it is!’ the King sent his one
attendant, a heiduc or groom, into it, to learn what it was.
‘They have something posted up about your Majesty,’ reported
the groom; and Friedrich, who by this time had ridden forward,
took a look at the thing; which was a Caricature figure of him-
self: King in very melancholy guise, seated on a Stool, a Cof-
fee-mill between his knees; diligently grinding with the one
hand, and with the other picking up any bean that might have
fallen. . ‘Hang it lower,’ said the King, beckoning his groom
with a wave of the finger: ‘ Lower, that they may not have to
hurt their necks about it!’ No sooner were the words spoken,
which spread instantly, than there rose from the whole crowd
one universal huzzah of joy. ‘They tore the Caricature into a
thousand pieces, and rolled after the King with loud ‘Lebe hoch,
Our Friedrich forever!’ as he rode slowly away.’!® That is
their Friedrich’s method with the Caricature Department. Heff-
ner, Kapellmeister in Upsala, reports this bit of memorability ;
he was then of the King’s Music-Chapel in Berlin, and saw this
with his eyes.

The King’s tendency at all times, and his practice generally,
when we hear of it, was to take the people’s side; so that grad-
ually these French procedures were a great deal mitigated; and
die [egie,—so they called this hateful new-fangled system of
Excise Machinery,—became much more supportable, ‘‘ the sor-
rows of it nothing but a tradition to the younger sort,” reports
Dohm, who is extremely ample on this subject.!9 De Launay
was. honourably dismissed, and the whole Regie abolished, a
month or two after Friedrich’s death.

With a splenetic satisfaction, authentic Dohm, who sufficient-
ly condemns the Regie, adds that it was not even successful ;
and shows by evidence, and computation to the uttermost far-
thing; that instead of two million thalers annually, it yielded on
the average rather less than one. ‘The desired overplus of two

17 Nicolai, i. 155.

18 Preuss, iii. 275 (‘* from Berlin Conversationsblatt &c. of 1827, No. 253”).

Christian Wilhelm von Dohm, Denkwiirdigke:ten meiner Zeit (Lemgo
und Hanover, 1819), iv. 500 et seq.

: |
Cuap. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 289
1766.

millions, and a good deal more did indeed come in, says he: but
it was owing to the great prosperity of Prussia at large, after
the Seven-Years War; to the manifold industries awakening,
which have gone on progressive ever since. Dohm declares
farther, that the very object was, in a sort, fanciful, nugatory ;
arguing that nobody did attack Friedrich ;—but omitting to
prove that nobody would have done so, had Friedrich not stood
ready to receive him. We will remark only, what is very in-
disputable, that Friedrich, owing to the Regie, or to other
causes, did get the humble overplus necessary for him; and did
stand ready for any war which might have come (and which did
in a sort come); that he more and more relaxed the Regie, as
it became less indispensable to him; and was willing, if he
found the Caricatures and Opposition Placards too high posted,
to save the poor reading people any trouble that was possible.

A French eyewitness testifies: ‘They had no talent, these
Régie fellows, but that of writing and ciphering; extremely con-
ceited too, and were capable of the most ridiculous follies. Once,
for instance, they condemned a common soldier, who had hidden
some pounds of tobacco, to a fine of 200 thalers. The King, on
reviewing it for confirmation, wrote on the margin: ‘ Before
confirming this sentence, I should wish to know where the Sol-
dier, who gets 8 groschen’ (ninepence halfpenny) ‘in the 5 days,
will find the 200 crowns for paying this Fine!’”° Inntmera-
ble instances of a constant disposition that way, on the King’s
part, stand on record. ‘‘A crown a head on the import of fat
cattle, Tax on butcher’s-meat?” writes he once to De Launay:
‘** No, that would fall on the poorer classes; to that I must say
No. I am, by office, Procurator of the Poor (lavocat du pau-
vre).” Elsewhere it is, “Avocat du pauvre et du soldat (of the
working-man and of the soldier); and have to plead their
eause.”?}

We will now give our Second Anecdote; which has less of
memorability to us strangers at present, though doubtless it was
then, in Berlin society, the more celebrated of the two; rela-
ting, as it did, to a high Court-Lady, almost the highest, and

*0 Laveaux (2d edition), iii. 228. 21 Preuss, iii, 20.

Vee ee

e
290 AFTERNOON. AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1766.

who was herself only too celebrated in those years. ‘The hero-
ine is Princess Elizabeth of Brunswick, King’s own Niece and a
pretty woman; who for four years (14th July 1765—18th
April 1769) of her long life was Princess Royal of Prussia,—
Wife of that tall young Gentleman, whom we used to see danc-
ing about, whom we last saw at Schweidnitz, getting flung from
his horse, on the day of Pirch’s saddle there ;—but in the fourth
year ceased to be so” (for excellent reasons, on both sides), and
lived thenceforth in a divorced state, at Stettin, where is laid
the scene of our Anecdote. I understand it to be perfectly true ;
but cannot ascertain from any of the witnesses in what year the
thing happened ; or whether it was at Stettin or Berlin,—though
my author has guessed, “‘ Stettin, in the Lady’s divorced state,”
as appears :

“This Princess had commissioned, direct from Lyon, a very beauti-
. ful dress; which arrived duly, addressed to her at Stettin. As this
kind of stuffs is charged with very heavy dues, the Douanzer, head
Customhouse Personage of the Town, had the impertinence to detain
the dress till payment were made. The Princess, in a lofty indigna-
tion, sent word to this person, To bring the dress instantly, and she
would pay the dues on it. He obeyed: but,’—mark the result,—
“scarcely had the Princess got eye on hig, when she seized her Lyon
Dress ; and, giving the Douanier a couple of good slaps on the face,
ordered him out of her apartment and house.

“The Douanier, thinking himself one and somewhat, withdrew in
high choler; had a long Proces-verbal of the thing drawn out ; and
sent it to the King with eloquent complaint, ‘ That he had been dishon-
oured in doing the function appointed him.’ Friedrich replied as fol-
lows: “To the Douamer at Stettin: The loss of the Excise-dues
shall fall to my score; the Dress shall remain with the Princess; the
slaps to him who has received them. As to the pretended Dishonour,
I entirely relieve the complainant from that: never can the appliance
of a beautiful hand dishonour the face of an Officer of Customs.—F.”**

Northern Tourists, Wraxall and others, passing that way,
speak of this Princess, down to recent times, as a phenomenon
of the place. Apparently a high and peremptory kind of Lady,
disdaining to be bowed too low by her disgraces. She survived
all her generation, and the next and the next, and indeed into

22 Rodenbeck, ii. 241, 257. *3 Tbid. (abridged) iii. 229.

oe

eS

Cusp. II.] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 291
1766.

our own. Died, 18th February 1840: at the age of ninety-six.
Three score and eleven years of that eclipsed Stettin Existence ;
this of the Lyon gown, and caitiff of a Customhouser slapped on

‘the face, her one adventure put on record for us!—

She was signally blameable in that of the Divorce; but not
she alone, nor first of the IT'wo. Her Crown-Prince, Friedrich
Wilhelm, called afterwards, as King, ‘‘ der Dicke (the Fat, or the
Big),” and held in little esteem by Posterity,—a headlong, rath-
er dark and physical kind of creature, though not ill-meaning or
dishonest,—was himself a dreadful sinner in that department of

‘things; and had begun the bad game against his poor Cousin

and Spouse! Readers of discursive turn are perhaps acquaint-
ed with a certain “ Grafin von Lichtenau,” and her Memoirs so-
called :—not willingly, but driven, I fish up one specimen, and
one only, from that record of human puddles and perversities :

“From the first year of our attachment,” says this precious Grafin,
““T was already the confidant of his,” the Prince of Prussia’s, ‘* most
secret thoughts. One day” (in 1767, second year of his married life,
I then fifteen, slim Daughter of a Player on the French Horn, in his
Majesty’s pay), “the Prince happened to be very-serious; and was
owning to me with frankness that he had some wrongs towards my sex
to reproach himself with,”—alas yes, some few :—‘ and he swore that
he would never forsake me; and that if Heaven disposed of my life
before his, none but he should close my eyes. He was fingering with
a penknife at the time; he struck the point of it into the palm of his
left hand, and wrote with his blood” (the unclean creature), “‘ on a little
bit of paper, the Oath which his lips had just pronounced in so solemn
atone. Vainly should I undertake to paint my emotion on this action
of his!’ The Prince saw what I felt ; and took advantage of it to beg
that I would follow his example. I hastened to satisfy him; and
traced, as he had done, with my blood, the promise to remain his friend
to the tomb, and never to forsake him. This Promise must have been
found among his Papers after his death” (still in the Archives? we
will hope not !)—* Both of us stood faithful to this Oath. The tie of
love, it is true, we broke: but that was by mutual consent, and the bet-
ter to fix ourselves in the bonds of an inviolable friendship. Other
mistresses reigned over his senses; but I’—Ach Gott, no more of
that.**

24 Mémoires de la Comtesse de Lichtenau (a Londres, chez Colburn Li-
braire, Conduit-street, Bond-street, 2 tomes, small 8vo, 1809), i. 129.

292 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. . [Book XXI.

1766.
The King’s own account of the affair is sufficiently explicit.
His words are: ‘Not long ago’ (about two years before this
of the penknife), “we mentioned the Prince of Prussia’s mar-
riage with Elizabeth of Brunswick” (his Cousin twice over, her
Mother, Princess Charlotte of Prussia, being his Father’s Sister
and mine, and her Father is Mother’s Brother,—if you like to
count it). ‘*This engagement, from which everybody expected
happy consequences, did not correspond to the wishes of the
Royal House.” Only one Princess could be realized (subse-
quently Wife to the late Duke of York),—she came this same
year of the penknife,—and bad outlooks for more. ‘The Hus-
band, young and dissolute (sans meurs), given up to a crapulous
life, from which his relatives could not correct him, was contin-
ually committing infidelities to his Wife. ‘The Princess, who
was in the flower of her beauty, felt outraged by such neglect
of her charms; her vivacity, and the good opinion she had of
herself, brought her upon the thought of avenging her wrongs
by retaliation. Speedily she gave into excesses, scarcely infe-
rior to those of her Husband. Family quarrels broke out, and
were soon publicly known. The antipathy that ensued took
away all hope of succession” (had it been desirable in these sad
circumstances !). “Prince Henri” (Junior, this hopeful Prince
of Prussia’s Brother), “ who was gifted with all the qualities to
be wished in a young man” (witness my tears for him), “ had
been carried off by smallpox.2® The King’s Brothers, Princes
Henri and Ferdinand, avowed frankly that they would never
consent to have, by some accidental bastard, their rights of suc-
cession to the crown carried off. In the end, there was nothing
for it but proceeding to a divorce.”26
Divorce was done in a beautiful private manner; case tried
with strictly-shut doors; all the five judges under oath to carry
into the grave whatever they came to know of it :?7 divorce com-
pleted, 18th April 1769 ; and, within three months, a new mar-
riage was accomplished, Princess Frederika Louisa of Hessen-
Darmstadt the happy woman. By means of whom there was
*5 «96th May 1767,” age 19 gone; Eloge of him by Friedrich (‘‘ Ms.
still stained with tears”), in Quvres de Frédéric, vii. 37 et seq.
*§ (Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 23. 27 Preuss, iv. 180-186.

— ee

Pe ae ee ee ae

ae

RGAl Cheer

> ag

nah,

CuHar. II. ] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 298
1766. ;

duly realised a Friedrich Wilhelm, who became “ King Fried-
rich Wilhelm III.” (a much-enduring, excellent, though inartic-
ulate man), as well as various other Princes and Princesses, in
spite of interruptions from the Lichtenau Sisterhood. High-
souled Elizabeth was relegated to Stettin; her amount of Pen-
sion is not mentioned; her Family, after the unhappy proofs
communicated to them, had given their consent and sanction ;—
and she stayed there, idle, or her own mistress of work, for the
next seventy-one years.—Enough of her Lyon Dress, surely, and
of the Excise-system altogether !—

The Neue Palais, in Sans-Souct Neighbourhood, ts founded
and finished (1768-1770).

If D’Alembert’s Visit was the germ of the Excise-system, it
will be curious to note,—and indeed whether or not, it will be
chronologically serviceable to us here, and worth noting,—that
there went on a small synchronous affair, still visible to every-
body: namely, That in the very hours while Friedrich and
D’Alembert were saluting mutually at Geldern (11th June
1763), there was laid the foundation of what they call the Neue
Palais ; New Palace of Sans-Souci:2° a sumptuous Edifice, in
the curious Zowis-Quinze or what is called ‘ Rococo” style of the
time; Palace never much inhabited by Friedrich or his success-
ors, which still stands in those ornamental Potsdam regions.
Why built, especially in the then down-pressed financial circum-
stances, some have had their difficulties to imagine. It appears,
this New Palace had been determined on, before the War broke
out; and Friedrich said to himself: ‘‘ We will build it now, to
help the mechanical classes in Berlin,—perhaps also, in part”
(think some, and why should not they, a little?) ‘ to show man-
kind that we have still ready money; and are nothing like so
ruined as they fancy.”

“This Neue Palais,” says one recent Tourist, “is a pleasant
quaint object, nowadays, to the stranger. It has the air degagé,
pococurante ; pleasantly fine in aspect and in posture ;—spacious
expanses round it, not in a waste, but still less in a strict condi-
tion; and (in its deserted state) has a silence, especially a total

28 Rodenbeck, ii. 219.

294 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1766.

absence of needless flunkeys and of gaping fellow-loungers, which
is charming. Stands mute there, in its solitude, in its stately
silence and negligence, like some Tadmor of the Wilderness in
small. The big square of Stables, Coach-houses, near by, was
locked up,—probably one sleeping groom in it. The very Custos
of the grand Edifice (such the rarity of fees to him) I could not
awaken without difficulty. In the gray autumn zephyrs, no
sound whatever about this New Palace of King Friedrich’s, ex-
cept the rustle of the crisp brown leaves, and of any faded or
fading memories you may have.

“TI should say,” continues he, ‘‘it somehow reminds you of
the City of Bath. It has the cut of a battered Beau of old date ;
Beau still extant, though in strangely other circumstances; some-
thing in him of pathetic dignity in that kind. It shows excellent
sound masonries; which have an over-tendency to jerk them-
selves into pinnacles, curvatures and graciosities ; many statues
atop,—three there are, in a kind of grouped, or partnership atti-
tude; ‘These,’ said diligent scandal, ‘note them; these mean
Maria Theresa, Pompadour and Catin du Nord’ (mere Muses, I
believe, or of the Nymph or Hamadryad kind, nothing of harm
in them). In short, you may call it the stone Apotheosis of an
old French Beau. Considerably weatherbeaten (the brown of
lichens spreading visibly here and there, the firm-set ashlar tell-
ing you, ‘I have stood a hundred years’) ;—Beau old and weath-
erbeaten, with his cocked-hat not in the fresh condition, all his
gold-laces tarnished; and generally looking strange, and in a
sort tragical, to find himself, fleeting creature, become a denizen
of the Architectural Fixities and earnest Eternities !”—

From Potsdam Palace to the New Palace of Sans-Souci may
be a mile distance; flat ground, parallel to the foot of Hills; all
through arbours, parterres, water-works, and ornamental garden-
ings and cottagings or villa-ings,—Cottage-Villa for Lord Maris-
chal is one of them. This mile of distance, taking the Cottage
Royal of Sans-Souci on its hill-top as vertex, will be the base of
an isosceles or nearly isosceles triangle, flatter than equilateral.
To the Cottage Royal of Sans-Souci may be about three-quarters
of a mile north-east from this New Palace, and from Potsdam
Palace to it rather less. And the whole square-mile or so of

Cuavp. II. ] REPAIRING OF A RUINED. PRUSSIA. 295
1766.

space is continuously a Garden, not in the English sense, though
it has its own beauties of the more artificial kind; and, at any
rate, has memories for you, and footsteps of persons still unfor-
gotten by mankind.—Here is a Notice of Lord Marischal; which
readers will not grudge; the chronology of the worthy man, in
these his later epochs, being in so hazy a state:

Lord Marischal, we know well and Pitt knows, was in England in
1761,—ostensibly, on the Kintore Heritage ; and in part perhaps, really
on that errand. But he went and came, at dates now uncertain; was
back in Spain after that, had difficult voyagings about ;*°—and did not
get to rest again, in his Government of Neufchatel, till April 1762.
There is a Letter of the King’s, which at least fixes that point :

* Breslau, 10th April 1762. My nose is the most impertinent nose
in the universe, mon cher Mylord” (Queen-Dowager snuff, Spaniol from
the fountain-head, of Marischal’s providing ; quality exquisite, but diffi-
cult to get transmitted in the Storms of War) ; ‘1 am ashamed of the
trouble it costs you! I beg many pardons ;—and should be quite abashed,
did I not know how you compassionate the weak points of your friends,
and that, for a long time past, you have a singular indulgence for my
nose. I am very glad to know you happily returned to your Govern-
ment, safe at Colombier (Dove-cote) in Neufchatel again.” This is
10th April 1762. There, as I gather, quiet in his Dove-cote, Marischal
continued, though rather weary of the business, for about a year more ;
or till the King got home,—who delights in companionship, and is will-
ing to let an old man demit for good.

It was in Summer 1762 (about three months after the above Letter
from the King), that Rousseau made his celebrated exodus into Neuf-
chatel Country, and found the old Governor so good to him,—glad to
be allowed to shelter the poor skinless creature. And, mark as curi-
ous, it must have been on two of those mornings, towards the end of the
Siege of Schweidnitz, when things were getting so intolerable, and at
times breaking out into electricity, into ‘‘ rebuke all round,” that Fried-
rich received that singular pair of Laconic Notes from Rousseau in
Neufchatel : forwarded, successively, by Lord Marischal; Note First,
of date, “ Motier-Travers, Neufchatel, September,” nobody can guess
what day, “1762:” ‘‘I have said much ill of you, and don’t repent it.
Now everybody has banished me ; and it is on your threshold-that I
sit down. Kill me,if you have a mind!” And then (after, not death,
but the gift of 100 crowns), Note Second,‘ October 1762:” * * “Take
out of my sight that sword, which dazzles and pains me; 2¢ has only
too well done its duty, while the sceptre is abandoned :” Make Peace,

29 King’s Letters to him, in Quvres de Frédéric, xx. 282-285.

\

296 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1766.
can’t you !*°—What curious reading for a King in such posture, among
the miscellaneous arrivals overnight! Above six weeks before either
of these Notes, Friedrich, hearing of him from Lord Marischal, had an-
swered: “ An asylum? Yes, by all means: the unlucky cynic!” It
is on September Ist that he sends, by the same channel. 100 crowns
for his use, with advice to “ give them 7n natura, lest he refuse other-
wise ;” as Friedrich knows to be possible. In words, the Rousseau
Notes got nothing of Answer. “A gargon singulier,” says Friedrich :
odd fellow, yes indeed, your Majesty ,—and has such a pungency of flat-
tery in him, too, presented in the way of snarl! His Majesty might
take him, I suppose, with a kind of relish, like Queen-Dowager snuff.
There was still another shift of place, shift which proved temporary,
in old Marischal’s life: Home to native Aberdeenshire. The two
childless Brothers, Marls of Kintore, had died successively, the last of
them, November 22d, 1761: title and heritage, not considerable the lat-
ter, fell duly, by what preparatives we know, to old Marischal ; but his
Keith kinsfolk, furthermore, would have him personally among them,—
nay, after that, would have him to wed and produce new Keiths. At
the age of 78; decidedly an inconvenient thing! Old Marischal left
Potsdam, “ August 1763,”*'—New-Palace scaffoldings and big stone-
blocks conspicuous in those localities ; pleasant D’Alembert now just
about leaving in the other direction ;—much to Friedrich’s regret, the
old Marischal especially, as is still finely evident.

Friedrich to Lord Marischal (in Scotland for the last six months).

** Sans-Souci, 16th February 1764.

“Tam not surprised that the Scotch fight to have you among them:
and wish to have progeny of yours, and to preserve your bones. You
have, in your lifetime, the lot of Homer after death: Cities arguing
which is your birthplace ;—I myself would dispute it with Edinburgh
to possess you. If I had ships, I would make a descent on Scotland, to
steal off my cher Mylord,and bring him hither. Alas! our Elbe Boats
can’t do it. But you give me hopes ;—which I seize with avidity! I
was your late Brother’s friend, and had obligations to him: I am yours
with heart and soul. These are my titles, these are my rights :—you
shan’t be forced in the matter of progeny here (faire [étalon 1c), nei-
ther priests nor attorneys shall meddle with you ; you shall live here in
the bosom of friendship, liberty and philosophy.” Come tome! * *
ee es

Old Marischal did come ; and before long. 1 know not the precise

39 (Huvres completes de Rousseau (a Geneve, 1782-1789), xxxiii. 64, 65.
*! Letters of his to the King (‘‘ Londres, 14 Aout 1763”), in Quvres de
Frédéric, xx. 298. 32 (Huvres de Frédéric, xx. 295.

eS ae eee eee

a

— SS

in

ee ee ee

Cnar. II] REPAIRING OF A RUINED PRUSSIA. 297
1766.

month : but “ his Villa~-Cottage was built for him,” the Books say, “ in
1764.” He had left D’Alembert just going ; next year, he will find
Helvetius coming. He lived here, a great treasure to Friedrich, till
his death, 25th May 1778, age 92.

The New Palace was not finished till 1770 ;—in which year,
also, Friedrich reckons that the general Problem of Repairing
Prussia was victoriously over. New Palace, growing or com-
plete, looks down on all these operations and occurrences. In
its cradle, it sees D’Alembert go, Lord Marischal go; Helvetius
come, Lord Marischal come; in its boyhood or maturity, the
Excise, and French /ats-de-Cave, spring up; Crown Prince
Friedrich Wilhelm prick his hand for a fit kind of ink; Fried-
rich Wilhelm’s Divorced Wife give her Douanier two slaps in
the face, by way of payment. Nay, the same I riedrich Wi!-
helm, become “ Friedrich Wilhelm IL., or der Dicke,” died in it,
—his Lichtenau and his second Wife, jewel of women, nursing
him in his last sickness there.*?

The violent stress of effort for repairing Prussia, Friedrich in-
timates, was mostly over in 1766: till which date specifically,
and in a looser sense till 1770, that may be considered as his
main business. But it was not at any time his sole business ;
nor latterly at all equal in interest to some others that had risen.
on him, as the next Chapter will now show. Here, first, is a
little Fraction of Necrology, which may be worth taking with us.
Readers can spread these fateful specialities over the Period in
question; and know that each of them came with a kind of
knell upon Friedrich’s heart, whatever he might be employed
about. Hour striking after hour on the Horologe of Time; in-
timating how the Afternoon wore, and that Night was coming.
Various meanings there would be to Friedrich, in these footfalls
of departing guests, the dear, the less dear, and the indifferent or
hostile ; but each of them would mean: “ Gone, then, gone; thus
we all go!”

“ Obituary in I’riedrich’s Circle till 1771.” ;
Of Polish Majesty’s death (5th October 1763), and then (2d Decem-
» “Died, 16th November 1797.
N 2

298 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

1766..

ber following) of his Kurprinz or Successor’s, with whom we dined at
Moritzburg so recently, there will be mention by and by. November
28th, 1763, in the interval between these two, the wretched Briihl had
died. April 14th, 1764, died the wretched Pompadour ;—-* To us not
known, Je ne (a connats pas :’—hapless Butterfly, she had been twenty
years in the winged condition ; age now forty-four: dull Louis, they
say, looked out of window as her hearse departed, “ froidement,” with-
out emotion of any visible kind. These little concern Friedrich or us:
we will restrict ourselves to Friends.

“* Died un 1764. At Pisa, Algarotti (23d May 1764, age fifty-two) ;
with whom Friedrich has always had some correspondence hitherto (to
himself interesting, though not to us), and will never henceforth have
more. Friedrich raised a Monument to him: Monument still to be
seen in the Campo-Santo of Pisa: * Hic jacet Ovidii emulus et Neu-
ton discipulus ;’ friends have added ‘ Frredertcus Magnus poni fecit ;°
and on another part of the Monument, * Algarottus non omnis.’**

‘*__ in 1765. At the age of eighty, November 18th, Grafin Camas,
‘Ma bonne Maman’ (widow since 1741): excellent old Lady,—once
brilliantly young, German by birth, her name Brandt ;—to whom the
King’s Letters used to be so pretty.” This same year, too, Kaiser
Franz died ; but him we will reserve, as not belonging to this Select
List.

“__ in 1766. At Nanci, 23d February, age eighty-six, King Stan-
islaus Leczinsky : ‘his clothes caught fire’ (accidental spark or sputter
on some damask dressing-gown or the like): and the much-enduring
innocent old soul ended painfully his Titular career.

“__ in 1767. October 22d, the Grand-Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha,
age fifty-seven; a sad stroke this also, among one’s narrowing List of
Friends.—I doubt if Friedrich ever saw this high Lady after the Visit
we lately witnessed. His Letters to her are still in the Archives of
Gotha: not hers to him; all lost, these latter, but an accidental Two,
which are still beautiful in their kind.*°

“17 1770. Bielfeld, the fantastic individual of old days. Had long
been out of Friedrich’s circle,—in Altenburg Country, I think ;—with-
out importance to Friedrich or us: the year of him will do, without
search for day or month.

“*__ in 1771. Two heavy deaths come this year. January 28th, 1771,

at Berlin, dies our valuable aS Excellency Mitchell,—still here |

on the part of England, in condial esteem as a man and companion;
though as Minister, I suppose, with function more and more imaginary.
This painfully ushers in the year. To usher it out, there is still worse:
faithful D’Argens dies, 26th December 1771, on a visit in his native

34 Preuss, iv. 188, 35 Given in Qiuvres de Frédéric, xviii. 165, 256.

ee ee TT

Te EE

Cuap. III. ] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 299
11th April 1764.
Provence,—leaving, as is still visible,*® a big and sad blank behind him
at Potsdam.” But we need not continue; at least not at present.

Long before all these Friedrich had lost friends ; with a sad but quiet
emotion he often alludes to this tragic fact, that all the souls he loved
most are gone. His Winterfelds, his Keiths, many loved faces, the
War has snatched: at Monbijou, at Baireuth, it was not War; but they
too are gone. Is the world becoming all a Mausoleum, then; nothing
of divine in it but the Tombs of vanished loved ones? Friedrich makes
no noise on such subjects: loved and unloved alike must go.

We have still to mark Kaiser Franz’s sudden death ; a thing politic-
ally interesting, if not otherwise. August 1765, at Innspruck, during the
Marriage-festivities of his Second Son, Leopold (Duke of Florence, who
afterwards, on Joseph’s death, was Kaiser),—Kaiser Franz, sauntering
about in the evening gala, “18th August, about 9 p.m.,” suddenly tottered,
staggered as falling; fell into Son Joseph’s arms: and was dead. Above
a year before, this same Joseph, his Eldest Son, had been made King of
the Romans: “ elected, 26th March; crowned, 3d April 1764 ;”—Fried-
rich furthering it, wishful to be friendly with his late enemies.*’

On this Innspruck Tragedy, Joseph naturally became Kaiser,—Part-
Kaiser; his Dowager-Mother, on whom alone it depends, having decided
that way. The poor Lady was at first quite overwhelmed with her grief.
She had the death-room of her Husband made into a Chapel; she found-
ed furthermore a Monastery in Innspruck, “'T'welve Canonesses to pray
there for the repose of Franz ;” was herself about to become Abbess
there, and quit the secular world; but in the end was got persuaded to
continue, and take Son Joseph as Coadjutor.*® In which capacity we
shall meet the young man again.

CHAPTER III.
TROUBLES IN POLAND.

Aprit 11th, 1764, one year after his Seven-Years labour of
Hercules, fede made Treaty of Alliance with the new Cza-
rina Catharine. England had deserted him; France was his
enemy, especially Pompadour and Choiseul, and refused recon-
cilement, though privately solicited: he was without an Ally

36 Friedrich’s two Letters to the Widow (given in Gtuvres de Frédéric,
xix. 427-429). 37 Rédenbeck, ii. 234.

38 Hormayr, Oesterreichischer Plutarch (§ Maria Theresa), iv. (2tes Band-
chen) 6-124; Maria Theresiens Leben, p. 30.

’ -
300 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1769.

anywhere. The Russians had done him frightful damage in
the last War, and were most of all to be dreaded in the case of
any new one. The Treaty was a matter of necessity as well as
choice. Agreement for mutual good neighbourhood and friendly
offices; guarantee of each other against intrusive third parties:
should either get engaged in war with any neighbour, practical
aid to the length of 12,000 men, or else money in lieu. ‘Treaty
was for eight years, from day of date.

As Friedrich did not get into war, and Catharine did, with
the Turks and certain loose Polacks, the burden of fulfilment
happened to fall wholly on Friedrich; and he was extremely
punctual in performance,—eager now, and all his life after, to
keep well with such a Country under such a Czarina. Which
proved to be the whole rule of his policy on that Russian side.
‘Good that Country cannot bring me by any quarrel with it;
evil it can, to a frightful extent, in case of my quarrelling with
others! Be wary, be punctual, magnanimously polite, with that
srandiose Czarina and her huge territories and notions:” this
was Friedrich’s constant rule in public and in private. Nor is
it thought his Correspondence with. the Empress Catharine, when
future generations see it in print, will disclose the least ground
of offence to that highflying Female Potentate of the North.
Nor will it ever be known what the silently observant Friedrich
thought of her, except indeed what we already know, or as good
as know, That he, if anybody did, saw her clearly enough for ~
what she was; and found good to repress into absolute zero
whatever had no bearing upon business, and might by possibility
give offence in that quarter. For we are an old King, and have
learned by bitter experiences! No more nicknames, biting verses,
or words which a bird of the air could carry; though this poor
Lady too has her liabilities, were not we old and prudent ;—and
is entirely as weak on certain points (deducting the devotions and
the brandy-and-water) as some others were! The Treaty was
renewed when necessary; and continued valid and vital in every
particular, so long as Friedrich ruled.

By the end of the first eight years, by strictly following this
passive rule, Friedrich, in counterbalance of his losses, unexpect-
edly found himself invested with a very singular bit of gain,—

ar

\

Cuap. IIT] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 301
1763-1769.

‘“‘unjust gain!” cried all men, making it of the nature of gain
and loss to him,—which is still practically his, and which has
made, and makes to this day, an immense noise in the world.
Everybody knows we mean West-Preussen; Partition of Po-
land; bloodiest picture in the Book of Time, Sarmatia’s fall
unwept without a crime ;—and that we have come upon a very
intricate part of our poor History.

No prudent man,—especially if to himself, as is my own poor
case in regard to it, the subject have long been altogether dead
and indifferent,—would wish to write of the Polish Question.
Tor almost a hundred years the Polish Question has been very
loud in the world; and ever and anon rises again into vocality
among Able Editors, as a thing pretending not to be dead and
buried, but capable of rising again, and setting itself right, by
good effort at home and abroad. Not advisable, beyond the
strict limits of compulsion, to write of it at present! The rather
as the History of it, any History we have, is not an intelligible
series of events, but a series of vociferous execrations, filling all
Nature, with nothing left to the reader but darkness, and such
remedies against despair as he himself can summon or contrive.

** Rulhiére’s on that subject,” says a Note which I may cite, “is the
only articulate-speaking Book to which mankind as yet can apply ;'
and they will by no means find that a sufficient one. Rulhiére’s Book
has its considerable merits ; but it absolutely wants those of a History ;
and can be recognised by no mind as an intelligible cosmic Portraiture
of that chaotic Mass of Occurrences: chronology, topography, precision
of detail by time and place ; scene, and actors on scene, remain unintel-
ligible. Rulhiére himself knew Poland, at least had looked on it from
Warsaw outwards, year after year, and knew of it what an inquiring Sec-
retary of Legation could pick up on those terms, which perhaps, after
all, is not very much. His Narrative is drowned in beautiful seas of
description and reflexion; has neither dates nor references ; and ad-
vances at an intolerable rate of slowness; in fact, rather turns on its
axis than advances; produces on you the effect of a melodious Sonata,
not of a lucid and domnfortably instructive History.

“1 forget for how long Rulhiére had been in Poland, as Ambassador’s S
Assistant : but the Country, the King, and leading Personages were per-
sonally known to him, more or less; Events with all details of them were
known: ‘ Why not write a History of the Anarchy and Wreck they

2 Cl. Rulhiére, Histoire de I’ Anarchie de Pologne (Paris, 1807), 4 voll. 12mo.

302 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

= 1763--1769.
fell into ? said the Official people to him, on his return home : ‘ For be-
hoof of the Dauphin’ (who is to be Louis XVI. shortly) ; ‘ may not he
perhaps draw profit from it? At the top of the Universe, experience is
sometimes wanted. Here are the Archives, here is Salary, here are
what appliances you like to name: Write!’ It is well known he was
appointed, on a Pension of 250/. a-year, with access to all archives, doc-
uments, and appliances in possession of the French Government, and
express charge to delineate this subject for benefit of the Dauphin’s
young mind. Nor can I wonder, considering everything, that the proc-
ess on Rulhiére’s part, being so full of difficulties, was extremely delib-
erate ; that his Book did not grow so steadily or fast as the Dauphin
did ; and that in fact the poor Dauphin never got the least benefit from
it,—being guillotined, he, in 1793, and the Book intended for him never
coming to light for fourteen years afterwards, it too in a posthumous
and still unfinished condition.

** Rulhiere has heard the voices of rumour, knows an infinitude of
events that were talked of; but has not discriminated which were the
vital, which were the insignificant ; treats the vital and the insignificant
alike ; seldom with satisfactory precision; mournfully seldom giving
any date, and by no chance any voucher or authority ;—and instead of
practical terrestrial scene of action, with distances, milestones, definite
sequence of occurrences, and of causes and effects, paints us a rosy
cloudland, which, if true at all,as he well intends it to be, is little more
than symbolically or allegorically so; and can satisfy no clear-headed
Dauphin or man. Rulhiére strives to be authentic, too; gives you no
suspicion of his fairness. ‘There is really fine high-coloured painting
in Rulhiére ; and you hope always he will let you into the secret of the
matter : but the sad fact is, he never does. He merely loses himself in
picturesque details, philosophic eloquences, elegancies ; takes you to a
Castle of Choczim, a Monastery of Czenstochow, a Bay of Tschesme,
and lets off extensive fireworks that contain little or no shot; leads you
on trackless marches, inroads or outroads, through the Lithuanian Peat-
bogs, on daring adventures and hairbreadth escapes of mere Pulawski,
Potocki, and the like ;—had not got to understand the matter himself,
you perceive : how hopeless to make you understand it!”

English readers, however, have no other shift ; the rest of the Books
Ihave seen,—Histoire des Revolutions de Pologne ;? Histoire des Trois
Dimembremens de la Pologne;*° Letters on Poland,‘ and many more,—

2 1778 (a Warsovie, et se trouve a Paris), 2 voll. 8vo.

* Anonymous (by one Ferrand, otherwise unknown to me), Paris, 1820,
3 voll. 8vo.

* Anonymous (by a ‘‘ Reverend Mr. Lindsey,” it would seem), Letters
concerning the Present State of Poland, together with &c. (London, 1773; 1

Cuap. IIT.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 303
1763-1769.

are not worth mentioning at all. Comfortable in the mad dance of these
is Hermann’s recent dull volume ;°—commonplace, dull, but steady and
faithful : yielding us at least dates, and an immunity from noise. By
help of Hermann and the others, distilled to caput mortuum,a few dated
facts (cardinal we dare not call them) may be extracted ;—dimly out
of these, to the meditating mind, some outline of the phenomenon may
begin to become conceivable.

King of Poland dies ; and there ensue huge Anarchies in that
Country.

The poor old King of Poland,—whom we saw, on that fall of
the curtain at Pirna seven years ago, rush off for Warsaw with
his Briihl, with expressive speed and expressive silence, and who
has been waiting there ever since, sublimely confident that his
powerful terrestrial friends, Austria, Russia, France, not to speak
of Heaven’s justice to all, would exact due penalty, of signal and
tremendous nature, on the Prussian Aggressor,—has again been
disappointed. The poor old Gentleman got no compensation
for his manifold losses and woes at Pirna or elsewhere; not the
_ least mention of such a thing, on the final winding-up of that
War of Seven Years, in which his share had been so tragical; no
alleviation was provided for him in this world. His sorrows in
Poland had been manifold; nothing but anarchies, confusions
and contradictions had been his Royal portion there: in about
Forty different Diets he had tried to get some business done,—
no use asking what; for the Diets, one and all, exploded in Nie
pozwalam; and could do no business, good, bad, or indifferent,
for him or anybody. An unwise, most idle Country ; following
as chief employment perpetual discrepancy with its idle unwise
King and self; Russia the virtual head of it this long while, so
far as it has any head.

Februar, y— August 1763, just while the Treaty of Hubertsburg
was blessing everybody with the return of Peace, and for long
months after Peace had returned to everybody, Polish Maisie

vol. 8vo.): of these Letters, 01 at least of Reverend Lindsey, Author of them,
‘¢ Tutor to King Stanislaus’s Nephew,” and a man of painfully loud loose
tongue, there may perhaps be mention afterwards.
4 orien, Geschichte des Russischen Staats, vol. v. (already cited in re-
gard to the Peter-Catharine tragedy) ; seems to be compiled mainly from
the Saxon Archives, from Despatches written on the spot, and at the time.

304 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1769,

was in sore trouble. Trouble in regard to Courland, to his poor
Son Carl, who fancied himself elected, under favour and permis-
sion of the late Czarina our gracious Protectress and Ally, to
the difficult post of Duke in Courland; and had proceeded, three
or four years ago, to take possession,—but was now interrupted
by Russian encroachments and violences. Not at all well dis-
posed to him, these new Peters, new Catharines. They have
recalled their Bieren from Siberia; declare that old Bieren is
again Duke, or at least that young Bieren is, and not Saxon Karl
at all; and have proceeded, Czarina Catharine has, to instal him
forcibly with Russian soldiers. Karl declares, “You shall kill
me before you or he get into this Palace of Mietau !”—and by .
Domestics merely, and armed private Gentlemen, he does main-
tain himself in said Palatial Mansion; valiantly indignant, for
about six months; the Russian Battalions girdling him on all :
sides, minatory more and more, but loth to begin actual blood-
shed.© A transaction very famed in those parts, and still giving
:
|
.
;
|

loud voice in the Polish Books, which indeed get «ver noisier
from this point onward, till they end in inarticulate shrieks, as
we shall too well hear. ;

Empress Catharine, after the lapse of six months, sends an
Ambassador to Warsaw (Kayserling by name), who declares, in
tone altogether imperative, that Czarish Majesty feels herself
weary of such contumacy, weary generally of Polish Majesty’s
and Polish Republic’s multifarious contumacies ; and, in fine,
cruellest of all, that she has troops on the Frontier; that Cour-
land is not the only place where she has troops. What a stab
to the poor old man! ‘‘Contumacies?” Has not he been
Russia’s patient stepping-stone, all along; his anarchic Poland
and he accordant in that, if in nothing else? ‘‘ Let us to Sax-
ony,” decides he passionately, ‘‘and leave all this.” In Saxony
his poor old Queén is dead long since; much is dead: Saxony
and Life generally, what a Golgotha! He immediately sends
word to Karl: ‘*Give up Courland; I am going home !”—and ;
did hastily make his packages, and bid adieu to Warsaw, and,
in a few weeks after, to this anarchic world altogether. Died
at Dresden, 5th October 1763.

6 Rulhiere, ii. (Livre v.) 81 et antea; Hermann, v. 348 et seq.

Cuar. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. — 805
1763-1769.

Polish Majesty had been elected, 5th October 1733; died,
you observe, 5th October 1763 ;—was King of Poland (“ King,”
save the mark!) for thirty years to a day. Was elected—do
readers still remember how? Leaves a ruined Saxony lying
round him; a ruined life mutely asking him, ‘ Couldst thou
have done no better, then?” Wretched Briihl followed him in
four.or five weeks. Nay, in about two months, his Son and
Successor, “ Friedrich Christian” (with whom we dined at Mo-
ritzburg), had followed him ;’ leaving a small Boy, age 13, as
new Kurfiirst, “ Friedrich August’? the name of him, with
guardians to manage the Minority; especially with his Mother
as chief guardian,—of whom, for two reasons, we are now to
say something. Reason /irst is, That she is really a rather bril-
liant, distinguished creature, distinguished more especially in
Friedrich’s world; whose Letters to her are numerous, and, in
their kind, among the notablest he wrote ;—of which we would
gladly give some specimen, better or worse: and reason second,
That in so doing, we may contrive to look, for a moment or
two, into the preliminary Polish Anarchies at first hand; and,
transiently and far off, see something of them as if with our own
eyes.

Marie-Antoine, or Marie-Antoinette, Electress of Saxony, is
still a bright Lady, and among the busiest living; mow in her
36th year: “born 17th July 1724; second child of Kaiser Karl
VII. ;’—a living memento to us of those old times of trouble.
Papa, when she came to him, was in his 27th year; this was
his second daughter; three years afterwards, he had a son
(born, 1727; died, 1777), who made the “ Peace of Fiissen,” to
Friedrich’s disgust, in 1745, if readers recollect ;—and-who, dy-
ing childless, will give rise to another War (the ‘‘ Potato War”
so-called), for Friedrich’s behoof and ours. ‘This little creature
would be in her teens during that fatal Kaisership (1742-1745,
her age then 18-21),—during these triumphs, flights, and fur-
nished-lodging intricacies. Her Mamma, whom we have seen,
a little fat. bullet given to devotion, was four years younger
than Papa. Mamma died, “11th December 1756,” Germa-

7 Prince died, 17th December (Briihl, 18th November) 1763.

306 _ AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
- 1763-1769.

ny all blazing out in War again; she had been a Widow eleven
years.

Marie-Antoine was wedded to Friedrich Christian, Saxon
Kurprinz, “20th June 1747 ;” her age 23, his 25 :—Chronolo-
gy itself is something, if one will attend to it, in the absence of
all else! The young pair were Cousins, their Mothers being
Sisters; Polish Majesty one’s Uncle, age now 51,—who was
very fond of us, poor indolent soul, and glad of our company on
an afternoon, “being always in his dressing-gown by 2 o’clock.”
Concerning which the tongue of Court scandal was not entirely
idle,—Hanbury chronicling, as we once noticed. AH which I
believe to be mere lying wind. ‘The young Princess was beau-
tiful ; extremely clever, graceful, and lively, we can still see for
ourselves: no wonder poor Polish Majesty, always in his dress-
ing-gown by 2, was charmed to have her company,—the rather
as I hope she permitted him a little smoking withal.

Her Husband was crook-backed; and, except those slight,
always perfectly polite little passages, in Schmettau’s Siege
(1759), in the Hubertsburg Treaty affair, in the dinner at Mo-
ritzburg, I never heard much history of him. He became Elect-
or, 5th October 1763; but enjoyed the dignity little more than
two months. Our Princess had borne him seven children,—
three boys, four girls, —the eldest about 138, a Boy, who suc-
ceeded ; the youngest a girl, hardly 3. The Boy is he who sent
Gellert the caparisoned Horse, and had estafettes on the road
while Gellert lay dying. ‘This Boy lived to be 77, and saw
strange things in the world; had seen Napoleon and the French
Revolution; was the first ‘‘King of Saxony” so-called; saw
Jena, retreat of Moscow; saw’ the ‘ Battle of the Nations”
(Leipzig, 15th—-18th October 1813), and his great Napoleon ter-
minate in Bankruptcy. He left no Son. A Brother, aged 72,
succeeded him-as King for a few years; whom again a Brother
would have succeeded, had not he (this third Brother, age now
66) renounced, in favour of fis Son, the present King of Saxo-
ny. Enough, enough !—

August 28th, 1763, while afflicted Polish Majesty is making
his ih ee at Warsaw, far away,—Marie-Antoinette, in Dres-
den, had sent Friedrich an Opera of her composing, just brought

Cuap. ITI. ] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 307
1763-1769,

out by her on her Court-theatre there. Here is Friedrich’s An-
swer,—to what kind of Opera I know not, but to a Letter ac-
companying it which is extremely pretty.

Friedrich to the Electoral Princess (at Dresden).

‘*Potsdam, 5th September 1763.

“‘ Madam, my Sister,—The remembrance your Royal Highness sends
is the more flattering to me, as I regret infinitely not to have been
spectator and hearer of the fine things” (Opera Thalestris, words and
music entirely lost to us) “‘ which I have admired for myself in the si-
lent state.

“‘] wish I could send you things as pleasant out of these parts: but,
Madam, I am obliged to give you a hint, which may be useful if you
can have it followed. In Saxony, however, my Letters get opened ;—
which obliges me to send this by a special Messenger; and him, that
he may cause no suspicion, I have charged with fruits from my garden.
You will have the goodness to say” (if anybody is eavesdropping)
“that you asked them of me at Moritzburg, when I was happy enough
to see you there” (six months ago, coming home from the Seven- Years
War). ‘ The hint I had to give was this:

“In Petersburg people’s minds are getting angry at the stubbornness
your friends show in refusing to recognize Duke Bieren” (home from
Siberia, again Duke of Courland, by Russian appointment, as if Russia
had that right; Polish Majesty and his Prince Karl resisting to the ut-
termost). ‘‘ I counsel you to induce the powerful in your circle to have
this condescension” (they have had it, been obliged to have it, though
Friedrich does not yet know); “ for it will turn out ill to them, if they
persist in being obstinately stiff. It begins already to be said That
there are more than a million Russian subjects at this time refugees in
Poland; whom, by I forget what cartel, the Republic was bound to de-
liver up. Orders have been given to Detachments of Military to enter
certain places, and-bring away these Russians by force. In a word,
you will ruin your affairs forever, unless you find means to produce a
change of conduct on the part of him they complain of. Take, Madam,
what I now say as a mark of the esteem and profound regard with
which—”—F.°

This hint, if the King knew, had been given, in a less kind shape, by
Necessity itself; and had sent Polish Majesty, and his Brihls and
“powerful people,” bodily home, and out of that Polish-Russian welter,
in a headlong and tragically passionate condition. Electoral Princess,
next time she writes, is become Electress all at once,

8 (Euvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 46.

308 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1769.

Electress Marie-Antoine to Friedrich.

*¢Dresden, 5th October 1763.

“‘ Sire,—Your Majesty has given me such assurance of your goodness
and your friendship, that I will not appeal to that promise. You have
assured us, too, that you would with pleasure contribute to secure Poland
for us. ‘The moment is come for accomplishing that promise. The
King is dead” (died this very day; see if J lose time in sentimental
lamentations ')—‘‘ with him these grievances of Russia” (our stiffness
on Courland and the like) ‘ must be extinct; the rather as we” (the
now reigning) “ will lend ourselves willingly to everything that can be
required of us for perfect reconcilement with that Power.

“You can do all, if you will it; you can contribute to this reconcile-
ment! You can render it favourable to us. You will give me that
proof of the flattering sentiments I have been so proud of hitherto,”—
won't you, now? “ Russia cannot disapprove the mediation you might
deign to offer on that behalf;—our intentions being so honestly amicable,
and all ground of controversy having died with the late King. Russia
reconciled, our views on the Polish Crown might at once be declared
(éclater).” Oh, do it, your Majesty ;—“ my gratitude shall only end
with life !—M. A.’

Friedrich, who is busy negotiating his Treaty with Russia (perfected
11th April next), and understands that they will mean not to have a
Saxon, but to have a Piast, and perhaps dimly even what Piast (Stanis-
laus Poniatowski, the emeritus Lover), who will be their own, and not
Saxony’s at all,—must have been a little embarrassed by such an appeal
from his fair friend at this moment. “ Wait alittle; don’t answer yet,”
would have occurred to the common mind. But that was not Fried-
rich’s resource : he answers by return of post, as always in such cases;
—and in the following adroit manner brushes off, without hurt to it, with
kisses to it rather, the beautiful hand that has him by the button:

To the Electress Marie-Antoine (at Dresden).

‘¢ Berlin, 8th October 1763.

“Madam my Sister,~-I begin by making my condolences and my
congratulations to your Electoral Highness on the death of the King
your Father-in-law, and on your Accession to the Electorate.

“Your Electoral Highness will remember what I wrote, not long
since, on the affairs of Poland. Iam afraid, Madam, that Russia will
be more contrary to you than you think. M. de Woronzow” (famous
Grand-Chancellor of Russia; saved himself dexterously in the late
Peter-Catharine overturn; has since fallen into disfavour for his no-

© Guvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 47,

Cuap. III] ‘ TROUBLES IN POLAND. 309
1763-1769.

tions about our Gregory Orlof, and is now on his way to Italy, “ for
health’s sake,” in consequence), “‘ who is just arrived here,'° told me,
too, of some things which raise an ill augury of this affair. If you do
not disapprove of my speaking frankly to you, it seems to me that it
would be suitable in you to send some discreet Diplomatist to that Court
to notify the King’s death ; and you would learn by him what you have
to expect from her Czarish Majesty” (the Empress, he always calls her,
knowing she prefers that title). “It seems to me, Madam, that it would
be precipitate procedure should I wish to engage you in an Enterprise,
_ which appears to myself absolutely dubious (hasardée), unless approved
by that Princess. As to me, Madam, | have not the ascendant there
which you suppose: I act under rule of all the delicacies and discretions
with a Court which separated itself from my Enemies when all Europe
wished to crush me: but I am far from being able to regulate the Km-
press’s way of thinking.

“Tt is the same with the quarrels about the Duke of Courland; one

cannot attempt mediation except by consent of hoth parties. I believe
I am not mistaken in supposing that the Court of Russia does not mean
to terminate that business by foreign mediation. What I have heard
about it (what, however, is founded only on vague news) is, That the
Empress might prevail upon herself (pourrait se resoudre) to purchase
from Brihl the Principality of Zips” (Zips, on the edge of Hungary ;
let readers take note of that Principality, at present in the hand of Briihl,
—who has much disgusted Poland by his voracity for Lands; and is
disgorging them all again, poor soul!), “to give it to Prince Karl in
compensation : but that would lead to a negotiation with the Court of
Vienna, which might involve the affair in other contentions.
_ “T conjure you, Madam, I repeat it, Be not precipitate in anything ;
lest, as my fear is, you replunge Europe into the troubles it has only
just escaped from! As to me, I have found, since the Peace, so much
to do within my own borders, that I have not, I assure you, had time,
Madam, to think of going abroad. I confine myself to forming a thou-
sand wishes for the prosperity of your Electoral Highness, assuring
you of the high esteem with which I am,—F.”"

After some further Letters, of eloquently pressing solicitation on the
part of the Lady, and earnest advising, as well as polite fencing, on the
part of Friedrich, the latter writes:

Friedrich to Electress.

“ Potsdam, 3d November 1763.
“Madam my Sister,—At this moment I receive a Letter from the

10 <¢ Had his audience, 7th October’’ (yesterday): Rodenbeck, ii. 224.
11 (uvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 48.

310 7 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1763-1769.
Empress of Russia, the contents of which do not appear to me favour-
able, Madam, to your hopes. She requires (exzge) that I should instruct
my Minister in Poland to act entirely in concert with the Count Kay-
serling ; and she adds these very words: ‘I expect, from the friendship
of your Majesty, that you will not allow a passage through your terri-
tory, nor the entry into Poland, to Saxon troops, who are to be regarded
there absolutely as strangers.’

‘Unless your Letters, Madam” (Madam had said that she had written
to the Empress, assuring her &c.) ‘‘ change the sentiments of the Em-
press, I do not see in what way the Elector could arrive at the throne
of Poland; and consequently, whether I deferred to the wishes of the
Empress in this point, or refused to do so, you would not the more be-
come Queen; and I might commit myself against a Power which I
ought to keep well with (ménager). I am persuaded, Madam, that your
Electoral Highness enters into my embarrassment; and that, unless
you find yourself successful in changing the Empress’s own ideas on
this matter, you will not require of me that I should embroil myself fruit-
lessly with a neighbour who deserves the greatest consideration from me.

** All this is one consequence of the course which Count Briihl in-
duced his late Polish Majesty to take with regard to the interests of
Prince Karl in Courland: and your Electoral Highness will remember,
that I often represented to you the injury which would arise to him
from it.

“TI will wish, Madam, that other opportunities may occur, where it
may be in my power to prove to your Electoral Highness the profound
esteem and consideration with which I am—”—F."?

Electress to Friedrich.

“Dresden, 11th November 1763.

“‘Sire,—I am not yet disheartened. I love to flatter myself with
your friendship, Sire, and I will not easily renounce the hope that you
will give me a real mark of it in an affair which interests me so strongly.
Nobody has greater ascendancy over the mind of the Empress of Rus-
sia than your Majesty; use it, Sire, to incline it to our favour. Our
obligation will be infinite.” * * ‘Why should she be absolutely
against us? What has she to fear from us? The Courland business,
if that sticks with her, could be terminated in a suitable manner.”—
“Troops into Poland, Sire?” ‘‘My Husband so little thinks of sending
troops thither, that he has given orders for the return of those already
there. He does not wish the Crown except from the free suffrages of
the Nation: if the Empress absolutely refuse to help him with her
good offices, let her, at least, not be against him. Do try, Sire.”°—

12 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 52. 13 Thid. xxiv. 53.

Cuap. III. ] | TROUBLES IN POLAND. dll
1763-1769.

Friedrich answers, after four days, or by return of post—But we will
give the rest in the form of Dialogue.

Friedrich (after four days). * * “If, Madam, I had Crowns to
give away, I would place the first on your head, as most worthy to bear
it. But I am far from such a position. I have just got out of a horri-
ble War, which my enemies made upon me with a rage almost beyond
example; I endeavour to cultivate friendship with all my neighbours,
and to get embroiled with nobody. With regard to the affairs of Po-
land, an Empress whom I ought to be well with, and to whom I owe
great obligations, requires me to enter into her measures ; you, Madam,
whom I would fain please if I could, you want me to change the senti-
ments of this Empress. Do but enter into my embarrassment!” * *
“* According to all I hear from Russia, it appears to me that every reso-
lution is taken there ; and that the Empress is resolved even to sustain
the party of her partisans in Poland with the forces she has all in read-
iness at the borders. As for me, Madam, I wish, if possible, not to med-
dle at all with this business, which hitherto is not complicated, but which
may, any day, become so by the neighbours of Poland taking a too live-
ly part init. Ready, otherwise, on all occasions, to give to your Elect-
oral Highness proofs of my—”!*

Electress (after ten days). * * ‘Why should the Empress be so
much against us? We have not deserved her hatred. On the con-
trary, we seek her friendship. She declares, however, that she will up-
hold the freedom of the Poles in the election of their King. You, Sire”
—'*—But we must cut short, though it lasts long months after this,
Great is the Electress’s persistence,—“ My poor Husband being dead,
cannot our poor Boy, cannot his uncle Prince Xavier try? O Sire !”
Our last word shall be this of Friedrich’s; actual Election-time now
drawing nigh:

Friedrich. “1 am doing like the dogs who have fought bitterly till
they are worn down: [I sit licking my wounds. I notice most Euro-
pean Powers doing the same ; too happy if, whilst Kings are being man-
ufactured to right and left, public tranquillity is not disturbed thereby,
and if every one may continue to dwell in peace beside his hearth and
his household gods.”*® Adieu, bright Madam.

No reader who has made acquaintance with Polish History
can well doubt but Poland was now dead or moribund, and well
deserved to die. Anarchies are not permitted in this world.
Under fine names, they are grateful to the Populaces, and to the

4 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 54: ‘* Potsdam, 16th November 1763.”

© Thid. p. 55: ‘* Dresden, 26th November 1763.”

te ««Sans-Souci, 26th June 1764” (Ibid. p. 69).

312 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1763-1769.

Editors of Newspapers; but to the Maker of this Universe they
are eternally abhorrent; and from the beginning have been for-
bidden to be. They go their course, applauded or not applauded
by self and neighbours,—for what lengths of time none of us can
know; for a long term sometimes, but always for a fixed term ;
and at last their day comes. Poland had got to great lengths,
two centuries ago, when poor John Casimir abdicated his Crown
of Poland, after a trial of twenty years, and took leave of the
Republic in that remarkable Speech to the Diet of 1667.

This John is *‘ Casimir V.,” last Scion of the Swedish House
of Vasa,—with whom, in the Great Elector’s time, we had some
slight acquaintance ; and saw at least the three-days beating he
got (Warsaw, 28th-30th July 1656) from Karl Gustav of Swe-
den and the Great Elector,!” ancestors respectively of Karl XII.
and of our present Friedrich. He is not “ Casimir the Great”
of Polish Kings; but he is, in our day, Casimir the alone Re-
markable. It seems to me I once had i extenso this Valedictory
Speech of his; but it has lapsed again into the general Mother
of Dead Dogs, and I will not spend a week in fishing for it.
The gist of the Speech, innumerable Books and Dead Dogs tell
you,'® is “‘lamentation over the Polish Anarchies,” and “a
Prophecy,”’ which is very easily remembered. ‘The poor old
Gentleman had no doubt eaten his peck of dirt among those Po-

lacks, and swallowed chagrins till he felt his stomach could no.

more, and determined to have done with it. To one’s fancy, in
abridged form, the Valediction must have run essentially as fol-
lows:

“*‘ Magnanimous Polack Gentlemen, you are a glorious Repub-
lic, and have Vie pozwalam, and strange methods of business, and
of behaviour to your Kings and others. We have often fought
together, been beaten together, by our enemies and by ourselves;
and at last I, for my share, have enough of it. I intend for
Paris; religious-literary pursuits, and the society of Ninon de
l’Enclos. I wished to say before going, that according to all
record, ancient and modern, of the ways of God Almighty in this

17 Supra, i. 265-267.

'§ Histoire des Trois Démembremens does, and many others do ;—copied
in Biographie Universelle, vii. 278 (§ Casimir).

Se ee

~ — So

Cuap. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 313
1763-1769.

world, there was not heretofore, nor do I expect there can hence-
forth be, a Human Society that would stick together on those
terms. Believe me, ye Polish Chivalries, without superior ex-
cept in Heaven, if your glorious Republic continue to be man-
aged in such manner, not good will come of it, but evil. The
day will arrive” (this is the Prophecy, almost in dpsissimis verbis),
‘the day perhaps is not so far off, when this glorious Republic
will get torn into shreds, hither, thither; be stuffed into the
pockets of covetous neighbours, Brandenburg, Muscovy, Austria;
and find itself reduced to zero, and abolished from the face of
the world.

“‘T speak these words in sorrow of soul; words which proba-
bly you will not believe. Which only Fate can compel you to
believe, one day, if they are true words :—you think, probably,
they are not? Me, at least, or interest of mine, they do not re-
gard. Ispeak them from the fulness of my heart, and on behest
of friendship and conviction alone; having the honour at this
moment to bid you and your Republic a very long farewell.
Good morning, for the last time!’ And so emt: to Rome (had
been Cardinal once); to Paris and the society of Ninon’s Circle,
for the few years left him of life.'

_ This poor John had had his bitter experiences: think only of
one instance. In 1652, the incredible Law of Liberum Veto had
been introduced, in spite of John and his endeavours. Liberum
Veto ; the power of one man to stop the proceedings of Polish
Parliament by pronouncing audibly, “‘ Ne pozwalam, I don’t per-
mit !’’—never before or since among mortals was so incredible a
Law. Law standing indisputable, nevertheless, on the Polish
Statute-Book for above two hundred years: like an ever-flowing
fountain of Anarchy, joyful to the Polish Nation. How they
got any business done at all, under sucha Law? ‘Truly they did
but little; and for the last thirty years, as good as none. - But
if Polish Parliament was universally in earnest to do some busi-
ness, and veto came upon it, Honourable Members, I observe,
gathered passionately round the vetoing Brother; conjured, ob-
tested, menaced, wept, prayed; and, if the case was too urgent
and insoluble otherwise, the Nie pozwalam Gentleman still obsti-
19 “* Died, 16th December 1672, age 63.”

Vor. VI.—O

314 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1763-1769.
nate, they plunged their swords through him, and in that way
brought consent. ‘The commoner course was to dissolve and go
home again, in a tempest of shrieks and curses.

The Right of Confederation, too, is very curious: do readers
know it? A free Polack gentleman, aggrieved by anything
that has occurred or been enacted in his Nation, has the right
of swearing, whether absolutely by himself I know not, but cer-
tainly with two or three others of like mind, that he will not
accept said occurrence or enactment, and is hereby got into arms
against its abettors and it. The brightest jewel in the cestus
of Polish Liberty is this right of confederating; and it has
been, till of late, and will be now again practised to all lengths:
right of every Polish gentleman to confederate with every other
against, or for, whatsoever to them two may seem good; and to
assert their particular view of the case by fighting for it against
all comers, King and Diet included. It must be owned, there
never was in Nature such a Form of Government before; such
a mode of social existence, rendering ‘‘government” impossible
for some generations past.

On the strength of Saxony and its resources and connexions,
the two Augusts had contrived to exist with the name of Kings;
with the name, but with little or nothing more. Under this last
August, as we heard, there have been about forty Diets, and in
not one of them the least thing of business done; all the forty,
after trying their best, have stumbled on Nie pozwalam, and been
obliged to vanish in shrieks and curses.2° As to August the
Physically Strong, such treatment had he met with,—poor Au-
gust, if readers remember, had made up his mind to partition
Poland ; to give away large sections of it in purchase of the con-
sent of neighbours, and plant himself hereditarily in the central
part ;—and would have done so, had not Grumkow and he
drunk so deep, and death by inflammation of the foot suddenly
come upon the poor man. Some partition of Poland has been
more than once thought of by practical people concerned. Po-
land, as “‘a house chronically smoking through the slates,”
which usually brings a new European War every time it changes
King, does require to be taken charge of by its neighbours.

7” Buchholz (Preussisch-Brandenburgische Geschichte, ii. 138, 154, &e.
&¢c.) gives various samples, and this enumeration.

a“

a ee

Cuap. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 315
1763-1769.

Latterly, as we observed, there has been little of confederating ;
indeed, for the last thirty years, as Rulhicre copiously informs
us, there has been no Government, consequently no mutiny
needed ; little or no National business of any kind,—the Forty
Diets having all gone the road we saw. Electing of the Judges,
—that, says Rulhiere, and wearisomely teaches by example
again and ever again, has always been an interesting act, in the
various Provinces of Poland; not with the hope of getting fair
or upright Judges, but Judges that will lean in the desirable di-
rection. In a Country overrun with endless lawsuits, debts,
credits, feudal intricacies, claims, liabilities, how important to
get Judges with the proper bias! And these once got, or lost
till next term,—what is there to hope or to fear? Russia does
our Politics, fights her Seven-Years War across us; and we,
happy we, have no fighting ;—never till this of Courland was
there the least ill-nature from Russia! We are become latterly
the peaceable stepping-stone of Russia into Europe and out of
it;—what may be called the door-mat of Russia, useful to her
feet, when she is about paying visits or receiving them! That
is not a glorious fact, if it be a safe and “lucky” one; nor do
the Polish Nobilities at all phrase it in that manner. But a
fact it is; which has shown itself complete in the late Czarina’s
and late August’s time, and which had been on the growing
hand ever since Peter the Great gained his Battle of Pultawa,
and rose to the ascendancy, instead of Karl and Sweden.

The Poles put fine colours on all this; and are much con-
tented with themselves. ‘The Russians they regard as intrinsic-
ally an inferior barbarous people; and to this day you will hear
indignant Polack Gentlemen bursting out in the same strain:
“Still barbarian, sir; no culture, no literature,’’—=inferior be-
cause they do not make verses equal to ours! How it may be
with the verses, I will not decide: but the Russians are incon-
ceivably superior in respect that they have, to a singular degree
among Nations, the gift of obeying, of being commanded. Po-
lack Chivalry sniffs at the mention of sucha gift. Polack Chiv-
alry got sore. stripes for wanting this gift. And in the end, got
striped to death, and flung.out of the world, for continuing blind
to the want of it, and never acquiring it. Beyond all the verses

316 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
oa 1763-1769.

in Nature, it is essential to every Chivalry and Nation and Man.
‘‘ Polite Polish Society for the last thirty years has felt itself to
be in a most halcyon condition,” says Rulhiere :*! “ given up to
the agreeable, and to that only ;’ charming evening-parties, and
a great deal of flirting; full of the benevolences, the philanthro-
pies, the new ideas,—given up especially to the pleasing idea of
“‘ Laissez-faire, and everything will come right of itself.” ‘What
a discovery !” said every liberal Polish mind: “for thousands
of years, how people did torment themselves trying to steer the
ship; never knowing that the plan was, To let go the helm, and
honestly sit down to your mutual amusements and powers of
pleasing !”

To this condition of beautifully phosphorescent rot-heap has
Poland ripened, in the helpless reigns of those poor Augusts ;—
the fulness of time not now far off, one would say? It would
complete the picture, could I go into the state of what is called
‘Religion’ in Poland. Dissenterism, of various poor types, is
extensive; and, over against it, is such a type of Jesuit Fanati-
cism as has no fellow in that time. Of which there have been
truly savage and sanguinary outbreaks, from time to time; es-
pecially one at Thorn, forty years ago, which shocked Friedrich
Wilhelm and the whole Protestant world.?? Polish Orthodoxy,
in that time, and perhaps still in ours, is a tliing worth noting.
A late Tourist informs me, he saw on the streets of Stettin, not
long since, a drunk human creature staggering about, who
seemed to be a Baltic sailor, just arrived; the dirtiest, or among
the dirtiest, of mankind; who, as he reeled along, kept slapping
his hands upon his breast, and shouting, in exultant soliloquy,
“Polack, Catholik!” Zam a Pole and Orthodox, ve inferior
two-legged entities !|—In regard to the Jesuit Fanaticisms, at
Thorn and elsewhere, no blame can attach to the poor Augusts,
who always leant the other way, what they durst or could. Nor
is speciality of blame due to them on any score; it was ‘‘like
People, like King,” all along ;—and they, such their luck, have
lived to bring in the fulness of time.

21 Rulhiére, i. 216 (a noteworthy passage).
2 See supra, ii. 10, 11 (and many old Pamphlets on it).

=

a

il ate el

Pes

Cuap. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 317
1763-1769.

The Saxon Electors are again aspirants for this enviable
Throne. We have seen the beautiful Electress zealously solicit-
ing Friedrich for help in that project; Friedrich, in a dexter-
ously graceful manner, altogether declining. Hereditary Sax-
ons are not to be the expedient this time, it would seem; a
grandiose Czarina has decided otherwise. Why should not she?
She and all the world are well aware, Russia has been virtual
lord of Poland this long time. Credible enough that Russia in-
tends to continue so; and also that it will be able, without very
much expenditure of new contrivance for that object.

So far as can be guessed and assiduously deduced from Rulhiere,
with your best attention, Russian Catharine’s interference seems
first of all to have been grounded on the grandiose philanthropic
principle. Astonishing to the liberal mind; yet to appearance
true. Rulhiere nowhere says so; but that is gradually one’s
own perception of the matter; no other refuge for you out of
flat inconceivability. Philanthropic principle, we say, which the
- Voltaires and Sages of that Epoch are prescribing as one’s duty
and one’s glory: ‘‘Oh ye Kings, why won’t you do good to man-
kind, then?” Catharine, a kind of She-Louis Quatorze, was
equal to such a thing. ‘To put one’s cast Lover into a throne,
—poor soul, console him in that manner ;—and reduce the long-
dissentient Country to blessed composure under him: what a
thing! Foolish Poniatowski, an empty, windy creature, redo-
lent of macassar and the finer sensibilities of the heart: him she
did make King of Poland; but to reduce the long-dissentient
Country to composure,—that was what she could not do. Coun-
tries in that predicament are sometimes very difficult to compose.
The Czarina took, for above five years, a great deal of trouble,
without losing patience. The Czarina, after every new effort,
perceived with astonishment that she was further from. success
than ever. With astonishment; and gradually with irritation,
thickening and mounting towards indignation.

There is no reason to believe that the grandiose Woman hand-
led, or designed to handle,.a doomed Poland in the merciless fe-
line-diabolic way set forth with wearisome loud reiteration in
those distracted Books; playing with the poor Country as cat
does with mouse; now lifting her fell paw, letting the poor

318 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXT.
1763-1769.

mouse go loose in floods of celestial joy and hope without limit ;
and always clutching the hapless creature back into the black-
ness of death, before eating and ending it. Reason first is, that
the Czarina, as we see her elsewhere, never was im the least a
Cat or a Devil, but a mere Woman ; already virtual proprietress
of Poland, and needing little contrivance to keep it virtually
hers. Reason second is, that she had not the gift of prophecy,
and could not foreknow the Polish events of the next ten years,
much less shape them out beforehand, and preside over them,
like a Devil or otherwise, in the way supposed. |

My own private conjecture, I confess, has rather grown to be,
on much reading of those Rudhzeres and distracted Books, that
the Czarina,—who was a grandiose creature, with considerable
maenanimities, natural and acquired; with many ostentations,
some really great qualities and talents; in effect, a kind of She-
Louis Quatorze (if the reader will reflect on that Royal Gentle-
man, and put him into petticoats in Russia, and change his im-
proper females for improper males),—that the Czarina, very
clearly resolute to keep Poland hers, had determined with her-
self to do something very handsome in regard to Poland; and to
gain glory, both with the enlightened Philosophe classes and
with her own proud heart, by her treatment of that intricate
matter. ‘On the one hand,” thinks she, or let us fancy she
thinks, ‘‘here is Poland; a Country fallen bedrid amid Anar-
chies, curable or incurable; much tormented with religious in-
tolerance at this time, hateful to the philosophic mind; a hate-
ful fanaticism growing upon it for forty years past” (though it is
quite against Polish Law); ‘and the cries of oppressed Dissi-
dents” (Dissenters, chiefly of the Protestant and of the Greek
persuasion) “‘ becoming more and more distressing to hear. And,
on the other hand, here is Poniatowski who, who— !”—

Readers have not forgotten the handsome, otherwise extreme-
ly paltry, young Polack, Stanislaus Poniatowski, whom Excel-
lency Williams took with him 8 or 9 years ago, ostensibly as
“Secretary of Legation,” unostensibly as something verv differ-
ent? Handsome Stanislaus did duly become Lover of the Grand
Duchess; and has duly, in the course of Nature, some time ago
(date uncertain to me), become discarded Lover; the question

|
:
j
|
.
|

Cuar. IIT.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 819
1763-1769.

rising, What is to be done with that elegant inane creature, and
his vaporous sentimentalisms and sublime sorrows and disap-
pointments? ‘‘Let us make him King of Poland!” said the
Czarina, who was always much the gentleman with her discard-
ed Lovers (more so, I should say, than Louis Quatorze with his;
—and indeed it is computed they cost her, in direct moneys,
about twenty millions sterling,—being numerous and greedy ;
but never the least tiff of scolding or ill language) :?3—“ King of
Poland, with furnishings, and set him handsomely up in the
world! We will close the Dissident Business for him, cure
many a curable Anarchy of Poland, to the satisfaction of Vol-
taire and all leading spirits of mankind. He shall have outfit
of Russian troops, poor creature; and be able to put down An-
archies, and show himself a useful and grateful Viceroy for us
there. Outfit of 10,000 troops, a wise Russian Manager: and
the Question of the Dissidents to be settled as the first glory of
his reign 1”

Ingenuous readers are invited to try, in their diffuse vague
Rulhieres, and unintelligible shrieky Polish Histories, whether
this notion does not rise on them as a possible human explana-
tion, more credible than the feline-diabolic one, which needs
withal such a foreknowledge, unattainable by cat or devil? Po-
land must not rise to be too strong a Country, and turn its back
on Russia. No, truly; nor, except by miraculous suspension of
the Laws of Nature, is there danger of that. But neither need
Poland lie utterly lame and prostrate, useless to Russia; and be
tortured on its sick-bed with Dissident Questions and Anarchies,
curable by a strong Sovereign, of whom much is expected by
Voltaire and the leading spirits of mankind.

What we shall have to say with perfect certainty, and what
alone concerns us in our own affair, is, “rst, that Catharine did
proceed by this method, of crowning, fitting out and otherwise
setting up Stanislaus; did attempt settlement (and at one time
thought she had settled) the Dissident Question and some cura-
ble Anarchies,—but stirred up such legions of incurable, waxing
on her hands, day after day, year after year, as were abundantly

23 Castéra ( Vie de Catharine IT.) has an elaborate Appendix on this part
of his subject.

320 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. {Boox XXI.
7th Sept.—25th Nov. 1764.

provoking and astonishing:—and that within the next eight
years she had arrived, with Poland and her cargo of anarchies,
at results which struck the whole world dumb. Dumb with as-
tonishment, for some time; and then into tempests of vocifera-
tion more or less delirious, which have never yet quite ended,
though sinking gradually to lower and lower stages of human
vocality. Fact jist is abundantly manifest. Nor is fact second
any longer doubtful, That King Friedrich, in regard to all this,
till a real crisis elsewhere had risen, took little or no visible in-
terest whatever; had one unvarying course of conduct, that of
punctually following Czarish Majesty in every respect; instruct-
ing his Minister at Warsaw always to second and reinforce the
Russian one, as his one rule of policy in that Country,—whose
distracted procedures, imbecilities and anarchies, are, beyond this
point of keeping well with a grandiose Czarina concerned in it,
of no apparent practical interest to Prussia or its King.

Friedrich, for a long time, passed with the Public for contriver
of the Catastrophe of Poland,—‘“ felonious mortal,” ‘‘ monster
of maleficence,” and what not, in consequence. Rulhiere, whose
notion of him is none of the friendliest nor correctest, acquits
him of this atrocity; declares him, till the very end, mainly or
altogether passive in it. Which I think is a little more than the
truth,—and only a little, as perhaps may appear by and by.
Beyond dispute, these Polish events did at last grow interesting
enough to Prussia and its King ;—and it will be our task, suffi-
cient in this place, to extricate and riddle out what few of these
had any cardinal or notable quality, and put them down (dated,
if possible and in intelligible form), as pertinent to throwing light
on this distressing matter, with careful exclusion of the immense
mass which can throw only darkness.

Ex-Lover Poniatowski becomes King of Poland (7th Sept. 1764),
and is crowned without Loss of his Hair.

Warsaw,7th September 1764. Stanislaus Poniatowski, by what man-
agement of an Imperial Catharine upon an anarchic Nation readers shall
imagine ad libitum, was elected, what they call elected, King of Poland.
Of course there had been preliminary Diets of Convocation, much diet-
ing, demonstrating, and electing of imaginary members of Diet,—only
“ten persons massacred” in the business. There was a Saxon Party;

a

ne

‘Cnap. TE.) TROUBLES IN POLAND. 321

7th Sept.—25th Nov. 1764.

but no counter-candidate of that or any other nation. King Friedrich,
solicited by a charming Electress-Dowager, decides to remain accu-
rately passive. Polish emissaries came entreating him. A certain
Mockranowski, who had been a soldier under him (never of much mark
in that capacity, though now a flamingly conspicuous ** General” and Pol-
itician, in the new scene he has got into), came passionately entreating
(Potsdam, Summer of 1764, is all the date), ‘ Donnez-nous le Prince
Henri, Give us Prince Henri for a King!” the sound of which almost
made Friedrich turn pale: ‘ Have you spoken or hinted of this to the
Prince?” “‘ No, your Majesty.” ‘‘ Home then, instantly ; and not a
whisper of it again to any mortal !”** which, they say, greatly irritated
Prince Henri, and Jeft a permanent sore-place in his mind, when he
came to hear of it long after.

“* A question rises here,” says one of my Notes, which perhaps I had
better have burnt: ‘‘ At or about what dates did this glorious Ponia-
towski become Lover of the Grand-Duchess, and then become Ex-
Lover? Nobody will say ; or perhaps can?** Would have been a small
satisfaction to us; and it is denied! ‘ Ritter Williams’ (that is, Han-
bury) must have produced him at Petersburg some time in 1756: ‘ 11th
January 1757,’ finding it would suit, Poniatowski appeared there on his
own footing as ‘ Ambassador from Warsaw,’ ”—(easy to get that kind
of credential from a devoted Warsaw, if you are succeeding at the Court
of Petersburg ; ‘* Warsaw watchfully makes that the rule of distribu-
ting its honours ; and, from freezing-point upwards, is the most delicate
thermometer,” says Hermann somewhere). And this is our one date,
“ Poniatowski in business, Spring 1757 ;” of “ Poniatowski fallen bank-
rupt,” date is totally wanting.

“* Poniatowski’s age is 32 gone ;—how long out of Russia, readers
have to guess. Made his first public appearance on the streets of War-
saw, in the late Election time, as a Captain of Patriot Volunteers,—

~ ©Independence of Poland! Shall Poland be dictated to!’ cried Stanis-

laus and an indignant Public at one stage of the affair. His Uncles
Czartoryski were piloting him in; and in that mad element, the cries,
and shiftings of tack, had to be many.*® He is Nephew, by his mother,
of these Czartoryskis; but is not by the father of very high family.
‘Ought to be King of Poland?’ argued some Polish Emissary at Pe-
tersburg : ‘ His Grandfather was Land-steward to the Sapiehas.’ ‘ And
if he himself had been it!’ said the Empress, inflexible, though with a

24 Rulhiére, ii. 268; Hermann, vi. 355-364.

2° Preuss (iv. 12) seems to try, but does not succeed.

26 In Hermann, vy. 362-380 (still more in Rulhiére, ii. 119-289), wearisome
account of every particular.

One

322 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

; 25th Nov. 1764.
blush.—It seems the family was really good, though tallen poor; and,
since that Land-steward phasis, had bloomed well out again. His Fa-
ther was conspicuous as a busy, shifting kind of man, in the Charles-
Twelfth and other troubles; had died two years ago, as ‘ Castellan of

as

Cracow ;’ always a dear friend of Stanislaus Leczinski, who gets his

death two years hence” (in 1766, as we have seen).

“ King Stanislaus had five Brothers: two of them dead long before
this time ; a third, still alive, was Bishop of Something, Abbot of Some-
thing; ate his revenues in peace, and demands silence from us. The
other two, Casimir and Andreas, are better worth naming,—especially
the Son of one of themis. Casimir, the eldest, is ‘Grand Crown-Cham-
berlain’ in the days now coming, is also ‘ Starost of Zips’” (a Country
you may note the name of!)—“‘and has a Son,” who is no¢ the “ remark-
able one. Andreas, the second Brother (died, 1773), was in the Aus-
trian Service, ‘Ordnance Master,’ and a man of parts and weight ;—

who has been here at Warsaw, ardently helping, in the late Election

time. He too had a Son (at this time a child in arms),—who is really
the remarkable ‘ Nephew of King Stanislaus,’ and still deserves a word
from us.

“This Nephew, bred as an Austrian soldier, like his Father, is the
Joseph Poniatowski, who was very famous in the Newspapers fifty
years ago. By all appearance, a man of some real patriotism, energy
and worth. He had tried to believe (though, I think, never rightly
able) what his omnipotent Napoleon had promised him, That extinct
Poland should be resuscitated ; and he fought and strove very fiercely,
his Poles and he, in that faith or half-faith. And perished, fiercely fight-
ing for Napoleon, fiercely covering Napoleon’s retreat when his game
was lost: horse and man plunged into the Elster River (Leipzig Coun-
try, October 19th, 1813, evening of the ‘ Battle of the Nations’ there),
and sank forever ;—and the last gleam of Poland along with him.?’
Not even a momentary gleam of hope for her, in the sane or half-sane
kind, since that,—though she now and then still tries it in the insane:
the more to my regret, for her and others!

’ “ Besides these three Brothers, King Stanislaus had two Sisters still
living: one of them Wife of a very high Zamoiski ; the other of a ditto
Branicki (pronounce Branitzki)—him whom our German Books call
Kron-Grossfeldherr, ‘Grand Crown-General,’ if the Crown have any
soldiers at all; the sublime, debauched old Branicki, of whom Rulhiére
is continually galling! and never reports anything but futilities in a futile
manner. So much is futile, and not worth reporting, in this Polish ele-
ment !—King Stanislaus himself was born, 17th January 1732 ; played
King of shreds and patches till 1790,—or even farther (not till 1795 did

*7 Biographie Universelle (§ Poniatowski, Joseph), xxxv. 349-359.

Cuap. I{T.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. * $238
1764-1767.

Catharine pluck the paper tabard quite off him) ; he died in Petersburg,
February 11th or 12th, 1798.” After such a life !—

Stanislaus was crowned, 25th November 1764. He needs, as pre-
liminary, to be anointed, on the bare scalp of him, with holy oil before
crowning; ought to have his head close-shaved with that view. Stan-
islaus, having an uncommonly fine head of hair, shuddered at the barba-
rous idea; absolutely would not: whereupon delay, consultation ; and
at length some artificial scalp, or second skull, of pasteboard or dyed
leather, was contrived for the poor man, which comfortably took the oil-
ing in a vicarious way, with the ambrosial locks well packed out of
sight under it, and capable of flowing out again next day,as if nothing
had happened.?*® Not a sublime specimen of Ornamental Human Na-
ture, this poor Stanislaus. Ornamental wholly: the body of him, and
the mind of him, got up for representation ; and terribly plucked to
pieces on the stage of the world. You may try to drop a tear for him,
but will find mostly that you cannot

Tor several Years the Dissident Question cannot be got settled ; Con-
federation of Radom (23d June 1767—5th March 1768) pushes
wt into Settlement.

For several years after this feat of the false scalp, through long vol-
umes, wearisome even in Rulhzere. there turns up nothing which can
now be called memorable. The settling of the Dissident Question
proves exceedingly tedious to an impatient Czarina; as to curing of
the other curable Anarchies, there is absolutely nothing but a knitting
up by A, with a ravelling out again by B, and no progress discernible
whatever. Impatient Czarina ardently pushes on some Dissident settle-
ment,—seconded by King Friedrich and the chief Protestant Courts,
London included, and by the European leading spirits everywhere,—
through endless difficulties: finds native Orthodoxy an unexpectedly
stiff matter, Bishops generally having a fanaticism which is wonderful
to think of, and which keeps mounting higher and higher. Till at
length there will Images of the Virgin take to weeping,—as they gen-
erally do in such cases, when in the vicinity of brewhouses and con-
veniences ;?’—a Carmelite Monk go about the country working mira-
cles; and, in short, an extremely ugly phasis of religious human nature
disclose itself to the afflicted reader. King Friedrich thinks, had ‘it

28 Rulhidre. |

29 Nicolai, in his Travels over Germany, doggedly undertook to overhaul
one of those weeping Virgins (somewhere in Austria, I think); and found
her, he says, to depend on subterranean percolation of steam from a Brew-
~ ery not far off.

324 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXII.

1766.
not been for this Dissident Question, things would have taken their old
Saxon complexion. and Poland might have rotted on as heretofore, per-
haps a good while longer.

As to the knitting up and ravelling out again, which is called curing
of the other anarchies, no reader can or need say any thing: it seems
to be a most painful knitting up, by the Czartoryskis chiefly, then an
instant ravelling out by malign Opposition parties of various indistinct
complexion ; the knitting, the ravelling, and the malign Opposition
parties, alike indistinct and without interest to mankind. A certain
drunken, rather brutal Phantasm of a Prince Radzivil, who hates the
- Czartoryskis, and is dreadfully given to drink, to wasteful ambitions and
debaucheries, figures much in these businesses; is got banished and
confiscated, by some Confederation formed; then, by new Confedera-
tions, is recalled and reinstated—worse if possible than ever. ‘The
thing is reality; but it reads like a Phantasmagory produced by Lap-
land Witches, under presidency of Diabolus (very certainly the Devit
presiding, as you see at all turns),—and is not worth understanding,
were it even easy.

Much semi-intelligible, wholly forgetable stuff about King Stanislaus
and his difficulties, and his duplicities and treacherous imbecilities,*’
now of interest to no mortal. Stanislaus is at one time out with the
uncles Czartoryski, at another in with these worthy gentlemen: a man
not likely to cure Anarchies, unless wishing would do it. On the Dis-
sident Question itself he needs spurring: a King of liberal ideas, yes;
but with such flames of fanaticism under the nose of him In regard
to the Dissident and all other curative processes he is languid, evasive,
for moments recalcitrant to Russian suggestions: a lost imbecile,—for-
get him, with or without a tear. He has still a good deal of so-called
gallantry on his hands: flies to his harem when outside things go con-
tradictory.*' Think of malign Journalists printing this bit of Letter at
one time, to do him ill in a certain quarter: **‘ Oh, come to me, my Prin-
cess! Dearer than all E:mpresses,:—imperial charms, what were they
to thine for a heart that has—” with more of the like stuff, for a Cza- ;
rina’s behoof

Winter of 1766, Imperial Majesty, whether after or before that mi-
raculous Carmelite Monk, I do not remember, became impatient of these
tedious languors and tortuosities about the Dissident Question, and gave
express order, ‘‘ Setile it straightway!” ‘To which end, Confederations
and the other machinery were set agoing: Confederations among the
Protestants and Dissidents themselves, about Thorn and such places
(got up by Russian engineering), and much more extensively in the
Lithuanian parts ; Confederations of great extent, imperative, minatory;

a <r Tee.

9° Hermann, v 400, &c.; Rulhiere passim, 3! Hermann, v 402, &e.

a

Cuap. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 325
23d June 1767—5th March 1768.
ostensibly for reinstating these poor people in their rights (which, by
old Polish Law, they quite expressly were, if that were any matter),
but in reality for bringing back drunken Radzivil, who has covenanted
to carry that measure. And so,

June 23d, 1767, These multiplex Polish-Lithuanian Confederations,
twenty-four of them in all, with their sublime marshals and officials,
and above 80,000 noblemen in them, meet by deputies at Radom, a con-
venient little Town within wind of Warsaw (lies 60 miles to south of
Warsaw) ; and there coalesce into one general “ Confederation of Ra-
dom,”*? with drunken Radzivil atop, who, glad to be reinstated in his
ample Domains and Wine-cellars, and willing at any rate to spite the
Czartoryskis and others, has pledged himself to carry that great measure
in Diet, and quash any Nie pozwalams and difficulties there may be.
This is the once world-famous, now dimly discoverable, Confederation
of Radom, which,—by preparatory declaring, under its hand and seal,
That the Law of the Land must again become valid, and “ Free Polacks
of Dissident opinions concerning Religion (Nos dissidentes de reli-
gione),” as the old Law phrases it, shall have equal rights of citizenship,
—was beautifully instrumental in achieving that bit of Human Progress,
and pushing it through the Diet, and its difficulties shortly ensuing.

Not that the Diet did not need other vigorous treatment as well, the
flame of fanaticism being frightfully ardent ; many of the poor Bishops
having run nearly frantic at this open spoliation of Mother Church, and
snatching of the sword from Peter. So that Imperial Majesty had to
decide on picking out a dozen, or baker’s dozen, of the hottest Bishops;
and carrying them quietly into Russia under lock and key, till the thing
were done. Done it was, surely to the infinite relief of mankind ;—I
cannot say precisely on what day: October 13th—14th (locking up of
the dozen Bishops), was one vital epoch of it; November 19th, 1767
(report of Committee on it, under Radzivil’s and Russia’s coercion),
was another: first and last it took about five months baking in Diet.
Diet met, Oct. 4th, 1767, Radzivil controlling as Grand-Marshal, and
Russia as minatory Phantom controlling Radzivil; Diet, after adjourn-
ments, after one long adjournment, disappeared, 5th March 1768; and
of work mentionable it had done this of the Dissidents only. That of
contributing to “ the sovereign contempt with which King Stanislaus is
regarded by all ranks of men,” is hardly to be called peculiar work or
peculiarly mentionable.

At this point, to relieve the reader’s mind, and, at any rate, as the
date is fully come, we will introduce a small Newspaper Article from
a very high hand, little guessed till long afterwards as the writer,—

32 Hermann, v, 420.

326 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI,

23d June 1767—5th March 1768.
namely, from King Friedrich’s own. It does not touch on the Dissident
Question, or the Polish troubles; but does, in a back-handed way, on
Prussian Rumours rising about them; and may obliquely show more
of the King’s feeling on that subject than we quite suppose. It seems
the King had heard that the Berlin people were talking and rumouring
of “‘a War being just at hand ;” whereupon—‘ March 5th, 1767, in the
Vessische Zeitung (Voss’s Chronicle), No. 28,” an inquisitive Berlin
public read, as follows :

“We are advised from Potsdam, that, on the 27th of February, to-
wards evening, the sky began to get overcast; black clouds, presaging
a tempest of unexampled fury, covered all the horizon: the thunder,
with its lightnings, forked bolts of amazing brilliancy, burst out ; and,
under its redoubled peals, there descended such a torrent of hail as
within man’s memory had not been seen. Of two bullocks yoked in
their plough, with which a peasant was hastening home, one was struck
on the head by a piece or it, and killed outright. Many of the common
people were wounded in the streets; a brewer had his arm broken.
Roofs are destroyed by the weight of this hail; all the windows that
looked windward while it fell were broken. In the streets, hailstones
were found of the size of pumpkins (citrouzles), which had not quite
melted, two hours after the storm ceased. This singular phenomenon
has made a very great impression. Scientific people say, the air had
not buoyancy enough to support these solid masses when congealed to
ice; that the small hailstones in these clouds getting so lashed about in
the impetuosity of the winds, had united the more the further they fell,
and had not acquired that enormous magnitude till comparatively near
the earth. Whatever way it may have happened, it is certain that oc-
currences of that kind are rare, and almost without example.”*?

Another singularity is, “‘ Professor Johann Daniel Titius of Witten-
berg,” who teaches Natural Philosophy in that famous University,
one may judge with what effect, wrote a Monograph on this unusual
Phenomenon !**

Confederation of Bar ensues, on the per-contra Side (March 28th,
1768); and, as first Result of its Achievements (October 6th,
1768), a Turk-Russian War.

The Confederation of Radom, and its victorious Diet, had hardly be-
gun their Song of Triumph, when there ensued on the per-contra side
a flaming Confederation of Bar ;—which, by successive stages, does

33 -Vossische Zeitung, ubi supra; Gluvres de Frédéric, xv. 204.

** Rodenbeck (ii. 285) gives the Title of it, *‘ Considerations on the Pots-
dam Hail of Last Year (Wittenberg, 1768).”’

Cnap. ITT. TROUBLES IN POLAND. 327
28th March—6th Oct. 1768.

at last burn out the Anarchies of Poland, and reduce them to ashes.
Confederation of Bar; and then, as progeny for that, for and against,
such a brood of Confederations, orthodox, heterodox, big, little, short-
lived, long-lived, of all complexions, and degrees of noisy fury, potent,
at any rate, each of them for murder and arson, within a certain radius,
as the Earth never saw before. Now was the time of those inextrica-
ble marchings (as inroads and outroads) through the Lithuanian Bogs,
of those death-defiant, unparalleled exploits, skirmishings, scaladings,
riding by the edge of precipices, of Pulawski, Potocki, and others,—in
which Rulhiére loses himself and turns on his axis, amid impatient
readers.

For the Russian troops (summoned by a trembling Stanislaus and
his Senate, in terms of Treaty 1764), and in more languid manner, the
Stanislaus soldiery, as per law of the case, proceeded to strike in,—
generally, my impression was, with an eye to maintain the King’s
Peace and keep down murder and arson :—and sure enough, the small
bodies of drilled Russians blew an infuriated orthodox Polack chivalry
to right and left at a short notice; but as to the Constable’s Peace or
King’s, made no improvement upon that, far the reverse. It is certain
the Confederate chivalry were driven about, at a terrible rate,—over
the Turk frontier for shelter; began to appeal to the Grand Turk, in
desperate terms: “ Brother of the Sun and Moon, saw you ever such a
chance for finishing Russia? Polack chivalry is Orthodox, but also it
is Anti-Russian!” The Turk beginning to give ear to it, made the
matter pressing and serious. Here, more specifically, are some fea-
tures and successive phases,—unless the reader prefer to skip.

Bar, March 1768. The Confederation of Radom, as efficient pre-
liminary, and chief agent in that Diet of emancipation to the Dissident
human mind, might long have been famous over Poland and the world;
but there instantly followed as corollary to it a Confederation of Bar,
which quite dimmed the fame of Radom, and indeed of all Confedera-
tions prior or posterior! As the Confederation of Bar and its Doings,
or rather sufferings and tragical misdoings and undoings, still hang like
fitful spectralities, or historical shadows, of a vague ghastly complex-.
ion, in the human memory, one asks at least: Since they were on this
Planet, tell us where? Bar is in the Waiwodship Podol (what we call
Podolia), some 400 miles south-east of Warsaw; not far from the
Dniester River :—not very far from that mystery of the Dniester, the
Zaporavian Cossacks,—from those rapids or cataracts (quasi-cataracts
of the Dniester, with Islands in them, where those Cossack robbers
live unassailable) :—across the Dniester lies Turkey, and its famed
Fortress of Choczim. This is a commodious station for Polish Gen-
tlemen intending mutiny by law.

328 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXi. ©
28th March—6th Oct. 1768.

March 8th, 1768, Three short days after the Diet had done its fine
feat, and retired to privacy, news come to Warsaw, That Podolia and
the Southern parts are all up, confederating with the highest anima-~
tion; in hot rage against such decision of a Diet, contrary to Holy Re-
ligion and to much else; and that the said decision will have to fight
for itself, now that it has done voting. This interesting news is true;
and goes cn intensifying and enlarging itself, one dreadful Confedera-
tion springing up, and then another and ever another, day after day; |
till at last we hear that on the 27th of the month, March 27th, 1768, at
Bar, a little Town on the Southern or Turkish Frontier, all these more
or less dreadful Confederations have met by delegates, and coalesced
into one “ Confederation of Bar,’—which did surely prove dreadful
enough, to itself especially, in the months now ensuing!

No history of Bar Confederation shall we dream of; far be such an
attempt from us. It consists of many Confederations, and out of each,
pro and contra, spring many. Like the Lernean Hydra, or even Hy-
dras in a plural condition. A many-headed dog: and how many
whelps it had,—I cannot give even the cipher of them, or I would!
One whelp Confederation, that of Cracow, is distinguished by having
frequently or generally been “‘ drunk ;” and of course its procedures had
often a vinous character.*° I fancy to have read somewhere that the
number of them was one hundred and twenty-five. The rumour and
the furious barking of Bar and its whelps goes into all lands: such
rabid loud baying at mankind and the moon; and then, under Russia’s
treatment, such shrill yelping and shrieking, was not heard in the world
before, though perhaps it has since.

- Poor Bar’s exploits in the fighting way were highly inconsiderable ;
all on the same scale; and spread over such a surface of country,
mostly unknown. as renders it impossible to give them head-room, were
you never so unfurnished. ‘They can be read in eloquent Rulhiére;
but by no mortal held in memory. Anarchy is not a thing to be written
of: a Lernean Hydra, several Lernean Hydras, in chaotic genesis,
getting their heads lopped off, and at the same time sprouting new ones
in such ratio, where is the Zoologist that will give account of it?
There was not anything considerable of. fighting; but of Bullying,
plundering, murdering and being murdered, a frightful amount. There
are seizures of castles, convents, defensible houses; marches at a rate
like that of antelopes, through the Lithuanian parts, boggy, hungry,
boundless, opening to the fancy the Infinitude of Peat, in the solid and
the fluid state. This, perhaps, is the finest species of feats, though
they never lead to anything. There are heroes famed for these marches.

°° In Hermann (v. 431-448); and especially in Rudhiére (ii. livre 8 et
seq.), details in superabundance,

Sn nea
-
cee
‘
-

Cuap. III. ] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 329
28th March—6th Oct. 1768.

The Pulawskis, for example, — four of them, Lawyer people, —
showed much activity, and a talent for impromptu soldiering, in that
kind. The Magnates of the Confederation, | was surprised to learn,
had all quitted it the instant it came to strokes: ‘‘ You Lawyer peopie,
with your priests and orthodox peasantries, you do the fighting part;
ours is the consulting!” And except Potocki (and he worse than
none), there is presently not a Magnate of them left in Poland,—the
rest all gone across the Austrian Border, to Teschen, to Bilitz,a handy
little town and domain in that Duchy of Teschen; and sit there as
“Committee of Government :” much at their ease in comparison, could
they but agree among themselves, which they cannot. Bilitz is one
of the many domains of Magnate Sulkowski :—do readers recollect the
Sulkowski who at one time “‘ declared War” on King Friedrich; and

‘was picked up, both War and he, so compendiously by General Goltz,

and locked in Glogau to cool? This is the same Sulkowski; much
concerned now in these matters; a rich Magnate, glad to see his friends
about him as Governing Committee ; but gets, and gives, a great deal
of vexation in it, the element proving again too hot !—

I said there were four famed Pulawskis ;*° a father, once Advocate
in Warsaw, with three sons and a nephew; who, though extremely act-
ive people, could do no good whatever. The father Pulawski had the
fine idea of introducing the British Constitution; clothing Poland
wholly in British tailorage, and so making it a new Poland: but he
never could get it done. This poor gentleman died in Turkish prison,
flung into jail at Constantinople, on calumnious accusation and contriv-
ance by a rival countryman; his sons and nephew, poor fellows, all
had their fame, more or less, in the Cause of Freedom so-called ; but
no other profit in this world, that I could hear of. Casimir, the eldest
son, went to America; died there, still in the Cause of Freedom so-
called; Fort Pulawski,in the Harbour of Charlestown (which is at pres-
ent, on very singular terms, 7eengaged in the same so-called Cause !),
was named in memory of this Casimir. He had defended Czenstochow
Cif anybody knew what Czenstochow was, or could find it in the Polish
map); and it was also he that contrived that wonderful plan of sudden-
ly snapping up King Stanislaus from the streets of Warsaw one night,*’
and of locking him away (by no means killing him), as the source of
all our woes. Oh my Pulawskis, men not without manhood, what a
bedlam of a Time have you and I fallen into, and what Causes of Free-
dom it has got in hand!

Bar, a poor place, with no defences but a dry ditch and some miser-
able earthworks, the Confederates had not the least chance to main-
tain; Kaminiec, the only fortress of the Province, they never even got

36 Hermann, y. 465. 37 «¢3d November, 1771.”

330 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

28th March—6th Oct. 1768.
into, finding some fraction of royal soldiery who stood for King Stanis-
laus there, and who fired on the Confederates when applied to. Bara
small Russian division, with certain Stanislaus soldieries conjoined, took
by capitulation; and (date not given) entered in a victorious manner.
The War-Epic of the Confederates, which Rulhiere sings at such
length, is blank of meaning.

Of “Cloister Czenstochow,” a famed feat of Pulawski’s, also without
result, I could not from my Rulhiére discover (what was altogether an
illuminative fact to me!) that the date of Czenstochow was not till
1771. <A feat of “ Cloister Berdiczow,’ almost an exact fac-simile by
the same Pulawski, also resultless, I did, under Hermann’s guidance, at
once find ;—and hope the reader will be satisfied to accept it instead :
Cloister Berdiczow, which lies in the Palatinate of Kiow; and which
has a miraculous Holy Virgin, not less venerated far and wide in those
eastern parts, than she of Cloister Czenstochow in the western: this
Cloister Berdi¢zow and its salutary Virgin, Pulawski (the Casimir, now
of Charlestown Harbour) did defend, with about 1,000 men, in a really
obstinate way. ‘The Monastery itself had in it gifts of the faithful ac-
cumulated for ages; and all the richest people in those Provinces, Con-
federate or not, had lodged their preciosities there, as in an impregna-
ble and sure place, in those times of trouble. Intensely desirous, ac-
cordingly, the Russians were to take it, but had no cannon; desperately
resolute Pulawski and his 1,000 to defend. Pulawski and his 1,000
fired intensely, till their cannon-balls were quite done; then took to
firing with iron work, and hard miscellanies of every sort, especially
glad when they could get a haul of glass to Joad with ;—and absolutely
would not yield till famine came; though the terms offered were good,
—had they been kept. So that Pulawski, it would appear, did Two
Cloister Defences? Two, each with a miraculous Holy Virgin; an
eastern, and then a westerly. This of Berdiczow, not dated to me far-
ther, is for certain of the year 1768; and Pulawski, owing to famine,
did yield here. In 1771, at miraculous Cloister Czenstochow, in the
western parts, Pulawski did an external feat, or consented to see it done,
—that of trying to snuff out poor King Stanislaus on the streets (3d
November, 10 p.m., ‘‘ miraculously” in vain, as most readers know),— ~
which brought its obloquies and troubles on the Defender of Czensto-
chow. Obloquies and troubles: but as to surrendering Czenstochow
on call of obloquy, or of famine itself, Pulawski would not, not he for his
own part; but solemnly left his men tu do it, and walked away by cir-
cuitous uncertain paths, which end in Charlestown Harbour, as we have
seen. Defence of Czenstochow in 1771 shall not concern us farther.
Truly these two small defences of monasteries by Pulawski are almost
all, I do not say of glorious, but even of creditable or human, that re-

-Cuar. IIT. ] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 331

28th March—6th Oct. 1768.
ward the poor wanderer in that Polish Valley of Jehoshaphat, much of
it peat-country ; wherefore I have, as before, marked the approximate

localities, approximate dates, for behoof of ingenuous readers.

The Russians, ever since 1764, from the beginnings of those Stanis-
Jaus times, are pledged to maintain peace in Poland; and it is they that
have to deal with this affair,—they especially, or almost wholly, poor
Stanislaus having scarcely any power, military or other, and perhaps
being loth withal. ‘There was more of investigating and parleying,
bargaining and intriguing, than of fighting, on Stanislaus’s part. “June
11th, 1768,” says a Saxon Note from Warsaw, “ Mokranowski, Stanis-
laus’s General” (the same that was with Friedrich), “has been sent
down to Bar to look into those Confederates. Mokranowski does not
think there are above 8,000 of them ; about 3,000 have got their death
from Russian castigation. ‘The 8,000 might be treated with, only Rus-
sians are so dreadfully severe, especially so intent on wringing money
from them. Confederates have been complaining to the Turk; Turk
ambiguous ; gives them no definite ground of hope. ‘ What, then, is
your hope?’ LT inquired. ‘ Little or none, except in Heaven,’ several an-
swered : ‘it is for our religion and our liberty :’ religion cut to pieces
by this Dissident Toleration-blasphemy ; liberty ditto by the Russian
guarantee of peace among us: ‘ what can we do but trust in God and
our own despair?’”** ‘‘ Prave worts, Ancient Pistol,”—but much des-
titute of sense, and not to be realised in present circumstances. Here
is something much more critical :

June—July 1768. “‘ The peasants in the Southern regions, Palati-
nates Podol, Kiow, Braclaw, called Ukraine or Border-Country by the
Poles, are mostly of Greek and other schismatic creeds. Their Lords
are of an orthodox religion, and not distinguished by mild treatment of
such Peasantry, upon whom civil war and plunder have been latterly a
sore visitation. To complete the matter, the Confederates in certain
quarters, blown upon by fanatical priests, set about converting these poor
peasants, or forcing them, at the point of the bayonet, to swear that they
adopt the ‘ Greek united rite,’ which I suppose to be a kind of halfway
house towards perfect orthodoxy. In one Village, which was getting
converted in this manner, the military party seemed to be small; the
Village boiled over upon it; trampled orthodoxy and military both un-
der foot, in a violent and sanguinary manner ; and was extremely fright-
ened when.it had done. Extremely frightened, not the Village only,
but the Schismatic mind generally in those parts, dreading vengeance
for such a paroxysm. But the atrocious Russians whispered them,
‘We are here to protect you in your religions and rights, in your poor

38 « Hssen’s Report, 11th June 1768” (in Hermann, vy. 441).

332 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

28th March—6th Oct. 1768.
consciences and skins.’ Upon which hint of the atrocious Russians, the
schismatic mind and population one and all rose ; and, ‘ with the canni-
bal’s ferocity, gave way to their appetite for plunder!’ * \*

“Nay, the Russian Government” (certain Russian Officials hard
pressed) ‘“‘ had invited the Zaporavian Cossacks to step over from their
Islands in the Dniester, and assist in defending their Religion” (true
Greek, of course) ; ‘who at once did so; and not only extinguished the
last glimmer of Confederation there, but overwhelmed the Country,
thousands on thousands of them, attended by revolted peasants,—say a
20,000 of peasants under command of these Zaporavians,—who went
about plundering and burning. ‘That they plundered the Jew pothouses
of their brandy, and drank it, was a small matter. Very furious upon
Jews, upon Noblemen, Landlords, upon Catholic Priests. ‘On one tree’
(tree should have been noted) ‘ was found hanged a specimen of each
of those classes, with a Dog adjoined, as fit company.’ In one little
Town, Town of Human” (so-called in that foreign dialect), “ getting
some provocation or other, they set to massacring ; and if brandy were
plentiful, we can suppose they made short work. By the lowest com-
putation the number of slain Jews and Catholics amounted to 10,000
odd*°—Rulhiére says ‘50,000, by some accounts 200,000.’” This I
guess to have been at its height about the end of June; this leads di-
rect to the Catastrophe, as will presently be seen.

Foreign States don’t seem to pay much attention,—indeed, what sane
person would like to interfere, or hope to do it with profit? France,
Austria, both wish well to Poland, at least ill to Russia; Choiseul has
no finance, can do nothing but intrigue, and stir up trouble everywhere :
a devout Kaiserin goes with Holy Church, and disapproves of these
Dissident Tolerations: it is remarked that all through 1768 the Con-
federates of Bar are permitted to retire over the Austrian Frontier into
Austrian Silesia, and find themselves there in safety. Permitted to buy
arms, to make preparations, issue orders: at Sulkowski’s Bilitz, in the
Duchy of Teschen, supreme Managing Committee sits there; no Kau-
nitz or Official person meddling with it. About the beginning of next
year (1769), it is, ostensibly, a little discountenanced ; and obliged to go
to Eperjes, on the Hungarian Frontier*® (as a more decent, or less con-
spicuous place),—such trouble now rising ; a Turk War having broken
out, momentous not to the Confederation alone. March 1769, the ever-
intriguing Choiseul,—fancy with what rapturous effect,—had sent some
kind of Agent or Visitor to Teschen; Vergennes in Turkey, from the
beginning of these things, has been plying night and day his diplomatic
bellows upon every live-coal (‘I who myself kindled this Turk-War !”

39 Hermann, v. 444: Rulhiére, iii. 93.
4° See Biisching: for Eperjes, ii. 1427; for Bilitz, viii. 885.

ee.

Cuap. III.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. 333
28th March—6th Oct. 1768. ¥

brags he afterwards) ; not till next year (1770) did Choiseul send his
Dumouriez to the Bilitz neighbourhoods; not till next again, when
Choiseul was himself out,*! did his Vioménil come :*? neither of whom,
by their own head alone, without funds, without troops, could do other
than with fine effort make bad worse.

It is needless continuing such a subject. Here is one glimpse two
years later, and it shall be our last: “ Near Lublin, 25th September
1770. It is frightful, all this that is passing in these parts,—about the
Town of Labun, for example. The dead bodies remain without burial ; °
they are devoured by the dogs and the pigs.” * * ‘ Everywhere
reigns Pestilence ; nor do we fear contagion so much as famine. Offer
100 ducats for a fowl or for a bit of bread, I swear you won’t get it.
General von Essen” (Russian, we will hope) “has had to escape from
Laticzew, then from” some other place, “ Pestilence chasing him every-
where.”

To apply to the Turks,—afflicted Polish Patriots prostrating them-
selves with the hope of despair, ‘‘ Save us, your sublime Clemency ;
throw a ray of pity on us, Brother of the Sun and Moon: oh, chastise
our diabolic oppressors ;’—this was one of the first resources of the
Bar Confederates. The Turks did give ear; not inattentive, though
pretending to be rather deaf. M. de Vergennes,—of whose “ diplomatic
bellows” we just heard (in fact, for diligence in this Turk element, in
this young time, the like of him was seldom seen; we knew him long
afterwards as a diligent old gentleman, in French Revolution days),—
M. de Vergennes zealously supports; zealous to let loose the Turks
upon Anti-French parties. The Turks seem to wag their heads, for
some time ; and their responses are ambiguous. Tor some time, not
forlong. Here, fast enough, comes, in disguised shape, the Catastrophe
itself, ye poor plaintive Poles!

July—October 1768. Those Zaporavian and other Cossacks, with
20,000 peasants plundering about on both sides of the Dniester,*had set
fire to the little Town of Balta, which is on the south side, and belongs
to the Turks: a very grave accident, think all political people, think
especially the Foreign Excellencies at Warsaw, when news of it ar-
rives. Burning of Balta,not to be quenched by the amplest Russian
apologies, proved a live-coal at Constantinople; and Vergennes says,
he set population and Divan on fire by it: a proof that the population
and Divan had already been in a very inflammable state. Not a wise
Divan, though a zealous. Plenty of fury in these people ; but a sad de-

41 Thrown out, ‘‘2d December 1770,”—by Louis’s new Pompadour.

42 Hermann, v. 469-471; in Rulhiére (iv. 241-289), account of Dumou-
riez and his fencings and spyings, still more of Vioménil, who had ‘‘ French
Volunteers,” and did some bits of real fighting on the small scale.

334 AYTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

‘ 28th March—6th Oct. 1768.
ficiency of every other faculty. They made haste, in their hot humour,
to declare War (6th October 1768) ;** not considering much how they
would carry it on. Declared themselves in late Autumn,—as if to give
the Russians ample time for preparing; those poor Turks themselves
being as yet ready with nothing, and even the season for field-opera-
tions being over.

King Friedrich, who has still a Minister at the Porte, endeav-
oured to dissuade his old Turk friends, in this rash crisis; but
to no purpose; they would listen to nothing but Vergennes and
their own fury. Friedrich finds this War a very mad one on
the part of his old Turk friends ; their promptitude to go into it
(he has known them backward enough when their chances were
better !), and their way of carrying it on, are alike surprising to
him. He says: ‘‘ Catharine’s Generals were unacquainted with
the first elements of Castrametation and Tactic; but the Gener-
als of the Sultan had a still more prodigious depth of ignorance ;
so that to form a correct idea of this War, you must figure a set
of purblind people, who, by constantly beating a set of altogether
blind, end by gaining over them a complete mastery.”44 This,
as Friedrich knows, is what Austria cannot suffer ; this is what
will involve Austria and Russia, and Friedrich along with them,
in—Friedrich, as the matter gradually unfolds itself, shudders
to think what. The beginnings of this War were perhaps al-
most comical to the old Soldier-King ; but as it gradually devel-
oped itself into complete shattering to pieces of the stupid Blind
by the ambitious Purblind, he grew abundantly serious upon it.

It is but six months since Polish Patriotism, so effulgent to
its own eyes in Orthodoxy, in Love of glorious Liberty, confeder-
ated at Bar, and got into that extraordinary whirlpool, or cess-
pool, of miseries and deliriums we have been looking at; and
now it has issued on a broad highway of progress,—broad. and
precipitous,—and will rapidly arrive at the goal set before it.
All was so rapid, on the Polish and on the Turkish part. The
blind Turks, out of mere fanaticism and heat of humour, have
rushed into this adventure ;—and go rushing forward into a se-
ries of chaotic platitudes on the huge scale, and mere tragical
disasters, year after year, which would have been comical, had

43 Wermann, v. 608-11. 48 Gluvres de F rédéric, vi. 23, 24.

t Cuap. IIT.] TROUBLES IN POLAND. ooo
i 26th March 1769.

they not been so hideous and sanguinary: constant and enor-
mous blunders on the Turk part, issuing in disasters of like mag-
nitude ; which in the course of ‘Two Campaigns had quite finish-
ed off their Polish friends, in a very unexpected way; and had
like to have finished themselves off, had not drowned Poland
served as a stepping-stone.

Not till March 26th, 1769, six months after declaring in such
haste, did the blind Turks “display their Banner of Mahomet,”
that is, begin in earnest to assemble and make ready. Nor
were the Russians shiningly strategic, though sooner in the
field,—a Prince Galitzin commanding them (an extremely pur-
blind person); till replaced by Romanzow, our old Colberg ac-
-quaintance, who saw considerably better. Galitzin, early in
the season, made a rush on Choczim (Choizim), the first Turk
Fort beyond the Dneister ; and altogether failed,—not by Turk
prowess, but by his own purblind mal-arrangements (want of
ammunition, want of bread, or I will forget what) ;—which oc-
casioned mighty grumblings in Russia: till in a month or two,
by favour of Fortune and blindness of the Turk, matters had
come well round again; and Galitzin, walking up to Choczim
the second time, found there was not a Turk in the place, and
that Choczim was now his on those uncommonly easy terms!

Instead of farther details on such a War,—the shadow or re-
flex of which, as mirrored in the Austrian mind, has an import-
ance to Friedrich and us; but the self or substance of which has
otherwise little or none,—we will close here with a bit of Rus-
sian satire on it, which is still worth reading. ‘The date is evi-
dently Spring 1769; the scene what we are now treating of:
Galitzin obliged to fall back from Choczim; great rumour—
“What a Galitzin; what a Turk War his, in contrast to the
last we had!’45—-no Romanzow yet appointed in his room.
And here is a small Manuscript, which was then circulating
fresh and new in Russian Society; and has since gone over all
the world (though mostly in an uncertain condition, in old Jest-
Books and the like), as a genuine bit of caviare from those North-
ern parts:

Manuscript circulating in Russian Society. “ Galitzin, much

# Turk War of 1736-1739, under Miinnich (supra, it. 482-526).

336 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXL

26th March 1769.
grieved about Choczim, could not sleep; and, wandering about in his
tent, overheard, one night, a common soldier recounting his dream to the
sentry outside the door.

“¢A curious dream,’ said the soldier: ‘I dreamt I was in a bat-
tle; that I got my head cut off; that I died: and, of course, went to
Heaven. I knocked at the door: Peter came with a bunch of Keys;
and made such rattling that he awoke God; who started up in haste,
asking, “ What is the matter?” ‘ Why,” says Peter, “ there is a great
War on earth between the Russians and the Turks.” ‘ And who com-
mands my Russians?” said the Supreme Being. ‘‘ Count Miinnich,”
answered Peter. ‘ Very well; I may go to sleep again.”—But this
was not the end of my dream,’ continued the soldier ; ‘I fell asleep and
dreamt again, the very same as before, except that the War was not
Count Miinnich’s, but the one we are now in. Accordingly, when God
asked, ‘‘ Who commands my Russians?” Peter answered, ‘ Prince Ga-
litzin.” ‘ Galitzin? Then, get me my boots !” said the’ (Russian) ‘ Su-
preme Being.’ ”*°

CHAPTER IV.
PARTITION OF POLAND.

THEsE Polish phenomena were’ beginning to awaken a good
deal of attention, not all of it pleasant, on the part of Friedrich.
From the first he had, as usual, been a most clear-eyed observer
of everything; and found the business, as appears, not of tragical
nature, but of expensive-farcical, capable to shake the diaphragm
rather than touch the heart of a reflective onlooker. He has a
considerable Poem on it,— War of the Confederates by title (in
the old style of the Palladion, imitating an unattainable Jeanne
d’Arc),—considerable Poem, now forming itself at leisure in his
thoughts,' which decidedly takes that turn; and laughs quite
loud at the rabid fanaticisms, blusterous inanities and imbecili-

*6 W. Richardson (then at Petersburg, Tutor to Excellency Cathcart’s
Children ; afterwards Professor at Glasgow, and a man of some reputation
in his old age), Anecdotes of the Russian Empire, in a Series of Letters writ-
ten a few Years ago from St. Petersburg (London, 1784), p. 110: date of
this Letter is ‘‘17th October 1769.”

"La Guerre des Confédérés” (CEuvres, xiv. 183 et seq.), ‘finished in
November 1771.”

aE aly

Cuar. IV.) . PARTITION OF POLAND. 337
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

ties of these noisy unfortunate neighbours :—old unpleasant style
of the Palladion and Pucelle; but much better worth reading ;
having a great deal of sharp sense in its laughing guise, and more.
of real Historical Discernment than you will find in any other
Book on that delirious subject.

Much a laughing-stock to this King hitherto, such a ‘War of
the Confederates,”—-consisting of the noisiest, emptiest bedlam
tumults, seasoned by a proportion of homicide, and a great deal
of battery and arson. But now, with a Russian-Turk War
springing from it, or already sprung, there are quite serious as-
pects rising amid the laughable. By Treaty, this War is to cost
the King either a 12,000 of Auxiliaries to the Czarina, or a
72,000/., (480,000 thalers) annually ;3—which latter he prefers
to pay her, as the alternative: not an agreeable feature at all;
but by no means the worst feature. Suppose it lead to Russian
conquests on the Turk, to Austrian complicacies, to one knows
not what, and kindle the world round one again! In short, we
can believe Friedrich was very willing to stand well with next-
door neighbours at present, and be civil to Austria and its young
Kaiser’s civilities. . :

First Interview between Friedrich and Kaiser Joseph (Neisse,
25th-28th August 1769).

In 1766, the young Kaiser, who has charge of: the Military
Department, and of little else in the Government, and is already
a great traveller, and enthusiastic soldier, made a pilgrimage
over the Bohemian and Saxon Battlefields of the Seven-Years
War. On some of them, whether on all I do not know, he set
up memorial stones; one of which you still see on the field of
Lobositz ;—of another on Prag field, and of reverent salutation
by Artillery to the memory of Schwerin there, we heard long
ago. Coming to Torgau on this errand, the Kaiser, through
his Berlin Minister, had signified his “‘ particular desire to make
acquaintance with the King in returning ;” to which the King
was ready with the readiest ;—only that Kaunitz and the Kai-
serinn, in the interim, judged it improper, and stopped it. ‘The
reported Interview is not to take place,” Friedrich warns the

? (uvres de Frédéric, vi. 138. |

Vor. Vi—P

338 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

25th-28th Aug. 1769.
Newspapers; “‘having been given up, though only from courtesy,
on some points of ceremonial.’

The young Kaiser felt a little huffed; and signified to Fried-
rich that he would find a time to make good this bit of uncivility,
which his pedagogues had forced upon him. And now, after
three years, August 1769, on occasion of the Silesian Reviews,
the Kaiser is to come across from his Bohemian businesses, and
actually visit him: Interview to be at Neisse, 25th August 1769,
for three days. Of course the King was punctual, everybody
was punctual, glad and cordial after a sort,—no ceremony, the
Kaiser, officially incognito, is a mere Graf von Falkenstein, come
to see his Majesty’s Reviews. There came with him four or five
Generals, Loudon one of them; Lacy had preceded: Friedrich
is in the Palace of the place, ready and expectant. With Fried-
rich are: Prince Henri; Prince of Prussia; Margraf of Anspach,
Friedrich’s Nephew (Lady Craven’s Margraf, the one remnant
now left there); and some Generals and Military functionaries,
Seidlitz the notablest figure of these. And so, l’riday, August
25th, shortly after noon—But the following Two Letters, by an
Eyewitness, will be preferable; and indeed are the only real
Narrative that can be given:

No. 1. Engineer Le Febvre to Perpetual Secretary Formey (at Berlin).

“‘Neisse, 26th” (partly 25th) ‘ August 1769,

“My most worthy Friend,—I make haste to inform you of the Kai-
ser’s arrival here at Neisse, this day, 25th August 1769, at one in the
afternoon. The King had spent the morning in a proof Maneuvre,
making rehearsal of the Manceuvre that was to be. When the Kaiser
was reported just coming, the King went to the window of the grand
Episcopal Saloon, and seeing him alight from his carriage, turned round
and said, ‘Je l’ai vu (I have seen him).’ His Majesty then went to re-
ceive him on the grand staircase” (had hardly descended three or four
steps), “ where they embraced: and then his Majesty led by the hand
his august Guest into the Apartments designed for him, which were all
standing open and ready,”—which, however, the august Guest will not .
occupy except with a grateful imagination, being for the present incog-
nito, mere Graf von Falkenstein, and judging that The Three-Kings
Inn will he suitabler.

3“ Friedrich to One of his Foreign Ambassadors” (the common way of
announcing in Newspapers): Preuss, iv. 22 n.

Cuap. IV. } PARTITION OF POLAND. 339
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

“ Arrived in the Apartments, they embraced anew; and sat talking

together for an hour and half.”—
(The talk, unknown to Le Febvre,
began in this strain. Kaiser: ‘* Now are my wishes fulfilled, since I
have the honour to embrace the greatest of Kings and Soldiers.”
King: “1 look upon this day as the fairest of my life; for it will be-
come the epoch of uniting Two Houses which have been enemies too
long, and whose mutual interests require that they should strengthen,
not weaken one another.” Kaiser: ** For Austria there is no Si-
Jesia farther.”* ‘Talk, it appears, lasted an hour and half )
—‘“‘ The Kaiser” (continues our
Engineer) “had brought with him the Prince of Sachsen-Teschen”
(his august Brother-in-law. Duke ef Teschen, son of the late Polish
Majesty of famous memory): “afterwards there came Feldmarschall
Lacy, Graf von Dietrichstein, General von Loudon,” and three others
of no account to us. ‘‘ At the King’s table were the Kaiser, the Prince ~
of Prussia” dissolute young Heir-Apparent, of the polygamous tenden-
cy), “ Prince Henri, the Margraf of Anspach” (King’s Nephew, unfor-
tunate Lady-Craven Margraf, ultimately of Hammersmith vicinity) ;
“the above Generals of the Austrian suite, and Generals Seidlitz and
Tauentzien. The rest of the Court was at two other tables.” Of the
dinner itself an Outside Individual will say nothing.

“The Kaiser, having expressly requested the King to let him lodge
in an inn (Three Kings), under the name of*Graf von Falkenstein,
would not go into the carriage which had stood expressly ready to con-
duct him thither. He preferred walking on foot” (the loftily scornful
Incognito) “in spite of the rain; it was like a lieutenant of infantry
stepping out of his quarters. Some moments after, the King went to
visit him ; and they remained together from 5 in the evening till 8. It
was thought they would be present (assister) at a Comic Opera which
was to be played: but after waiting till 7 o’clock, the people received
orders to go on with the Piece ;’—both Majesties did afterwards look
in; but finding it bad, soon went their way again. (Major Le Febvre
stops writing for the night.)

“This morning, 26th, the Maneuvre” (rehearsed yesterday) “ has
been performed before both their Majesties: the troops, by way of fin-
ish, filing past them in the highest order. The Kaiser accompanied
the King to his abode; after which he returned to his own. This is
all the news I have today: the sequel by next Post” (apparently a
week hence). ‘I am, and shall ever be,—your true Friend,

3 “Le Fesvre.”

4 Preuss, iv. 23; Quvres de Fréderic, vi 25, 26.

340 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXII.
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

No.2 Same to Same.

*“* Neisse, 2d September 1769,

“ Monsieur and dearest Friend,—We had, as you heard, our first
Maneeuvre on Saturday 26th, in presence of the Kaiser and the King,
and of the whole Court of each. ‘That evening there was Opera;
which their Majesties honoured by attending. Sunday was our Sec-
ond Maneuvre ; Operette in the evening. Monday 28th, was our last
Maneuvre, at the end of which the two Majesties, without alighting
from horseback, embraced each other; and parted, protesting mutually
the most constant and inviolable friendship. One took the road for
Breslau ; the other that of Konigsgratz. All the time the Kaiser was
here, they have been continually talking together, and exhibiting the
tenderest friendship,—from which I cannot but think there will benefit
result.

“Tam almost in the mind of coming to pass this Winter at Berlin;
that I may have the pleasure of embracing you,—perhaps as cordially
as King and Kaiser here. I am, and shall always be, with all my
heart,—your very good Friend, Le Fesvre.”*

The Le Febvre that. writes here is the same who was set to manage
the last Siege of Schweidnitz, by Globes of Compression and other fine
inventions ; and almost went out of his wits because he could not do it.
An expert ingenious créature ; skilful as an engineer ; had been brought
into Friedrich’s service by the late Balbi, during Balbi’s ascendancy
(which ended at Olmiitz long ago). At Schweidnitz, and often else-
where, Friedrich, who had an esteem for poor Le Febvre, was good to
him, and treated his excitabilities with a soft hand, not a rough. Once
at Neisse (1771, second year after these Letters), on looking round at the
works done since last review, in sight of all the Garrison he embraced
Le Febvre, while commending his excellent performance ; which filled
the poor soul with a now unimaginable joy.

“ Helas,’ says Formey, ‘‘ the poor Gentleman wrote to me of his
endless satisfaction ; and how he hoped to get through his building, and
retire on half pay this very season, thenceforth to belong to the Acade-
my and me; he had been Member for twenty years past.” With this
view, thinks Formey, he most likely hastened on his buildings too fast:
certain it is, a barrack he was building tumbled suddenly, and some
workmen perished in the ruins. ‘‘ Enemies at Court suggested,” or
the accident itself suggested without any enemy, “has not he been
playing false, using cheap bad materials ?”—and Friedrich ordered him
arrest in his own Apartments, till the question were investigated. Ex-

® Formey, Souvenirs d’un Citoyen, i. 145-148.

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 341
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

citable Le Febvre was like to lose his wits, almost to leap out of his
skin. ‘ One evening at supper, he managed to smuggle away a knife ;
and in the course of the night, gave himself sixteen stabs with it;
which at length sufficed The King said,‘ He has used himself worse
than I should have done ;’ and was very sorry.”” Of Le Febvre’s scien-
tifie structures, globes of compression and the rest. 1 know not whether
anything 1s left; the above Two Notes, thrown off to Formey, were ac-
‘ eidentally a hit,and, in the great blank, may last a long while

The King found this young Kaiser a very pretty man; and
could have liked him considerably, had their mutual positions
permitted. ‘He had a frankness of manner, which seemed
natural to him,’’ says the King; “in his amiable character,
gaiety and great vivacity were prominent features.” By acci-
dental chinks, however, one saw ‘“‘ an ambition beyond measure”
burning in the interior of this young man,°—let an old King be
wary. A three days, clearly, to be marked in chalk; radiant
outwardly to both; to a certain depth, sincere; and uncom-
monly pleasant for the time. King and Kaiser were seen walk-
ing about arm in arm. At one of the Reviews a Note was
brought to Friedrich: he read it, a Note from her Imperial
Majesty ; and handing it to Kaiser Joseph, kissed it first. At
parting, he had given Joseph, by way of keepsake, a copy of
Maréchal de Saxe’s Zéveries (a strange Military Farrago, dicta-
ted, I should think, under opium’): this Book lay continually
thereafter on the Kaiser’s night-table; and was found there at
his death, Twenty-one years hence,—not a page of it read, the
leaves all sticking together under their bright gilding.®

It was long believed, by persons capable of seeing into mill-
stones, that, under cover of this Neisse Interview, there were
important Political negotiations and consultings carried on ;—
that here, and in a Second Interview or Return-Visit, of which
presently, lay the real foundation of the Polish Catastrophe.
What of Political passed at the Second Interview readers shall

® (uvres de Frédéric (in Mémoires de 1763 jusqu’a 1775, a Chapter
which yields the briefest, and the one completely intelligible account we
yet have of those affairs), vi. 25. .
7 « Mes Réveries ; Ouvrage Posthume, par,” &c. (2 voll. 4to: Amsterdam
et Leipzig, 1757). 8 Preuss, iy. 24 n.

\

342 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

see for themselves, from an excellent Authority. As to what
passed at the present (“‘mutual word-of-honour: should En-
gland and France quarrel, we will stand neutral’”®), it is too in-
significant for being shown to readers. Dialogues there were,
delicately holding wide of the mark, and at length coming close
enough; but, at neither the one Interview nor the other, was
Poland at all a party concerned,—though, beyond doubt, the
Turk War was; silently this first time, and with clear vocality
on the second occasion.

In spite of Galitzin’s blunders, the Turk War is going on at a
fine rate in these months; Turks, by the hundred thousand, get-
ting scattered in panic rout :—but we will say nothing of it just
yet. Polish Confederation, horror-struck, as may be imagined,
at its auxiliary Brother of the Sun and Moon and his perform-
ances,—is weltering in violently impotent spasms into deeper
and ever deeper wretchedness, Friedrich sometimes thinking of
a Burlesque Poem on the subject ;—though the Russian suc-
cesses, and the Austrian grudgings and gloomings, are rising on
him as a very serious consideration. ‘‘Is there no method, then,
of allowing Russia to prosecute its Turk War in spite of Austria
and its umbrages ?” thinks Friedrich sometimes, in his anxieties
about Peace in Europe :—“ If the Ukraine, and its meal for the
Armies, were but Russia’s! At present, Austria can strike in
there, cut off the provisions, and at once put a spoke in Russia’s
wheel.” Friedrich tells us ‘he (on,” the King himself, what I
do not find in any other Book) “sent to Petersburg, under the
name of Count Lynar, the seraphic Danish Gentleman, who, in
1757, had brought about the Convention of Kloster-Zeven, a
Project, or Sketch of Plan, for Partitioning certain Provinces of
Poland, in that view ;”—the Lynar opining, so far as I can see,
somewhat as follows: ‘ Russia to lay hold of the essential bit
of Polish Territory for provisioning itself against the Turk, and
allow to Austria and Prussia certain other bits; which would
content everybody, and enable Russia and Christendom to ex-
clude and suppress ad libitum that abominable mass of Mahom-
etan Sensualism, Darkness and Fanaticism from the fairest part
of God’s Creation.” An excellent Project, though not success-

9 uvres de Frédéric, ubi supra.

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 343
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

ful! ‘To which Petersburg, intoxicated with its own outlooks
on Turkey, paid not the least attention,” says the King.!? He
gives no date to this curious statement; nor does anybody else
mention it at all; but we may fancy it to have been of Winter
1769-1770,—and leave it with the curious, or the idly curious,
since nothing came of it now or afterwards.

Potsdam, 20th-29th October 1769. Only two months after Neisse,
what kindles Potsdam into sudden splendour, Electress Marie-Antoine
makes a Visit of nine days to the King. “In July last,” says a certain
Note of ours, “the Electress was invited to Berlin, to a Wedding ;
‘would have been delighted to come, but letter of invitation arrived too
late. Will, however, not give up the plan of seeing the great Fried-
rich.” Comes to Potsdam, 20th-29th October. Stays nine days; much
delighted, both, with the visit. ‘ Magnificent palaces, pleasant gardens,
ravishing concerts, charming Princes and Princesses: the pleasantest
nine days I ever had in my life,’ says the Electress. Friedrich grants,
to her intercession, pardon for some culprit. ‘ Diva Antonia,’ he calls
her henceforth for some time; she him, ‘Plus grand des mortels,
* Salomon du Nord, and the like names.”"' Next year, too (September
26th—October 5th, 1770), the bright Lady made a second visit ;!2 no
third,—the times growing too political, perhaps ; the times not suiting.
The Correspondence continues to the end; and is really pretty. And
would be instructive withal, were it well edited. For example,—if we
might look backwards, and shoot a momentary spark into the vacant
darkness of the Past,—Friedrich wrote (the year before this) :

Potsdam,3d May 1768 * * * Jesuits have got all cut adrift: A dim
rumour spreads that his Holiness will not rest with that first anathema,
but that a fulminating Bull is coming out against the Most Christian,
the Most Catholic and the Most Faithful. If that be so, my notion is,
Madam, that the Holy Father, to fill his table, will admit the Defender
of the Faith” (poor George III.) “and your Servant; for it does not
suit a Pope to sit solitary.” * *

“A pity for the human race, Madam, that men cannot be tranquil,—
but they never and nowhere can! Not even the little Town of Neuf-
chatel but has had its troubles: your Royal Highness will be astonished
to learn how. A Parson there” (this was above seven years ago, in old
Marischal’s reign’*) “had set forth in a sermon, That considering the

10 (Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 26.

11 Tbid. (Correspondence avec 0 Electrice Marie-Antoine), xxiv. 179-186.

12 Rodenbeck, iii. 24.

13 See Letters to Marischal, ‘‘ Leipzig, 9th March 1761,” *‘ Breslau, 14th
May 1762:” in Giuvres de Frédéric, xx. 282, 287.

344 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
25th-28th Aug. 1769.

immense mercy of God, the pains of Hell could not last forever. The
Synod shouted murder at such scandal; and has been struggling, ever
since, to get the Parson exterminated. The affair was of my jurisdic-
tion ; for your Royal Highness must know that I am Pope in that Coun-
try ;—here is my decision: Let the parsons, who make for themselves
a cruel and barbarous God, be eternally damned, as they desire, and de-
serve ; and let those parsons, who conceive God gentle and merciful,
enjoy the plenitude of his mercy! However, Madam, my sentence has
failed to calm the minds; the schism continues; and the number of the
damnatory theologians prevails over the others.”'*—Or again :

Potsdam, 1st December 1766. “At present I have with me my
Niece” (Sister’s Daughter, of Schwedt), “the Duchess of Wiirtemberg ;
who remembers with pleasure to have had the happiness of seeing your
Royal Highness in former times. She is very unhappy and much to
be pitied ; her Husband” (Eugen of Wirtemberg, whom we heard much
of, and last at Colberg) “‘ gives her a deal of trouble: he is a violent
man, from whom she has everything to fear; who gives her chagrins,
and makes her no allowances. I try my best to bring him to reason ;”
—but am little successful. ‘Three years after this, “ May 3d, 1769,” we
find Kugen, who once talked of running his august Reigning Brother
through the body, has ended by returning to Stuttgard and him; where,
or at Miimpelgard, his Apanage, he continued thenceforth ; and was
Reigning Duke himself, long afterwards, for two years, at the very end
of his life.'? At this date of 1766, “‘ my poor Niece and he” have been
married thirteen years, and have half a score of children; the eldest of
them Czar Paul’s Second Wife that is to be, and mother of the now Czars.

December 17th, 1765. * * “Thave had 12,360 houses and barns to
rebuild, and am nearly through with that. But how many other wounds
remain yet to be healed !”

July 22d,1765. * * ‘“ Wedding festivities of Prince of Prussia.
Duchess of Kingston tipsy on the occasion!”—But we must not be
tempted farther.**

Next, Year, there is a Second Interview ; Friedrich making a
Return: Visit during the Kaiser's Moravian Reviews (Camp
of Mahrisch-Neustadt, 8d—7th September 1770).

The Russian-Turk War, especially in this Second Campaign

14 «¢ April 2d, 1768” (a month before this Letter to Madam), there is
‘riot at Neufchaitel; and Avocat Gardot” (heterodox Parson’s Advocate)
‘killed in it” (Rédenbeck, ii. 303).

18 ¢*Sueceeded,”’ on his Brother Karl’s death, ‘‘ 20th May 1795; diced, 23d
December 1797, age 75.” 16 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 90-155,

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 345
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

of it, —‘ Liberation of Greece,” or, failing that, total destruction
of the Turk Fleet in Greek waters; conquest of Wallachia, as
of Moldavia; in a word, imminency of total ruin to the Turk by
land and sea,—all this is blazing aloft at such a pitch, in Sum-
mer 1770, that a new Interview upon it may well, to neighbours
so much interested, seem more desirable than ever. Interview
accordingly there is to be: 38d September, and for four days fol-
lowing.

Kaunitz himself attends, this time; something of real busi-
ness privately probable to Kaunitz. Prince Henri is not there;
Prince Henri is gone to Sweden; on visit.to his Sister, whom
he has not seen since boyhood: of which visit there will be far-
ther mention. Present with the King were:' the Prince of
Prussia (luckier somewhat in his second wedlock, little red-col-
oured Son and Heir born to him just a month ago);!® Prince
Ferdinand; two Brunswick Nephews, ELrbprinz whom we used
to hear of, and Leopold a junior, of whom we shall once or so.
No Seidlitz this time. Except Lentulus, no General to name.
But better for us than all Generals, in the Kaiser’s suite, besides
Kaunitz, was Prince de Ligne,—who holds a pen, as will appear.

“Liberation of the Greeks” had kindled many people, Vol-
taire among the number, who is still intermittently in. corre-
spondence with Friedrich: ‘ A magnificent Czarina about to re-
vivify that true Temple of Mankind, or at least to sweep the
blockhead Turks out of it; what a prospect!” Friedrich is
quite cool on Greece; not too hot on any part of this subject,
though intensely concerned about it. Besides his ingenious
Count-Lynar Project, and many other businesses, Friedrich has
just been confuting Baron d’Holbach’s Systeme de la Nature ;}9—
writing to Voltaire, Potsdam, 18th August 1770, on this subject
among others, he adds: ‘“‘I am going for Silesia, on the Reviews.
Iam to see the Kaiser, who has invited me to his Camp in Mah-
ren. ‘That is an amiable and meritorious Prince; he values your
Works, reads them as diligently as he can; is anything but su-

17 Rodenbeck, iii. 21. /
18 Friedrich Wilhelm III., *‘ born 3d August 1770.”
19 «© Heamen Critique du Systéme de la Nature” (in Qluvres de Frédéric, ix,
153 et sea.), ‘‘ finished, July 1770.”
P2

346 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
3d-7th Sept. 1770.
perstitious: in brief, a Kaiser such as Germany has not for a
great while had. Neither he nor I have any love for the block-
head and barbaric sort ;—but that is no reason for extirpating
them: if it were, your Turks” (oppressors of Greece) “ would
not be the only victims !’’?°
In a lengthy Leiter, written by request, Zo Stanislaus, King of
Poland, in 1785, or at a distance of fifteen years from this Inter-
view at Neustadt, Prince de Ligne, who was present there, has
left us some record or loose lively reminiscence of it ;?'—sputter-
ing, effervescing, epigrammatic creature, had he confined himself
to a faithful description, and burnt off for us, not like a pretty
firework, but like an innocent candle, or thing for seeing by!
But we must take what we have, and endeavour to be thankful.
By great luck, the one topic he insists on is Friedrich and his
aspect and behaviour on the occasion; which is what, of all else
in it, we are most concerned with.

“You have ordered me, Sire,” (this was written for him in 1785),
“to speak to you of one of the greatest men of this Age. You admire
him, though his neighbourhood has done you mischief enough ; and,
placing yourself at the impartial distance of History, feel a noble cu-
riosity on all that belongs to this extraordinary genius. I will, there-
fore, give you an exact account of the smallest words that I myself
heard the great Friedrich speak. * * The I (Jee) is odious to me;
but nothing is indifferent when”—Well, your account, then, your ac-
count, without farther preambling, and in a more exact way than you
are wont !—

‘By a singular chance, in 1770” (3d—7th September, if you would
but date), “ the Kaiser was” (for the second time) “‘ enabled to deliver
himself to the personal admiration which he had conceived for the King
of Prussia; and these Two great Sovereigns were so well together,
that they could pay visits. The Kaiser permitted me to accompany ;
and introduced me to the King: it was at Neustadt in Moravia” (Mah-
risch-Neustadt, short way from Austerlitz, which is since become a
celebrated place). ‘I can’t recollect if I had, or had assumed, an air
of embarrassment ; but what I do well remember is, that the Kaiser,
who noticed my look, said to the King, ‘ He has a timid expression,
which I never observed in him before, he will recover presently.’ This
he said in a graceful merry way; and the two went out, to go, I believe,

*° (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 165, 166.
#1 Prince de Ligne, Mémoires et Mélanges Historiques (Par. 1827), i. 8-21.

nas ie

eet

Cuar. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 347
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

to the Play. On the way thither, the King for an instant quitting his
Imperial Friend, asked me if my Letter to Jean Jacques” (now an en-
tirely forgotten Piece) ‘‘ which had been printed in the Papers, was real-
ly by me? J answered, ‘Sire, I am not famous enough to have my name
forged’ (as a certain Other name has been, on this same unproductive
topic). He felt what I meant. It is known that Horace Walpole took
the King’s name to write his famous Lettre a Jean Jacques” (impossi-
ble to attend to the like of it at present), “ which contributed the most
to drive mad this eloquent and unreasonable man of genius.

‘Coming out of the Play, the Kaiser said to the King of Prussia:
‘There is Noverre, the famous Composer of Ballets; he has been in
Berlin, I believe.’ Noverre made thereupon a beautiful dancing-master
bow. ‘Ah, I know him,’ said the King: ‘we saw him at Berlin; he
was very droll; mimicked all the world, especially our chief Dancing
Women, to make you split with laughing.’ Noverre, ill content with
this way of remembering him, made another beautiful third-position
bow; and hoped possibly the King would say something farther. and
offer him the opportunity of a small revenge. ‘ Your Ballets are beau-

. tiful,’ said the King to him; ‘ your Dancing Girls have grace; but it is

grace in a squattish form (de la grace engoncée). 1 think you make
them raise their shoulders and their arms too much. For, Monsieur
Noverre, if you remember, our principal Dancing Girl at Berlin wasn’t
so.’ ‘ That is why she was at Berlin, Sire,’ replied Noverre” (satiric-
ally, all he could).

“I was every day asked to sup with the King; too often the conver-
sation addressed itself to me. In spite of my attachment to the Kaiser,
whose General I like to be, but not whose D’Argens or Algarotti, I had
not beyond reason abandoned myself to that feeling. When urged by
the King’s often speaking to me, I had to answer, and go on talking.
Besides the Kaiser took a main share in the conversation; and was

_ perhaps more at his ease with the King than the King with him. One

day, they got talking of what one would wish to be in this world; and
they asked my opinion. I said, I should like to be ‘a Pretty Woman
till thirty ; then, till sixty, a fortunate and skilful General ;—and not
knowing what more to say, but for the sake of adding something, what-
ever it might be, ‘a Cardinal till eighty... The King, who likes to ban-
ter the Sacred College, made himself merry on this; and the Kaiser
gave him a cheap bargain of Rome and its upholders (suppots). That
supper was one of the gayest and pleasantest I have ever seen. The
Two Sovereigns were without pretension and without reserve ; what
did not always happen on other days; and the amiability of two men so
superior, and often so astonished to see themselves together, was the
agreeablest thing you can imagine. ‘The King bade me come and see

348 , AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

3d-7th Sept. 1770.
him the first time he and I should have three or four hours to our-
selves.

‘“‘ A storm such as there never was, a deluge compared with which
that of Deucalion was a summer shower, covered our Hills with water”
(cannot say which day of the four), “‘and almost drowned our Army
while attempting to maneuvre. ‘T’he morrow was a rest-day for that
reason. At nine in the morning, I went to the King, and stayed till
one. He spoke to me of our Generals: I let him say, of his own ac-
cord, the things I think of Marshals Lacy and Loudon; and I hinted
that, as to the others, it was better to speak of the dead than of the liv-
ing; and that one never can well judge of a General who has not in his
lifetime actually played high parts in War. He spoke to me of Feld-
marschall Daun: I said, ‘that against the French I believed he might
have proved a great man; but that against him’ (you), ‘he had never
quite been all he was; seeing always his opponent, as a Jupiter, thun-
derbolt in hand, ready to pulverise his Army.’ ‘That appeared to give
the King pleasure: he signified to me a feeling of esteem for Daun ;
he spoke favourably of General Brentano” (one of the Maxen gentle-
men). “J asked his reason for the praises I knew he had given to
General Beck. ‘Why (mazs), 1 thought him a man of merit,’ said the
King. ‘Ido not think so, Sire; he didn’t do you much mischief.’ ‘He
sometimes took Magazines from me.’ ‘ And sometimes let your Gen-
erals escape’ (Bevern at Reichenbach, for instance, do you reckon that
his blame ?).—‘ I have never beaten him,’ said the King. ‘ He never
came near enough for that: and I always thought your Majesty was
only appearing to respect him, in order that we might have more confi-
dence in him, and that you might give him the better slap some day,
with interest for all arrears.’

King. “* Do you know who taught me the little ] know? It was
your old Marshal Traun: that was a man, that one.—You spoke of the
French: do they make progress ?”

Figo. “‘ They are capable of everything in time of war, Sire: but in
Peace,—their chiefs want them to be what they are not, what they are
not capable of being.’

King. “‘ How, then ; disciplined? They were so in the time of M.
du Turenne.’

Ego. ‘“** Oh, it isn’t that. They were not so in the time of M. de
Vendéme, and they went on gaining battles. But it is now wished
that they become your Apes and ours; and that doesn’t suit them.’

King. “‘‘ Perhaps so: I have said of their busy people (farseurs,’
St. Germains and Army-reformers), ‘that they would fain sing without
knowing music.’

£go, ‘Oh, that is true! But leave them their natural notes; profit

*

see

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 349
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

by their bravery, their alertness (legéreté), by their very faults,—I be-
lieve their confusion might confuse their enemies sometimes.’

King. “* Well, yes, doubtless, if you have something to support them
with.’

Ego. *** Just so, Sire,—some Swiss and Germans.’

King “‘°*Tis a brave and amiable nation, the French; one can’t
help any them: but, mon Dieu, what have they made of their Men
of Letters; and what a tone has now come up among them! Voltaire,
for example, had an excellent tone. D’Alembert, whom I esteem in
many respects, is too noisy, and insists too much on producing effect in

- society :—was it the Men of Letters that gave the Court of Louis XIV.

its grace, or did they themselves acquire it from the many amiable per-
sons they found there? He was the Patriarch of Kings, that one’ (in
a certain sense, your Majesty!). ‘In his lifetime a little too much
good was said of him; but a great deal too much ill after his death.’

Ego. “* A King of France, Sire, is always the Patriarch of Clever
People (Patriarche des gens d’esprit :’ You do not much mean this,
Monsieur? You merely grin it from the teeth outward 72).

King. “‘‘ That is the bad number to draw: they aren’t worth a doit
(ne valent pas le diable, these gens desprit) at Governing. Better
be Patriarch of the Greek Church, like my sister the Empress of Rus-
sia! That brings her, and will bring, advantages. ‘There’s a religion
for you; comprehending many Countries and different Nations! As
to our poor Lutherans, they are so few, it is not worth while being their
Patriarch.’ e

Ego. “‘ Nevertheless, Sire, if one join to them the Calvinists, and
all the little bastard sects, it would not be so bad a post.’ (The King
appeared to kindle at this; his eyes were full of animation. But it did
not last when I said): ‘If the Kaiser were Patriarch of the Catholics,
that too wouldn’t be a bad place.’

King. “‘ There, there: Europe divided into three Patriarchates. I
was wrong to begin; you see where that leads us: Messieurs, our
dreams are not those of the just, as M. le Regent used to say. If Louis
XIV. were alive, he would thank us.’

* All these patriarchal ideas, possible and impossible to realise, made
him, for an instant, look thoughtful, almost moody.

King. “‘ Louis XIV., possessing more judgment than cleverness
(esprit), looked out more for the former quality than for the latter. It
was men of genius that he wanted, and found. It could not be said that
Corneille, Bossuet, Racine, and Condé were people of the clever sort
(des hommes d’esprit).’

Ego. “ ‘On the whole, there is that ‘in the Country which really de-
serves to be happy. It is asserted that your Majesty has said, If one
would have a fine dream, one must—’

350 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

King. “‘ Yes, it is true,—be King of France.’

Bee “<Tf Francis I. and Henri 1V. had come into the world after
your "Majesty, they would have said, “ be King of Prussia.”

King. “‘ Tell me, pray, is there no citeable writer left in France ?’

“This made me laugh; the King asked the reason. _ I told him, He
reminded me of the Russe a Paris, that charming little piece of verse
of M. de Voltaire’s ; and we remembered charming things out of it,
which made us both laugh. He said,

King. “‘T have sometimes heard the Prince de Conti spoken of:
what sort of man is he?’

Ego. ‘He is a man composed of twenty or thirty men. He is

proud, he is affable,’"—he is fiddle, he is diddle (in the see-saw epigram-
matic way, for a page or more) ; and is not worth pen and ink from us,
since the time old Marshal Traun got us rid of him,—home across the
Rhine, full speed, with Croats sticking on his skirts.*?
" “This portrait seemed to amuse the King. One had to captivate
him by some piquant detail; without that, he would escape you, give
you no time to speak. The success generally began by the first words,
no matter how vague, of any conversation; these he found means to
make interesting ; and what, generally, is mere talk about the weather,
became at once sublime; and one never heard anything vulgar from
him. He ennobled everything; and the examples of Greeks and Ro-
mans, or of modern Generals, soon dissipated everything of what, with
others, would have remained trivial and commonplace.

““¢ Have you ever,’ said he, ‘seen such a rain as. yesterday's? Your
orthodox Catholics will say, ‘‘ That comes of having a man without re-
ligion among us: what are we to do with this cursed (maudit) King;
a Protestant at lowest?’ For I really think I brought you bad luck.
Your soldiers would be saying, “ Peace we have ; and still is this devil
of a man to trouble us!”

Ego. “‘ Certainly, if your Majesty was the cause, it is very bad.
Such a thing is only permitted to Jupiter, who has always good reasons
for everything ; and it would have been in his fashion, after destroying
the one set by fire, to set about destroying the others by water. How-
ever, the fire is at an end; and | did not expect to revert to it.’

King. “‘1I ask your pardon for having plagued you so often with
that; I regret it for the sake of all mankind. But what a fine Appren-
ticeship of War! I have committed errors enough to teach you young
people, all of you, to do better. Mon Dieu, how I love your grena-
diers! How well they defiled in my presence! If the god Mars were
raising a bodyguard for himself, I should advise him to take them hand

‘over head. Do you know I was well pleased (d%en content) with the

22 Supra, iv. 126.

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 351
3d—7th Sept. 1770.

Kaiser last night at supper? Did you hear what he said to me about
Liberty of the Press, and the Troubling of Consciences (la géne des
consciences)? ‘There will be bits of difference between his worthy
Ancestors and him, on some points!’

_ Ego. “*1 am persuaded, he will entertain no prejudices on anything ;
and that your Majesty will be a great Book of Instruction to him.’

King. “* How adroitly he disapproved, without appearing to mean
anything, the ridiculous Vienna Censorship; and the too great fondness
of his Mother (without naming her) for certain things which only make
hypocrites. By the bye, she must detest you, that High Lady ?

Ego. “‘ Well, then, not at all. She has sometimes lectured me
about my strayings, but very maternally: she is sorry for me, and quite
sure that I shall return to the right path. She said to me, some time
ago, ‘I don’t know how you do, you are the intimate friend of Father
Griffet; the Bishop of Neustadt has always spoken well of you; like-
wise the Archbishop of Malines ; and the Cardinal” (name not known
to me, dignity and red hat sufficiently visible) ‘“‘loves you much.”’

“* Why cannot I remember the hundred luminous things which es-
caped the king in this conversation! It lasted till the trumpet at Head-
quarters announced dinner. ‘The King went to take his place; and I
think it was on this occasion that, some one having asked why M. de
Loudon had not come yet, he said,‘ That is not his custom: formerly
he often arrived before me. Please let him take this place next me; I
would rather have him at my side than opposite.’ ”

That is very pretty. And a better authority gives it, The King said
to Loudon himself, on Loudon’s entering, ‘“‘Mettez-vous auprés de moi,
M. de Loudon; j’aime mieux vous avoir a cote de moi que vis-a-vis.”
He was very kind to Loudon; “ constantly called him ‘M. le Feldmare-
chal’” (delicate hint of what should have been, but was not for seven
years yet); “and, at parting, gave him” (as he did to Lacy also) “ two
superb horses, magnificently equipped.””??

“Another day,” continues Prince de Ligne, ‘‘ the Maneuvres being
over in good time, there was a Concert at the Kaiser’s. Notwithstand-
ing the King’s taste for music, he was pleased to give me the prefer-
ence; and came where I was, to enchant me with the magic of his
conversation, and the brilliant traits, gay and bold, which characterise
him. He asked me to name the general and particular Officers who
were present, and to tell him those who had served under Marshal
Traun: ‘ For, enfin, he said, ‘as I think I have told you already, he is
my Master ; ‘ he corrected me in the Schooling I was at.’

Ego. “‘ Your Majesty was very ungrateful, then; you never paid

23 Pezzl, Vie de Loudon, ii. 29.

352 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d-7th Sept. 1770.
him his lessons. If it was as your Majesty says, you should, at least,
have allowed him to beat you; and I do not remember that you ever did.’

King. “ ‘I did not get beaten, because I did not fight.’

Ego. “‘It is in this manner that the greatest Generals have often
conducted their wars against each other. One has only to look at the
two Campaigns of M. de Montecuculi and M. de Turenne, in the Valley
of the Rench’ (Strasburg Country, 1674 and 1675, two celebrated Cam-
paigns, Turenne killed by a cannon-shot in the last).

King. “‘ Between Traun and the former there is not much difference;
but what a difference, don Dieu, between the latter and me!’

“‘T named to him the Count d’Althan, who had been Adjutant-Gen-
eral, and the Count de Pellegrini. He asked me twice which was
which, from the distance we were at; and said, He was so short-sighted
I must excuse him.

Ego. “* Nevertheless, Sire, in the War your sight was good enough;
and, if I remember right, it reached very far!’

King. “‘ It was not 1; it was my glass.’

Ego. “‘ Ha, I should have liked to find that glass;—but I fear it
would have suited my eyes as little as Scanderberg’s sword my arm.’

‘“‘T forget how the conversation changed; but I know it grew so free
that, seeing somebody coming to join in it, the King warned him to take
care ; that it wasn’t safe to converse with a man doomed by the theolo-
gians to Everlasting Fire. I felt as if he somewhat overdid this of his
‘being doomed,’ and that he boasted too much of it. Not to hint at the
dishonesty of these free-thinking gentlemen (messieurs les esprits forts),
who very often are thoroughly afraid of the Devil, it is, at least, bad taste
to make display of such things: and it was with the people of bad taste
whom he has had about him, such as a Jordan, a D’Argens, Maupertuis,
La Beaumelle, La Mettrie, Abbé de Prades, and some dull sceptics of
his own Academy, that he had acquired the habit of mocking at Religion;
and of talking (de parler) Dogma, Spinozism, Court of Rome, and the
like. In the end, I didn’t always answer when he touched upon it. [
now seized a moment’s interval, while he was using his handkerchief,
to speak to him about some business, in connexion with the Circle of
Westphalia, and a little Comté Immédiat” (County holding direct of the
Reich) “which I have there. The King answered me: ‘1, for my part,
will do anything you wish; but what thinks the other Director, my
comrade, the Elector of Cologne, about it ?

Ego. “‘I was not aware, Sire, that you were an. Ecclesiastical
Elector.’

King. “‘T am so; at least on my Protestant account.’

Ego. “‘ That is not to our account’s advantage! ‘Those good people
of mine believe your Majesty to be their protector.’

Sp

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 353
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

‘“* He continued asking me the names of persons he saw. I was tell.
ing him those of a number of young Princes who had lately entered the
Service, and some of whom gave hopes. ‘That may be,’ said he; ‘ but
I think the breed of the governing races ought to be crossed. I like
the children of love: look at the Maréchal de Saxe, and my own Anhalt’
(severe Adjutant von Anhalt, a bastard of Prinz Gustav, the Old-Des-
sauer’s Heir-Apparent, who begot a good many bastards, but died before
inheriting : bastards were brought up, all of them to soldiering, by their
Uncles,—this one by Uncle Moritz; was thrown from his horse eight
years hence, to the great joy of many); ‘though I am afraid that since’
(mark this since, alas!) * his fall on his head, that latter is not,so good
as formerly. I should be grieved at it,** both for his sake and for mine;
he is a man full of talents.’

“T am glad to remember this; for I have heard it said by silly slan-
derous people (sots denigrants), who accuse the King of Prussia of in-
sensibility, that he was not touched by the accident which happened to
the man he seemed to love most. ‘T’oo happy if one had only said that
of him! He was supposed to be jealous of the merit of Schwerin and
of Keith, and delighted to have got them killed. It is thus that medio-
cre people seek to lower great men, to diminish the immense space that

‘ lies between themselves and such.

“Out of politeness, the King, and his Suite as well, had put on white”
(Austrian) “ Uniforms, not to bring back on us that blue which we had
so often seen in war. He looked as though he belonged to our Army
and to the Kaiser’s suite. There was, in this Visit, I believe, on both
sides, a little personality, some distrust, and perhaps a beginning of bit-
terness ;—as always happens, says Philippe de Comines, when Sover-
eigns meet. ‘The King took Spanish snuff, and brushing it off with his
hand from his coat as well as he could, he said, ‘I am not clean enough
for you, Messieurs ; | am not worthy to wear your colours.’ The air
with which he said this, made me think he would yet soil them with
powder, if the opportunity arose.

“| forgot a little Incident which gave me an opportunity of setting
off (faire valoir) the two Monarchs to each other,”’—(Incident, about
the King’s high opinion of the Kaiser’s drill-sergeantry in this day’s
maneeuvres, and how I was the happy cause of the Kaiser’s hearing it
himself: Incident omissible ; as the whole Sequel is, except a sentence
or two).—

* * “On this Neustadt occasion, the King was sometimes too

*4 Not for eight years yet, mon Prince, I am sorry tosay! Adjutant von
Anhalt did, in reality, get this fall, and damaging hurt on the head, in the
‘Bavarian War” (nick-named Kartoffel- Krieg, ‘‘ Potato-War’”), 1778-9.
Militair-Lexikon, i. 69: see Preuss, ii. 356, iv.578; &e.

354 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d-7th Sept. 1770.
ceremonious; which annoyed the Kaiser. For instance,—I know not
whether meaning to show himself a disciplined Elector of the Reich,
but so it was,—whenever the Kaiser put his foot in stirrup, the King
was sure to take his Majesty’s horse by the bridle, stand respectfully
waiting the Kaiser’s right foot, and fit it into 2¢s stirrup: and so with
every thing else. The Kaiser had the more sincere appearance, in
testifying his great respect; like that of a young Prince to an aged
King, and of a young Soldier to the greatest of Captains.” * *

‘Sometimes there were appearances of cordiality between the two
Sovereigns. One saw that Friedrich II. loved Joseph II., but that the
preponderance of the Empire, and the contact of Bohemia and Silesia,
a good deal barred the sentiments of King and Kaiser. You remember,
Sire” (Ex-Sire of Poland), ‘ their Letters” (readers shall see them, in
1778,—or rather refuse to see them!) “ on the subject of Bavaria; their
compliments, the explanations they had with regard to their intentions ;
all carried on with such politeness: and that from politeness to polite-
ness, the King ended by invading Bohemia.”

Well, here is legible record, with something really of portraiture in it,
valuable so far as it goes; record unique on this subject ;—and substan-
tially true, though inexact enough in details. Thus, even in regard to
that of Anhalt’s head, which is so impossible in this First Dialogue, ©
Friedrich did most probably say something of the kind, in a Second
which there is, of date 1780: of which latter De Ligne is here giving
account as well,—though we have to postpone it till its time come.

At this Neustadt Interview there did something of Political
occur; and readers ought to be shown exactly what. Kaunitz
had come with the Kaiser: and this something was intended as
the real business among the gaieties and galas at Neustadt.
Poland, or its Farce-Tragedy now playing, was not once men-
tioned that I hear of; though perhaps, as a /lebile ludibrium, it
might turn up for moments in dinner-conversation or the like:
but the astonishing Russian-Turk War, which has sprung out
of Poland, and has already filled Stamboul and its Divans and
Muftis with mere horror and amazement; and, in fact, has
brought the Grand Turk to the giddy rim of the Abyss; noth-
ing but ruin and destruction visible to him: this, beyond all
other things whatever, is occupying these high heads at present ;
—and indeed the two latest bits of Russian-Turk news have
_ been of such a blazing character as to occupy all the world more .
or less. Readers, some glances into the Turk War, I grieve to
say, are become inevitable to us!

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 355
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

Russian-Turk War, First Two Campaigns.

* October 6th, 1768, Turks declare War; Russian Ambassador thrown
into the Seven Towers as a preliminary, where he sat till Peace came
to be needed. March 23d, 1769, Display their Banner of Mahomet, all
in paroxysm of F'anaticism risen to the burning-point: ‘ Under pain of
death, No Giaour of you appear on the streets, nor even look out of
window, this day !—Austrian Ambassador’s Wife, a beautiful gossamer
creature, venturing to transgress on that point, was torn from her car-
riage by the Populace, and with difficulty saved from destruction: Broth-
er of the Sun and Moon, apologising afterwards down to the very shoe-
tie, is forgiven.

First Campaign; 1769. “ April 26th-30th, Galitzin versus Choc-
zim ; can’t, having no provender or powder. Falls back over Dneister
again,—overhears that extraordinary Dream, as above recited, betoken-
ing great rumour in Russian Society against such Purblind Command-
ers-in-Chief. Purblind versus Blind is fine play, nevertheless; wait,
only wait: |

“July 2d, Galitzin slowly gets on the advance again: 150,000 Turks,
still slower, are at last across the Donau (sharp enough French Officers
among them, agents of Choiseul; but a mass incurably chaotic) ;—fu-
riously intending towards Poland and extermination of the Giaour. Do
not reach Dniester River till September, and Jook across on Poland,— .
for the first time, and also for the last, in this War. September 17th:
Weather has been rainy ; Dniester, were Galitzin nothing, is very diffi-
cult for Turks; who try in two places, but cannot.?* In a third place
(name not given, perhaps has no name), about 12,000 of them are across;
when Dneister, raging into flood, carries away their one Bridge, and

leaves the 12,000 isolated there. Purblind Galitzin, on express order,
- does attack these 12,000 (night of September 17th-18th) :—‘ Hurrah’
of the devouring Russians about midnight, hoarse shriek of the doomed
12,000, wail of their brethren on the southern shore, who cannot help:
—night of horrors ‘ from midnight till 2 a.m. ;’ and the 12,000 massa-
cred or captive, every man of them; Russian loss 600 killed and wound-
ed. Whereupon the Turk Army bursts into unanimous insanity ; and
flows home in deliquium of ruin. Choczim is got on the terms already
mentioned (15 sick men and women lying in it, and 184 bronze cannon,
when we boat across); Turk Army can by no effort be brought to halt
anywhere ; flows across the Donau, disappears into Chaos :—and the
whole of Moldavia is conquered in this cheap manner. What perhaps
is still better, Galitzin (28th September) is thrown out; Romanzow,

25 Hermann, v. 611-613.

356 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
| 3d-7th Sept. 1770.

hitherto Commander of a second smaller Army, kind of covering wing
to Galitzin, is Chief for Second Campaign.

“In the Humber, this Winter, to the surprise of incredulous mankind,
a Russian Fleet drops anchor for a few days: actual Russian Fleet in-
tending for the Greek waters, for Montenegro and intermediate errands;
to conclude with Liberation of Greece next Spring, —so grandiose is
this Czarina.*®

Second Campaign; 1770. “ This is the flower of Anti-Turk Cam-
paigns,—victorious, to a blazing pitch, both by land and sea. Roman-
zow, master of Moldavia, goes upon Wallachia, and the new or rehabili-
tated Turk Army; and has an almost gratis bargain of both. Roman-
zow has some good Officers under him (‘ Brigadier Stoffeln,” much
more ‘ General Tottleben,’ ‘General Bauer,’ once Colonel Bauer of the
Wesel Free-Corps,—many of the Superior Officers seem to be Ger-
man, others have Swedish or Danish names) ;—better Officers; and
knows better how to use them than Galitzin did. August Ist, Roman-
zow has a Battle, called of Kaghul, in Pruth Country. That is his one
‘Battle’ this Summer; and brings him Ismail, Akkerman, all Wallachey,
and no Turks left in those parts. But first let us attend to sea-matters,
and the Liberation of Greece, which precede in time and importance.

“*¢Tiberation of Greece :’ an actual Fleet, steering from Cronstadt
to the Dardanelles to liberate Greece! The sound of it kindles all the
warm heads in Europe; especially Voltaire’s, which, though covered
with the snow of age, is still warm internally on such points. As to lib-
erating Greece, Voltaire’s hopes were utterly balked; but the Fleet
from Cronstadt did amazing service otherwise in those waters. Fed-
ruary 28th, 1770, first squadron of the Russian Fleet anchors at Pas-
sawa,—not far from Calamata, in the Gulf of Coron, on the antique
Peloponnesian coast; Sparta on your right hand, Arcadia on your left,
and so many excellent Ghosts (i¢@ioe Yvyai) of Heroes looking on :—
Russian squadron has four big ships, three frigates, more soon to follow ;
on board there are arms and munitions of war; but unhappily only 500
soldiers. Admiral-in-Chief (not yet come up) is Alexei Orlof, a broth-
er of Lover Gregory’s, an extremely worthless seaman and man. Has
under him ‘many Danes, a good few English too,—especially Three
English Officers, whom we shall hear of, when Alexei and they come
up. Meanwhile, on the Peloponnesian coast are modern Spartans, to
the number of 15,000, all sitting ready, expecting the Russian advent:
these rose duly; got Russian muskets, cartridges,—only two Russian
Officers :—and attacked the Turks with considerable fury or voracity,
but with no success of the least solidity. Were foiled here, driven out
there ; in fine, were utterly beaten, Russians and they: lost Tripolizza,

26 Hermann, v. 617.

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 357
- 8d-7th Sept. 1770.

by surprise ; whereupon (April 19th) the Russians withdrew to their
fleet; and the Affair of Greece was at an end.*’ It had lasted (28th
February—19th April) seven weeks and a day. ‘The Russians retired
to their Fleet, with little loss; and rode at their ease again, in Nava-
rino Bay. But the 15,000 modern Spartans had nothing to retire to,—
these had to retire into extinction, expulsion, and the throat of Moslem
vengeance, which was frightfully bloody and inexorable on them.

“Greece having failed, the Russian Fleet, now in complete tale, made
for Turkey, for Constantinople itself. ‘Into the very Dardanelles’ they
say they will go; an Englishman among them,—Captain Elphinstone,
a dashing seaman, if perhaps rather noisy, whom Rulhiére is not blind
to,—has been heard to declare, at least in his cups: ‘ Dardanelles im-
possible? Pshaw, I will do it, as easily as drink this glass of wine!’
Alexei Orlof is a Sham-Admiral; but under him are real Sea-Officers,
one or two. ,

“In the Turkish Fleet, it seems, there is an Ex-Algerine, Hassan-
Bey, of some capacity in sea-matters ; but he is not in chief command,
only in second ; and can accomplish nothing. The Turkish Fleet, nu-
merous but rotten, retires daily,—through the famed Cyclades, and Isles
of Greece, Paros, Naxos, apocalyptic Patmos, on to Scio (old Chios of
the wines); and on July 5th, takes refuge behind Scio, between Scio
and the Coast of Smyrna, in Tchesme Bay. ‘Safe here!’ thinks the
chief Turk Admiral. ‘Very far from safe!’ remonstrates Hassan ;
though to no purpose. And privately puts the question to himself, ‘ Have
these Giaours a real Admiral among them, or, like us,a sham one?

Tchesme Bay, 7th July 1770. “Nothing can be more imaginary
than Alexei Orlof as an Admiral: but he has a Captain Elphinstone, a
Captain Gregg,a Lieutenant Dugdale; and these determine to burn
poor Hassan and his whole Fleet in Tchesme here :—and do it totally,
night of July 7th; with one single fireship; Dugdale steering it; Gregg
behind him, to support with broadsides; Elphinstone ruling and con-
triving, still farther to rear; helpless Turk Fleet able to make no de-
bate whatever. Such a blaze of conflagration on the helpless Turks as
shone over all the world—one of Rulhiére’s finest fireworks, with little
shot ;—the light of which was still dazzling mankind while the Inter-
view at Neustadt took place. Turk Fleet, fifteen ships, nine frigates,
and above 8,000 men, gone to gases and to black cinders,— Hassan hard-
ly escaping with I forget how many score of wounds and bruises.”°

** Now for the Dardanelles,” said Elphinstone : ‘‘ bombard Constan-
tinople, starve it,—to death, or to what terms you will!” ‘ Cannot be
done; too dangerous; impossible!” answered the sham Admiral, quite
in a tremor, they say ;—which at length filled the measure of Elphin-

27 Hermann, v. 621. 28 Ibid, v. 623.

«

358 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

3d-7th Sept. 1770.
stone’s disgusts with such a Fleet and Admiral. Indignant Elphinstone
withdrew to his own ship, “ Adieu, Sham-Admiral!”—sailed with his
own ship, through the impossible Dardanelles (Turk batteries flying
one huge block of granite at him, which missed ; then needing about
forty minutes to load again); feat as easy to Elphinstone as this glass
of wine. In sight of Constantinople, Elphinstone, furthermore, called
for his tea; took his tea on deck, under flourishing of all his drums and
all his trumpets: tea done, sailed out again scathless ; instantly threw
up his command,—and at Petersburg, soon after, in taking leave of the
Czarina, signified to her, in language perhaps too plain, or perhaps only
too painfully true, some Naval facts which were not welcome in that
high quarter.”*? This remarkable Elphinstone I take to be some junior
or irregular Balmerino scion; but could never much hear of him ex-
cept in Rulhiére, where, on vague, somewhat theatrical terms, he fig-
ures as above.

“‘ August 1st, Romanzow has a ‘ Battle of Kaghul,’ so they call it;
though it is a ‘Slaughtery’ or Schlachterei, rather than a ‘ Slaught’ or
Schlacht, say my German friends. Kaghul is not a specific place, but
a longish river, a branch of the Pruth; under screen of which the Grand
Turk Army, 100,000 strong, with 100,000 Tartars as second line, has
finally taken position, and fortified itself with earthworks and abundant
cannon. August Ist, 1770, Romanzow, after study and advising, feels
prepared for this Grand Army and its earthworks: with a select 20,000,
under select captains, Romanzow, after nightfall, bursts in upon it, si-
multaneously on three different points; and gains, gratis or nearly so,
such a victory as was never heard of before. The Turks, on their
earthworks, had 140 cannons; these the Turk gunners fired off two
times, and fled, leaving them for Romanzow’s uses. The Turk cavalry
then tried if they could not make some attempt at charging ; found they
could not; whirled back upon their infantry ; set it also whirling: and
in a word, the whole 200,000 whirled, without blow struck ; and it was
a universal panic route, and delirious stampede of flight, which never
paused (the very garrisons emptying themselves, and joining in it) till
it got across the Donau again, and drew breath there, not to rally or
stand, but to run rather slower. And had left Wallachia, Bessarabia,
Dneister river, Donau river, swept clear-of Turks; all Romanzow’s

~ henceforth. To such astonishment of an invincible Grand Turk, and

of his Moslem Populations, fallen on such a set of Giaours,—(‘ Allah
Kerim, And cannot we abolish them, then?’ Not we them, it would
appear !),—as every reader can imagine.” Which shall suffice every
reader here, in regard to the Turk War, and what concern he has in
the extremely brutish phenomenon.

29 Rulhiere, iii. 476-509.

Cuap. IV. PARTITION OF POLAND. ~ 859
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

Tchesme fell out, July 7th; Elphinstone has hardly done his
tea in the Dardanelles, when (August Ist) this of Kaghul fol-
lows: both would be fresh news blazing in every head, while
the Dialogues between Friedrich and Kaunitz were going on.
For they “had many dialogues,” Friedrich says; ‘‘and one of
the days” (probably September 6th) was mainly devoted to Poli-
. tics, to deep private Colloquy with Kaunitz. Of which, and of
the great things that followed out of it, I will now give, from
Friedrich’s own hand, the one entirely credible account I have
anywhere met with in writing.

Friedrich’s account of Kaunitz himself is altogether life-like:
A solemn, arrogant, mouthing, brow-beating kind of man,—em-
barrassed at present by the necessity not to browbeat, and by
the consciousness that “King Friedrich is the only man who
refuses to acknowledge my claims to distinction :”*°—a Kaunitz
whose arrogances, qualities and claims, this King is not here to
notice, except as they concern business on hand. He says,
‘‘Kaunitz had a clear intellect, greatly twisted by perversities
of temper (un sens droit, [esprit rempli de travers), especially by a
self-conceit and arrogance which were boundless. He did not
talk, but preach. At the smallest interruption, he would stop
short in indignant surprise: it has happened that, at the Coun-
cil-Board in Schénbrunn, when Imperial Majesty herself asked
some explanation of a word or thing not understood by her,
Kaunitz made his bow (dui tira sa reverence), and quitted the
room.’ Good to know the nature of the beast. Listen to him,
then, on those terms, since it is necessary. ‘The Kaunitz Sermon
was of great length, imbedded in circumlocutions, innuendos and
diplomatic cautions; but the gist of it we gather to have been
(abridged into dialogue form) essentially as follows:

Kaunitz. “ Dangerous to the repose of Europe, those Russian
encroachments on the Turk. Never will Imperial Majesty con-
sent that Russia possess Moldavia or Wallachia; War sooner,—
all things sooner! ‘These views of Russia are infinitely danger-
ous to everybody. To your Majesty as well, if I may say so,
and no remedy conceivable against them,—to me none conceiv-

*° Rulhiére (somewhere) has heard this, as an utterance of Kaunita’s in
some plaintive moment.

360 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

able,—but this only. That Prussia and Austria join frankly in
protest and absolute prohibition of them.”

Friedrich. “I have nothing more at heart than to stand well
with Austria; and always to be her ally, never her enemy.
But the Prince sees how I am situated: bound by express Treaty
with Czarish Majesty ; must go with Russia in any War! What
can Ido? I can, and will with all industry, labour to conciliate
Czarish Majesty and Imperial; to produce, at Petersburg, such a
Peace with the Turks as may meet the wishes of Vienna. Let
us hope it can be done. By faithful endeavouring, on my part
and on yours, I persuade myself it can. Meanwhile, steadfastly
together, we two! All our little rubs, customhouse squabbles on
the Frontier, and suchlike, why not settle them here, and now?”
(and does so with his Highness.) ‘That there be nothing but
amity, helpfulness and mutual effort towards an object so mo-
mentous to us both, and to all mankind.”

Kaunitz. ‘*Good so far. And may a not intolerable ‘lurk-
Russian Peace prove possible, without our fighting for it! Mean-
while, Imperial Majesty” (as she has been visibly doing for some
time) ‘‘ must continue massing troops and requisites on the Hun-
garian Frontier, lest the contrary happen !”

This was the result arrived at. Of which Friedrich “judged
it but polite to inform the young Kaiser; who appeared to be
grateful for this mark of attention, being much held down by
Kaunitz in his present state of tutelage.”>!

And by a singular chance, on the very morrow there arrived
from the Divan (dated August 12th) an Express to Friedrich:
“‘ Mediate a Peace for us, with Russia; not you alone, as we
have often asked, but Austria and you!” For the Kaghul
Slaughtery has come on us; Giaour Elphinstone has taken tea
in the Dardanelles; and we know not to what hand to turn !—
“The young Kaiser did not hide his joy at this Overture, as
Kaunitz did his, which was perhaps still greater: the Kaiser
warmly expressed his thanks to Friedrich as the Author of it;
Kaunitz, with a lofty indifference (morgue), and nose in air as
over a small matter, “merely signified his approval of this step
which the Turks had taken.”

31 Chuvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 30,

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 361
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

“Never was mediation undertaken with greater pleasure,”
adds the King. And both did proceed upon it with all zeal;
but only the King as real “ mediator,” or mddle-man; Kaunitz
from the first planting himself immovably upon the Turk side
of things, which is likewise the Austrian ; and playing in secret
(as Friedrich probably expected he would) the strangest tricks
with his assumed function.

So that Friedrich had to take the burden of mediating alto-
gether on himself; and month after month, year after year, it is
evident he prosecutes the same with all the industry and faculty
that are in him,—in intense desire, and in hope often nearly
desperate, to keep his two neighbours’ houses, and his own and
the whole world along with them, from taking fire. Apart
from their conflicting interests, the two Empresses have private-
ly a rooted aversion to one another. What with Russian exor-
bitancy (a Czarina naturally uplifted with her Tchesmes and
Kaghuls); what with Austrian cupidity, pride, mulishness, and
private trickery. of Kaunitz; the adroit and heartily zealous
Friedrich never had such a bit of diplomacy to do. For many
months hence, in spite of his intensest efforts and cunningest
appliances, no way of egress visible: ‘The imbroglio must
catch fire?” At last a way opens, ‘Ha, at last a way !”—
then, for above a twelvemonth longer, such a guiding of the
purblind quadrupeds and obstinate Austrian mules into said
way: and for years more such an urging of them, in pig-driver
fashion, along the same, till Peace did come !—

And here, without knowing it, we have insensibly got to the
topmost summit of our Polish Business; one small step more,
and we shall be on the brow of the precipitous inclined-plane,
down which Poland and its business go careering thenceforth,
down, down, — and will need but few more words from us.
Actual discovery of ‘‘a way out” stands for next Section.

First, however, we will notice, as prefatory, a curious occur-
rence in the Country of Zips, contiguous to the Hungarian
Frontier. Zips, a pretty enough District, of no great extent,
had from time immemorial belongéd to Hungary; till, above
300 years ago, it was,—by Sigismund super Grammaticam, a

Vor. VI.—Q

362 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XX],
3d-7th Sept. 1770.

man always in want of money (whom we last saw, in flaming
colour, investing Friedrich’s Ancestor with Brandenburg instead
of payment for a debt of money),—pledged to the Crown of Po-
land for a round sum to help in Sigismund’s pressing occasions.
Redemption by payment never followed; attempt at redemption
there had never been, by Sigismund or any of his successors.
Nay, one successor, in a Treaty still extant,°? expressly gave up
the right of redeeming: Pledge forfeited; a Zips belonging to
Polish Crown and Republic by every law.

Well; Imperial Majesty, as we have transiently seen, is as-
sembling troops on the Hungarian Frontier, for a special pur-
pose.. Poor Poland is, by this time (1770), as we also saw, sunk
in Pestilence,—pigs and dogs devouring the dead bodies; not a
loaf to be had for a hundred ducats, and the rage of Pestilence
itself a mild thing to that of Hunger, not to mention other
rages. So that both Austria and Prussia, in order to keep out
Pestilence at least, if they cannot the other rages, have had to
draw cordons, or lines of troops, along the Frontiers. ‘The
Prussian cordon,” I am informed, ‘‘ goes from Crossen, by Frank-
furt northward, to the Weichsel River and border of Warsaw
Country ;” and ‘‘is under the command of General Belling,”
our famous Anti-Swede Hussar of former years. ‘The Austrian
cordon looks over upon Zips and other Starosties, on the Hun-
garian Border; where, independently of Pestilence, an alarmed
and indignant Empress-Queen has been and is assembling masses
of troops, with what object we know. Looking over into Zips
in these circumstances, indignant Kaunitz and Imperial Majes-
ty, especially iis Imperial Majesty, a youth always passionate
for territory, say to themselves, ‘‘ Zip was ours, and in a sense
is !”—and (precise date refused us, but after Neustadt, and be-
fore Winter has quite come) push troops across into Zips Sta-
rosty; seize the whole Thirteen Townships of Zips, and not
only these, but by degrees tract after tract of the adjacencies:
‘¢ Must have a Frontier to our mind in those parts; indefensible -
otherwise!” And quietly set up boundary pillars, with the
Austrian double-eagle stamped on them, and intimation to Zips
and neighbourhood, That it is now become Austrian, and shall

82 Preuss, iv. 82 (date 1589; pawning had been, 1412).

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 363
Jan. 1771.

have no part farther in these Polish Confederatings, Pestilences,
rages of men, and pigs devouring dead bodies, but shall live
quiet under the double-eagle as others do. Which to Zips, for
the moment, might be a blessed change, welcome or otherwise;
but which awoke considerable amazement in the outer world,—
very considerable in King Stanislaus (to whom, on applying,
Kaunitz would give no explanation the least articulate) ;—and
awoke, in the Russian Court especially, a rather intense sur-
prise and provocation.

Prince Henri has been to Sweden; vs seen at Petersburg in
Masquerade (on or about Newyear’s Day 1771); and

does get Home, with Results that are important.

Prince Henri, as we noticed, was not of this Second King-
and-Kaiser Interview ; Henri had gone in the opposite direction,
—to Sweden, on a visit to his Sister Ulrique,—off for West
and North, just in the same days while the King was leaving
Potsdam for Silesia and his other errand in the South-east parts.
Henri got to Drottingholm, his Sister’s country Palace near
Stockholm, by the “end of August ;” and was there with Queen °
Ulrique and Husband during these Neustadt manceuvres. A
changed Queen Ulrique, since he last saw her “beautiful as
Love,” whirling off in the dead of night for those remote Coun-
tries and destinies.*> She is now fifty, or on the edge of it, her
old man sixty,—old man dies within few months. They have
had many chagrins, especially she, as the prouder, has had, from
their contumacious People,—contumacious Senators at least
(strong always both in pocket-money French or Russian, and in
tendency to insolence and folly),—who once, I remember, de-
manded sight and count of the Crown-Jewels from Queen Ul-
rique: ‘‘ There, void, there are they!” said the proud Queen;
“view them, count them,—lock them up: never more will I
wear one of them!” But she has pretty sons grown to man-
hood, one pretty Daughter, a patient good old Husband; and
Time, in Sweden too, brings its roses; and life is life, in spite
of contumacious bribed Senators and doggeries that do rather
abound. Henri stayed with her six or seven weeks; leaves

33 Supra, iii. 578.

364 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

Jan. 1771.
Sweden, middle of October 1770,—not by the straight course
homewards: ‘No, verily, and well knew why!” shrieks tlie in-
dignant Polish world on us ever since.

It is not true that Friedrich had schemed to send Henri
round by Petersburg. On the contrary, it was the Czarina, on
ground of old acquaintanceship, who invited him, and asked his
Brother’s leave to do it. And if Poland got its fate from the
circumstance, it was by accident, and by the fact that Poland’s
fate was drop-ripe, ready to fall by a touch.—Before going far-

ther, here is ocular view of the shrill-minded, serious and ingen-

ious Henri, little conscious of being so fateful a man:

Prince Henri in white Domino. “ Prince Henri of Prussia,” says
Richardson, the useful Eye-witness cited already, “is one of the most
celebrated Generals of the present age. So great are his military tal-
ents, that his Brother, who is not apt to pay compliments, says of him,
—that,in commanding an army, he was never known to commit a fault.
This, however, is but a negative kind of praise. He” (the King) “ re-
serves to himself the glory of superior genius, which, though capable
of brilliant achievements, is yet liable to unwary mistakes ; and allows
him no other than the praise of correctness.

“ To judge of Prince Henri by his appearance, I should form no high
estimate of his abilities. But the Scythian Ambassadors judged in the
same manner of Alexander the Great. He is under the middle size;
very thin; he walks firmly enough, or rather struts, as if he wanted to
walk firmly ; and has little dignity in his air or gesture. He is dark-
complexioned ; and he wears his hair, which is remarkably thick, club-
bed, and dressed with a high toupee. His forehead is high; his eyes
large and blue, with a little squint; and when he smiles, his upper lip is
drawn up a little in the middle. His look expresses sagacity and ob-
servation, but nothing very amiable; and his manner is grave and stiff
rather than affable. He was dressed, when I first saw him, in a light
blue frock, with silver frogs ; and wore a red waistcoat and blue breech-
es. He is not very popular among the Russians, and accordingly their
wits are disposed to amuse themselves with his appearance, and par-

ticularly with his toupee. They say he resembles Samson; that all_ —

his strength lies in his hair; and that, conscious of this, and recollect-
ing the fate of the son of Manoah, he suffers not the nigh approaches
of any deceitful Delilah. They say he is like the Comet, which, about
fifteen months ago, appeared so formidable in the Russian hemisphere ;
and which, exhibiting a small watery body, but a most enormous train,
dismayed the Northern and Eastern Potentates with ‘fear of change.’

Us

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. ; 365
Jan. 1771.

“T saw him a few nights ago” (on or about Newyear’s Day 1771;
come back to us, from his Tour to Moscow, three weeks before, and
nothing but galas ever since) “ at a Masquerade in the Palace, said ta
be the most magnificent thing of the kind ever seen at the Russian
Court. Fourteen large rooms and galleries were opened for the accom-
modation of the masks; and | was informed that there were present sev-
eral thousand people. A great part of the company wore dominos, or
capuchin dresses; though, besides these, some fanciful appearances af-
forded a good deal of amusement. A very tall Cossack appeared com-
pletely arrayed in the ‘ hauberk’s twisted mail.’ He was indeed very
grim and martial. Persons in emblematical dresses, representing Apol-
lo and the Seasons, addressed the Empress in speeches suited to their
characters. ‘The Empress herself, at the time I saw her Majesty, wore
a Grecian habit ; though I was afterwards told that she varied her dress
two or three times during the masquerade. Prince Henri of Prussia
wore a white domino. Several persons appeared in the dresses of dif-
ferent nations,—Chinese, Turks, Persians, and Armenians. The most
humorous and fantastical figure was a Frenchman, who, with wonderful
nimbleness and dexterity, represented an overgrown but very beautiful
Parrot. He chattered with a great deal of spirit; and his shoulders,
covered with green feathers, performed admirably the part of wings.
He drew the attention of the Empress; a ring was formed; he was
quite happy ; fluttered his plumage ; made fine speeches in Russ, French,
and tolerable English; the ladies were exceedingly diverted.; every-
body laughed except Prince Henri, who stood beside the Empress, and
was so grave and so solemn, that he would have performed his part
most admirably in the shape of an owl. The Parrot observed him; was
determined to have revenge; and having said as many good things as
he could to her Majesty, he was hopping away ; but just as he was go-
ing out of the circle, seeming to recollect himself, he stopped, looked
over his shoulder at the formal Prince, and quite in the parrot tone and
French accent, he addressed him most emphatically with‘ Henri ! Hen-
vi! Henri! and then diving into the crowd, disappeared. His Royal
Highness was disconcerted ; he was forced to smile in his own defence,
and the company were not a little amused.

‘““ At midnight, a spacious hall, of a circular form, capable of contain-
ing a vast number of people, and illuminated in the most magnificent
manner, was suddenly opened. ‘Twelve tables were placed in alcoves
around the sides of the room, where the Empress, Prince: Henri, and a
hundred and fifty of the chief nobility and foreign ministers sat down to
supper. The rest of the company went up, by stairs on the outside of
the room, into the lofty galleries placed all around on the inside. Sucha
row of masked visages, many of them with grotesque features and bushy

366. AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Jan. 1771.

beards, nodding from the side of the wall, appeared very ludicrous to

those below. The entertainment was enlivened with a concert of music;

and at different intervals persons in various habits entered the hall, and

exhibited Cossack, Chinese, Polish, Swedish, and Tartar dances. The

whole was so gorgeous, and at the same time so fantastic, that I could

not help thinking myself present at some of the magnificent festivals

described in the old-fashioned romances :

‘¢é The marshal’d feast
Served up in hall with sewers and seneschals.’

The rest of the company, on returning to the rooms adjoining, found

prepared for them also a sumptuous banquet. The masquerade began

at 6 in the evening, and continued till 5 next morning.

“ Besides the masquerade, and other festivities, in honour of, and to
divert Prince Henri, we had lately a most magnificent show of fire-
works. They were exhibited in a wide space before the Winter Pal-
ace ; and, in truth, ‘ beggared description.’ They displayed, by a vari-
ety of emblematical figures, the reduction of Moldavia, Wallachia, Bes-
sarabia, and the various conquests and victories achieved since the com-
mencement of the present War. The various colours, the bright green,
and the snowy white, exhibited in these fireworks, were truly astonish-
ing. For the space of twenty minutes, a tree, adorned with the loveliest
and most verdant foliage, seemed to be waving as with a gentle breeze.
It was entirely of fire; and during the whole of this stupendous scene,
an arch of fire, by the continued throwing of rockets and fireballs in one
direction, formed as it were a suitable canopy.

‘On this occasion a prodigious multitude of people was assembled ;
and the Empress, it was surmised, seemed uneasy. She was afraid, it
was apprehended, lest any accident, like what happened at Paris at the
marriage of the Dauphin, should befal her beloved people. I hope I
have amused you; and ever am”—** r

The masquerades and galas in honour of Prince Henri, from
a grandiose Hostess, who had played with him in childhood,
were many; but it is not with these that we have to do. One
day, the Czarina, talking to him of the Austrian procedures at
Zips, said with pique, “It seems, in Poland you have only to
stoop, and pick up what you like of it. If the Court of Vienna
have the notion to dismember that Kingdom, its neighbours will
have right to do as much.** This is supposed, in all Books, to

4 'W. Richardson, Anecdotes of the Russian Empire, pp. 325-331: ‘‘ Pe-
tersburg, 4th January 1771.”

*> Rulhiére, iv. 210; Trois Démembremens, i. 142; above all, Henri him-
self, in (iuvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 345, ‘‘ Petersburg, 8th January 1771.”

Cuapr. IV. ] PARTITION OF POLAND. 367
18th Feb. 1771.

be the punctum saliens, or first mention, of the astonishing Parti-
tion, which was settled, agreed upon, within about a year hence,
and has made so much noise ever since. And in effect it was
so; the idea rising practically in that high head was the real
beginning. But this was not the first head it had been in; far
from that. Above a year ago, as Friedrich himself informed
us, it had been in Friedrich’s own head,—though at the time it
went for absolutely nothing, nobody even bestowing a sneer on
it (as Friedrich intimates), and disappeared through the Horn-
Gate of Dreams.

Friedrich himself appears to have quite forgotten the Count-
Lynar idea; and, on Henri’s report from Russia, was totally in-
credulous ; and even suspected that there might be trickery and
danger in this Russian Proposal. Not till Henri’s return (/’eb-
ruary 18th, 1771) could he entirely believe that the Czarina was
serious ;—and then, sure enough, he did, with his whole heart,
go into it: the Hureka out of all these difficulties, which had so
long seemed insuperable. Prince Henri “had an Interview with
the Austrian Minister next day” (February 19th), who immedi-
ately communicated with his Kaunitz,—and got discouraging
response from Kaunitz; discouraging, or almost negatory; which
did not discourage Friedrich. ‘A way out,” thinks Friedrich:
“‘the one way to save my Prussia and the world from incalcu-
lable conflagration.”? And entered on it without loss of a mo-
ment. And laboured at it with such continual industry, rapid-
ity, and faculty for guiding and pushing, as all readers have
known in him, on dangerous emergencies; at no moment lifting
his hand from it till it was complete. |

His difficulties were enormous: what a team to drive; and
on such a road, untrodden before by hoof or wheel! ‘Two Em-
presses that cordially hate one another, and that disagree on this
very subject. Kaunitz and his Empress are extremely skittish
in the matter, and as if quite refuse it at first: ‘Zips will be
better,’ thinks Kaunitz to himself; ‘“‘Cannot we have, all to our-

selves, a beautiful little cutting out of Poland in that part; and -

then perhaps, in league with the Turk, who has money, beat the
Russians home altogether, and rule Poland in their stead, or
‘share it with the Sultan,’ as Reis-Effendi suggests?” And the

368 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Feb.—June 1771.

dismal truth is, though it was not known for years afterward,
Kaunitz does about this time, in profoundest secret, actually
make ‘Treaty of Alliance with the Turk (‘*so many million Pias-
tres to us, ready money, year by year, and you shall, if not by
our mediating, then by our fighting, be a contented Turk”); and
all along at the different Russian-Turk “ Peace-Congresses,”’
Kaunitz, while pretending to sit and mediate along with Prussia,
sat on that far other basis, privately thwarting everything; and
span out the Turk pacification in a wretched manner for years
coming.’ A dangerous, hard-mouthed, high-stalking, ill-given
old coach-horse of a Kaunitz: fancy what the driving of him
might be, on a road he did not like! But he had a driver too,
who, in delicate adroitness, in patience, and in sharpness of whip,
was consummate: ‘ You shall know it is your one road, my ill-
given friend!” (I ostentatiously increase my Cavalry by 8,000;
meaning, “* A New Seven-Years War, if you force me, and Rus-
sia by my side this time!’’) So that Kaunitz had to quit his
Turk courses (never paid the Piastres back), and go into what
really was the one way out.

But Friedrich’s difficulties on this course are not the thing
that can interest readers; and all readers know his faculty for
overcoming difficulties. Readers ask rather: *‘ And had Fried-
rich no feeling about Poland itself, then, and this atrocious Par-
titioning of the poor Country?” Apparently none whatever ;—.
unless it might be, that Deliverance from Anarchy, Pestilence,
Famine, and Pigs eating your dead bodies, would be a manifest
advantage for Poland, while it was the one way of saving Europe
from War. Nobody seems more contented in conscience, or ra-
diant with heartfelt satisfaction, and certainty of thanks from all
wise and impartial men, than the King of Prussia, now and aft-
erwards, in regard to this Polish atrocity! A psychological
fact, which readers can notice. Scrupulous regard to Polish
considerations, magnanimity to Poland, or the least respect or
pity for her as a dying Anarchy, is what nobody will claim for
him; consummate talent in executing the Partition of Poland

86 “*Peace of Kainardschi,”’ not till ‘‘21st July 1774,”—after four or five

abortive attempts, two of them ‘‘ Congresses,” Kaunitz so industrious (Her-
mann, v. 664 et antea)

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 369
14th June 1771.

(inevitable some day, as he may have thought, but is nowhere at
the pains to say),—great talent, great patience too, and merito-
rious self-denial and endurance, in executing that Partition, and
in saving it from catching fire instead of being the means to
quench fire, no well-informed person will deny him. Of his dif-
ficulties in the operation (which truly are unspeakable) I will
say nothing more; readers are prepared to believe that he, be-
yond others, should conquer difficulties when the object is vital
to him. I will mark only the successive dates of his progress,
and have done with this wearisome subject :

June 14th, 1771. Within four months of the arrival of Prince Henri
and that first certainty from Russia, diligent Friedrich, upon whom the
whole burden had been laid of drawing up a Plan, and bringing Austria
to consent, is able’ to report to Petersburg, That Austria has dubieties,
reluctancies, which it is to be foreseen she will gradually get over; and
that here meanwhile (June 14th, 1771) is my Plan of Partition —the
simplest conceivable: “That each choose (subject to future adjust-
ments) what will best suit him; I, for my own part, will say, West-
Preussen ;—what Province will Czarish Majesty please to say?” Czar-
ish Majesty, in. answer, is exorbitantly liberal to herself; claims, not a
Province, but four or five; will have Friedrich, if the Austrians attack
her in consequence, to assist by declaring War on Austria; Czarish
Majesty, in the reciprocal case, not to assist Friedrich at all, till her
Turk War is done! ‘“ Impossible,” thinks Friedrich ; “ surprisingly so,
high Madam! But, to the delicate bridle-hand. you are a manageable
entity.”

Tt was with Kaunitz that Friedrich’s real difficulties lay. Privately,
in the course of this Summer, Kaunitz, by way of preparation for ‘‘me-
diating a Turk-Russian Peace,” had concluded his “ Subsidy Treaty”
with the Turk,°’—Treaty never ratified, but the Piastres duly paid ;—
Treaty rendering Peace impossible, so long as Kaunitz had to do with
mediating it. And indeed Kaunitz’s tricks in that function of media-
tor, and also after it, were of the kind which Friedrich has some reason
to call “ infamous.” ‘* Your Majesty, as co-mediator, will join us, should
the Russians make War?” said Kaunitz’s Ambassador, one day, to Fried-
rich. “ For certain, no!” answered Friedrich; and, on the contrary,
remounted his Cavalry, to signify, “I will fight the other way, if need-
ed!” which did at once bring Kaunitz to give up his mysterious Turk
projects, and come into the Polish. After which his exorbitant greed
of territory there ; his attempts to get Russia into a partitioning of Tur-

37 6¢ 6th July 1771” (Preuss, iv. 31; Hermann; &c. &e.

Q 2

370 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

17th Feb.—5th Aug. 1772.
key as well,—(“A slice of Turkey too, your Czarish Majesty and we?”
hints he more than once),—gave Friedrich no end of trouble; and are
singular to look at by the light there now is. Not for about a twelve-
month did Friedrich get his hard-mouthed Kaunitz brought into step at
all; and to the last, perpetual vigilance and, by whip and bit, the adroit-
est charioteering was needed on him.

February 17th, 1772, Russia and Prussia, for their own part,—Fried-
rich, in the circumstances, submitting to many things from his Czarina,
—get their particular ‘“‘ Convention” (Bargain in regard to Poland) com-
pleted in all parts, “ will take possession, 4th June instant :” sign said
Convention (February 17th) ;—and invite Austria to join, and state her
claims. Which, in three weeks after, March 4th, Austria does ;—ex-
orbitant abundantly ; and not to be got very much reduced, though we
try, for a series of months. ‘Till at last:

August 5th, 1772, Final Agreement between the Three Barwouia
Powexts “These are our respective shares; we take possession on the
Ist of September instant :’—and actual possession for Friedrich’s share
did, on the 13th of that month, ensue. A right glad Friedrich, as every-
body, friend or enemy, may imagine him! Glad to have done with such
a business,—had there been no other profit in it; which was far from
being the case. One’s clear belief, on studying these Books, is of two
things: First, that, as everybody admits, Friedrich had no real hand in
starting the notion of Partitioning Poland ;—but that he grasped at it
with eagerness, as the one way of saving Europe from War: Second,
what has been much less noticed, that, under any other hand, 2¢ would
have led Europe ta War ;—and that to Friedrich is due the fact that it
got effected without such accompaniment. Friedrich’s share of Ter-
ritory is counted to be in all, 9,465 English square miles; Austria’s,
62,500; Russia’s, 87,500,°° between nine and ten times the amount of
Friedrich’s,—which latter, however, as an anciently Teutonic Country,
and as filling up the always dangerous gap between his Ost-Preussen
and him, has, under Prussian administration, proved much the most
valuable of the Three; and, next to Silesia, is Friedrich’s most im-
portant acquisition. September 13th, 1772, it was at last entered upon,
—through such waste-weltering confusions, and on terms never yet un-
questionable.

Consent of Polish Diet was not had for a year more; but that is worth
little record. Diet, for that object, got together, 19¢h April 1773; re-
calcitrant enough, had not Russia understood the methods: “a common
fund was raised” (on se cotisa, says Friedrich) “ for bribing ;” the Three
Powers had each a representative General in Warsaw (Lentulus the
Prussian personage), all three with forces to rear: Diet came down by

‘8 Preuss, iv. 45.

®,

Cuapr. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 371
13th Sept. 1772.

degrees, and, in the course of five months (September 18th 1773), ac-
quiesced in everything.

And so the matter is ended; and various men will long have
various opinions upon it. I add only this one small Document
from Maria Theresa’s hand, which all hearts, and I suppose even
Friedrich’s had he ever read it, will pronounce to be very beau-
tiful; homely, faithful, wholesome, well-becoming in a high and
true Sovereign Woman.

“The Empress-Queen to Prince Kaunitz” (Undated: date must be
Vienna, February 1772).

“‘When all my lands were invaded, and I knew not where in the
world I should find a place to be brought to bed in, I relied on my good
right and the help of God. But in this thing, where not only public
law cries to Heaven against us, but also all natural justice and sound
reason, | must confess never in my life to have been in such trouble,
and am ashamed to show my face. Let the Prince” (Kaunitz) “ con-
sider what an example we are giving to all the world, if, for a miserable
piece of Poland, or of Moldavia or Wallachia, we throw our honour and
reputation to the winds. I see well that I am alone, and no more in
vigour; therefore I must, though to my very great sorrow, let things
take their course.”*?

And some days afterwards, here is her Majesty’s Official Assent:
“ Placet, since so many great and learned men will have it so: but long
after I am dead, it will be known what this violating of all that was
hitherto held sacred and just will give rise to.”*° (Hear her Majesty !)

Friedrich has none of these compunctious visitings; but his account
too. when he does happen to speak on the subject, is worth hearing, and

89 <¢Als alle meine lénder angefochten wurden und gar nit mehr wusste wo
ruhig niederkommen sollte, steiffete ich mich auf mein gutes Recht und den
Beystand Gottes. Aber in dieser Sach, wo nit allein das offenbare Recht
himmelschreyent wider Uns, sondern auch alle Billigkeit und die gesunde Ver-
nunft wider Uns ist, muess bekhennen dass zeitlebens nit so bedngstigt mich
befunten und mich sehen zu lassen schéme. Bedenkh der Fiirst, was wir aller
Welt fiir ein Exempel geben, wenn wir um ein ellendes stuk von Pohlen oder
von der Moldau und Wallachey unser ehr und reputation in die schanz schlagen.
Ich merkh wohl dass ich allein bin und nit mehr en vigeur, darum lasse ich die
sachen, jedoch nit ohne meinen grissten Gram, thren Weg gehen.” (From
*Hormayr, Taschenbuch, 1831, 8. 66:” cited in Preuss, iv. 38.)

*® From “ Zeitgenossen” (a Biographical Periodical), ‘‘1xxi. 29:” cited in
Preuss, iv. 39.

372 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1773.
credible every word. Writing to Voltaire, a good while after ( Potsdam,
9th October 1773), this, in the swift-flowing, miscellaneous Letter, is
one passage: * * “To return to your King of Poland. 1 am aware
that Europe pretty generally believes the late Partition made (qu'on a
fait) of Poland to be a result of the Political trickeries (manigances)
which are attributed to me; nevertheless, nothing is more untrue.
After in vain proposing different arrangements and expedients, there
was no alternative left but either that same Partition, or else Europe
kindled into a general War. Appearances are deceitful; and the Public
judges only by these. What I tell you is as true as the Forty-seventh
of Euclid.’ .

What Friedrich did with his new Acquisition.

Considerable obloquy still rests on Friedrich, in many liberal
circles, for the Partition of Poland. Two things, however, seem
by this time tolerable clear, though not yet known in liberal cir-
cles: first, that the Partition of Poland was an event inevitable
in Polish History; an operation of Almighty Providence and of
the Eternal Laws of Nature, as well as of the poor earthly Sover-
eigns concerned there: and secondly, that Friedrich had nothing
special to do with it, and, in the way of originating or causing it,
nothing whatever.

It is certain the demands of Eternal Justice must be fulfilled: -

in earthly instruments, concerned with fulfilling them, there may
be all degrees of demerit and also of merit,—from that of a world-
ruffian Attila the Scourge of God, conscious of his own ferocities
and cupidities alone, to that of a heroic Cromwell, sacredly aware
that he is, at his soul’s peril, doing God’s Judgments on the ene-
mies of God, in Tredah and other severe scenes. If the Laws
and Judgments are verily those of God, there can be no clearer
merit than that of pushing them forward, regardless of the bark-
ings of Gazetteers and wayside dogs, and getting them, at the
earliest term possible, made valid among recalcitrant mortals!
Friedrich, in regard to Poland, I cannot find to have had any-
thing considerable either of merit or of demerit, in the moral
point of view; but simply to have accepted, and put in his
pocket without criticism, what Providence sent. He himself
evidently views it in that light; and is at no pains to conceal
4! (uvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 257.

deers

79

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 373
1773.

his great sense of the value of West-Preussen to him. We
praised his Narrative as eminently true, and the only one com-

’ pletely intelligible in every point: in his Preface to it, written

some years later, he is still more candid. Speaking there in the
first person, this once and never before or after,—he says:

-**These new pretensions” (of the Czarina, to assuage the re-
ligious putrid-fever of the Poles, by word of command) “raised
all Poland” (into Confederation of Bar, and War of the Confed-
erates, sung by Friedrich); “‘the Grandees of the Kingdom im-
plored the assistance of the Turks: straightway War flamed out;
in which the Russian Armies had only to show themselves to
beat the Turks in every rencounter.” His Majesty continues:
‘“‘This War changed the whole Political System of Europe”
(general Diplomatic Dance of Europe, suddenly brought to a
whirl by such changes of the music); ‘a new arena (carriére)
came to open itself,—and one must have been either without
address, or else buried in stupid somnolence (engourdissement),
not to profit by an opportunity so advantageous. I had read
Bojardo’s fine Allegory ;*? I seized by the forelock this unex-
pected opportunity; and, by dint of negotiating and intriguing”
(candid King), ‘“‘I succeeded in indemnifying our Monarchy for
its past losses, by incorporating Polish Prussia with my Old
Provinces.”#3

Here is a Historian King who uses no rouge-pot in his Nar-
ratives,—w hose word, which is all we shall say of it at present,
you find to be perfectly trustworthy, and a representation of the

42 Signifies only, ‘¢scize opportunity ;” but here is the passage itself:
‘‘Quante volte le disse: ‘O belladama, Che UVavuto piacer mai non si perde.

Conosci l’ora de la tua ventura, Questa eta giovenil, ch’ é si gioiosa,
Dapot che un tal Baron pit che st Tutta in diletto consumar si deve,
t’ama, Perché quasi in un punto ci € nascosa:

Che non ha il Ciel pit vaga creatura. Como dissolve ’l sol la bianca neve,
Forse anco avrai di questo tempo Como in un giorno la vermiglia rosa
brama, Perde il vago color in tempo breve,

Che’? felice destin sempre non dura; Cost fugge 0 eta com’ un baleno,
Prendi diletto, mentre sei su’l verde, E non si puo tener, ché non ha freno.
(Bojardo, Orlando Innamorato, lib. i. cant. 2.)
43 (fuvres de Frédéric (Preface to Mémoires depuis 1763 jusqwa 1774),
vi. 6, 7: Mémoires” (Chapter First, including all the Polish part) ‘‘ were

finished in 1775; Preface is of 1779.”

997

374 : AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1773.

fact as it stood before himself! What follows, needs no vouch-
ing for: “This acquisition was one of the most inportant we
could make, because it joined Pommern to East Prussia” (ours
for ages past), ‘‘and because, rendering us masters of the Weich-
sel River, we gained the double advantage of being able to de-
fend that Kingdom’’ (Ost-Preussen), ‘‘and to draw considerable
tolls from the Weichsel, as all the trade of Poland goes by that
River.”

Yes truly! Our interests are very visible: and the interests
and wishes and claims of Poland,—are they nowhere worthy of
one word from you, O King? Nowhere that I have noticed ;
not any mention of them, or allusion to them ; though the world
is still so convinced that perhaps they were something, and not
nothing! Which is very curious. In the whole course of my
reading I have met with no Autobiographer more careless to
defend himself upon points in dispute among his Audience, and
marked as criminal against him by many of them. Shadow of
Apology on such points you search for in vain. In rapid bare
summary he sets down the sequel of facts, as if assured before-
hand of your favourable judgment, or with the profoundest in-
difference to how you shall judge them; drops his actions, as
an Ostrich does its young, to shift for themselves in the wilder-
ness, and hurries on his way. ‘This style of his, noticeable of
old in regard to Silesia too, has considerably hurt. him with the
common kind of readers; who, in their preconceived suspicions
of the man, are all the more disgusted at tracing in him not the
least anxiety to stand well with any reader, more than to stand
ill, as ill as any reader likes!

Third parties, it would seem, have small temptation to be-
come his advocates; he himself being so‘totally unprovided with
thanks for you! But, on another score, and for the sake of a
better kind of readers, there is one third party bound to remark :
1°. That hardly any Sovereign known to us did, in his general
practice, if you will examine it, more perfectly respect the
boundaries of his neighbours; and go on the road that was his
own, anxious to tread on no man’s toes if he could avoid it: a
Sovereign who, at all times, strictly and beneficently confined
himself to what belonged to his real business and him. 2°.

Cuap. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 375
1773.

That apparently, therefore, he must have considered Poland to
be an exceptional case, unique in his experience: case ofa mori-
bund Anarchy, fallen down as carrion on the common highways
of the world; belonging to nobody in particular; liable to be
cut into (nay, for sanitary reasons requiring it, if one were a
Rhadamanthus Errant, which one is not!)—lhable to be cut
into, on a great and critically stringent occasion ; no question
to be asked of it; your only question the consent of bystand-
ers, and the moderate certainty that nobody got a glaringly dis-
proportionate share! ‘That must have been, on the part of an
equitable Friedrich, or even of a Friedrich accurate in Book-
keeping by Double Entry, the notion silently formed about Po-
land.

Whether his notion was scientifically right, and conformable
to actual fact, is a question I have no thought of entering on;
still less, whether Friedrich was morally right, or whether there
was not a higher rectitude, granting even the fact, in putting it
in practice. These are questions on which an Editor may have
his opinion, partly complete for a long time past, partly not
complete, or, in human language, completable or pronounceable
at all; and may carefully forbear to obtrude it on his readers;
and only advise them to look with their own best eyesight, to
be deaf to the multiplex noises which are evidently blind, and
to think what they find thinkablest on such a subject. Were it
never so just, proper, and needful, this is by nature a case of
Lynch Law ; upon which, in the way of approval or apology, no
spoken word is permissible. Lynch being so dangerous a Law-
giver, even when an indispensable one !—

For, granting that the Nation of Poland was for centuries past
an Anarchy doomed by the Eternal Laws of Heaven to die, and
then of course to get gradually buried, or eaten by neighbours,
were it only for sanitary reasons,—it will by no means suit, to
declare openly on behalf of terrestrial neighbours who have taken
up such an idea (granting it were even a just one, and a true
reading of the silent but inexorably certain purposes of Heaven),
That they, those volunteer terrestrial neighbours, are justified
in breaking in upon the poor dying or dead carcass, and flaying
and burying it, with amicable sharing of skin and shoes! If it

376 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1778.

even were certain that the wretched Polish Nation, for the last
forty years hastening with especial speed towards death, did in
present circumstances, with such a howling canaille of Turk
Janissaries and vultures of creation busy round it, actually re-
quire prompt surgery, in the usual method by neighbours,—the
neighbours shall and must do that function at their own risk.
If Heaven did appoint them to it, Heaven, for certain, will at
last justify them; and in the mean while, for a generation or
two, the same Heaven (I can believe) has appointed that Earth
shall pretty unanimously condemn them. ‘The shrieks, the
foam-lipped curses of mistaken mankind, in such case, are man-
kind’s one security against over-promptitude (which is so dread-
fully possible) on the part of surgical neighbours.

Alas, yes, my articulate-speaking friends; here, as so often
elsewhere, the solution of the riddle is not Logic, but Silence.
When a dark human Individual has filled the measure of his
wicked blockheadisms, sins and brutal nuisancings, there are
Gibbets provided, there are Laws provided; and you can, in an
articulate regular manner, hang him and finish him, to general
satisfaction. Nations too, you may depend on it as certain, do
require the same process, and do infallibly get it withal; Heav-
en’s Justice, with written Laws or without, being the most in.
dispensable and the inevitablest thing I know of in this Uni-
verse. No doing without it; and it is sure to come :—and the
Judges and Executioners, we observe, are vot, in that latter case,
escorted in and out by the Sheriffs of Counties and general ring-
ing of bells; not so, in that latter case, but far otherwise !—

And now, leaving that vexed question, we will throw one
glance—only one is permitted—into the far more profitable
question, which probably will one day be the sole one on this
matter, What became of poor West-Preussen under Friedrich ?
Had it to sit weeping unconsolably, or not? Herr Dr. Freytag,
a man of good repute in Literature, has, in one of his late Books
of Popular History,‘4 gone into this subject, in a serious way,
and certainly with opportunities far beyond mine for inform-

#4 “¢G, Freytag, Neue Bilder aus dem Leben des deutschen Volkes (Leip-
zig, 1862).

th

Cnar. IV.] ‘PARTITION OF POLAND, 377
1773.

ing himself upon it:—from him these Passages have been ex-
cerpted, labelled, and translated by a good hand:

Acquisition of Polish Prussia. “ During several Centuries, the
much-divided Germans had habitually been pressed upon, and straiten-
ed and injured, by greedy conquering neighbours; Friedrich was the
first Conqueror who once more pushed forward the German Frontier
towards the East; reminding the Germans again, that it was their task
to carry Law, Culture, Liberty and Industry, into the East of Europe.
All Friedrich’s Lands, with the exception only of some Old-Saxon ter-
ritory, had, by force and colonisation, been painfully gained from the
Sclave. At no time since the migrations of the Middle Ages, had this
struggle for possession of the wide Plains to the east of Oder ceased.
When arms were at rest, politicians carried on the struggle.”

Persecution of German Protestants in Poland. ‘In the very ‘Cen-
tury of Enlightenment’ the persecution of the Germans became fanat-
ical in those Countries ; one Protestant Church after the other got con-
fiscated ; pulled down; if built of wood, set on fire: its Church once
burnt, the Village had lost the privilege of having one. Ministers and
schoolmasters were driven away, cruelly maltreated. ‘Vera Luther-
anum, dabit Thalerum (wring the Lutheran, he has money in him),’
became the current Proverb of the Poles in regard to Germans. A
Protestant Starost of Gnesen, a Herr von Unruh of the House of Birn-
baum, one of the largest proprietors of the country, was condemned to
die, and first to have his tongue pulled out and his hands cut off,—for the
crime of having copied into his Notebook some strong passages against
the Jesuits, extracted from German Books. Patriotic ‘ Confederates
of Bar,’ joined by all the plunderous vagabonds around, went roaming
and ravaging through the country, falling upon small towns and Ger-
man villages. The Polish Nobleman, Roskowski” (a celebrated “ sym-
bolical” Nobleman, this), “‘ put on one red boot and one black, symbol-
ising fire and death; and in this guise rode about, murdering and burn-
ing, from place to place; finally, at Jastrow, he cut off the hands, feet,
and lastly the head of the Protestant Pastor, Willich by name,and threw
the limbs into a swamp. ‘This happened in 1768.”

In what State Friedrich found the Polish Provinces. “Some ae
only of the larger German Towns, which were secured by walls, and
some protected Districts inhabited exclusively by Germans,—as the
Niederung near Danzig, the Villages under the mild rule of the Cister-
cians of Oliva, and the opulent German towns of the Catholic Erme-
land,—were in tolerable circumstances. The other Towns lay in ruins;
so also most of the Hamlets (Hofe) of the open Country. Bromberg,
the city of German Colonists, the Prussians found in heaps and ruins:

378 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1773.
to this hour it has not been possible to ascertain clearly how the Town
came into this condition.*° No historian, no document, tells of the de-
struction and slaughter that had been going on, in the whole district of
the Netze there, during the last ten years before the arrival of the Prus-
sians. The Town of Culm had preserved its strong old walls and state-
ly churches ; but in the streets, the necks of the cellars stood out above
the rotten timber and brick heaps of the tumbled houses: whole streets
consisted merely of such cellars, in which wretched people were still
trying to live. Of the forty houses in the large Market-place of Culm,
twenty-eight had no doors, no roofs, no windows, and no owners. Oth-
er towns were in similar condition.”

“The Country people hardly knew such a thing as bread; many had
never in their life tasted such a delicacy ; few Villages possessed an
oven. A weaving-loom was rare, the spinning-wheel unknown. ‘The
main article of furniture, in this bare scene of squalor, was the Crucifix
and vessel of Holy-Water under it,’—(and “* Polack! Catholik!” ifa
drop of gin be added).—* The Peasant-Noble” (unvoting, inferior kind)
“was hardly different from the common Peasant ; he himself guided his
Hook-Plough (Hacken-pflug), and clattered with his wooden slippers
upon the plankless floor of his hut.” * * “It was a desolate land,
without discipline, without law, without a master. On 9,000 English
square miles lived 500,000 souls: not 55 to the square mile.”

Sets to Work. ‘“ The very rottenness of the Country became an at-
traction for Friedrich; and henceforth West-Preussen was, what hith-
erto Silesia had been, His favourite child ; which, with infinite care, like
that of an anxious loving mother, he washed, brushed, new-dressed, and
forced to go to school and into orderly habits,and kept ever in his eye.
The diplomatic squabbles about this ‘ acquisition’ were still going on,
when he had already sent” (so early as June 4th, 1772, and still more
on September 13th of that Year**) ‘a body of his best Official People
into this waste-howling scene, to set about organising it. The Land-
schaften (Counties) were divided into small Circles ; in a minimum of
time, the land was valued, and an equal tax put upon it; every Circle
received its Landrath, Law-court, Post-office, and Sanitary Police.
New Parishes, each with its Church and Parson, were called into ex-
istence as by miracle; a company of 187 Schoolmasters,—partly se-
lected and trained by the excellent Semler” (famous over Germany, in
Halle University and Seminarium, not yet in England),—* were sent

45 ¢* Neue Preussische Provinzialbldtter, Year 1854, No. 4, p. 259.”

46 See his new Dialogue with Roden, our Wesel acquaintance, who was
a principal Captain in this business (in Preuss, iv. 57, 58: date of the Dia-
logue is ‘‘11th May 1772 ;”—Roden was on the ground, 4th June next;
but, owing to Austrian delays, did not begin till September 13th).

Ox wiaghte p> ind

Cuap. IV.] © PARTITION OF POLAND. 379
1773.

into the Country; multitudes of German Mechanics too, from brick-
makers up to machine-builders. Everywhere there began a digging,
a hammering, a building; Cities were peopled anew;; street after street
rose out of the heaps of ruins; new Villages of Colonists were laid out,
new modes of agriculture ordered. In the first Year after taking pos-
session, the great Canal” (of Bromberg) “ was dug; which, in a length
of fifteen miles, connects, by the Netze River, the Weichsel with the
Oder and the Elbe: within one year after giving the order, the King
saw loaded vessels from the Oder, 120 feet in length of keel,” and of
40 tons burden, “enter the Weichsel. The vast breadths of Jand, gain-
ed from the state of swamp by drainage into this Canal, were immedi-
ately peopled by German Colonists.

“As his Seven-Years Struggle of War may be called superhuman,
so was there also in his present Labour of Peace something enormous ;
which appeared to his contemporaries” (unless my fancy mislead me)
‘almost preternatural, at times inhuman. It was grand, but also terri-
ble, that the success of the whole was to him, at all moments, the one
thing to be striven after; the comfort of the individual of no concern at
all. When,in the Marshland of the Netze, he counted more the strokes
of the 10,000 spades, than the sufferings of the workers, sick with the
marsh-fever in the hospitals which he had built for them ;*’ when, rest-
less, his demands outran the quickest performance,—there united itself
to the deepest reverence and: devotedness, in his People, a feeling of
awe, as for one whose limbs are not moved by earthly life” (fanciful,
considerably !). * * “And when Goethe, himself become an old ©
man, finished his last Drama” (Second Part of Faust), “the figure of
the old King again rose on him, and stept into his Poem; and his Faust
got transformed into an unresting, creating, pitilessly exacting Master,
forcing-on his salutiferous drains and fruitful canals through the morass-
es of the Weichsel.’’*%

These statements and pencillings of Freytag, apart from here
and there a flourish of poetic sentiment, I believe my readers
can accept as essentially true, and a correct portrait of the fact.
And therewith, con la bocca dolce, we will rise from this Supper
of Horrors. ‘That Friedrich fortified the Country, that he built
an impregnable Graudentz, and two other Fortresses, rendering
the Country, and himself on that Eastern side, impregnable
henceforth, all readers can believe. Friedrich has been build-

*7 Compare Preuss, iv. 60-71.

48 G. Freytag, Neue Bilder aus dem Leben des deutschen Volkes (Leipzig,
1862), pp. 397-408.

880 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
1773.

ing various Fortresses in this interim, though we have taken no
notice of them; building and repairing many things ;—trim-
ming up his Military quite to the old pitch, as the most partic-
ular thing of all. He has his new Silesian Fortress of Silber-
berg,—big Fortress, looking into certain dangerous Bohemian
Doors (in Tobias Stusche’s Country, if readers recollect an old
adventure now mythical) ;—his new Silesian Silberberg, his new-
er Polish Graudentz, and many others, and flatters himself he is
not now pregnable on any side.

A Friedrich working, all along, in Poland especially, amid
what circumambient deluges of maledictory outcries, and men-
dacious shriekeries from an ill-informed Public, is not now worth
mentioning. Mere distracted rumours, of the Pamphleteer and
Newspaper kind; which, after hunting them a long time, through
dense and rare, end mostly in zero, and angry darkness of some
poor human brain,—or even testify in favour of this Head-Work-
er, and of the sense he shows, especially of the patience. For
example: that of the ‘‘ Polish Towns and Villages, ordered” by
this Tyrant “to deliver, each of them, so many marriageable
girls; each girl to bring with her as dowry, furnished by her par-
ents, 1 feather-bed, 4 pillows, 1 cow, 3 swine, and 8 ducats,”—
in which desirable condition this tyrannous King ‘sent her into
the Brandenburg States to be wedded and promote population.”#9
Feather-beds, swine and ducats, had their value in Brandenburg;
but were girls such a scarcity there? Most extraordinary new
Rape of the Sabines; for which Herr Preuss can find no basis or
source,—nor ean I; except in the brain of Reverend Lindsey
and his loud Letters on Poland above mentioned.

Dantzig too, and the Harbour-dues, what a case! Dantzig
Harbour, that is to say, Netze River, belongs mainly to Fried-
rich, Dantzig City not,—such the Czarina’s lofty whim, in the
late Partition Treatyings; not good to contradict, in the then
circumstances ; still less afterwards, though it brought chican-
ings more than enough. ‘And she was not ill pleased to keep
this thorn in the King’s foot for her own conveniences,” thinks

49 TLindsey, Letters on Poland (Letter 2d), p. 61; Peyssonnel (in some
French Book of his, ‘‘solemnly presented to Louis XVI. and the Constitu-
ent Assembly :” cited in Preuss, iv. 85); &c. &e.

Cuapr. IV.] PARTITION OF POLAND. 381
1773. ;

the King; though, mainly, he perceives that it is the English
acting on her grandiose mind: English, who were apprehensive
for their Baltic trade under this new Proprietor, and who egged
on an ambitious Czarina to protect Human Liberty, and an in-
flated Dantzig Biirgermeister to stand up for ditto; and made a
dismal shriekery in the Newspapers, and got into dreadful ill-
humour with said Proprietor of Dantzig Harbour, and has never
quite recovered from it to this day. Lindsey’s Polish Letters are
very loud again on this occasion, aided by his Seven Draloques on
Poland ; concerning which, partly for extinct Lindsey’s sake, let
us cite one small passage, and so wind up:

March 2d, 1775, in answer to Voltaire, Friedrich writes:
* * «The Polish Dialogues you speak of are not known to me.
I think of such Satires, with Epictetus: ‘If they tell any truth
of thee, correct thyself; if they are lies, laugh at them.’ I have
learned, with years, to become a steady coach-horse; I do my
stage, like a diligent roadster, and pay no heed to the little dogs
that will bark by the way.” And then, three weeks after:

““T have at length got the Seven Dialogues on Poland; and the
whole history of them as well. The Author is an Englishman
named Lindsey, Parson by profession, and Tutor to the young
Prince Poniatowski, the King of Poland’s Nephew,’’—Nephew
Joseph, Andreas’s Son, not the undistinguished Nephew: so we
will believe for poor loud Lindsey’s sake! ‘It was at the in-
stigation of the Czartoryskis, Uncles of the King, that Lindsey
composed this Satire,—in English first of all. Satire ready,
they perceived that nobody in Poland would understand it, un-
less it were translated into French ; which accordingly was done.
But as their translator was unskilful, they sent the Dialogues to
a certain Gérard at Dantzig, who at that time was French Con-
sul there, and who is at present a Clerk in your Foreign Office
under M. de Vergennes. This Gérard, who does not want for

wit, but who does me the honour to hate me cordially, retouched

these Dialogues, and put them into the condition they were pub-
lished in. I have laughed a good deal at them: here and there
occur coarse things (grossiéret¢s), and platitudes of the insipid
kind; but there are traits of good pleasantry. I shall not go
fencing with goosequills against this sycophant. As Mazarin

(A Se ee

382 E AFTERNOON AND EVENING. ‘ [Book XXI.
; 1771-1777.

said, ‘Let the French keep singing, provided they let us keep
doing.’ ”°°

CHAPTER V.
A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES.

AFTER Neustadt, Kaiser Joseph and the King had no more
Interviews. Kaunitz’s procedures in the subsequent Pacification
and Partition business had completely estranged the two Sover-
eigns: to friendly visiting, a very different state of mutual feeling
had succeeded; which went on, such “the immeasurable ambi-
tion” visible in some of us, deepening and worsening itself, instead
of improving or abating. Friedrich had Joseph’s Portrait hung
in conspicuous position in the rooms where he lived; somebody
noticing the fact, Friedrich answered: ‘ Ah, yes, I am obliged to
keep that young Gentleman in my eye.” And, in effect, the
rest of Fricdrich’s Political Activity, from this time onwards,
may be defined as an ever-vigilant defence of himself, and of the
German Reich, against Austrian Encroachment: which, to him,
in the years then running, was the grand impending peril; and
which to us in the new times has become so inexpressibly unin-
teresting, and will bear no narrative. Austrian Encroachment
did not prove to be the death-peril that had overhung the world
in Friedrich’s last years !—

These, accordingly, are years in which the Historical interest
goes on diminishing; and only the Biographical, were anything
of Biography attainable, is left. Friedrich’s industrial, economic
and other Royal activities are as beautiful as ever; but cannot to
our readers, in our limits, be described with advantage. Events
of world interest, after the Partition of Poland, do not fall out,
or Friedrich is not concerned inthem. It is a dim element; its

significance chiefly German or Prussian, not European. What.

of humanly interesting is discoverable in it,—at least, while the
Austrian Grudge continues in a chronic state, and has no acute

fit,—I will here present in the shape of detached Fragments, —

5° (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 319-321: ‘‘ Potsdam, 2d March 1775,” and
**25th March” following. See Preuss, ili. 275, iv. 85.

es in

———_—- .

a

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 383
25th Oct. 1771.

suitably arranged and rendered legible, in hopes these may still
have some lucency for readers, and render more conceivable the
surrounding masses that have to be left dark. Our first Piece
is of Winter, or late Autumn, 1771,—while the solution of the
Polish Business is still in its inchoative stages; perfectly com-
plete in the Artist’s own mind; Russia too adhering; but Kau-
nitz so refractory and contradictory.

Herr Doctor Zimmermann, the famous Author of the Book
“On Solitude,” walks reverentially before Kriedrich’s Door
in the Dusk of an October Evening; and has a Royal In-
terview next Day.

Friday Evening, 25th October 1771, is the date of Zimmer-
mann’s walk of contemplationm—among the pale Statues and
deciduous Gardenings of Sans-Souci Cottage (better than any
Rialto, at its best),—the eternal stars coming out overhead, and
the transitory candle-light of a King Friedrich close by.

** At Sans-Souci,”’ says he, in his famed Book, “where that
old God of War (Kriegsgott) forges his thunder-bolts, and writes
Works of Intellect for Posterity; where he governs his People
as the best father would his house; where, during one half of
the day, he accepts and reads the petitions and complaints of
the meanest citizen or peasant; comes to help of his Countries
on all sides with astonishing sums of money, expecting no pay-
ment, nor seeking anything but the Common Weal; and where,
during the other half, he is a Poet and Philosopher ;—at Sans-
Souci, I say, there reigns all round a silence, in which you can
hear the faintest breath of every soft wind. I mounted this Hill
for the first time in Winter” (late Autumn, 25th October 1771,
edge of Winter), ‘‘in the dusk. When I beheld the small Dwell-
ing-House of this Convulser of the World close by me, and was
near his very chamber, I saw indeed a light inside, but no sen-
try or watchman at the Hero’s door; no soul to ask me, Who I
was, or what I wanted. I saw nothing; and walked about as
I pleased before this small and silent House.”!

1 Preuss, i. 887 (“from Linsamkeit,” Zimmermann’s Solitude, ‘i. 110;
Edition of Leipzig, 1784’’).

384 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
25th Oct. 1771.

Yes, Doctor, this is your Kriegsgott; throned in a free and
easy fashion. In regard to that of Sentries, I believe these do
come up from Potsdam nightly, a corporal and six rank-and-
file; but perhaps it is at a later hour; perhaps they sit within
doors, silent, not to make noises. Another gentleman, of saun-
tering nocturnal habits, testifies to having, one night, seen the
King actually asleep in bed, the doors being left ajar.-—As Zim-
mermann had a Dialogue next day with his Majesty, which we
propose to give; still more, as he made such noise in the world
by other Dialogues with Friedrich, and by a strange Book about
them, which are still ahead,—readers may desire to know a lit-
tle who or what the Zimmermann is, and be willing for a rough
brief Note upon him, which. certainly is not readier than it is
rough:

Johann George Zimmermann; born 1728, at Brugg, in the Canton
of Bern, where his father seems to have had some little property and
no employment, “a Rathsherr (Town-Councillor), who was much re-
spected.” Of brothers or sisters, no mention. The Mother being
from the French part of the Canton, he learned to speak both langua-
ges. Went to Bern for his Latin and high-schooling ; then to Got-
tingen, where he studied Medicine, under the once great Haller and
other now dimmed celebrities. Haller, himself from Bern, had taken
Zimmermann to board, and became much attached to him: Haller, in
1752, came on a summer visit to native Bern; Zimmermann, who had
in the mean time been “ for a few months” in France, in Italy and En-
gland, now returned and joined him there; but the great man, feeling
very poorly and very old, decided that he would like to stay in Bern,
and not move any more ;—-Zimmermann, accordingly, was sent to Got-
tingen to bring Mrs. Haller, with her Daughters, bandboxes and effects,
home to Bern. Which he did;—and not only them, but a soft ingen-
ious, ingenuous, and rather pretty young Gottingen Lady along with
them, as his own wife withal. With her he settled as Stadtphysicus
(Town-Doctor) in native Brugg; where his beloved Hallers were
within reach ; and practice in abundance, and honours, all that the place
yielded, were in readiness for him.

Here he continued some sixteen years; very busy, very successful

in medicine and literature; but “tormented with hypochondria ;”—

having indeed an immense conceit of himself, and generally too thin a
skin for this world. Here he first wrote his Book on Solitude, a Book
, famed over all the world in my young days (and perhaps still famed) ;

2 Preuss, i. 388,

s

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 385
25th Oct. 1771.

he wrote it a second time, much enlarged, about thirty years after :° I
read it (in the curtailed English-Mercier form, no Scene in it like the
above), in early boyhood,—and thank it for nothing, or nearly so.
Zimmermann lived much alone, at Brugg, and elsewhere ; all his days,
“ Hypochondria” was the main company he had :—and it was natural,
but wnprofitable that he should say, to himself and others, the best he
could for that bad arrangement: poor sonl! He wrote also on Med-
ical Experience, a famed Book in its day ;* also on Natzonal Pride ;
and became famed through the Universe, and was Member of infinite
Learned Societies.

All which rendered dull dead Brugg still duller and more dead; un-
fit utterly for a man of such sublime accomplishments. Plenty of
Counts Stadion, Kings of Poland even, offered him engagements;
eager to possess such a man, and deliver him from dull dead Brugg;
but he had hypochondria, and always feared their deliverance might be
into something duller. At length,—in his fortieth year, 1768,— the
place of Court-Physician (Hofmedicus), at Hanover, was offered him
by George the Third of pious memory, and this he resolved to accept;
and did lift anchor, and accept and occupy accordingly.

Alas, at the Gate of Hanover, “his carriage overset ;” broke his
poor old Mother-in-law’s leg (who had been rejoicing doubtless to get
home into her own Country), and was the end of her,—poor old soul;
—and the beginning of misfortunes continual and too tedious to men-
tion. Spleen, envy, malice and calumny, from the Hanover Medical
world ; treatment, “ by the old buckram Hofdames who had drunk cof-
fee with George II.,” “ which was fitter for a laquais-de-place” than
for a medical gentleman of eminence: unworthy treatment, in fact, in
many or most quarters ;—followed by hypochondria, by dreadful bodily
disorder (kind not given or discoverable), “so that I suffered the pains
of Hell,” sat weeping, sat gnashing my teeth, and couldn't write a
Note after dinner; followed finally by the sickness, and then by the
death, of my poor Wife, “after five months of torment.” Upon which,
in 1771, Zimmermann’s friends,—for he had many friends, being, in
fact, a person of fine graceful intellect, high proud feelings and tender
sensibilities, gone all to this sad state,—- rallied themselves; set his
Hanover house in order for him (governess for his children, what not) ;
and sent him off to Berlin, there to be dealt with by one Meckel, an in-

3 Betrachtungen iiber die Einsamkeit, von Doctor J. G. Zimmermann,
Stadtphysicus in Brugg (Ziirich, 1756),—as yet only ‘‘1 vol. 8yo, price 6d.”
(5 groschen); but it grew with years; and (Leipzig, 1784) came out re-
modelled into 4 voll. ;—was translated into French, ‘‘ with many omis-
sions,” by Mercier (Paris, 1790) ; into English from Mercier (London, 1791).

4 «<¢Zurich, 1763-4:” by and by, one “ Dobson did it into English.”

1 a OR

386 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

25th Oct. 1751.
comparable Surgeon, and be healed of his dreadful disorder (“ Lezbes-
schade, of which the first traces had appeared in Brugg”’),—though to
most people it seemed rather he would die; “and one Medical Emi-
nency in Hanover said to myself” (Zimmermann) “ one day: ‘ Dr. So-
and-so is to have your Pension, I am told; now, by all right, it should
belong to me, don’t you think so?’” What “I” thought of the matter,
seeing the greedy gentleman thus “ parting my skin,” may be conjec-
tured !—

The famed Meckel received his famed patient with a nobleness wor-
thy of the heroic ages. Lodged him in his own house, in softest beds
and appliances ; spoke comfort to him, hope to him,—the gallant Meck-
el ;—rallied, in fact, the due medical staff one morning; came up to
Zimmermann, who “ stripped,” with the heart of a lamb and lion con-
joined, and trusting in God,“ flung himself on his bed” (on his face, or
on his back, we never know), and there, by the hands of Meckel and
staff, “received above 2,000 (two thousand) cuts, in the space of an
hour and half, without uttering one word or sound.” <A frightful opera-
tion, gallantly endured, and skilfully done; whereby the “ bodily disor-
der” (Leibesschade), whatever it might be, was effectually and forever
sent about its business by the noble Meckel.

Hospitalities and soft hushed kindnesses and soothing ministrations,
by Meckel and by everybody, were now doubled and trebled : wise kind
Madam Meckel, young kind Mamsell Meckel, and the Son (who “ now,
in 1788, lectures in Gottingen”); not these only, nor Schmucker Head
Army-Surgeon, and the ever-memorable Herr Generalchirurgus Ma-
dan, who had both been in the operation ; not these only, but by degrees
all that was distinguished in the Berlin world, Ramler, Biisching, Sulzer,
Prime Minister Hertzberg, Queen’s and King’s Equerries, and honoura-
ble men and women,—bore him “on angel-wings,” towards complete re-
covery. ‘Talked to him, sang and danced to him (at least the ‘‘ Muses”
and the female Meckels danced and sang), and all lapped him against
eating cares, till, after twelve weeks, he was fairly on his feet again,
and able to make jaunts in the neighbourhood with his “‘ life’s saviour,”
and enjoy the pleasant Autumn weather to his farther profit—All this,
though described in ridiculous superlative by Zimmermann, is really
touching, beautiful and human: perhaps never in his life was he so hap-
py, or a thousandth part so helped by man, as while under the roof of
this thrice-useful Meckel,—more power to Meckel !

Head Army-Surgeon Schmucker had gone through all the Seven-
Years War; Zimmermann, an ardent Hero-worshipper, was never
weary questioning him, listening to him in full career of narrative, on
this great subject,—only eight years old at that time. Among their
country drives, Meckel took him to Potsdam, twenty English miles off;

Cuap. V.} A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 387
26th Oct. 1771.

in the end of October, there to stay a night. This was the ever-memo-
rable Friday, when we first.ascended the Hill of Sans-Souci, and had
our evening walk of contemplation ; to be followed by a morrow which
was ten times more memorable; as readers shall now see.®

Next day, Zimmermann has a Dialogue. Schmucker had his
apartments in “ Little Sans-Souci,” where the King néw lived (Big
Sans-Souci, or “ Sans-Souci” by itself, means in those days, not in ours
at all,“ New Palace, Neue Palais,” now in all its splendour of fresh fin-
ish). De Catt, Friedrich’s Reader, whom we know well, was a Gene-
vese,and knew Zimmermann from of old. Schmucker and De Catt were
privately twitching up Friedrich’s curiosity—to whom also Zimmer-
mann’s name, and perhaps his late surgical operation might be known:
“Can he speak French ?”—‘ Native to him, your Majesty.” Friedrich
had some notion to see Zimmermann; and judicious De Catt,.on this
fortunate Saturday, “ 26th October 1771,” morrow after Zimmermann’s
arrival at Potsdam, “ came to our inn about 1 p.m.” (King’s dinner just
done) ; ‘and asked me to come and look at the beauties of Sans-Souci”
(Big Sans-Souci) “for a little.” Zimmermann willingly went: Catt
left him in good hands to see the beauties : slipt off, for his own part, to
“ Little Sans-Souci;” came back, took Zimmermann thither; left him
with Schmucker, all trembling, thinking perhaps the King might call
him. ‘I trembled sometimes, then again I felt exceeding happiness :”
I was in Schmucker’s room, sitting by the fire, mostly alone for a good
while, “the room that had once been Marquis d’Argens’s” (who is now
dead, and buried far away, good old soul) ;—when, at last, about half-
past 4, Catt came jumping in, breathless with joy; snatched me up:
“His Majesty wants to speak with you this very moment!” Zimmer-
mann’s self shall say the rest.

“ T hurried, hand-in-hand with Catt, along a row of Chambers. ‘ Here,’
said Catt,‘ we are now at the King’s room !’—My heart thumped, like
to spring out of my body. Catt went in; but next moment the door
again opened, and Catt bade me enter.

‘‘In the middle of the room stood an iron camp-bed without curtains.
There, on a worn mattrass, lay King Friedrich, the terror of Europe,
without coverlet, in an old blue roquelaure. He had a big cocked-hat,
with a white feather” (hat aged, worn soft as duffel, equal to most caps;
“feather” is not perpendicular, but horizontal, round the inside of the
brim), “ on his head.

“The King took off his hat very graciously, when I was perhaps ten

5 Jordens, Lexikon (§ Zimmermann), v. 632-658 (exact and even elo-
quent account, as these of Jordens, unexpectedly, often are); Zimmermann
himself, Unterredungen mit Friedrich dem Grrossen (ubi infra); Tissot, Vie
de M..Zimmermann (Lausanne, 1797); &e. &e.

388 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI..

26th Oct. 1771.
steps from him; and said in French (our whole Dialogue proceeded in
French): ‘Come nearer, M. Zimmermann.’

“‘T advanced to within two steps of the King; he said in the mean
while to Catt: ‘Call Schmucker in, too.” Herr Schmucker came;
placed himself behind the King, his back to the wall; and Catt stood
behind him. Now the Colloquy began.

King. “‘T hear you have found your health again in Berlin; I wish
you joy of that.’ Ego. “*T have found my life again in Berlin;
but at this moment, Sire, I find here a still greater happiness!’ (Ach !)

King. ‘‘* You have stood a cruel operation: you must have suffered
horribly ? Ego. “* Sire, it was well worth while.’

King. “‘ Did you let them bind you before the operation ?”

Ego. “‘*No: I resolved to keep my freedom.’

King (laughing in a very kind manner). “‘ Oh, you behaved like a
brave Switzer! But you are quite recovered, though ”

Ego. ‘“* Sire, 1 have seen all the wonders of your creation in Sans-
Souci, and feel well in looking at them.’

King. “‘1 am glad of that. But you must have a care, and espe-
cially not get on horseback.’ Ego. ‘“** It will be pleasant and easy
for me to follow the counsels of your Majesty.’

King. “‘‘ From what Town in the Canton of Bern are you original-
ly? Ego. “‘ From Brugg.’

King. “ ‘T don’t know that Town.’ (“ No wonder, tho pht Bi")

King. “*‘ Where did you study ? Ego. “‘ At Gottingen: Hal-
ler was my teacher.’

King. “‘ What is M. Haller doing now? Ego. ‘‘ He is con-
cluding his literary career with a romance.’ (“ Usong had just come
out ;’—no mortal now reads a word of it; and the great Haller is dread-
fully forgotten already !)

King. “‘ Ah, that is pretty !—On what system do you treat your pa-
tients ? Ego. “* Not on any system.’

King. “*‘ But there are some Physicians whose methods you prefer
to those of others?’ Ego. “‘I especially like Tissot’s methods,
who is a familiar friend of mine.’

King. “‘I know M. Tissot. I have read his writings, and value
them very much. On the whole, I love the Art of Medicine. My
Father wished me to get some knowledge init. He often sent me into
the Hospitals ; and even into those for venereal patients, with a view of
warning by example. Ego. “‘ And by terrible example !—Sire,
Medicine is a very difficult Art. But your Majesty is used to bring all
Arts under subjection to the force of your genius, and to conquer all that
is difficult.’

King. “* Alas,no: I cannot conquer all that is difficult!’ (Hard-

- Crap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 389
26th Oct. 1771.

mouthed Kaunitz, for example ; stockstill, with his right ear turned on
Turkey : how get Kaunitz into step !)—‘ Here the King became reflect-
ive; was silent for a little moment, and then asked me, with a most
bright smile: ‘ How many Churchyards have you filled? (A common
question of his to Members of the Faculty). Ego. ‘“* Perhaps, in
my youth, I have done a little that way! But now it goes better; for
I am timid rather than bold.’

King. “‘ Very good, very good.’

“Our Dialogue now became extremely brisk. ‘The King quickened
into extraordinary vivacity ; and examined me now in the character of
Doctor, with such a stringency as, in the year 1751, at Gottingen, when
I stood for my Degree, the learned Professors Haller, Richter, Segner,
and Brendel (for which Heaven recompense them!) never dreamed of!
All inflammatory fevers, and the most important of the slow diseases,
the King mustered with me, in their order. He asked me, How and
whereby I recognised each of these diseases ; how and whereby distin-
guished them from the approximate maladies ; what my procedure was
in simple and in complicated cases; and how I cured all those disor-
ders? On the varieties, the accidents, the mode of treatment, of small-
pox especially, the King inquired with peculiar strictness ;—and spoke,
with much emotion, of that young Prince of his House who was carried
off, some years ago, by that disorder”—(suddenly arrested by it, while
on march with his regiment, “ near Ruppin, 26th May 1767.” This is
the Prince Henri, junior Brother of the subsequent King, Friedrich
Wilhelm II., who, among other fooleries, invaded France, in 1792, with
such success. Both Henri and he, as boys, used to be familiar to us in
the final winters of the late War. Poor Henri had died at the age of
nineteen,—as yet all brightness, amiability, and nothing else : Friedrich
sent an Lloge of him to his Académie,° which is touchingly and strange-
ly filled with authentic sorrow for this young Nephew of his, but other-
wise empty,—a mere bottle of sighs and tears). ‘‘ Then he came upon
Inoculation ; went along over an incredible multitude of other medical
subjects. Into all he threw masterly glances; spoke of all with the
soundest” (all in the superlative) “‘ knowledge of the matter, and with
no less penetration than liveliness and sense.

“With heartfelt satisfaction, and with the freést soul, I made my an-
swers to his Majesty. It is true, he potently supported and encouraged
me. Ever and anon his Majesty was saying to me: ‘That is very
good ;—that is excellently thought and expressed ;—your mode of pro-
ceeding, altogether, pleases me very well ;—I rejoice to see how much
our ways of thinking correspond.’ Often, too, he had the graciousness
to add: ‘But I weary you with my many questions!’ His scientific

6 In Quvres de Frédéric, vii. 37 et seq.

390 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

26th Oct. 1771.
questions I answered with simplicity, clearness and brevity ; and could
not forbear sometimes expressing my astonishment at the deep and
conclusive (tiefen und frappanten) medical insights and judgments of
the King.

‘“‘ His Majesty came now upon the history of his own maladies. He
told me them over, in their series; and asked my opinion and advice
about each. On the Hemorrhoids, which he greatly complained of, I
said something that struck him. Instantly he started up in his bed;
turned his head round towards the wall, and said: ‘ Schmucker, write
me that down!’ I started in fright at this word; and not without. réa-
son! ‘Then our Colloquy proceeded :

King. “‘The Gout likes to take up his quarters with me; he knows
I am a Prince, and thinks I shall feed him well. But I feed him ill;
I live very meagrely.’

Ego.“ May Gout thereby get disgusted, and forbear ever calling on
your Majesty !

King. ‘Tam grown old. Diseases will no longer have pity on me.
Ego. we Europe feels that your Majesty is not old; and your Majesty’ s
look (physiognomic) shows that you have still the same force as in
your thirtieth year.’

King (laughing, and shaking his head). ‘‘‘ Well, well, well!’

“In this way, for an hour and quarter, with uninterrupted vivacity,
the Dialogue went on. At last the King gave me the sign to go; lift-
ing his hat very kindly, and saying: ‘ Adieu, my dear M. Zimmermann;
I am very glad to have seen you.’” Towards 6 p.m. now, and Fried-
rich must sign his Despatches ; have his Concert, have his reading ;
then to supper (as spectator only),—with Quintus Icilius and old Lord
Marischal, to-night, or whom 2”

]

“Herr von Catt accompanied me into the anteroom, and Schmucker
followed. I could not stir from the spot; could not speak, was so
charmed and so touched, that I broke into a stream of tears” (being
very weak of nerves at the time!). ‘“ Herr von Catt said: ‘I am now
going back to the King; go you into the room where I took you up;
about eight, I will conduct you home.’ I pressed my excellent country-
man’s hand, I’ —*“ Schmucker said, I had stood too near his Majesty ;
T had spoken too frankly, with too much vivacity ; nay, what was un-
heard of in the world, I had ‘ gesticulated’ before his Majesty! ‘In
presence of a King,’ said Herr Schmucker,‘ one must stand stiff, and
not stir.’ De Catt came back to us at eight; and, in Schmucker’s

’ Of Icilius, and a quarrel and estrangement there had lately been, now
happily reconciled, see Nicolai, Anekdoten, vi. 140-142.

ea"

Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 391
26th Oct. 1771.

presence” (let him chew the cud of that!), “ reported the following little
Dialogue with the King:

King. “‘ What says Zimmermann?’ De Catt. “* Zimmer-
mann, at the door of your Majesty’s room, burst into a stream of tears.’
King. “‘T love those tender affectionate hearts ; I love right wel! ihose
brave Swiss people!’

“Next morning the King was heard to say: ‘I have found Zimmer-
mann quite what you described him.’—Catt assured me furthermore,
‘ Since the Seven- Years War there had thousands of strangers, persons
of rank, come to Potsdam, wishing to speak with the King, and had not
attained that favour; and of those who had, there could not one indi-
vidual boast that his Majesty had talked with him an hour and quarter
at once.’ (Fourteen years hence, he dismissed Mirabeau in half an
hour; which was itself a good allowance.)

“ Sunday 27th, I left Potsdam, with my kind Meckels, in an enthusi-
asm of admiration, astonishment, love and gratitude; wrote to the King
from Berlin, sent him a Tissot’s Book (marked on the margins for
Majesty’s use), which he acknowledged by some word to Catt; where-
upon I”—in short, I got home to Hanover, in a more or less seraphic
condition,—* with indescribable, unspeakable,” what not,—early in No-
vember: and, as a healed man, never more troubled with that disorder,
though still troubled with many and many, endeavoured to get a little
work out of myself again.®

“Zimmermann was tall, handsome of shape; his exterior was
distinguished and imposing,” says Jérdens.9 ‘‘He had a firm
and light step; stood gracefully; presented himself well. He
had a fine head; his voice was agreeable; and intellect sparkled
in his eyes :”—had it not been for those dreadful hypochondrias,
and confused disasters, a very pretty man. At the time of this
first visit to Friedrich he is 48 years of age, and Friedrich is on
the borders of 60. Zimmermann, with still more famous Dia-
logues, will reappear on us from Hanover, on a sad occasion!
Meanwhile, few weeks after him, here is a Visit of far more joy-
ful kind.

Sister Ulrique, Queen-Dowager of Sweden, revisits her native
Place (December 1771—August 1772).

Prince Henri was hardly home from Petersburg and the

§ Zimmermann, Meine Unterredungen (Dialogues) with Friedrich the Great
(8vo, Leipzig, 1788), pp. 305-326. ° Ubi supra,

392 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Dec. 1771—Aug. 1772.

Swedish Visit, when poor Adolf Friedrich, King of Sweden,
died.'!° A very great and ‘sad event to his Queen, who had
loved her old man; and is now left solitary, eclipsed, in circum-
stances greatly altered on the sudden. In regard to settlements,
Accession of the new Prince, dowager revenues and the like, all
went right enough; which was some alleviation, though an in-
considerable, to the sorrowing Widow. Her two Princes were
absent, touring over Europe, when their Father died, and the
elder of them, Karl Gustav, suddenly saw himself King. They
were in no breathless haste to return; visited their Uncle, their
Prussian kindred, on the way, and had an interesting week at
Potsdam and Berlin;'! Karl Gustav flying diligently about, still
incognito, as ‘Graf von Gothland,”’—a spirited young fellow,
perhaps too spirited ;—and did not reach home till May-day was
come, and the outburst of the Swedish Summer at hand.

Some think the young King had already something dangerous
and serious in view, and wished his Mother out of the way for a
time. Certain it is she decided on a visit to her native Country
in December following: arrived accordingly, December 2d, 1771;
and till the middle of August next was a shining phenomenon
in the Royal House and upper ranks of Berlin Society, and a
touching and interesting one to the busy Friedrich himself, as
may be supposed. She had her own Apartments and House-

hold at Berlin, in the Palace there, I think; but went much -

visiting about, and receiving many yvisits,—fond especially of
literary people.

Friedrich’s notices of her are frequent in his Letters of the
time, all affectionate, natural and reasonable. Here are the first
two I meet with: Yo the Electress of Saxony (three weeks after
Ulrique’s arrival): “ A thousand excuses, Madam, for not an-
swering sooner! What will plead for me with a Princess who
so well knows the duties of friendship, is, that I have been occu-
pied with the reception of a Sister, who has come to seek conso-
lation in the bosom of her kindred for the loss of a loved Hus-
band, the remembrance of whom saddens and afflicts her.”? And
again, two months later: * * “Your Royal Highness deigns
to take so obliging an interest in the visit I have had” (and still

40 12th February 1771. ‘1 April 22d-29th: Rodenbeck, iii. 45.

wee tae)

Cuap. V.] A CHAPLER OF MISCELLANIES. 393
Dec. 1771—Aug. 1772.

have) ‘from the Queen of Sweden. I beheld her as if raised
from the dead to me; for an absence of eight-and-twenty years,
in the short space of our duration, is almost equivalent to death.
She arrived among us, still in great affliction for the loss she had
had of the King; and I tried to distract her sad thoughts by all
the dissipations possible. It is only by dint of such that one
compels the mind to shift away from the fatal idea where grief
has fixed it: this is not the work of a day, but of time, which
in the end succeeds in everything. I congratulate your Royal
Highness on your Journey to Bavaria” (on a somewhat similar
errand, we may politely say); ‘where you will find yourself in
the bosom of a Family that adores you:” after which, and the
sight of old scenes, how pleasant to go on to Italy, as you pro-
pose !!2

Queen Ulrique,—a solid and ingenuous character (in child-
hood a favourite of her Father's, so rational, truthful, and of
silent staid ways), appears to have been popular in the Ber-
lin circles; pleasant and pleased, during these eight months.
Formey, especially Thiébault, are copious on this Visit of hers ;
and give a number of insipid Anecdotes: How there was sol-
emn Session of the Academy made for her, a Paper of the King’s
to be read there,!°—reading beautifully done by me, Thicbault
(one of my main functions, this of reading the King’s Academy
Papers, and my dates of them always correct); how Thiébault
was invited to dinner in consequence, and again invited: how
Formey dined with her Majesty “twenty-five. times ;” and
‘‘ preached to her in the Palace, August 19th” (should be Au-
gust 9th); insipid wholly, vapid and stupid ; descriptive of noth-
ing, except of the vapidities and vanities of certain persons.
Leaving these, we will take an Excerpt, probably our last, from.
authentic Biisching, which is at least to be depended on for per-
fect accuracy, and has a feature or two of portraiture.

12 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 230, 235. ‘*24th December 1771,” ‘‘ Feb-
ruary 1772. ”’See also ‘‘ Epitre a la Reine Douairiére de Suéde” (Poem on
the Troubles she has had: Gtuvres de Frédéric, xiii. 74, ‘* written in De-
cember 1770”), and “Vers a la Reine de Suede,” “‘ January 1771” (ibid. 79).

13 6 Discours del Utilité des Sciences et des Arts dans un Etat” (in Ceuvres
de Frédéric, ix. 169 et seq.): read *‘27th January 1772.” Formey, ii. 16,
&e. &e. .

Ki2

394 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Dec. 1771—Aug. 1772.
Biisching, for the last five or six years, is home from Russia;
comfortably established here as Consistorialrath, much concern-
ed with School-Superintendence; still more with Geography,
with copious rugged Literature of the undigested kind: a man
well seen in society ; has ‘‘ six families of rank which invite him
to dinner ;” all the dining he is equal to, with so much undigest-
ed writing on his hands. Biisching, in his final Section, headed
Berlin Life, Section more incondite even than its foregoers, has
this passage:

“On the Queen-Dowager of Sweden, Louise Ulrique’s, coming to
Berlin, I felt not a little embarrassed. ‘The case was this: Most part
of the Sixth Volume of my Magazine” (meritorious curious Book,
sometimes quoted by us here, not yet known in English Libraries)
‘“‘was printed; and in it, in the printed part, were various things that
concerned the deceased Sovereign, King Adolf Friedrich, and his
Spouse” (now come to visit us),—‘‘and among these were Articles
which the then ruling party in Sweden could certainly not like. And
now I was afraid these people would come upon the false notion, that
it was from the Queen Dowager I had got the Articles in question ;—
notion altogether false, as they had been furnished me by Baron Korf”
(well known to Hordt and others of us, at Petersburg, in the Czar-Pe-
ter time), “now Russian Minister at Copenhagen. However, when
Duke Friedrich of Brunswick” (one of the juniors, soldiering here with
his Uncle, as they almost all are) “wrote to me, one day, That his Lady
Aunt the Queen of Sweden invited me to dine with her tomorrow, and
that he, the Duke, would introduce me,—I at once decided to lay my
embarrassment before the Queen herself. r

“Next day, when I was presented to her Majesty, she took me by
the hand, and led me to a window” (as was her custom with guests
whom she judged to be worth questioning and talking to), “and so
placed herself in a corner there that I came to stand close before her ;
when she did me the honour to ask a great many questions about Rus-
sia, the Imperial Court especially, and most of all the Grand-Duke”
(Czar Paul that is to be)—a kind of kinsman he, his poor Father was
my late Husband’s Cousin-german, as perhaps you know). “A great
deal of time was spent in this way; so that the Princes and Princesses,
punctual to invitation, had to wait above half an hour long; and the
Queen was more than once informed that dinner was on the table and
getting cold. I could get nothing of my own mentioned here; all I
could do was to draw back, in a polite way, so soon as the Queen would
permit: and afterwards, at table, to explain with brevity my concern

Cuap. V. | A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 395
Dec. 1771—Aug., 1772.

about what was printed in the Magazine ; and request the Queen to
permit me to send it her to read for herself. She had it, accordingly,
that same afternoon.

“A few days after, she invited me again; again spoke with me a
long while in the window embrasure, in a low tone of voice ; confirmed
to me all that she had read,—and, in particular, minutely explained that
Letter of the King” (one of my Pieces) “in which he relates what
passed between him aud Count Tessin” (Son’s Tutor) “in the Queen’s
Apartment. At table, she very soon took occasion to say: ‘I cannot
imagine to myself how the Herr Consistorialrath’” (Biisching, to wit)
““¢ has come upon that Letter of my deceased Lord the King of Swe-
den’s ;, which his Majesty did write, and which is now printed in your
Magazine. For certain, the King showed it to nobody.’” Whereupon
Biusching: ‘Certainly ; nor is that to be imagined, your Majesty. But
the person it was addressed to must have shown it; and so a copy of it
has come to my hands.” Queen still expresses her wonder; where-
upon again Busching, with a courageous candour: “‘ Your Majesty,
most graciously permit me to say, that hitherto all Swedish secrets of
Court or State have been procurable for money and good words!’ The
Queen, to whom I sat directly opposite, cast down her eyes at these
words, and smiled ;—and the Reichsrath Graf von Schwerin” (a Swe-
dish Gentleman of hers), ‘‘ who sat at my left, seized me by the hand,
and said: ‘ Alas, that is true!’ ”—Here is a difficulty got over; Maga-
zine Number can come out when it will. As it did, ‘‘ next Easter-
Fair,” with proper indications and tacit proofs that the Swedish part
of it lay printed several months before the Queen’s arrival in our neigh-
bourhood.

Biisching dined with her Majesty several times,—“ eating nothing,”
he is careful to mention, and was careful to show her Majesty, ‘‘ except,
very gradually, a small bit of bread soaked in a glass of wine !”—mean-
ing thereby, “ Note, ye great ones, it is not for your dainties; in fact,
it is out of loyal politeness mainly!” the gloomily humble man.

“ One time, the Queen asked me, in presence of various Princes and
Princesses of the Royal House: ‘ Do you think it advisable to enlight-
en the Lower Classes by education?’ To which I answered: ‘Consid-
ering only under what heavy loads a man of the Lower Classes, espe-
cially of tbe Peasant sort, has to struggle through his life, one would
think it was better neither to increase his knowledge nor refine his sens-
ibility. But when one reflects that he, as well as those of the Higher
Classes, is to last through Eternity; and withal that good instruction
may’ (or might, zf it be not dad) ‘increase his practical intelligence,
and help him to methods of alleviating himself in this world, it must be
thought advisable to give him useful enlightenment.’” The Queen ac-
corded with this view of the matter.

396 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Dec. 1771—Aug. 1772.
“Twice I dined with her Majesty at her Sister, Princess Amelia,
the Abbess of Quedlinburg’s :—and the second time” (must have been
Summer 1772), “ Professor Sulzer, who was also a guest, caught his
’ death there. When I entered the reception-room, Sulzer was standing
in the middle of a thorough-draught, which they had managed to have
there, on account of the great heat ; and he had just arrived, all in a
perspiration, from the Thiergarten: I called him out of the draught,
but it was too late.”!4 Ach, mein lieber Sulzer,—Alas, dear Sulzer ;
seriously this time!

Biisching has a great deal to say about Schools, about the “* School-
Commission 1765,” the subjects taught, the methods of teaching de-
vised by Bisching and others, and the King’s continual exertions,
under deficient funds, in this province of his affairs. Biisching had
unheard-of difficulty to rebuild the old Gymnasium at Berlin into a
new. ‘Tried everybody ; tried the King thrice over, but nobody would.
“One of the persons I applied to was Lieutenant-General von Ramin,
Governor of Berlin” (surliest of mankind, of whose truculent incivility
there go many anecdotes); “to Ramin I wrote, entreating that he
would take a good opportunity and suggest a new Town School-house
to his Majesty: ‘ Excellenz, it will render you immortal in the annals
of Berlin!’ To which Ramin made answer: ‘ That is an immortality
I must renounce the hope of, and leave to the Town-Syndics and your-
self. I for my own part, will by no means risk such a proposal to his
Majesty ; which he would, in all likelihood, answer in the negative,
and receive ill at anybody’s hands.’”'*® By subscriptions, by bequests,
donations, and the private piety of individuals, Biisching aiding and
stirring, the thing was at last got done. Here is another glance into
School-life; not from Biisching :

June 9th,1771. “This Year the Stande of the Kurmark find they
have an overplus of 100,000 thalers (15,000/.); which sum they do
themselves the pleasure of presenting to the King for his Majesty’s
uses. King cannot accept it for his own uses. ‘ This money,’ answers
he (9th June), ‘ comes from the Province, wherefore I feel bound to lay
it out again for advantage of the Province. Could it not become a
means of getting English Husbandry’ (turnips in particular, whether
short-horns or not, 1 do not know) ‘introduced among us? In the
Towns that follow Farming chiefly, or in Villages belonging to un-
moneyed Nobles, we will lend out this 15,000., at 4 per cent, in con-
venient sums for that object: hereby will turnip-culture and rotation
be vouchsafed us; interest at 4 per cent brings us in 600/. annually ;
and this we will lay out in establishing new Schoolmasters in the Kur-

14 Biisching, Beytrdze, vi. 578-582, 15 Thid. vi. 568.

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 397
Dec. 1771—Aug. 1772.

mark, and having the youth better educated.’ What a pretty idea;
neat and beautiful, killing two important birds with one most small
stone! J have known enormous cannonballs and granite blocks, tor-
rent after torrent, shot out under other kinds of Finance-gunnery, that
were not only less respectable, but that were abominable to me in com-
parison.

Unluckily, no Nobles were found inclined; English Husbandry
(* Turnipse,” and the rest of it) had to wait their time. The King
again writes: ‘*No Nobles to be found, say you? Well; put the
15,000/. to interest in the common way,—that the Schoolmasters at
least may have solacement: I will add 120 thalers (18/.) apiece, that
we may have a chance of getting better Schoolmasters ;—send me List
of the Places where the worst are.” List was sent; is still extant;
and on the margin of it, in Royal Autograph, this remark :

“The Places are well selected. ‘The bad Schoolmasters are mostly
Tailors ; and you must see whether they cannot be got removed to lit-
tle Towns, and set to tailoring again, or otherwise disposed of, that
our Schools might the sooner rise into good condition, which is an inter-
esting thing.” “ Hager always our Master is to have the Schooling of
his People improved and everywhere diffused,” writes, some years after-
wards, the excellent Zedlitz, officially ‘‘ Minister of Public Justice,”
but much and meritoriously concerned with School-matters as well.
The King’s ideas were of the best, and Zedlitz sometimes had fine
hopes; but the want of funds was always great.

“In 1779,” says Preuss, “ there came a sad blow to Zedlitz’s hopes;
Minister von Brenkenhof” (deep in West-Preussen canal-diggings and
_ expenditures) “having suggested, That instead of getting Pensions,
the Old Soldiers should be put to keeping School.” Do but fancy it;
poor old fellows, little versed in scholastics hitherto! ‘“ Friedrich, in
his pinch, grasped at the small help; wrote to the War-Department :
‘Send me a List of Invalids who are fit’ (or at least fittest) ‘to be
Schoolmasters.’? And got thereupon a List of 74, and afterwards 5
more” (79 Invalids in all); ‘“ War-Department adding, That besides
these scholastic sort, there were 741 serving as Budner” (‘Turnpike-
keepers, in a sort), ‘as Forest-watchers, and the like; and 3,443 un-
versorgt” (shifting for themselves, no provision made for them at all),
—such the check, by cold arithmetic and inexorable finance, upon the
genial current of the soul !—

The Turnips, I believe, got gradually in; and Brandenburg, in our
day, is a more and more beautifully farmed Country. Nor were the
Schoolmasters unsuccessful at all points; though I cannot report a
complete educational triumph on those extremely limited terms.'®

16 Preuss, iii. 115, 113, &e.

398 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. {Book XXI.
9th Aug. 1772.

Queen Ulrique left, I think, on the 9th of August 1772; there
is sad farewell in Friedrich’s Letter next day to Princess Sophie
Albertine, the Queen’s Daughter, subsequently Abbess of Qued-
linburg: he is just setting out on his Silesian Reviews; ‘shall,
too likely, never see your good Mamma again.”!” Poor King;
Berlin City is sound asleep, while he rushes through it, on this
errand,—“ past the Princess Amelia’s window,” in the dead of
night; and takes to humming tender strophes. to her too; which
gain a new meaning by their date.!® ,

Ten days afterwards (19th August 1772), Queen Ulrique not
yet home,—her Son, the spirited King Gustav III., at Stock-
holm, had made, what in our day is called a “ stroke of state,”
—put a thorn in the snout of his monster of a Senate, namely :
‘“‘Less of palaver, venality and insolence, from you, Sirs; we
‘restore the Constitution of 1680,’ and are something of a King
again!” Done with considerable dexterity and spirit; not one
person killed or hurt. And surely it was the muzzling-up of a
great deal of folly on their side, —provided only there came
wisdom enough from Gustav himself instead. But, alas, there
did not, there hardly could. His uncle was alarmed, and not a
little angry for the moment: ‘“‘ You had two parties to recon-
cile; a work of time, of patient endeavour, continual and quiet;
no good possible till then. And instead of that—!” Gustav,
a shining kind of man, showed no want of spirit, now or after-
wards: but he leant too much on France and broken reeds ;—
and, in the end, got shot in the back by one of those beautiful
“Nobles” of his, and came to a bad conclusion, they and he.!9
Scandinavian Politics, thank Heaven, are none of our business.

Queen Ulrique was spared all these catastrophes. She had
alarmed her Brother by a dangerous illness, sudden and danger-
ous, in 1775; who writes with great anxiety about it, to An-
other still more anxious:”° of this she got well again; but it did

17 «¢ Potsdam, 10th August 1772 :” Cuvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 93.

'8 «(4 ma Seeur Amélie, en passant, la nuit, sous sa fenétre, pour aller en
Silésie (Aout 1772): Giuvres de Frédéric, xiii. 77.

19 <¢16th-29th March 1792,” death of Gustav ITI. by that assassination ;”
‘¢13th March 1809;”’ his Son Gustav IV. has to go on his travels; ‘‘ Karl
XITI.,’’ a childless Uncle, succeeds for a few years; after whom &c.

20 See ‘‘Correspondence with Gustav III.” (in Qvuvres de Frédéric,
XXVii. Ir. 84, &c.).

Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 399
7th Sept. 1773.

not last very long. July 16th, 1782, she died ;—and the sad
Friedrich had to say, Adieu. Alas, ‘‘must the eldest of us
mourn, then, by the grave of those younger!’’

Wilhelmina’s Daughter, Elizabeth Frederike Sophie, Duchess
of Wiirtemberg, appears at Ferney (September 1778).

Of our dear Wilhelmina’s high and unfortunate Daughter
there should be some Biography; and there will, surely, if a
man of sympathy and faculty pass that way; but there is not
hitherto. Nothing hitherto but a few bare dates; bare and
sternly significant, as on a ‘Tombstone; indicating that she had
a History, and that it was a tragic one. Welcome to all of us,
in this state of matters, is the following one clear emergence of
her into the light of day, and in company so interesting too!
Seven years before her death, she had gone to Lausanne (July
1773) to consult Tissot, a renowned Physician of those. days.
From Lausanne, after two months, she visited Voltaire at Fer-
ney. Read this Letter of Voltaire’s:

To Elizabeth Frederike Sophie, Duchess of Wurtemberg
(at Lausanne).
‘¢Ferney, 10th July 1773.

*“ Madame,—I am informed that your most Serene Highness has
deigned to remember that I was in the world. It is very sad to be
there, without paying you my court. I never felt so cruelly the sad
state to which old age and maladies have reduced me.

“T never saw you except as a child” (1743, her age then 10): “ but
you were certainly the beautifullest child in Europe. May you be the
happiest Princess” (alas!), “as you deserve to be! I was attached to
Madame the Margravine” (your dear Mother) “ with equal devotedness
and respect; and I had the honour to be pretty deep in her confidence,
for some time before this world, which was not worthy of her, had lost -
that adorable Princess. You resemble her :—but don’t resemble her in
feebleness of health! You are in the flower of your age” (coming forty,
I should fear) : “ let such bright flower lose nothing of its splendour ;
may your happiness be able to equal (puisse egaler) your beauty ; may
all your days be serene, and the sweets of friendship add a new charm
to them! These are my wishes; they are as lively as my regrets at
not being at your feet. What a consolation it would be for me to speak
of your loving Mother, and of all your august relatives! Why must

400 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

22d Sept. 1773.
Destiny send you to Lausanne” (consulting Dr. Tissot there), ‘and
hinder me from flying thither!—Let your most Serene Highness deign
to accept the profound respect of the old moribund Philosopher of Fer-
ney.—V”?!

The Answer of the Prinzess, or farther Correspondence on the mat-
ter, is not given; evident only that by and by, as Voltaire himself will
inform us, she did appear at Ferney ;—and a certain Swedish tourist,
one Bjornsthal, who met her there, enables us even to give the date.
He reports this anecdote :

** At supper, on the evening of 7th September 1773, the Princess sat
next to Voltaire, who always addressed her, ‘Votre Altesse.’ At last,
the Duchess said to him,‘ Tu es mon papa, je suis ta fille, et je veux
étre appelée ta fille.’ Voltaire took a pencil from his pocket, asked for
a card, and wrote upon it::

“Ah, le beau titre que voila!
Vous me donnez la premiére des places ;
Quelle famille jaurais la!
Je serais le pére des Graces.’??

He gave the card to the Princess, who embraced and kissed him for it.”

Voltaire to Friedrich (a fortnight after).
‘*Ferney, 22d September 1773.

“T must tell you that I have felt, in these late days, in spite of all my
past caprices, how much I am attached to your Majesty and to your
House. Madame the Duchess of Wiirtemberg having had, like so
many others, the weakness to believe that health is to be found at
Lausanne, and that Dr. Tissot gives it if one pay him, has, as you
know, made the journey to Lausanne ; and I, whom am more veritably
ill than she, and than all the Princesses who have taken Tissot for an
A@sculapius, had not the strength to leave my home. Madame of
Wiirtemberg, apprised of all the feelings that still live in me for the
memory of Madame the Margravine of Baireuth her Mother, has
deigned to visit my hermitage, and pass two days with us. I should
_ have recognised her, even without warning; she has the turn of her
Mother’s face with your eyes.

‘You Hero-people who govern the world don’t allow yourselves to
be subdued by feelings; you have them all the same as we, but you
maintain your decorum. We other petty mortals yield to all our im-
pressions: I set myself to cry, in speaking to her of you and of Madame
the Princess her Mother; and she too, though she is Niece of the first

21 (Qfuvres de Voltaire, xcii. 331. 22 Thid. xviii. 342.
*3 Vehse, Geschichte der Deutschen Hife (Hamburg, 1853), xxv. 252, 258.

~ wa

az

_ Cnap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 401

Sept.—Dec. 1773.

Captain in Europe, could not restrain her tears. It appears to me that
she has the talent (esprit) and the graces of your House; and that
especially she is more attached to you than to her Husband” (I should
think so!). “She returns, I believe, to Baireuth,’—

—(No Mother, no Father, there now: foolish Uncle of Anspach died
long ago, “3d August 1757 ;” Aunt Dowager of Anspach gone to Er-
langen, I hope, to Feuchtwang, Schwabach or Schwaningen, or some
Widow’s-Mansion (Wittwensitz) of her own ;** reigning Son, with his
French-Actress equipments, being of questionable figure),—

—* returns, I believe, to Baireuth ; where she will find another Princess
of a different sort ; I mean Mademoiselle Clairon, who cultivates Natural
History, and is Lady Philosopher to Monseigneur the Margraf,”—high-
rouged ‘l'ragedy-Queen, rather tyrannous upon him, they say; a young
man destined to adorn Hammersmith by and by, and not go a good road.

* * “T renounce my beautiful hopes of seeing the Mahometans
driven out of Europe, and Athens become again the Seat of the Muses.
Neither you nor the Kaiser are”—are inclined in the Crusading way at |
all. * * “The old sick man of Ferney is always at the feet of your
Majesty ; he feels very sorry that he cannot talk of you farther with
Madame the Duchess of Wiirtemberg, who adores you.—Le Vieux
Malade.”**

To which Friedrich makes answer: “If it is forevermore forbidden
me to see you again, I am not the less glad that the Duchess of Wiirtem-
berg has seen you. I should certainly have mixed my tears with yours,
had I been present at that touching scene! Be it weakness, be it ex-
cess of regard, I have built for her lost Mother, what Cicero projected
for his Tullia, a Tempe or Frienpsuip: her Statue occupies the back-
ground, and on each pillar stands a mask (mascaron) containing the Bust
of some Hero in Friendship: I send you the drawing of it.”*° Which
again sets Voltaire weeping, and will the Duchess when she sees it.”’

We said there hitherto was nearly nothing any where discover-
able as History of this high Lady but the dates only; these we
now give. She was “born, 30th August 1732,”—her Mother’s
and Father’s one Child ;—four years older than her Anspach
Cousin, who inherited Baireuth too, and finished off that gene-
alogy. She was ‘‘ wedded, 26th September 1748;” her age then

24 Lived, finally at Schwaningen, in sight of such vicissitudes and follies
round her, till ‘‘4th February 1784’’ (Rédenbeck, iii. 304).

25 (Huvres de Voltaire, xcii. 390.

26 <¢ Potsdam, 24th October 1773:” Cfuvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 259 + —
“ Temple” was built in 1768 (Ibid. p. 259 n.).

- 27 Voltaire’s next Letter: Guvres de Voltaire, xcii. 434.

402 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Sept.—Dec. 1773.

about 16; her gloomy Duke of Wiirtemberg, age 20, all sunshine
and goodness to her then: she was ‘“‘ divorced, in 1757:” ‘died,
6th April 1780,”—Tradition says, ‘in great poverty” (great for
her rank, I suppose, proud as she might be, and above complain-
ing), —-‘* at Neustadt-on-the-Aisch” (in the Nurnberg region),
whither she had retired, I know not how long after her Papa’s
death and Cousin’s accession. She is bound for her Cousin’s
Court, we observe, just now; and, considering her Cousin’s ways
and her own turn of mind, it is easy to fancy she had not a
pleasant time there.

Tradition tells us, credibly enough, “She was very like her
Mother: beautiful, much the lady (von feinem Ton), and of ener-
getic character ;” and adds, probably on slight foundation, “ but
very cold and proud towards the People.”’8’ Many Books will
inform you how, ‘On first entering Stuttgart, when the reigning
Duke and she were met by a party of congratulatory Peasant
Women, dressed in their national costume, she said to her Duke,”’
being then only sixteen, poor young soul, and on her marriage-
journey, ‘Was will das Geschmeis (Why does that rabble bore
us)!” This is probably the main foundation. That ‘her
Ladies, on approaching her, had always to kiss the hem of her
gown,” lay in the nature of the case, being then the rule to peo-
ple of her rank. Beautiful Unfortunate, adieu ;—and be Vol-
taire thanked, too !—

It is long since we have seen Voltaire before :—a prosperous
Lord at Ferney these dozen years (‘‘the only man in France
that lives like a grand Seigneur,” says Cardinal Bernis to him
once”®); doing great things for the Pays de Gex, and for France,
and for Europe; delivering the Calases, the Sirvens, and the
Oppressed of various kinds; especially ardent upon the Jnfdme,
as the real business Heaven has assigned him in his Day, the
sunset of which, and Night wherein no man can work, he feels
to be hastening on. ‘‘ Couldn’t-we, the few Faithful, go to Cleve
in a body?” thinks he at one time: ‘To Cleve; and there, as

25 Vehse, xxv. 251.
** Their Correspondence, really pretty of its kind, used to circulate as a
separate Volume, in the years then subsequent.

Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 403
Sept.—Dec. 1773.
from a safe place, under the Philosopher King, shoot out our
fiery artilleries with effect?’ The Philosopher King is perfectly
willing, “provided you don’t involve me in Wars with my neigh-
bours.” Willing enough he; but they the Faithful—alas, the
Patriarch finds that they have none of his own heroic ardour,
and that the thing cannot be done. Upon which, struck with
sorrow, he writes nothing to Friedrich for two years.3°

The truth is, he is growing very old; and though a piercing
radiance, as of stars, bursts occasionally from the central part of
him, the outworks are getting decayed and dim; obstruction
more and more accumulating, and the immeasurable Night draw-
ing nigh. Well does Voltaire himself, at all moments, know
this; and his bearing under it, one must say, is rather beautiful.
There is a tenderness, a sadness, in these his later Letters to
Friedrich ; instead of emphasis or strength, a beautiful shrill
melody, as of a woman, as of a child; he grieves unappeasably
to have lost Friedrich; never will forgive Maupertuis :—poor
old man! Friedrich answers in a much livelier, more robust

' tone: friendly, encouraging, communicative on small matters ;—

full of praises,—in fact, sincerely glad to have such a transcend-
ant genius still alive with him in this world. Praises to the
most liberal pitch everything of Voltaire’s,—except only the Ar-
ticle on War, which occasionally (as below) he quizzes a little,
to the Patriarch or his Disciple.

As we have room for nothing of all this, and perhaps shall not
see Voltaire again,—there are Two actual Interviews with him,
which, being withal by Englishmen, though otherwise not good
for much, we intend for readers here. In these last twenty years,
D’ Alembert is Friedrich’s chief Correspondent. Of D’Alembert
to the King, it may be or may not, some opportunity will rise
for a specimen; meanwhile here is a short Letter of the King’s
to D’Alembert, through which there pass so many threads of
contemporaneous flying events (swift shuttles on the loud-sound-
ing Loom of Time), that we are tempted to give this, before the
two Interviews in question.

Date of the Letter is two months after that apparition of the Duchess

30 < Noy. 1769,” recommences (Cuvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 140, 189).

404 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI,

Sept.—Dec. 1773.
of Wiirtemberg at Ferney. Of “Crillon,” an ingenious enough young
Soldier, rushing ardently about the world in his holiday time, we have
nothing to say, except that he is Son of that Rossbach Crillon, who al-
ways fancies to himself that once he perhaps spared Friedrich’s life (by
a glass of wine judiciously given) long since, while the Bridge of Weis-
senfels was on fire, and Rossbach close ahead.** Colonel ‘‘ Guibert” is
another Soldier, still young, but of much superior type; greatly an ad-
mirer of Friedrich, and subsequently a Writer upon him.*?

In regard to the “ Landgravine of Darmstadt,” notice these points.
First, that her eldest Daughter is Wife, second Wife, to the dissolute
Crown Prince of Prussia: and then, that she has Three other Daugh-
ters,—one of whom has just been disposed of in an important way ; wed-
ded to the Czarowitch Paul of Russia, namely. By Friedrich’s means
and management, as Friedrich informs us.** ‘The Czarina, he says,
had sent out a confidential Gentleman, one Asseburg, who was Prussian
by birth, to seek a fit Wife for her Son: Friedrich, hearing of this, sug-
gested to Asseburg, “The Landgravine of Darmstadt, the most distin-
guished and accomplished of German Princesses, has three marriagea-
ble Daughters ; her eldest, married to our Crown Prince, will be Queen
of Prussia in time coming ;—suppose now, one of the others were to be
Czarina of Russia withal? Think, might it not be useful both to your
native Country and to your adopted?” Asseburg took the hint; report-
ed at Petersburg, That of all marriageable Princesses in Germany, the
Three of Darmstadt, one or the other of them, would, in his humble
opinion, be the eligiblest. ‘‘ Could not we persuade you to come to Pe-
tersburg, Madam Landgravine 2” wrote the Czarina thereupon: “ Do us
the honour of a visit, your three Princesses and you!” ‘The Landgra-
vine and Daughters, with decent celerity, got under way ;** Czarowitch
Paul took interesting survey, on their arrival; and about two months
ago wedded the middle one of the three ;—and here is the victorious
Landgravine bringing home the other two. Czarowitch’s fair one did
not live long, nor behave well: died of her first child ; and Czarowitch,
in 1776, had to apply to us again for a Wife, whom, this time, we fitted
better. Happily, the poor victorious Landgravine was gone before any-
thing of this; died suddenly five months hence ;** nothing doubting of
her Russian Adventure. She was an admired Princess of her time, die
grosse Landgrafin, as Goethe somewhere calls her; much in Fried-

31 Supra, v. 154. 1
32 Of Guibert’s visit to Friedrich (June 1773), see Preuss, iv. 214; Ro-
denbeck, iii. 80.
83 (Huvres de l'rédéric (Mémoires de 1763 jusqu’a 1775), vi. 57.
%¢ Passed through Berlin, 16th-19th May 1773: Rodenbeck, iii. 78.
"35 30th March 1774.

hes <

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES, 405
16th Dec. 1773.

rich’s esteem,—femina sexu, ingento vir, as the Monument he raised to
her at Darmstadt still bears.*°

Friedrich to D’ Alembert.
‘¢ Potsdam, 16th December 1773.

**M. de Crillon delivered me your Crillonade” (lengthy Letter of in-
troduction) ; ‘‘ which has completed me in the History of all the Cril-
lons of the County of Avignon. He doesn’t stop here ; he is soon to be
off for Russia; so that I will take him on your word, and believe him
the wisest of all the Crollins: assuring myself that you have measured
and computed all his curves and angles of incidence. He will find Did-
erot and Grimm in Russia” (famous visit of Diderot), ‘‘ all occupied with
the Czarina’s beautiful reception of them, and with the many things
worthy of admiration which they have seen there. Some say Grimm
will possibly fix himself in that Country” (chose better),—* which will
be the asylum at once of your fanatic Chaumeixes and of the Encyclo-
pédistes, whom he used to denounce.” (‘This poor Chaumeix did, after
such feats, “‘ die peaceably at Moscow, as a Schoolmaster.”’)

‘*M. de Guibert has gone by Ferney; where it is said Voltaire has
converted him, that is, has made him renounce the errors of ambition,
abjure the frightful trade of hired man-slayer, with intent to become
either Capuchin or Philosophe; so that I suppose by this time he will
have published a ‘ Declaration’ like Gresset, informing the public that,
having had the misfortune to write a Work on Tactics, he repented it
from the bottom of his soul, and hereby assured mankind that never
more in his life would he give rules for butcheries, assassinations, feints,
stratagems, or the like abominations. As to me, my conversion not be-
ing yet in an advanced stage, | pray you to give me details about Gui-
bert’s, to soften my heart and penetrate my bowels.

“We have the Landgravine of Darmstadt here :*’7 no end to the
Landgravine’s praises of a magnificent Czarina, and of all the beautiful
and grand things she has founded in that Country. As to us, who live
like mice in their holes, news come to us only from mouth to mouth,
and the sense of hearing is nothing like that of sight. I cherish my
wishes, in the meanwhile, for the sage Anaxagoras” (my D’Alembert
himself); ‘‘and I say to Urania, ‘It is for thee to sustain thy foremost
Apostle, to maintain one light, without which a great Kingdom’ (France)
‘would sink into darkness ;’ and I say to the Supreme Demiurgus:
‘Have always the good D’Alembert in thy holy and worthy keep-
ing.’—F.”°*

36 (Huvres de Frédéric, xx.183 n. His Correspondence with her is Ibid.
xxvii. W. 135-153; and goes from 1757 to 1774.
37 Rodenbeck, iii. 89, 90. 3° (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiv. 614.

406 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
16th Dec. 1773.

The Boston Tea (same day) Curious to remark, while Friedrich
is writing this Letter, ‘‘ Thursday, December 16th, 1773,” what a com-
motion is going on far over seas, at Boston, New England,—in the
“Old South Meetinghouse” there; in regard to three English Tea-
Ships that are lying embargoed in Griffin's Wharf, for above a fortnight
past. The case is well known, and still memorable to mankind. Brit-
ish Parliament, after nine years of the saddest haggling and baffling to
and fro, under Constitutional stress of weather, and such east-winds and
west-winds of Parliamentary eloquence as seldom were. has made up
its mind, That America shall pay duty on these Teas before infusing
them: and America, Boston more especiaily, is tacitly determined that
it will not; and that to avoid mistakes, these Teas shall never be Jand-
ed at all. Such is Boston’s private intention, more or less fixed ;—to
say nothing of the Philadelphias, Charlestons, New Yorks, who are
watching Boston, and will follow suite of it.

«Sunday, November 26th,—that is, nineteen days ago,—the first of
these Tea-Ships, the Dartmouth, Captain Hall, moored itself in Grif-
fin's Wharf: Owner and Consignee is a broad-brimmed Boston gentle-
mun called Retch, more attentive to profits of trade than to the groans
of Boston :—but already on that Sunday, much more on the Monday
following, there had a meeting of Citizens run together,—(on Monday,
Faneuil Hall won’t hold them, and they adjourn to the Old South Meet-
inghouse),—who make it apparent to Rotch that it will much behove
him, for the sake both of tea and skin, not to ‘ enter’ (or officially an-
nounce) this Ship Dartmouth at the Customhouse in any wise: but to
pledge his broad-brimmed word, equivalent to his oath, that she shall
lie dormant there in Griffin’s Wharf, till we see. Which, accordingly,
she has been doing ever since; she and two others that arrived some
days later: dormant all three of them, side by side, three crews totally
idle; a ‘Committee of Ten’ supervising Rotch’s procedures; and the
Boston world much expectant. Thursday, December 16th: this is the
20th day since Rotch’s Dartmouth arrived here; if not ‘entered’ at
Customhouse in the course of this day, Customhouse cannot give her a
‘clearance’ either (a leave to depart),—she becomes a smuggler, an
outlaw, and her fate is mysterious to Rotch and us.

“ This Thursday, accordingly, by 10 in the morning, in the Old South
Meetinghouse, Boston is assembled, and country-people to the number
of 2,000 ;—and Rotch never was in such a company of human Friends
before. They are not uncivil to him (cautious. people, heedful of the
verge of the Law); but they are peremptory, to the extent of—Rotch

may shudder to think what. ‘I went to the Customhouse yesterday,’ ©

said Rotch, ‘ your Committee of Ten can bear me witness; and de-
manded clearance and leave to depart; but they would not; were for-

a. a

a.

Fo

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 407
16th Dee. 1773.

bidden, they said!’ ‘Go, then. sir; get you to the Governor himself;
a clearance, and out of harbour. this day: hadn’t you better? Rotch is
well aware that he had; hastens off to the Governor (who has vanished
to his Country-house, on purpose); Old South Meetinghouse adjourning
till 3 p.m., for Rotch’s return with clearance.

* At 3 no Rotch, nor at 4, nor at 5; miscellaneous plangent intermit-
tent speech instead, mostly plangent, in tone sorrowful rather than in-
dignant :—at a quarter to 6, here at length is Rotch; sun is long since
set,—has Rotch a clearance or not? Rotch reports at large, willing to
be questioned and cross-questioned : ‘Governor absolutely would not!
My Christian friends, what could I or can I do? There are by this
time about 7,000 people in Old South Meetinghouse, very few tallow-
lights in comparison,—almost no lights for the mind either—and it is
difficult to answer. Rotch’s report done, the Chairman” (one Adams,
** American Cato,” subsequently so-called) “dissolves the sorrowful
7,000, with these words: ‘ This Meeting declares that it can do nothing
more to save the Country.’ Will merely go home, then, and weep.
Hark, however: almost on the instant, in front of Old South Meeting-
house, ‘a terrific War-whoop ; and about fifty Mohawk Indians,—with
whom Adams seems to be acquainted ; and speaks without Interpreter :
Aha !—

“‘ And, sure enough, before the stroke of 7, these fifty painted Mo-
hawks are forward, without noise, to Griffin's Wharf; have put sentries
_all round there ; and, in a great silence of the neighbourhood, are busy,
in three gangs, upon the dormant Tea-ships; opening their chests, and
punctually shaking them out into the sea. ‘ Listening from the dis-
tance, you could hear distinctly the ripping open of the chests, and no
other sound.’ About 10 p.m. all was finished ; 342 chests of tea flung
éut to infuse in the Atlantic; the fifty Mohawks gone like a dream;
and Boston sleeping more silently even than usual.”*?

“Seven in the evening:” this, I calculate, allowing for the
Earth’s rotation, will be about the time when Friedrich, well
tired with the day’s business, is getting to bed; by 10 on the
Boston clocks, when the process finishes there, Friedrich will
have had the best of his sleep over. Here is Montcalm’s Proph-
ecy coming to fulfilment ;—and a curious intersection of a flying
Event through one’s poor Letter to D’ Alembert. We will now
give the two English Interviews with Voltaire; one of which
is of three years past, another of three years ahead.

#9 «Summary of the Advices from America” (in Gentleman’s Magazine
Jor 1774, pp. 26, 27); Bancroft, iii. 536 et seq. ;

408 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
July 1770.

No. 1. Doctor Burney has Sight of Voltaire (July 1770).

In the years 1770-71, Burney, then a famous Doctor of Music, made
his Tour through France and Italy, on Musical errands and research-
es ;*° with these we have no concern, but only with one most smal! ex-
ceptional offshoot or episode which grew out of these. Enough for us
to know that Burney, a comfortable, well-disposed, rather dull Doctor,
age near 45, had left London for Paris “in June 1770;” that he was
on to Geneva, intending for Turin, “ early in July ;”*and that his “ M.
Fritz,” mentioned below, is a veteran Brother in Music, settled at Ge-
neva for the last thirty years, who has been helpful and agreeable to
Burney while here. Our Excerpt therefore dates itself, ‘one of the
early days of July 1770,’—Burney hovering between two plans (as we
shall dimly perceive), and not exactly executing either :

* * “My going to M. Fritz broke” (was about breaking, but did
not quite) “into a plan which I had formed of visiting M. de Voltaire,
at the same hour, along with some other strangers, who were then go-
ing to Ferney. But, to say the truth, besides the visit to M. Fritz be-
ing more my business, I did not much like going with these people, who
had only a Geneva Bookseller to introduce them; and I had heard that
some English had lately met with a rebuff from M. de Voltaire, by go-
ing without any letter of recommendation, or anything to recommend
themselves. He asked them What they wanted? Upon their reply-
ing That they wished only to see so extraordinary a man, he said:
‘Well, gentlemen, you now see me: did you take me for a wild-beast
or monster, that was fit only to be stared at as a show?’ This story
very much frightened me ; for, not having, when I left London, or even
Paris, any intention of going to Geneva, I was quite unprovided with a
recommendation. However, I was determined to see the place of his
residence, which I took to be” (still Les Deélices),

‘“ Cette maison ad’ Aristippe, ces jardins d’ Epicure,

to which he retired in 1755; but was mistaken” (not the Délices now
at all, but Ferney, for nine or ten years back).

‘“‘T drove to Ferney alone, after I had left M. Fritz. This house is
three or four miles from Geneva, but near the Lake. I approached it
with reverence, and a curiosity of the most minute kind. I inquired
when I first trod on his domain; | had an intelligent and talkative pos-
tillion, who answered all my questions very satisfactorily. M. de Vol-

*9 Charles Burney’s Present State of Music in France and Italy, being the
Journal of a Tour through those Countries to collect Materials for a General-
History of Music (London, 1773). The History of Music followed duly, in
Four 4tos (London, 1776-1789).

> g

“os

Cuap. V. | A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 409
July 1770. :

taire’s estate is very large here, and he is building pretty farmhouses
upon it. He has erected on the Geneva side a quadrangular Justice,
or Gallows, to show that he is the Seigneur. One of his farms, or
rather manufacturing houses,— for he is establishing a manufacture
upon his estate,—was so handsome that I thought it was his chateau.

‘We drove to Ferney, through a charming country, covered with
corn and vines, in view of the Lake, and Mountains of Gex, Switzer-
land, and Savoy. On the left hand, approaching the House, is a neat
Chapel, with this inscription :

“DEO EREXIT VOLTAIRE MDCCLXI.”

T sent to inquire, Whether a stranger might be allowed to see the House
and Gardens; and was answered in the affirmative. A servant soon
came, and conducted me into the cabinet or closet where his Master
had just been writing: this is never shown when he is at home; but
having walked out, I was allowed that privilege. From thence I passed
to the Library, which is not a very large one, but well filled. Here I
found a whole-length Figure in marble of himself, recumbent, in one of
the windows; and many curiosities in another room; a Bust of him-
self, made not two years since ; his Mother’s picture ; that of his Niece,
Madam Denis; his Brother, M. Dupuis; the Calas Family; and others.
It is a very neat and elegant House; not large, nor affectedly deco-
rated.

“J should first have remarked, that close to the Chapel, between
that and the house, is the Theatre, which he built some years ago;
where he treated his friends with some of his own Tragedies: it is now
only used as a receptacle for wood and lumber, there having been no
play acted in it these four years. The servant told me his Master was
78” (76 gone), “but very well. ‘JZ travaille,’ said he, ‘ pendant dix
heures chaque jour, He studies ten hours every day ; writes constantly
without spectacles, and walks out with only a domestic, often a mile or
two—Et le voila, la bas, And see, yonder he is!’

‘‘He was going to his workmen. My heart leaped at the sight of
so extraordinary a man. He had just then quitted his Garden, and
was crossing the court before his House. Seeing my chaise, and me
on the point of mounting it, he made a sign to his servant who had been
my cicerone, to go to him; in order, I suppose, to inquire who I was.
After they had exchanged a few words together, he,” M. de Voltaire,
“approached the place where I was standing motionless, in order to
contemplate his person as much as I could while his eyes were turned
from me; but on seeing him move towards me, I found myself drawn
by some irresistible power towards him; and, without knowing what I
did, I insensibly met him half-way.

“Tt is not easy to conceive it possible for life to subsist in a form so

Vor. VI.—S

410 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

April 1776.
nearly composed of mere skin and bone as that of M. de Voltaire.”
Extremely lean old Gentleman! ‘ He complained of decrepitude, and
said, He supposed I was anxious to form an idea of the figure of one
walking after death. However, his eyes and whole countenance are
still full of fire; and though so emaciated, a more lively expression
cannot be imagined.

‘ He inquired after English news; and observed that Poetical squab-
bles had given way to Political ones; but seemed to think the spirit of
Opposition as necessary in poetry as in politics. ‘Les querelles d’au-
teurs sont pour le bien de la littérature, comme dans un gouvernement
libre les querelles des grands, et les clameurs des petits, sont néces-
saires a la liberté... And added,‘ When critics are silent, it does not
so much prove the Age to be correct, as dull.’ He inquired what Poets
we had now; I told him we had Mason and Gray. * They write but
little,’ said he: ‘and you seem to have no one who lords it over the
rest, like Dryden, Pope, and Swift.’ I told him that it was one of the
inconveniences of Periodical Journals, however well executed, that they
often silenced modest men of genius, while impudent blockheads were
impenetrable, and unable to feel the critic’s scourge: that Mr. Gray
and Mr. Mason had both been illiberally treated by mechanical critics,
even in newspapers ; and added, that modesty and love of quiet seemed
in these gentlemen to have got the better even of their love of fame.

“ During this conversation, we approached the buildings that he was
constructing near the road to his Chateau. ‘ ‘These,’ said he, pointing
to them, ‘ are the most innocent, and perhaps the most useful, of all my
works.’ I observed that he had other works, which were of far more
extensive use, and would be much more durable, than those. He was
so obliging as to show me several farmhouses that he had built, and the
plans of others: after which I took my leave.”*!

No. 2. A Reverend Mr. Sherlock sees Voltaire, and even dines with
him (April 1776).

Sherlock’s Book of Travels, though he wrote it in two languages,
and it once had its vogue, is now little other than a Dance of Will-o’-
wisps to us. A Book tawdry, incoherent, indistinct, at once flashy and
opaque, full of idle excrescences and exuberances ;—as is the poor man
himself. He was “ Chaplain to the Earl of Bristol, Bishop of Derry ;”
gyrating about as ecclesiastical Moon to that famed Solar Luminary,
what could you expect !** Poor Sherlock is nowhere intentionally fab-

*' Burney’s Present State of Music (London 1773), pp. 55-62. |
*? Title of his Book is, Letters from an English Traveller ; translated from
the French Original (London, 1780). Ditto, Letters from an English Trav.

si Ste

7

Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 411
April 1776.

-ulous; nor intrinsically altogether so foolish as he seems: let that suf-
fice us. In his Dance of Will-o’-wisps, which in this point happily is
dated,—26th-27th April 1776,—he had come to Ferney, with proper
introduction to Voltaire: and here, after severe excision of the flabby
parts, but without other change) is credible account of what he saw and
heard. In Three Scenes; with this Prologue—as to Costume, which
is worth reading twice:

Voltaire’s Dress. ‘* On the two days I saw him, he wore white cloth
shoes, white woollen stockings, red breeches, with a nightgown and
waistcoat of blue linen, flowered, and lined with yellow. He had ona
grizzle wig with three ties, and over it a silk nightcap embroidered
with gold and silver.”

Scene I. The Entrance-Hall of Ferney (Friday, 26th April 1776) ;
exuberant Sherlock entering, Letier of Introduction having pre-
ceded.

‘He met me in the hall ; his Nephew M. d’Hornoi” (Grand-nephew ;
Abbé Mignot, famous for durying Voltaire, and Madame Denis, whom
we know, were his Uncle and Aunt)—Grand-nephew, ‘‘ Counsellor in
the Parlement of Paris, held him by the arm. He said to me, with a
very weak voice: ‘ You see a very old man, who makes a great effort
to have the honor of seeing you. Will you take a walk in my Garden?
It will please you, for it is in the English taste :—it was I who intro-
duced that taste into France, and it is become universal.: But the
French parody your Gardens ; they put your thirty acres into three.’

“From his Gardens you see the Alps, the Lake, the City of Geneva
and its environs, which are very pleasant. He said:

Voltaire. “ ‘It is a beautiful prospect.’ He pronounced these words

tolerably well. Sherlock. “‘ How long is it since you were in
England Y

Voltmre. “‘ Fifty years, at least.’ (Not quite; in 1728 left; in 1726
had come).** D’ Hornoi. “*‘ It was at the time when you printed

the First Edition of your Henriade.’

“ We then talked of Literature ; and from that moment he forgot his
age and infirmities, and spoke with the warmth of a man of thirty. He
said some shocking things against Moses and against Shakspeare.”
(Like enough!) * * “ We then talked of Spain.

Voltaire. “*It is a Country of which we know no more than of the
most savage parts of Africa; and it is not worth the trouble of being

eller ; written originally in French: by the Rev. Martin Sherlock, A.M.,
Chaplain to the Earl of Bristol, &c. (a new Edition, 2 voll., London, 1802).
*} Supra, ii. 456.

412. AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

April 1776.
known. Ifa man would travel there, he must carry his bed, &c. On
arriving in a Town, he must go into one street to buy a bottle of wine;
a piece of a mule’ (by way of beef) ‘in another ; he finds a table in a
third—and he sups. A French Nobleman was passing through Pam-
peluna: he sent out for a spit: there was only one in the Town, and
that was lent away for a wedding.’

D’Hornoi. “* There, Monsieur, is a Village which M. de Voltaire has
built !” Voltaire. *** Yes, we have our freedoms here. Cut off
a little corner, and we are out of France. I asked some privileges for
my Children here, and the King has granted me all that I asked, and
has declared this Pays de Gex exempt from all Taxes of the Farmers-
General ; so that salt, which formerly sold for ten sous a pound, now
sells for four. J have nothing more to ask, except to live.—We went
into the Library” (had made the round of the Gardens, I suppose).

Scene II. Jn the Library.

a

Voltaire. ‘‘‘ There you find several of your countrymen’ (he had |

Shakspeare, Milton, Congreve, Rochester, Shaftesbury, Bolingbroke,
Robertson, Hume, and others). ‘ Robertson is your Livy ; his Charles
Fifth is written with truth. Hume wrote his History to be applauded,
Rapin to instruct; and both obtained their ends.’ Sherlock. * ‘ Lord
Bolingbroke and you agreed that we have not one good Tragedy”

Voltaire. “* We did think so. Cato is incomparably well written :
Addison had a great deal of taste ;—but the abyss between taste and
genius is immense! Shakspeare had an amazing genius, but no taste:
he has spoiled the taste of the Nation, He has been their taste for
two hundred years; and what is the taste of a Nation for two hundred
~ years will be so for two thousand. This kind of taste becomes a relig-
ion; there are, in your Country, a great many Fanatics for Shakspeare.’
Sherlock. “* Were you personally acquainted with Lord Bolingbroke ?

Voltaire. “‘ Yes. His face was imposing, and so was his voice; in
his Works, there are many leaves, and little fruit ; distorted expressions,
and periods intolerably long.’ (Taking down a Book.) ‘ ‘There, you
see the Koran, which is well read, at least.” (“It was marked through-
out with bits of paper.”) ‘'There are Historic Doubts, by Horace Wal-
pole’ (“which had also several marks”); ‘here is the Portrait of Rich-
ard III.; you see he was a handsome youth.’ Sherlock (making
an abrupt transition). “‘ You have built a Church?”

Voltaire. “‘'True; and it is the only one in the Universe in honour
of God’ (Deo erexit Voltaire, as we read above): ‘ you have plenty of
Churches built to St. Paul, to St. Geneviéve, but not one to God.”
Exit Sherlock (to his Inn; makes jotting as above ;—is to dine at
Ferney tomorrow).

Cuap. V.]. A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES, 413
April 1776. |

Scene III. Dinner-Table of Voltaire.

“The next day, as we sat down to Dinner,” our Host in the above
shining Costume, “ he said, in English tolerably pronounced :

Voltaire. “*‘ We are here for liberty and property !’ (parody of some
old Speech in Parliament, let us guess,—liberty and property, my
Lords!) ‘This Gentleman,—whom let me present to Monsieur. Sher-
~ lock,—is a Jesuit’ (old Pére Adam, whom I keep for playing Chess, in
his old, unsheltered days) ; ‘he wears his hat: | am a poor invalid,—I
wear my nightcap.’ * *

“T do not now recollect why he quoted these verses, also in English,
by Rochester, on Charles Second :

‘¢ “Here lies the mutton-eating King,
Whose promise none relies on;
Who never said a foolish thing,
Nor ever did a wise one.’

But speaking of Racine, he quoted this Couplet (of Roscommon’s Essay
on Translated Verse) :

‘¢¢The weighty bullion of one sterling line
Drawn to French wire would through whole pages shine.’

Sherlock. “‘The English prefer Corneille to Racine.’

Voltaire. ‘That is because the English are not sufficiently ac-
quainted with the French tongue to feel the beauties of Racine’s style,
or the harmony of his versification. Corneille ought to please them
_more because he is more striking; but Racine pleases the French be-
cause he has more softness and tenderness.’

Sherlock. “‘ How did you find’ (/:ke) ‘ the English fare (Ja chére An-
glaise ?’—which Voltaire mischievously takes for “the dear English-
“woman”’). Voltaire. ‘‘*I found her very fresh and white,—+truly!

(‘It should be remembered, that when he made this pun upon Women,
he was in his eighty-third year).”

Sherlock. “‘ Their language ?” Voltaire. “‘ Energetic, precise
and barbarous; they are the only Nation that pronounce their a as e.’
* * (And some time afterwards) ‘ Though I cannot perfectly pro-
nounce English, my ear is sensible of the harmony of your language
and of your versification. Pope and Dryden have the most harmony in
Poetry ; Addison in Prose.’ (Takes now the interrogating side.)

Voltaire. ‘“‘‘ How have you found (avez-vous trouvé) the French?
Sherlock. “‘‘ Amiable and witty, I only find one fault with them: they
imitate the English too much.’

Voltare. “‘How! Do you think us worthy to be originals oure
selves? Sherlock. “* Yes, Sir.’

414 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXT.
April 1776.

Voltaire. “*So do I too :—but it is of your Government that we are
envious. :

Sherlock. “*T have found the French freer than I expected.’

Voltaire. ‘* Yes, as to walking, or eating whatever he pleases, or lol]-
ing in his elbow-chair, a Frenchman is free enough; but as to taxes—
Ah, Monsieur, you are a lucky Nation; you can do what you like; poor
we are born in slavery : we cannot even die as we will; we must have
a Priest’ (can’t get buried otherwise ; am often thinking of that'). * *
‘Well, if the English do sell themselves, it is a proof that they are worth
something: we French don’t sell ourselves, probably because we are
worth nothing.’

Sherlock. “* What is your opinion of the Eloise’ (Rousseau’s im-
mortal Work) ? Veltare ‘“* That it will not be read twenty
years hence.’

Sherlock. “** Mademoiselle de ’Enclos wrote some good Letters 2”
Voltaire. “* She never wrote one; they were by the wretched Crébillon’
(my beggarly old * Rival” in the Pompadour epoch)! * *

Voltamre. “~The Italians are a Nation of brokers. Italy is an Old-
Clothes shop; in which there are many Old Dresses of exquisite taste.
* * But we are still to know, Whether the subjects of the Pope or
of the Grand Turk are the more abject.’ (We have now gone to the
Drawing-room, I think, though it is not jotted )

* He talked of England and of Shakspeare; and explained to Madame
Denis part of a Scene in Henry Fifth, where the King makes love to
Queen Catherine in bad French; and of another in which that Queen
takes a lesson in English from her Waiting-woman, and where there
are several very gross double-entendres”— but, I hope, did not long
dwell on these. * *

Voltaire. *** When I see an Englishman subtle and fond of law-suits,
I say, “ There is a Norman, who came in with William the Conqueror.”
When I see a man good-natured and polite, “* That is one who came
with the Plantagenets .” a brutal character,“ That is a Dane :”—for
your Nation, Monsieur, as well as your Language, is a medley of many
others.’

‘After dinner, passing through a little Parlour where there was a
head of Locke, another of the Countess of Coventry, and several more,
he took me by the arm and stopped me; ‘ Do you know this Bust’ (bust
of Sir Isaac Newton)? ‘It is the greatest genius that ever existed: if
all the geniuses of the Universe were assembled, he should lead the band.’

“Tt was of Newton, and of his own Works, that M. de Voltaire
always spoke with the greatest warmth.*? (Exit Sherlock, to jot down
the above, and thence into Infinite Space.)

44 Sherlock, Letters (London, 1802), i. 98-106.

a

ve

- Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. ‘415

Aug.—Sept. 1774.

General or Fieldmarshal Conway, direct from the London
Circles, attends one of Friedrich’s Reviews (August—Sep-
tember 1774.

Now that Friedrich’s Military Department is got completely
into trim again, which he reckons to have been about 1770, his
annual Reviews are becoming very famous over Europe; and
intelligent Officers of all Countries are eager to be present, and
instruct themselves there. ‘The Review is beautiful as a Spec-
tacle; but that is in no sort the intention of it. Rigorous busi-
ness, as in the strictest of Universities examining for Degrees,
would be nearer the definition. Sometimes, when a new ma-
neeuvre or tactical invention of importance is to be tried by ex-
periment, you will find for many miles the environs of Potsdam,
which is usually the scene of such experiments, carefully shut
in; sentries on every road, no unfriendly eye admitted; the
thing done as with closed doors. Nor at any time can you at-
tend without leave asked; though to Foreign Officers, and per-
sons that have really business there, there appears to be liberal-
ity enough in granting it. The concourse of military strangers
seems to keep increasing every year, till Friedrich’s death.‘
French, more and more in quantity, present themselves; multi-
farious German names; generally a few English too,— Bur-
goyne (of Saratoga finally), Cornwallis, Duke of York, Marshal
Conway,—of which last we have something farther to say at
present.

In Summer 1774, Conway, the Marshal Conway, of whom
Walpole is continually talking as of a considerable Soldier and
Politician, though he was not in either character considerable,
but was Walpole’s friend, and an honest modest man,—had made
up his mind, perhaps partly on domestic grounds (for I have no-.
ticed glimpses of a ‘* Lady C.” much out of humour), to make a
Tour in Germany, and see the Reviews, both Austrian and Prus-
sian, Prussian especially. Two immense Letters of his on that
subject have come into my hands,*® and elsewhere incidentally

45 Rodenbeck, iii. in Jocis.

46 Kindly presented me by Charles Knight, Esq., the well-known Au-
thor and Publisher (who possesses a Collection by the same hand): these
Two run to fourteen large pages in my Copy!

om

416 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
Aug.—Sept. 1774.

there is printed record of the Tour ;*7 unimportant as possible,
both Tour and Letters, but capable, if squeezed into compass, of
still being read without disadvantage here.

Sir Robert Murray Keith,—that is, the younger Excellency
Keith, now minister at Dresden, whom we have sometimes heard
of,—accompanies Conway on this Tour, or flies alongside of him,
with frequent intersections at the principal points; and there is
printed record by Sir Robert, but still less interesting than this
of Conway, and perfectly conformable to it :—so that, except for
some words about the Lord Marischal, which shall be given,
Keith must remain silent, while the diffuse Conway strives to
become intelligible. Indeed, neither Conway nor Keith tell us
the least thing that is not abundantly, and even wearisomely
known from German sources; but to readers here, a pair of
English eyes looking on the matter (put straight in places by
the help there is), may give it a certain freshness of meaning.
Here are Conway’s Two Letters, with the nine-parts of water
charitably squeezed out of them, by a skilful friend of mine and
his. .

Conway to his Brother, Marquis of Hertford (in London).

“Berlin, July 17th, 1774.

“ Dear Brother,—In the hurry Ilive in’-— ... ‘“ Leaving Bruns-
wick, where, in absence of most of the Court, who are visiting at Pots.
dam, my old Commander,” Duke Ferdinand, now estranged from Pots-
dam,** and living here among works of Art, and speculations on Free
Masonry, ‘‘ was very kind to me, I went to Celle, in Hanover, to pay
my respects to the Queen of Denmark” (unfortunate divorced Matilda,
saved by my friend Keith,—innocent, I will hope!) . . . “She is
grown extremely fat.” . . . “‘At Magdeburg, the Prussian Frontier on
this side, one is not allowed, without a permit, even to walk on the ram-
parts,—such the strictness of Prussian rule.” . . . ‘“ Driving through
Potsdam, on my way to Berlin, I was stopped by a servant of the good
old Lord Marischal, who had spied me as I passed under his window,

47 In Keith (Sir Robert Murray), Memoirs and Correspondence, ii. 21 et
5Cq. - .

48 Had a kind of quarrel with Friedrich in 1776 (rough treatment by Ad-
jutant von Anhalt, not tolerable to a Captain now become so eminent), and
quietly withdrew, —still on speaking terms with the King, but never his Of-
ficer more. |

vaya!

Cie Kp

Cnap.V.]  —- A: CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES, 417
Aug.—Sept. 1774.

He came out in his nightgown, and insisted upon our staying to dine
with him”—-(worthy old man; a word of him, were this Letter done).
“We ended, on consultation about times and movements of the King,
by staying three days at Potsdam, mostly with this excellent old Lord.

“On the third day” (yesterday evening, in fact), “I went, by appoint-
ment, to the New Palace, to wait upon the King of Prussia. There
was some delay: his Majesty had gone, in the interim, to a private
Concert, which he was giving to the Princesses” (Duchess of Bruns-
wick and other high guests*’) ; “but the moment he was told I was
there, he came out from his company, and gave me a most flattering
gracious audience of more than half an hour; talking on a great varie-
ty of things, with an ease and freedom the very reverse of what I had
been made to expect.” . . . ‘I asked, and received permission, to
visit the Silesian Camps next month, his Majesty most graciously tell-
ing me the particular days they would begin and end” (27th August—
3d September, Schmelwitz near Breslau, are time and place*®). ‘‘ This
considerably deranges my Austrian movements, and will hurry my re-
turn out of those parts: but who could resist such a temptation !—I
saw the Foot-Guards exercise, especially the splendid ‘ First Battalion ;’
I could have conceived nothing so perfect and so exact as all I saw :—
so well dressed, such men, and so punctual in all they did.

“The New Palace at Potsdam is extremely noble. Not so perfect,
perhaps, in point of taste, but better than I had been led to expect. The
King dislikes living there ; never does, except when there is high Com-
pany about him; for seven or eight months in the year, he prefers Lit-
tle Sans-Souci, and freedom among his intimates and some of his Gen-
erals.” .... ‘His Music still takes up a great share of the King’s
time. On a table in his Cabinet there, I saw, I believe, twenty boxes
with a German flute in each; in his Bed-chamber, twice as many boxes
of Spanish snuff ; and, alike in Cabinet and in Bed-chamber, three arm-
chairs in a row for three favourite dogs, oye with a little stool by wey
of step, that the getting up might be easy.”

*“ The Town of Potsdam is a most extraordinaty and, in its appear-
ance, beautiful Town; all the streets perfectly straight, all at right an-
gles to each other ; pe all the houses built with handsome, generally
elegant fronts.” . . . “He builds for everybody who has a bad or
a small house,—even the lowest mechanic. . He has done the: same at
Berlin.” Altogether, his Majesty’s building operations are astonishing.
And “from whence does this money come, after a long expensive: War?
It is all fairy-land and enchantment,”—Magnum vectigal parsimonia,
in fact! ... . ‘At Berlin here, I saw the Porcelain Manufacture to-
day, which is greatly improved. I leave presently. Adieu, dear Broth-

*° Rodenbeck (in die), iii. 98. 5° Rédenbeck, iii. 101.
S2

418 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Aug.—Sept. 1774.
er; excuse my endless Letter” (since you cannot squeeze the water
out of it, as some will !)—‘* Yours most sincerely,
“ Henry Seymour Conway.”

Keith is now Minister at Dresden for some years back; and has,
among other topics, much to say of our brilliant friend the Electress
there: but his grand Diplomatic feat was at Copenhagen, on a sudden
sally out thither (in 1771) :°' the saving of Queen Matilda, youngest
Sister of George Third, from a hard doom. Unfortunate Queen Ma-
tilda; one never knows how guilty, or whether guilty at all, but she
was very unfortunate, poor young Lady! What with a mad Husband
collapsed by debaucheries into stupor of insanity ; with a Doctor, grad-
ually a Prime Minister. Struensee, wretched scarecrow to look upon,
but wiser than most Danes about; and finally, with a lynx-eyed Step-
sister, whose Son, should Matilda mistake, will inherit, — unfortunate
Matilda had fallen into the awfullest troubles ; got divorced, imprison-
ed, would have lost her head along with scarecrow Struensee, had not
her Brother George III. emphatically intervened,—Excellency Keith,
with Seventy-fours in the distance, coming out very strong on the oc-
casion,—and got her loose. Loose from Danish axe and jail, at any
rate ; delivered into safety and solitude at Celle in Hanover, where she
now is,—and soon after suddenly dies of fever, so closing a very sad
short history.

Excellency Keith, famed in the Diplomatic circles ever since, is at
present ahead of Conway on their joint road to the Austrian Reviews.
Before giving Conway’s Second Letter, let us hear Keith a little on
his kinsman the Old Marischal, whom he saw at Berlin years ago, and
still occasionally corresponds with, and mentions in his Correspond-
ence. Keith loguitur; date is Dresden, February 1770:

Has visited the Old Marischal at Potsdam lately. * * ‘My
stay of three days with Lord Marischal” . .. . “He is the most in-
nocent of God’s creatures; and his heart is much warmer than his
head. The place of his abode,” I must say, “is the very Temple of
Dulness; and his Female Companion” (a poor Turk foundling, a per-
ishing infant flung into his late Brother’s hands at the Fall of Ocza-
kow,°?—whom the Marischal has carefully brought up, and who refuses
to marry away from him,—rather stupid, not very pretty by the Por-
traits ; must now be two-and-thirty gone) “is perfectly calculated to be
the Priestess of it! Yet he dawdles away his day in a manner not un-
pleasant to him; and I really am persuaded he has a conscience that
would gild the inside ofa dungeon. The feats of our bare-legged war-

‘1 In Keith, i. 152, &c., nothing of se Narrative given, hardly
the date discoverable. . * Supra, ii. 484,

Cuap. V.]. A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 419 -—
Aug.—Sept. 1774.

riors in the late War (Berg-Schotten, among whom I was a Colonel),
“accompanied by a pebrach” (elegiac bagpipe droning more suo) “in
his outer room, have an effect on the old Don, which would delight
you. 3953

And then seen him in Berlin, on the same occasion. * * “Lord
Marischal came to meet me at Sir Andrew’s” (Mitchel’s, in Berlin, the
last year of the brave Mitchel’s life), “ where we passed five days to-
gether. My visit to his country residence,” as you already know,
‘“‘ was of three days; and I had reason to be convinced that it gave the
old Don great pleasure. He talked to me with the greatest openness
and confidence of all the material incidents of his life; and hinted often
that the honour of the Clan was now to be supported by our family, for
all of whom he had the greatest esteem. His tastes, his ideas, and his
manner of living, are a mixture of Aberdeenshire and the Kingdom of
Valencia; and as he seeks to make no new friends, he seems to retain
a strong, though silent, attachment for his old ones. As to his political
principles, I believe him the most sincere of converts” to Whiggery
and Orthodoxy. * * Since I began this, 1 have had a most inim-
itable Letter from Lord Marischal. I had mentioned Dr. Bailies to
him” (noted English Doctor at Dresden, bent on inoculating and the
like), ** and begged he would send me a state of his case and infirmities,
that the Doctor might prescribe for him. This is a part of his answer :

“¢T thank you for your advice of consulting the English Doctor to
repair my old carcass. I have lately done so by my old coach, and it
is now almost-as.good as new. Please, therefore, to tell the Doctor,
that from him I expect a good repair, and shall state the case. First,
he must know that the machine is the worse for wear, being nearly
eighty years old. The reparation | propose he shall begin with is.
One pair of new eyes, one pair of new ears, some improvement on the
memory. When this is done, we shall ask new legs, and some change
inthe stomach. For the present, this first reparation will be sufficient ;
and we must not trouble the Doctor too much at once.—You see by
this, how easy his Lordship’s infirmities sit upon him; and it is really
so as he says. Your friend Sir Andrew is, J am aftaids less gay; but
I have not heard from him these three months.”**

Conway to Keith, on the late Three Days at Potsdam.” “Istayed
three days at Potsdam, with much entertainment, for good part of which
I am obliged to your Excellency’s old friend Lord Marischal, who

83 Keith, i. 129; ‘Dresden, 25th February 1770:” to his Sister in Scot-
land.

5¢ Keith, i. 182, 183; ‘* Dresden, 13th March 1770;” to his Father.

85 Date, ‘*Drosden, 21st July 1774:” in Keith, ii. 15,

420 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

: Aug.—Sept. 1774.
showed me all the kindness and civility possible He stopped me as I
passed, and not only made me dine with him that day, but in a manner
live withhim. He is not atall blind, as you imagined ; so much other-
wise that I saw him read, without spectacles, a difficult hand I could
not easily decipher.” . . . “ Stayed but a day at Berlin ;” am rushing
after you :—Here is my Second Letter:

Conway's Second Letter (to his Brother, as before).
‘¢ Schmelwitz” (near Breslau) ‘‘ Headquarters,
‘‘ August 31st, 1774.

‘Dear Brother” . . . “I left that Camp” (Austrian Camp, and Re-
views, in Hungary, where the Kaiser and everybody had been very
gracious to me) “ with much regret.” “ Parted regretfully with Keith ;
—had played, at Presburg, in sight of him and fourteen other English-
men, a game with the Chess Automaton” (brand-new miracle, just
out) ;°°—* came on through Vienna hitherward, as fast as post-horses
could carry us; travelling night and day, without stopping, being rather
behind time.” “Arrived at Breslau near dark, last night ; where I learnt
that the Camp was twenty miles off; that the King was gone there,
and that the Manceuvres would begin at four or five this morning. I
therefore ordered my chaise at twelve at night, and set out, in darkness
and rain, to be presented to the King of Prussia next morning at five,
at the head of his troops.” . . . “‘ When I arrived, before five, at the
place called ‘ Headquarters,’ I found myself in the middle of a miser-
able Village” (this Schmelwitz here) ; “‘no creature alive or stirring,
nor a sentinel, or any Military object to be seen.” . . . ““As soon as
anything alive was to be found, we asked, If the King was lodged in
that Village? ‘Yes,’ they said,‘ in that House’ (pointing to a clay
Hovel). But General Lentulus soon appeared ; and—”

“His Majesty has been very gracious; asked me many questions
about my Tour to Hungary. I saw all the Troops pass him as they
arrived inCamp. ‘They made a very fine appearance really, though it
rained hard the whole time we were out; and as his Majesty” (age 62)
“did not cloak, we were all heartily wet. And, what was worse, went
from the field to Orders” (giving out Parole, and the like) ‘at his Quar-
ters, there to make our bow ;—where we stayed in our wet clothes an
hour and half” (towards 10 a.m. by this time). . . “ How different
at the Emperor’s, when his Imperial Majesty and everybody was
cloaked!” (Got no hurt by the wet, strange to say.) .... “ These
are our news to this day. And now, having sat up five nights out of
the last six, and been in rain and dirt almost all day,I wish you sin-
cerely good night.—H. S. C.”

6° Account of it, and of this game, in Keith too (ii. 18; ‘‘ Vienna, 3d
September 1774 ;” Keith to his Father).

Bete ee ee ee ee ee

Wiig ate 2

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 421
Aug.—Sept. 1774.

“P.S. Breslau, 4th September.— * * My Prussian Campaign is
finished, and as much to my satisfaction as possible. The beauty and
order of the Troops, their great discipline, their” &c. &c., “ almost pass
all belief.” . . . “ Yesterday we were on horseback early, at four
o’clock. ‘The movement was conducted with a spirit and order, on
both sides, that was astonishing, and struck the more delightful (sic) by
the variety, as in the course of the action the Enemy, conducted by
General Anhalt” (head all right as yet), “ took three different positions
before his final retreat.

‘The moment it was over” (nine o’clock or so), “ his Majesty got a
fresh horse, and set out for Potsdam, after receiving the compliments
of those present, or rather holding a kind of short Levee in the field.
I can’t say how much, in my particular, I am obliged to his Majesty
for his extraordinary reception, and distinction shown me throughout.
Each day after the Manceuvre, and giving the Orders of the day, he
held a little Levee at the door, or in the court; at which, I can assure
you, it is not an exaggeration of vanity to say, that he not only talked
to me, but literally to nobody else at all. It was a good deal each time,
and as soon as finished, he made his bow, and retired, though all, or
most, of the other Foreigners were standing by, as well as his own
Generals. He also called me up, and spoke to me several times on
horseback, when we were out, which he seldom did to anybody.

“The Prince Royal also showed me much civility. The second day,
he asked me to come and drink a dish of tea with him after dinner, and
kept me an hour and half. He told me, among other things, that the

ing of Prussia had a high opinion of me, and that it came chiefly from
the favourable manner in which Duke Ferdinand and the Hereditary
Prince” (of Brunswick) ‘‘ had spoken of me.” . . . “* Pray let Hor-
ace Walpole know my address, that I may have all the chance I can of
hearing from him. But, if he comes to Paris, I forgive him.—H.S.C.”

Friedrich’s Reviews, though fine to look upon, or indeed the finest in
the world, were by no means of spectacular nature ; but of altogether
serious and practical, almost of solemn and terrible, to the parties in-
terested. Like the strictest College Examination for Degrees, as we
said; like a Royal Assize or Doomsday of the Year; to Military peo-
ple, and over the upper classes of Berlin Society, nothing could be more
serious. Major Kaltenborn, an Ex-Prussian Officer, presumably of
over-talkative habits, who sounds on us like a very messroom of the
time all gathered under one hat, describes in an almost awful manner
the kind of terror with which all people awaited these Annual Assizes
for trial of military merit.

“What a sight,” says he, “and awakening what thoughts, that of a

422 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

Aug.—Sept. 1774.
body of from 18,000 to 20,000 soldiers, in solemn silence and in deep-
est reverence, awaiting their fate from one man! A Review, in Fried-
rich’s time, was an important moment for almost the whole Country.
The fortune of whole families often depended on it: from wives, moth-
ers, children and friends, during those terrible three days, there arose
fervent wishes to Heaven, that misfortune might not, as was too fre-
quently the case, befal their husbands, fathers, sons and friends, in the
course of them. Here the King, as it were, weighed the merits of his
Officers, and distributed, according as he found them light or heavy,
praise or blame, rebukes or favours; and often, too often, punishments,
to be felt through life. One single unhappy moment” (especially, if it
were the last ofa long series of such!) “ often deprived the bravest Of-
ficer of his bread, painfully earned in peace and war, and of his reputa-
tion and honour, at least in the eyes of most men, who judge of every-
thing only by its issue. The-higher you had risen, the easier and deep-
er your fall might be, at an unlucky Review. ‘The Heads and Com-
manders of regiments were always in danger of being sent about their
business (weggejagt).”

The fact is, ] Kaltenborn quitted the Prussian Service, and took Hes-
sian,—being (presumably) of exaggerative, over-talkative nature, and
strongly gravitating Opposition way !—Kaltenborn admits that the King
delighted in nothing so much as to see people’s faces cheerful about
him; provided the price for it were not too high. Here is another
passage from him:

‘At latest by 9 in the morning, the day’s Maneuvre had finished, and
everything was already in its place again. Straight from ihe ground
all Heads of regiments, the Majors-de-jour, all Aides-de-Camp, and
from every battalion one Officer, proceed to Headquarters. It was im-
possible to speak more beautifully, or instructively, than the King did
on such occasions, if he were not in bad humour. It was then a very
delight to hear him deliver a Military Lecture, as it were. He knew
exactly who had failed, what caused the fault, and how it might and
should have been retrieved. His voice was soft and persuasive (hin-
reissend) ; he looked kindly, and appeared rather bent upon giving good
advice than commands.

“Thus, for instance, he once said to General von Lossow, Head of
the Black Hussars: ‘ Your (seine) Attack would have gone very well,
had not your own squadron pressed forward too much (vorgeprelit).
The brave fellows wanted to show me how they can ride. But don’t
I know that well enough ;—and also that you’ (covetous Lossow) ‘al-
ways choose the best horses from the whole remount for your own
squadron! ‘There was, therefore, no need at all for that. Tell your
people not to do so tomorrow, and you will see it will go much better;

oe 7 ee

—_——

SY eee

oe

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 423
Aug.—Sept. 1774.

all will remain closer in their places, and the left wing be able to keep
better in line, in coming on.’—Another time, having observed, in a cer-
tain Foot-regiment, that the soldiers were too long in getting out their
cartridges, he said to the Commandant: ‘ Do you know the cause of
this, my dear Colonel? Look, the cartouche, in the cartridge-box, has
32 holes; into these the fellow sticks his eight cartridges, without
caring how: and so the poor devil fumbles and gropes about, and can-
not get hold of any. But now, if the Officers would look to it that he
placed them all well together in the middle of the cartouche, he would
never make a false grasp, and the loading would go as quick again.
Only tell your Officers that I had made this observation, and I am sure
they will gladly attend to it.’”*’

Of humane consolatory Anecdotes, in this kind, our Opposition Kal-
tenborn gives several; of the rhadamanthine desolating or destructive
kind, though such also could not be wanting, if your Assize is to be good
for anything, he gives us none. And so far as I can learn, the effective
punishments, dismissals and the like, were of the due rarity and pro-
priety ; though the flashes of unjust rebuke, fulminant severity, light-

nings from the gloom of one’s own sorrows and ill-humour, were much

more frequent, but were seldom,—lI do not know if ever,—persisted in
to the length of practical result. This is a Rhadamanthus much in-
terested not to be unjust, and to discriminate good from bad! Of Zie-
then there are two famous Review Anecdotes, omitted and omissible by
Kaltenborn, so well known are they: one of each kind. At a certain
Review, year not ascertainable,—long since, prior to the Seven-Years
War,—the King’s humour was of the grimmest, nothing but faults all
round; to Ziethen himself, and the Ziethen Hussars, he said various
hard things, and at length this hardest: “‘ Out of my sight with you!®*
Upon which Ziethen,—a stratum of red-hot kindling in Ziethen too, as
was easily possible,—turns to his Hussars, “ Right about, Rechis um:
march!” and on the instant did as bidden. Disappeared, double-quick ;
and at the same high pace, in a high frame of mind, rattled on to Ber-
lin, home to his quarters,.and there first drew bridle. ‘Turn; for
Heaven’s sake, bethink you!” said more than one friend whom he met
on the road: but it was of no use. Everybody said, “ Ziethen is ruin-
ed ;” but Ziethen never heard of the thing more.

Anecdote Second is not properly of a Review, but of an incidental
Parade of the Guard, at Berlin (25th December 1784), by the King in
person: Parade, or rather giving out of the Parole after it, in the
King’s Apartments ; which is always a kind of Military Levee as well;

57 Anonymous (Kaltenborn), Briefe eines alten Preussischen Officiers (Ho-
henzollern, 1790), ii. 24-26.
°° Madame de Blumenthal, Life of Ziethen, i. 285.

424. AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

Aug.—Sept. 1774.
—and which, in this instance, was long famous among the Berlin peo-
ple. King is just arrived for Carnival season; old Ziethen will not fail
to pay his duty, though climbing of the stairs is heavy to a man of 85
gone. This is Madam Blumenthal’s Narrative (corrected, as it needs,
in certain points) :

** Saturday, 25th December 1784, Ziethen, in spite of the burden of
eighty-six years, went to the Palace, at the end of the Parade, to pay
his Sovereign this last tribute of respect, and to have the pleasure of
seeing him after six months absence. ‘The Parole was given out, the
orders imparted to the Generals, and the King had turned towards the
Princes of the Blood,—when he perceived Ziethen on the other side of
the Hall, between his Son and his two Aides-de-camp. Surprised in a
very agreeable manner at this unexpected sight, he broke out into an
exclamation of joy; and directly making up to him,—‘ What, my good
old Ziethen, are you there!’ said his Majesty: ‘ How sorry am I that
you have had the trouble of walking up the staircase! I should have
called upon you myself. How have you been of late?’ ‘Sire,’ an-
swered Ziethen, ‘my health is rot amiss, my appetite is good; but my
strength! my strength!’ ‘This account,’ replied the King, ‘makes me
happy by halves only: but you must be tired ;—I shall have a chair for
you.’” (Thing unexampled in the annals of Royalty!) ‘A chair,”
on order to Ziethen’s Aides-de-Camp, “ was quickly brought. Ziethen,
however, declared that he was not at all fatigued: the King maintained
that he was. ‘Sit down, good Father (Mezn lieber alter Papa Ziethen,
setze Er sich doch) \’ continued his Majesty : ‘I will have it so; other-
wise I must instantly leave the room; for I cannot allow you to be in-
commoded under my own roof.’ The old General obeyed, and Fried-
rich the Great remained standing before him, in the midst of a brilliant
circle that had thronged round them. After asking him many ques-
tions respecting his hearing, his memory, and the general state of his
health, he at length took leave of him in these words: ‘ Adieu, my dear
Ziethen’ (it was his last adieu!)—‘ take care not to catch cold; nurse
yourself well, and live as long as you can, that I may often have the
pleasure of seeing you.’ After having said this, the King, instead of
speaking to the other Generals, and walking through the saloons, as
usual, retired abruptly, and shut himself up in his closet.”°°

59 Blumenthal, ii. 341; Militair-Lexikon, iv. 318. Chodowiecki has made
an Engraving of this Scene; useful to look at for its military Portraits, if
of little esteem otherwise. Strangely enough, both in Blumenthal and in
Chodowiecki’s Engraving, the year is given as 1785 (plainly impossible);
Militair-Lexikon misprints the month; and, one way or other, only Re
denbeck (iii. 316) is right in both day and year.

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 425
1775.

Following in date these small Conway Phenomena, if these,
so extraneous and insignificant, can have any glimmer of mem-
orability to readers, are two other occurrences, especially one
other, which come in at this part of the series, and greatly more
require to be disengaged from the dust-heaps, and presented for
remembrance.

In 1775, the King had a fit of illness; which long occupied
certain Gazetteers and others. ‘That is the first occurrence of
the two, and far the more important. He himself says of it, in
his /Zistory, all that is essential to us here:

“ Towards the end of 1775, the King was attacked by several strong
consecutive fits of gout. Van Swieten, a famous Doctor’s Son, and
Minister of the Imperial Court at Berlin, took it into his head that this
gout was a declared dropsy ; and, glad to announce to his Court the
approaching death of an enemy that had been dangerous to it, boldly
informed his Kaiser that the King was drawing to his end, and would
not last out the year. At this news the soul of Joseph flames into en-
thusiasm ; all the Austrian troops are got on march, their Rendezvous
marked in Bohemia; and the Kaiser waits, full of impatience, at Vienna,
till the expected event arrive; ready then to penetrate at once into Sax-
ony, and thence to the Frontiers of Brandenburg, and there propose to
the King’s Successor the alternative of either surrendering Silesia
straightway to the House of Austria, or seeing himself overwhelmed by
Austrian troops before he could get his own assembled. All these
things, which were openly done, got noised abroad everywhere; and
did not, as is easy to believe, cement the friendship of the T'wo Couris,
To the Public, this scene appeared the more ridiculous, as the King of
Prussia, having only had a common gout in larger dose than common,
was already well of it again, before the Austrian Army had got to their
Rendezvous. ‘The Kaiser made all these troops return to their old
quarters; and the Court of Vienna had nothing but mockery for its
imprudent conduct.”®°

The first of these gout-attacks seems to have come in the end of
September, and to have lasted about a month; after which the illness
abated, and everybody thought it was gone. The Kaiser-Joseph evolu-
tion must have been in October, and have got its mockery in the next
months. Friedrich, writing to Voltavre, October 22d, has these words:
* * “A pair of charming Letters from Ferney; to which, had they
been from the great Demiurgus himself, I could not have dictated An-

6° (Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 124

426 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.-

1775.
swer. Gout held me tied and garrotted for four weeks ;—gout in both
feet and in both hands; and, such its extreme liberality, in both elbows
too: at present the pains and the fever have abated, and I feel only a
very great exhaustion.’’*' ‘ Four consecutive attacks; hope they are
now all over :” but we read, within the Spring following, that there have
been in all twelve of them; and in May 1776, the Newspapers count
eighteen quasi-consecutive. So that in reality the King’s strength was
sadly reduced: and his health, which did not recover its old average till
about 1780, continued, for several years after this bad fit, to be a constant
theme of curiosity to the Gazetteer species, and a matter of solicitude
to his friends and to his enemies.

Of the Kaiser’s immense ambition there can be no question. He is
stretching himself out on every side, ‘ seriously wishing,” thinks Fried-
rich, “ that he could ‘ revivify the German Reich,’ *°—new Barbarossa
in improved fixed form, how noble! Certainly. to King Friedrich’s
sad conviction, “the Austrian Court is aiming to swallow all manner
of dominions that may fall within its grasp.” Wants Bosnia and Servia
in the East; longs to seize certain Venetian Territories, which would
unite Trieste and the Milanese to the Tyrol. Is throwing out hooks on
Modena, on the Ferrarese, on this and on that. Looking with eager
eyes on Bavaria,—the situation of which is peculiar , the present Kur-
Baiern being elderly, childless; and his Heirs the like, who withal is
already Kur-Pfalz, and will unite the Two Electorates under one head ;
a thing which Austria regards with marked dislike.*® These are anxious
considerations to a King in Friedrich’s sick state. In his private circle,
too, there are sorrows: death of Fouquet, death of Quintus Izilius, of
Seidlitz, Quantz (good old Quantz, with his fine Flutings these fifty

years, and the still finer memories he awoke !°*),—latterly an unusual —

number of deaths. The ruggedly intelligent Quintus, a daily companion,
and guest at the supper-table, died few months before this fit of gout;
and must have been greatly missed by Friedrich. Fouquet, at Branden-
burg, died last year: his benefactor in the early Ciistrin distresses, his
“ Bayard,” and chosen friend ever since ; how conspicuously dear to
Friedrich to the last is still evident. A Friedrich getting lonely enough,
and the lights of his life going out around him ;—has but one sure con-
solation, which comes to him as compulsion withal, and is not neglect-
ed, that of standing stedfast to his work, whatever the mood and pos-
ture be.

The Event of 1776 is Czarowitch Paul’s arrival in Berlin, and

®t (Huvres de Frédéric, xxv. 44. 62 Tbid. vi. 123.
** Friedrich’s Teacher of the Flute; procured for him by his Mother
(Supra, ii. 84),

“a

Cuar. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 427
21st July 1776.

betrothal to a second Wife there; his first having gid 4 in child-
birth lately. The first had been of Friedrich’s choosing, but had
behaved ill,—seduced by Spanish-French Diplomacies, by this
and that, poor young creature :—the second also was of Fried-
rich’s choosing, and a still nearer connexion: figure what a tri-
umphant event! Event now fallen dead to every one of us; and
hardly admitting the smallest Note, except for chronology’s
sake, which it is always satisfactory to keep clear:

‘‘Czarowitch Paul’s first Wife, the Hessen-Darmstadt Princess of
Three, died of her first child, April 26th, 1776: everybody whispered,
‘Tt is none of Paul’s!'—who, nevertheless, was inconsolable, the wild
heart of him like to break on the occurrence. By good luck, Prince
Henri had set out, by invitation, on a second visit to Petersburg ; and
arrived there, also on April 26th,°*—the very day of the fatality. Prince
Henri soothed, consoled the poor Czarowitch; gradually brought him
round ; agreed with his Czarina Mother that he must have a new Wife ;
and dextrously fixed her choice on a ‘ Niece of the King’s and Henri’s.’
Eldest Daughter of Eugen of Wurtemberg, of whom, as an excellent
General, though also as a surly Husband, readers have some memory ;
now living withdrawn at Miimpelgard, the Wtirtemberg A panage” (Mont-
beillard, as the French call it), ‘in these piping times of Peace :—she
is the Princess. ‘To King Friedrich’s great surprise and joy. The

“Mimpelgard Principalities, and fortunate Princess, are summoned to

Berlin. Czarowitch Paul, under Henri’s escort, and under gala and
festivities from the Frontier onward, arrived in Berlin, 21st July 1776;
was betrothed to his Wiirtemberg Princess straightway ; and after about
a fortnight of festivities still more transcendent, went home with her to
Petersburg; and was there wedded, 18th October following ;— Czar
and Czarina, she and he, twenty years after, and their posterity reigning
ever since.’’®

“ At Vienna,” says the King, “‘everybody was persuaded the
Czarowitch would never come to Berlin. Prince Kaunitz had
been,”’—been at his old tricks again, playing his sharpest, in the
Court of Petersburg again: what tricks (about Poland and other-
wise), let us not report, for it is now interesting to nobody. Of
the Czarowitch Visit itself, I will remark only,—what seems to
be its one chance of dating itself in any of our memories,—that
it fell out shortly after the Sherlock dinner with Voltaire (in
1776, April 27th the one event, July 21st the other) ;—and that

6 Ridenbeck, iii. 1389-146. 6s (Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 120-122.

428 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. Boox XXI,
April—Oct. 1777.

here is, by pure accident, the exuberant erratic Sherlock, once
more, and once only, emerging on us for a few moments !—

Ecuberant Sherlock and Eleven other Hnglish are presented
to Friedrich, on a Court Occasion (8th October 1777);
and Two of them get spoken to, and speak each a Word.
Excellency Hugh Elliot is their Introducer,

Harris, afterwards Earl of Malmesbury, succeeded Mitchell
at Berlin: ‘Polish troubles” (heartily indifferent to England),
‘‘Dantzic squabbles” (miraculously important there),—nothing
worth the least mention now. Excellency Harris quitted Ber-
lin in Autumn 1776; gave place to an Excellency Hugh Elliot
(one of the Minto Elliots, Brother of the first Earl of Minto,
and himself considerably noted in the world), of whom we have
a few words to say.

Elliot has been here since April 1777; stays some five years
in this post ;—with not much Diplomatic employment, I should
think, but with a style of general bearing and social physiogno-
my, which, with some procedures partly incidental as well, are
still remembered in Berlin. Something of spying, too, doubtless
there was; bribing of menials, opening of Letters: I believe a
great deal of that went on; impossible to prevent under the
carefullest of Kings.6° Hitherto, with one exception to be men-
tioned presently, his main business seems to have been that of
introducing, on different Court-Days, a great number of Travel-
ling English, who want to see the King, and whom the King
little wants, but quietly submits to. Incoherent Sherlock, whom
we discover to have been of the number, has, in his tawdry, dis-
jointed Book, this Passage :

-6 An ingenious young Friend of mine, connected with Legationary
Business, found lately, at the Hague, a consecutive Series, complete for
four or five years (I think from 1780 onwards), of Friedrich’s Letters to his
Minister in London,—Copies punctually filched as they went through the
Post-office there:—specimens of which I saw; and the whole of which I
might have seen, had it been worth the effort necessary. But Friedrich’s
London Minister, in this case, was a person of no significance or intimacy ;
and the King’s Letters, though strangely exact, clear, and even elucidative

on English Court-Politics and vicissitudes, seemed to be nearly barren as to
Prussian,

” ——

ws"

Cuap. V. | A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 429
April—Oct. 1777.

“The last time of my seeing him” (this Hero-King of my heart)
“was at Berlin’ (not a hint of the time when). ‘ He came thither to
receive the adieus of the Baron de Swieten, Minister from their Impe-
rial Majesties” (thank you; that means 8th October 1777°’), ‘and to
give audience to the new Minister, the Count Cobenzl. The Foreign
Ministers, the persons who were to be presented” (we, for instance),
“‘and the Military, were all that were at Court. We were ten En-
glish” (thirteen by tale): ‘ the King spoke to the first and the last; not
on account of their situation, but because their names struck him. The
first was Major Dalrymple. To him the King said: * You have been
presented to me before? ‘I ask your Majesty’s pardon; it was my
Uncle’ (Lord Dalrymple, of whom presently). Mr. Pitt” (unknown to
me which Pitt, subsequent Lord Camelford or another) ‘“ was the last.
The King: ‘Are you a relation of Lord Chatham's? * Yes, Sire.’—
‘He is a man whom I highly esteem’ (read “‘ esteemed”).

‘** He then went to the Foreign Ministers ; and talked more to Prince
Dolgorucki, the Russian Ambassador, than to any other. In the midst
of his conversation with this Prince, he turned abruptly to Mr. Eliot,
the English Minister, and asked : ‘ What is the Duchess of Kingston’s
family name?’ This transition was less Pindaric than it appears; he
had just been speaking of the Court of Petersburg, and that Lady was
then there.’”** Whereupon Sherlock hops his ways again; leaving us
considerably uncertain. But, by a curious accident, here, at first hand,
is confirmation of the flighty creature;—a Letter from Excellency
Elliot himself having come our way:

To William Eden, Esquire (of the Foreign Office, London; Elliot’s
Brother-in-law ; afterwards Lord Auckland).

‘* Berlin, 12th October 1777.

“My dear Eden, — If you are waiting upon the pinnacle of all im-
patience to give me news from the Howes” (unknown to us, of no in-
terest to us), | am waiting with no less impatience to receive it, and
think every other subject too little interesting to be mentioned. I
must, however, tell you the King has been here ;°° to the astonishment
of all croakers, hearty and in high spirits. He was very civil to all of
us. I was attended by one dozen English, which nearly completes my
half hundred this season. Pitt made one of the twelve, and was par-
ticularly distinguished. Kine: ‘ Monsieur est-l parent de Mylord
Chatham?’ Prrr: ‘Out, Sire.’ Kine: ‘C’est un homme que at
beaucoup estimé.’

67 Rodenbeck, iti. 172. 68 Sherlock, ii. 27.

6° <‘Came to Berlin, 8th October,” on the Van-Swieten errand; saw
Princess Amelia twice; and on the 9th, returned to Potsdam” (Rodenbeck,
iii. 172).

430 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
April—Oct. 1777.
‘“ You have no idea of the joy the people expressed to see the King
on Horseback,—all the Grub-street nonsense of ‘a Country groaning
under the weight of its burdens,’ of ‘a Nation governed with a rod of
iron,’ vanished before the sincere acclamations of all ranks, who joined
in testifying their enthusiasm for their great Monarch. I long for Har-
ris and Company” (Excellency Harris; making for Russia, I believe);
‘they are to pig together in my house; so that 1 flatter myself with
having a near view, if not a taste, of connubial joys. My love to E
and e” (your big Hleanor and your /ittle, a baby in arms, who are my
Sister and Niece ;—pretty, this!). ‘‘ Your most affectionate, H. E.”
“P.S. I quite forgot to tell you, I sent out a servant some time ago
to England to bring a couple of Horses. He will deliver some Pack-
ets to you; which I beg you will send, with Lord Marischal’s compli-
ments, to their respective addresses. There is also a china cup for
Mr. Macnamara, Lawyer, in the Temple or Lincoln’s Inn, from the
same person” (lively old gentleman, age 91 gone; did die next year).
“What does Eleanor mean about my Congratulatory Letter to Lord
Suffolk” (our Foreign Secretary, on his marriage lately)? “I wished
his Lordship, most sincerely, every happiness in his new state, as soon
as I knew of it. I beg, however, Eleanor will do the like;—and al-
though it is not my system to * congratulate’ anybody upon marriage, yet
I never fail to wish them what, I think, it is always two to one they do
not obtain.””°

As to the Dalrymple of Sherlock, read this (Friedrich to
D Alembert, two years before™!): * * ‘A Mylord of won-
derful name” (Lord Dalrymple, if I could remember it), “ of
amiable genius (au nom baroque, a Cesprit aimable), gave me a
Letter on your part. ‘Ah, how goes the Prince of Philosophers,
then? Is he gay; is he busy; did you see him often? To
which the Mylord: ‘1? No; I am straight from London!”
—“ Quoi donc—?’ In short, knowing my Anaxagoras, this
Mylord preferred to be introduced by him; and was right:
‘** One of the amiablest Englishmen I have seen ;—I except only
the name, which I shall never remember’ (but do, on this new
occasion): ‘* Why doesn’t he get himself unchristened of it, and
take that of Stair, which equally belongs to him?” (Earl of Stair
by and by; Nephew or Grand-Nephew, of the great Earl of

0 Eden-House Correspondence (part of which, not this, has been published,
in late years).
" Qluvres de Frédéric, xxv. 21: 5th August 1775.

Sasi tbat coe sre

pr teben.. .

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 431
April—Oct. 1777.

Stair, once so well known to some of us. Becomes English
Minister here in 1785, if we much cared.)

That word of reminiscence about Pitt is worth more atten-
tion. Not spoken lightly, but with meaning and sincerity ; some-
thing almost pathetic in it, after the sixteen-years separation :
‘*A man whom I much esteemed,”—and had good reason to do
so! Pitt’s subsequent sad and bright fortunes, from the end of
the Seven-Years War and triumphant summing-up of the Jen-
kins’s- Har Question, are known to readers. His Burton-Pynsent
meed of honour (Estate of 3,000/. a-year bequeathed him by an
aged Patriot, “ Let this bit of England go a noble road!”’); his
lofty silences, in the World Political; his vehement attempts in
it, when again asked to attempt, all futile,—with great pain to
him, and great disdain from him:—his passionate impatiences
on minor matters, “labourers” (ornamenting Burton-Pynsent
Park, in Somersetshire) “planting trees by torchlight;” ‘ kitch-
en people” (at Hayes in North Kent, House still to be seen)
‘‘roasting a series of chickens, chicken after chicken, all day,
that at any hour, within ten minutes, my Lord may dine !”—
these things dwell in the memory of every worthy reader. Here,
saved from my poor friend Smelfungus (nobody knows how much
of him I suppress), is a brief jotting, in the form of rough mem-
oranda, if it be permissible :

“ Pitt four years King; lost in quicksands, after that; off to Bath,
from gout, from semi-insanity ; ‘India should pay, but how? Lost in
General-Warrants, in Wilkes Controversies, American Revolts,—gen-
erally, in shallow quicksands ;—dies at his post, but his post had become
a delirious one.

“A delicate, proud, noble man; pure as refined gold. Something
sensitive, almost feminine in him ; yet with an edge, a fire, a steadiness ;
liker Friedrich, in some fine principal points, than any of his Contem-
poraries. The one King England has had, this King of Four Years,
since the Constitutional system set in. Oliver Cromwell, yes indeed,
—but he died, and there was nothing for it but to hang his body on the
gallows. Dutch William, too, might have been considerable,—but he
was Dutch, and to us proved to be nothing. ‘Then again, so long as
Sarah Jennings held the Queen’s Majesty in bondage, some gleams of
Kinghood for us under Marlborough :—after whom Noodleism and Som-
nambulism, zero on the back of zero, and all our Affairs, temporal, spirit-

432 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
April—Oct. 1777.
ual and eternal, jumbling at random, which we call the Career of Free-
dom, till Pitt stretched out his hand upon them. For four years; never
again, he; never again one resembling him,—nor indeed can ever be.

“Never, [ should think. Pitts are not born often; this Pitt’s ideas
could occur in the History of Mankind once only. Stranger theory of
society, completely believed in by a clear, sharp and altogether human
head, incapable of falsity, was seldom heard of in the world. For King:
open your mouth, let the first gentleman that falls into it (a mass of
Hanover stolidity, stupidity, foreign to you, heedless of you) be King:
Supreme Majesty he, with hypothetical decorations, dignities, solemn
appliances, high as the stars (the whole, except the money, a mendaci-
ty, and sin against Heaven): him you declare Sent-of-God, Supreme
Captain of your England; and-having done so,—tie him up (according
to Pitt) with Constitutional straps, so that he cannot stir hand or foot,
for fear of accidents: in which state he is fully cooked ; throw me at his
Majesty’s feet, and let me bless Heaven for such a Pillar of Cloud by day.

* Pitt, closely as I could scrutinise, seems never to have doubted in
his noble heart but he had some reverence for George II. ‘ Reverenced
his Office,’ says a simple reader? Alas no, my friend, man does not
‘reverence Office,’ but only sham-reverences it. I defy him to rever-
ence anything but a Man filling an Office (with or without salary) no-
bly. Filling a noble office ignobly ; doing a celestial task in a quietly
‘nfernal manner? It were kinder perhaps to run your sword through
tim (or through yourself) than to take to revering him! If inconven-
ient to slay him or to slay yourself (as is oftenest likely), keep well to
windward of him; be not, without eae partaker of his adventures
in this extremely earnest Universe!” *

‘‘No; Nature does not produce many Pitts :—nor will any Pitt ever
again aprly in Parliament for a career. ‘ Your voices, your most sweet
voices; ye melodious torrents of Gadarenes Swine, galloping rapidly
down steep places,—I, for one, know whither!” * *—Enough.

About four months before this time, Elliot had done a feat,
not in the Diplomatic line at all, or by his own choice at all,
which had considerably astonished the Diplomatic world at
Berlin, and was doubtless well in the King’s thoughts during
this introduction of the Dozen. The American War is raging
and blundering along,—a delectable Lord George. Sackville
(alas Germaine) managing as War-Minister, others equally skil-
ful presiding at the Parliamentary helm; all becoming worse
and worse off; as the matter proceeds. The revolted Colonies
have their Franklins, Lees, busy in European Courts: ‘“ Help

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. 433
April—Oct. 1777.

us in our noble struggle, ye European Courts; now is your
chance on tyrannous England!” ‘To which France at least
does appear to be lending ear. Lee, turned out from Vienna, is
at work in Berlin, this while past; making what progress is un-
certain to some people.

I know not whether it was by my Lord Suffolk’s instigation,
or what had put the Britannic Cabinet on such an idea,—per-
haps the stolen Letters of Friedrich, which show so exact a
knowledge of the current of events in America as well as En-
gland (“‘ knows every step of it, as if he were there himself, the
Arch-Enemy of honest neighbours in a time of stress!”)—but it
does appear they had got it into their sagacious heads that the
bad neighbour at Berlin was, in effect, the Arch-Enemy, proba-
bly mainspring of the whole matter; and that it would be in the
highest degree interesting to see clearly what Lee and he had on
hand. Order thereupon to Elliot: ‘Do it, at any price ;”’ and
finally, as mere price will not answer, ‘‘ Do it by any method,—

steal Lee’s Despatch-Box for us!” ~

Perhaps few Excellencies living had less appetite for such a
job than Elliot; but his Orders were peremptory, ‘Lee is a
rebel, quasi-outlaw ; and you must!” Elliot thereupon took ac-
curate survey of the matter; and rapidly enough, and with per-
fect skill, though still a novice in Berlin affairs, managed to do
it. Privily hired, or made his servant hire, the chief House-
breaker or Pickpocket in the City; ‘‘ Lee lodges in such and
such a Hostelry; bring us his Red-Box for a thirty hours; it
shall be well worth your while!” And in brief space the Red-
Box arrives, accordingly ; a score or two of ready-writers wait-
ing for it, who copy all day, all night, at the top of their speed,
till they have enough: which done, the Lee Red-Box is left on
the stairs of the Lee Tavern; Box locked again, and complete ;
only the Friedrich-Lee Secrets completely pumped out of it, and
now rushing day and night towards England, to illuminate the
Supreme Council-Board there.

This astonishing mass of papers is still extant in England ;7?

7? In the Hden-House Archives ; where a natural delicacy (unaware that
the questionable Legationary Fact stands in print for so many years past)
is properly averse to any promulgation of them,

Vou. VIL—T

434 _ AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
April—Oct. 1777.

—the outside of them I have seen, by no means the inside, had
I wished it; but am able to say from other sources, which are
open to all the world, that seldom had a Supreme Council-Board
procured for itself, by improper or proper ways, a Discovery of
less value! Discovery that Lee has indeed been urgent at Ber-
lin; and has raised in Friedrich the question, ‘‘ Have you got
to such a condition that I can, with safety and advantage, make
a Treaty of Commerce with you!”—That his Minister Schulen-
burg has, by Order, been investigating Lee on that head; and
has reported, ‘‘ No, your Majesty, Lee and People are not in such
a condition ;” that his Majesty has replied, ‘‘ Well, let him wait
till they are ;” and that Lee is waiting accordingly. In general,
That his Majesty is not less concerned in guidance or encourage-
ment of the American War than he is in ditto of the Atlantic
Tides or of the East-Wind (though he does keep barometers and
meteorological apparatus by him); and that we of the Council-
Board are a—what shall I say! Not since the case of poor
Dr. Cameron, in 1753, when Friedrich was to have joined the
Highlanders with 15,000 chosen Prussians for Jacobite purposes,
—and the Cham of Tartary to have taken part in the Bangorian
Controversy,—was there a more perfect platitude, or a deeper
depth of ignorance as to adjacent objects on the part of Govern-
ing Men. -For shame, my friends !—

This surprising bit of Burglary, so far as I can gather from
the Prussian Books, must have been done on Wednesday, June
25th, 1777; Box (with essence pumped out) restored to stair-
case, night of Thursday,—Police already busy, Governor Ramin
and Justice-President Philippi already apprised, and suspicion
falling on the English Minister,—whose Servant (“ Arrest him
we cannot without a King’s Warrant, only procurable at Pots-
dam !”’) vanishes bodily. Friday 27th, Ramin and Philippi make
report; King answers, “greatly astonished :” a “ garstuye Sache
‘(ugly Business), which will do the English no honour :” ‘‘ Servy-
ant fled, say you? ‘Trace it to the bottom; swift!” Excel-
lency Elliot, seeing how matters lay, owned honestly to the Of-
ficial People, That it was his Servant (Servant safe gone, Chief
Pickpocket not mentioned at all) ; Sunday Evening 29th, King or-
ders thereupon, ‘‘ Let the matter drop.” ‘These Official Pieces,

3
.
if

md

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. } 435
April—Oct. 1777.

signed by the King, by Hertzberg, Ramin and others, we do not
give: here is Friedrich’s own notice of it to his Brother Henri:

“ Potsdam, 29th June 1777. * * There has just occurred
a strange thing at Berlin. Three days ago, in absence of the
Sieur Lee, Envoy of the American Colonies, the Envoy of En-
gland went” (sent !) ‘‘to the Inn where Lee lodged, and carried
off his Portfolio; it seems he was in fear, however, and threw
it down, without opening it, on the stairs” (alas, no, your Maj-
esty, not till after pumping the essence out). ‘All Berlin is
talking of it. If one were to act with rigour, it would be neces-
sary to forbid this man the Court, since he has committed a
public theft: but, not to make a noise, I suppress the thing.
Shan’t fail, however, to write to England about it, and indicate
that there was another way of dealing with such a matter, for
they are impertinent” (say ignorant, blind as moles, your Maj-
esty ; that is the charitable reading !).79

This was-not Excellency Elliot’s Burglary, as readers see,—
among all the Excellencies going, I know not that there is one
with less natural appetite for such a job; but sometimes what
can a necessitous Excellency do? Elliot is still remembered in
Berlin society, not for this only, but for emphatic things of a
better complexion which he did; a man more justly estimated
there, than generally here in our time. Here his chief fame
rests on a witty Anecdote, evidently apocryphal, and manufac-
tured in the London Clubs: ‘ Who is this Hyder-Ali,” said the
old King to him, one day (according to the London Clubs).
‘““Hm,” answered Elliot, with exquisite promptitude, politeness
and solidity of information, ‘‘ C’est un viewx voleur qui commence
radoter (An old robber, now falling into his dotage),”—let his
dotard Majesty take that.

Alas, my friends !—Ignorance by herself is an awkward lump-
ish wench; not yet fallen into vicious courses, nor to be un-
charitably treated: but Ignorance and Insolence,—these are, for
certain, an unlovely Mother and Bastard! Yes;—and they
may depend upon it, the grim Parish-beadles of this Universe

73 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 394. In Preuss, v. (he calls it ‘‘iv.”- or
**Urkundenbuch to vol. iv.,” but it is really and practically vol. vy.) 278, 279,
are the various Official Reports.

436 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

April—Oct. 1777.
are out on the track of them, and oakum and the correction-
house are infallible sooner or later! The clever Elliot, who
knew a hawk from a hernshaw, never floundered into that plat-
itude. This, however, is a joke of his, better or worse (I think,
on his quitting Berlin in 1782, without visible resource or out-
look): “*I am far from having a Sans-Souci,” writes he to the
Edens; ‘‘and I think I am coming to be sans six-sous.’-— —
Here still are two small Fractions, ; which I must insert; and
then rigorously close. Kaiser Joseph, in these months, is trav-
elling through France to instruct his Imperial mind. ‘The fol-
lowing is five weeks anterior to that of Lee’s Red-Box:

1. A Bit of Dialogue at Paris (Saturday, 17th May 1777). After
solemn Session of the Academie Frangatse, held in honour of an illus-
trious Comte de Falkenstein (privately, Kaiser Joseph II.), who has
come to look at France,“*— Comte de Falkenstein was graciously
pleased to step up to D’Alembert, who is perpetual Secretary here; and
this little Dialogue ensued :

Falkenstein. “ Ihave heard you are for Germany this season; some
say you intend to become German altogether ?” D’Alembert. “I
did promise myself the high honour of a visit to his Prussian Majesty,
who has deigned to invite me, with all the kindness possible: but, alas
for such hopes! the bad state of my health—” Falkenstein. “ It
seems to me you have already been to see the King of Prussia?”
D Alembert. “ Two times; once in 1756” (1755, 17th-19th June, if
you will be exact), “at Wesel, when I remained only a few days; and
again in 1763, when I had the honour to pass three or four months with
him. Since that time I have always longed to have the honour of see-
ing his Majesty again, but circumstances hindered me. I, above all,
regretted not to have been able to pay my court to him that year he
saw the Emperor at Neisse,—but at this moment there is nothing more
to be wished on that head” (Don’t bow: the Gentleman is Incognito).
Falkenstein. “ It was very natural that the Emperor, young, and desir-
ing to instruct himself, should wish to see such a Prince as the King
of Prussia; so great a Captain, a Monarch of such reputation, and who
has played so great a part. It was a Scholar going to see his Master”
(these are his very words, your Majesty). D Alembert. “1 wish
M. le Comte de Falkenstein could see the Letters which the King of
Prussia did me the honour to write after that Interview: it would then

7 Minute and rather entertaining Account of his procedures there, and
especially of his two Visits to the Academy (first was May 10th), in Mayer,
Reisen Josephs IT. (Leipzig, 1778), pp. 112-132, 147 et seq.

oy Be
=e

te

Cuap. V.] A CHAPTER OF MISCELLANIES. go
April—Oct. 1777.
appear how this Prince judged of the Emperor, as all the world has
since done.””®

King to D’ Alembert (three months after. Kaiser is home ; passed
Ferney, early in August; and did not call on Voltaire, as is well
known). * * “I hear the Comte de Falkenstein has been seeing
harbours, arsenals, ships, manufactures, and hasn’t seen Voltaire. Had
I been in the Emperor’s place, I would not have passed Ferney with-
out a glance at the old Patriarch, were it only to say that I had seen
and heard him. Arsenals, ships, manufactures, these you can see any-
where ; but it requires ages to produce a Voltaire. By the rumours I
hear, it will have been a certain great Lady Theresa, very Orthodox
and little Philosophical, who forbade her Son to visit the Apostle of
Tolerance.” D’ Alembert (in answer): ‘‘ No doubt your Majes-
ty’s guess is right. It must have been the Lady Mother. Nobody
here believes that the advice came from his Sister” (Queen Marie An-
toinette), “ who, they say, is full of esteem for the Patriarch, and has
more than once let him know it by third parties.””® .

According to Friedrich, Joseph’s reflections in France were very
gloomy: “This is all one Country; strenuously kneaded into perfect
union and incorporation by the Old Kings: my discordant Romish Reich
is of many Countries,—and should be of one, if Sovereigns were wise
and strenuous !”?7’—

2. A Cabinet-Order and actual (facsimile) Signature of Friedrich’s.
—After unknown travels over the world, this poor brown Bit of Paper,
with a Signature of Friedrich’s to it, has wandered hither; and I have
had it copied, worthy or not. A Royal Cabinet-Order on the smallest
of subjects ; but perhaps all the more significant on that account; and
a Signature which readers may like to see.

Fordan, or Fordon, is in the Bromberg Department in West-Preus-
sen,— Bromberg no longer a heap of ruins; but a lively, new-built,
paved, canalled, and industrious trading Town. At Fordan is a Grain-
Magazine: Bein (“ Leg,” der Bein, as they slightingly call him) is
Proviant-Master there ; and must consider his ways,—the King’s eye
being on him. Readers can now look and understand :

* An den Ober-Proviantmeister Bein, zu Fordan.
‘*¢ Potsdam, den 9ten April 1777.

“ Seimer Koniglicher Majestat “His Royal Majesty of Preus-
von Preussen, Unser allergnad- sen, Our most all-gracious Lord,
agster Herr, lassen dem Ober- lets herewith, to the Head Provi-

78 “J)Alembert to Friedrich” (in (uwvres de Frédéric, xxv. 75), ‘‘ 23d
May 1777.” Ibid. xxv. 82;. ‘‘13th August 1777.” ;

7 (KHuvres de Frédéric, xxv. 84. 7 Tbid, vi. 125.

438

Proviantmeister Bein hiebey die
Getraide-Preistabelle des Brom-
bergschen Departments zuferti-
gen; Woraus derselbe ersiehet
wie niedrig solche an einigen Or-
then sind, und dass zu Inovraclaw
und Strezeltnow der Scheffel Rog-
gen um 12 Groschen kostet: da
solches nun her so wohlfeil ist,
so muss ja der Preis in Pohlen
noch wohl geringer, und ist daher
nicht abzusehen warum die Pohlen
auf so hohe Preise bestehen; der
Bein muss sich daher nun rechte
Muhe geben,und den Einkauf so
wohlfel als nur wmmmer moglich
zu machen suchen.”

iffy pod amvseefan YG |

AFTERNOON AND EVENING.

[Boox XXI.
April—Oct. 1777.

ant-master Bein, the Grain-Prices

Table of the Bromberg Depart-,

ment be despatched; Wherefrom
Bein perceives how low in some
places these are, and that at Inovra-
claw and Strezeltnow the Bushel
of Rye costs about 14 Pence: now,
as it is so cheap there, the price in
Poland must be still smaller; and
therefore it is not to be conceived
why the Poles demand such high
prices,” as the said Bein reports:
“‘ Bein therefore is charged to take
especial pains, and try not to make
the purchase dearer than is indis-
pensable.”

* Original kindly furnished me by Mr. W. H. Doeg, Barlow Moor, Man-
chester ; whose it now is,—purchased in London, a.p. 1863. ‘The Frh of

— ae

Cuap. VI. ] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 439
30th Dec. 1777.

CHAPTER VI.
THE BAVARIAN WAR.

At the very beginning of 1778, the chronic quarrel with Aus-
tria passed, by an accident just fallen out, into the acute state;
rose gradually, and, in spite of negotiating, issued in a thing called
Bavarian-Succession War, which did not end till Spring of the
following year. ‘The accident was this. At Miinchen, Decem-
ber 30th, 1777, Max Joseph, Kurfiirst of Baiern, only Brother of
our lively friend the Electress-Dowager of Saxony, died; sud-
denly, of small-pox unskilfully treated. He was in his fifty-
second year; childless, the last of that Bavarian branch. His
Heir is Karl Theodor, Kur-Pfalz (Elector Palatine), who is now
to unite the Two Electorates,—unless Austria can bargain with
him otherwise. Austria’s desire to get hold of Baiern is of very
old standing; and we have heard lately how much it was an
object with Kaunitz and his young Kaiser. With Karl Theodor
they did bargain,—in fact, had beforehand as good as bargained,
—and were greatly astonished, when King Friedrich, alone of
all Teutschland or the world, mildly, but peremptorily, interfered,
and said No,—with effect, as is well known.

Something, not much, must be said of this Bavarian Succession
War; which occupied, at a pitch of tension and anxiety foreign
to him for a long time, fifteen months of Friedrich’s old age
(January 1778—March 1779); and filled all Europe round him
and it, in an extraordinary manner. Something; by no means
much, now that we have seen the issue of such mountains all in
travail. Nobody could then say but it bade fair to become a
Fourth Austrian-Prussian War, as sanguinary as the Seven-
Years had been; for in effect there stood once more the Two

German cursiv-schrift (current hand), which the woodcutter has appended,
shut off by a square, will show English readers what the King means: an
rh” done as by a flourish of one’s stick, in the most compendious and
really ingenious manner,—suitable for an economic King, who has to re-
peat it scores of times every day of his life!

440 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
30th Dec. 1777.

Nations ranked against each other, as if for mortal duel, near
half a million men in whole; parleying indeed, but brandishing
their swords, and ever and anon giving mutual clash of fence,
as if the work had begun, though there always intervened new
parleying first..

And now everybody sees that the work never did begin; that
parleying, enforced by brandishing, turned out to be all the work
there was: and everybody has forgotten it, and, except for spe-
cific purposes, demands not to be put in mind of it. Mountains
in labour were not so frequent then as now, when the Penny
Newspaper has got charge of them; though then as now to
practical people they were a nuisance. Mountains all in terrific
travail-throes, threatening to overset the solar system, have al-
ways a charm, especially for the more foolish classes: but when
once the birth has taken place, and the wretched mouse ducks
past you, or even nothing at all can be seen to duck past, who is
there but impatiently turns on his heel?

Those Territories, which adjoin on its own dominions, would
have been extremely commodious to Austria ;—as Austria itself
has long known; and by repeatedly attempting them on any
chance given (as in 1741-45, to go no farther back), has shown
how well it knows. Indeed, the whole of Bavaria fairly incor-
porated and made Austrian, what an infinite convenience would
it be!

“Do but look on the Map” (this Note is not by Bisching, but by
somebody of Austrian tendencies): ‘‘ you would say, Austria without
Bavarra is like a Human Figure with its belly belonging to somebody
else. Bavaria is the trunk or belly of the Austrian Dominions, shut-
ting off all the limbs of them each from the other; making for central
part a huge chasm.

# Cheri inia owisch used to be Kur- Pfalz? S, A te is Bavaria’s
since we took it from the Winter-King and bestowed it in that way,—
Ober-Pfalz, the Country of Amberg, where Maillebois once pleased to
make invasion of us ;—does not it adjoin on the Bohemian Forest?
The ribs there, Bohemian all, up to the shoulder, are ours: but the
shoulder-blade and left arm, whose are they! Austria Proper and Hun-
gary, these may be taken as sitting-part and lower limbs, ample and
fleshy ; but see, just above the pelvis, on the south side, how Bavaria
and its ‘Tyrol sticks itself in upon Austria, who fancied she also had a

Cuapr. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 441
30th Dec. 1777.

Tyrol, and far the more important one. Our Tyrol, our Styria, Carni-
ola, Carinthia,—Bavaria blocks these in. ‘Then the Swabian Austria,
—Breisach, and those Upper-Rhine Countries, from which we invade
France,—we cannot reach them except through Bavarian ground.
Swabian Austria should be our right arm, fingers of it reaching into
Switzerland ; Ober-Pfalz our left :—and as to the broad breast between
these two; left arm and broad breast are Bavaria’s, not ours. Of the
Netherlands, which might be called geographically the head of Austria,
alas, the long neck, Lorraine, was once ours; but whose is it? Irre-
coverable for the present,—perhaps may not always be so!” ‘

These are Kaunitz’s ideas ; and the young Kaiser has eagerly adopt-
ed them as the loadstar of his life. ‘“ Make the Reich a reality again,”
thinks the Kaiser (good, if only possible, think we too); “make Aus-
tria great ; Austria is the Reich, how else can the Reich be real ?”

In practical politics these are rather wild ideas; but they are
really Kaunitz’s and his Kaiser’s; and were persisted in long
after this Bavarian matter got its check: and as a whole, they
got repeated checks; being impossible all, and far from the
meaning of a Time big with French Revolution, and with quite
other things than world-greatness to Austria, and rejuvenescence
on such or on any terms to the poor old Holy Roman Reich,
which has been a wiggery so long. Nobody could guess of what
it was that France or the world might be with child: nobody,
till the birth in 1789, and even for a generation afterwards.
France is weakly and unwieldy, has stgange enough longings
for chalky, inky, visionary, foolish substances, and may be in the
family-way for aught we know. |

Jo Kaunitz it is pretty clear that France will not stand in his
path in this fine little Bavarian business; which is all he cares
for at present. England in war with its Colonies; Russia at-
tentive to its Turk; foreign Nations, what can they do but talk;
remonstrate more or less, as they did in the case of Poland; and
permit the thing with protest? Only from one Sovereign Per-
son, and from him I should guess not much, does Kaunitz ex-
pect serious opposition: from Friedrich of Prussia; to whom
no enlargement of Austria can be matter of indifference. ‘ But
cannot we perhaps make it worth his while?” thinks Kaunitz:
“‘'Tush, he is old and broken; thought to be dying; has an ab-
solute horror of war. He too will sit quiet; or we must make

T 2

442 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. {Book XXI.
30th Dec. 1777.

it worth his while.” In this calculation Kaunitz deceived him-
self; we are now shortly to see how.

Kaunitz’s Case, when he brings it before the Reich, and general Pub-
lic of mankind and its Gazetteers, will by no means prove to be a strong
one. His law “ttle” is this:

“ Archduke Albert V. of Austria, subsequently Kaiser Albert IT., had
married Elizabeth, only Daughter of Kaiser Sigismund Super-Gram-
maticam: Albert is he who got three crowns in one year, Hungary,
Bohemia, Romish Reich; and ‘we hope a fourth,’ say the Old Histo-
rians, ‘which was a heavenly and eternal one,’-—died, in short (1439,
age forty). From him come the now Kaisers.

“In 1426, thirteen years before this event of the Crowns, Sigismund
Grammaticam had infeoffed him in a thing still of shadowy nature,—
the Expectancy of a Straubingen Princedom ; pleasant extensive Dis-
trict, only not yet fallen, or like falling vacant: ‘ You shall inherit, you
and yours (who are also my own), so soon as this present line of Wit-
telsbachers die!’ said Kaiser Sigismund, solemnly, in two solemn sheep-
skins. ‘Not a whit of it,’ would the Wittelsbachers have answered,
had they known of the affair. ‘ When we die out, there is another Line
of Wittelsbachers, plenty of other lines; and House-treaties many and
old, settling all that, without help of you and Albert of the Three
Crowns!’ And accordingly there had never come the least fruit, dt
attempt at fruit, from these two Sigismund Sheepskins; which were
still lying in the Vienna Archives, where they had lain since the crea-
tion of them, known to an Antiquary or two, but not even by them
thought worthy of mention in this busy world. This was literally all
the claim that Austria had and every bystander admitted it to be, in
itself, not worth a rush.”

“Tn itself perhaps not,” thought Kaunitz; ‘but the free con-
sent of Karl Theodor the Heir, will not that be a Title in full?
One would hope so; in the present state of Europe: France,
England, Russia, every Nation weltering overhead in its own
troubles and affairs, little at leisure for ours!’ And it is with
Karl Theodor, to make out a full Title for himself there, that
Kaunitz has been secretly busy this long time back, especially in
the late critical days of poor Kurfiirst Max.

Karl Theodor of the Pfalz, now fallen Heir to Baiern, is a
poor idle creature, of purely egoistic, ornamental, dilettante na-
ture; sunk in theatricals, bastard children, and the like; much
praised by Voltaire, who sometimes used to visit him; and by

:

De

SS

ae

Chap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 443
30th Dec. 1777.

Collini, to whom he is a kind master. Karl Theodor cares little
for the integrity of Baiern, much for that of his own skin. Very
long ago, in 1742, in poor Kaiser Karl’s Coronation time, we
saw him wedded, him and another, to two fair Sister Sulzbach
Princesses,! Granddaughters of old Karl Philip, the then Kur-
Pfalz, whom he has inherited. It was the last act of that. nev-
er-resting old Karl Philip, of whom we used to hear so much ;
“ Karl Theodor to have one of my inestimable Granddaughters ;
Duke Clement, younger Brother of our blessed new Kaiser, to
have another; thereby we unite the kindred branches of the
Pfalz-Baiern Families, and make the assurance of the Heritages
doubly sure!” said old Karl Philip; and died happy, or the hap-
piest he could.

Readers no doubt have forgotten this circumstance; and, in
their total lack of interest in Karl Theodor and his paltry af-
fairs, may as well be reminded of it ;—and, furthermore, that
these brilliant young Wives, ‘‘ Duchess Clement” especially, call-
ed on Wilhelmina during the Frankfurt Gaieties, and were a
charm to Kaiser Karl Albert, striving to look forward across
clouds into a glittering future for his House. Theodor’s Princess
brought him no children; she and her Sister are both still liv-
ing; a lone woman the latter (Duke Clement dead these seven
years),—a still more lone the former, with such a Husband yet
living! Lone women both, well forward in the fifties; active
souls, I should guess, at least to judge by Duchess Clement, who
being a Dowager, and mistress of her movements, is emphatic in
denouncing such disaster and disgrace; and plays a great part,
at Miinchen, in the agitating scenes now on hand. Comes out
‘like a noble Amazon,” say the admiring bystanders, on this
occasion ; stirs whatever faculty she has, especially her tongue ;
and goes on urging, pushing and contriving, all she can, regard-
less of risks in such an imminency.

Karl Theodor finds his Heritages indisputable ; but he has no
Legitimate Son to leave them to; and has many Illegitimate,
whom Austria can provide for,—and richly will. His Heir is
a Nephew, Karl. August Christian, of Zweibriick ; whom per-
haps it would not be painful to him to disappoint a little of his

' Supra, iii. 411.

444 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
30th Dec. 1777.

high expectations. On the whole, Peace; plentiful provision,
titular and other, for his Illegitimates; and a comfortable sum
of ready-money over, to enliven the Theatricals, Diisseldorf Pic-
ture-Galleries and Dilettante operations and Collections,—how
much welcomer to Theodor than a Baiern never so religiously
saved entire at the expense of quarrel, which cannot but be te-
dious, troublesome and dangerous! Honour, indeed—but what,
to an old stager in the dilettante line, is honour? Old stagers
there are who will own to you, like Balzac’s Englishman in a
case of conflagration, when honour called on all men to take
their buckets, ‘* Mais je n’ai point @honneur !” ‘To whom, un-
luckily, you cannot answer as in that case, “C'est égal,’Tis all
one; do as if you had some!’ Karl Theodor scandalously left
Baiern to its fate. .

Karl Theodor’s Heir, poor August Christian of Zweibriick,
had of course his own gloomy thoughts on this parcelling of his
Bavarian reversion; but what power has he? None, he thinks,
but to take the inevitable patiently. Nor generally in the
Princes cf the Reich, though one would have thought them per-
sonally concerned, were it only for danger of a like mistreat-
ment, was there any emotion publicly expressed, or the least
hope of help. ‘ Perhaps Prussia will quarrel about it?’ think
they: ‘‘ Austria, Prussia, in any of their quarrels we get only
crushed ; better to keep out of it. We well out of it, the more
they quarrel and fight, the better for. us!” England, in the
shape of Hanover, would perhaps have made some effort to in-
terfere, provided France did: on either side, I incline to think,
—that is to say, on the side opposite to France. But poor En-
gland is engaged with its melancholy American War; France
on the point of breaking out into Alliance with the Insurrection
there. Neither France nor England did interfere. France is
sinking into bankruptcy; intent to have a Navy before most
things; to assist the cause of Human Liberty over seas withal,
and become a sublime spectacle, and a ruin to England,—not as
in the Pitt-Choiseul time, but by that improved method. Rus-
sia, again involved in Turk business, looks on, with now and
then a big word thrown out on the one side and the other.—
Miinchen, in the interval, we can fancy what an agitated City!
One Note says:

4

|

=
Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 445
3d Jan. 1778.

‘“‘ Kurfiirst Max Joseph being dead (30th December 1777), Privy
Councillor Johann Euchar von Obermayr. favourite and factotum Min-
ister of the Deceased, opened the Chatoulle” (Princely Safe, or Case
of Preciosities) , ‘* took from it the Act, which already lay prepared,
for Homaging and solemn Instalment of Karl Theodor Kur-Pfalz, as
Heir of Baiern; with immediate intent to execute the same. Euchar
orders strict closure of the Town-gates; the Soldiery to draw out, and
beset all streets,—especially that street where Imperial Majesty’s Am-
bassador lives. ‘Rank close with your backs to that House,’ orders
Kuchar; * and the instant anybody stirs to come out, sound your drums,
and, at the same instant, let the rearmost rank of you, without looking
round’ (for one would not give offence, unless imperative), ‘smite the
butts of their muskets to the ground’ (ready for firing, 7f imperative).
Nobody, I think, stirred out from that Austrian Excellency’s House ;
in any case, Obermayr completed his Act without the least protest. or
trouble from anybody; and Karl Theodor, almost to his terrer” (for
he meant to sell, and satisfy Austria, by no means to resist or fight, the
paltry old creature, careful of self and skin only), “saw himself sol-
emnly secured by all forms of Jaw in all the Lands of the Deceased.’

“‘ Kaiser Joseph, in a fume at this, shot off an express to Bohemia:
* Such and such regiments, ten or twelve of you, with your artillery and
tools, march instantly into Straubingen, and occupy that Town and
District.’ At Vienna, to the Karl Theodor Ambassador, the Kaunitz
Officials were altogether loud-voiced, minatory: ‘What is this, Herr
Excellenz? Bargain already made; lying ready for mere signature ;
and at Minchen such doings. Sign this Bargain, or there cross your
frontier 60,000 Austrian men, and seize both Baiern and the Ober-
Pfalz; bethink you, Herr?’ The poor Herr bethought him, what could
he do? signed the Bargain, Karl Theodor sanctioning, 3d January
1778,—the fourth day after Obermayr’s Homaging feat;—and com-
pletes the first act of this bad business. The Bargain, on Theodor’s
side, was of the most liberal kind; All and sundry the Lands and Cir-
cles of Duke Johann of Straubingen, Lordship of Mindelheim” (Marl-
borough's old Place) ‘‘ superadded, and J know not what else ; Sover-
eignty of the Fiefs in Ober-Pfalz to lapse to the Crown of Bohmen on
my decease.” Half Bavaria, or better; some reckon it as good as
two-thirds. :

The figure of Duchess Clement, Amazon in hair-powder, driving in-
cessantly about among the officialities and aristocratic circles; this
and the order of, “ Rattle your muskets on the ground ;” let these two
features represent to us the Miinchen of those months. Miinchen, Re-

* Fischer, Geschichte Friedrichs des Zwieten (Halle, 1787), ii. 358.

446 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d Jan. 1778.

gensburg, Vienna are loud with pleading, protocolling; but it is not
there that the crisis of the game will be found to he

Friedrich has, for some time back, especially since the late
Kur-Baiern’s illness, understood that Austria, always eager for
a clutch at Baiern, had something of that kind in view; but
his first positive news of it was a Letter from Duchess Clement
(date, January 3d), which, by the detail of facts, unveiled to his
quick eye the true outline, extent and nature of this Enterprise
of Austria’s; Enterprise which, he could not but agree with
Duchess Clement, was one of great concernment not to Baiern
alone. ‘‘Must be withstood; prevented, at whatever risk,”
thought Friedrich on the instant: “The new Elector, Karl
Theodor, he probably is dead to the matter; but one ought to
ask him. If he answer, Dead; then ask his Heir, Have you
no life to it?” Heir is a gallant enough young gentleman, of
endless pedigree, but small possessions, ‘‘ Karl August Christian”
(Karl II. in Official style), ‘‘ Duke of Zweibriick-Birkenfeld,”
Karl Theodor’s eldest Nephew; Friedrich judges that he prob-
ably will have haggled to sign any Austrian convention for dis-
memberment of Baiern, and that he will start into life upon it
so soon as he sees hope.

**A messenger to him, to Karl Theodor and him,” thinks
Friedrich: ‘‘a messenger instantly; and who?’ For that
clearly is the first thing. And a delicate thing it is; requiring
to be done in profoundesé secrecy, by hint and innuendo rather
than speech,—by somebody in a cloak of darkness, who is of
adroit quality, and was never heard of in diplomatic circles be-
fore, not to be suspected of having business of mine on hand.
Friedrich bethinks him that in a late visit to Weimar, he had
noticed, for his fine qualities, a young gentleman named Gortz;
Eustace von Gortz,? late Tutor to the young Duke (Karl Au-
gust, whom readers know as Goethe’s friend): a wise, firm,
adroit-looking young gentleman; who was farther interesting
as Brother to Lieutenant-General von Gértz, a respectable sol-
dier_of Friedrich’s. Ex-Tutor at Weimar, we say, and idle for
the moment; hanging about Court there, till he should find a
new function.

2 Preuss, iv. 92 n., &e.

tpi tea

_— -—-"

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 447
3d Jan.—5th April 1778.

Of this Ex-Tutor Friedrich bethinks him; and in the course
of that same day,—for there 1s no delay,—Friedrich, who is at
Berlin, beckons General Gortz to come over to him from Pots-
dam instantly. ‘‘ Hither this evening, and in all privacy meet
me in the Palace at such an hour’ (hour of midnight or thereby) ;
which of course Gortz, duly invisible to mankind, does, Fried-
rich explains: An errand to Miinchen; perfectly secret, for the
moment, and requiring great delicacy and address; perhaps not
without risk, a timorous man might say: will your Brother go for
me, think you? Gértz thinks he will. ‘Here is his Instruction,
if so,” adds the King, handing him an Autograph of the necessary
outline of proeedure,—not signed, nor with any credential, or even
specific address, lest accident happen. “ Adieu, then, Herr Gen-
eral-Lieutenant; rule is, shoes of swiftness, cloak of darkness:
adieu!’ And Gértz Senior is off on the instant, careering to-
wards Weimar, where he finds Gértz Junior, and makes known
his errand. Gortz Junior stares in the natural astonishment;
but, after some intense brief deliberation, becomes affirmative,
and in a minimum of time is ready and on the road.

Gértz Junior proved to have been an excellent choice on the
King’s part; and came to good promotion afterwards by his con-
duct in this affair. Gértz Junior started for Miinchen on the
instant, masked utterly, or his business masked, from profane
eyes; saw this person, saw that, and glided swftly about, swiftly
and with sure aim; and speedily kindled the matter, and had
smoke rising in various points. And before January was out,
saw the Reichs-Diet at Regensburg, much more the general
Gazetteerage everywhere, seized of this affair, and thrown into
paroxysms at the size.and complexion of it: saw, in fact, a world
getting into flame,—kindled by whom or what nobody could
guess, for a long time to come. Gértz had great running about
in his cloak of darkness, and showed abundant talent of the kind
needed. A pushing, clear-eyed, stout-hearted man; much clever-
ness and sureness in what he did and forbore to do. His adven-
tures were manifold; he had much travelling about: was at
Regensburg, at Mannheim; saw many persons whom he had to
judge of on the instant, and speak frankly to, or speak darkly,
or speak nothing; and he made no mistake. One of his best

448 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d Jan.—5th April 1778.

counsellors, I gather, was Duchess Clement: of course it was
not long till Duchess Clement heard some inkling of.him; till,
in some of his goings and comings, he saw Duchess Clement,
who hailed him as an angel of light. In one journey more mys-
terious than ever, ‘‘he was three days invisible in Duchess Clem-
ent’s Garden-house.” ‘Ah, Afadame, que n’étiez-vous Electeur,
Why were not you Elector!” writes Friedrich to her once:
“We should not have seen those shameful events, which every
good German must blush for, to the bottom of his heart (dont
tout bon Allemand doit rougir jusqu’au fond du cur)!’

We cannot afford the least narrative of Gértz and his courses:
imagination, from a few traits, will sufficiently conceive them.
He had gone first to Karl Theodor’s Minister: “ Dead to it, I
fear; has already signed?” Alas, yes. Upon which to Zwei-
briick the Heir’s Minister; whom his Master had distinctly or-
dered to sign, but who, at his own peril, gallant man, delayed,
remonstrated, had not yet done it; and was able to answer:
‘¢ Alive to it, he? Yes, with a witness, were there hope in the
world !”—which threw Gértz upon instant gallop towards Zwei-
briick Schloss, in search of said Heir, the young Duke August
Christian ; who, however, had left in the interim (Summoned by
his Uncle, on Austrian urgency, to consent along with him);
but whom Gédrtz, by dexterity and intuition of symptoms, caught
up by the road, with what a mutual joy! As had been expected,
August Christian, on sight of Goértz, with an armed Friedrich
looming in the distance, took at once into new courses and ac-
tivities. From him, no consent now; far other: Treaty with
Friedrich; flat refusal ever to consent: application to the Reich,
application even to France, and whatever a, gallant young fellow
could do.

It was by Friedrich’s order that he applied to France; his
younger Brother, Max Joseph, was a soldier there, and strove to
back him in Official and other circles,—who were all friendly,
even zealous for him; and gave good words, but had nothing
more. This French department of the business was long a delay -
to Friedrich’s ‘operations: and in result, poor Max’s industry
there, do what he could, proved rather a minus quantity than

* Preuss, iv. 94.

- ners

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 449
3d Jan.—5th April 1778.

otherwise. A good young man, they say; but not the man to
kindle into action horses that are dead,—of which he had ex-
perience more than once in time coming. He is the same that,
30 years after, having survived his childless elder Brother, be-
came King Max, first King of Baiern; begot Ludwig, second
King,—who, for his part, has begotten Otho King of Greece,
and done other feats still less worth mentioning. August Chris-
tian’s behaviour is praised as excellent,—passively firm and po-
lite; the grand requisite, persistence on your ground of ‘“ No:”
—but his luck, to find such a Friedrich, and also to find such a
Gortz, was the saving clause for him.

Friedrich was in very weak health in these months; still con-
sidered by the Gazetteers to be dying. But it appears he is not
yet too weak for taking, on the instant necessary, a world-im-
portant resolution ; and of being on the road with it, to this issue
or to that, at full speed before the day closed. “ Desist, good
neighbour, I beseech you. You must desist, and even you shall:”
this resolution was entirely his own; as were the equally prompt
arrangements he contrived for executing it, should hard come
to hard, and Austria prefer war to doing justice. ‘ Excellent
methods,” say the most unfriendly judges, ‘‘ which must at once
have throttled Austria into compliance, had he been as prompt
in executing them ;—which he by no means was. And there
lies his error and failure; very lamentable, excusable only by
decrepitude of body producing weakness and decay of mind,”
This is emphatically and wearisomely Schmettau’s opinion,® who
looks at it only as a military Adjutant, intent on honour and
rapid feats of war,—with how much reason, readers not Prussian
or military shall judge as we go on.

5. W. C. Graf von Schmettau (this is the Llder Schmettau’s Son, not
the Dresdener’s whom we used to quote), Feldzug der Preussischen Armee in
Béhmen im Jahre 1778 (Berlin, 1789,—simultancously in French too, with
Plans): with which,—as the completest Account by an eager Witness and
Participator,—compare always Friedrich’s own (Mémoires de la Guerre de
1778), in Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 135-208. Schéning (vol. iv.), besides his
own loose Narrative, or Summary, has given all the Correspondence between
Henri and the King :—sufficient to quench the sharpest appetite on this
subject.

450 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
3d Jan.—5th April 1778.

Saxony, we ought to mention, was also aggrieved. ‘The Dow-

ager-Electress Maria Antoinette, our sprightly friend, had, as_

sole surviving Sister of the late Kurfiirst Max, the undoubted
heirship of Kurfiirst Max’s “allodial properties and territories:”
territories, I think, mainly in the Ober-Pfalz (which are not
Bavaria Proper, but were acquired in the Thirty-Years War),
which are important in value, and which Austria, regardless of
our lively friend, has laid hold of as lapsed fiefs of Bohemia.
Clearly Bohemian, says Austria; and keeps hold. Our lively
friend hereupon makes over all her rights in that matter to her
Son, the reigning Elector; with the counsel, if counsel were
needed, ‘“‘ Ask protection of King Friedrich ; go wholly with
King Friedrich.” Mecklenburg too has an interest. Among
the lapsed fiefs is one to a Duchy called of Leuchtenberg ;—in
regard to which, says Mecklenburg, as loud as it can, “That
Duchy is not lapsed at all; that is now mine, witness this Docu-
ment” (of a valid testamentary nature)! Other claims were put
in; but these three: Zweibriick endlessly important ; Saxony
important too, though not in such degree; Mecklenburg unim-
portant, but just,—were alone recognised in impartial quarters
as authentic and worthy of notice.

Of the pleadings and procedures in the Reich’s Diet no read-
er would permit me to speak, were I inclined. Enough to un-
derstand that they went on in the usual voluminous dull-droning
way, crescendo always; and deserve, what at present they are
sure of, oblivion from all creatures. The important thing was,
not those pleadings in the Reich's Diet, nor the Austrian pro-
posals there or elsewhere; but the brandishing of arms in emit-
ting and also in successively answering the same. Answer al-
ways No by Friedrich, and some new flash of handled arms,—
the physiognomy of which was the one significant point. Aus-
tria, which is far from ready with arms, though at each fresh
pleading or proposal it tries to give a kind of brandish, says
mainly three things, in essence somewhat thus. Austria: ‘ Can-
not two States of the Reich come to a mutual understanding, as
Austria and Bavaria have done? And what have third parties
to say to it?” Friedrich: “Much! Parties of the Reich have
much to say toit!” (This several times with variations.) Aus-

EW te

at

v

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 451
5th April 1778.

tra: “ Our rights seem to us valid: Zweibriick, Saxony, Meck-
lenburg, if aggrieved, can try in the Reichs Law-Courts.” F’ried-
rich: ‘* Law-Courts!’ with a new brandish; that is, sets more
regiments on march, from Pommern to Wesel all on march, to
Berlin, to Silesia, towards the Bohemian Frontier. Austria, by
the voice of Kaunitz: ‘‘ We will not give up our rights without
sentence of Law. We cannot recognise the King of Prussia as
Law-Judge in this matter.” Friedrich: “The King of Prussia
is of the Jury!”

Pulse after pulse, this is something like the course things had,
crescendo till, in about three months, they got to a height which
was evidently serious. Nay, in the course of the pleadings it
became manifest that on the Austrian grounds of claim, not
Maria Theresa could be heir to Straubingen, but Friedrich him-
self: ‘I descend from Three-Crown Albert’s Daughter,” said
Maria Theresa. ‘ And I from an elder Daughter of his; and
do not claim!” Friedrich could have answered, but did not;
treating such claim all along as merely colorable and chimerical,
not worth attention in serious affairs of fact. ‘Till, at length,
after about three months, there comes a really serious brandish.

Sunday, April 5th, 1778, at Berlin, Friedrich holds review of
his Army, all assembled, equipped and in readiness; and (in
that upper Parole-Room of the Schloss) makes this Speech,
which, not without extraneous intention, was printed in the
Newspapers :

Friedrich’s Speech to his Generals. “Gentlemen, I have assem-
bled you here for a public object. Most of you, like myself, have often
been in arms along with one another, and are grown gray in the service
of our Country: to all of us is well known in what dangers, toils, and
renown we have been fellow-sharers. I doubt not in the least that all
of you, as myself, have a horror of bloodshed: but the danger which
now threatens our Countries, not only renders it a duty, but puts us in
the absolute necessity, to adopt the quickest and most effectual means
for dissipating at the right time the storm which threatens to break out
on us.

“‘] depend with complete confidence on your soldierly and patriotic
zeal, which is already well and gloriously known to me, and which,
while I live, I will acknowledge with the heartiest satisfaction. Be-

Ns

452 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
6th-24th April 1778.
fore all things, | recommend to you, and prescribe as your most sacred
duty, That, in every situation, you exercise humanity on-unarmed en-
emies; and be continually attentive that, in this respect too. there be
the strictest discipline (Mannszucht) kept among those under you.
“To travel with the pomp of a King is not among my wishes; and
all of you are aware that I have no pleasure in rich field-furniture : but
my increasing age, and the weakness it brings, render me incapable of
riding as I did in my youth. | shall, therefore, be obliged to make use
of a postchaise in times of marching ; and all of you have liberty to do
the same. But on the day of battle you shal] see me on horseback ;
and there, also, I hope my Generals will follow that example.”

Voltaire smothered under Roses. King’s Speech was on Sunday,
April 5th. Evening of last Monday (March 30th), at the Theatre
Francais in Paris. poor Voltaire had that world-famous apotheosis of
his; and got “smothered under roses,” as he termed it. He had left
Ferney (such the urgency of Niece Denis and her unappeasable desire
for a sight of Paris again), February 5th; arrived in Paris, February
10th ; ventured out to see his poor last ‘Tragedy, not till the sixth night
of it, March 30th; was beshouted, crowned, raised to the immortal gods
by a repentant Paris world: “‘ Greatest of men,—You were not a mis-
creant and malefactor, then: on the contrary, you were a spiritual Her-
cules, a heroic Son of Light; Slayer of the Nightmare Monsters, and
foul Dragons and Devils that were preying on us: to you shall not we
now say. Long life, with all our throats and all our hearts,’—and so
quench you at last! Which they managed to do, poor repentant souls.
The tottering wayworn Voltaire, over-agitated in this way, took to bed ;
never rose again; and on that day two-months was dead. His light
all done; to King Friedrich, or to any of us. no flash of radiancy from
him any more forever.

Apri 6th, Friedrich gets on march,—perhaps about 100,000
strong,—for Schénwalde, in the Neisse-Schweidnitz neighbour-
hood; and there, in the course of the week, has cantoned him-
self, and sits completing his magazines and appliances for actual
work of war. ‘This is a considerable brandish; and a good deal
astonishes Kaunitz and the Vienna people, who have not 10,000
at present on those Frontiers, and nothing whatever in a state
of readiness. ‘ Dangerous really!’ Kaunitz admits; and sets
new regiments on march from Hungary, from the Netherlands,

° In Duvernet, and still better in Longchamp et Wagniére, ample account
of these interesting occurrences.

ee

ae ae =

PnP NE oe

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR, 453
6th-24th April 1778.

from all ends of the Earth where they are. Tempers his own
insolent talk, too; but strives to persuade himself that it. is
** Menace merely. He won’t; he abhors war.” Kaunitz had
hardly exaggerated Friedrich’s abhorrence of war; though it
turned out there were things which Friedrich abhorred still
more.

Schénwalde, headquarter of this alarming Prussian canton-

- ment, is close on the new Fortress of Silberberg, a beautiful new

impregnability, looking into those Valleys of the Warta, of the
young Neisse, which are the road to Bohemia or from it,—where
the Pandour torrents used to issue into the first Silesian Wars;
where Friedrich himself was once to have been snapped up, but
was not quite,—and only sang Mass as Extempore Abbot, with
Tobias Stusche, in the Monastery of Camenz, according to the
myth which readers may remember. No more can Pandours
issue that way; only Prussians can enter in. IF riedrich’s win-
dows in the Schloss of Schénwalde,—which are on the left hand,
if you be touring in those parts,—look out direct upon Silber-
berg, and have its battlements between them and the 3-o’clock
Sun.” In the Town of Silberberg, Friedrich has withal a mod-
est little lodging, — lodging still known,—where he can alight
for an hour or a night, in the multifarious businesses that lead
him to and fro. ‘A beautiful place,” says Schéning; ‘ where
the King stayed twelve weeks” or more; waiting till the Bava-
rian-Austrian case should ripen better. At Schénwalde, what
was important in his private circle, he heard of Lord Marischal’s
death, then of Voltaire’s; not to mention that of English Pitt,
and perhaps others interesting to him.®

‘‘ Now was the time,” cry Schmettau and the unfavourable,
“when he might have walked across into Eastern Bohemia, into
Miéhren, whither you like; to Vienna itself, and taken Austria
by the throat at discretion: ‘Do justice, then, will you! Let
go Bavaria, or—! In his young years, would not he have

? Schéning, iv. (Introductory Part).

® Voltaire died, May 30th; Marischal, May 25th; Pitt, May 11th ;—and
‘‘May 4th, in the Cantonment here, died General von Rentzel, the same
who, as Lieutenant Rentzel, sixty years ago, had taught the little Crown-
Prince his drill” (Rédenbeck, iii. 187).

454 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
6th-24th April 1778.
done so? His Plan, long since laid down, was grand: To
march into Mihren, leaving Silesia guarded; nay leaving Bohe-
mi to be invaded,—for Prince Henri, and the Saxons, who are
a willing handful, and will complete Henri likewise to 100,000,
were to do that feat the while;—march into Mihren, on to Vi-
enna if he chose; laying all flat. Infallible,” say the Schmettau
people. ‘‘He had the fire of head to contrive it at all; but
worn down and grown old, he could not execute his great
thoughts.” Which is obviously absurd, Friedrich’s object not
being to lay Austria flat, or drive animosities to the sanguinary
point, and kindle all Europe into war; but merely to extract,
with the minimum of violence, something like justice from Aus-
tria on this Bavarian matter. For which end he may justly
consider slow pressure preferable to the cutting method. His
problem is most ticklish, not allowed for by Schmettau.

The encampment round Schénwalde, especially as there was
nothing ready thereabouts on the Austrian side, produced a vis-
ible and great effect on the negotiations: and notably altered
the high Kaunitz tone towards Friedrich. ‘‘ Must two great
Courts quarrel, then, for the sake of a small one?” murmured
Kaunitz, plaintively now, to himself and to the King,—to the
King not in a very distinct manner, though to himself the prin-
ciple is long since clear as an axiom in Politics: ‘ Great
Courts should understand one another; then the small would be
less troublesome.” For a quarter of a century, this has been
the Kaunitz faith. In 1753, when he miraculously screwed
round the French into union with the Austrians to put down
an upstart Prussia, this was his grand fulcrum, the immovable
rock in which the great Engineer fixed down his political cap-
stans, and levered and screwed. He did triumphantly wind
matters round,—though whether they much profited him when
round, may be a question.

But the same grand principle, in the later instance of parti-
tioning Poland, has it not proved eminently triumphant, suc-
cessful in all points? And, doubtless, this King of Prussia rec-
ognises it, if made worth his while, thinks Kaunitz. In a word,
Kaunitz’s next utterance is wonderfully changed. ‘The great
Engineer speaks almost like a Bishop on this new text. “Let

ie. Ret Aen ete A S

ee ee a ee

¥ Rite ts ¢

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 455
6th-24th April 1778.

the two Courts,’’ says he, ‘‘put themselves each in the other’s
place; each think what 7 would want;” and in fact each, in a
Christian manner, try to do as it would be done by! How
touching in the mouth of a Kaunitz, with something of pathos,
of plaintiveness, almost of unction in it! ‘There is no other
method of agreeing,” urges he: “ War is a terrible method, dis-
liked by both of us. Austria wishes this of Bavaria; but his
Prussian Majesty’s turn will come, perhaps now is (let him say
and determine); we will make it worth his while.” This is of
April 24th; notable change since the cantoning round Schin-
walde. ;

Germany at large, though it lay so silent, in its bed-rid
condition, was in great anxiety. Never had the Holy Romish
Reich such a shock before: ‘* Meaning to partition us like Po-
land?” thought the Reich, with a shudder. ‘ ‘They can, by
degrees, if they think good; these Two Great Sovereigns!”
Courage, your Durchlauchts: one of the Two great ones has
not that in his thoughts; has, and will have, the reverse of that ;
which will be your anchorage in the storms of fate for a long
time to come! Nor was it,—as will shortly appear to readers,
—Kaunitz’s immediate intention at all: enough if poor we can
begin it, set it fairly under way; let some unborn happier Kau-
nitz, the last of a series, complete such blessed consummation ;
in a happier time, far over the practical horizon at present.
This we do gather to have been Kaunitz’s real view; and it
throws a light on the vexed Partition-of-Poland question, and
gives weight to Dohm’s assertion, That Kaunitz was the actual
beginner there.

Weeks before Friedrich heard of this remarkable Memorial,
and ten days before it was brought to paper, there came to
Friedrich another unexpected remarkable Document: a Letter
from Kaiser Joseph himself, who is personally running about in
these parts, over in Bohemia, endeavouring to bring Army mat-
ters to a footing; and is no doubt shocked to find them still in
such backwardness, with a Friedrich at hand. The Kaiser’s
Letter, we perceive, is pilot-balloon to the Kaunitz episcopal
Document, and .to an actual meeting of Prussian and Austrian
Ministers on the Bavarian point; and had been seen to be a sal-

456 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
6th-24th April 1778.

utary measure by an Austria in alarm. It asks, as the Kaunitz
Memorial will, though in another style, ‘‘ Must there be war
then? Is there no possibility left in negotiation and mutual
concession? I am your Majesty’s friend and admirer; let us
try.” This was an unexpected and doubtless a welcome thing
to Friedrich ; who answers eagerly, and in a noble style both of
courtesy and of business sense: upon which there followed two
other Imperial Letters with their two Royal answers ;° and di-
rectly afterwards the small Austrian-Prussian Congress we
spoke of, Finckenstein and Hertzberg on the Prussian part, Co-
benzl on the Austrian (Congress sitting at Berlin), which tried
to agree, but could not; and to which Kaunitz’s Memorial of
April 24th was meant as some helpful sprinkling of presidential
quasi-episcopal oil.

Oil merely: for it turned out Kaunitz had no thought. at
present of partitioning the German Reich with Briedrich : ; but
intended merely to keep his own ‘seized portion of Baiern, and
in return for Friedrich’s assent, intended to recompense Fried-
rich with—in fact, with Austria’s consent, That if Anspach and
Baireuth lapsed home to Prussia (as it was possible they might,
the present Margraf, Friedrich’s Nephew, the Lady-Craven Mar-
eraf, having a childless Wife), Prussia should freely open the
door to them! <A thing which Friedrich naturally maintained
to be in need of Webaden s consent, and to lie totally apart from
this question; but which Austria always considered a very gen-
erous thing, and always returned to, with new touches of im-
provement, as their grand recipe in this matter. So that, un-
happily, the Hertzberg-Cobenzl treatyings, Kaiser’s Letters, and
Kaunitz’s episcopal oil, were without effect,—except to gain for
the Austrians, who infinitely needed it, delay of above two
months. ‘The Letters are without general interest: but for
Iriedrich’s sake, perhaps readers will consent to a specimen?
Here are parts of his First Letter: people meaning to be Kings
(which I doubt none of my readers are) could not do better than

° In Giuvres de Frédéric (vi. 183-193), Three succcessive Letters from
the Kaiser (of dates, ‘‘ Olmiitz,” ‘‘Litau,” ‘‘ Konigsgratz,” 18-19th April
1778), with King’s Answers (‘‘ Schénwalde,” all of them, and 14th-20th
April),—totally without interest to the general reader.

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. . 457
24th April—24th June 1778.

read it, and again read it, and acquire that style, first of know-
ing thoroughly the object in hand, and then of speaking on it
and of being silent on it, in a true and noble manner:

Friedrich to his Imperial Majesty (at Olmiitz).
‘** Schonwalde, 14th April 1778.

= Sire my Brother,—TI have received, with all the satisfaction possi-
ble, the Letter which your Imperial Majesty has had the goodness to
write to me. I have neither Minister nor Clerk (scribe) about me;
therefore your Imperial Majesty will be pleased to put up with such
Answer as an Old Soldier can give, who writes to you with probity and
frankness, on one of the most important subjects which have risen in
Politics for a long time.

‘Nobody wishes more than I to maintain peace and harmony be-
tween the Powers of Europe: but there are limits to everything ~ and
cases so intricate (éprneux) arise that good-will alone will not. suf-
fice to maintain things in repose and tranquillity. Permit me Sire, to
state distinctly what the question seems to me to be. It is to determ-
ine if an Emperor can dispose at his will of the Fiefs of the Empire.
Answer in the affirmative, and all these Fiefs become Timars” (in the
Turk way), “ which are for life only ; and which the Sultan disposes
of again, on the possessor’s death. Now, this is contrary to the Laws,
to the Customs and Constitutions of the German Empire.”—* TI, as
member of the Empire, and as having, by the Treaty of Hubertsburg,
re-sanctioned the Peace of Westphalia, find myself formally engaged to
support the immunities, the liberties and rights of the Germanic Body.

“This, Sire, is the veritable state of things. Personal interest I
have none: but I am persuaded your Majesty’s self would regard me
as a paltry man, unworthy of your esteem, should I basely sacrifice the
rights, immunities and privileges, which the Electors and I have re-
ceived from our Ancestors.

““T continue to speak to your Majesty with the same frankness. I
love and honour your person. It will certainly be hard for me to fight
against a Prince gifted with excellent qualities, and whom I personally
esteem. But”— —‘ And is there no remedy? Anspach and Baireuth
stand in no need of sanction. I consent to the Congress proposed :—
being with the &c. &c.—F.”"°

The sittings of this little Congress at Berlin lasted all through
May and June; to the disgust of Schmettau and the ardent
Prussian mess-rooms, “lying ready here, and forbidden to act.”
For the Austrians all the while were at their busiest, improving

19 (Huvres de Frédéric, vi. 187.

Vout. VI.—U

458 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
24th April—24th June 1778.

the moments, marching continually hitherward from Hungary,
from Limburg, from all the ends of the earth. Both negotiating
parties had shown a manifest wish to terminate without war;
and both made various attempts or proposals that way; Fried-
rich offering, in the name of European peace, to yield the Aus-
trians some small rim or paring of Bavaria from the edge ad-
joining them; the Austrians offering Anspach-Baireuth with
some improvements;—always offering Friedrich his own Bai-
reuth-Anspach with some new sauce (as that he might exchange
those Territories with Saxony for a fine equivalent in the Lau-
sitz, contiguous to him, which was a real improvement and in-
_ erease) :—but as neither party would in the least give up in es-
sentials or quit the ground it had taken, the result was nothing.
Week after week; so many weeks are being lost to Friedrich ;
gained to Austria: Schmettau getting more and more disgusted.

Friedrich still waited; not in all points quite ready yet, he
said, nor the futile diplomacies quite complete ;—evidently in
the highest degree unwilling to come to the cutting point, and
begin a war which nobody could see the end of. Many things
he tried; Peace so precious to him, try and try again. All
through June too, this went on; the result always zero,—obvi-
ously certain to be so. As even Friedrich had at last to own to
himself; and likewise that the Campaign season was ebbing
away; and that if his grand Moravian scheme was to be tried
on Austria, there was not a moment to lose.

Friedrich’s ultimate proposal, new modification of what all
his proposals had been, “To you some thin rim of Baiern; to
Saxony and Mecklenburg some etcetera -of indemnity, money
chiefly (money always to be paid by Karl Theodor, who has left
Baiern open to the spoiler in this scandalous manner), was of
June 13th; Austrians for ten days meditating on it, and espe-
cially getting forward their Army matters, answer, June 24th,
“No, we won't.” Upon which Friedrich, — to the joy of
Schmettau and every Prussian, — actually rises. Emits his
War-Manifesto (July 3d): ‘ Declaration to our Brethren (JM/t-
stiinde) of the Reich,” that Austria will listen to nothing but
War ;!! and, on and from that day, goes flowing forward in per-

" Fischer, ii. 388; Dohm, Denkwiirdigkeiten, i.110; CGluvres de F'rédé-
ric, vi. 145.

== =e

Cuap. VI] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 459
5th July 1778.

fect columns and arrangements, 100,000 strong; through the
picturesque Glatz Country, straight towards the Bohemian Bor-
der, hour by hour. Flows over the Bohemian Border, by Na-
chod Town ; his vanguard bursting into field-music and flour-
ishes of trumpeting at that grand moment (July 5th); flowed
bodily over; and encamped that night on Bohemian ground,
with Nachod to rear; thence towards Kwalkowitz, and on the
second day to Jaromirtz (‘‘ Camp of Jaromirtz’’), a little Town
which we have heard of before, but which became more famous
than ever during the next ten weeks,

Jaromirtz, Kwalkowitz, Konigsgratz: this is the old hill-and-
dale labyrinth of an Upper-Elbe Country; only too well known
to his Majesty and us, for almost forty years past: here again
are the Austrians waiting the King; watching diligently this
new invasion of his out of Glatz and the East! In the same
days Prince Henri, who is also near 100,000, starts from Dres-
den to invade them from the West. Loudon, facing westward,
is in watch of Henri; Lacy, or indeed the Kaiser himself, back-
to-back of Loudon, stands in this K6nigsgritz-Jaromirtz part ;
said to be embattled in a very elaborate manner, to a length of
fifty miles on this fine ground, and in number somewhat superior
to the King ;—the Austrians in all counting about 250,000; of
whom Lacy has considerably the larger share. The terror at
Vienna, nevertheless, is very great: ‘‘A day of terror,” says one
who was there; “I will not trust myself to describe the sensa-
tion which this news, ‘ Friedrich in Bohemia again!’ produced
among all ranks of people.”!2, Maria Theresa, with her fine
motherly heart, in alarm for her Country, and trembling “ for
my two Sons’ (Joseph and Leopold) “and dear Son-in-law” (of
Sachsen-Techsen) ‘‘ who are in the Army,” overcomes all scru-
ples of pride; instantly despatches an Autograph to the King
(‘“‘ Bearer of this, Baron von Thugut, with Full Powers’); and
on her own strength starts a new Negotiation,—which, as will
be seen, ended no better than the others.!%

12 Cogniazzo, iv. 316, 320, 321; Preuss, iv. 101, &e.
13 Her Letters, four in all, with their Appendixes, and the King’s An-

- gwers: in Quvres de Frédéric, vi. 196-200.

460 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
5th July 1778.

Schmettau says, “ Friedrich, cheated of his Mihren schemes,
was still in time; the Austrian position being indeed strong,
but not being even yet quite ready.” Friedrich himself, how-
ever, on reconnoitering, thought differently. A position such as
one never saw before, thinks he; contrived by Lacy; masterly
use of the ground, of the rivers, of the rocks, woods, swamps;
Elbe and his branches, and the intricate shoulders of the Giant
Mountains: no man could have done it better than Lacy here,
who, they say, is the contriver and practical hand.14 From
Konigsgriitz, northward, by Koénigshof, by Arnau, up to Hohen-
elbe, all heights are crowned, all passes bristling with cannon.
Rivers Aupa, Elbe beset with redoubts; with dams, in favoura-
ble places, and are become inundations, difficult to tap. There
are ‘‘ ditches 8 feet deep by 16 broad.” Behind or on the right
bank of Elbe, it is mere entrenchment for five-and-twenty miles.
With bogs, with thickets full of Croats; and such an amount of
artillery,—I believe they have in battery no fewer than 1,500
cannon. <A position very considerable indeed :—must have taken
time to deliberate, delve and invest; but it is done. Near fifty
miles of it: here, clear to your glass, has the head of Lacy visi-
bly emerged on us, as if for survey of phenomena :—head of Lacy
sure enough (body of him lying invisible in the heights, passes
and points of vantage); and its neck of fifty miles, like the neck
of a war-horse clothed with thunder. On which (thinks Schmet-
tau privately) you may, too late, make your reflexions !

Schmettau asserts that the position, though strong, was noth-
ing like so infinitely strong; and that Friedrich in his younger
days would very soon have assaulted it, and turned Lacy inside
out: but Friedrich, we know, had his reasons against hurry.
He reconnoitered diligently; rode out reconnoitering ‘fifteen
miles the first day” (July 6th), ditto the second and following ;
and was nearly shot by Croats,—by one specific Croat, says
Prussian Mythology, supported by Engraving. An old Engray-
ing, which I have never seen, represents Friedrich reconnoitering
those five-and-twenty miles of Elbe, which have so many redoubts
on their side of it, and swarm with Croat parties on both sides :
this is all the truth that is in the Engraving.’5 Fact says:

4 Quvres de Frédéric, vi. 147. *® Rodenbeck, p. 188.

Fe

. Cuar. VIL] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 461
13th July—10th Aug. 1778.

Friedrich (“on the 8th,” if that were all the variation) “ was a
mark for the Austrian sharpshooters for half-an-hour.” Myth
says, and engraves it, with the date of ‘July 7th:” Friedrich,
skirting some thicket, suddenly came upon a single Croat with
musket levelled at him, wild creature’s finger just on the trigger;
—and quietly admonishing, Friedrich lifts his finger with a “‘Du,
Du (Ah you!);” upon which, such the divinity that hedges one,
the wild creature instantly flings down his murder-weapon, and,
kneeling, embraces the King’s boot,—with kisses, for anything I
know. It is certain, Friedrich, about six times over in this pal-
try War or Quasi No-War, set his attendants on the tremble ;
was namely, from Croateries and Artilleries, in imminent peril
of life ; so careless was he, and dangerous to speak to in his sour
humour. Humour very sour, they say, for most part; being in
reality altogether backward and loth for grand enterprise; and
yet striving to think he was not; ashamed that any War of his
should be a No-War. Schmettau says:

“On the day of getting into Jaromirtz” (July 8th), “the King, tired
of riding about while the Columns were slowly getting in, lay down on
the ground with his Adjutants about him. A young Officer came riding
past ; whom the King beckoned to him ;—wrote something with pencil
(an Order, not of the least importance), and said: ‘Here; that Order to
General Lossow, and tell him he is not to take it ill that I trouble him,
as I have none in my Suite that can do anything.’” Let the Suite take
it as they can! A most pungent, severe old King; quite perverse at
times, thinks Schmettau. Thus again, more than once:

“On arriving with his Column where the Officer, a perfectly skilful
man, had marked out the Camp, the King would lift his spyglass; gaze
to right and left, riding round the place at perhaps a hundred yards dis-
tance ; and begin: ‘ Siehé ey, Herr, But look, Herr, what a botching you
have made of it again (was er da wieder fur dumm Zeug gemacht
hat)" and grumbling and blaming would alter the Camp, till it was all
out of rule; and then say, ‘See there, that is the way to mark out
Camps.’ ”®

In a week’s time, July 13th, came another fine excuse for
inaction: Plenipotentiary Thugut, namely, and the Kaiserinn’s
Letter, which we spoke of. Autograph from Maria Theresa
herself, inspired by the terror of Vienna and of her beautiful

16 Schmettau, xxv. 30, 24.

462 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. © [Book XXI.
13th July—10th Ang. 1778.

motherly heart. Negotiation to be private utterly: ‘‘My Son,
the Kaiser, knows nothing of it; I beg the most absolute secre-
cy ;” which was accordingly kept, while Thugut, with Fincken-
stein and Hertzberg again, held ‘‘Congress of Braunau” in those
neighbourhoods,—with as little effect as ever. Thugut’s Name,
it seems, was originally Twunzcotto (Tyrolese-Italian) ; which the
ignorant Vienna people changed into “ Thu-nicht-gut (Do-no-
good),” till Maria Theresa, in very charity, struck out the nega-
tive, and made him “ Do-good.” Do-good and his Congress
held Friedrich till August 10th: five more weeks gone; and
nothing but reconnoitering,—with of course foraging, and dili-
gently eating the Country, which is a daily employment, and
produces fencing and skirmishing enough.

Henri, in the interim, has invaded from the West; seen Leit-
meritz, Lobositz;— Prag Nobility all running, and. I suppose
Prayers to St. Vitus going again,—and Loudon in alarm. Lou-
don, however, saved Prag ‘‘ by two masterly positions” (not men-
tionable here); upon which Henri took camp at Niemes; Lou-
don, the weaker in this part, seizing the Iser as a bulwark, and
ranking himself behind it, back-to-back of Lacy. Here for about
five weeks sat Henri, nothing on hand but to eat the Country.
Over the heads of Loudon and Lacy, as the crow flies, Henri’s
Camp may be about 70 miles from Jaromirtz, where the King is.
Hussar Belling, our old Anti-Swede friend, a brilliant cutting-
man, broke over the Iser once, perhaps twice; and there was
pretty fencing by him and the like of him: “but Prince Henri
did nothing,” says the King,!’—was, in fact, helping the King to
do nothing. By the 10th of September; as Henri has computed,
this Country will be eaten; “‘ Forage, I find, will be quite done
here on September 10th,” writes Henri, after a week or two’s
experience.

There was always talk of Henri and the King, who are
100,000 each, joining hands by the post of Arnau, or some weak
point of Lacy’s well north of Konigsgriitz; thus of cutting off
the meal-carts of that back-to-back copartnery, and so of tum-
bling it off the ground (which was perfectly possible, says Schmet-

17 (Huvres de Wrédéric, vi. 154.

sale le

Cnar. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 463
15th Aug. —8th Sept. 1778.

tau); and small detachments and expeditions were pushed out,
General Dalwig, General Anhalt, partly for that object: but
not the least of it ever took effect. “ Futile, lost by loitering,
as all else was,” groans Schmettau. Prince Henri was averse
to attempt, intimates the King,—as indeed (though refusing to
own it) was I. ‘September 10th, my forage will be out, your
Majesty,” says Henri, always a punctual calculating man.

The Austrians, on their side, were equally stagnant; and, ex-
cept the continual skirmishing with the Prussian foragers, un-
dertook nothing.» “‘ Shamefully ill-done our foraging, too,” ex-
claims Schmettau again and again: ‘‘Had we done it with neat-
ness, with regularity, the Country would have lasted us twice as
long. Doing it headlong, wastefully, and by the rule-of-thumb,
the Country was a desert, all its inhabitants fled, all its edibles
consumed, before six weeks were over. Friedrich is not now
himself at all; in great things or in little; what a changed
Friedrich !” exclaims Schmettau, with wearisome iteration.

From about August 6th, or especially August 10th, when the
Maria-Theresa Correspondence, or ‘‘ Congress of Brannau,”’ end-
ed likewise in zero, Friedrich became impatient for actual junc-
tion with Prince Henri, actual push of business; and began to
hint of an excellent plan he had: ‘ Burst through on their left
flank ; blow up their post of Hohenelbe yonder: thence is but
one march to Iser river; junction with Prince Henri there; and
a Lacy and a Loudon tumbled to the winds.” ‘A plan perfect-
ly feasible,” says Schmettau; “which solaced the King’s hu-
mour, but which he never really intended to execute.” Possibly
not ; otherwise, according to old wont, he would have forborne to
speak of it beforehand. At all events, August 15th, in the feel-
ing that one ought really to do something, the rather as forage
hereabouts was almost or altogether running out, he actually set
about this grand scheme.

Got on march to leftward, namely, up the Aupa river, through
the gloomy chasms of Kingdom-Wood, memorable in old days:
had his bakery shifted to Trautenau; his heavy cannon getting
tugged through the mire and the rains, which by this time were
abundant, towards Hohenelbe, for the great enterprise: and sat
encamped on and about the Battleground of Sohr for a week or

464 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
8th-21st Sept. 1778.

so, waiting till all were forward; eating Sohr Country, which
was painfully easy to do. The Austrians did next to nothing
on him; but the rains, the mud, and scarcity were doing much.
Getting on to Hohenelbe region, after a week’s wet waiting, he,
on ocular survey of the ground about, was heard to say, ‘‘ This
cannot be done, then!” *‘*Had never meant to do it,” sneers
Schmettau, ‘‘and only wanted some excuse.’ Which is very
likely. Schmettau gives an Anecdote of him here: In regard
to a certain Hill, the Key of the Austrian position, which the
King was continually reconnoitering, and lamenting the enor-
mous height of, ‘Impossible, so high!”’. One of the Adjutants
took his theodolite, ascertained the height, and, by way of com-
forting his Majesty, reported the exact number of feet above their
present level. ‘‘ How do you know, Herr?” said the King an-
erily. ‘Measured it by Trigonometry, your Majesty.”—“ 'Trig-
onometry! Scher’ er sich zum Teufel (Off with you, Sir, to the
Devil, your Trigonometry and you!)’’—no believer in mathemat-
ics, this King.

He was loth to go; and laid the blame on many things.
“Were Prince Henri now but across the Iser. Had that stu-
pid Anhalt, when he was upon it” (galloping about, to the ruin
of his head), only seized Arnau, Arnau and its Elbe-Bridge ;
and had it in hand for junction with Prince Henri!” In fine,
just as the last batch of heavy cannon,—twenty or thirty hun-
gered horses to a gun, at the rate of five miles a day in roads
unspeakable,—were getting in, he ordered them all to be drag-
ged back, back to the Trautenau road; whither we must now
all go. And, September 8th, in perfect order, for the. Austrians
little molested him, and got a bad bargain when they did,
the great Friedrich with his whole Army got on march home-
ward, after such a Campaign as we see. Climbed the Trau-
tenau-Landshut Pass, with nothing of effective loss except from
the rainy elements, the steep miry ways, and the starved horses ;
draught-horses especially starved,—whom, poor creatures, “you
would see spring at the ropes” (draught-harness), “thirty of
them to a gun, when started and gee-ho’d to; tug violently with
no effect, and fall down in whole rows.”

Prince Henri, forage done, started punctually September 10th,

Cuap. VI.] | © THE BAVARIAN WAR. 465
Oct. 1778—May 1779.

two days after his Brother; and, with little or no pursuit from
the Austrians, and with horses unstarved, got home in compar-
atively tolerable circumstances. Cantoned himself in Dresden
neighbourhood, and sat waiting: he had never approved this
War; and now, I suppose, would not want for reflexions. Fried-
rich’s cantonments were round Landshut, and spread out to right |
and to left, from Glatz Country and the Upper Silesian Hills,
to Silberberg and Schweidnitz;—his own quarter is the same
region, where he lay so long in Summer 1759, talking on learn-
ed subjects with the late Quintus Icilius, if readers remember,
and wearily waiting till Cunctator Daun (likewise now deceased)
took his stand, or his seat, at Marklissa, and the King could fol-
low him to Schmottseifen. Friedrich himself on this present oc-
casion stayed at Schatzlar as rearguard, to see whether the Aus-
trians would not perhaps try to make some Winter Campaign
of it, and if so, whether they would attempt on Prince Henri or
on him. ‘The Austrians did not attempt on either; showed no
such intention,—though mischievous enough in other small ways.
Friedrich wrote the Eloge of Voltaire!® while he waited here at
Schatzlar, among the rainy Mountains. Later on, as prospects
altered, he was much at Breslau, or running about on civic er-
rands with Breslau as centre: at Breslau he had many Dialogues
with Professor Garve,—in whose good, but oppressively solemn,
little Book, more a dull-droning Preachment than a Narrative,
no reader need look for them or for him.

As to the Eulogy of Voltaire, we may say that it is generous, in-
genious, succinct; and of dialect now obsolete to us. There was (and
is, though suppressed) another Eulogy, brand-new, by a Contemporary
of our own,—from which I know not if readers will permit me a sen-
tence or two, in this pause among the rainy Mountains?

* * “A wonderful talent lay in this man”—(in Voltaire, to wit;
“ such an intellect, the sharpest, swiftest of the world,” thinks our Con-
temporary ; “ fathoming you the deepest subject, to a depth far beyond
most men’s soundings, and coming up with victory and something wise
and logically speakable to say on it, sooner than any other man,—never
doubting but he has been at the bottom, which*is from three to ten
miles lower !’’)—‘* Wonderful talent; but observe always, if you look
closely, it was in essence a mere talent for Speech ; which talent Ba-

18In Quvres de Frédéric, vii. 50 et seq. (‘' finished, Nov. 26th, 1778’’).
U 2

Or I gar SF enz

i ee et es

— Se ee ee

466 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

Oct. 1778—May 1779.
vius and Mevius and the Jew Apella may admire without looking be-
hind it, but this Eulogist by no means will. Speech, my friend? If
your sublime talent of speech consists only in making ignorance appear
to be knowledge, and little wisdom appear to be much, I will thank you
to walk on with it, and apply at some other shop. The guanizty of
shops where you can apply with thrice-golden advantage, from the
Morning Newspapers to the National Senate, is tremendous at this
epoch of the poor world’s history ;—go, I request you!’ And while his
foot is on the stairs, descending from my garret, I think: Oh unfortu-
nate fellow-creature in an unfortunate world, why is not there a Fried-
rich Wilhelm to ‘ elect’ you, as he did Gundling, to his Tobacco Par-
liament, and there set Fassmann upon you with the pans of burning
peat? It were better even for yourself; wholesomely didactic to your
poor self, 1 cannot doubt; and for the poor multitudes to whom you are
now to be sacred vates, speaking and singing your dismal Gundlingiana
as if inspired by Heaven, how infinitely better !— —Courage, courage!
I discern, across these hideous jargons, the reign of greater silence ap-
proaching upon repentant men; reign of greater silence, I say ; or else
that of annihilation, which will be the most silent of all. * *

* Voltaire, if not a great man, is a remarkably peculiar one; and did
such a work in these Ages as will render him long memorable, more or
less. He kindled the infinite dry dungheap of things; set it blazing
heaven-high ;—and we all thought, in the French Revolution time, it
would burn out rapidly into ashes, and then there would a clear Upper
Firmament, if over a blackened Earth, be once more vouchsafed us.
The flame is now done, as I once said; and only the dull dungheap,
smokily burning, but not, now blazing, remains,—for it was very damp,
except on the surface, and is by nature slow of combustion :—who
knows but it may have to burn for centuries yet, poisoning by its vil-
Janous mal-odours the life-atmosphere of all men? Eternal Author of
this Universe, whose throne is Truth, to whom all the True are Sons,
wilt thou not look down upon us, then!—Till this sad process is com-
plete, Voltaire is like to be very memorable.” * *

To Friedrich the Winter was in general tranquil; a Friedrich
busy preparing all things for his grand Mihren Enterprise, and
for ‘real work next year.” By and by, there came to be real
Peace-prospects instead. Meanwhile, the Austrians do try a
little, in the small Pandour way, to dislodge him from the Up-
per-Silesian or Teschen regions, where the Erbprinz of Bruns-
wick is in command; a man not to be pricked into gratis by
Pandours. Erbprinz, accordingly, provoked by their Pandour-

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 467
Oct. 1778—May 1779.

ings, broke out at last; and about Zuckmantel instantly scourged
them home, and had peace after. Foiled here, they next tried
upon Glatz; “Get into his Glatz Country, then ;—a snatch of
that will balance the. account” (which was one of Newspaper
glory only): and a certain Wiirmser of theirs, expert in such
things, did burn the Town of Habelschwert one morning ;!9 and
tried farther, not wisely this time, a surprisal of Glatz Fortress
itself; but got smitten home by our old friend General Wunsch,
without profit there. This was the same Wiirmser who came
to bad issues in the Napoleon time afterwards; a rising man
then; not a dim Old-Newspaper ghost as now.

Most shameful this burning of Habelschwert by way of mere
bravura, thinks Friedrich, in a time of actual Treaty for Peace,
when our Congress of Teschen was just struggling to get togeth-
er! It was the chief stroke done by the Austrians in this War;
glorious or shameful, we will not think of inquiring. Nor in fact
of adding one word more on such a War,—except, what every-
body longs for, That, November 27th, 1778, Czarina Catharine,
by her Prince Galitzin at Vienna, intervened in the matter, in a
lofty way; and ended it. Czarina Catharine,—small thanks to
her, it seems, for it was Friedrich that by his industries and
world-diplomacies, French and other, had got her Turks, who
had been giving trouble again, compesced into peace for her; and
indeed, to Friedrich or his interests, though bound by Treaty,
she had small regard in taking this step, but wished merely to
appear in German Politics as a She-Jove,—Czarina Catharine
signified, in high and peremptory though polite Diplomatic terms,
at Vienna, “ Imperial Madam, how long is such a War to last?
Be at Peace, both of you; or—!—I shall, however, mediate, if
you like, being the hearty friend of both.’’2°

‘‘ Do,” answers Maria Theresa, whose finance is quite out,
whose motherly heart is almost broken, though a young Kaiser
still prances violently, and kicks against the pricks: ‘“ Do, your
noble Czarish Majesty ; France, too, is interfering: France and
you will decide what is just, and we will end.” ‘Congress of
Teschen” met accordingly, March 10th, 1779: Teschen, in Aus-

19 18th January 1779” (Rédenbeck, iii. 195; Schmettau, &c.),
20 Copy of Galitzin’s ‘‘ Declaration,” in Fischer, ii. 406-411.

468 | AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Oct. 1778—May 1779.

trian Silesia, where we have been ;—Repnin as Russian, Breteuil
the Frenchman, Cobenzl and Hertzberg as Austrian and Prus-
sian ;—and, May 13th (in two months time, not in two weeks, as
had been expected, for there rose unexpected haggles), did close
everything, firm as Diplomacy could do it, into equitable, or ap-
proximately equitable finis: “Go home, you Austria; quit your
stolen Bavaria (all but a rim or paring, Circle of Burghausen,
since you must have something!): Saxony, Mecklenburg, these
must be satisfied to moderate length; and therewith general
As-you-were.”’

Russia and France were agreed on the case; and Friedrich,
bitterly longing to have done with it, had said to himself, “ In
two. weeks or so:’’ but it proved far otherwise. Never were
such hagglings, provocations, and unreasonable confusions as now
rose. The burning of Habelschwert was but a type of them.
Haggles on the part of worthless Karl Theodor, kindled by Jo-
seph and his Kaunitz, kicking against the pricks. Haggles on
Saxony’s part: “I claimed 7,000,0002. sterling, and you allow
me 600,000/.” ‘* Better that than nothing,” answered Friedrich.
Haggles with Mecklenburg: ‘Instead of my Leuchtenberg, I
get an improvement in my Law-Courts, right of Judging with-
out Appeal; what is that! MHaggles with the once grateful
Duke of Zweibriick: ‘Can’t part with my Burghausen.” ‘Sup-
pose you had had to part with your Bavaria altogether?” In
short, Friedrich, who had gained nothing for himself, but such
infinity of outlay in all kinds, never saw such a coil of human
follies and cupidities before; and had to exhaust his utmost pa-
tience, submit to new losses of his own, and try all his dexteri-
ties in pig-driving: overjoyed, at last, to get out of it on any
terms. Outlay of Friedrich is about Two Millions sterling, and
above 10,000 men’s lives (his own narrowly not included), with
censures, criticisms, provocations and botherations without end.
In return for which, he has, truly, put a spoke in Austria’s proud
wheel for this time, and managed to see fair play in the Reich;
which had seemed to him, and seems, a considerable thing. By
way of codicil, Austria agrees not to chicane him in regard to
Anspach-Baireuth,—how generous of Austria, after this expe-
rience !—

Aha nee

Cuap. VI.] THE BAVARIAN WAR. 469
Oct. 1778—May 1779.

In reality, the War was an Imaginary War; deserving on its
own score little record anywhere; to readers here, requiring al-
most less than it has got. Schmettau, Schéning and others, have
been abundantly minute upon it; but even to soldiers there is
little either of interest or instruction; to us, allit yields is cer-
tain Anecdotes of Friedrich’s temper and ways in that difficult
predicament; which; as coming at first-hand, gathered for us by
punctual authentic Schmettau, who was constantly about him,
with eyes open and note-book ready, have a kind of worth in
the Biographic point of view.

The Prussian Soldiery, of whom we see a type in Schmettau,
were disgusted with this War, and called it, in allusion to the
foraging, A scramble for potatoes, “ Der Kartoffel- Krieg, The
Potato War; which is its common designation to this day.
The Austrians, in a like humour, called it ‘‘ Zwetschken-Rummel”
(say, ‘‘ Three-button Loo); a game not worth playing; especially
not at such cost. Combined cost counted to have been in sum
total 4,350,000/. and 20,000 men.?!' “ The Prussian Army was
full of ardour, never abler for fight” (insists Schmettau), which
indeed seems to have been the fact on every small occasion ;—
‘‘but fatally forbidden to try.’ Not so fatally perhaps, had
Schmettau looked beyond his epaulettes: was not the thing, by
that slow method, got done? By the swifter method, awaken-
ing a new Seven-Years business, how infinitely costlier might it
have been ! , )

Schmettau’s Narrative, deducting the endless lamentings, es-
pecially the extensive didactic digressions, is very clear, ocular,
exact; and, in contrast with Friedrich’s own, is really amusing
to read. A Schmettau giving us, in his haggard light and ob-

lique point of vision, the naked truth, naked and all in a shiver;

a Friedrich striving to drape it a little, and make it comfortable
to himself. Those bits of Anecdotes in Schmetiau, clear, credi-
ble, as if we had seen them, are so many crevices through which
it is curiously worth while to look.

31 Preuss, iy. 115,

470 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. — [Book XXI.
1779.

CHAPTER VII.
MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT.

Axzout the Second Law-Reform, after reading and again read-
ing much dreary detail, I can say next to nothing, except that
it is dated as beginning in 1776, near thirty years after Cocce-
ji’s;! that evidently, by what causes is not stated, but may be
readily enough conjectured (in the absence of Cocceji by death,
and of a Friedrich by affairs of War), the abuses of Law had
again become more or less unendurable to this King; that said
abuses did again get some reform (again temporary, such the
law of Nature, which bids you sweep vigorously your kitchen,
though it will next moment recommence the gathering of dirt
upon it); and that, in fine, after some reluctance in the Law
circles, and debating pro and contra, oral some of it, and done in
the King’s presence, who is so intent to be convinced and see
his practical way in it,2—there was, as supplement to the mere
Project or Theory of a Codex Fredericianus in Cocceji’s time, an
actual Prussian Code set about; Von Carmer, the Silesian Chan-
cellor, the chief agent: and a First Folio, or a First and partly
a Second of it, were brought out in Friedrich’s lifetime, the re-
mainder following in that of his successor; which Code is ever
since the Law of the Prussian Nation to this day.? Of its worth

1 “Tn 1748” Cocceji’s was completed; ‘‘in 1774-75,” on occasion of
the Silesian Reviews, Von Carmer, Chancellor of Silesia, knowing of the
King’s impatience at the state of Law, presented successively Two Memo-
rials on the subject; the Second of which began, “4th January 1776,” to
have visible fruit.

2 At Potsdam, ‘‘4th January 1776,” Debate, by solemn appointment, in
the King’s Presence (King very unwell), between Silesian-Chancellor von
Carmer and Grand-Chancellor von Fiirst, as to the feasibility of Carmer’s
ideas; old Fiirst strong in the negative ;—King, after reflexion, determin-
ing to go on nevertheless. (Rédenbeck, iii, 131, 133.)

3 Not finished and promulgated till ‘* 5th February 1794 ;” First Volume

(containing Prozess Ordnung, Form of Procedure, in all its important de-
tails) had come out, ‘26th April 1784” (Preuss, iii. 418-422.)

——s

Cuap. VII. ] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 471
1779.

as a Code I have heard favourable opinions, comparatively fa-
vourable; but can myself say nothing: famed Savigny finds it
superior in intelligence and law-knowledge to the Code Napolé:
on,—upon which indeed, and upon all Codes possible to poor
hag-ridden and wig-ridden generations like ours, Savigny feels
rather desperate. Unfortunate mortals do want to have their
bits of lawsuits settled, nevertheless; and have, on trial, found
even the ignorant Code Napoléon a mighty benefit in comparison
to none !—

Readers all see how this Second Prussian Law-Reform was a
thing important to Prussia, of liveliest interest to the then King
of Prussia; and were my knowledge of it greater than it is, this
is all I could hope to say of it that would be suitable or profita-
ble at present. Let well-disposed readers take it up in their
imaginations, as a fact and mass of facts, very serious there and
then; and colour with it in some degree those five or six last
years of this King’s life.

Connected with this Second Law-Reform, and indeed partial-
ly a source of it, or provocation to go on with it, mending your
speed, there is one little Lawsuit, called the Miller Arnold Case,
which made an immense noise in the world, and is still known
by rumour to many persons, who would probably be thankful,
as certainly I myself should, for some intelligible word on it. In
regard to. which, and to which alone, in this place, we will per-
mit ourselves a little more detail.

In the sandy moors towards the Silesian border of the Neu-
mark, south-west of Ziillichau,—where we once were, with Dic-
tator Wedell, fighting the Russians in a tragic way,—there is,
as was casually then indicated, on one of the poor Brooks trick-
ling into Oder, a Mill called Krebsmiihle (Crabmill); Millers of
which are a line of dusty Arnolds, laboriously for long genera-
tions grinding into meal the ryes, pulses, barleys of that dim re-
gion; who, and whose Crabmill, in the year 1779-80, burst
into a notoriety they little dreamt of, and became famous in the
fashionable circles of this Universe, where an indistinct rumour
of them lives to this day. We indicated Arnold and his Mill

472 AFTERNOON AND’ EVENING. [Book XXI.
1779.

in Wedell’s time; Wedell’s scene being so remote and empty to
readers: in fact, nobody knows on what paltriest of moors a
memorable thing will not happen ;—here, for instance, is withal
the Birthplace of that Rhyming miracle, Frau Karsch (Karsch-
inn, Karchess as they call her), the Berlin literary Prodigy, to
whom Friedrich was not so flush of help as had been expected.
The child of utterly poor Peasants there ; whose poverty, shin-
ing out as thrift, unweariable industry and stoical valour, is
beautiful to me, still more their poor little girl’s bits of fortunes,
‘‘ tending three cows” in the solitudes there, and gazing wistfully
into Karth and Heaven with her ingenuous little soul,—desiring
mainly one thing, that she could get Books, any Book what-
ever; having half-accidentally picked up the art of reading, and
finding hereabouts absolutely nothing to read. Frau Karsch, I
have no doubt, knows the Crabmill right well; and can, to all
permissible lengths, inform the Berlin Circles on this point.*

Crabmill is in Pommerzig ‘Township, not far from Kay :—
Ziillichau, Kay, Palzig, Crossen, all come to speech again, in
this Narrative; fancy how they turned up in Berlin dinner cir-
cles, to Dictator Wedell, gray old gentleman, who is now these
many years War-Minister, peaceable, and well accepted, but re-
members the flamy youth he had. Landlord of these Arnolds
and their Mill is Major Graf von Schmettau (no connexion of
our Schmettaus),—to what insignificantly small amount of rent,
I could not learn on searching; 102. annually is a too liberal]
guess. Innumerable things, of no pertinency to us, are weari.

4 See Jérdens (§ Karschin), ii. 607-640. An excellent Silesian Noble-
man lifted her miraculously from the sloughs of misery, landed her from
his travelling-carriage in the upper world of Berlin, ‘‘ January 1761” (age
then thirty-nine, husband Karsch a wretched drunken Tailor at Glogau,
who thereupon enlisted, and happily got shot or finished): Berlin’s enthu-
siasm was, and continued to be, considerable ;— Karschin’s head, I fear,
proved weakish, though her rhyming faculty was great. Friedrich saw
her once, October 1763, spoke kindly to her (Dialogue reported by herself,
with a Chodowiecki Engraving to help, in the Musen-Almanachs ensuing) ;
and gave her a 10/., but never much more :—‘‘ somebody had done me ill
with him,” thinks the Karschin (not thinking, ‘‘Or perhaps nobody but
my poor self, and my weakness of head”). She continued rhyming and
living,—certain Principalities and High People still standing true, —till
**12th October 1791.”

ry

Cuap. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 473
1779.

somely told, and ever again told, while the pertinent are often
missed out, in that dreary cart-load of Arnold Law-Papers,
barely readable, barely intelligible, to the most patient intellect:
with despatch let us fish up the small cardinal particles of it,
and arrange in some chronological or human order, that readers
may form to themselves an outline of the thing. In 1759, we
mentioned that this Mill was going; Miller of it an old Arnold,
Miller’s Lad a young. Here is the subsequent succession of oc-
currences that concern us:

In 1762, Young Arnold, as I dimly gather, had got married, appar-
ently a Wife with portion; bought the Mill from his Father, he and
Wife co-possessors thenceforth ;—* Rosine his Spouse” figuring jointly
in all these Law-Papers; and the Spouse especially as a most shifty
litigant. ‘There they continue totally silent to mankind for about eight
years. Happy the Nation, much more may we say the Household,
“whose Public History is blank.” But in the eighth year,

In 1770, Freyherr Baron von Gersdorf in Kay, who lies farther up
the stream, bethinks him of Fish-husbandry ; makes a Fish-pond to
himself, and for part supply thereof, lays some beam or weir across the
poor Brook, and deducts a part of Arnold’s water.

In 1773, the Arnolds fall into arrear of rent: ‘* Want of water; Fish-
pon! spoils our water,” plead they to Major Graf von Schmettau.
“ Prosecute von Gersdorf, then,” says Schmettau: “I must have my
rent! Youshall have time, lengthened terms; but pay then, or else—!”
For four years the Arnolds tried more or less to pay, but never could,
or never did completely: during which period Major von Schmettau
had them up in his. Court of Pommerzig,—manorial of feudal kind of
Court; I think it is more or less his, though he does not sit there ; and
an Advocate, not of his appointing, though probably of his accepting,
dispenses justice there. Schlecker is the Advocate’s name; acquitted
by all Official people of doing anything wrong. No appearance that the
Herr Graf von Schmettau put hand to the balances of justice in this
Court; with his eye, however, who knows but he might act on them
more or less! And, at any rate, be suspected by distressed Arnolds,
especially by a distressed Frau Arnold, of doing so. The Frau Arnold
had a strong suspicion that way ; and seems to have risen occasionally
upon Schlecker, who did once order the poor woman to be locked up
for contempt of Court: “ Only two hours !” asseverates Schlecker after-
wards; after which she came out cool and respectful to Court.

Not the least account survives of those procedures in Schlecker’s
Court; but by accident, after many readings, you light upon a little

474 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1779.
fact which does shed a transient ray over them. Namely, that already
in 1775, four years before the Case became audible in Official circles,
much more in general society, Frau Arnold had seized an opportunity,
Majesty being at Crossen in those neighbourhoods, and presented a Pe-
tition: “ Oh, just King, appoint a Military Commission to investigate
our business; impartial Officers will speedily find out the facts, and
decide what is just!** Which denotes an irritating experience in
Schlecker’s Court. Certain it is, Schlecker’s Court did, in this tedious
harassing way, decide against Frau Arnold in every point. ‘* Pay Herr
Graf von Schmettau, or else disappear; prosecute Von Gersdorf, if you
like!” And, in fine, as the Arnolds could not pay up, nor see any day-
light through prosecuting Baron von Gersdorf, the big gentleman in

Kay,—Schlecker, after some five years of this, decreed Sale of the -

Mill:—and sold it was. In Ziillichau, September 7th, 1778, there is
Auction of the Mill: Herr Landeinnehmer (Cess- Collector) Kuppisch
bought it; knocked down to him for the moderate sum of 600 thalers,
or 90J. sterling, and the Arnolds are an ousted family. ‘ September

7th,”— Potato-War just closing its sad Campaign ; tomorrow, march

for Trautenau, thirty horses to a gun.—

The Arnolds did make various attempts and appeals to the
Neumark Regierung (College of Judges); but it was without the
least result. ‘*Schlecker right in every point; Gersdorf right,”
answered the College: ‘‘go, will you!” A Mill forfeited by every
Law, and fallen to the highest bidder. Cess-Collector Kuppisch,
it was soon known, had sold his purchase to Von Gersdorf:
‘“‘Hah!” said the rural public, smelling something bad. Certain
it is, Von Gersdorf is become proprietor both of Pond and Mill;
and it is not to the ruined Arnolds that Schlecker law can seem
an admirable sample.

And truly, reading over those barrow-loads of pleadings and
relationes, one has to admit that, taken as a reason for seeing
oneself ruined, and one’s Mill become the big gentleman’s who
fancies carp, they do seem considerably insufficient. The Law-
Pleadings are duly voluminous. Barrow-loads of them, dreariest
reading in Creation, remain; going into all manner of questions,
proving, from Grotius and others, that landlords have rights upon
private rivers, and another sort upon public ditto; that Von
Gersdorf, by Law of 1566, had verily the right to put down his
Fishpond,—whether Schmettau the duty to indemnify Arnold

5 Preuss, iii. 382.

oe —

Cuap. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 475
1779.

for the same? that is not touched upon: nor, singular to say, is it
anywhere made out, or attempted to be made out, How much of
water Arnold lost by the Pond, much less what degree of real
impediment, by loss of his own time, by loss of his customers

_ (tired of such waiting on a mill), Arnold suffered by the Pond.

This, which you would have thought the soul of the matter, is
absolutely left out; altogether unsettled,—after, I think, four,
or at least three, express Commissions had sat on it, at ‘suc-
cessive times, with the most esteemed hydraulic sages opining
and examining ;—and remains, like the part of Hamlet, omitted

by particular desire. No wonder Frau Arnold begged for a

Military Commission ; that is to say, a decision from rational
human creatures, instead of juridical wigs proceeding at this rate.

It was some time in 1775 that Rosine (what we reckoned a
very elucidative point!) had given-in her Petition to the King
at Crossen, showing how ill Schlecker was using them. She
now, “‘ about May-day 1779,” in a new Petition, referred to that,
and again begged a Commission of Soldier-people to settle it.
May 4th, 1779,— King not yet home, but coming,°— King’s
Cabinet, on Order, ‘ sends this to Justice-Department :” nothing
said on it, the existence of the Petition sufficiently saying. Jus-
tice- Department thereupon demands the Law-Records, docu-
mentary Narrative of res Arnold, from Ciistrin ; finds all right:
‘Peace, ye Arnolds; what would you have?”

Same year 1779 (no express date), Grand-Chancellor yon
Fiirst, being at Ciistrin, officially examining the condition of
Law-matters, Frau Arnold failed not to try there also with a
Petition: “See, great Law-gentleman come to reform abuses,
can that possibly be Law; or if so, is it not Injustice as well?”
“Tush!” answered Fiirst;—for I believe Law-people, ever since
this new stringency of Royal vigilance upon them, are plagued
with such complaints from Dorfships and dark greedy Peasant
people; “Tush!” and flungit promptly into his waste-basket.

Is there no hope at all, then? Arnold remembers that a
Brother of his is a Prussian soldier; and that he has for Colonel,
Prince Leopold of Brunswick, a Prince always kind to the poor.

6 «Arrived at Berlin, May 27th” (Rodenbeck, iii. 201).
”? Preuss, iii. 382.

476 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
1779.

The Leopold Regiment lies at Frankfurt: try Prince Leopold
by that channel. Prince Leopold listened ;—the Soldier Arnold
probably known to him as rational and respectable. Prince
Leopold now likewise applies to Fiirst: ‘* A defect, not of Law,
Herr Kanzler, but of Equity, there does seem. Schmettau had
a right to his rent; Von Gersdorf, by Deed of 1566, to his Pond:
but the Arnolds had not water, and have lost their Mill. Could
not there,” suggests Leopold, “be appointed, without noise of
any kind, a Commission of neutral people, strangers to the Neu-
mark, to search this matter to the actual root of it, and let Kqui-
ty ensue?” To whom also Fiirst answers, though in a politer
shape, “ Tush, Durchlaucht! Every man to his trade!”

So that Prince Leopold himself, the King’s own Nephew,
proves futile? Some think Leopold did, this very Autumn, cas-
ually, or as if casually, mention the matter to the King,—whose
mind is uneasily awake to all such cases, knowing what a buck-
ram set his Lawyers are. ‘ At the Reviews,” as these people
say, Leopold could not have done it; there being, this Year, no
Reviews, merely return of King and Army from the Bavarian
War. But during August, and on into September this Year, it
is very evident, there was a Visit of the Brunswick Family at
Potsdam ;° Leopold’s Mamma and certain of his Brothers,—of
which, Colonel Prince Leopold, though not expressly mentioned
in the Books, may very possibly have been permitted, for a day
or two, to form part, for Mamma’s behoof and his own; and
may have made his casual observation, at some well-chosen mo-
ment, with the effect intended. In which case, Leopold was by
no means futile, but proved, after all, to be the saving clause for
the Arnolds.

Gallant young fellow, one loves to believe it of him; and to
add it to the one other fact now known of him, which was also
beautiful, though tragic. Six years after, Spring 1785, Oder
River, swollen by rains, was in wild deluge; houses in the sub-
urbs like to be washed away. Leopold, looking on it from the
Bridge or shore, perhaps partly with an Official eye, saw the in-
habitants of some houses like to be drowned; looked wildly for
assistance, but found none; and did, himself, in uncontrollable

8 Rédenbeck, iii. 206 et seq.

a a

- Cuar. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. ATT

1779.

pity, dash off in a little boat, through the wild-eddying surges ;
and got his own death there, himself drowned in struggling to
save others. Which occasioned loud lamentation in the world;
in his poor Mother’s heart what unnamable voiceless lamenta-
tion!9 He had founded a Garrison School at Frankfurt; spared
no expenditure of pains or of money. A man adored in Frank-
furt. “His Brother Friedrich, in memory of him, presented,
next year, the Uniform in which Leopold was drowned, to the
Freemason Lodge of Berlin, of which he had been member.”
Sunt lacryme rerum.

But to return to the Arnolds, and have done with them: for
we are now, by Leopold’s help or otherwise, got to the last act
of that tedious business.

August 21st, 1779 (these high Brunswickers still at Potsdam,
if that had any influence), the Arnolds again make Petition to
the King: “ Alas, no justice yet, your Majesty!” ‘Shall we
never see the end of this, then?’’ thinks the King: ‘some Sol-
dier, with human eyes, let him, attended by one of their Law-
wigs, go upon the ground; and search it!” And, next day,
having taken Protocol of the Arnold Complaint, issues Cabinet
Order, or King’s Message to the Ciistrin Law-wigs: ‘Colonel
Heucking” (whose regiment lies in Ziillichau district, a punctual

enough man), ‘‘he shall be the Soldier ; to whom do you adjoin

what member of your Court you think the fittest: and let, at
last, justice be done. And swift, if you please!”

The Ciistrin Regierung, without delay, name Regrerungs-Rath
Neumann; who is swiftly ready, as is Colonel Heucking swiftly,
—and they two set out together up the Pommerzig Brook, over
that moor Country; investigating, pondering, hearing witnesses,
and no doubt consulting, and diligently endeavouring to get to
the bottom of this poor Arnold question. For how many Sep-
tember days, I know not: everybody knows, however, that they
could not agree; in other words, that they saw two bottoms to
it,—the Law-gentleman one bottom, the Soldier another. ‘True
bottom is already there,” argued the Law-gentleman ; “ confirm

° Friedrich’s Letter to her: Gfuvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 351 (‘12th
May 1785.’’). 10 Militair-Lexikon, i. 247.

478 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1779.

Decision of Court in every point.” ‘No; Arnold has lost wa-
ter, has suffered wrong,’’ thinks Heucking; ‘that is the true
bottom.” And so they part, each with his own opinion. Neu-
mann affirmed afterwards, that the Colonel came with a prede-
termination that way, and even that he said, once or oftener, in
his eagerness to persuade: “‘ His Majesty has got it into his
thought; there will be nothing but trouble if you persist in that
notion.” ‘To which virtuous Neumann was deaf. Neumann
also says, The Colonel, acquainted with Austrian enemies, but
not with Law, had brought with him his Regiment’s-Auditor,
one Bech, formerly a Law-practitioner in Crossen (readers know
Crossen, and Ex-Dictator Wedell does),— Law-practitioner in
Crossen; who had been in strife with the Ciistrin Regierung,
under rebuke from them (too importunate for some of his pau-
per clients, belike); was a cunning fellow too, and had the said
Regierung in ill-will. An adroit fellow Bech might be, or must
have been; but his now office of Regiment’s-Auditor is certifi-
cate of honesty,—good, at least, against Neumann.

Neumann's Court was silent about these Neumann surmises ;
but said afterwards, ‘‘ Heucking had not gone to the bottom of
the thing.” This was in a subsequent report, some five or six
weeks subsequent. ‘Their present report they redacted to the
effect, ‘‘ All correct as it stood,” without once mentioning Heuck-
ing. Gave it in, 27th September; by which time Heucking’s
also was in, and had made a strong impression on his Majesty.
Presumably an honest, intelligible report; though, by ill-luck
for the curious, it is now lost; among the barrow-loads of vague
wigged stuff, this one Piece, probably human, is not to be dis-
covered.

Friedrich’s indignation at the Ciistrin report, ‘‘ Perfectly cor-
rect as it stood,” and no mention of Heucking or his dissent,
was considerable: already, 27th September,—that is, on the very
day while those Ciistrin people were signing their provoking re-
port,—Friedrich, confident in Heucking, had transmitted to his
Supreme Board of Justice (Kammergericht) the impartial Heuck-
ing’s account of the affair, with order, “‘ See there, an impartial
human account, clear and circumstantial (dewtliches und ganz
umstdndliches), going down to the true roots of the business:

°
Cuap. VII. ] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 479
ith Dec. 1779.

swift, get me justice for these Arnolds!!! Searcely was this
gone, when, September 29th, the Ciistrin impertinence, ‘ Per-
fectly right as it stood,’’ came to hand; kindling the King into
hot provocation; ‘‘extreme displeasure, dusserstes Misfallen,” as
his answer bore: ‘ Rectify me all that straightway, and relieve
these Arnolds of their injuries!” You Pettifogging Pedant
Knayes, bring that Arnold matter to order, will you; you had
better !— f

The Ciistrin Knaves, with what feelings I know not, proceed
accordingly ; appoint a new Commission, one or more Lawyers
in it, and at least one Hydraulic Gentleman in it, Schade the
name of him; who are to go upon the ground, hear witnesses,
and the like. Who went accordingly; and managed, not too
fast, Hydraulic Schade rather disagreeing from the Legal Gen-
tlemen, to produce. a Report, reported upon by the Ciistrin
Court, 28th October: ‘‘'That there is one error found: 6/. 12s.
as value of corn /e/t, clearly Arnold’s that, when his Mill was
sold; that, with this improvement, all is now correct to the ut-
termost; and that Heucking had not investigated things to the
bottom.” By some accident, this Report did not come at once
to Friedrich, or had escaped his attention; so that—

November 21st, matters hanging fire in this way, Frau Ar-
nold applies again, by Petition to his Majesty; upon which is
new Royal Order,!? far more patient than might have been ex-
pected: “In God’s name, rectify me that Arnold matter, and
let us at last see the end of it!’ To which the Ciistriners an-
swer: ‘All is rectified, your Majesty. Frau Arnold, in her
Petition, has not mentioned that she gained 67. 12s. ;”—import-
ant item, that; 6/. 12s. for corn left (clearly Arnold’s that, when
his Mill was sold)! ‘‘ Our sentence we cannot alter; a Court’s
sentence is only alterable by appeal; your Majesty decides where
the appeal is to lie!” _Friedrich’s patience is now wearing out;
but he does not yet give way: ‘“ Berlin Kammergericht be your
Appeal Court,” decides he, 28th November: and will admit of no
delay on the Kammergericht’s part either. ‘‘ Papers all at Ciis-
trin, say you? Send for them by express; they will come in
one day: be swift, I say!”
11 Preuss, ili. 489. 12 Thid. iii. 490.

&
480 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. —[ Book XXL.
11th Dec. 1779.

Chancellor Fiirst is not a willing horse in this case; but he is
obliged to go. December 7th, Kammergericht sits on the Ar-
nold Appeal; Kammergericht’s view is: ‘‘Ciistrin Papers all
here, not the least delay permitted; you, Judge Rannsleben,
take these Papers to you; down upon them: let us, if humanly
possible, have a Report by tomorrow.” Rannsleben takes the
Papers in hand, December 7th; works upon them all day, and
all night following, at a rate of energy memorable among Legal
gentlemen; and December 8th, attends with lucid Report upon
them, or couple of Reports; one on Arnold versus Schmettau, in
six folios; one on Arnold versus Gersdorf, in two ditto; draws
these two Documents from his pocket, December 8th; reads them
in assembled Court (six of the Judges present'’),—which, with
marked thankfulness to the swift Rannsleben, at once adopts
his Report, and pronounces upon the Ciistrin Raths, “ Right in
every particular.” Witness our hands: every one affixing his
signature, as to a matter happily got done with.

It was Friday 10th December 1779, before Friedrich got this
fine bit of news; Saturday 11th, before he authentically saw
their Sentence. He is lying miserably ill of gout in the Schloss
of Berlin; and I suppose, since his Father, of blessed memory,
took cudgel to certain Judges and knocked out teeth from them,
and broke the judicial crowns, nobody in that Schloss has been
in such humour against men of Law. ‘Attend me here at 2
P.M. with the Three Raths who signed in Arnold’s Case :” Sat-
urday, about 11 a.m., Chancellor Fiirst receives this command:
gets Rannsleben, and two others, Friedel, Graun,—and there
occurred such a scene—But it will be better to let Rannsleben
himself tell the story, who has left an Autobiography, punctually
correct, to all appearance, but except this alone notable passage
of it, still unpublished, and like to continue so:

“ Berlin, Tuesday, 7th December 1779,” says Rannsleben (let him
tell it again in his own words), “the Acta, which had arrived from
Ciistrin in re Miller Arnold and his Wife versus Landrath von Gers-
dorf, as also those, in the same matter, versus Count von Schmettau,

13 Preuss, iii. 496.

_——<-

vv. -'?.

Cuapr. VIL] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 481 -
11th Dec. 1779.

were assigned to me, to be reported on guam primum ;—our President
von Rebeur;” President of the Supreme Kammergericht (King’s-
Chamber Tribunal, say Exchequer High Court, or Collegium), where-
of I have the honour to be one of the Seven Judges, or Raths,—“ our
President von Rebeur enjoining me to make such utmost despatch that
my Report on both these sets of Papers might be read to the assembled
Court-next day; whereby said Court might then and there be enabled
to pronounce judgment on the same. I at once set to work; went on
with it all night; and on the morrow I brought both my Reports (Re-
latuones)”—one referring to the Gersdorf, the other to the Schmettau
part of the suit,—‘‘ one of six sheets, the other of two sheets, to the
Kammergericht; where both Relationes were read. There were
present, besides me, the following six members of the Collegium: Pres-
ident von Rebeur, Raths Uhl, Friedel, Kircheisen, Graun, Gassler.

“ Appellant,” as we all know, “was Miller Arnold; and along with
the Acta were various severe Cabinet-Orders, in which the King, who
had taken quite particular notice of the Case, positively enjoined, That
Miller Arnold should have justice done him. The King had not, how-
ever, given formally any authoritative Decision of his own (keinen
eigentlichen Machtspruch gethan),” which might have given us pause,
though not full-stop by any means: “ but, in his Order to the Kammer-
gericht, had merely said, we were to decide with the utmost despatch,
and then at once inform his Majesty how.” With the speed of light or
of thought, Rannsleben hardly done reading, this Kammergericht de-
cided,—it is well known how: “In the King’s name; Right in every
particular, you Ciistrin Gentlemen ;—which be so good as publish to
parties concerned !”

Report of Kammergericht’s Judgment to this effect, for behoof of
Ciistrin, was at once got under way; and Kammergericht, in regard
to his Majesty, agreed merely to announce the fact in that quarter:
“Judgment arrived at, please your Majesty ;—Judgment already under
way for Ciistrin :’—you, Rannsleben, without saying what the Judg-
ment is, you again write for us. And Rannsleben does so; writes the
above little Message to his Majesty, “which got to the King’s hand,
Friday, December 10th. And the same day,” continues Rannsleben,
“the King despatched a very severe Cabinet-Order to Minister von
Dornberg,”—head of the Department to which the Kammergericht be-
longs,—“ demanding a Copy of the Judgment. Which order was at
once obeyed. |

“ Hereupon, on Saturday, about 11 a.m., there came to Grand-Chan-
cellor von First,” sublime head of us and of all Lawyers, a Cabinet-
Order, ‘Appear before me here, this day, at 2 o’clock; and bring with
you your Three Kammergericht Raths who drew up (minutirt) the

Vor. VI.—X

482 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

11th Dec. 1779.
Judgment in the Arnold Case.’” Message bodeful to Fiirst and the
Three Raths.

“‘ Nota,” says Rannsleben here, “the King is under the impression
that, in judging a Case, Three Raths are always employed, and there-
fore demands Three of us. But, properly, all the above-named Six
Membra Collegii, besides myself, ought to have gone to the Palace, or
else I alone.” On some points, an ill-informed King. Rannsleben
continues :

** President von Rebeur came to me in his carriage, at a quarter to 12: —

told me of the King’s Order; and said, as the King demanded only
Three Raths, there was nothing for it but to name me and Raths Frie-
del and Kircheisen, my usual partners in Judgment business. Find-
ing, however, on looking into the Sentence itself, that Kircheisen was
not amongst the signers of it, he” (Rebeur) ‘ named, instead of him,
Rath Graun, who was. For the Herr President apprehended the King
might demand to see our Sentence in Originali, and would then be
angry that a person had been sent to him who had not signed the same.
President von Rebeur instructed me farther, That I, as Reporter in the
Case, was to be spokesman at the Palace; and should explain to his
Majesty the reasons which had weighed with the Kammergericht in
coming to such decision.

“To my dear Wife I,” as beseemed a good husband, “ said nothing
of all this ; confiding it only to my Father-in-law, who tried to cheer me.
Nor, indeed, did I feel any fear within me, being persuaded in my con-
science that, in this decision of the Arnold Case, I had proceeded ac-
cording to the best of my knowledge and conviction.

** At 1 o’clock I drove to the Grand-Chancellor’s, where I found the
Raths Friedel and Graun already arrived. The Chancellor,” old Fiirst,
“instructed us as to what we had to do when we came before the King.
And then, towards 2 o’clock, he took us in his carriage to the Palace.
We entered the room immediately at the end of the Great Hall. Here
we found a heyduc” (tall porter), “ by whom the Chancellor announced
to the King that we were here. Heyduc soon came back to inquire,
Whether the Cabinets-Rath Stellter,” a Secretary or Short-hand writer
of his Majesty’s, “had arrived yet; and whether we” (we, what a doubt!)
“were Privy Councillors. We were then shortly after shown in to the
King. We passed through three rooms, the second of which was that
in which stands the Confidenz Tafel” (Table that goes by pulleys
through the floor, and comes up refurnished, when you wish to be spe-
cially private with your friends). ‘In the fourth, a small room with
one window, was the King. The Chancellor walked first ; I followed
him close ; behind me came the Rath Friedel, and then Graun. Some
way within, opposite the door, stood a screen; with our backs to this,”

’

Cuar. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 483
11th Dec. 1779.

the King-ward side of this, “ we ranged ourselves,”—in respectful row
of Four, Fiirst at the inward end of us (right or left is no matter).
“The King sat in the middle of the room, so that he could look point-
blank at us: he sat with his back to the chimney, in which there was a
fire burning. He had on a worn hat, of the clerical shape” (old-military
in fact, not a shovel at all); “cassaquin,” short dressing-gown, “ of red-
brown (mordoré) velvet; black breeches, and boots which came quite
up over the knee. His hair was not dressed. Three little benchlets
or stools, covered with green cloth, stood before him, on which he had
his feet lying” (terribly ill of gout). ‘In his lap he had a sort of muff,
with one of his hands in it, which seemed to be giving him great pain.
In the other hand he held our Sentence on the Arnold Case. He lay
reclining (Jag) in an easy-chair: at his left stood a table, with various
papers on it,—and two gold snuff-boxes, richly set with brilliants, from
which he kept taking snuff now and then.

“ Besides us, there was present in the room the Cabinets-Rath Stell-
ter” (of the short-hand), “ who stood at a desk, and was getting ready
for writing. ‘The King looked at us, saying, ‘Come nearer!’ Where-
upon we advanced another step, and were now within less than two
steps of him. He addressed himself to us three Raths, taking no notice
at all of the Grand-Chancellor :

King. “Is it you who drew up the judgment in the Arnold ‘ case?”

We (especially I, with a bow). ‘‘ Yea.”

“The King then turned to the Rath Friedel” (to Friedel, as the cen-
tral figure of the Three, perhaps as the portliest, though poor Friedel,

_except signing, had little cognizance of the thing, in which not he but
Rannsleben was to have been spokesman), “and addressed to Friedel
those questions, of which, with their answers, there is Protocol publish-
ed, under Royai authority, in the Berlin newspapers of December 14th,
1779 ;”'* Short-hand Stellter taking down what was said,—quite accu-
rately, testifies Rannsleben. From Stellter (that is to say from the
*‘ Protocol” just mentioned), or from Stellter and Rannsleben together,
we continue the Dialogue:

“‘ King to Friedel” (in the tone of a Rhadamanthus suffering from
gout). “To give sentence against a Peasant from whom you have
taken wagon, plough, and everything that enables him to get his living,
and to pay his rent and taxes: is that a thing that can be done?”

Friedel (and the two Mutes, bowing). ‘“‘ No.”

King. “‘ May a Miller who has no water, and consequently cannot

14 Yon seiner Kéniglichen Majestat Hoéchstselbst angehaltenes Protocoll:
‘¢ Protocol’? (Minute of Proceedings) ‘‘held by Royal Majesty’s Highest-
self, on the 11th December 1779, concerning the three Kammergerichts-
Raths, Friedel, Graun, and Rannsleben :” in Preuss, iii. 495.

484 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
11th Dec. 1779.
grind, and, therefore, not earn anything, have his mill taken from him,
on account of his not having paid his rent: is that just?”
- Friedel (and Mutes as aforesaid). ‘‘ No.” .

King. “ But here now is a Nobleman, wishing to make a Fish-pond :
to get more water for his Pond, he has a ditch dug, to draw into it the
water from a small stream which drives a water-mill. Thereby the
Miller loses his water, and cannot grind; or, at most, can only grind in
the spring for the space of a fortnight, and late in the autumn, perhaps
another fortnight. Yet, in spite of all this, it is pretended that the
Miller shall pay his rent quite the same as at the time when he had full
water for his mill. Of course, he cannot pay his rent; his incomings
are gone! And what does the Ciistrin Court of Justice do? It orders
the mill to be sold, that the Nobleman may have his rent. And the
Berlin Tribunal”—(Chancellor First, standing painfully mute, unspoken
to, unnoticed hitherto, more like a broomstick than a Chancellor, ven-
tures to strike in with a syllable of emendation, a small correction, of
these words “ Berlin ‘Tribunal”—

Furst (suggestively): “ Kammergericht” (mildly suggestive, and
perhaps with something in his tone which means, “I am not a broom-
stick !”) : ‘* Kammergericht !”

King (to short-hand Stellter). ‘“ Kammergerichts- Tribunal :”’—
(then to First) “Go you, Sir, about your business, on the instant!
Your Successor is appointed; with you I have nothing more to do.
Disappear !” — “ Ordered,” says Official Rannsleben, “ordered the
Grand-Chancellor, in very severe terms, To be gone! telling him that
his Successor was already appointed. Which order Herr von First,
without saying a word, hastily obeyed, passing in front of us three, with
the utmost speed.” In front,—screen, I suppose, not having room be-
hind it,—and altogether vanishes from Friedrich’s History; all but
some ghost of him (so we may term it), which reappears for an instant
_ once, as will be noticed.

King (continues to Friedel, not in a lower tone probably) :—“ the
Kammergerichts-Tribunal confirms the same. That is highly unjust ;
and such Sentence is altogether contrary to his Majesty’s landsfatherly
intentions :—my name” (you give it, “In the King’s Name,” forsooth)
“cruelly abused !” . ;

So far is set forth in the “ Royal Protocol printed next Tuesday,” as
well as in Rannsleben. © But from this point, the Dialogue,—if it can be
called Dialogue, being merely a rebuke and expectoration of Royal wrath
against Friedel .and his ‘wo, who are all mute, so far as I can learn,
and stand:like criminals in the. dock, feeling themselves. unjustly con-
demned,;—gets more: and more into conflagration, and ‘cannot: be: dis-
tinctly reported... “‘ My name to such a thing! . When was I found to

~~

Cuapr. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 485

11th Dee. 1779.

oppress a poor man for love of a rich? To follow wiggeries and forms
with solemn attention, careless what became of the internal fact? Act
of 1566, allowing Gersdorf to make his Pond? Like enough ;—and
Arnold’s loss of water, that is not worth the ascertaining; you know
not yet what it was, some of you even say it was nothing; care not
whether it was anything. Could Arnold grind, or not, as formerly?
What is Act of 1566, or any or all Acts, in comparison? Wretched
mortals, had you wigs a fathom long, and Law-books on your back, and
Acts of 1566, by the hundredweight, what could it help, if the right of
a poor man were left by you trampled under foot? What is the mean-
ing of your sitting there as Judges? Dispensers of Right in God’s
Name and mine? I will make an example of you which shall be re-
membered !—Out of my sight!” Whereupon exewnt in haste, all Three,
—though not far, not home, as will be seen.

Only the essential sense of all this, not the exact terms, could (or
should) any Stellter take in short-hand ; and in the Protocol it is deco-
rously omitted altogether. -Rannsleben merely says: ‘‘ The King far-
ther made use of very strong expressions against us,’—too strong to
be repeated,— and, at last, dismissed us without saying what he in-
tended to do with us. We had hardly left the room, when he followed
us, ordering us to wait. The King, during the interview with us, held
the Sentence, of my composition, in his hand; and seemed particularly
irritated about the circumstance of the judgment being pronounced in
his name, as is the usual form. He struck the paper again and again
with his other hand,’—heat of indignation quite extinguishing gout, for
the moment,—‘‘ exclaiming at the same time repeatedly, ‘ Cruelly abused
my name (meinen Namen cruel missbraucht) !”'*—We will now give
the remaining part of the Protocol (what directly follows the above
catechetical or Dialogue part before that caught fire),—as taken down
by Stellter, and read in all the Newspapers next Tuesday :

“‘ Protocol’ (of December 11th, Title already given; Docketing
adds), ‘which ws to be printed.”

* * (Catechetics as above,—and then): “The King’s desire al-
ways is and was, That everybody, be he high or low, rich or poor, get
prompt justice; and that, without regard of person or rank, no subject
of his fail at any time of impartial right and protection from his Courts
of Law.

‘“* Wherefore, with respect to this most unjust Sentence against the
Miller Arnold of the Pommerzig Crabmill, pronounced in the Neumark,
and confirmed here in Berlin, his Majesty will establish an emphatic

18 Preuss, ili. 495-498.

486 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

11th Dec. 1779.
example (ein nachdruckliches Exempel statuiren) ; to the end that all
Courts of Justice, in all the King’s Provinces, may take warning there-
by, and not commit the like glaring unjust acts. For, let them bear in
mind, That the least peasant, yea, what is still more, that even a beg-
gar, is, no less than his Majesty, a human being, and one to whom due
justice must be meted out. All men being equal before the Law, if it
is a prince complaining against a peasant, or vice versd, the prince is
the same as the peasant before the Law; and, on such occasions, pure
justice must have its course, without regard of person: Let the Law-
Courts, in all the Provinces, take this for their rule. And whenever
they do not carry out justice in a straightforward manner, without any
regard of person and rank, but put aside natural fairness,—then they
shall have to answer his Majesty for it (sollen sie es mit Seiner Ko-
niglichen Mayestat zu thun kriegen). For a Court of Law doing in-
justice is more dangerous and pernicious than a band of thieves: against
these one can protect oneself; but against rogues who make use of the
cloak of justice to accomplish their evil passions, against such no man
can guard himself. ‘These are worse than the greatest knaves the
world contains, and deserve double punishment.

“ For the rest, be it also known to the various Courts of Justice, That
his Majesty has appointed a new Grand-Chancellor.” First dismissed.
“Yet his Majesty will not the less look sharply with his own eyes after
the Law-proceedings in all the Provinces; and he commands you”—
that is, all the Law-Courts—‘ urgently herewith: Furstly,’—which is
also lastly—‘* To proceed to deal equally with all people seeking just-
ice, be it prince or peasant; for, there, all must be alike. However, if
his Majesty, at any time hereafter, comes upon a fault committed in this
regard, the guilty Courts can now imagine beforehand how they will be
punished with rigour, President as well as Raths, who shall have deliv-
ered a judgment so wicked and openly opposed to justice. Which all
Colleges of Justice in all his Majesty’s Provinces are particularly to
take notice of.”

“Mem. By his Majesty’s special command, measures are taken that
this Protocol be inserted in all the Berlin Journals.”'®

The remainder of Rannsleben’s Narrative is beautifully brief and sig-
nificant. —‘* We had hardly left the room,” said he supra, “‘ when the
King followed us,” lame as he was, with a fulminant: ‘‘ Wait there!”
Rannsleben continues: “Shortly after came an Aide-de-Camp, who
took us in a carriage to the common Town-prison, the Kalandshof;
here two Corporals and two Privates were set to. guard us. On the

*® In Berlin’sche Nachrichten von Staats und Gelehrten Sachen, No. 149,
‘Tuesday, 14th December 1779.” Preuss, iii. 494.

. ied

Cuap. VII. ] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 487
11th Dec. 1779—I1st Jan. 1780. .

13th December 1779,” third day of our arrest, “a Cabinet Order was
published to us, by which the King had appointed a Commission of In-
quiry : but had, at the same time, commanded beforehand that the Sen-
tence should not be less than a year’s confinement in a fortress, dis-
missal from office, and payment of compensation to the Arnold people
for the losses they had sustained.” Which certainly was a bad outlook
for us. .

Precisely the same has befallen our Brethren of Ciistrin; all sudden-
ly packed into Prison, just while reading our Approval of them ;—there
they sit, their Sentence to be like ours. ‘Our arrest in the Kalandshof
lasted from 11th December 1779 till 5th January 1780,” three weeks
and three days,—when (with Two Exceptions, to be noted presently)
we were all, Kammergerichters and Ciistriners alike, transferred to
Spandau.

I spoke of what might be called a ghost of Kanzler Fiirst once re-
visiting the glimpses of the Moon, or Sun if there were any in the dis-
mal December days. This is it, witness one who saw it: ‘‘ On the
morning of December 12th, the day after the Grand-Chancellor’s dis-
missal, the Street in which he lived was thronged with the carriages
of callers, who came to testify their sympathy, and to offer their con-
dolence to the fallen Chancellor. The crowd of carriages could be
seen from the windows of the King’s Palace.” ‘The same young Le-
gal Gentleman, by and by a very old one, who, himself one of the call-
ers at the Ex-Chancellor’s house that day, saw this, and related it in
his old age to Herr Preuss,'? remembers and relates also this other sig-
nificant fact :

“ During the days that followed” the above event and Publication of
the Royal Protocol, ‘‘ 1 often crossed, in the forenoon, the Esplanade in
front of the Palace (Schlossplatz), at that side where the King’s apart-
ments were; the same which his Royal Highness the Crown Prince
now” (1833) “occupies. I remember that here, on that part of the
Esplanade which was directly under Friedrich’s windows, there stood
constantly numbers of Peasants, not ten or twelve, but as many as a
hundred at a time; all with Petitions in their hands, which they were
holding up towards the window; shouting, ‘ Please his Majesty to look
at these; we have been still worse treated than the Arnolds!’ And
indeed, I have understood the Law-Courts, for some time after, found
great difficulty to assert their authority: the parties against whom
judgment went, taking refuge in the Arnold precedent, and appealing
direct to the King.”

Far graver than this Spectre of First, Minister Zedlitz hesitates,

17 Preuss, iii. 499, 500.

fh

488 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

11th Dec. 1779—I1st Jan. 1780.
finally refuses, to pronounce such a Sentence as the King orders on
these men of Law! Estimable, able, conscientious Zedlitz ; zealous on
Education matters, too ;—whom I always like for contriving to attend
a Course of Kant’s Lectures, while 500 miles away from him (actual
Course in Konigsberg University, by the illustrious Kant; every Lec-
ture punctually taken in short-hand, and transmitted to Berlin, post after
post, for the busy man).'® Here is now some painful Correspondence
between the King and him,—painful, yet pleasant :

King to Minster Von Zedlitz, who has alarming Doubts (Berlin,
28th December 1779).—‘ Your Report of the 20th instant in regard to
Judgment on the arrested Raths has been received. But do you think
I don’t understand your Advocate fellows and their quirks; or how they
can polish up a bad cause, and by their hyperboles exaggerate or exten-
uate as they find fit? The Goose-quill class (Federzeug) can’t look at
facts. When Soldiers set to investigate anything, on an order given,
they go the straight way to the kernel of the matter ; upon which, plen-
ty of objections from the Goose-quill people!—But you may assure
yourself I give more belief to an honest Officer, who has honour in the
heart of him, than to all your Advocates and sentences. I perceive
well they are themselves afraid, and don’t want to see any of their fel-
lows punished.

“Tf, therefore, you will not obey my Order, I shall take another in
your place who will; for depart from it I will not. You may tell them
that. And know, for your part, that such miserable jargon (miserabel
Styl) makes not the smallest impression on me. Hereby, then, you
are to guide yourself; and merely say whether you will follow My Or-
der or not; for I will in no wise fall away from it. I am your well-
affectioned King,—F riepricn.

Marginale (in Autograph).—‘* My Gentleman” (you, Herr von Zed-
litz, with your dubitatings), “‘ won’t make me believe black is white. I
know the Advocate sleight-of- hand, and won’t be taken in. An ex-
ample has become necessary here,—those Scoundrels (Canazllen) hav-
ing so enormously misused my name, to practise arbitrary and unheard-
of injustices. A Judge that goes upon chicaning is to be punished
more severely than a highway Robber. For you-have trusted to the
one; you are on your guard against the other.”

Zedlitz to the King (Berlin, 31st December 1779).—* 1 have at all
times had your Royal Majesty’s favour before my eyes as the supreme
happiness of my life, and have most zealously endeavoured to merit the
same: but I should recognise myself unworthy of it, were I capable of
an undertaking contrary to my conviction. From the reasons indicated
by myself, as well as by the Criminal-Senate” (Paper of reasons fortu-

18 Kuno Fischer, Kant’s Leben (Mannheim, 1860), pp. 34, 35.

Cuap. VII.] MILLER ARNOLD’S LAWSUIT. 489
11th Dec. 1779—Ist Jan. 1780.

nately lost), “ your Majesty will deign to consider that I am unable to
draw up a condemnatory Sentence against your Majesty’s Servants-of-
Justice, now under arrest on account of the Arnold Affair. Your Maj-
esty’s till death —Von Zepuirz.”

King to Zedlitz (Berlin, Ist January 1780).—“ My dear State’s-
Minister Freiherr von Zedlitz,—It much surprises me to see, from your
Note of yesterday, that you refuse to pronounce a judgment on those
Servants-of-Justice arrested for their conduct in the Arnold Case, ac-
cording to my Order. If you, therefore, will not, I will, and do it as
follows :

“1°, The Ciistrin Regierungs-Rath Scheibler, who, it appears in ev-
idence, was of an opposite opinion to his Colleagues, and voted That the
man up-stream had no¢a right to cut off the water from the man down-
stream; and that the point, as to Arnold’s wanting water, should be
more closely and strictly inquired into,—he, Scheibler, shall be set free
from his arrest, and go back to his post at Ciistrin. And in like man-
ner, Kammergerichts-Rath Rannsleben,—who has evidently given him-
self faithful trouble about the cause, and has brought forward with a
quite visible impartiality all the considerations and dubieties, especially
about the condition of the water and the alleged hurtfulness of the Pond,
—is absolved from arrest.

“2°. As for the other arrested Servants-of-Justice, they are one and
all dismissed from office (cassirt), and condemned to one year’s For-
tress-Arrest.. Furthermore, they shall pay to Arnold the value of his
Mill, and make good to him, out of their own pocket, all the loss and
damage he has suffered in this business, the Neumark Kammer (Rev-
enue-Board) to tax and estimate the same.” (Damage came to 1,358
thalers, 11 groschen, 1 pfennig,—that is, 203/. 14s. and some pence and
farthings; the Jast farthing of which was punctually paid to Arnold,
within the next eight months) ;'°—“ so that

“3°. The Miller Arnold shall be completely put as he was (in tnte-
grum restituirt).

“And in such way must the matter, in all branches of it, be tnitnedés
ately proceeded with, got ready, and handed in for my Completion
(Vollzitehung) by signature. Which you, therefore, will take charge of,
without Saree: For the rest, I will tell you farther, that I am not ill
pleased to know you on the side you show on this occasion” (as a man
that will not go against his conscience), ‘‘ and shall see, by and by, what
I can farther do with you.” (Left him where he was, as the best
thing.) “ Whereafter you are accordingly to guide yourself. And I
remain otherwise your well-affectioned King,—F riepricu.”?°

19 Preuss, iii. 409. 20 Thid. iii. 519, 520: see ib. 405 n,
xX 2

490 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
11th Dec. 1779—l1st Jan. 1780.

This, then, is an impartial account of the celebrated passage
between Friedrich and the Lawyers, known by the name of
“the Miller-Arnold Case ;” which attracted the notice of all Eu-
rope,—just while the decennium of the French Revolution was
beginning. In Russia, the Czarina Catharine, the friend of Phi-
losophers, sent to her Senate a copy of Friedrich’s Protocol of
December 11th, as a noteworthy instance of Royal supreme ju-
dicature. In France, Prints in celebration of it,—‘‘ one Print
by Vangelisti, entitled Balance de Frederic,” —were exhibited in
shopwindows, expounded in newspapers, and discoursed of in
drawing-rooms. ‘The Case brought into talk again an old Mill-
er Case of Friedrich’s, which had been famous above thirty years
ago, when Sans-Souci was getting built. Readers know it:
Potsdam Miller, and his obstinate Windmill, which still grinds on
its knoll in those localities, and would not, at any price, become
part of the King’s Gardens. ‘ Not at any price?” said the King’s
agent: ‘Cannot the King take it from you for nothing if he
chose?” ‘Haven’t we the Kammergericht at Berlin!” an-
swered the Miller. ‘To Friedrich’s great delight, as appears ;—
which might render the Windmill itself a kind of ornament to
his Gardens thenceforth. ‘The French admiration over these
two Miller Cases continued to be very great.?!

As to Miller Arnold and his Cause, the united voice of Prus-
sian Society condemned Friedrich’s procedure: Such harshness
to Grand-Chancellor Fiirst and respectable old Official Gentle-
men, amounting to the barbarous and the tyrannous, according
to Prussian Society. To support which feeling, and testify it
openly, they drove in crowds to Fiirst’s (some have told me to
the Prison-doors too, but that seems hypothetic); and left cards
for old Fiirst and Company. In sight of Friedrich, who in-
quired, ‘“* What is this stir on the streets, then ?””—and, on learn-
ing, made not the least audible remark ; but continued his salu-
tary cashierment of the wigged Gentlemen, and imprisonment
till their full term ran.

My impression has been that, in Berlin Society, there was

2! Dieulafoi, Le Meunier de Sans-Souci (Comedy or Farce, of I know not
what year); Andrieux, Le Moulin de Sans-Souci (‘‘ Poem,” at Institut-Na-
tional, 15 Germinal, An 5), &c. &c.: Preuss, iii. 412, 413.

a.

sey rte Me

4

Cuap. VII] MILLER ARNOLD'S LAWSUIT. | 491
11th Dee. 1779—I1st Jan. 1780.

more sympathy for mere respectability of wig than in Friedrich.
To Friedrich respectability of wig that issues in solemnly failing
to do justice, is a mere enormity, greater than the most wigless
condition could be. Wigless, the thing were to be endured, a
thing one is born to, more or less: but in wig,—out upon it!
And the wig which screens, and would strive to disguise and
even to embellish such a thing: To the gutters with such-
wig ! |
In support of their feeling for Fiirst and Company, Berlin So-
ciety was farther obliged to pronounce the claim of Miller Ar-
nold a nullity, and that no injustice whatever had been done
him. Mere pretences on his part, subterfuges for his idle con-
duct, for his inability to pay due rent, said Berlin Society. And
that impartial Soldier-person, whom Friedrich sent to examine
by the light of nature, and report? ‘Corrupted, he!” answer
they: “had intrigues with—” I forget whom ; somebody of the
womankind (perhaps Arnold’s old hard-featured Wife, if you
are driven into a corner!)—‘‘and was not to be depended on at
all!” In which condemned state, Berlin Society almost wholly
disapproving it, the Arnold Process was found at Friedrich’s
death (restoration of honours to old Fiirst and Company, one
of the first acts of the New Reign, sure of immediate populari-
ty); and, I think, pretty much continues so still, few or none in
Berlin Society admitting Miller Arnold’s claim to redress, much
less defending that onslaught on Fiirst and the wigs.??

Who, from the remote distance, would venture to contradict?
Once more, my own poor impression was, which I keep silent
except to friends, that Berlin Society was wrong; that Miller
Arnold had of a truth lost portions of his dam-water, and was
entitled to abatement; and that in such case, Friedrich’s horror

*? Herr Preuss himself inclines that way, rather condemnatory of Fried-
rich ; but his Account, as usual, is exact and authentic,—though distress-
ingly confused, and scattered about into different corners (Preuss, ili. 381-
413; then again, ibid. 520 &.). On the other hand, there is one Sege-
busch, too, a learned Doctor, of Altona, who takes the King’s side,—and
really is rather stupid, argumentative merely, and unilluminative, if you
read him: Segebusch, Historisch-rechtliche Wiirdigung der Kinmischung
Friedrich’s des Grossen in die bekannte Rechtssache des Miillers Arnold, auch

Sur Nicht-Juristen (Altona, 1829). )

492 AFTERNOON AND EVENING, [Book XXI.
11th Dec. 1779—Ist Jan. 1780,

at the Fiirst-and-Company Phenomenon (horror aggravated by
gout) had its highly respectable side withal.

When, after Friedrich’s death, on Von Gersdorf’s urgent rec-
saiaASn, the case was reopened, and allowed to be carried ‘‘into
the Secret Tribunal, as the competent Court of Appeal in third
instance,” the said Tribunal found, That the law-maxim depended
upon by the Lower Courts, as to ‘the absolute right of owners
of private streams,” did not apply in the present case; but that
the Deed of 1566 did; and also that ‘‘the facts as to pretended
damage” (pretence merely) “‘ from loss of water, were satisfactorily
proved against Arnold:’’ Gersdorf, therefore, may have his Pond;
and Arnold must refund the money paid to him for ‘‘ damages”
by the condemned Judges; and also the purchase-money of his
Mill, if he means to keep the latter. All which moneys, how-
ever, his Majesty Friedrich Wilhelm II., Friedrich’s Successor,
to have done with the matter, handsomely paid out of his own
pocket: the handsome way of ending it.

In his last journey to West-Preussen, June 1784, Friedrich
said to the new Regierungs-President (Chief Judge) there: “I
am Head Commissary of Justice ; and have a heavy responsi-
bility lying on me,”’—as will you in this new Office. Friedrich
at no moment neglected this part of his functions; and his pro-
cedure in it throughout, one cannot but admit to have been faith-
ful, beautiful, human. Very impatient indeed when he comes
upon Imbecility and Pedantry threatening to extinguish Essence
and Fact, among his Law People! This is one marginale of his,
among many such, some of them still more stinging, which are
comfortable to every reader. The Case is that of a murderer,
—murder indisputable; ‘but may not insanity be suspected,
your Majesty, such the absence of motive, such the—?’’? Majes-
ty answers: “That is nothing but inanity and stupid pleading
against right. The fellow put a child to death; if he were a
soldier, you would execute him without priest; and because this
canaille is a citizen, you make him ‘ melancholic’ to get him off.
Beautiful justice !’’?°—

Friedrich has to sign all Death-Sentences; and he does it,
wherever I have noticed, rigorously well. For the rest, his

23 Preuss, iii. 375.
:

Cuap. VII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 493
1780-1785. —

Criminal Calendar seems to be lighter than any other of his
time; ‘“‘in a population of 5,200,000,” says. he once, 14 to 15
are annually condemned to death.”

CHAPTER VIII.
THE FURSTENBUND‘: FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS.

At Vienna, on November 29th, 1780, the noble Kaiserinn Ma-
ria Theresa, after a short illness, died. Her end was beautiful
and exemplary, as her course had been. The disease, which
seemed at first only a bad.cold, proved to have been induration
of the lungs; the chief symptom throughout, a more and more
suffocating difficulty to breathe. On the edge of death, the Kai-
serinn, sitting in a chair (bed impossible in such struggle for
breath), leant her head back as if inclined to sleep. One of her
women arranged the cushions, asked in a whisper, ‘ Will your
Majesty sleep, then?” “No,” answered the dying Kaiserinn ;
**T could sleep, but I must not; Death is too near. He must
not steal upon me. These fifteen years I have been making
ready for him; I will meet him awake.” Fifteen years ago her
beloved Franz was snatched from her, in such sudden manner:
and ever since, she has gone in Widow’s dress; and has looked
upon herself as one who had done with the world. The 18th
of every month has been for her a day of solitary. prayer; 18th
of every August (Franz’s death-day) she has gone down punctu-
ally to the vaults in the Stephans-Kirche, and sat by his coffin
there ;—last. August, something broke in the apparatus as she
descended ; and it has ever since been an omen to her.! Omen
now fulfilled. .

On her death, Joseph and Kaunitz, now become supreme,
launched abroad in their ambitious adventures with loose rein.
Schemes of all kinds; including Bavaria still, in spite of the late
check; for which latter, and for vast prospects in Turkey as
well, the young Kaiser is now upon a cunning method, full of
promise to him,—that of ingratiating himself with the Czarina,
and cutting out Friedrich in that quarter. Summer 1780, while

1 Hormayr, Oesterreichischer Plutarch, iv. (2tes) 94; Keith, ii. 114.

494 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
1780-1785.

the Kaiserinn still lived, Joseph made his famous First Visit to
the Czarina (May—August 1780),?—not yet for some years his
thrice-famous Second Visit (thrice-famous Cleopatra- Voyage with
her down the Dnieper ; dramaturgic cities and populations keep-
ing pace with them on the banks, such the scenic faculty of Rus-
sian Officials, with Potemkin as stage-manager) :—1in the course
of which First Visit, still more in the Second, it is well known
the Czarina and Joseph came to an understanding. Little articu-
lated of it as yet; but the meaning already clear to both. “A
frank partnership, high Madam ; to you, full scope in your glori-
ous notion of a Greek Capital and Empire, ‘Turk quite trampled
away, Constantinople a Christian metropolis once more” (and
your next Grandson a Constantine,—to be in readiness): “why
not, if I may share too, in the Donau Countries, that lie handy?
To you, I say, an Eastern Empire; to me, a Western: Revival
of the poor old Romish Reich, so far as may be; and in no hin-
drance upon Bavaria, next time. Have not we had enough of
that old Friedrich, who stands perpetually upon status quo, and
to both of us is a mere stoppage of the way ?”

Czarina Catharine took the hint; christened her next Grand-
son ‘Constantine’ (to be in readiness);? and from that time
stifly refused renewing her Treaty with Friedrich ;—to Fried-
rich’s great grief, seeing her, on the contrary, industrious to for-
ward every German scheme of Joseph’s, Bavarian or other, and
foreshadowing to himself dismal issues for Prussia when this
present term of Treaty should expire. As to Joseph, he was
busy night and day,—really perilous to Friedrich and the inde-
pendence of the German Reich. His young Brother, Maximil-
ian, he contrives, Czarina helping, to get elected Coadjutor of
Koéln ; Successor of our Lanky Friend there, to be Kur-K6In in
due season, and make the Electorate of Koln a bit of Austria
henceforth. Then there come “ Panis-Briefe,’°—who knows

2 Hermann, vi. 132-135.

3 This is the Constantine who renounced, in favour of the late Czar Nich-
olas; and proved a failure in regard to ‘‘ New Greek Empire,” and other-
wise.

* Lengthy and minute account of that Transaction, in all the steps of it,

in Dohm, i. 295-379.
® Panis (Bread) Brief is a Letter with which, in ancient centuries, the

oy va

Cuap. VIII. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 495
1780-1785.

what ?—usurpations, graspings and pretensions without end :—
finally, an open pretension to incorporate Bavaria, after all.
Bavaria, not in part now, but in whole: ‘ You, Karl Theodor,
injured man, cannot we give you Territory in the Netherlands ;
a King there you shall be, and have your vote as Kur-Pfalz still;
only think! In return for which, Bavaria ours in fee-simple,
and so finish that?’ Karl Theodor is perfectly willing,—only
perhaps some others are not.

Then and there, these threatening complexities, now gone like
a dream of the night, were really life-perils for the Kingdom of
Prussia; never to be lost sight of by a veteran Shepherd of the
People. They kept a vigilant King Friedrich continually on
the stretch, and were a standing life-problem to him in those
final Years. Problem nearly insoluble to human contrivance ;
the Russian card having palpably gone into the other hand.
Problem solved, nevertheless ; it is still remembered how.

On the development of that pretty Bavarian Project, the thing
became pressing; and it is well known by what a stroke of gen-
ius Friedrich checkmated it ; and produced instead a “ Ftirsten-
bund,” or general ‘‘ Confederation of German Princes,” Prussia
atop, to forbid peremptorily that the Laws of the Reich be in-
fringed. irstenbund: this is the victorious summit of Fried-
rich’s Public History, towards which all his efforts tended, dur-
ing these five years: Friedrich’s last feat in the world. Feat,
how obsolete now,—fallen silent everywhere, except in German
Parish-History, and to the students of Friedrich’s character in
old age! Had no result whatever in European History ; so un-
expected was the turn things took. A Yirstenbund which was
swallowed bodily within few years, in that World-Explosion of
Democracy, and War of the Giants; and,—unless Napoleon’s
“Confederation of the Rhine’? were perhaps some transitory
ghost of it?—left not even a ghost behind. <A irstenbund of
which we must say something, when its Year comes; but ob-
viously not much. c

Kaiser used to furnish an old worn-out Servant, addressed to some Mon-
astery, some Abbot or Prior in easy circumstances: ‘‘ Be so good as pro-
vide this old Gentleman with Panis (Bread, or Board and Lodging) while
he lives.” Very pretty in Barbarossa’s time ;—but now—!

496 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1780-1785.

Nor are the Domesticities, as set forth by our Prussian au-
thorities, an opulent topic for us. Friedrich’s Old Age is not
unamiable; on the contrary, I think it would have made a pret-
ty Picture, had there been a Limner to take it, with the least fe-
licity or physiognomic coherency ;—as there was not. His Let-
ters, and all the symptoms we have, denote a sound-hearted brave
old man; continually subduing to himself many ugly troubles;
and, like the stars, always steady at his work. To:sit grieving
or desponding is, at all times, far from him: ‘* Why despond ?
Won’t it be all done presently; is it of much moment while it
lasts?” A fine, unaffectedly vigorous, simple and manful old
age ;—rather serene than otherwise; in spite of electric out-
bursts and cloudy weather that could not be wanting.

Of all which there is not, in this place, much more to be said.
Friedrich’s element is itself wearing dim, sombre of hue; and
the records of it, too, seem to grow dimmer, more and more in-
termittent.. Old friends, of the intellectual kind, are almost all
dead; the new are of little moment to us,—not worth naming
in comparison. The chief, perhaps, is a certain. young Marchese
Lucchesini, who comes about this time,® and continues in more
and more favour both with Friedrich and his Successor,—em-
ployed even in Diplomatics by the latter. An accomplished
young Gentleman, from Lucca; of fine intelligence, and, what
was no less essential to him here, a perfect propriety in breeding
and carriage. One makes no acquaintance with him in :these
straggling records, nor desires tomake any. It was he that
brought the inane, ever-scribbling Denina hither, if that can be
reckoned a merit. Jnane Denina came as Academician, Octo-
ber 1782; saw Friedrich,’ at least once (‘‘ Academician, Pen-
sion; yes, yes!”)—and I know not whether any second time.

Friedrich, on loss of friends, does not take refuge in solitude;
he tries always for something of substitute; sees his man once
or twice,—in several instances once only, and leaves him to his
pension in sinecure thenceforth. Cornelius De Pauw, the rich
Canon of Xanten (Uncle of Anacharsis Klootz, the afterwards

6 «* Chamberlain” (titular, with Pension, &c.), ‘‘9th May 1780, age then

28” (Preuss, iv. 211) ;—arrived, when or how is not said.
7 Rodenbeck, iii, 285, 286.

Cuap. VIII.) FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 497
1780-1785.

renowned), came on those principles; hung on for six months,
not liked, not liking; and was then permitted to go home for
good, his pension with him. Another, a Frenchman, whose
name I forget, sat gloomily in Potsdam, after his rejection; si-
lent (not knowing German), unclipt, unkempt, rough as Nebu-
chadnezzar, till he died. Le Catt is still a resource; steady till
almost the end, when somebody’s tongue, it is thought, did him
ill with the King.

Alone, or almost alone, of the ancient set is Bastiani; a tall,
black-browed man, with uncommonly bright eyes, now himself
old, and a comfortable Abbot in Silesia; who comes from time
to time, awakening the King into his pristine topics and alti-
tudes, Bastiani’s history is something curious: as a tall Veni-
tian Monk (son of a tailor in Venice), he had been crimped by
Friedrich Wilhelm’s people; Friedrich found him serving as a
Potsdam Giant, but discerned far other faculties in the bright-
looking man, far other knowledges; and gradually made him
what we see. Banters him sometimes that he will rise to be
Pope one day, so cunning and clever is he: ‘‘ What will you say
to me, a Heretic, when you get to be Pope; tell me now; out
with it, L insist!’ Bastiani parried, pleaded, but unable to get
off, nade what some call his one piece of wit: ‘‘I will say: O
Royal Eagle, screen me with thy wings, but spare me with thy
sharp beak!” This is Bastiani’s one recorded piece of wit; for
he was tacit rather, and practically watchful, and did not waste
his fine intellect in that way.

Foreign Visitors there are in plenty; now and then some-
thing brilliant going. But the old Generals seem to be mainly
what the King has for company. Dinner always his bright
hour; from ten to seven guests daily. Seidlitz, never of intelli-
gence on any point but Soldiering, is long since dead; Ziethen
comes rarely, and falls asleep when he does; General Gortz
(brother of the Weimar-Miinchen Gértz); Buddenbrock (the
King’s comrade in youth, in the Reinsberg times), who has good
faculty ; Prittwitz (who saved him at Kunersdorf, and is lively,
though stupid); General and Head-Equerry Schwerin, of head-
long tongue, not witty, but the cause of wit; Major Graf von
Pinto, a magniloquent Ex-Austrian ditto ditto; these are among

498 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXTI.
1780-1785.

his chief dinner-guests. If fine speculation do not suit, old
pranks of youth, old tales of war, become the staple conversa-
tion ; always plenty of banter on the old King’s part ;—who sits
very snuffy (says the privately ill-humoured Biisching), and does
not sufficiently abhor grease on his fingers, or keep his nails
quite clean. Occasionally laughs at the Clergy, too; and has
little of the reverence seemly in an old King. The truth is,
Doctor, he has had his sufferings from Human Stupidity; and
was always fond of hitting objects on the raw. For the rest, as
you may see, heartily an old Stoic, and takes matters in the
rough; avoiding useless despondency above all; and intent to
have a cheerful hour at dinner if he can.

Visits from his Kindred are still pretty frequent; never ex-
cept on invitation. For the rest, completely an old Bachelor,
an old Military Abbot; with business for every hour. Prin-
cess Amelia takes care of his linen, not very well, the dear old
Lady, who is herself a cripple, suffering, and voiceless, speaking
only in hoarse whisper. I think I have heard there were but
twelve shirts, not in first-rate order, when the King died. A
King supremely indifferent to small concerns; especially to that
of shirts and tailorages not essential. Holds to Literature, al-
most more than ever; occasionally still writes ;° has his daily
Readings, Concerts, Correspondences as usual: — readers can
conceive the dim Household Picture, dimly reported withal.
The following Anecdotes may be added as completion of it, or at
least of all I have to say on it:

You go on Wednesday, then?—* Loss of time was one of the losses
Friedrich could least stand. In visits even from his Brothers and Sis-
ters, which were always by his own express invitation, he would say ©
some morning (call it Tuesday morning): ‘ You are going on Wednes-
day, I am sorry to hear’ (what you never heard before) !—‘ Alas, your
Majesty, we must!’ ‘Well, I am sorry: but I will Jay no constraint
on you. Pleasant moments cannot last forever!’ And sometimes,

8 For one instance: The famous Pamphlet, De la Littérature Allemande
(containing his onslaught on Shakespeare, and his first salutation, with the
reverse of welcome, to Goethe’s Gétz von Berlichingen) ;— printed, under
stupid Thiébault’s care, Berlin, 1780. Stands now in (uvres de Frédéric,
vii. 89-122. The last Pieces of all are chiefly Military Instructions of a
practical or official nature. ;

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 499
1780-1785,
after this had been agreed to, he would say: ‘ But cannot you stay till
Thursday, then? Come, one other day of it !!—‘ Well, since your Maj-
esty does graciously press!’ And on Thursday, not Wednesday, on
those curious terms, the visit would terminate. ‘This trait is in the An-
ecdote-Books: but its authenticity does not rest on that uncertain ba-
sis; singularly enough, it comes to me, individually, by two clear
stages, from Friedrich’s Sister the Duchess of Brunswick, who, if any-
body, would know it well.”®

Dinner with the Queen.—The Queen, a prudent, simple-minded,
worthy person, of perfect behaviour in a difficult position, seems to have
been much respected in Berlin Society and the Court Circles. Nor
was the King wanting in the same feeling towards her; of which there
are still many proofs: but as to personal intercourse, — what a fig-
ure has that gradually taken! Preuss says, citing those who saw;
“When the King, after the Seven- Years War, now and then, in Car-
nival season, dined with the Queen in her Apartments, he usually said
not a word to her. He merely, on entering, on sitting down at table
and leaving it, made the customary bows; and sat. opposite to her.
Once, in the Seventies” (years 1770, years now past), ‘‘ the Queen was
ill of gout; table was in her Apartments; but she herself was not
there, she sat in an easy-chair in the drawing-room. On this occasion
the King stepped up to the Queen, and inquired about her health. The
circumstance occasioned, among the company present, and all over
Town as the news spread, great wonder and sympathy (Verwunderung
und Theilnahme). This is probably the last time he ever spoke to
her.?”!°

The Two Grand-Nephews.— The King was fond of children ; liked
to have his Grand-Nephews about him. One day, while the King sat
at work in his Cabinet, the younger of the two, a boy of eight or
nine” (who died soon after twenty), “ was. playing ball about the room ;
and knocked it once and again into the King’s writing operation; who
twice or oftener flung it back to him, but next time put it in his pocket,
and went on. ‘Please your Majesty, give is me back!’ begged the
Boy; and again begged: Majesty took no notice; continued writing.
Till at length came, in the tone of indignation,‘ Will your Majesty give
me my ball, then?” The King looked up; found the little Hohenzol-
lern planted firm, hands on haunches, and wearing quite a peremptory
air. ‘Thou art a brave little fellow; they won’t get Silesia out of
thee ” cried he laughing, and flinging him his ball.”"

® My informant is Sir George Sinclair, Baronet, of Thurso ; his was the
distinguished Countess of Finlater, still remembered for her graces of mind
and person, who had been Maid-of-Honour to the Duchess.

10 Preuss, iv. 187. 11 Fischer, ii. 445 (‘‘year 1780”).

500 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
1780-1785.
Of the elder Prince, afterwards Friedrich Wilhelm III. (Father of
the now King), there is a much more interesting Anecdote, and of his
own reporting too, though the precise terms are irrecoverable: “ How
the King, questioning him about his bits of French studies, brought
down a La Fontaine from the shelves, and said, ‘Translate me this
Fable ;’? which the Boy did, with such readiness and correctness as ob-
tained the King’s praises: praises to an extent that was embarrassing,
and made the honest little creature confess, ‘1 did it with my Tutor, a
few days since!’ To the King’s much greater delight; who led him
out to walk in the Gardens, and, in a mood of deeper and deeper se-
riousness, discoursed and exhorted him on the supreme law of truth
and probity that lies on all men, and on all Kings still more ; one of his
expressions being, ‘ Look at this high thing’ (the Obelisk they. were
passing in the Gardens), ‘its uprightness is its strength (sa drovture
fait sa force) ; and his final words, ‘ Remember this evening, my good
Fritz; perhaps thou wilt think of it, long after, when 1am gone.’ As
the good Friedrich Wilhelm III. declares piously he often did, in the
storms of fate that overtook him.”*?

Industrial matters, that of Colonies especially, of drainages,
embankments, and reclaiming of waste lands, are a large item
in the King’s business,—readers would not, guess how large, or
how incessant. Under this head there is on record, and even
lies at my hand translated into English, what might be called a
Colonial Day with Friedrich (Day of July 23d, 1779; which
Friedrich, just come home from the Bavarian War, spent whol-
ly, from 5 in the morning onward, in driving about, in earnest
survey of his Colonies. and Land-Improvements in the Potsdam-
Ruppin Country); curious enough Record, by a certain Bailiff
or Overseer, who rode at his chariot-side, of all the questions,
criticisms and remarks of Friedrich on persons and objects, till
he landed at Ruppin for the night. Taken down, with forensic,
almost with religious exactitude, by the Bailiff in question; a
Son-in-law of the Poet Gleim,—by whom it was published, the

12 R. F. Eylert, Charakterziige und historische Fragmente aus dem Leben
des Kénigs von Preussen, Friedrich Wilhelm IIT. (Magdeburg, 1843), i. 450—
456. This is a ‘‘King’s Chaplain and Bishop Eylert:” undoubtedly he
heard this Anecdote from his Master, and was heard repeating it; but the
dialect his Editors have put it into is altogether tawdry, modern, and im-
possible to take for that of Friedrich, or even, I suppose, of Friedrich Wil-
helm III.

Cuar. VIII.] FRIEDRICH § LAST YEARS. 501
9th-16th July 1780.

year after Friedrich’s death ;}3 and by many others since. It is
curiously authentic, characteristic in parts, though in its bald fo-
rensic style rather heavy reading. lLuckier, for most readers,
that inexorable want of room has excluded it, on the present
occasion ! ?

~ No reader adequately fancies, or.could by any single Document
be made to do so, the continual assiduity of Friedrich in regard
to these interests of his. ‘The strictest Husbandman is not busier
with his Farm than Friedrich with his Kingdom throughout ;—
which is indeed a Farm, leased him by the Heavens; in which
not a gate-bar can be broken, nor a stone or sod roll into the
smallest ditch, but it is to his the Husbandman’s damage, and
must be instantly looked after. There are Meetings with the Si-
lesian manufacturers (in Review time), Dialogues ensuing, several
of which have been preserved ; strange to read, however dull. |
There are many scattered evidences ;—and only slowly does, not
the thing indeed, but.the degree of the thing, become fully credi-
ble. Not communicable, on the terms prescribed us at present ;
and must be left to the languid fancy, like so much else. -

Here is an Ocular View, here are several such, which we yet
happily have, of the actual Friedrich as he looked and lived.
These, at a cheap rate, throw transiently some flare of illumina-
tion over his Affairs and him: these let me now give; and these
shall be all.

Prince de Lngne, after Ten Years, sees Friedrich a Second
Time; and reports what was said.

In Summer 1780, as we mentioned, Kaiser Joseph was on his
first Visit to the Czarina. ‘They met at Mohilow on the Dnieper,
towards the end of May; have been roving about, as if in mere
galas and amusements (though with a great deal of business in-
cidentally thrown in), for above a month since, when Prince de
Ligne is summoned to join them at Petersburg. He goes by
Berlin, stays at Potsdam with Friedrich for about a week; and
reports to Polish Majesty these new Dialogues of 1780, the year
after sending him those of Mihrisch-Neustadt of 1770, which we
read above. - Those were written down from memory, in 1785 ;

13-Js'in Anekdoten und Karakterziige, No. 8 (Berlin, 1787), pp. 15-79.

502 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

9th-16th July 1780.
these in 1786,—and “towards the end of it,” as is internally
evident. Let these also be welcome to us on such terms as
there are:

“Since your Majesty” (Quasi-Majesty, of Poland) ‘is willing to lose
another quarter of an hour of that time, which you employ so well in
gaining the love of all to whom you deign to make yourself known, here
is my Second Interview. It can be of interest only to you, Sire, who
have known the King, and who discover traits of character in what to
another are but simple words. One finds in few others that confidence,
or at least that kindliness (bonhomie), which characterises your Majes-
ty. With you, one can indulge in rest; but with the King of Prussia,
one had always to be under arms, prepared to parry and to thrust, and
to keep the due middle between a small attack and a grand defence.
I proceed to the matter in hand, and shall speak to you of him for the
last time.

‘‘He had made me promise to come to Berlin. I hastened thither

directly after that little War’’ (Potato-War), “ which he called ‘an action
where he had come as bailiff to perform an execution.’ The result for
him, as is known, was a great expense of men, of horses and money ;
some appearance of good faith and disinterestedness ; little honour in
the War; a little honesty in Policy, and much bitterness against us
Austrians. The King began, without knowing why, to prohibit Aus-
trian Officers from entering his Territories without an express order,
signed by his own hand. Similar prohibition, on the part of our Court,
against Prussian Officers; and mutual constraint, without profit or rea-
son. I, for my own part, am of confident humour; I thought I should
need no permission, and [I think still I could have done without one.
But the desire of having a Letter from the great Friedrich, rather than
the fear of being ill received, made me write to him. My Letter was
all on fire with my enthusiasm, my admiration, and the fervour of my
sentiment for that sublime and extraordinary being; and it brought me
three charming Answers from him. He gave me, in detail, almost
what I had given him in the gross; and what he could not return me
in admiration,—for I do not remember to have gained a battle,—he
accorded me in friendship. For fear of missing, he had written to me
from Potsdam, to Vienna, to Dresden, and to Berlin.” (In fine, at Pots-
dam I was, Saturday 9th July 1780, waiting ready ;—stayed there
about a week).'*

“While waiting for the hour of 12, with my Son Charles and M. de
Lille (Abbé de Lille, prose writer of something now forgotten; by no
means lyrical De Lisle, of Les Jardins), “ to be presented to the King,

:4 «¢9th (or 10th) July 1780” CRodenbeck, iil, 288); © Stayed till Leth.”

Cuap. VIII. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 503
9th-16th July 1780.

I went to look at the Parade ;—and, on its breaking up, was-surrounded,
and escorted to the Palace, by Austrian deserters, and particularly from
my own regiment, who almost caressed me, and asked my pardon for
having left me.

“The hour of presentation struck. The King received me with an
unspeakable charm. ‘The military coldness of a General’s Headquarters
changed into a soft and kindly welcome. He said to me, ‘ He did not
think I had so big a Son.’

Ego. “‘ He is even married, Sire; has been so these twelve months.’
King. “‘ May I (oserais-je) ask you to whom? He often used this
expression, ‘ oserais-je ;’ and also this: ‘If you permit me to have the
honour to tell you, Sz vous me permettez davoir ’honneur de vous
dire.’ Ego. “‘To a Polish Lady, a Massalska.’

King (to my Son). ‘“‘‘ What, a Massalska? Do you know what her
Grandmother did?’ ‘*‘ No, Sire,’ said Charles.

King. “‘She put the match to the cannon at the Siege of Dantzig
with her own hand;!> she fired, and made others fire, and defended
herself, when her party, who had lost head, thought only of surrendering.’

Ego. “* Women are indeed undefinable ; strong and weak by turns,
indiscreet, dissembling, they are capable of anything.’ ‘ Without doubt,’
said M. de Lille, distressed that nothing had yet been said to him, and
with a familiarity which was not likely to succeed ; ‘ Without doubt.
Look—’ said he. The King interrupted him. I cited some traits in
support of my opinion,—as that of the woman Hachette at the Siege of
Beauvais.‘* The King made a little excursion to Rome and to Sparta:
he liked to promenade there. After half a second of silence, to please
De Lille, I told the King that M. de Voltaire died in De Lille’s arms.
That caused the King to address some questions to him; he answered
in rather too long-drawn a manner, and went away. Charles and I
stayed dinner.” ‘This is day first in Potsdam.

“‘ Here, for five hours daily, the King’s encyclopedical conversation
enchanted me completely. Fine arts, war, medicine, literature and re-
ligion, philosophy, ethics, history and legislation, in turns passed in re-
view. The fine centuries of Augustus and.of Louis XIV.; good society
among the Romans, among the Greeks, among the French; the chivalry
of Francois [.; the frankness and valour of Henry IV.; the new-birth
(renaissance) of Letters and their revolution since Leo X.; anecdotes
about the clever men of other times, and the trouble they give; M. de

1° February 1734, in poor Stanislaus Leczinski’s second fit of Royalty:
Supra, ii. 373, 389.

16 4.p. 1472; Burgundians storming the wall, had their flag planted ;
flag and flag-bearer are hurled into the ditch by Hachette and other in-
spired women,—with the finest results.

ry

-

‘504 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

9th-16th July 1780.
Voltaire’s slips; susceptibilities of M. de Maupertuis; Algarotti’s agree-
able ways; fine wit of Jordan; d’Argens’s hypochondria, whom the King
would send to bed for four-and-twenty hours by simply telling him that
~ he looked ill ;—and, in fine, what not? Everything, the most varied
and piquant that could be said, came from him,—in a most soft tone of
voice; rather low than otherwise, and no less agreeable than were the
movements of his lips, which had an inexpressible grace.

“Tt was this, I believe, which prevented one’s observing that he was,
in fact, like Homer’s heroes, somewhat of a talker (un peu babillard),
though a sublime one.. It is to their voices, their noise and gestures,
that talkers often owe their reputation as such; for certainly one could
not find a greater talker than the King; but one was delighted at his
being so. Accustomed to talk to Marquis Lucchesini, in the presence
of only four or five Generals who did not understand French, he com-
pensated in this way for his hours of labour, of study, of meditation and
solitude. At least, said I to myself, 1 must get in a word. _ He had just
mentioned Virgil. I said:

Ego. “* What a great Poet, Sire; but what a bad gardener!’

King. “* Ah, to whom do you tell that! Have not I tried to plant,
sow, till, dig, with the Georgics in my hand? ‘ But, Monsieur,” said my
man, “ You are a fool (déte), and your Book no less; it is not in that
way one goes to work.” Ah, mon Dieu, what a climate! Would you
believe it, Heaven, or the Sun, refuse me everything? Look at my
poor orange-trees, my olive-trees, lemon-trees: they are all starving.’
Ego. “*It would appear, then, nothing but laurels flourish with you,
Sire.’ (The King gave me a charming look; and to cover an inane
observation by an absurd one, I added quickly) : ‘ Besides, Sire, there
are too many grénadiers’ (means, in French pomegranates as well as
grenadiers,—peg of one’s little joke!) ‘in this Country; they eat up
everything!’ The King burst out laughing; for it is only absurdities
that cause laughter.

“One day I had turned a plate to see of what porcelain it was.
‘Where do you think it comes from? asked the King. Ego. “*T
thought it was Saxon ; but instead of two swords’ (the Saxon mark), ‘I
see only one, which is well worth both of them.’ King. “‘It isa
sceptre.’ Ego. “*T beg your Majesty’s pardon; but itis so much like
a sword that one could easily mistake it for one.’ And such was real-
ly the case. This, it is known, is the mark of the Berlin china. As
the King sometimes played King, and thought himself, sometimes, ex-
tremely magnificent while taking up a walking-stick or snuff-box with
a few wretched little diamonds running after one another on it, I don’t
quite know whether he was infinitely pleased with my little allegory,

“One day, as I entered his room, he came towards me, saying, ‘1

®

lien
7

Cuap. VIII. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 505
9th-16th July 1780.

tremble to announce bad news to you. I have just heard that Prince
Karl of Lorraine is dying.”’’ He looked at me to see the effect this
would have; and observing some tears escaping from my eyes, he, by
gentlest transitions, changed the conversation ; talked of war, and of the
Maréchal de Lacy. He asked me news about Lacy ; and said, ‘ That
is a man of the greatest merit. In former time, Count Mercy among
yourselves’ (killed, while commanding in chief, at the Battle of Parma
in 1733,) ‘ Puységur among the French, had some notions of marches
and encampments; one sees from Hyginus’s Book’ (ancient Book) ‘on
Castrametatton, that the Greeks also were much occupied with the
subject: but your Maréchal surpasses the Ancients, the Moderns, and
all the most famous men who have meddled with it. Thus, whenever
he was your Quartermaster-General, if you will permit me to make the
remark to you, I did not gain the least advantage. Recollect the two
Campaigns of 1758 and 1759; you succeeded in everything. I often
said to myself, ‘ Shall I never get rid of that man, then?” You your-
selves got me rid of him; and’”—(some liberal or even profuse eulogy
of Lacy, who is De Ligne’s friend; which we can omit).

‘Next day, the King, as soon as he saw me, came up; saying with
the most penetrated air: ‘If you are to learn the loss of a man who
loved you, and who did honour to mankind, it will be better that it be
from some one who feels it as deeply as Ido. Poor Prince Karl is no
more. Others, perhaps, are made to replace him in your heart; but
few Princes will replace him with regard to the beauty of his soul and
to all his virtues.’ In saying this, his emotion became extreme. I said:
‘Your Majesty’s regrets are a consolation; and you did not wait for
his death to speak well of him. There are fine verses with reference

~ to him in the Poem, Sur l’Art de la Guerre.’ My emotion troubled

me against my will; however, I repeated them to him.’* The Man of
Letters seemed to appreciate my knowing them by heart. King: ‘His
passage of the Rhine was a very fine thing ;—but the poor Prince de-
pended upon so many people! I never depended upon anybody but my-
self; sometimes too much so for my luck. He was badly served, not
too well obeyed: neither the one nor the other ever was the case with
me.—Your General Nadasti appeared to me a great General of Caval-

17Ts already dead, ‘‘at Brussels, July 4th;” Duke of Saschen-Teschen
and Wife Christine succeeded him as Joint-Governors in those parts.
18 Soutien de mes rivaux, digne appui de ta reine,
Charles, un ennemi sourd aux cris de la haine
Recois Péloge”...... (for crossing the Rhine in 1744); ten rath-
er noble lines, still worth reading; as indeed the whole Poem well is, es-
pecially to soldier-students (L’Art de la Guerre, Chant vi.: (uvres de
Frédéric, x. 273). ;
Vor. VIL—Y

506 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
. 9th-16th July 1780.
ry? Not sharing the King’s opinion on this point, I contented myself
with saying, that Nadasti was very brilliant, very fine at musketry, and
that he could have led his hussars to the world’s end and farther (dans
UVenfer), so well did he know how to animate them.
_ King. “* What has become of a brave Colonel who played the devil
at Rossbach? Ah, it was the Marquis de Voghera, I think?—Yees, that’s
it; for I asked his name after the Battle.’ Ego. “‘ He is General
of Cavalry.’

King. “‘ Perdi! It needed a considerable stomach for fight, to
charge like your Two Regiments of Cuirassiers there, and, I believe,
your Hussars also: for the Battle was lost before it began.’

Ego. “‘ Apropos of M. de Voghera, is your Majesty aware of a little
thing he did before charging? He is a boiling, restless, ever-eager
kind of man; and has something of the good old Chivalry style. See-
ing that his Regiment would not arrive quick enough, he galloped ahead
of it; and coming up to the Commander of the Prussian Regiment of
Cavalry which he meant to attack, he saluted him as on parade; the
other returned the salute; and then, Have at each other like madmen.’

King. “‘ A very good style it is! I should like to know that man;

I would thank him for it—Your General von Ried, then, had got the
devil in him, that time at Eilenburg’ (spurt of fight there, in the Meis-
sen regions, | think in Year 1758, when the D’Ahremberg Dragoons
got so cut up), ‘to let those brave Dragoons, who so long bore your
Name with glory, advance between Three of my Columns?’—He had
asked me the same question at the Camp of Neustadt ten years since;
and in vain had I told him that it was not M. de Ried; that Ried did
~ not command them at all; and that the fault was Maréchal Daun’s, who
ought not to have sent them into that Wood of Eilenburg, still less or-
dered them to halt there without even sending a patrol forward. The
King could not bear our General von Ried, who had much displeased
him as Minister at Berlin; and it was his way to put down everything
to the account of people he disliked.
King. “‘ When I think of those devils of Saxon Camps’ (Summer
1760),—‘ they were unattackable citadels! If, at Torgau, M. de Lacy
had still been Quartermaster-General, I should not have attempted to
attack him. But there I saw at once the Camp was ill chosen.’

Ego. “* The superior reputation of Camps sometimes causes a desire
to attemptthem. For instance, I ask your Majesty’s pardon, but I have
always thought you would at last have attempted that of Plauen, had
the War continued.’ King. “‘Oh,no, indeed! There was no way
of taking that one. Ego. “‘ Doesn’t your Majesty think: With a
good battery on the heights of Dolschen, which commanded us; with
some battalions, ranked behind each other in the Ravine, attacking a

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 507
9th-16th July 1780.

quarter of an hour before daybreak’ (and so forth, at some length,—ex-
cellent for soldier-readers who know the Plauen Chasm), ‘ you could
have flung us out of that almost impregnable Place of Refuge?
King. “* And your battery on the Windberg, which would have scourged
my poor battalions, all the while, in your Ravine?’ Ego. ** But,
Sire, the night” King. ““*Oh, you could not miss us even by
grope. That big hollow that goes from Burg, and even from Potschap-
pel,—it would have poured like a water-spout’ (or fire-spout) ‘ over us.
You see, I am not so brave as you think.’

“The Kaiser had set out for his Interview” (First Interview, and in-
deed it is now more than half done, a good six weeks of it gone) “with
the Czarina of Russia. That Interview the King did not like” (no
wonder) :—‘“ and, to undo the good it had done us, he directly, and very
unskilfully, sent the Prince Royal to Petersburg” (who had not the
least success there, loutish fellow, and was openly snubbed by a Czar-
ina gone into new courses). “ His Majesty already doubted that the
Court of Russia was about to escape him :—and I was dying of fear
lest, in the middle of all his kindnesses, he should remember that I was
an Austrian. ‘ What,’ said I to myself, ‘not a single epigram on us, or
on our Master? What a change!’

“One day, at dinner, babbling Pinto said to the person sitting Jon
him, ‘ This Kaiser is a great traveller; there never was one who went
so far.’ ‘I ask your pardon, Monsieur,’ said the King; ‘ Charles Fifth
went to Africa; he gained the Battle of Oran.’ And, turning towards
me,—who couldn’t guess whether it was banter or only history,—‘ This
time,’ said he, ‘ the Kaiser is more fortunate than Charles Twelfth;
like Charles, he entered Russia by Mohilow; but it appears to me he
will arrive at Moscow.’

“The same Pinto, one day, understanding the King was at a loss
whom to send as Foreign Minister somewhither, said to him: ‘ Why
does not your Majesty think of sending Lucchesini, who is a man of
much brilliancy (homme desprit)V ‘It is for that very reason,’ an-
swered the King, ‘that I want to keep him. JI had rather send you
than him, or a dull fellow like Monsieur—’ I forget whom, but. believe
it is one whom he did appoint Minister somewhere.

““M. de Lucchesini, by the charm of his conversation, brought out
that of the King’s. He knew what topics were agreeable to the King ;
and then, he knew how to listen; which is not so easy as one thinks,
and which no stupid man was ever capable of. He was as agreeable
to everybody as to his Majesty, by his seductive manners and by the
graces of his mind. . Pinto, who had nothing to risk, permitted him-
self everything. Says he: ‘Ask the Austrian General, Sire, all he
saw me do when in the service of the Kaiser.’

508 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. | Book XXI.
9th-16th July 1780.

Figo. “* A neewoits at my Wedding, wasn’t that it, my dear Pinto?
King (interrupting). “‘ Do me the honour to say whether it was suc-
Bogan ce Ego. “*No, Sire; it even alarmed all my relations,
who thought it a bad omen. Monsieur the Major here had struck out
the idea of joining Two flaming Hearts, a very novel image of a mar-
ried couple. But the groove they were to slide on, and meet, gave
way: my Wife’s heart went, and mine remained.’ King. “* You
see, Pinto, you were not good for much to those people, any more than
to me.’ Ego. “‘Oh, Sire, your Majesty, since then, owes him
some compensation for the sabre-cuts he had on his head.’ King.
““* He gets but too much compensation. Pinto, didn’t I send you yes-
terday some of my good Preussen honey ?’ Pinto. “*‘ Oh, surely ;
it was to make it known. If your Majesty could bring that into vogue,
and sell it all, you would be the greatest King on earth. For your
Kingdom produces only that; but of that there is plenty.’

‘“**Do you know,’ said the King, one day, to me—‘ Do you know
that the first soldiering I did was for the House of Austria! Mon
Dieu, how the time passes !’"—He had a way of slowly bringing his
hands together, in ejaculating these Mon-Dieus, which gave him quite
a good-natured and extremely mild air.—‘ Do you know that I saw the
glittering of the last rays of Prince Eugen’s genius? Ego.
“*¢ Perhaps it was at these rays that your Majesty’s genius lit itself.’
King. “‘ Eh, mon Diew! who could equal the Prince Eugen?
Ego. “*‘He who excels him ;—for instance, he who could win Twelve
Battles '—He put on his modest air. I have always said, it is easy to
be modest, if you are in funds. He seemed as though he had not un-
derstood me, and said :

King. “‘ When the cabal which, during forty years, the Prince had
always had to struggle with in his Army, were plotting mischief on
him, they used to take advantage of the evening time, when his spirits,
brisk enough in the morning, were jaded by the fatigues of the day. It
was thus they persuaded him to undertake his bad March on Mainz’
(March not known to me).

Ego. “‘ Regarding yourself, Sire, and the Rhine Campaign, you
teach me nothing. I know everything your Majesty did, and even -
what you said. I could relate to you your Journeys to Strasburg, to
Holland, and what passed in a certain Boat. Apropos of this Rhine
Campaign, one of our old Generals, whom I often set talking, as one
reads an old Manuscript, has told me how astonished he was to see a
young Prussian Officer, whom he did not know, answering a General
of the late King, who had given out the order, Not to go a-foraging :
“And I, Sir, I order you to go; our Army needs it; in short, I will
have it so (je le veux) !—”’

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 509
9th-16th July 1780.

King. “* You look at me too much from the favourable side! Ask
these Gentlemen about my humours and my caprices; they will tell you
fine things of me.’

“ We got talking of some Anecdotes which are consigned to, or con-
cealed in, certain obscure Books. ‘I have been much amused,’ said I
to the King, ‘with the big cargo of Books, true or false, written by
‘ French Refugees, which perhaps are unknown in France itself.’
(Discourses a little on this subject, though without telling us.)

King. “‘ Where did you pick up all these fine old Pieces? These
would amuse me on an evening; better than the conversation of my
Doctor of the Sorbonne’ (one Peyrau, a wandering creature, not oth-
erwise of the least interest to us),’° ‘whom I have here, and whom I
am trying to convert.” Ego. “‘T found them all in a Bohemian
Library, where I sat diverting myself for two Winters.’

King. “‘ How, then? Two Winters in Bohemia? What the devil
were you doing there! Is it long since? igo. “* No, Sire;
only a year or two’ (Potato-War time)! ‘I had retired thither to read
at my ease.’-—He smiled, and seemed to appreciate my not mentioning
the little War of 1778, and saving him any speech about it. He saw
well enough that my Winter-quarters had been in Bohemia on that oc-
casion; and was satisfied with my reticence. Being an old sorcerer,
who guessed everything, and whose tact was the finest ever known, he
discovered that I did not wish to tell him I found Berlin changed since
I had last been there. I took care not to remind him that I was at the
capturing of it in 1760, under M. de Lacy’s orders” (M. de Lacy’s in-
deed !).— It was for having spoken of the first capture of Berlin, by
Marshal Haddick” (highly temporary as it was, and followed by Ross-
bach), ‘‘ that the King had taken a dislike to M. de Ried.

“Apropos of the Doctor of the Sorbonne” (uninteresting Peyrau)
“with whom he daily disputed, the King said to me once, ‘Get me a
Bishopric for him.’ ‘I don’t think,’ said I, ‘that my recommendation,
or that of your Majesty, could be useful to him with us.’ ‘Ah, truly
no!’ said the King: ‘ Well, I will write to the Czarina of Russia for
this poor devil; he does begin to bore me. He holds out as Jansen-
ist, forsooth. Mon Dieu, what blockheads the present Jansenists are!
But France should not have extinguished that nursery (foyer) of their
genius, that Port Royal, extravagant as it was. Indeed, one ought to
destroy nothing! Why have they destroyed, too, the Depositaries of
the graces of Rome and of Athens, those excellent Professors of the Hu-
manities, and perhaps of Humanity, the Ex-Jesuit Fathers? Educa-

49 Nicolai, Anekdoten, ii. 1383 n.

510 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

9th-16th July 1780.
tion will be the loser by it. But as my Brothers the Kings, most Cath-
olic, most Christian, most Faithful and Apostolic, have tumbled them
out, I, most Heretical, pick up as many as | can; and perhaps, one day,
I shall be courted for the sake of them by those who want some. I
preserve the breed: I said, counting my stock, the other day,“ A Rec-
tor like you, my Father, I could easily sell for 300 thalers ; you, Rev-
erend Father Provincial, for 600; and so the rest, in proportion.”
When one is not rich, one makes speculations.”

“From want of memory, and of opportunities to see oftener and
longer the Greatest Man that ever existed” (Oh, mon Prince !), “I am
obliged to stop. There is not a word in all this but was his own ; and
those who have seen him will recognise his manner. All I want is, to
make him known to those who have not had the happiness to see him.
His eyes are too hard in the Portraits: by work in the Cabinet, and
the hardships of War, they had become intense, and of piercing quali-
ty; but they softened finely in hearing, or telling, some trait of noble-
ness or sensibility. Till his death, and but quite shortly before it,—
notwithstanding many levities which he knew I had allowed myself,
both in speaking and writing, and which he surely attributed only to
my duty as opposed to my interest,—he deigned to honour me with
marks of his remembrance; and has often commissioned his Ministers,
at Paris and at Vienna, to assure me of his good will.

“IT no longer believe in earthquakes and eclipses at Cesar’s death,
since there has been nothing of such at that of Friedrich the Great. I
know not, Sire, whether great phenomena of Nature will announce the
day when you shall cease to reign” (great phenomena must be very
idle if they do, your Highness !)—“ but it is a phenomenon in the world,
that of a King who rules a Republic by making himself obeyed and re-
spected for his own sake, as much as by his rights” (Hear, hear).”°

Prince de Ligne thereupon hurries off for Petersburg, and the
final Section of his Kaiser’s Visit. An errand of his own, too,
the Prince had,—about his new Daughter-in-law Massalska, and
claims of extensive Polish Properties belonging to her. He was
the charm of Petersburg and the Czarina; but of the Massalska
Properties could retrieve nothing whatever. The munificent
Czarina gave him “‘a beautiful Territory in the Crim,” instead ;
and invited him to come and see it with her, on his Kaiser’s
next Visit (1787, the aquatic Visit and the highly scenic).
Which it is well known the Prince did; and has put on record,

*0 Prince de Ligne, Mémoires et Meélanges, i. 22-40.

om aye Binouy

Cuap. VIII. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 511
1782-1785.

in his pleasant, not untrue, though vague, high-coloured and fan-
tastic way,—if it or he at all concerned us farther.

How General von der Marwite, in early Boyhood, saw
Friedrich the Great Three Times (1782-5).

General von der Marwitz, who died not many years ago, is
of the old Marwitz kindred, several of whom we have known
for their rugged honesties, genialities, and peculiar ways. This
General, it appears, had left a kind of Autobiography; which
friends of his thought might be useful to the Prussian Public,
after those Radical distractions which burst out in 1848 and
onwards; and a first Volume of the Marwitz Posthumous Papers
was printed accordingly,?!—-whether any more I have not heard;
though I found this first Volume an excellent substantial bit of
reading; and the Author a fine old Prussian Gentleman, very
analogous in his structure to the fine old English ditto; who
showed me the per contra side of this and the other much-cel-
ebrated modern Prussian person and thing, Prince Hardenberg,
Johannes von Miiller, and the like ;—and yielded more especial-
ly the following Three Reminiscences of Friedrich, beautiful lit-
tle Pictures, bathed in morning light, and evidently true to the
life :

1°. June 1782 or 1783. ‘The first time I saw him was in 1782
(or it might be 1783, in my sixth year),” middle of June, whichever
year, ‘as he was returning from his Annual Review in Preussen.”
(West-Preussen, never revisits the Konigsberg region), “‘and stopped
to change horses at Dolgelin.” Dolgelin is in Milrose Country, west-
ward of Frankfurt-on-Oder; our Marwitz Schloss not far from it.
“JT had been sent with Mamsell Bénézet,’ my French Governess;
“Cand, along with the Clergyman of Dolgelin, we waited for the King.

“The King, on his journeys, generally preferred, whether at mid-
day or for the night, to halt in some Country place, and at the Parson-
ages most of all; probably because he was quieter there than in the
Towns. ‘To the Clergyman this was always a piece of luck ; not only
because, if he pleased the King, he might chance to get promoted ; but
because he was sure of profitable payment, at any rate; the King al-
ways ordering 50 thalers” (say 10 guineas) “for his noon-halt, and for
his night’s-lodging 100. The little that the King ate was paid for

21 Nachlass des General von der Marwitz (Berlin, 1852), 1 vol. 8vo.

512 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

1782-1785.
over and above. It is true, his Suite expected to be well treated; but
this consisted only of one or two individuals. Now, the King had been
wont almost always, on these journeys homewards, to pass the last night -
of his expedition with the Clergyman of Dolgelin ; and had done so last
year, with this present one who was then just installed; with him, as
with his predecessor, the King had talked kindly, and the 100 thalers
were duly remembered. Our good Parson flattered himself, therefore,
that this time too the same would happen; and he had made all prep-
arations accordingly.

** So we waited there, and a crowd of people with us. The team of
horses stood all ready (peasants’ horses, poor little cats of things, but
the best that could be picked, for there were then no post-horses that
could run fast) ;—the country-fellows that were to ride postillion all
decked, and ten head of horses for the King’s coach: wheelers, four,
which the coachman drove from his box; then two successive pairs
before, on each pair a postillion-peasant; and upon the third pair, fore-
most of all, the King’s outriders were to go.

“And now, at last, came the Feldjager” (Chacer, Hunting-groom),
“‘with his big whip, on a peasant’s horse, a peasant with him as attend-
ant, .All blazing with heat, he dismounted; said, The King would be
here in five minutes; looked at the relays, and the fellows with the
water-buckets, who were to splash the wheels; gulped down a quart
of beer; and so, his saddle in the interim having been fixed on another
horse, sprang up again, and off at a gallop. The King, then, was not
to stay in Dolgelin! Soon came the Page, mounted in like style; a
youth of 17 or 18; utterly exhausted; had to be lifted down from his
horse, and again helped upon the fresh one, being scarcely able to
stand ;—and close on the rear of him arrived the King. He was sit-
ting alone in an old-fashioned glass-coach, what they call a vis-a-vis
(a narrow carriage, two seats fore and aft, and on each of them room
for only one person). ‘The coach was very long, like all the old car-
riages of that time ; between the driver’s box and the body of the coach
was a space of at least four feet; the body itself was of pear-shape,
peaked below and bellied -out above; hung on straps, with rolled
knuckles” (winden), “did not rest on springs; two beams, connecting
fore-wheels and hind, ran not under the body of the coach, but along
the sides of it, the hind-wheels following with a goodly interval.

“The carriage drew up; and the King said to his coachman” (the
far-famed Pfund): “‘Is this Dolgelin?” ‘Yes, your Majesty ?!—‘I
stay here.’ ‘No,’ said Pfund; ‘the sun is not down yet. We can get
on very well to Miincheberg tonight’ (ten miles ahead, and a Town too,
perfidious Pfund!)—‘ and then tomorrow we are much earlier in Pots-
dam.’ ‘ Na, Hm,—well, if it must be so !’—

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 513

1782-1785.

“And therewith they set to changing horses. The peasants who
were standing far off, quite silent, with reverently bared heads, came
softly nearer, and looked eagerly at the King. An old Gingerbread-
woman (Semmelfrau) of Lebbenichen” (always knew her afterwards)
“took me in her arm, and held me aloft close to the coach-window. I
was now at farthest an ell from the King; and I felt as if I were look-
ing in the face of God Almighty (es war mir als ob ich den lieben Gott
ansahe). He was gazing steadily out before him, into the glowing
West, through the front window. He had on an old three-cornered
regimental hat, and had put the hindward straight flap of it foremost,
undoing the loop, so that this flap hung down in front, and screened
him from the sun. The hat-strings (Hut-cordons,” trimmings of sil-
ver or gold cord) “ had got torn loose, and were fluttering about on this
down-hanging front flap; the white feather in the hat was tattered and
dirty ; the plain blue uniform, with red cuffs, red collar, and gold shoul-
der-bands” (epaulettes without bush at the end), “ was old and dusty,
the yellow waistcoat covered with snuff; for the rest, he had black-
velvet breeches” (and, of course, the perpetual doots, of which he would
allow no polishing or blacking, still less any change for new ones while
they would hang together). “I thought always he would speak to me.
The old woman could not long hold me up; and so she set me down
again. Then the King looked at the Clergyman, beckoned him near,
and asked, Whose child it was? ‘ Herr von Marwitz of Friedersdorf’s.’
—‘Is that the General? ‘No, the Chamberlain.’ The King made no
answer: he could not bear Chamberlains, whom he considered as idle
fellows. The new horses were yoked; away they went. All day the
peasants had been talking of the King, how he would bring this and
that into order, and pull everybody over the coals who was not agree-
able to them.

“ Afterwards it turned out that all Clergymen were in the habit of
giving 10 thalers to the coachman Pfund, when the King lodged with
them: the former Clergyman of Dolgelin had regularly done it; but
the new one, knowing nothing of the custom, had omitted it last year ;
—and that was the reason why the fellow had so pushed along all day
that he could pass Dolgelin before sunset, and get his 10 thalers in
Mincheberg from the Biirgermeister there.

2°. January 1785. ‘The second time I saw the King was at the
Carnival of Berlin in 1785. [had gone with my Tutor to a Cousin of
mine who was a Hofdame (Dame de Cour) to the Princess Henri, and
lived accordingly in the Prince-Henri Palace,—which is now, in our
days, become the University ;—her apartments were in the third story,
and looked out into the garden. As we were ascending the great

Y2

514 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

1782-1785.
stairs, there came dashing past us a little old man with staring eyes,
jumping down three steps ata time. My Tutor said, in astonishment,
‘That is Prince Henri!’ We now stept into a window of the first
story, and looked out to see what the little man had meant by those
swift boundings of his. And lo, there came the King in his carriage
to visit him.

“Friedrich the Second never drove in Potsdam, except when on
journeys, but constantly rode. He seemed to think it a disgrace, and
unworthy of a Soldier, to go in a carriage: thus, when in the last Au-
tumn of his life (this very 1785) he was so unwell in the windy Sans-
Souci (where there were no stoves, but only hearth-fires), that it be-
came necessary to remove to the Schloss in Potsdam, he could not de-
termine to drive thither, but kept hoping from day to day for so much
improvement as might allow him to ride. As no improvement came,
and the weather grew ever colder, he at length decided to go over under
cloud of darkness, in a sedan-chair, that nobody might notice him.—So
likewise during the Reviews at Berlin or Charlottenburg he appeared al-
ways on horseback : but during the Carnival in Berlin, where he usually
stayed four weeks, he drove, and this always in Royal pomp,—thus:

“ Ahead went eight runners with their staves, plumed caps and run-
ner-aprons” (Laufer-schurze, whatever these are), “in two rows. As
these runners were never used for anything except this show, the office
was a kind of post for Invalids of the Lifeguard. A consequence of
which was, that the King always had to goat a slow pace. His courses,
however, were no other than from the Schloss to the Opera twice a
week; and during his whole residence, one or two times to Prince
Henri and the Princess Amelia” (once always, too, to dine with his
Wife, to whom he did not speak one word, but merely bowed at begin-
ning and ending!) “ After this the runners rested again for a year.
Behind them came the Royal Carriage, with a team of eight; eight
windows round it; the horses with old-fashioned harness, and plumes
on their heads. Coachman and outriders all in the then Royal livery,

-—blue ; the collar, cuffs, pockets, and all seams, trimmed with a stripe
of red cloth, and this bound on both sides with small gold-cord; the
general effect of which was very good. In the four boots (Nedentrit-
ten) of the coach stood four Pages, red with gold, in silk stockings,
feather-hats (crown all covered with feathers), but not having plumes ;
—the valet’s boot behind, empty; and to the rear of it, down below,
where one mounts to the valet’s boot” (Bedienten-tritt, what is now
become foot-board), “stood a groom (Stallknecht). Thus came the
King, moving slowly along ; and entered through the portal of the Pal-
ace. We looked down from the window in the stairs. Prince Henri
stood at the carriage-door; the pages opened it, the King stepped out,

a i |

/

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 515
1782-1785.

‘saluted his Brother, took him by the hand, walked upstairs with him,

and thus the two passed near us (we retiring upstairs to the second
story), and went into the Apartment, where now Students run leaping
about.

3°. May 23d, 1785. “ The third time I saw him was that same year,
at Berlin still, as he returned home from the Review.??. My Tutor had
gone with me for that end to the Halle Gate, for we already knew that
on that day he always visited his Sister, Princess Amelia. He came
riding on a big white horse,—no doubt old Condé, who, twenty years
after this, still got his free-board in the Ecole Vétérinaire ; for since
the Bavarian War (1778), Friedrich hardly ever rode any other horse,
His dress was the same as formerly at Dolgelin, on the journey; only
that the hat was in a little better condition, properly looped up, and with
the peak (but not with the Jong peak, as is now the fashion, set in front,
in due military style. Behind him were a guard of Generals, then the
Adjutants, and finally the grooms of the party. The whole ‘ Rondeel’
(now Belle-Alliance Platz) and the Wilhelms-Strasse were crammed
full of people; all windows crowded, all heads bare, everywhere the
deepest silence; and on all countenances an expression of reverence
and confidence, as towards the just steersman of ali our destinies. The
King rode quite alone in front, and saluted people, continually taking
off his hat. In doing which he observed a very marked gradation, ac-
cording as the onlookers bowing to him from the windows seemed to
deserve. At one time he lifted the hat a very little ; at another he took
it from his head, and held it an instant beside the same ; at another he
sunk it as far as the elbow. But these motions lasted continually ; and
no sooner had he put on his hat, than he saw other people, and again
took it off. From the Halle Gate to the Koch-Strasse he certainly
took off his hat 200 times.

“Through this reverent silence there sounded only the trampling of
the horses, and the shouting of the Berlin street-boys, who went jump-
ing before him, capering with joy, and flung up their hats into the air,
or skipped along close by him, wiping the dust from his boots. I and
my Tutor had gained so much room that we could run alongside of him,
hat in hand, among the boys.—You see the difference between then
and now. Who was it that then made the noise? Who maintained a
dignified demeanour 2—Who is it that bawls and bellows now ?” (No-
bilities ought to be noble, thinks this old Marwitz, in their reverence to
Nobleness. If Nobilities themselves become Washed Populaces in a
manner, what are we to say?) “ And what value can you put on such
bellowing ?

#2 «May 21st-23d” (Rodenbeck, iii. 327).

516 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
5th-lith Aug. 1784.

“‘ Arrived at the Princess Amelia’s Palace (which, lying in the Wil-
helms-Strasse, fronts also into the Koch-Strasse), the crowd grew still
denser, for they expected him there: the fore-court was jammed full ;
yet in the middle, without the presence of any police, there was open
space left for him and his attendants. He turned into the Court; the
gate-leaves went back; and the aged lame Princess, leaning on two
Ladies, the Oberhofmeisterinn (Chief Lady) behind her, came hitching
down the flat steps to meet him. So soon as he perceived her, he put
his horse to the gallop, pulled up, sprang rapidly down, took off his hat
(which he now, however, held quite low at the full length of his arm),
embraced her, gave her his arm, and again led her up the steps. The
gate-leaves went to; all had vanished, and the multitude still stood,
with bared head, in silence, all eyes turned to the spot where he had
disappeared; and so it lasted awhile, till each gathered himself and
peacefully went his way. :

“‘ And yet there had nothing happened! No pomp, no fire-works, no
cannon-shot, no drumming and fifing, no music, no event that had oc-
curred. No, nothing but an old man of 73, ill-dressed, all dusty, was
returning from his day’s work. But everybody knew that this old man
was toiling also for him; that he had set his whole life on that labour,
and for five-and-forty years had not given it the slip one day! Every-
one saw, moreover, the fruits of this old man’s labour, near and far, and
everywhere around ; and to Jook on the old man himself awakened rev-
erence, admiration, pride, confidence,—in short, all the nobler feelings
of man.”?°

This was May 21st, 1785; I think, the last time Berlin saw
its King in that public manner, riding through the streets. The
Fiirstenbund Affair is now, secretly, in a very lively state, at Ber-
lin and over Germany at large; and comes to completion in a
couple of months hence,—as shall be noticed farther on.

General Bouillé, home from his West-Indian Exploits, visits
Friedrich (August 5-11th, 1784).

In these last years of his life, Friedrich had many French of
distinction visiting him. In 1782, the Abbé Raynal (whom, ex-
cept for his power of face, he admired little);?4 in 1786, Mira-
beau (whose personal qualities seem to have pleased him) ;—
but chiefly, in the interval between these twe, various Military

23 Nachlass des General von der Marwitz, }, 15-20.
** Rodenbeck, iii. 277 n.

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 517
5th-lith Aug. 1784. ¥

Frenchmen, now home with their laurels from the American
War, coming about his Reviews: eager to see the Great Man,
and be seen by him. Lafayette, Ségur, and many others came;
of whom the one interesting to us is Marquis de Bouillé: already
known for his swift sharp operation on the English Leeward Isl-
ands; and memorable afterwards to all the world for his presi-
dency in the L’light to Varennes of poor Louis XVI. and his Queen,
in 1791; which was by no means so successful. ‘ ‘The brave
Bouillé,” as we called him long since, when writing of that latter
operation, elsewhere. Bouillé left Mémoires of his own; which
speak of Friedrich: in the Vie de Bouillé, published recently by
friendly hands,”° there is Summary given of all that his Papers
say on Friedrich ; this, in still briefer shape, but unchanged other-
wise, readers shall now see.

“Tn July 1784, Marquis de Bouillé (lately returned from a visit to
England), desirous to see the Prussian Army, and to approach the great
Friedrich while it was yet time, travelled by way of Holland to Ber-
lin, through Potsdam” (no date; got to Berlin “ August 6th ;”?° so that
we can guess “ August 5th” for his Potsdam day). “Saw, at Sans-
Souci, in the vestibule, a bronze bust of Charles XII.; in the dining-
room, among other pictures, a Portrait of the Chateauroux, Louis XV.’s
first Mistress. In the King’s bedroom, simple: camp-bed, coverlet of
crimson taffetas,—rather dirty, as well as the other furniture, on ac-
count of the dogs. Many books lying about: Cicero, Tacitus, Titus
Livius” (in French Translations). ‘‘On a chair, Portrait of Kaiser
Joseph II.; same in King’s Apartments in Berlin Schloss, also in the

Potsdam new Palace: ‘C’est un jeune homme que je ne dots pas per-
dre de vue.’

“King entering, took off his hat, saluting the Marquis, whom a
Chamberlain called Goertz presented” (no Chamberlain ; a Lieutenant-
General, and much about the King; his Brother, the Weimar Goertz,
is gone as Prussian Minister to Petersburg some time ago). “ King
talked about the War des Isles’ (my West-India War), “ and about En-
gland. ‘They’ (the English) ‘are like sick people who have had a fe-
ver; and don’t know how ill they have been, till the fit is over.’ Fox
he treated as a noisy fellow (de brouillon) ; but expressed admiration
of young Pitt. ‘The coolness with which he can stand being not only
contradicted, but ridiculed and insulted, cela parait au-dessus de la pa-
tience humaine.’ King closed the conversation by saying he would be

25 René de Bouillé, Essai sur la Vie du Marquis de Bouillé (Paris, 1853).

26 Rodenbeck, iii. 309.

518 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

19th-24th Aug. 1784.
glad to see me in Silesia, whither he was just about to go for Reviews”
(will go in ten days, August 15th).

“ Friedrich was 72,” last January 24th. ‘“ His physiognomy, dress,
appearance, are much what the numerous well-known Portraits repre-
sent him. At Court, and on great Ceremonies, he appears sometimes
in black-coloured stockings rolled over the knee, and rose-coloured or
sky-blue coat (dleu céleste). He is fond of these colours, as his fur-
niture too shows. ‘The Marquis dined with the Prince of Prussia, with-
out previous presentation ; so simple are the manners of this Soldiez
Court. The Heir Presumptive lodges at a brewer’s house, and in a
very mean way ; is not allowed to sleep from home without permission
from the King.”

Bouillé set out for Silesia, 11th August; was at Neisse in good time.
“Went, at 5 a.m.” (date is August 19th, Review lasts till 24th),?’ “ to
see the King mount. All the Generals, Prince of Prussia among them,
waited in the street; outside of a yery simple House, where the King
lodged. After waiting half an hour, his Majesty appeared; saluted
very graciously, without uttering a word. This was one of his special
Reviews” (that was it!). “ He rode (marchait) generally alone, in ut-
ter silence; it was then that he had his regard terrible, and his fea-
tures took the impress of severity, to say no more.” (Is displeased
with the Review, I doubt, though Bouillé saw nothing amiss ;—and
merely tells us farther): “‘ At the Reviews the King inspects strictly one
regiment after another: it is he that selects the very Corporals and Ser-
geants, much more the Upper Officers; nominating for vacancies what
Cadets are to fill them,—all of whom are Nobles.” Yes, with rare ex-
ceptions, al]. Friedrich, democratic as his temper was, is very strict
on this point; “‘ because,” says he repeatedly, “ Nobles have honour; a
Noble that misbehaves, or flinches in the moment of crisis, can find no
refuge in his own class; whereas a man of lower birth always can in
his.”?°  Bouillé continues :

“‘ After Review, dined with his Majesty. Just before dinner he gave
to the assembled Generals the ‘ Order’ for tomorrow’s Maneuvres” (as
we saw in Conway’s case, ten years ago). “ This lasted about a quar-
ter of an hour; King then saluted everybody, taking off trés-affectueuse-
ment his hat, which he immediately put on again. Had now his affa-
ble mien, and was most polite to the strangers present. Conversation
turned on the Wars of Louis XIV.; then on English-American War,
-—King always blaming the English, whom he does not like. Dinner
lasted three hours. His Majesty said more than once to me” (in ill
humour, I should almost guess, and wishful to hide it): ‘ Complete free-
dom here, as if we were in our Tavern (Jci, toute liberté, Monsieur,

27 Rédenbeck, iii. 310. 2° (uvres de Frédéric (more than once).

a

—

Cuap. VIII. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 519
5th Sept. 1784.

comme si nous étions au cabaret)!’ On the morrow,” August 20th,
“dined again. King talked of France; of Cardinal Richelieu, whose
principles of administration he praised. Repeated several times, that
‘he did not think the French Nation fit for Free Government!’ At
the Reviews, Friedrich-did not himself command; but prescribed, and
followed the movements; criticised, reprimanded, and so forth. On
horseback six hours together, without seeming fatigued.

“King left for Breslau, 25th August” (24th, if it were of moment).
“ Bouillé followed thither; dined again. Besides Officers, there were
present several Polish Princes, the Bishop of the Diocese, and the Ab-
bot Bastiani. King made pleasantries about religion” (pity, that) ;
“ Bastiani not slow with repartees,” of a defensive kind. ‘“‘ King told
me, on one occasion, ‘ Would you believe it? I have just been put-
ting my poor Jesuits’ finances into order. They understand nothing
of such things, ces bons hommes. ‘They are useful to me in forming
my Catholic Clergy. Ihave arranged it with his Holiness the Pope,
who is a friend of mine, and behaves very well to me.’ Pointing from
the window to the Convent of Capuchins, ‘ Those fellows trouble me a
little with their bell-ringings. They offered to stop it at night, for my
sake : but I declined. One must leave everybody to his trade ; theirs
is to pray, and I should have been sorry to deprive them of their chimes
(carillon).’

“'The 20,000 troops, assembled at Breslau, did not gain the King’s
approval,”—far from it, alas, as we shall all see! ‘“'T’o some Chiefs of
Corps he said,‘Vous ressemblez plus a des tailleurs qua des mili-
taires (You are more like tailors than soldiers)!’ He cashiered sev-
eral, and even sent one Major-General to prison for six weeks.” ‘That
of the tailors, and Major-General Erlach clapt in prison, is too true ;—
nor is that the saddest part of the affair to us. ‘‘ Bouillé was bound
now on an excursion to Prague, to a Camp of the Kaiser’s there.
‘Mind,’ said the King, alluding to Bouillé’s d/we uniform,— mind, in
the Country you are going to, they don’t like the blue coats; and your
Queen has even preserved the family repugnance, for she does not like
them either.”?°

‘September 5th, 1784, Bouillé arrived at Prague. Austrian Ma-
neuvres are very different; troops, though more splendidly dressed,
contrast unfavorably with Prussians ;—unfavourably, though the strict
King was so dissatisfied. Kaiser Joseph, speaking of Friedrich, al-
ways admiringly calls him ‘Le Rot.’ Joseph a great questioner, and
answers his own questions. His tone brusque et décidé. Dinner last.
ed one hour.

29 Hssai sur la Vie du Marquis de Bouillé, pp. 134-140.

520 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
Sept.—Oct. 1784.

“ Returned to Potsdam to assist at the Autumn Reviews,” 21st-23d
September 1784.°° .* Dinner very splendid, magnificently served;
twelve handsome Pages, in blue or rose-colored velvet, waited on the
Guests,—these being forty old rude Warriors booted and spurred.
King spoke of the French approvingly: ‘ But,’ added he, ‘the Court
spoils everything. Those Court-fellows, with their red heels and deli- -
cate nerves, make very bad soldiers. Saxe often told me, In his Flan-
ders Campaigns, the Courtiers gave him more trouble than did Cum-
berland.’ Talked of Marechal Richelieu ; of Louis XIV., whose apol-
ogy he skilfully made. Blamed, however, the Revocation of the Edict
of Nantes. Great attachment of the ‘ Protestant Refugees’ to France
and its King. ‘ Would you believe it?’ said he: ‘ Under Louis XIV.
they and their families used to assemble on the day of St. Louis, to cel-
ebrate the fete of the King who persecuted them!’ Expressed pity for
Louis XV., and praised his good-nature.

‘“‘ Friedrich, in his conversation, showed a modesty which seemed a
little affected. ‘ S’ul m’est permis d’avoir une opinion, a common ex-
pression of his ;—said ‘ opinion’ on most things, on Medicine among
others, being always excellent. Thinks French Literature surpasses
that of the Ancients. Small opinion of English Literature: turned
Shakspeare into ridicule ; and made also bitter fun of German Letters,
—their Language barbarous, their Authors without genius.” * *

‘“‘T asked, and received permission from the King, to bring my Son
to be admitted in his Académie des Gentilshommes ; an exceptional fa-
vour. On parting, the King said to me: ‘I hope you will return to me
Maréchal de France; it is what I should like; and your Nation couldn’t
do better, nobody being in a state to render it greater services.’”

Bouillé will reappear for an instant next year. Meanwhile he re-
turns to France, “ first days of October 1784,” where he finds Prince
Henri; who is on Visit there for three months past.*! A shining event
in Prince Henri’s Life; and a profitable ; poor King Louis,—what was
very welcome in Henri’s state of finance,—having, in a delicate kingly
way, insinuated into him a “Gift of 400,000 francs” (16,000/.) :*°—
partly by way of retaining-fee for France; “‘ may turn to excellent ac-
count,” think some, “ when a certain Nephew comes to reign yonder,
as he soon must.”

What Bouillé heard about the Silesian Reviews is perfectly

30 Rodenbeck, iii. 313.

31 «Od July 1784,” Prince Henri had gone (Rédenbeck, iii. 309).

52 Anonymous (De la Roche-Aymon), Vie privée, politique et militaire du
Prince Henri, Frére de Frédéric IT. (a poor, vague and uninstructive, though
authentic little Book: Paris, 1809), pp. 219-239.

Cuap. VIII.) FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. ° 521
Sept.—Oct. 1784.

true; and only a part of the truth. Here, to the person chiefly
responsible, is an indignant Letter of the King’s: to a notable
degree, full of settled wrath against one who 1s otherwise a dear

old Friend:

Friedrich to Lieutenant-General Tauentzien, Infantry Inspector-
General of Silesia.
‘¢ Potsdam, 7th September 1784.

“My dear General von Tauentzien,x— While in Silesia I mentioned
to you, and will now repeat in writing, That my Army in Silesia was
at no time so bad as at present. Were I to make Shoemakers or Tai-
lors into Generals, the Regiments could not be worse. Regiment Thad-
den is not fit to be the most insignificant militia battalion of a Prussian
Army; Rothkirch and Schwarz’—bad as possible all of them—* of
Erlach, the men are so spoiled by smuggling” (sad industry, instead of
drilling), ‘‘ they have no resemblance to Soldiers; Keller is like a heap
of undrilled boors; Hager has a miserable Commander; and your own
Regiment is very mediocre. Only with Graf von Anhalt” (in spite of
his head), “ with Wendessen and Markgraf Heinrich, could I be con-
tent. See you, that is the state I found the Regiments in, one after
one. I will now speak of their Maneuvering” (in our Mimic Battles
on the late occasion) :

‘Schwartz, at Neisse, made the unpardonable riiiatakee of not suffi-
cieutly besetting the Height on the Left Wing; had it been serious,
the Battle had been lost. At Breslau, Erlach” (who is a Major-Gen-
eral, forsooth !), “‘ instead of covering the Army by seizing the Heights,
marched off with his Division straight as a row of cabbages into that
Defile ; whereby, had it been earnest, the enemy’s Cavalry would have
cut down our Infantry, and the Fight was gone.

“It is not my purpose to lose Battles by the base conduct (lacheté)
of my Generals: wherefore I hereby appoint, That you, next year, if I
be alive, assemble the Army between Breslau and Ohlau ; and for four
days before I arrive in your Camp, carefully manceuvre with the igno-
rant Generals, and teach them what their duty is. Regiment Von Ar-
mum and Garrison-Regiment Von Kanitz are to act the Enemy: and
whoever does not then fulfil his duty shall go to Court-Martial,—for |
should think it a shame of any Country (jeden Puzssance) to keep such
people, who trouble themselves so little about their business. Erlach
sits four weeks longer in arrest” (to have six weeks of it in full).
‘‘ And you have to make known this my present Declared Will to your
whole Inspection.—F.”°*

33 Rédenbeck, iii. 311.

522 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
Sept.—Oct. 1784.

What a peppering is the excellent old Tauentzien getting!
Here is a case for Kaltenborn, and the sympathies of Opposition
people. But, alas, this King knows that Armies are not to be
kept at the working point on cheaper terms,—though some have
tried it, by grog, by sweet-meats, sweet-speeches, and found it in
the end come horribly dearer! One thing is certain: the Sile-
sian Reviews, next Year, if this King be alive, will be a terrible
matter; and Military Gentlemen had better look to themselves
in time! Kaltenborn’s sympathy will help little; nothing but
knowing one’s duty, and visibly and indisputably doing it, will
the least avail.

Just in the days when Bouillé left him for France, Friedrich
(“October 1784”) had conceived the notion of some general
Confederation, or Combination in the Reich, to resist the con-
tinual Encroachments of Austria; which of late are becoming
more rampant than ever. Thus, in the last year, especially with-
in the last six months, a poor Bishop of Passau, quasi-Bavarian,
or in theory Sovereign Bishop of the Reich, is getting himself
pulled to pieces (Diocese torn asunder, and masses of it forcibly
sewed-on to their new “ Bishopric of Vienna”), in the most tragic
manner, in spite of express Treaties, and of all the outcries the
poor man and the Holy Father himself can make against it.%+
To this of Passau, and to the much of Panis-Briefe and the like
which had preceded, Friedrich, though studiously saying almost
nothing, had been paying the utmost of attention:—part of
Prince Henri’s errand to France is thought to have been, to
take soundings on those matters (on which France proves alto-
gether willing, if able); and now, in the general emotion about
Passau, Friedrich jots down in a Note to Hertzberg the above
idea; with order to put it into form a little, and consult about
it in the Reich with parties interested. Hertzberg took the thing
up with zeal; instructed the Prussian Envoys to inquire, cau-
tiously, everywhere; fancied he did find willingness in the Courts

34 Dohm (Denkwiirdigkeiten, iii. 46,— Geschichte der letzten Periode Fried-
richs des Zweiten) gives ample particulars. Dohm’s first 3 volumes call
themselves ‘‘ History of Friedrich’s last Period, 1778-1786 ;” and are full

of Bavarian War, 3d vol. mostly of Fiirstenbund ;—all in a candid, authen-
tic, but watery and rather wearisome way.

Cuapr. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 523
3d Jan. 1785. ;

of the Reich, in Hanover especially : in a word, got his various
irons into the fire ;—and had not proceeded far, when there rose
another case of Austrian Encroachment, which eclipsed all the
preceding; and speedily brought Hertzberg’s irons to the weld-
ing-point. ‘Too brief we cannot be in this matter; here are the
dates, mostly from Dohm:

Newyears-Day 1785, on or about that day, Romanzow, Son of
our old Colberg and Anti-Turk friend, who is Russian “ Minis-
ter in the Ober-Rheinish Circle,” appears at the little Court of
Zweibriick, with a most sudden and astounding message to the
Duke there:

‘‘Important Bargain agreed upon between your Kaiser and
his Highness of the Pfalz and Baiern; am commanded by my
Sovereign Lady, on behalf of her friend the Kaiser, to make it
known to you. LBaiern all and whole made over to Austria; in
return for which the now Kur-Baiern gets the Austrian Nether-
lands (Citadels of Limburg and Liixemburg alone excepted) ;
and is a King henceforth, ‘“ King of Burgundy” to be the Title,
he and his fortunate Successors for all time coming. To your
fortunate self, in acknowledgment of your immediate consent,
Austria offers the free-gift of 100,000/., and to your Brother
Max of 50,0002.; Kur-Baiern, for his loyal conduct, is to have
150,000/.; and to all of you, if handsome, Austria will be hand-
some generally. For the rest, the thing is already settled; and
your refusal will not hinder it from going forward. I request
to know, within eight days, what your Highness’s determination
is !”

His poor Highness, thunderstruck as may be imagined,
asks: ‘¢ But—but—What would your Excellency advise me?”
** Haven’t the least advice,” answers his Excellency: ‘‘ will wait
at Frankfurt-on-Mayn, for eight days, what your Highness’s res-
olution is; hoping it may be a wise one ;—and have the honour
at present to say Good-morning.’’ Sudden, like a thunderbolt —
in winter, the whole phenomenon. ‘This, or January 3d, when
Friedrich, by Express from Zweibriick, first heard of this, may
be considered as birthday of a Fiirstenbund now no longer hy-
pothetic, but certain to become actual.

Zweibriick naturally shot off expresses: to Petersburg (no

524 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXi.
29th June 1785.

answer ever); to Berlin (with answer on the instant) ;—and in
less than eight days, poor Zweibriick, such the intelligence from
Berlin, was in a condition to write to Frankfurt: “ Excellency,
No; I do not consent, nor ever will.” For King Friedrich is
broad-awake again ;—and Hertzberg’s smithy-fires, we may con-
ceive how the winds rose upon these, and brought matters to a
welding heat !—

The Czarina,—on Friedrich’s urgent remonstrance, “ What is
this, great Madam? To your old Ally, and from the Guaranty
and Author of the Peace of Teschen !”—had speedily answered :
“Far from my thoughts to violate the Peace of Teschen; very
far: I fancied this was an advantageous exchange, advantageous
to Zweibriick especially ; but since Zweibriick thinks otherwise,
of course there is end.” ‘* Of course ;’—though my Romanzow
did talk differently ; and the forge-fires of a certain person are
getting blown at a mighty rate! Hertzberg’s operation was con-
ducted at first with the greatest secrecy ; but his Envoys were
busy in all likely places, his Proposal finding singular considera-
tion; acceptance, here, there,—‘‘ A very mild and safe-looking
Project, most mild in tone surely !”—and it soon came to Kau-
nitz’s ear; most unwelcome to the new Kingdom of Burgundy
and him !

Thrice over, in the months ensuing (April 13th, May 11th,
June 23d), in the shape of a “ Circular to all Austrian Ambas-
sadors,”*> Kaunitz lifted up his voice in severe dehortation, the
tone of him waxing more and more indignant, and at last snuf-
fling almost tremulous quite into alt, ‘against the calumnies and
malices of some persons, misinterpreters of a most just Kaiser
and his actions.” But as the Czarina, meanwhile, declared to
the Reich at large, that she held, and would ever hold, the
Peace of Teschen a thing sacred, and this or any Kingdom of
Burgundy, or change of the Reich’s Laws, impossible,—the
Kaunitz clangours availed nothing; and Fiirstenbund privately,
but at a mighty pace, went forward. And, June 29th, 1785, after
much labour, secret but effective, on the part of Dohm and oth-
ers, Three Plenipotentiaries, the Prussian, the Saxon, the Hano-
verian (‘‘excellent method to have only the principal Three !’’)

25 Dohm, iii. 64, 68.

Cuap. VIII.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 525
1785. uals

met, still very privately, at Berlin; and labouring their best,
had, in about four weeks, a Fiirstenbund Covenant complete;
signed, July 23d, by these Three,—to whom all others that ap-
proved append themselves. As an effective respectable number,
Brunswick, Hessen, Mainz and others, did,2°—had not, indeed,
the first Three themselves, especially as Hanover meant England
withal, been themselves moderately sufficient.—Here, before the
date quite pass, are two Clippings which may be worth their
room :

Bouille’s Second Visit (Spring 1785). May 10th, 1785, — just
while Furstenbund, so privately, was in the birth-throes—* Marquis
de Bouillé had again come to Berlin, to place his eldest Son in the
Academie des Gentilhommes ; where the young man stayed two years.
Was at Potsdam,” May 13th-16th:*’ “ well-received ; dined at Sans-
Souci. Informed the King of the Duc de Choiseul’s death” (Paris,
May 8th). ‘King, shaking his head, ‘J2 n’y a pas grand mal.’
Seems piqued at the Queen of France, who had not shown much atten-
tion to Prince Henri. Spoke of Peter the Great,‘ whose many high
qualities were darkened by singular cruelty... When at Berlin, going
on foot, as his custom was, unattended, to call on King Friedrich Wil-
helm, the people in the streets crowded much about him. ‘ Brother,’
said he to the King,‘ your subjects are deficient in respect; order one
or two of them to be hanged, it will restrain the others!’ During the
same visit, one day, at Charlottenburg, the Czar, after dinner, stepped
out on a balcony which looked into the Gardens. Seeing many people
assembled below, he gnashed his teeth (grinca des dents), and began
giving signs of frenzy. Shifty little Catharine, who was with him, re-
quested that a certain person down among the crowd, who had a yellow
wig, should be at once put away, or something bad would happen.
This done, the Czar became quiet again. The Czarina added, he was
subject to such attacks of frenzy ; and that, when she saw it, she would
scratch his head, which moderated him. ‘ Voila, Monsieur,’ concluded
the King, addressing me: ‘ Voila les grands hommes

“ Bouillé spent a fortnight at Rheinsberg, with Prince Henri; who
represents his Brother as impatient, restless, envious, suspicious, even
timid ; of an ill-regulated imagination,”"—nothing like so wise as some
of us! “Is too apprehensive of war; which may very likely bring it
on. On the least alarm, he assembles troops at the frontier; Joseph
does the like; and so” —A notably splenetic little Henri; head of an
Opposition Party which has had to hold its tongue. Cherishes in the

36 List of them in Dohm. 37 Rodenbeck, iii. 325.

526 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.

1785.
silent depths of him an almost ghastly indignation against his Brother
on some points. ‘ Bouillé returned to Paris, June 1785.”*°

Comte de Ségur (on the road to Petersburg as French Minister) has
seen Friedrich: January 29th,1785. Ségur says: “ With lively curi-
osity I gazed at this man; there as he stood, great in genius, small in
stature , stooping, and as it were bent down under the weight of his
laurels and of his long toils. His blue coat, old and worn like his body ;
his long boots coming up above the knee; his waistcoat covered with
snuff, formed an odd but imposing whole. By the fire of his eyes, you
recognised that in essentials he had not grown old. Though bearing
himself like an invalid, you felt that he could strike like a young sol-
dier: in his small figure, you discerned a spirit greater than any other
man's! *

“ Tf used at all to intercourse with the great world, and possessed of
any elevation of mind, you have no embarrassment in speaking to a
King: but to a Great Man you present yourself not without fear.
Friedrich, in his private sphere, was of sufficiently unequal humour ;
wayward, wilful ; open to prejudices ; indulged in mockery, often enough
epigrammatic upon the French ;—agreeable in a high degree to stran-
gers whom he pleased to favour ; but bitterly piquant for those he was
prepossessed against, or who, without knowing it, had ill chosen the
hour of approaching him. ‘To me, luck was kind in all these points ,”
my Interview delightful, but not to be reported farther.*

Except Mirabeau, about a year after this, Segur is the last distin-
guished French visitor. French Correspondence the King has now
little or none. October gone a year, his D’Alembert, the last intel-
lectual Frenchman he had a real esteem for, died. Paris and France
seem to he sinking into strange depths; less and less worth hearing of.
Now and then a straggling Note from Condorcet, Grimm, or the like,
are all he gets there.

That of the Fiirstenbund put a final check on Joseph’s no-
tions of making the Reich a reality; his reforms and ambitions
had thenceforth to take other directions, and leave the poor old
Reich at peace. A mighty reformer he had been, the greatest
of hisday. Broke violently in upon quiescent Austrian routine,
on every side: monkeries, school-pedantries, trade-monopolies,
serfages,—all things, military and civil, spiritual and temporal,
he had resolved to make perfect in a minimum of time. Aus-

38 Essai sur la Vie de Bouillé (ubi supra).

~ 39-6 Mémoires par M. le Comte de Ségur (Paris, 1826), il. 183, 120:”
cited in Preuss, iv. 218. For date, see Rodenbeck, iii. 322, 328.

Cuap. VIII. FRIEDRICH’S LAST YEARS. 527
1785.

tria gazed on him, its admiration not unmixed with terror. He
rushed incessantly about ; hardy as a Charles Twelfth; slept on
his bear-skin on the floor of any inn or hut ;—flew at the throat
of every Absurdity, however broad-based or dangerously armed,
‘Disappear, I say!’ Will hurl you an Official of Rank, where
need is, into the Pillory; sets him, in one actual instance, to
permanent sweeping of the streets in Vienna. A most prompt,
severe, and yet beneficent and charitable kind of man. Im-
mensely ambitious, that must be said withal. A great admirer
of Friedrich; bent to imitate him with profit. ‘* Very clever
indeed,” says Friedrich ; “but has the fault” (a terribly grave
one!) “ of generally taking the second step without having taken
the first.”

A troublesome neighbour he proved to everybody, not by his
reforms alone ;—and ended, pretty much as here in the /irsten-
bund, by having, in all matters, to give in and desist. In none
of his foreign Ambitions could he succeed; in none of his do-
mestic Reforms. In regard to these latter, somebody remarks:
‘“No Austrian man or thing articulately contradicted his fine
efforts that way; but, inarticulately, the whole weight of Aus-
trian vis mertie bore day and night against him ;—whereby, as
we now see, he bearing the other way with the force of a steam-
ram, a hundred tons to the square inch, the one result was, To
dislocate every joint in the Austrian Edifice, and have it ready
for the Napoleonic Earthquakes that ensued.” In regard to am-
bitions abroad it was no better. The Dutch fired upon his
Scheld Frigate: ‘ War, if you will, you most aggressive Kaiser;
but this Toll is ours!” His Netherlands revolted against him,
** Can holy religion, and old use-and-wont be tumbled about at
this rate?” His Grand Russian Copartneries and Turk War
went to water and disaster. His reforms, one and all, had to
be revoked for the present. Poor Joseph, broken-hearted (for
his private griefs were many, too), lay down to die. ‘ You may
put for epitaph,” said he with a tone which is tragical and pa-
thetic to us, ‘‘ Here lies Joseph,” the grandly-attempting Joseph,
“who could succeed in nothing.”4° A man of very high quali-

49 Died, at Vienna, 20th February 1790, still under fifty ;—born there,
18th March 1741. Hormayr, Oesterreichischer Plutarch, iv. (2tes) 125-223

528 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
16th-20th Aug. 1785.

ties, and much too conscious of them. A man of an ambition
without bounds. One of those fatal men, fatal to themselves
first of all, who mistake half-genius for whole; and rush on the
second step without having made the first. Cannot trouble the
old King or us any more.

CHAPTER IX.
FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH.

To the present class of readers, Fiirstenbund is become a Noth-
ing; to all of us the grand Something now is, strangely enough,
that incidental item which directly followed, of Reviewing the
Silesian soldieries, who had so angered his Majesty last year.
‘If I be alive next year!” said the King to Tauentzien. The
King kept his promise; and the Fates had appointed that, in
doing so, he was to find—But let us not yet pronounce the
word.

August 16th, 1785, some three weeks after finishing the Fiirst-
enbund, Friedrich set out for Silesia: towards Strehlen, long
known to him and us all;—at Gross-Tinz, a Village in that
neighbourhood, the Camp and Review are to be. He goes by
Crossen, Glogau ; in a circling direction: Glogau, Schweidnitz,
Silberberg, Glatz, all his Fortresses are to be inspected as well,
and there is much miscellaneous business by the road. At
Hirschberg, not on the military side, we have sight of him; the
account of which is strange to read:

“ Thursday, August 18th,” says a private Letter from that little
Town,' “he passed through here: concourse of many thousands, from
all the Country about, had been waiting for him several hours. Out-
riders came at last; then he himself, the Unique; and, with the live-
liest expression of reverence and love, all eyes were directed on one
point. I cannot describe to you my feelings, which of course were
those of everybody, to see him, the aged King; in his weak hand the
hat; in those grand eyes such a fatherly benignity of look over the vast
crowd that encircled his Carriage, and rolled tide-like, accompanying

(and five or six recent Lives of Joseph, none of which, that I have seen,
was worth reading, in comparison).
! Given in extenso, Rédenbeck, iii. 331-333.

€

Cuap. [X.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 529
20th Aug. 1785.

it. Looking round when he was past, J saw in various eyes a tear
trembling.” (‘‘ Alas, we shan’t have him long !’’)

‘‘ His affability, his kindliness, to whoever had the honour of speech
with this great King, who shall describe it! After talking a good while
with the Merchants-Deputation from the Hill Country, he said, ‘Is there
anything more, then, from anybody ? Upon which, the President (Kauf-
mannsalteste,” Merchants- Eldest) ‘* Lachmann, from Greiffenberg,”
which had been burnt lately, and helped by the King to rebuild itself,
“stepped forward, and said, ‘ The burnt-out Inhabitants of Greiffenberg
had charged him to express once more their most submissive gratitude
for the gracious help in rebuilding; their word of thanks, truly, was of
no importance, but they daily prayed God to reward such Royal benefi-
cence.’ ‘The King was visibly affected, and said, ‘ You don’t need to
thank me; when my subjects fall into misfortune, it is my duty to help
them up again; for that reason am I here.” * *

Saturday 20th, he arrived at Tinz; had a small Cavalry Ma-
noeuvre next day; and on Monday the Review Proper began.
Lasted four days,-22d-25th August, Monday to Thursday,
both inclusive. ‘*‘ Headquarter was in the Dorf-Schulze’s (Vil-
lage Mayor’s) house; and there were many Strangers of distinc-
tion quartered in the Country Mansions round.” Gross-Tinz is
about 12 miles straight north from Strehlen, and as far straight
east from the Zobtenberg: Gross-Tinz, and its Review of Au-
gust 1785, ought to be long memorable.

How the Review turned out as to proficiency recovered, I
have not heard; and only infer, by symptoms, that it was not
unsatisfactory. The sure fact, and the forever memorable, is,
That on Wednesday, the third day of it, from 4 in the morn-
ing, when the Manceuvres began, till well after 10, when they
ended, there was a rain like Noah’s; rain falling as from buck-
ets and waterspouts; and that Friedrich (and perhaps most oth-
ers too), so intent upon his business, paid not the least regard to
it; but rode about, intensely inspecting, in lynx-eyed watchful-
‘ness of everything, as if no rain had been there. Was not at the
pains even to put on his cloak. — Six hours of such down-pour ;
and a weakly old man of 73 past. Of course he was wetted to
the bone. Qn returning to headquarters, his boots were found
full of water; “when pulled off, it came pouring from them like

a pair of ers

530 "AFTERNOON AND EVENING. .. [Book XXI.
9th-10th Sept. 1785.

He got into dry clothes; presided in his usual way at dinner,
which soon followed; had many Generals and guests,—La Fay-
ette, Lord Cornwallis, Duke of York ;—and, as might be expect-
ed, felt unusually feverish afterwards. Hot, chill, quite poorly
all afternoon ; glad to get to bed :—where he fell into deep sleep,
into profuse perspiration, as his wont was; and awoke, next
morning, greatly recovered ; altogether well again, as he sup-
posed. Well enough to finish his Review comfortably; and start
for home. Went,—round by Neisse, inspection not to be omit-
ted there, though it doubles the distance,—to Brieg that day; a
drive of 80 miles, inspection-work included. Thence, at Breslau
for three days more: with dinners of state, balls, illuminations,
in honour of the Duke of York,—our as yet last Duke of York,
then a brisk young fellow of twenty-two; to whom, by accident,
among his other distinctions, may belong this of having (RICE
inv pldutarily) helped to kill Friedrich the Great!

Back to Potsdam, Friedrich pushed on with business; and
complained of nothing. Was at Berlin in about ten days (Sep-
tember 9th), for an Artillery Review ; saw his Sister Amelia ;
saw various public works in a state of progress,—but what per-
haps is medically significant, went in the afternoon to a kind of
Spa Well they have at Berlin; and slept, not at the Palace, but
at this Spa, in the hostelry or lodginghouse attached.? Next
day (September 10th), the Artillery Manceuvre was done; and
the King left Berlin,—little guessing he had seen Berlin for the
last time.

The truth is, his health, unknown to him (though that of tak-
ing a Night at the Spa Well, probably denotes some guess or
feeling of the kind, on his part), must have been in a dangerous
or almost ruinous state. Accordingly, soon afterwards, Septem-
ber 18th—19th, in the night-time, he was suddenly aroused by a
Fit of Suffocation (what they call Stckfluss); and, for some hours,
till relief was got, everybody feared he would perish. Next day
there came gout; which perhaps he regarded almost as a friend:
but it did not prove such; it proved the captain of a chaotic
company of enemies; and Friedrich’s end, I suppose, was already
inexorably near. At the Grand Potsdam Review (22d—23d Sep-

2 Rédenbeck, in die. .

Cuap. IX.] FRIEDEICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 531
Sept. 1785—Jan. 1786.

tember), chief Review of all, and with such an affluence of Stran-
gers to it this Autumn, he was quite unable to appear; prescribed
the Manceuvres and Procedures, and sorrowfully kept his room.?

Friedrich was always something of a Doctor himself: he had
little faith in professional Doctors, though he liked to speak with
the intelligent sort, and was curious about their science. And
it is agreed he really had good notions in regard to it; in par-~
ticular, that he very well understood his own constitution of
body ; knew the effects of causes there, at any rate, and the fit
regimens and methods :—as an old man of sense will usually do.
The complaint is, that he was not always faithful to regimen;
that, in his old days at least, he loved strong soups, hot spicy
meats ;—finding, I suppose, a kind of stimulant in them, as others
do in wine; a sudden renewal of strength, which might be very:
tempting to him. There has been a great deal of unwise babble
on this subject, which I find no reason to believe, except as just
said. In the fall of this year, as usual, perhaps rather later than
usual,—not till November 8th (for what reason so delaying, Mar-
witz told us already),—he withdrew from Sans-Souci, his Sum-
mer-Cottage; shut himself up in Potsdam Palace (Old Palace)
for the winter.. It was known he was very ailing; and that he
never stirred out,—but this was not quite unusual in late winters;
and the rumours about his health were-vague and various. Now,
as always, he himself, except to his Doctors, was silent on that
subject. Various military Doctors, Theden, Frese, and others of
eminence, were within reach ; but it is not known to me that he
consulted any of them.

Not till January 1786, when symptoms worse than ever, of
asthma, of dropsy, began to manifest themselves, did he call in
Selle, the chief Berlin Doctor, and a man of real sagacity, as is

5 This of 23d September 1785 is what Print-Collectors know loosely as
‘‘F'riedrich’s Last Review ;”— one Cunningham, an English Painter (son of
a Jacobite ditto, and himself of wandering habitat), and Clemens, a Prus-
sian Engraver, having done a very large and highly-superior Print of it, by
way of speculation in Military Portraits (Berlin, 1787); in which, among
many others, there figures the crediblest Likeness known to me of Friedrich
in Old Age, though Friedrich himself was not there. (See Preuss, iv. 242;
especially see Rédenbeck, iii. 337 n. )—As Crown-Prince, riot had oF
to Pesne; never afterwards to any Artist.

532 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXL
17th April 1786.

still evident ; who from the first concluded the disease to be des-
perate; but of course began some alleviatory treatment, the skil-
fullest possible to him.*. Selle, when questioned, kept his worst
fears carefully to himself: but the King noticed Selle’s real opin-
ion,—which, probably, was the King’s own too;—and finding
little actual alleviation, a good deal of trouble, and no possibility
of a victorious result by this warfare on the outworks, began to
be weary of Selle; and to turn his hopes,—what hopes he yet
had,—on the fine weather soon due. He had a continual short
small cough, which much troubled him; there was fear of new
Suffocation-Fit; the breathing always difficult.

But Spring came, unusually mild; the King sat on the south-
ern balconies in the genial sun and air, looking over the bright
sky and earth, and newbirth of things: ‘* Were I at Sans-Souci,
amid the Gardens!” thought he. April 17th, he shifted thither:
not ina sedan, as Marwitz told us of the former journey; but
‘*in his carriage, very early in the morning, making a long round-
about through various Villages, with new relays,” — probably
with the motive Marwitz assigns. Here are two contemporane-
ous Excerpts :

1°. Mirabeau at Sans-Souci. “This same day,” April 17th, it ap-
pears,° “ the King saw Mirabeau, for the second and last time. Mira-
beau had come to Berlin, 19th January last; his errand not very pre-
cise,—except that he infinitely wanted employment, and that at Paris
the Controller-General Calonne, since so famous among mankind, had
evidently none to offer him there. He seems to have intended Russia,
and employment with the Czarina,—after viewing Berlin a little, with
the great flashy eyesight he had. He first saw Friedrich, January 25th.
There pass in all, between Friedrich and him, seven Letters or Notes,
two of them by the King ; and on poor Mirabeau’s side, it must be own-
ed, there is a massively respectful, truthful, and manly physiognomy,
which probably has mended Friedrich’s first opinion of him.* This

4 Christian Gottlieb Selle, Krankhettsgeschichte des Hochstseeligen Kénigs
von Preussen Friedrichs des Zweyten Majestat (Berlin, 1786); a very small
Pamphlet, now very rare ;—giving in the most distinct, intelligent, modest
and conclusive way, an Account of everything pertinent, and rigorously of
nothing else. 5 Preuss: in Qluvres de Frédéric, xxv. 328 n.

6 * * ‘Ts coming to me today; one of those loose-tongued fellows, I
suppose, who write for and against all the world.” (Friedrich to Prince
Henri, ‘‘25th January 1786: Geuvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 522.)

Cuap. [X.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 533
17th April 1786.

day, April 17th, 1786, he is at Potsdam; so far on the road to France
again,—Mirabeau Senior being reported dangerously ill. * My Dialogue
with the King,’ say the Mirabeau Papers,‘ was very lively; but the
King was in such suffering, and so straitened for breath, I was myself
anxious to shorten it: that same evening I travelled on.’

** Mirabeau Senior did not die at this time: and Controller-General
Calonne, now again eager to shake off an importunate and far too clear-
sighted Mirabeau Junior, said to the latter: ‘ Back to Berlin, couldn’t
you? Their King is dying,a new King coming; highly important to
us !’—and poor Mirabeau went. Left Paris again, in May ; with money
furnished, but no other outfit, and more in the character of Newspaper
Vulture than of Diplomatic Envoy,”’—as perhaps we may transiently see.

2°. Marie Antoinette at Versailles; To her Sister Christine at
Brussels (Husband and she, Duke and Duchess of Sachsen-Teschen,
are Governors of the Netherlands) :

March 20th, 1786. * * “There has been arrested at Geneva one
Villette, who played a great part in that abominable affair” (of the Dia-
mond Necklace, now emerging on an astonished Queen and world).®
“M. Target,” Advocate of the enchanted Cardinal, “‘is coming out with
his Memoir: he does his function; and God knows what are the lies
he will produce upon us. There is a Memoir by that Quack of a Cag-
liostro, too: these are at this moment the theme of all talk.”

April 6th. “The Memoirs, the lies, succeed each other; and the
Business grows darker, not clearer. Such a Cardinal of the Church!
He brazenly maintains his distracted story about the Bosquet” (Inter-
view with me in person, in that Hornbeam Arbour at Versailles ; to me
inconceivable, not yet knowing of a Demoiselle D’Oliva from the streets,
who had acted my part there), ‘and my Assent” (to purchase the Neck-
lace for me). ‘“* His impudence and his audacity surpass belief. Oh,
Sister, | need all my strength to support such cruel assaults.” * *
“The King of Prussia’s condition much engages attention (preoccupe)
here, and must do at Vienna too: his death is considered imminent. I
am sure you have your eyes open on that side,” * *

April 17th (just while the Mirabeau Interview at Potsdam is going
on). * * “King of Prussia thought to be dying: I am weary of the

7 Rodenbeck, iii. 343. Fils Adoptif, Mémoires de Mirabeau (Paris, 1834),
iv. 288-292, 296.

8 Carlyle’s Miscellanies (London, 1857), iv. 1-60, § Diamond Necklace.
The wretched Cardinal de Rohan was arrested at Versailles, and put in the
Bastille, ‘‘ August 15th, 1785,” the day before Friedrich set out for his Sile-
sian Review; ever since which, the arrestments and Judicial investigations
have continued,—continue till ‘‘May 10th, 1786,” when Sentence was
given.

534 "- APTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.

4th-22d June 1786.
political discussions on this subject. as to what effects his death must
produce. He is better at this moment, but so weak he cannot resist
long. Physique is gone; but his force and energy of soul, they say,
have often supported him, and in desperate crises have even seemed to
increase. Liking to him 1 never had : his ostentatious immorality (7m-
moralite affichee,” ah, Madame')* has much hurt pe virtue” (public
orthodoxy, I mean), ‘and there have been related to me” (by mendacious
or ill-informed persons) “* barbarities which excite horror. He has done
us all a great deal of ill. He has been a King for his own Country, but
a Trouble-feast for those about him ;—setting up to be the arbiter of
Europe ; always undertaking on his neighbours. and making them pay
the expense. As Daughters of Maria Theresa, it is impossible we can
regret him, nor is it the Court of France that will make his funeral ora-
tion.’

From Sans-Souci the King did appear again on horseback ;
rode out several times (‘‘ Condé,” a fine English horse, one of
his favourites, carrying him,—the Condé who had many years
of sinecure afterwards, and was well known to Touring people):
the rides were short; once to the New Palace to look at some
new Vinery there, thence to the gate of Potsdam, which he was
for entering; but finding masons at work, and the street encum-
bered, did not, and hile home instead: this, of not above two
miles, was his longest ride of all. Selle’s attendance, less and
Jess in esteem with the King, and less and less followed by him,
did not quite cease till June 4th; that day the King had said to
Selle, or to himself, “It is enough.” That longest of his rides
was in the third week after ; June 22d, Midsummer-Day. July
4th, he rode again; and it was for the last time. About two
weeks after, Condé was again brought out; but it would not do:
Adieu, my Condé; not possible, as things are !—

During all this while, and to the very end, Friedrich’s Affairs,
great and small, were, in every branch and item, guided on by
him, with a perfection not surpassed in his palmiest days: he
saw his Ministers, saw all who had business with him, many who
had little ; and in the sore coil of bodily miseries, as Hertzberg
observed with wonder, never was the King’s intellect clearer, or
his judgment more oe and decisive. Of his disease, except to

* Comte de Hunolstein, Correspondance inédite de Marie Antoinette (Paris,
1864), pp. 136, 137, 149. 3

i

CnHap. TX. ] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. ts a ty
4th-22d June 1786.

the Doctors, he spoke no word to anybody. The body of Fried-
rich is a ruin, but his soul is still here; and receives his friends
and his tasks as formerly. Asthma, dropsy, erysipelas, continual
want of sleep; for many months past he has not been in bed,
but sits day and night in an easy-chair, unable to get breath ex-
cept in that posture. He said one morning, to somebody enter-
ing, ‘If you happened to want a night-watcher, I could suit you
well.”

His multifarious Military businesses come first ; then his three
Clerks, with the Civil and Political. These three he latterly,
instead of calling about 6 or 7 o'clock, has had to appoint for 4
each morning: ‘“ My situation forces me,” his message said, ‘ to
give them this trouble, which they will not have to suffer long.
My life is on the decline; the time which I still have I must
employ. It belongs not to me, but to the State.’!9 About 11,
business, followed by short surgical details or dressings (sadly in-
sisted on in those Books, and in themselves sufficiently sad), be-
ing all done,—his friends or daily company are admitted: five
chiefly, or (not counting Minister Hertzberg) four, Lucchesini,
Schwerin, Pinto, Gortz; who sit with him about one hour now,
and two hours in the evening again:—dreary company to our
minds, perhaps not quite so dreary to the King’s; but they are
all he has left. And he taiks cheerfully with them ‘on Litera-
ture, History, on the topics of the day, or whatever topic rises,
as if there were no sickness here.’’ A man adjusted to his hard
circumstances; and bearing himself manlike and kinghke among
them.

He well knew himself to be dying; but some think, expected
that the end might be a little farther off. There is a grand
simplicity of stoicism in him; coming as if by nature, or by
long second-nature; finely unconscious of itself, and finding
nothing of peculiar in this new trial laid on it. From of old,
Life has been infinitely contemptible to him. In death, I think,
he has neither fear nor hope. Atheism, truly, he never could
abide: to him, as to all of us, it was flatly inconceivable that
intellect, moral emotion, could have been put into jim by an En-
tity that had none of its own. But there, pretty much, his The-

: 10 Preuss, iv. 257 n. .

536 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
. 4th-22d June 1786.

ism seems to have stopped. Instinctively, too, he believed, no
man more firmly, that Right alone has ultimately any strength
in this world: ultimately, yes ;—but for him and his poor brief
interests, what good was it? Hope for himself in Divine Justice,
in Divine Providence, I think he had not practically any: that
the unfathomable Demiurgus should concern himself with such
a set of paltry ill-given animalcules as oneself and mankind are,
this also, as we have often noticed, is in the main incredible to
him.

A sad Creed, this of the King’s ;—he had to do his duty with-
out fee or reward. Yes, reader ;—and what is well worth your
attention, you will have difficulty to find, in the annals of any
Creed, a King or man who stood more faithfully to his duty;
and, till the last hour, alone concerned himself with doing that.
To poor Friedrich that was all the Law and all the Prophets:
and I much recommend you to surpass him, if you, by good luck,
have a better Copy of those inestimable Documents !—TInartic-
ulate notions, fancies, transient aspirations, he might have, in the
background of his mind. One day, sitting for a while out of
doors, gazing into the Sun, he was heard to murmur, ‘ Perhaps
I shall be nearer thee soon :”—and indeed nobody knows what
his thoughts were in these final months. There is traceable only
a complete superiority to Fear and Hope; in parts, too, are half-
glimpses of a great motionless interior lake of Sorrow, sadder
than any tears or complainings, which are altogether wanting
to it.

Friedrich’s dismissal of Selle, June 4th, by no means meant
that he had given up hope from medicine; on the contrary, two
days after, he had a Letter on the road for Zimmermann at Han-
over; whom he always remembers favourably since that Dia-
logue we read fifteen years ago. His first Note to Zimmermann
is of June 6th, “Would you consent to come for a fortnight, and
try upon me?” Zimmermann’s overjoyed Answer, “ Yes, thrice
surely yes,”’ is of June 10th; Friedrich’s-second is of June 16th,
“Come, then!” And Zimmermann came accordingly,—as is
still too well known. Arrived, 23d June; stayed till 10th July ;
had Thirty-three Interviews or Dialogues with him: one visit

ee

Cuap.IX.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 537
6th June—10th July 1786.

the last day; two, morning and evening, every preceding day;
—and published a Book about them, which made immense noise
in the world, and is still read, with tittle profit or none, by in-
quirers into Friedrich.!' ‘Thirty-three Dialogues, throwing no
new light on Friedrich, none of them equal in interest to the old
specimen known to us.

In fact, the Book turns rather on Zimmermamn himself than
on his royal Patient; and might be entitled, as it was by a Sat-
irist, Dialogues of Zimmermann I. and Friedrich IT... An unwise
Book ; abounding in exaggeration ; breaking out continually into
extraneous sallies and extravagancies,—the source of which is
too plainly an immense conceit of oneself. Zimmermann is fif-

_ teen years older since we last saw him; a man now verging to-

wards sixty; but has not grown wiser in proportion. In Han-
over, though miraculously healed of that Lezbesschade, and full of
high hopes, he has had his new tribulations, new compensations,
—both of an agitating character. ‘‘ There arose,” he says, in
reference to some medical Review-article he wrote, ‘‘a Weiber-
epidemik, a universal shrieking combination of all the Women
against me:’”’—a frightful accident while it lasted! Then his
little Daughter died on his hands; his Son had disorders, nerv-
ous imbecilities,—did not die, but did worse; went into hopeless
idiotcy, and so lived for many years. Zimmermann, being dread-
fully miserable, hypochondriac, what not, his friends,” he him-
self passive, it would seem, ‘managed to get a young Wife for
him ;”’ thirty years younger than he,—whose performances, how-
ever, in this difficult post, are praised.

Lastly, not many months ago (Leipzig, 1785), the big final
edition of “ Solitude’ (four volumes) has come out; to the joy
and enthusiasm of all philanthropic-philosophic and other circu-
lating-library creatures :—a Copy of which came, by course of
nature, not by Zimmermann’s help, into the hands of Catharine
of Russia. Sublime imperial Letter thereupon, with “ valuable
diamond ring ;” invitation to come to Petersburg, with charges

1 Ritter von Zimmermann, Uber Friedrich den Grossen und meine Un-
terredungen mit Ihm kurz vor seinem Tode (1 vol. 8vo: Leipzig, 1788) ;—
followed by Fragmente iiber Friedrich den Grossen (3 voll. 12mo; Leipzig,
1790); and by &c. &e.

y At

538 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Book XXI.
6th June—10th July 1786.

borne (declined, on account of health); to be imperial Physician
(likewise declined) ;—in fine, continued Correspondence with
Catharine (trying enough for a vain head), and Knighthood of
the Order of St. Wladimir,—so that, at least, Doctor Zimmer-
mann is Ritter Zimmermann henceforth. And now, here has
come his new Visit to Friedrich the Great ;—which, with the
issues it had, and the tempestuous cloud of tumid speculations
and chaotic writings it involved him in, quite upset the poor
Ritter Doctor; so that, hypochondrias deepening to the abys-
mal, his fine intellect sank altogether,—and only Death, which
happily followed soon, could disimprison him. At this moment,
there is in Zimmermann a worse “Dropsy” of the spiritual kind,
than this of the physical, which he has come in relief of !

Excerpts of those Zimmermann Dialogues lie copiously round
me, ready long ago,—nay, I understand there is, or was, an En-
glish Translation of the whole of them, better or worse, for be-
hoof of the curious :—but on serious consideration now, I have
to decide, That they are but as a Scene of Clowns in the Elder
Dramatists; which, even were it not overdone as it is, cannot be
admitted in this place, and is plainly impertinent in the Tragedy
that is being acted here. Something of Farce will often enough,
in this irreverent world, intrude itself on the most solemn ‘T'rag-
edy; but, in pity even to the Farce, there ought at least to be
closed doors kept between them.

Enough for -us to say, That Ritter Zimmermann,—who is a
Physician and a Man of literary Genius, and should not have
become a Tragic Zany,—did, with unspeakable emotions, terrors,
prayers to Heaven, and paroxysms of his own ridiculous kind,
prescribe “Syrup of Dandelion” to the King; talked to him
soothingly, musically, successfully ; found the King a most pleas-
ant Talker, but a very wilful perverse kind of Patient; whose
errors in point of diet especially were enormous to a degree.
Truth is, the King’s appetite for food did still survive :—and
this might have been, you would think, the one hopeful basis of
Zimmermann’s whole treatment, if there were still any hope:
but no; Zimmermann merely, with uncommon emphasis, lyric-
ally recognises such amazing appetite in an old man overwhelm-
ed by diseases,—trumpets it abroad, for ignorant persons to re-

Cuap. IX.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 539
10th Aug. 1786.

gard as a crime, or perhaps as a type generally of the man’s past
life, and makes no other attempt upon it ;—stands by his “ Ex-
tract of Dandelion boiled to the consistency of honey ;” and on
the seventeenth day, July 10th, voiceless from emotion, heart just
breaking, takes himself away, and ceases. One of our Notes
says:

“ Zimmermann went by Dessau and Brunswick ; at Brunswick, if
he made speed thither, Zimmermann might perhaps find Mirabeau, who
is still there, and just leaving for Berlin to be in at the death :—but if
the Doctor and he missed each other, it was luckier, as they had their
controversies afterwards. Mirabeau arrived at Berlin, July 21st:'* vast-
ly diligent in picking up news, opinions, judgments of men and events,
for his Calonne ;—and amazingly accurate, one finds; such a flash of
insight has he, in whatever element, foul or fair.

“ July 9th, the day before Zimmermann’s departure, Hertzberg had
come out to Potsdam in permanence. Hertzberg is privately thenceforth
in communication with the Successor ; altogether privately, though no
doubt Friedrich knew it well enough, and saw it to be right. Of course,
all manner of poor creatures are diligent about their own bits of interests ;
and sayiwg to themselves, ‘A New Reign is evidently nigh!’ Yes, my
friends ;—and a precious Reign it will prove in comparison: sensuali-
ties, unctuous religiosities, ostentations, imbecilities; culminating in Jena
twenty years hence.”

Zimmermann haggles to tell us what his report was at Bruns-
wick; says, he ‘set the Duke” (Zrdprinz, who is now Duke these
six years past) “sobbing and weeping ;” though towards the Wid-
ow Duchess there must have been some hope held out, as we shall
now see. The Duchess’s Letter or Letters to her Brother are
lost; but this is his Answer:

Friedrich to the Duchess-Dowager of Brunswick.

*¢ Sans-Souci, 10th August 1786.

“* My adorable Sister, The Hanover Doctor has wished to make
himself important with you, my good Sister; but the truth is, he has
been of no use to me (m’a été inutile). The ‘old must give place to the
young, that each generation may find room clear for it: and Life, if we
examine strictly what its course is, consists in seeing one’s fellow-crea-
tures die and be born. In the mean while, I have felt myself a little

_ 12 Mirabeau, Histoire secréte de la Cour de Berlin, Tome iii. of Qeuvres de
Mirabeau: Paris, 1821, Lettre v. p. 37.

540 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
10th Aug. 1786.

easier for the last day or two. My heart remains inviolably attached
to you, my good Sister. With the highest consideration,—My adorable
Sister,— Your faithful Brother and Servant, Frtepricu.”!®

This is Friedrich’s last Letter;—his last to a friend. ‘There is
one to his Queen, which Preuss’s Index seems to regard as later,
though without apparent likelihood; there being no date what- _
ever, and only these words: ‘‘ Madam,—I am much obliged by
the wishes you deign to form: but a heavy fever I have taken
(grosse fievre que j'ai prise) hinders me from answering you.”'*

On common current matters of business, and even on uncom-
mon, there continue yet for four days to be Letters expressly
dictated by Friedrich; some about military matters (vacancies
to be filled, new Free-Corps to be levied). ‘Two or three of them
are on so small a subject as the purchase of new Books by his
Librarians at Berlin. One, and it has been preceded by examin-
ing, is, Order to the Potsdam Magistrates to grant ‘‘the Baker
Schrider, in terms of his petition, a Free-Pass out of Preussen
hither, for 100 bushels of rye and 50 of wheat, though Schréder
will not find the prices much cheaper there than here.” His
last, of August 14th, is to De Launay, Head of the Excise:
‘Your Account of Receipts and Expenditures came to hand
yesterday, 13th; but is too much in small: I require one more
detailed,”—-and explains, with brief clearness, on what points
and how. Neglects nothing, great or small, while life yet is.

Tuesday, August 15th, 1786, Contrary to all wont, the King
did not awaken till 11 o’clock. On first looking up, he seemed
in a confused state, but soon recovered himself; called in his
Generals and Secretaries, who had been in waiting so long, and
gave, with his old precision, the Orders wanted,—one to Rohdich,
Commandant of Potsdam, about a Review of the troops there
next day; Order minutely perfect, in knowledge of the ground,
in foresight of what and how the evolutions were to be; which
was accordingly performed on the morrow. The Cabinet work
he went through with the like possession of himself, giving, on
every point, his Three Clerks their directions, in a weak voice,
yet with the old power of spirit,—dictated to one of them, among

13 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 352. 4 Thid. xxvi. 62.

Cuap. [X.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 541
16th Aug. 1786.

other things, an “Instruction” for some Ambassador just leaving;
‘four quarto pages, which,” says Hertzberg, “‘ would have done
honour to the most experienced Minister ;”’ and, in the evening,
he signed his Missives as usual. ‘This evening still,—but—no
evening more. We are now at the last scene of all, which ends
this strange eventful History.

Wednesday morning, General-Adjutants, Secretaries, Com-
mandants, were there at their old hours; but word came out,
‘‘ Secretaries are to wait:” King is in a kind of sleep, of sterto-
rous ominous character, as if it were the death-sleep; seems not
to recollect himself, when he does at intervals open his eyes.
After hours of this,’ on a ray of consciousness, the King be-
thought him of Rohdich, the Commandant; tried to give Rohdich
the Parole as usual; tried twice, perhaps three times; but found
he could not speak ;—and with a glance of sorrow, which seemed
to say, ‘It is impossible, then!” turned his head, and sank back
into the corner of his chair. Rohdich burst into tears: the
King again lay slumberous;—the rattle of death beginning soon
after, which lasted at intervals all day. Selle, in Berlin, was
sent for by express; he arrived about 3 of the afternoon: King
seemed a little more conscious, knew those about him, ‘‘his face
red rather than pale, in his eyes still something of their old fire.”
Towards evening the feverishness abated (to Selle, I suppose, a
fatal symptom); the King fell into a soft sleep, with warm per-
spiration ; but, on awakening, complained of cold, repeatedly of
cold, demanding wrappage after wrappage (‘‘ Kissen,” soft quilt of
the old fashion) ;—and on examining feet and legs, one of the
Doctors made signs that they were in fact cold, up nearly to the
knee. ‘* What said he of the feet?’ murmured the King some
time afterwards, the Doctor having now stepped out of sight.
‘Much the same as before,” answered some attendant. ‘The
King shook his head, incredulous.

He drank once, grasping the goblet with both hands, a draught
of fennel-water, his customary drink ; and seemed relieved by it;
—his last refection in this world. ‘Towards 9 in the evening,

15 Selle (ut sup.); Anonymous (Kletschke), Letzte Stunden und Leichen-
begdngniss Friedrichs des Zweyten (Potsdam, 1786): Preuss, iv. 264 et seq. ;
Rodenbeck, iii. 363-366.

542 ' AFTERNOON AND EVENING. . [Book XXI.

17th Aug. 1786.
there had come on a continual short cough, and a rattling in the
breast, breath more and more difficult. Why continue? Fried-
rich is making exit, on the.common terms; you may hear the
curtain rustling down. For most part he was unconscious, never
more than half-conscious. As the wall-clock above his head
struck 11, he asked: “* What o’clock?” “Eleven,” answered
they. ‘At 4,” murmured he, “I will rise.” One of his dogs
sat on its stool near him; about midnight he noticed it shivering
for cold: ‘‘ Throw a quilt over it,” said or beckoned he; that, I
think, was his last completely-conscious utterance. Afterwards,
in a severe choking fit, getting at last rid of the phlegm, he said,
‘« Ta montagne est passce, nous irons mieux, We are over the hill,
we shall go better now.”

Attendants, Hertzberg, Selle and one or two. others, were in
the outer room; none in Friedrich’s but Striitzki, his Kammer-
hussar, one of Three who are his sole valets and nurses; a faith-
ful ingenious man, as they all seem to be, and excellently chosen
for the object. Striitzki, to save the King from hustling down,
as he always did, into the corner of his chair, where, with neck
and chest bent forward, breathing was impossible,—at last took
the King on his knee; kneeling on the ground with his other
knee for the purpose,—King’s right arm round Striitzki’s neck,
Striitzki’s left arm round the King’s back, and supporting his
other shoulder; in which posture the faithful creature, for above
two hours, sat‘motionless, till the end came. Within doors, all
is silence, except this breathing ; around it the dark earth silent,
above it the silent stars. At 20 minutes past 2, the breathing
paused, — wavered; ceased. Friedrich’s Life-battle is fought
out; instead of suffering and sore labour, here is now rest.
Thursday morning, 17th August 1786, at the dark hour just
named. On the 3lst of May last, this King had reigned 46
years. “He has lived,” counts Rddenbeck, “74 years, 6
months and 24 days.”

His death seems very stern and lonely ;—a man of such af-
fectionate feelings, too; “‘a man with more sensibility than other
men!” But so had his whole life been, stern and lonely; such

the severe law laid on him. Nor was it inappropriate that he

Cuap. IX.] FRIEDRICH’S LAST ILLNESS AND DEATH. 543
17th Aug. 1786.

found his death in that poor Silesian Review ; punctually doing,
as usual, the work that had come in hand. Nor that he died
now, rather than a few years later. In these final days of his,
we have transiently noticed Arch-Cardinal de Rohan, Arch-
Quack Cagliostro, and a most select Company of Persons and
of Actions, like an Elixir of the Nether World, miraculously
emerging into daylight; and all Paris, and by degrees all Eu-
rope, getting loud with the Diamond-Necklace History. And to
eyes of deeper speculation,—World-Poet Goethe’s, for instance,
—it is becoming evident that Chaos is again big. As has not
she proved to be, and is still proving, in the most teeming way!
Better for a Royal Hero, fallen old and feeble, to be hidden from

such things.

“Yesterday, Wednesday August 16th,’ says a Note which now
strikes us as curious, ‘‘ Mirabeau, smelling eagerly for news, had ridden
out towards Potsdam ; met the Page riding furiously for Selle ( one
horse already broken down,’ say the Peasants about); and with beak,
powerful beyond any other vulture’s, Mirabeau perceived that here the
end now was. And thereupon rushed off, to make arrangements for a
courier, for flying pigeons, and the other requisites. And appeared that
night at the Queen’s Soirée in Schonhausen” (Queen has Apartment
that evening, dreaming of nothing), “‘ where,” says he, “ I eagerly whis-
pered the French Minister, and less eagerly ‘mon amz Mylord Dalrym-
ple,’ the English one ;—neither of whom would believe me. Nor, in
short, what Calonne will regret, but nobody else, could the pigeons be
let loose, owing to want of funds.”'’—Enough, enough.

Friedrich was not buried at Sans-Souci, in the Tomb which
he had built for himself; why not, nobody clearly says. By his
own express will, there was no embalming. Two Regiment-
surgeons washed the Corpse, decently prepared it for interment :
“at 8 that same evening, Friedrich’s Body, dressed in the uni-
form of the First Battalion of Guards, and laid in its coffin, was
borne to Potsdam, in a hearse of eight horses, twelve Non-com-
missioned officers of the Guard escorting. All Potsdam was in
the streets; the soldiers, of their own accord, formed rank, and
followed the hearse; many a rugged face unable to restrain
tears: for the rest, universal silence as of midnight, nothing aud-

16 Mirabeau, Histoire secrete, &c. (Lettre xiv.), pp. 58-63.

544 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. [Boox XXI.
17th Aug. 1786.

ible among the people but here and there a sob, and the mur-
mur, ‘Ach, der gute Konig L : ;

“‘ All next day, the Body lay in state in the Palace; thou-
sands crowding, from Berlin and the other environs, to see that
face for the last time. Wasted, worn; but beautiful in death,
with the thin gray hair parted into locks, and slightly powdered.
And at 8 in the evening”’ (Friday 18th), ‘‘he was borne to the
Garnison-Kirche of Potsdam ; and laid beside his Father, in the
vault behind the Pulpit there,’’!"—where the two Coffins are
still to be seen.

I define him to myself as hitherto the Last of the Kings ;—
when the Next will be, is a very long question! But it seems
to me as if Nations, probably all Nations; by and by, in their
despair,—blinded, swallowed like Jonah, in such a whale’s-belly
of things brutish, waste, abominable (for is not Anarchy, or the
Rule of what is Baser over what is Nobler, the one life’s-misery
worth complaining of, and, in fact, the abomination of abomina-
tions, springing from and producing all others whatsoever ?)—
as if the Nations universally, and England too if it hold on, may
more and more bethink themselves of such a Man and his Func-
tion and Performance, with feelings far other than are possible
at present. Meanwhile, all I had to say of him is finished: that
too, it seems, was a bit of work appointed to be done. Adieu,
good readers; bad also, adieu.

17 Rodenbeck, iii, 365 (Public Funeral was not till September 9th).

Vol. VI. p.698 a.

544 AFTERNOON AND EVENING. — [Book XXI.
| 17th Aug. 1786.

ible among the people but here and there a sob, ane the mur-
mur, ‘Ach, der gute Kong Ll

‘All next day, the Body lay in state in the Palace; thou-
sands crowding, from Berlin and the other environs, to see that
face for the last time. Wasted, worn; but beautiful in death,
with the thin gray hair parted into locks, and slightly powdered.
And at 8 in the evening’’ (Friday 18th), ‘‘ he was borne to the
Garnison-Kirche of Potsdam ; and laid beside his Father, in the
vault behind the Pulpit there,’*!"—where the two Coffins are
still to be seen.

I define him to myself as hitherto the Last of the Kings ;—
when the Next will be, is a very long question! But it seems
to me as if Nations, probably all Nations, by and by, in their
despair,—blinded, swallowed like Jonah, in such a whale’s-belly
of things brutish, waste, abominable (for is not Anarchy, or the
Rule of what is Baser over what is Nobler, the one life’s-misery
worth complaining of, and, in fact, the abomination of abomina-
tions, springing from and producing all others whatsoever ?)—
as if the Nations universally, and England too if it hold on, may
more and more bethink themselves of such a Man and his Func-
tion and Performance, with feelings far other than are possible
at present. Meanwhile, all I had to say of him is finished: that
too, it seems, was a bit of work appointed to be done. Adieu,
good readers; bad also, adieu.

17 Roédenbeck, iii. 365 (Public Funeral was not till September 9th).

—— ee ee

ee ee ee

3 Vol. VI. p.698 a.
ie, 2 Sera SB

i ls zi i”
= = S. : i - 2 =

i
¥.

NK ° % ie =

A 3 : af P ENNA a a
Le a ons : iI ios os ae ee ee 3 Goes eS [Xe iN =
SEES Gee 1 AWE i Sa Fa, Cnn eT

East from Greenwich ; . =

KINGDOM OF PRUSSIA.

ur 1740; at the Accession of Frederick IU. ti 1786, at Fredericks death. ......_ tn 1815, at Congress of Vienna.

TS Alas

ener er —
oat

— eS '

i res

hee

pes i ar

i bs a o¥ < fogaw a * be aes ctr peer 4s

?

uy tiie’ Je eter Pla ite pe ee Ber a
Aaah 3 OB EO Leena

AS eek D as 2 :
Ried :

GENERAL CONTENTS

AND ©

INDEX TO THE WORK.

GENERAL CONTENTS

AND

; INDEX TO THE WORK.

(Vol. I contains Books I.—V.)
Boox I. Birra anp PaRENTAGE. 1712 (p. 1-49.)

I. Proem: Friedrich’s History from the Distance we are at—II. Fried-
rich’s Birth—IIJ. Father and Mother: the Hanoverian Connexion—IV.
Father’s Mother—V. King Friedrich I.

Boox II. Or BRANDENBURG AND THE HOHENZOLLERNS.
928-1417. (p. 51-147 )

I. Brannibor: Henry the Fowler—II. Preussen: Saint Adalbert—III.
Margraves of Brandenburg—IV. Albert the Bear—V. Conrad of Hohen-
zollern, and Kaiser Barbarossa—VI. The Teutsch Ritters, or Teutonic
Order—VII, Margraviate of Culmbach: Baireuth, Anspach—VIII: As-
canier Markgraves in Brandenburg —IX. Burggraf Friedrich [V—X.
Brandenburg lapses to the Kaiser—XI. Bavarian Kurfiirsts in Branden-
burg—XII. Brandenburg in Kaiser Karl’s Time; End of the Bavarian
Kurfiirsts—XIII. Luxemburg Kurfiirsts in Brandenburg—XIV. Burg-
graf Friedrich VI.

Boox III. Tae HouEenzoLtuERNs IN BRANDENBURG.
1412-1713. (p. 149-291.)

I. Kurfurst Friedrich I.—II. Matinées du Roi de Prusse—III. Kur-
fiirst Friedrich IJ.—IV. Kurfiirst Albert Achilles, and his Successor—V.
Of the Baireuth-Anspach Branch—VI. Hochmeister Albert, Third nota-
ble Son of Friedrich—VITI. Albert Alcibiades—VIII. Historical Meaning
of the Reformation—IX. Kurfiirst Joachim I.—X. Kurfiirst Joachim IT.
—XI. Seventh Kurfiirst, Johann George—XII. Of Albert Friedrich, the
Second Duke of Preussen—XIII. Ninth Kurfiirst, Johann Sigismund—
XIV. Symptoms of a Great War coming—XV. Tenth Kurfiirst, George
Wilhelm — XVI. Thirty-Years’ War—XVII. Duchy of Jagerndorf —
XVIII. Friedrich Wilhelm, the Great Kur fiirst, Eleventh of the Series—
XIX. King Friedrich I. again—XX. Death of King Friedrich I.

548 GENERAL CONTENTS OF THE WORK.

Boox IV. Friepricu’s APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE.
1713-1723. (p. 293-398.)

I. Childhood; Double Educational Element—II. The German Element
—III. Friedrich Wilhelm is King—IV. His Majesty’s Ways—V. Fried-
rich Wilhelm’s One War—VI,. The Little Drummer—VII. Transit of
Czar Peter—VIII. The Crown-Prince is put to his Schooling—IX. Wus-
terhausen—X. The Heidelberg Protestants—XI. Of the Crown-Prince’s
Progress in his Schooling--XII. Crown-Prince falls into Disfavor with
Papa—XIII. Results of the Crown-Prince’s Schooling.

Boox V. Dovusie-Marriace ProJectT, AND WHAT ELEMENT IT FELL
INTO. 1723-1726. (p. 399-485.)

I. Double-Marriage is decided on—II. A Kaiser hunting Shadows—
III. The Seven Crises, or European Travail-throes—IV Double-Marriage
Treaty cannot be signed—V. Crown-Prince goes into the Potsdam Guards
—VI. Ordnance-Master Seckendorf crosses the Palace-Esplanade—VII.
Tobacco-Parliament—VIII. Seckendorf’s Retort to her Majesty.

(Vol. II, contains Books VI.—X.)

Book VI. DovsiE-MarriAGE PROJECT, AND CROWN-PRINCE, GOING
ADRIFT UNDER THE STORM-WINDs. 1727-1730. (p. 1-102.)

I. Fifth Crisis in the Kaiser’s Spectre-Hunt—II. Death of George I.—
III. Visit to Dresden—IV. Double-Marriage Project is not dead—V. Con-
gress of Soissons, Sixth Crisis in the Spectre-Hunt—VI. Imminency of
War or Duel between the Britannic and Prussian Majesties—VII. A Mar-
riage; not the Double-Marriage : Crown-Prince deep in Trouble—VIII.
Crown-Prince getting beyond his Depth in Trouble —IX. Double-Mar-
riage shall be or shall not be.

Boox VII. Fearrut SHIPWRECK OF THE DoUBLE-MARRIAGE PROJECT.
February—November 1730. (p. 103-223.)

I. England sends the Excellency Hotham to Berlin—II. Language of
Birds: Excellency Hotham proves unavailing—III. Camp of Radewitz—
IV. Excellency Hotham quits Berlin in Haste—V. Journey to the Reich
—VI. Journey homewards from the Reich ; Catastrophe on Journey home-
wards—VII. Catastrophe, and Majesty, arrive in Berlin—VIII. Sequel to
Crown-Prince and Friends—IX. Court-Martial on Crown-Prince and Con-
sorts.

Boox VIII. Crown-PrIncE RETRIEVED: LIFE AT CUSTRIN.
_ November 1730—February 1732. . (p. 225-284.)
I. Chaplain Miiller waits on the Crown-Prince—II. Crown-Prince to
repent and not perish—III. Wilhelmina is to wed the Prince of Baireuth

GENERAL CONTENTS OF THE WORK. 549

--IV. Criminal Justice in Preussen and elsewhere —V. Interview of
Majesty and Crown-Prince at Ciistrin—VI. Wilhelmina’s Wedding.

Boox IX. Last Srace or Friepricn’s APPRENTICESHIP: LIFE IN
Rurrin. 1732-1736. (p. 285-429.)

I. Princess Elizabeth Christina of Brunswick-Bevern—II. Small Inci-
dents at Ruppin—III. The Salzburgers—IV. Prussian Majesty visits the
Kaiser—V. Ghost of the Double-Marriage rises; to no Purpose—VI.
King August meditating Great Things for Poland—VII. Crown-Prince’s
Marriage—VIII. King August dies, and Poland takes Fire—IX. Kaiser’s
Shadow-Hunt has caught Fire—X. Crown-Prince goes to the Rhine
Campaign — XI. In Papa’s Sick-room; Prussian Inspections: End of
War.

Book X. At Reinsperc. 1736-1740. (p. 431-540.)

I. Mansion of Reinsberg—II. Of Voltaire and the Literary Correspond-
ences—III. Crown-Prince makes a Morning Call—IV. News of the Day
—V. Visit at Loo—VI. Last Year of Reinsberg; Journey to Preussen—
VII. Last Year of Reinsberg: Transit of Baltimore and other Persons
and Things—VIII. Death of Friedrich Wilhelm.

(Vol. III. contains Books XI.—XTIV.)

Book XI. FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS In Hanp. 1740.
(p. 1-125.)

I. Phenomena of Friedrich’s Accession —II. The Homagings —III.
Friedrich makes an Excursion, not of direct sort, into the Cleve Countries
—IV. Voltaire’s First Interview with Friedrich —V. Affair of Herstal—
VI. Returns by Hanover; does not call on his Royal Uncle there—VII.
Withdraws to Reinsberg, hoping a Peaceable Winter—VIII. The Kaiser’s
Death—IX. Resolution formed at Reinsberg in consequence.

Book XII. First Smtesian WAR, AWAKENING A GENERAL EUROPEAN
ONE, BEGINS. 1740-1741. (p. 127-309.)

I. Of Schlesien, or Silesia—II. Friedrich marches on Glogau— III.
Problem of Glogau—IV. Breslau under soft Pressure —V. Friedrich
pushes forward towards Brieg and Neisse —VI. Neisse is bombarded —
VII. At Versailles, the Most Christian Majesty changes his Shirt, and
Belleisle is seen with Papers— VIII. Phenomena in Petersburg —IX.
Friedrich returns to Silesia—X. Battle of M6éllwitz—XI. The Bursting-
forth of Bedlams: Belleisle and the Breakers of Pragmatic Sanction—
XII. Sorrows of his Britannic Majesty—XIII.. Small-War: First Emer-
gence of Ziethen the Hussar-General into Notice.

550 GENERAL CONTENTS OF THE WORK.

Boox XIII. First Siresi1an War, LEAVING THE GENERAL EUROPEAN
ONE ABLAZE ALL ROUND, GETS ENDED. 1741-1742. (p. 311-459.)

I. Britannic Majesty as Paladin of the Pragmatic—II. Camp of Streh-
len—III. Grand Review at Strehlen: Neipperg takes Aim at Breslau, but
another hits it—IV. Friedrich takes the Field again, intent on having
Neisse—V. Klein-Schnellendorf: Friedrich gets Neisse, in a Fashion—
VI. New Mayor of Landshut makes an Installation Speech—VII. Fried-
rich purposes to mend the Klein-Schnellendorf Failure: Fortunes of the
Belleisle Armament —VIII. Friedrich starts for Moravia, on a New
Scheme he has—IX. Wilhelmina goes to see the Gaieties at Frankfurt—
X. Friedrich does his Moravian Expedition, which proves a mere Mora-
vian Foray—XI. Niissler in Neisse, with the Old Dessauer and Walrave—
XII. Prince Karl does come on—XIII. Battle of Chotusitz—XIV. Peace
of Breslau.

*

Boox. XIV. THE suRROUNDING EUROPEAN WAR DOES NOT END.
1742-1744. (p. 461-596.)

I. Friedrich resumes his Peaceable Pursuits—II. Austrian Affairs are
on the Mounting Hand —III. Carnival Phenomena in War-time —IV.
Austrian Affairs mount to a Dangerous Height—V. Britannic Majesty
fights his Battle of Dettingen; and becomes Supreme Jove of Germany,
in a Manner—VI. Voltaire visits Friedrich for the Fourth Time—VII.
Friedrich makes Treaty with France; and silently gets ready—VIII. Per-
fect Peace at Berlin, War all round.

(Vol. IV. contains Books XV.— X VII.)

Book XV. Seconp SILEsIAN War, Important EpisopEe IN THE |
GENERAL EUROPEAN ONE. 1744-1745. (p. 1-183.)

I. Preliminary: How the Moment arrived—II. Friedrich marches upon
Prag, captures Prag—III. Friedrich, diligent in his Bohemian Conquests,
unexpectedly comes upon Prince Karl, with no French attending him—
IV. Friedrich reduced to Straits; cannot maintain his Moldau Conquests
against Prince Karl—V. Friedrich, under Difficulties, prepares for a new
Campaign—VI. Valori goes on an Electioneering Mission to Dresden—
VII. Friedrich in Silesia; unusually busy —VIII. The Martial Boy and
his English versus the Laws of Nature—IX. The Austrian-Saxon Army
invades Silesia, across the Mountains—X. Battle of Hohenfriedberg—XI.
Camp of Chlum: Friedrich cannot achieve Peace — XII. Battle of Sohr
— XIII. Saxony and Austria make a surprising Last Attempt — XIV.
Battle of Kesselsdorf— XV. Peace of Dresden: Friedrich does march

~~

Home.

GENERAL CONTENTS OF THE WORK. 551

Book XVI. Tue Tren Years or Peace. 1746-1756. (p. 185-394.)

I. Sans-Souci—II. Peep at Voltaire and his divine Emilie (by Candle-
light) in the Tide of Events—III. European War falls done: Treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle —IV. Cocceji finishes the Law Reform; Friedrich is
printing his Poésies—V. Strangers of Note come to Berlin, in 1750—VI.
Berlin Carrousel, and Voltaire visible there—VII. M. de Voltaire has a
painful Jew-Lawsuit —VIII. Ost-Friesland and the Shipping Interests—
IX. Second Act of the Voltaire Visit—X. Demon Newswriter, of 1752—
XI. Third Act and Catastrophe of the Voltaire Visit—XII. Of the After-
piece, which proved still more tragical— XIII. Romish-King Question;
English-Privateer Question—XIV. There is like to be another War ahead
—XYV. Anti-Prussian War-Symptoms: Friedrich visible for a Moment.

Boox XVII. Tue Srven-YEARS’ WAR: First CAMPAIGN.
1756-1757. (p. 395-490.)

I. What Friedrich had read in the Menzel Documents—II. English
Diplomacies abroad, in Prospect of a French War—III. French-English
War breaks out—IV. Friedrich puts a Question at Vienna, twice over—
V. Friedrich blockades the Saxons in Pirna Country-—-VI. Battle of Lo-
bositz—VII. The Saxons get out of Pirna on Dismal Terms—VIII. Win-
ter in Dresden. :

(Vol. V. contains Books XVIII. and XIX.)

Boox XVIII. SeEveN-YEARS’ WAR RISES TO A HeiguHtT. 1757-1759.
(p. 1-811.)

I. The Campaign opens—II. Battle of Prag—lIII. Prag cannot be got
at once—IV. Battle of Kolin—V. Friedrich at Leitmeritz, his World of
Enemies coming on—VI. Death of Winterfeld—VII. Friedrich in Thii-
ringen, his World of Enemies all come—VIII. Battle of Rossbach—IX.
Friedrich marches for Silesia— X. Battle of Leuthen— XI. Winter in
Breslau: Third Campaign opens—XII. Siege of Olmiitz—XIII. Battle
of Zorndorf—XIV. Battle of Hochkirch.

Book XIX. FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED IN THE SEVEN-
Years’ War. 1759-1760. (p. 313-515.)

I. Preliminaries to a Fourth Campaign—-II. General Dohna; Dictator
Wedell: Battle of Ziillichau—III. Friedrich in Person attempts the Rus-
sian Problem; not with Success—IV. Battle of Kunersdorf—V. Saxony
without Defence: Schmettau surrenders Dresden —VI. Prince Henri
makes a March of Fifty Hours; the Russians cannot find Lodging in Si-
lesia—VII. Friedrich reappears on the Field, and in Seven Days after
comes the Catastrophe of Maxen—VIII. Miscellanea in Winter-quarters,
1759-60—IX. Preliminaries to a Fifth Campaign.

552 GENERAL CONTENTS OF THE WORK.

(Vol. VI. contains Books XX. and XXT.)

Book XX. FRIEDRICH IS NOT TO BE OVERWHELMED: THE SEvVEN-
Years’ Wak GRADUALLY ENDS. 25th April 1760— 15th February
1763. (p. 1-260.)

I. Fifth Campaign opens—II. Friedrich besieges Dresden—III. Battle
of Liegnitz—IV. Daun in wrestle with Friedrich in the Silesian Hills—
V. Battle of Torgau—VI. Winter-quarters, 1760-61—VII. Sixth Cam-
paign opens: Camp of Bunzelwitz—VIIJ. Loudon pounces upon Schweid-
nitz, one Night (last of September 1761)—IX. Traitor Warkotsch—xX.
Friedrich in Breslau; has News from Petersburg—XI. Seventh Cam-
paign opens— XII. Siege of Schweidnitz; Seventh Campaign ends—
XIII. Peace of Hubertsburg.

Book XXI. ArrerNoon AND Eveninc oF Friepricn’s Lire.
1763-1786. (p. 261-544.)

I. Prefatory—II. Repairing of a ruined Prussia—III. Troubles in Po-
land—IV. Partition of Poland—V. A Chapter of Miscellanies—VI. The
Bavarian War—VII. Miller Arnold’s Lawsuit—VIII. The Fiirstenbund:
Friedrich’s Last Years—IX. Friedrich’s Last Illness and Death.

PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND PLANS.

Vor. I. Portrait of ‘‘ The Little Drummer’—Maps of Cleve-Jiilich and
Baireuth-Anspach.

Vou. II. Portrait of ‘‘ Fredericus Wilhelmus”—Plan of Camp of Rade-
witz— Map of Journey to the Reich —Maps of Ciistrin, Philipsburg, and
Kingdom of Prussia.

Vou. III. Portrait of ‘‘ Frédéric II. Roi de Prusse, Electeur de Bran-
debourg’”’—Plans of Battles of Mollwitz, Chotusitz, and penere ere
for First and Second Silesian Wars.

Vou. IV. Portrait of ‘‘ Frederike Sophie Wilhelmine, Margravine of
Baireuth’’—Plans of Battles of Fontenoy, Hohenfriedberg, Sohr, Kessels-
dorf, and Lobositz—Plan of Camp of Pirna—Map for Second and Third
Silesian War—Facsimile of Secret Letter of Instructions.

Vou. V. Portrait of ‘‘ Friedrich II. Konig in Preussen, xtatis 58’—
Plans of Battles of Prag, Kolin, Rossbach, Leuthen, Zorndorf, Hochkirch,
Minden, Kunersdorf, and Maxen— Map for Siege of Olmiitz—Map for
Third Silesian War.

Vot. VI. Portrait of ‘‘ Friedrich IT. Konig von Preussen, etatis 73”’—
Plans of Battles of Liegnitz and Torgau—Map of Bunzelwitz, Burkers-
dorf, and Reichenbach Country—Map for Third Silesian War—Map of
Kingdom of Prussia.

Se

PeNe Di bex:.

ABEL, D. Otto, cited, ii. 342 n.

Abercromby, at Ticonderago, v. 307.

Académie des Sciences of Berlin, i. 282, 474.

Achard, M., ii. 444.

Achilles, v. 189.

Acre, Siege of, i. 83.

Adalbert’s, St., attempt to convert Preussen
to Christianity, i. 60, 865; iii. 130.

Adams, Johann, Burgermeister, complains
of French rapacity, v. 178.

Adams, John Quincy, cited on Silesia, iii.
383.

Adams of. Boston, ‘t American Cato,”’ vi. 407.

Adelung, cited, iii. 106 n.; iv.2n.3 v.4n.

Adolf Friedrich, Prince, iii. 575, 5763 mar-
ries Princess Ulrique, 577; King of Swe-
den, vi. 363 5 his death, 592.

Adolf of Nassau, Kaiser, i. 146.

Agamemnon’s Sceptre, i. 1.

Aguesseau, Chancellor d’, iv. 230 n.

Ahlden, Castle of, i. 26, 402, 410, 484; the
“ Ahliden Heritage,” ii. 57, 79.

Ahlden, Die Herzogin von, i. 27 n.

Ahremberg, Duke d’, iii. 517, 585; at Dettin-
gen, 525; iv. 2, 56, 74, 84; gone all to hebe-
tude, 135; at Sohr, 147; at Eger, v. 12,13;
Leuthen, 210; Hochkirch, 286, 295; beat-
en by Prince Henri at Pretsch, 446.

Aix-la-Chapelle, Charlemagne at, iii. 469 ;
Treaty of, iv. 219, 220, 375.

Akakia, Doctor, Voltaire’s, iv. 344; publicly
burnt, 348.

Alba, i. 194.

Alberoni, i. 344.

Albert Achilles, Kurfiirst, i. 164, 165; how
he managed the Bishop of Bamberg, 167.

Albert Alcibiades of Baireuth, i.177; a kind
of ‘* Failure of a Fritz,’’ 195, 200, 214.

Albert, Archbishop of Maintz, i. 170; mem-
orable Sale of Indulgences, 171; at the
Diet of Augsburg, 184.

Albert Friedrich, Second Duke of Preussen,
i. 224; his marriage, 226; overclouding
of mind, 227; death, 248.

Albert I., Kaiser, harsh and ugly, i. 108,
109 ; assassinated by his nephew, 110.

Albert Henry, Prince of Brunswick, vi. 155,

Albert, Hochmeister,i. 187; difficulties about
homage to Poland, 1883; getting deep into
Protestantism, 191; Hereditary Duke of
Preussen, 193, 215; his second Wife;
death, 224,

Albert, Prince of Brunswick, iv. 124; killed
at Sohr, 146.

Albert, Prince of Saxony, vi. 24T.

Albert II., Kaiser, i. 147,178; vi. 442.

Albert the Bear, the great Markgrafof Bran- |

Vor. VIL—A aA

denburg, i. 60; origin of name, 735 de-
scendants, 117.

Alderfeld, cited, i. 335 n.

Alembert, D’, iv. 390, 3915 letters from Vol-
taire to, v. 497, 498, 499 ; meets with the
King at Geldern, vi. 277; declines the post
of Perpetual President; letter to Madame
du Deffand, 283; recommends Helvetius
to Friedrich, 251; leaves Potsdam, 296;
becomes Friedrich’s chief correspondent,
402-405; writes to him of his interview
with Kaiser Joseph, 4373; his death, 526;
mentioned also, 282 and n., 283 n., 349.

Alexander, v. 195, 213.

Alexius, Czarowitz, ii. 289.

Algarotti, ii. 515 5 one of the first beawx-es-
prits of his age, iii. 46; with Friedrich at
Strasburg, 48; mission to Sardinia, 174;
at Breslau, 346; position with Friedrich,
iv. 306, 3665; death, vi. 298 ; mentioned
also, iii. 15, 33, 70, 158, 204.

Almon, cited, v. 56 n.

Alphonso, King of Castile and sham Kaiser,
i. 98, 100. <

Alsace, iii, 524.

Altenburg, ii. 162.

Althan, Count a’, vi. 352.

Altranstadt, Treaty of, iii. 132, 148.

Amber, i. 59.

Ambitious, question for the, iii. 268.

Amelia, Dowager Empress, iii. 382.

Amelia, Princess of England, i, 401; ii. 49135
iv. 290; vi. 108.

Amelia, Princess of Prussia, i. 410; in pe-
cuniary trouble, iii. 507; Abbess of Qued-
linburg, 580; at Berlin Carrousel, iv. 253;
income small, 334; letter from Friedrich,
vy. 41; visits Breslau, 215; gift from Fried-
rich, vi. 260; mentioned also, 396, 398, 498,
514, 530.

Amelot, M., iii. 551, 562; iv. 2.

America, i. 318; Salzburg Emigrants to, ii.
3820.

American Colonies in great need of a com-
mander, v. 573; prediction of their revolt,
448-451; America to be English and not
French, 451; vi. 15S; a considerable Fact
in the History of the World, 258; uncon-
scious Declaration of Anarchy, ending at
last in hideous suicide, 262, 263 ; America
refuses to be taxed by a British Parlia-
ment; Boston Tea-catastrophe, 406, 407.

Amherst, General, worth of, discerned by
Pitt, v. 230; captures Louisbourg, £51;
Montreal, 453.

Amiability, iii. 99.

Ammon, Von, iv. 287.

554

Amdneburg, cannonade at, vi. 241-243.

Anarchies, Millennium of, vi. 262; not per-
mitted in this World, 311.

André, St., v. 434.

Andrié, Excellency, iv. 371.

Andrieux, vi. 490 n.

Anecdotes of Friedrich, v. 189, 190; vi. 265.

Anhalt, Adjutant von, vi. 237, 274, 353, 354,
416 n., 463, 521.

Anhalt, Graf von, v.79; the Anhalt forced
contributions to Friedrich’s war-expenses,
321.

Anhalt-Zerbst, i. T0, 1183 ii. 140: iii. 575.

Anne of Cleves, i. 226.

Anne of Courland, afterwards Czarina, ii.
27, 30 n., 140, 278, 370, 599, 523; iii. 104;
death of, 117, 193.

Anne, Princess, of Russia, formerly of Meck-
lenburg, iii. 194, 196, 214.

Anson, Commodore, iii. 108, 299; his mem-
orable Voyage, 305.

Anspach, i. 96,1725 ii. 168.
Frederika Louisa.

Anspach, Margraf of, v. 90.

Anspach, Margraf of (Lady Craven’.), with
Friedrich at Neisse, vi. 335, 339

Anspach, Margravine of. See Frederika
Louisa.

Antoinette Amelia, of Brunswick, ii. 290.

Anton Ulrich, Czar Iwan’s Father, iii. 117,
198; exile, 196, 19S.

Anton Ulrich, of Brunswick, i. 416; ii. 289,
290; his Great-grandson, 291, 497, 525,

Antwerp, i. i. 55, 56.

Apes, Dead-Sea, i, 158,

cae Nee knitting at their Stalls, i. 313.

1

See Culmbach,

Apraxin, Feldmarschall, in Preussen, v. 88,
128, 189 ; retires slowly home, 128; indig-
nantly dismissed by the Czarina, 218.

Aprill, eS ., tries to serve Citatio on Plotho,
v. 147-14).

Archenholtz, cited, iv. 402 n.; on the *¢ Ob-
lique Order,”’ v. 194, 200; on Lord George
Sackville, 365; Prince Henri’s march of
fifty hours, 441; Prussian recruiting-sys-
tem, 506; at battle of Liegnitz, vi. 49;
wounded at Torgau, 92, 99; at Leipzig,
noticing vividly to right and left, 128;
Prussian and }'rench exactions, 128, 129;
the camp of Bunzelwitz, 1443 siege of Col-
berg, 178; the Seven-Years’ War, 256 ;
mentioned also, 15, 19, 61.

Argens, Marquis 4’, iii. 417, 419, 426, 563;
iv. 180, 194, 215, 820, 851; the King’s
friend for nearly thirty years, 3053; visits
Friedrich at Breslau, v. 215-217; letters
from Friedrich, 213, 216, 317, 399-401, 464,
465, 479; preface to Cuvre de Poésiv,
481: the confidant of Friedrich’s miseries,
B14: letters from Friedrich to, vi. 57, 68,
74, 189, 190, 202, 203, 204; visits him at
Leipzig, 112, 249; surprised to see him
amusing himself with his dogs, 113; his
death, 298.

Argenson, Marquis d’, letter from Voltaire
to, iii. 497 5 their personal friendship, 551;
iv. 127, 206 ; Waselie

Argental, D’, ‘iv. 255, 258, 287, 301, 316; v.

INDEX.

134; letters from Voltaire about Friedrich,
494, 495-497.

Aristocracies , Mutinous, tamed down, i. 149,
224, 225, 228, See Pride of place.

Army, value of a good, i. 315, 439, 440.

Arnaud, M. Baculard d’, iv, 256, 266, 26T,
285, 287.

Arnim, Minister of Justice, iv. 216.

Arnim’s, Major, gallant defence at Frank-
furt, v. 368, 369.

Arnold Miller, v. 351 ;
493,

Arouet, M., Senior, ii. 449. See Voltaire.

Arundel, Earl of, cited, i. 258 n.

Ascanier Markgraves, i. 103, 117;
tated, 121, 122, 129.

Aschersleben, i. 69.

Asiento, Treaty of, iii, 295.

Assas, D’, at Kloster Kampen, vi. 105.

Asseburg finds a Wife for Czarowitch Paul,
vi. 404.

Astruii, Mamsell, an Italian singer, iv. 329.

Astruc, Dr., iv. 307.

Atours, Dame a’, iii. 418.

Attila, vi. 372.

Attorneys, a fat affair for the, i. 236, 239,
247; extirpation of the attorney species,
iv, 228.

Augsburg, Diet of, i. 182; ii. 164, 175.

August Ferdinand, i. 4133 ii. 534.

August Theodor, Kur- Pfalz, iv. 135.

August the Strong, i. 45, 326, 375, 3803 il.
134; objects to the Kaiser’s Pragmatic
Sanction, i. 421; quarrel with Friedrich
Wilhelm, ii. 10; invites him and Fried-
rich to Dresden, 15; magnificent hospital-
ities and unspeakable pollutions, 17; his
return visit, 22; rumour of a projected
marriage with Wilhelmina, 28; Camp of

his lawsuit, vi. 470-

resusci-

Radewitz, 135; King of Playhouse man- ,

agers, 144; attained the maximum in sey-
eral things, 148; meditates partition of
Poland, 353 ; vi. 315; last interview with
Grumkow, i ii. 354 3 death and absolution,
366; his hunting-lodge, i iv. 474.

August III. of Poland, ii. 369, 872, 491, 424 5
suggested for Kaiser, iv. 6S: his antipathy
to Friedrich, 69, 123; how he was benetted
by Briihl and Guarini, T3 ; taken comfort-
ably to Prag to be out of danger, 165; glad
to make peace, 175; Hanbury’s account
of, 235; withdraws to Pirna, and tries ne-
gotiation with Friedrich, 438, 439; Head-
quarters at Struppen, 448-451; will not
agree to Friedrich’s terms, 4503; snug in
the Koénigstein, 474, 475; goes to War-
saw, never to come back, 478; gets no
compensation for his Saxon losses; noth-
ing but confusions and contradictions in
Poland, vi. 303; difficulties with Czarina
Catharine, and death, 304. See Kur-Sach-
sen.

August Wilhelm, i. 412; with Friedrich at
Strasburg, iii. 4S; betrothed, 95; married,
402; at his Sister's wedding, 577; heir-
apparent of Prussia, iv. 334; opposition
views, 426, 427; letter to Valori, 464, 465;
lamentations and accusations, v. TT, 82 5
put in command at Jung- Buntzlau, 84, 88;

aa

iy

ve

INDEX.

finds the problem too hard for him, 94 ;
council of war, 97; a disastrous march,
98; cannot save Zittau, 98,99; reaches
Bautzen, happily unchased, 100; stern re-
ception by the King, 102-104; his death,
105, 240; antipathy to Winterfeld, 112;
Sp also, iii. 45, 99, 101, 120, 230,
559.

Aulaire, Marquis de &t., iv. 205.

Austerlitz, i. 6.

Australia, i. 318.

Austria, i. 55, 57; Kaisers of, still riding on
the shadow of a saddle, 109 ;. the ‘* Aus-
trian lip,” 168, 203; rejection of Protest-
antism, 203 ; an Austrian swindle, 278 3 ii.
347; Austrian - Succession War, iii. 258,
472; conservatism, 262, 335, ponderous
pedantry and helplessness, 335, 8340; dumb
stubborn pride, 462; extraordinary Claim
for Damages, 548, 546; no longer the lead-
ing nation of Teutschland, iv. 187, 188°
share in the partitioning of Prussia, v. 2;
fixed rage and hatred, 6; does not claim
Parma and Piacenza, 503; gets into sore
difficulties as to cash, vi. 150; anxious to
get rid of its pledge to the Reich; truce
with Friedrich, 248, peace and general
As-you-were, 257; takes forcible posses-
sion of Zips, 361-363 : ‘share in the parti-
tion of Poland, 369, 870; intrigues and
bargains for succession of Bavarie, 439.

Auteroche, Marquis d’, at Fontenoy, iv. 93,
04.

Autograph (facsimile) of Friedrich’s Letter
of ‘* Secret Instruction &c.,” iv. 483 a;
Signature, vi. 438,

Ayscough, cited, ii. 48 n.

Bacuaumont and La Chapelle, Voyage de,
iii. 59 n.3 cited, v. 486 n.

Bachmann for three days Russian Com-
mandant of Berlin, vi. 70.

Bacon, Lord, i. 245, 246.

Baden-Durlach, Prince of, at Hochkirch, v.
286, 256.

Bagieu, Dr., iv. 349.

Baiern, Kur, sends embassy to Friedrich, vi.
45 ; in subsidy of France, 173.

Bailies, Dr., vi. 419.

Baillet, cited, i. 62 n.

Bailli de Froulay, v. 489, 492.

Baireuth, i. 96,172 5 genealogy, 2883 ii. 323.
See Culmbach, Albert Alcibiades, Fried-
rich of.

Baireuth, Margraf of, iii. 414, 415, 560; v.
90, 332. Margravine of, see Wilhelmina.

Balaclava, ii. 328.

Balance of Power, i. 432, 433, 4853 iv. 3.

Balbi, Engineer, iv. 391, 425; v. 116; vi.
3403 at Siege of Schweidnitz, v. 232; Ol-
mutz, 236, 238, 239, 241. .

Ballenstiidt, 1.69, 74.

Baltimore, Lord, ii. 516.

Bamberg, i. 67; ii. 323; Croats driven out
of, v. 332.

Bamberg, Bishop of, iii. 473 v. 89.

Bar, Confederation of, vi. 326-330.

Bar, Graf von, ii. 57.

Barbarossa, Kaiser, i. 68, 70, 74, 78; the

555

greatest of all the Kaisers, 76; German tra-
dition about him, 77, 78; ii. 315; changed
times, i. 127; ii. 186, 319; iii. 29, 262.

Barberina, an Opera-Dancer, iii. 5743 en-
gagement at Berlin, 5883; hospitality to
Collini, iv. 250, 253, 254.

Barbier, cited, i. 156 n,, 409 n.; iii. 9 n.3 iv.
2n.; on the French account of their grand
invasion scheme, v. 478.

Birenklau, General von, iii. 399, 424; at
Stockstiidt, iv. 4; swept from Bavaria, 29 ;
returns with Bathyani, 76.

Baronay, Major-General, at Rothschloss, iii.

Bartenstein, Austrian Minister, iii. 103, 336;
iv. 152. ,

Bartholomew, &t., night of, i. 204.

Basel, i. 100.

Bastiani promoted by Friedrich, vi. 497, 519.

Bathyani summoned to relief of Prag, iv. 18;
at Beraun, 18; troubles Friedrich’s march
through Bohemia, 25, 26, 32; in Bavaria,
es , 63, 75; supersedes D’Ahremberg, S84,

6.

Baty Khan, ii. 335.

Bauer, Colonel, at Wesel, vi. £52, 253; in the
Russian-Turk War, 356,

Baumgarten, Skirmish of, iii. 206.

Bavaria, Kurfiirst of, i. 422, ii. 196,

Bavarian-Succession War, vi. 439-469.

Bayle, i. 24, 387.

Beatson, cited, iii. 582 n.; vi. 182 n.

Beatson, Colonel, cited, v. 44S and note.

Beauffremont, v. 478.

Beaumarchais, Voltaire papers saved by, iii.
553, 557; cited, vi. 250 n.

Beaumelle’s, M. Angliviel de la, enmity to
Voltaire, iv. 320, 321, 352; cited, 262 n.;
account of Maupertuis, v. 473, 474, 475.

Beausobre, M. de, i. 35, 365 ii. 443.

Beauvais, women fighting at the siege of, vi.
503 n.

Beauvau, Marquis de, French Ambassador
to Berlin, iii. 114; Audience of leave, 123;
mentioned also, 155.

Beauvrye, Captain, vi. 237.

Beck, General, advanced to relief of Prag, v.
85; captures Diiringshofen’s battalion,
334; captures Dierecke and his post at
Meissen, 466, 467; attacks General Czet-
teritz, 509; with Loudon in Silesia, vi.
149; defeated at Reichenbach, 233, 234;
mentioned also, v. 97,106; vi. 42, 56, 318.

Becket, Thomas 4, i. 74.

Beckwith, Colonel, at Warberg, vi. 32; We-
sel, 252, 253. :

Beelzebub not God, i. 8; worshippers of, 155;
August's Saxon Court of, ii. 19, 41.

Bein, Proviant-master, vi. 437.

Belgard, ii. 514.

Bell, Herr Hofrath, iv. 279.

Belleisle, Chevalier de, a magnanimous high-
flown spirit, iii. 188; his brother’s right
hand, 285, 456; death at the Pass of Ex-
illes, or Gol di Sieta, iv. 213; mentioned
also, 57, 59, 60.

Belleisle, Comte de, iii. 186, 187; his Ger-
man Enterprise, 187, 263; with Friedrich
at Brieg, 255; mainly to blame for the

556

Austrian-Succession War, 260; consum-
mate skill, 275, 276; grandiose schemes,
277, d1T, 498 : ‘ ” successful manipulation,
278": visits Friedrich, 280; proceeds to
Dresden and Miinchen, 283; takes up his
abode in Frankfurt, 284, 333; Treaty with
Friedrich, 330; a kind of Dictator, 339 ;
his Army crosses the Rhine, 356, 357;
rheumatic fever, 392; partial recovery,
397; visits Wilhelmina, 414; Sahay, 452;
interview with Friedrich at Kuttenberg,
456; Colloquy with Broglio at Prag, 481;
defends Prag, 482; much distinguishes
himself, 483; gallant retreat, BOL, 504 5
German enterprise ruined, 535 : gives
Friedrich bad advice about his Bohemian
Campaign, iv. 22; in Miinchen, 57-5); on
his road to Berlin, 59, 60; arrested, and
carried to England, 61, 62; in Italy, 198,
205, 213; his grand schemes all bankrupt,
221; War-Minister, v. 21T, 308, 358, 471,
479; loses his only son at Crefeld, 251; as-
tonished at Friedrich’s marching power,
306, 307; letters to Contades published by
Ferdinand, 365, 480; dies of putrid fever ;
the last of the grand old Frenchmen, vi.
130, 181; mentioned also, iv. 2, 450.

Belleisle, General, ii. 371, 375, 420.

Belleisle, Madame de, interview with Wil-
helmina, iii. 414.

Belling, Colonel, in Pommern, v. 222; looks
after the Swedes, vi. 202; in battle of
Freyberg, 246; in Bavarian War, 462;
mentioned also, 362.

Benda, the Brothers, ii. 438.

Beneckendorf, cited, i. 482 n.

Beneschau, Schwerin takes, iv. 34.

Bénézet, Mamsell, vi. 511.

Benkendorf, Lieutenant-Colonel, turns the
fortune of battle at Kolin, v. 74; small re-
cognition of his service, T7, 78, 79.

Benoit, Prussian Secretary, iv. 387.

Bentenrieder, the kidnapped Ambassador,
i. 447; ii. 44.

Bentham, cited, i. 58 n.

Bentinck, Madame de, v. 496,

Beraun, Action of, iv. 18.

Berenhorst, Heinrich von, vy. 72.

Berenhorst, cited, ii. 500 n.; v. 71; pique
against Friedrich; his ‘‘Artof War,” vi.93.

Bergen, battle of, v. 329, 330.

Bergen-op-Zoom, Siege of, iv. 214.

Bergerie, M. de la, i. 32.

Berghover, Legationsrath, iii. 412.

Berg-Jtilich, iii. 4, 269.

Berlichingen, General, at Mollwitz, iii. 244,
2463 in Silesia, iv. 106.

Berlin, early condition of, i. 104; Palace at,
159; Royal Academy of, 282, 474; St. Pe-
ter’s Church burnt down, ii. 1335 Fried-
rich Wilhelm’s building operations, 274;
Homaging at, iii. 36; Treaty of, 457; open-
ing of the Opera-House, 468 ; Carrousel, iv.
251-254; entered by Haddick, v. 115, 146;
agony of commotion at the news of Ku-
nersdorf, 391, 392; seized by Tottleben
and Lacy, vi. "6T, 72.

Rernir 2, Prince of, at siege of Schweidnitz,
Vi. 238, 239.

INDEX.

Bernburg, Regiment, at Siege of Dresden, vL
23; at Liegnitz, 51, 54.

Berne, Oligarchy of, iv. 337.

Berneck, ii. 390.

Bernhard of Weimar, ii. 172.

Bernis, Cardinal de, iv. 417, 418; v. 314;
Letter from Voltaire, 494, 495.

Bernouilli, Jean, iii. 62.

Bernouilli of Basel, v. 473.

Bertin, Captain, at Weissenfels, v. 15.

Berwick, Maréchal Duc de, ii. 379; at Phil-
ipsburg, 384, 386.

Besserer, ii. 222.

Bestuchef, Chancellor, dismissed, v. 21S.

Bestuchef, Russian Chancellor, iv. 414.

Beutelsbachers, the, ii. 179.

Bevern, Brunswick-, Duke of, iv. 437, 439 5
in the battle of Lobositz, 462, 463; ad-
vances towards Prag, v. 11; defeats Ké-
nigseck at Reichenberg, 13, 14, 16; sen%
after Daun, 44; finds Daun too strong, 62;
joined by the King, 63; retreat from Ko-
lin, 75,765 at Jung-Buntzlau, 95; at Gér-
litz to guard Silesia, 107, 108 ; jealous of
Winterfeld, 109, 111; retires into Silesia,
112, 113, 180; defeated at Breslau, 182;
prisoner; graciously sent home again}; or-
dered to Stettin, 183; vigilant against the
Swedes, 222; diligent at Stettin, vi. 165;
defeats the Austrians at Reichenbach, 232-
234; great merit, not of dexterity alone,
233; left in charge of Silesia, 240.

Bias, iii. 321.

Bible, Hebrew, i. 16.

Bielfeld, ii. 493, 498, 516, 519; his descrip-
tion of George IT., iii. 39, 40; at siege of
Neisse, 379; Duchess of Wiirtemberg, 418;
Friedrich’s victorious return from Silesia,
459; marriage of Princess Ulrique, 578 ;
death, vi. 298; mentioned also, iii. 4, 5,
101, 113, 1243; iv. 292; cited, i. 444 n.; iv.
324 n.

Bieren, Duke of Courland, ii. 2783 iii. 117;
to Siberia, 194; Bieren and Miinnich re-
fuse to be reconciled, vi. 208; to be again
Duke of Courland, 304, 30T.

Bismark, Herr Minister von, iv. 280.

Bj drnstahl, M., vi. 400.

Blair in Athol, Siege of, iv. 76.

Blakeney, Governor, strives to defend Mi-
norca, iv. 422, 4233; at Minorca, v. 113.

soe Don, Governor of Carthagena, iii. 297,

Ov

Blenheim, Battle of, i. 303 5 ii. 172.

Bligh, General, at Morlaix, v. 807.

Blonquet, General Thomas von, y. 405.

Bliicher, Prince of Wahlstatt, vi. 46.

Blumenthal, cited, ii. 419 n.; iv. 102 n.3 v.
211 n. : Minister von, vi. 281.

Blumenthal, Frau von, iii. 30S n.; cited, vi.
423 n.

Boden, Prussian Finance-Minister, iii. 24,
40; iv. 85.

Boerhaave, iy. 307.

Bohemian Papists, iv. 25, 37.

Boleslaus, Duke of Poland, i. 63.

Bolingbroke, ii. 453, 456.
Boll, cited, vi. 135 n.
Bollandus, cited, i. 62 n.

INDEX.

Boniface VIII., Pope, i. 109.

Bonneville, M. de, Revolutionary spiritual-
ist, i. 156 n.; v. 483, 484.

Bonneville, M. de, the Demon Newswriter,
stealer and editor of Guvres du Philo-
sophe de Sans-Souct, and author of Ma-
tinées du Roi de Prusse, v. 482-485; swin-
dling exploit and lodgment in Spandau,
485, 486.

Borck, Adjutant-General, accompanies the
King to Silesia, iii. 133; at Breslau, 164,
165, 209.

Borck, Finance Manager, v. 422.

Borck, General, ii. 63, 68, 90, 95, 97, 153, 236 ;
Major-General, manages the Herstal Af-
fair, iii. 83; at Neisse, 179; mentioned
also, 45, 46.

Borelly, M., vi. 206.

Boscawen, Admiral, v. £513 chases and de-
stroys the Toulon fieet, 409, 410.

Bose, Baron von, v. 174.

Boston refuses to admit taxed tea, vi. 403,
407.

Bosworth, i. 168.

Botta d’Adorno, Marquis, iv. 198.

Botta, Marchese di, Austrian Envoy to Ber-
lin, iii. 120; to Russia, 195.

Bougainville, M., v. 451.

Bouillé’s, Marquis de, recollections of Fried-
rich, vi. 517-520.

Bourbon Family Compact, the, vi. 181, 182.

Bourbonisn, iii. 92.

Bourcet, cited, vi. 153 n.

Boyer, cited, i. 456 n.

Braddock, General, sent to America, iv. 883;
his death, 354; his field of battle, v. 30S.
Brandenburg, early condition of, i, 51, 57;
early Markgraves, 64, 69; Ascanier Mark-
graves, 89, 103, 117; how Brandenburg
and the Hohenzollern Family came to-
gether, 108,119; Bavarian Kurfiirsts, 118,
‘121; a resuscitated Ascanier, 121, 129 ;
Luxemburg Kurfiirsts, 131; Brandenburg
in Pawn, 187; sold to Friedrich of Hohen-
zollern, 143, 144; Noble refractory Rob-
ber-lords, 149; Heavy Peg, 150; begin-
ning of the Prussian Nation, 153; Bran-
denburg under the Hohenzollerns, 154;
lucky enough to adopt the Reformation,
202; Nadir-point of the Brandenburg Ho-
henzollerns, 256; condition during the
Thirty-Years’ War, 258; again a flourish-
ing country, 262; Swedes driven out, 271.

Brandes, Colonel, at Prag, iv. 44, 45,

Branicki, vi. 322.

Breda, Congress of, iv. 211.

LBredow, leads charge at Chotusitz, iii. 445;
General, iv. 313.

Breitenbach, General, at Hastenbeck, v. 102.

Brender, Herr, ii. 408.

Brenkendorf, Minister von, vi. 397.

Brenkenhof, Privy-Councillor von, vi. 271.

Brentano, enters Saxony, v. 410; at siege of
Dresden, 414, 440; at Maxen, 460, 462,
463; at Reichenbach, vi. 233, 234; men-
tioned also, 348.

Breslau, iii. 130; able to defend itself, 139,
146; bottled emotion, 159 ; quiet surren-

- der to Friedrich, 164; unsettled condition,

557

209; attempted deliverance, 348; wholly
Friedrich’s, 351; Homaging, 380; Treaty
of, 457; battle of, v. 182,183; surrendered
to the Austrians, 184; recovered by Fried-
rich, 209; defended by Tauentzien against
Loudon, vi. 36, 37.

Breteuil, at Congress of Teschen, vi. 468.

Breton, Cape, capture of, iv. 99, 377.

Bribery, Parliamentary, iii 291.

Brieg, iii. 170; siege of, 281.

Britannic Army of observation, v. 4, 5.

Britton, cited, v. 229 n.

Broglio, Excellency, iv. 432, 438; demands
admission to the Saxon Camp at Pirna,
449; defends Cassel, vi. 123.

Broglio, Maréchal, surprised by the Aus,
trians at Secchia, ii. 378; Commandant in
Strasburg, ili. 53; receives Friedrich in-
cognito, 55, 57; General of the French
Army, 393, 397, 403; Bivouac of Pisek,
397; general incompetency, 421, 422, 439,
488, 492, 514; Skirmish of Sahay, 452; de-
mands Db’ Harcourt’s reinforcements, 477 5
flurried retreat before Prince Karl, 480;
Colloquy with Belleisle, 451; takes com-
mand of the Bavarian Army, 494; relieves
Braunau, 505; interview with the Kaiser,
511; writes for Order home, 514; retreats
“across the Rhine, 515; ordered to his own
Estates; death, 534; mentioned also, vi.
24.

Broglio, Maréchal, at Rossbach, v. 151, 155,
163, 164; the two extreme points of his
career, Rossbach and the fall of the Bas-
tille, 172; at Sangerhausen, 177; fight of
Sandershausen, 309 n.; at Frankfurt-on-
Mayne, 326; repulses Ferdinand at Ber-
gen, 329, 330; at Minden, 353-364; vehe-
mently manceuvres against Duke Ferdi-
nand, vi. 31-343; lays hold of Gittingen,
1045 defeated at Langensalza; loses his
winter magazines, 124, 125; gets into
quarrel with Soubise, and is defeated by
Ferdinand at Vellinghausen, 152-155.

ea Collection of Royal Letters, i,

12 0

Browne, General, born German, iii. 142;
tries to defend Breslau, 159; a superior
soldier, 169, 171, 181; back to Glatz, 205;
at Mollwitz, 246; in Bavaria, iy. 76; in
Italy, 197, 198 n., 213; in Bohemia, 442,
448; enthusiastic help to him, 452;
marches to the relief of the Saxons, 452,
455 ; battle of Lobositz, 455464; retreats
to Budin, 463; will try it another way,
466; arrives at Lichtenhayn, 468; hears
nothing from the Saxons, 472; a right
valiant soldier and man, 472, 473 ; recom-
mends Loudon, 485; securing posts in the
Metal Mountains, vy. 11; has to retire sud-
denly to defend Prag, 11, 18, 16; alterca-
tions with Prince Karl, 17, 18; battle of
Prag, 24, 27, 28, 29; mortally wounded,
31; his last counsel, 34; death, 34, 59, 843;
mentioned also, iii. 188, 140, 221.

Briihl, Count, ii. 25; iii. 272, 402; no friend
to Friedrich, iv. 14, 66; regards him with
perfect hatred, 69, 72, 123, 127, 154; twelve
tailors always sewing for him, 72; great

558

schemes-against Friedrich, 130, 151, 152,
154; cannot keep his secret, 154; rage
yellower than ever, 165; doom of nations
governed by Brihls, 168, 173, 441, 471,
481; Brith] a much-illuminated man,
175; afraid of Friedrich, 397, 402; plots
to set the Czarina against him, 402-404 ;
Prussian invasion, 432; withdraws with
Polish Majesty to Pirna, 438, 448, 449,
474; communicates with Browne, 468;
goes to Warsaw, 478; Briihl’s property
alone respected by the French, v. 175;
enmity to Friedrich, 305; death, vi. 298,
805; his voracity for lands in Poland, 39.

Briihl, Madame, iv. 484.

Brummel, Beau, iv. 370.

Brunswick-Bevern, Ferdinand Albert Duke
of, ii. 289, 882, 386, 423. See Elizabeth
Christina; Karl Duke of; Bevern.

Brunswick, Hereditary Prince of, dashes
out of Fulda on the Reich's folk, v. 327,
828; drives out the French post at Goh-
feld, 360, 364; marches into Saxony to aid
Friedrich, 468 ; drives the Duke of Wiir-
temberg out of Fulda, 470, 471; at Kor-
bach; at Emsdorf, vi. 31; Kloster Kam-
pen, 103-106; surprised by Broglio, 125;
generally had command of the English
troops, 157; in the Bavarian War, 466;
mentioned also, 345, 539.

Brunswick. See Anton Ulrich; Christian
of.

Buccow, General, killed at Torgau, vi. 95.

Buch, Johann von, i. 106.

Buchholz, ii. 326; cited, i. 312 n., 375 n.;5
iv. 30 n.3 vi. 221.

Buchwald, Frau von, v. 122, 124.

Buddiius, cited, i. 207 n.

Buddiius, Dr., iv. 243.

Buddenbrock, General, ii. 160, 172, 229, 313,
331, 334, 439; at Chotusitz, iii. 444, 445,
446; at Sohr, iv. 145, 146; mentioned
also, vi. 497.

Biiderich, Camp at, iii. 96.

Budget, Fixed, value of a, iii. 31.

Bilow, General, with Friedrich at Liegnitz,
vi. 45; at Camp of Bunzelwitz, 148, 164.

Biilow, Mamsell, ii. 92, 102, 199, 211.

Biinau, cited, i. T7 n.

Buonamici, cited, iii, 484 n.; iv. 198 n.

Burgoyne, Brigadier, in Portugal, vi. 186,

Burk, Lieutenant, in Portugal, vi. 187.

Burke, Edmund, iv. 249.

Burkersdorf Heights, Storming of, vi. 223-
229.

Burney’s, Dr., account of his visit to Vol-
taire, vi. 408-410.

Burns, Robert, i. 361. :

Biisching, cited, i. 78 n,, 232 n., 272 n.3 ii.
313 n.; iii. 25, 47 n., 1825; iv. 339,96 n.;
v.15 n.; crude authenticity, ii. 312, 313 n.;
Russian Mission, iii. 215; at Petersburg,
vi. 205; homaging to Czar Peter, 208;
sees the Czar.on horseback, 209; tumult
and revolution, 213-216; Niissler’s Inter-
view with the King, 271-273; a dull,
though solid, accurate kind of man, 271;
interviews with Queen Ulrique, 394-396 ;

INDEX.

gets a new Town Schoolhouse for Berlin,
396; mentioned also, 386, 498.

Bussy, Sieur de, vi. 158, 181; conducts Choi-
seul’s negotiations with Pitt, 182.

Bute, Lord, v. 123; vi. 109, 112, 183, 184, 188 ;
his shameful peace, 230, 231, 248, 244, 252,

Butturlin, Feldmarschall, to command the
Russian Army in Silesia, vi, 139; will not
venture upon Friedrich at Bunzelwitz,
146; altercations with Loudon, 148; re-
turns homewards, accelerated by General
Platen, 149, 150; sends reinforcements to
Romanzow at Colberg, 162; returns to I'o-
land, 178.

Byng, Admiral, i. 381, 425; iv. 422, 423;
burnt in Effigy, 436.

Canviz, blockade of, iii. 484.

Ceesar, v. 195, 213; vi. 62.

Cagliostro, vi. 533, 543.

Calas, Widow, v. 499.

Callenberg, Griifin von, iii. 228, 436.

Calmet, Dom, iv. 364.

Calonne, Controller-General, vi. 532, 559,

Calvin, i. 287, 3873 ii. 213.

Camas, Colonel, i. 369; sent to the French
eutte iii. 4; to Glatz, 168, 172; death,

Camas, Madame, Friedrich’s great respect
for, i. 370; iii. 255; his Letters to, ii. 402 ;
vi. 103, 132, 202, 203; her death, 298.

Cambrai, Congress of, i. 382, 427.

Cameron, Dr. Archibald, iv. 373; executed,
B74.

Cameron of Lochiel, iv. 373.

Cameron, Dr., vi. 434.

Campbell, cited, i. 382 n.

Campbell, John, Duke of Argyle, iii. 474.

Campitelli, General, marches to join Solti-
kof, v. 433.

Campitellis, vi. 245.

Canada, English and French in, iv. 376.

Candidatus Theologise, a, and the King of
Prussia, i. 321.

Cannabich, Pastor, iv. 238

Carlos IT. of Spain, i. 46.

Carlos III. of Spain, ii. 250, 376; King of the
Two Sicilies, 378, 424; iii. 485; iv. 221 n.;
v. 502; a diligent, indignant kind of man,
504; declares war against England, vi.
158, 159, 181, 182; quarrels with Portugal
on account of England, 185-187.

Carlowitz, Captain, at Prag, iv. 45. {

Carlyle, cited, vi. 5383 n.

Carmer, Silesian-Chancellor von, vi. 470 n.

Carmichael, the Scottish, iii. 457.

Caroline, Queen, i. 175, 400; ii. 55, 94, 106,
122; a beautiful Brandenburg - Anspach
Princess, i. 415; refuses the Catholic Kai-
ser, 416; ii. 2873; Friedrich’s Letters to,
33, 92 5 visit to her foolish Son, 481; mod-
est stoicism and death, 482; mentioned
algo, iii, 290.

Carr, cited, i. 24 n. ‘

Carteret, Lord, i, 343; iii. 314, 475, 516,
523; conferences at Hanau, 537; replies
to Pitt’s threat of resignation, vi. 183,
184; mentioned also, iv. 30, 77, 192, 371;
Vv.

INDEX.

Carzig, ii. 252, 260.
Carthagena, Expedition against, iii, 108, 297,
304. ~

Casano, Bridge of, i. 281, 303.

Casimir IV., King of Poland, i. 178.

Casimir, See Culmbach; Poland.

Casimir V. See John Casimir.

Castéra, cited, vi. 319 n.

Castries, Marquis de, defends Wesel, vi.
105, 106

Catechisme, Theological, i. 387, 358.

Catharine IL. of Russia, i. 69, 118; ii. 140;
iv. 410, 414; one of the cleverest of young
ladies, 415; her married life; rapid suc-
cession of lovers, vi. 198, 318, 319; books
about her, 199; becomes Czarina of Rus-
sia, 200; shocked at Colonel Hordt’s treat-
ment, 207; misgivings about her hus-
band's fate; gracious attentions to Hordt;
discerns that either Peter or she must
fall, 212; conspires for his destruction,
214-917; manifesto against Prussia; af-
terwards withdrawn, 218; treaty of alli-
ance with Friedrich, 299; difficulties with
Poland, 304; virtual sovereign of Poland,
and intends to keep so, 317; a kind of
she-Louis Quatorze; never in the least a
Cat or a Devil towards Poland, 317, 318;
makes Poniatowski king, 319; gets impa-
tient of the Dissident Question, 3253 locks
up the refractory Bishops, 325 (see Turk
War); enmity to Maria Theresa, 361,
367 ; sumptuously entertains Prince Hen-
ri, 8364-366; proposes dismemberment of
Poland, 366; her share in the partition,
369, 370, 380; mediates on the Bavarian
Succession question, 467; forms alliance
with Kaiser Joseph, and hopes to get Con-
stantinople and a new Greek Empire,
493-495; mentioned also, 197 n., 490, 510,
524.

Catheart, Charles Lord, iii. 300.

Catherine, Wife of Czar Peter, i. 3465; at
Berlin, 346, 349, 433.

Catherine - Alexiewna, formerly Sophie-
Frederike of Anhalt-Zerbst, iii. 577.

Catholic Religion, mournful state of, iii. 64.

Catt’s, De, first interview with Friedrich,
iv. 391; enters his service, 393; at Bres-
lau, v. 215; Hochkirch, 297; surprise at
Friedrich’s ‘‘Sermon on the Last Judg-
ment,"’ 318; introduces Zimmermann to
the King, vi. 387-391.

Caulaincourt, v. 221 n.

Caumartin, M., ii. 450.

Cellamare, Ambassador, i. 344.

Chalmers, cited, vi. 109 n.

Chapelle, La. See Bachaumont.

Charlemagne, i. 53; iii. 469.

Charles XII. of Sweden, i. 1403 ii. 367; ar-
rives suddenly at Stralsund, i. 326; his
surprising career, 326, 334, 343; desperate
defence of Stralsund, 362; assassinated at
Frederickshall, 335; last of the Swedish
pines, 335, ©3863; Treaty of Altranstadt,
lii. 132, 145, 199. See Karl XII.

Charles Amadeus, King of Sardinia, tii. 272.

Charles Edward, the Young Pretender, iii.

459

Charles Emanuel, King of Sardinia, iii. 483,
484, 566.

Charlotte, Queen, ii. 78, 826, 478; her Fa-
ther, 476; Ancestress of England, iv. 236
Princess of Mecklenburg, vi. 132; letter
to the King of Prussia, 133-135 ; question
of authenticity, 135.

Charlotte. See Philippina.

Charlottenburg, i. 34, 39; George I. at, 406.

Chasot, Lieutenant, fights a duel; is intro-
duced to Friedrich, ii. 408, 439; becomes
Prussian Major of Horse, iii. 563; Lieu-
tenant-Colonel, iv. 119, 866; affront on
his Austrian friend, 236, 237 ; Voltaire’ s
Hirsch affairs, 278, 312; mentioned also,
vi. 146.

Chaéteauroux, Madame de la, iii. 357. 549,
562, 569; her Ministry, iv.2; with Louis
XV. in the Netherlands, 2; dismissed, 8 ;
death, 10.

Chitelet, Madame du, ii. 459, 470; not in-
vited ‘by King Friedrich, iii. 42: hope
disappointed, 67; her relation to Vol-
taire not so celestial as it once was, 550,
564; with Voltaire on a visit at Sceaux,
iv. SEEN intrigue with M. de St. Lam-
bert, 210, 21153 death from child-birth,
225, 226; mentioned also, iii. 495, 508;
iv, 199.

Chatelet, Marquis du, in Maillebois’s Army,
iii. 38) : at Dingelfingen, 512, 515; men-
tioned also, iv. 211, 226, .55.

Chauvelin, M. de, iv. S13:

Chesterfield, Lord, ii. 106, 117, 203:
5953 iv. 218, 233, 371; cited, 212 n.

Chétardie, Marquis de la, ii. 413, 418: iii.
96.

Chevert, French Brigadier, at Prag. iii.
503, 5045 General, at Hastenbech, v.
101; Meer, 308 n.

Chivalry Orders, Era of, i. 84.

Chlum, Camp of, iv. 123.

Chlumetz, ii. 337.

Chodowiecki, i. 3423 ii. 161;
ings, vi. 424 n., 472 n.

Choiseul, Duc de, French Minister of For-
eign Affairs, v. 315, 434, 486, 479; impli-
cated in publication of Qvuvres du Phi-
losophe de Sans-Souc?, 484; tries to make
mischief between Pitt and Friedrich, 492,
493; letter from Voltaire, 497; vi. 3; is-
sues peace proposals, 129, 180; succeeds
Belleisle as War-Minister, 181; spasmodic
effort towards Hanover, 151, ‘1b4: artful
negotiations with Pitt, 158, 159, ist; ; in-
trigues with Poland and Turkey, 333,

553 his death, 525.

Chotusitz, Battle of, iii, 442, 449; topogra-
phy of, 450.

Christian Ernst of Baireuth, ii. 277.

Christian Ernst of Saalfeld-Coburg, ii. 164.

Christian of Anhalt, i. 240, 252.

Christian of Brunswick, i. 251, 253.

Christian II. of Denmark, a rash, unwise,
explosive man, i. 206, 209.

Christian IV. of Denmark, i. 253, 262.

Christian Wilhelm, Archbishop “of Magde-
burg, i. 253, 261.

Cideville, M. de, i iii. T4, 497.

iii.

his Engrav-

560

Cimburgis, i. 169.

Clairaut, the Mathematician, letter from
Voltaire to, v. 498.

Clamei, Meadow of, ii. 62, 65.

Clarendon, Earl of, iv. 164.

Clayton, General, iii. 517.

Clemence, Princess, Wife of Prince Clement,
iii. 414,

Clemens, Engraver, vi. 531 n.

Clement August. See Koln.

Clement, the Hungarian Swindler, i. 371,

81.

Clement, Duke of Baiern, iii. 411.

Clement, Prince, Nephew of Elector of Kéln,
iii.

Clement XIL, Pope, iii. 104.

Clement, Duchess, protests against the Aus-
trian attempt on Bavaria, vi. 443, 445;
writes to Friedrich, 446 ; counsels and aids
Géortz in the matter, 448.

Clermont, Prince de, iii. 185; succeeds Rich-
elieu, v. 170; beaten by Ferdinand at Cre-
feld; dismissed, 250.

Cleve, Wilhelm Duke of, i. 226, 232;
Heritage Settlement, 232; death;
Son's tragic career, 233.

Cleve, Duchy of, i. 230; a naturally opu-
lent Country, 232; disputed Heritage,
234, 237, 247, 264, 457; ii. 183; occupied
by Spanish and Dutch troops, i. 244, 247 ;
Friedrich Wilhelm’s interest in, 373, 431,
4573; ii. 56, 182, 344, 486.

Cleve, Friedrich at, receiving Homage, iii.
37,

Cleveland, Duchess of, i. 127.

Clogenson, Commentator on Voltaire’s Let-
ters, cited, ili. 552 n.; mentioned also, v
494,

Clubs, i. $4.

Clue, De la, Admiral of the Toulon Fleet,
v. 410.

Cobenzl, Count, at Berlin, vi. 429, 456;
Congress of Tetschen, 46S.

Coblenz, ii. 194.

Cocceji, jun., marries Barberina, iii, 591;
with Collini at Berlin, iv. 250; at Hoch-
kirch, v. 293 n.

Cocceji,, Samuel von, iii. 591, 593; Chief
Prussian Law-Minister, iv. 190, 191, 216;
finishes his Law.-Reform, 228, 229; Vol-
taire’s Lawsuit, 280; washes his hands of
the sorry business, 283

Cochius, ii. 531, 534.

Coehorn’s Masterpiece, iv. 214.

Cogniazo, cited, iv. 114n.; v. §4n.; on the
Camp of Bunzelwitz, vi. 145; mentioned
also, 459 n.

Coigny, Maréchal de, iii. 534, 546, 582; at
Stockstadt, iv. 4; guarding Brisgau, 56,
59.

Colberg, Russian siege of, v. 275; again be-
sieged by Russia, vi. 59; siege raised, 65 ;
third and toughest siege of all, 159-163;
garrison fairly starved out, 177, 178.

Colbert, iii. 1ST; iv. 206.

Colignon, Colonel, and his recruiting prac-
tices, v. 507.

Collenbach, Plenipotentiary von, vi. 255.

Collini, Como Alessandro, iii, 591; iv. 250;

his
his

at

INDEX.

his first sight of Voltaire, 253, 254; be.
comes his secretary, 266 n , 313, 348, 350,
851; at Frankfurt, 357-368 ; cited, 250 n.; HP
Vv. 91 n.

Céln on the Spree, i. 104.

Cologne. See Koln.

Columbus and the Atlantic, iii. 2,

Comines, Philippe de, vi. 353.

Condé, Prince de, vi. 241.

Conflans, Admiral, v. 410; his fleet utterly
ruined by Hawke, 475-479

Conrad of Hohenzollern, i. 74; becomes
Burggraf of Niirnberg, 78; ii. 167.

Conrad of Thiringen, i. 915 ‘* whip my Ab-
bot 7? 92; plunders Fritzlar; repentance
and Teutsch- Ritter vows, 93.

Conradin, Boy, last of the Hohenstauffens,
i. 97, 99

Conservatism, iii. 262.

Constantine of Russia, vi. 4° 4.

Constitutional Government, iii. 290.

Contades supersedes Clermont, v. 250;
against Ferdinand in the Rhine Prov-
el 308-310; defeated at Minden, 358-
36

Conti, Prince de, joins the Army for relief
of Prag, iii. 489; with Broglio at Woln-
zach, 511; driven from Deggendorf, 5133
Army for Italy, 582 ; in the Middle-Rhine
countries, iv. 56, 75, 54; retreats across
the Rhine, 126, 127; to be a General-in-
chief of the grand Invasion-of-England
Army, v. 478 ; De Ligne’s opinion of him,
vi. 350.

Conway, Fieldmarshal, at Langensalza, vi.
127; account of King Friedrich at Pots.
dam, and at his Silesian Reviews, 415-
421; kindly entertained by Lord Mari-
schal, 416, 417, 419, 420.

Cook, Captain, at Quebec, v. 451.

Cookery, spiritual, i. 13, 14.

Cope, General, iii. 533, 585.

Copenick, ii. 219.

Coper, Secretary, v. 3903 vi. 278.

Coram, Captain, iv. 378.

Corne, La, in America, iv. 379, 380.

Cornwallis, Colonel Edward, iv. 378, 379.

Cornwallis, Lord, vi. 530.

Cossack brutality, vy. 255, 370, 3933 vi, 73.

Cothenius, Dr., iv. 289, 312, 318, 349.

Councils, Church, i 36, 373 Council of Con-
stance, 142, 145.

Courage, ii. 292.

Courland, Duke of, ii. 278. See Anne of.

Courten, Chevalier de, at Berlin, iv. 68.

Coxe, cited, i. 409 n. ; ii. 250 n.; iv. 64 n.

Cramer, cited, ii. 28 n.

Craven, Lady, i 1.179; ii. 825 vi. 339, 456.

Crébillon, iv. 203.

Crécy, Battle of, i. 128; v. 165.

Crefeld, Battle of, y. 250.

Creutz the Finance-Minister, i. 337; ii. 304.

Crillon, Duc de, at Weissenfels, v. 154.

Crillon, jun., vi., 404, 405.

Crinoline, fashion of, vi. 258.

Crochardiere. M. de la, at Strasburg, iii. 56.

Crochet, ii. 331.

Cromwell, what a German, might have
done, i. 200; Cromwell and his Puritans,

INDEX.

203, 250, 2713 his time, iii. 294; his sol-
diers, iv. 225; his worth to England, v.
51,52; his Ironsides, 2U8; Cromwell and
Attila, vi. 372.

Cronstrém, Commandant of Bergen - op -
Zoom, iv. 214,

Crossen, ii. 354.

Croze, La, ii. 444.

Culloden, Victory of, iv. 98.

Culmbach, Margraf of, i. 172; Friedrich
founder of the Elder Line, 175; Casimir,
a severe, rather truculent Herr, 177; Mar-
graf George, and his connection with the
King of Hungary, 178; gets the Duchy
of Jigerndorf, 180; noble conduct in the
Reformation, 181; at the Diet of Augs-
burg, 182; few truer specimens of the
Honest Man; his Son and Brothers, 185 ;
troubles with Albert Alcibiades, 195, 196;
Diagram of the Elder and Younger Culm-
bach Lines, 290,291. See Friedrich George
of.

Cumberland, Duke of, iii. 4745 at Dettin-
gen, 523,531; in the Netherlands, iv. 88,
217, 218; at Fontenoy, 89; at Culloden,
98; disagreements with the Duke of New-
castle, 420, 423; takes command of Bri-
tannic Army, v. 4; to little purpose, 48,
915; aiming to oust the Duke of Newcas-
tle, 49; opposition to Pitt, 55, 565 defeat-
ed at Hastenbeck, 101; Convention of
Kloster-Zeven, 118, 119; returns home,
and resigns his military offices, 119;
mentioned also, iv. 2, 73, 232, 290.

Cunningham's Friedrich’s Last Review, vi.
531 n.

Ciistrin, i. 220, 256, 257; Friedrich a prison-
er at, ii. 209, 216; Katte’s execution, 222;
Friedrich’s life at, 251; a rugged little
town, with strong castle, v. 257; town
burnt by the Russians, 254, 257-259.

Czarina. See Elizabeth; Catharine.

Czartoryskis, the Polish, vi. 321, 324.

Czernichef, General, prisoner at Zorndorf,
v. 276; with Soltikof in Silesia, vi. 44, 55;
marches on Berlin, 66, 68, 72; with Lou-
don in Silesia, 149, 165, 169; ordered home
by Czar Peter; to join himself with Fried-
rich, 201; with less advantage than he
expected, 204; joins with him at Lissa,
220; recalled home, 225; generously stays
three days, 225, 226.

Czetteritz, General, taken prisoner with his
copy of Military instructions, v. 509.

DatrymPieE, Major, at Berlin, vi. 428, 430,
543.

Dalwig, Lieutenant-Colonel, vi. 94, 164, 463.

Damiens, v. 4.

Danes, the, seize Schleswig - Holstein, vi.
197.

Dankelmann, i. 42.

Dante, i. 99, 110, 113.

Dantzig, not to belong to Friedrich, vi. 380;
siege of, ii. 373, 38, 422.

Danz, Dr., iv. 243, 244.

D’Arget, iii. 429; saves Valori from Pan-
dours, iv. 137; despatched to Friedrich at
Dresden, 176; letter to Valori describing |

561

his interview with the King, 176-179;
taken into Friedrich’s service, 180, 190,
258, 267, 314.

Darlington, Countess of, i. 404; ii. 9, 219.

Darmstadt, Landgravine of, visits the Czar-
ina with her daughters, vi. 404. See
Ernst Ludwig of.

Dashkof, Princess, vi. 212.

Daun, Leopold Graf von, iii, 512; under Bi-
renklau at Stockstadt, iv. 4; advances to
relief of Prag, v. 85; retreats on hearing
of the Prussian victory, 44; order from
Vienna to proceed, 63; battle of Kolin,
62; orders retreat; order disobeyed, 74;
victory, 75; makes no chase of the Prus-
sians, 76, 83; the first chief of the Or-
der of Maria Theresa, 78; with Prince
Karl, following the Prince of Prussia, 95;
following Bevern, 180; at Breslau, 190;
Leuthen, 198, 210; supersedes Prince
Karl, 211; guarding the Bohemian Fron-
tier, 233; on march to assist Olmititz,
234; at Leutomischl, 236; sits on his
magazine, clear not to fight, 237; Bos
against Leo, 238, 467; encamps at Ge-
witsch, watching Friedrich, 238; gets cau-
tiously on foot again; gets reinforcement
into Olmiitz, 240; aware of Friedrich’s
convoys, 242; attack on Mosel, 243-246 ;
siege of Olmiitz ended, 247; cautiously
follows Friedrich to Kinigsgritz, 24S; to
recapture Saxony, while lriedrich is en-
gaged with the Russians, 276; at Zittau,
-277; near Meissen, hears of Friedrich's
approach, 279; a note sent to Fermor un-
expectedly answered, 279, 280; retires to
Stolpen, 280, 251; encamps ahead of
Friedrich, at Kittlitz, 282; surprisal of
Friedrich in his camp at Hochkirch, 288;
consecrated hat and sword from the Pope
for his victory, 299, 336; cannot prevent
Friedrich reaching Silesia, 302; tries to
get Dresden, 303; wheels homeward, un-
successful, 306; puzzled at having to take
the offensive, 535; encamps near Mark-
Lissa, 835, 340, 341; content to play jack-
al to the Russian lion, 341; expects al-_
ways to succeed by help of others, 396,
3897; cannot persuade Soltikof to do all his
fighting for him, 402-404; determines on
siege of Dresden, 410; informs Soltikof of
success, 425; reason to be proud of his
cunctatory method, 426; carting endless
provisions for self and Soltikof, 427; al-
most captures Ziethen at Sorau, 430; sits
on his magazine at Bautzen; dare not at-
tack Prince Henri, 432; concessions to
Soltikof, 432, 4833; will attack Prince Hen-
ri to-morrow, 438; finds only an empty
camp; Prince Henri vanished in un-
known space, 439; Prince Henri out-ma-
noeuvres him in Saxony, 446; is compel-
led to retreat on Dresden, 447; going at
his slowest step, 455; hears uncomforta-
bly that Finck is at Maxen, but decides
to attack, 458; three simultaneous as-
saults, 461, 462; captures Finck and his
whole army, 463; also another outpost of
Friedrich’s at Meissen, 466; dare not ate

A A 2

562

tack Friedrich ; contents himself with
holding Dresden, 467; Vienna nightcaps,
in token of his talent for sleep, 468; vi.
235; in winter-quarters, v. 469; again to

have chief command in the new cam-
paign, 507; continues near Dresden, vi. 2,
8; entrenched and palisaded to the teeth,
8,12; intercepts Friedrich's march for Si-
lesia, 13-16; arrives to relief of Dresden,
21; safe on his Northern side, 22; attends
Friedrich's march into Silesia, 40-43; bat-
tle of Liegnitz, 45; his beautiful plan all
gone to distraction, 52,53; indolently al-
lows Friedrich to get clear away, 55, 56;
and has a troublesome time with him in
consequence, 61-63; sends Lacy to join
the Russians in seizing Berlin, 66; order-
ed to maintain Saxony, 77; inexpugnably
encamped at Torgau, 79; moves to Kilen-
berg; returns to Torgau, 80; attacked by
Friedrich, 89; furious slanghter on both
sides, 90-97; thinks the victory his, $5;
defeat and swift retreat, 98,99; at Plauen;
his return to Vienna, 100; takes charge
of Saxony, 139, 140; attacks Prince Hen-
ri's outposts, 179; takes command in Si-
lesia against Friedrich, 219, 220; skilfully
defends himself, 222; attacked and de-
feated by Friedrich at Burkersdorf, 223-
229: attempts to break in upon Friedrich's
siege of Schweidnitz, 232, 234; defeated at
Reichenbach, and gives up the enterprise,
235; his fighting all over; dies some three
years afterwards, 240; mentioned also,
348.

Dauphiness, the, intercedes for Polish Maj-
esties, iv. 450.

David's Psalms, ii. 505; v. 130.

Deblin, Cordwainer, works against Browne
at Glogau, iii. 159; v. 211.

Debt, National, sublime invention of, v.
319.

™effand, Madame du, iv. 205; letter from
D'Alembert to, vi. 283.

Degenfeld, ii. 130, 486.

Deggendorf, iii. 513.

Demikof, General (Thémicoud), with Fer-
mor invading Prussia, v. 255; Zorndorf,
270, 271.

Demon Newswriter, iv. 309, 3253; his eaves-
dropping account of Friedrich and his
Court, 326-335; identification of, v. 482,
484,

Denina comes to Berlin, vi. 496.

Denis, Madame, iii. 247; keeps house for Vol-
taire, iv. 255, 288 ; an expensive gay lady,
259 ; joins Voltaire in his Frankfurt troub-
on 358, 359, 361; mentioned also, vi. 414,

52.

Denmark. See Christian II. and IV. of;
Friedrich IV. of; Danes.

Derschan, i. 469 ; ii, 254, 275, 426, 5305 con-
tinued in office, iii. 17.

Deschamps, M.., ii. 440.

Desfontaines, ii. 459; iii. 496; iv. 200.

Dessau, i. 302, 303. See Leopold of.

Sc see aha ii. 193; Battle of, iii, 258, 523,

Devil, principal function of a, iv. 326.

INDEX.

Deville, to try-what he can do on Silesia, v.
276, 278, 281; hurries homewards, 303 ;
makes an unsuccessful dash at Leobschtitz,
a 3 at Landshut, 428 ; cashiered by Daun,
431.

Dickens, Sir Guy, ii. 121, 143, 149, 158, 207,
215, 239, 282; iii. 88,121; iv. 215; cited,
iii. 1 n., 125 n.

Diderot, visits Prussia, vi. 405.

Dierecke, Colonel, at Zittau, v. 100; cap-
tured at Meissen, 466.

Dieskau, Artillery-General, at siege of
Schweidnitz, vi. 238.

Dieskau, Camp of, iv. 84, 129, 130.

Dietrich, Prince, of Anhalt-Dessan, iii. 423,
42); able, soldier-like conduct, 430; at
Olischau, 431; at Plomnitz, iv. 54; sent to
reinforce his Father, 129; mentioned also,
173 n., 425.

Dietrichstein, Graf von, vi. 339.

Dietzman, the Thiiringian Landgraf, i. 110.

Diculafoi, vi. 490 n.

Digby, Captain, in the attack on Conflans’s
ficet, v. 477.

Dilworth, Life de. of Frederick, iii. 213 n.

Dingelfingen, burned by Daun, iii. 512.

Diplomatists, Devil-, ii. 46; an undiplomatic
reflection, 66, 159; Smelfungus on Modern
Diplomacy, 148; heavy-footed diplomacy,
489 ; imbroglio of diplomacies, iii. 322, 372,
377; iv. 65, 419.

Discipline, value of, iii. 316.

Ditmarsch-Stade Markgraves, i. 65.

D’O, Colonel, helplessly loses Glatz, vi. 25;
court-martial, 27.

Dobryn, Knights of, i. 90.

Dockum, General, ii. 244, 245.

Doeg, W. H., vi. 488 n.

Dohn, cited, i. 312 n. ; on Friedrich’s Excise-
system, vi. 285; mentioned also, 524.

Dohna, i. 330, ’

Dohna, General, succeeds Lehwald in Pom-
mern, v. 222, 235, 249, 250; defends Frank-
furt bridge against Fermor, 257; at Gir-
gast, 259; sudden panic in his troops at
Zorndorf, 269, 270; pursues Fermor, 275;
marches for Saxony, 304; sent against the
Russians, 340, 344; can do nothing on
“gees 344; superseded by Wedell, 345,
347.

Dohna, Graf von, at Vienna, iv. 9.

Dolgorucki, Prince, Russian Ambassador at
Berlin, vi. 429.

Dollar, origin. of the word, iv. 454.

Dollart, the, iv. 291, 292.

Dombaile, General, with Zweibriick march-
ing to Saxony, v. 277, 278.

Domstiidtl, Pass of, v. 244.

Donauworth under ban, i. 237.

Donhof, ii. 228, 245.

Donnel, 0’, with Daun at Torgau, vi. 95, C8,

Dorn, Freytag’s clerk, iv. 360, 362.

Dérnberg, Minister von, vi. 481.

Dorothee, Electress, i. 41, 43, 275, 277.

Double-Marriage, the famous, of Prussia and
England, i. 399, 4183; Treaty cannot be
signed, 435; grown plainly hopeless, 483 ;
yet far from dead, ii. 32; reémerges in an
Official shape, 35; drawing to an-end, 88;

INDEX,

England favourable, 105, 120; effulgent
flaming-point, 110; as good as extinct,
128; ended, 158; revived, but to no pur-
poe, 347.

Douglas, Scotch Peerage, cited, iii, 474 n. ;
v. 230 n.

Draper, Brigadier-General, vi. 183 n.

Dresden, Friedrich’s Visit to, ii. 15; fortified
against the Prussians, iv. 12, 14; opens its
gates to Friedrich, 175; ‘Treaty of, 180,
181, 219, 396; Friedrich again enters, and
takes possession, 439; besie@ed and par-
tially burnt by the Austrians, y. 805; sur-
rendered by Schmettau, 411-418; capitu-

~ lation scandalously ill kept, 491-493 3 fu-
riously besieged by Friedrich, vi. 18-24.

Driesen, at Leuthen, v. 204, 205.

Drummer, the Little, i. 340,

Drusus Germanicus, i. 52.

Dryasdust, the Prussian, i. 93; ii. 113, 125;
doing History, i. 17, 58, 155, 293; v. 189,
190.

Dubois, Cardinal, i. 409; ugliest of created
souls, 463; ii. 451.

Dubois killed at Kloster Kampen, vi. 105 n.

Dubourgay, ii. 9, 23, 64, 89, 102; Correspond-
ence about the Double-Marriage, 36, 69,
86; proves Grumkow’s treachery, 93; ar-
rival of Hotham, 106; conversation with
the King of Prussia, 107.

Dugdale, Lieutenant, vi. 357.

Duhan de Jandun, i. 339, 353, 384, 388; ii.
213; King Friedrich’s thoughtfulness for,
iii. 16; iv. 183.

Dulaure, cited, iv. 2 n.

Bones busy generations, i. 300, 305, 316,
317.

Dumoulin, Colonel, sent after Keith, ii. 198,

202.

Dumoulin in Silesia, iv. 104, 107, 109; Ho-
henfriedberg, 111, 419; follows the Aus-
trians into Bohemia, 121.

Dumouriez, at Bilitz, vi. 333.

Dunkirk, iii. 473; Louis XV. at, iv. 7.

Duquesne, M., iv. 379, 382.

Duquesne, Fort, v. 307.

Duren, Van, Printer of Anti-Macchiavel,
aes with Voltaire at Frankfurt, iv.

Diiringshofen, Colonel, Battalion captured
at Griefenberg, v. 334.

Diisseldorf, i. 234; ii. 197; a Dinner-scene
at, i. 241.

Dutch Revolt, the world-famous, i. 236, 244,
247 ; Dutch Traders and Karl VI., 423;
the Dutch disinclined to join in the Aus-
trian-Succession War, iii. 266; torpid re-
sponse to his Britannic Majesty’s enthusi-
asm, 314, 473, 500; Carteret, strongly pul-
leying, succeeds in raising them, 516; end
of the Dutch Republic, iv. 312.

Duvernet, Biographer of Voltaire, iv. 180,
258, 267; cited, ii. 452 n.; iii. 509 n.; iv.
256 n.; vi. 452 n.

Esenrt, cited, vi. 116 n.

Eckart, Prussian Finance Minister, dis-
missed, iii. 24.

Economics, National, i. 310, 318. See Thrift.

563

Edelsheim, Herr von, v. 489, 492, 493; vi. 3.

Kden-Louse Correspondence, vi.430 n , 1433 n.

Kditor’s interest in Friedrich, i. 11, 13; dif-
ficulties, iii. 29, 257; iv. 1S8; early recol-
lections, iii. 474.

Education, i. 355; Friedrich Wilhelm's no-
tion of, 356, 383, 391, 397, 439; influences
of Nature, 367; teaching Religion, 387;
Mother-wit squandered away for long-
eared erudition, 472.

Edward I. of England, i. 107,

Edward IL., i. 116.

Kdward IIL, i. 121.

Eginhart and Emma, iii. 5-6.

Ehrenbreitstein, ii. 194.

Kichel, Prussian Secretary of State, lii. 25,
102, 231, 587; iv. $5; captured by Nadas-
ti, 147; ‘at Dresden, iTT; at Potsdam, 328,
329; sends keys to Dresden, 388 ; Prince
Henry writes to, complaining of the King,
vi. 191-193; Kichel consults with Niissler
about his ruined district, 273.

Kichsted, Franz von, i. 163.

Kighteenth Century, the fraudulent, and its
suicidal end, i. 7; heroism in the, iii. 28,
Einsiedel, General, has charge of Prag, iv.
23, 41; to quit Prag for Silesia, 42; his
perilous retreat, 44; Hochwald, the hard-
est brush of all, 45; passes through Saxon

territory ; his last march, 46.

Elbe River, rise of the, iv. 138, 189; passes
through Saxon Switzerland, 444.

Elbingerode, Belleisle arrested at, iv. 60.

Elcheset, Sieur d’, v. 116.

Electors. See Kurfiirsts.

Elizabeth Christina, Empress, i, 4163 ii.
287, 838; iii. 105.

Elizabeth Christina of Brunswick-Bevern
(afterwards Queen Regnant of Prussia), ii,
285, 292; chosen for Friedrich, 293; what
he thought of her, 297, 300, 301, 306, 845,
358; her Betrothal, 305; Wedding, 850;
grand entrance into Berlin ; Wilhelmina’s
Portrait of her, 362; her honest, guileless
heart, 363; happy days at Reinsberg, 433,
436, 521; Friedrich’s gradual estrange-
ment, iii. 23, 469, 471; Demon Newswrit-
er’s account of, iv. 5235 visited by Fried-
rich, vi. 260, 499; mentioned also, 602,
696.

Elizabeth, Czarina, ii, 30; iii. 195, 198;
chooses a successor to the Swedish King,
574; on good terms with Friedrich, 575,
BIT: takes offence at Friedrich, 196;
stirred up against him, iv. 72; takes part
with Saxony, 165; increasing ill-will to
Friedrich, 217 n., 232, 288, 411; in secret
treaty with Austria, 397, 403; worked
upon with cunningly-devised fabrications,
402-404; will not be reconciled to Fried-
rich, 413; Hanbury Williams’s account
of her, 414, 415; takes possession of East
Preussen, v. 218, 220; fixed enmity to
Friedrich, 314, 315; signs peace-proposals,
which end in nothing, vi. 130; her death,
195; makes her nephew Peter heir, 197 ;
Catherine's respect for her, 199; lying in
state, 210; funeral, 211.

Elizabeth Farnese, Queen of Spain, i. 381;

564

her quarrel with Karl VI., 417, 424, 429 ;
ii. 42; the little Spanish Infanta sent
back from France, i. 429; Siege of Gibral-
tar, ii. 1,32 n.; league with lrance, 376;
West-Indian procedures, 502.

Elizabeth Frederike Sophie marries the
Duke of Wiirtemberg, iv. 227; finds it
impossible to live with him, 227, 228; vis-
its Voltaire at Ferney, vi. 399-401; beau-
tiful and unfortunate, 402.

Elizabeth, first wife of Crown- Prince of
Prussia, chastises a custom-house officer,

‘vi, 290; her marriage and divorce, 290-
293.

Elizabeth, Queen, of England, i. 194.

Elizabeth, Saint, i. 91, 93.

Elizabeth, Wife of Joachim L., i. 206; Prot-
estantism, and escape to Lichtenberg,
208; visits Luther, 209.

Elizabeth. See Termagant of Spain.

Eller, Dr., ii. 582 ; iii. 568; v. 41.

Elliott, at Emsdorf, vi. 31, 32.

Elliott, Excellency Hugh, at Berlin, vi. 42T;
letter about Friedrich, 429, 430; commits
a surprising piece of burglary, 432-434 ;
few men with less appetite fer such a job,
435.

Elphinstone, Captain, in the Russian-Turk
War, vi. 357; takes his tea in the Dar-
danelles, and throws up his command,
858.

Elsner’s preaching, iv. 85.

Elton, Mr., builds ships for Nadir Shah, iv.
248. °

Ely Cathedral, i. 57, 58.

Emanuel, Prince of Portugal, ii. 370.

Emilie. See Madame du Chatelet.

Emsdorf, Fight of, vi. 31.

Endorf, Johann von, i. 120.

English Volunteers at the Siege of Jiilich, i.
239; English treatment of the great Marl-
borough, 283, 415; how England got drilled
into human order, 317; Ingland and
George I., 401, 402; ii. 7; first triumph of
the ‘* Constitutional Principle,” i. 405; ii.
8; English self-complacence, i. 119; Par-
liaments, 465, 467; ii. 119; an English
change of Ministry, 105; English influ-
ence on Voltaire, 453; English thick-skin
penetrated, 503, 524; merits of the Eng-
lish-Spanish War, iii. 93, 216, 256, 260,
305; English Army and English Navy,
94; English share in the Austrian-Succes-
sion War, 258, 318; English Parliament
under Walpole, 290; real cause of the
War with Spain, 293; English toughness,
302, 528, 582; tragic stupidity, 304; what
became of the Spanish War, 304, 315, 318;
a disciplined England, 316; Kngland with
a George II. for Chief Captain, 337, 567;
** Perfidious Albion,’ 485, 539; Inglish
indignation against Friedrich, iv. 12,373;
their dull fire of deliriums, 31; their mad
method of. fighting, 96; quarrel with
Spain, 220; Privateer controversy with
Friedrich, 293, 370-373; freedom of the
Ocean Highway, 376; no preparation for
war, 409, 420, 421; Prussian-Iinglish Neu-
trality Convention, 412, 413; relation to

INDEX.

Hanover, 415, 416; French-English War, _

419; English Treaties with Prussia, v. 3,
6; Government imbecility, 49 ; hour of tide
for England, 51,52; joy at news of Ross-
bach and Leuthen, 171, 212-214; four sub-
sidies, 223-225; enthusiasm about Fried-
rich, 225, 226; troops to join Ferdinand,
308; National Debt, 319; French invasion
preparing, 351; damaged by Rodney at
Havre, 302; by Boscawen, off Cadiz, 409,
410; capture of Quebec, 447, 449; Amer-
ica to be &nglish and not French, 451;
England lucky to have a King, though a
temporary, in Pitt, 452; victory in India,
453; Conflans’s fleet and the French In-
vasion-scheme utterly spoiled by Hawke,
475-479 ; English soldiers under Duke
Ferdinand, vi. 156, 157; love for their
horses, 156; war with Spain, and its re-
sults, 184-188, 244; liberty of the seas;
Fnglish America, universal uproar of
‘*Lnexampled J rosperities,” 258; the
Constitutional system, 432.

Epaminondas, v. 195.

Ephraim the Berlin Jew, iv. 272, 274, 277;
coins base money for Friedrich, v. 322,
323.3 vi. 72, 111.

Epic Poems, i. 15, 16.

Krasmus Reinhold, i. 195.

Erfurt, i. 92; entered by General Olden-
burg, v. 48.

Erfarth, Menzel’s brother-in-law, iv. 387,
£88.

Erlach, Major-General, vi. 519, 521.

Erlangen, i. §23 ii. 823.

Erman, cited, i 28 n., 39 n., 68 n.; iv. 345n.

Ernesti, Professor, vi. 114.

Ernst August. See Bishop of Osnabriick.

Ernst, Elector, i. 24, 45, 72.

Ernst Ludwig of Darmstadt, ii. 191; ad-
dicted to ‘‘ivory-turning,”’ 192.

Ernst the Ficus, v. 123. ;

Erthorn, Van, of Embden, v. 226; complaint
to Friedrich against him, 227.

Espagnac, Biographer of Comte de Saxe,
&c., cited, ii. 28 n. ; iii. 359 n.5 iv. 7 n.

Essen, General Von, vi. 328. f

Vssex, Earl of, iv. 234 n.

Esterhazy, Prince, at Presburg, iii. 332; in
Berlin, vi. 71.

Estoc, L’, returns from Siberia, vi. 207.

Estrées, d’, Maréchal, invades Prussia, v. 4;
comething of a soldier, 49, 91; battle of
Hastenbeck, 101, 162; superseded by Rich-
elieu, 107, 118; profligate condition of hig
army, 173; with Soubise in his final Cam-
paign, vi. 280; Cannonade of Améneburg,
241, 242.

Ettlingen, Lines of, ii. 386.

Eugene, Prince, i. 22, 280, 303; ii. 348, 351;
a bright little soul, growing very old and
snuffy, i. 422; his crowning feat, ii. 190 n. ;
receives Friedrich Wilhelm, 337, 340; his
Rhine Campaign, 381, 387, 400, 408 ; Fried-
rich’s respect for him, vi. 508.

Euler, iii. 21; Curator of the Berlin Acade-
my, iv. 340. :

Evangelical Union, i. 236, 240, 250, 252; ii.
314

A ee ee ee ee ee

=

aa

INDEX.

Eversmann, ii. 235.

Exilles, Chevalier Belleisle perishes at, iv.
213.

Eylert, cited, vi. 500 n.

FApricr, ii. 6, 9, 456.

Fact, inexorable nature of, i. 18, 3945 ii.
217; the one asbestos which survives all
fire, i. 14; ii.351. See Reality.

Falsehood, living under, i, 202.

Fasch, Musician, with the King at Leipzig,
vi. 113.

Fassmann, i. 441, 479; ii. 25 n., 40, 52, $1,
133, 258, 321; cited, i. 323 n.};-ii. 25 n. 5
iii. 49.

Favart, M., Saxe’s Theatre-Director; and
his Wife, iv. 223, 224.

Fawkener, Sir Edward, ii. 455.

Feder, cited, ii. 58 n.

Fehrbellin, Battle of, i. 269.

Fénélon, iii, 314, 360.

Ferbers, Hofrath, iv. 387.

Ferdinand, Duke, Prince of Brunswick, ii.
292, 496; iii. 471, 559, 579; at Nahorzan,
iv. 124: Sohr, 146 y collecting his troops at
Halle; letters from the King, 433, 484;
at Leipzig, 437; Cotta, 439; on the Bo-
hemian frontier, 448, 452 ; mentioned also,
117, 156, 290, 425; at Prag, v. 32, 33,815; in
retreat, 82, 85; with the King, 103; march
to Erfurt, 115; to Madgeburg, 127; to be
General of Britannic Army, 150; Ross-
bach, 151, 155; gets his Britannic Com-
mission, 169; vigorous speed upon the
French, 170, 172; every feather of them
over the Rhine, 229 ; congratulations from
Friedrich, 230, 231; across the Rhine, aft-
er the French, 240; beats Clermont at
Crefeld, 250; re-crosses the Rhine, 308;
sends a detachment to clear Erfurt, 326;
battle of Bergen; cannot get Frankfurt,
5328-330; recommends Guichard to Fried-
rich, 339; battle of Minden, and defeat of
Contades, 358-366; sends the Hereditary
Prince with 12,000 to aid Friedrich, 468;
very busy on the French, 469; has a dif-
ficult Campaign against Broglio’s superior
forces, vi. 31-34; Korbach; Emsdorf, 31;
Warburg, 32; Kloster Kampen, 103-106;
successfully defends Hanover, 107; de-
termines to have a sudden stroke at Br og-
lio, 124; Langensalza, Cassel, 125; de-
feats Broglio at Vellinghausen, 151-155 ;
difficulties with his English troops, 156,
157; beats Soubise at Wilhelmsthal, 229,
230: drives the French from their strong
holds, 241; Cannonade of Améneburg, and
end of the war, 241-243 ; visits Westphalia
with Friedrich, 274, 275 ; estranged from
Potsdam, 416.

ee ae I., Kaiser, Settlement by, iii.
268.

Ferdinand II., Kaiser, i. 238 n., 250; high-
handed proceedings against the Protest-
ants, 252; all Europe to be converted to
Orthodoxy, 254; his Restitution - Edict,
257 ; seizes Jiigerndorf, 261.

Ferdinand III, Kaiser, i. 238 n.

Ferdinand VI. of Spain, iy. 220, 221; v. 502.

565

Ferdinand, King of the Romans, i. 217.

Ferdinand, Prince, of Prussia, iii. 579; iv.
227, 234; v. 60; at Leuthen, 204; Bres-
lau, 215; ill at Berlin, 484, 435, 436, 437;
at Berlin, vi. 30; mentioned also, 292.

Fermor succeeds Apraxin, and takes posses-
sion of East Preussen, v. 218; wending
towards Brandenburg, 240; at Konitz,
249; Posen, 251; redhot savagery on Ciis-
trin, 254, 258; cannot get Ciistrin Castle,
259; prepares hastily for Prussian attack,
263; battle of Zorndorf, 263-274; retires
towards Kénigsberg, 274; again invades
Prussia, under Soltikof, 343; succeeds Sol-
tikof, and marches on Berlin, vi. 67; with
Romanzow at Colberg, 162.

Ferrand, cited, vi. 302 n.

Festititz and his Tolpatches, iii, 492, 502,
503.

Fiction akin to Lying, i. 16, 394.

Vienne, Madame de, of Strasburg, iii. 55.

Filibusters, iii, 294.

inch, Minister at Petersburg, iii. 324.

Finck, General, v. 105; left in charge of
Saxony, 142, 301, 304; attacking the Aus.
trian Magazines, 331, 332; with Prince
Henri at Bautzen, 353; vanguard at Ku-
nersdorf, 372-374, 379, 381, 884; the King
hands over command of the Army to him,
390; resumes it, 394; sent into Saxony,
409; indignation at the loss of Dresden,
425; ordered by the King to plant him.
self in Maxen, 457; expostulates in vain,
458; sees his enemies gathering round
him, 459; such a sphinx-riddle as soldier
seldom had, 460; determines to remain,
hoping Friedrich may do something, 460,
461; arranges himself with his utmost
skill, 461; total defeat, and absolute sur.
render, 464; tried by court-martial, 466.

Finckenstein, Colonel, iii. 20, 101; his death,
247.

Finckenstein, Count Finck von, Friedrich's
Head-Tutor, i. 339, 353, 354; message to
the Queen, ii. 90, 95; his Wite, iy 109.

Finckenstein, Minister, Friedrich’s Secret
Instructions to, iv. 487-489; letters from
Friedrich to, v. 357, 858, 367, 889, 390; vi.
202; in the Bavarian business, 456, 462.

Finlater, Countess of, vi. 499 n.

Firmian, Count, and the Salzburg Protest-
ants, ii. 316.

Firmian, Archbishop, iv. 63.

Fischer, cited, i. 96 n.; vi. 445 n.

Fischer, Hussar, at Sangerhausen, v. 176.

Fischer, Johann David, of Landshut, iii.
883, 386.

Fischhausen, ii, 244,

Fitz-James, Cardinal Grand-Almoner, iii.
584.

Flemming, Countess, iv. 182.

Flemming, F ieldmarshal, ii. 14, 16.

Fleury, Cardinal, i. 431, 432; ii. 2, 42, 50,
249, 298, 370, 375, 493 ; thinks Voltaire
might find out Friedrich’s secret, iii. 114,

497; obliged to yield to Belleisle’s war-
schemes, 191, 330; bad faith with King

Friedrich, 453; sends Maillebois to relief
of Prag, 488; letter from Voltaire, 498, 500.

566

Fontenoy, Battle of, iii. 258; iv. §8, 9S.

Forbes, General, at Pittsburg, v. 307.

Forcade, General, at Zorndorf, v. 270, 271;
takes the place of Prince Henri in Silesia,
vi. 60.

Formey, ii. 440, 444; iii. 18, 574; account of
Voltaire, iv. 260, 279, 287; of Maupertuis’s
quarrel with Konig, 261; his own share
in it, 338, 340-3425 letter from Voltaire to,
v. 496, 318 n.; letters from Lefebvre to,
vi. 335-341; honoured by Queen Ulrique,
393; cited, ii, 443 n.; iv. 260 n.3 vi.
340 n.

Forster, ii. 426 n.; cited, i. 19 n. 3 ii. 426 n.:
iii. 32 n.

Fortsch, Dr., iv. 243.

Fos, Mamsell, of Dessau, i. 300, 301.

Fouquet, Intendant, Belleisle’s Grandfather,
iii. 187, 431 n.

Fouquet with Friedrich at Ciistrin, ii, 21S;
at Reinsberg, 470; his march from Ful-
nek, iii, 431, 432 n.; at Glatz, iv. 125,
148; at battle of Prag, v. 38; with the
Prince of Prussia, 96; Glatz, 233, Ol-
miitz, 236; Leutomischl, 247; extremely
strict, almost pedantic man, 2453 with
Margraf Karl guarding Silesia, 253, 275 ;
Friedrich's. kindly thought of him, 51S,
444; at Leobsch ‘tz, 331, 333; at Land-
shut, 341, 842, 42S; truce with Loudon,
445; fortifies himself firmly about Land-
shut, 510,511; with Prince Henri, defends
Silesia against the Russians, vi. 2,4; out-
manceuvred by Loudon; deeply hurt by
Friedrich’s reproof: speech to his Gene-
rals, 5; catastrophe at Landshut, 9, 10;
his death, 426.

Fourth Estate, iii. 291.

Fowler, John, Esq., cited, v. 22S n.

Fox, Right Hon. Henry, iv. 235; v. 49, 56.

France. See French.

Francois L., iii. 2633; iv. 465.

Franke, Archidiaconus, ii. 325.

Franke, August Hermann, founder of the
‘* Pietists,” ii, 13.

Frankfurt-on-Mayn, ii. 193; union of, iii.
570; iv. 9,56, 64; what Friedrich got by

- it, 30, 49; seized by the French, v. 325,
326.

Frankfurt-on-Oder, in possession of the Rus-
Se v. 365-371, 379; the environs, 374—

7.

Franklin, Benjamin, iv. 383; vi. 484.

ager hon tries to capture Valori, iv. 137,
9.

Franz, Grand Duke, his prospects of Kai-
sership, ili. 278, 280; a good-tempered,
well-conditioned Duke, 338, 506; Hunga-
rian Diet, 369; joins Neipperg at Frating,
3925; marches towards Prag, 395, 397:
joins the main Army at Konigsaal, 482 ;
with Traun in the Rhine countries, iv.
127; elected Kaiser, 1834; opposes the
Austrian-French alliance; deals largely
in stores, 416; forging Reich thunder
against Friedrich, 482; a solid, pacific
gentleman, v. 6; official violence against
Friedrich, 6,9, 17; advises Prince Karl's
dismissal, 211; his sudden death, vi. 299;

INDEX.

mentioned also, iii. 103, 105, 188, 253; iv.
84

Franz Josias of Coburg, ii. 164, t

Franz of Brunswick, killed at Hochkirch, v.
294.

Franz of Dessau, v- 71, 72.

Frederick, Prince, of England, i. 400, 401,
4365 ii. 398; intended visit to Berlin, 23,
arrival in England, 50; letters from, 110;
Queen of Prussia’s opinion of, 240; strange
treatment of his’ young Wife, 480; his
death, iv. 289; his epitaph, 290, mention-
ed also, v. 55.

Frederika Louisa of Anspach, iii. 47.

Frederika Louisa of Prussia, i. 412; de-
manded in marriage, ii. 52; married to
the Margraf of Anspach, S0; visited by
her Father and Brother, 169; visits Wil-
helmina, 346, 347; iii. 47.

Frederika Louisa of Hessen-Darmstadt mar-
ries Prince of Prussia, vi. 292.

Frederickshall, Charles XII. killed at, i.
335.

Fredersdorf, M., ii. 521; iii. 45, 101, 231,
250; iv. 349; his share in the Voltaire ar-
rest, 354-359.

Free Corps, Prussian, v. 47.

Freedom of the Press, iii. 14.

Freemasonry, ii. 493.

Free-Trade, iv. 295; Litany, vi. 270.

Free World, a, iii. 497.

French :—Revolution, i. 5; grand universal
Suicide of a despicable Century, S$; what
is to follow it, 14; French Protestantism,
204; French Cooks, 320, Fashions, 321,
322; French Protestants of Erlangen, ii.
3823; War with Karl VL, 375; Camp at
Philipsburg, 407; France, the top of the
Universe, iii. 191: urges Sweden to War,
200, 35S; originates the Austrian-Succes-
sion War, 260; many wars kindled on
poor Teutschland, 263; evasion of Prag-
matic Sanction, 264; ushering in a French
Revolution, 265; French Ambition rerszs
the stingy Fact, 278, 317, 35S, 3SS, 504;
ruin of German Enterprise, 535; French
Army in the Netherlands, iv. 1, 1975 at
Stockstadt, 4; imminent peril of; Fried-
rich decides to intervene, 8; little grate-
ful for their deliverance, 27; magnani-
mous promises ending in nothing, 3S, 55
-5T, 62; not even money payment, 128;
pique against him, 166; invade Holland,
211; First Nation of the Universe, 221,
222; an Army of extreme dissoluteness
and levity, 224, 225; of two Frenchmen
in a Foreign Court, one must die, 299;
French claims to North America, 376-881,
885; French-English War, 419; France
joins Austria and the Reich, 483; France
intrigues with Sweden against Friedrich,
v. 1; share of the expected plunder, 2;
the first in the field, 3; ‘* L’Armée de la
Dauphine,” 91, 113; intent to deliver
Saxony, 113, 115; at Gotha, 125; ven-
tures forward on hearing of the Haddick
Invasion, 149; retreats at sound of Fried-
Yich, 151; puffed up with vanity, 152;
Rossbach, 155; exultant spirits, 159; never

INDEX.

was army better beaten, 163, 165; rapaci-
ty and profligate insubordination, 173-
179; France will not have peace, 217;
incredible pains with the Swedes, 221;
financial difficulties, 310; getting weary of
the war, 314; joy over the battle of Ber-
gen, 330; invasion of England, 3513 flat-
bottomed fleet destroyed at Havre, 352;
Toulon fleet chased and ruined, 409, 410;
Conflans’s fleet and the grand Invasion-
scheme entirely wreeked, 475-4795 tem-
porary bankruptcy, and melting of the na-
tional spoons, 479, 480; French exactions
on Germany, vi. 129; preparation for the
General Overturn, 131; anxious for peace,
180, 252, 254; results of the war, 258, 259 ;
the French Revolution, Part Third of
World-History, 261, 262; Kaiser Joseph's
visit, and opinion of French society, 437.

Fréron, ii. 459 ; iv. 259, 285, 287.

Freyburg, Battle of, vi. 245.

Freyburg, Siege of, iv. 28, 55.

Freytag, Baron, and the Silesian question, i.
278; arrest of Voltaire, iv. 354-363.

Freytag’s, Dr., account of West Preussen, vi.
376-379.

Friedel, Kammergericht Rath, vi. 481, 482.

Friedland, Friedrich at, iii. 229.

Friedrich August, of Saxony, left under the
guardianship of his Mother, vi. 305; lived
to see strange things in the world, 306.

Friedrich Christian, Kurprinz of Saxony, in
Dresden, during siege of, v. 4135; nego-
tiates peace, vi. 254; King Friedrich dines
with him at Moritzburg, 260; death, 297,
305; Elector for little more than two
months, 306.

Friedrich Eugen of Wiirtemberg. See Wiir-
temberg.

Friedrich I., King, and his Grandchildren,
i. 19; rather ‘tan expensive Herr,” 28;

‘the first King of Prussia, 40; his back in-
jured in infancy, 41, 281; quarrels with
his stepmother, 41, 42; how he came by
his ** Kingship,”’ 44; his sublime Corona-
tion, 47; his Father's death, 276; how
Austria swindled him out of Schwiebus,
278; his true Hohenzollern character,
280; closing days, 283; his third mar-
Tiage, 286; death, 287, 306. °

Friedrich IV. of Denmark, i. 326.

Friedrich TV., Duke of Holstein-Gottorp and
Schleswig, vi. 197. y

Friedrich, King of Bohemia, Winterkonig,
i. 140, 245, 247, 249 5 ex-King, 249, 251.

Friedrich, Landgraf of Hessen, iii. 415.

Friedrich, Madame, of Seidlitz, vi. 255.

Friedrich, Margraf of Schwedt, iii. 242.

Friedrich of Baireuth, ii. 97, 166, 234; ar-
rives at Berlin, 238; introduced to Wil-
helmina, 239-5 an honourable and eligible
young Prince; betrothal, 240; a narrow
escape, 273; marries Wilhelmina, 276; full
of honest sunshine towards her, 358, 392;
at the Rhine Campaign, 405.

Friedrich of Meissen, Hochmeister, i. 188.

Friedrich, Prince, and his Hessians, iv. 30;
at Vilshofen, 76; Edinburgh, 76.

Friedrich the Fair, Duke of Austria, i. 114.

567

Friedrich II., Kaiser, i. 91, 94.

Friedrich III., Kaiser, i. 235.

Friedrich II., Hohenzollern Kurfiirst, recoy-
ers Neumark from the Teutsch Ritters, i.
159, 162 ; his Pomeranian war, 159, 162.

Friedrich IlI., Burggraf of Ntirnberg, i. 96;
troubles with the Niirnbergers, 97; Burg-
graviate made hereditary, 98 ; Kaiser Ru-
dolph’s friend and helper, 100, 102.

Friedrich IV., i. 112,119; aids Kaiser Lud-
wig, 114.

Friedrich V., i. 183; his daughter, 136.

Friedrich VI, i. 119, 133, 134, 1363; helps
Sigismund, 141; buys Brandenburg, 143,
144$ Noble Robber-lords brought to rea-
son, 149; Heavy Peg, 150; taproot of the
Prussian Nation, 152.

Priedrichfelde, ii. 252. See Carzig.

Friedrich II., sauntering on the terraces of
Sans-Souci, i. 1; physiognomic traits, 2;
human interest in what he did, 3; the Last
of the Kings, 5, 15; English prepossessions
about him, 11; by no means a perfect dem-
igod, yet a true man and King, 12, 20.
Joy at his birth, 18; his christening, 20;
his ancestors, 153, 256, 276. Not a skilful
gambler and worshipper of Beelzebuhb,
1555 recovery of Jiigerndorf, 2613; inter-
est in Jiilich, 265; opening the Great Kur-
fiirst’s coffin, 276. Infancy, 284, 285, 294;
French educational element, 294; ii. 4;
one of the prettiest, vividest little boys, i.
295; his affectionate disposition, 296, 297,
353, 369, 384; bad spelling, 298, 384, 395;
German element, 298, 299; his Father's
Spartan discipline, 306, 397, 4393; ii. 3;
one of his first impressions of war, i. 325;

~his Tutors, 339, 353, 3843; Portraits of
him, 340; the commonly-received Por-
trait, 3425 his education, 355, 883, 394 ;
ii. 33 his Father’s notions about it, i. 856;
miniature Svuldiering, 358; his Cousins,
368; love for his Sister Wilhelmina, 359 ;
at the Roucoulles Soirée, 370; troubles
preparing from afar, 382, 437 ; his contra-
band Latin lessons, 385; French fashions;
his bright locks to be ruthlessly shorn
away, 887 ; his theological drill-sergeants,
387; divulsion, fearfully widening, be-
tween Father and Son, 391; ii. 345 George
I. pleased with him, i. 407; goes into the
Potsdam Guards, 438; surrounded by in-
trigues and treachery, 440; unwillingly at
the Tobacco-Parliament, 469 5 ii. 3.

Friedrich II., vol. ii., his life heavy at Pots-
dam, 3; his books, 4; visit to King Au-
gust at Dresden, 15; dissolute seductions,
17, 24; poor Fritz fallen into the wake of
Beelzebub, 20, 265; miserable health, 21,
24; his soul tragically dimmed for the re-
mainder of life, 21; pleased with Maréchal
de Saxe, 27; writes to Queen Caroline un-
known to his Father, 33, 923 letter to his
Father, and angry reply, 343; his Father's
ill-treatment, 37, 38, 45, 53,66; thoughts
of flight, 69, 87, 101, 104; his regiment on
the march, 73; his Father surprises him
at unlawful amusements, 833 publicly
beaten by his Father, 86, 142, 157; makes

568

a companion of Katte, 87, 156; his debts,
101, 864; off to Dresden, 103; Father will
not agree to his marriage, 111; Hotham’s
testimony of him, 122; letter to Hotham,
130; at King August’s Camp of Radewitz,
135, 188, 142, 145; attempted flight, 142;
rumour of marriage with Maria ‘Theresa,
144; England will not sanction flight,
149; letter to Hotham, 155; will fly, in
spite of all, 156, 159, 169; Journey to the
Reich, 159; arrangements for flight, 171,
180, 186; more ili-usage, 171, 174; flight
prevented, 172; paternal taunts, 192; a
detected prisoner, 193, 195; chastised like
a dog, 194; confesses nothing, and nar-
rowly escapes his Father's sword, 201; an
arrested Deserter, 202, 204 5 a prisoner at
Mittenwalde; interrogated and threaten-
ed by Grumkow, 203; rigorous confine-
ment at Ciistrin, 209, 216; his notion of
Predestination, 213, 257; to be tried by
Court-Martial, 216; a lucid human judg-
ment in him, 217; sees poor Katte led to
execution, 222; crushed down by sorrow
and despair, 225; Chaplain Miiller’s fa-
vourable testimony, 226, 229; condemned
to death; he is to repent, and not perish,
229; takes an oath of repentance and
prostrate submission, 230, 231; letter to
his Father; begins gradually a new ca-
reer, 2325 corresponds with Grumkow,
234, 293, 299, 300, 302, 330; among the
Domain Sciences at Ciistrin, 251; efforts
to regain favour, 253; polite cloak-of-
darkness ; visited by his Father, 254; loy-
alty to fact, 25S ; his life at Ciistrin, as re-
ported by Schulenburg, 261; the beauti-
ful Madam de Wreech, 263, 269; glimp-
ses of Friedrich’s habits, 265, 273; re-
turns to Berlin at his Sister’s Wedding; a
much-changed Crown-Prince, 251; soli-
tude of soul, 282; Colonel of the Goltz
Regiment, 284, 30T, 308; whom shall he
marry? 285; all romance too sorrowfully
swept out of him, 286; what he thought
of his destined Wife, 293, 299, 301, 305,
307, 345, 858; continued love for Wilhel-
mina, 298, 305, 306, 361, 390; his betroth-
al, 305; Life at Ruppin, 307; anxiety to
learn what seemed worth learning ; mili-
tary studies, 309; love for his rugged Fa-
ther, 310, 512, 5593; spirit of frolic, 311,
405; letter to Captain Hacke, 3323 to
Seckendorf, 332; what he thought of the
Kaiser, 344; his Marriage, 356; back to
Ruppin, 363; at Philipsburg; his first ex-
perience of arms, 38, 3953; interest in the
war, 884, 389; a difficult meeting with
Wilhelmina, 330; what he thought of the
Rhine Campaign, 402; news of his Fa-
ther’s illness, 406, 410; visits the French
Camp, 407; visits Wilhelmina at Bai-
reuth, and talks of his future plans, 411;
in his Father’s sick-room, 413; sent to
Preussen, 419, 420; his Father’s growing
satisfaction with him, 421, 491; his Ap-
prenticeship completed, 429 5 life at Reins-
berg, an actual snatch of something like
the Idyllic, 431, 469, 503, 515,519 ; love of

INDEX.

music, 438 ; choice of associates, 521; re-
ligious doubts, 524; literary correspond-
ence, 446; writes to Voltaire, 447; ardent
admiration, 462, 463, 506; their corre-
spondence, 462, 491; correspondence with
Suhm; with Manteufel, 471; Dr. Zim-
mermann’s puddle of calumnies, 472; a
visit to the Prince of Mirow, 473 5 return
visits, 476 5 quality of his letters to his
Father, 480°; visits Loo with his Father,
490; his Anti-Macchiavel, 492, 506; be-
comes a Freemason, 493, 497; his literary
achievements, 503; journey to Preussen
with his Father, 510; visit of Lord Balti.
more and others, 515; his poor Father's
last illness, 528, 532; long private dia«
logues with him, 534; his Father’s death,
587, 538; Friedrich is King, 539.

Friedrich II., vol. iii., his Accession, 15 edi-

torial prophecies about, 2; old veracity
shining through the giddy new element,
833; wishes to keep well with France and
Hanover, 4; a cask of wine to Voltaire;
surrounded by adventures; anew knight-
hood; fine, free, expressive face, 5; would
make men happy, 63; opens the public
granaries; finds employment for a thou-
sand poor old women, 7; abolishes the use
of torture, 8; will build up the Academy
of Sciences; invites Wolf, 9; and Mau-
pertuis, 10; enjoins toleration for all Re-
ligions ; tries Free Press, 12; his activity
wonderful; writes many letters, 15; in-
creases his Army; conduct to old compan-
ions ; every inch a King, 16; loves men
of merit, 20; affection for his Mother, 21;
filial piety; lessening intimacy with his
own Queen, 23; minimum of change in
his Father's methods on men, 24; what
he will grow to, 26; his Biographers, 29 ;
he considers it unnecessary to be crowned,
30; accepts Homages, personally, in three
places, 83; interview with Dickens, 38;
best to be frank with him, 393 diffieult
for a Diplomatist to deal with, 41; invi-

_ tations to Voltaire, 425 visits Wilhelmina

at Baireuth, 45; two days incognita at
Strasburg, 48; arrives at Wesel, 59; ague,
63, 9T, 101; light contempt for the Cleve
Monks and their Masses, 64; Berg-Jiilich
preparations, 65, 96; first meeting with
Voltaire, 66; takes Herstal in hand, 81;
a long account to settle with Karl VI., 88;
returns home without seeing George II.,
89; means to do his work like a King,
96; Wilhelmina’s account of hina,9S8; not
amiable to every body, 99; news of the
Kaiser's death, 100; momentous resolu-
tion formed in consequence, 109 ; to seize
Silesia, 110; mysterious preparations,
112 5 Voltaire tries to discover his secret,
114; he knows his own mind clearly, 117;
eandour of confession, 118; piqued with
the Old Dessauer, 119; audiences at Ber-
lin; the secret out, 120; Address to his
Generals, 1243; away, Frankfurt- ward,
125, 1335 crossing the Rubicon ; at Cros-
sen, 1353; steps into Silesia, 136; Griin-
berg, 137 ; Glogau Church, 141; Schloss_

INDEX.

ot Weichau, 143; industriously concilia-
tory, 144; Milkau; two Messengers from
Breslau, 145; a wet march ; Herrendorf,
149; before Glogau, 150; Proposals at Vi-
enna, 152; refusal with mockery, 153;
“la Gloire,’ 156, 15T, 202, 846, 4635; to
Breslau; gains possession, 161; festivi-
ties, 164; at Ottmachau, 172; high moods,
173; bombardment of Neisse, 177 ; home
to Berlin; a life of labour cut out for him-
self, 1S1; quizzing the Czarina, 196; re-
turns to Silesia, 202; tries to make terms
with Austria, 203; at Schweidnitz, 204;
narrow escape at Baumgarten, 206; hears
of project for partitioning Prussia, 213;
his Life-element, 215; insists that Glogau
be taken, 217; his high satisfaction, 221 ;
takes the field. in Jigerndorf country, 223,
231; Battle of Mollwitz, 232; slow exacti-
tude, 238, 249; seeming ruin, and flight to
Oppeln, 248, 250; back to Mollwitz, 252;
Austrians totally beaten, 254; takes Brieg,
255; Excellencies, from the four winds,
take wing towards Friedrich, 257; his
business in the Austrian-Succession War,
260; his account with Pragmatic Sanc-
tion, 269; visited by Belleisle, 280; siezes
Brieg, 281; rests on his oars, 3063; recog-
nises Ziethen’s worth, 8308; improves his
Cavalry, 309; Camp of Strehlen, 319; dip-
lomatic veracity and skill, 322; audience
with Hyndford, 324; ‘*mendacity,” 326;
Treaty with France, 328; Valori’s diplo-
matic note; will renounce the Berg-Jii-
lich Controversy, 330; misunderstands
the English, 334; vividly characteristic
interview with Robinson and Hyndford,
8/15 practical insight and singular hu-
nmin faculty, 347, 373 ; cavalry review at
Strehlen, 350; takes the field again, 353;
encamps at Gross Neundorf, 354; refuses
to treat with Austria, 3615 secret negotia-
tions, 363; urges Carl Albert, 3663; ques-
tionable diplomacies, 372, 377; meeting
at Klein-Schnellendorf, 374; secret treaty
with Austria, 375; sham-siege of Neisse,
378; homaged at Breslau, 380; home to
Berlin, 381; secret treaty divulged, 352,
395; prompt action thereupon, 400, 402;
boundary stones of Silesia, 4015; visits
Dresden, 402; urges attack on Vienna;
off for Prague, 403; determined to have
Glatz, 404; gives a new dress to the Vir-
gin, 405; at Olmiitz, 406; disappointed
with his Moravian Expedition, 420; urges
the taking of Iglau, 422; cannot get
Briinn, 4253 gossipy Letters, 426; trou-
ble with the Saxons, 427; their partner-
ship ended, 428; resentment; getting in-
structed by the stripes of experience; in
full march out of Moravia, 429; at Chru-
dim, 430; Schwerin piqued at preference
shown to the Old Dessauecr, 431; Synopsis
of the Moravian Failure, 482; Winter
Campaigns, 433; reins up the Old Des-
sauer, 434; humours Walrave, 437 ; prep-
arations for meeting Prince Karl, 438; on
march from Chrudim, 439; takes a baking
of bread from the Austrians, 441; Battle

569

of Chotusitz, 443, 453; sympathy for Gen-
eral Pallandt, 453 ; Interview with Belle-
isle; Treaty of peace with Austria, 456;
triumphant return homewards, 459; hopes
for a general peace, 461; veracity of in-
tellect, 462; life at Reinsberg,463; begins
writing his Memoirs, 464; could recognise
the uses of Religion, 466; opens his Opera,
463, 506, 563; takes the waters at Aachen,
469 ; a King thoroughly practical, 470;
assurances of friendship to the new Kai-
ser, 471; watching the omens, 473, 542;
receives Voltaire at Aachen, 497, 499; ex-
ertions to bring about peace, 519, 522; his
patience exhausted, 545, 546; Austria to
take back Silesia; receives Voltaire’s
fourth visit, 5495 sees what he has come
about, 553; characteristic ‘* Marginalia,”
£53, 557; visits Baireuth, 557; gets notice
of the Treaty of Worms, 567; preparations
for War, 568, 572; skilful diplomacies,
569; Union of Frankfurt, 570; French
Treaty, 572; arts and business of Peace ;
grants right of appeal to himself in per-
son, 573; suggests a Wife for the Heir of
Russia, 5763; on good terms with the Uzar-
ina, 577, 580; his Sister's marriage, 577;
preparations for a Campaign, 5813 Part-
ing letter to the Duke of Wiirtemberg,
586; writes a quizzing Testimonial to
Polnitz, 587; engages the Barberina for
his Opera, 5S8; takes possession of Ost-
Friesland, 592.

Friedrich II., vol. iv., how he was forsaken

by the French, 13; his praise of Prince
Karl's Rhine Campaign, 6; decides to in-
vade Bohemia, 8; marches upon Prag,
11,17; his Manifesto; English theory of
him, 12; secret article of treaty with the
French, 13; anxious to keep well with
Saxony, 14; interview with the Duke of
Weissenfels; puts military problems to
himself in all manner of scenery, 17; in
haste to get hold of Prag, 183; indifference
to personal danger, 19; captures Prag, 20;
admits that he did not understand War at
this period, 21; dreads public opinion in
France too much; marches, amid difficul-
ties, towards Austria, 22; shut out from
all news by Pandour swarms, 26; heais
that the French have left him to his fate,
and that Prince Karl is close upon him;
tries to have battle with Prince Karl, 32;
out-manceuvred by Traun, who schools
him in the art of War, 35, 3S, 47; loses
three garrisons; encamped at Ionopischt,
26; has to retire northward, 37; a heavy-
laden, sorely-exasperated man, 38 5 gath-
ers himself at Kolin, 39 ; posts himself on
the north shore of the Elbe, 40; retreats
to Silesia, 42; foiled on every point; his
veracity of mind, 47; general impression
that he had ruined himself, 49; private
inexpugnability of mind; delivers Sile-
sian Army to Old Dessauer, and hastens
to Berlin, 50; spurt of impatience, 51,535
his feelings towards the French, 55, 57;
informed of Belleisle’s capture, 615 pro-
poses Peace, 65; thinks to make friends

570

with Saxony, 66; financial difficulties, and
dexterity of management; changed for the
better by his reverses, 67; King of Poland
for Kaiser, 68; Saxon antipathies, 69, T4,
113, 123, 124; angerat Seckendorf; army
preparations in Silesia, 78; letters unusu-
ally frank, 79, 85; Austrian invasion, to
recover Silesia, S0; studies to be ready for
Prince Karl, 82, 84; indignation against
Saxony; establishes Camp of Observa-
tion, $4,853 will play his part among the
crowned heads of Kurope, 86; Headquar-
ter at Camenz, 87; surprises Valori, in
not defending his mountain passes, 100;
full of silent finesse; very dangerous to
play with at games of skill, 101; much
satisfied with his Cousin Margraf Karl,
102; decoys Prince Karl on, 103; the big
moment approaching, 105-108; Hohen-
friedberg, 114-117; God has helped me
very wonderfully this day, 120; receives
Protestant deputation at Landshut, 121;
Camp of Chlum, 123; hopes for peace ;
Convention of Hanover, 123, 149; snubbed
by Briihl, 127; writes to France for help
in money, but to no purpose, 128 ; volun-
tary subsidy from Brandenburg; indig-
nant Manifesto against Saxony, 129 5 docs
not yet strike, 130; no peace with Austria
and Saxony, 132; no braver little figure
on the earth at that epoch, 133, 1345 ad-
mires Maria Theresa after a sort, 134;
still in Bohemia, watching Prince Karl’s
movements, 135; at Jaromirz; moves
northward, 139; at Staudentz, hears of
Prince Karl's advance, 142; rapidly forms
his plans, 148, 144; battle of Sohr, 144—
148; returns to Berlin, 149; new hope
of peace, 152; combined Austrian-Saxon
scheme of attack on Brandenburg, 152-
155 ; instant preparations to meet it, 155 ;
hard words to the Old Dessauer, 156;
takes command of Silesian Army, 156,
157 ; hoodwinks Prince Karl, 159 5 crosses
the Queiss at Naumburg, 160; beats the
Saxons at Hennersdorf, 161, 162; cannot
eatch Prince Karl, who tumbles home
double-quick, 162, 163; renews proposals
for peace, 164; finds Brithl’s rage yellower
than ever; runs his risks with the Czari-
na, 165; again snubbed by France, 166;
Old Dessauer conducts him over the field
of Kesselsdorf, 174; lodges in Dresden;
his enemies compelled at last to come
to terms, 175; interview with D’ Arget;
“would not henceforth attack a cat, ex-
ecpt to defend myself,” 177, 179; Treaty
of Dresden, 18), 181, 182; strange changes
since his first visit to Dresden, 182; wel-
come in Berlin; ‘‘ long live Friedrich the
Great,” 183; has climbed the heights,
185; hopes for Peace to the end of his life,
186; the chief memory of him, that of a
King and man who fought consummatcy
well, 187 ; difficulty of narrating his peace-
ful conquests, 18S; he takes the waters at
Pyrmont; pays with exactness all losses
incurred during the war, 190; goes into
Law-Reform, 190, 192, 216, 228, 230, 29+;

X

INDEX.

temptations from England to play Con-
quering Hero; Stadtholder of Holland,
192, 193; Sans-Souci, 193, 194; renewai
of the Reinsberg Program, 195, 294, 297;
attaches the two Keiths to his service, 215,
2'5; something like a stroke of apoplexy,
«10 5 Silesia guaranteed by all the Powers,
220; getting decidedly deep into snuff,
221; visited by Maréchal de Saxe, 223,
225; strikes a medal to celebrate his Law-
Reforms, 229; literary works; wishes Vol-
taire were with him, 230, 231, 254; a
Land'’s-Husband, not inferior to hig Fa-
ther, 231, 294-297 ; Army Reviews, 232;
audience with Sir Hanbury Williams,
2333; pays back an Austrian-Review af-
front, 236, °3T; rights Candidatus Linsen-
barth’s wrongs, 237-247; interview in the
garden, 242-244; Wilhelmina at Berlin;
reception of Voltaire, 247; refuses to know
the Pompadour, 247, 248, 407,408; a pres-
ent to his old friend Keith, 249; Berlin
Carrousel, £51-254; experiences of Vol-
taire which he does not like, 255; Vol-
taire’s visit much misunderstood to this
day, 257; Friedrich’s royal provision for
him, 257, 258 ; recognises his Pope, 259,
260, 261; painfully sensible what a skin-
less explosive Trismegistus he has got,
266, 267, 298; hears of Voltaire’s Steuer-
Scheine proceedings, 273 ; takes the mat-
ter silently, but with boundless contempt,
283; two letters to Voltaire; rough com-
mon-gense of a German, who speaks what
he thinks, 285, 286; anxiety for Wilhel-
mina’s health, 289; visits Ost-Friesland,
290; Shipping Companies and Sea-Enter-
prises, 292, 293; English Privateer con-
troversy, 293, 370-375 no faith in Free-
Trade, 2955 grateful for Voltaire’s honest
literary help, 302, 803; how he regards

-Maupertuis, D’ Argens, Algarotti, 304-306;

a great appetite for conversation and turn
for bantering, 806; La Mettrie, 307, 3038,
818, 319; esteem for Rothenburg, 309, 310;
for Marshal Keith, 310; quits Rothen-
burg’s death-bed in tears, 315; writes to
Wilhelmina, 317, 318; his French Colony
of Wits a sorry set, 323; ‘* Ach, mein lie-
ber Sulzer,” 324; domestic details from
Preuss and Demon Newsvwriter, 326, 330,
832, 384; fantasying on his flute, 328; di-
abolic rumours about his private life, 330-
832; defends Maupertuis against Voltaire,
344; peals of laughter at reading Akakia,
8414, 345; in a towering passion with Vol-
taire, 347, 348; outward reconciliation,
349; last interview, 851; determines to
have his Book of Poesies back from Voltaire
at Frankfurt, 353, 354; no farther cor-
respondence with him; no Muses’-IHeay-
en on Telluric terms, 365; sees indications
of approaching War, 366, 386, 390; indif-
ferent to the King of the Romans Ques-
tion, 368, 369; anxious to establish a For-
eion Trade, 370; minds his own affairs,
875; his Third Silesian War, 390, 395;
visits Holland ; interview with De Catt,
090-393 ; the Menzel Documents, 397, 401,

INDEX.

405; irritated with the Czarina, 404; a
very stormy and dubious future, 408, 411,
412; Neutrality Convention with England,
412, 413 5 no intention to be Adjunct and
Satellite of France, 417, 415; perplexity
of his situation, 424, 426 ; army in the per-
fection of order, 426; puts a question at
Vienna, 428, 431; consults with his prin-
cipal Generals, 429; marches towards
Saxony, 432, 435; letters to Duke Ferdi-
nand; army arrangements, 433, 434; to
his Brother and Sister; war inevitable,
434, 435; consultations with Mitchell, 435,
436; enters Saxony, 437; cannot make
terms with Polish Majesty, 438, 439, 450;
secures the originals of the Menz-1 Docu-
ments, 43 )-441 ; blockades the Saxons in
Pirna country, 442, 446, 44); joins Keith
in Bohemia, 453-455; battle of Lobositz,
455-465; writes to Wilhelmina, 464; com-
pels his Saxon prisoners to enter his army,
476-478 ; prepares to winter in Dresden,
480; all Kurope against him, 482, 483; no
King living has better servants, 484; be-
gins his Prussian Free Corps, 4853 his life
in Dresden, 484, 486; visit to his Moth-
er, 487; Secret Letter of Instructions to
Finckenstein, 487-489; provides him<elf
with poison, in case of the worst, 459 ;
last adieu to his Mother, 490.

Friedrich II., vol. v., anger of the Great
Powers against him, 3; withdraws the
Wesel-Cleve garrisons, 4; gets little im-
mediate help from England, 5; remon-
strates against Austria’s unseemly lan-
guage, 7; for what small sums he got his
work well done, 8; his Instructions to
Count Finck, 9; four Invasions advanc-
ing upon him, 10; suddenly marches on
Prag, 10,12; before the city, 17; junction
with Schwerin, 19, 20; got to know his
man, after fighting him a month or two,
20; battle of Prag, and defeat of the Aus-
trians, 25-37; over-haste, dispute with
Schwerin, 26, 35, 36; exultation and con-
gratulations, 42; Prag not captured, 45,
44; general discouragement of his ene-
mies, 44; Friedrich and Chatham, 53;
Ban of the Reich, 58, 147; finds siege of
Prag unexpectedly tedious, 58-62; ru-
mours of Daun’s approach, 62; sets forth
to meet him, 63; battle of Kolin, 62-77;
hasty orders to Moritz of Dessau, 72, 735
retreat to Nimburg, 755 tears for his lost
soldiers, 80; at Leitmeritz, 823 grief at
hearing of his Mother's death, S5-87; pre-
destination; would bribe the Pompadour
to obtain peace, 92; his own view of his
troubles, 92,93; indignation at the Prince
of Prussia’s disastrous folly, 100; meeting
of the Brothers; stern condemnation, 103—
105; well-nigh desperate, 105; vain ef-
forts to get battle with the Austrians, 106,
107; marches to Dresden to look into the
French movements, 107, 113; hears of
Winterfeld’s death, 112; near Erfurt; on
march for Berlin, against Haddick, 115,

142; back towards Erfurt; writes to Riche-

lieu, urging peace, 115, 116; sees hope of

571

help from England and Pitt, 120; enters
Erfurt, 120, 121; visits the Duke and Duch-
ess of Sachsen-Gotha, 122; writes to the
Duchess; to Wilhelmina, 1243 high opin-
ion of Prince Henri, 124, 441; writes to the
Duchess, 126, 127; hears bad news from
Preussen, 127; a bright-glancing articu-
late man, not to be struck dumb by the
face of Death itself, 128; fighting for ex-
istence, and yet going into verse in addi-
tion, 129; Lamentation Psalms on strange
conditions, 129, 130, 131, 132, 140,141; again
brought into correspondence with Vol-
taire, 131, 134; letter to Wilhelmina; ut-
terly resolved not to survive defeat, 137~
139 5 will die, if he needs must, in utmost
spasm of battle to the last, 141; interviews
with Gottsched at Leipzig, 143, 144; a word
of encouragement to Wilhelmina, 145;
cheering prospect of work now ahead, 149 ;
Ferdinand of Brunswick to be General of
Britannic Army; Pitt again in power,
150; Friedrich marches after Combined-
Army, 151; at Weissenfels, 152; Ross-
bach, 155; watching the enemy, 153; a
wager of life, with glorious possibilities,
161; has got the flank of Dauphiness, and
means to keep it, 164; never was Army
better beaten, 165; his famed Congé de
U Armée, 167; marches for Silesia,the news
ominously doubtful, 180, 181; Schweidnitz
and Breslau lost, 182, 185; rigorous indig-
nant messages, 185; addresses his Gener-
als at Parchwitz: ** We must beat the en-
emy, or perish all,’ 186-18S; snatches of
Camp Dialogue, 188, 189 ; hears with joy
that the Austrians are advancing on him,
191; captures their bakery, 192; full view
of the Austrian Army ; his plan of battle
soon clear to him, 1945 the * Oblique Or-
der,’* 194, 199 ; hears, amid his field-mu-
sic, the sound of Psalms, 196; battle of
Leuthen ; no finer bit of work for hund-
reds of years, 196-205, 212; talks with a
landlord at Saara, 206; at Lis-a comes un-
expectedly on a party of Austrian Officers,
207; ahomely V’e-Dewm from his soldiers;
a pious people, of right Teutsch stuff, 208;
recovers Breslau, 209; popular astonish-
ment and enthusiasm, 212; an English
Pottery - Apotheosis, 213, 214; winter in
Breslau, 215, 216; writes pacifically to
Maria Theresa, 217; hears with disgust
that East-Preussen has become Russian,
219; raises no new taxes, 223; English sub-
sidies, 223-225; present from Miss Wynd-
ham, 226-2293 letter to an English lady,
227, 228; good news of Ferdinand’s Rhine
Campaign, 231; recaptures Schweidnitz,
231, 232; marches for Olmiitz, 233; lays
siege, 236; not thought to shine in the
sieging line, 237; Daun feels his proce-
dures to be altogether feline; impatient
of his slow siege, 238; hears of August
Wilhelm’s death, 240; mistakes Daun’s
movements fcr an intention to give him
battle, 240; one more convoy indispensa-
ble, 241; convoy lost, and Olmiitz siege
over; masterly retreat to Leutomischl,

572

=

247; near Konigseriitz, planted impreg-
nable inside the Daun redoubts, 248, 249 ;
marches against Fermor, 251; extremity
of grief on account of Wilhelmina, 25/,
8317, 318; Paper of Directions for Prince
Henri, in case of death, 253 3 straight for
Frankfurt, 253, 254; unduly despises Rus-
sian soldiership, 259, 274; inspects Doh-
na’s camp at Gorgast, 259; joy of the
country people on his appearance among
them, 260; hastens to attack the Russian
Army, 262; neglects to abolish the Rus-
sian Baggage, 264, 265, 273; battle of
Zorndorf, 263-274; praises Seidlitz, 272 ;
marches for Saxony, 275; replies to Daun's
cautionary note to Fermor; with Prince
Henriin Dresden, 280; cannot draw Daun
from his entrenchments, 281; suddenly
takes the road for Neisse, 282; piqued at
seeing Daun ahead of him, and encamps
directly in front of him; obstinate rash-
ness, and contempt for Daun, 283; anx-
ious to get out of his bad post, 28T; battle
of Hochkirch, 287-296; orders retreat,
296; takes his punishment with wonder-
ful cheerfulness, 297; hears of Wilhelmi-
na’s death, 298; fixed intention to march
to Neisse, 301; sends his wounded to Hoy-
erswerda; sweeps past Daun, and arrives
at Gérlitz, 302; Silesia brushed clear;
back to Dresden 3 his marches wonderful
this year, 306 ; a sad and silent winter for
him, 310, 317; the campaign over; and
nothing come of it on either side but
frightful loss, 310; mutually vigilant Win-
ter-quarters, 313, 3143 vain hopes of peace,
3145 must stand on the defensive hence-
forth, 316, 317, 8835; writes considerably
in the intervals of business; affectionate
consideration for Fouquet, 318; his heavy
Finance problem, 319, 320; miraculously
meagre War-Budget, and methods of gath-
ering it, 320-323; issue of base money, 322;
opening of spring campaign, 324; drives
Deville from Leobschiitz, 333; at Reich-
Hennersdorf, 336; introduces Horse-Artil-
lery, 837; changes.Guichard into Quintus
Icilius, 355; encamped at Schmottseifen,
340, 341; watching Daun, 3435 sends We-
dell against Soltikof, 345, 348, 350; must
look to the Russian problem himself, 351;
rendezvous at Sagan, 354; tries to inter-
cept Loudon and Haddick, 355; attacks
Haddick; marches towards Frankfurt,
85T; at Lebus, 367; out reconnoitering
372; battle of Kunersdorf, 372-394; a
peasant brings a draught of water, 374,
377; not so despondent as might be imag-
ined, 378; reckons that the victory is his,
384; three horses shot under him: ‘T,
like the rest, must stand to my duty here!”
3833; passionately struggles, commands,
entreats, 887; the Prussian Army all in
flight; Iriedrich among the last to quit
the ground, 388; looks after two wounded
Lieutenants, 389; taking leave both of
Kingship and of life; hands over the
Army to Finck’s charge, 390; writes to
Schmettau in Dresden, authorising capit-

INDEX.

ulation, 391; despair did not last quite
four days, 394; a most lone soul of a man,
but continually toiling forward; might
have been ruined now, had his enemies
been diligent about it, 395; utterances to
D'Argens: heavy-laden, nearly desperate,
399-401; second letter to Schmettau: must
defend Dresden to the utmost, 401; thanks
Wolfersdorf for his defence of Torgau,
409 ; grief and indignation at loss of Dres-
den, 417, 423; lays hold of Sagan, and es-
tablishes communication with Prince Hen-
ri, 433; Voltaire peace-expectations; anx-
ieties, private and public, 434, 436; ma-
neeuvering against Soltikof, 437, 442; on
the Heights of Zébelwitz; getting tragic-
ally scarce of persons to consult, 443;
much risen in hope; ill of gout; for three
weeks cannot stir from his room; takes
to writing about Charles XII., 444; car-
ried on a litter to Glogau, 445; arrives in
Prince Ilenri’s Camp; free of his gout, in
joyful spirits and high humour; proce-
dures against Daun too rapid and rash,
455; a proud Vriedrich, got on his feet
again, 456; orders Finck to plant himeelf
in Maxen; will not be dissuaded, 457;
himself follows; at Wilsdruf, 459; mes-
sages to Finck, 45), 460; whirlwind of
grief and indignation at the catastrophe
of Maxen, 4645; no ray of pity visible for
poor Finck, then or afterwards, 466; sets
Daun at utter defiance, 467; mutually
hostile Winter-quarters, 468; ‘* Protest-
ant Hero,” 472; amused at the French
resource of borrowing Plate for coining,
479, 480; publishes an expurgated edition
of his poems, 481; Voltaire Peace-nego-
tiations, 486; their characteristic corre-
spondence, 459-502; rebukes his perse-
vering ridicule of Maupertuis: trouble not ,
the ashes of the dead, 500-502; sends
Lord Marischal to Spain on a diplomatic
mission, 502; many fallacies of hope, al-
most pathetic to think of, 504; one hope
that did not deceive him, hope in his own
best exertion to the very death ; his ene-
mies more confident than ever, refuse to
exchange prisoners, 505; wholezale re-
cruiting or crimping, 506; is considered
to be ruined; gloom or censure among his
own people; incredible diligence and per
sistence, 513; a man drenched in misery,
but doing his very utmost in it, with or
without success, 515.

Friedrich ITI., vol. vi., his ill-luck does not

yet cease its sad company, 1; his marches
exceed all calculation and example, 2; en-
camped near Meissen, 2, 3; clings to the
hope of peace, and of extraneous help, 33
finds the Russian movements full of enig..
ma, 43 reproaches Fouquet for losing
Landshut, 5; tries to get a stroke on Lacy,
and to get well into Silesia, 6-8; without
success, $; visible ill-humour; hears of
Fouquet’s catastrophe, 9; prepares for
siege of Dresden, 11; tries to decoy Daun
from his entrenchments ; marches for Si-
lesia, 12; is himself decoyed by Lacy, 12

INDEX.

14; hears that Daun is at Bautzen before
him, and hastens onward; such a march
for heat and difficulty as he never had
before, 14; hears that Daun has reached
Gorlitz, and determines again to turn
upon Lacy, 15-17; skirmish of horse, and
personal jeopardy, 16; besieges Dresden;
one of the rapidest and most furious sieges
on record, 18; expects to be master of the
town in a few days; hears of Daun’s ar-
rival, 21; his soul black and wrathful,
worn almost desperate, 22; deals hard
measure’on Regiment Bernburg, 233 re-
tires from Dresden; hears of the loss of
Glatz, 24; beaten. on every hand; will
make for Silesia without loss of an hour,
27; dissatisfied with Prince Henri’s cau-
tious proceedings, 28-30; more Alcides-
like than ever, 34; arranges his march
beforehand to the last item, 39, 40; on to
Liegnitz, attended all the way by Daun
and Lacy, 40-45; Daun, Lacy, and Lou-
don all agape for him, in scientific pos-
tures, 45; provisions all but run out, 465
marches,during night,unobserved through
Liegnitz; Austrian-Irvish deserter, 47;
leaves his camp-fires all carefully burn-
ing, 48; arranges himself in order of bat-
tle, and tries for a snatch of sleep, 4);
suddenly attacked by Loudon; springs to
horse, and is rapidly ready to receive
him, 50; uncommonly stiff fighting; Reg-
iment Bernburg doing wonders ; Loudon
sorely beaten, 51, 52; Daun and Lacy can
do nothing on him, 52, 53; gathers up his
spoil, and marches victorious 5; one of the
succinctest of Kings; takes Regiment
Bernburg into favour again, 54; still ut-
terly dark as to the course his enemies
will take, 55; secure at last of Breslau,
and of junction with Henri, 56; does not
deceive himself with these bits of success-
es; letter to D’Argens, 57, 58; finds an
unexpected recoil among his enemies, 59 ;
beautifully marches and manceuvres upon
Daun and his chain of army-posts, 61,
62; worn down into utter weariness,
sickness, and disgust, 63, 64; hears that
Berlin is seized, and hastens to its relief,
68; finding Berlin again free, he marches
to Liibben, 74; interview with Gotzkow-
sky; ‘*‘ Merchants’ Bills a sacred thing,”
75; resolved to dare all things rather than
sign a humiliating peace, 78; skilfully
manceuvres upon Daun, 75-S0; marches
towards Torgau, 81; determines to attack
Daun's impregnable position, 85; arrange-
ments and marchings, S65 unexpected de-
lays, 88; obliged to attack with but a frac-
tion of his forces, 89; such a problem as hu-
man bravery seldom had, 90; a Grandson of
the Old Dessauer shot dead, 91; reinforce-
ment and renewed effort; himself wound-
ed, 923; attack upon attack, but without
adequate result, 98, 943; night sinks, and
_ nothing more can be made of it, 95; unex-
pected turn of affairs, and Daun in full re-
treat, 96-98, 100; the campaign ended;
Friedrich takes to his winter-quarters, 101;

573,

Leipzig ; sees all black, as if at the bottom
of a tomb, 102; writes a sadly playful let-
ter to his old friend Madame Camas, 1(3 ;
his winter in Leipzig cheerfuller than
expected; D’Argens and other faithful
friends about him, 112; amuses himself
with feeding his dogs, 113; always an ap-
petite for a snatch of talk with anybody of
sense, 114; interview and dialogue with
Gellert, 116-119; resolves to retaliate on
the Saxon plunderings at Berlin, 121; di-
alogue with General Saldern, who refuses
to act contrary to his honour and oath,
121-123 ; sends Quintus Icilius, and ban-
ters him about it ever afterwards, 122, 123;
sends a small expedition to Langensalza,
124-127; levies contributions on Leipzig,
128; sends Madame Camas a_ porcelain
box, 131, 132; a King risen from the deeps
again, more incalculable than ever, 1363
his stoicaland manful figure of demeanour,
137; marches into Silesia for Loudon and
the Russians, 138, 140; swift, skilful ma-
neeuverings, 141, 142; tries to seize Kun-
zendorf, but finds Loudon too quick for
him, 142, 143; digs and entrenches his
world-famous Camp of Bunzelwitz, 143-
146; beaten here, he is beaten altogether ;
his last stronghold in the world, 146; con-
stant vigilance, and expectation of at-
tack; like an Arab Sheik among his tribes-
men, 147; finds the Russian Army has
given it up, and returned homewards 3
sends General Platen to quicken their
march, 149; stays a fortnight longer at
Bunzelwitz, 150; g.ts very anxious about
Colberg, 160, 163; quits Bunzelwitz, and
loses Schweidnitz, 163-167; surprising in-
attention to the state of his Garrizons,
166; falls ill of gout, the inflexible heart
of him at, last like to break, 168; on march
towards Strehlen, 169; lodges with Trai-
tor Warkotsch, 170; a night ride, with
Kappel for guide, 171; narrowly escapes
betrayal to the Austrians, 172-177; loxes
Colberg, 177, 178; a gloomy winter in
Breslau, 179, 180; loses his English sub-
sidy, and puts more alloy into his curren-
cy; all gift-moneys in abeyance, 158 ;
succeeds in raising his army to the neces-
sary number, 189; grim letter to D’Ar-
gens ; becoming wise by stripes, 189, 190 ;
tiff of quarrel with Prince Henri, 190-193 ;
his darkest hour, and dawning of a bright-
er day, 194; death of the Czarina, 195;

.finds a warm friend in Czar Peter, 195,

196; liberates all his Russian prisoners,
200; Treaty of Peace with the Czar, 203°

the way out from destruction now a thing
credible and visible to him, 202; hopeful
letters, 202-204; opens his seventh cam-
paign, with Daun, not Loudon, for enemy,
219 ; joined by Czernichef with a Russian
reinforcement, 220, 221; makes unsuccess-
ful attempts on Daun, 222; dismayed to
hear that Czar Peter is murdered, and
Czernichef recalled, 225; 226; storms Bur.
kersdorf, and drives Daun clear of Schweid-
nitz, 226-229; his contempt for Lord Bute,

74 INDEX.

230, 244, 251; besieges Schweidnitz, 231;
Battle of Reichenbach, 232-225; Schweid-
nitz proves unexpectedly difficult, 255 ;
gets it atlast, and praises the Commandant
for his excellent defence, 239; marches
into Saxony, 240; congratulates Prince
Henrionhis victory of Freyberg, 247; truce
with Austria, 248; visits Gotha; dialogue
with Professor Putter, 250, 251; terms of
peace, 252; Austria tries to get his Rhine
Provinces, but cannot, 252, 253; he ruth-
lesely pays off all superfluous men, 253;
treaty for general peace as good as certain,
254, 255; dines with Kurprince of Sax-
ony; home once more at Berlin; supper
with the Queen and Court, 260; his part
in World-History now played out, 261;
reads no sign of the coming French Revo-
lution, 263-265; his history henceforth in-
teresting to Prussia chiefly; not so pecul-
iar as to authorise much painting of char-
acter, 265; sets earnestly to work to repair
his ruined Prussis, 26S, 269; listens to the
distresses of Niissler and company, and
helps those who most ne2d it, 271-273 ;
rapidly restores his debased currency ;
visits Westphalia with Duke Ferdinand,
274; dialogue with Roden, 2:5-277; picks
up D’Alembert at Geldern, 277; second
dialogue with Roden; prouder of his vic-
tories over his social chaos than of his oth-
er victories, 278; has great difficulty in
fi ding fit persons for his different em-
ployments, £50; obliges all the rich Ab-
beys to establish manufactures, 281; in-
duces the rich landlords to give up their
encroachments on the poor farmers, 282 ;
D' Alembert’s report of him, 252, 283 3 he
adopts the French Iixcise-system, much
to the dissatisfaction of Prussia, 254-28);
caricatured as a miser grinding coffee ;
his method with the Caricature Depart-
ment of things, 288; procurator of the
poor, 289; replies to the Douanier at Stet-
tin, 290; account of his nephew's divorce,
292; builds his Newe Palais of Sans-Sou-
ci, 298, 294; affection for Lord Marischal,
295-297 ; shows kindness to Roussean,
295; footfalls of departing guests, 297,
298; makes treaty of Alliance with Czar-
jna Catharine, 299 5; corresponds with the
Electress of Saxony about the Polish
Crown, 307-311; takes little interest in
the Polish quarrels; his one rule of policy
to keep well with the Czarina, 320, 323;
alarmed at the suggestion of Prince Hen-
ri for King of Poland, 3213 strives to dis-
suade the Turks from their Polish war
with Russia, 334; dreads another Kuro-
pean outbreak, 334, 335, 337; receives a
friendly visit from Kaiser Joseph, 337-
341; suggests at Petersburg a cutting
down of Poland, 342; pleasant visit from
Electress Marie-Antoine, 343; fulminates
a Royal Bull concerning eternal punish-
ment, 344; makes a return-visit to the
Kaiser; Prince de Ligne’s account, 346—
5545 would rather have Loudon at: his
side than before him, 351; ceremoniously

7

respectful to the Kaiser, 354; interview
with Kaunitz on the Russian-Turk war,
609, 360; mediates with the Czarina, 361;
she proposes dismemberment of Poland,
366; he gladly undertakes to negotiate the
matter, 8367-369 ; has his difficulties with
Kaunitz, 367, 368, 369, 370; final agree-
ment between the Partitioning Powers,
370; no alternative left, but either that
same Partition, or all Europe kindled into
war, 372; at no pains to conceal his great
sense of, the value of West-Preussen to
him, 372-375; how he set to work; and
what he made of it, 376-379; keeps an
eye on Kaiser Joseph, 682; long dialogue
with Zimmermann, 383,387-391; receives
a visit from his sister Ulrique, 391-393 ;
school improvements, 396, 397; sets out
for his Silesian Reviews, 3953 his later
correspondence with Voltaire, 4033 his
annual Reviews, matters of rigorous busi-
ness, 415; Conway’s account of him and
them, 416-421; Major Kaltenborn’s, 421-
42353 two famous anecdotes of him and
Ziethen, 423, 424; suffers from a severe

~ attack of gout; the Kaiser, thinking him

dying, marches on Brandenburg, 425; en-
tertains Czarowitch Paul at Berlin, 427;
expresses esteem for Pitt, 429, 4315; corre-
spondence with D’ Alembert on the Kaiser's
French tour, 437 ; Cabinet-Order, with fac-
simile of Signature, 437, 458; forbids the
Austrian attempt on Bavaria, 439; letter
from Duchess Clement on the subject, 446 ;
instantly gets to work, 447, 449; fruitless
neg>tiations with Austria, 450, 451; speech
to his Generals, 451, 452; marches to Sile-
sia, 452; Kaunitz’s high tone becomes no-
tably altered, 453, 454, 455; correspondence
with the Kaiser, 455-457; highly unwil-
ling to begin a war which nobody can see
the end of, 458; crosses into Bohemia,
459; regardless of personal risks, 460; hu-
mour very sour and severe, 461, 464; let-
ter from Maria Theresa, 401, 462 5; returns
homeward, 464, 465; difficulties mediated
by the Czarina, 467; has put a spoke in
Austria’s proud wheel, and managed to see
fair play in the Reich, 465; his second
Law-Reform, 470; appoints Heucking to
see justice done to Miller Arnold, 477; in-
dignant at the Lawyers, 4795; orders the
judges to appear before him; and passes
judgment on them, 481-48); never. neg-
lected this part of his function, 492; still
watchful of Austrian encroachments on the
Reich, 494; produces a Itirstenbund, or
general confederation of German Princes,
495, 522; an unaffectedly vigorous, simple,
and manful old age, 496; his old compan-
ions dropping off, 498; domestic anecdotes,
498-500; industrial matters a large item
in his daily business, 5005 the strictest
husbandman not busier with his farm than
he with his Kingdom, 501; Prince de Ligne
reports several pleasant interviews with
him, 501-510; Marwitz’s recollections, 511-
516; Marquis de Bouille’s, 517-620, 525;
severe letter to General Tauentzien on the
~,

INDEX.

state of the Silesian Army, 521; Comte de
Ségur’s description of his appearance, 526;
goes to his last Silesian Review, 528; takes
severe cold; returns to Potsdam, 530, in-

Friedrich’s Mother.
Friedrich’s Wife.

575

on occasion of the Bavarian War, 451,
See Sophie Dorothee.
See Elizabeth Christina.

creasing illness, 531; interview with Mira- | Friedrich Wilhelm, Eleventh or Great Kur-

beau, 532; cannot take his usual ride, 534;
sends for Zimmermann, hoping to get re-
lief, 536, 537; does faithfully to the end
the work that comes to hand, 5405 his last
day’s work over, 541; his life-battle fought
out, 542; the Last of the Kings, 544.

Friedrich’s Letters :—dquality of, ii. 254, 445,
416, 462, 479; to Duhan, i. 334; his Fa-
ther, ii. 34, 232, 260, 385, 421, 473, 476, 479,
5173 his Mother, 863; iv. 120, 159; v. 42;
Wilhelmina, ii. 305, 306, 861, 390, 393, 395;
iii. 254; iv. 317, 464; v. 92-04, 124, 137-
139, 145, 146, 169, 252; Hotham, ii. 130,
132, 155; Grumkow, 297, 299, 300, 330:
Hacke, 332; Seckendorf, 332; Margraf
Heinrich, 384; Madame Camas, 492; vi.
103, 132, 202, 203; Groben, ii. 404; Karl
of Brunswick, 423; Voltaire, 464, 504, 511;
iii. 42, 67, 15T, 557, 558; iv. 205, 206, 314,
347, 849, 850; v. 134, 140, 485, 465, 490,
499-592; vi. 345, 346, 872, 381, 401; Mau-
pertuis, iii. 11; Jordan, 75, 115, 156, 160,
173, 231, 432 ; the Bishop of Liége, $1, 82;
Algarotti, 115, 174; Old Dessauer, 119,
221; iv. 51; Young Dessauer, iii. 217;
August Wilhelm, 230; v. 104; Duke Fer-
dinand, iv. 433, 434; Podewils, 7S, 85, 87 5
Fouquet, 125; v. 444; Prince of Prussia
and Princess Amelia, iv. 434, 485; Prin-
cess Amelia, v. 41; Schwerin, iv. 461;
Finckenstein, 487-48); v. 857, 358, 367,
389, 3903 vi. 202; Duchess of Sachsen-
Gotha, v. 124, 126, 127, 435, 487, 488 ; vi.
251; Duke de Richelieu, v. 116; D’Argens,
213, 216, 317, 399-401, 464, 465, 479, 450,
481, 5145 vi. 57, 63, T4, 78, 102, 189, 190;
202-204; to an English lady, v. 227, 228;
Prince Henri, 252, 336; vi. 28-30, 63, 64,
191-193, 237, 247, 255, 435; Daun as if
from Fermor), v. 280; Lord Marischal,310;
vi, 295, 296; Finck, v. 389, 390, 460;
Schmettau, 391, 417, 424; Wunsch, v.
3943 Prince Ferdinand, 434, 4363 Zas-
trow, vi. 168, 169; De Launay, 289; Doua-
nier at Stettin, 290; Electress Marie-An-
toine, 307-311, 343, 314, 392; D’Alembert,
405, 437; Kaiser Joseph, 455; Tauentzien,
521; Duchess-Dowager of Brunswick, 539;
Note on Toleration, iii. 12; the Strasburg
Adventure, 49> Silesian Project,118, Mar-
ginalia for Voltaire, 553, 557; quizzing

‘Testimonial to POllnitz, 5873; his opinion |.

of Traun, iv. 47; of an Austrian Battalion,
119; of D’Ahremberg, 1353; account of
straw sentry, 125; Le Palladion, 137;
Speech to his Generals before Leuthen, y.
186-188 ; closing paragraph of his ‘‘ His-
tory of the Seven Years’ War,” 3233 on
the ruined condition of Prussia at the
close of the War, vi. 2793; account of the
Prince of Prussia’s divorce, 292; newspa-
per article, 325, 326; on Russian and Turk
tactics, 333; suggestion for cutting down
Poland, 342; Speech to his Generals

fiirst, i. 40, 41, 43, 261; his wariness and
dexterity, 262; gets Hinter-Pommern,
264; marches into Jiilich, 265; his Polish-
Swedish War, 266 3; essentially an indus-
trial man, 268; character and portrait,
269 ; Battle of Fehrbellin, 269; beats the
Swedes out of Preussen, 271; conquers
Swedish Pommern, but cannot keep it,
272; his true Wife, Louisa of Nassau-Or-
ange, 271, 274; his second Wife, Doro-
thea ; mutinies quenched out, 275; death,
276; how Austria settled his Silesian
claims, 277 ; mentioned also, iv. 102, 296,
345; vi. 279, 280, 312.

Friedrich Wilhelm, King; as Crown Prince,

i. 21, 30; taken to Hanover in childhood,
24; a rough unruly boy from the first,
27, 31, 47, 306; an abrupt peremptory
young King, 299; his Spartan habits,
306; his Father’s death, 3665 the new
King’s house swept clear of mendacity
and idle hypocrisy, 807; his strange wild
ways, 309; love of justice, 310, 4635; the
first years of his laborious reign, 311; a
‘tman of genius,”? fated to work in Na-
tional Husbandry, 313, 331, 439, 443, 448;
ii. 351; his tall Potsdam Regiment, i. 315,
352, 489; ii. 311, 538: the great Drill-
sergeant of the Prussian Nation, i. 316;
his faculty of minding his own business,
318, 879 5 ii. 149; Portraits of him, i. 315;
ii. 20, 326; personal habits, i. 320; no
love for the French or their fashions,
321; Brobdignagian waggeries, 322, 472;
an original North-German Spartan, 323,
365; charge of avarice, 324; ii. 37; his
siege of Stralsund, i. 325, 3325 regard for
Charles XII., 330, 3345 an original fare-
well Letter of Instructions, 330, makes
his Will in favour of the Queen, 331, 870,
449 ; returns victorious, 336, 8425 visited
by Czar Peter, 348; Tutors selected for
Fritz, °53 3; his notions about education,
355; fond of hunting, 360; ii. 39; habits
at Wusterhausen, i. 3663; his Tobacco-
Parliament, 367, 453 (see ‘Tobacco-Parlia-
ment); alarming attack of ‘nephritic
colic,” 370; interest in Cleve-Jiilich, the
Pfalz-Neuburg Heritage, 373, 431, 457;
ii. 182, 486 5 interferes for the Heidelberg
Protestants, i, 374; a King who stayed
well at home, 383; ii. 149; loses favour
with the Kaiser, i. 380; disappointed with
his son Fritz, 391; assists at the birth of
Princess Amelia, 410; list of his Ten
Children, 411; signs Treaty of Hanover,
431; gets annoyed with the Double-Mar-
riage Treaty, 436; ii. 36 (see Double-
Marriage) ; his recruiting difficulties, and
predatory encroachments, i. 4435 ii. 11;
George I. fires-up, i. 447; surrounded by
intrigues, 449; snared for the Kaiser by
Grumkow and Seckendorf, 452 (see Grum-
kow); Treaty of Wusterhausen, 456, 482 ;

576

“ possessed” as by two devils, 461; ii.
46, 66, 95, 158; horse-play with Gund-
ling, i. 472; his irreverence for the Sci-
ences and Fine Arts; summary treatment
of Wolf, 475; how Queen Sophie might
have managed him, 483; his sorrow at the
death of George I. ; unsuspected tears in
the rugged man, ii. 9; hypochondriacal
fits, 10; talks of abdicating, 12; visits
King August at Dresden, 16, 103; disso-
lute entertainments, 17; singular mutual
liking of the two, 20; Friedrich Wilhelm
receives a return-yisit at Berlin, 225 in-
creased dislike for his Son, 33, 82; con-
temptuous Letter to him, 35; a grand
slaughter of wild swine, and what his
Majesty did with the pork, 393; a bad at-
tack of the gout, 40,52; ill treatment of
his family, 45, 52, 66, 82, 86, 172; quar-
rels with George II., 54, 62; troubles of
Mecklenburg, &c., 61; resolves to chal-
lenge George II. to single combat, 67; im-
minency of War between them, 69, 73;
arbitration, 75; publicly canes the Crown-
Prince, 86, 142, 157; will end the Double-
Marriage speculation, 88; Wilhelmina to
have Friedrich of Baireuth, 98; a conver-
sation with Dubourgay, 107; jealous of
the Crown-Prince, 108, 111; joyful recep-
tion of Hotham, 109; will not consent to
Friedrich’s marriage, 112; looks sour on
Hotham, 123; apprised of Grumkow’s
treachery, but refuses to believe it, 126,
129; will agree to Single Marriage, not
Double, 128; King August’s Camp of
Radewitz, 135; extraordinary conduct to
Hotham, 149; passionate vexation with
himself and others, 157; Journey to the
Reich, 159; no taste for salutations in the
market-place, 161; a Bridal-procession,
175; visits the Duke of Wiirtemberg, 176;
gives him good advice, 180; visits Karl
Philip, 181, 189; a simple dinner, 185;
discovers Friedrich’s attempt at flight 5
suppressed rage, 190; visits Ernst Lud-
wig, 192; can suppress no longer, 194;
summary orders, 195; visits Clement Au-
gust, 1°63; letter home, announcing ar-
rest; draws his sword upon his Son, 201;
‘*let him take the doom the Laws have
appointed,’ 202; arrives at Berlin, 204;
almost mad at the turn things have taken ;
receives a packet of fictitious Letters 5 as-
saults Wilhelmina in a frenzy of rage and
disappointment, 205; no more negotia-
tions with England, 210; cannot get to
the bottom of the conspiracy, 211; whole-
sale punishments, 212; anxiety to save
Friedrich’s soul, 213; something of the
nature of real prayer, 214, 257; his con-
duct, looked at from without and from
within, 214, 227; distracted wanderings,
215; will have Katte and Crown-Prince
tried by court-martial, 216, 219; Katte
must die, 220; the King’s troubled
thoughts, 228; spares his Son’s life, 229 ;
and even hopes to save his soul, 230; re-
solves on Wilhelmina’s marriage, 234 ;

preparations for her betrothal, 237; never |

INDEX.

neglects public business, 241; the Salz-
burg Protestants, 241, 314; hangs Schlub-
hut for theft, 242 ; elk- hunting at Pillau,
244; cudgels his Criminal - Collegium,
245; excessively severe on defalcations,
246: reconciled to his Son, 255, 260; a
narrow escape from a bullet, 274; ‘his
Majesty's building operations, and in-
fringements of Free-Trade, O74, 426; his
store of silver, 279; takes Friedrich’ into
favour, 281, 308; repentant love for Wil-
helmina, 283; decides on a Bride for
Friedrich, 293; his Letters, 294; receives
the Salzburg Protestants at Berlin, 326;
a man skilful in investments, 328 ; his
Majesty visits the Kaiser, 329, 8385" con-
tempt for their ceremonials, 333, 338;_
dines at Prag with Prince Eugene, 340;
meetings with the Kaiser, 342, 343; re-
turns home, with new experiences of his
high friends, 3445 visits Wilhelmina,
346; passes Leipzig, 847; total change
of mind towards the Kaiser, 349, 360,
427; a strange Session of the Tobacco-
Parliament, 349; a ride with Scckendorf,
352, 416; passionate remorse, 852; inter-
est in West-Preussen, 356; rough banter
with Wilhelmina, 38573 provision for
Friedrich on his marriage, 364, 431; «mall
interest in the Polish Election, 369 ; con-
nection with the Rhine Campaign, 381,
3825 grants asylum to’ Stanislaus, 359 ;
Friedrich still finds him difficult to please,
891; at Philipsburg, 397; steadily refuses
to give up Stanislaus, 399, 418; falls se-
riously ill, 406; pleased with Friedrich’s
success in Preussen, 421; continued ill-
ness, 426, 503; fallen-out with the Kaiser,
42T, 487; a visit to Loo, 490, 494; grow-
ing favour for Friedrich, 491, 512; re-
newed anxiety about his Heterodoxies,
497; Friedrich’s testimony to his noble
kingly qualities, 511; a new fit of illness,
513; the final shadows closing in upon
him, 523, 526; his last Tobacco-Parlia-
ment, 528; how he shall stand justified
before Almighty God, 530, 584; much af-
fected at seeing his Son; Instructions for
his Funeral, 533; abdicates in favour of
Friedrich, 534, 586; death, 5387; his Spar-
tan Funeral, 538; his dealings with the
old Stdnde, iii. 830; his troubles about
Herstal, 78,79; though dead, still fights,
249; his Law-Reform, iv. 191; mention-
ed also, vi. 466.

Friedrich Wilhelm of Schwedt, Cousin of
Friedrich, i. 368, 369 n.3 ii. 31, 385, 45,
409

Friedrich Wilhelm III.’s monument to
Schwerin, v. 40; his parentage, vi. 293;
boyish recollection of the Great Fried-
rich, 500.

Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince (afterwards
King), with Friedrich at Leipzig, vi.
112; at siege of Schweidnitz, 237, 238;
Westphalia, 274, 275; married to Eliza-
beth of Brunswick, 290; headlong, and
dreadfully dissolute, 291, 292; divorce,
and second mariage, 2)2; his curious

INDEX.

“

death-bed, 297; at Friedrich’s Silesian
Reviews, 259, 260, 441, 442, 518; mention-
ed also, 112 n., 338, 339, 345, 421, 492, 507.

Friesack demolished, i. 151, 152, 270.

Friesland, i. 280.

Fritsch, Baron von, negotiates peace, vi.
251, 254.

Fritz, M., vi. 408.

Fritzlar plundered and burnt, i. 92.

Fuchs, Dr., monument at Mollwitz, iii.
233.

Fuggers, the, of Augsburg, i. 171, 1825 if.
175. ;

Fuglemen, iii. 203.

Funccius of Niirnberg, i. 194.

Funck, Sieur de, iv. 402, 403.

Furnes, iv. 3.

Fiirst, Grand-Chancellor von, vi. 470 n.,
475, 476, 480; dismissed by the King,
484; crowd of carriages offering sympa-
thy, 487.

Flissen, Peace of, iv. T7, 79.

Gages, Senor de, iv. 197.

Gaisson, Count, at siege of Prag, iii. 394.

Galitzin, Prince, commands the Russian
Army against the Turks, vi. 335, 336,
342, 855, 856; at Vienna, 467.

Gallas, Austrian, i. 262.

Gallisonniére, La, iv. 378, 420; sails for Mi-
norea, 421, 422.

Gardot, Avocat, vi. 341 n.

Garve, Professor, vi. 465 5 cited, v. 87 n.

Gaudi, Adjutant, at Rossbach, v. 160;
Hochkirch, 293 n.

Gaudi, Engineer, iv. 425.

Gebhardus of Milan, i. 76.

Geldern, i. 227; ii. 197, 490.

Gellert, Professor, a kind of oracle in his
day, vi. 114-116; his interview with King
Friedrich, 116-119 ; his peaceful death,
120.

Genius, i. 20, 311, 313; ii 4.

George I. of England, i. 25, 330, 332, 344;
the Pretender coming, 544; his Majesty
visits Berlin, 359, 399; assists the Heidel-
berg Protestants, 377; English troubles,
492; first triumph of the ‘* Constitutional
Principle,’’ 405; ii. T; consents to the
Double-Marriage scheme, i. 406; Treaty
of Hanover, 431; does not sign the Double-
Marriage Treaty, 435; fires-up at Fried-
rich Wilhelm’s predatory recruitings,
445; his smoking-room, 464; not inclined
for War, ii. 2; death by apoplexy, on the
road to Osnabriick, 5.

George II. of England, i. 11,119; as Prince
of Wales, 402, 436; gives no help to the
Double-Marriage scheme, ii. 31; quarrels
with Friedrich Wilhelm, 54, 62; his dap-
per, self-satisfied character, 55; coerces
the Duke of Mecklenburg, 59; discovers
Grumkow’s treachery, 94, 152; helps the
Salzburg Protestants, 828; his quarrel
with the Prince of Wales, 480; his Wife’s
Death, 482; in a conciliatory humour to-
wards Friedrich, iii. 4; perplexed about
his Spanish War, 38; described by Biel-
feld, 39; thick-coming difficulties, 90;

- Voi. VI.—B B

O77

news of the Kaiser’s death, 108. 112 ;
against Friedrich, 204; assists Austria,
212, 266; distracted procedures, 286, 290,
311; a strange Curator of England, 304;
Austrian Subsidy, 312; difficulty of mov-
ing the Dutch, 314, 500; of saving Han-
over from War, 315; sees that Friedrich
must be bargained with, 518, 333, 357;
consequences of having a George II. for
Chief Captain, 337, 566; can do no more
for Austria, 361, 370, 88S; tries a second
time to draw his sword, 473; but to no
purpose, 500; sword actually drawn, 516;
at Dettingen, 523, 532; Conferences at
Hanau, 537; receives Prince Karl, 540;
projected invasion of Alsace, 546; Aus-
tria to take back Silesia, 5419; Treaty of
Worms, 566; French Treaty, 571; threat-
ened with invasion, 585; litigation with
Friedrich about Ost-Friesland, 503; rath-
er a dear morsci for England, iv. 315 dif-
ficulties in Highlands and the Nether-
lands, 88, 99, 132; agreement with Fried-
rich, 124, 180, 182, 149; the Young Pre-
tender in Edinburgh, 150; helps the
Dutch, 212; hires Russian troops, 214,
217, 410; Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 219 5
King of the Romans Question, 367-369 5
Privateer Difficulties with Friedrich, 373 ;
deaf ear to Cameron’s Wife, 374; feels
that war with France is inevitable, 408;
refuses the French a passage through
Hanover, v. 4; finds no help in Kur-
Mainz, 6; anger at the Duke of Cumber-
land, 119; disgraces Lord George Sack-
ville, 365; his sudden death, vi. 107;
Smelfungus on, 432; mentioned also, iv.
9; vi. 102, 106.

George III. of England, ii. 78; v. 123; be-
comes King of England, vi. 108; his fu-
ture Wife, 183; saves Queen Matilda of
Denmark, 418.

George, Duke, of Saxony, i. 215.

George Friedrich of Culmbach, i. 185, 200,
215, 219; goes to Preussen to administer,
228.

George Ludwig, Bishop of Liege, iii. 79.
See Affair of Herstal.

George, Prince, of Hessen-Cassel, iii. 413,
518,

George the Pious, of Liegnitz, iii. 169. See
Culmbach.

George Wilhelm, Tenth Kurfiirst, helpless
amid the hot ashes of the Thirty-Years’
War, i. 248, 255.

Gera Bond, the, an excellent piece of Ho-
henzollern thrift, i. 1738, 229, 276, 277; ii.
163; the Salzburg Protestants at Gera,
824; Friedrich delayed at, 390.

Gerard, translator of ‘‘ Dialogues on Po-
land,” vi. 381.

Gerber, ii. 208, 220.

Gerhard, Engineer-Lieutenant, vi. 239.

Gerlach, Reverend Herr, assists Kappel in
saving Friedrich from betrayal, vi. 174,
175, 176.

Germain, St., at Rossbach, v. 159, 160, 161,
165, 166; rapacity and insubordination
of the French army, 179.

578 INDEX.

German language, the, i. 298; Names, iv.
106, 162; Nation, the, v. 167.

Gersdorf, Baron von, takes the water from
Arnold's Mill, vi. 473; the King’s Judg-
ment, 484; Judgment reversed, 492.

Gessler, General, at Hohenfriedberg, iv.
117, 119; sent to reinforce the Old Des-
sauer, 129, 167 ; mentioned also, vi. 146.

Gensau, Anton ‘von, at Versailles, iii. 182,
191.

Geyler, i. 269 n.

Gibbon’s only instructions in Ancient War,
v. 340.

Gibraltar, Spanish siege of, ii. 1, 6, 43.

Gibson, cited, iv. 99 n.

Giesebrecht, cited, vi. 133 n.

Gilge, i. 272.

Ginkel, General, ii. 215, 259, 334, 406;
Dutch Ambassador to King’ Friedrich,
iii. 827, 331.

Gisors, Comte de, killed at Crefeld, v. 251.

Glasenapp, Grenadiers of, iii. 220.

Glatz, ii. 3363 iii. 404; captured by Gener.
al Loudon, vi. 25-2.

Gleim, Bailiff, vi. 500.

Glenbucket, Laird of, iv. 373.

Glenfinlas, iv. 132.

Glinde, Albrecht, i. 163.

Glogau, iii. 140, 150, 159 ; capture of, 216.

Glume, ii. 439.

Gobel, ii. 825.

Goethe, i. 17, 299; ii. 193; his Hermann
and Dorothea, 329; iii. 189; v. 167; a boy
at Frankfurt, 326; his and his father’s in-
terest in the battle of Bergen, 330; his
recollection of Gellert, vi. 120; mentioned
also, 155 n., 379, 404, 446, 543; cited,
120 n.

Gildlein, General, iii. 239, 243, 244.

Goltz, Colonel von, accompanies the King
to Silesia, iii. 134; despatched to Prince
Leopold at Glogau, 218; scalade of Glo-
gau, 219, 221; secret Treaty of Klein-
Schnellendorf, 362, 364, 375; shot at Prag,
v. 39.

Goltz, General, under Prince of Prussia, v.
96; not condemned with him, 103; de-
fends Landshut, 428, 429, 445; chief post
at Neustadt; retires towards Neisse, 511 ;
summoned by Loudon to surrender, 512;
stubbornly repels every attack, and reach-
es his destination, 513; in Silesia, vi. 60;
reinforced to look after Loudon, 78, 1003
flings himself upon his task in a way
pleasant to look at, 135; taken with sud-
den fever and dies, 141.

Goltz, Kammerherr von, goes to Peters-
burg, vi. 201.

* Gompert, i. 312.

Gortz, i. 343.

Girtz, Eustace von, employed by Friedrich
in the Bavarian business, vi. 446-448 ;
Minister to Petersburg, 517.

G ‘rtz, General von, vi. "446, 447,

Gotha, Sachsen-, Duke and ‘Duchess of, vis-
ited’ by Friedrich, v. 122; brief account
of them, 123; letters from Friedrich to
the Duchess, 124, 126, 127, 435, 487-489 ;
timber cut down by Reichs Army, 326;

-
;

Duchess of, visited by Friedrich, vi. 249;
her death, 298; letter from Friedrich,
251.

Gotter, Count, iii. 116, 147; Proposals to
Austria, 152, 203; at Breslau, 209; at
Princess Ulrique’ 8 "Wedding, 578.

Gottfried, cited, ii. 6 n.

Gottsched’s, Professor, interviews with
Friedrich, v. 143, 1445; his wife a fine,
graceful, loyal creature, 144; the King
amused at his conceit, vi. 251; mentioned
also, 114, 119.

Gottin, Camp of, iii. 222, 315, 343.

Gitze, Kriegsrath von, iv. 387.

Gotzinger, Wilhelm Lebrecht, iv. 474 n.

Gotzkowsky, the good genius of Berlin, vi.
69-73; interview with Friedrich about
dag of ransom, 75; at Leipzig, 128,
Ht

Gough, cited, i. 98 n.

Grahame, Colonel, vi. 136.

er Madame de, ii. 460 n.3 cited, iv.

nD.

Grammont, Duke of, iii. 527; killed at Fon-
tenoy, iv. 91, 98.

Granaries, Public, i iii. 7.

Granby, Lord, at Minden, v. 364; leads an
attack at Warburg, vi. 33; his portrait by
Reynolds, 34; at Vellinghausen, 153, 1545
character of his English troops, 156, 157;
at Wilhelmsthal, 230; Amdneburg, 249,
243,

Grand, Le. See Grant.

Grant, Lieutenant-Colonel, at Kolin, v. 15;
at Leobschiitz, 511.

Granville, Earl. See Carteret. !

Griitz, Fortress of, ii. 501.

Graun, the Brothers, ii. 438; iii. 101.

Graun, the Composer, iii. 101.

Graun, Kammergericht Rath, vi. 482.

Griivenitz, Countess, and the Duke of Wiir-
temberg, ii, 176; becoming much of a He-
cate, 179; stowed away, 181, 263.

Gray’s Elegy, quoted by Wolfe on the night
preceding Quebec, v. 447.

Great Elector, the. See Friedrich Wilhelm.

Gregg, Captain, vi. 357.

Gregory, St., of Nazianzen, i. 36;

Gribeauval, M., Engineer in defence of
Schweidnitz, vi. 232, 235-238.

Griffet, Father, vi. 351.

Grimm, visits Russia, vi. 405.

Grimnitz, Schloss of, i. 214.

Groében, Lieutenant, ii. 313, 402.

Groében, President von der, vi, 273.

Gross, Russian Excellency, iv. 285, 288, 402, |

403.

Grotkau, in Silesia, iii. 229, 230, 331.

Grumkow, Baron, i. 299, 315 : 3 11. 175 a cun-
ning, greedy-hearted, long-he aded fellow,
i. 300; sets a spy on Creutz, 337; chal-
lenged by the Old Dessauer, and humbly
apologises, 450; introduces Seckendorf to
Friedrich Wilhelm, 453; bribed by the
Kaiser, 454, 4513; he ‘and Seckendorf
Black - Artists of | the first quality, 454;
how they ‘‘ possessed”? Friedrich Wilhelm,
4615 ii, 46, 66,158; skilful manoeuvres in
the Tobacco-Parliament, i. 466 ; ii, 12, 36,

——

ee ee ay eee

ee

INDEX.

44, 61, 108, 111; deputation to the Queen,
90,95; Cipher-Correspondence with Keich-
enbach, 93, 113, 123; their treachery
brought home to them, and denied, 127;
an intercepted Letter, 151; Grumkow in-
terrogates Friedrich at Mittenwalde, 209 ;
becoming almost too victorious, 210, 216,
229; if the King should suddenly die on
us, 217, 228; Grumkow visits Friedrich
at Clistrin, 217, 230; is one of the Court-
Martial to try him, 220; correspondence
with Friedrich, 234, 293, 299, 300, 302;
deputation to Wilhelmina, 236; his ac-
count of the King's interview with Fried-
rich at Ciistrin, 254: receives a private
report of Friedrich from Schulenburg,
261; introduces Friedrich to Wilhelmina,
281; with the King at his visit to the
Kaiser, 336, 339, 342; visits Wilhelmina,
346; will have nothing to do with Kaiser’s
Double-Marriag» project, 348; last inter-
views with the King of Poland, 354, 366.

Griinberg, Biirgermeister of, iii. 137.

Griine, General, iv, 151; on march for Bran-
denburg, 153, 154; joins Rutowski in Sax-
ony, 166; at Kesselsdorf, 170, 172.

Guarini, Jesuit, and the King of Poland, iv.
73, 441, 486.

Guasco, General, at Siege of Dresden, v
416 ; skilfully defends Schweidnitz, vi.
232-239 ; obliged to surrender at last, and
dies a prisoner, 239.

Guastalla, Monsignore di, iii. 273.

Gudowitsh, Adjutant, vi. 201.

Guhrauer, cited, i. 403 n.

Guibert, Colonel, vi. 404, 405.

Guichard. See Quintus Icilius.

Gumbrecht, i. 186.

Gundling, Jakob Paul, and his sublime long-
eared erudition, i. 470; Friedrich W il-
helm‘s rough sport with him, 472; quar-
rels with Fassmann, 480; strange burial,
481; mentioned also, vi. 466.

Gustaf Adolf, the great, i. 140, 248, 249, 255,
257 3 iv. 2253 v. 157.

Gustav III. See Karl Gustav.

Gustav IV. fF vi. 398 n.

Gutzmar, Mayor of Breslau, iii. 162, 164, 349,
352.

Guyon, Captain, vi. 239,

Hapsetscouwert, Action of, iv. 53.

Hacke’s wedding, ii. 304; his advancement,
831, 384, 841, 5853 letter from Friedrich,
332 ; Friedrich’s regard for him, iii. 231;
at Beraun, iv. 18; in attendance of Fried-
rich, 327.

Haddick, General, in Berlin, v. 115, 142, 146;
defends Torgau, 304; in the Lausitz, 342 ;
to join with Soltikof, 545; attacked by
Friedrich, 357; by Finck, 426 ; dismissed
from service, 438.

Haddock, Admiral, iii. 454, 485.

Hagen, Minister von, vi. 281.

Hague, Friedrich’s letters at the, vi. 47S n.

Halifax, Lord, iv. 378.

Hall, Captain 'of the ship ‘t Dartmouth,” vi.
406.

Halle, University of, i. 282; controversy

579

with Wolf, 475; the Salzburg Protestants
at, ii. 324.

Haller, Dr., vi. 353, 389.

Hamann, Customhouse-clerk, vi. 284.

Hameln, i. 253.

Hamersleben, i. 377.

Hanau, Conferences at, iii. 536; Belleisle
at, iv. 59.

Hanover, Electorate of, i. 24: Linden Ave-
nue at, 34; Treaty of, 431, 456; our Han-
over Series of Kings, ii. 7 ; King George's
Hanoverian difficulties, fii. 314, 370, 501 ;
Convention of, iv. 124, 130, 132, 149, 175:
eg profit from her English honors , 415,

Hanway, Sir Jonas, iv, 248, 249, 2923; cited,
248 n.; iii. 18 n.

Hapsburg Kaisers. See Rudolf.

Harcourt, Duc a’, iii. 439, ATT.

Hardenberg, Prince, vi. 511..

Hardwicke, Lord, v. 56; vi. 109, 112.

Haren, Van, iii. 498.

Harrach, Count, iv. 176, 181, 397.

Harrington, Lord, i ii. 43, 143; iii. 39, 65, 3115
tries to negotiate peace, iv. 130,

Harris, Excellency, vi. 428.

Harsch, General, defends Prag, iv. 16,18;
obliged to: surrender, 20; to remain near
Silesia, v. 276, 278, 281 ; hurries home-

wards, 303 ; attacks Landshut, 428; with
Loudon at capture of Glatz, vi. 26.

Hartmann, Herr von, iii. 269.

Hartoff, Herr von, ii. 70.

Haslang, iv. 77.

Hassan-Bey, in the Turkish fleet, vi. 357.

Hastenbeck, Battle of, v. 101, 102.

Haude, Bookseller, and the Mercury news-
paper, iii, 13.

Hautchar moi, General, iv. 81, 82, 100, 125.

Havelberg, i. 345 5 ii. 326.

Havre-de-Grace attacked by Rodney, v. 352.

Hawke, with a Channel Fleet, watclies
Vannes, v. 352, 409, 410; utterly ruins.
Conflans’s fleet, 475-479,

Hawley, General, iii. 533.

Haxthausen, Count, Danish Ambassador at
Petersburg, vi. 216.

Hay, Lord Charles, at Honboryyy iv. 93, 94;
quizzes Lord Loudon, vy. 57.

Heavy Peg, i. 150), 317.

Hecht, Prussian Secretar 'Y, iv. 388.

Hedwig, Grandmother of Peter 1II., vi. 197.

Heffner, Kapellmeister, vi. 258:

Heidelberg Protestants, i. 370.

Heiden, Colonel, defends Colberg, v. 275.

Heilbronn, ii. 1863 iv. 3.

Heilsbronn, i. 80, 250 5 ii. 168.

Heinrich Friedrich of Schwedt, Cousin of
Friedrich, i. 368, 369 n. 5 ii. 384, 405, 477,
478; iii. 16.

Helden-Geschichte, cited, ii. 135 n. 5 v. 3 n.;
vi. 10 n.

Heldorf, Kreis-Commissariat, v. 175, 177.

Helvetius arranges an Excise-system for
Prussia, vi. 283, 284.

Hénault, President, iv. 204.

Henderson, cited, iii. 547 n. 3 iv. 76 n.

Henkel, Count, at Berlin; supper with the
Queen Mother, iii. 22,

580 INDEX.

Hennersdorf, Fight of, iv. 160-162.

Hennert, cited, ii. 433 n.

Henri II., iii. 263.

Henri, Prince, ii. 434; with the King at
Aachen, iii. 471; marches upon Prag, iv.
11; at Tabor, 34; at battle of Hohenfried-
berg, 117; at Pyrmont, 190; Demon-
Newswriter’s account of, 334; at battle
of Prag, v. 32, 33, 36, 39: in retreat, 82,
85; with the King, 103; a grudge of pe-
culiar intensity, 105; enters Erfurt, 121 ;
at Gotha, 122; Friedrich’s high opinion
of him, 124, 441; slightly wounded, 169 ;
to guard Saxony, 181, 235, 276 ; visits
Wilhelmina, 239; at Tschopau, 250 ; let-
ter from Friedrich, grieving for Wilhelmi-
na, 2523; secret Paper of Directions, 253 ;
at Gross Seidlitz, 277, 278; suddenly posts
himself on the heights of Gahmig, 279;
with Friedrich in Dresden, 280; on march
for Neisse, 301; despatches Knobloch to
clear Erfurt, 326; swift work on the Aus-
trian Magazines, 331, 332; congratulated
by Friedrich, 336; called away from Sax-
ony, 342; at Bautzen, looking after Lou-
don and Haddick, 352 5 at Schmdttseifen,
354; hears of the Kunersdorf disaster,
3983; at Sagan, looking after Daun, 498,
430 makes extraordinary exertions :
moves southward after the Austrian Mag-
azines, 431; march of fifty hours, from
the Landskron to Hoyerswerda, 435-441 ;
captures Hoyerswerda, 440; ‘the only
one who never committed a mistake,”
441; beautifully outmanceuvres Daun,
445, 446; defeats D’Ahrenberg at Pretsch,
416; judiciously pricks into Daun; meet-
ing with Friedrich, 455; advises the slow
and sure method, 456; threatening to re-
sign, 513; to look after the Russians and
Silesia, vi. 2; cannot see his way to at-
tack, 4, 27; correspondence with Fried-
rich; mutual dissatisfaction, 28-30; makes
one of his winged marches, and saves
Breslau, 38; crosses Oder, to watch Solti-
kof, 443 out of health; nurses himself in
Breslau and Glogau, 60; letters from
Friedrich ; longing for his return, 63, 64;
presents his horse to Gellert, 120, 194;
takes charge of Saxony against Daun,
140, 151; driven into straiter quarters,
179’; tiff of quarrel with Friedrich, 190-
193; writes to Eichel, 192, 193; brilliant
successes in Saxony, 1983 letters from
Friedrich, 237; attacked by Stolberg and
driven from Freyberg, 240; defeats Stol-
berg in battle of Freyberg ; letter to
Friedrich, 245; from Friedrich, 247; goes
home to recruit his health, 249; letter
from Friedrich, 255; Friedrich forbids
him the offer of the Polish Crown, 321;
with Friedrich at the visit of Kaiser
Joseph, 338, 339; visits his sister the
Queen of Sweden, 345, 363; visits the
Czarina; sumptuous entertainments at
Petersburg, 364-366; Czarina proposes
the dismemberment of Poland, 366 5 again
at Petersburg, 427; in the Bavarian War,
459; visits Paris, 520; mentioned also,

iv. 227, 407, 486; vi. 113 n., 292, 514,

525.

Henri, Prince, the King’s Nephew, with him
at Leipzig, vi. 112; Friedrich’s good opin-
ion of him, 292, 389,

Henry II. of England, i. 79.

Henry II. of France, i. 198,

Henry IV., i. 237, 239.

Henry IV., Kaiser, i. 67.

Henry VII., Luxemburg Kaiser, i. 111, 146;
poisoned ‘in sacramental wine, 112; his
descendants, 122.

Henry VIII., i. 226.

Henry the Fowler, beginning of German
Kings, i. 53; his six Markgraviates, 54; a
valiant Son of Cosmos, 50 3 iii. 262.

Henry the Lion, i. 70, 79.

Henzi, Conspirator, of Berne, iv. 537.

Hermann, cited, vi. 199 n.

Hero-worship, a agian ive, 40.

Herrenhausen, i. 35, 406

Herrnhuth, founded by Count Zinzendorf,
iv. 157, 163.

Herrnstadt burnt by Soltikof, v. 445.

Herstal, ii. 487; the affair of, iii. 66, T2, T6.

Hlertzbcrg, at Congress of Hubertsburg, vi.
255; with Friedrich in his last illness,
531, 539, 542; mentioned also, 386, 435,
456, 462, 468, 523.

Hervey, Lord, ii. 68; cited, 68 n.

Herzen, cited, vi. 199 n.

Hesse, poor old, ii. 247.

Hessen - Darmstadt, Prince of, joins the
Reichs Army, vy. 89.

Hessian troops in Scotland, iv. 76; in Eng-
land, 420, 421.

Heucking, Colonel, vi. 477.

Heyde defends Colberg, vi. 59, 65; thanks
from the King, 65; third siege, ‘159-168 ;
utterly starved out, and honourably sur-
renders, 178.

Heywood, General, at Brussels, iii. 517.

Hierusalem, Rey. M., cited, vi. 155 n.

Hildburghausen, Prince of, ii. 484; takes
command of Reichs Army, v. $9; Ross-
bach, 151, 152, 153, 163, 164; retreat by
Naumburg; flings down his truncheon,
and goes home, 166.

Hildburghausen, Duke of, v. 89.

Hildebrand, Pope, i. 67.

Hildebrandt, cited, iii. 64 n.

Hille, ii. 251, 253.

Himmelstiidt, ii, 252.

Hirsch, the Voltaire- Lawsuit, iv. 267, 284.
History, all, an imprisoned Epic, Psalm and
Prophecy, i. 15; fleeting rumours of, 66;

use of, ii. 309

History’ of the Seven-Years War by the
Royal Staff Officers, cited, v. 25 n.

Hoare, cited, y. 229 n.

Hoadly, Bishop, iv. 374.

Hochkirch and its environs, v. 284; battle,
287-297 ; Hochkireh Church, 300.”

Hochstiidt, i, 281.

Hocke, Baron von; deputation from Griin-
berg, iii. 135,

Hof, i. 119 ; ii. 390.

aaa Colonel, killed at Dresden, v.

INDEX.

Hoffmannswaldau, Silesian poet, iii. 132.
Hofmann, Brunswick Envoy, iv. 237.

581

amazing interview with the King, 150; no
choice but to return home, 153.

Hohenfriedberg, iv. 108,109 ; battle of, 114- Howe, Lord, in the attack on Conflans's

- 120.
Hohenlohe, Reich-Fiirst von, v. 45.

Hohenstauffen Dynasty, i. 68; tragic end

of the, 97, 99.

Hohenzollerns, the, i. 75; Burggraves of
Niirnberg, 80; ii. 167; a thrifty, sted-
fast, clear-sighted line of men, i. $1, 96;
how they obtained Baireuth and Anspach,
96; Burggraviate made hereditary, 97 ;
further acquisitions, 116 ; become connect-
ed with Brandenburg, 119, 132; become
Kurfiirsts, 149; contrast between guid-
ance and no-guidance, 154; not worship-
ers of Beelzebub, 155; not speckless par-
agons of all the virtues, 1583; practical
notions of Fairplay, 268; the Twelve Ho-
henzollern Electors, 288; Nationl Drill-
sergeants, 317; fine talent for annihila-
ting rubbish, ii. 163 5 Prussia’s debt to her
Hohenzollern Kings, vi. 267. See Bran-
denburg 3 Prussia.

Holbach, Baron d’, vi. 345.

Holberg, cited, i. 207 n.

Holderness, Lord, making for Venice, iv. 30;
mentioned also, v. 42.

Ifolland, a Stadtholder chosen for, iv. 211,
212. See Dutch.

Holle, cited, i. 95 n; iv. 364 n.

Holstein, i. 329, 336; Holstein-Beck, Prince
of, ii. 139; accompanies King Friedrich
into Silesia, iii, 1843; at Frankenstein,
223, 227.

Holstein-Plén, Duke of, vi. 111.

Holstein, Prince George of, vi. 211.

Holstein, Prince von, at siege of Dresden, vi.
20, 223 in Battle of Torgau, 86, S9, 94.

Homer's Iliad, i. 16.

Hompesch, Baron von, i. 446.

Hope sometimes a godlike thing, v. 186;
very beautiful, sometimes even fallacious
hope, 505.

Hopfgarten, General, and his complimentary
palderdash, ii. 161.

Hoppe, cited, ii. 58 n.

Hordt, Colonel of the Prussian Free-Corps,
Vv. 47; sharp on the Cossacks, 249; charge
of baggage during battle of Zor ndorf, 260;
taken prisoner to Petersburg, 429, 430; at
Petersburg, vi. 200, 205, 206 ; hears in’ his
prison of the accession of Peter III., 206;
presented at Court, 208; sees the de-
ceased Czarina lying in State; sups with
the Czar, 210; with the Czarina, 212;
paid off, at close of the war, 253.

Hormayr, cited, i. 111 n.; ii. 286 n. 3; iii.
269 n.; iv.6n.3 v. 23 n.; vi. 240 n.

Horn, cited, i. 43 n.

Hornoi, M. d’, vi. 411.

Horse Artillery, first introduced by Fried-
HICH. Vv; Sol.

Horst, Minister von der, vi. 281.

Hotham, Sir Charles, English Envoy to
Prussia, ii. 106; welcomed at Berlin; din-
ner with the King Friedrich Wilhelm,
109; his Despatches, 120; Double-Mar-
riage scheme as good as ended, 128, 130;

fleet, v. 47 7

Hoym, Graf von, ii. 142.

Hubertsburg, sacking of, vi. 121-123, 254;
Congress for peace held at, 254-256.

Hiibner, cited, i. 57 n. 3 ii. 367 n. 3 vi. 197 n.

Hiilsen, at Kolin, v. 68, 74, 75, 765 with
Prince Henri in Bohemia, 330; with Doh-
na, against the Russians, 344; at Zilli-
chau, 349; marches into Saxony, 445,
447; with Friedrich in Saxony, vi. 7, 8;
assists at siege of Dresden, 19; defeats
the Reichfolk on the Diirrenberg, 53 ;
hastens to the assistance of Berlin, 68; re-
turns to Saxony, 763 with Friedrich, 79 ;
despatched to Leipzig, to clear out the
Reichs Army, 80; battle of Torgau, 86,
8S, 92; getting into bivouac, 95; hears
renewed firing, and hastens to it, through
the darkness of night, 96, 97; his respect
for Gellert, 115; sends reinforcements to
Prince Henry, 247.

Hungary becomes prt of Austria, i. 179.

Hungarian Diet, iii. 367.

Hungarian enthusiasm for Maria Theresa,
iv. 15.

Hunger, war waged by, i. 258.

Hunolstein, cited, vi. 534 n.

TIuss, John, i. 142, 145 ; iii, 451.

Hussites, i iv. 40.

Hyndford, Lord, at Breslau, iii. 321, 323,

527; audience with King Friedrich, 324,

331; again, with Robinson, 5413 at Gross-
Neundorf, 354, 361; two notes, 362; inter-
view with Goltz, 363; meeting at Klein-
Schnellendorf, 371; at Berlin, 382; Order
of the Thistle, and Silver Dinner-Service,
457; mentioned also, 215, 318, 483, 454; iv.
233

Hypocrites, Sincere-, i. 355.

Icu Dien, i. 128, 129.

Ignon, St., General, at Torgan, vi. ST.

Tigen, i. 330: > ii. 365 iii. 49.

Imhof defends the br idge at Rees, v. 308 n.

India, England victorious in, v. 454.

Indigence made human, iii. 8.

Infime, L’, chief monster of chaos, vi. 263,
264; may again need to be tied up, 264.

Ingoldsby, Brigadier, at Fontenoy, iv. 92.

Intellects, female, i. 39; the best symptom
of Intellect, 395; uttered and wnuttered
Intellect, ii, 292; Intellect and Vulpinism,
351; love of intellect, 443.

Tpres, iv. 3.

Italian Liberty, i. 113; Italy. extinguishing
its Protestantism, 204; Italian War, iii.
482.

Itzig of Berlin, vi. 72.

Iwan, Czar, i. 349 ; ii. 291; childhood of, iii.
117; death, 198.

Iwanowna, See Anne of Courland.

JACOBEA of Baden, i. 233.

Jiigerndorf, Duchy of, i. 180, 200, 219, 229,
259, 278; ii. 336; country, iii. 132, 225,

Jahnus, Colonel, death of, iv. 34,

582

James I, of England, i. 245, 252, 253.

James Sobieski of Poland, i. 372.

Jandun, Duhan de. See Duhan.

Jaromierz, Friedrich Wilhelm at, ii. 336;
D’Arget saves Valori from the Pandours
at, iv. 136.

J et M., a Prussian Judge, iv. 268, 279,

99.

Jauernik, iii. 435,

Jean Paul, i. 82.

Jeetz, General, at Breslau, iii. 165; cannot
take Namslau, 168,170; succeeds ut last,
172; siege of Brieg, 172, 281.

Jeffery, Bookseller, iv. 234 n.

Jena University, iv. 243, 244.

Jenkins, Captain Robert, scandalous treat-
ment of, by the Spaniards, ii, 249; his
*« Kar’? reémerges, and produces effects,
5)2, 524; iii. 90, 93, 256, 260, 296; iv. 220,
221, 375; Jenkins-Kar Controversy at last
settled, iv. 258.

Jennings, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough,
vi. 431,

Jericho, one’s, apt to fall, iii. 453.

Jerome’s, St., method of scripture comment-
ary, i. 30.

Jesuits, i. 233, 239, 245, 250, 251, 374, 445;
ii. 456; busy in Glatz, vi. 25; fanaticism
in Poland, 316,

J. ¥.8., Author of a Life of Brown, cited,
iii, 142 n.3 v. S89 n.

Joachim Ernst, Markegraf, i. 251.

Joachim Friedrich, Eighth Kurfiirst, i. 214,
223; fairly gets hold of Preussen, 229 ;
death, 231.

Joachim [I., Kur-Brandenburg, i. 170, 171,
189; his character, 205; his Protestant
Wife, 206; death-bed, 219.

Joachim II., Sixth Kurfiirst, i. 210; abhor-
rence of chicanery, 213; accident to his
poor Wife in the Schloss of Grimnitz, 214;
gets Co-infeftment in Preussen, 215; Her-
itage-Brotherhood with the Duke of Lieg-
nitz, 216; stiff debates with King Ferdi-
nand, 219; stanch to the great cause of
Protestantism, 219; on good terms with
Karl V., 221.

Joachimsthal, iv. 454.

Joachimsthal Gymnasium, i. 215, 223.

Jobst of Mithren, i. 126, 134, 137, 139, 141.

Johann IL. Burggraf of Nurnberg, i. 119,
133.

Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous taken
captive by Karl V., i. 211, 213, 2223 ii.
136; v. 123; his Wife, i. 226.

Johann George, Elector of Saxony, i. 256.

Johann George of Jiigerndorf, i. 229, 259;
iii. 132.

Johann George, Seventh Kurfiirst, i. 173,
224, 227; Gera Bond, 174; with Karl V.
at the siege of Wittenberg, 221; a pru-
dent, thrifty, just-minded Herr, 223.

Johann, King of Bohemia, i. 122, 125; death
on the field of Crecy, 128; iii. 131.

Johann of Ciistrin, i. 220.

Johann of Nepomuk, i. 134; ii. 342.

Johann Sigismund, Ninth Kurfiirst, i. 229,
2315; interest in the Cleve-Heritage, 231;
his claims disputed,- 234; slaps young

INDEX.

Pfalz-Neuburg"s face, 242; gets posses-
sion of Prussia, 248.

Johann the Alchemist, i. 164.

Johanna Elizabeth, Wife of Duke of Wiir-
temberg, ii. 176; steadily refuses an in-
iquitous divorce, 177.

Johannes Cicero, Fourth Kurfiirst, i. 169.

Johannes of Valencia, i. 186.

Johannes Parricida, i. 111.

John Casimir, King of Poland, gives up the
Homage of Preussen, i. 266; abdicates,
267; ii. 355; vi. 312; his valedictory
speech, 312, 313.

John, St., Hospitallers of, i. 865 ii. 258.

eo the Steadfast, Kur-Sachsen, i. 183,

Johnson, cited, ii. 51 n.

Johnson, Samuel, i. 4, 39, 156, 314,361; ii. 83.

Jomini, cited, v. 65 n.

Jordan, Charles Etienne, ii. 438, 440, 570;
gossipy Letters to Friedrich, iii. 154, 254,
426; iv. 183; mentioned also, iii-7, 13, 20,
101, 158, 230, 346, 419, 563.

Jirdens, cited, vi. 115 n.

Jore, Bookseller, iv. 286.

Joseph IL, Kaiser, iii. 132, 145.

Joseph IL., Kaiser; birth, iii. 105; a thriy-
ing child, 368; shown to the Mungarian
Diet, 369; King of the Romans, iv. 267,
369; vi. 299; becomes Kaiser, 299; does
honour to Schwerin’s memory, v. 40; pays
Friedrich a friendly visit at Neisse, vi.
337, 841; receives return-visit at Neu-
stadt; Prince de Ligne’s account, 346-354;
informed that Friedrich is dying, and
marches on Brandenburg, 425; visits Par-
is, and converses with D’Alembert, 436,
437; thinks France a beautifully united
country, 437; tries to get Bavaria, 439,
441; bullies Karl Theodor, 445; writes to
King Friedrich, 455; at the head of his
troops, 459; ingratiates himself with the
Czarina, and hopes to have a clear stage
for his ambition, 493, 494; a grandly-at-
tempting man, who could succeed in noth-
ing, 527; mentioned also, 382, 420, 425,
519.

J.lich, i. 226, 231, 265; siege of, 239; a car-
penter of, kidnapped, 446. See Cleve.

Jiilich and Berg. See Berg-Jiilich.

Junius, vi. 1S8 n.

Justice, love of, i. 311, 463 ; ii. 247; persist-
ence in, i. 312, 379 5 ii. 292.

Kautsurtz, Colonel, at Tetschen, iv, 17.

Kainardschi, Peace of, vi. 368 n.

Kaisers, the early, i. 53, 67; three futile
Kaisers, 97; a new Kaiser, 100; a con-
tested Election, 114; seven Non-IHapsburg
Kaisers, 146.

Kaiserwahl, iii. 274.

Kalkreuth, Adjutant, v. 441; in battle of
Freyberg, vi. 246, 247.

Kalkstein, Baron von, kidnapped at Watr-
saw, i. 275, 276, 354.

Kalkstein, Lieut.-Colonel, i. 339, 353, 354.

Kalkstein, General, iii. 223, 225, 227, 281.

Kaltenborn's, Major, account of King Fried-
rich’s Reviews, vi. 421, 423.

INDEX.

Kamecke, Frau yon, i. 294; letter from the
King, ii. 201; defends Wilhelmina from
her Father’s violence, 206, 207.

Kamenz, Abbey of, iii. 206.

Kamken. See Kamecke.

Kannegiesser, ii. 58, T0, 79.

Kansler von Ludwig, iii. 155; Silesian Man-
ifesto, 288.

Kant, vi. 488.

Kapp, cited, i. 199 n.

Kappel saves Friedrich from betrayal to the
Austrians, vi. 170-176.

Karl Albert, Kur-Baiern, iii. 107, 185, 264 ;
protests against Pragmatic Sanction, 267 ;
treaty with Belleisle for Kaisership, 276;
elected, 279, 255, 407; Unertl’s urgent ap-
peal, 284; public declaration, 339; enters
Linz, 366; dreams of sovereignty, 371,
390, 897; across to Mannheim, 399; at the
topgallant of his hopes, 40S; his strange-
ly chequered career, 408, 411; Kaiser Karl
VII., 411; coronation and illness, 412; se-
ries of disasters, 424; Terror on Friedrich
making peace for himself, 471; D’Har-
court’s futile reinforcements, 477; ‘* Kai-
ser and nothing,” 490; returns to Miin-
chen, 495, 510; takes Broglio in hand, and
flings down his Patent, 511; hurries back
to Frankfurt, 515 ; Conferences at Hanau,
536; become tragical to think of, 542;
** Kaiser, as you call him,” 543; gets back
to Miinchen, iv. 31, 58; death, 63, 64;
mentioned also, vi. 305.

aoe Alexander, Duke of Wiirtemberg, iii.
417

Karl August Christian of Zweibriick, Heir
of Bavaria, vi. 444, 446; glad to resist the
Austrian encroachments, 448, 523, 524.

Karl, Duke of Brunswick, ii. 291, 423, 496.

Karl, Duke of Courland, vi. 304.

Karl Edward, of Ost-Friesland, iii. 592.

Karl Eugen, Prince of Wiirtemberg. See
Wurtemberg.

Karl, Grand-Master of the Knights of St.
John, ii. 25S,

Karl Gustaf of Sweden, i. 140; war with Po-
land, 266; dream of a new Goth Empire ;
death, 267.

Karl Gustav III. becomes King of Sweden,
vi. 892; tries to muzzle his monster of a
Senate; and gets killed, 398.

Karl IV., Kaiser, i. 122, 125, 127, 146; iii.
131, 262; buys Brandenburg, i. 131, 132.
Karl V., Kaiser, i. 179, 153, 194, 196, 200,
218, 227; ii. 164; at the siege of Metz, i.
198; iii, 524; his Sister married to Chris-
tian II. of Denmark, i. 206; triumph at
Miihlberg, 211; ii. 185; his haughty ways,
212; reverses and abdication, 2145 at the

siege of Wittenberg, 221.

Karl VI., Kaiser, i. 21, 283, 414, 424; ii.
338; iii. 145; his feebly-virulent quarrel
with the Queen of Spain, i, 3815 a fearful
affair, though a ludicrous one, 882, 417,
424, 437; ii. 42; converts and marries a
Protestant. Princess, i. 4153; ii. 287; his
Pragmatic Sanction in favour of Maria
Theresa, i. 420; ii. 48, 191, 299; his Os-
tend East-India Company, i. 423; Con-

4

583

gress of Cambrai, 427; Treaty of Vienna,
430; ii. 249; sends Seckendorf to Berlin
to snare Friedrich Wilhelm, i. 452; ii.
44; bribes Grumkow, i. 454; high-sniffing
contempt for Friedrich Wilhelm, 456; a
treacherous bargain, 457; ii. 57; Congress
of Soissons, 42; suspends the Duke of
Mecklenburg, 59; a visit from Friedrich
Wilhelm, 333; dreadful doubts about the
ceremonial, 333, 337 ; unceremonial meet
ings, 342; what Friedrich thought of his
Father’s visit, 344; attempt to resuscitate
the Double-Marriage, 347, 359; interferes
in the Polish Election, 369; attacked by
the French, 375; applies to the Reich for
help, 381; high demands on Friedrich
Wilhelm, 418; second Rhine-Campaign,
419; the damages he had to pay, 474;
fallen-out with Friedrich Wilhelm, 427 ;
declares war against the Turks, 454; dis-
astrous results, 499; shameful Peace; a
Kaiser much beggared and disgraced, 523;
his orthodoxy, iii. 1453 tries to settle the
Herstal affair, 87; will not declare for
England against France, 93; news of his
death reaches Berlin; particulars of his
last illness, 102; angry controversy with
Karl Albert, 410.

Karl VIL, Kaiser, i. 119,147. See Karl Al-
bert.

Karl, Margraf, at scalade of Glogau, iii. 219 ;
wounded at Mollwitz, 242; iv. 19; in Si-
lesia, 83, 100; a brilliant passage of arms,
102; refuses Broglio admission to the Sax-
on Camp, 449; to guard Silesia, v. 2535
at Grussau, 277, 278; marching towards
Daun, 279; meets the King at Grossen-
hayn, 280; in battle of Hochkirch, 292,
294,

Karl Peter Ulrich, afterwards Czar Peter
ILl., iii. 575.

Karl Philip, Kur-Pfalz, i. 3713 ii. 500; vi.
443; runs-off with James Sobieski’s Bride,
i. 372; becomes Pfalz-Neuburg, 373; trib-
ulations of the Heidelberg Protestants,
374; Friedrich Wilhelm's visit, ii, 181,
18); his Mistress, 263.

Karl, Prince, iii. 395, takes command of the
Austrian Army, 398, 427, 431; advances
towards Chrudim, 438 ; at Chotusitz, 443,
448; chases Broglio, 480; bevieges Prag,
482, 4ST; off to meet Maillebois, 492; at
Brannau, 505, 511; Deggendorf, 513; vis-
its George II. at Hanau, 540; projected
invasion of Alsace, 546; marriage, 54S;
his Rhine campaign, iv. 3; the acme of
his life, 6, 9; distracted books about him,
6 n.3; hastens to relief of Prag, 21; re-
crosses the Rhine, 27; follows Friedrich
into Bohemia, 32; having pushed his ene-
my over the Elbe, wishes to close the
campaign, 40; his Wife’s sad death, 52;
marches against Iriedrich in Silesia, 84,
100, 104; very capable of certainty, and
also of doubt, the wrong way, 104; Iohen-
friedberg, 112, 116,118; will have to go,
119; beats retreat, 120; skill in choosing
camps and positions ; at Kinigsgriitz, 122;
urged to try another battle, 135; ad-

584 INDEX.

vances towards Friedrich, 142; battle of
Sohr, 143, 148; tumultuous retreat, 146;
falls back to Kénigsgriitz, 149; on march
to Brandenburg, 153, 154; quite unaware
that Friedrich has got ready for him, 157,
159; after Hennersdorf, tumbles home
double-quick, 162, 163; hastens to join
Rutowski, 163; arrives at Dresden, but
does nothing, 172; vanishes into Bohe-
mia, 175; takes command in defence of
Prag, Vv. 13, 16, 17, 24; attack of spasm,
31; frantic efforts to prevent defeat, 34;
will not surrender, 61; not very broad
awake, 83, 84; follows the Prince of Prus-
sia, 95; burns Zittau to ashes, 99; sends
Nadasti to attack Winterfeld, 109, 110;
follows Bevern into Silesia, 180; battle of
Breslau, 182; Breslau capitulates, 184;
Council of War: will go out to meet Fried-
rich; and finish him, 191; puffed-up with
high thoughts, 192; battle of Leuthen ;
Prince Karl and Austria fallen from their
high hopes in one day, 193-205, 210, 211;
relieved from his military employments;
withdraws to his government of the Neth-
erlands, 211; his death, vi. 505.

Karl, Theodor, bargains with Austria to give
up his succession to Bavaria, vi. 439; a
poor, idle, egoistic creature, 442, 443, 444;
legally installed; signs the Austrian bar-
gain, 445; and remains dead to the mat-
ter, 446, 448, 495, 523.

Karl XII. of Sweden, v. 443, 444; how he
first took arms, vi. 197. See Charles XII.

Karl XTIL., vi. 39S n.

Karoly, General, iv. 82.

Karsch, Frau, the Berlin literary prodigy,
vi. 472 and n.

Kiisebier, a celebrated Prussian thief, v. 61.

Katholische Kirche, iv. 309

Katsbach, the, ii. 335.

Katsch, ii. 12.

Katte, ‘Lieutenant, ii. 21, 83; a dangerous
companion for Friedrich, 87, 143, 156; Wil-
helmina’s Miniature, 156 ; Friedrich’ s pro-
jected Flight, 158, 169, 174; news of his Ar-
rest, 199; sends Writing-desk and money to
the Queen, 200; arrested, 201; the King’s
ungovernable rage, 206, 208; Katte and
the Crown-Prince to be tried by Court-
Martial, 216; Katte’s iron doom, 220;
‘piously prepares himself to die, 221; last
words with the Prince, and death, 223.

Katte, Lieutenant-General von, ii. 399, 425;
iii. 17, 34, 222.

Katte, Minister, v. 858.

Katte, Rittmeister von, ii. 166, 170, 171.

Katzenellenbogen, ii. 193.

Katzler, Colonel, iv. 142; at Hennersdorf,
161.

Kaufbeuern, ii. 321.

Kaunitz-Rietberg, Count von, iv. 219; great-
est of Diplomatists, 222, 223, 407, 40S;
Smelfungus’s estimate of him, 369, 370;
arranges Klingegriif’s audience with the
Empress, 431; despatched to Prince Karl
at Zittau, v. 108; snubs Lord Bute, vi.
230; at the interview of the Kaiser with
Friedrich, 345, 354; discusses with Fried-

rich the Russian-Turk war, 359-361;
hard-mouthed negotiations on the Polish
Question, 367-370; indignant letter from
Maria Theresa, 371; intrigues and bar-
gains to get Bavaria, 439, 441, 442, 452;
tries to mollify Friedrich, 454, 455; his
fine schemes all spoiled, 524; mentioned
also, v. 217, 315, 496; vi. 331, 369, 382,
493.

Kausler, cited, i. 271 n.3 iii. 239 n.3 v. C5

mn.) viz 1LOtsan.

Kayserling, Russian Ambassador at War-

saw, vi. 3

Kehl, ii. 375.
Keith, Excellency, entertains Czar Peter,

vi. 208; Minister at Dresden, 416 ; rescues
Queen Matilda from a Danish prison, 418;
visits Lord Marischal, 41S, 419, 420.

Keith, General, in the Russian Service, at

the siege of Oczakow, ii. 483; at Stock-
holm, iii, 201; takes service with Fried-
rich, iv. 215; much esteemed by him, 310;
omanarch into Saxony, 437; interviews
with her Polish Majesty, 439, 440; march-
es to Aussig, to meet the Austrians, 445,
452; joined by Friedrich, 453; before
Prag, v. 19, 34, 43, 69, 60; skilful retreat,
82; with the King at Bernstadt, 1€6;
march to Erfurt, 115; Rossbach, 151, 152,
154, 155; to march into Bohemia, 181;
with Friedrich at siege of Olmiitz, 236,
289, 247 ; retreat to Konigsgriitz, 247, 248;
prompt enough with his stroke, when
wanted, 248; Breslau, 253; experience of
Russian soldiering, 2593 joins Ziethen in
Saxony, 278; expostulates with Friedrich
at Hochkirch, 284; has command of right
wing, 285; death, 293; honourable sol-
dier’s-burial; ‘ta noble legacy ;’? monu-
ments to his memory, 299, 300; his ances-
try, 508, 504.

Keith, lieutenant, ii. 21, 142; stationed at

Wesel, ST, 143; a party to Friedrich’s pro-
jected’ Flight, 171; news of its discovery
by the King, 195; escapes, 198, 2023; safe
in England, 203; sentence, 220; returns
to Prussia, iii. 18; receives a present from
the King, iv. 249; in the Kénig-Mauper-
tuis controversy, 340, 341.

Keith, Page, ii. 172, 174; will get horses for

Friedrich, 186; attempted flight at Siein-
furth, 188; coniesses all to the King, 190;
packed into the Fusileer Regiment, 204;
mentioned also, iii. 19.

Keith, Sir Robert Murray, iv. 367, 411; vi.
154'n.; cited, v. 800 n.

Kelly, O'", with Daun at Burkersdorf, vi.
226298,

Kemeter, ii. 481.

gions Duchess of, i. 127, 403; ii. 8, 120,
219.

Kepler, i. 245; iii. 366.

Keppel, in the attack on Conflans’s fleet, v.

477.
Ker of Kersland, i. 403 n.

Kestlitz, Baron yon, deputation from Griin-

berg, iii. 135.
Kettenbeil, Herr, iv. 239,
Kettlers, the, ii. 278,

INDEX,

Keyserling, ii. 361, 439, 469, 5213 iii. 20, 70,
231; iv. 183.

Khan, Thamas Kouli, iv. 248.

Khevenhiiller, General, fortifies Vienna, iii.
367, 371; collects an Army, 393, sweeps
Ségur back, 399; takes Linz, 406; master
of nearly all Bavaria, 477; visits King
George at Hanau, 540; mentioned also,
iv. 453.

Kielmannsegge, Graf von, ii. 495.

King, a, without the trappings, i. 1: Sham
Kingship, 5; the True King, 309, 313;
worth of, 317; an Economist King, 318;
a Constitutional King, 405; ii. 8; a Work-
ing King, i . 443; ii. 505; an Absolute
King, i. 463; a Kingly Fight lost to the
world, ii. 68; Modern Kings, 537; Kings
cannot steer by count of votes, ili. 25 can-
not be amiable all round, 99; a George I.
for King, 337; unfortunate and guilty

_ Kings, iv. 31; a born King, with his
kingdom to seek, v. 54; Kings true and
false, vi. 267, 26S. See Sovereignties.

Kingston, Duchess of, vi. 344, 429.

Kintore, Earldom of, v. 503.

Kirkman, James, the Irish Giant, i. 441,
443; ii. 539.

Kladrup, ii. 3375 iv. 40.

Klaproth, Medicinal-Assessor, iv. 247.

Kleefeld, General, attacks Torgau, v. 406,
420.

Klein, cited, iv. 268 n.

Klein-Schnellendorf, secret treaty at, iii.
374.

Kleist, Colonel, of the Green Hussars, v.
333, 392 ; at Aussig, 458 ; with Hiilxen on
the Diirrenberg, vi. 58; pounces upon the
Duke of Wiirtemberg, 79, with Friedrich
at Torgau, 86, 87, 88, 89; with Prince
Henri, 151, 193; tries to relieve Colberg,
WT; at Freyberg, 246; attacks the Bohe-
mian magazines, 247, 248; seizes Niirn-
ong 248; paid off at close of the war,

Kleist, General, at Brieg, iii. 168, 170; sum-
moried from Pommern, v. 394

Kleist’s, Major, tragic fate at ‘Kunersdorf,
y. 392; death and goldier’s-funeral at
Frankfurt, 393.

Kleist, von, Engineer-Lieutenant, vi. 239.

Klinggriif, ii. 276; at Conferences of Ha-
nau, iii. 537; iv. 428; audience with the
Empress of Austria, 430, 4313; farther
question from Friedrich, 431, 432.

Klootz, Anacharsis, vi. 496.

Kloss, cited, i. 64 n.

Kloster Kampen, Fight of, vi. 103-106.

Kloster-Zeven, Convention of, v. 117-119;
renounced by England and Hanover, 150.

Knesebeck, cited, v. 231 n.; vi, 34 n.

Knight, Charles, vi. 415 n.

Knobelsdorf, ii, 392, 439, 5203 iii. 100; iv.
193.

Knobloch, General, at Erfurt, v. 326;
tacking the Austrian magazines, 331
drives the Croats out of Bamberg, 332:
tries to relieve Colberg, vi. 177.

Knock, Fort of, iv, 3.

Knut, i. 57. |

at-

585

Knyphausen, Baron von, ii. 37, 76, 102, 121,
126, 2123 iv. 407, 41S; v. 224.

Knyphaucen, Madame, iv. 249,

Koch, ii. 276; cited, v. 5 n.

Kohler, cited, i. 53 n., 54 n., 67 n., 94 n.,
95 n , 113, 160 n. 3 ili. 209 n.; vi. 46 n.

Kolin, Battle of, ii. 8339, v. 62-77.

Kolitz, ii. 455.

Kollas, Captain, at siege of Dresden, v. 414,
415, 417, 425.

Koln, Clement August, Kurfirst of, ii. 194,
271; famed old City of. 197,

Kiln, Elector of, and his troops, iv. 38.

Konig, dispute between Madame du Chiate-
let and, iii. 61.

Konig visits Maupertuis about his ‘‘ Law of
Thrift,” and is not handsomely received,
iv. 262-265; publishes his strictures, 335,
336 ; correspondence with Maupertuis,
336, ‘387; summoned by the Berlin Acad-
emy, 838, 839; resigns his Membership,
Hee appeals to the public, 342; cited,

36 n.

Konigsberg, i. 47, 89, 18S, 271 ; University
of, 195; Biirgermeister “of. seized in open
Hall, O75: Stanislaus at, ii. 4225 homag-
ing at, iii. 33.

Konigseck, Graf von, ii. 378; with Prince
Karl, tii. 427; at Chotusitz, 447; at Dres-
den, iv. 73, in the Netherlands, $5; at
Fontenoy, 89; ordered to Prag, v. 12, 13;
defeated at Reichenburg, 14, 15,

Konigsmark, Aurora von, iii. 391.

Konigsmark tragedy, the, i. 25.

Konopischt, Camp of, iv. 35.

Koppen, Lieutenant, 7. 333.

Korbach, Fight of, vi. 31.

Korbitz, Action of, v. 426,

Korf, General, introduces Hordt to the Rus-
sian Court, vi. 207, 210; great expecta-
tions of the new reign, 209

Kosel, iv. 83; cited, 126 n.

Koslin, Town in Pommern, iii. 33.

Kreutzer, Colonel, at Liége, iii. T9.

Kriele, Johann Ludwig, on Kunersdorf, v
870, 876, 359, 392; cited, 36S n.

Kricher, Colonel, ii. 160.

Krockow, commander of Prussian vanguard
at Domstiidtl, v. 245; recommends the
French Excise-System to Friedrich, vi. 284,

Krusemark, Colonel, vi. 171, 175.

Kunersdorf, ii. 266; battle of, v. 372-594;
description of the country, 374-37T.

Kunz von Kauffungen, i. 166 ; ii, 162.

Kuppisch, Cess-Collector, vi. 474.

Kur-Baiern, the young, iv. 64, T7, 79.

Kurfiirsts and their function, i. 71; the
Twelve Hohenzollern, 288.

Kur. Kéln, dances with Wilhelmina at
Frankfurt, iii. 414.

Kur-Mainz, iii. 519, 544.

Kur- Pfalz, iii, 275. See Philip.

Kur-Sachsen, protests against Pragmatic

Sanction, iii. 271; helps Belleisle, 275;
King of "Mor avia, "O83 ; Copartnery with
France and Bayaria, 367, 889, 392, 400;
green diamond, 427; resentment against
Friedrich, 42S 5 mentioned also, 204, 209,
214, 264. tee August IIL. of Poland,

Br?

586 INDEX.

Kurt, ii. 212.

Kiister, Army-Chaplain, vi, 121, 123, 168,
170; cited, iii. 19 n.; vi. 122 n

Kutzen, cited, v.65 n.

Kyau, General, takes Bevern’s command,
and retires towards Glogau, v. 184; su-
perseded by Ziethen, 186.

LAcRrETELLE, cited, i. 409 n.

Lacy, Fieldmarshal, ii. 371, 420; iii. 142;
commands the Russian Army, 201; at
Riga, 215; mentioned also, iv. 214.

Lacy, Junior, iii. 142; at Hochkirch, v. 288 ;
Keith’s chief-mourner, 299; message to
Soltikof, 402 ; urges Daun, 459; with
Daun in Saxony, vi. 2, 6,8; follows Fried-
rich’s march for Silesia, 13; vanishes from
Lichtenberg at Friedrich’s approach, 14;
skirmish of horse at Gidau, 15, 16; has-
tily quits Gédau, 17; arrives in Dresden,
18; leaves Dresden to its fate, 19; with
Daun attends Friedrich’s march into Si-
lesia, 40-43; at battle of Liegnitz, 45, 48,
53; joins with the Russians to seize Ber-
lin, 66; flies into open rage at Tottleben’s
terms of capitulation; for three days, the
evil genius of Berlin, 70; off, quicker than
he came, at Friedrich’s approach, 73; with
Daun in battle of Torgau, 87, 88, 95, 98;
in retreat, 99; defeated at Reichenbach,
233, 234; in the Bavarian War, 459, 460;
mentioned also, 338, 339, 348, 351, 505.

Lafayette, prisoner in Olmtitz, v. 2834; men-
tioned also, vi. 517, 530

Lally, Count, at Fontenoy, iv. 9T; at Mad-
ras, v. 310; nearly the most unfortunate
and worst-used *“*man of genius,’ 453,
454.

Lambert, M. de St., iv. 210, 226.

Laudshut, i iii. 382; Protestants of, iv. 121.

Lange, i. 4765 iii. 15T.

Lange, Major, killed at Hochkirch, v. 292.

Langensalza, Fight of, vi. 124-126.

Latin, learning, i. 356. See Education.

Latour, De, iv. 111, 112.

Latour, Father, chief Jesuit, iv. 200.

Lattorf defends Kosel, v. 303.

Lauffeld, Battle of, iv. 197 n., 211.

Launay, De, head of the Excise department,
vi. 286, 283, 289, 540.

Lausitz, i. 55, 57.

Lautensack, Prussian Secretary, iii. 25.

Lauterburg, Lines of, iv. 5.

Laveaux, Iditor, iv. 391; cited, iii, 13 n.,
64; iv. 893 n.3 vi. 289 n.

Law, the Finance- Wizard, i. 344, 409.

Law Reform, iii. 9; iv. 190, 191, 228-230;
omnipresence of Law, 133.

Lecouvreur, Adrienne, ii. 27, 457.

Lediard, cited, ii. 60 n.

Lee, from America, at Berlin, vi. 432-435.

Lefebvre, M., Mining Engineer at siege of
Schweidnitz, vi. 232, 235-239; writes to
Formey of the meeting of Friedrich and
Kaiser Joseph, 338, 339; in a fit of ex-
citement destroys himself, 341.

Legge, Ex-Exchequer, iv. 233; v. 86.

Lehmann, Dr., vi. 197 n.

Lehwald, iii. 445; at Habelschwert, iv. 53,

54; at Sohr, 147; joins the Old Dessauer
at Meissen, 167; to defend the Baltic
parts, v. 10, 88, 93, 127, 128, 220; resig-
nation, 222; assists in defending Berlin,
vi. 67.

Leibnitz, cited, i. 55 n.

Leibnitz, i. 25 Leibnitzian **justification
of the ways of God,” 28; sage Leibnitz, a
rather weak but hugely ingenious old
gentleman, 34, 35, 39, 403; Letter, quoted
by Konig, iv. 336.

Leipe, hamlet near Grotkau, iii. 230.
Leipzig, ii. 160; Treaty of, iv. 401; under
Prussian military contribution, vi. 128.
Lentulus, General, iii. 205, 224, 228, 229,

8743; vi. 164, 179, 345, 370, 420.

Lentulus, Lieut.-Colonel, v. 104, 440.

Lenz, President, of Kast Friesland, v. 228.

Leo X., Pope, i. 171.

Leon, Herr von, i. 383,

Leopold, Archduke, at the siege of Jiilich, i.
240.

Leopold, Kaiser, i. 45, 263, 273, 977, 414,

Leopold, King Richar d's, Duke of Austria,
a man with some stuff in him, i. 83.

Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, i. 22, 69, 118,
980, 299, 333, 368, 468; a rugged practical
man, of dreadful impetuosity, 300, 305;
Fox's Daughter; kills a Cousin of hers,
and marries her, 302; inventor of modern
mnilitary tactics, 303; ii. 239; General
Fieldmarshal of the Prussian Armies, i.
303; at Blenheim; Bridge of Cassano;
Lines of Turin, 304; ii. 173; at the Siege
of Stralsund, i. 333 ; challenges Grumkow,
450; leaves him and the Court in dis-
gust, 451; at King August’s Camp of
Radewitz, ii. 1389; takes Mors Castle,
198; favours Friedrich at Ciistrin, 218,
229, 283; assists in his military studies,
309; sends King Friedrich Wilhelm tall
recruits, 331; the Rhine Campaign, 382,
400, 419; visits the French Camp, 407;
with the King at Belgard, 514; at his
death, 535; first interview with King
Friedrich, 540; curtly reproved by: him,
iii. 1195 private consultations, 202; con-
gratulated on his Son’s success, 221; takes
Camp at Gottin, 222; at Brandenburg,
427; meets Friedrich at Chrudim, 430;
preferred before Schwerin, 432; neglect
of orders, 434; sharp bantering of Wal-
rave, 436; takes charge of the Silesian
Army, iv. 50; Friedrich’s impatience, 51 ;
repels Silesian invasion, 51-54; home with
thanks; just lost his Wife, 79; his sick
Daughter, 80; takes charge of a Camp of
Observation against Saxony, 84, 129, 130;
his feu-de-joie for the Victory of Sohr,
150, 151; home for the Winter, 153; new
preparations for Saxony, 155, 156; hard
words from the King, 156; enters Saxony,
164; marches against Rutowski, 167-169 ;
Victory at Kesselsdorf, 169-172; his bat-
tle-prayer, 170; glorious in the last of his
fields; conducts the King over the bat-
tle-field, 174; death, 173.

Leopold, the Young Dessauer, iii. 45; with
Friedrich at Strasburg, 48; on the road to

INDEX.

Silesia, 134; before Glogau, 160; skilful
capture, 216; joins the King at *chweid-
nitz, 223; crosses Sorgau Bridge, 229; at
Mollwitz, 242, 246, 250; at Breslau, 350;
in the Glatz country, 378, 401, 404; at
Chrudim, 430, 439; on march, 441; at
Chotusitz, 443; on march to Prag, iv. 13;
towards Austria,24; quarrels with Schwer-
in, 27; is for keeping hold of Prag, 39;
near Kolin, 40; on retreat towards Silesia,
42; in Silesia, worn down with gout, 54;
left to command in Silesia, 149; watching
Prince Karl, 153; draws out his forces,
156.

Leopold, Duke of Florence, afterwards Kai-
ser, vi. 299.

Leopold, Prince of Brunswick, helps Miller
Arnold to justice, vi. 475, 476; gets
drowned in struggling to save others,
476, 477.

Lepel, Major-General, ii. 255.

Lessing, iv. 136; Tauentzien’s chief clerk,
v. 322; cited, vi. 39 n.; mentioned also,
vi. 38, 254.

L’ Estoc, Surgeon to Elizabeth of Russia, iii.
196.

Lestwitz, General, surrenders Breslau to the
Austrians, v. 184; with Friedrich at Tor-
gau, vi. 96, 97.

Leuthen, Battle of, i. 6; v. 191-208.

Lewin, ii. 336.

Lexden Heath, Camp on, iii. 313, 473.

Liberty, Cause of, iii. 316.

Lichnowski, Colonel, at Landshut, vi. 10.

Lichtenau, Griifin von, vi. 291.

Lichtenberg, i. 208.

Lichtenstein, Graf von, lodges King Fried-
rich, iii. 406.

Lichtenstein, Prince von, ii. 396, 417; iii.
863; v. 23, 29; cited, 23 n.

Lie, a, i. 8, 13; galvanised, 193; iii. 30.
See Fiction, Mendacity.

Liebstadt, review at, iii. 34.

Lieberkiihn, Dr., iv. 250, 312, 318.

Liége, Bishop of, ii. 487.

Liége, iii. 76. See Affair of Ierstal.

Liegnitz, Duke of, i. 176, 185, 190; Herit-
age-Brotherhood with Joachim, 216; what
comes of it, 273; the town of, ii. 335.

Liegnitz entered by Schwerin, iii. 158;
Liegnitz, vi. 45; battle of, 45-53.

Ligne, Prince de, i. 156; iii. 517; his ac-
count of the Battle of Leuthen, v. 202,
210; in Berlin, vi. 71; at Burkersdorf,
226, 228; his account of Friedrich’s visit
to Kaiser Joseph, 345-354; visits Fried-
rich at Potsdam, 501; hurries off to Pe-
tersburg, 510; cited, vi. 346 n.

Ligonier, iii. 517; iv. 197 n., 218.

Ligonier’s Dragoons, iii. 474, 517.

Lille, Abbé de, vi. 502, 503.

Aindauer of Sangerhausen, v. 176.

Linden, Major, at Kunersdorf, v. 377, 383.

Lindsey’s, Reverend Mr., Works on Poland,
vi. 302 n., 381.

Linger, ii. 228.

Linsenbarth’s, Candidatus, interview with
Friedrich, iv. 237, 246, 328, 329.

Lintz, i. 245.

587

Linz, Karl Albert at, iii. 366.

Lippe-Btickeburg, Freemason, ii. 494, 498.

Lippe-Biickeburg, Ordnance Master, enter-
tains a select dinner-party in his tent, vi.
126; takes command of the English forces
in Portugal, 185, 186.

Lisbon, Earthquake of, iv. 390.

Literature, romantic appetite for, i. 394;
literary fame, 475; ii. 442; Book-writing,
of two kinds, i. 477; ii. 499; something
grander than all literatures, 468; Fried-
rich’s literary attainments, 503. See
Newspaper, Review-articles.

Lithuania, ii. 511.

Lloyd, Major-General, iv. 456, 461 n., 463,
oe cited, ili. 399 n.; iv. 456 n; v. 160,

n.

Lobkowitz, Prince, joins with Grand-Duke
Franz in Bohemia, iii, 395; at Iglau,
422, 423; at Waidhofen, 425; near I’rau-
enberg, 438, 452; takes Leitmeritz from
the French, 502; to watch Belleisle at
Prag, 502-504; with Prince Karl at K6-
nigsgritz, iv. 135, 136; Hennersdorf, 159;
mentioned also, iii. 512; iv. 153.

Lobositz, Battle of, iv. 455-465,

Locke, ii. 453.

Logau, Silesian poet, iii. 132.

Loigle, Marquis de, at Strasburg, iii. 54.

Longchamp, Intendant, iv. 259; cited, 227 n.

Longchamp et Wagnieére, cited, v. 494 n, ;
vi. 452 n.

Loo, Palace of, ii. 490.

Loper, M., iv. 279.

Lorraine, Leopold Joseph, Duke of, ii. 48;
Charles, 49; Franz Stephen, 49, 232, 298,
374. 4243 visits Potsdam, 303, 307; at
Kolitz, 485 5 end of Turk War, 523; Karl
of, 49; Lorraine taken by the French,
375, 424,

Lossow, General von, vi. 422, 461.

Lothar, Kaiser, i. 68, 70.

Lottum, Colonel, vi. 228.

Lottum, Count, i. 345.

Loudon, with Fieldmarshal Browne, iy.
485; near Leitmeritz, annoys the Prus-
sian retreat, v. 83, S4; attacked by Seid-
litz in Saxony, 117; ‘* Commission of Ma-
jor-General”’ taken by Seidlitz in Gotha,
125, 126; with Daun near Olmiitz, 238,
240-242; attacks and ruins Mosel’s con-
voy, 242-247; at Holitz, 248; captures
Peitz, 277, 278; with Daun in Saxony,
281; Hochkirch, 285, 288, 302; in the
Lausitz, 342; to join with Soltikof, 345-—
857; arrives at Frankfurt, but without
provisions, 370, 371; battle of Kunersdorf,
873, 377, 880, 385; ends the battle, 387,
394; continues with Soltikof, 402, 433,
444; may go where he pleases; dismal
march into Moravia, 445; to have a sepa-
rate command, and army of his own,
507; in Silesia, 507, 510; prepares to at-
tack Goltz, 511; beaten off in every at-
tempt, 513; threatens Silesia, vi. 3, 4, 27;
blockades Glatz, 5; ruins Fouquet at
Landshut, 9, 10; captures Glatz, 25, 26,
on march for Breslau, 35; difficulties with
Soltikof, 36 ; besieges Breslau, and threat-

588 INDEX.

ens furiously, 36, 37; moves off-at ap-
proach of Prince Henri, 37, 38; joins with
Daun and Lacy to intercept Friedrich, 42 ;
at battle of Liegnitz, 45; tries to sur-
prise Friedrich, and is himself surprised
at the reception he gets; behaves mag-
nificently in his sudden peril, 50; sorely,
but not dishonorably beaten, 51; to try
for a stroke on Kosel, 77; but without
success, 100; retires to Bohemia, to pre-
pare for a new campaign, 1383 to be join-
ed by the Russians, and re-conquer Sile-
sia, 139; skilfully effects junction, 142;
gets beforehand with Friedrich at Kun-
zendorf, 143; astonished at his Camp of
Bunzelwitz, 145, 146; earnestly urges
Butturlin to join him in attacking, 146;
Butturlin positively refuses, and returns
homewards, 143; he suddenly pounces
upon Schweidnitz, and captures it in one
night, 163-167; gets small thanks from
Vienna, 168; no longer to command in
chief, 219; visits Friedrich with the Kai-
ser, 338, 339 ; complimented by Friedrich,
851; in the Bavarian War, 459,

Loudon, Lord, commander of the forces in
America, v. 57, 58; recalled, 230; Cousin
to the Austrian Loudon, 230 n.

Louisa Amelia of Brunswick, betrothed, iii.
95.

Louisa, Old Dessauer's eldest daughter, iv.
80.

Louisa of Nassau-Orange, Wife of the Great
Kurfiirst, i. 271, 274.

Louisa of Prussia, ii. 478.

Louisa Ulrique, i. 343, 412. See Ulrique.

Louisburg, in Cape Breton, captured by Am-
herst, v. 351.

Louis Ferdinand, i. 413; ii. 555.

Louis, Fort, ii. 386.

Louis XIV., i. 263, 270, 271, 273, 280, 328,
875, 415; death of, 283; bankrupt condi-
tion of, 329; mentioned also, iii. 190, 263,
524; iv. 204.

Louis XV., i. 119, 429, 4315 ii. 368; changes
his shirt, iii. 182, 190; a poor demigod,
278; lame story for himself to the German
Diet, 535; declares War against England
and Austria, 5815; in the Netherlands, iv.
25 falls ill at Metz, 7; dismisses Chateau-
roux, 8; recovers, 10; besieges Freyburg,
28; not much taken with Voltaire, 28,
199, 202; hastens to Tournay, 83; at Fon-
tenoy, 95,98; help to Friedrich impossi-
ble, 128; evident pique, 128, 166; v. 4,
472; tired of War, iv. 218; determines to
aid Austria, 450, 453.

Louis XVI., vi. 302.

Liéwen, King Friedrich at, iii. 250,

Léwendahl, Lieutenant, iv. 214.

Lubowirski, Princess, iv. 175, 177.

Lucchesi at Breslau, v- 191; Leuthen, 198,
2025 death, 204,

Luechesini, Marchese, vi. 496, 507, 535.

Liideritz, General, iv. 46!.

Ludwig Eugen, Prince, of Wiirtemberg, iii.
417, 419.

Ludwig IV., Bavarian Kaiser, i. 114, 146.

Ludwig, Bavarian Kurfiirst of Brandenburg,

i. 121; marries Margaret Maultasche, 123;
will not be turned out, 129; retires to Ba-
varia and the Tyrol, 130.

Ludwig, Kanzler von, ii. 275.

Ludwig, King of Bavaria, vi. 449. . /

Ludwig, Kurfurst, the Roman, i. 130.

Ludwig Ohne Haut, the last King of Hun-
gary, i. 179, 217.

Ludwig Rudolf, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfen-
biittel, ii. 288. .

Ludwig, Prince, of Brunswick, iv. 124;
pianige at Sohr, 146; mentioned also, v.

6.

Ludwigsburg, ii. 176.

Luiscius of the One Razor, ii. 488,

Luise, Princess of Orange, i. 40.

Lusinsky, General, with Stolberg, at Tor-
gau, v. 408.

Luther, i. 93, 168, 177, 20S n. ; ii. 161; visit-
ed by Markgraf George, i. 182; by Hoch-
meister Albert, 191; opinion of the Teutsch
Ritters, 192; visited by Elizabeth of Bran-
denburg, 209; his Bible, 298 ; Hymn,304;
at Coburg during the Diet of Augsburg,
ii. 164; Luther and Friedrich the Great,
in essential agreement, v. 472; mentioned
also, vi. 114.

Lutternberg, Fight of, v. 309 n.

Liitzen, ii. 162.

Liitzow, cited, iv. 105 n.

Luxemburg Kaisers, i. 111, 113.

Lynar, Count, iii. 215; Convention of Klos-
a een y. 117-119; mentioned also, vi.
342,

Lynch Law, vi. 375.

Lyttelton, George (first Lord), in Lorraine,
ii. 47; at Soissons during the Congress,
49; in the Ministry, 51; in Opposition,
395 iii, 595.

MAASEYK, General Borck occupies, iii, 84.

Macchiavel, ii. 507.

Mackenzie, James, iii. 590.

Mackenzie, Sir George, iii. 590.

Macmahon, Father, iv. 318.

Macnamara, Mr., vi. 430.

Madras, Lally’s siege of, v. 453.

Magdeburg, i. 105, 186, 225, 260, 270, 512,
377. See Christian Wilhelm of.

Magdeburg, Camp of, iv. 84,

Magnetic Mountains, i. 405.

Maguire, at Reichenberg, v. 13, 14, 15, 97,
468; besieges Pirna, 278 ; chased by Prince
Henri, 331, 332; reénters Saxony, 411;
Siege of Dresden, 413; successful negoti-
ations, 415-417; broken pledges, 421; be-
sieged in Dresden by Friedrich, vi. 19-24;
at Freyberg, 245.

Muhomet’s Koran, v. 129, 130. -

Mahizahn, Prussian Minister, iv. 387, 397,
398, 441.

Mailiith, cited, iii. 108 n., 870 n.

Maillebois, Marshal, ii. 877; marches to re-
lief of Prag, iii. 489; small reverence for
the Kaiser, 490; in the Middle - Rhine
countries, iv. 56, 59, 743 sent to Italy, 75,
197 5 at Sceanx, 25. 206; mentioned also,
iii. 357, 359, 371, 388, 475 488, 493 ; iv. 150.

Mailly, Madame ce, und her sisters, iii. 191,

Maine, Due du, iv. 204.

Maine, Duchesse du, iv. 204, 205.

Maintz, Archbishops of, i. 92, 100,113. See
Albert, Archbishop of.

Mainz, Kur-, Chairman of the Reichs Diet,
vy. 6; admonished by General Oldenburg,
AT, 48.

Malmesbury, Earl of, v. 228.

Malosa, M., at Strasburg, iii. 56.

Malplaquet, Battle of, i. 22; bloodiest of ob-
stinate fights, 2S1.

Malton, Lord, iv. 248, 249.

Malzahn, Friiulein von, afterwards Madame
Miinnich, iii. 195.

Mann, Sir Horace, vi. 109.

Mannheim, Karl Philip removes his Court
to; i. 379.

Mannstein, General, arrests Bieren, iii. 194 ;
in Prussian Service, iv. 227; at Potsdam,
316; at battle of Prag, v. 32, 33,39; rash
mistake at Kolin, 70,71; death,83; cited,
i. 348 n. 3 iii. 198 n.

Mansion-House, the, ii. 524.

Manteufel and his somewhat impertinent
letter to Friedrich, ii. 472.

Manteuffel, General, in Pommern, v. 222;
battle of Zorndorf, 2673; Ziillichau, 349.
Marburg and its Teutsch Ritters, i. 93;

Wolf finds shelter at, 476.

Margaret Maultasche, i, 123.

Marheineke, cited, i. 184 n.

Maria Anna, Archduchess, Prince Karl's
Wife, iv. 6,11; her death, 52.

Maria Eleonora, Wife of Albert Friedrich
of Preussen, i. 226, 228, 231.

Maria Theresa, i. 11, 420, 482; ii, 49, 232;
rumour of Marriage with Friedrich, 144,
286; to marry the Duke of Lorraine, 299 ;
at her father’s death, iii. 105; proclaimed
Empress, 107; refuses Friedrich’s propo-
sals, 153; gets money from England, 212,
312; indignant protest against Friedrich's
seizure of Silesia, 266; against Kur-Sach-
sen, 276; Coronation, 332; a brave young
Queen, 337; driven to despair, 361; at
Presburg, 336; ‘* Moriamur,” mythical
and actual, 367; one stroke more for Sile-
sia, 433; sorrowful surrender, 454; a true
Sovereign Ruler, 506; Queen of Bohemia,
515; triumphant demands, 536, 540, 542;
clutches Bavaria with uncommon tight-
ness, 541; extraordinary Response to King
Louis’s Declaration, 542; high conduct
towards the Reich, 544; Treaty of Worms,
566; her indignation against Friedrich,
and undaunted resolution ; again appeals
to Hungary, iv. 15; will have the Bohe-
mian campaign finished, 40; very high
exultation and hope, 48, 49; Silesian Man-
ifesto, 48 ; a face-to-face glimpse; inter-
view with Robinson, 130, 131; at her Hus-
band’s Coronation, 134, 135; will as soon
part with her petticoat as Silesia; her
opinion of Friedrich; urges Prince Karl
to fight Friedrich, 1355 a third and fiercer
trial this Winter, 152; consents to peace,
181; goes into the Italian war, 197 3 pro-
tests against the Treaty of Aix-la-Cha-
pelle, 219; high opinion of Kaunitz, 369,

589

407; flattering little Notes to the Pompa-
dour, 370, 407; still hopes to reconquer
Silesia, 396; secret Treaty with Russia
and Saxony, 400, 401; tries to deny it,
406; refuses to aid in defence of Hanover,
409; joins with France, 416, 417; gives
audience to Klinggriif, 431; bent on re-
lieving Saxony, 450, 466; flings open her
Imperial Studs, 451; courage in misfor-
tune, v. 44; new order of Knighthood in
honour of Kolin, 77,78; despatches Kau-
nitz to urge on Prince Karl, 108; hears of
Leuthen, 211; thought to be disposed for
peace, 217; substantial reasons for war,
815; anti-Protestantism, 472; urges Rué-
sia to attack Silesia, 508; welcomes Daun
back to Vienna, vi. 100; signs peace-pro-
posals, 129; piqued at Loudon’s secrecy
about Schweidnitz, 168; consents to a
separate peace between France and En-
gland, 181; horror at Czar Peter’s peace
with Friedrich, 201; prayers and tears,
204; grief at her husband’s death; takes
her Son Joseph as Coadjutor, 299; enmity
to the Czarina, 361, 367; indignant letter
to Kaunitz on the Partition of Poland,
371; writes to Friedrich, 462; her beauti-
ful death, 493; mentioned also, iv. 9; vi.
351, 359, 487, 467. -

Marie-Antoine, Electress of Saxony, a bright
lady, among the busiest in the world, vi.
3053 left with the guardianship of her
son, 306 ; correspondence with King Fried-
rich about the crown of Poland, 307-311 5
visits him at Berlin, 343; their pleasant
correspondence, 343, 344; interest in the
Bavarian-Succession question, 45); men-
tioned also, 418, 437, 489.

Marie-Antoinette, writes. to her sister, vi.
533.

Marienburg, i. 88, 120.

Marischal College, Aberdeen, v. 503.

Marischal, Lord, iv. 215, 310; sorrow for his
brother’s death, v. 299; an excellent
cheery old soul; honest as the sunlight,
300; sympathising letter from Friedrich,
810, 211; visited by Maupertuis, 474;
goes to Spain on diplomatic mission, 502—
504; calls at London on his way to look
after the Earldom of Kintore, 504; im-
portant Spanish nytices to Pitt, 504; a
good deal in England, vi. 159; Cottage-
villa near Sans-fcuci, 294; later epochs
of his life, 295-297; entertains Conway
and Keith, 41€ 421; letter to Keith, 419,
420; mentioned also, 430, 453 n.

Markgrafs, origin of, i. 56.

Marlborough, i, 20, 45, 237, 280, 3033; his
dextrous management, 283; how the En-
glish treated him, 284, 415; his last days,
ii. 173; mentioned also, iii. 476, 489; v.
188.

Marlborough, Duchess of, iii. 212, 4763 v.
55.

Marlborough, Duke of, at Koesfeld, v. 308 n.
Marquart, Cuptain, noticed by Friedrich, v.
443

Marschowitz, Prince Karl's Camp at, iv. 27.
Martin, Commodore, iii. 4855 v. 504.

590

Marwitz, Adjutant, at Hochkirch, y. 283.

Marwitz's, General, recollections of King
Friedrich, vi. 511-516,

Marwitz, Senior, wounded at Mollwitz, iii.
412; at Neisse, 436; his death, iv. 53.

Marwitz, The Demoiselles, ii. 4125 iii. 47,
412; iv. 52.

Mary, Princess, iii. 518.

Massow, Minister von, vi. 281.

Matilda, Queen of Denmark, rescued by
Keith, vi. 418.

Matinées du Rot de Prusse, an impudent
pamphlet of forgeries, i. 155; the author
identified, v. 482-485.

Matthews, Admiral, iii. 485.

Maud, Empress, i. 68.

Mauduit, Dissenter, and his pamphlet on the
German War, vi. 109-112.

Maupertuis, M. de, ii. 432 ; iii. 70, 158; his
Portrait, 10; invitation from Friedrich,
113; arrives at Wesel, 59; quarrel with
Madame du Chatelet, 60; taken prisoner
at Mollwitz, 253; letter from Voltaire,
563; Perpetual President of the Berlin
Academy, 574; quarrels with Konig for
questioning his metaphysics, iv. 261-265;
cannot help Voltaire ‘‘in a bad business,”
268, 279; jealous of his favour with the
King, 305; Voltaire’s opinion of him, 316;
flattered by La Beaumelle, 320; indignant
correspondence with Konig, 336, 337; ap-
peals to the Berlin Academy, 338-341 ;
mercilessly quizzed by Voltaire ; Dr. Aka-
kia, 342-346 5 threatens him, and gets his
reply, 352, 353; his final pilgrimings,
sicknesses and death, v. 473-475; his
character defended by Friedrich, 500, 501.

Maurice, Count, ii. 27.

Maurepag, iii. 549.

Mauvillon, Major, on the character of En-
glish soldiers, vi. 156, 157; his Prussian
statistics, 270; cited, i. 318 n.; ii. 497 n. ;
iv. 124n.; v. 102 n., 119; vi. 31 n.

Maxinilian L., iii. 408, 409.

So regaeanes Kurfiirst of Baiern, iii. 408,

Sy

Max Joseph, Kurfiirst of Baiern, death of,
vi. 439.

Max Joseph, first King of Bavaria, vi. 449.

Maxwell's Brigade, at Warburg, vi. 33.

Mayer, Colonel, iv. 485; in Bohemia, v. 13;
his exploits on the Reich, 44-47; death;
knighthood from Wilhelmina, 47; with
Friedrich in Saxony, 115, 151; Rossbach,
159, 161, 165; with Prince Henri guard-
ing Saxony, 235, 278, 279; Dresden, 305;
dies of fever; a man of considerable gen-
ius in the sleepless kind, 333.

Mayer, cited, vi. 436 n.

Mazis, Du, Engineer, iv. 89.

Meagher, Chevalier, iv. 438, 439.

Meckel'’s, Dr., great skill and kindness to
Zimmermann, vi. 385-387.

Mecklenburg, i. 73, 254, 336; compelled to
contribute to Friedrich’s war-expenses, v.
320; unparalleled Duke and Duchess of,
i. 348; ii. 140, 265; iv. 236; the Duke's
Misgovernment an1 suspension, ii. 59, 76;
their Daughter, 4)7, 525.

INDEX.

Mecklenburg-Schwerin, vi. 135 n.

Mecklenburg-Strelitz, vi. 135 n.

Meer, Fight of, v. 30S n.

Meinecke, General, v. 169.

Meiningen, Dowager Duchess of, ii. 277.

Meissen, Friedrich and Duke of Weissen-
fels at, iv. 17.

Melanchthon, vi. 114.

Menckenius, cited, i. 91 n.

Mendacity, i. 309, 355 5 iii. 30,326,373. See
Lie.

Menin, iv. 3.

Menou, Father, iv. 210.

Mentzel, cited, i. 84 n.

Mentzel, Colonel, iii. 371, 399, 415, 424, 546,
547; death of, iv. 5.

Menzel and the Saxon state-papers, iv. 387-
889, 397-400, 431, 441.

Mephistopheles, i. 414.

Meran, i. 95.

Mercy, Graf von, ii. 378,

Merit, men of, iii. 21.

Mérope, triumphant success of the Play, iii.
509.

Mesmes, President de, iv. 205.

Mettrie, La, Army Surgeon, iv. 98; finds
refuge with Friedrich, 307, 308; quizzes
Voltaire, 315; his death, 318, 319.

Metz, Siege of, i. 198; iii. 524; Louis XV.
falls ill at, iv. 7.

Meuselwitz, ii. 162.

Meyen, Kammer-Director, vi. 275.

Michaelis, cited, i. 64 n.3 iv. 228 n.3 v. 123
Hosgvir 19.

Michel, Herr, Secretary of Legation, iv. 371.

Mignot, Abbé, vi. 411.

Milan, ii. 377.

Militair-Lexikon, i. 339 n.; vi. 39 n.

Military Instructions, &c., Friedrich’s, iii.
433 n.; v. 509, 510.

Military tactics, modern, i. 302; military
studies, ii. 309.

Miller Arnold's case, vi. 470-493; the Sans-
Souci Miller, 490.

Minden, i. 877; ii. 320; battle of, v. 35S-
366.

Minnesdnger, Manesse’s, i. 99, 105.

Minuzzi, General, takes Passau, iii, 340;
mentioned also, 477, 511.

Mirabeau, i. 2,5, 10; his Grandfather, 303;
Monarehie Prussienne, and advocacy of
Free-Trade, iv. 295 5; vi. 269, 270, 279; sees
Friedrich, 5325; carries news of his death,
5435; cited, i. 2 n.3 iii. 467 n.; vi. 539;
mentioned also, 516, 526.

Mirabeau, M. de, v. 92, 117.

Merepoix, Bishop of, ii. 458.

Mirepoix, L’ Ane de, iii. 549.

Mirow, Karl Ludwig Friedrich, Prince of, ii.
473, ATT.

Misnia, i. 55, 56.

Mist, cited, ii. 43 n.

Mistevoi, King of the Wends, i. 64, 65.

Mitbelehnung of Preussen, i. 215.

Mitchell, Sir Andrew, iv. 427, 428, 453; in
consultation with Friedrich, 4385, 436;
urges Friedrich’s cause, v. 5; personal in-
timacy and mutual esteem, $5, S6, 150,
514,515; quizzes Gottsched, 144; at Bres-

INDEX.

lau, 215; subsidy treaty, 223; burning of
Dresden suburbs, 305; his account of
Friedrich’s marches, vi. 6, 7,9, 12, 41; at
siege of Dresden, 19, 20, 21, 22; at Sei-
chau; burns all his papers, 44, 45; battle
of Liegnitz, 49, 53; with Friedrich at
Leipzig, 112 ; his respect for Gellert, 115,
116; stroke of apoplexy on hearing of the
English defection, 251; his death, 298;
cited, v. 42 n.5 vi. 6 n.; mentioned also,
419.

Mitschepfal, Lieutenant, at Grotkau, iii.
230

Mockranowski, proposes Prince Henri as
King of Poland, vi. 321; sent to look after
Bar, 331.

sey Rittmeister de, in Sangerhausen, v

TT.

Moczinska, Prince, iv. 439,

Mohacz, Battle of, i 179.

Millendorf, carries news of the victory of
Sohr, iv. 150; leads an attack at Leuthen,
v. 203; at Hochkirch, 295, 296; at Lieg-
nitz, vi. 51; turns the tide of battle in
Friedrich’s favour at Torgau, 96-98; at
Burkersdorf, 224-229; cited, 189 n.

Mollwitz, Battle of, iii. 232, 255; a signal-
shot among the Nations, 256, 266.

Montalembert, urges Sweden and Russia
against Friedrich, v. 256, 350, 351, 403,
432, 442, 444, 508; vi. 36,44; takes credit
to himself for the Lacy vulture-swoop on
Berlin, 74, 75, 76 ; cited, v. 221 n.; vi. 74 n.

Montazet at Leuthen, v. 198; watching and
messaging about, 350, 351.

Montbail, Dame de, i. 28, 294,

Montcalm, Marquis de, Commander of Que-
bec, v. 366, 451; defeated by Wolfe, 448 ;
letter to a cousin in France: particulars
of his own defeat and death, and the com-
ing revolt of America, 449-451.

Montecuculi, M. de, vi. 352.

Montemar, Duke of, ii. 377.

Montenero, Duke of, son-in-law of Madame
du Chatelet, iii. 508,

Montespan, Madame de, iv. 204 n:

Montesquieu, ii. 106, 447; iv. 187.

Montholieu, ii. 212.

Montholon, cited, v. 167 n. 3 vi. 140 n.
Montijos, Excellency, iii. 271; his sumptu-
osities, 321.

Montmorency, iii. 273.

Moor, Mr., death of, at Carthagena, iii. 301.

Moore, Dr. pases

Moravian Foray, iii. 420-433.

ory of Saxony, i. 196, 199, 211, 214; ii.

Moritz, See Comte de Saxe.

Moritz of Dessau, at Kesselsdorf, iv. 172,
173; in Saxony, 437, 478; at Eger, on
march for Prag, v. 12; ill-luck at Prag,
35; with the King to meet Daun, 63;
scene with the King at battle of Kolin, Th,
(eA E® charge of the retreat, 75, 82; re-
called, 84; in the Pirna country, 107, 115;
Torgau, 127, 142; Leuthen, 200 ; Feld-
marschall; and thanks from the King,
205; badly wounded at Hochkirch, 294;
mentioned also, iv. 173 n., 425.

591

Mors, ii. 197.

Mortaigne, v. 221 n.

Mosel, Colonel, has charge of convoy to Ol-
miitz, v. 241; cleverest precautions and
dispositions, 243; convoy attacked and
is 244, 245; made prisoner at Maxen,

64.

Mosel, General, ii. 201.

Mosheim, ii. 361; cited, 361 n.

Moyland, little Schloss of, iii. 68.

Miihlberg, Camp of, ii. 104, 135,

Miihldorf, Fight of, i. 114.

Miller, Chaplain, and Lieutenant Katte, ii.
221; waits on the Crown-Prince, 225, 229.

Miiller, cited, v. 152 n.

Miiller, Johannes von, v. 494; vi. 511.

Miiller, Jungfer, killed in Breslau, vi. 37 n.

Miiller, Lieutenant, cited, v. 280 n.

Miinchausen of Hanover, iv. 60.

Miinchausen, Baron, iii. 4.

Miinchen and its poor Kaiser, iv, 31.

Miinchow, President, ii. 217, 253.

Miinchows, the, iii. 17, 45, 46, 210.

Miinnich, ii. 373, 399, 400, 422, 483, 5003 iii.
117; arrests Duke Bieren, 194; supreme
in Russia, 195; withdraws from Court,
196; sent to Siberia, 198; at Oczakow, v
257, 264; Miinnich and Bieren refuse to
be reconciled, vi. 208; would undertake to
save Czar Peter, 215; his praises of Catha-
rine, 217.

Muy, du, Chevalier, at Warburg, vi. 32, 33.

Mylius, ii. 220; cited, iv. 240 n,

Nacuon, ii. 336.

Nadasti, in Prince Karl’s Rhine Campaign,
iv. 5,6; attacks Tabor, 34; with Prince
Karl in Silesia, 103, 105; Hohenfriedberg,
112; back into Bohemia, 120,121; Sohr,
143, 147; on march with Prince Karl to
Brandenburg, 153; with Daun at Kolin,
v. 69; following the Prince of Prussia, 97;
surprised at Ostritz, 106; attacks Winter-
feld at Jiikelsberg, 110; besieges Schweid-
nitz, 181; at Leuthen, 199; reccives the
Prussian attack, 200; in a bad way; skil-
fully covers the retreat, 201; mentioned
also, vi. 505, 506.

Nadir Shah, ii. 524; iv. 248.

Nahorzan, Camp of, iv. 124,

Namslau, Prussian siege of, iii. 170, 172.

Nanke, cited, i. 162 n.

Nantes, Edict of, i. 268, 294, 298.

Napier, General ‘Sir Charles, v. 510 n.

Naples, ii. 376.

Napoleon, contrast between, and Friedrich,
i. 6, T,13; Napoleon and Sham-Napoleon,
iii. ‘OTT: Napoleon's opines of Rossbach,
v. 167; "of Leuthen, 212; of Prince Henri’s
Saxon’ Campaign of 1761, vi. 140; Code
Napoléon, 471; mentioned also, i. 63, 12,
81, 194, 272; vi. 306, 322, 495.

Nassau, General, iv. 83; on march through
Bohemia, 24, 96; seizes Kolin, 387, 59; in
retreat towards Silesia, 42; despatched to
relief of Einsiedel, 45; with Friedrich in
Silesia, 105, 125, 126, 158.

National dr y-rot. i 309 ; Economics, 310,
818; Drill-Sergeants, 316; National Bap-

592

tism, iv. IST; a Nation's diseases and
fashions, vi. 25S

Natzmer, Captain, the Prussian Recruiter,
ii. 11; Natzmer Junior and the Duke of
Lorraine, 232.

Nauen, ii. 330.

Needlewomen, distressed, iii. T.

Neipperg, iii. 108, 181; hastens to save
Neisse, 224, 226, 229; quits Neisse, 229; at
Mollwitz, 232; much at his ease, 237;
news of the Prussian Army, 238; battle,
244; back to Neisse, 255; glad to be qui-
escent, 306; marches towards Breslau,
348; then to Schweidnitz, but again re-
tires, 353; vigilant manceuvering, 354;
meeting with Friedrich at Klein-Schnel-
lendorf, 374; withdraws his Army, 377;
joins the Grand-Duke, 392; not a Eu-
gene, 396; at Dettingen, 528.

Neisse, bombardment of, iii. 177; pretended
siege of, 378.

Neitsche, Excise-Inspector, v. 178.

Nepomuk. See Johann of.

Neuchatel, iii. TT.

Neumann, Regierungs-Rath, vi. 477.

Neumark, i. T1, 103, 138, 159, 162.

Neustadt, Prussian Army at, iii. 22T.

Newcastle, Duke of, iii. 538; iv. 293, 367,
371, 374, 380; jealous of the Duke of Cum-
berland, 420-423; influence in Parliament,
v.5; quite insecure, 49; imbecility and
futility, 50,56; Newcastle and the Clack
of Tongues, 452; mentioned also, vi. 184.

New Era, introduction of, iii. 15, 26, 248.

Newspaper editing, i, 379; newspaper ru-
mour, ii. 323; Russian notion of Newspa-
per-editors, vi. 72, T3.

Newton, i. 403; ii. 453; Voltaire's high opin-
ion of, vi. 414.

Nicholas, Czar, vi. 494 n.

Nichols, cited, vi. 109 n.

Nicolai, ii. $2, 226, 231 n., 252; iv. 308; his
account of La Mettrie’s death, 318, 319;
defence of Friedrich, 330; cited, i. 43 n.,
104 n.; ii. S4n., 231 n.; iii 19 n., 64 n.;
iv. 194 n.3 v. 143 n.

Nikolai, Professor, of Frankfurt, v. 393.

Nimburg, ii. 339.

Nimeguen, Peace of, i. 273.

Ninon de I’ Enclos, i. 267.

Nivernois, Due de, iv. 417, 418.

Noailles, Maréchal, ii. 379; at the siege of
Philipsburg, 38T; at Dettingen, iii. 524,
532;. prepared for the worst, 537, 546;
mentioned also, iii. 510, 514, 517; iv. 2,7,
27, 98.

Noltenius, i. 387.

Nordlingen, ii. 321.

Norris, Admiral, ii, 203; iii. 584.

Norroy, i. 58.

Nostitz, General, at Kolin, v. T4, 79; wound-
ed at Leuthen, 194.

Nova Scotia, iv. 376.

Noyerre, M., Ballet composer, vi. 347.

Nugent, General, at siege of Dresden, vi. 23.

Nurnberg, i. 80; ii. 167, 323. See Friedrich,
Burgeraf of.

Niissler, ii. 79, 275; iii, 228,401; makes sur-

~ vey of Silesia, 435; settles the Silesian

INDEX.

Boundaries, 465; successfully appeals to
the King on behalf of his ruined neigh-
bours, vi. 271-273; mentioned also, 73 n.

OBEDIENCE, li. 21T.

Oberg, Baron von, ii. 495, 519.

Oberg, General, beaten by Soubise, v. 309.

Obermayr, Johann Euchar von, manages the
instalment of Karl Theodor, vi. 445.

Oblique Order, the, v. 194, 199.

Obscenities, hankering for, iv. 331.

Obstinacy, female, iv. 132.

Oczakow, Siege of, ii. 483.

UO" Donnell, succeeds Deville, v. 431.

Oerzen, General, iv. 464.

Ogilvy, General, defends Prag, iii. 393; iv.
16, 18.

Ogle, Sir Chaloner, in the Carthagena Expe-
dition, iii. 298, 300.

Ohlanu, description of, iii. 167.

Oldenburg, General von, enters Erfurt, v.
4T, 48; cited, 48 n.

Oliva, Demoiselle d’, vi. 533.

Oliva, Peace of, i. 267.

Olmiitz, an ancient pleasant little city, v.
234; besieged by Friedrich, 236-24T.

Opitz, Silesian poet, iii. 132.

Oppeln, i. 180, 219; iii. 250.

ye og Duke of, beheaded at Neisse, iii.

76.

Opportunity, miraculous, iii. 31.

Orange, Princess of, i. 40; Prince of, hus-
band of George II.’s daughter, ii. 379, 409,
490, 492; iii. 413; assists Guichard, v.339;
Principality of, iii. TT.

Oranienburg, i. 274.

Order of Merit, Friedrich’s, iii. 5.

Orlamiinde, ii. 163.

Orleans, Regent d’, i. 409, 428; ii. 450, 451 ;
iv. 204 n.

Orleans, Duchess of, v. 160; Duke of. 479.

Orlich, cited, ii. 415 n.; iii. 120 n., 180 n.;
iv. 17 n.: v. 89 n.

Orlof, Alexei, vi. 212, 214; in the Russian-
Turk war, 256, 357.

Orlof, Gregory, Czarina’s lover, vi. 212, 214,
helps in the murder of Czar Peter, 215,

217. :

Orseln, Werner von, i. 120.
or pe Countess, ii. 18, 25, 189, 141; iv.

Osiander, Dr., i. 191, 194.

Osnabriick, Ernst August, Bishop of, i. 33;
ii. 6; his death, 5S.

Ostein, Graf von, iii. 519, 533.

or East-India Company, Karl VI.'’s, i.

Ostermann, Russian Statesman, iii. 196.

Ost-Friesland, Friedrich takes possession of,
iii. 592.

O'Sullivan, iv. 150.

Otho, King of Greece, vi. 449.

Ottmachau, Prussians take, iii. 171.

Otto, Duke of Meran, slain, i. £5. F

Otto III., Elector of Brandenburg, i. 89.

Otto IIL., last of *‘ Saxon Kaisers,” i. 60, 63.

Otto of Stettin, Duke, Burial of, i. 163.

re Bavarian Elector of Brandenburg,
i. 131.

a

INDEX.

Otto with the Arrow, i. 105.

Ottocar, King of Bohemia, i. 89; scandalous
plight before Rudolf of Hapsburg, 102.

Oxenstiern, i. 257,

Patry, Count, iii. 332, 368; iv. 15.

Pallandt, General, Friedrich’s sympathy for,
iii. 453.

age emi, General, tries to get Colberg, v.

75.

Pandour, iii. 206 n., 224.

Bree Grand-Duke Paul's tutor, vi. 212,
216.

Panis-Briefe, vi. 494 and n.

Pannewitz, Colonel, ii. 201.

Panzendorf, i. 387.

Panzern, Widow, iii. 252.

Papiatry, i. 356, 380; the Catholic Bull tak-
en by the tail and taught manners, 377;
a Papist conversion, 416; absolution, 364.
See Popes.

Pardubitz, Pandours try to get into, iv. 37.

Paris, Abbé, iii. 192.

Park, cited, ii. 519 n.

Parliament, reduced to its simplest expres-
sion, i. 404, 405; Constitutional Parlia-
ments, 466 ; English, 467; ii. 119, 276 ;
a Female Parliament, 92; a compact Par-
liament, iii. 8, 25; Parliamentary sleeping
dogs, 81, 290; Mr. Viner in, 287; Ost-
Friesland Parliament reformed, 593.

Pascopol, the, iv. 454.

Passau, Peace of, i. 198 ;
possession of, iii. 340.

Paul, Czarowitch, ii. 341; iv. 414; parent-
age, vi. 19S; night of his father’s murder,
215, 2382; his second wife, 344, 427, 197 n. ;
his first wife, 4045 visits Berlin, 497.

Pauli, cited, i. 64 n: iv. 485 n.; v.45n.

Paulmy, Marquis de, iv. 337.

Pauw, Cornelius de, vi. 496.

Pedants, learned, i. 356, 470.

Peitsch, Professor, vi. 119.

Pelham, iv. 218; Pelham’s Parliaments, v
52, 54.

Pellegrini, Count de, vi. 352.

Penalties, i. 202.

Penthiévre, Duce de, iv. 204 n.

Perry, Alderman, ii. 502.

Pertz, cited, iii. 100 n.

Perusa, Karl Albert’s Ambassador at Vien-
na, iii, 267, 268.

Pesne’s Portraits, i. 318, 340, 841; ii. 327;
at Reinsberg, 436; his portrait of King
Friedrich, iii. 429.

Peter, Czar, i. 324, 406 ; visits Friedrich Wil-
helm at Berlin, 343; the strangest mix-
ture of heroic virtue and brutish Samoe-
idic savagery, 346; at Magdeburg, 347;
his Ae gs noi fe 350; mentioned also, vi.
197, 52

Peter Federowitz, Grand-Duke of Russia, iii.
575, 577; iv. 410, 411, 414, 415; becomes
Peter If. of Russia, vi. 195, 196; geneal-
ogy and tragical career, 197, 200; ardent
profession of friendship for Friedrich, 207,
208, 212; tries to reconcile Bieren and
Miinnich, 208 ; magnanimous improve-
ments, 209; always in a plunge of hur-

Karl Albert gets

593

ries, 211; fetches Colonel Hordt from the
Czarina; turning-point in his history,
at brutally murdered, 215; his funeral,
2

Petersburg, Treaty of, iv. 402; resolution
at, to reduce the House of Brandenburg to
its former mediocrity, 405, 411; Hanbury
Williams’s Treaty signed at, 410; Colonel
Hordt released from the citadel of, at the
accession of Peter III., vi. 206; presented
at Court; Bieren and Miinnich home from
Siberia, 207; Pastor Biisching assists in
the Homagings to Peter III., 208; Czar-
ina Elizabeth lies in State, 210; her Fu-
neral; Catharine’s Evening Parties, 211;
plots and riots,ending in murder of the
Czar, 214-216; Prince Henri sumptnous-
ly entertained by the Czarina, 364-366.

Peter's, St., Church at Berlin burnt down, i.
133.

Peterswalde, iv. 1T. /

Petitot, cited, ii. 376 n.

Peubla, E xcellency, i iy. 399, 411.

Peyrau, Dr., vi. 509.

Peyssonnel, cited, vi. 380.

Pezay, Campagnes de Maillebois, cited, iii.
484 n.

Pezzl, cited, iv. 485 n.; vi. 351 n.

Pfalz, Kur, in subsidy of France, v. 173.

Pfalz- Neuburg, Wolfgang Wilhelm, i. 233,
236; claims the Cleve- Heritage, 934, 241;
face slapped, 242; conference with the
Great Kurfirst, 264; his Grandson Karl
Philip, 373.

Pfanner, cited, i. 243 n.

Pfau, General, at Kunersdorf, v. 392.

Pfeffel, vi. 259 n.; cited, i. 423 n.

Pfitzner, iii. 407.

Philip II., King of Spain, iii. 270.

Philip, Kur-Pfalz, iii. 399, 411, 570.

Philip’s, Don, claim on the Milanese, iii. 4825
mentioned. also, iv. 178, 197, 213, 221 n.
v. 502.

Philip of Hessen, i. 93, 94, 184, 211; en-
trapped by Karl V., 211.
Philippina Charlotte, i. 412; ii. 238, 353;
wedded to Karl of Brunswick, 291, 363 5

their Sons, 496.

Philips, the English groom, ii. 532.

Philip ‘Theodor, Kur-Pfalz, iii. 570.

Philipsburg, Siege of, ii. 380, 385; iv. 4.

Phillimore, cited, ii. 51 n.

Phillips, Captain, in battle of Minden, v.
363, 364.

Piacenza, Battle of, iv. 198 n.

Piast Dukes, the, iii. 130.

Picard, Voltaire’s servant, iv. 273, 27T.

Piccolomini, Graf von, defends Bri inieg, iii.
282 ; mentioned also, iv 442,

Pictures, i. 840, 341.

Pierre, Abbé St., iii. 86.

Pillau, ii. 244, 513.

Pine, John, the English Engraver, ii. 530.

Pinto, Major Graf von, vi. 497, 507, 535.

Pipin, King, iii. 76.

Pirch, Page von, at siege of Schweidnitz, vi.
238 "and n.

Pitra, Bookseller, vi. 206.

Pitt, William, ii. 525; his Life-element, iil,

594 INDEX.

316; iv. 220; eyes bent on America, 381,
885, 394; anxious to treat with Friedrich,
412; the one hope of England, 421; tries
to help Friedrich, v. 5; impatient of the
Duke of Newcastle, 49, 50, 56; depth of
sad conviction about England, 51; his
speeches full of genius, 51-54; like Fried-
rich, a born King, 53, 54, 4525 stages of
his course, 55-58; thinks America may be
conquered in Germany, 120; assists Fried-
rich against France, 150, 171; subsidies,
224; descent on Rochefort, 229; better
hopes of America, 230, 251; at his zenith
in public reputation, 315; sends Wolfe
against Quebec, 366, 367; a despotic sov-
ereign, though a temporary one, 396, 452;
resources and promptitudes, 409; reply
to Parliamentary congratulations, 452 ;
America and India both to be his, 454; im-
portant Spanish notions from Lord Ma-
rischal, 504; increases Ferdinand’s army,
vi. 31, 107; consequence to him of George
II.’s death, 108; his peace-negotiations
with Choiseul suddenly explode into war
with Spain, 157-159, 181; his last Cabinet
Council, 183; Bute’s shameful peace, 252 5
English America due to Pitt, 258; Fried-
rich's esteem for, 431; Smelfungus’s mem-
oranda on, 431, 432.

Pitt, Mr., at Berlin, vi. 429.

Pittsburg, iv. 884 n.; taken by Forbes, v.
307.

Plantagenet Kings, Mother of our, i. 68;
their family name, 73; worth to England,
317.

Plassenburg, Castle of, i. 82, 95, 176, 200.

Platen, Adjutant von, death of, v. 39.

Platen, General von, ii. 514; in Hinter-
Pommern, y. 235, 249; in Poland, 328;
despatched after Butterlin, vi. 149; march-
es to Colberg, 150, 162, 177.

Plitz, ii. 330. ©

Plauen Canal, iii. 573.

Playfair, cited, v. 447 n.

Plessmann, Prussian Secretary, iv. 338, 389.

Ploschke, Friedrich’s Guide at Mollwitz, iii.
2365-5

Plotho, Baron von, and his Reich's plead-
ings, v. 7,923 will not be served with Cita-
tio, 147-149; gathers documents concern-
ing the French invasion, 173-179; offers
peace or war to the Reich's Princes, vi. 428.

Plunket, Thomas, v. 405.

Podewils, iii. 24, 40, 110, 323, 329, 341, 381;
iv. 78, 85, 155, 164; interview with D’Ar-
get at Dresden, 177; cited, iii. 505 n.

Poet, the highest, the fittest Historian, i. 16.

Poictiers, v. 165.

Poland, edging itself into the territories of
Prussia, i. 159, 161; Polish Partition of
Preussen, 162, 267; ii. 353; an ‘+ Aristo-
cratic Republic,” i. 2255 ii. 367, 369; Pol-
ish Chivalry, i. 267; King August’s pro-
posed Partition of; a Polish Election, ii,
369; early troubles in, iii, 130; Polish
Republic, anarchic every fibre of it, v
328; vi. 262, 311, 312; Partition of, 301 ;
Ruthiére’s History, 301-303 ; Nie pozwa-
lam, 313; Right of Confederation, 314;

little or no national business transacted ;
the door-mat of Russia, 315; feels itself
to be in a most halcyon condition ; Jesuit
fanaticism, 316; the Czarina thinks to do
something handsome in regard to Poland,
317, 318; makes Poniatowski King, 319-
323; Confederation of Radom, 323-325;
of Bar, 326-331; last glimmer of Confed-
eration extinguished ; a specimen of each
class hung on a tree, 332; the Polish Pa-
triots apply to the Turks, 333; two Cam-
paigns quite finish them off, 335; Austria
takes forcible possession of Zips, 361-363;
the Czarina proposes dismemberment,
366; Friedrich'’s negotiations thereupon,
368-370 ; final agreement between the
Three Partitioning Powers, 370; a case of
Lynch Law; upon which no spoken word
of approval or apology is permissible,
875, 376; early condition of Polish Prus-
ne 376-379; Lindsey’s Letters on, 380,
81. .

Poland, King of. See August III.

Poland, Queen of, iv. 733 tries to defend the
Dresden Archives, 440, 441; civilities and
difficulties with Friedrich, 484; death,
485.

Polastron, Count, iii. 391, 394, 420, 424.

Polignac, Cardinal de, iii. 192.

Political Economy, iv. 295.

PoOllnitz, cited, i. 40 n., 42 n., 46 n., 47 n.,
286 n.; ii. SO n.

Pollnitz, i. 460, 469; ii. 485, 513; 5285 iii.
101, 323, 574; receives a Testimonial, 587.

Pomerania, i. 73, 162, 254, 342; divided by

Sweden, 264, 273.

Pommern Regiment, the, v. 188, 512, 513;
vi. 92.

Pompadour, i. 126; helps Voltaire to Court,
iv. 199; becomes indifferent to him, 203;
compliments to Friedrich not accepted by
him, 247, 407, 408; flatteries from Maria
Theresa, 370, 407, 408; in Committee at
Babiole, 417; backs Austria at the French
Court, 450; enmity to Friedrich, v. 3, 90,
172, 217; very fell and feminine, 315; her
death, vi. 298.

Poniatowski, Andreas, vi. 322.

Poniatowski, Casimir, vi. 322. ‘
Poniatowski, Joseph, perished fighting for
Napoleon, vi. 8322; mentioned also, 381.
Poniatowski, Stanislaus, at Petersburg, iv.

410; vi. 199, 308; becomes King of Po-
land, and is crowned without loss of his
hair, 317-323; a good deal of gallantry
on his hands, 324; summons Russian

troops, 32T.

Ponikau, iv. 388.

Pope, ii. 454.

Popes, the Avignon, i. 110, 112, 116; the
Pope prays for a good quarrel among the
Heretics, ii. 74. See Boniface, Hilde-
brand, Leo X., Papistry.

Popish Superstition, or creed of Incredibili-
ties, vi. 263, 323.

Porta, Baptista, i. 246 n.

Porto-Bello, iii. 90, 297.

Portugal involved in the Spanish-English
War, vi. 185-187,

ee ee a

INDEX.

Posadowsky, Colonel, iii. 34; at Breslau,
161, 162, 165; at Mollwitz, 245; in the
Moravian Foray, 425; on march from
Prag towards Austria, iv. 24, 25.

Potsdam Giants, Friedrich Wiihelm’s, i.
439; ii. 311; their last service, 538.

Pottery-Apotheosis, English, of Friedrich,
v. 213.

Pownal, Governor of New England, v. 453.

Poyntz, Stephen, ii. 43.

Prades, Abbé de, iv. 321, 322, 350, 351, 390,
893; v. 213, 215, 216.

Pretorius, General, ii. 476; account of Fried-
rich’s new Government, iii. 40.

Prag, i. 244, 257; ii. 337, 340, 342; French
Sealade of, iii. 393; Austrian Siege, 481,
486; Siege raised, 492; Lelleisle’s retreat
from, 501,502; Austrian preparations for
resisting Prussian siege of, iv. 15, 16;
taken by Friedrich, 20; left under Ein-
siedel, 23, 41; his difficult retreat from,
44; Battle of, v. 17-41; Siege of, 58-62.

Pragmatic Sanction, Karl VJ.’s, i. 420; ii.
43, 191, 251; iii, 216, 249, 264; downbreak
of, 265, 273.

Prasse, Sieur, iv. 403.

Predestination, ii. 213, 257.

Presburg, Maria Theresa at, iii. 8367; iv. 15.

Pretender, the Young, in Edinburgh, iy.
150.

Pretsch, Action of, v. 446.

Preuss, a meritoriously exact man, i. 297 n.;
account of Friedrich’s domesticities, iv.
327, 32); cited in notes, i. 19, 297, 435;
ii. 3; iii. 5, 27, 37, 42, 49, 63; iv. 102; v.
4

Preussen, East, taken possession of by Rus-
sia, v. 218; keeps quiet, and hopes for
better days, 256.

Preussen. See Prussia.

Pride of place, the last thing that deserts a
sinking house, i. 189.

Primogeniture, Law of, i. 174, 223; ii. 163.

Prince, Mr., of Boston, cited, iv. 99 n.

Prinzen, i. 330.

Prinzenraub, Little Albert of the, i. 235.

Priort, ii. 352, 416.

Prittwitz, Captain, saves the King at Ku-
nersdorf, v. 388; mentioned also, vi. 497.

Prittwitz, Silesian magnate, iii. 351.

Promethean conquests, i. 185,

Prometheus, v. 515.

Protestant Refugees, i. 232, 268; Protestant
Germany, 249; ‘‘enlightened Protestant-
ism,’ 296, 387; the Heidelberg Protest-
ants, 370; Birth-place of Protestantism,
ii. 161; the Salzburg Protestants, 241,
314; Protestant. sympathy with Fried-
rich, iv. 40, 121, 163; Protestantism, v.
472. See Reformation.

Prussia, early condition of, i. 58; a vehe-
mently Heathen Country, 59; attempts
at Conversion, 60; brought to terms by
the Teutsch Ritters, 86,119; West-Preus-
sen cut away by the Polish sword, 161;
how East-Preussen came into the Hohen-
zollern Family, 187; Mitbelehnung, 215 ;
a troublesome Aristocracy, 224; tamed
down by George Friedrich, 229; posses-

595

sions in the Rhine Country, 248, 265;
freed from Homage to Poland, 266, 26T ;
invaded by the Swedes, 271; Kingdom of
Prussia contrasted with Westphalia, 282
(see Friedrich I); dawning of a new day
for Prussia, 306, 354; Salzburg Protest-
ants in, ii. 319; population and revenue,
iii. 27 n.; preparedness for War, iv. 1;
discipline in storm of battle, 116, 144,

461, 462; devoutnezs of heart, 163, 225;—

Prussia during ten years of peace, 187,
294, 296; the Nation of Teutschland, 188;
Prussian Free-Corps, 485; Prussia to be
divided amongst the Great Powers, v. 2;
resources to meet the general attack ;
militias, 223, 246; noble conduct of young
recruits at Démstadtl, 245; Prussian loy-
alty towards the King, 246; surrounded
by enemies; army becoming exhausted,
316; exchequer ditto, 319; Prussian ex-
penditure of life on the Seven - Years’
War, vi. 256; Fire-Baptism, and rank
among the Nations, 257; the Prussian
Clio, 465; what Prussia owes to its Ho..
henzollern Kings, 267; ruined condition
at close of the war, 271-281; dissatisfac-
tion at Friedrich’s Excise-system, 284-
289; acquisition of West-Preussen, 369,
370, 378, 379. See Brandenburg.

Prussia, Prince of. See August Wilhelm.

Publie Opinion, iii. 2.

Piickler, Reichsgraf, and Colonel Mayer, v;
5.

Puffendorf, cited, i. 243 n., 269 n.

Pulawski, Fort, in Charlestown Harbour,
vi. 329, 330.

Pulawskis, the Polish, and their efforts for
Freedom, vi. 329; defence of Cloister
Czenstochow, 330.

Piitter, cited, i, 387 n.

Putter, Professor, talks with King Fried-
rich, vi. 250, 251.

Puttkammer, General, escorts convoy, v.
97; killed at Kunersdorf, 387.

Pytheas, i. 51, 59,

QUAD, the, iii. 129.

Quadt, Colonel, assists in losing Glatz, vi.
25, 26.

nes preaches before King Friedrich, iii.
3

Quantz, the Saxon Flute-player, ii. 82; iv.
190, 230; his death, vi. 426.

Quebec, besieged by General Wolfe, v. 366,
367; captured, 447-449; decision that
America is to be English and not French,
451,

Quedlinburg, iii. 36.

Queen Mother. See Sophie Dorothee.

Queen Regnant. See Elizabeth Christina
of Brunswick-Bevern.

Queen of France, Stanislaus's daughter be-
comes, ii, 370, 873; iii. 184, 186.

Queens, the average of, ii. 478.

Quintus Icilius, otherwise Guichard, v. 47;
with Friedrich at Breslau, 216; how he
got his new name, 337, 338; sketch of his
career, 338-340; vi. 8; at siege of Dres-
den, 20; in Leipzig, 80, 112; his respect

596

for Gellert, 116; brings him to the King,
116, 118, 119; undertakes the sacking of
Hubertsburg, 123, 254; with Prince Hen-
ri in Saxony, 1935 his troops paid off, at
close of the war, 253; his death, 4:6;
mentioned also, 390 and n.

Quitzow, Dietrich von, i. 151.

Quixote, Don, vi. 103.

RABENAU, Rittmeister, vi. 175, 176.

Rabener of Berlin, vi. 116.

Racine’s Athalie, Friedrich’s high opinion
of, vi. 283, 349.

Racknitz, Countess, iv. 182.

Radewitz, Camp of, ii. 104, 135.

Radom, Confederation of, vi. 323-325.

Radzivil, Prince, at Radom, vi. 324, 325.

Radzivil, Princess, elopes with Karl. Philip,
i. 372.

Rambonet, employed in the Herstal Affair,
iii. 71, 72, 76, S1.

Ramen, betrays Queen Sophie Dorothee’s
confidence, ii. 92, 96.

Rameau, iv. 199.

Ramin, Governor of Berlin, vi. 396, 434.

Ramrods, iron, invention of, i. 302.

Ramsay, Chevalier, iii. 192.

Ranfft, cited, ii. 195 n.

Ranke, iii. 328, 560; iv. 78, 86,128; cited, |

11,-142)n.§ Piii..569 n., STT un. 3 “iv. 29 n- ;
v. 3 n.

Rannsleben, Judge, and the Miller-Arnold
case, vi. 48-489.

Riisfeld, iii. 71; Prussian Ambassador in
Holland, 323, 328.

Rasomowski, Count, vi. 214.

Rastadt, i. 284.

Rathenau, i. 270.

Ratibor, i. 180, 219.

Raumer, cited, iii. 135 n., 339 n.3 iv. 131 n.

Rauter, General, at Zorndorf, v. 270, 271.

Ravyaillac, i. 239.

Raynal, Abbé, vi. 516.

Reality, worth of, i. 311. See Fact.

“Rebecca, the, boarded by-the Spaniards, ii.
247.

Rebeur, President von, vi. 480.

Reform, Administrative, i. 307.

Reformation, the, Markgraf George in the
great business of, i. 181; the Event of the
Sixteenth Century, 201, 236; fatal conse-
quences of rejecting, 203; symptoms of
the Thirty-Years’ War, 237; George Wil-
helm's perplexities, 248.

Rége, Major de, killed at Ottmachau, iii.
171, 174.

Regensburg, iii. 209, 521.

Rehback, Jakob, i. 122.

Reichartsbronn, Abbey of, i. 92.

Reichenbach, ii. 93; his Cipher-Correspond-
ence with Grumkow, 113, 120, 123; his
recall, 129, 130.

Reichenbach, Battle of, vi. 232-235.

Reichenberg, Battle of, v. 14-15.

Reichs-Kammergericht, iii. 50, 81; Holy
Romish Reich, 262, 274; Reich thunder,
iv. 482; v. 6,58; Execution Army to be
got on foot, 8,89; Citatio Fiscalis, 147-
149; Army all gone to wreck, 166; placed

INDEX.

under command of Zweibriick, 239; in
Saxony, 276, 278; tries to capture Leipzig
and Torgau, 304; driven from Erfurt,
326; chased by Prince Henri, 331; again
enters Saxony, 404, 405, 410, 4115 at
Maxen, 459; repulsed by Hiilsen, vi. 58;
has temporary possession of Saxony, 763
rapidly retreats before Friedrich, 79;
driven from Leipzig, 80; makes its exit
from the world, 248.

Reinbeck, Herr, writes to Wolf, iii. 9.

Reinhart, Count, v. 480.

Reinsberg, ii. 284, 364, 432; Friedrich's
Mansion at, 431, 435.

Reklam, Herr, Berlin Jeweller, iv. 277.

Religion, teaching, i. 887. See Education.

Rembrandt, vi. 250. .

Rentsch, cited, i. T4 n.

Rentzel, i. 358; vi. 453 n.

Repnin, Prince, iv. 214; at Congress of
‘Yeschen, vi. 468.

Retzow, Colonel, at Pardubitz, iii. 455; on

commencement of Seven-Years’ War, iv.
429, 430; on battle of Prag, v. 85; Fried-
rich’s speech before Leuthen, 186, 187; on
Zorndorf, 265; Hochkirch, 289, 298; Prus-
sian Army losing its best men, 316, 443 ;
cited also, iii, 195 n. 5 iv. 398 n.; v. 36 2.3
vi. 19.

Retzow, Major-General, in conference with
Friedrich, iv. 429, 430; under Prince of
Prussia, v. 96; Leuthen, 192, 205; at Leu-
tomischl, with Fouquet, 247,248; at Hoch-
kirch, 282; put under momentary arrest,
284; occupies Weissenberg, 286, ¥8T, 2955
in battle of Hochkirch, 295, 296; death at
Schweidnitz, 303.

Reusch, Colonel, at Tein Bridge, iv. 33.

Reuss, Counts von, i. 95.

Reuss, Graf von, at Versailles, iii. 183, 192.

Reverence, iv. 31.

Review-articles, i. 91. See Literature.

Reynolds’s Portrait of Lord Granby, vi. 34.

Rhadamanthus, not so well informed as he
might be, ii. 212.

Rhenitz of Dresden, iv. 387, 388.

Richard Coeur-de-Lion and the Siege of
Acre, i. 83, 91.

Richard of Cornwall, sham Kaiser, i. 98,
100.

Richardson's account of Prince Henri's visit
to Petersburg, vi. 8364-366; cited, vi. 336.
Richelieu, Due de, iv. 97, 202; takes Minor-
ca, 422, 423; v.91; supersedes D’Estrées,
107, 113,118; one of the most magnificent
marauders, 114, 127; Letter from Fried-
rich, 116; Convention of Kloster-Zeven,
118, 119; superseded by Prince de Cler-

mont, 170.

Riedesel, at Himmelskron, v. 332.

Ried, General, at Torgau, vi. 87.

Riesebeck, cited, i. 78 n.; ii. 315 n.

Rights, iii, 119; American Rights of Man,
vi. 262.

Ripon, Countess de Grey and, ancestor of
the, iii. 290 n.

Ripperda, Duke de, i, 428; ii. 1, 50,

Ritter, Doris, ii. 212.

Robinson, Professor, v. 447 n.

INDEX.

Robinson, Sir Thomas, ii. 43, 249, 251, 348;
difficulties at Vienna, iii. 335, 338, 352,
357, 360; audience of King Friedrich,
840; King refuses to see him, 361; letter
to Hyndford, 363; interview with Maria
Theresa, iv. 130, 131; mentioned also, iii.
92, 103, 318, 382, 433 ; iv. 49, 3253 v. 56.

Roche-Aymon, De la, cited, vi. 520 n.

Rochow, Lieutenant-Colonel, ii. 160, 170,
174; prevents Friedrich’s Flight, 188,
a Commandant of Berlin, v. 146; vi.

T

Rockingham, Marquis of, iv. 249.

Roden, mentioned to the King by Duke Fer-
dinand, vi. 275; royal dialogue with him,
275-277; second audience, and standing
appointment, 278, 378 n.

Rédenbeck, cited, i. 308 n. 3 ii. 185 n. 5 iii.
8n.3; iv.34n.3 v.78 n.3 vi. 24 n.

Rédenskjold, Swedish Ambassador, iii. 577.

Réder, General, ii. 384.

Rodolf IL, Kaiser, i. 238, 240.

Rodney attacks Havre-de-Grace, v. 352.

Roel, Lieutenant-General, iv. 168, 172.

Rohan, Duc de, and Voltaire, ii, 4515 vi.
543.

Rohdich, Commandant, vi. 540.

Rohr, Captain, v. 39.

Rohwedel, ii. 232.

Roi, M., iv. 200.

Rollin, ii. 447.

Roloff, Provost, ii. 528, 530.

Romanzof sent by Soltikof to Daun, vy. 432,
433.

Romanzow besieges Colberg, vi. 160-163,
178, 179; sent against the Turks, 335,
356-358,

Romanzow junior, vi. 523.

Riémer, General, at Mollwitz, iii. 238 5
killed, 242.

Roquefeuille, Admiral, iii. 582, 584.

Rose, Medicinal-Assessor, iv. 247.

Roskowski, symbolical Polish Nobleman, vi.
3TT.

Rossbach, Battle of, i.6; v. 151; the coun-
try round, 156-159; Napoleon’s opinion
of, 167.

Roscold of Sangerhausen, v. 176.

Rostock, i. 254.

Rotch, of Boston, loses his tea, vi. 406, 407.

Roth, Count von, iii. 139; defends Neisse,
177; Briinn, 425, 426.

Roth, Lieutenant-General, taken prisoner at
Freyberg, vi. 246.

Rothenburg, Count von, and his French fash-
ions, i. 322; at Mollwitz, iii, 237,245; at
Chotusitz, 446, 449; despatched to Paris,
569; sent with reinforcements to Prag, iv.
41; at Hohenfriedberg, 115; at Dresden,
177; much esteemed by Friedrich, 309 ;
his death, 315; mentioned also, ii. 1715
iii. 20, 1925 iv. 2, 46, 156, 190, 215, 312.

Rothschloss, Affair of, iii. 307.

Rottembourg, Count de (properly von Roth-
enburg), ii. 407.

Rottofreddo, Battle of, iv. 198 n.

Roucoulles, Dame de, i. 28, 294.

Roucoux, Battle of, iv. 197 n., 211.

Rouillé, M. de, iv. 418.

597

Rousseau, iii. 347, iv. 417; finds refuge
with Lord Marischal, and writes to Fried-
rich, vi. 295, 296.

Rousset, cited, iv. 132 n.; vi. 256 n.

Rovigo, Due de, v. 483.

Ruibezahl, Sprite, iv. 13; v. 16.

Ricker, Dr., of Frankfurt, iv. 357, 358.

Rudenskjéld reveals Briih!’s scheme to Fried-
rich, iv. 155; mentioned also, 215.

Riidiger von Manesse, cited, i. 105.

Rudolf of Hapsburg, i. 89, 146; elected Kai-
ser, 100; humiliation of King Ottocar,
1013; unlovely posterity, 109.

eat J. U., citizen of Landshut, iii. 383,

Riigen, Isle of, i. 333.

Rulhiére, M., cited, vi. 205; his book on Po-
land, 301-303, 316, 817, 318, 319, 327.

Rupert, Kaiser Kur-Pfalz, i. 139, 147.

Ruppin, ii. 284, 307, 431. i

Russian project of partition of Prussia, iii.
213, 214; Russians hired by England, iv:
214, 217, 410; resolutions against Fried-
rich, 405, 406, 413; share in the partition-
ing of Prussia, v. 2; invasion of Preussen,
§8, 93; 127, 128, 189; forcible possession,
218; the regular Army shares the com-
mon horror against the Cossacks, 255;
Russian soldiership, 259, 274; Russian
Army in possession of Frankfurt, 368-
871; the regular Russians civil and order-
ly, 370; their honourable treatment of
Major Kleist, 393; joy at Petersburg for
the victory of Kunersdorf, 393, 394; Army
threatens Silesia, vi. 4, 5, 27; advances
towards Neisse, to join Loudon, 141; junc-
tion near Liegnitz, 142; Russian Grena-
diers at Schweidnitz, 167 ; Russian obedi-
ence and stedfastness, 220, 221,315; satire
on Prince Galitzin, 335, 336; war with
Turkey, 344, 345, 355-358; Partition of
Poland, 269, 370.

Rutowski, ii. 19 ; iii. 391, 394, 422, 424; iy.
151,182; grand scheme against Friedrich,
154; beaten at Kesselsdorf, 169-172 ; van-
ishes into Bohemia, 175; disastrous man-
agement at Pirna, 468-471, 474-477.

Ryswick, Peace of, i. 374.

SAALE Rtver, vy. 152, 153.
Sachsen-Gotha. See Gotha.
Sachsen-Meiningen, Duchess of, ii, 277.
Sack, Baron de, iv. 403.

Sackville, Lord George, iv. 98; v. 308 n.3 in ~
charge of Miinster country, 328; disgrace-
ful conduct at Minden, 362-366.

Sahay, Skirmish of, iii. 452.

Sainte-Beuve, M., v.4S5 n.

Saldern, General, at Mollwitz, iii. 2353 in
battle of Liegnitz, vi. 54; of Torgau, 265
dialogue with the King at Leipzig; re-
fuses to act contrary to his honour and
oath, 121, 122; in favour with the King,
12

Salmon, cited, ii. 2 n.

Salzburg Protestants, the, Friedrich Wil-
helm’s interest in, ii. 241, 511; Emigra-
tion of, 314; the Salzburg Country, 315;
ili, 521; iv. 63.

598

Salzdahlum, ii. 360.

Salzwedel, i. 54, 57, 71.

Samson, Abbot, i. 74.

Samson Agonistes, i. 4.

Sandershausen, Fight of, v. 309 n.

Sans-Souci, iv. 193, 194; the Neue Palais of,
vi. 293, 294, 297.

Sardinia, i ii. 376.

Satan’s Invisible-World, i. 337.

Sauerteig on Ideal History, i. 15; on purity
in the Relation of the Sexes, ii. 21; on
Friedrich and Voltaire, 447; on Wars not
memorable, iii. 259; on Diplomatic Ve-
racity, 372.

Saul, Legationsrath von, iv. 387.”

Savage, cited, i, 264 n.

Savage’s, Mr., Compleat History of Ger-
many, i. 264 n,

Savoy Passes, iii. 483, 485.

Saxe, Chevalier de, iii. 391, 406, 422, 428;
betes Einsiedel, iv. 45; mentioned also,

82

Saxe, Maréchal de, ii. 27, 278, 387; quarrels
with Valori, iii. 423 ; commands under the
Young Pretender, 583; made Maréchal,
iv. 2; in the Netherlands, 7, 57, 197, 211,
214; siege of Tournay, $8; at Fontenoy,
90-98 ; nearly dead of dropsy, 98; march-
es upon Maestricht, 218; visits Friedrich
at Sans-Souci, 223; diligent service of the
Devil, and death, 224, 225; favoured of
the Devil, Aa eS he his Reveries, vi. 341;
mentioned also, iii. 358, 371, 389, 390, 395,
402, 422, 425, 490, 515; iv. 182.

Saxon Switzerland, iv. 442-445, 478, 474.

Saxony, Prussian Army marehes through,
iv. 11,14; Saxony’s broken back, 69, 71;
antipathy to Friedrich, 69, 74,1135 in se-
cret league with Austria, 69; Saxon army
at Striegau, 112, 116, 119; at Hennersdorf,
161, 162; a Nation governed by a Briihl,
168; Steuer -Scheine, 181; invaded by
Friedrich, 437; Saxon Army blockaded in
Pirna country, 442-449 ; gets out on dis-
mal terms, 466-478; Capitulation of Strup-
pen, 476, 477; Prussia takes possession,
480; Saxon share in the proposed parti-
tioning of Prussia, v. 2; resentment
against Friedrich, 74, 79; forced contri-
bution to the expenses of the war, 320,
321.

Saxony, Elector of, claims Cleve, i. 235, 240.

Saxony, Kur- Prince of. See mi tet
Christian.

Schaffgotsch, Cardinal, of Breslau, iii, 165;
yv. 185, 210.

Schaffgotsch senior, iii, 162, 166.

Schaper, cited, v. 171 n.

Schellenberg, i. 237; ii. 173.

Schenkendorf, General, in battle of Lieg-
nitz, vi. 50.

Schidlo, Toll of, iv. 181. '

Schilda, and its absurd celebrity, vi. 82.

Schiller, i. 15, 175 ii. 341; iii. 419.

Schimmelmann, Herr, and his false Danish
coining, vi. 111.

Schlecker, Advocate, vi. 473.

Schlegenberg, Count and Countess von, of
Breslau, iii. 165, 166.

INDEX.

seat iii. 127; Historical Epochs of, 129,

} provisions for the Prussian Army i in,

iB: reformations in, under Friedrich,

382, "464, 467; guaranteed to Prussia, 458,
See. Silesia.

ae fence at Camp of Staudentz, iv. 147,

Schlétzer, cited, iv. 214 n.

Schlézer, cited, ii, 409 n.

Schlubhut hung for theft, ii. 242, 530.

Schmalkaldic War, the, i. 210, 221.

Schmettau junior, ii. 407; iii. 20, 425, 4415

' iv. 119, 483; v. 162, 424; vi. 191; on the
Bavarian War, 449; cited, v. 95 n.; vi.
449 n.

Schmettau senior, in the Austrian service,
ii. 407; ordered home to Prussia, iii. 20;
sent to urge Karl Albert, 366; at scalade
of Prag, 393, 394; mission to the French,
iv. 8; could make nothing of it, 28; urges
the Hanoverians, v. 4, 5; at. Prag a teres
with Prince of Prussia, "94, "95, 96, 08; de-
fends Dresden against Daun, 304-306 : let-
ter from the King authorising capitula-
tion, 391; outlooks becoming very grim,
411; does not receive the King’s second
letter, promising relief, 412; summoned to
surrender, 413; hot preparation for de-
fence ; helpless uncertainty, and Council
of War, 414; high-toned negotiations, 415;
feeble haste, and blindness to symptoms,
416; Dresden disastrously lost, 417; capit-
ulation scandalously ill kept, 421-423;
Schmettau’s ill-fortune much pitied by all.
men, 423; his good Wife a constant sun-
shine to his declining days, 424.

Schmettau, Major Graf von, Landlord of
Miller Arnold, vi. 472, 473.

Schmidt, Curatus, of Siebenhuben, vi. 173,
174; curious disappearance from the up-
per world, 176.

Schmidt, Hofrath, of Frankfurt, iv. 356 ; his
Wife’s treatment of Voltaire, 360.

Schmidt, Lieutenant, in Sangerhausen, v.
176.

Schmidt, President, in Cleve, v. 173.

Schmucker, present during Zimmermann’s
interview with the King, vi. 387-390.

Scholl, cited, i. 375 n. 5 iii. 328 n. 5 iv. 13 n. 5
v. dn.

Schiélzke. See Ploschke.

Schonfeld, Herr von, iv. 103.

Schéning, Madan, ii. 263.

Schoning, cited, v. 29S n. 3, Vi. 4n.

Schénwitz, Christopher, iii. 235,

bee ties Magister, insulted by the French, v.

Schrock, iv. 5.

Schuhmacher,
231.

Schulenburg, Fieldmarshal, ii. 8; Lieuten-
ant-General, 219, 273, 334, 341, 384, 527;
his account of Friedrich at Ciistrin, 261;
pockets an affront, iii. 16; in the Silesian
Enterprise, 134; his dragoons, 208; at
Mollwitz, 240; death, 241; mentioned
also, v. 443, 4443 vi. 434.

Schulenburg, Graf von, vy. 150.

Schulze, David, Butcher of Neisse, iii, 381,

Prussian Secretary, iii. 25,

INDEX.

Schumacher, Danish Legation Secretary, vi.
216.

Schuwalofs, the, of Russia, iv. 414; vi. 210.

Schwartz, Monk, i. 126.

Schwartzburg, Princess of, ii, 475, 4TT.

Schwartzenbergs, the, of Austria, i. 255.

Schwedt, Margraves of, i. 368, 450; ii. 31,
239; the Mother Margravine, 97, 239, 280;
Heinrich, 313.

sperms: Hanoverian Excellency, iii.

Schweidnitz, besieged by the Austrians, v
181; capitulation, 182; recaptured by
Friedrich, 231, 232; suddenly captured
by General Loudon, vi. 163-167; retaken
by Friedrich, 231-239.

Schweinfurt, i. 270.

Schwerin, ii. 60, 77, 212, 228; iii. 110, 134,
165; on march towards Liegnitz, 147,

150; sudden entry, 158; takes Ottma-
chau, 171; bombards Neisse, 178; to com-
mand in chief, 181; at Breslau, 209, 212;
in Jiigerndorf Country, 224, 225; at Moll:
witz, 243, 245, 250 ; manages Breslau, 350,
381; entertains Bielfeld, 379 5 takes Ol-
miitz, 401; Moravian Foray, 425; home
in a huff, 432; on march to Prag, iv. 13;
takes Ziscaberg battery, 20; on march
towards Austria, 24; quarrels with Leo-
pold of Dessau, 27; takes Beneschau, 34;
goes home in a huff, 38; lays down his
plough again, 425; in conference with
Friedrich, 429 ; through the Glatz Mount-
ains, for Bohemia, 442, 451; retires to Si-
lesia, 480; on march to Prag, v. 11, 15, 16;
junction with the King, 19, 20; pattle of
Prag, 25; expostulates with the King, 26;
attacks the Austrian army; desperate
struggle, 28; On, my children! 30; death,
30, 37, 39; monument near Sterbohol, 40;
statue in Ber lin, 300.

Schwerin, Reichsrath Graf von, vi. 395.

Schwiebus, Circle of, i. 278.

Sciences, the, or Technologies, ii. 309.

Scotch Highlanders in Hanover, v. 308; at
Emsdorf, vi. 31.

Scots-Greys, Royal, iii. 474, 526.

Scoundrelism, one of the crowning summits
of, i. 112.

Secchia, surprisal of the, ii. 375.

Séchelles, M. de, iii. 403, 488, 492; iv. 57.

Seckendorf, cited, i. 208 n., 45 n,

Seckendorf, i 315, 331, 339 ; arrives at Ber-
lin, 437, 452 (see Grumkow) ; a stiff-back-
ed, petrified, inscrutable old Intriguer,
458; ii. T5; an offence to Queen Sophie, i.
482 ; ii. 75; present at Friedrich’s at-
tempted Flight, 187, 188, 195, 198; nego-
tiates his Marriage, 294; letter from Fried-
rich, 3323; negotiates Friedrich Wilhelm's
visit to the Kaiser, 3333; the visit, 346;
tries to resuscitate the Double-Marriage,
347, 359; a ride with the King, 352, 416;
at the Rhine Campaign, 399, 414, 420;
quits Berlin, 414; Commander-in-chief
against the Turks, 484; a prisoner in the
Fortress of Griitz, 499; Commander of
the Bavarian forces, iii. 479, 490, 493, 505,
510, 514; makes terms for himeelf, 515;

599

Hungarian Majesty refuses to confirm
them, 541; he garrisons. Philipsburg, iv.
4; to sit on Prince Karl's skirts, 28; loud-
ly blamed by the French, 29, 30; recon-
quers Bavaria, 29; reduced to nothing
again, 55, 56, 63, 75; as ill-treated as
could be wished, 58 ; diplomatising, 64, 65 ;
in questionable capacity at Fiissen, ce
mentioned also, iii. 107, 414, 471.

Seckendorf junior, ii. 414.

Seehausen, ii. 326.

Segebusch, cited, vi. 631 n

Ségur, Comte de, lii. 393, ‘399, 406, 421; Seas
56; at Pfaffenhofen, TT: vi. BIT; sees
Friedrich, 526.

Seidlitz at Prag, v. 20,35; with Friedrich in
Saxony, 115, 116, 117, 122; frightens ‘*‘ La
Dauphine’ out of Gotha, 125, 126; at
Rossbach, 159, 162; plunges down upon
‘*La Dauphine,” 163, 165; wounded, 169 ;
at Zorndorf, beyond praise, 267, 269 5 pub-
licly thanked by the King, 272; Statue,
in Berlin, 300; Kunersdorf, 379, 381, 885;
seriously wounded, 386 ; ill at Berlin, 434;
assists in defending Berlin, vi. 67; with
Prince Henri in Saxony, 140, 193 ; greatly
distinguishes himself at Freyberg, 245,
246, 247; visits Gotha with the King,
250): his death, 426.

Selchow, iii. 431 n.

Seligenstadt, iii. 526.

Selle, Dr., attends Friedrich in his last ill-
ness, vi. 531, 532, 542; cited, 532 n.

Selwyn, George, i iv. 325.

Senning, Major von, i. 358; ii. 438.

Serbelloni, beaten by Prince Henri, vi. 193.

Seven-Year War, results of the, vi. 248-

A 9

Seville, Treaty of, ii. 44, 249.

Seydlitz, Rittmeister, iv.ni0T.3 ‘at’ Hohen-
friedberg, 115.

Seyfarth, cited, ii, 393 n., 531 n., 533 n. 3 iii.
142 n., 233 n.; iv. 12 n.3 v. 111 n.; vi.
10 n.

Shakspeare, i. 17.

Shams, hatefulness of, i. 311.

Sherlock’s, Reverend Mr., Account of his
visit to Voltaire, vi. 410-414; visits Ber-
lin, 428, 429; cited, 411 n.

tes HR Wife ‘of Johann Friedrich, i, 226,

35.

Sicilian Vespers, i. 99.

Sieta, Col di, Pass of, iv. 213.

Sigismund I. King of Poland, i. 190, 192,
215.

Sigismund,.Kurfiirst of Brandenburg and
King of Hungary, i. 133, 134, 135, 139, 147;
becomes Kaiser, 141; Council of Con-
stance, 142, 145, 178; how he pledged Zips
to the Polish Crown, vi. 362; referred to
in the Bavarian-Succession War, 442.

Silence, value of, ii. 505; iv. 113.

Silesia, Prussian claims on, i. 260, 273, 27S,
431; ii. 335; iii. 109 5; revenue of, in 1742,
467 n. See Schlesien.

Silesian War, Third, sources of the, iv. 396.

Silhouette, M. de, French Controller-Gener-
al of Finance, v. 315; suspension of pay-
ment, 479; Dictionary immortality, 480.

600 INDEX.

Sincere, with Daun at Maxen, v. 459, 462.

Sinclair, Major, iii. 200.

Sinclair, Sir George, vi. 499 n.

Sinzendorf, Cardinal, Bishop of Bamberg, ii.
166.

Sinzendorf, Hof-Kanzler Count von, ii. 341;
iii. 165, 171, 178, 336, 352, 466.

Sirach, Jesus, vi. 119.

Skepticism, i. 35.

Slave, etymology of, i. 52.

Smelfungus on ‘Tobacco-smoking, i. 465; on
Modern Diplomacy, ii. 149; Voltaire’s Bi-
ographers, 452; on Contemporary Infiu-
ences, iii. 27,28; Friedrich’s Biographers,
29; on Maréchal de Saxe, iv. 223-225;
Voltaire, as Friedrich’s Supreme of Liter- |
ature, 259; Editorial Ignorances about |
him, 299, 300; Voltaire’s Speech better |
than his Silence, 304,314; La Beaumelle,
320, 321; Abbé de Prades, 321, 322; Vol-
taire’s ‘‘ Doctor Akakia,” 344, 345; the
end of his connection with Friedrich, 363 ;
on Kaunitz and his Diplomacies, 369,
370; on Friedrich’s Lamentation Psalms,
vy. 129; the Prussian Dryasdust's treat-
ment of Friedrich, 189, 190; English Pot-
tery Apotheosis, 215, 214; on old Marshal
Miinnich, vi. 217; Pitt, 431,432; Voltaire, |
465, 466.

Smollett, Tobias, iii. 299, 486; horrors of

the Carthagena Expedition, 303; cited,
303 n.3 iv. 409 n.

Soap-and-Water, Gospel of, iii. 451.

Sobieski, King, i. 372.

Sohr, country about, iv. 140, 143; Battle of,
143-148.

Soissons, Congress of, ii. 42.

Solitude of Soul, ii. 282; iii. 46, 100, 203.

Sdlltl, cited, i. 249 n.

Solomon’s Temple, v. 190.

Soltikof, General, prisoner at Zorndorf, v.

‘

34; her philosophical reunions, 35; her
symbolic pinch of snuff, 48.

Sophie Dorothee, Friedrich’s Mother, i. 24,

28, 285,332; her husband's confidence in
her, 331, 370, 449; ii. 215; her reception
of the Czarina Catherine, i. 847, 349; her
love for Fritz, 392; ii. 838; Double-Mar-
riage scheme, i. 392, 400, 405, 436; her
English Pension, 404; secret Correspond-
ence with her poor Mother, 410, 484; un-
expected birth of Princess Amelia, 411;
surrounded by intrigues and treachery,
449; Seckendorf an offence to her, 482;
difficulties becoming insuperable, 483;
visit of August of Saxony, ii. 25; persist-
ence in the Double-Marriage scheme, 31,
54, 95; a pressing message from the King,
90, 95; her Female Parliament, 91; a bed
of sickness the one refuge left, 96, 105;
proposes Friedrich of Baireuth for Wil-
helmina, 97; not a perfectly wise Mother,
100; Dr. Villa sent express to England,
102; joyful news about the. Double-Mar-
riage, 110; grievous disappointment, 133,
156; news of her Son's arrest, 199; re-
ceives his Writing-desk from Katte, 200;
delivers it to the King, filled with ficti-
tious letters, 205; terror for her Son's life,
229; will not give-up the English Mar-
riage, 234; anger at Wilhelmina, 237, 238,
240, 281, 288, 387, 691; her opinion of the
Prince of Wales, 240; interest in the Salz-
burg Protestants, 327; contempt for her
Son's Bride, 358, 361; the King's Death,
534; Friedrich’s affection for, iii. 21; en-
tertains Count Henkel, 22; receives Wil-
helmina, 98; Demon-Newswriter's account
of, iv. 333; her last visit from Fried-
rich, 486, 490; letter from Friedrich, v.
42; death, 85; mentioned also, iii, 469,
471; iv. 120, 150, 233, 249; v. 41.

275, 276; placed over Fermor at Posen,
343; advancing towards Brandenburg,
345 ; battle of Ziillichau, 348-350 ; march-
es towards Frankfurt, 350; seizes the
town, 368-370; not an altogether bad man,
3T1; battle of Kunersdorf, 373, 377; a
dearly-bought victory, 393 ; doubtful what
next to do, 398; will not consent to do all
the fighting for Austria, 402, 403, 425;
disgusted at Daun’s inaction, 432; only
terms on which he will continue the war,
433; intercepted by Friedrich, 437, 412;
angry at Daun, 444; marches home in
sulphurous humour, 445; prepares for a
new campaign, 508; with Loudon, threat-
ens Silesia, vi. 27; consents to join Lou-
don at Breslau, 36; indignant at finding
Loudon gone, and Prince Henri there, 38;
will not be made a cat’s-paw again, 44,
62; retires toward Poland, 60; falls sick,
and is succeeded by Fermor, 66.

Fe Madam, i. 408; ii. 92, 199, 206,
35.

Sophie Albertine, Princess, vi. 398.

Sophie Charlotte, Friedrich’s Grandmother,
i. 24,285; her love for Friedrich Wilhelm,
315; her death-bed, 32; she and her Moth-
er shrewd, noticing, intelligent women,

Sophie Dorothee Maria, i. 412; ii. 385,391.

Sophie Dorothee of Hanover, i. 24; thirty-
years imprisonment, 26, 402, 410, 484; her
Will, ii. 57.

Sophie, Electress, i. 24, 284, 401; ii. 58.

ee eee Princess, of Anhalt-Zerbst,
iii. 576.

Sophie Louisa, third Wife of King Friedrich
I.; her dreary orthodoxy, i. 286; madness
and death, 2ST.

Soubise, Prince de, iii. 186; iv. 9S; rein-
forces the Reichs Army, v. 4, 90, 91;
pique against D’Estrées, 91; near Erfurt,
107; Merseburg, 151, 154, 155; Rossbach,
160, 163, 164; to Nordhausen, 166; tries
to assist Clermont against Ferdinand,
172; profligate rapacity of his Army, 174;
to assist Contades, 250, 308-310; seizes
Frankfurt-on-Mayn, 325, 326; Invasion
of England, 351, 478; to be Co-General
with Broglio, vi. 152; quarrel and defeat
at Vellinghausen, 153-155 ; Wilhelmsthal,
229; Am@oneburg, 241.

Soul, a lost, iii, 269.

Sovereignties, empty, iii 317. See Kings.

Spaen, Lieutenant, ii. 208, 212; iii, 19, 69;
vi. 277.

Spandau, Commandant of, i. 262.

INDEX.

Spanish “ Protestantism,” i. 203 ; Spaniards
in Holland, 256; in Cleve, 244,247; Span-
ish quarrel with Karl VI., 381 (see Eliza-
beth Farnese) ; ill-treatment of Captain
Jenkins, ii. 247, 02.

Spanish-English War, iv. 220; vi. 155, 159,
184-188, 244. See English, Don Blas.

ae an original North-German, i. 323,
325,

Speech, and the Thing spoken, v. 53.
Spener, T., iii. 383; Installation Speech, 354,
387

Speyer, iv. 4.

Spinelli, Conte di, iii. 5$3.

Spittler, cited, ii. 179 n.

Spon, Baron de, iv. 330 n.

Sporken, General, in Miinster Country, v.
328; Langensalza, vi. 127.

Sprecher, Captain, surrenders Breslau to
Friedrich, v. 209.

Staal, Madame de, friend of Madame du
Deffand, iv. 204.

Stadion, Count, vi. 385.

Stainville, Comte de, y. 315; at Wilhelm-
sthal, vi. 230.

Stair, Lord, iii. 314, 475, 517, 515, 585; at
Dettingen, 525, 531.

Stampach, General, at battle of Kolin, v. 76.

Stinde, iii, 30, 35,

Stanislaus Leczinsky, elected King of Po-
land, ii. 367-374; flight from Dantzig,
3389; protected by Friedrich Wilhelm,
399, 400; visited by Crown-Prince Fried-
rich, 422; to be Titular King for life, 424;
quits Koénigsberg for Dukedom of Lor-
raine, 426; his idle life and Titular Army,
iv. 210; v. 487; death, vi. 298.

star i Hans, Pitt's envoy to Choiseul, vi.

58

Staudentz, Camp of, iv. 142, 143.

Steinau, near Neisse, iii. 22%.

Steinfurth, ii. 187.

Stellter, Cabinets-Rath, vi. 482, 483.

Stenzel, cited, i. 149 n.; iii. 22 n.; iv. 54n.;
Woe Tt, 5 945, 521

Sternberg’s, Count von, mansion of Klein-
Schnellendorf, iii. 374.

Sternberg, Graf von, iv. 440.

Sterne’s Father, i. 426; ii. 2.

Stettin, Duke Otto’s burial in the High
Church of, i, 163, 253, 264; Friedrich Wil-
helm’s possession of, 328, 342, 345; ii. 274.

Steur-Scheine, Saxon, iv. 181; Voltaire’s at-
tempts to traffic in, 267, 269, 285.

Stieler’s Maps, iii. 69 n.

Stille, Major von, ii. 440; iii. 45, 46, 405, 438 ;
iv. 103, 112, 142; cited, 103 n.

Stockholm Blutbad, i. 206.

Stockstadt, French Army at, iv. 4:

Stoffeln, General, with Fermor at Ciistrin,
y. 258; in the Russian-Turk War, vi. 356.

Stolberg, Prince von, at Torgau, cannot out-
general Wolfersdorf, v. 406-408; attacks
Prince Henri, vi. 240; defeated at I'rey-
berg, 244, 245; end of the War, 248; men-
tioned also, 193.

Stollhofen, Lines of, ii. 386.

Stone, Mr., of the Newcastle Parliament, v.

56.
Vor. VI.—C C

601

Stormont, Lord, iv. 441, 448.

Stralsund, i. 254; Friedrich Wilhelm’s Siege
of, 325, 332.

Strasburg, i. 259; Friedrich at, iii. 49.

Straw sentry, a Prussian, iy. 125.

Strehlen, Camp of, iii. 319.

Strelitz, Karl Ludwig of, ii. 326, 474, 477.

Striegau, iv. 108.

Struensee, Danish Prime Minister, vi. 418.

ig with Friedrich at his death, vi.

Struve, vi. 250 n.

Stump-oratory at zero,i.311; hideous night-
mare of, 466.

Stusche, Tobias, Abbot of Kamenz, iii. 206,
209; iv. 87, 100.

Stutterheim, left in charge of Schméttseifen,
y. 429; in the Lausitz; seizing Austrian
magazines, 431.

Stuttgard, ii. 178.

Suhm, Baron vou, ii. 3, 11, 16, 396, 471; dies
on his way home, iii. 15; cited, vi. 693 n.

Sulkowski, General, prisoner at Zorndorf, v.
276; declares War against the King of
Prussia, 327; extinguished by General
Wobersnow, 328; in the Polish troubles,
vi. 329.

Sulli, Due de, ii. 451.

Sulzer, M., and Friedrich, iv. 324; in the
Konig - Maupertuis controversy, 341; at
Berlin, on arrival of the news of Kuners-
dorf, v. 391; vi. 385; his death, 396.

Superville, Dr., iv. 317.

Sweden, without a King, i. 335; iii. 199;
War with Russia, 200, 358 ; joins the gen-
eral combination against Friedrich, v. 1,
92,93; Army put to flight by five postil-
lions, 220; commanded by nobody in par-
ticular, 221,223. See Charles XII., Gus-
taf Adolf, Karl Gustaf.

Swieten, Van, vi. 425, 423.

Swindlership, iii. 265.

Sword-Brothers, Livonian, i. 90.

Syberg, ii. 350.

Syburg, General, at Langensalza; his re-
cruiting commission, vi. 127.

Sydow, Captain, at surrender of Dresden, v.

Tasor, iv. 24.

Tacitus, cited, i. 52 n.

Tallard, iv. 61.

Talleyrand, Marquis de, iv. 59.

Tangermiinde, i. 105, 132, 153 ; famine, 258,

Tannenberg, Battle of, i. 141, 159, 1ST, 188.

Target, Mr., vi. 533.

Tauentzien defends Neustadt,iv.126; Army-
Treasurer, v. 322; defends Breslau against
Loudon’s fiery bombardment and threats,
vi. 36, 37; a brave man; true to the
death, 38; at Siege of Schweidnitz, 231,
238, 239; severe letter from the King on
the Silesian Army, 521; mentioned also,
539.

Tebay’s, John, account of Keith’s death, y.
295, 299 ; on sick-list, 302.

Teinitz, Elbe-, passage of, iv. 40, 42.

Tell, i. 110.

Tempelhof, cited, iy. 462 n.; on the battle

602

of Prag, v. 25,33; on Kolin, 76; Leuthen,
195; Zorndorf, 269, 271; Hochkirch, 290,
291, 299; Soubise, 309; Kunersdorf, 382,
385; Prince Henri’s march of Fifty hours,
440, 441; and manceuvering in Saxony,
446; cited, 15 n.; on Friedrich’s marches,
vi. J, 34, 41, 60, 623 siege of Dresden, 11;
seizure of Berlin, 75, 76; Camp of Bunzel-
witz, 144; Reichenbach, 235.

Templars, Knights, end of the, i. 86.

Temple, Pitt’s brother-in-law, vi. 184.

Tencin, Cardinal, iii. 583; iv. 2,364; v. 130;
vi. 253 n.

Tentzel, cited, i. 110 n.

Termagant of Spain, iii. 270, 482, 4853 iv.
221 n

Terray, Abbé, v. 480.

Teschen, Congress of, vi. 467, 524.

Teschen, Duke of, vi, 339.

Tessin, Count, vi. "395.

Tessin, Swedish Ambassador, iil. 577.

Tetschen, iy. 16, 18.

Tetzel, i. 171.

Teutschland, not to be cut into four, vi. 259.

Teutsch Ritters, the, i. S25 origin of the Or-
der, 84; remoyal from Palestine to Ven-
ice, 85; conversion and settlement of
Prussia. 86; for more than a Century a
bright beacon in those Northern Coun-
tries, 90; the stuff they were made of, 91;
degenerating into idleness and riches; a
Grand - Master assassinated, 120; pride
tripped into the ditch at Tannenberg, 141;
sinking steadily into final extinction, 159;
new false hopes, 187; the end, 192. See
Albert, Hochmeister.

Thackeray, cited, iv. 385 n.; v. 50 n. 3
155. ¥

Thadden, at Colberg, vi. 163, 177.

Thémicoud. See Demikof.

Theodor of Deux Ponts, iii. 411, 414.

Thiébault, always incorrect, and the prey
of stupidities, ili. 508, 580; iv. 260, 319;
vi. 398.

Thielicke, Mrs., killed at Frankfurt, v. 368.

Thirty-Years War, i. 237, 244, 250; hunger
the grand weapon, 258.

Thomont, Milord, v. 47S.

Thompson, C: yptain, boards one of Fried-
rich’s ships, iv. 293.

Thomson, iii. 595.

Thorn, town of, i. 120; hurls out the Teutsch
Ritters, 160; Jesuit tragedy at, ii. 10

Thirring, Feldmarschall, iii. 477; iv. 59.

Thrift, no great empire ever founded with-
out, i. 823; incalculable value of, ii. 434,
436. See Kconomics.

Thugut, at Congress of Braunau, vi. 462.

Thulmeyer, ii. 236; iii. 24, 40.

Thiringen, ii. 324.

Ticonderago, attacked by Abercromby, v
30T.

Ticleke, Captain, on the Schweidnitz Sieges,
v. 2323; escapes from Prussian bondage ;
with Fermor at Ciistrin, 255, 258; Zorn-
dorf, 268, 270, 271; on the Camp of Bun-
ie vi. 145; cited, v. 232 n.3 vi.

vi.

n.
Tilson, George, ii. 93.

INDEX.

Tindal, cited, ii. 829 n. 5 iii. 288 n., 299 n.
Tinois, Voltaire’s clerk, iv. 266 n., "987.
Tissot, Dr., vi. 388, 399.

Titius, Professor, vi. 326.

Tobacco, good and bad influences ofi i. 464,

Tobacco-Parliament, Friedrich Wilhelm’ Sy
369; description of, 463; a strange Ses-
sion, ii. 349; the last, 528.

Tobago, Island of, iv. 418.

Toland, i. 37; his account of Prussia and
Westphalia, 2825 cited, 38 n.

Toleration, iii. 12.

Tooke, cited, vi. 199 n.

Torgau, beautifully defended by Wolfersdorf,
v. 406-409; Torgau and its environs, vi.
81-84; battle of, 84-101.

Torrington, Lord, iv. 422.

Torstenson’s siege of Brieg, iii. 283.

Torture, iii. 8.

Toryism, iii. 335.

Tottleben, at Kunersdorf, v. 394; in Pom-
mern, 508; marches, with Czernichef, on
Berlin, vi. 66; tries bombardment}; is re-
inforced by Lacy, 68; grants favourable
capitulation; is himself under obligations
to Friedrich and Berlin, 69; will not sanc-
tion Lacy’s ferocity, 70; marches off at
the approach of Friedrich, 73; in eastern
Pommern, 139, 140; Colberg, 159; in the
anti-Turk war, 356.

Touche, Ritter De la, iv. 292.

Toul, iii. 524,

Toulouse, Comte de, iv. 204 n.

Tour and Taxis, Princess, iii. 66.

Tournament, the, iv. 292.

Tournay, Siege of, iv.-89.

Townshend, Lord, ii. 64, 75, 122,126; quar- -
rel with Walpole, 105.

Trakehnen, the Stud of, iii. 34.

Traun, Marshal, iv. 3, 38, 35; Friedrich’s
Schoolmaster in the art of War, 35, 38, 47 5
encamps at Marschowitz, 36; gets Bene-
schau, 37; follows Friedrich to Silesia, 4S,
51-53; retires to Moravia, 53; sent to the
Frankfurt countries, 84; drives Prince
Conti across the Rhine, 126, 127; death,
151 n.; Friedrich acknowledges his obli-
gations to, vi. 348, 351.

Trautenau, burnt down, iv. 141.

Trautschke, saves General Fouquet at Land-
shut, vi. 10. ‘

Travenol Lawsuit, summary of the, iv. 260.

Trefurt, Pastor, at Petersburg, vi. 209.

Trenck, Baron, i. 411; at Berlin Carnival,
iii. 507; arrested for breaking orders, iv.
124; extensively fabulous blockhead, 125;
a convicted liar, 148; vi. 25, 27; cited, iv.
148 n.

Trenck, Pandour, and his Tolpatches, iii.

491, 546: ; in Prince Karl's Rhine Cam- |
paign, iv. 5,81; gets his head broken at
Kolin, 395 Sohr, 143, 147.

Treskau, Captain, at Siege of Schweidnitz,
v. 232.

Treskow, General, defends Neisse against
the Austri ians, v. 303.

Trevor, Excellency, iii. 324.

Trier, Kurfiirst of, ii. 194.

Triglaph, god of the Wends, i. 65.

INDEX.

Turenne, M. du, vi. 348, 352.

Turin, Lines of, i. 281.

Turks, the, ii. 190 n.; attacked by Russia
and Austria, 482, 499; ruin put off till a
better time, 522; Turks begin to take in-
terest in the Polish-Russian quarrel, vi.
327-333; declare War against Russia, 334 ;
the Blind against the Purblind, 334-336,
355; getting scattered in panic rout; dark-
ening the fairest part of God’s creation,
342; some glances into the extremely
brutish phenomenon, 354-358 ; they solic-
cong to mediate a peace for them,

Turpin, Hussar, vy. 116, 125.

Tweeddale, Marquis of, iv. 94 n.

Tweeddale, cited, v. 57 n.

Tyrants, so-called, i. 31T. »

Tyrawley, Lord, at Portugal, vi. 185.

Tyrconnell, Excellency, iv. 258; at Pots-
dam, 308, 309, 310, 312, 318, 325.

UcCKERMUNDE, i. 164.

Uln, ii. 324.

Ulrich von Hiitten, cited, i. 170 n.

Ulrique Eleonora, Queen of Sweden, i. 343,

Ulrique, Princess Louisa, i. 343, 412; iii.
202; Letter to Friedrich, 507; Marriage,
517, 579; becomes Queen of Sweden, iv.
288; chagrins and contumacies ; Senators
demand sight and count of the Crown
Jewels, vi. 368; she visits Berlin, 391,
392; Biisching’s account of her, 394-396;
her death, 398, 399.

Umminger, J. J., of Landshut, iii. 383, 38T.

Unertl, Baron von, passionately warns Karl
Albert against the French alliance, iii.
284, 510.

Union of Frankfurt, iv. 9.

Unruh, Herr von, killed by the Poles, vi. 377.

Unruh, Major, at Glatz, vi. 26.

Ursula, St. ii. 197.

Utrecht, Treaty of, i. 283, 327, 415; iv. 376.

Vaon, affair at, v. 46.

Valfons, Marquis de, cited, iv. 93 n.; v.
118 n.

Valori, drops a diplomatic note, iii. 330; at
Gross Neundorf, 354, 374, 376; at siege of
Neisse, 378; goes to Belleisle, 392; at
Dresden, 402; with the French Army at
Trebitsch, 422; nettled with Comte Mau-
rice, 4233 with Friedrich in his Saxon
troubles, 429; with Belleisle at Prag, 451;
suspicious of Voltaire,553; informs Fried-
rich of Belleisle’s capture, iv. 61; his mis-
sion to Dresden, 72-74; with Friedrich in
Silesia, 100; at Hohenfriedberg battle,
111, 113, 115, 116, 117, 120; falls into dis-
grace with Friedrich, 128; saved from
Pandours by D’Arget, 137; quits the army
for Breslau, 141; tries to prevent the
Peace of Dresden, 176; blames Friedrich
in regard to Pompadour, 407; conversa-
tion with the Prince of Prussia, 427; quits
Berlin, 450; letter from Prince of Prussia,
464, 465; mentioned also, iii. 24, 73, 202,
280, 328, 421, 456; iv. 29, 57, 58, 68, 75;
cited, 56 n.

603

Vandals. See Wends.

Varnhagen von Ense’s account of Voltaire’s
arrest, iv. 356 5 cited, i. 22 n.; iv. 216 n.;
v. 248 n.; vi. 185 n.

Vattel, of Droit des Gens, at Berlin, iii. 426.

Vaudreuil, M. de, loses Montreal, vy. 453.

Vaugrenand, M. de, iv. 176, 177.

Vehse, cited, vi. 400 n.

Vellinghausen, Battle of, vi. 151-155.

Verdun, iii. 524..

Vere, Sir Horace, i. 251.

Vergennes, M. de, in Turkey, trying to kin-
dle war with Russia, vi. 332, 333, 381.

Vernon, Admiral, iii. $0, 10S; attacks Porto-
Bello, 297; Carthagena, 297, 300; quarrel
with Wentworth, 302; miserable conse-
quences, 303,

Vesuvius, Eruptions of, vi. 264.

Victor Amadeus, King of Sardinia, ii. 272.

Victor Leopold of Anhalt-Bernburg, iv. 80.

Vienna, Congress of, i. 247; Karl VI.’s
Treaty of, 430; ii. 347; what Friedrich
thought of the Vienna Court, 344.

Vigo, descent on, i. 426

Villa, Dr., ii. 102, 105.

Villars, Duchesse de, immortalises Voltaire
with a kiss, iii. 509.

Villars, Marshal, ii. 377.

Villebois, General, vi. 214,

Villiers, Mr., iii, 382.

Villiers, Sir Thomas, iv. 164, 175, 176, 181,
233.

Vilshofen, iv. 76.
at makes bad worse in Poland, vi.
33.

Viner’s, Mr., speech in Parliament, iii. 287,
288, 289.

Virnsperg, i. 82.

Vitus, St., prayers to, iv. 16, 68.

Vladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia,
i. 178, 180, 216.

Voghera, Marquis de, vi. 506.

Vohburg Family, the, i. 78.

Voigt, cited, i. 61 n., 94 n.

Voigtland, Duke of, i. 95, 116.

Voltaire, and his scandalous Libel or Life
of Friedrich, i. 12; ii. 207, 212; his Life
of Charles XII., i. 335; ii. 10, 456; his
first renown, i. 383; sees the Congress of
Cambrai, 427; his Henriade, ii. 4, 456;
his Name, 10, 453; Friedrich’s admira-
tion, 331, 462, 464; their correspondence,
446, 462, 491; Sauerteig’s estimate; no
proper History of Voltaire, 447; his pa-
rentage and youth, 448; insulted by the
Duce de Rohan, 451; challenges him, and
flies to England, 452; English influences
and associates, 453; his stereotype En-
glishman, 455; a shrewd financier, 456;
returns triumphant to France, 457; Lions
and Dogs in his path, 45S; Madame du
Chatelet, 459; life at Cirey, 460; his first
Letter to Friedrich, 466; his account of
Luiscius ; difference between a witty sa-
tire and a prose fact, 488; edits Fried-
rich’s Anti-Macchiavel, 507 ; receives a
cask of wine from Friedrich, iii. 5; print-
ing the Anti-Macchiavel; Friedrich's
pressing invitations, 42; account of the

604

Strasburg Adventure, 49, 59; Voltaire
and Maupertuis, 60; first interview with
Friedrich, 66; what he thought of the
Herstal affair, $5; first visit to Berlin,
114; at Lille, 247; quizzes Maupertuis,
253; ‘* Frédéric le Grand,” 461 3; visits
Friedrich at Aachen, 472, 497; getting
Mahomet on the boards, 496; home to
Cirey again, 508; vacancy in the Acade-
my; made immortal by a kiss, 509; fourth
visit to Friedrich, 549; differences with
Madame du Chatelet, 550, 564; his secret
Diplomatic Commission, 551; on slippery
ground, 553; hands in a ‘** Memorial” to
Friedrich, 553, 557; end of his diploma-
cy, 561; Three Madrigals, 562. Letters:
—to Maupertuis, 62, 73, 563 5 to Cideville,
T4, 497; D’Argenson, 497; Fleury, 498 ;
Amelot, 560; first seen by Louis XV. at
Freyburg, iv. 28; celebrates the victory
of Fontenoy, 98; a gleam in him from
the Eternities, 196; makes way at Court,
199; no favourite with Louis XV., 199,
2025; gets into the Academy, 206; Trave-
nol Lawsuit, 200-202; on a visit at Sceaux,
203-209 ; tremulous anxiety about his
manuscripts, 209; his account of Madame
du Chitelet’s lying-in, 225, 226; singular
emotion at her death, 226,227; grand re-
ception at Berlin, 247; seen by Collini at
the Carrousel, 254; not yet sunset with
him; coolness towards him at the French
Court, 256; every precaution that his
Berlin visit should be no loss, 257; his
own account of his Berlin festivities, 258 ;
Friedrich’s Supreme of Literature, 259 ;
spiteful rumours, 260; really attached to
Friedrich, 261; visited by Kénig, 265;
gets D’ Arnaud dismissed, 266, 267; shame-
ful Jew-Lawsuit, 267, 284; illegal stock-
jobbing, 269; clutches Jew Hirsch by the
windpipe, 278; calls on Formey, 279; a
fraudulent document, 281-283; left lan-
guishing in Berlin, 285, 256; cozy little
dinners, 287; tries to keep up appear-
ances, 28T, 300; strives to forget there
ever was a Hirsch,'297; sure enough a
strange Trismegistus, 298; occasional
flights to Paris, 299; ill-health, discontent,
misery driven into meanness, 3013 his
Louis Quatorze goes steadily on, 301, 392;
honest literary help to Friedrich, 302, 303;
little bits of flatteries, 303, 304; can keep
patience with Maupertuis no longer, 305,
316; a certain jealous respect for Rothen-
burg, 309; fractions of Letters to Fried-
rich, 310; Louis Quatorze published, and
pirated; ‘all Prussia to the rescue,” 314,
315; the ‘‘orange-skin” and * dirty-linen”
rumours, 315; La Mettrie’s death, 318;
enmity of La Beaumelle, 320; testifies to
Friedrich’s conversational powers, 3245
obscene scandals about Friedrich, 330;
takes part in the Kénig-Maupertuis quar-
rel, 342 ; letter on the subject, quizzing
Maupertuis, 342, 343; Friedrich indig-
nantly replies, 344; Doctor Akakia, 344~
346; published, in spite of his promise to
the King, 347; sick, and in disgrace, 348,

INDEX.

349 ; outward reconciliation, 349-352; last
interview with Friedrich, 351, 352; goes
to Dresden, 351; receives a threatening
letter from Maupertuis, and replies to it,
352, 353 ; at the Court of Sachsen-Gotha,
353 ; arrested at Frankfurt, 354-363 ;
strikes Van Duren, 359; wanders about
for several years, 364; Wilhelmina very
kind to him, 364, 365; writes to Fried-
rich, 390; indifferent Epigram on Kings
Friedrich and George, 479; at Gotha, v.
123; Wilhelmina urges him to help in her
peace project, &c., 130, 134-137; renewed
correspondence with Friedrich, 131, 134,
135, 140, 435, 465; a good word for Soue
bise, 309; verses on Wilhelmina, 318 n.;
peace expectations, 434, 435, 487; last
touch to Maupertuis’s life- drama, 475,
492, 496, 498; not the publisher of Gw-
vres du Philosophe de Sans-Souct, 482,
characteristic correspondence with, and
about Friedrich, 489-502; ‘‘Lion and
Mouse,” 492, 493; ‘*Luc,” his nickname
for Friedrich, 493; case of Widow Calas,
499; hatred of a fanatic Popedom, vi.
263; has no anticipation of the coming
French Revolution, 263-265; interest in
the expected liberation of Greece, 356 3
writes to Friedrich of the visit of Wilhel-
mina’s Daughter, 399-401; longs to do
battle on L’Infime, 402; Dr. Burney’s ac-
count of him at Ferney, 408-410; Mr.
Sherlock's, 410-414; his gay costume,
411; his high opinion of Newton, 4143
apotheosis at Paris, and death, 452; Smel-
fungus on, 465, 466; mentioned also, iii.
8, 10, 15, 28, 100, 157, 212; iv. 181, 185,
3323 vi. 317, 345, 437, 442, 453 n. 3 cited,
1.12 n.; ii 10 n.3 iii. 43 n., 49 n.3 iv. 92
n.3‘v. 136 n. 3 vi. 5T-n.

Von Loen, cited, i. 383 n.; iii. 490 n.

Vota, the famous Jesuit, i. 35.

bapa not carry Columbus to America,
iii. 2.

W ACKERBARTH, Fieldmarshal, ii. 16, 139.

Wade, General, iii. 533, 584, 585; iv. 2, 7,85
his helplessness, 10, SS.

Waghiusel, ii. 388,

Wagram, i. 6, 102.

Wahlstatt, vi. 46.

Wakenitz, General, at Zorndorf, v. 272.

Walch, iv. 244.

Waldau, Colonel, ii. 160, 334.

Waldburg, Colonel Truchsess von, ii. 78 5
iii. 4,431 n.; chases the Pandours, iv. 43;
his death, 115.

Waldeck, at Fontenoy, iv. 90, 96.

Wales’s, Prince of, Plume, i. 128; ances-
tors, ii. 165.

Wallenstein, i. 249, 254, 257, 332; ii. 348.

Wallis, iii. 107, 1388; at Breslau, 139 3
strengthens Glogau, 141; will resist to the
utmost, 149, 217 ; surrenders, 220; at Ha-
belschwert, iv. 54.

Wallis, Colonel, conspires with traitor War-
kotsch for the betrayal of Friedrich, vi.
173-177. :

Walpole, Horace, i. 404; ii. 43; iv. 234; on

INDEX.

the Fight of Kloster Kampen, vi. 106; on
Dissenter Mauduit, and the German War,
108-110; ** Letter to Jean Jacques,” 347 ;
friendship for Conway, 415.

Walpole’s ‘* George the Second,” v. 51, 52;
cited, i. 402 n.; i 9n.; iv. 257 n.; v. 51
nis) viz 106 n.

Walpole, Robert, i. 4023; ii. 3, 482, 502, 524;
iii. 212; the phenomenon of, in England,
290, 293, 298, 304; Walpole and his talk-
ing apparatus, v. 50, 55.

Walpot von Bassenheim, i i. St,

Walrave, Engineer, iii. 223, "282, 880, 435;
sulky at the Old Dessauer’ 8 pantering; a
er polygamist, 437 ; prisoner for life,
iv. 425.

Wangenheim, Major von, and her Polish
Majesty, iv. 440, 441.

Wangenheim, General, in battle of Minden,
v. 360-363.

War, art of, i. 7; War, not a school of pity,
iv. 36; omnipotence of luck in matters of,
178,193; War, an Art, iii. 95; Wars not
memorable, 258; needless Wars, 317 ;
War, not an over-fond Mother to her
Sons, vi. 15.

Warkotsch, Baron von, entertains Friedrich
at Schénbrunn, vi. 170; traitorously be-
trays him to the Austrians, but his plot
discovered, 172-182; arrested and escapes,
175-177.

Warnery, v. 31.

Warsaw, Battle of, i. 266; Kalkstein kid-
napped at, 276; Election at, ii. 371 ;
‘*Union” and Treaty” of, iv. 69, Tl,
397, 400, 401.

Wartburg, i ist

Wartensleben, Captain, ii. 496, 497; Adju-
tan!-General, iii. 133, 231.

Washington, George, iv. 378; early war-
passages with the French, 382; mention-
ed also, v. 30T.

‘de Austrian Minister at Paris, iii.

82.

Weber, cited, i. 192 n.; iii. 201 n.

Wedell, General, at Leuthen, v. 200, 201;
Saxony, 304; sent against Soltikof, 345;
foiled in battle of Ziillichan, 348-351;
marches towards Frankfurt, 3575 at Siege
of Dresden, vi. 28; becomes War-Minis-
ter, 281.

Wedell, Leonidas, at Elbe-Teinitz, iv. 41,
42; v. 347.

Weefiihrer, cited, i. 41 n.

Wehla, General, enters Saxony, v. 410; at
Siege of Dresden, 414; captured by Prince
Henri at Hoyerswerda, 440,

Wehlau, ii. 244.

Weibertreue, ii. 186.

Weimar, Duke of, ii. 475; v. 123.

Weingarten, senior and junior, iv. 399,

Weinheim, ii. 403.

Weinsberg, Siege of, i. 263 n. 3 ii. 186.

Weissenberg, Battle of, i. 251, 260; ii. 343.

Weissenborn, iv. 243, 244.

Weissenburg, Lines of, iv. 5.

Weissenfels, v. 152.

Weissenfels, Johann Adolf, Duke of, ii. aa
38T, 88, oT, 139, 323, 324, 373 iy. ii;

605

terview with Friedrich, 17; marches to
join the Austrians, 32,36; sends Saxe to
waylay Einsiedel, 45; help to Prince Karl
in invading Silesia, 83, 100; in junction
with the Austrians, 104, 106, 107; Ho-
henfriedberg, 109, 112, 115, 119.

Welts, the, ii. 292 5 the Welf” Sovereigns, iii,
528.

Welmina, near Lobositz, iv. 455.

Wenck, cited, vi. 256 n.

Wends, the, settling in Europe, i. 52, 59;
converted to Christianity and Civilisa-
tion, 64, 65, T2.

Wentworth, Gener al, at Carthagena, iii.
300, 302, 304,

Wentzel the young Bohemian King, i. 110,

23

Wenzel, Kaiser, i. 132, 134, 139, 141, 146;
killed in Olmniitz, v. 234.

Werben, ii. 326.

Werner, General, v. 47; at Landshut, 429,
445 ; rescues Colberg, vi. 65; defends Bel-
gard, 140; again at Colberg, 160; taken
prisoner and carried to Petersburg, 162;
liberated and returns home, 213.

Werthern, Herr Graf von, iv. 239.

West, Gilbert, iii. 495,

Westphalen’s, Herr, Leitmeritz Journal, v.
82-84; cited, 81 n.

Westphalia, savage condition of; hams,
282; Treaty of, 264; ii. 317.

Whitfield, Rev. Mr., v. 225.

Wied, General, with Friedrich at Burkers-
dorf, vi. 222-229; sent with reinforce-
ments into Saxony, 240, 246, 247.

Wiesenthal, ii. 388.

Wieskau, Camp of, iv. 85.

Miss Friedrich Wilhelm's taxes on, iL

Wilhelm, Bishop of Riga, i. 186.

Wilhelm of Hessen, i. 249, 257.

Wilhelm, Viceregent of Hessen, iii. 413, 515,
518, 537, 570.

Wilhelm, "Landeraf, and his Hessians, iv.
30; with Belleisle at Cassel, 59; consents
to be neutral, 75; in Pyrmont, 190; be-
comes Landgraf in reality, 288; lodges
Voltaire, 357.

eee the Rich, Markgraf of Meissen, i.

Wilhelm, Prince Margraf, death of, iv. 19.

Wilhelmina, cited, i. 20 n.

Wilhelmina, Frederika Sophie, i. 18, 20, 29,
82, 175, 284, 411; her Book, with its shrill
exaggerations, yet earnest veracity, 293,
810, 461; ii. 412; her Portrait as a child,
i. 340; her account of Czar Peter's visit,
346, 349; recollections of Wusterhausen,
366 ; love for her Brother, 369 ; proposed
maxyiage with the Prince of Wales, 400,
437 ; ii. 24,110; interview with George I.,
i. 407 5 her notion of Grumkow and the
Old Dessauer, 449; account of Franke
the Pietist, ii. 13; her Brother's visit to
King August, 18; August's visit to Ber-
lin, 25; Wilhelmina’s ineffectual Suitors,
28, 69, "SS; illness, 40, 52, 82; her sister
Louisa’s marriage, 52’; her Father's vio-
lent ill-usage, 54, 66, 35; anxiety about

606

her Brother, 86; is to be married out of
hand, 88; worn down by agitations, 97;
Friedrich of Baireuth, 98, 234; troubles
with her Mother, 100, 8357; Dr. Villa, 102;
her Brother talks of flight, 104; prema-
turely saluted as Princess of Wales, 110;
Katte’s unwise worship, 156; no marriage
with England, 157; her Brother’s attempt-
ed flight, and arrest, 199; his letters

burnt, and fictitious substitutes written, |

200; her Father’s furious rage, 205; a
close prisoner in the Berlin Palace, 210,
235; her pity for poor Katte, 221; to
marry the Prince of Baireuth, 234; her
distracted consent; preparations for be-
trothal, 237; the Prince introduced, 239;
a Bride these six months, 273; her mag-
nificent wedding, 277; meeting with her
Brother, 281; opens her heart to her Fa-
ther, 283; a grand problem coming for
her, 29S, 345; letters from her Brother,
305, 861, 390, 393, 395; helps the Salzburg
Protestants, 324; her Father's visit, 346;
her inauspicious visit to Berlin, 357, 362;
meetings with her Brother and his Bride,
858, 362; difficult meeting with him on
his way to Philipsburg, 3905; he visits her
at Baireuth, strangely altered, 41); iii.
45; disappointed with his manner, 47 ;
return visit to Berlin; truest of magnetic
needles, but so sensitive and liable to de-
flection, 97 ; Karl Albert's passage through
Baireuth, 411; account of his Coronation,
411, 416; receives Madame de Belleisle,
414; meets the new Empress, 4153 re-
ceives the Duchess of Wiirtemberg, 416 ;
visits Friedrich, iv. 203; her daughter
married, 227; at Berlin Carrousel, queen
of the scene, 247; returns home, 272; se-
rious illness, 289; letters from Friedrich,
317, 318, 464; kindness to Voltaire, 364,
365; in the neighbourhood of war, 293 v.
46, 90, 332; confers Knighthood on Colo-
nel Mayer, 475; letters from Friedrich, 92,
124, 137-139, 169; hopes for peace, 117; a
noble sisterly affection in her, vehement-
ly trying the impossible, 150; correspond-
ence with Voltaire, 130, 134, 137; Fried-
rich’'s Hpitre &@ ma scour, 132-1845 her
answer, 139; frantic letter to her Brother,
145; visited by Prince Henri, 239; Fried-
rich’s esteem and love for her, 2523; his
grief at her death, 298, 317, 318.

Wilhelmsthal, Battle of, vi. 229, 230.

Wilke, ii. 246.

Wille’s Engraving of Friedrich, iii. 5 n.

William Conqueror, i. 317.

William, Count of Holland, ‘* Pope’s Kai-
ser,’’ 1. 98.

William, our Dutch, i. 40, 44, 45- 274, 276 5
iii. 77; vi. 431.

Williams’s, Sir Hanbury, first audience with
Friedrich, iv. 2833 bits of acrid testimo-
ny, but with fatal proclivity to scandal,
234, 237; knows his Cicero by heart, 259 ;
his opinion of Prussia, 295; wandering
continental duties, 367, 368; negotiations
and bribings at Petersburg, 409-411; all
his intriguing come to nothing, 413; his

INDEX.

account of the Czarina, 414, 415; men-
tioned also, v. 86.

Willich, Pastor, killed by the Poles, vi. 377.

Wilmanstrand, Siege of, iii. 200.

Wilmington, Lord, v. 58.

Winkelmann, ii. 326.

Winkler, Professor, vi. 114.

Winter Campaigns, iii. 432.

Winterfeld, goes to Russia, iii. 117, 193;
how he got his Wife, 197; at Mollwitz,
244; at Rothschloss, 357; on march
through Saxony, iv. 11; in Silesia, $2;
skilfully defends Landshut; brilliant ef-
fectuality shining through all he does,
103; with Friedrich as Vanguard, 104,
107; Hohenfriedberg, 111, 115; Henners-
dorf, 15S, 159, 160; hastens after Prince
Karl, 163 ; does not shine in learned cir- _
cles, 309; discovers the Saxon intrigues, -
and gains access to their state-documents,
398-400; eager to attack, 424; high hopes
for Prussia, 425; in conference with Fried-
rich, 429; takes a tour in Bohemia, 430;
interview with Polish Majesty, 450; ne-
gotiates terms with the Saxon Army, 475-
477; with Schwerin at Prag, v. 20, 25-39;
badly wounded, 28; account of the battle,
87-39 5 with the Prince of Prussia, 94-97;
received with honour by the King, 103;
attacks Nadasti at Hirschfeld; with Be-
vern watching the Austrians, 107 ; posted
at Jiikelsberg, 109; suddenly attacked by
Nadasti, 110; vigorous defence and death,
110, 111; except Friedrich, the most shin-
ing figure in the Prussian army, 112;
statue in Berlin, 300; mentioned also, iv.
215, 327.

Wit, modern, i. 156, 203; Hanbury’s London
Wit, iv. 2345; Friedrich’s Colony of French
Wits, 523.

Wittelsbach, Graf von, iii. 409.

Wittenberg, Siege of, i. 221.

Wobersnow, General, siezes Sulkowski and
his Polacks, v. 327, 328; with Dohna,
against the Russians, 343,344; his porta-
ble field-bakery, 3846; urges an attack,
hy at battle of Ziillichau, 3485; death,
349

Wolden, Hofmarschall, ii. 282, 255, 259, 264,
296, 438.

Wolf, and the Halle University, i. 475; what
Friedrich thought of him, ii. 464, 471;
quits Marburg for his old place at Halle,
iii. 10, 156; iv. 243. ;

Wolf, Pater, Kaiser's Confessor, i. 46.

Wolfe, General, worth of, discerned by Pitt,
v. 230; at capture of Louisburg, 2515; un-
successful attempt on Quebec, 366, 367;
descends the St. Lawrence for one more
attempt, 447; captures Quebec, and with
it Canada; the prettiest soldiering among
the English for several generations, 44S;
excitement in England at the news of his
victory and death, 451.

Wolfersdorf, Colonel von, beautifully de-
fends himself in Torgau, v. 406-409; on
march for Dresden, 412, 418; captures a
party of Austrian horse, 419; with Wunsch
before Dresden; they drive Kleefeld from

INDEX.

Torgau, 420; made prisoner at Maxen,

463.

Wolfgang Wilhelm. See Pfalz-Neuburg.

Wolfstierna, Swedish Envoy at Dresden, iv.
154.

Work, a Captain of, i. 443.

World, the, much of a bedlam, iy, 133.

Worma, Treaty of, iii. 549, 565.

Woronzow, Countess, Czar Peter's Misty ess,
vi. 210-212.

Woronzow, Grand-Chancellor of Russia, vi.
808.

Worth, Human, reverence for, vi. 267.

Wotton, Sir Henry, i. 241 n., 245, 250.

Wraxall, cited, ii. T n.3 vi. 290,

Wreech, Colonel, ii. 73, 215; his Wife and
Friedrich at Ciistrin, 263, 267.

Writing Era, i. 10.

“Wunsch, of the Prussian Free-Corps, v. 47;
distinguishes himself under Prince Henri,
332, 8333; Kunersdorf, 374, 858; marches
into Saxony, 400, 409, 410, 4153 hastens
to relief of Dresden, 418; hears that
Schmettau has capitulated; delivers Tor-
gau, and is Lord of the Nor ‘thern regions,
420; seemingly a high career before him,
421: with Finck at Maxen, 457, 459, 462,
463; tries to get the Cavalry away, but is
obliged to surrender, 463; defends Glatz,
vi. 467.

Wiirbitz, Fight of, iv. 82.

Wiirmser, burns Habelschwert, vi. 467.

Wiirtemberg, Duchess Dowager of, Wilhel-
mina’s account of her at Frankfurt, iii.
412; and at Baireuth, 416; her reception
bedroom at Berlin, 418; quarrels with
D’Argens, 426; demands her son of King
Friedrich, 561.

Wiirtemberg, Eberhard Ludwig, Duke of, ii.
176, 381; matrimonial and amatory in-
iquity, 176; moved to repentance, 180,
233; Karl Alexander, Duke of, 181, 340,
382, "420; Schiller’s Duke of, 341.

Wiirtemberg, Friedrich Eugen, iii. 419; iv.
228; raises his arm against Excellency
Broglio, 449 ; at Hochkirch, v. 296; watch-
ing Loudon and Haddick, 353 ; at Sagan,
354; battle of Kunersdorf, 379, 38T 5
wounded, 887; ill at Berlin, 434; at the
Castle of Schwedt, seized by the Cossacks,
508; hastens to the assistance of Berlin,
vi. 68; marches into Saxony, T7, 79; de-
spatches Colonel Kleist upon his brother,
the reigning Duke, 79; at Rostock, 135 n. ;
with Heyde defending Colberg, 160-163,
178; gives his poor Wife great trouble;
becomes reigning Duke, 344, 427; men-
tioned also, v. 215; vi. 135 n., 197 n.

Wiirtemberg, Karl Eugen, Duke of, boyish
gallantries ; under the guardianship of
Friedrich, iii. 417, 561; Schiller’s Duke,
419; parting letter from Friedrich, 586;
marries Wilhelmina’s Daughter, iv. 227;
impossible to live with him, 228; vi. 401,
402; at Kolin, 78; his poor Wife, 332 ;
bitter enmity to Friedrich, 470; driven
headlong out of Fulda, 470-472: fright-
ened homeward and out of the wars alto-
gether, vi. 79, S0.

607

Wiirzburg, Bishop of, iii. 560.

Wusterhausen, description of, i. 364;. Treaty
of, 457, 482; ii. 57; Tabagie at, i. 468;
Treaty of, iii, 269.

Wylich, General, ii. 439 ; iv. 439, 441.

Wyndham, Henry, v. 226.

Wyndham, Miss Barbara, iv. 292; subsidy
to Friedrich, v. 226-228.

XAVIER’s, Prince, profane revelling during
siege of Prag, v. 61; at the burning of
Zittau, 99; with Broglio, vi. 32; in Sax-
ony, 192; mentioned also, 311.

YANKEE Nation, iii. 296.

Yarmouth, Countess of, iii. 40.

York, Duke of, vi. 530.

Youthful dissipations, mud-bath of, ii. 19,
1

Ysenburg, Prince von, beaten by Soubise,
v. 309; near Frankfurt -on-Mayn, 325;
pattle of Bergen, 328 ; death, 329.

ZAMOISEL, Vi. 322.

Zastrow, Commandant, makes poor defence
of Schweidnitz, which is captured by Lou-
don, vi. 166; letter from the King, who
leaves him well alone for the future, 168,
169; at Amoéneburg, 242, 243.

Zastrow, General, killed, v. 18; vi. 169.

Zedlitz, Minister of Public Justice, vi. 397 ;
cannot pronounce sentence as enjoined by
the King, 48S, 489.

Zeiller, Beschreibung von Boheim, cited, iii.
227 n.

Zeitz, ii. 324,

Zelle, i, 378.

Zelter, cited, vi. 113 n.

Zentha, Battle of, ii. 190.

‘Ziethen, ii. 418; at Rothschloss; rises rapid-

ly in favour, iii, 83073. in Moravia, 425; at
siege of Prag, iv. 18; repulses Pandours
at Tein ridge, 33; decidedly a rather
likeable man, 343; at Elbe-Teinitz, 41, 42;
with the Old Dessauer in Silesia, 53; takes
message to Margraf Karl, at Jiigerndorf,
101,102; at Hohenfriedberg, 117; at Hen-
nersdorf, 160; at Pirna, 471; on march
for Prag, v. 13; in battle, 31, 34; at Ko-
lin, 68,69, 76; with the Prince of Prussia,
96; with Bevern at battle of Breslau, 183 ;
takes command of the Bevern wreck;
joins the King at Parchwitz, 186; Leu-
then, 196, 200, 201, 205; chases Prince
Karl from Breslau, 211; Troppau, 235,
236; Olmiitz, 240; meets Mosel’s convoy,
241, 244; no efforts can save it, 244, 245;
following Daun into Saxony, 277, 278; at
Hochkirch, 290, 292, 295; nearly captured
at Sorau, 430; reports the approach of
Reichsfolk on Finck, 459; court-martial
on Finck, 466; in battle of Liegnitz, vi.
49, 52,53; has command of half the force
at Torgau, 85, S86; takes a wrong road, 8S;
recovers it only not too late, 96,97; with
Friedrich in Silesia, 141; at Camp of Bun-
zelwitz, 145; winter in Breslau, 179; once
took the King sharply at his word, 423 ;
in his old age the King tenderly compels

608

him to sit down in his presence, 424; men-
tioned also, 497.

Zimmermann, Dr., ii. 472; iii. 589 n.3 iv.
330; at Sans-Souci, vi. 8383, sketch of his
life, 384-387; Dialogue with King Fried-
rich, 387-391; attends him in his last ill-
ness, 536; his unwise book, 537; can do
no good, and takes himself away, 539 ;
cited, 354 n.

Zimmermann, Herr, the poor, kidnapped
carpenter, i.

Zinnow, Finance Manager, v. 422.

Zinzendorf, Count, iv. 157.

Zips pledged by Sigismund to the Polish
Crown; taken back again by mere force,
vi. 362.

Zisca, risen out of the ashes of murdered
Huss, i. 185, 145; ii. 343; iii. 405; birth

INDEX.

Pig pecs spa of, 452; Tabor built by,
iv

Ziskowitz, with Daun near Olmiitz, v. 240,
241; Mosel’s convoy ruined, 243-245.

Zittau burnt by the Austrians, v. 98, 99.

Zoliner, i. 365; cited, 366 n.; iii. 170 un. 3 iv.
138 n. :

Zorndorf, ii. 263, 266; environs, v. 260-262;
battle, 263, 274. :

Zuckmantel, Moravian town, iii. 227 n.

Zweibriick, Reichs General, v. 239; pushes
across the Metal Mountains, 277; in Pirna
country, 278, 281; chased by Prince Hen-
ri, 331; again enters Saxony, 405; besieges
Dresden, 413, 414-417 ; hurries off for Tép-
litz, 418; broken faith, 421; with Daun
at Bautzen, 432; quits Dresden on the ap-
proach of Friedrich, vi. 19.

THE END.

iii

3 9318 01004799 2

AS AX RIMM Iw ww» CCRChpCBCKgjhj[ \ AC SS
VQ ; Ay AK »
ASS \ \ IQ

(

\ RAN \ \

|

CH,

te

Yi
HY
VL

Yi
yy

S

SS

SS WN X SF
A A“
\

ALA

hz

Lo

Yi
