er

Gs. §

J yee

Carlyle, Thomase ,
The history of Frederick |
the seconde

Lene
Ds ate cece

nee oe ef ae 4

i *
“i

eats

4 ade St) aan

NW

AYA

Nk

NAAN

E

HISTORY

OF

FRIEDRICH THE SECOND,

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

BY

THOMAS CARLYLE.

IN SIX VOLUMES,

VOL. V.

NEW YORK:
HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,

FRANKLIN SQUARE.

CONTENTS OF VOL V.

BOOK XVIII

SEVEN-YEAR’S WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. 1757-1759.

PTER
PCE aE CAMPAIGN. OPENG: ccdedccdskissosicceanevuswets tne dea couebaccentqnee 1

Reich’s Thunder, slight Survey of it; with Question, Whith-

erward, if anywhither? p. 6.

Friedrich suddenly marches on Prag, 10.

PUR ETEE OF BAG fee ie eC OU eee den esnn ave 17
TEI. PRAG CANNOT. BE GOT AT ONCE.........ssscccsccecnccsvesccssccecsnccs 41
Colonel Mayer with his ‘‘ Free-Corps” Party makes a Visit,
of didactic Nature, to the Reich, p. 44.
Of the singular quasi-bewitched Condition of England; and
what is to be hoped from it, for the Common Cause, if
Prag go amiss, 48.
Phenomena of Prag Siege :—Prag Siege is interrupted, 58.
BF LVATEGE Obs IOOEIN ooicccsceecicesyccncded ewe tue cetentaveen ieie-cscenns 62
The Maria-Theresa Order, new Knighthood for Austria,
Del
V. Friepricu at LEITMERITZ, HIS WORLD oF ENEMIES COM-
ING COMME INGE eth ale TAT bi Lewd pedes wns 79
Prince August Wilhelm finds a bad Problem at Jung-Buntz-
lau; and does it badly: Friedrich thereupon has to rise
from Leitmeritz, and take the Field elsewhere, in bitter
Haste and Impatience, with Outlooks worse than ever,
‘p. 94.
Ie EAT OF LW INTER RE LDeci yaks iell ai sevesy dead suipaiguiner xicaiodaee 108
VII. Friepricuh 1x THURINGEN, HIS WorRLD oF ENEMIES ALL
WOME Aes ghee A AR ats ALS SN eect as 113

I. Friedrich’s March to Erfurt from Dresden (31st August—

13th September 1757), p. 115.

II. The Soubise-Hildburghausen People take into the Hills ;

Friedrich in Erfurt Neighbourhood, hanging on, Week

iv CONTENTS.

OHAPTER : PAGE
after Week, in an Agony of Inaction (13th September—
10th October), 120.

III. Rumour of an Inroad on Berlin suddenly sets Friedrich
on March thither: Inroad takes Effect,—with important
Results, chiefly in a left-hand Form, 142.

Will, BArrey OF ROBSBAGH ..1f.5.2. 5.0. be dds gee Reade shade ics =secensuar

Catastrophe of zanpiaees (Saturday, 5th November 1757),
p- 156.

Ulterior Fate of Dauphiness; flies over the Rhine in bad
Fashion: Dauphiness’s Ways with the Saxon Populations
in her Deliverance-Work, 169.

TX. FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA... s00cctsessustarsesestgaredemgaee
X. BAW BOR  LABUTHEN 045 fas aevqeuaeds debs lew sperineenedeklnad aces «3 oes
XI. Winter 1n BrReEs“tAv: THIRD CAMPAIGN OPENS.........eeeeees

Of the English Subsidy, p. 223.

Friedrich, as indeed Pitt’s People and Others have done,
takes the Field uncommonly early: Friedrich goes upon
Schweidnitz, as the Preface to whatever his Campaign
may be, 229.

XIT>. SIEGH; OF | OLMOTZ i5s090.<05.d--nee ppeodehsnsindsme deb men bees aguhh We Pesan «
XL. Bitrex 6F Bonney il. ATA AES, ae dd Aas towann sone

Theseus and the Minotaur over again, —that is to say, Fried-
rich at Handgrips with Fermor and his Russians (25th
August 1758), p. 263.

XIV: DAtra “Or. FIGOMRROE 2, UT AAA tive ee

Daun and the Reichs Army invade Saxony in Friedrich’s
Absence, p. 277.

Friedrich intervening, Daun draws back; cneneeiah him-
self, in Neighbourhood to Dresden and Pirna; Friedrich
following him. Four Armies standing there, in ‘dad Lock,
for a Month; with Issue, a Flank March on the Part of
Friedrich’s Army,—which halts at Hochkirch (September
12th—October 10th, 1758), 279.

What actually befel at Hochkirch (Saturday, 14th October
1758), 287.

Sequel of Hochkirch ; the Campaign ends in a Way surpris-
ing to an attentive Public (22d October—20th November
1758), 301.

Friedrich marches, enigmatically, not on Glogau, but on
Reichenbach and Gorlitz; to Daun’s astonishment, 301.
Feldmarschall Daun and the Reichs Army try.some ia

of Dresden (9th-16th November), 303.

‘179

193
215

233
254

276

CONTENTS.

As
BOOK XIX.
FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED IN THE SEVEN-YEARS WAR.
1759-1760.
OUAPTER ‘ PAGE
I, ia papenney TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN....ccccccccsccccccecsccse 318

Of the Small-War in Spring 1759. There are Five Disrup-
tions of that grand Cordon (February—April) ; and Fer-
dinand of Brunswick fights his Battle of Bergen (April
13th), p. 324.

II. GeneRAL Douna; DicratoR WEDELL: BatrLe oF ZiL-
BCEER UMA coor er veoh ct da noes onic Vip tens tpervscrseg cadelsaueaue aie: 343
Dictator Wedell fights his Battle (Monday, 23d July 1759),
without Success, p. 348.

Ill. FriepRICH IN PERSON ATTEMPTS THE RussIAN PROBLEM;
OTS WILE ROUCCESS sc, out sisna ned skp ap ti has Soomcan aneinavearalte ate 352

IV. BATTLE OF KUNERSDORE.........ccccscssescersoeceeees se cdewt tO e'cae 368

PREG eave occa Vasks si suas iis the Vigil ss Udusde vac te indusesase tpn eucetars 394
The ‘‘ Reichs Army” so-called has entered Saxony, under
fine Omens; does some Feats of Sieging (August 7th—
23d),—with an Eye..on. Dresden as the crowning one,
p. 404.
Austr jan-Reichs Army does its crowning . Feat (August 26th—
September 4th):. Diary of what is called the ‘‘ Siege” of
Dresden, 410.

VI. Prince Henri MAKES A Marcu or Firty Hours; THE
RUSSIANS CANNOT FIND LODGING IN SILESIA..........0000- 426
~~ Daun, Soltikof and Company again have a Colloquy (Baut-
‘zen, September 15tli); after which Everybody starts on
his special Course of Action, p. 432.
Four Letters of Friedrich’s (10th-24th September), 434.
Friedrich manages (September 24th—October 24th) to get
the Russians sent home; and Himself falls lamed with

Gout, 442.
VII. FRIEDRICH REAPPEARS ON THE FIELD, AND IN SEVEN Days
AFTER COMES THE CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN............... 455
VIII. MiscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS, 1759-60........c.scseceeeees 468

Serene Highness of Wiirtemberg, at Fulda (November 30th,
1759), is just about ‘‘ firing Victoria,” and giving a Ball
to Beauty and Fashion, in Honour of a certain Event ;—
but is unpleasantly interrupted, p. 469.

What is Perpetual President Maupertuis doing all this

Vil CONTENTS.

CHAPTER : ae : PAGE:
While? Is he still in Berlin; or where in the Universe

ishe? Alas, poor Maupertuis! 473.

Grand French Invasion-Scheme comes entirely to Wreck
(Quiberon Bay, 20th November 1759): of Controller-Gen-
eral Silhouette, and the Outlooks of France, financial and
other, 475.

Friedrich, strange to say, publishes (March—June 1760) an
Edition of his Poems. Question, ‘‘Who wrote Matinées
du Roi de Prusse?”—for the second, and positively the
last Time, 481.

Peace-Negotiations hopeful to Friedrich, all through Win-
ter; but the French won’t. Voltaire, and his Style of
Corresponding, 486.

Friedrich has sent Lord Marischal to Spain: other fond
Hopes of Friedrich’s, 502.

;
TX. PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN ...cccccccscocecececccssence 505
MAPS
BATT OR LE RAG EORseidks Des Biweld. eke Aves, tes ee es 33 a
SA BOUT Wit his eds vata ul bas ADs Rae. STR Ree eee cana ib.
“g TER ATEAO Gn 253.5 sicsacacsausesvitthsnseealgwastarie bene enteee 209 a.
be TUTE cbs sn wls Pen Gee teeth waals ROSS IAL el a ib.
SrEGR OF OLMUDZ). ds add sis ocas tetcote Sues SEER. ook HE. Reeahgeked tes crus 275 a.
Be A PTE SO RATE UMONIE PP co u'ois vs.d5 cd den vaye tp 6c Ube ddan Gacahes Feu CORO M Ieee vane ib.
a PI OGHIIE BOE 5 oy os vas suse coats ices pyomphopne Spaeth eieih elle 297 a.
a DESIR g Ab tieti's scans sasoud<upaund>aibeeakiee rtd peo 363
ee PRON EOE Bice ss s:0568¢esachocnacegasysuhsdeuanpebodan Reinier 462 a
es VARY Casa ss 5.skviev che Soutiheve unas MCnidie ehhh es ocuieeeaeeneeee ib
For THE THIRD SILESIAN OR SEVEN-YEARS WAR.....ecceeee ieee nd 516 a.
PORTRAIT.
Friepricu II., Konic 1n PrReussen, //ratis 58..........2006 Frontispiece,

From a Picture by Franke, of Potsdam: painted for the Herren
Schickler, Bankers, Berlin, in whose Banking-house it still is.
Copies, or Repetitions by Franke himself, occur in English Col-
lections.

Jan.—April 1757. —

BOOK XVIIL
SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT.
1757-1759.

CHAPTER I.
THE CAMPAIGN OPENS.

SELDOM was there seen such a combination against any man
as this against Friedrich, after his Saxon performances in 1756.
The extent of his sin, which is now ascertained to have been
what we saw, was at that time considered to transcend all com-
putation, and to mark him out for partition, for suppression,
and enchainment, as the general enemy of mankind. ‘“ Parti-
tion him, cut him down,”’ said the Great Powers to one another ;
and are busy, as never before, in raising forces, inciting new al-
liances, and calling out the general posse comitatus of mankind,
for that salutary object. What tempestuous fulminations in the
Reichstag, and over all Europe, England alone excepted, against
this man!

Latterly the Swedes, who at first had compunctions on the
score of Protestantism, have agreed to join in the Partitioning
adventure: ‘It brings us his Pommern, all Pommern ours!”’
cry the Swedish Parliamentary Eloquences (with French gold in
their pocket): ‘At any rate,” whisper. they, “it spites the
Queen his Sister!”—and drag the poor Swedish Nation into a
series of disgraces and disastrous platitudes it was little antici-
pating. This precious French-Swedish Bargain (‘Swedes to
invade with 25,000; France to give fair subsidy,” and bribe
largely) was consummated in March ;' but did not become known
to Friedrich for some months later; nor was it of the import-
ance he then thought it, in the first moment of surprise and
provocation. Not indeed of importance to anybody, except, in
the reverse way, to poor Sweden itself, and to the French, who.
had spent a great deal of pains and.money on it, and continued

1 «¢91st March 1757” (Stenzel, v. 38; &e.). |

Vou. V.—A

2 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
Jan.—April 1757.

to spend, with as good as no result at all. For there never was
such a War, before or since, not even by Sweden in the Cap-
tainless state! And the one profit the copartners reaped from
it, was some discountenance it gave to the rumour which had
risen, more extensively than we should now think, and even with
some nucleus of fact in it as appears, That Austria, France, and
the Catholic part of the Reich were combining to put down Prot-
estantism. ‘To which they could now answer, ‘See, Protestant
Sweden is with us!”—and so weaken a little what was pretty
much Friedrich’s last hold on the public sympathies at this time.

As to France itself,—to France, Austria, Russia,—bound by
such earthly Treaties, and the call of very Heaven, shall they
not, in united puissance and indignation, rise to the rescue?
France, touched to the heart by such treatment of a Saxon
Kurfiirst, and bound by Treaty of Westphalia to protect all
members of the Reich (which it has sometimes, to our own
knowledge, so carefully done), is almost more ardent than Aus-
tria itself. France, Austria, Russia; to these add Polish Maj-
esty himself; and latterly the very Swedes, by French bribery
at Stockholm: these are the Partitioning Powers ;—and their
shares (let us spare one line to their shares) are as follows.

The Swedes are to have Pommern in whole; Polish-Saxon
Majesty gets Magdeburg, Halle, and opulent slices thereabouts ;
Austria’s share, we need not say, is that jewel ofa Silesia. Czar-
ish Majesty, on the extreme East, takes Preussen, Konigsberg-
Memel Country in whole; adds Preussen to her as yet too nar-
row Territories. Wesel-Cleve Country, from the other or West-
ern extremity, France will take that clipping, and make much
of it. These are quite serious business-engagements, engrossed
on careful parchment, that Spring 1757, and I suppose not yet
boiled down into glue, but still to be found in dusty corners,
with the tape much faded. The high heads, making prepara-
tion on the due scale, think them not only executable, but indu-
bitable, and almost as good as done. Push home upon him, as
united Posse Comitatus of Mankind; in a sacred cause of Polish
Majesty and Public Justice, how can one malefactor resist? “Ah,
ma tres-chere Reine,” and ‘‘ Oh, my dearest Princess and Cousin,”
what a chance has turned up!

Sal

Cuap. I.] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 3
26th—27th March 1757.

It is computed that there are arrayed against this one King,
under their respective Kings, Empress-Queens, Swedish Senates,
Catins and Pompadours, populations to the amount of above 100
millions,—in after stages, I remember to have seen ‘150 mill-
ions” loosely given as the exaggerative cipher. Of armed soldiers
actually in the field against him (against Hanover and him), in
1757, there are, by strict count, 430,000. Friedrich’s own Do-
minions at this time contain about Five Millions of Population ;
of Revenue somewhat less than Two Millions sterling. New
taxes he cannot legally, and will not, lay on his People. His
Schatz (ready-money Treasure, or Hoard yearly accumulating

“for such end) is, I doubt not, well filled,—express amount not
mentioned. Of drilled men he has, this Year, 150,000 for the
field; portioned out thriftily,—as well beseems, against Four
Invasions coming on him from different points. In the field,
150,000 soldiers, probably the best that ever were; and in gar-
rison, up and down (his Country being, by nature, the least de-
fensible of all Countries), near 40,000, which he reckons of in-
ferior quality. So stands the account.2_ These are, arithmetic-
ally precise, his resources,—plus only what may lie in his own
head and heart, or funded in the other heads and hearts, espe-
cially in those 150,000, which he and his Fathers have been dil-
igently disciplining, to good perfection, for four centuries come
the time.

France, urged by Pompadour and the enthusiasms, was first in
the field. The French Army, in superb equipment, though pri-
vately in poorish state of discipline, took the road early in
March; ‘‘ March 26th and 27th,’’ it crossed the German Bor-
der, Cleve Country and K6éln Country; had been rumoured of
since January and February last, as terrifically grand; and here
it now actually is, about 100,000 strong,—110,405, as the
Army-Lists, flaming through all the Newspapers, teach man-
kind.2 Bent mainly upon Prussia, it would seem; such the
- 2 Stenzel, iv. 308, 306, v. 39; Ranke, iii. 415; Preuss, ii. 389, 43, 124;
&c. &c. ;—substantially true, I doubt not; but little or nothing of it so def-
inite and conclusively distinct as it ought, in all items, to have been, by
this time,—had poor Dryasdust known what he was doing.

3 Helden-Geschichte, iv. 391; iii. 1078.

& SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
16th April 1757.

will of Pompadour. Mainly upon Prussia; Maréchal d’Estrées,
crossing at Koln, made offers even to his Britannic Majesty to
be forgiven in comparison; ‘‘ Yield us a road through your
Hanover, merely a road to those Halberstadt-Magdeburg parts,
your Hanover shall have neutrality!” ‘‘ Neutrality to Hano-
ver?” sighed Britannic Majesty: ‘* Alas, am not I pledged by
Treaty? And, alas, withal, how is it possible, with that Amer-
ica hanging over us?” and stood true. Nor is this all, on the
part of magnanimous France: there is a Soubise getting under
way withal, Soubise and 30,000, who will reinforce the Reich’s
Armament, were it on foot, and be heard of by and by! So
high runs French enthusiasm at present. A new sting of prov-
ocation to Most Christian Majesty, it seems, has been Friedrich’s
conduct in that Damiens matter (miserable attempt, by a poor
mad creature, to assassinate, or at least draw blood upon the
Most Christian Majesty’); about which Friedrich, busy and ob-
livious, had never, in common politeness, been at the pains to
eondole, compliment, or take any notice whatever. And will
now take the consequences, as due !—

The Wesel-Cleve Countries these French find abandoned:
Friedrich’s garrisons have had orders to bring off the artillery
and stores, blow up what of the works are suitable for blowing
up, and join the ‘ Britannic Army of Observation” which is
getting itself together in those regions. Considerable Army,
Britannic wholly in the money part: new Hanoverians so
many, Brunswickers, Biickeburgers, Sachsen-Gothaers so many;
add those precious Hanoverian-Hessian 20,000, whom we have
had in England guarding our liberties so long,—who are now
shipped over in a lot; fair wind and full sea to them. Army
of 60,000 on paper; of effective, more than 50,000; Head- »
quarters now at Bielefeld on the Weser ;—where, ‘‘ April 16th,”
or a few days later, Royal Highness of Cumberland comes to
take command; likely to make a fine figure against Maréchal
d’Estrées and his 100,000 French! But there was no helping
it. Friedrich, through Winter, has had Schmettau earnestly,

4 “Evening of 5th January 1757” (exuberantly plentiful details of it,
and of the horrible Law-procedures which followed on it; in Adelung, viii,
197-220; Barbier, &c. &c.).

Cuapr. I. { THE CAMPAIGN OPENS, 5
Jan.—April 1757.

flagitating the Hanoverian Officialities: “‘‘The Weser is wadea-
ble in many places, you cannot defend the Weser!” and coun-
selling and pleading to all lengths, —without the least effect.
“Wants to save his own Halberstadt lands at our expense!”
Which was the idea in London, too: ‘ Don’t we, by Apocalyp-
tic Newswriters and eyesight of our own, understand the man?”
Pitt is by this time in Office, who perhaps might have judged a
little otherwise. But Pitt’s seat is altogether temporary, inse-
cure; the ruling deities Newcastle and Royal Highness, who
withal are in standing quarrel. So that Friedrich, Schmettau,
Mitchell pleaded to the deaf. Nothing but ‘Defend the We-
ser,” and ignorant Fatuity ready for the Impossible, is to be
made out there. ‘ Cannot help it, then,” thinks Friedrich, oft-
en enough, in bad moments; “Army of Observation will have
its fate. Happily there are only 5,000 Prussians in it, Wesel
and the other garrisons given up!”

Only 5,000 Prussians: by original Engagement, there should
have been 25,000; and Friedrich’s intention is even 45,000 if
he prosper otherwise. For in January 1757 (Anniversary, or
nearly so, of that Neutrality Convention last year), there had
been,—encouraged by Pitt, as I could surmise, who always likes
Friedrich,—a definite, much closer Treaty of Alkiance, with
‘Subsidy of a million sterling,” Anti-Russian ‘ Squadron of
Observation in. the Baltic,’ ‘25,000 Prussians,” and other
items, which I forget. Forget the more readily, as, owing to
the strange state of England (near suffocating in its Constitu-
tional bedclothes), the Treaty could not be kept at all, or serve
as rule to poor England's exertions for Friedrich this Year; ex-
ertions which were of the willing-minded but futile kind, going
forward pell-mell, not by plan, and could reach Friedrich only
in the lump,—had there been any “‘lump” of them to sum to-
gether. But Pitt had gone out;—we shall see what, in Pitt’s
absence, there was! So that this Treaty 1757 fell quite into
the waste-basket (not to say, far deeper, by way of ‘‘ pavement”
we know where !),—and is not mentioned in any English Book ;
nor was known to exist, till some Collector of such things print-
ed it, in comparatively recent times.° A Treaty 1757, which,

§ «M. Koch in 1802,” not very perfectly (Scholl, iii. 30 n.; who copies
what Koch has given).

6 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
Jan.—April 1757.

except as an emblem of the then quasi-enchanted condition of
England, and as Foreshadow of Pitt’s new Treaty in January
1758, and of three others that followed and were kept to the let-
ter, is not of moment farther.

Reich's Thunder, slight Survey of it; with Question, Whath-
erward, uf anewhather ?

The thunderous fulminations in the Reich’s Diet,—an injured
Saxony complaining, an insulted Kaiser, after vain Dehortatori-
ums, reporting and denouncing, ‘‘ Horrors such as these: What
say you, O Reich ?”—have been going on since September last ;
and amount to boundless masses of the liveliest Parliamentary
Eloquence, now fallen extinct to all creatures.6 The Kaiser,
otherwise a solid pacific gentleman, intent on commercial opera-
tions (furnishes a good deal of our meal, says Friedrich), is Of-
ficially extremely violent in behalf of injured Saxony,—that is
to say, in fact, of injured Austria, which is one’s own. Kur-
Mainz, Chairman of the Diet (we remember how he was got,
and a Battle of Dettingen fought in consequence, long since) ;
Kur-Mainz is admitted to have the most decided Austrian lean-
ings: Britannic George, Austria being now in the opposite scale,
finds him an unhandy Kur-Mainz, and what profit it was to in-
troduce false weights into the Reich’s balance that time! Not
for long generations before had the poor old semi-imaginary
Reich’s-Diet risen into such paroxysms; nor did it ever again
after. Never again, in its terrestrial History, was there such
agonistic parliamentary struggle, and terrific noise of parliament-
ary palaver, witnessed in the poor Reich’s Diet. Noise and
struggle, rising ever higher, peal after peal, from September
1756, when it started, till August 1757, when it had reached its
acme (as perhaps we shall see), though it was far from ending
then, or for years to come.

Contemporary bystanders remark, on the Austrian part, ex-
traordinary rage and hatred against Prussia; which is now the
one point memorable. Austria is used to speak loud in the
Diet, as we have ourselves seen: and it is again (if you dive

§ Given, to great lengths, in Helden-Geschichte, ili., iv. (and other easily
avoidable Books).

Cuap. I.] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 7
Jan.—April 1757.

into those old AMolus’-Caves, at your peril) unpleasantly notable
to what pitch of fixed rage, and hot sullen hatred, Austria has
now gone; and how the tone has in it a potency of world-wide
squealing and droning, such as you nowhere heard before. Om-
nipotence of droning, edged with shrieky squealing, which fills
the Universe, not at all in a melodious way. Irom the depths
of the gamut to the shrieky top again,—a droning that has
something of porcine or wild-boar character. Figure assembled
the wild-boars of the world, all or mostly all got together, and
each with a knife just stuck into its side, by a felonious individ-
ual too well known,—you will have some notion of the sound
of these things. Friedrich sometimes remonstrates: ‘ Cannot
you spare such phraseology, unseemly to Kings? The quarrels
of Kings have to be decided by the sword; what profit in un-
seemly language, Madam ?”—but, for the first year and more,
there was no abatement on the Austrian part.

Friedrich’s own Delegate at Regensburg, a Baron von Plotho,
come of old Brandenburg kindred, is a resolute, ready-tongued,
very undaunted gentleman ; learned in Diplomacies and Reich’s
Law; carries his head high, and always has his story at hand.
Argument, grounded on Reich’s Law and the nature of the case,
Plotho never lacks, on the spur of the hour: and is indeed a
very commendable parliamentary mastiff; and honourable and
melodious in the bark of him, compared with those infuriated
porcine specimens. He has Kur-Hanover for ally on common
occasions, and generally from most Protestant members individ-
ually, or from the Corpus Hvangelicorum in mass, some feeble
whimper of support. Finds difficulty in getting his Reich’s
Pleadings printed ;—dangerous, everywhere in those Southern
Parts, to print anything whatever that is not Austrian: so that
Plotho, at length, gets printers to himself, and sets up a Printing-
Press in his own house at Regensburg. He did a great deal of
sonorous pleading for Friedrich; proud, deep-voiced, ruggedly
logical; fairly beyond the Austrian quality in many cases,—and
always far briefer, which is another high merit. October com-
ing, we purpose to look in upon Plotho for one minute; ‘ Octo-
ber 14th 1757 ;” which may be reckoned essentially the acme
or turning-point of these unpleasant thunderings.7

7 Helden- Geschichte, iv. 745-9.

8 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
Jan.—April 1757.

What good he did to Friedrich, or could have done with the
tongue of angels in such an audience, we do not accurately know.
Same good he would do even in the Reich’s-Diet there ; and out
of doors, over a German public, still more; and is worth his
frugal wages,—say 1,000/. a year, printing and all other expense
included! This is a mere guess of mine, Dryasdust having been
incurious: but, to English readers, it is incredible for what sums
Friedrich got his work done, no work ever better. Which is it-
self an appreciable advantage, computable in pounds sterling ;
and is the parent of innumerable others which no Arithmetic or
Book-keeping by Double Entry will take hold of, and which are
indeed priceless for Nations and for persons. But this poor old
bed-ridden Reich, starting in agonistic spasm at such rate: is it
not touching, in a Corpus moribund for so many Centuries past !
The Reich is something; though it is not much, nothing like so
much as even Kaiser Franz supposes it. Much or not so much,
Kaiser Franz wishes to secure it for himself; Friedrich to hin-
der him,—and it must be a poor something, if not worth Plotho’s
wages on Friedrich’s part.

It would insult the patience of every reader to go into these
spasmodic tossings of the poor paralytic Reich; or to mention
the least item of them beyond what had some result, or fraction
of result, on the world’s real affairs. We shall say only, there-
fore, that after tempests not a few of porcine squealing, answer-
ed always by counter-latration on the vigilant Plotho’s part ;—
squealing, chiefly, from the Reichs-Hofrath at Vienna, the Head
Tribunal of Imperial Majesty, which sits judging and denouncing
there, touched to the soul, as if by a knife driven into its side, by
those unheard-of treatments of Saxony and disregard to our De-
hortatoriums, and which bursts out, peal after peal, filling the
Universe, Plotho not unvigilant ;—the poor old Reich’s-Diet did
at last get into an acting posture, and determine, by clear major-
ity of 99 against 60, that there should be a “ Reich’s Execution
Army” got on foot. Reich’s Execution Army to coerce, by force
of arms, this nefarious King of Prussia into making instant res-
titution to Saxony, with ample damages on the nail; that right
be done to Kurfiirsts of this Reich. To such height of vigour
has the Reich’s-Diet gone ;—and was voting it at Regensburg,

Cuar. I] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 9
Jan.—April 1757.

January 10th, 1757 ;8 that very day when nefarious Friedrich
at Berlin, case-hardened in iniquity to such a pitch, sat writing
his Instruction to Count Linck, which we read not long since.
Simultaneous movements, unknown to one another, in this big
wrestle.

Reich’s-Diet perfected its Vote; had it quite through, and
sanctioned by the Kaiser’s Majesty, January 29th: ‘“ Arming to
be a triplum’’ (triple contingent required of you, this time); with
Romish-months (Rémermonate) of cash contribution from all and
sundry (rigorously gathered, I should hope, where Austria has
power), so many as will cover the expense. Army to be got on
actual foot hastily, instantly if possible: an “‘ eilende Reichs-Exe-
cutions-Armee ;” so it ran, but the word eilende (speedy) had a
mischance in printing, and was struck off into elende (contempti-
bly wretched): so that on all Market-Squares and Public Places
of poor Teutschland, you read flaming Placards summoning out,
not a speedy or immediate, but ‘a miserable Reich’s Execution
Army!” <A word which, we need not say, was laughed at by
the unfeeling part of the public; and was often called to mind
by the Reich’s Execution Army’s performances, when said speedy
Army did at last take the field.

For the Reich performed its Vote; actually had a Reich’s Ex-
ecution Army; the last it ever had in this world, not by any
means the worst it ever had, for they used generally to be bad.
Commanders, managers are named, Rémermonate are gathered
in, or the sure prospect of them; and, through May—June
1757, there is busy stir, of drumming, preparing, and enlisting,
all over the Reich. End of July, we shall see the Reich’s Army
in Camp; end of August, actually in the field; and later on,a
touch of its fighting withal. Many other things the Reich tried
against the unfortunate Friedrich,—gradual advance, in fact, to
Ban of the Reich (or total anathema and cutting off from fire
and water): but in none of these, in Ban as little as any, did it
come to practical result at all, or acquire the least title to be re-
membered at this day. Finis of Ban, some eight months hence,
has something of attractive as futility, the curious Death of a
Futility. Finis of Ban (October 14th, already indicated) we

8 Helden- Geschichte, iv. 252-302-330; Stenzel, v. 32.
A 2

10 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
\ 20th April—2d May 1757.

may for one moment look in upon, if there be one moment to
spare; the rest—readers shall fancy it; and read only of the
actuality and fighting part, which will itself be enough for them
on such a matter.

Friedrich suddenly marches on Prag.

Four Invasions, from their respective points of the compass,
north-east, north-west, south-east and south-west: here is a
formidable outlook for the one man against whom they are all
advancing open-mouthed. The one man,—with nothing but a
Duke of Cumberland and his Observation Army for backing
in such duel,—had need to look to himself! Which, we well
know, he does; wrapt in profoundly silent vigilance, with his
plans all laid. Of the Four Invasions, three, the Russian,
French, Austrian, are very large ; and the two latter, especially
the last, are abundantly formidable. ‘The Swedish, of which
there is rumouring, he hopes may come to little, or not come at
all. Nor is Russia, though talking big, and actually getting
ready above 100,000 men, so immediately alarming. Friedrich
always hopes the English, with their guineas and their manage-
ments, will do something for him in that quarter; and he knows,
at worst, that the Russian Hundred-Thousand will be a very
slow-moving entity. ‘The Swedish Invasion Friedrich, for the
present, leaves to chance: and against Russia, he has sent old
Marshal Lehwald into those Baltic parts; far eastward, towards
the utmost Memel Frontier, to put the Country upon its own de-
fence, and make what he can of it with 30,000 men,—West
Prussian militias a good few of them. ‘This is all he can spare
on the Swedish-Russian side: Austria and France are the peril-
ous pair of entities; not to be managed except by intense con-
centration of stroke ; and by going on them in succession, if one
have luck !—

Friedrich’s motions and procedures in canton-quarters, through
Winter and in late months, have led to the belief that he means
to stand on the defensive; that the scene of the Campaign will
probably be Saxony; and that Austria, for recovering injured
Saxony, for recovering dear Silesia, will have to take an invasive
attitude. And Austria is busy everywhere preparing with that

Cuap. I.] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 11
20th April—2d May 1757.

view. Has Tolpatcheries, and advanced Brigades, still harassing
about in the Lausitz. A great Army assembling at Prag,—
Browne forward towards the Metal Mountains securing posts,
gathering magazines, for the crossing into Saxony there. There,
it is thought, the tug of war will probably be. Furious, and
strenuous, itis not doubted, on this Friedrich’s part: but against
such odds, what can he do? With Austrians in front, with Rus-
sians to left, with French to right and a-rear, not to mention
Swedes and appendages: surely here, if ever, is a lost King!—

It is by no means Friedrich’s intention that Saxony itself
shall need to be invaded. Friedrich’s habit is, as his enemies
might by this time be beginning to learn, not that of standing on
the defensive, but that of going on it, as the preferable method
wherever possible. March 24th, Friedrich had quitted Dresden
City; and for a month aftér (headquarters Lockwitz, edge of
the Pirna Country), he had been shifting, redistributing, his can-
toned Army,—privately into the due Divisions, due readiness
for march. Which done, on fixed days, about the end of April,
the whole Army, he himself from Lockwitz, April 20th,—to the
surprise of Austria and the world, Friedrich in three grand Col-
umns, Bevern out of the Lausitz, King himself over the Metal
Mountains, Schwerin out of Schlesien, is marching with extra-
ordinary rapidity direct for Prag; in the notion that a right
plunge into the heart of Bohemia will be the best defence for
Saxony and the other places under menace.

This is a most unexpected movement; which greatly aston-
ishes the world-theatre, pit, boxes and gallery alike (as Fried-
rich’s sudden movements often do); and which is, above all, in-
teresting on the stage itself, where the actors had been counting
on a quite opposite set of entries and activities! Feldmarschall
Browne, and General Konigseck (not our old friend Konigseck,
who used to dry-nurse in the Netherlands, but his nephew and
heir) may cease gathering Magazines, in those Lausitz and Metal-
Mountain parts: happy could they give wings to those already
gathered! Magazines, for Austrian service, are clearly not the
things wanted there. One does not burn one’s Magazines till
the last extremity ; but wings they have none; and such is the
enigmatic velocity of those Prussian movements, one seldom has

12 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

20th April—2d May 1757.
time even to burn them, in the last crisis of catastrophe! Con-
siderable portions of that provender fell into the Prussian throat;
* as much as ‘‘three-months provision for the whole Army,” count
they,—-adding to those Frontier sundries the really important
Magazine which they seized at Jung-Bunzlau farther in.° It is
one among their many greater advantages from this surprisal of
the enemy, and sudden topsy-turvying of his plans. Browne
and Konigseck have to retire on Prag at their swiftest, looking
to more important results than Magazines.

It is Friedrich’s old plan. Long since, in 1744, we saw a
march of this kind, Three Columns rushing with simultaneous
rapidity on Prag; and need not repeat the particulars on this
occasion. Here are some Notes on the subject, which will suffi-
ciently bring it home to readers:

“The Three Columns were, for a part of the way, Four; the King’s
being, at first, in two branches, till they united again, on the other side
of the Hills. For the King,” what is to be noted, “‘ had shot out, three
weeks before, a small preliminary branch, under Moritz of Dessau; who
marched, well westward, by Eger (starting from Chemnitz in Saxony);
and had some tusseling with our poor old friend Duke d’Ahremberg,
Browne’s subordinate in those parts. D’Ahremberg, having 20,000 un-
der him, would not quit Eger for Moritz; but pushed out Croats upon
him, and sat still. This,it was afterwards surmised, had been a feint
on Friedrich’s part; to give the Austrians pleasant thoughts: ‘Invading
us,is he? Would fain invade us, but cannot!’ Moritz fell back from
Eger; and was ready to join the King’s march, ‘at Linay, April 23d’
(third day from Lockwitz, on the King’s part). Onwards from which
point the Columns are specifically ‘Three; in strength, and on routes,
somewhat as follows:

1°. “The Furst Column or King’s,—which is 60,000 after this junc- ~
tion, 45,000 foot, 15,000 horse,—quitted Lockwitz (headquarter for a
month. past), Wednesday, April 20th. They go by the Pascopol and
other roads; through Pirna, for one place: through Karbitz, Aussig,
are at Linay on the 23d; where Moritz joins: 24th, in the united state,
forward again (leave eG two miles to left) ; to Trebnitz, ee and
rest there one day.

“ At Aussig an unfortunate thing befel. Zastrow, respectable old
General Zastrow, was to drive the Austrians out of Aussig: Zastrow
does it, April 22d—23d, drives them well over the heights; April 25th,

° Helden-Geschichte, iv. 6-1 3; &e.

Cuap. I.] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 13
20th April—2d May 1757.

however, marching forward towards Lobositz, Zastrow is shot through
both temples (Pandour hid among the bushes and cliffs, other side of
Elbe), and falls dead on the spot. Buried in Gotileube Kirk, 1st
May.”

In these Aussig affairs, especially in recapturing the Castle
of Tetschen near by, Colonel Mayer, father of the new “ Free-
Corps,” did shining service ;—-and was approved of, he and they.
And, a day or two after, was detached with a Fifteen Hundred
of that kind, on more important business: First to pick up one
or two Bohemian Magazines lying handy; after which,-—to pay
a visit to the Reich and its bluster about Execution-Army, and
teach certain persons who it is they are thundering against in
that awkwardly truculent manner! Errand. shiningly done by
Mayer, as perhaps we may hear,—and certainly as all the News-
papers loudly heard,—--in the course of the next two months.

At crossing of the Eger, Friedrich’s Column had some chasing
of poor D’Ahremberg; attempting to cut him off from his
Bridges, Bridge of Koschlitz, Bridge of Budin; but he made
good despatch, Browne and he; and, except a few prisoners of
- Ziethen’s gathering, and most of his Magazines unburnt, they did
him no damage. ‘The chase was close enough; more than once,
the Austrian headquarter of tonight was that of the Prussians
tomorrow. Monday, May 2d, Friedrich’s Column was on the
Weissenberg of Prag; Browne, D’Ahremberg, and Prince Karl,
who is now come up to take command, having hastily filed
through the City, leaving a fit garrison, the day before. Ex-
cept his Magazines, nothing the least essential went wrong with
Browne; but Konigseck, who had not a Friedrich on his heels,
—Konigseck, trying more, as his opportunities were more,—was
not quite so lucky.

2°. “Column Second, to the King’s left, comes from the Lausitz un-
der Brunswick-Bevern,—18,000 foot, 5,000 horse. This is the Bevern
who so distinguished himself at Lobositz last year; and he is now to
culminate into a still brighter exploit,—the last of his very bright ones,
as it proved. Bevern set out from about Zittau (from Grottau, few
miles south of Zittau), the same day with Friedrich, that is April 20th ;
—and had not well started till he came upon formidable obstacles.
Came upon General Konigseck, namely: a Konigseck manceuvering
ahead, in superior force ; a Macguire, Irish subordinate of Konigseck’s,

14 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
21st April 1757.
coming from the right to cut off our baggage (against whom Bevern
has to detach) ; a Lacy, coming from the left ;—or indeed, Konigseck
and Lacy in concert, intending to offer battle. Battle of Reichenberg,
which accordingly ensued, April 21st,”"—of which, though it was very
famous for so small a Battle, there can be no account given here.

The short truth is, Konigseck falling back, Parthian-like, with
a force of 30,000 or more, has in front of him nothing but Be-
vern ; who, as he issues from the Lausitz, and till he can unite
with Schwerin farther southward, is but some 20,000 odd: can-
not Konigseck call halt, and bid Bevern return, or do worse ?
KGnigseck, a diligent enough soldier, determines to try ; chooses
an excellent position,—at or round Reichenberg, which is the
first Bohemian ‘Town, one march from Zittau in the Lausitz, and
then one from Liebenau, which latter would be Bevern’s second
Bohemian stage on the Prag road, if he continued prosperous.
Reichenberg, standing nestled among hills in the Neisse Valley
(one of those Four Neisses known to us, the Neisse where Prince
Karl got exploded, in that signal manner, Winter 1745, by a cer-
tain King), offers fine capabilities; which Konigseck has laid
hold of. There is especially one excellent Hollow (on the left
or western bank of Neisse River, that is, across from Reichen-
berg), backed by woody hills, nothing but hills, brooks, woods all
round; Hollow scooped out as if for the purpose; and altogeth-
er of inviting character to Koénigseck. ‘There, “ Wednesday,
April 20th,” Kénigseck posts himself, plants batteries, fells aba-
tis; plenty of cannon, of horse and foot, and, say all soldiers, one
of the best positions possible.

So that Bevern, approaching Reichenberg at evening, evening
of his first march, Wednesday, April 20th, finds his way barred ;
and that the difficulties may be considerable. ‘* Nothing to be
made of it tonight,” thinks Bevern; “but we must try tomor-
row!” and has to take camp, ‘‘ with a marshy brook in front of
him,” some way on the hither side of Reichenberg ; and study
overnight what method of unbarring there may be. Thursday
morning early, Bevern, having well reconnoitred and studied, .
was at work unbarring. Bevern crossed his own marshy brook ;
courageously assaulted KGnigseck’s position, left wing of Kénig-
seck ; stormed the abatis, the batteries, plunged in upon Kénig-

Cuap. I.] THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 15
20th April—2d May 1757.

seck, man to man, horse to horse, and after some fierce enough
but brief dispute, tumbled Konigseck out of the ground. K6-
nigseck made some attempt to rally; attempted twice, but in
vain ; had fairly to roll away, and at length to run, leaving 1,000
dead upon the field, about 500 prisoners ; one or two guns, and
I forget how many standards, or whether any kettle-drums.
This was thought to be a decidedly bright feat on Bevern’s part
(rather mismanaged latterly on K6nigseck’s) ;!°—much approved
by Friedrich, as he hears of it, at Linay, on his own prosperous
march Prag-ward. A comfortable omen, were there nothing
more.

K6nigseck and Company, torn out of Reichenberg, and set
running, could not fairly halt again and face about till at Liebe-
nau, twenty miles off, where they found some defile or difficult
bit of ground fit for them; and this too proved capable of yield-
ing pause for a few hours only. For Schwerin, with his Sile-
sian Column, was coming up from the north-east, threatening
K@nigseck on flank and rear: Konigseck could only tighten his
straps a little at this Liebenau, and again get under way; and
making vain attempts to hinder the junction of Schwerin and
Bevern, to defend the Jung-Buntzlau Magazine, or do any good
in those parts, except to detain the Schwerin-Bevern people cer-
tain hours (I think, one day in all), had nothing for it but to gird
himself together, and retreat on Prag and the Ziscaberg, where
his friends now were.

The Austrian force at Reichenberg was 20,000; would have
been 30 and odd thousands, had Macguire come up (as he might
have done, had not the appearances alarmed him too much);
Bevern, minus the Detachment sent against Macguire, was but
15,000 in fight; and he has quite burst the Austrians away,
who had plugged his road for him in such force: is it not a
comfortable little victory, glorious in its sort; and a good omen

10 Tempelhof, i. 100; Helden-Ceschichte, iii. 1077 (Friedrich’s own Ac-
count, ‘ Linay in Béhmen, 24th April 1757”); &c. &e. There is, in Bii-
sching’s Magazin (xvi. 139 et seq.), an intelligible sketch of this Action of
Reichenberg, with satirieal criticisms, which have some basis, on Lacy,
Maeguire, and others, by an Anonymous Military Cynic,—who gives many
such in Bisehing (that of Fontenoy, for example), not without force of judg-
ment, and signs of wide study and experience in his trade.

16 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
20th April—2d May 1757.
for the bigger things that are coming? Bevern marched com-
posedly on, after this inspiriting tussle, through Liebenau and
what defiles there were; April 24th, at Turnau, he falls into the
Schwerin Column; incorporates himself therewith, and, as sub-
ordinate constituent part, accompanies Schwerin thenceforth.

3°. “Column Third was Schwerin’s, out of Schlesien; counted to
be 32,000 foot, 12,000 horse. Schwerin, gathering himself, from Glatz
and the northerly country, at Landshut,—very careless, he, of the pleas-
ant Hills, and fine scattered peaks of the Giant Mountains thereabouts,
—was completely gathered foremost of all the Columns, having farthest
to go. And on Monday, 18th April, started from Landshut, Winterfeld
leading one Division. In our days, it is the finest of roads; high level
Pass, of good width, across the Giant Range; pleasant painted ham-
lets sprinkling it, fine mountain ridges and distant peaks looking on ;
Schneekoppe (Snowfell, its head bright white till July come) attends
you, far to the right, all the way :—probably Sprite Ribezahl inhabits
there ; and no doubt River Elbe begins his long journey there, trickling
down in little threads over yonder, intending to float navies by and by:
considerations infinitely indifferent to Schwerin. ‘ The road,’ says my
Tourist, ‘is not Alpine; it reminds you of Derbyshire-Peak country ;
more like the road from Castletown to Sheffield than any I could name;’
we have been in it before, my reader and I,about Schatzlar and other
places. Trautenau, well down the Hills, with swift streams, more like
torrents, bound Elbe-wards, watering it, is a considerable Austrian
Town, and the Bohemian end of the Pass,—Sohr only a few miles from
it: heartily indifferent to Schwerin at this moment; who was home
from the Army, in a kind of disfavour, or mutual pet, at the time Sohr
was done. Schwerin’s March we shall not give; his junction with
Bevern (at Turnau, on the Iser, April 24th), then their capture of Jung-
Buntzlau Magazine, and crossing of the Elbe at Melnick, these were
the important points ; and, in spite of Konigseck’s tusselings, these all
went well, and nothing was lost except one day of time.”

The Austrians, some days ago, as we observed, filed through
Prag,—Sunday, May Ist, not a pleasant holiday spectacle to the
populations;— and are all encamped on the Ziscaberg high
ground, on the other side of the City. Had they been alert,
now was their time to attack Friedrich, who is weaker than they,
while nobody has yet joined him. They did not think of it, un-
der Prince Karl; and Browne and the Prince are said to be in
bad agreement.

Cuap. II. ] BATTLE OF PRAG. 17
2d May 1757.

\

CHAPTER II.
BATTLE OF PRAG.

Monpay morning, 2d May 1757, the Vanguard, or advanced
troops of Friedrich’s Column, had appeared upon the Weissen-
berg, north-west corner of Prag (ground known to them in 1744,
and to the poor Winter-King in 1620): Vanguard in the morn-
ing; followed shortly by Friedrich himself; and, hour after hour,
by all the others, marching in. So that, before sunset, the whole
force lay posted there; and had the romantic City of Prag full
in view at their feet. A most romantic, high-piled, many-tow-
ered, most unlevel old City; its skylights and gilt steeplecocks
glittering in the western sun,—Austrian Camp very visible close
beyond it, spread out miles in extent on the Ziscaberg Heights,
or eastern side ;—Prag, no doubt, and the Austrian Garrison of
Prag, taking intense survey of this Prussian phenomenon, with
commentaries, with emotions, hidden now in eternal silence, as
is fit enough. One thing we know, ‘ Headquarter was in Wel-
leslawin :’’ there, in that small Hamlet, nearly to north, lodged
Friedrich, the then busiest man of Europe; whom Posterity is
still striving for a view of, as something memorable.

Prince Karl, our old friend, is now in chief command yonder ;
Browne also is there, who was in chief command; their scheme
of Campaign gone all awry. And to Friedrich, last night, at
his quarters ‘‘in the Monastery of Tuchomirsitz,” where these
two Gentlemen had lodged the night before, it was reported that
they had been heard in violent altercation ;'—both of them, nat-
urally, in ill-humour at the surprising turn things had taken ;
and Feldmarschall Browne firing up, belike, at some platitude
past or coming, at some advice of his rejected, some imputation
cast on him, or we know not what. Prince Karl is now chief;
and indignant Browne, as may well be the case, dissents a good
deal,—as he has often had to do. Patience, my friend, it is near

1 Helden-Geschichte, iv. 11 (exact ‘‘ Diary of the march” given there).

18 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

2d May 1757.
ending now! Prince Karl means to lie quiet on the Ziscaberg,
and hold Prag; does not think of molesting Friedrich in his sol-
itary state; and will undertake nothing, “ till K6nigseck, from
Jung-Buntzlau, come in,” victorious or not; or till perhaps even
Daun arrive (who is, rather slowly, gathering reinforcement in
Miihren): ‘‘ What can the enemy attempt on us, in a Post of
this strength?” thinks Prince Karl. And Browne, whatever his
insight or convictions be, has to keep silence.

“ Weissenberg,” let readers be reminded, “is on the hither or west-
ern side of Prag: the Hradschin” (pronounce Radsheen, with accent on
the last syllable, as in “ Schwerzn” and other such cases), “ the Hrad-
schin, which is the topmost summit of the City and of the Fashionable
Quarter,—old Bohemian Palace, still occasionally habitable as such, and
in constant use as a Downing-Street,—lies on the slope or shoulder of
the Weissenberg, a good way from the top; and has a web of streets
rushing down from it, steepest streets in the world; till they reach the
Bridge, and broad-flowing Moldau (broad as Thames at half-flood, but
nothing like so deep); after which the streets become level, and spread
out in intricate plenty to right and to left, and ahead eastward, across
the River, till the Ziscaberg, with frowning precipitous brow, suddenly
puts a stop to them, in that particular direction. From Ziscaberg top
to Weissenberg top may be about five English miles; from the Hrad-
schin to the foot of Ziscaberg, north-west to south-east, will be half that
distance, the greatest length of Prag City. Which is rather rhomboidal
in shape, its longer diagonal this that we mention. ‘The shorter diag-
onal, from northmost base of Ziscaberg to southmost of Hradschin, is
perhaps a couple of miles. Prag stands nestled in the lap of mount-
ains; and is not in itself a strong place in war: but the country round
it, Moldau ploughing his rugged chasm of a passage through the piled
- table-land, is difficult to manceuvre in.

** Moldau Valley comes straight from the south, crosses Prag ; and,—
making, on its outgate at the northern end of Prag (end of ‘ shortest
diagonal’ just spoken of), one big loop, or bend and counter-bend, of
horse-shoe shape,” which will be notable to us anon,—* again proceeds
straight northward and Elbe-ward. It is narrow everywhere, especial-
ly when once got fairly north of Prag; and runs along like a Quasi-
Highland Strath, amid rocks and Hills. Big Hill-ranges, not tobe call-
ed barren, yet with rock enough on each hand, and fine side valleys —
opening here and there: the bottom of your Strath, which is green and
fertile, with pleasant busy Villages (much intent on water-power and
cotton-spinning in our time), is generally of few furlongs in breadth.
And so it lasts, this pleasant Moldau-Valley, mile after mile, on the

Cuap. IT.] . BATTLE OF PRAG. 19
bth May 1757. = =~ = =

northern or Lower Moldau, generally straight north, though with one
big bend eastward just before ending; and not till near Melnick, or the
mouth of Moldau, do we emerge on that grand Elbe Valley,—glanced
at once already, from Pascopol or other Height, in the Lobositz times.”

Friedrich’s first problem is the junction with Schwerin: junc-
tion not to be accomplished south of the Ziscaberg in the pres-
ent circumstances; and which Friedrich knows to be a ticklish
operation, with those Austrians looking on from the high grounds
there. Tuesday 3d May, in the way of reconnoitring, and deci-
sively on Wednesday 4th, Friedrich is off northward, along the
western heights of Lower Moldau, proper force following him, to
seek a fit place for the pontoons, and get across in that northern
quarter. “How dangerous that Schwerin is a day too late!”
murmurs he; but hopes the Austrians will undertake nothing.
Keith, with 30,000, he has left on the Weissenberg, to straiten
Prag and the Austrian Garrison on that side: our wagon-trains
arrive from Leitmeritz on that side, Elbe-boats bring them up to
Leitmeritz; very indispensable to guard that side of Prag.
Friedrich’s fixed purpose also is to beat the Austrians, on the
other side of it, and send them packing; but for that, there are
steps needful!

Up so far as Lissoley, the first day, Friedrich has found no fit
place; but on the morrow, Thursday 5th, farther up, at a place
called Seltz, Friedrich finds his side of the Strath to be “a lit-
tle higher than the other,”—proper, therefore, for cannonading
the other, if need be ;—-and orders his pontoons to be built to-
gether there. He knows accurately of the Schwerin Column,
of the comfortable Bevern Victory at Reichenberg, and how they
have got the Jung-Buntzlau Magazine, and are across the Elbe,
their bridges all secured, though with delay of one day; and do
now wait only for the word,—for the three cannon-shot, in fact,
which are to signify that Friedrich is actually crossing to their
side of Lower Moldau.

Friedrich’s Bridge is speedily built (trained human hands can
be no speedier), his batteries planted, his precautions taken: the
three cannon-shot go off, audible to Schwerin; and Friedrich’s
troops stream speedily across, hardly a Pandour to meddle with
them. Nay, before the passage was complete—what light-horse

20 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

6th May 1757.
squadrons are these? Hussars, seen to be Seidlitz’s (missioned
by Schwerin), appear on the outskirts: a meeting worthy of
three-cheers; surely, after such a march on both sides! Fried-
rich lies on the eastern Hill-tops that night (Hamlet of Czimitz
his Headquarter, discoverable if you wish it, scarcely three miles
north of Prag); and accurate appointment is made with Schwer-
in as to the meeting-place tomorrow morning. Meeting-place
is to be the environs of Prossik Village, south-eastward over
yonder, short way north of the Prag-Koniggritz Highway; and
rather nearer Prag than we now are, in Czimitz here: time at
Prossik to be 6 A.M. by the clock; and Winterfeld and Schwerin
to come in person and speak with his Majesty. This is the pro-—
eram for Friday, May 6th, which proves to be so memorable a
day.

Schwerin is on foot by the stroke of midnight; comes along,
“over the heights of Chaber,” by half-a-dozen, or I know not
how many roads; visible in due time to Friedrich’s people, who
are likewise punctually on the advance: in a word, the junction
is accomplished with all correctness. And, while the Columns
are marching up, Schwerin and Winterfeld ride about in per-
sonal conference with his Majesty; taking survey, through spy-
glasses, of those Austrians encamped yonder on the broad back
of their Zisca Hill, a couple of miles to southward. ‘ Whata
set of Austrians,” exclaim military critics; “to permit such
junction, without effort to devour the one half or the other, in
good time!” Friedrich himself, it is probable, might partly be
of the same opinion; but he knew his Austrians, and had made
bold to venture. Friedrich, we can observe, always got to
know his man, after fighting him a month or two; and took
liberties with him, or did not take, accordingly. And, for most
part,—not quite always, as one signal exception will show,—he
does it with perfect accuracy; and often with vital profit to his
measures. ‘If the Austrian cooking-tents are a-smoke before
eight in the morning,” notes he, “you may calculate, in such
case, the Austrians will march that day.”’? With a surprising
vividness of eye and mind (beautiful to rival, if one could), he
watches the signs of the times, of the hours and the days and

2 Miltary Instructions.

CHAP. Il. ] BATTLE OF PRAG. 91
6th May 1757.

the places; and prophesies from them ;—reads men and their
procedures, as if they were mere handwriting, not too cramp for
him.—The Austrians have, by this time, got their Kénigseck
home, very unvictorious, but still on foot, all but a thousand or
two: they are already stronger than the Prussians by count of
heads; and till even Daun come up, what hurry in a Post like
this? The Austrians are viewing Friedrich, too, this morning ;
but in the blankest manner: their outposts fire a cannon-shot
or two on his group of adjutants and him, without effect ; and the
Head people send their cavalry out to forage, so little prophecy
have they from signs seen.

Zisca Hill, where the Austrians now are, rises sheer up, of
well-nigh precipitous steepness, though there are trees and grass
on it, from the eastern side of Prag, say five or six hundred feet.
A steep, picturesque, massive green Hill; Moldau River, turn-
ing suddenly to right, strikes the north-west corner of it (has
flowed well to west of it, till then), and winds eastward round
its northern base. As will be noticed presently. The ascent
of Ziscaberg, by roads, is steep and tedious: but once at the top,
you find that it is precipitous on two sides only, the City or
westward side, and the Moldau or northward. Atop it spreads
out, far and wide, into a waving upland level; bare of hedges ;
ploughable all of it, studded with littery hamlets and farmstead- —
ings: far and wide, a kind of Plain, sloping with extreme gen-
tleness, five or six miles to eastward, and as far to southward,
before the level perceptibly rise again.

Another feature of the Ziscaberg, already hinted at, is very
notable:, that, of the Moldau skirting its northern base, and
scarping the Hill, on that side too, into a precipitous, or very
steep condition. Moldau having arrived from southward, fairly
past the end of Ziscaberg, had, so to speak, made up his mind’to
go right eastward, quarrying his way through the lower uplands
there. And he proceeds, accordingly, hugging the northern
base of Ziscaberg, and making it steep enough; but finds, in the
course of a mile or so, that he can no more; upland being still
rock-built, not underminable farther; and so is obliged to wind
round again, to northward, and finally straight westward, the
way he came, or parallel to the way he came; and has effected

22 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
6th May 1757.

that great Horse-shoe Hollow we heard of lately. An extreme-
ly pretty Hollow, and curious to look upon; pretty villas, gar-
dens, and a “ Belvedere Park,’ laid out in the bottom part;
with green mountain-walls rising all round it, and a silver ring
of river at the base of them: length of Horse-shoe, from heel to
toe, or from west to east, is perhaps a mile; breadth, from heel
to heel, perhaps half as much. Having arrived at his old dis-
tance to west, Moldau, like a repentant prodigal, and as ifashamed
of his frolic, just over against the old point he swerved from,
takes straight to northward again. Straight northward; and
quarries out that fine narrow valley, or Quasi-Highland Strath,
with its pleasant busy villages, where he turns the overshot ma-
chinery, and where Friedrich and his men had their pontoons
swimming yesterday.

It is here, on this broad back of the Ziscaberg, that the Aus-
trians now lie; looking northward over to the King, and trying
cannon-shots upon him. ‘There they have been encamping, and
diligently entrenching themselves for four days past ; diligent
especially since yesterday, when they heard of Friedrich’s cross-
ing the River. Their groups of tents, and batteries at all the
good points, stretch from near the crown of Ziscaberg eastward
to the Villages of Hlaupetin, Kyge, and their Lakes, near four
’ miles; and rearward into the interior one knows not how far;*
Prince Karl, hardly awake yet, lies at Nussel, near the Moldau,
near Wischerad or south-eastmost point of Prag; six good miles
west-by-south of Kyge, at the other end of the diagonal line.
About the same distance, right east from Nussel, and a mile or
more to south of Kyge over yonder, is a littery Farmstead named
Sterbohol, which is not yet occupied by the Austrians, but will
become very famous in their War-Annals, this day !—

Where the Austrian Camp or various Tent-groups were, at
the time Friedrich first cast eye on them, is no great concern of
his or ours; inasmuch as, in two or three hours hence, the Aus-
trians were obliged, rather suddenly, to take Order of Battle;
and that, and not their camping, is the thing we are curious
upon. Let us step across, and take some survey of that Austrian
ground, which Friedrich is now surveying from the distance,

* Map at p.111 a.

Cuap. IL] BATILE OF PRAG. 23
6th May 1757.

fully intending that it shall be a battle-ground in few hours;
and try to explain how the Austrians drew up on it, when they
noticed the Prussian symptoms to become serious more and
more. By nine in the morning,—some two hours after Fried-
rich began his scanning, and the Austrian outposts their firing
of stray cannon-shots on him,—it is Battle-lines, not empty
Tents (which there was not time to strike), that salute the eye
over yonder.

From behind that verdant Horse-shoe Chasm we spoke of,
buttressed by the inaccessible steeps, and the Moldau, double-
folded in the form of Horse-shoe, all along the brow of that
sloping expanse, stands (by 9 a.m. “foragers all suddenly called
in”) the Austrian front; the second line and the reserve, paral-
lel to it, at good distances behind. Ranked there; say 65,000
regulars (Prussian force little short of the same), on the brow of
- Ziscaberg slope, some four miles long. Their right wing ends,
in strong batteries, in intricate marshes, knolls, lakelets, between
Hlaupetin and Kyge: the extreme of their left wing looks over
on that Horse-shoe Hollow, where Moldau tried to dig his way,
but could not, and had to turn back. They have numerous re-
doubts, in front and in all the good places; and are busy with
more, some of them just now getting finished, treble-quick, while
the Prussians are seen under way. As many as sixty heavy
cannon in battery up and down: of field-pieces they have a
hundred and fifty. Excellent always with their Artillery, these
Austrians; plenty of it, well placed, and well served: thanks to
Prince Lichtenstein’s fine labours, within these ten years past.3
The villages, the farmsteads, are occupied; every rising ground
especially has its battery,—Homoly Berg, Tabor Berg, «‘ Mount
of Tabor ;”’ say Knoll of Tabor (nothing like so high as Battersea
Rise, hardly even as Constitution Hill), though scriptural Zisca
would make a Mount of it ;—these, and other Bergs of the like
type. ;
That is the Austrian Battle Order (as it stood about nine,
though it had still to change a little, as we shall see): their first
line, straight or nearly so, looking northward, stands on the brow
of the Zisca Slope; their second and their third, singularly like

* (Buvres de Frédéric (in several places); see Hormayr, § Lichtenstein.

24 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
6th May 1757.

it, at the due distances behind ;—in the intervals, their tents,
which stand scattered, in groups wide apart, in the ample interi-
or to southward. ‘The cavalry is on both wings; left wing, be-
hind that Moldau Chasm, cannot attack nor be attacked,—ex-
cept it were on hippogriffs, and its enemy on the like, capable of
fighting in the air, overhead of these Belvedere Pleasure-grounds :
perhaps Prince Karl will remedy this oversight; fruit of close
following of the orthodox practice? Prince Karl, supreme
Chief, commands on the left wing; Browne on the right, where
he can attack or be attacked, not on hippogriffs. As we shall
see, and others will! Light horse, in any quantity, hang scat-
tered on all outskirts. With foot, with cannon batteries, with
horse, light or heavy, they cover in long broad flood the whole
of that Zisca Slope, to near where it ceases, and the ground to
eastward begins perceptibly to rise again.

In this latter quarter, Zisca Slope, now nearly ended, begins
to get very swampy in parts; on the eastern border of the Aus-
trian Camp, at Kyge, Hostawitz, and beyond it southward, about
Sterbohol and Michelup, there are many little lakelets; artificial
fish-ponds, several of them, with their sluices, dams and appara-
tus: a ragged broadish lacing of ponds and lakelets (all well
dried in our day) straggles and zigzags along there, connected by
the miserablest Brook in nature, which takes to oozing and ser-
pentising forward thereabouts, and does finally get emptied, now
in a rather livelier condition, into the Moldau, about the ¢éoe-
part of that Horse-shoe or Belvedere region. It runs in sight
of the King, I think, where he now is; this lower livelier part of
it: little does the King know how important the upper oozing
portion of it will be to him this day. Near Michelup are lake-
lets worth noticing; a little under Sterbohol, in the course of
this miserable Brook, is a string of fish-ponds, with their sluices
open at this time, the water out, and the mud bottom sown with
herb-provender for the intended carps, which is coming on beau-
tifully, green as leeks, and nearly ready for the fish getting to it
again.

Friedrich surveys diligently what he can of all this, from the
northern verge. We will now return to Friedrich; and will
stay on his side, through the terrible Action that is coming.

Cuar. II.] BATTLE OF PRAG. - 25
6th May 1757.

Battle of Prag, one of the furious Battles of the World; loud as
Doomsday ;—the very Emblem of which, done on the Piano by
females of energy, scatters mankind to flight who love their
ears! Of this great Action the Narratives old and modern are
innumerable; false some of them, unintelligible well nigh all.
There are three in Lloyd, known probably to some of my read-
ers. Tempelhof, with criticisms of these three, gives a fourth,—
perhaps the one Narrative which human nature, after much
study, can in some sort understand. Human readers, especially
military, I refer to that as their finale.‘ Other interest than
military-scientific the Action now has not much. The stormy
fire of soul that blazed that day (higher in no ancient or modern
Fight of men) is extinct, hopeless of resuscitation for English
readers. Approximately what the thing to human eyes might
be like; what Friedrich’s procedure, humour and physiognomy
of soul was in it: this, especially the latter head, is what we
search for,—had lazy Dryasdust given us almost anything on
this latter head! What little can be gleaned from him on both
heads let us faithfully give, and finish our sad part of the combat.

Friedrich, with his Schwerin and Winterfeld, surveying these
things from the northern edge, admits that the Austrian posi-
tion is extremely strong; but he has no doubt that it must be,
by some good method, attacked straightway, and the Austrians
got beaten. Indisputably the enterprise is difficult. Unattack-
able clearly, the Austrians, on that left wing of theirs; not in
the centre well attackable, nor in the front at all, with that stiff

4 In Lloyd, i. 38 et seq. (the Three): in Tempelhof, i. 123 (the Fourth) ;
ib. i. 144 (strength of each Army), 105-149 (remarks of Tempelhof).—The
‘* History,” or Series of Lectures on the Battles, &c. of this War, ‘‘ by the
Royal Staff-Oficers,’—which, for the last thirty or forty years, is used as
Text-Book, or Military Huclid, in the Prussian Cadet-Schools, —appears to
possess the fit professorial lucidity and amplitude; and, in regard to all Of-
ficial details, enumerations and the like, is received as of canonical authori-
ty: itis not accessible to the general Public,—though liberally enough con-
ceded in special cases; whereby, in effect, the main results of it are now
become current in modern Prussian Books. By favour in high quarters, I
had once possession of a copy, for some months; but not, at that time, the
possibility of thoroughly reading any part of it.

Yor. V.—B

26 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
6th May 1757.

ground, and such redoubts and points of strength: but round on
their right yonder; take them in flank,—cannot we? On as
far as Kyge, the Three have ridden reconnoitring ; and found no
possibility upon the front; nor at Kyge, where the front ends in
batteries, pools and quagmires, is there any. ‘* Difficult, not un-
doable,’ persists the King: “and it must be straightway set
about, and got done.” Winterfeld, always for action, is of that
opinion, too; and, examining farther down along i right
flank, reports that there the thing is feasible. .
Feasible perhaps: “ but straightway?” objects Schwerin. His
men have been on foot since midnight, and on forced marches
for days past: were it not better to rest for this one day?
‘Rest :—and Daun, coming on with 30,000 of reinforcement to
them, might arrive this night? Never, my good Feldmarschall ;”
—and as the Feldmarschall was a man of stiff notions, and had
a tongue of some emphasis, the Dialogue went on, probably with
increasing emphasis on Friedrich’s side too, till old Schwerin,
with a quite emphatic flash of countenance, crushing the hat
firm over his brow, exclaims: “ Well, your Majesty: the fresher
fish the better fish (frische Iische, gute Fische): straightway,
then !” and springs off on the gallop southward, he too, seeking
some likely point of attack. He too,—conjointly or not with
Winterfeld, I do not know; Winterfeld himself does not say;
whose own modest words, on the subject, readers shall see before
we finish. But both are mentioned in the Books as searching,
at hand-gallop, in this way: and both, once well round to south,
by the Podschernitz quarter,* with the Austrian right flank full
in view, were agreed that here the thing was possible. ‘ Infan-
try to push from this quarter towards Sterbohol yonder, and
then plunge into their redoubts and them! Cavalry may sweep
still farther southward, if found convenient, and even take them
in rear.” Both agree that it will do in this way: ground toler-
ably good, slightly downwards for us, then slightly upwards
again; tolerable for horse even:—the intermediate lacing of
dirty lakelets, the fishponds with their sluices drawn, Schwerin
and Winterfeld either did not notice at all, or thought them in-

* See Map at p. 111 a: ‘‘ Podschernitz” is pronounced Potshernitz (should
we happen to mention it again); ‘‘ Kyge,” Keega.

Cuap. IT.] BATTLE OF PRAG- 27
6th May 1757.

significant, interspersed with such beautiful “ pasture-ground,”—
of unusual verdure at this early season of the year.

The deployment, or ‘marching up (Aufmarschireny’ of the
Prussians was wonderful; in their squadrons, in their battal-
ions, horse, foot, artillery, wheeling, closing, opening; strangely
chequering a country-side,—in movements intricate, chaotic to
all but the scientific eye. Conceive them, flowing along, from
the Heights of Chaber, behind Prossik Hamlet (right wing of
infantry plants itself at Prossik, horse westward of them); and
ever onwards in. broad many-chequered tide-stream, eastward,
eastward, then southward (‘our artillery went through Pod-

_ schernitz, the foot and horse a little on this westward side of

it”): intricate, many-glancing tide of coming battle; which,
swift, correct as clockwork, becomes two lines, from Prossik to
near Chwala (‘‘ baggage well behind at Gbell’’); thence round
by Podschernitz quarter; and descends, steady, swift, tornado-
storm so beautifully hidden in it, towards Sterbohol, there to
grip-to. Gradually, in stirring up those old dead pedantic rec-
ord-books, the fact rises on us: silent whirlwinds of old Platt-
Deutsch fire, beautifully held down, dwell in those mute masses 3.
better human stuff there is not than that old Teutsch (Dutch,
English, Platt-Deutsch, and other varieties); and so disciplined
as here it never was before or since. ‘In an hour and half,”
what military men may count almost incredible, they are fairly
on their ground, motionless the most of them by 9 a.m.; the
rest wheeling rightward, as they successively arrive in the
Chwala-Podschernitz localities; and descending diligently, Ster-
bohol way; and will be at their harvest-work anon.

Meanwhile the Austrians, seeing, to their astonishment, these
phenomena to the north, and that it is a quite serious thing, do
also rapidly bestir themselves; swarming like bees ;—bringing
in their foraging Cavalry, ‘‘ No time to change your jacket for a
coat: rank, double-quick! Browne is on that right wing of
theirs: ‘‘ Bring the left wing over hither,” suggests Browne ;
‘cavalry is useless yonder, unless they had hippogriffs!”—and
(again Browne suggesting) the Austrians make a change in the
position of their right wing, both horse and foot: change which

28 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
6th May 1757.

is of vital importance, though unnoted in many Narratives of this
Battle. Seeing, namely, what the Prussians intend, they wheel
their right wing (say the last furlong or two of their long Line
of Battle) half round to right; so that the last furlong or two
stands at right angles (‘‘en potence,” gallows-wise, or joiner’s-
square-wise to the rest); and, in this way, make front to the
Prussian onslaught,—front now, not flank, as the Prussians are
anticipating. This is an important wheel to right, and forma-
tion in joiner’s-square manner; and involves no end of interior
wheeling, marching and deploying; which Austrians cannot
manage with Prussian velocity. ‘Swift with it, here about
Sterbohol at least, my men! For here are the Prussians within
wind of us!” urges Browne. And here straightway the hurri-
cane does break loose.

Winterfeld, the van of Schwerin’s infantry (Schwerin’s own
regiment, and some others, with him), is striding rapidly on
Sterbohol; Winterfeld catches it before Browne can. But near
by, behind that important post, on the Homoly Hill (Berg or
“Mountain,” nothing like so high as Constitution Mountain),
are capnon-batteries of devouring quality; which awaken on
Winterfeld, as he rushes out double-quick on the advancing
Austrians; and are fatal to Winterfeld’s attempt, and nearly
to Winterfeld himself. Winterfeld, heavily wounded, sank in
swoon from his horse; and awakening again in a pool of blood,
found his men all off, rushing back upon the main Schwerin
body ; ‘‘ Austrian grenadiers gazing on the thing, about eighty
paces off, not venturing to follow.’’ Winterfeld, half-dead, -
scrambled across to Schwerin, who is now come up with the
main body, his front line fronting the Austrians here. And
there ensued, about Sterbohol and neighbourhood, led on by
Schwerin, such a death-wrestle as was seldom seen in the An-
nals of War. Winterfeld’s miss of Sterbohol was the beginning
of it; the exact course of sequel none can describe, though the
end is well known.

The Austrians now hold Sterbohol with firm grip, backed by
those batteries from Homoly Hill. Redoubts, cannon-batteries,
as we said, stud all the field; the Austrian stock of artillery is
very great; arrangement of it cunning, practice excellent; does

Cuapr. II.] BATTLE OF PRAG. 29
6th May 1757.

honour to Prince Lichtenstein, and indeed is the real force of
the Austrians on this occasion. Schwerin must have Sterbohol,
in spite of batteries and ranked Austrians, and Winterfeld’s re-
coil tumbling round him:—and rarely had the oldest veteran
such a problem. Old Schwerin (fiery as ever, at the age of 73)
has been in many battles, from Blenheim onwards; and now
has got to his hottest and his last. ‘‘ Vanguard could not do
it; main body, we hope, kindling all the hotter, perhaps may !”
A most willing mind is in these Prussians of Schwerin’s: fa-
tigue of over-marching has tired the muscles of them; but their
hearts,—all witnesses say, these (and through these, their very
muscles, ‘always fresh again, after a few minutes of breathing
time”) were beyond comparison, this day: !

Schwerin’s Prussians, as they ‘“‘march up” (that is, as they
front and advance upon the Austrians), are everywhere saluted
by case-shot, from Homoly Hill and the batteries northward of
Homoly; but march on, this main line of them, finely regardless
of it or of Winterfeld’s disaster by it. The general Prussian
Order this day is: ‘ By push of bayonet; no firing, none, at any
rate, till you see the whites of their eyes!’ Swift, steady as on
the parade-ground, swiftly making up their gaps again, the Prus-
Sians advance, on these terms; and are now near those ‘fine
sleek pasture-grounds, unusually green for the season.” Figure
the actual stepping upon these “fine pasture-grounds :”°—mnud-
tanks, verdant with mere “bearding oat-crop’’ sown there as
carp-provender! Figure the sinking of whole regiments to the
knee; to the middle, some of them; the steady march become a
wild sprawl through viscous mud, mere case-shot singing round
you, tearing you away at its ease! Even on those terrible
terms, the Prussians, by dams, by footpaths, sometimes one man
abreast, sprawl steadily forward, trailing their cannon with
them; only a few regiments, in the footpath parts, cannot
bring their cannon. Forward; rank again, when the ground
will carry; ever forward, the case-shot getting ever more mur-
derous! No human pen can describe the deadly chaos which
ensued in that quarter. Which lasted, in desperate fury, issue
dubious, for above three hours; and was the crisis, or essential
agony, of the Battle. Foot-chargings (once the mud-transit was

30 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
6th May 1757.
accomplished), under storms of grape-shot from Homoly Hill;
by and by, Horse-chargings, Prussian against Austrian, south-
ward of Homoly and Sterbohol, still farther to the Prussian left ;
huge whirlpool of tumultuous death-wrestle, every species of
spasmodic effort, on the one side and the other ;—King himself
present there, as I dimly discover; Feldmarschall Browne emi-
nent, in the last of his fields ; and, as the old Wiebedungen has it,
“a murder grim and great”’ going on.
Schwerin’s Prussians, in that preliminary struggle through
’ the mud-tanks (which Winterfeld, I think, had happened to
skirt, and avoid), were hard bested. This, so far as I can learn,
was the worst of the chaos, this preliminary part. Intolerable
to human nature, this, or nearly so; even to human nature of
the Platt-Teutsch type, improved by Prussian drill. Winter-
feld’s repulse we saw; Schwerin’s own Regiment in it. Va-
rious repulses, I perceive, there were,—* fresh regiments from
our Second Line”’ storming in thereupon; till the poor repulsed
people “took breath,” repented, ‘‘and themselves stormed in
again,” say the Books. Fearful tugging, swagging and swaying
is conceivable, in this Sterbohol problem! And after long scan-
ning, I rather judge it was in the wake of that first repulse, and
not of some other farther on, that the veteran Schwerin himself
got his death. No one times it for us; but the fact is unforget-
table; and in the dim whirl of sequences, dimly places itself
there. Very certain it is, “at sight of his own regiment in re-
treat,’ Feldmarschall Schwerin seized the colours,—as did other
Generals, who are not named, that day. Seizes the colours, fiery
old man: “ Heran, meine Kinder (This way, my sons)!”’ and rides
ahead, along the straight dam again; his ‘‘sons” all turning, and
with hot repentance following. “On, my children, Heran/”
Five bits of grape-shot, deadly each of them, at once hit the old
man ; dead he sinks there on his flag; and will never fight more.
*‘Heran /’* storm the others with hot tears; Adjutant von Platen
takes the flag: Platen, too, is instantly shot; but another takes
it. ‘“Heran, On!” in wild storm of rage and grief:—in a word,
they managed to do the work at Sterbohol, they and the rest.
First line, Second line, Infantry, Cavalry (and even the very
Horses, I suppose), fighting inexpressibly ; conquering one of

—¢ Faw

Cuap. IL.] BATTLE OF PRAG. 31
6th May 1757. ’

the worst problems ever seen in War. For the Austrians too,
especially their grenadiers there, stood to it toughly, and fought
like men ;—and “every grenadier that survived of them,” as I
read afterwards, ‘‘ got double pay for life.”

Done, that Sterbohol work ;—those Foot-chargings, Horse-
chargings; that battery of Homoly Hill; and, hanging upon
that, all manner of redoubts and batteries to the rightward and
rearward :—but how it was done no pen can describe, nor any
intellect in clear sequence understand. An enormous mélée
there: new Prussian battalions charging, and ever new, irre-
pressible by case-shot, as they successively get up; Marshal
Browne too sending for new battalions at double-quick from
his left, disputing stiffly every inch of his ground. — Till at length
(hour not given), a cannon4shot tore away his foot; and he had
to be carried into Prag, mortally wounded. Which probably
was a most important circumstance, or the most important of
all. .

Important too, I gradually see, was that of the Prussian Horse
of the Left Wing. Prussian Horse of the extreme left, as al-
ready noticed, had, in the mean while, fallen in, well southward,
round by certain lakelets about Michelup, on Browne’s extreme
right; furiously charging the Austrian Horse, which stood rank-
ed there in many lines; breaking it, then again half broken by
it; but again rallying, charging it a second time, then a third
time, “both to front and flank, amid whirlwinds of dust’ (Zie-

then busy there, not to mention indignant Warnery and others);

—and at length, driving it wholly to the winds: ‘beyond Nus-
sel, towards the Sazawa Country ;”’ never seen again that day.
Prince Karl (after Browne’s death-wound, or before, I never
know) came galloping to rally that important Right Wing of
horse. Prince Karl did his very utmost there; obtesting, pray-
ing, raging, threatening :—but to no purpose; the Zietheners
and others so heavy on the rear of them:—and at last there
came a cramp, or intolerable twinge of spasm, through Prince
Karl’s own person (breast or heart), like to take the life of him:
so that he too had to be carried into Prag to the doctors. And
his Cavalry fled at discretion ; chased by Ziethen, on Friedrich’s
express order, and sent quite over the horizon. Enough, “ by

32 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
6th May 1757,

about half-past one,’’ Sterbohol work is thoroughly done: and
the Austrian Battle, both its Commanders gone, has heeled fair;
ly downwards, and is in an ominous way.

The whole of this Austrian Right Wing, horse and foot, bat~
teries and redoubts, which was put en potence, or square-wise, to
the main battle, is become a ruin; gone to confusion; hovers in
distracted clouds, seeking roads to run away by, which it ulti-
mately found. Done all this surely was; and poor Browne,
mortally wounded, is being carried off the ground; but in what
sequence done, under what exact vicissitudes of aspect, special
steps of cause and effect, no man can say; and only imagination,
guided by these few data, can paint to itself. Such a chaotic
whirlwind of blood, dust, mud, artillery - thunder, sulphurous
rage, and human death and victory,—who shall pretend to de-
scribe it, or draw, except in the gross, the scientific plan of it?

For, in the mean time,—I think while the dispute at Sterbo-
hol, on the extreme of the Austrian right wing “in joiner’s-
square form,” was past the hottest (but nobody will give the
hour),—there has occurred another thing, much calculated to
settle that. And, indeed, to settle everything ;—as it did. This
was a volunteer exploit, upon the very elbow or angle of said
‘‘joiner’s square ;” in the wet grounds between Hlaupetin and
Kyge, a good way north of Sterbohol. Volunteer exploit; on
the part of General Mannstein, our old Russian friend; which
Friedrich, a long way off from it, blames as a rash fault of
Mannstein’s, made good by Prince Henri and Ferdinand of
Brunswick running up to mend it; but which Winterfeld, and
subsequent good judges, admit to have been highly salutary, and
to have finished everything. It went, if I read right, somewhat
as follows.

In the Kyge-Hlaupetin quarter, at the corner of that Austrian
right wing en potence, there had, much contrary to Browne’s in-
tention, a perceptible gap occurred; the corner is open there;
nothing in it but batteries and swamps. The Austrian right
wing, wheeling southward, there to form potence; and scram-
bling and marching, then and subsequently, through such ground
at double-quick, had gone too far (had thinned and lengthened
itself, as is common, in such scrambling, and double-quick movee

Vol V pl40 a

Spl book >
Ces ERAS

SS

Mine

wove

SY QU

US 3 sae SS
BONN

Cbssen\\& \ eh Me
Dr of aya NOH I
RG? , NAR aoe
ae dy sath ¢
\\\)

&E

Ad ivi HNN
th \ '

Tyas
yyy

Ca

n

\

Taye r TW

Hee WKS. YS RSs

PSE ANAS, US SQ
Ee USS AS \ NS sy
FIN Min yj ¥\., INN Yan ti
BON pa CANT) = ANE a

BATTLE OF PRAG.

# ; 67" MAY 1757. oes ;
a.a.a.first position of dustriam Arnvy. e.e. Second position of Frusstam Army.

a.
b.8.b. Second posttion to meet the Prussian Attack.  f. Schwerins Prussians.
ce. Prusstans under Kreth. . Prusstan Horse.

a.d. First position of Prussian. Army . Marmstein's Attack.
tv. Place of Schwertn's Morament.

BATTLE OF

KOLIN.
18 June 1757.

a.a. Austytan
army.

men

—

6.6. Prusstarm
Army.
c. Ziethens
Hussars.
d. Nadastis
Hussars.

Cuap. II.] BATTLE OF PRAG. 33
6th May 1757.

ment, thinks Tempelhof), and left a little gap at elbow; which
always rather widened asthe stress at Sterbohol went on. Cer-
tain enough, a gap there is, covered only by some half-moon bat-
tery in advance; into this, General Mannstein has been looking
wistfully a long time: ‘¢ Austrian Line fallen out at elbow yon-
der; clouted by some battery in advance ?”—and at length can-
not help dashing loose on it with his Division. -A man liable to
be rash, and always too impetuous in battle-time.

He would have fared ill, thinks Friedrich, had not Henri and
Ferdinand, in pain for Mannstein (some think, privately in pre-
concert with him), hastened in to help; and done it altogether
in a shining way; surmounting perilous difficulties not a few.
Hard fighting in that corner, partly on the Sterbohol terms; bat-
teries, mud-tanks ; chargings, rechargings: ‘‘ Comrades, you have
got honour enough, Kameraden, thr habt Ehre genug’ (the second
man of you lying dead); ‘let us now try!” said a certain Regi-
ment to a certain other, in this business.© Prince Henri shone
especially, the gallant little gentleman: coming upon one of
those mud-tanks with battery beyond, his men were spreading
file-wise, to cross it on the dams ; ‘‘ Bursche, this way!” cried the
Prince, and plunged in middle-deep, right upon the battery, and
over it, and victoriously took possession of it. In a word, they
all plunge forward, in a shining manner; rush on those half-
moon batteries, regardless of results; rush over them, seize and
secure them. Rush, in a word, fairly into that Austrian hole-
at-elbow, torrents more following them,—and irretrievably ruin
both fore-arm and shoulder-arm of the Austrians thereby.

Fore-arm (Austrian right wing, if still struggling and wrig-
gling about Sterbohol) is taken in flank ; shoulder-arm, or main
line, the like; we have them both in flank; with their own bat-
teries to scour them to destruction here:—the Austrian Line,
throughout, is become a ruin. Has to hurl itself rapidly ta
rightwards, to rearwards, says Tempelhof, behind what redoubts
and strong points it may have in those parts; and then, by sura
stages (Tempelhof guesses three, or perhaps four), as one redoubt
after another is torn from the loose grasp of it, and the stand
made becomes ever weaker, and the confusion worse,—to roll

5 Archenholtz, i. 75; Tempelhof, &c.
B2

34 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII.
6th May 1757.

pell-mell into Prag, and hastily close the door behind it. ‘The
Prussians, Sterbohol people, Mannstein-Henri people, left wing
and right, are quite across the Zisca Back, on by Nussel (Prince
Karl’s headquarter that was), and at the Moldau Brink again,
when the thing ends, Ziethen’s Hussars have been at Nussel,
very busy plundering there, ever since that final charge and
chase from Sterbohol. . Plundering; and, I am ashamed to say,
mostly drunk: ‘‘ Your Majesty, I cannot rank a hundred sober,”
answered Ziethen (doubtless with a kind of blush), when the
King applied for them. The King himself has got to Branik,
farther up stream. Part of the Austrian foot fled, leftwards,
southwards, as their right wing of horse had all done, up the
Moldau. About 16,000 Austrians are distractedly on flight
that way. ‘Towards the Sazawa Country; to unite with Daun,
as the now advisable thing. Near 40,000 of them are getting
crammed into Prag; in spite of Prince Karl, now recovered of
his cramp, and risen to the frantic pitch; who vainly struggles
at the Gate against such inrush, and had even got through the
Gate, conjuring and commanding, but was himself swum in
again by those panic torrents of ebb-tide.

Rallying within, he again attemped, twice over, at two differ-
ent points, to get out, and up the Moldau, with his broken peo-
ple; but the Prussians, Nussel-Branik way, were awake to him:
‘No retreat up the Moldau for you, Austrian gentlemen !”
They tried by another Gate, on the other side of the River; but
Keith was awake too: “In again, ye Austrian gentlemen !
Closed gates here too. What else?” Browne, from his bed of
pain (death-bed, as it proved), was for a much more determined
outrush : ‘In the dead of night, rank, deliberately adjust your-
selves; storm out, one and all, and cut your way, night favour-
ing!” ‘That was Browne’s last counsel; but that also was not
taken. A really noble Browne, say all judges; died here in
about six weeks,—and got away from Kriegs-Hofraths and
Prince Karls, and the stupidity of neighbours, and the other ills.
that flesh is heir to, altogether.

At Branik the victorious King had one great disappointment :
Prince Moritz of Dessau, who should have been here long hours
ago, with Keith’s right wing, a fresh 15,000, to fall upon the en-

Cuap. II. ] BATTLE OF PRAG. 35
6th May 1757.

emy’s rear ;—no Moritz visible; not even now, when the busi-
ness is to chase! ‘‘ How is this?” ‘Ill luck, your Majesty !”
Moritz’s Pontoon Bridge would not reach across, when he tried
it. That is certain: ‘just three poor pontoons wanting,” Ru-
mour says:—three or more; spoiled, I am told, in some narrow
road, some short cut which Moritz had commanded for them:
and now they are not; and it is as if three hundred had been
spoiled. Moritz, would he die for it, cannot get his Bridge to
reach: his fresh 15,000 stand futile there; not even Seidlitz
with his light horse could really swim across, though he tried
hard, and is fabled to have done so. Beware of short cuts, my
Prince: your father that is gone, what would he say of you
here! It was the worst mistake Prince Moritz ever made.
The Austrian Army might have been annihilated, say judges (of
a sanguine temper), had Moritz been ready, at his hour, to fall
on from rearward ;—and where had their retreat been? As it
is, the Austrian Army is not annihilated; only bottled into
Prag, and will need sieging. The brightest triumph has a bar
of black in it, and might always have been brighter. Here is a
flying Note, which I will subjoin:

“‘ Friedrich’s dispositions for the Battle, this day, are allowed to have
been masterly ; but there was one signal fault, thinks Retzow: That he
did not, as Schwerin counselled, wait till the morrow. Fault which
brought many in the train of it; that of his ‘tired soldiers,’ says Ret-
zow, being only a first item, and small in comparison. § Had he waited
till the morrow, those fish-ponds of Sterbohol, examined in the interim,
need not have been mistaken for green meadows; Prince Moritz, with
his 15,000, would have been a fact, instead of a false hope ; the King
might have done his marching down upon Sterbohol in the night-time,
and been ready for the Austrians, flank, or even rear, at daybreak: the
King might’—In reality, this fault seems to have been considerable; to
have made the victory far more costly to him, and far less complete.
No doubt he had his reasons for making haste: Daun, advancing Prag-
ward, with 30,000, was within three marches of him; General Beck,
Daun’s vanguard, with a 10,000 of irregulars, did a kind of feat at Bran-
deis, on the Prussian post there (our Saxons deserting to him, in the
heat of action), this very day, May 6th; and might, if lucky, have taken
part at Ziscaberg next day. And besides these solid reasons, there
was perhaps another. Retzow, who is secretly of the Opposition-party,
and well worth hearing, knows personally a curious thing. He says:

36 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
6th May 1757.
- “© Being then’ (in March or April, weeks before we left Saxony) ‘ em-
ployed to translate the Plan of Operations into French, for Marshai
Keith’s use, who did not understand German, I well know that it con-
tained the following three main objects: 1°. “All Regiments cantoning
in Silesia as well as Saxony march for Bohemia on one and the same
day. 2°. Whole Army arrives at Prag, May 4th” (Schwerin was a day
later, and got scolded in consequence) ; “if the Enemy stand, he is at-
tacked, May 6th, and beaten. 3°. So soon as Prag is got, Schwerin,
with the gross of the Army, pushes into Mahren,” and the heart of Aus-
tria itself; ‘‘ King hastens with 40,000 to help of the Allied Army,” ’"—
Royal Highness of Cumberland’s; who will much need it by that
time !°

** Here is a very curious fact and consideration, ‘That the King had
so prophesied and preordained: ‘ May 4th, Four Columns arrive at
Prag; May 6th, attack the Austrians, beat them,’-—and now wished to
keep his word! ‘This is an aerial reason, which I can suspect to have
had its weight among others. ‘There were twirls of that kind in Fried-
rich ; intricate weak places; knots in the sound straight-fibred mind he
had (as in whose mind are they not ?),—which now and then cost him
dear! The Anecdote-Books say he was very ill of body, that day, May
6th; and called for something of drug-nature, and swallowed it (drug
not named), after getting on horseback. ‘The Evening Anecdote is
prettier: How, in the rushing about, Austrians now flying, he got eye
on Brother Henri” (clayey to a degree; ‘and sat down with him, in the
blessed sunset, for a minute or two, and bewailed his sad losses of
Schwerin and others.

“‘ Certain it is, the victory was bought by hard fighting ; and but for
the quality of his troops, had not been there. But the bravery of the
Prussians was exemplary, and covered all mistakes that were made.
Nobler fire, when did it burn in any Army? More perfect soldiers I
have not read of. Platt-T'eutsch fire,—which | liken to anthracite, in
contradistinction to Gaelic blaze of kindled straw,—is thrice noble,
when, by strict ‘stern discipline, you are above it withal; and wield
your fire-element, as Jove his thunder, by rule! Otherwise it is but
half-admirable : Turk Janissaries have it otherwise; and it comes to
comparatively little.”

This is the famed Battle of Prag; fought, May 6th, 1757;
which sounded through all the world,—and used to deafen us
in drawing-rooms within man’s memory. Results of it were:
On the Prussian side, killed, wounded and missing, 12,500 men;
on the Austrian, 18,300 (prisoners included), with many flags,

® Retzow, i. 84 n.

Cuap. II.] - BATTLE OF PRAG. 37
6th May 1757.

cannon, tents, much war-gear gone the wrong road;—and a
very great humiliation and dispiritment ; though they had fought
well: ‘No longer the old Austrians, by any means,” as Fried-
rich sees; but have iron ramrods, all manner of Prussian im-
provements, and are “learning to march,” as he once says, with
surprise not quite pleasant !

Friedrich gives the cipher of loss, on both sides, much higher :
“This Battle,” says he, ‘‘ which began towards nine in the morn-
ing, and lasted, chase included, till eight at night, was one of the
bloodiest of the age. ‘The Enemy lost 24,000 men, of whom
were 5,000 prisoners; the Prussian loss amounted to 18,000
fighting men,—without counting Marshal Schwerin, who alone
was worth above 10,000.” ‘This day saw the pillars of the
Prussian Infantry cut down,” says he mournfully, seeming al-
most to think the ‘laurels of. victory” were purchased too dear.
His account of the Battle, as if it had been a painful object, rath.
er avoided in his after thoughts, is unusually indistinct ;—and
helps us little in the extreme confusion that reigns otherwise,
both in the thing itself and in the reporters of the thing. Here
is a word from Winterfeld, some private Letter, two days after ;
which is well worth reading for those who would understand this.
Battle.

*'The Enemy had his Left Wing leaning on the City, close by the
Moldau,” at Nussel; “and stretched with his Right Wing across the
high Hill” (of Zisca) “to the village of Lieben” (so he Aad stood, look-
ing into Prag; but faced about, on hearing that Friedrich was across
the River) ; “‘ having before him those terrible Defiles” (dve terradlen
Defilées, “* Horse-shoe of the Moldau,” as we call it), “and the Village
of Prossik, which was crammed with Pandours. It was about half-past
six in the morning, when our Schwerin Army” (myself part of it, at
this time) “joined with the twenty battalions and twenty squadrons,
which the King had brought across to unite with us, and which formed
our right wing of battle that day” (our left wing were Schweriners,
Sterbohol and the fighting done by Schweriners after their long march).
“The King was at once determined to attack the Enemy ; as also were
Schwerin” (say nothing of the arguing) “and your humble servant
(meine Wenigkert): but the first thing was, to find a hole whereby to
get at him.

“This too was selected, and decided on, my proposal being found
good; and took effect in manner following: We” (Schweriners) ‘ had

38 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

6th May 1757,
marched off left-wise, foremost; and we now, without halt, continued
marching so with the Left Wing” of horse, ‘ which had the van (¢éte) ;
and moved on, keeping the road for Hlaupetin, and ever thence onwards
along for Kyge, round the Ponds of Unter-Podschernitz, without need-
ing to pass these, and so as to get them in our rear.

““The Enemy, who at first had expected nothing bad, and never sup- -
posed that we would attack him at once, flagrante delicto, and least of
all in this point; and did not believe it possible, as we should have to
wade, breast-deep in part, through the ditches, and drag our cannon,—
was at first quite tranquil. But as he began to perceive our real design
{in which, they say, Prince Karl was the first to open Marshal Browne’s
eyes), he drew his whole Cavalry over towards us, as fast as it could be
done, and stretched them out as Right Wing; to complete which, his
Grenadiers and Hungarian Regulars of Foot ranked themselves as they
got up” (makes his potence, Haken, or joiner’s-square, outmost end of
it Horse).

“The Enemy’s intention was to hold with the Right Wing of his in-
fantry on the Farmstead which they call Sterbaholy” (Sterbohol, a very
dirty Farmstead at this day) ; ‘I, however, had the good luck, plunging
on, head foremost, with six battalions of our Left Wing and two of the
Flank, to get to it before him. Although our Second Line was not yet
come forward, yet, as the battalions of the First were tolerably well to-
gether, I decided, with General Fouquet, who had charge of the Flank,
to begin at once; and, that the Enemy might not have time to post
himself still better, I pushed forward, quick step, out of the Farmstead”
of Sterbohol “to meet him,—so fast, that even our cannon had not time
to follow. He did, accordingly, begin to waver; and I could observe
that his people here, on this Wing, were making right-about.

“Meanwhile, his fire of case-shot opened” (from Homoly Hill, on
our left), “and we were still pushing on,—might now be about two
hundred steps from the Enemy’s Line, when I had the misfortune, at
the head of Regiment Schwerin, to get wounded, and, swooning away
(vor Tod), fell from my horse to the ground. Awakening after some
minutes, and raising my head to look about, I found nobody of our peo-
ple now here beside or round me, but all were already,behind, in full
flood of retreat (hoch Anschlagen). The Enemy’s Grenadiers were
perhaps eighty paces from me; but had halted, and had not the confi-
dence to follow us. I struggled to my feet, as fast as, for weakness, I
possibly could; and got up to our confused mass” (confusen Klumpen,
—exact place, where?): “but could not, by entreaties or by threats,
persuade a single man of them to turn his face on the Enemy, much
less ‘to halt and try again.

“Tn this embarrassment the deceased Feldmarschall found me, and

Cuar. IL] BATTLE OF PRAG. 39
6th May 1757.

noticed that the blood was flowing stream-wise from my neck. As I
was on foot, and none of my people now near, he bade give me his led
horse which he still had’—(and sent me home for surgery? Winter-
feld, handsomely effacing himself when no longer good for anything,
hurries on to the Catastrophe, leaving us to guess that he was not an
eye-witness farther) —“ bade give me the led horse which he still had ;
and” (as if that had happened directly after, which surely it did not?
_“and) snatched the Flag from Captam Rohr, who had taken it up to
make the Bursche turn, and rode forward with it himself. But before
he could succeed in the attempt, this excellent man, almost in a minute,
was hit with five case-shot balls, and fell dead on the ground; as also
his brave Adjutant von Platen was so wounded that he died next day.

“ During this confusion and repulse, by which, as already mentioned,
the Enemy had not the heart to profit, not only was our Second Line
come on, but those of the First, who had not suffered, went vigorously
(frisch) at the Enemy,’—and in course of time (perhaps two hours
yet), and by dint of effort, we did manage Sterbohol and its batteries :—
“‘ Like as” (still in one sentence, and without the least punctuation;
Winterfeld being little of a grammarian, and in haste for the close),
‘Like as Prince Henri’s Royal Highness with our Right Wing,” Mann-
stein and he, “ without waiting for order, attacked so prompt and with
such fermete,” in that elbow-hole far north of us, ‘‘ that everywhere the
Enemy's Line began to give way ;,and instead of continuing as Line,
sought corps-wise to gain the Heights, and there post itself. And as,
without winning said Heights, we could not win the Battle, we had to
storm them all, one after the other; and this it was that cost us the
best, most, and bravest people.

“The late Colonel von Goltz” (if we glance back to Sterbohol itself ),
“who, with the regiment Fouquet, was advancing, right-hand of Schwer-
in regiment” and your servant, “ had likewise got quite close to the En-
emy ; and had he not, at the very instant when he was levelling bayo-
nets, been shot down, I think that he, with myself and the Schwerin reg-
iment, would have got in,’—and perhaps have there done the job, spe-
cial and general, with much less expense, and sooner !’

This is what we get from Winterfeld; a rugged, not much
grammatical man, but (as I can perceive) with excellent eyes in
his head, and interior talent for twenty grammatical people, had
that been his line. These, faithfully rendered here, without
change but of pointing, are the only words I ever saw of his:
to my regret,—which surely the Prussian Dryasdust might still

7 Preuss, ii. 45-47 (in Winterfeld’s hand; dated, ‘‘Camp at Prag, 8th
May 1757;” addressed to one knows not whom; first printed by Preuss).

40 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

~ 6th May 1757.
amend a little?—in respect of so distinguished a person, and
chosen Peer of Friedrich’s. This his brief theory of Prag Bat-
tle, if intensely read, I find to be of a piece with his practice
there.

Schwerin was much lamented in the Army; and has been
duly honoured ever since. His body lies in Schwerinsburg, at
home, far away ; his Monument, finale of a series of Monuments, —
stands, now under special guardianship, near Sterbohol on the
spot where he fell. A late Tourist says:

** At first there was a monument of wood” (tree planted, I will hope),
* which is now all gone; round this Kaiser Joseph II. once, in the year
1776, holding some review there, made his grenadier battalions and ar-
tilleries form circle, fronting the sky all round, and give three volleys
of great arms and small, Kaiser in the centre doffing hat at each vol-
ley, in honour of the hero. Which was thought a very pretty thing on
the Kaiser’s part. In 1824, the tree, suppose, being gone to a stump,
certain subscribing Prussian Officers had it rooted out, and a modest
Pyramid of red veined marble built in its room. Which latter the then
King of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm III., determined to improve upon;
and so, in 1839, built a second Pyramid close by, bigger, finer, and of
Prussian iron, this one ;—purchasing also, from the Austrian Govern-
ment, a rood or two of ground for site; and appointing some perpetual
Peculium, or increase of Pension to an Austrian Veteran of merit for
taking charge there. All which, perfectly in order, is in its place at
this day. The actual Austrian Pensioner of merit is a loud-voiced,
hard-faced, very limited, but honest little fellow; who has worked a
little polygon ditch and miniature hedge round the two Monuments;
keeps his own cottage, little garden, and self, respectably clean; and
leads stoically a lone life-—no company, I should think, but the Sterbo-
hol hinds, who probably are Czechs and cannot speak to him. He was
once ‘of the regiment Hohenlohe;’ suffers somewhat from cold, in
the winter time, in those upland parts (the ‘ cords of wood’ allowed him
being limited); but complains of nothing else. Two English names
were in his Album, a military two, and no more. ‘ Hhret den Held
(Honour the Hero)!’ we said to him, at parting. ‘Don’t I? answered
he; glancing at his muddy bare legs and little spade, with which he
had been working in the Polygon Ditch when we arrived. I could
wish him an additional ‘ Klafter Holz’ (cord more of firewood), now
and then, in the cold months !—
- “© Sterbohol Farmstead has been new-built, in man’s memory, but is

Cuap.III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 41
- 9th May—13th June 1757.
dirty as ever. Agriculture, all over this table-land of the Ziscaberg, I
should judge to be bad. Not so the prospect, which is cheerfully ex-
tensive, picturesque in parts, and to the student of Friedrich offers good
commentary. Roads, mansions, villages: Prossik, Kyge, Podscher-
nitz, from the Heights of Chaber round to Nussel and beyond: from
~ any knoll, all Friedrich’s Villages, and many more, lie round you as ou
a map,—their dirt all hidden, nothing wanting to the landscape, were it
better carpeted with green (green instead of russet), and shaded here
and there with wood. A small wild pink, bright red, and of the size of
a star, grows extensively about; of which you are tempted to pluck
specimens, as memorial of a Field so famous in War.”

CHAPTER III.
PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE.

Wuat Friedrich’s emotions after the Battle of Prag were, we
do not much know. ‘They are not inconceivable, if we read his
situation well; but in the way of speech, there is, as usual, next
to nothing. Here are two stray utterances, worth gathering
from a man so uncommunicative in that form.

Friedrich a Month before Prag (From Lockwitz, 25th March, to
Princess Amelia, at Berlin).—‘* My dearest Sister, I give you a thou-
sand thanks for the hints you have got me from Dr. Eller on the illness
of our dear Mother. Thrice welcome this; and reassures me” (alas,
not on good basis!) ‘‘ against a misfortune which I should have consid-
ered very great for me.

‘“‘ As to us and our posture of affairs, political and military,—place
yourself, I conjure you, above every event. Think of our Country;
and remember that one’s first duty is to defend it. If you learn that a
misfortune happens to one of us, ask, ‘ Did he die fighting ? and if Yes,
give thanks to God. Victory or else death, there is nothing else for
us; one or the other we must have. All the world here is of that tem-
per. What! you would have everybody sacrifice his life for the State,
and you would not have your Brothers give the example? Ah, my
dear Sister, at this crisis, there is no room for bargaining. Either at
the summit of glorious success, or else abolished altogether. This
Campaign now coming is like that of Pharsalia for Rome, or that of
Leuctra for the Greeks”—a Campaign we verily shall have to win, or
go to wreck upon!?

® Tourist’s Note (September 1858). 1 Quvres de Frédéric, xxvii.1. 391.

42 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
9th May—13th June 1757, .

Friedrich shortly after Prag (To his Mother, Letter still extant in
Autograph, without date).—‘‘ My Brothers and I are still well. The
whole Campaign runs risk of being lost to the Austrians; and I find
myself free, with 150,000 men. Add to this that we are masters ofa -
Kingdom” (Bohemia here), “ which is obliged to furnish us with troops
and money. The Austrians are dispersed like straw before the wind. ~
I will send a part of my troops to compliment Messieurs the French ;
and am going” (if I once had Prag!) ‘‘ to pursue the Austrians with the
rest of my Army.”?

Friedrich, who keeps his emotions generally to himself, does
not, as will be seen, remain quite silent to us throughout this
great Year; but, by accident, has left us some rather impressive
gleanings in that kind; and certainly in no year could such
accident have been luckier to us; this of 1757 being, in several
respects, the greatest of his Life. From nearly the topmost
heights down to the lowest deeps, his fortunes oscillated this
year; and probably, of all the sons of Adam, nobody’s outlooks
and reflexions had in them, successive and simultaneous, more
gigantic forms of fear and of hope. He is on a very high peak
at this moment; suddenly emerging from his thick cloud, into
thunderous victory of that kind; and warning all Pythons what
they get by meddling with the Sungod! Loud enough, far-
clanging, is the sound of the silver bow; gazetteers and men all
on pause at such new Pheebus Apollo risen in his wrath ;—the
Victory at Prag considered to be much more annihilative than
it really was. At London, Lord Holderness had his 'Tower-guns
in readiness, waiting for something of the kind; and “the joy
of the people was frantic.”

Very dominant, our ‘‘ Protestant Champion” yonder, on his
Ziscaberg ; bidding the enormous Pompadour-Theresa combina-
tions, the French, Austrian, Swedish, Russian populations and
dread sovereigns, check their proud waves, and hold at mid-
flood. It is thought, had he in effect “ annihilated” the Austrian

2 (Luvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 75.

3 Mitchell Papers and Memoirs (i. e. the Printed Selection, 2 voll., Lon-
don, 1850 ;—which will be the oftenest cited by us, ‘‘ Papers and Memoirs’),
i. 249: ‘‘ Holderness to Mitchell, 20th May 1757.” Mitchell is now at-
tending Friedrich; his Letter from Keith’s Camp, during the thunder of
“ Friday, May 6th,” is given, ib. i. 248.

Cuap.III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 43
9th May—13th June 1757.

force at Prag, that day (Friday, 6th May, as he might have done
_ by waiting till Saturday 7th), he could then, with the due rapid-
ity, rapidity being indispensable in the affair, have become mas-
ter of Prag, which meant of Bohemia altogether; and have
stormed forward, as his program bore, into the heart of an Aus-
‘ tria still terror-stricken, unrallied ;—in which case, it is calcu-
lated, the French, the Russians, Swedes, much more the Reich
and such like, would all have drawn bridle; and Austria itself
have condescended to make Peace with a Neighbour of such
quality, and consent to his really modest desire of being let
alone! Possible, all this,—think Retzow and others. But
the King had not waited till to-morrow ; no persuasion could
make him wait: and it is idle speculating on the small turns
which here, as everywhere, can produce such deflections of
course.

Beyond question, Prag is not captured, and may, as now gar-
risoned, require a great deal of capturing :—and perhaps it is but
a peak, this high dominancy of Friedrich’s, not a solid table-land,
till much more have been done! Friedrich has nothing of the
Gascon: but there may well be conceivable at this time a cer-
tain glow of internal pride, like that of Phoebus amid the piled
tempests,—like that of the One Man prevailing, if but for a
short. season, against the Devil and All Men: ‘I have made
good my bit of resolution so far: here are the Austrians beaten
at the set day, and Prag summoned to surrender, as per pro-
gram !”’—

Intrinsically, Prag is not a strong City: we have seen it taken
in few days; in one night ;—and again, as in Belleisle’s, time,
we have seen it making tough defence for a series of weeks. It
depends on the garrison, what extent of garrison (the circuit of
it being so immense), and what height of humour. There are
now 46,000 men caged in it, known to have considerable maga-
zines; and Friedrich, aware that it will cost trouble, bends all
his strength upon it, and from his two camps, Ziscaberg, Weis-
senberg, due Bridges uniting, Keith and he batter it violently,
aiming chiefly at the Magazines (which are not all bomb-proof) ;
and hope they may succeed before it is too late.

4 See Retzow, i. 100-108; &e.

44 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
9th May—13th June 1757.

The Vienna people are in the depths of amazement and dis-
couragement; almost of terror, had it not been for a few, or es-
pecially for one high heart among them. Feldmarschall Daun,
on the news of May Gth, hastily fell back, joined by the wrecks
of the right wing, which fled Sazawa way. Brunswick-Bevern,
with a 20,000, is detached to look after Daun; finds Daun still °
on the retreat; greedily collecting reinforcements from the home-
ward quarter; and hanging back, though now double or so of
Bevern’s strength. Amazement and discouragement are the
general feeling among Friedrich’s enemies. Notable to see how
the whole hostile world marching in upon him,—French, Rus-
sians, much more the Reich, poor faltering entity,—pauses, as
with its breath taken away, at news of Prag; and, arrested on
the sudden, with lifted foot, ceases to stride forward; and mere-
ly tramp-tramps on the same place (nay in part, in the Reich
part, visibly tramps backward), for above a month ensuing!
Who knows whether, practically, any of them will come on ;°
and not leave Austria by itself to do the duel with Friedrich ?
If Prag were but got, and the 46,000 well locked away, it would
be very salutary for Friedrich’s affairs !—Week after week, the
City holds out; and there seems no hope of it, except by hunger,
and burning their Magazines by red-hot balls.

Colonel Mayer with his “ Free-Corps” Party makes a Visit,
of didactic Nature, to the Reich.

Friedrich, as we saw, on entering Bohmen, had shot off a
Light Detachment under Colonel Mayer, southward, to seize any
Austrian Magazines there were, especially one big Magazine at
Pilsen :—which Mayer has handsomely done, May 2d (Pilsen
‘a bigger Magazine than Jung-Buntzlau, even’); after which
Mayer is now off westward, into the Ober-Pfalz, into the Niirn-
berg Countries; to teach the Reich a small lesson, since they
will not listen to Plotho. Prag Battle, as happens, had already
much chilled the ardour of the Reich! Mayer has two Free-
Corps, his own and another; about 1,300 of foot; to which are
added a 200 of hussars. They have 5 cannon, carry otherwise

> See Correspondance du Comte de Saint-Germain, an Eye-witness, i. 108
(cited in Preuss, ii. 50); &e. &e.

_
4

a

~Cuap.III.]  PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE, 45

9th May—13th June 1757.

a minimum of baggage; are swift wild fellows, sharp of stroke;
and do, for the time, prove didactic to the Reich ; bringing home
to its very bosom the late great lesson of the Ziscaberg, in an ap-
plied form. Mayer made a pretty course of it, into the Ober-
Pfalz Countries; scattering the poor Execution Drill-Sergeants
and incipiencies of preparation, the deliberative County Meet-
ings, Kreis-Convents: ransoming Cities, Niirnberg for one city,
whose cries went to Friedrich on the Ziscaberg, and wide over
the world. Nirnberg would have been but too happy to “ re-
fuse its contingent to the Reich’s Army,” as many others would
have been (poor Kur-Baiern hurrying off a kind of Embassy to
Friedrich, great terror reigning among the wigs of Regensburg,
and everybody drawing back that could),—had not Imperial
menaces, and an Event that fell out by and by in Prag Country,
forced compliance.

Mayer’s Expedition made a loud noise in the Newspapers ;
and was truly of a shining nature in its kind; very perfectly
managed on Mayer’s part, and has traits in it which are amusing
to read, had onetime. Take one small glance from Pauli:

“ At Fiirth in Anspach, Ist June” (after six-days screwing of Niirn-
berg from without, which we had no cannon to take), “a Gratuity for
the Prussian troops” (amount not stated) “was demanded and given:
at Schwabach, farther up the Regnitz River, they took quarters; no ex-
emption made, clergy and laity alike getting soldiers billeted. Meat and
drink had to be given them; as also 100 carolines” (guineas and bet-
ter), ‘and twenty new uniforms. Upon which, next day, they marched
to Zirndorf, and the Reichsgraf Piickler’s Mansion, the Schloss of Far-
renbach there. Mayer took quarter in the Schloss itself. Here the
noble owners got up a ball for Mayer’s entertainment; and did all they
could contrive to induce a light treatment from him.” Figure it, the
neighbouring nobility and gentry in gala; Mayer too in his best uni-
form, and smiling politely, with those “ bright little black eyes” of his!
For he was a brilliant airy kind of fellow, and had much of the cheva-
lier, as well as of the partisan, when requisite!

“ Out of Farrenbach, the Mayer people circulated upon all the neigh-
bouring Lordships ; at Wilhermsdorf, the Reichs-Fiirst von Hohenlohe”

®° In Helden-Geschichte, iv. 360-367, the Niirnberg Letter and Response
(31st May—5th June 1757): in Pauli, Leben grosser Helden (iii. 159 et seq.),
Account of the Mayer Expedition; also in Militair-Lexikon, iii.29 (quoting
from Pauli).

46 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII.

9th May—13th June 1757.
(a too-busy Anti-Prussian) “had the worst brunt to bear. The adja-
cent Baireuth lands” (dear Wilhelmina, fancy her too in such neigh-
bourhood !) “‘ were to the utmost spared all billeting, and even all tran-
sit,”—though wandering sergeants of the Reich’s Force, “ one sergeant
with the Wiirzburg Herr Commissarius and eight common men, did get
picked up on Bayreuth ground: and this or the other Anspach Official
(Anspach being disaffected), too busy on the wrong side, found himself,
suddenly Prisoner of War; but was given up, at Wilhelmina’s gracious
request. On Bamberg he was sharp as flint; and had to be; the Bam-
bergers, reinforced at last by ‘ Circle-Militias (Krets-truppen)’ in quan-
tity, being called out in mass against him; and at Vach, an actual Pas-
sage of Fight had occurred.”

Of the “ Affair at Vach,” pretty little Drawn-Battle (mostly
an affair of art), Mayer versus * Kreis-troops to the amount of
6,000, with twelve cannon, or some say twenty-four” (which
they couldn’t handle); and how Mayer cunningly took a posi-
tion unassailable, ‘burnt Bridges of the Regnitz River,” and,
plying his five cannon against these ardent awkward people,
stood cheerful on the other side; and then at last, in good time,
whisked himself off to the Hill of Culmbach, with all his bag-
gage, inexpugnable there for three days :—of all this, though it
is set down at full length, we can say nothing.” And will add
only that, having girt himself and made his packages, Mayer left
the Hill of Culmbach; and deliberately wended home, by Co-
burg and other Countries where he had business, eating his way;
and early in July was safe in the Metal Mountains again, hav-
ing fluttered the Volscians in their Frankenland Corioli to an
unexpected extent. It is one of five or six such sallies Fried-
rich made upon the Reich, sometimes upon the Austrians and
Reich together, to tumble up their magazines and preparations.
Rapid unexpected inroads, year after year; done chiefly by the
Free-Corps; and famous enough to the then Gazetteers. Of
which, or of their doers, as we can in time coming afford little
or no notice, let us add this small Note on the Free-Corps topic,
which is a lanes one in the Books, but must not intercunt us
again :

“‘ Before this War was done,” say my Authorities, ‘ there came grad-

7 Pauli, iii. 159, &c. (who. gives Mayer’s own Leiter, and agen) wy hs
Vach).

Cuar. ILI. ] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 47
9th May—13th June 1757.

ually to be twenty-one Prussian Free-Corps,”"—foot almost all; there
being already Hussars in quantity, ever since the first Silesian expe-
riences. ‘‘ Notable Aggregates they were of loose wandering fellows,
broken Saxons, Prussians, French; *‘ Hungarian-Protestant’ some of
them,‘ Deserters from all the Armies’ not a few; attracted by the fame
of Friedrich,—as the Colonels enlisting them had been; Mayer him-
self, for instance, was by birth a Vienna man; and had been in many
services and wars, from his fifteenth year and onwards. Most miscel-
laneous, these Prussian Free-Corps ; a swift faculty the indispensable
thing, by no means a particular character: but well-disciplined, well-
captained ; who generally managed their work well.

“They were, by origin, of Anti-Tolpatch nature, got up on the dia-
mond-cut-diamond principle ; they stole a good deal, with order some-
times, and oftener without; but there was nothing of the old Mentzel-
Trenck atrocity permitted them, or ever imputed to them; and they
did, usually with good military talent, sometimes conspicuously good,
what was required of them. Regular Generals, of a high merit, one or
two of their Captains came to be: Wunsch, for example; Werner, in
some sort; and, but for his sudden death, this Mayer himself. Others
of them, as Von Hordt (Hard is his Swedish name); and ‘ Quintus
Icilius’ (by nature, Guichard, of whom we shall hear a great deal in
the Friedrich circle by and by), are distinguished as honourably intel-
lectual and cultivated persons.®

** Poor Mayer died within two years hence (5th January 1759); of
fever, caught by unheard-of exertions and over-fatigues; after many
exploits, and with the highest prospects opening on him. A man of
many adventures, of many qualities; a wild dash of chivalry in him all
along, and much military and other talent crossed in the growing. In
the dull old Books, I read one other fact which is vivid to me, That
Wilhelmina, as sequel of those first F'ranconian exploits and procedures,
‘had given him her Order of Knighthood, Order of Sincerity and Fi-
delity, ” — poor dear Princess, what an interest to Wilhelmina, this
flash of her Brother’s thunder thrown into those Franconia parts, and
across her own pungent anxieties and sorrowfully affectionate thoughts,
in those weeks !—

Shortly after Mayer, about the time when Mayer was wending
homeward, General von Oldenburg, a very valiant punctual old

8 Count de Hordt’s Memoirs (autobiographical, or in the first-person :
English Translation, London, 1806; two French Originals, a worse in 1789,
and a better now at last), Preface, i.-xii.. In Helden-Geschichte, v. 102-
104, 93, a detailed ‘“ List of the Free-Corps in 1758” (twelve of foot, two of
horse, at that time): see Preuss, ii. 372 n. ; Pauli(ubi supra), Life ef Mayer.

48 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII
9th May—13th June 1757.

General, was pushed out westward upon Erfurt, a City of Kur-

-Mainz’s, to give Kur-Mainz a similar monition. And did it
handsomely, impressively upon the Gazetteer world at least and
the Erfurt populations,—though we can afford it no room in
this place. Oldenburg’s force was but some 2,000; Pirna Sax-
ons most of them:—such a winter Oldenburg has had with
these Saxons; bursting out into actual musketry upon him
once; Oldenburg, volcanically steady, summoning the Prussian
part, “To me, true Prussian Bursche !”—and hanging nine of
the mutinous Saxons. And has coerced and compesced them
(all that did not contrive to desert) into soldierly obedience ;
and, 20th June, appears at the Gate of Erfurt with them, to do
his delicate errand there. Sharply conclusive, though polite
and punctual. ‘Send to Kur-Mainz, say you? Well, as to
your Citadel, and those 1,400 soldiers all moving peaceably off
thither,—Yes. As to your City: within one hour, Gate open
to us, or we open it!’9 And Oldenburg marches in, as vice-
sovereign for the time :—but, indeed, has soon to leave again ;
owing to what Event in the distance, will be seen!

If Prag Siege go well, these Mayer-Oldenburg expeditions
will have an effect on the Reich: but if it go ill, what are they,
against Austria with its force of steady pressure? All turns
on the issue of Prag Siege :—a fact extremely evident to Fried-
rich too! But these are what in the interim can be done. One
neglects no opportunity, tries by every method.

Of the singular quasi-bewitched Condition of England ; and
what ts to be hoped from tt, for the Common Cause, of Prag
go amiss.

On the Britannic side too, the outlooks are not good ;—much
need Friedrich were through his Preg affair, and “hastening
with forty thousand to help his Allies,”—that is, Royal High-
ness of Cumberland and Britannic Purse, his only allies at this
moment. Royal Highness and Army of Observation (should
have been 67,000, are 50 to 60,000, hired Germans; troops

° In Helden-Geschichte (v. 371-3884), copious Account, with the Missives
to and from, the Reichs-Pleadings that followed, the &c. &e. Militair-Lex-
ikon, § Oldenburg.

Cuap.III.] = PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 49
9th May—18th June 1757.

good enough, were they tolerably led) finds the Hanover Program
as bad as Schmettau and Friedrich ever represented it; and,
already, — unless Prag go well, — wears, to the understanding
eye, a very contingent aspect. D’Estrées outnumbers him;
D’Estrées, too, is something of a soldier,—a very considerable
advantage in affairs of war.

D’Estrées, since April, is in Wesel; gathering in the reve-
nues, changing the Officialities: much out of discipline, they
say ;—“‘ hanging” gradually “‘ 1,000 marauders ;” in round num-
bers 1,000 this year.!° D’Estrées does not yet push forward,
owing to Prag. If he do—It is well known how Royal High-
ness fared when he did, and what a Campaign Royal Highness
made of it this Year 1757! How the Weser did prove wadea-
ble, as Schmettau had said to no purpose; wadeable, bridgea-
ble; and Royal Highness had to wriggle back, ever back; no
stand to be made, or far worse than none: back, ever back, till
he got into the Sea, for that matter, and to the end of more than
one thing! Poor man, friends say he has an incurable Hanover
Ministry, a Program that is inexecutable. As yet he has not
lost head, any head he ever had: but he is wonderful, he ;—and
his England is! We shall have to look at him once again; and
happily once only. Here, from my Constitutional Historian,
are some Passages which we may as well read in the present in-
terim of expectation. I label, and try to arrange:

1. England in Crisis. ‘ England is indignant with its Hero of Cul-
loden and his Campaign 1757; but really has no business to complain.
Royal Highness of Cumberland, wriggling helplessly in that manner, is
a fair representative of the England that now is. For years back, there
has been, in regard to.all things Foreign or Domestic, in that Country,
by way of National action, the miserablest haggling as to which of va-
rious little-competent persons shall act for the Nation. A melancholy
condition indeed !—

“ But the fact is, his Grace of Newcastle, ever since his poor Broth-
er Pelham died (who was always a solid, loyal kind of man, though a
dull; and had always, with patient affection, furnished his Grace, much
unsupplied otherwise, with Common-Sense hitherto), is quite insecure
in Parliament, and knows not what hand to turn to. Fox is contempt-
uous of him; Pitt entirely impatient of him; Duke of Cumberland

10 Stenzel, v. 65; Retzow, i. 173.
Vou. V.—C

50  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

9th May—13th June 1757.
(great in the glory of Culloden) is aiming to oust him, and bear rule
with his Young Nephew, the new Rising Sun, as the poor Papa and
Grandfather gets old. Even Carteret (Karl Granville, as they now
call him, a Carteret much changed since those high-soaring Worms-
Hanau times!) was applied to. But the answer was—what could the
answer be?  High-soaring Carteret, scandalously overset and hurled
out in that Hanau time, had already tried once (long ago, and with such
result!) to spring in again, and ‘ deliver his Majesty from factions ,’ and
actually had made a ‘ Granville Ministry ;’ Ministry which fell again in
one day.’' ‘To the complete disgust of Carteret-Granville ;—who, ever
since, sits ponderously dormant (kind of Fixture in the Privy Council,
this long while back); and is resigned, in a big contemptuous way, to
have had his really considerable career closed upon him by the small-
est of mankind; and, except occasional blurts of strong rugged speech
which come from him, and a good deal of wine taken into him, disdains
making further debate with the world and its elect Newcastles. Car-
teret, at this crisis, was again applied to, ‘Cannot you? In behalf of
an afflicted old King? But Carteret answered, No."

“Tn short, it is admitted and bewailed by everybody, seldom was there
seen such a Government of England (and England has seen some
strange Governments), as in these last Three Years. Chaotic Imbe-
cility reigning pretty supreme. Ruler’s Work,—policy, administration,
governance, guidance, performance in any kind,—where is it to be
found? For if even a Walpole, when his Talking-Apparatus gets out
of gear upon him, is reduced to extremities, though the stoutest of men,
—faney what it will be, in like case, and how the Acting-Apparatuses
and Affairs generally will go, with a poor hysterical Newcastle, now
when his Common-Sense is fatally withdrawn! The poor man has no
resource but to shuffle about in aimless perpetual fidget ; endeavouring
vainly to say Yes and No to all questions, Foreign and Domestic, that
may rise. Whereby, in the Affairs of England, there has, as it were,
universal St. Vitus’s-dance supervened, at an important crisis: and the
Preparations for America, and for a downright Life-and-Death Wrestle
with France on the Jenkins’s Ear-Question, are quite in a bad way.
In an ominously bad. Why cannot we draw a veil over these
things ?”—

2. Pitt, and the Hour of Tide. ‘The fidgetings and shufflings, the
subtleties, inane trickeries, and futile hitherings and thitherings of
Newcastle may be imagined: a man not incapable of trick; but anx-
ious to be well with everybody; and to answer Yes and No to almost
everything,—and not a little puzzled, poor soul, to get through, in that

11 11th February 1746” (Thackeray, Life o Chatham, i. 146).
12 Thackeray, Life of Chatham, i. 264.

Crap. III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 51
9th May—13th June 1757.
impossible way! Such a paralysis of wriggling imbecility fallen over
England, in this great crisis of its fortunes, as is still painful to con-
template: and indeed it has been mostly shaken out of mind by the
modern Englishman; who tries to laugh at it, instead of weeping and
considering, which would better beseem. Pitt speaks with a tragical
vivacity, in all ingenious dialects, lively though serious; and with a
depth of sad conviction, which is apt to be slurred over and missed al-
together by a modern reader. Speaks as if this brave English Nation
were about ended; little or no hope left for it; here a gleam of. possi-
bility, and there a gleam, which soon vanishes again in the fatal murk
of impotencies, do-nothingisms. Very sad to the heart of Pitt. A once
brave Nation arrived at its critical point, and doomed to higgle and pud-
dle there till it drown in the gutters: considerably tragical to Pitt; who
is lively, ingenious, and, though not quitting the Parliamentary tone for
the Hebrew-Prophetic, far more serious than the modern reader thinks.

“In Walpole’s Book'* there is the liveliest Picture of this dismal
Parliamentary Hellbroth,—such a Mother of Dead Dogs as one has
seldom looked into! For the Hour is great; and the Honourable Gen-
tlemen, I must say, are small. The Hour, little as you dream of it, my
Honourable Friends, is pregnant with questions that are immense.
Wide Continents, long Epochs and A®ons hang on this poor jargoning
of yours; the Eternal Destinies are asking their much-favoured Nation,
‘Will you, can you?’—much-favoured Nation is answering in that man-
ner. Astonished at its own stupidity, and taking refuge in laughter.
The Eternal Destinies are very patient with some nations; and can
disregard their follies, for a long while; and have their Cromwell, have
their Pitt, or what else is essential, ready for the poor Nation, in a
grandly silent way!

** Certain it is——though how could poor Newcastle know it at all!—
here is again the hour of tide for England. Tide is full again; has
been flowing long hundreds of years, and is full: certain, too, that time
and tide wait on no man or nation. In a dialect different from Crom-
well’s or Pitt’s, but with a sense true to theirs, I call it the Eternal
Destinies knocking at England’s door again: ‘Are you ready for the
crisis, birth-point of long Ages to you, which is now come? Greater
question had not been, for centuries past. None to be named with it
since that high Spiritual Question (truly a much higher, and which was
in fact the parent of this, and of all of high and great that lay ahead),
which England and Oliver Cromwell were there to answer: ‘Will you
hold by Consecrated Formulas, then, you English, and expect salvation
from traditions of the elders; or are you for Divine Realities, as the
one sacred and indispensable thing?” Which they did answer, in what

13 Memoirs of the Last Ten Years of George II.

52 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

9th May—13th June 1757.
may we know. ‘Truly the Highest Question; which, if a Nation can
answer well, it will grow in this world, and may come to be considera-
ble, and to have many high Questions to answer,—this of Pitt's, for ex-
ample. And the Answers given do always extend through coming
ages; and do always bear harvests, accursed or else blessed, according
as the Answers were. A thing awfully true, if you have eye for it;—
a thing to make Honourable Gentlemen serious, even in the age of per-
cussion-caps! No, my friend, Newcastleisms, impious poltrooneries,
in a Nation, do not die:—neither (thank God) do Cromwellisms and
pious Heroisms; but are alive for the poor Nation, even in its som-
nambulencies, in its stupidest dreams. For Nations have their som-
nambulencies; and, at any rate, the questions put to Nations, in differ-
ent ages, vary much. Not in any age, or turning-point in History, had
England answered the Destinies in such a dialect as now, under its
Newcastle and National palaver.”

3. Of Walpole, as Recording Angel. ‘Walpole’s George the Sec-
ond is a book of far more worth than is commonly ascribed to it; almost
the one original English Book yet written on those times,—which, by
the accident of Pitt, are still memorable tous. But for Walpole,—burn-
ing like a small steady light there, shining faithfully, if stingily, on the
evil and the good,—that sordid muddle of the Pelham Parliaments,
which chanced to be the element of things now recognisable enough as
great, would be forever unintelligible. He is unusually accurate, punc-
tual, lucid; an irrefragable authority on English points. And if, in re-
gard to Foreign, he cannot be called an understanding witness, he has
read the best Documents accessible, has conversed with select Ambas-
sadors (Mitchell and the like, as we can guess); and has informed him-
self to a degree far beyond most of his contemporaries. In regard to
Pitt’s Speeches, in particular, his brief jottings, done rapidly while the
matter was still shining to him, are the only Reports that have the least
human resemblance. We may thank Walpole that Pitt is not dumb to
us, as well as dark. Very curious little scratchings and etchings, those
of Walpole; frugal, swift, but punctual and exact; hasty pen-and-ink
outlines; at first view, all barren; bald as an invoice, seemingly; but —
which yield you, after long study there and elsewhere, a conceivable
notion of what and how excellent these Pitt Speeches may have been.
Airy, winged, like arrow-flights of Phebus Apollo; very superlative
Speeches indeed. Walpole’s Book is carefully printed,—few errors in
it like that ‘Chapeau’ for Chasot,” which readers remember :—“ but,
in respect to editing, may be characterised as still wanting an Editor.
A Book unedited ; little but lazy ignorance of a very hopeless type,
thick contented darkness, traceable throughout in the marginal part.
No attempt at an Index, or at any of the natural helps to a reader now

Cuap. III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 53
9th May—13th June 1757.

at such distance from it. Nay, till you have at least marked, on the
top of each page, what Month and Year it actually is, the Book can-
not be read at all,—except by an idle creature, doing worse than noth-
ing under the name of reading !”

4, Pitt’s Speeches, foreshadowing What. “It is a kind of epoch in
your studies of modern English History when you get to understand of
Pitt’s Speeches that they are not Parliamentary Eloquences, but things
which with his whole soul he means, and is intent to do. This sur-
prising circumstance, when at last become undeniable, makes, on the
sudden, an immense difference for the Speeches and you! Speeches
are not a thing of high moment to this Editor; it is the Thing spoken,
and how far the speaker means to do it, that this Editor inquires for.
Too many Speeches there are, which he hears admired all round, and

has privately to entertain a very horrid notion of! Speeches, the finest
- in quality (were quality really ‘ fine’ conceivable in such case), which
want a corresponding fineness of source and intention, corresponding
nobleness of purport, conviction, tendency ; these, if we will reflect, are
frightful instead of beautiful. Yes;—and always the frightfuller, the
‘finer’ they are; and the faster and farther they go, sowing themselves
in the dim vacancy of men’s minds. For Speeches, like all human
things, though the act is now little remembered, do always rank them-
selves as forever blessed or as forever unblessed. Sheep or goats; on
the right hand of the Final Judge, or else on the left. There are
Speeches which can be called true : and, again, Speeches which are not
true :—Heavens, only think what these latter are! Sacked wind, which
you are intended to sow,—that you may reap the whirlwind! After
Jong reading, I find Chatham’s Speeches to be what he pretends they
are: true, and worth speaking then and there. Noble indeed,I can
call them with you: the highly noble Foreshadow, necessary preface
and accompaniment of Actions which are still nobler. A very singular
phenomenon within those walls, or without!

“ Pitt, though nobly eloquent, is a Man of Action, not of Speech; an
authentically Royal kind of Man. And if there were a Plutarch in
these times, with a good deal of leisure on his hands, he might run a
Parallel between Friedrich and Chatham. ‘Two radiant Kings; very
shining Men of Action both; both of them hard bested, as the case oft-
en is. For your born King will generally have, if not ‘all Europe
against him,’ at least pretty much all the Universe. Chatham’s course
to Kingship was not straight or smooth,—as Friedrich, too, had his well-
nigh fatal difficulties on the road. Again, says the Plutarch, they are
very brave men both; and of a clearness and veracity peculiar among
their contemporaries. In Chatham, too, there is something of the flash
of steel; a very sharp-cutting, penetrative, rapid individual, he too; and

=
*

54 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

9th May—13th June 1757.
shaped for action, first of all, though he has to talk so much in the world.
Fastidious, proud, no King could be prouder, though his element is that
of Free-Senate and Democracy. And he has a beautiful poetic delica-
cy, withal; great tenderness in him, playfulness, grace ; in all ways, an
airy as well as a solid loftiness of mind. Not born a King,—alas, no,
not officially so, only naturally so; has his kingdom to seek. The
Conquering of Silesia, the Conquering of the Pelham Parliaments—But
we will shut up the Plutarch with time on his hands. .

** Pitt’s Speeches, as I spell them from Walpole and the other faint
tracings left, are full of genius in the vocal kind, far beyond any Speech-
es delivered in Parliament: serious always, and the very truth, such as
he has it; but going in many dialects and modes; full of airy flashings,
twinkles and coruscations. Sport, as of sheet-lightning glancing about,
the bolt lying under the horizon ; bolt hidden, as is fit, under such a
horizon as he had. A singularly radiant man. Could have been a ©
Poet, too, in some small measure, had he gone on that line. There are-
many touches of genius, comic, tragic, lyric, something of humour
even, to be read in those Shadows of Speeches taken down for us by
Walpole. * *

“In one word, Pitt, shining like a gleam of sharp steel in that murk
of contemptibilities, is carefully steering his way towaids Kingship over
it. Tragical itis (especially in Pitt’s case, first and last) to see a Roy-
al Man, or Born King, wading towards his throne in such an element.
But, alas, the Born King (even when he tries, which I take to be the
rarer case) so seldom can arrive there at all ;—sinful Epochs there are,
when Heaven’s curse has been spoken, and it is that awful Being, the
Born Sham-King, that arrives! Pitt, however,does it. Yes; and the
more we study Pitt,the more we shall find he does it in a peculiarly
high, manful, and honourable as well as dextrous manner; and that En-
glish History has a right to eall him ‘ the acme and highest man of Con-
stitutional Parliaments ; the like of whom was not in any Parliament
called Constitutional, nor will again be.’ ”

Well, probably enough; too probably! But what it more
concerns us to remember here is the fact, That in these dismal
shufflings which have been, Pitt,—in spite of Royal dislikes and
Neweastle peddlings and chicaneries,—has been actually in Of-
fice, in the due topmost place, the poor English Nation ardently
demanding him, in what ways it could. Been in Office ;—and
is actually out again, in spite of the Nation. Was without real
power in the Royal Councils; though of noble promise, and
planting himself down, hero-like, evidently bent on work, and on

Cuap.III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 55
9th May—13th June 1757.
ending that unutterable ‘St. Vitus’s-dance” that had gone so
high all round him. Without real power, we say; and has had
no permanency. Came in, 11th—-19th November 1756; thrown
out, 5th April 1757. After six months trial, the St. Vitus finds
that it cannot do with him; and will prefer going on again.
_ The last act his Royal Highness of Cumberland did in England
was to displace Pitt: ‘‘ Down you, I am the man!” said Royal
Highness; and went to the Weser Countries on those terms.
Would the reader wish to see, in summary, what Pitt’s Offi-
ces have been, since he entered on this career about thirty years
ago? Here, from our Historian, is the List of them in order of
time; Stages of Pitt’s Course, he calls it:

1°. “ December 1734, Comes into Parliament, age now twenty-six ;
Cornet in the Blues as well; being poor, and in absolute need of some
career that will suit. Apral 1736, makes his First Speech :—Prince
Frederick the subject——who was much used as battering-ram by the
Opposition ; whom perhaps Pitt admired for his madrigals, for his
Literary patronisings, and favour to the West-Wickham set. Speech,
full of airy lightning, was much admired. Followed by many, with
the lightning getting denser and denser; always on the Opposition
side” (once on the Jenkins’s Ear Question, as we saw, when the Gaz-
etteer Editor spelt him Mr. Pitts}: so that Majesty was very angry,
sulky Public much applausive ; and Walpole was heard to say, ‘We
must muzzle, in some way, that terrible Cornet of Horse !"—but could
not, on trial; this man’s ‘ price,’ as would seem, being awfully high!
August-October 1744, Sarah Duchess of Marlborough bequeathed him
10,000/.,as Commissariat equipment in this his Campaign against the
Mudgods,'*—glory to the old Heroine for so doing! Which lifted Pitt
out of the Cornetcy or Horseguards element,I fancy ; and was as the
nailing of his Parliamentary colours to the mast.

February 14th, 1746, Vice-Treasurer for Ireland: on occasion of
that Pelham-Granville ‘ As-you-were !’ (Carteret Ministry, which last-
ed One Day), and the slight shufflings that were necessary. Now first
in Office,—after such Ten Years of colliding and conflicting, and fine
steering in difficult waters. Vice-Treasurer for Ireland: and ‘ soon
after, on Lord Wilmington’s death,’ Paymaster of the Forces. Con-
tinued Paymaster about nine years. Rejects, quietly and totally, the
big income derivable from Interest of Government Moneys lying de-
layed in the Paymaster’s hand (‘ Dishonest, I tell you!”)—and will none
of it, though poor. Not yet high, still low over the horizon, but shining

+* ‘Thackeray, ‘i. 138.

56 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

9th May—13th June 1757.
_brighter and brighter. Greatly contemptuous of Newcastle and the
Platitudes and Poltrooneries; and still a good deal in the Opposition
strain,—and not always tempering the wind to-the shorn lamb. For
example, Pitt (still Paymaster) to Newcastle on King of the Romans
Question (1752 or so): ‘ You engage for Subsidies, not knowing their
extent; for Treaties, not knowing the terms !’—' What a bashaw!’
moan Neweastle and the top Officials. ‘ Best way is, don’t mind it,’
said Mr. Stone” (one of their terriers,—a hard-headed fellow, whose
brother became Primate of Ireland by and by).

3°. “ November 20th, 1755, Thrown out:—on Pelham’s death, and
the general hurlyburly in Official regions, and change of partners with
no little difficulty, which had then ensued! Sir Thomas Robinson,”
our old friend, “ made Secretary,—not found to answer. Pitt sulkily
looking on America, on Minorca; on things German, on things in gen-
eral; warily set on returning, as is thought; but How? Foz to Pitt:
‘Will you join me ?’—Putt: ‘ No, —with such politeness, but in an un-
mistakable way! ‘Ten months of consummate steering on the part of
Pitt; Chancellor Hardwicke coming as messenger, he among others;
Pitt’s answer to him dextrous, modestly royal. Pitt’s bearing, in this
grand juncture and crisis, is royal, his speakings and also his silences
notably fine. October 20th,1756: to Newcastle face to face, ‘I will
accept no situation under your Grace !’—and, about that day month,
comes zn, on his own footing. That is to say,

“ November 19th, 1756, to England’s great comfort, Sees himself
Secretary of State (age now just forty-eight). Has pretty much all
England at his back ; but has, in face of him, Fox, Newcastle and Com-
pany, offering mere impediment and discouragement ; Royal Highness
of Cumberland looking deadly sour. Till finally,

“ April 5th, 1757, King bids him resign ; Royal Highness setting off
for Germany the second day after. Pitt had been am rather more than
Four months. England, at that time a silent Country in comparison,
knew not well what to do; took to offering him Freedoms of Corpora-
tions in very great quantity. Town after Town, from all the four
winds, sympathetically firing off, upon a misguided Sacred Majesty, its
little Box, in this oblique way, with extraordinary diligence. Where-
by, after six-months bombardment by Boxes, and also by Events, June
29th, 1757”°—We will expect June 29th.?®

In these sad circumstances, Preparations, so-called, have been
making for Hanover, for America ;—such preparations as were
never seen before. Take only one instance; let one be enough:

*° Thackeray, i. 231, 264. Almon, Anecdotes of Pitt (London, 1810), i.
151, 182, 218.

Cuap, III.] | PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 57
9th May—138th June 1757.

“By the London Gazette, well on in February 1756, we learn that
Lord Loudon, a military gentleman of small faculty, but of good con-
nexions, has been nominated to command the Forces in America; and
then, more obscurely, some days after, that another has been nomina-
ted :—one of them ought certainly to make haste out, if he could; the
French, by account, have 25,000 men in those countries, with real offi-
cers to lead them! Haste out, however, is not what this Lord Loudon
or his rival can make. In March, we learn that Lord Loudon has been
again nominated; in an improved manner, this time ;—and still does
not look like going. ‘Again nominated, why again? Alas, reader,
there have been hysterical fidgetings in a high quarter; internal shift-
ings and shufflings, contradictions, new proposals, one knows not
what.’® One asks only: How is the business ever to be done, if you
cannot even settle what imbecile is to go and try it?

“Seldom had Country more need of a Commander than America
now. America itself is of willing mind; ahd surely has resources, in
such a Cause; but is full of anarchies as well: the different States and
sections of it, with their discrepant Legislatures, their half-drilled Mili-
tias, pulling each a different way, there is, as in the poor Mother Coun-
try, little result except of the St. Vitus kind. In some Legislatures are
anarchic Quakers, who think it unpermissible to fight with those hec-
toring French, and their tail of scalping Indians; and that the ‘ method
of love’ ought to be tried with them. What is to become of those poor
people, if not even a Lord Loudon can get out 2”

The result was, Lord Loudon had not in his own poor person
come to hand in America till August 1756, Season now done;
and could only write home, ‘* Allis St. Vitus out here! Must
have reinforcement of 10,000 men!” “Yes,” answers Pitt,
who is now in Office: “you shall have them; and we will take
Cape Breton, please Heayen !”’—but was thrown out; and by
the wrigglings that ensued, nothing of the 10,000 reached Lord
Loudon till Season 1757 too was done. Nor did they then
stead his Lordship much, then or afterwards; who never took
Cape Breton, nor was like doing it ;—but wriggled to and fro a
good deal, and revolved on his axis, according to pattern given.
And set (what chiefly induces us to name him here) his not rey-
erent enough Subordinate, Lord Charles Hay, our old Fontenoy
friend, into angry impatient quizzing of him ;—and by and by
into Court Martial for such quizzing.'7 Court Martial, which

16 Gentleman’s Magazine for 1756, pp. 92, 150, 359, 450.
‘7 Peerage Books, § Tweeddale.
C2

58 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
9th May—13th June 1757.

was much puzzled by the case; and could decide nothing, but
only adjourn en] adjourn ;—as we will now do, not mentioning
Lord Loudon farther, or the numerous other instances at all.

Pitt, we just saw, far from being confirmed and furthered,
has been thrown out by Royal Highness of Cumberland, the
last thing before crossing to that exquisite Weser Problem.
‘“‘ Nothing now left at home to hinder ws and our Hanover and
Weser Problem !” thinks Royal Highness. No, indeed: a com-
fortable pacific No- government, or Battle of the Four Ele-
ments, left yonder; the Anarch Old waggling his addle head
over it; ready to help everybody, and bring fire and water, and
Yes and No, into holy matrimony, if he could!—Let us return
to Prag. Only one remark more; upon “April 5th.” That
was the Day of Pitt’s Dismissal at St. James’s: and I find, at
Schénbrunn it is likewise the day when Leichs-Hofrath (Kaiser
in Privy Council) decides, in respect to Friedrich, that Ban of
the Reich must be proceeded with, and recommends Reich’s Diet
to get through with the same.!§ Official England ordering its
Pitt into private life, and Official Teutschland its Friedrich into
outlawry (‘‘ Be quiet henceforth, both of you /”’)—are, by chance,
synchronous pheromena.

Phenomena of Prag Siege :—Prag Siege is interrupted.
Friedrich’s Siege of Prag proved tedious beyond expectation.
In four days he had done that exploit in 1744; but now, to

the world’s disappointment, in as many weeks he cannot. Noth--

ing was omitted on his part: he seized all egresses from Prag,
rapidly enough; had beset them with batteries, on the very
morrow of the Battle; every egress beset, cannon and ruin for-

bidding any issue there. On the 9th of May, cannonading be- -

gan; proper siege-cannon and ammunition, coming up from
Dresden, were completely come May 19th; after which the
place is industriously battered, bombarded with red-hot balls;
but except by hunger, it will not do. Prag, as a fortress, is
weak, but as a breastwork for 50,000 men it is strong. The
Austrians tried sallies; but these availed nothing,—very ill-
conducted, say some. ‘The Prussians, more than once, had
18 Helden- Geschichte (Reichs Procedures, ubi supra).

e
Cuap.III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 59
19th-24th May 1757.
nearly got into the place by surprisal; but, owing to mere luck .
of the Austrians, never could,—say the same parties. !9

A Diarium of Prag Siege is still extant, Two Diariums ; punc-
tual diurnal account, both Austrian and Prussian :2° which it is
far from our intention to inflict on readers, in this haste. Siege
lasted six weeks; four weeks extremely hot,—from May 19th,
when the proper artilleries, in complete state, got up from Dres-
den. Line of siege-works, or intermittent series of batteries, is
some twelve miles long; from Branik southward, to beyond the
Belvedere northward, on both sides of the Moldau. King’s
Camp is on the Ziscaberg; Keith’s on the Lorenz Berg, em-
bracing and cannonading the Weissenberg; there are two
Bridges of communication, Branik and Podoli: King lodges in
the Parsonge of Michel,—the busiest of all the sons of Adam;
what a set of meditations in that Parsonage! The Besieged,
46,000 by count, offer to surrender Prag on condition of * Free
withdrawal :” “No; you shall engage, such of you as won’t en-
list with us, not to serve against me for six years.” Here are
some select Specimens; Prussian chiefly, in an abridged state:

“* May 19th, No sooner was our artillery come (all the grounds and
beds for it had been ready beforehand), than as evening fell, it began
to play in terrific fashion.”

“ Night of the 23d-24th May, There broke out a furious sally; their
first, and much their hottest, say the Prussians: a very serious affair ;—
which fell upon Keith’s quarter, west side of the Moldau. Sally, say
something like 10,000 strong; picked men all, and strengthened with
half a pound of horse-flesh each” (unluckily without salt): judge what
the common diet must have been, when that was generous! ‘“ No salt
to it; but a fair supplement of brandy. Browne, from his bed of pain
(died, 26th June), had been strongly urgent. Aim is, To force the
Prussian lines, by determination, and the help of darkness, in some
weak point: the whole Army, standing ranked on the walls, shall fol-
low, if things go well; and storm itself through,—away Daun-wards,
across the River by Podoli Bridge.

“Sally broke out between 1 and 2 a.m.; but we had wind of it, and
were on the alert. Sally tried on this place and on that; very furious
in places, but could not anywhere prevail. The tusseling lasted for

*9 Archenholtz, Mapper Nia EY otha 968 sqent

20 In Helden-Geschichte, iv. 42-56, Prussian Diarium ; ib. 73-86, Aus-
trian. ;

o

60 SEVEN YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

29th May 1757.
near six hours (Prince Ferdinand” of Preussen, King’s youngest Broth- |
er, ‘and others of us, getting hurts and doing exploits),—till, about 7
A.M., it was wholly swept in, with loss of 1,000 dead. Upon which,
their whole Army retired to its quarters, in a hopeless condition. Es-
cape impossible.. Near 50,000 of them; but in such a posture. Pro-
vision of bread, the spies say, is not scarce, unless the Prussians can
burn it, which they are industriously trying (diligent to learn where the
Magazines are, and to fire incessantly upon the same): plenty of meal
hitherto; but for butcher’s meat, only what we saw. Forage nearly
done, and 12,000 horses standing in the squares and market-places,—
not even stabling for them, not to speak of food or work,—slaughtering
and salting” (if one but had salt!) ‘the one method. Horse-flesh two
kreutzers a pound; rises gradually to double that value.

“ May 29th, About sunset there came a furious burst of weather:
rain-torrents mixed with battering hail;—some flaw of water-spout
among the Hills; for it lasted hour on hour, and Moldau came down
roaring double-deep, above a hundred yards too wide each way; with
cargoes of ruin, torn-up trees, drowned horses ; which sorely tried our
Bridge at Branik. Bridge, half of it, did break away (Friedrich’s half,
forty-four pontoons; Keith’s people got their end of the Bridge doubled-
in and saved): the Austrians, in Prag, fished out twenty-four of Fried-
rich’s pontoons; the other twenty we caught at our Bridge of Podoli ,
farther down. A most wild night for the Prussian Army in tents; and
indeed for Prag itself, the low parts of which were all under water; un-
fortunate individuals getting drowned in the cellars; and, still more im-
portant, a great deal of Austrian meal, which had been carried thither,
to be safe from the red-hot balls.

“Tt was thought the Austrians, our Bridge being down, might try a
sally again. To prevent which, hardly was the rain done, when, on
our part, a rocket flew aloft; and there began on the City, from all
sides, a deluge of bombs and red-hot balls. So that the still-dripping
City was set fire to, in various parts; and we could hear” (what this
Editor never can forget) ‘the Weh-Klagen (wail) of the Townsfolk
as they tried to quench it, and it always burst out again. The fire-de!-
uge lasted for six hours.”—Human Weh-Klagen, through the hollow
of Night, audible to the Prussians and us: “ Woe’s me! water-deluges,
then fire deluges; death on every hand!” According to the Austrian
accounts, there perished, by bursting of bomb-shells, falling of walls, by
hunger and other misery and hurts, “ above 9,000 Townsfolk in this
Siege.” Yes, my Imperial friends; War is not a thing of streamering
and ornamental trumpeting alone; War is an inexorable, dangerously
incalculable thing. Is it not a terrible question, at whose door lies the
beginning of a War?

Cuap. III.] PRAG CANNOT BE GOT AT ONCE. 61
13th June 1757.

“ June 5th, 12,000 poor people of Prag were pushed out: ‘ Useless
mouths, will you contrive to disappear some way!’ But, after haggling
about all day, they had to be admitted in again, under penalty of being
shot.

** June 8th, City looking black and ruinous, whole of the Neustadt in
ashes; few houses left in the Jew Town; in the Altstadt the fire raged
on, wuthete fort. Nothing but ruin and confusion over there; popula-
tion hiding in cellars, getting killed by falling buildings. Butirgermeis-
ter and Townsfolk besiege Prince Karl, *‘ For the Virgin’s sake, have
pity on us, Your Serenity!’ Poor Prince Karl has to be deaf, what-
ever his feelings.

“He was diligent in.attending mass, they say: he alone of the
Princes, of whom there were several; two Saxon Princes among oth-
ers, Prince Xavier the elder of them, who will be heard of again. A
profane set, these, lodging in the Clementinum” (vast Jesuit Edifice,
which had been cleared out for them, and “the windows filled with
dung outside,” against balls): “there, with wines of fine vintage, and
cookeries plentiful and exquisite, that know nothing of famine outside,
they led an idle disorderly life,—ran races in the long corridors” (not
so bad a course), “dressed themselves in Priests’ vestures” (which are
abundant in such locality), ‘*and made travesties and mummeries of
Holy Religion; the wretched creatures, defying despair, as buccaneers
might when their ship is sinking. ‘To surrender, everything forbids ;
of escape, there is no possibility."

* June 9th, The bombardment abates; a Laboratorium of our own
flew aloft by some spark or accident; and killed thirteen men.

“* June 15th, From the King’s Camp a few bombs” (King himself
now gone) “kindled the City in three places :”—but there is, by this
time, new game afield; Prag Siege eta: its decision not at Prag,
but some way off.

Friedrich has been doing his utmost; diligent, by all meth-
ods, to learn where the Austrian Magazines were, that is, on
what special edifices and localities shot might be expended with
advantage; and has fired into these ‘about 12,000 bombs.”
Here is a small thing still remembered :

“Spies being, above all, essential in this business, Friedrich had be-
thought him of one Kasebier, a supreme of Housebreakers, whom he
has, safe with a ball at his ancle, doing forced labour at Spandau” (in
Stettin, if it mattered). ‘‘ Kasebier was actually sent for, pardon prom-
ised him if he could do the State a service. Kasebier smuggled him-
self twice, perhaps three times, into Prag; but the fourth time he did

21 Archenholtz, i. 86; LHelden-Geschichte, iv. 73-84.

4

62 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL.

13th-18th June 1757,
not come back.”®? Another Note says: ‘‘ Kasebier was a Tailor, and
Son of a Tailor, in Halle; and the expertest of Thieves. Had been
doing forced Jabour, in Stettin, since 1748; twice did get into Prag;
third time, vanished. A highly celebrated Prussian Thief; still a myth
among the People, like Dick Turpin or Cartouche, except that his was
always theft without violence.”*

We learn vaguely that the price of horse-flesh in Prag has ris-
en to double; famine very sore: but still one hears nothing of
surrender. And again there is vague rumour that the City may
be as it will; but that the Garrison has meal, after all we have
ruined, which will last till October. Such a problem has this
King: soluble within the time; or not soluble? Such a ques-
tion for the whole world, and for himself more than any.

CHAPTER IV.
BATTLE OF KOLIN.

On and after June 9th, the bombardment at Prag abated, and
never rose to briskness again; the place of trial for decision of
that Siege having flitted elsewhither, as we said. About that
time, rumours came in, not so favourable, from the Duke of Be-
vern; which Friedrich, strong in hope, strove visibly to disbe-
lieve, but at last could not. Bevern reports that Daun is actu-
ally coming on, far too strong for his resisting ;—in other terms,
that the Siege of Prag will not decide itself by bombardment,
but otherwise and elsewhere. Of which we must now give some
account; brief as may be, especially in regard to the prelimi-
nary or marching part.

Daun, whose light troops plundered Brandeis (almost within wind of
the Prussian Rear) on the day while Prag Battle was fighting, had, on
that fatal event, gradually drawn back to Czaslau, a place we used to
know fifteen years ago; and there, or in those neighbourhoods, defens-
ively maneuvering, and hanging upon Kuttenberg, Kolin, especially
upon his Magazine of Suchdol, Daun, always rather drawing back, with
Brunswick Bevern vigilantly waiting on him, has continued ever since ;
diligently recruiting himself; ranking the remains of the right wing de-
feated at Prag; drawing regiments out of Mahren, or whencesoever to

** Retzow, i. 108 n. 23 Preuss, ii. 57 n.

a a

Cuap. IV. ] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 63
13th-18th June 1757.

be had. ‘Till, by these methods, he is grown 60,000 strong; nearly
thrice superior to Bevern; though being a “ Fabius Cunctator” (so
called by and by, he as yet attempts nothing. Forty thousand in Prag,
with Sixty here in the Czaslau Quarter,' that makes 100,000; say his
Prussian Majesty has two-thirds of the number: can the Fabius Cune-
tator attempt nothing before Prag utterly famish ?

Order comes to him from Vienna: ‘“ Rescue Prag; straightway go
upon it, cost what it like!’ Daun does go upon it; advances visibly to-
wards Prag, Bevern obliged to fall back in front of him. Sunday, 12th
June, Daun despatches several Officers to Prince Karl at Prag, with no-
tice that, “‘ On the 20th, Monday come a week, he will be in the neigh-
bourhood of Prag with this view :—they, of course, to sally out, and help
from rearward.” ‘‘ Several Officers, under various disguises,” go with
that message, June 12th ; but none of them could get into the City ; and
some of them, | judge, must have fallen into the Prussian Hussar Par-
ties :—at any rate, the news they carried did get into the Prussian cir-
cuit, and produced an instant resolution there. Early next morning,
Monday 13th, King Friedrich, with what disposable force is on the spot,

~—10,000 capable of being spared from siege-work, and 4,000 more that
will be capable of following, under Prince Moritz, in two days,—sets
forth in all speed. Joins Bevern, that same night; at Kaurzim, thirty-
five miles off, which is about midway from Prag to Czaslau,* and only
three miles or so from Daun’s quarters that night,—had the King known
it, which he did not.

Daun must be instantly gone into; and shall,—if he is there at all,
and not fallen back at the first rumour of us, as Friedrich rather sup-
poses. In any case, there are preliminaries indispensable: the 4,000
of Prince Moritz still to come up; secondly, bread to be had for us,
which is baking at Nimburg, across the Elbe, twenty miles off; lastly
(or rather firstly, and most indispensable of all), Daun to be reconnoi-
tred. Friedrich reconnoitres Daun with all diligence; pushes on ev-
erything according to his wont; much obstructed in the reconnoitring
by Pandour clouds, under which Daun has veiled himself, which far out-
number our small Hussar force. « Daun, as usual,—showing always
great skill in regard to camps and positions,—has planted himself in
difficult country: alittle river with its boggy pools in front; behind and
around, an intricate broken country of knolls and swamps, one ridge in
it which they even call a Berg or Hill, Kamhayek Berg; not much of
a Hill after all, but forming a long backbone to the locality, west end of
it straight behind Daun’s centre, at present. Friedrich’s position is
from north to south; like Daun’s, taking advantage of what heights and

* Tempelhof, i. 196; Retzow (i. 107, 109) counts 46,000 + 66,000.
“Sce Map at p. 111 a,

64 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII.

: 15th-17th June 1757.
brooks there are; and edging northward to be near his bread-ovens :
right wing still holds by Kaurzim, left wing looking down on Planian,
a little Town on the High Road (Kavser-.Strasse) from Prag to Vien-
na. Little Town destined to get up its name in a day or two,—next
little Town to which, twelve miles farther on, is Kolin, secretly destined
to become and continue still more famous among mankind. Kolin is
close to the Elbe, left or south bank; Elbe hereabouts strikes into his
long north-eastern course (to Wittenberg all the way; Pirna, say 150
miles off, is his halfway house in that direction) ;—strikes off north-
ward hereabouts, making for Nimburg, among other places: Planian,
right south of Nimburg, is already fifteen good miles from Elbe.

This is Friedrich’s position, Wednesday June 15th and the day fol-
lowing ; somewhat nearer his ovens than yesterday. Daun is yet par-
allel to him, has his centre behind Swoyschitz, an insignificant Village,
at the foot of those Kamhayek Heights, which is, ever since, to be
found in Maps. Friday 17th, Friedrich’s bread-wagons and 4,000 hav-
ing come in,as doubtless the Pandours report in the proper place, Daun
does not quite like his strong position any more, but would prefer a
stronger. Friday about sunset, “ great clouds of dust” rise from Daun:
changing his position, the Prussians see, if for Pandours and gathering
darkness they can at present see little else. Daun, truly, observing the
King to have in that manner edged up, towards Planian, is afraid of his
right wing from such a neighbour. ‘So that the reader must take his
Map again. Or if he care not for such things, let him skip, and leave
me solitary to my sad function; till we can meet on easier ground, and
report the Battle which ensued. Daun hustles his right wing back out
of that dangerous proximity ; wheels his whole right wing and centre
ninety degrees round, so as to reach out now towards Kolin, and lie on
the north slope of the Kamhayek ridge ; places his left wing en potence
(gibbet-wise), hanging round the western end of said Kamhayek, its
southern extremity at Swoyschitz, its northern at Hradenin, where (not
a mile from Planian) his right wing had formerly been ;—with other in-
tricate movements not worth following, under my questionable guidance,
on a Map with unpronounceable names. Enough to say that Daun’s
right wing is now far east at Kreczhorz, well beyond Chotzemitz,
whereabouts his centre now comes to stand (and most of his horse
there, both the wings being hilly and rough, unfit for horse) ;—and that
this being nearly the last of Daun’s shiftings and hustlings for the pres-
ent, or indeed in essential respects the very last, readers may as well
note the above main points in it.

Hustled into this still stronger place, with wheeling and shov-
ing, which lasted to a late hour, Daun composes himself for the

—* i a aed

Cnuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 65
18th June 1757.

night. He lies now, with centre and right looking northward,
pretty much parallel to the Planian-Kolin or Prag-Vienna High-
way, and about a mile south of the same; extreme posts extend-
ing almost to Kolin on that side; left wing well planted en po-
tence ; Kamhayek ridge, north face and west end of it, complete-
ly his on both the exposed or Anti-Prussian faces. Friedrich
feels uncertain whether he has not gone his ways altogether ;
but proposes to ascertain by break of day.

By break of day Friedrich starts, having cleared off certain
Pandour swarms visible in places of difficulty, who go on first
notice, and without shot fired.2 Marches through Planian in
two columns, along the Kolin Highway and to north of it;
marches on, four or five miles farther, nothing visible but the
skirts of retiring Pandours,—‘ Daun’s rear-guard probably ?”—
Friedrich himself is with Ziethen, who has the vanguard, as
Friedrich’s wont is, eagerly enough looking out; reaches a cer-
tain Inn on the wayside ( Wirthshaus ‘* of Slatislunz or Golden-
Sun,” say the Modern Books,—though I am driven to think it
Novomiesto, nearer Planian; but will not quarrel on the sub-
ject); Inn of good height for one thing; and there, mounting to
the top-story or perhaps the leads, descries Daun, stretching far
and wide, leant against the Kamhayek, in the summer morning.
What a sight for Friedrich: ‘ Big game shall be played, then ;
death sure, this day, to thousands of men: and to me—?—
Well!” |

Friedrich calls halt: rest here a little; to consider, examine,
settle how. <A hot close morning; rest for an hour or two, till
our rear from Kaurzim come up: horses and men will be the
better for it,—horses can have a mouthful of grass, mouthful of
water; some of them “had no drink last night, so late in get-
ting home.’ Poor quadrupeds, they also have to get into a
blaze of battle-rage this day, and be blown to pieces a great

? Lloyd, i. 61 et seq. (or Tempelhof’s Translation, i. 151-164); Tempel-
hof’s own Account is, i. 179-196; Retzow’s, i. 120-149 (fewer errors of de-
tail than usual); Kutzen, Der Tag von Kolin (Breslau, 1857), a useful little
compilation from many sources. Very incorrect most of the common ac-
counts are; Kausler’s Sch/achten, Jomini, and the like.

66 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

many of them,—in a quarrel not of their seeking! Horse and
rider are alike satisfied on that latter point; silently ready for
the task they have; and deaf on questions that are bottomless.

At this Hostelry of Novomiesto (not of Slatislunz or ‘‘ Gold-
en-Sun”’ at all, which is a ‘Sun’ fallen dismally eclipsed in other
ways’), Friedrich halted for three hours and more; saw Daun
developing himself into new Order of Battle, ‘every part of his
position visible;” considered with his whole might what was to
be tried upon him ;—and about noon, having made up his mind,
called his Generals, in sight of the phenomenon itself there, to
give them their various orders and injunctions in regard to the
same. The Plan of Fight, which was thought then, and is still
thought by everybody, an excellent one,—resting on the ‘ ob-
lique order of attack,” Friedrich’s favourite mode,—was, if the
reader will take his Map, conceivable as follows.

Daun has by this time deployed himself; in three lines, or
two lines and a reserve; on the high-lying Champaign south of
the Planian-Kolin Great Road; south, say a mile, and over the
crests of the rising ground, or Kamhayek ridge, so that from the
Great Road you can see nothing of him. His line, swaying here
and there a little, to take advantage of its ground, extends near-
ly five miles, from east to west; pointing towards Planian side,
the left wing of it; from Planian, eastward, the way Friedrich
has marched, Daun’s left wing may be four miles distant. On
the other side, Daun’s right wing,—main line always pretty par-
allel to the Highway, and pointing rather southward of Kolin,

3 «The Inn of Slati-Slunz was burnt, about twenty years ago; nothing
of it but the stone walls now dates from Friedrich’s time. It is a biggish
solid-looking House of two stories (whether ever of three, I could not learn);
stands pleasantly, at the crown of a long rise from Kolin ;—and inwardly,
alas, in our day, offers little but bad smells and negative quantities! Only
the ground-floor is now inhabited. From the front, your view, northward,
Nimburg way, across the Elbe Valley, is fertile, wide-waving, pretty: but
rearward, up stairs,—having with difficulty got permission,—you find bare
balks, tattered feathers, several hundred weight of pigeon’s dung, and no
outlook at all, except into walls of office-houses and the overhanging brow
of Heights,—fatal, clearly, to any view of Daun, even from a third story!”
(Tourist’s Note, 1858.)—Tempelhof (ubi supra) seems to have known the
right place; not Retzow, or almost anybody since: and indeed the ques-
tion, except for expressly Military people, is of no moment.

Cuar. IV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 67
18th June 1757.

—reaches to the small Hamlet of Krzeczhorz, which is two miles
off Kolin. In front of his centre is a Village called Chotzemitz
(from which for a while, in those months, the Battle gets its
name, ‘‘ Battle of Chotzemitz,” by Daun’s christening): in front
of him, to right or to left of Chotzemitz, are some four or even
six other Villages (dim rustic Hamlets, invisible from the High
Road), every Village of which Daun has well beset with batter-
ies, with good infantry, not to speak of Croat parties hovering
about, or dismounted Pandours squatted in the corn. That
easternmost Village of his is spelt ‘ Krzeczhorz” (unpronouncea-
ble to mankind), a dirty little place; in and round which the
Battle had its hinge or cardinal point: the others, as abstruse of
spelling, all but equally impossible to the human organs, we will
forbear to name, except in case of necessity. Half a mile be-
hind Krzeczhorz (let us write it Kreczor for the future: what
can we do?), is a thin little Oak-wood, bushes mainly, but with
_ sparse trees too, which is now quite stubbed out, though it was
then important enough, and played a great part in the result of
this day’s work. Radowesnitz, a pronounceable little Village,
half a mile farther or southward of the Oak-bush, is beyond the
extremity of Daun’s position; low down on a marshy little
Brook, which oozes through lakes and swamps towards Kolin,
in the northerly direction.

Most or all of these Villages are on little Brooks (natural
thirst so leading them): always some little runlet of water, not
so swampy when there is any fall for it; in general lively when
it gets over the ridge, and becomes visible from this Highway.
And it is ¢urious to see what a considerable dell, or green as-
cending chasm, this little thread of water, working at all mo-
ments for thousands of years, has hollowed out for itself in the
sloping ground; making a great military obstacle, if you are
mounting to attack there. Poor Czech Hamlets all of them,
dirty, dark, malodorous, ignorant, abhorrent of German speech ;
in what nook those inarticulate inhabitants, diving under-
ground at a great rate this morning, have hidden themselves to-
day, I know not. The country consists of knolls and slopes,
with swamps intermediate ; rises higher on the Planian side; but
except the top of that Kamhayek ridge on the Planian side, and

~

68 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII
18th June 1757.

‘“‘Friedrich’s-Berg” on the Kolin side, there is nothing that you
could think of calling a Hill, though many Books (and even
Friedrich’s Book) rashly say otherwise. Friedrich’s-Berg now
so called, is on the north side of the Highway: half a mile
north-eastward of Slati-slunz, the malodorous Inn. A conical
height of perhaps a hundred and fifty feet; rises rather suddenly
from the still-sloping ground, checking the slope there; on
which the Austrian populations have built some memorial late-
ly, notable to Tourists. Here Friedrich “stood during the Bat-
tle,” say they ; and the Prussians ‘‘ had a battery there.””, Which
remains uncertain to me, at least the battery part of it: that
Friedrich himself was there, now and then, can be believed; but
not that he kept “standing there” for long together. Fried-
rich’s-Berg does command some view of the Kreczor scene,
which at times was cardinal, at others not: but Friedrich did
not stand anywhere: “ oftenest in the thick of the fire,” say those
who saw.

Friedrich, from his Inn near Planian, seeing how Daun de-
ploys himself, considers him impregnable on the left wing; im-
pregnable, too, in front: not so on the Kreczor side, right flank
and rear; but capable of being rolled together, if well struck at
there. ‘Thither, therefore; that is his vulnerable point. March
along his front; quietly parallel in due Order of Battle, till we
can bend round, and plunge in upon that. The Van, which
consists of Ziethen’s Horse and Hiilsen’s Infantry; Van, having
faced to right at the proper moment and so become Left Wing,
will attack Kreczor; probably carry it; each Division following

will in like manner face to right when it arrives there, and fall -

on in regular succession in support of Hiilsen (at Hiilsen’s right
flank, if Hiilsen be found prospering): our Right Wing is to re-
fuse itself, and be as a Reserve,—no fighting on the road, you
others, but steady towards Hiilsen, in continual succession, all
you; no facing round, no fighting anywhere, till we get thither:
—‘ March!”

The word is given about -2 p.m.; and all, on the instant, is in
motion; rolls steadily eastward, in two columns, which will be-
come First Line and Second. One along the Highway, the sec-
ond at due distance leftward on the green ground, no hedge or

Cuap. LV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 69
18th June 1757.

other obstacle obstructing in that part of the world. Daun’s
batteries, on the right, spit at them in passing, to no purpose;
sputters of Pandour musketry, from coverts, there may be:
Prussians finely disregarding, pass along; flowing tide-like to-
wards thew goal and place of choice. An impressive phenome-
non in the sunny afternoon; with Daun expectant of them, and
the Czech populations well hidden underground !—

Ziethen, vanmost of all, finds Nadasti and his Austrian squad-
rons drawn across the Highway, hitherward of the Kreczor lati-
tude: Ziethen dashes on Nadasti; tumbles his squadrons and
him away; clears the Road, and Kreczor neighbourhood, of Na-
dasti: drives him quite into the hollow of Radowesnitz, where
he stood inactive for the rest of the day. Hiilsen now at the |
level of Kreczor (in the latitude of Kreczor, as we phrased it),
halts, faces to right; stiffly presses up, opens his cannon-thun-
ders, his bayonet-charges and platoon-fires upon Kreczor. Stiff
ly pressing up, in spite of the violent counter-thunders, Hiilsen
' does manage Kreczor without very much delay, completely
enough, and like a workman; takes the battery, two batteries ;
overturns the Infantry ;—in a word, has seized Kreczor, and, as
new tenant, swept the old, and their litter, quite out. Of all
which Ziethen has now the chase, and by no means will neglect
that duty. Ziethen, driving the rout before him, has driven it
in some minutes past the little Oak-wood above mentioned ; and,
or rather dut,—what is much to be noted,—is there taken in
flank with cannon-shot and musketry, Daun having put batteries
and Croat parties in the Oak-wood; and is forced to draw bri-
dle, and get out of range again.

Hiilsen, advancing towards this little Oak-wood, is surprised
to discover, not the wood alone, but a strong Austrian force, foot
and horse, to rear of it;—-such had been Daun’s and Nadasti’s
precaution, on view of those Friedrich phenomena, flowing on
from Planian, guessed to be hitherward. At sight of which
Wood and foot-party, Hiilsen, no new Battalion having yet ar-
rived to second him, pauses, merely cannonading from the dis-
tance, till new Battalions shall arrive. Unhappily they did not
arrive, or not in due quantity at the set time,—for what rea-

70  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

son, by what strange mistake? men still ask themselves. Prob-
ably by more mistakes than one. Enough, Hiilsen, struggling
here all day, with reinforcements never adequate, did take the
Wood, and then lose it; did take and lose this and that; but
was unable to make more of it than keep his ground thereabouts.
A resolute man, says Retzow, but without invention of his own,
or head to mend the mistakes of others. In and about Kreczor,
Hiilsen did maintain himself with more and more tenacity, till
the general avalanche, fruit of said mistakes, swept zm, quite
spasmodically struggling at that period, off to the edge of it, and
all the others clean away! Mistakes have been to rightwards,
one or even two, the fruit of which, small at first, suffices to turn
the balance, and ends in an avalanche, or precipitous descent of
ruin on the Prussian side.

One mistake there was, miles westward on the right wing;
due to Mannstein, our too impetuous Russian friend. Mann-
stein well to right, while marching forward according to order,
has Croat musketry spitting upon him from amid the high corn,
to an inconvenient extent: such was the common lot, which oth-
ers had borne and disregarded: perhaps it was beyond the aver-
age on Mannstein, or Mannstein’s patience was less infinite ;
anyway it provoked Mannstein to boil over; and in evil moment
he said, “ I°xtinguish me that Croat canaille, then!” Regiment
Bornstedt faced to right, accordingly ; took to extinguishing the
Croat canaille, which of course fled at once, or squatted closer,

but came back with reinforcements; drew Mannstein deeper in,

fatally delayed Bornstedt, and proved widely ruinous. For now
he stopped the way to those following him: regiments marching
on to rear of Mannstein see Mannstein halted, volleying with the
Austrians; ask themselves, “‘ How? Is there new order come ?
Attack to be in this point?” And successively fall on to sup-
port Mannstein, as the one clear point in such dubiety. So that
the whole right wing from Regiment Bornstedt westward is
storming up the difficult steeps, in hot conflict with the Austri-
ans there, where success against them had been judged impracti-
cable ;—and there is now no reserve force anywhere to be ap-
_ plied to in emergency, for Hiilsen’s behoof or another’s; and the
Plan of Battle from Mannstein westward has been fatally over-

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 71
18th June 1757.

turned. Poor Mannstein, there is no doubt, committed this er-
ror, being too fiery a man. Surely to him it was no luxury, and
he paid the smart for it in skin and soul: ‘‘ badly wounded in
this business ;” nay, in direct sequel, not many weeks after,
killed by it, as we shall see !—

To Mannstein’s mistake, Friedrich himself, in his account of
Kolin, mainly imputes the disaster that followed ; and such, then
and afterwards, was the universal judgment in military circles ;
loading the memory of too impetuous Mannstein with the whole.t
Much talk there was in Prussian military circles; but there
must also have been an admirable silence on the part of some.
To Three Persons it was known that another strange incident
had happened far ahead, far eastward, of Mannstein’s position :
incident, which did not by any means tend to alleviate, which
could only strengthen and widen, the evil results of Mannstein ;
and which might have lifted part of the load from Mannstein’s
memory! Not till the present Century, after the lapse of al-
most fifty years, was this secret slowly dug out of silence, and
submitted to modern curiosity.

The incident is this ;—never whispered of for near fifty years
(so silent were the three); and endlessly tossed about since that ;
the sense of it not understood till almost now.® The three par-
ties were: King Friedrich; Moritz of Dessau, leading on the
centre here; Moritz’s young Nephew Franz, Heir of Dessau, a
brisk lad of seventeen, learning War here as Aide-de-camp to
Moritz: the exact spot is not known to me,— probably the
sround near that Inn of Slatislunz, or Golden Sun; between the
foot of Friedrich’s-Berg and that :—fact indubitable, though
kept dark so long. Moritz is marching with the centre, or main
battle, that way, intending to wheel and turn hillwards, Kreczor-
wise, as per order, certain furlongs ahead; when Friedrich (hay-
ing, so I can conceive it, seen from his Hill-top how Hiilsen had
done Kreczor, altogether prosperous there; and what endless ca-
pability there was of prospering to all lengths and speeding the
general winning, were Hiilsen but supported soon enough, were

* See Retzow, i. 185; Tempelhof, i. 214, 220.
° See Retzow, i. 126; Berenhorst; &c. &c. ;—then finally, Kutzen, pp. 99,
217.

72 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

there any safe short cut to Hiilsen) dashed from his Hill-top in
hot haste toward Prince Moritz, General of the centre, intend-
ing to direct him upon such short cut; and hastily said, with
Olympian brevity and fire, ‘‘ Face to right here!’ With Jove-
like brevity, and in such blaze of Olympian fire as we may im-
agine. Moritz himself is of brief, crabbed, fiery mind, brief in
temper; and answers to the effect, ‘‘Impossible to attack the
enemy here, your Majesty; postured as they are; and we with
such orders gone abroad !”—‘‘ Face to right, I tell you!” said
the King, still more Olympian, and too emphatic for explaining.
Moritz, I hope, paused, but rather think he did not, before re-
monstrating the second time; neither perhaps was his voice so
low as it should have been: it is certain Friedrich dashed quite
up to Moritz at this second remonstrance, flashed out his sword
(the only time he ever drew his sword in battle); and now, gone
all to mere Olympian lightning and thunder-tone, asks in this at-
titude, ‘* Will Hr (will He) obey orders, then ?”—Moritz, fallen
silent of remonstrance, with gloomy rapidity obeys.

Prince Franz, the young Nephew of Moritz, alone witnessed
this scene; scene to be locked in threefold silence. In his old
age, Franz had whispered it to Berenhorst, his bastard Half-
Uncle, a famed military Critic,—who is still in the highest re-
pute that way (Berenhorst’s Ariegskunst, and other deep Books),
and is recognisable, to day readers, for an abstruse strong judg-
ment; with equal strength of abstruse temper hidden behind it,
and very privately a deep grudge towards Friedrich, scarcely
repressible on opportunity. From Berenhorst it irrepressibly
oozed out ;° much more to Friedrich’s disadvantage than it now
looks when wholly seen into. Not change of plan, not ruinous
caprice on Friedrich’s part, as Berenhorst, Retzow, and others
would have it; only excess of brevity towards Moritz, and acci-
dent of the Olympian fire breaking out. Friedrich is chargeable
with nothing, except perhaps (what Moritz knows the evil of)
trying for a short cut! Such is now the received interpreta-
tion. Prince Franz, to his last day, refused to speak again on

6 «Heinrich von Berenhorst” (a natural son of the Old Dessauer’s), ‘fin
his Betrachtungen iiber die Kriegskunst, is the first that aliudes to it in print
(Leipzig, 1797, —page in second edition, 1798, is, i. 219).”’

ee

CHAP. IW BATTLE OF KOLIN. 73
18th June 1757.

the subject; judiciously repentant, we can fancy, of having
spoken at all, and brought such a matter into the streets and
their pie-powder adjudications.? For the present, he is Adju-
tant to Moritz, busy obeying to the letter.

Friedrich, withdrawing to his Height again, and looking back
on Moritz, finds that he is making right in upon the Austrian
line; which was by no means Friedrich’s meaning, had not he
been so brief. Friedrich, doubtless with pain, remembers now
that he had said only, ‘‘ Face to right !’’ and had then got into
Olympian tempest, which left things dark to Moritz. ‘ Hald-
links, Half to left withal!” he despatches that new order to
Moritz, with the utmost speed: “Face to right; then, forward
half to left.’ Had Moritz, at the first, got that commentary to
his order, there had probably been no remonstrance on Moritz’s
part, no Olympian scene to keep silent; and Moritz, taking that
diagonal direction from the first, had hit in at or below Kreczor,
at the very point where he was needed. Alas, for overhaste;
short cuts, if they are to be good, ought at least to be made
clear! Moritz, on the new order reaching him, does instantly
steer half-left: but he arrives now above Kreczor, strikes the
Austrian line on this side of Kreczor; disjoined from Hiilsen,
where he can do no good to Hiilsen: in brief, Moritz, and now
the whole line with him, have to do as Mannstein and sequel
are doing, attack in face, not in flank; and try what, in the pro-
portion of one to two, up-hill, and against batteries, they can
make of it in that fashion ! ;

_ And so, from right wing to left, miles long, there is now uni-
versal storm of volleying, bayonet-charging, thunder of artillery,
case-shot, cartridge-shot, and sulphurous devouring whirlwind;
the wrestle very tough and furious, especially on the assaulting
side. Here, as at Prag, the Prussian troops were one and all
in the fire; each doing strenuously his utmost, no complaint to
be made of their performance. More perfect soldiers, I believe,
were rarely or never seen on any field of war. But there is no
reserve left: Mannstein and the rest, who should have been re-
serve, and at a General’s disposal, we see what they are doing!
In vain, or nearly so, is Friedrich’s tactic or manceuvering tal-
7In Kutzen, pp. 217-237, a long dissertation on it.

Von. V.—D

74 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

ent; what now is there to manceuvre? All is gone up into one
combustion, ‘To fan the fire, to be here, there, fanning the fire
where need shows: this is now Friedrich’s function; ‘ every-
where in the hottest of the fight,” that is all we at present know

of him, invisible to us otherwise. ‘This death-wrestle lasted per-

haps four hours; till seven or towards eight o’clock in the June
evening; the sun verging downwards; issue still uncertain.
And, in fact, at last the issue turned upon a hair ;—such the
empire of Chance in War matters. Cautious Daun, it is well
known, did not like the aspect of the thing; cautious Daun
thinks to himself, “If we get pushed back into that Camp of
yesternight, down the Kamhayek Heights, and right into the
impassable swamps; the reverse way, Heights now /zs, not ours,
and impassable swamps waiting to swallow us? Wreck com-
plete, and surrender at discretion—!’’—Daun writes in pencil:
“The retreat is to Suchdol’’ (Kuttenberg way, southward, where
we have heights again and magazines); Daun’s Aide-de-camp is
galloping everywhither with that important Document; and
Generals are preparing for retreat accordingly,—one General
on the right wing has, visibly to Hiilsen and us, his cannon out

of battery, and under way rearwards; a welcome sight to Hiil-

sen, who, with imperfect reinforcement, is toughly maintaining
himself there all day.

And now the Daun Aide-de-camp, so Chance would have it,
cannot find Nostitz the Saxon Commandant of Horse in that
quarter; finds a ‘*Saxon Lieutenant-Colonel B—” (‘“ Benken-
dorf”’ all Books now write him plainly), who, by another little
chance, had been still left there: “Can the Herr Lieutenant-
Colonel tell me where General Nostitz is?” Benkendorf can
tell;—will himself take the message: but Benkendorf looks into
the important Pencil Document; thinks it premature, wasteful,
and that the contrary is feasible; persuades Nostitz so to think;
persuades this regiment and that (Saxon, Austrian, horse and
foot); though the cannon in retreat go trundling past them:
‘Merely shifting their battery, don’t you see:—Steady!”’ And,
in fine, organises, of Saxon and Austrian horse and foot in prom-
ising quantity (Saxons in great fury on the Pirna score, not to
say the Striegau, and other old grudges), a new unanimous as-
sault on Hiilsen.

— ee

.
*

Cap. IV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 75
18th June 1757.

The assault was furious, and became ever more so; at length
irresistible to Htlsen. Hiilsen’s horse, pressing on as to victory,
are at last hurled back; could not be rallied ;° fairly fled (some
of them); confusing Hiilsen’s foot,—foot is broken, instantly
ranks itself, as the manner of Prussians is; ranks itself in im-
promptu squares, and stands fiercely defensive again, amid the
slashing and careering: wrestle of extreme fury, say the wit-
nesses. ‘* This for Striegau !” cried the Saxon dragoons, furi-
ously sabring.2 Yes; and is there nothing to account of Pirna,
and the later scores? Scores unliquidated, very many still; but
the end is, Hiilsen is driven away; retreats, Parthian-like, down
hill, some space; whose sad example has to spread rightwards

_like a powder-train, till all are in retreat,—northward, towards
Nimburg, is the road ;—and the Battle of Kolin is finished.

Friedrich made vehement effort to rally the Horse, to rally

this and that; but to no purpose: one account says he did col-

lect some small body, and marched forth at the head of it against

a certain battery; but, in his rear, man after man fell away, till
Lieutenant-Colonel Grant (not “Le Grand,” as some call him,
and indeed there is an accent of Scotch in him, still audible to
us here) had to remark, ‘“‘ Your Majesty and I cannot take the
battery ourselves!” Upon which Friedrich turned round; and,
finding nobody, looked at the enemy through his glass, and slow-
ly rode away!°—on a different errand.

Seeing the Battle irretrievably lost, he now called Bevern and
Moritz to him; gave them charge of the retreat—‘‘To Nim-
burg; cross Elbe there” (fifteen good miles away); ‘and in
the defiles of Planian have especial care!” and himself rode off
thitherward, his Garde-du-Corps escorting. Retzow says, ‘a
swarm of fugitive horse-soldiers, baggage-people, grooms and led
horses gathered in the train of him: these latter, at one point,”
Retzow has heard in Opposition circles, “rushed up, galloping:
‘Enemy’s hussars upon us!’ and set the whole party to the gal-
lop for some time, till they found the alarm was false.”!! Of

8 That of ‘‘ Racker, wollt thr ewig leben, Rascals, would you live forever ?”
with the ‘‘ Fritz, for eight groschen, this day there has been enough !”—is
to be counted pure myth; not unsuccessful, in its withered kind.

* Archenholtz, i. 100. 10 Retzow, i. 1389. 11 Tb: i: 140.

76 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

Friedrich we see nothing, except as if by cloudy moonlight in
an uncertain manner, through this and the other small Anec-
dote, perhaps semi-mythical, and true only in the essence of it.
Daun gave no chase anywhere; on his extreme left he had,
perhaps as preparative for chasing, ordered out the cavalry;
‘General Stampach and cavalry from the centre,” with cannon,
with infantry and appliances, to clear away the wrecks of Mann-
stein, and what still stands, to right of him, on the Planian
Highway yonder. But Stampach found “ obstacles of ground,”
wet obstacles and also dry,—Prussian posts, smaller and great-
er, who would not stir a handbreadth: in fact, an altogether
deadly storm of Negative, spontaneous on their part, from the
indignant regiments thereabouts, King’s First Battalion, and
two others; who blazed out on Stampach in an extraordinary
manner, tearing to shreds every attempt of his, themselves stiff

as steel: ‘ Die, all of us, rather than stir!’’ And, in fact, the

second man of these poor fellows did die there.!? So that Be-
vern, Commander in that part, who was absent speaking with the
King, found on his return a new battle broken out; which he
did not forbid, but encourage; till Stampach had enough, and
withdrew in rather torn condition. This, if this were some
preparative for chasing, was what Daun did of it, in the cavalry
way; and this was all. The infantry he strictly prohibited to
stir from their position,—‘* No saying, if we come into the level
ground, with such an enemy !”—and passed the night under
arms. Far on our left, or what was once our left, Ziethen with
all his squadrons, nay, Hiilsen with most of his battalions, con-
tinued steady on the ground; and marched away at their leis-
ure, as rear-guard.

“It seemed,” says Tempelhof, in splenetic tone, ‘as if Feld-
marschall Daun, like a good Christian, would not suffer the sun
to go down on his wrath. This day, nearly the longest in the
year, he allowed the Prussian cavalry, which had beaten Nadas-
ti, to stand quiet on the field till ten at night” (till nine); ‘he
did not send a single hussar in chase of the infantry. He stood
all night under arms; and next day, returned to his old Camp,

72 Kutzen, p. 138 (from the canonical, or ‘‘ Staff-Officers” enumera-
tion: sce supra, p. 25 n.).

eas

ee

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KOLIN. 77
18th June 1757.

as if he had been afraid the King would come back. Arriving
there himself, he could see, about ten in the morning, behind
Kaurzim and Planian, the whole Prussian Baggage fallen into
such a coil that the wagons were with difficulty got on way
again; nevertheless he let it, under cover of the grenadier bat-
talion Manteuffel, go in peace.”'? A man that for caution and
slowness could make no use of his victory !

The Austrian force in the Field this day is counted to have
been 60,000; their losses in killed, wounded and missing, 8,114.
The Prussians, who began 34,000 in strength, lost 13,773; of
whom prisoners (including all the wounded), 5,380. Their
baggage, we have seen, was not meddled with: they lost 45 ¢an-
non, 22 flags,—a loss not worth adding, in comparison to this
sore havoc, for the second time, in the flower of the Prussian
infantry. '+

The news reached Prag Camp at two in the morning (Sunday
19th): to the sorrowful amazement of the Generals there; who
“stood all silent; only the Prinee of Prussia breaking out into
loud lamentations and accusations,’ which even Retzow thinks
unseemly. Friedrich arrived that Sunday evening: and the
Siege was raised, next day; with next to no hindrance or in-
jury. With none at all on the part of Daun; who was still
standing among the heights and swamps of Planian,—busy sing-
ing, or shooting, universal Ze Deum, with very great rolling fire
and other pomp, that day while Friedrich gathered his Siege-
goods and got on march.

The Maria-Theresa Order, new Knighthood for Austria.

No tongue can express the joy of the Austrians over this
victory,—vouchsafed them, in this manner, by Lieutenant-Colo-
nel Benkendorf and the Powers Above. Miraculously, behold,
they are not upon the retreat to Suchdol, at double-quick, and
in ragged, ever-lengthening line; but stand here, keeping rank
all night, on the Planian-Kolin upland of the Kamhayek :—be-
hold, they have actually beaten Friedrich; for the first time, not

13 ‘Tempelhof, i. 195.
™* Retzow, i. 141 (whose numbers are apt to be inaccurate); Kutzen, p.
144 (who depends on the Canonical Staff- Officer Account).

78 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
18th June 1757.

been beaten by him. Clearly beaten that Friedrich, by some
means or other. With such a result, too; consider it,—drawn
sword was at our throat; and marvellously now it is turned
round upon his (if Daun be alert), and we—let us rejoice to all
lengths, and sing Te Deum and Te Daunum with one throat, till
the Heavens echo again.

There was quite a hurricane, or lengthened storm, of jubila-
tion and tripudiation raised at Vienna on this victory; New
Order of Maria Theresa, in suitable Olympian fashion, with no
end of regulating and inaugurating,—with Daun the first Chief
of it; and “ Pensions to Merit’’ a conspicuous part of the plan,
we are glad to see. Jt subsists to this day: the grandest Mili-
tary Order the Austrians yet have. Which then deafened the
world, with its infinite solemnities, patentings, discoursings,
trumpetings, for a good while. As was natural, surely, to that
high Imperial Lady with the magnanimous heart; to that loyal
solid Austrian People with its pudding-head. Daun is at the
top of the Theresa Order, and of military renown in Vienna cir-
cles ;—of Lieutenant-Colonel Benkendorf I never heard that he
got the least pension or recognition ;—continued quietly a mili-
tary lion to discerning men, for the rest of his days,!4

Nay once, on Daun’s Te-Deum day, he had a kind of recogni-
tion ;—and even, by good accident, can tell us of it in his own
words :16

“T was sent for to headquarters by a trumpeter,”"—Benkendorf was,
—‘when all was ready for the Te Deum. Feldmarschall Daun was
pleased to say at sight of me, ‘ That as I had had so much to do with
the victory, it was but right I should thank our Herr Gott along with
him.’ Having no change of clothes,—as the servant who was to have
a uniform and some linens ready for me had galloped off during the
Fight, and our baggage was all gone to rearward,—I tried to hustle out
of sight among the crowd of Imperial Officers all in gala: but the reign-
ing Duke of Wiirtemberg” (Wilhelmina’s Son-in-law, a perverse obsti-
nate Herr, growing ever more perverse; one of Wilhelmina’s sad af-
flictions in these days) “ called me to him, and said,‘ He would give his
whole wardrobe could he wear that dusty coat with such honour as [!’”

15 «* Died at Dresden, General of Cavalry,” 5th May 1801 (Rédenbeck,

i, 338, 339).
16 Kutzen (citing some Biography of Benkendorf ), p. 143.

es

Cnap. V.]| FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 79
20th-27th June 1757.

—yes; and tried hard, in his perverse way, for some such thing ; but
never could, as we shall see.

How lucky that Polish Majesty had some remains of Cavalry
still at Warsaw in the Pirna time; that they were made into a
Saxon Brigade, and taken into the Austrian service; Brigade
of three Regiments, Nostitz for Chief, and this Benkendorf a
Lieutenant-Colonel, among them ;—and that Polish Majesty,
though himself lost, has been the saving of Austria twice with-
in one year!

CHAPTER V.
FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ, HIS WORLD OF ENEMIES COMING ON.

Or Friedrich’s night-thoughts at Nimburg; how he slept, and
what his dreams were, we have no account. Seldom did a wea-
ried heart sink down into oblivion on such terms. By narrow
miss, the game gone; and with such results ahead. It was a
right valiant plunge this that he made, with all his strength and
all his skill, home upon the heart of his chief enemy. To quench
his chief enemy before another came up: it was a valiant plan,
and valiantly executed; and it has failed. To dictate peace from
the walls of Vienna: that lay on the cards for him this morning;
and at night—? Kolin is lost, the fruit of Prag Victory too is*
lost; and Schwerin and new tens of thousands, unreplaceable
for worth in this world, are lost: much is lost! Courage, your
Majesty, all is not lost, you not, and honour not.

To the young Graf von Anhalt, on the road to Nimburg, he is
recorded to have said, ‘* Don’t you know, then, that every man
must have his reverses (Mais ne savezvous done pas que chaque
homme doit avoir ses revers)? It appears I am to have mine.”?
And more vaguely, in the Anecdote-Books, is mention of some
stanch ruggedly pious old Dragoon, who brought, in his steel
cap, from some fine-flowing well he had discovered, a draught
of pure water to the King; old Mother Earth’s own gift, through
her rugged Dragoon, exquisite refection to the thirsty wearied
soul; and spoke, in his Dragoon dialect,—‘‘ Never mind, your

1 Rodenbeck, i. 309.

80  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
20th-27th June 1757.

Majesty! Der Allmiichtige and we; it shall be mended yet.
‘The Kaiserin may get a victory for once; but does that send
us to the Devil (davon holt uns der Teufel nicht)?’ ”—words of
rough comfort, which were well taken.

- Next morning, several Books, and many Drawings and Sculp-
tures of a dim unsuccessful nature, give us view of him, at Nim-
burg; sitting silent ‘on a Brunnen-Rohr” (Fountain Apparatus,
waste-pipe or feeding-pipe, too high for convenient sitting); he
is stooping forward there, his eyes fixed on the ground, and is
scratching figures in the sand with his stick, as the broken troops
reassemble round him. Archenholtz says: ‘‘ He surveyed with
speechless feeling the small remnant of his Life-guard of Foot,
favourite First Battalion; 1,000 strong yesterday morning, hard-
ly 400 now ;”—gone the others, in that furious Anti-Stampach
outburst which ended the day’s work! ‘All soldiers of this
chosen Battalion were personally known to him; their names,
their age, native place, their history” (the pick of his Ruppin
regiment was the basis of it); ‘in one day, Death had mowed
them down; they had fought like heroes, and it was for him that
they had died. His eyes were visibly wet, down his face rolled
silent tears.’’?

In public I never saw other tears from this King,—though in
private I do not warrant him; his sensibilities, little as you
would think it, being very lively and intense. ‘‘To work, how-
ever!’’ ‘This King can shake away such things; and is not giv-
en overmuch to retrospection on the unalterable Past. ‘‘ Like
dewdrops from the lion’s mane” (as is figuratively said); the lion
swiftly rampant again! ‘There was manifold swift ordering, con-
sidering and determining, at Nimburg, that day; and towards
night Friedrich shot rapidly into Headquarters at Prag, where,
by order, there is, as the first thing of all, a very rapid business
going on, well forward by the time he arrives.

To fold one’s Siege-gear and Army neatly together from those
Two Hill-tops, and march away with them safe, in sight of so
many enemies: this has to be the first and rapidest thing; if this
be found possible, as one calculates it may. After which, the

? Archenholtz, i. 104, 101; Kutzen, pp. 259, 188; Retzow, i. 142,

‘
4
%
;
{
‘
q

Cuap. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 81
20th-27th June 1757.

world of enemies, held in the slip so long, will rush in from all
the four winds,—unknown whitherward; one must wait to see
whitherward and how.

Friedrich’s History for the remaining six months of this Year
falls, accordingly, into three Sections. Section jist: Waiting
how and towards what objects his enemies, the Austrians first.
of all, will advance ;—this lasts for about a month; Friedrich
waiting mainly at Leitmeritz, on guard there both of Saxony and
of Silesia, till this slowly declare itself. Slowly, perhaps almost
stupidly, but by no means satisfactorily to Friedrich, as will be
seen! After which, Section second of his History lasts above
two months; Friedrich’s enemies being all got to the ground,
and united in hope and resolution to overwhelm and abolish him;
but their plans, positions, operations so extremely various that,
for a long time (end of August to beginning of November), Fried-
rich cannot tell what to do with them; and has to scatter him-
self into thin threads, and roam about, chiefly in Thiiringen and
the West of Saxony, seeking something to fight with, and finding
nothing; getting more and more impatient of such paltry misery ;
at times nigh desperate; and habitually drifting on desperation
as on a lee shore in the night, despite all his efforts. ‘Till, in
Section third, which goes from November 5th, through December
Sth, and into the New Year, he does find what to do; and does
it,—in a forever memorable way.

Three Sections; of which the reader shall success.vely have
some idea, if he exert himself; though it is only in snatches,
suggestive to an active fancy, that we can promise to dwell on
them, especially on the First Two, which lie pretty much wnsur-
veyable in those chaotic records, like a world-wide coil of thrums.
Let us be swift, in Friedrich’s own manner; and try to disem-
prison the small portions of essential! Here, partly from Eye-
witnesses, are some Notes in regard to Section First :° |

“ Sunday, 19th June, At 2 a.m., Major Grant arrives at Prag” (musz
have started instantly after that of “ We two cannot take the battery,
your Majesty !”)—‘ goes to Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, intenm
Commander on the Ziscaberg, with order To raise Siege. Consterna-

> Westphalen, Geschichte der Feldziige des Herzogs Ferdinand (and a Pri-
vate Journal of W.’s there), ii. 13-19; Retzow; &e,

D 2

82 SEVEN YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

20th-27th June 1757:
tion on the part of some ; worse, on the Prince of Prussia’s part; the
others kept silence at least,—and set instantly to work. On both Hills,
the cannons are removed (across Moldau the Zisca- Hill ones), batteries
destroyed, Siege-gear neatly gathered up, to go in wagons to Leitmer-
itz, thence by boat to Dresden: all this lies ready done, the dangerous
part of it done, when Friedrich arrives.

“ Monday, 20th, before sunrise, Siege raised. At three in the morn-
ing, Friedrich marches from the Ziscaberg; to eastward he, to Alt-
Buntzlau, thence to Alt-Lissa,”—-Nimburg way, with what objects we
shall see. ‘Marshal Keith’s fine performance. Keith, from the Weis-
senberg, does not march, such packing and loading still; all the bag-
gages and artilleries being with Keith. Not till four in the afternoon
did Keith march; but beautifully then; and folded himself away,—
rearguard under Schmettau ‘ retreating chequer-wise,’ nothing but Tol-
patcheries attempting on him,—westward, Budin-ward, without loss of
a linstock, not to speak of guns. Very prettily done on the part of
Keith. By Budin, to Leitmeritz, he; where the King will join him
shortly.”

Friedrich’s errand in Alt-Lissa, eastward, while Keith went
westward, was, ‘lo be within due arm’s-length of the Moritz-Be-
vern, or beaten Kolin Army, which is coming up that way; in-
tending to take post, and do its best, in those parts, with Zittau
Magazine and the Lausitz to rear of it. One of our Eyewit-
nesses, a Herr Westphalen, Ferdinand of Brunswick’s Secretary,
—who, with his Chief, got into wider fields before long,—yields
these additional particulars face to face:

“ Tuesday,2\st June 1757. King’s Headquarters in Lissa or neigh-
bourhood till Friday next; which is central for both these movements,
—Thursday, orders seven regiments of horse to reinforce Keith. No
symptom yet of pursuit anywhere.

“ Friday, 24th. Prince Moritz with the Kolin Army made appear-
ance, all safe, and is to command here; King intending for Keith.
After dinner, and the due interchange of battalions to that end, King
sets off, with Prince Henri, towards Keith; Headquarter in Alt-Buntz-
lau again. Saturday Night, at Melnick ;* Sunday, Gastorf: Monday
Night, 27th June, Leitmeritz ; King lodges in the Cathedral Close, in
sight of Keith, who is on the opposite side of Elbe,—but the town has
a Bridge for tomorrow. ‘ Never was a quieter march; not the shadow
of a Pandour visible. The Duke’ (Ferdinand, my Chief, Chatham’s
jewel that is to be, and precious to England) ‘ has suffered much from

* Map at p. LILI a.

Cuap. V. ] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 83
20th—-27th June 1757.

a’—in fact, from a cours de ventre, temporary bowel-derangement,
which was very troublesome, owing to the excessive heats by day, and
coldness of the nights.

“ Tuesday, 28th. Junction with Keith,—Bridge rightly secured,due
party of dragoons and foot left on the right bank, to occupy a height
which covers Leitmeritz. ‘Clearing of the Pascopol’ (that is, sweep-
ing the Pandours out of it), is the first business; Colonel Loudon with
his Pandours, a most swift sharp-cutting man, being now here in those
parts ; doing adeal of mischief. ‘Three days ago, Saturday 25th, Keith
had sent seven battalions, with the proper steel-besoms, on that Pasco-
pol affair; Tuesday, on junction, Majesty sends three more: job done
- on Wednesday ; reported ‘ done, —though I should not be surprised,”
says Westphalen, “if some little highway robbery still went on among
the Mountains up there.”

No ;—and bevore quitting hold, what is this that Loudon (on
the very day of the King’s arrival, June 27th), on the old Field
of Lobositz over yonder, has managed to do! General Mann-
stein, wounded at Kolin, happened, with others in like case, to be
passing that way, towards Dresden and better surgery,—when
Loudon’s Croats set upon them, scattering their slight escort:
‘‘ Quarter, on surrender! Prisoners?” ‘ Never!” answered
Mannstein; ‘ Never!” that too impetuous man, starting out
from his carriage, and snatching a musket: and was instantly
cut down there. And so ends ;—a man of strong head, and of
heart only too strong.*

From Prag onwards, here has been a delicate set of opera-
tions; perfectly executed,—thanks to Friedrich’s rapidity of
shift, and also to the cautious slowly-puzzling mind of Daun.
Had Daun used any diligence, had Daun and Prince Karl been
broad awake, together or even singly! But Friedrich guessed
they seldom or never were ; that they would spend some days in
puzzling ; and that, with despatch, he would have time for every-
thing. Daun, we could observe, stood singing Te Deum, greatly
at leisure, in his old Camp, 20th June, while Friedrich, from the
first gray of morning, and diligently all day long, was withdraw-
ing from the trenches of Prag,—Friedrich’s people, self, and
goods getting folded out in the finest gradation, and with perfect

4 Preuss, ii. 58; Militair-Lexikon, iii. 10.

84 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
27th June—20th July 1757.

success; no Daun to hinder him,— Daun leisurely doing Te
Deum, forty miles off, helping on the wrong side by that exer-
tion !5—‘‘ Poor Browne, he is dead of his wounds, in Prag yon-
der,” writes Westphalen in his Leitmeritz Journal, ‘news came
to us, July 1st: men said, ‘Ah, that was why they lay asleep.’”’

Till June 26th, Daun and Karl had not united; nor, except
sending out Loudon and Croats, done anything, either of them.
Sunday, June 26th, at Podschernitz on the old Field of Prag, a
week and a day after Kolin, they did get together; still seem-
ingly a little puzzled, ‘Shall we follow the King? Shall we
follow Moritz and Bevern ?”—nothing clear for some time, ex-
cept to send out Pandour parties upon both. Moritz, since
parting with the King in Alt-Buntzlau neighbourhood, has gone
northward some marches, thirty miles or so, to Jung-Buntzlau,
—meeting of Iser and Elbe, surely a good position :—Moritz, on
receipt of these Pandour allowances of his, writes to the King,
“Shall we retreat on Zittau, then, your Majesty? Straight
upon Zittau?” Fancy Friedrich’s astonishment ;—who well in-
tends to eat the Country first, perhaps to fight if there be chance,
and at least to lie outside the doors of Silesia and the Lausitz, as
well as of Saxony here !—and answers, with his own hand, on
the instant: ‘* Your Dilection will not be so mad!” And at
once recals Moritz, and appoints the Prince of Prussia to go and
take command. Who directly went ;—a most important step
for the King’s interests and his own. Whose fortunes in that
business we shall see before long !—

At Leitermitz the King continues four weeks, with his Army
parted in this way; waiting how the endless hostile element,
which begirdles his horizon all round, will shape itself into com-
binations, that he may set upon the likeliest or the needfullest
of these, when once it had disclosed itself. Horizon all round
is black enough: Austrians, French, Swedes, Russians, Reichs
Army; closer upon him or not so close, all are rolling in: Sax-
ony, the Lausitz and Silesia, Brandenburg itself, it is uncertain
which of these may soonest require his active presence.

The very day after his arrival in Leitmeritz,—Tuesday, 28th.

> Cogniazo, ii. 367.
* In Preuss, ii. 58, the pungent little Autograph in full.

; |
4
4
;

Cuap. V. ] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 85
28th June 1757.

of June, while that junction with Keith was going on, and the
troops were defiling along the Bridge for junction with Keith,—
a heavy sorrow had befallen him, which he yet knew not of.
An irreparable Domestic loss; sad complement to these Mili-
tary and other Public disasters. Queen Sophie Dorothee, about
whose health he had been anxious, but had again been set quiet,
died at Berlin that day.7. In her seventy-first year: of no defi-
nite violent disease; worn down with chagrins and apprehen-
sions, in this black whirlpool of Public ‘troubles. So far as
appears, the news came on Friedrich by surprise :—‘“‘ bad cough,”
we hear of, and of his anxieties about it, in the Spring time;
then again of ‘improvement, recovery, in the fine weather ;”—
no thought, just now, of such an event: and he took it with a
depth of affliction, which my less informed readers are far from
expecting of him.

July 2d, the news came: King withdrew into privacy; to
weep and bewail under this new pungency of grief, superadded
to so many others. Mitchell says: ‘‘ For two days he had no
levee; only the Princes dined with him” (Princes Henri and
Ferdinand; Prince of Prussia is gone to Jung Buntzlau, would
get the sad message there, among his other troubles): “ yester-
day, July 3d, King sent for me in the afternoon,—the first time
he has seen anybody since the news came :—lI had the honour
to remain with him some hours in his closet. I must own to
your Lordship I was most sensibly afflicted to see him indulging
his grief, and giving way to the warmest filial affections; re-
calling to mind the many obhgations he had to her late Majesty ;
all she had suffered, and how nobly she bore it; the good she
did to everybody; the one comfort he now had, to think of
having tried to make her last years more agreeable.”® In the
thick of public business, this kind of mood to Mitchell seems to
have lasted all the time of Leitmeritz, which is about three
weeks yet: Mitchell’s Notebooks and Dispatches, in that part,
have a fine Biographic interest; the wholly human Friedrich

7 Monbijou, 28th June 1757; born at Hanover, 27th March 1687.

8 Papers and Memoirs, i. 253; Despatch to Holdernsss, 4th July (slight-
ly abridged) ;—see ib. i. 357- 359 (Private Journal): nanny ii. 14,
See Quvres de Frédéric, iv. 182.

86 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
27th June—20th July 1757.

wholly visible to us there as he seldom is. Going over his past
Life to Mitchell; brief, candid, pious to both his Parents ;—in-
expressibly sad; like moonlight on the grave of one’s Mother,
silent that, while so much else is too noisy !— _

This Friedrich, upon whom the whole world has risen like a
mad Sorcerer’s Sabbath, how. safe he once lay in his cradle, like
the rest of us, mother’s love wrapping him soft:—and now!
These thoughts commingle in a very tragic way with the ava-
lanche of public disasters which is thundering down on all sides.
Warm tears the meed of this new sorrow; small in compass, but
greater in poignancy than all the rest together. ‘‘ My poor old
Mother, oh, my Mother, that so loved me always, and would
have given her own life to shelter mine!”—It was at Leitmer-
itz, as J guess, that Mitchell first made decisive acquaintance,
what we may almost call intimacy, with the King: we already
defined him as a sagacious, long-headed, loyal-hearted diplomatic
gentleman, Scotch by birth and by turn of character; abundant-
ly polite, vigilant, discreet, and with a fund of general sense and
rugged veracity of mind; whom Friedrich at once recognised
for what he was, and much took to, finding a hearty return
withal ; so that they were soon well with one another, and con-
tinued so. Mitchell, as orders were, ‘‘ attended the King’s per-
son” all through this War, sometimes in the blaze of battle it-
self and nothing but cannon-shot going, if it so chanced; and
has preserved, in his multifarious Papers, a great many traits
af Friedrich, not to be met with elsewhere.

Mitchell’s occasional society, conversation with a man of sense
and manly character, which Friedrich always much loved, was,
no doubt, a resource to Friedrich in his lonely roamings and
vicissitudes in those dark years. No other British Ambassador
ever had the luck to please him or be pleased by him,—most of
of them, as Ex-Exchequer Legge and the like Ex-Parliamentary
people, he seems to have considered dull, obstinate, wooden fel-
lows, of fantastic, abrupt, rather abstruse kind of character, not
worth deciphering ;—some of them, as Hanbury Williams, with
the mischievous tic (more like galvanism or St. Vitus’s dance)
which he called “ wit,’’ and the inconvenient turn for plotting
and intriguing, Friedrich could not endure at all, but had them

~

Cuap. V. ] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 87
27th June—20th July 1757.

as soon as possible recalled,—of course, not without detestation
on their part.

At Lietmeritz, it appears, he kept withdrawn to his closet a
good deal; gave himself up to his sorrows and his thoughts;
would sit many hours drowned in tears, weeping bitterly like a
child or a woman. ‘This is strange to some readers; but it is
true,—and ought to alter certain current notions. Friedrich,
flashing like clear steel upon evil-doers and mendacious unjust
persons and their works, is not by nature a cruel man, then, or
an unfeeling, as Rumour reports? Reader, no, far the reverse;
—and public Rumour, as you may have remarked, is apt to be
an extreme blockhead, full of fury and stupidity on such points,
and had much better hold its tongue till it know in some meas-
ure. Extreme sensibility is not sure to be a merit; though it
is sure to be reckoned one, by the greedy dim fellows looking idly
on: but, in any case, the degree of it that dwelt (privately, for
most part) in Friedrich was great; and to himself it seemed a
sad rather than joyful fact. Speaking of this matter, long after-
wards, to Garve, a Silesian Philosopher, with whom he used to
converse at Breslau, he says ;—or let dull Garve himself report
it, in the literal third-person:

‘“‘ And herein I,” the Herr Garve (venturing to dispute or qualify, on
one of his Majesty’s favourite topics) “believe lies the real ground of
‘happiness :’ it is the capacity and opportunity to accomplish great
things. This the King would not allow; but said,’That I did not suf-
ficiently take into account the natural feelings, different in different
people, which, when painful, embittered the life of the highest as of the
lowest. ‘That, in his own life, he had experienced the deepest suffer-
ings of this kind: *‘ And,’ added he, with a touching tone of kindness
and familiarity which never occurred again in his interviews with me,
‘if you (Er) knew, for instance, what I underwent on the death of my
Mother, you would see that | have been as unhappy as any other, and
unhappier than others, because of the greater sensibility I had (wed
ich mehr Empfindlichkeit gehabt habe).’””°

° Fragmente zur Schilderung des Geistes, des Charakters und der Regierung
Friedrichs des Zweiten, yon Christian Garve (Breslau, 1798), i. 314-316.
An unexpectedly dull Book (Garve having talent and reputation); kind
of monotonous Preachment upon Friedrich’s character; almost nothing
but the above fraction now derivable from it.

88 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. | Boox XVIII.
27th June—20th July 1757.

There needed not this new calamity in Friedrich’s lot just.

now! From all points of the compass, his enemies, held in
check so long, are flooding on: the confluence of disasters and
ill tidings, at this time, very great. From Jung-Buntzlau, close
by, his Brother’s accounts are bad; and grow ever worse,—as
will be seen! On the extreme West, “July 3d,” while Fried-
rich at Leitmeritz sat weeping for his Mother, the French take
Embden from him; ‘‘ July 5th,” the Russians, Memel, on the ut-
most East. June 30th, six days before, the Russians, after as
many months of haggling, did cross the Border; 37,000 of them
on this point; and set to bombarding Memel from land and sea.
Poor Memel (garrison only 700) answered very fiercely, “ sank
two of their gunboats” and the like; but the end was as we see,
—Feldmarschall Lehwald able to give no relief. For there
were above 70,000 other Russians (Feldmarschall Apraxin with
these latter, and Cossacks and Calmucks more than enough)
crossing elsewhere, south in Tilsit Country, upon old Lehwald.?°
Lehwald, with 30,000, in such circumstances—what is to be-
come of Preussen and him! Nearer hand, the Austrians, the
French, the very Reichs Army, do now seem intent on business.

The Reichs Execution Army, we saw how Mayer and the
Battle of Prag had checked it in the birth-pangs; and given
rise to pangs of another sort; the poor Reichs Circles generally
exclaiming, ‘What! Bring the war into our own borders?
Bring the King of Prussia on our own throats !”—and stopping
short in their enlistments and preparations; in vain for Austri-
an Officials to urge them. Watching there, with awe-struck
eye, while the 12,000 bombs flew into Prag.

The Battle of Kolin has reversed all that; and the poor old
Reich is again bent on business in the Execution way. Drum-
ming, committeeing, projecting and endeavouring with all her
might, in all quarters; and, from and after the event of Kolin,
holding visible Encampment, in the Niirnberg Country ; frac-
tions of actual troops assembling there. “On the Plains of
Fiirth, between Fiirth and Farrenbach, east side the River Reg-
nitz, there was the Camp pitched,” says my Anonymous Friend;
who gives me a cheerful Copperplate of the thing: red pennons,

10 FIelden-Geschichte, iv. 407-418.

Cuar. V. | FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 89
27th June—20 sn suly 1757.

blue, and bright mixed colours ; generals’ tents; order-of-battle,
and respective rallying points: with Bamberg Country in front,
and the peaks of the Pine Mountains lying pleasantly behind: a
sight for the curious.!' It is the same ground where Mayer
was careering lately; neighbouring nobility and gentry glad to
come in gala, and dance with Mayer. Hither, all through July,
come contingents straggling in, thicker and thicker; ‘ August
8th,” things now about complete, the Bishop of Bamberg came
to take survey of the Reichs-Heer (Bishop’s remarks not given) ;
August 10th, came the young reigning Duke of Hildburghausen
(Duke’s grand-uncle is to be Commander), on like errand; Au-
gust 11th, the Reichs-Heer got on march. Westward ho !—
readers will see towards what.

A truly elende, or miserable, Reichs Execution Army (as the
muisprinter had made it); but giving loud voice in the Gazettes 5
and urged by every consideration to do something for itself.
Prince of Hildburghausen,—a general of small merit, though he
has risen in the Austrian service, and we have seen him with
Seckendorf in old Turk times,—has, for his Kaiser’s sake, taken
the command; sensible perhaps that glory is not likely to be rife
here; but willing to make himself useful. Kaiser and Austria
urge, everywhere, with all their might: Prince of Hessen-Darm-
stadt, who lay on the Weissenberg lately, one of Keith’s distin-
guished seconds there and a Prussian Officer of long standing,
has, on Kaiser’s order, quitted all that, and become Hildburg-
hausen’s second here, in the Camp of Fiirth; thinking the path
of duty lay that way,—though his Wife, one of the noble wom-
en of her age, thought very differently.'2 A similar Kaiser’s or-
der, backed by what Law-thunder lay in the Reich, had gone
out against Friedrich’s own Brothers, and against every Reichs
Prince who was in Friedrich’s service; but, except him of Hes-
sen-Darmstadt, none of them had much minded.!°_ I did not

1 J.F.S. Qvhom I named Anonymous of Hamburg long since; who has
boiled down, with great diligence, the old Newspapers, and gives a great
many dates, notes, &c., without Index), i. 211, 224 (the Copperplate).

13 Her letter to Friedrich, ‘‘ Berlin, 30th October 1757,” Gfuvres de Fréd-
éric, Xxvii. 11. 135.

13Jn Orlich, Fitrst Moritz von Anhalt Dessau (Berlin, 1842), pp. 74, 75,

Prince Moritz’s rather mournful Letter on the subject, with Friedrich’s
sharp Answer.

90 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
27th June—20th July 1757.

hear that his strategic talent was momentous: but Prussia had
taught him the routine of right soldiering, surely to small pur-
pose; and Friedrich, no doubt, glanced indignantly at this small
thing, among the many big ones.

From about the end of June, the Reichs Army kept dribbling
in: the most inferior Army in the world; no part of it well
drilled, most of it not drilled at all; and for variety in colour,
condition, method, and military and pecuniary and other outfit,
beggaring description. Hildburghausen does his utmost; Kai-
ser the like. ‘The number should have far exceeded 50,000;
but was not, on the field, of above half that number: 25,000;

add at last 8,000 Austrian troops, two regiments of them cav-

alry; good these 8,000, the rest bad,—that was the Reichs Ex-
ecution Army; most inferior among Armies; and considerable
part of it, all the Protestant part, privately wishing well to Fried-
rich, they say. Drills itself multifariously in that Camp between
Fiirth and Farrenbach, on the east side of Regnitz River. Fan-
cy what a sight to Wilhelmina, if she ever drove that way;
which I think she hardly would. ‘The Baireuth contingent it-
self is there; the Margraf would have held out stiff on that
point; but Friedrich himself advised compliance. Margraf of
Anspach,—perverse tippling creature, ill with his Wife, I doubt,
—has joyfully sent his legal hundreds; will vote for the Reichs
Ban against this worst of Germans, whom he has for Brother-
in-law. Dark days in the heart of Wilhelmina, those of the
Camp at Fiirth. Days which grow ever darker, with strange
flashings-out of empyrean lightning from that shrill true heart;
no peace more, till the noble heroine die !—

This elende Reichs-Heer, miserable ‘‘ Army of the Circles,” is
mockingly called “the Hoopers, Coopers (Zonneliers),” and gets
quizzing enough, under that and other titles, from an Opposition
Public. Far other from the French and Austrians; who are
bent that it should do feats in the world, and prove impressive
on a robber King. Thus too, “for Deliverance of Saxony,” to
co-operate with Reichs-Heer in that sacred object, thanks to the
zeal of Pompadour, Prince de Soubise has got together, in El-
sass, a supplementary 30,000 (40,330 said Theory, but Fact
never quite so many); and is passing them across the Rhine, in

Cuap. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 91
27th Junc—20th July 1757.

Frankfurt Country, all through July, while the drilling at Fiirth
goeson. With these, Soubise, simultaneously getting under way,
will steer north-eastward ; join the Reichs-Heer about Erfurt,
before August end; and—and we shall see what becomes of the
combined Soubise and Reichs Army after that.

It must be owned, the French, Pompadour and love of glory
urging, are diligent since the event of Kolin. In select Parisian
circles, the Soubise Army, or even that of D’Estrées altogether,
—produced by the tears of a filial Dauphiness,—is regarded as
a quasi-sacred, or uncommonly noble thing; and is called by her
name, “ Z’ Armée de la Dauphine,’ or for shortness, “‘ La Dauphine”
without adjunct. Thus, like a kind of chivalrous Bellona, venge-
ance in her right hand, tears and fire in her eyes, The Dauphi-
ness advances; and will join Reichs-Heer at Erfurt before August
end. Such the will of Pompadour; Richelieu encouraging, for
reasons of his own. Soubise, I understand, is privately in pique
against poor D’Estrées;'* and intends to eclipse him by a high-
er style of diligence; though D’Kstrées too is doing his best.

July 3d, we saw the D’Estrées people taking Embden; D’Es-
trées, quiet so long in his Camp at Bielefeld, had at once bestir-
red himself, Kolin being done ;—shot out a detachment leftwards,
and Embden had capitulated that day. Adieu to the Shipping
Interests there, and to other pleasant things! ‘July 9th, after
sunset,” D’ Estrées himself got on march from Bielefeld; set forth,
in the cool of night, 60,000 strong, and 10,000 more to join him
by the road (the rest are left as garrisons, reserves,—1,000 ma-
rauders of them swing as monitory pendulums, on their various
trees, for one item),—direct towards Hanover and Royal High-
ness of Cumberland; who retreats, and has retreated, behind the
Ems, the Weser, back, ever back; and, to appearance, will make
a bad finish yonder.

To Friedrich, waiting at Leitmeritz, all these things are gloom-
ily known; but the most pressing of them is that of the Austri-
ans and Jung-Buntzlau close by. Let us give some utterances

14 <¢ Reappeared unexpectedly in Paris” (from D’Estrée’s Army), ‘22d
June” (four days aftre Kolin); got up this Dauphiness Army, by aid of
Pompadour, with Richelieu, &c.: Barbier, iv. 227,231. Richelieu ‘‘ busy
at Strasburg lately” (29th July: Collini’s Voliatre, p. 191).

92 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII)
13th July 1757,

of his to Wilhelmina, nearly all we have of direct from him in
that time; and then hasten to the Prince of Prussia there:

Friedrich to Wilhelmina (at Baireuth).

Leitmeritz, 1st July 1757. * * “Sensible as heart can be to the ten-
der interest you deign to take in what concerns me. Dear Sister, fear
nothing on my score: men are always in the hand of what we call Fate”
(“* Predestination, Gnadenwahl,’—Pardon us, Papa !—“ ce qu’on nomme

le destin) ; accidents will befal people, walking on the streets, sitting in

their room, lying in their bed; and there are many who escape the per-
ils of war.” * * “T think, through Hessen will be the safest route for
your Letters, till we see ;—and not to write just now except on occa-
sions of importance. Here is a piece in cipher ; anonymous, —intend-
ed for the Newspapers, or some such road.

July 5th. “ By a Courier of Plotho’s, returning to Regensburg” (who
passes near you), “I write to apprise my dear Sister of the new misery
which overwhelms us. We have no longer a Mother. This loss puts
the crown on my sorrows. I am obliged to act; and have not time to
give free course to my tears. Judge,I pray you, of the situation of a
feeling heart put to so cruel atrial. All losses in the world are capa-
ble of being remedied; but those which Death causes are beyond the
reach of hope.”

July 7th. “ You are too good; I am ashamed to abuse your indul-
gence. Butdo,since you will, try to sound the French, what conditions
of Peace they would demand; one might judge as to their intentions.
Send that Mirabeau (ce M. de Mirabeau) to France. Willingly will I
pay the expense. He may offer as much as five million thalers”
(750,000/.) “to the Favourite” (yes, even to the Pompadour) “ for
Peace alone. Ofcourse, his utmost discretion will be needed ;”—should
the English get the least wind of it! But if they are gone to St. Vitus,
and fail in every point, what can one do? Ce M. de Mirabeau, read-
ers will be surprised to learn, is an‘Uncle of the great Mirabeau’s ; who
has fallen into roving courses, gone abroad insolvent; and “ directs the
Opera at Baireuth,” in these years !—One letter we will give in full:

‘* Leitmeritz, 13th July 1757.

‘My peAResT SisTer,—Y our letter has arrived: I see in it your re-
grets for the irreparable loss we have had of the best and worthiest
Mother in this world. I am so struck down with all these blows from
within and without, that I feel myself in a sort of stupefaction.

“The French have just laid hold of Friesland” (seized Embden, July
3d); ‘are about to pass the Weser: they have instigated the Swedes
to declare War against me; the Swedes are sending 17,000 men” (rath-

a a a ee

Cuap. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 93
13th July 1757.

er more if anything; but they proved beautifully ineffectual) “ into Pom-
mern,”—will be burdensome to Stralsund and the poor country people
mainly; having no Captain over them but a hydra-headed National Pa-
laver at home, and a Long-pole with Cocked-hat on it here at hand.
“The Russians are besieging Memel” (have taken it, ten days ago):
“‘Lehwald has them on his front and in his rear. ‘The troops of the
Reich,” from your Plains of Firth yonder, “are also about to march.
All this will foree me to evacuate Bohemia so soon as that crowd of
Enemies gets into motion.

“T am firmly resolved on the extremest efforts to save my Country.
We shall see (quitte a voir) if Fortune will take a new thought, or if
she will entirely turn her back upon me. Happy the moment when I
took to training myself in Philosophy! There is nothing else that can
sustain the soul in a situation like mine. I spread out to you, dear Sis-
ter, the detail of my sorrows: if these things regarded only myself, I
could stand it with composure ; but I am bound Guardian of the safety
and happiness of a People which has been put under my charge. There
lies the sting of it: and I shall have to reproach myself with every fault,
if, by delay or by over-haste, I occasion the smallest accident; all the
more as, at present, any fault may be capital.

“What a business! Here is the liberty of Germany, and that Prot-
estant Cause for which so much blood has been shed; here are those
Two great Interests again at stake; and the pinch of this huge game
is such, that an unlucky quarter of an hour may establish over Germany
the tyrannous domination of the House of Austria forever! Jam in the
case of a traveller who sees himself surrounded and ready to be assas-
sinated by a troop of cutthroats, who intend to share his spoils. Since
the League of Cambrai” (1508-1510, with a Pope in it and a Kaiser
and Most Christian King, iniquitously sworn against poor Venice ;—to
no purpose, as happily appears), “ there is no example of such a Con-
spiracy as that infamous Triumvirate” (Austria, France, Russia) ‘ now
forms against me. Was it ever seen before that three great Princes
laid plot in concert to destroy a Fourth, who had done nothing against
them? I have not had the least quarrel either with France or with
Russia, still less with Sweden. If,in common life, three citizens took
it into their heads to fall upon their neighbour, and burn his house about
him, they very certainly, by sentence of tribunal. would be broken on
the wheel. What! and will Sovereigns, who maintain these tribunals
and these laws in their States, give such example to their subjects ?”—
“ Happy, my dear Sister, is the obscure man, whose good sense, from
youth upwards, has renounced all sorts of glory; who, in his safe low
place, has none to envy him, and whose fortune does not excite the cu-
pidity of scoundrels!

94 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
30th June-22d July 1757.

“ But these reflections are vain. We have to be what our birth,
which decides, has made us in entering upon this world. I reckoned
that, being King, it beseemed me to think as a Sovereign; and I took
for principle, that the reputation of a Prince ought to be dearer to him
than life. They have plotted against me; the Court of Vienna has giv-
en itself the liberty of trying to maltreat me; my honour commanded
me not to suffer it. We have come to War; a gang of robbers falls on
me, pistol in hand: that is the adventure which has happened to me.
The remedy is difficult: in desperate diseases there are no methods but
desperate ones.

‘“T beg a thousand pardons, dear Sister: in these three long pages I
talk to you of nothing but my troubles and affairs. A strange abuse it
would be of any other person’s friendship. But yours, my dear Sister,
yours is known to me; and I am persuaded you are not impatient when
I open my heart to you :—a heart which is yours altogether ; being fill-
ed with sentiments of the tenderest esteem, with which I am, my dear-
est Sister, your” (in truth, affectionate Brother at all times) * F.”’°

Prince August Wilhelm finds a bad Problem at Jung-Bunta-
lau; and does zt badly; Friedrich thereupon has to rise
from Leitmeritz, and take the Field elsewhere, in bitter
Haste and Impatience, with Outlooks worse than ever.

The Prince of Prussia’s Enterprise had its intricacies; but,
by good management, was capable of being done. At least, so
Friedrich thought ;—though, in truth, it would have been better
had Friedrich gone himself, since the chief pressure happened to
fall there! ‘The Prince has to retire, Parthian-like, as slowly
as possible, with the late Kolin or Moritz-Bevern Army, towards
the Lausitz, keeping his eye upon Silesia the while; of course
securing the passes and strong places in his passage, for defence
of his own rear at lowest; especially securing Zittau, a fine op-
ulent town, where his chief Magazine is, fed from Silesia now.
The Army is in good strength (guess 30,000), with every equip-
ment complete; in discipline, in health and in heart, such as
beseems a Prussian Army,—probably longing rather, if it ven-
ture to long or wish for anything not yet commanded, to have a
stroke at those Austrians again, and pay them something to-
wards that late Kolin score.

The Prince arrived at Jung-Buntzlau, June 30th; Winterfeld

18 Cuvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 294, 295, 296~8.

ee ee

oe

Cuap. V. FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 95
30th June—22d July 1757. ;

with him, and, at his own request, Schmettau. The Austrians
haye not yet stirred: if they do, it may be upon the King, it
may be upon the Prince: in three or even in two marches,
Prince and King can be together,—the King only too happy, in
the present oppressive coil of doubts, to find the Austrians ready
for a new passage of battle, and an immediate decision. The
Austrians did, in fact, break out,—seemingly, at first, upon the
King; but in reality upon the Prince, whom they judge safer
game; and the matter became much more critical upon him
than had been expected.

The Prince was thought to have a good judgment (too much
talk in it, we sometimes feared), and fair knowledge in military
matters. ‘The King, not quite by the Prince’s choice, has given
him Winterfeld for Mentor; Winterfeld, who has an excellent
military head in such matters, and a heart firm as steel,—almost
like a second self in the King’s estimation. Excellent Winter-
feld ;—but then there are also Schmettau, Bevern and others,
possibly in private not too well affected to this Winterfeld. In
fact, there is rather a multitude of Counsellors ;—and an ingen-
uous fine-spirited Prince, perhaps more capable of eloquence on
the Opposition side, than of condensing into real wisdom a mul-
titude of counsels, when the crisis rises, and the affair becomes
really difficult. Crisis did rise: the victorious Austrians, aft-
er such delay, had finally made up their minds to press this
one a little, this one rather than the King, and hang upon his
skirts; Daun and Prince Karl set out after him, just about the
time of his arrival,—‘“ 70,000 strong,” the Prince hears, includ-
ing plenty of Pandours. Certain it is, the poor Prince’s mind
did flounder a good deal; and his procedures succeeded ex-
tremely ill on this occasion. Certain, too, that they were ex- .
tremely ill taken at headquarters: and that he even died soon
after,—chiefly of broken heart, said the censorious world. It is
well known how Europe rang with the matter for a long while;
and Books were printed, and Documents, and Collections by a
Master's Hand.'© We, who can spend but a page or two on it,
must carefully stand by the essential part.

16 Lettres Secrétes touchant la Derniére Guerre ; de Main de Maitre; di-
visées en deux parties (Francfort et Amsterdam, 1772): this is the Prince’s

96 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

30th June—22d July 1757.

* June 30th—July 3d, Prince at Jung-Buntzlau, in chief command.
Besides Winterfeld, the Generals under him are Ziethen, Schmettau,
Fouquet, Retzow, Goltz, and two others who need not be of our ac-
quaintance. Impossible to stay there, thinks the Prince, thinks every-
body ; and they shift to Neuschloss, westward thirty miles. July 1st,
Daun had crossed the Elbe (Daun let us say for brevity, though it is
Daun and Karl, or even Karl and Daun, Karl being chief, and capable
of saying so at times, though Daun is very splendent since Kolin),—
crossed the Elbe above Brandeis; Nadasti, with precursor Pandours,
now within an hour’s march of Jung-Buntzlau ;—and it was time to
go.
* July 3d—-6th, At Neuschloss, which is thought a strong position,
key of the localities there, and nearer Friedrich too, the Prince staid
not quite four days; shifted to Bohm (Bohmisch) Leipa, July 7th,—
rather off from Leitmeritz, but a march towards Zittau, where the pro-
visions are.* ‘A bad change,’ said the Prince’s friends afterwards ;

‘change advised by Winterfeld,—who never mentioned that circum- ~

stance to his Majesty, many as he did mention, not in the best way !—
Prince gets to Bohm Leipa, July 7th; stays there, in questionable cir-
cumstances, nine days.

“Bohm Leipa is still not above thirty miles north-eastward of the
King; and it is about the same distance south-westward from Zittau,
out of which fine Town, partly by cross-roads, the Prince gets his pro-
visions on this march. From Zittau hitherward, as far as the little
Town of Gabel, which lies about half way, there is broad High Road,
the great Southern Kaiser-Strasse : from Gabel, for Bohm Leipa, you
have to cross south-westward by country roads; the keys to which, es-
pecially Gabel, the Prince has not failed to secure by proper garrison
parties. And so, for about a week, not quite uncomfortably, be contin-
ues at Bohm Leipa; getting in his convoys from Zittau. Diligently
scanning the Pandour stragglings and sputterings round him, which are
clearly on the increasing hand. Diligently corresponding with the
King, meanwhile; who much discourages undue apprehension, or re-
treat movement till the last pinch. ‘ Edging backward, and again
backward, you come bounce upon Berlin one day, and will then have to
halt!"—which is not pleasant to the Prince. But, indisputably, the
Pandour spurts on him do become Pandour gushings, with regulars also

noticeable: it is certain the Austrians are out,—pretending first to —

mean the King and Leitmeritz; but knowing better, and meaning the

own Statement, Proof in hand. By far the clea-est Account is in Schmet-
tau’s Leben (by his Son), pp. 853-384. See also Preuss, ii. 57-61, and espe-
cially ii. 407. . * Map at p.1lla

Cuap. V. FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 97
30th June—22d July 1757.

Prince and Bohm Leipa all the while.”—By way of supplement, take
Daun’s positions in the interim : .

Daun and Karl were at Podschernitz, 26th June; 1st July, cross the
Elbe, above Brandeis (Nadasti now within an hour’s march of Jung-
Buntzlau); 7th July (day while the Prince is flitting to Bohm Leipa),
Daun is through Jung-Buntzlau to Minchengratz ; thence to Leibenau;
14th, to Niemes, not above four miles from the Prince’s rightmost out-
post (rightmost or eastmost, which looks away from his Brother) ;
while a couple of advanced parties, Beck and Macguire, hover on his
flank Zittau-ward, and Nadasti (if he knew it) is pushing on to rear.

“ Thursday, 14th July, About six in the evening, at Bohm Leipa,
distinct cannon-thunder is heard from north-east: ‘ Evidently Gabel
getting cannonaded, and our wagon convoy’ (empty, going to Zittau for
meal, General Puttkammer escorting) ‘is in a dangerous state!’ And
by and by hussar parties of ours come in, with articulate news to that
bad effect: ‘Gabel under hot attack of regulars; Puttkammer with his
3,000 vigorously defending, will expect to be relieved within not many
hours!’ Here has the crisis come. Crisis sure enough ;—and the
Prince, to meet it, summons that refuge of the irresolute, a Council of
War.

‘“‘ Winterfeld, who is just come home in these moments, did not at-
tend ;—not, till three next morning. Winterfeld had gone to bed; fair-
ly ‘tired dead,’ with long marching and hurrying about. To the poor
Prince there are three courses visible. Course first, That of joining
the King at Leitmeritz Gabel, Zittau lost in that case; game given
up;—reception likely to be bad at Leitmeritz! Course second,—the
course Friedrich himself would at once have gone upon, and been already
well a-head with,—That of instantly taking measures for the relief of
Puttkammer. Dispute Gabel to the last; retreat, on loss of it, Parthi-
an like, to Zittau, by that broad Highway, short and broad, whole dis-
tance hence only thirty miles. ‘Thirty miles,’ say the multitude of
Counsellors: ‘ Yes; but the first fifteen, to Gabel, is cross-road, hilly,
difficult; they have us in flank!’ ‘ We are 25,000,’ urges the Prince ;
‘fifteen miles is not much!’ The thing had its difficulties: the Prince
himself, it appears, faintly thought it feasible: ‘25,000 we; 20,000
they ; only fifteen miles,’ said he. But the variety of Counsellors:
‘ Cross-roads, defiles, flank-march, dangerous,’ said they. And so the
third course, which was incomparably the worst, found favour in Coun-
cil of War: That of leaving Gabel and Puttkammer to their fate; and
of pushing off for Zittau leftwards through the safe Hills, by Kamnitz,
Kreywitz, Rumburg ;—which, if the reader look, is by a circuitous, nay
quite parabolic course, twicé or thrice as far :—‘ In that manner, let us
save Zittau and our Main Body!’ said the Council of War. Yes, my

Vor. V.—E

98 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

16th July 1757.
friends ; a cannon-ball, endeavouring to get into Zittau from the town-
ditch, would have to take a parabolic course ;— and the cannon-ball
would be speedy upon it, and not have Hill roads to go by! This no-
table parabolic circuit of narrow steep roads may have its difficulties
for an army and its baggages!” Enough, the poor Prince adopted that
worst third course ; and even made no despatch in getting into it; and
it proved ruinous to Zittau, and to much else, his own life partly in-
cluded.

“ July 16¢h-22d. Thursday night, or Friday 3 a.M., that third and
incomparably worst course was adopted: Gabel, Puttkammer with his
wagons, ensigns, kettledrums, all this has to surrender in a day: High
Road to Zittau, for the Austrians, is a smooth march, when they like to
gather fully there, and start. And in the Hills, with their jolts and pre-
cipitous windings, infested too by Pandours, the poor Prussian Main
Body, on its wide parabolic circuit, has a time of it! Loses its pon-
toons, loses most of its baggage; obliged to set, not to the Pandours,
but to your own wagons, and necessaries of army life; encamps on
bleak heights ; no food, not even water; road quite lost, road to be re-
discovered or invented; Pandours sputtering on you out of every bush
and hollow, your peasant wagoners cutting traces and galloping off :—
such are the phenomena of that march by circuit leftward, on the poor
Prince’s part. March began, soon after midnight, Saturday 16th,
Schmettau as vanguard; and”—

And, in fine, by Priday 22d, after not quite a week of it, the
Prince, curving from northward (in parabolic course, less speedy
than the cannon-ball’s’ would have been) into sight of Zittau,—
behold, there ave the Austrians far and wide to left of us, en-
camped impregnable behind the Neisse River there! They
have got the Eckart’s Hill, which commands Zittau :—and how
to get into Zittau and our magazines, and how to subsist if we
were in? The poor Prince takes post on what Heights there
are, on his own side of the Neisse; looks wistfully down upon
Zittau, asking How ?

About stroke of noon the Austrians, from their Eckartsberg,
do a thing which was much talked of. ‘They open battery of
red-hot balls upon Zittau; kindle the roofs of it, shingle-roofs in
dry July; set Zittau all on blaze, the 10,000 innocent souls
shrieking in vain to Heaven and Earth; and before sunset Zit-
tau is ashes and red-hot walls, not Zittau but a cinder-heap,—
Prussian Garrison not hurt, nor Magazine as yet; Garrison busy

Cuap. V. FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 99
20th-22d July 1757.

with buckets, I should guess, but beginning to find the air grow
very hot. On the morrow morning, Zittau is a smouldering cin-
der-heap, hotter and hotter to the Prussian Garrison ; aah does
not exist as a City.

One of the most inhuman actions ever heard of in War,
shrieks universal Germany; asks itself what could have set a
chivalrous Karl upon this devil-like procedure? <‘ Protestants
these poor Zittauers were; shone in commerce; no such weav-
ing, industrying, in all Teutschland elsewhere: Hah! An eye-
sorrow, they, with their commerce, their weavings, and industry-
ings, to Austrian Papists, who cannot weave or trade?” that was
finally the guess of some persons ;—wide of the mark, we may
well judge. Prince Xavier of Saxony, present in the Camp too,
made no remonstrance, said others. Alas, my friends, what
could Xavier probably avail, the foolish fellow, with only three
regiments? Prince Karl, it was afterwards evident, could have
got Zittau unburnt; and could even have kept the Prussians
out of Zittau altogether. Zittau surely would have been very
useful to Prince Karl. But overnight (let us try to fancy it so),
not knowing the Prussian possibilities, Prince Karl, screwed to
the devilish point, had got his furnaces lighted, his red-hot balls
ready; and so, hurried on by his Pride and by his other Devils,
had—There are devilish things sometimes done in War. And
whole cities are made ashes by them. For certain, here is a
strange way of commencing your “‘ Deliverance of Saxony !”
And Prince Karl carries, truly, a brand-mark from this confla-
gration, and will till all memory of him cease. As to Zittau, it
rebuilt itself. Zittau is alive again; a strong stone city, in our
day. On its new-built Townhouse stands again “ Benefacere et
male audire regium est,'To do well, and be ill spoken of, is the
part of kings” (amazingly true of them,—when they are not
shams). What times for Herrnhuth; preparing for its Chris-
tian Sabbath, under these omens near by!

The Prince of Prussia tells us, he “early next morning (Sat-
urday, 23d July) had his tents pitched ;’ which was but an un-
availing procedure, with poor Zittau gone such a road. “ Bring
us bread out of that ruined Zittau,’’ ordered the Prince: his De-
tachment returns ineffectual, “So hot, we cannot march in.”

100 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. ©

20th July 1757.
And the Garrison Colonel (one Dierecke and five battalions are
garrison) sends out word: ‘So hot, we cannot stand it.” ‘Stand
it yet a very little; and—!” answers the Prince: but Dierecke

and battalions cannot, or at least cannot long enough; and set —

to marching out. In firm order, I have no doubt, and with
some modicum of bread: but the tumbling of certain burnt walls

‘parted Colonel and men, in a sad way. Colonel himself, with

the colours, with the honours (none of his people, it seems,
though they were scattered loose), was picked up by an Austrian
party, and made prisoner. A miserable business, this of Zittau!

Next evening, Sunday, after dark, Prince of Prussia strikes his
tents again; rolls off in a very unsuccinct condition; happily
unchased, for he admits that chase would have been ruinous.
Off towards Lébau (what nights for Zinzendorf and Herrnhuth,
as such things tumble past them!); thence towards Bautzen ;
and arrives in the most lugubrious torn condition any Prussian
General ever stood in. Reaches Bautzen on those terms ;—and
is warned that his Brother will be there in a day or two.

One may fancy Friedrich’s indignation, astonishment and
grief, when he heard of that march towards Zittau through the
Hills by a parabolic course; the issue of which is too guessable
by Friedrich. He himself instantly rises from Leitmeritz; starts,
in fit divisions, by the Pascopol, by the Elbe passes, for Pirna;
and, leaving Moritz of Dessau with a 10,000 to secure the
Passes about Pirna, and Keith to come on with the Magazines,
hastens across for Bautzen, to look into these advancing tri-
umphant Austrians, these strange Prussian proceedings. On
first hearing of that side-march, his auguries had been bad
enough;!’ but the event has far surpassed them. Zittau gone ;
the Army hurrying home, as if in flight, in that wrecked condi-
tion; the door of Saxony, door of Silesia left wide open,—Daun
has only to choose! Day by day, as Friedrich advanced to re-
pair that mischief, the news of it have grown worse on him.
Days rife otherwise in mere bad news. ‘The Russians in Me-
mel, Preussen at their feet; Soubise’s French and the Reichs

17 Letter to Wilhelmina, ‘‘ Linay, 22d July” (second day of the march
from Leitmeritz): Quvres, xxvii. 1. 298.

;

ry ——

Cuap. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 101
22d-26th July 1757.

Army pushing on for Erfurt, to ‘‘ deliver Saxony,” on that west-
ern side: and from the French-English scene of operations—In
those same bad days, Royal Highness of Cumberland has been
doing a feat worth notice in the above connexion! Read this,
from an authentic source :

“ Hastenbeck, 22d-26th July 1757. Royal Highness, hitching back
and back, had got to Hameln, a strong place of his on the safe side of
the Weser ; and did at last, Hanover itself being now nigh, call halt;
and resolve to make a stand. July 22d” (very day while the Prince of
Prussia came in sight of Zittau, with the Austrians hanging over it),

“Royal Highness took post in that favourable vicinity of Hameln; at
perfect leisure to select his ground: and there sat waiting D’Estrées,
—swamps for our right wing, and the Weser not far off; small Hamlet
of Hastenbeck in front, and a woody knoll for our left ;—totally inactive
for four days long ; attempting nothing upon D’Estrées and his intricate
shufflings, but looking idly noonward to the courses of the sun, till D’EKs-
trées should come up. Royal Highness is much swollen into obesity,
into flabby torpor; a changed man since Fontenoy times; shockingly
inactive, they say,in this post at Hastenbeck. D’Estrées, too, is ridic-
ulously cautious, ‘has maneuvred fifteen days in advancing about as
many British miles.’ D’Estrées did at last come up (July 25th), near-
ly two to one of Royal Highness,—72,000 some count him, but consid-
erably anarchic in parts, overwhelmed with Court Generals and Princes
of the Blood, for one item ;—and decides on attacking, next morning.
D’Estrées duly went to reconnoitre, but unluckily ‘had mist suddenly
falling.‘ Well; we must attack, all the same!”

“ And so, 26th July, Tuesday, there ensued a Battle of Hastenbeck:
the absurdest Battle in the world; and which ought, in fairness, to have
been lost by doth, though Royal Highness alone had the illluck. Both
Captains behaved very poorly ; and each of them had a subaltern who
behaved well. D’Estrées, with his 70,000 versus 40,000 posted there,
knows nothing of Royal Highness’s position; sees only Royal High-
ness’s left wing on that woody Height; and, after hours of preliminary
cannonading, sends out General Chevert upon that. Chevert, his sub-
altern” (a bit of right soldier-stuff, the Chevert whom we knew at Prag,
in old Belleisle times), “ goes upon it like fury; whom the Brunswick
Grenadiers resist in like humour, hotter and hotter. Some hard fight-
ing there, on Royal Highness’s left; Chevert very fiery, Grenadiers
very obstinate ; till, on the centre, westward, in Royal Highness’s chief
battery there, some spark went the wrong way, and a powder-wagon
shot itself aloft with’ hideous blaze and roar; and in the confusion, the
French rushed in, and the battery was lost. Which discouraged the

102 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

29th July 1757.
Grenadiers; so that Chevert made some progress upon them, on their
woody Height, and began to have confident hope.

“ Had Chevert known, or had D’Estrées known, there was, close be-
hind said Height, a Hollow, through which these Grenadiers might
have been taken in rear. Dangerous Hollow, much neglected by Royal
Highness, who has only General Breitenbach with a weak party there.
This Breitenbach, happening to have a head of his own, and finding
nothing to do in that Hollow or to rightward, bursts out, of his own ac-
cord, on Chevert’s left flank; cannonading, volleying, horse-charging ;
—the sound of which (‘ Hah, French there too!’) struck a damp through
Royal Highness, who instantly ordered retreat, and took the road.
What singular ill luck that sound of Breitenbach to Royal Highness !
_ For observe, the effect of Breitenbach,—which was, to recover the lost
battery (gallant young Prince of Brunswick, ‘ Hereditary Prince,’ or
Duke that is to be, striking in upon it with bayonet-charge at the right
moment),—made D’Estrées too order retreat! ‘ Battle lost, thinks
D’Estrées ;—and with good cause, had Breitenbach been supported at
all. But no subaltern durst; and Royal Highness himself was not
overtakeable, so far on the road. Royal Highness wept on hearing;
the Brunswick Grenadiers too are said to have wept (for rage); and
probably Breitenbach and the Hereditary Prince.”"*

This is the last of Royal Highness’s exploits in War. ‘The retreat
had been ordered “ To Hanover ;” but the baggage by mistake took the
road for Minden; and Royal Highness followed thither,— much the
same what road he or it takes. Friedrich might still hope he would re-
treat on Magdeburg; 40,000 good soldiers might find a Captain there,
and be valuable against a D’Estrées and Soubise in those parts. | But
no; it was through Bremen Country, to Stade, into the Sea, that Royal
Highness, by ill luck, retreated! He has still one great vexation to
give Friedrich,—to us almost a comfort, knowing what followed out of
it ;—and will have to be mentioned one other time in this History, and
then go over our horizon altogether.

Whether Friedrich had heard of Hastenbeck the day his
Brother and he met (July 29th, at Bautzen), I do not know:
but it is likely enough he may have got the news that very
morning; which was not calculated to increase one’s good hu-
mour! His meeting with the Prince is royal, not fraternal, as
all men have heard. Let us give, with brevity, from Schmettau
Junior, the exact features of it; and leave the candid reader,

18 Mauvillon, i. 228; Anonymous of Hamburg, i. 206 (who gives a Plan
and all manner of details, if needed by anybody); Kausler; &e. &e.

es

Cuap. V | FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 103
30th July 1757.

who has formed to himself some notion of kingship and its sor-
zows and stern conditions (having perhaps himself something of
kingly, in a small potential way), to interpret the matter, and
make what he can of it:

“ Bautzen, 29th July 1757. The King with reinforcement is com-
ing hither, from the Dresden side; to take up the reins of this dishev-
elled Zittau Army; to speed with it against the Austrians, and, if hu-
manly possible, lock the doors of Silesia and Saxony again, and chase
the intruders away. Prince of Prussia and the other Generals have
notice, the night before: ‘ At 4 a.m. to-morrow (29th), wait his Majes-
ty.’ Prince and Generals wait accordingly, all there but Goltz and
Winterfeld ; they not, which is noted.

“For above an hour, no King; Prince and Generals ride forward :
—there is the King coming; Prince Henri, Duke Ferdinand of Bruns-
wick, and others in his train. King noticing them, at about 300 paces
distance, drew bridle; Prince of Prussia did the like, train and he sa-
luting with their hats, as did the King’s train in return. King did not
salute ;—on the contrary, he turned his horse round, and dismounted, as
did everybody else on such signal. King lay down on the ground, as
if waiting the arrival of his Vanguard; and bade Winterfeld arid Goltz
sit by him.” Poor Prince of Prussia, and battered heavy-laden Gener-
als! ‘After a minute or two, Goltz came over and whispered to the
Prince. ‘ Hither, meine Herren, all of you; a message from his Maj-
esty!’ cried the Prince. Whereupon, to Generals and Prince, Goltz
delivered, in equable official tone, these affecting words: ‘ His Majesty
commands me to inform your Royal Highness, That he has cause to be
greatly discontented with you; that you deserve to have a Court-mar-
tial held over you, which would sentence you and all your Generals to
death; but that his Majesty will not carry the matter so far, being un-
able to forget that in the Chief General he has a Brother!’”?®

The Prince answered, He wanted only a Court-martial ; and
the like, in stiff tone. Here is the Letter he writes next day to
his Brother, with the Answer:

Prince of Prussia to the King.
‘**Bautzen, 30th July 1757.
“My pear Brotuer,—The Letters you have written me, and the
reception I yesterday met with, are sufficient proof that, in your opin-
ion, | have ruined my honour and reputation. This grieves, but it does
not crush me, as in my own mind [| am not conscious of the least re-
proach. I am perfectly convinced that I did not act by caprice: I did

19 Schmettau, pp. 384-5.

“

104  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

30th July 1757.

not follow the counsels of people incapable of giving good ones; I have

done what I thought to be suitablest for the Army. All your Generals
will do me that justice.

“T reckon it useless to beg of you to have my conduct investigated:
this would be a favour you would do me; so I cannot expect it. My
health has been weakened by these fatigues, still more by these cha-
grins. I have gone to lodge in the ‘Town, to recruit myself. r

“‘T have requested the Duke of Bevern to present the Army Reports;
he can give you explanation of everything. Be assured, my dear
Brother, that in spite of the misfortunes which overwhelm me, and
which I have not deserved,I shall never cease to be attached to the
State; and as a faithful member of the same, my joy will be perfect

when I learn the happy issue of your Enterprises. I have the honour’

to be,’—Aveust WILHELM.”

King’s Answer, the same day.

. **Camp near Bautzen, 30th July 1757.

“My pear Brotuer,—Your bad guidance has greatly deranged my
affairs. It is not the Enemy, it is your ill-judged measures that have
done me all this mischief. My Generals are inexcusable; either for
advising you so ill, or in permitting you to follow resolutions so unwise.
Your ears are accustomed to listen to the talk of flatterers only. Daun
has not flattered you ;—behold the consequences. In this sad situation,
nothing is left for me but trying the last extremity. I must go and
give battle ; and if we cannot conquer, we must all of us have ourselves
killed.

‘1 do not complain of your heart, but I do of your incapacity, of your
want of judgment in not choosing better methods. A man who” (like
me; mark the phrase, from such a quarter!) “has but a few days to
live, need not dissemble. I wish you better fortune than mine has
been; and that all the miseries and bad adventures you have had may
teach you to treat important things with more of care, more of sense,
and more of resolution. The greater part of the misfortunes which I
now see to be near comes only from you. You and your Children will
be more overwhelmed by them than I. Be persuaded nevertheless
that I have always loved you, and that with these sentiments I ziti
die.—IrireprRicu.””!

As the King went off, to the Heights of Weissenberg, Zittau
way, to encamp there against the Austrians, that same evening,
the Prince did not answer this Letter,—2xcept by asking verb-
ally through Lieutenant-Colonel Lentulus (a mute Swiss figure,

°° Main de Maitre, p. 21. 21 Tbh. p22

a

a

Cuapr. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 105
30th July—25th August 1757.

much about the King, who often turns up in these Histories),
“for leave to return to Dresden by the first escort.””—“ Depends
on himself; an escort is going this night !” answered Friedrich.
And the Prince went accordingly; and, by two stages, got into
Dresden with his escort on the morrow. And had, not yet con-
scious of it, quitted the Field of War altogether; and was soon
about to quit the world, and die, poor Prince. Died within a
year, 12th June 1758, at Oranienburg, beside his Family, where
he had latterly been.??—-Winterfeld was already gone, six months
before him; Goltz went, shortly after him; the other Zittau
Generals all survived this War.

The poor Prince’s fate, as natural, was much pitied; and
Friedrich, to this day, is growled at for “inhuman treatment”
and so on. Into which question we do not enter, except to say
that Friedrich too had his sorrows; and that probably his con-
cluding words, “ with these sentiments I shall die,” were per-
fectly true. Main de Maitre went widely abroad over the world.
The poor Prince’s words and procedures were eagerly caught up
by a scrutinising public,—and some of the former were not tco
guarded. At Dresden, he said, one morning, calling on a Gen-
eral Finck whom we shall hear of again: ‘* Four such disagree-
ing, thin-skinned, high-pacing (uneinige, piquirte ) Generals as
Fouquet, Schmettau, Winterfeld and Goltz, about you, what
was to be done!”’ said the Prince to Finck.?8

His Wife, when at last he came to Oranienburg, nursed him
fondly ; that is one comfortable fact. Prince Henri, to the last,
had privately a grudge of peculiar intensity, on this score, against
all the peccant parties, King not excepted. As indeed he was
apt to have, on various scores, the jealous, too vehement little
man.

Friedrich’s humour at this time I can guess to have been well-
nigh desperate. He talks once of ‘a horse, on too much prov-
ocation, getting the bit between its teeth; regardless thenceforth
of chasms and precipices:”?‘—though he himself never carries
it to that length; and always has a watchful eye, when at his
swiftest! From Weissenberg, that night, he drives-in the Pan-

#2 Preuss, ii. 60 (ib. 78). 73 Tb. 11°79 nt see ib. 60, 78.

* Letter to Wilhelmina, ‘‘ Linay, 22d July” (cited above).

EK 2

106 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
30th July—25th Aug. 1757.

dours on Zittau and the Eckartsberg; but the Austrians don’t
come out. And, for three weeks, in this fierce necessity for be-
ing speedy, he cannot get one right stroke at the Austrians;
who sit inexpugnable upon their Eckart’s Hill, bristling with
cannon; and can in no way be manceuvered down, or forced or
enticed into Battle. <A baffling, bitterly impatient three weeks ;
—two of them, the worst two, he spends at Weissenberg itself,
chasing Pandours, and scufiling on the surface, till Keith and

the Magazine-train come up;—even writing Verses now and

then, when the hours get unendurable otherwise !

The instant Keith and the Magazines are come, he starts for
Bernstadt ; 56,000 strong after this junction :—and a Prussian
Officer, dating “ Bernstidtel” (Bernstadt on the now Maps),
“21st August 1757,” sends us this account; which also is but
of preliminary nature :

“* August 15th, Majesty left Weissenberg, and marched hither, much
to the enemy’s astonishment, who had lain perfectly quiet for a fort-
night past, fancying they were a mastiff on the door-sill of Silesia: lit-
tle thinking to be trampled on in this unceremonious way! General
Beck, when our hussars of the vanguard made appearance, had to sad-
dle and ride as for life, leaving every rag of baggage, and forty of his
Pandours captive. Our hussars stuck to him, chasing him into Ositritz,
where they surprised General Nadasti at dinner; and did a still better
stroke of business: Nadasti himself could scarcely leap on horseback
and get off; left all his field-equipage, coaches, horses, kitchen-utensils,
flunkies seventy-two in number,—and, what was worst of all, a secret
box, in which was found certain Dresden Correspondences of a highly
treasonous character, which now the writers there may quake to think
of; — if Friedrich, or we, could take much notice of them, in this
press of hurries !*°

Next day, August 16th, Friedrich detached five battalions to
Gérlitz ;—Prince Karl (he calls it Daun) still camping on the
Eckartsberg ;—and himself, about 4 p.m., with the main Army,
marched up to those Austrians on their Hill, to see if they would
fight.2° No, they wouldn’t: they merely hustled themselves
round so as to face him; face him, and even flank him with
cannon batteries if he came too near. Steep ground, ‘ precipit-
ous front of rocks,” in some places. ‘A hollow before their
front; Village of Wittgenau there, and three roads through it,

25 Helden- Geschichte, iv. 596-599. 26 (Huvres de Frédéric, iv. 137.

Cuar. V.] FRIEDRICH AT LEITMERITZ. 107
25th-3lst Aug. 1757.

one of them with width for wheels ;’’ Daun sitting inaccessible,
in short. Next day, Winterfeld, with a detached Division, cross-
ed the Neisse, tried Nadasti: ‘Attack Nadasti, on his woody
knoll at Hirschfeld yonder; they will have to rise and save him!”
In vain, that too; they let Nadasti take his own luck: for four
days (16th--20th August) everything was tried, in vain.

No Battle to be had from these Austrians. And it would
have been so infinitely convenient to us: Reichs army and Sou-
bise’s French are now in the actual precincts of Erfurt (August
25th, Soubise took quarter there); Royal Highness of Cumber-
land is staggering back into the Sea; Richelieu’s French (not
D’Estrées’s any more, D’Estrées being superseded in this strange
way) are aiming, it is thought, towards Magdeburg, had they
once done with Royal Highness; Swedes are getting hold of
Pommern ; Russians, in huge force, of Preussen: how comforta-
ble to have had our Austrians finished before going upon the
others! For four days more (August 20th—24th), Friedrich
arranges his Army for watching the Austrians, and guarding
Silesia ;—Bevern and Winterfeld to take command in his ab-
sence :—and, August 25th, has to march, with a small Division,
which, at Dresden, he will increase by Moritz’s, now needless
in the Pirna Country; towards Thiiringen; to look into Sou-
bise and the Reichs Army, as a thing that absolutely cannot
wait. Arrives in Dresden, Monday, August 29th; and—Or let
the old Newspaper report it, with the features of life:

“Dresden, 29th August 1757, This day, about noon, his Majesty, with
a part of his Army from the Upper Lausitz, arrived at the Neustadt
here. ‘Though the kitchen had been appointed to be set up at what
they call The. Barns (Die Scheunen), his Majesty was pleased to alight
in Konigsbriick Street, at the new House of Briithl’s Chamberlain, Hal-
ler; and there passed the night. ‘Tuesday evening, 30th, his Majesty
the King, with his Lifeguards of Horse and of Foot, also with the Gens
d’Armes and other Battalions, marched through the City, about a mile
out on the Freiberg road, and took qnarter 1 Klein Hamberg. The
31st, all the Army followed,’—a poor 23,000, Moritz and he, that was
all!°’—“ the King’s field-equipage, which had been taken from the
Brihl Palace and packed in twelve wagons, went with them.”*®

a7 ¢¢22,360” (Tempelhof, i. 228).
28 Rodenbeck, p. 316; Preuss, ii. 84n.; Mitchell’s Interview (Memoirs
and Papers, i, 270).

108 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
7th Sept. 1757,

CHAPTER VI.
DEATH OF WINTERFELD.

BEFORE going upon this forlorn march of Friedrich’s, one of
the forlornest a son of Adam ever had, we must speak ofa thing
which befel to rearward, while the march was only half-done,
and which greatly influenced it and all that followed. It was
the seventh day of Friedrich’s march, not above eighty miles of
it yet done, when Winterfeld perished in fight. No Winterfeld
now to occupy the Austrians in his absence; to stand between
Silesia and them, or assist him farther in his lonesome struggle
against the world. Let us spend a moment on the exit of that
brave man: Bernstiidt-Gorlitz. Country, September 7th, 1757.

The Bevern Army, 36,000 strong, is still there in its place in
the Lausitz, near Gorlitz; Prince Karl lies quiet in his near Zit-
tau, ever since he burnt that ‘Town, and stood four days in arms
unattackable by Friedrich with prospect of advantage. The
Court of Vienna cannot comprehend this state of inactivity:
“Two to one, and a mere Bevern against you, the King far
away in Saxony upon his desperate Anti-French mission there:
why not go in upon this Bevern? ‘The French, whom we are
by every courier passionately importuning to sweep Saxony clear,
what will they say of this strange mode of sweeping Silesia
clear?” Maria Theresa and her Kriegs-Hofrath are much ex-
ercised with these thoughts, and with French and other remon-
strances that come. Maria Theresa and her Kriegs-Hofrath at
length despatch their supreme Kaunitz, Graf Kaunitz in person,
to stir up Prince Karl, and look into the matter with his own
wise eyes and great heart. Prince Karl, by way of treat to this
high gentleman, determines on doing something striking upon
Bevern.

Bevern lies with his main body about Gorlitz, in and to west-
ward of Gorlitz, a pleasant Town on the left bank of the Neisse
(readers know there are Four Neisses, and which of them this

:

Te ee ee ee ee

Poe yee

ee

_ Cnapr. VI.) DEATH OF WINTERFELD. ~ 109

7th Sept. 1757.

is), with fine hilly country all round, bulky solitary Heights and
Mountains rising out of fruitful plains,—two Hochkirchs (High-
Kirks), for example, are in this region, one of which will become
extremely notable next year :—Bevern has a strong camp lean-
ing on the due Heights here, with Gorlitz in its lap; and beyond
Gorlitz, on the right bank of the Neisse, united to him by a
Bridge, he has placed Winterfeld with 10,000, who lies with his
back to Gérlitz, proper brooks and fencible places flanking him,
has a Dorf (Thorp) called Moys in fis lap; and, some short fur-
long beyond Moys, a 2,000 of his grenadiers planted on the top
of a Hill called the Moysberg, called also the Holzberg ( Wood-
hill) and Jakelsberg, of which the reader is to take notice. Fine
outpost, with proper batteries atop, with hussar squadrons and
hussar pickets sprinkled about ; which commands a far outlook
towards Silesia, and in marching thither, or in continuing here,
is useful to have in hand,—were it not a little too distant from
the main body. It is this Jiikelsberg, capable of being snatched
if one is sudden enough, that Prince Karl decides on:* it may
be good for much or for little to Prince Karl; and, if even for
nothing, it will be a brilliant affront upon Winterfeld and Be-
vern, and more or less charming to Kaunitz. ;

Winterfeld, the ardent enterprising man, King’s other self, is
thought to be the mainspring of affairs here (small thanks to
him privately from Bevern, add some): and is stationed in the
extreme van, as we see; Winterfeld is engaged in many things
besides the care of this post: and indeed where a critical thing
is to be done, we can imagine Winterfeld goes upon it. ‘ We
must try to stay here till the King has finished in Saxony!”
says Winterfeld always. To which Bevern replies, ‘‘ Excellent,
truly; but how?” Bevern has his provender at Dresden, sadly
far off; has to hold Bautzen garrisoned, and gets much trouble
with his convoys. Better in Silesia, with our magazines at
hand, thinks Bevern, less mindful of other considerations.

Tuesday, September 6th, Prince Karl sends Nadasti to the
right bank of the River, forward upon Moys, to do the Jiikels-
berg before day tomorrow: only some 2,000 grenadiers on it;
Nadasti has with him 15,000, some count 20,000 of all arms,

* See Map, p. 111 a.

110  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
7th Sept. 1757.

artillery in plenty; surely sufficient for the Jiikelsberg; and

Daun advances, with the main body, on the other side of the

River, to be within reach, should Moys lead to more serious
consequences. Nadasti diligently marches all day: posts him-
self at night within few miles of Moys; gets his cannon to the
‘proper Hills (Gallows Hill and others), his Croats to the proper
Woods; and, before daylight on the morrow, means to begin
upon the Moys Hill and its 2,000 grenadiers.

Wednesday morning, at the set hour, Nadasti, with artillery
bursting out and quivering battle-lines, is at work accordingly ;
hurls up 1,000 Croats, for one item, and regulars to the amount
of ‘forty companies in three lines.” The grenadiers, somewhat
astonished, for the morning was misty and their hussar-posts had
come hastily in, stood upon their guard, like Prussian men;
hurled back the 1,000 Croats fast enough ; stubbornly repulsed
the regulars too, and tumbled them down hill with bullet-storm
for accompaniment; gallantly foiling this first attempt of Nadas-
ti’s. Of course Nadasti will make another, will make ever oth-
ers: capture of the Jiikelsberg can hardly be doubtful to Nadasti.

Winterfeld was not at Moys, he was at Gorlitz, just got in
from escorting an important meal-convoy hither out of Bautzen ;
and was in conference with Bevern, when rumour of these Croat
attacks came in at the gallop from Moys. Winterfeld made lit-
tle of the rumours: he had heard of some attack intended, but it
was to have been overnight, and has not been. ‘‘ Mere foraging
of Croat rabble, like yesterday’s!” said Winterfeld, and contin-
ued his present business. In few minutes the sound of heavy
cannonading convinced him. ‘‘ Haha, there are my guests,”
said he; “we must see if we cannot entertain them right!”
sprang to horseback, ordered on, double-quick, the three regi-
ments nearest him, and was off at the gallop,—too late; or,
alas, too early we might rather say! Arriving at the gallop,
Winterfeld found his grenadiers and their insufficient reinforce-
ments rolling back, the Hill lost; Winterfeld ‘‘ sprang to a fresh
horse,” shot his lightning glances and energies to this hand and
that ; stormfully rallied the matter, recovered the Hill; and
stormfully defended it, for, I should guess, an hour or more; and
might still have done one knows not what, had not a bullet

ah VE

veined

-

Cuap. VI.] DEATH OF WINTERFELD. 111
7th Sept. 1757.
struck him through the breast, and suddenly ended all his doings
in this world. m

Three other reasons the Prussians give for loss of their Hill,
which are of no consequence to them or to us in comparison.
First, that Bevern, on message after message, sent no reinforce-
ment; that Winterfeld was left to his own 10,000, and what he
and they could make of it. Bevern is jealous of Winterfeld,
hint they, and willing to see his impetuous audacity checked.
Perhaps only cautious of getting into a general action for what
' was intrinsically nothing? Second, that two regiments of In-
fantry, whom Winterfeld detached double-quick to seize a couple
of villages (Leopoldshayn, Hermsdorf) on his right, and there-
from fusillade Nadasti on flank, found the villages already occu-
pied by thousands of Croats, with regular foot and cannon-bat-
teries, and could in no wise seize them. ‘This was a great re-
verse of advantage. Third, that an Aide-de-Camp made a small
misnomer, misreport of one word, which was terribly important:
“Bring me hither Regiment Manteuffel!’ Winterfeld had or-
dered. ‘The Aide-de-Camp reported it ‘‘ Grenadiers Manteuf-
fel:” upon which, the grenadiers, who were posted in a walled
garden, an important point to Winterfeld’s right, came instantly
to order; and Austrians instantly rushed in to the vacant post,
and galled Winterfeld’s other flank by their fire.?

Enough, Winterfeld lay bleeding to death, the Hill was lost,
Prussians drawing off slowly and back-foremost, about two in
the afternoon ; upon which the Austrians also drew off, leaving
only a small party on the Hill, who voluntarily quitted it next
morning. Next morning, likewise, Winterfeld had died. The
Hill was, except as bravado, and by way of comfort to Kaunitz,
nothing for the Austrians; but the death of Winterfeld, which |
had come by chance to them in the business, was probably a
great thing. Better than two pitched battles gained: who shall
say? He was a shining figure, this Winterfeld; dangerous to
the Austrians. The most shining figure in the Prussian Army,
except its Chief; and had great thoughts in his head. Prussia

* Abundant Accounts in Seyfarth, ii. (Beylagen), 162-183 ; Helden-Ge-
schichte, iv. 615-633 ; Retzow, i. 216-221.

112  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII _

7th Sept. 1757,
is not skilful to celebrate her Heroes,—the Prussian Muse of
History, ¢ choked with dry military pipeclay, or with husky cob-
webbery ‘and academic pedantry, how can she ?—but if Prussia
can produce heroes worth celebrating, that is the one important
point. Apart from soldiership, and the outward features which
are widely different, there is traceable in Winterfeld some kin-
ship in soul to English Chatham his contemporary; though he
has not had the fame of Chatham.

Winterfeld was by no means universally liked; as what brave
man is or can be? Too susceptible to flattery; too this, too
that. He is, one feels always, except Friedrich only, the most.
shining figure in the Prussian Army; and it was not unnatural
he should be Friedrich’s one friend,—as seems to have been the
case. Friedrich, when this Job’s-message reached him (in Er-
furt Country, eight days hence), was deeply affected by it. To
tears, or beyond tears, as we can fancy. ‘Against my multi-
tude of enemies I may contrive resources,” he was heard to say ;
“but I shall find no Winterfeld again!” Adieu, my one friend,
real Peer, sole companion to my lonely pilgrimage in these peril-
ous high regions.

“The Prince of Prussia, contrariwise” (says a miserable little Note,
which must not be withheld), ‘ brightened up at the news: ‘I shall now
die much more content, knowing that there is one so bad and dangerous
man fewer in the Army!’ And, six months after, in his.actual death-
moments, he exclaimed: ‘JI end my life, the last period of which has
cost me so much sorrow; but Winterfeld is he who shortened my

days !’”*—Very bitter Opposition humours circulating, in their fashion,
there as elsewhere in this world!

Bevern, the millstone of Winterfeld being off his neck, has be-
come a more responsible, though he feels himself a much-deliv-
ered man. Had not liked Winterfeld, they say; or had even
hated him, since those bad Zittau times. Can now, at any rate,
make for Schlesien and the meal-magazines, when he sees good.
He will find meal readier there; may he find other things corre-
sponding! Nobody now to keep him painfully manceuvering in
these parts; with the King’s Army nearer to him, but meal not.

On the third day after (September 10th), Bevern, having fin-

? Preuss, ii. 78; citing Retzow.

Cuap. VIT.] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 113
8lst Aug.—13th Sept. 1757.

ished packing, took the road for Schlesien; Daun and Karl at-
tending him; nothing left of Daun and Karl in those Saxon
Countries,—except, at Stolpen, out Dresden-wards, some Re-
serve-post or Rearguard of 15,000, should we chance to hear of
that again. And from the end of September onwards, Bevern’s
star, once somewhat bright at Reichenberg, shot rapidly down-
wards, under the horizon altogether; and there came, post after
post, such news out of Schlesien,—to say nothing of that Stol-
pen Party,—as Friedrich had never heard before.

CHAPTER VII.
FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN, HIS WORLD OF ENEMIES ALL COME.

Tue Soubise-Hildburghausen people had got rendezvoused at
Erfurt about August 25th; 50,000 by account, and no Enemy
within 200 miles of them; and in the Versailles circles it had
been expected they would pr oceed to the “ Deliverance of Sax-
ony” straightway. What is to hinder ?— Friedrich, haggling
with the Austrians at Bernstadt, could muster but a poor
23,000, when he did march towards Erfurt. In those same
neighbourhoods, within reach of Soubise, is the Richelieu, late
D’Estrées, Army; elated with Hastenbeck, comfortably pushing
Royal Highness of Cumberland, who makes no resistance, step
by step, into the sea; victoriously plundering, far and wide, in
those countries, Hanover itself the Headquarter. In the Ver-
sailles circles, it is farther expected that Richelieu, ‘‘ Conqueror
of Minorca,” will shortly besiege and conquer Magdeburg, and
so crown his glories. Why not; were the ‘Deliverance of
Saxony” complete?

The whole of which turned out greatly otherwise, and to the
sad disappointment of Versailles. The Conqueror of Minorca
is probably aware that the conquering of Magdeburg, against one
whose platforms are not rotten, and who does not “lie always in
his bed,” as poor old Blakeney did, will be a very different mat-
ter. And the private truth is, Maréchal de Richelieu never
turned his thoughts upon Magdeburg at all, nor upon any point
of war that had difficulties, but solely upon collecting plunder

4
114  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
3lst Aug.—13th Sept. 1757.

for himself in those Countries. One of the most magnificent
marauders on record; in no danger, he, of becoming monitory
and a pendulum, like the 1,000 that already swing in that ca- —
pacity to rear of him! And he did manage, in this Campaign,
which was the last of his military services, so as to pay off at
Paris “above 50,000/. of debts; and to build for himself a beau-
tiful Garden Mansion there, which the mocking populations
called ‘ Hanover Pavilion (Pavilion @Hanovre) ;’’’ a name still
sticking to it, I believe.! Of the Richelieu Campaign we are
happily delivered from saying almost anything: and the main ~
interest for us turns now on that Soubise-Hildburghausen wing
of it,—which also is a sufficiently contemptible affair; not to be
spoken of, beyond the strictly unavoidable.

Friedrich, with his 23,000 setting out from Dresden, August
30th, has a march of about 170 miles towards Erfurt. He may
expect to find,—counting Richelieu, if Royal Highness of Cum-
berland persist in acting zero as hitherto,—a confused mass of
about 150,000 Enemies, of one sort and other, waiting him
ahead; not to think of those he has just left behind ;—and he
cannot well be in a triumphant humour! Behind, before, around,
it is one gathering of Enemies: one point only certain, that he
must beat them, or else die. Readers would fain follow him in
this forlorn march; him, the one point of interest now in it:
and readers shall, if we can manage, though it is extremely diffi-
cult. For, on getting to Erfurt, he finds his Soubise-Hildburg-
hausen Army off on retreat among the inaccessible Hills still
farther westward; and has to linger painfully there, and to de-
tach, and even to march personally against other Enemies; and
then, these finished, to march back towards his Erfurt ones, who
are taking heart in the interim :—and, in short, from September
Ist to November 5th, there are two months of confused manceu-
vering and marching to and fro in that West-Saxon region,
which are very intricate to readers. November 5th is a day un-
forgettable: but anterior to that, what can we do? Here, dated,
are the Three grand Epochs of the thing; which readers had
better fix in mind as a preliminary.

1 Barbier, iii. 256, 271.

Cuap. VII.] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 115
31st Aug.—13th Sept. 1757.

©, September 13th, Friedrich has got to Erfurt neighbour-
hood; but Soubise and Company are off westward to the Hills
ot Eisenach, won’t come down; Friedrich obliged to linger there-
abouts, painfully waiting almost a month, till
2°. October 11th, hearing that “15,000 Austrians” (that Stol-
pen Party, left as rearguard at Stolpen; Croats mainly, under a
General Haddick) are on march for Berlin, he rises in haste thith-

erward, through Leipzig, Torgau, say 100 miles; hears that Had-

dick has been in Berlin (16th-17th October) for one day, and
that he is off again full speed with a ransom of 30,000/., which
they have had to pay him: upon which Friedrich calls halt in
the Torgau country ;—and would have been uncertain what to
do, had not

3°. Soubise and Company, extremely elated with this Haddick
Feat, come out from their Hills, intent to deliver Saxony after
all. So that Friedrich has to turn back (October 26th-30th)
through Leipzig again; towards,—in fact towards Rossbach and.
November 5th, in his old Saale Country, which does not prove so
wearisome as formerly !

These are the cardinal dates; these let the reader recur to, if
necessary, and keep steadily in mind: it will then perhaps be
possible to intercalate, in a manner intelligible to him, what oth-
er lucent phenomena there are; and these dismal wanderings,
and miserablest two months of Friedrich’s life, will not be wholly
a provoking blotch of enigmatic darkness, but in some sort a
thing with features in the twilight of the Past.

I. Friedrich’s March to Erfurt from Dresden (81st August—
13th September 1757).

The march to Erfurt was of twelve days, and without adven-
ture to speak of. Mayer and Free-Battalion had the vanguard,
Friedrich there as usual; main body, under Keith with Ferdi-
nand and Moritz, following in several columns: straight towards

_ their goal; with steady despatch; for twelve days ;—weather

often very wet.? Seidlitz, with cavalry, had gone ahead, in

? Tempelhof, i. 229; Rodenbeck, i. 317 (not very correct): in Westpha-
len (ii. 20 &c.) a personal Diary of this March, and of what followed on
Duke Ferdinand’s part.

116  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

7th Sept. 1757.
search of one Turpin, a mighty hunter and Hussar among the
French, who was threatening Leipzig, threatening Halle: but
Turpin made off at sound of him, without trying fight ; so that
Seidlitz had only to halt, and rejoin, hoping better luck another
time. .

A march altogether of the common type,—the stages of it not
worth marking except for special readers ;—and of memorable
to us offers only this, if even this: at Rotha, in Leipzig Country,
the eighth stage from Dresden, Friedrich writes, willing to try
for Peace if it be possible,

¥ To the Maréchal Duc de Richelieu.

**Rotha, 7th September 1757.

“T feel, M. le Duc, that you have not been put in the post where you
are for the purpose of Negotiating. I am persuaded, however, that the
Nephew of the great Cardinal Richelieu is made for signing treaties no
less than for gaining battles. J address myself to you from an effect of
the esteem with which you inspire even those who do not intimately
know you.

“Tis a small matter, Monsieur (7 s’agit d’une bagatelle): only to
make Peace, if people are pleased to wish it! I know not what your
Instructions are: but, in the supposition that the King your Master,
now assured by your successes, will have put it in your power to la-
bour in the pacification of Germany, I address to you the Sieur d’El-
cheset” (Sieur Balbi is the real name of him, an Italian Engineer of
mine, who once served with you in the Fontenoy times,—and some
say he has privately a 15,000/. for your Grace’s acceptance,—* the
Sieur d’Elcheset), in whom you may place complete confidence.

“Though the events of this Year afford no hope that your Court
still entertains a favourable disposition for my interests, I cannot per-
suade myself that a union which has lasted between us for sixteen
years may not have left some trace in the mind. Perhaps I judge oth-
ers by myself. But, however that may be, I, in short, prefer putting
my interests into the King your Master’s hands rather than into any
other’s. If you have not, Monsieur, any Instructions as to the Propo-
sal hereby made, I beg of you to ask such, and to inform me what the
tenor of them is.

‘“‘He who has merited statues at Genoa” (ten years ago, in those
Anti-Austrian times, when Genoa burst up in revolt, and the French
and Richeliew beautifully intervened against the oppressors) ; ‘“‘ he who
conquered Minorea in spite of immense obstacles; he who is on the
point of subjugating Lower Saxony,—can do nothing more glorious |

Cuap. VII. ] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 117
9th Sept. 1757.

than to restore Peace to Europe. Of all your laurels, that will be the
fairest. Work in this Cause, with the activity which has secured you
such rapid progress otherwise ; and be persuaded that nobody will feel
more grateful to you than, Monsieur le Due,—Your faithful Friend,—
Freperic.’?

Richelieu, it appears by any evidence there is, went willingly
into this scheme; and applied at Versailles, as desired; with a
peremptory negative for result. Nothing came of the Richelieu
attempt there ; nor of “ce Mf. de Mirabeau,” if he ever went; nor
of any other on that errand. Needless to apply for Peace at
Versailles (and a mere waste of your “sum of 15,000/.,”’ which
one hopes is fabulous in the present scarcity of maney) :—nor
should we perhaps have mentioned the thing at all, except for
the sake of Wilhelmina, whose fond scheme it is in this extrem-
ity of fate; scheme which she tries in still other directions, as
we shall see; her Brother willing too, but probably with much
less hope. If a civil Letter and a bribe of Money will do it,
these need not be spared.

This at Rétha is the day while Winterfeld, on Moys Hill, is
meeting his death. ‘Today at Pegau, in this neighbourhood,
Seidlitz, who could not fall in with Turpin, has given the Hus-
sars of Loudon a beautiful slap; the first enemy we have seen
on this march ; and the last,—nothing but Loudon and Hussars
visibly about, the rest of those Soubise-Reichs people dormant,
as would seem. ‘“ D’Elcheset,’ Balbi, or whoever he was,
would not find Richelieu at Hanover; but at a place called
Kloster-Zeven, in Bremen Country, fifty or sixty miles farther
on. There, this day, are Richelieu with one Sporcken a Hano-
verian, and one Lynar a Dane, rapidly finishing a thing they
were pleased to call ‘‘ Convention of Kloster-Zeven;” which
Friedrich regarded as another huge misfortune fallen on him,—
though it proved to have been far the reverse a while after.
Concerning which take this brief Note; cannot be too brief on
such a topic:

* Given in Rédenbeck, i. 313 (doubtless from Mémoires de Richelicu, Par-
is, 1793, ix. 175, the one fountain-head in regard to this small affair): for
**the 15,0007.” and other rumoured particulars, see Retzow, i. 197; Preuss,
ii. 84; (Muvres de Frédéric, iy. 145.

118 SEVEN YEARS WAR RISES'ToO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. —

9th Sept. 1757,
“ Never was there a more futile Convention than that of Kloster-
Zeven; which filled all Europe with lamentable noises, indignations

and anxieties, during the remainder of that Year; and is now reduced, ©

for Europe and the Universe, to a silent mathematical point, or mere
mark of position, requiring still to be attended to in that character,
though itself zero in any other. Here are the main particulars, in their
sequence.

“ August 3d, towards midnight,‘ 11 p.m.’ say the Books, Maréchal de
Richelieu arrives in the-D’Estrees Camp (‘Camp of Oldendorf,’ still
only one march west of Hastenbeck); to whom D’Estrées on the in-
stant, loftily, delivers up his Army; explains with loyalty, for a few
days more, all things needful to the new Commander; declines to be
himself second ; and loftily withdraws to the Baths of Aachen ‘ for his
health.’ t

* Royal Highness of Cumberland is, by this time, well on Elbe-ward,

Ocean-ward. Till August Ist, for one week, Royal Highness of Cum-
berland lay at Minden, some thirty odd miles from Hastenbeck; de-
ploring that sad mistake ; but unpersuadable to stand, and try amend-
ment of it: August Ist, the French advancing on him again, he moved
off northward, sea-ward. By Nienburg, Verden, Rotenburg, Zeven,
Bremenvorde, Stade ;—arrived at Stade, on the tidal Waters of the
Elbe, August 5th; and by necessity did halt there. From Minden on-
wards, Richelieu, not D’Estrées, has had the chasing of Royal High-
ness: ane of the simplest functions: only that the country is getting

muddy, difficult for artillery-carriage (thinks Richelieu), with an Army |

so dilapidated, hungry, short of pay ; and that Royal Highness, a very
furious person to our former knowledge, might turn on us like a boar at
bay, endangering everything; and finally, that one’s desire is not for
battle, but for a fair chance of plunder to pay one’s debts.

“‘ Britannic Majesty, in this awful state of his Hanover Armaments,
has been applying at the Danish Court: Richelieu too sends off an ap-
plication thither: ‘ Mediate between us, spare useless bloodshed !“*—
Whereupon Danish Majesty (Britannic’s son-in-law) cheerfully under-
takes it; bids one Lynar bestir himself upon it. Count Lynar, an es-
teemed Official of his, who lives in those neighbourhoods; Danish
Viceroy in Oldenburg,—much concerned with the Scriptures, the Sacred
Languages, and other seraphic studies;—and a changed. man, since we
saw him last in the Petersburg regions, making love to Mrs. Anton
Ulrich long ago! Lynar, feeling the axis of the world laid on his
shoulder in this manner, loses not a moment; invokes the Heavenly
Powers; goes on with an alacrity and a despatch beyond praise. Runs
to the Duke of Cumberland at Stade; thence to Richelieu at Zeven;

* Valfons, p. 291.

j

~

Cuap. Vii] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 119

- 9th Sept. 1757.

back to the Duke, back to Zeven: ‘Won't you; and won't you?’ and
in four short days has the once world-famed ‘Convention of Kloster-
Zeven’ standing on parchment,—signed, ready for ratifying: ‘ Royal
Highness’s Army to go home to their countries again’ (routes, methods,
times: when, how, and what next, all left unsettled), ‘and noise of War
to cease in those parts.’ Signed cheerfully on both sides, 9th Septem-
ber 1757; and Lynar striking the stars with his sublime head.°®

“ Unaccountable how Lynar had managed such a difficulty. He says
seraphically, in a Letter to a friend, which the Prussian hussars got
hold of,‘ The idea of it was inspired by the Holy Ghost :—at which
the whole world haha’d again. For it was a Convention, vague, ab-
surd, not capable of being executed; ratification of it refused by both
Courts, by the French Court first, if that was any matter :—and the only
thing now memorable of it is, that 2¢ was a total Futility ; but that there
ensued from it a Fact still of importance; namely :

“That on the 5th of October following, Royal Highness quitted
Stade, and his wrecked army hanging sorrowful there, like a flight of
plucked cranes in mid-air;— arrived at Kensington, October 12th;
heard the paternal Majesty say, that evening,* Here is my son who has
ruined me, and disgraced himself!’— and thereupon indignantly laid
down his military offices, all and sundry; and ceased altogether to
command Armies, English or other, in this world. Whereby, in the
then and now diagram of things, Kloster-Zeven, as a mathematical
point, continues memorable in History, though shrunk otherwise to
zero!

“ Pitt's magnanimity to Royal Highness was conspicuous. Royal
Highness, it is said, had been very badly used in this matter by his
poor peddling Father and the Hanover Ministers; the matter being
one puddle of imbecilities from beginning to end. He was the soul of
honour; brave as a Welf lion; but of dim poor head ; and had not the
faintest vestige” (allergeringsle, says Mauvillon) “of military skill:
awful in the extreme to see in command of British Armies! Adieu to
him, forever and a day.”

Ever since July 29th, three days after Hastenbeck, Pitt had
been in Office again; such the bombardment by Corporation-
Boxes and Events impinging on Britannic Majesty: but not till
now, as I fancy, had Pitt’s way, in regard to those German mat-

5 Biisching (who alone is exact in the matter), Beitrdge, iv. 167-8, § Ly-
nar: see Schill, iii. 49; Valfons, pp. 292-3; Cluvres de Frédéric, iv. 143
(with correction of Preuss’s Note there).

6 In Walpole (iii. 59-64) the amplest minuteness of detail.

120  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757, —

ters, been clear to him. The question of a German Army, if :

you must have a No-General at the top of it, might well be prob-
lematical to Pitt. To equip your strong fighting man, and send

him on your errand, regardless of expense; and, by way of pre- —
liminary, cut the head off him, before saying ‘ Good-speed to —
you, strong man!” But with a General, Pitt sees that it can —

2
*

+
4

rf
3

be different; that perhaps ‘‘ America can be conquered in Ger- —
many,” and that, with a Britannic Majesty so disposed, there is —
no other way of trying it. ‘To this course, Pitt stands hence- —
forth, heedless of the gazetteer cackle, ‘‘ Hah, our Pitt too be- —
come German, after all his talking !’’—like a seventy-four under —

full sail, with sea, wind, pilot all of one mind, and only certain
waterfowl objecting. And is King of England, for the next

Four Years; the one King poor England has _ had, this long —

while ;—his hand felt shortly at the ends of the Earth. And

proves such a blessing to Friedrich, among others, as nothing —

else in this war; pretty much his one blessing, little as he ex-
pected it. Before long, Excellency Mitchell begins consulting
about a General,—and Friedrich dimly sees better things in the
distance, and that Kloster-Zeven had not been the misfortune he
imagined, but only ‘*The darkest hour,” which, it is said, lies
‘‘nearest to the dawn.’

Il. The Soubise-Mildburghausen People take into the Hills ;
riedrich in Erfurt Neighbourhood, hanging on, Week after
Week, in an Agony of Inaction (18th September—10th
October).

Friedrich’s march has gone by Dobeln, Grimma, to Pegau and
Roétha, Leipzig way, but with Leipzig well to right: it just
brushes Weissenfels to rightward, next day after Rétha; crosses
Saale River near Naumburg, whence straight through Weimar
Country, Weimar City on your left, to Erfurt on the northern
side ;*—and,

“ Erfurt, Tuesday, 13th September 1757, About 10 in the morning”
(listen to a faithful Witness), “ there appeared Hussars on the heights
to northward :—‘ Vanguard of his Prussian Majesty ! said Erfurt with
alarm, and our French guests with alarm. And scarcely were the

* Map at p. 209.

tyes hy

a
a

~ Cuap. VII] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 121

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

words uttered, when said Vanguard, and gradually the whole Prussian
Army” (only some 9,000, though we all thought it the whole), “came
to sight; posting itself in half-moon shape round us there; French and
Reichs folk hurrying off what they could from the Cyriaksberg and
Petersberg, by the opposite gates,’—towards Gotha, and the Hills of
Eisenach.

“Think what a dilemma for Erfurt, jammed between two horns in
this way, should one horn enter before the other got out! Much par-
leying and supplicating on the part of Erfurt: Till at last, about 4 p..,
French being all off, Erfurt flung its gates open; and the new Power
did enter, with some due state: Prussian Majesty in person (who could
have hoped it!) and Prince Henri beside him: Cavalry with drawn
swords; Infantry with field-pieces, and the band playing”—Prussian
grenadier march, I should hope, or something equally cheering. “The
rest of the Vanguard, and, in succession, the Army altogether, had taken
Camp outside, looking down on the Northern Gate, over at Ilgertshofen,
a village in the neighbourhood, about two miles off.’

That is the first sight Friedrich has of ‘¢ Za Dauphine,” as the
Versailles people call this Bellona, come. to “ deliver Saxony ;”
and she is considerably coyer than had been expected. Many
sad days, and ardent vain vows of Friedrich, before he could see
the skirt of her again! From Ilgertshofen, north-westward to
Dittelstidt, Gamstiidt, and other poor specks of villages in Gotha
Territory, is ten or fifteen miles; from Dittelstadt eastward to
Buttstiidt and Buttelstidt, in Weimar Country, may be twenty-
five: in this area, Friedrich, shifting about, chiefly for conven-
ience of quarters,—headquarter Kirschleben for a while, Buttel-
stadt finally and longest, — had to wander impatiently to and
fro, for four weeks and more; no work procurable, or none
worth mentioning :—in the humour of a man whose House is
on fire, flaming out of every window, front and rear; who has
run up with quenching apparatus; and cannot, being spell-bound,
get the least bucket of it applied. And is by nature the rapid-
est soul now alive. Figure his situation there, as it gradually
becomes manifest to him !—

For the present, Dauphiness Bellona, hurrying to the Hills, has
left some tagrag of remnant in Gotha. Whereupon, the second
day, here is an “‘ Qwn Correspondent” again,—not going by elec-

? Helden- Geschichte, iv. 636~+7.

Vor. V.—F

i

122 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
15th Sept. 1757.

tric telegragh, but (what is a sensible advantage) credible in ev-

ery point, when he does come:

“‘ Gotha, Thursday, 15th September. Grand- Duke and Duchess,
like everybody else, have been much occupied all morning with the
fact, that the Prussian Army” (Seidlitz and a regiment or tw 0, nothing

more) “‘is actually here ; took possession of the ‘Town-Gates and Main ~

Guard, this eRe ab ty Hungarian-French hussar rabble, hateful
to every one in Gotha, having made off in time, rapidly towards Hise-
nach and the Hills.

‘* Towards noon, his Royal Majesty in highest person, with his Lord
Brother the Prince Henri’s Royal Highness, arrived in Gotha; sent
straightway, by one of his Officers, a compliment to the Grand-Duke ;
and ‘ would have the pleasure to come and dine, if his Serene Highness
permitted.’ Serene Highness, self and Household always cordially
Friedrich’s, was just about sitting down to dinner; and answered with
exuberantly glad surprise,—or was answering, when Royal Majesty
himself stept in with smiling face; and embracing the Duke, said: ‘1

timed myself to arrive at this moment, thinking your Durchlaucht would.

be at dinner, that I might be received without ceremony, and dine like
a neighbour among you.’ Unexpected as this visit was, the joy of Duke
and Duchess,” always fast friends to Friedrich, and the latter ever aft-
erwards his correspondent, “‘ may be conceived, but not adequately ex-
pressed; as both the Serenities were touched, in the most affecting
manner, by the honour of so great a King’s sudden presence among
them.

“‘ His Majesty requested that the Frau von Buchwald, our Most Gra-
cious Duchess’s Hof-Dame, whose qualities he much valued, might dine
with them,”—being always fond of sensible people, especially sensible
women. “The whole Highest and High company” (Royal, that is,
and Ducal) * was, during table, uncommonly merry. The King show-

ed himself altogether content; and his bright clever talk and sprightly

sallies, awakening everybody to the like, left not the least trace visible
of the weighty toils he was then engaged in ;—as if the weightier these
were, the less should they fetter the noble openness (Freymuthigkeit)
of this high soul, which is not to be cast down by the heaviest burden.

“His Majesty having taken leave of Duke and Duchess, and gra-
ciously permitted the chiefest persons of the Gotha Court to pay their
respects, withdrew to his Army.”® Slept, I find elsewhere, “at Gam-
stadt, on the floor of a little Inn ;” meaning to examine Posts in that
part, next morning.

Here has been a cheerful little scene for Friedrich; the last
8 Letter in LZelden- Geschichte, iv. 638-9.

i =
4
” a

4
.

Ss ee

a

Car. VII] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 123

17th Sept. 1757.
he has in these black weeks. <A laborious Predecessor, striving

to elucidate, leaves me this Note:

‘What a pity one knows nothing, nor can know, about this Duke and
Duchess, though their names, especially the latter’s name, are much
tossed to and fro in the Books! We heard of them, favourably, in Vol-
taire’s time; and may again, at least of the Lady, who is henceforth a
Correspondent of Friedrich’s. ‘The above is a dim direct view of

‘them, probably our last as well as first. Duke's name is Friedrich III. ;

I do believe, a man of solidity, honour, and polite dignified sense, a
highly respectable Duke of Sachsen-Gotha, contented to be obscure,
and quietly do what was still doable in that enigmatic situation. He is
Uncle to our George III. ;—his Sister is the now Princess-Dowager of
Wales, with a Lord Bute, and I know not what questionable figures and
intrigues, or suspicions of intrigue, much about her. His Duchess,
Louisa Dorothee, is a Princess of distinguished qualities, literary tastes,
—Voltaire’s Hostess, Friedrich’s Correspondent: a bright and quietly
shining illumination to the circle she inhabits. Duke is now fifty-eight,
Duchess forty-seven ; and they lost their eldest Son last year. There
has been lately a considerable private brabble as to T'utorage of the
Duke of Weimar (Wilhelmina’s maddish Duke, who is dead lately ;
and a Prince left, who soon died also, but left a Son, who grew to be
Goethe’s friend) ; Tutorage claimed by various Cousins, has been ad-
judged to this one, King Friedrich co-operating in such result.

“As to the famed Grand-Duchess, she is a Sachsen-Meiningen
Princess, come ef Ernst the Pious, of Johann the Magnanimous, as her
Husband and all these Sachsens are: when Voltaire went precipitant,
with such velocity, from the Potsdam Heaven, she received him at
Gotha; set him on writing his History of the Empire, and endeav-
oured to break his fall. She was noble to Voltaire, and well honoured
by that uncertain Spirit. There is a fine Library at Gotha; and the
Lady bright loves Books, and those that can write them ;—a friend of
the Light, a Daughter of the Sun and the Empyrean, not of Darkness
and the Stygian Fens.”°

Friedrich’s first Letter to her Highness was one of thanks,

above a year ago, for an act of kindness, act of justice withal,

which she did to one of his Official people. Here, on the mor-
row of that dinner, is the second Letter, much more aerial and
cordial, in which style they shall continue, now that he has seen
the admired Princess.

® Michaelis, 1.517; &ce. &e.

124  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII.

16th Sept. 1757.

To the Most Serene Grand-Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha.

Dittelstadt, ‘‘16th September 1757.

“¢ Mapame,— Yesterday was a Day I shall never forget; which sat-
isfied a just desire I have had, this long while, to see and hear a Prin-
sess whom all Europe admires. I am not surprised, Madame, that you
subdue people’s hearts; you are made to attract the esteem and the
homage of all who have the happiness to know you. But it is incom-
prehensible to me how you can have enemies ; and how men represent-
ing Countries that by no means wish to pass for barbarous, can have
been so basely (indignement) wanting in the respect they owe you,
and in the consideration which is due to all sovereigns” (French not
famous for their refined demeanour in Saxony this time). ‘* Why could
not I fly to prevent such disorders, such indecency! I can only offer
you a great deal of good will; but | feel well that, in present circum-
stances, the thing wanted is effective results and reality. May I, Ma-
dame, be so happy as to render you some service! May your for-
tune be equal to your virtues! I am with the highest consideration,
Madame, your Highness’s faithful Cousin.—F.”°

To Wilhelmina he says of it, next day, still peated’ though
sad news have come in the interim ;—death of Winterfeld, for
one black item:

* * © The day before yesterday I was in Gotha. It was a touch-
ing scene to see the partners of one’s misfortunes, with like griefs and
like complaints. ‘The Duchess is a woman of real merit, whose firm-
ness puts many a man to shame. Madame de Buchwald appears to me
a very estimable person, and one who would suit you much: intelli-
gent, accomplished, without pretensions, and good-humoured. My
Brother Henri is gone to see them today. Iam so oppressed with
erief, that I would rather keep my sadness to myself. J have reason
to congratulate myself much on account of my Brother Henri; he has
behaved like an angel, asa soldier, and well towards me as a Brother.
I cannot, unfortunately, say the same of the elder. He sulks at me (il
me boude), and has sulkily retired to Torgau, from whence, | hear, he
_is gone to Wittenberg. I shall leave him to his caprices and to his
bad conduct; and I prophesy. nothing good for the future, unless the
younger guide him.”'' *

This is part of a long sad Letter to Wilhelmina; parts of

10 (Huvres de Frédéric, xviii. 166.
aa “‘ Kirschleben, near Erfurt, 17th September, 1757” ire es de Frédé-
ric, XXvii. 1. 306).

_ . * 4 wr
ee Tee ee ee ae ae) eee

>.

_ Cuap. VIT.] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. | 125

18th Sept. 1757.
which we may recur to, as otherwise illustrative. But before
going into that tragic budget of bad news, let us give the finale
of Gotha, which occurred the next day,—tragi-comic in part,—
and is the last bit of action in those dreary four weeks,

Gotha, 18th September. “Since Thursday 15th, Major-General
Seidlitz,” youngest Major-General of the Army, but a rapidly rising
man, “has been Commandant in Gotha, under flourishing circumstan-
ces; popular and supreme, though only with a force of 1,500, dragoons
and hussars. Monday morning early, Seidlitz’s scouts bring word that
the Soubise-Hildburghausen people are in motion hitherward ; French
and Austrian, Turpin’s, Loudon’s, all that are; grenadiers in mass ;—
total, say 8,000 horse and foot, with abundance of artillery ;—have been
on march all night, to retake Gotha; with all the Chief Generals and
Dignitaries of the Army following in their carriages, for some hours
past, to see it done. Seidlitz, ascertaining these things, has but one
course left,—that of clearing himself out, which he does with orderly
velocity: and at 9 a.m.,the Dignitaries and their 8,000 find open gates,
Seidlitz clean off; occupy the posts, with due emphasis and flourish;
and proceed to the Schloss in a grand triumphant way,—where private-
ly they are not very welcome, though one puts the best face on it, and
a dinner of importance is the first thing imperative to be set in prog-
ress. <A flurried Court that of Gotha, and much swashing of French
plumes through it, all this morning, since Seidlitz had to flit.

“Seidlitz has not flitted very far. Seidlitz has ranked his small
dragoon-hussar force in a hollow, two miles off; has got warning sent
to a third regiment within reach of him. ‘Come towards me, and in
a certain defile, visible from Gotha eastward, spread yourselves so and
so !’—and judges by the swashing he hears of up yonder, that perhaps
something may still be done. Dinner, up in the Schloss, is just being
taken from the spit, and the swashing at its height, when— Hah, what
is that, though” and all plumes pause. For it is Seidlitz, artistically
spread into single files, on the prominent points of vision; advancing
again, more like 15,000 than 1,500: ‘And in the Defile yonder, that
regiment, do you mark it; the King’s vanguard, I should say? — To
horse !”

“That is Seidlitz’s fine bit of Painting, hung out yonder, hooked on
the sky itself, as temporary background to Gotha, to be judged of by
the connoisseurs. For pictorial effect, breadth of touch, truth to Na-
ture, and real power on the connoisseur, I have heard of nothing equal
by any artist. The high Generalcy, Soubise, Hildburghausen, Darm-
stadt, mount in the highest haste; everybody mounts, happy he who
has anything to mount; the grenadiers tumble out of the Schloss;

“y

126 sSEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
13th-Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

dragoons, artillery tumble out; Dauphiness takes wholly to her heels,
at an extraordinary pace: so that Seidlitz’s hussars could hardly get a
stroke at her; caught sixty and odd, nine of them Officers not of mark ;
did kill thirty ; and had such a haul of equipages and valuable effects,
cosmetic a good few of them, habilatory, artistic, as caused the hussar
heart to sing for joy. Among other plunder was Loudon’s Commission
of Major-General, just on its road from Vienna” (poor Mannstein’s
death the suggesting cause, say some) ;—* undoubtedly a shining Lou-
don; to whom Friedrich, next day, forwarded the Document with a
polite Note.’’!? j

The day after this bright feat of Seidlitz’s, which was a slight
consolation to Friedrich, there came a Letter from the Duchess,
not of compliment only; the Letter itself had to be burnt on
the spot, being, as would seem, dangerous for the High Lady,
who was much a friend of Friedrich’s. ‘Their Correspondence,
very polite and graceful, but for most part gone to the unintelli-
-gible state, and become vacant and spectral, figures considerably
in the Books, and was, no doubt, a considerable fact to Fried-
rich. His Answer on this occasion may be given, since we have
it,—lest there should not elsewhere be opportunity for a second
specimen.

Freidrich to the Grand-Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha.
‘* Kirschleben, near Erfurt, 20th September 1757.

‘“ MapamMe,—Nothing could happen more glorious to my troops than
that of fighting, Madame, under your eyes and for your defence. I wish
their help could be useful to you; but I foresee the reverse. If I were
obstinately to insist on maintaining the post of Gotha with Infantry, I
should ruin your City for you, Madame, by attracting thither and fixing
there the theatre of the War; whereas, by the present course, you will |
only have to suffer little rubs (passades), which will not last long.

‘A thousand thanks that you could, in a day like yesterday, find the
moment to think of your Friends, and to employ yourself for them.”
(Seidlitz’s attack was brisk, quite sudden, with an effect like Harlequin’s
sword in Pantomimes ; and Gotha in every corner, especially in the
Schloss below and above stairs,—dinner cooked for A,and eaten by B,
in that manner,—must have been the most agitated of little Cities.)
“T will neglect nothing of what you have the goodness to tell me; I
shall profit by these notices. Heaven grant it might be for the deliver-
ance and the security of Germany!

12 Helden-Geschichte, iv. 640; Westphalen, ii. 37; Gfuvres de Frédéric,
iy. 147.

- Cuap. VIL] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 127

13th Sept.—LOth Oct. 1757.

“The most signal mark of obedience I can give you consists unques-
tionably in doing your bidding with this Letter.” (Burn it, as soon
as read.) ‘‘I should have kept it as a monument of your generosity
and courage: but, Madame, since you dispose of it otherwise, your or-
ders shall be executed ; persuaded that if one cannot serve one’s friends,
one must at least avoid hurting them ; that one may be less circumspect
for one’s own interest, but that one must be prudent and even timid for
theirs. Iam, with the highest esteem and the most perfect considera-
tion, Madame, your Highness’s most faithful and affectionate Cousin,—
Peas

From Erfurt, on the night of his arrival, finding the Dauphin-
ess in such humour, Friedrich had ordered Ferdinand of Bruns-
wick with his Division, and Prince Moritz with his, both of
whom were still at Naumburg, to go on different errands,—Fer-
dinand out Halberstadt-Magdeburg way, whither Richelieu, vul-
ture-like, if not eagle-like, is on wing; Moritz to Torgau to se-
cure our magazine and be on the outlook there. Both of them
marched on the morrow (November 14th): and are sending him
news,—seldom comfortable news; mainly that, in spite of all

one can do (and it is not little on Ferdinand’s part), the Riche-

lieu vultures, 80,000 of them, floating onward, leagues broad, are
not to be kept out of Halberstadt, well if out of Magdeburg it-
self;—and that, in short, the general conflagration, in those parts
too, is progressive.'+ Moritz, peaceable for some weeks in Tor-
gau Country, was to have an eye on Brandenburg withal, on
Berlin itself; and before long Moritz will see something notice-
able there ! é

From Preussen, Friedrich hears of mere ravagings and horrid
cruelties, Cossack-Calmuck atrocities, which make human na-
ture shudder:'® “‘ Fight those monsters; go into them, at all
hazards!” he writes to Lehwald peremptorily. Lehwald, 25,000
against 80,000, does so; draws up, in front of Wehlau, not far
east of Kénigsberg, among woody swamps, August 30th, at a
Hamlet called Gross-Jdgersdor/, with his best skill; fights well,

13 (Huvres de Frédéric, xviii. 167.

44Tn Orlich’s First Moritz, pp. 71-89; and in Westphalen, ii. 23-143
(about Ferdinand): interesting Documentary details, Autographs of Fried-
rich, &c., in regard to both these Expeditions.

In Helden-Geschichte, iv. 427-437, the hideous details.

128 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757. _

though not without mistakes; and is beaten by cannon and 4
numbers.!6 Preussen now lies at Apraxin’s discretion. This —
bit of news too is on the road for Erfurt Country. Such a six
weeks for the swift man, obliged to stand spell-bound,—idle pos- —
terity never will conceive it; and description is useless. ;

Let us add here, that Apraxin did not advance on Konigsberg,
or farther into Preussen at all; but, after some loitering, turned,.
to everybody’s surprise, and wended slowly home. ‘Could get —
no provision,” said Apraxin for himself. ‘Thought the Czar-
ina was dying,” said the world; ‘‘and that Peter her successor
would take it well!’ Plodded slowly home, for certain; Leh-
wald following him, not too close, till over the border. Nothing
left of Apraxin, and his huge Expedition, but Memel alone; Me-
mel, and a great many graves and ruins. So that Lehwald
could be recalled, to attend on the Swedes, before Winter came.
And Friedrich’s worst forebodings did not take effect in this
case ;—nor in some others, as we shall see!

Lamentation-Psalms of Friedrich.

Meanwhile, is it not remarkable that Friedrich wrote more
Verses, this Autumn, than almost in any other three months of
his life? Singular, yes; though perhaps not inexplicable. And
if readers could fairly understand that fact, instead of running
away with the shell of it, and leaving the essence, it would throw
a great light on Friedrich. He is. not a brooding inarticulate
man, then; but a bright-glancing, articulate; not to be struck
dumb by the face of Death itself. Flashes clear-eyed into the
physiognomy of Death, and Ruin, and the Abysmal Horrors
opening; and has a sharp word to say to them. The explana-
tion of his large cargo of Verses this Autumn is, That always,
alternating with such fiery velocity, he had intolerable periods
of waiting till things were ready. And took to verses, by way
of expectorating himself, and keeping down his devils. Not a
bad plan, in the circumstances,—especially if you have so won-
derful a turn for expectoration by speech. “ All bad as Poetry,
those Verses?” asks the reader. Well, some of them are not of

16 Tempelhof, i. 299; Retzow, i. 212; &e. &c. (‘Russians lost about
9,000,” by their own tale 5,000; ‘the Prussians 3,000” and the Field).

2

Sake. VIL] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 129
13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

first-rate goodness. Should have been burnt; or the time mark-
ed which they took up, and whether it was good time wasted
(which I suppose it almost never was), or bad time skilfully got
over. ‘Time, that is the great point; and the heart-truth of
them, or mere lip-truth, another. We must give some speci-
mens, at any rate.

Especially that notable Specimen from the Zittau Countries:
the “Epistle to Wilhelmina (Zpitre a ma Seur'’);’’ which is the
keynote, as it were; the fountain-head of much other verse, and
of much prose withal, and Correspondencing not with Wilhel-
mina alone, of which also some taste must be given. Primary
E/pitre ; written, I perceive, in that interval of waiting for Keith
and the magazines,—though the final date is ‘‘ Bernstadt, Au-
gust 24th.” Concerning hihi Smelfungus takes, over-hastily,
the liberty to say: “‘ Strange, is it not, to be on the point of
fighting for one’s existence: overwhelmed with so many busi-
nesses; and disposed to go into verse in addition! Conceive
that form of mind; it would illuminate something of Friedrich’s
character: I cannot yet rightly understand such an aspect of
structure, and know not what to say of it, except ‘Strange !’ ”»—

Understand it or not, we do gather by means of it some indis-
putable glimpses, nearly all the direct insight allowed us out of
any source, into Friedrich’s inner man; what his thoughts were,
what his humour was in that unique crisis; and to readers in
quest of that, these Pieces, fallen obsolete and frosty to all other
kinds of readers, are well worth perusing, and again perusing.
Most veracious Documents, we can observe; nothing could be
truer; Confessions they are, in the most emphatic sense ; no
truer ever made to a Priest in the name of the Most High. Like
a soliloquy of Night-Thoughts, accidentally becoming audible to
us. Mahomet, I find, wrote the Koran in this manner. From
these poor Poems, which are voices De Profundis, there might,
by proper care and selection, be constructed a Friedrich’s Ko-
ran; and, with commentary and elucidation, it would be pleas-
ant to read. The Koran of Friedrich, or the Lamentation-
Psalms of Friedrich! But it would need an Editor,—other
than Dryasdust! Mahomet’s Koran, treated by the Arab Dry-

17 Huvres de Frédéric, xii. 836-42.

F 2

~

130 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL _

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.
asdust (merely birdie up the bottom of that Box of Shoulder-
blades, and printing them), has become dreadfully tough reading,

on this side of the Globe; and has given rise to the impossiblest

notions about Mahomet! Indisputable it is, Heroes, in their af-
fliction, Mahomet and David, have solaced themselves by snatch-
es of Psalms, by Suras, bursts of Utterance rising into Song ;—
and if Friedrich, on far other conditions, did the like, what has
History to say of blame to him?

Wilhelmina comes out very strong, in this season of trouble ;
almost the last we see of our excellent Wilhelmina. Like a
lioness; like a shrill mother when her children are in peril. A
noble sisterly affection is in Wilhelmina; shrill Pythian vehe-
mence trying the impossible. That a Brother, and such a
Brother, the most heroic now breathing, brave and true, and the
soul of honour in all things, should have the whole world rise
round him, like a delirious Sorcerer’s-Sabbath, intent to hurl the
mountains on him,—seems such a horror and a madness to Wil-
helmina. Like the brood-hen flying in the face of wild degs,
and packs of hounds in full trail! Most Christian Pompadour
Kings, enraged Czarinas, implacable Empress-Queens; a whole
world in armed delirium rushes on, regardless of Wilhelmina.
Never mind, my noble one; your Brother will perhaps manage
to come up with this leviathan or that, among the heap of them,
at a good time, and smite into the fifth rib of him. Your
Brother does not the least shape towards giving in; thank the
Heavens, he will stand to himself at least; his own poor strength
- will all be on his own side.

Wilhelmina’s hopes of a Peace with France; mission of her
Mirabeau, missions and schemes not a few, we have heard of on
Wilhelmina’s part with this view; but the notablest is still to
mention: that of stirring up, by Voltaire’s means, an important-
looking Cardinal de Tencin to labour in the business. Emi-
nency Tencin lives in Lyon, known to the Princess on her Ital-
ian. Tour ;—shy of asking Voltaire to dinner on that fine occa-
sion ;—but, except Officially, is not otherwise than well-affected
to Voltaire. Was once Chief Minister of France, and would
fain again be; does not like these Bernis novelties and Austrian

OO eee Bany

Cua. VII. } FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 131
~ 13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

Alliances, had he now any power to overset them. Let him
correspond with Most Christian Majesty, at least; plead for a
Peace with Prussia, Prussia being so ready that way. Emi-
nency Tencin, on Voltaire’s suggestion, did so, perhaps is even
now doing so; till ordered to hold fis peace on such subjects.
This is certain and well known; but nothing else is known, or
to us knowable about it; Voltaire, in vague form, being our one
authority, through whom it is vain to hunt, and again hunt.}8
The Dates, much more the features and circumstances, all lie
buried from us, and,—till perhaps the Lamentation-Psalms are
well edited,—must continue lying. As a fact certain, but un-
deniably vague.

Voltaire’s procedure, one can gather, is polite, but two-faced ;
not sublime on this occasion. In fact, is intended to serve him-
self. To the high Princess he writes devotionally, ready to obey
in all things; and then to his Eminency Cardinal Tencin, it
rather seems as if the tone were: ‘‘ Pooh! yes, your Emi-
nency; such are the poor Lady’s notions. But does your Em-
inency take notice how high my connections are; what service
a poor obscure creature might perhaps do the State some day !”
Friedrich himself is, in these ways, brought into correspondence
with Voltaire again; and occasionally writes to him in this
War, and ever afterwards: Voltaire responds with fine sympa-
thy, always prettily, in the enthusiasm of the moment ;—and at
other times he writes a good deal about Friedrich, oftenest in
rather a mischievous dialect. ‘‘The traitor!’ exclaim some
Prussian writers, not many or important in our time. In fact,
there is a considerable touch of grinning malice (as of Monkey
versus Cat, who had once burnt fis paw, instead of getting his
own burnt), in those utterances of Voltaire: some of which the
reader will grin over too, without much tragic feeling, — the
rather as they did our Felis Leo no manner of ill, and show our
incomparable Singe with a sparkle of the Tigre in him; theoretic
sprinkle merely and for moments, which makes him all the more
entertaining and interesting at the domestic hearth.

Of Friedrich’s Lamentation-Psalms we propose to give the
First and the Last: these, with certain Prose Pieces, interme-

18 Quvres (Mémoires), ii. 92-93; ib. i. 143: Preuss, ii. 84.

132  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [BooKk XVII.
13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

diate and connecting, may perhaps be made intelligible to read-

ers, and throw some light on these tragic weeks of the King’s —

History :

1°. Epitre & ma Seur (First of the Lamentation-Psalms).—This is
the famed ‘“ Epistle to Wilhelmina,” already spoken of; which the
King despatched from Bernstadt, “ August 24th,” just while quitting
those parts, on the Erfurt Errand ;—though written before, in the te-
dium of waiting for Keith. The piece is long, vehement, altogether
sincere ; lyrically sings aloud, or declaims in rhyme, what one’s indig-
nant thought really is on the surrounding woes and atrocities. We
faithfully abridge, and condense into our briefest Prose ;—readers can
add water, and the jingle of French rhymes ad libitum. It starts thus:

*“O sweet and dear hope of my remaining days; O Sister, whose
friendship, so fertile in resources, shares all my sorrows, and with a
helpful arm assists me in the gulf! It is in vain that the Destinies
have overwhelmed me with disasters: if the crowd of Kings have
sworn my ruin; if the Earth have opened to swallow me,—you still
love me, noble and affectionate Sister: loved by you, what is there of
misfortune?” (Branches off into some survey of it, nevertheless. )

*“* Huge continents of thunder-cloud, plots thickening against me” (in
those Menzel Documents), “I watched with terror; the sky getting
blacker, no covert for me visible: on a sudden, from the deeps of Hell,
starts forth Discord” (with capital-letter), “ and the tempest broke.

‘“* Ce fut dans ton Sénat, O fougueuse Angleterre ! |
Ou ce monstre inhumain fit éclater la guerre ;

It was from thy Senate, stormful England, that she first launched out

|
j
3
'

War. In remote climates first; in America, far away ;— between
France and thee. Old Ocean shook with it; Neptune, in the depths
of his caves (ses grottes profondes), saw the English subjecting his
waves (ses ondes): the wild Iroquois, prize of these crimes ( forfaits),
bursts out; detesting the tyrants who disturb his Forests’”—and scalp-
ing Braddock’s people, and the like.

“ Discord, charmed to see such an America, and feeble mortals cross-
ing the Ocean to exterminate one another, addresses the European
Kings: ‘ How long will you be slaves to what are called laws? Is it
for you to bend under worn-out notions of justice, right? Mars is the
one God: Might is Right. A King’s business is to do something fa-
mous in this world.’

“O Daughter of the Caesars,” Maria Theresa, “ how, at these words,
ambition, burning in thy soul, breaks out uncontrollable! Probity, hon-
our, treaties, duty: feeble considerations these, to a heart letting loose
its flamy passions; determining to rob the generous Germans of their

er hee —ae st

ie

{
}
|

i
| weCnap. VIL] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 133
- 18th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757. ,

liberties; to degrade thy equals; to extinguish ‘Schism’ (so called),
and set up despotism on the wrecks of all.”

“ Huge project”—‘ fier Triumvirat”—what not: “ From Roussillon
and the sunny Pyrenees to frozen Russia, all arm for Austria, and
march at her bidding. ‘They concert my downfall, trample on my
rights.

“The Daughter of the Cesars, proudly certain of victory,—'tis the
way of the Great, whose commonplace virtue, pusillanimous in reverses,
overbearing in success, cannot bridle their cupidity,—designates to the
Triumvirate what Kings are to be proscribed” (Britannic George and
me, Reich busy on us both even now), “and those ungrateful tyrants,
by united crime, immolate to each other, without remorse, their dearest
allies.” For instance :

*¢O jour digne d’oubli! Quelle atroce imprudence !
Thérése, c’est Anglais que tu vends ala France:
“Theresa! it is England thou art selling to France ;”—Yes, a thing

worth noting. ‘Thy generous support in thy first adversities; thy

one friend then, when a world had risen to devour thee. Thou reign-
est now :—but it was England alone that saved thee anything to reign

over!
‘¢ Tu réegnes, mais lui seul a sauvé tes états :

Les bienfaits chez les rois ne font que des ingrats.

*¢ And thou, lazy Monarch,”—stupid Louis, let us omit him :—“ Pom-
padour, selling her lover to the highest bidder, makes France, in our
day, Austria’s slave!” We omit Kolin Battle, too, spoken of with a
proud modesty (Prag is not spoken of at all); and how the neighbour-
ing ravenous Powers, onlookers hitherto, have opened their throats with
one accord to swallow Prussia, thinking its downfall certain: ‘ Poor
mercenary Sweden, once so famous under its soldier Kings, now de-
based by a venal Senate ;”’—Sweden, “ what say 1? my own kindred”
(foolish Anspach and others), “ driven, by perverse motives, join in the
plot of horrors, and become satellites of the prospering Triumvirs.

** And thou, loved People” (my own Prussians), “‘ whose happiness is
my charge” (notable how often he repeats this), “it is thy lamentable
destiny, it is the danger which hangs over thee, that pierces my soul.
The pomps of my rank I could resign without regret. But to rescue
thee, in this black crisis, I will spend my heart’s blood. Whose is that
blood but thine? With joy will I rally my warriors to avenge thy af-
front; defy death at the foot of the ramparts” (of Daun and his Eck-
artsberg, ahead yonder), “‘and either conquer, or be buried under thy
ruins.” Very well; but ah,—

“Preparing with such purpose, ye Heavens, what mournful cries are
those that reach us: ‘ Death has laid low thy Mother !’"—Hah, that was

184  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.
the last stroke, then, which angry Fate had reserved for me.— — O
Mother, Death flies my misfortunes, and spreads his livid horrors over
thee!” (Very tender, very sad, what he says of his Mother; but must
be omitted and imagined. General finale is :)

“Thus Destiny with a deluge of torments fills the poisoned remnant
of my days. ‘The present is hideous to me, the future unknown: what,
you say I am the creature of a Beneficent Being ?—

““ Quoi! serais-je formé par un Dieu bienfaisant ?
Ah! s'il était si bon, tendre pour son ouvrage’’—
—Husht, my litile Titan!

“ And now, ye promoters of sacred lies, go on leading cowards by the
nose, in the dark windings of your labyrinth :—to me the enchantment
is ended, the charm disappears. I see that all men are but the sport
of Destiny. And that, if there do exist some Gloomy and Inexorable
Being, who allows a despised herd of creatures to go on multiplying

here, he values them as nothing; looks down on a Phalaris crowned, -

- on a Socrates in chains; on our virtues, our misdeeds, on the horrors
of war, and all the cruel plagues which ravage Earth, as a thing indif-
ferent to him. Wherefore, my sole refuge and only haven, loved Sis-
ter, is in the arms of death:

‘* Ainsi mon seul asile en mon unique port
Se trouve, chere sceur, dans les bras de la mort.’’!*®

2°. Wilhelmina to Voltaire, with something of Answer (First of
certain intercalary Prose Pieces).—Wilhelmina has been writing to
Voltaire before, and getting consolations since Kolin; but her Letters
are lost, till this the earliest that is left us:

Baireuth, 19th August 1757 (To Voltaire).—‘ One first knows one’s
friends when misfortunes arrive. The Letter you have written does
honour to your way of thinking. I cannot tell you how much I am
sensible to what you have done” (set Cardinal Tencin astir, with result
we will hope). ‘The King, my Brother, is as much so as I. You
will find a Note here, which he bids me transmit to you” (Note lost).
“That great man is still the same. He supports his misfortunes with a
courage and a firmness worthy of him. He could not get the Note
transcribed. It began by verses. Instead of throwing sand on it, he
took the inkbottle ; that is the reason why it is cut in two.”

—This Note, we say, is lost to us ;—all but accidentally thus: Vol-
taire, 12th September, writes twice to friends. Writing to his D’Ar-
gentals, he says: ‘¢ The affairs of this King” (Friedrich) “ go from bad
to worse. I know not if I told you of the Letter he wrote to me about
three weeks ago” (say August 17th-18th: the Note through Wilhel.

18 (Huvres, xii. 36-42 ; is sent off to Wilhelmina, 24th August.

By

way

Cuap. VII. ] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. egos BY
13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.
mina, evidently): “‘I have learned,’ says he,‘ that you had interested

yourself in my successes and misfortunes. There remains to me noth-
ing but to sell my life dear, &c. His Sister writes me one much more
lamentable ;” the one we are now reading :-—

“JT am in a frightful state; and will not survive the destruction of
my House and Family. That is the one consolation that remains to
me. You will have fine subjects for making Tragedies of. O times!
O manners! You will, by the illusory representation, perhaps draw
tears; while all contemplate with dry eyes the reality of these miser-
ies : the downfall of a whole House, against which, if the truth were
known, there is no solid complaint. I cannot write farther of it: my
soul is so troubled that I know not what I am doing. But whatever
happen, be persuaded that I am more than ever your friend, — WiL-
HELMINA.”°

Friedrich, while Wilhelmina writes so, is at the foot of the Eckarts-
berg, eagerly maneuvering with the Austrians, in hopes of getting bat-
tle out of them,—which he cannot. Friedrich, while he wrote that
Note to Voltaire, and instead of sandbox shook the inkbottle over it,
was just going out on that errand.

Voltaire, 12th September (to a Lady whose Son is in the D’Estrées
wars).?°— Here are mighty revolutions, Madame; and we are not at
the end yet. ‘They say there have 18,000 Hanoverians been disposed
of at Stade” (Convention of Kloster-Zeven). ‘That is no small mat-
ter. I can hope M. Richelieu” (who is “ mon héros,” when I write to
himself) “ will adorn his head with the laurels they have stuck in his
pocket. I wish Monsieur your Son abundance of honour and glory
without wounds, and to you Madame unalterable health. The King
of Prussia has written me a very touching Letter” (one line of which
we have read); ‘‘ but I have always Madame Denis’s adventure on my
heart,” at Frankfurt yonder. ‘If I were well, 1 would take a run to

- Frankfurt myself on the business,”—now that Soubise’s reserves are in

those parts, and could give Freytag and Schmidt such a dusting for
me, if they liked! Shall I write to Collini on it? Does write, and

again write, the second year hence, as still better chances rise.”!

3°. Wilhelmina to Voltaire again, with Answer (Second of the
Prose Pieces).—Not a very zealous friend of Friedrich’s, after all, this
Voltaire! Poor Wilhelmina, terrified by that Epitre of her Brother’s,
and his fixed purpose of seeking Death, has, in her despair (though her
Letter is lost), been urging Voltaire to write dissuading him ;—as Vol-
taire does. Of which presently. Her Letter to Voltaire on this thrice-

In uvres de Voltaire, \xxvii. 30. 20 Tb. Ixxvii. 55-56.
71 Collini, pp. 208-211 (‘‘ January—May 1759”).

186  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.
important subject is lost. But in the very hours while Voltaire sat
writing what we have just read, ‘always with Madame Denis’s adven-
ture on my heart,” Wilhelmina, at Baireuth, is again writing to him as _
follows : | . ‘

Barreuth, 12th September 1757 (To Voltaire). —“ Your Letter has :
sensibly touched me; that which you addressed to me for the King”
(both Letters lost to us) “‘ has produced the same effect on him. I hope |
you will be satisfied with his Answer as to what concerns yourself; but
you will be as little so as 1 am with the resolutions he has formed. I |
had flattered myself that your reflections would make some impression — .
on his mind. You will see the contrary by the Letter adjoined.

“'To me there remains nothing but to follow his destiny if it is un-
fortunate. I have never piqued myself on being a philosopher; though
I have made my efforts to become so. ‘The small progress I made did _
teach me to despise grandeurs and riches: but I could never find in ;
philosophy any cure for the wounds of the heart, except that of getting
done with our miseries by ceasing to live. The state 1 am in is worse
than death. I see the greatest man of his age, my Brother, my friend,
reduced to the frightfullest extremity. I see my whole Family ex-—
posed to dangers and perhaps destruction; my native Country torn by ;
pitiless enemies; the Country where I am” (Reichs Army, Anspach,
what not) ‘‘ menaced by perhaps similar misfortune. Would to Heaven
I were alone loaded with all the miseries I have described to you! I
would suffer them, and with firmness.

“‘ Pardon these details. You invite me, by the part you take in what —
regards me, to open my heart to you. Alas, hope is well-nigh banished
from it. Fortune, when she changes, is as constant in her persecutions
as in her favours. History is full of those examples :—but I have ©
found none equal to the one we now see; nor any War as inhuman and
cruel among civilised nations. You would sigh if you knew the sad —
situation of Germany and Preussen. The cruelties which the Russians
commit in that latter Country make nature shudder.*? How happy you
in your Hermitage; where you repose on your laurels, and can philos-
ophise with a calm mind on the deliriums of men! I wish you all the
happiness imaginable. If Fortune ever favour us again, count on all
my gratitude. I will never forget the marks of attachment which you
have given; my sensibility is your warrant; I am never half-and-half
a friend, and I shall always be wholly so of Brother Voltaire.—W1tL-
HELMINA.

“Many compliments to Madame Denis. Continue, I pray you, to
write to the King.”?*

ee

, —) +

22 Details, horrible but authentic, in Helden-Geschichte, already cited.
23. In Voltaire, ii. 197-199; Ixxvii. 57.

_ Cnap. VIL] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. ; 137
| 18th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757. 7

Voltaire to Wilhelmina (Day uncertain: The Délices, September
1757).—‘ Madame, my heart is touched more than ever by the good-
ness and the confidence your Royal Highness deigns to show me.
How can I be but melted by emotion! I see that it is solely your no-
bleness of soul that renders you unhappy. I feel myself born to be at-
tached with idolatry to superior and sympathetic minds, who think like
“you.

** You know how much [ have always, exseritially and at heart, been
attached to the King your Brother. The more my old age is tranquil,
and come to renounce everything, and make my retreat here a home
and country, the more am I devoted to that Philosopher-King. I write
nothing to him but what [ think from the bottom of my heart, nothing
that I do not think most true; and if my letter” (dissuasive of seeking
Death; wait, reader) ‘appears to your Royal Highness to be suitable,
I beg you to protect it with him, as you have done the foregoing.’’**

4°. Friedrich to Wilhelmina, and, by anticipation, her Answer
(Third of the Prose Pieces).—‘ Kirschleben, near Erfurt, 17th Sep-

_ tember 1757. My dearest Sister, I find no other consolation but in

your precious Letters. May Heaven reward so much virtue and such

“heroic sentiments!

/

‘Since I wrote last to you, my misfortunes have but gone on accu-
mulating. It seems as though Destiny would discharge all its wrath
and fury upon the poor Country which I had to rule over. The Swedes
have entered Pommern. The French, after having concluded a Neu-

trality humiliating to the King of England and themselves” (Kloster.

Zeven, which we know), “are in full march upon Halberstadt and Mag.
deburg. From Preussen I am in daily expectation of hearing of a bat-
tle having been fought: the proportion of combatants being 25,000
against 80,000” (was fought, Gross-Jagersdorf, 30th August, and lost
accordingly). ‘The Austrians have marched into Silesia, whither the
Prince of Bevern follows them. I have advanced this way to fall upon
the corps of the allied Army; which has run off, and intrenched itself,
behind Hisenach, amongst hills, whither to follow, still more to attack
them, all rules of war forbid. The moment I retire towards Saxony,
this whole swarm will be upon my heels. Happen what may, I am de-
termined, at all risks, to fall upon whatever corps of the enemy ap-
proaches me nearest. I shall even bless Heaven for its mercy, if it
grant me the favour to die sword in hand.

* Should this hope fail me, you will allow that it would be too hard
to crawl at the feet of a company of traitors, to whom successful crimes

24 Voltaire, xxvii. 37, 39.

1388  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES To A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

have given the advantage to prescribe the law to me. How, my dear,
my incomparable Sister, how could I repress feelings of vengeance and

of resentment against all my neighbours, of whom there is not one who

did not accelerate my downfall, and will not share in our spoils? How

can a Prince survive his State, the glory of his Country, his own repu-.

tation? A Bavarian Elector, in his nonage” (Son of the late poor Kai-
ser, and left shipwrecked in his seventeenth year), “or rather in a sort
of subjection to his Ministers, and dull to the biddings of honour, may
cive himself up as a slave to the imperious domination of the House of
Austria, and kiss the hand which oppressed his Father: I pardon it to
his youth and his ineptitude. But is that the example for me to follow?
No, dear Sister, you think too nobly to give me such mean (/dche) ad-
vice. Is Liberty, that precious prerogative, to be less dear to a Sover-
eign in the eighteenth century than it was to Roman Patricians of old?
And where is it said that Brutus and Cato should carry magnanimity
farther than Princes and Kings? Firmness consists in resisting mis-
fortune: but only cowards submit to the yoke, bear patiently their
chains, and support oppression tranquilly. Never, my dear Sister, could
I resolve upon such ignominy.” —

“Tf [ had followed only my own jnclinations, I should have ended it
(Gje me serais dépéché) at once, after that unfortunate Battle which I
lost. ButI felt that this would be weakness, and that it behoved me to
repair the evil which had happened. My attachment to the State
awoke ; I said to myself, It is not in seasons of prosperity that it is rare
to find defenders, but in adversity. I made it a point of honour with
myself to redress all that had got out of square; in which I was not un-
successful ; not even in the Lausitz” (after those Zittau disasters) “ last
of all. But no sooner had I hastened this way to face new enemies,
than Winterfeld was beaten and killed near Gorlitz, than the French
entered the heart of my States, than the Swedes blockaded Stettin.
Now there is nothing effective left for me to do: there are too many
enemies. Were I even to succeed in beating two armies, the third
would crushme. ‘The enclosed Note” (in cipher) “ will show you what
I am still about to try: it is the last attempt.

“The gratitude, the tender affection, which I feel towards you, that
friendship, true as the hills, constrains me to deal openly with you. No,
my divine Sister, I shall conceal nothing from you that I intend to do;
all my thoughts, all my resolutions shall be open and known to you in
time. I will precipitate nothing: but also it will be impossible for me
to change my sentiments.”

‘“‘ As for you, my incomparable Sister, I have not the heart to turn
you from your resolves. We think alike, and I cannot condemn in you
the sentiments which I daily entertain (éprouve). Life has been given

3
f
i
4

Rs

7
Cuar. VII.) FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 139
48th Sept.—i0th Oct. 1757.

to us as a benefit: when it ceases to be such”—! I have nobody left
in this world, to attach me to it, but you. My friends, the relations I
loved most, are in the grave; in short, | have lost everything. If you
take the resolution which I have taken, we end together our misfortunes
and our unhappiness; and it will be the turn of them who remain in
this world to provide for the concerns falling to their charge, and to
bear the weight which has lain on us so long. ‘These, my adorable
Sister, are sad reflections, but suitable to my present condition.

“ The day before yesterday | was at Gutha” (yes, see above ;—and
tomorrow, if I knew it, Seidlitz with pictorial effects will be there). * *

“ But it is time to end this long, dreary Letter; which treats almost
of nothing but my own affairs. I have had some leisure, and have used
it to open on you a heart filled with admiration and gratitude towards
you. Yes,my adorable Sister, if Providence troubled itself about hu-
man affairs, you ought to be the happiest person in the Universe. Your
not being such confirms me in the sentiments expressed at the end of
my Lpitre. In conclusion, believe that I adore you, and that I would
give my life a thousand times to serve you. These are the sentiments
which will animate me to the last breath of my life; being, my beloved
Sister, ever,’— Your—F.?°

Wilhelmina’s Answer,—by anticipation, as we said: written “ 15th
September,” while Friedrich was dining at Gotha, in quest of Soubise.

“* Bavreuth, 15th September 1757. My dearest Brother, your Letter

and the one you wrote to Voltaire, my dear Brother, have almost killed

me. What fatal resolutions, great God! Ah, my dear Brother, you
say you love me; and you drive a dagger into my heart. Your Epi-
tre, which I did receive, made me shed rivers of tears. I am now
ashamed of such weakness. My misfortune would be so great” in the
issue there alluded to, “‘ that I should find worthier resources than tears.
Your lot shall be mine: I will not survive either your misfortunes or
those of the House I belong to. You may calculate that such is my
firm resolution.
“ But, after this avowal, allow me to entreat you to look back at what
was the pitiable state of your Enemy when you lay before Prag! It is
the sudden whirl of Fortune for both parties. The like can occur
again when one is least expecting it. Cesar was the slave of Pirates ;
and he became the master of the world. A great genius like yours
finds resources even when all is lost; and it is impossible this frenzy
can continue. My heart bleeds to think of the poor souls in Preussen”
Apraxin and his Christian Cossacks there,—who, it is noted, far excel
the Calmuck worshippers of the Dalai-Lama). ‘‘ What horrid barbar-

25 (Wuvres, xxvii. 1. 303-307.

140 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVM.
18th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.
ity, the details of cruelties that go on there! I feel all that you feel on
it, my dear Brother. I know your heart, and your sensibility for your
subjects. .

“T suffer a thousand times more than I can tell you; nevertheless —
hope does not abadon me. I received your Letter of the 14th by W.” |

(who W. is, no mortal knows.) ‘‘ What kindness to think of me, who
have nothing to give you but a useless affection, which is so richly re-
paid by yours! I am obliged to finish; but I shall never cease to be,
with the most profound respect (trés-profond respect,’—that, and some-
thing still better, if my poor pen were not embarrassed), “ your,”—WI1-
HELMINA.

5°. Friedrich’s Response to the Dissuasives of Voltaire (Last of
the Lamentation-Psalms: “ Buttstadt, October 9th’’?).—Voltaire’s Dis-
suasive Letter is a poor Piece ;”° not worth giving here. Remarkable
only by Friedrich’s quiet reception of it; which readers shall now see,
as Finis to those Lamentation-Psalms. ‘There is another of them,
widely known, which we will omit: the Epitre to D’Argens ;*" pas-
sionate enough, wandering wildly over human life, and sincere almost
to shrillness,in parts; which Voltaire has also got hold of. Omissible
here; the fixity of purpose being plain otherwise to Voltaire and us.
Voltaire’ s counter-arguments are weak, or worse : “ That Roman-death
is not now expected of the Philosopher; that your Majesty will, in the
worst event, still have considerable Dominions left, all that your Great-
Grandfather had; still plenty of resources; that, in Paris Society, an
estimable minority even now thinks highly of you; that in Paris itself

your Majesty” (does not say expressly, as dethroned and going on your —

travels) “ would have resources!” ‘To which beautiful considerations
Friedrich answers, not with fire and brimstone, as one might have
dreaded, but in this quiet manner (Réponse au Sieur Voltaire :)
‘¢ Je suis homme, il suffit, et né pour la souffrance ;
Aux rigeurs du destin j’oppose ma constance.*®
* But with these sentiments, I am far from condemning Cato and Otho.
The latter had no fine moment in his life, except that of his death.?
(Breaks off into Verse :)
“* Croyez que st j’étais Voltaire,
Et particulier comme lut,

26 (Kuvres de Voltaire, xxvii. 80-83 (Les Délices, early in September
1757: no date given). "
27In (Euvres de Frédéric, xii. 50-56 (“ Erfurt, 23d September 1757’).

5 «T am a man, and therefore born to suffer; to destiny’s rigours my
stedfastness must correspond.”—Quotation from I know not whom.

sigh “sla d cect ee cAI he ae ie ig Ty

Be be he ~~” a ed

| Sess gees ett

:. VIL]

ty

FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 141

13th Sept.—10th Oct. 1757.

-

Me contentant du nécessaire,

Je verrais voltiger la fortune légére,”—Or,
to wring the water and the jingle out of it, and give the substance in
Prose : 5

“ Yes, if I were Voltaire and a private man, I could with much com-
posure leave Fortune to her whirlings and her plungings; to me, con-
tented with the ffeedful, her mad caprices and sudden topsy-turvyings
would be amusing rather than tremendous.

“T know the ennui attending on honours, the burdensome duties, the
jargon of grinning flatterers, those pitiabilities of every kind, those de-
tails of littleness, with which you have to occupy yourself if set on high
on the stage of things. Foolish glory has no charm for me, though a
Poet and King: when once Atropos has ended me forever, what will
the uncertain honour of living in the Temple of Memory avail? One
moment of practical happiness is worth a thousand years of imaginary
in such Temple.—Is the lot of high people so very sweet, then? Pleas-
ure, gentle ease, true and hearty mirth, have always fled from the great
and their peculiar pomps and labours.

“No, it is not fickle Fortune that has ever caused my sorrows; let
her smile her blandest, let her frown her fiercest on me, I should sleep
every night, refusing her the least worship. But our respective condi-
tions are our law; we are bound and commanded to shape our temper
to the employment we have undertaken. Voltaire in his hermitage, in
a Country where is honesty and safety, can devote himself in peace to
the life of the Philosopher, as Plato has described it. But as to me,
threatened with shipwreck, I must consider how, looking the tempest in
the face, I can think, can live and can die as a King:

** Pour moi, menacé du naufrage,
Je dois, en affrontant Torage,
Penser, vivre et mourir en roi.”?°

This is of October 9th; this ends, worthily, the Lamentation-
Psalms ; work having now turned up, which is a favourable
change. Friedrich’s notion of suicide, we perceive, is by no
means that of puking up one’s existence, in the weak sick way of
Jfelo de se; but, far different, that of dying, if he needs must, as
seems too ae in uttermost spasm of battle for self and rights
to the last. From which latter notion nobody can turn him.
A valiantly definite, lucid and shiningly practical soul,—with
such a power of always expectorating himself into clearness
again. Ifhe do frankly wager his life in that manner, ire’

29 (Huvres, xxiii, 14.

142 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII .
11th-15th Oct. 1757,

ye Soubises, Karls, and flaccid trivial persons, of the stroke that
may chance to lie in him !—

Il. Rumour of an Inr oad on Berlin suddenly sets Friedrich
on March thither: Inroad takes Effect,—with important
Results, chiefly in a left-hand Form. .

October 11th, express arrived, important express from Gen-
eral Finck (who is in Dresden, convalescent from Kolin, and is —
even Commandant there, of anything there is to command), —
“‘ That the considerable Austrian Brigade or Outpost, which was”
left at Stolpen when the others went for Silesia, is all on march
for Berlin.”” Here is news! ‘‘The whole 15,000 of them,” re-
port adds ;—though it proved to be only a Detachment, picked
Tolpatches mostly, and of nothing like that strength; shot off,
under a swift General Haddick, on this errand. Between them —
and Berlin is not a_vestige of force; and Berlin itself has noth-
ing but palisades, and perhaps a poor 4,000 of garrison. ‘‘ March —
instantly, you Moritz, who lie nearest; cross Elbe at Torgau;
I follow instantly!” orders Friedrich ;3°—and, that same night, —
is on march, or has cavalry pushed ahead for reinforcement of
Moritz. |

Friedrich, not doubting but there would be captaincy and —
scheme among his Enemies, considered that the Swedes, and per- —
haps the Richelieu French, were in concert with this Austrian
movement,—from east, from north, from west, three Invasions
coming on the core of his Dominions ;—and that here at last
was work ahead, and plenty of it! ‘That was Friedrich’s opin-
ion, and most other people’s, when the Austrian inroad was first
heard of: “mere triple ruin coming to this King,” as the Gazet-

teers judged ;—great alarm prevailing among the King’s friends ;
in Berlin, very great. Friedrich, glad, at any rate, to have done
with that dismal lingering at Buttelstiidt, hastens to arrange
himself for the new contingencies; to post his Keiths, his Ferdi-
nands, with their handfuls of force, to best advantage; and push
ahead after Moritz, by Leipzig, Torgau, Berlin-wards, with all
his might. At Leipzig, in such press of business and interest,

3°, His Message to Moritz, Orlich, p. 73: Rodenbeck, p. 322 (dubious, or
wrong).

ar

Be te

Se ee a ae oe ee

ae ar. VIE] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 143
15th Oct. 1757.

_—judge by the following phenomenon what a clear-going soul

this is, and how completely on a level with whatever it may be

~ that he is marching towards :

“ Leipzig, 15th October 1757 (Interview with Gottsched).— At 11
this morning, Majesty came marching into Leipzig; multitudes of things
to settle there ; things ready, things not yet ready, in view of the great
events ahead. Seeing that he would have time after dinner, he at once
sent for Professor Gottsched, a gigantic gentleman, Reigning King of
German Literature for the time being, to come to him at3 p.m. Reign-
ing King at that time; since gone wholly to the Dustbins,—‘ Popular
Delusion,’ as Old Samuel defines it, having since awakened to itself,
with scornful hahas upon its poor Gottsched, and rushed into other
roads worse and better; its poor Gottsched become a name now signi-
fying Pedantry, Stupidity, learned Inanity, and the Worship of Col-
oured Water, to every German mind.

“ At 3 precise, the portly old gentleman (towards sixty now, huge of
stature, with a shrieky voice, and speaks uncommonly fast) bowed him-
self in; and a Colloquy ensued, on Literature and so forth, of the kind
we may conceive. Colloquy which had great fame in the world;
Gottsched himself having,—such the inaccuracy of rumour and Dutch
Newspapers, on the matter,—published authentic Report of it ;°' now
one of the dullest bits of reading, and worth no man’s bit of time. Col-

~ loquy which lasted three hours, with the greatest vivacity on both

sides; King impugning, for one principal thing, the roughness of Ger-
man speech; Gottsched, in swift torrents (far too copious in such com-
pany), ready to defend. ‘Those consonants of ours,’ said the King,
“they afflict one’s ear: what Names we have; all in mere 4’s and p’s:
Knap—, Knip—, Klop—, Krotz—, Krok— ;—your own Name, for
example!’ ”—Yes, his own name, unmusical Gottsched, and signifying
God’s-Damage (God’s-skaith) withal. ‘‘Husht, don’t take a Holy
Name in vain; call the man Sched (¢ Damage’ by itself), can’t we!”
said a wit once.**—‘‘‘ Five consonants together, ttsch, ttsch, what a
tone!” continued the King. ‘‘ Hear, in contrast, the music of this Stan-
za of Rousseau’s” (Repeats a stanza). ‘* Who could express that in
German with such melody?” And so on; branching through a great
many provinces; King’s knowledge of all Literature, new and ancient,
“perfectly astonishing to me;” and I myself, the swift-speaking Gott-
sched, rather copious than otherwise. Catastrophe, and summary of

$1 Next Year, in a principal Leipzig Magazine, with name signed: given |
in Helden-Geschichte, iv. 728-739 (with multifarious commentaries and
flourishings, denoting an attentive world). Nicolai, Anekdoten, iii, 286-290.
2 Nicolai, Anekdoten, iii, 287.

4

144 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL.
17th Oct. lV
the whole, was: Gottsched undertook to translate the Rousseau Stanza
into German of moderate softness ; and, by the aid of water, did so that —
very night ;*° sent it next day, and had ‘‘ within an hour” a gracious _
Royal Answer in verse ; calling one, incidentally, “ Saxon Swan, Cygne —
Saxon,” though one is such a Goose! ‘ Majesty to march at seven to-

morrow morning,” said a Postscript,—no Interviewing more, at present. —

“ About ten days after” (not to let this thing interrupt us again),
“ Friedrich, on his return to Leipzig,had another Interview with Gott-
sched ; of only one hour, this time ;—but with many topics: Reading —
of some Gottsched Ode (Ode, very tedious, frothy, watery, of Thanks
to Majesty for such goodness to the Saxon Swan; reading, too, of —
“some of Madam Gottsched’s Pieces’). Majesty confessed afterwards,
Every hour from the very first had lowered his opinion of the Saxon
Swan, till at length Goosehood became too apparent. Friedrich sent —
him a gold snuffbox by and by, but had no farther dialoguing. 3

“A saying of Excellency Mitchell’s to Gottsched,—for Gottsched, —
on that second Leipzig opportunity, went swashing about among the
King’s Suite as well,—is still remembered. ‘They were talking of
Skakespeare: * Genial, if you will,’ said Gottsched, ‘but the Laws of —
Aristotle; Five Acts, unities strict !'—‘ Aristotle? What is to hinder
a man from making his Tragedy in Ten acts, if it suit him better?
‘Impossible, your Excellency !'—‘ Pooh"’ said his Excellency ; ‘sup-
pose Aristotle, and general Fashion too, had ordered that the clothes of
every man were to be cut from five ells of cloth: how would the Herr -
Professor like’ (with these huge limbs of his) ‘if he found there were —
no breeches for him, on Aristotle's account?’ Adiet® to Gottsched ;
most voluminous of men ;—who wrote a Grammar of the German Lan-
guage, which, they say, did good. I remember always his poor Wife
with some pathos ; who was a fine, graceful, loyal creature, of ten times
his intelligence ; and did no end of writing and translating and compil-
ing (Addison’s Cato, Addison’s Spectator, thousands of things from all —
languages), on order of her Gottsched, till life itself sank in such enter-
prises; never doubting, tragically faithful soul, but her Gottsched was
an authentic Seneschal of Phebus and the Nine.”’**—

Monday 17th, at seven, his Majesty pushed off accordingly ;
cheery he in the prospect of work, whatever his friends in the

33 Copied duly in Helden-Geschichte, iv. 726. ©

34 Her Letters, collected by a surviving Lady-Friend, ‘‘ Briefe der Frau :
Inise Adelgunde Viktorie Gottsched, born Kulmzs (Dresden, 1771-1772, 3
vols. 8vo),” are, I should suppose, the only Gottsched Piece which anybody
would now think of reading.

5

_ Cuape. VII. j FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 145

17th Oct. 1757.
distance be. Here, from Eilenburg, his first stage Torgau way,
are a Pair of Letters in notable contrast.

Wilhelmina to the King (on rumour of Haddick, swoln into a Triple
Invasion, Austrian, Swedish, French).
Baireuth, ‘‘ 15th October 1757.

“My pearest Brotuer,—Death and a thousand torments could not
equal the frightful state | am in. There run reports that make me
shudder. Some say you are wounded; others, dangerously ill. In
vain have I tormented myself to have news of you; I can get none.
Oh, my dear Brother, come what may, 1 will not survive you. IfI am
to continue in this frightful uncertainty, I cannot stand it; I shall sink
under it, and then [ shall be happy. I have been on the point of send-
ing you a courier; but” (environed as we are) “I durst not. In the
name of God, bid somebody write me one word.

‘“‘T know not what [ have written; my heart is torn in pieces; I feel
that by dint of disquietude and alarms [ am losing my wits. Oh, my
dear, adorable Brother, have pity on me. Heaven grant I be mistaken,
and that you may scold me; but the least thing that concerns you
pierces me to the heart, and alarms my affection too much. Might I
die a thousand times, provided you lived and were happy!

““T can say no more, Grief chokes me; and I can only repeat, that
your fate shall be mine; being, my dear Brother, your—WILHELMINA.”

What a shrill penetrating tone, like the wildly weeping voice of Ra-
chel; tragical, painful, gone quite to falsetto and above pitch; but with
a melody in its dissonance like the singing of the stars. My poor shrill
Wilhelmina !—

King to Wilhelmina (has not yet received the Above).

‘* Hilenburg, 17th October 1757.

“ My DEAREST SisTer,— What is the good of philosophy unless one
employ it in the disagreeable moments of life? It is then, my dear
Sister, that courage and firmness avail us.

‘*T am now in motion; and having once got into that, you may cal-
culate I shall not think of sitting down again, except under improved
omens. If outrage irritates even cowards, what will it do to hearts that
have courage ?

‘I foresee I shall not be able to write again for perhaps six weeks :
which fails not to be a sorrow to me: but I entreat you to be calm dur-
ing these turbulent affairs, and to wait with patience the month of De-
cember ; paying no regard to the Niirnburg Newspapers nor to those
of the Reich, which are totally Austrian.

“T am tired as a dog (comme un chien). I embrace you with my

Von. V.—G

146  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII y
14th-19th Oct. 1757,

whole heart: being with the most perfect affection (tendresse), my
dearest Sister, your” —F R1eDRICH.

* * (at some other hour, same place and day.) “‘ No possibility
of Peace,’ say your accounts” (Letter lost) ; “‘the French won’t hear
my name mentioned.’ Well; from me they shall not farther. The
way will be to speak to them by action, so that they may repent their
impertinences and pride.”’*°

The Haddick affair, after all the rumour about it, proved to
be a very small matter. No Swede or Richelieu had dreamt of
codperating ; Haddick, in the end, was scarce 4,000 with four
cannon; General Rochow, Commandant of Berlin, with his small
garrison, had not Haddick skilfully slidden through woods, and
been so magnified by rumour, might have marched out, and
beaten a couple of Haddicks. As it was, Haddick skilfully
emerging, at the Silesian Gate of Berlin, 16th October, about
eleven in the morning, demanded ransom of 500,000 thalers
(45,000/.); was refused; began shooting on the poor palisades,
on the poor drawbridge there; “‘at the third shot brought down
the drawbridge ;” rushed into the suburb; and was not to be
pushed out again by the weak party Rochow sent to try it.
Rochow, ignorant of Haddick’s force, marched off thereupon for
Spandau with the Royal Family and effects ; leaving Haddick
master of the suburb, and Berlin to make its own bargain with
him. Haddick, his Croats not to be quite kept from mischief,
remained master of the suburb, minatory upon Berlin, for twelve
hours or more: and after a good deal of bargaining,—ransom
of 45,0002. of 90,0002., finally of 27,0002. and ‘two dozen pair
of gloves to the Empress Queen,”—made off about five in the

ae Nema ak ake,

—

ote

ae Se

morning; wind of Moritz’s advance adding wings to the speed

of Haddick.?°

Moritz did arrive next evening (18th); but with his tired
troops there was no catching of Haddick, now three marches
ahead. Royal Family and effects returned from Spandau the
day following; but in a day or two more, removed to Magde-
burg till the Capital were safe from such affronts. Much grum-

35 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 308, 309, 310.
36 Flelden-Geschichte, iv. 715-723 (Haddick’s own Account, and the Ber-
lin one).

pi

Pe pS ke he nel oe

+ b

— Cuapr. VII. ] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 147

14th-19th Oct. 1757.

bling against Rochow. ‘‘ What could I do? How could I
know?” answered Rochow, whose eye-sight indeed had been
none of the best. Berlin smarts to the length of 27,0007. and
an alarm; but asserts (not quite mythically, thinks Retzow),
that ‘“‘the two dozen pair of gloves were all gloves for the left
hand,’’—Berlin having wit, and a touch of absinthe in it, capable
of such things! Friedrich heard the news at Annaburg, a
march beyond Torgau; and there paused, again uncertain, for
about a week coming; after which, he discovered that Leipzig
would be the place; and returned thither, appointing a general

~ rendezvous and concentration there.

Scene at Regensburg in the Interim.

Just while Haddick was sliding swiftly through the woods,
Berlin now nigh, there occurred a thing at Regensburg; tragi¢
thing, but ending in farce,—Finale of Reichs-Acht, in short ;—
about which all Regensburg was loud, wailing or haha-ing ac
cording to humour; while Berlin was paying its ransom and
left-hand gloves. One moment’s pause upon this, though our
haste is great.

“ Reichs Diet had got its Ban of the Reich ready for Friedrich; Ci-
tatto (solemn Summons) and all else complete; nothing now wanted
but to serve Citatio on him, or ‘insinuate’ it into him, as their phrase
is ;—which latter essential point occasions some shaking of wigs. Dan-
gerous, serving Citatio in that quarter: and by what art, try to smuggle
it into the hands of such a one? ‘ Insinuate it into Plotho’s hand ; that
is the method, and that will suffice!’ say the wigs, and choose an unfor-
tunate Reich’s Notary, Dr. Aprill,to do it; who, in ponderous Chancery-
style gives the following affecting report,—wonderful, but intelligible
(when abridged) :

“Citatio” to come and receive your Ban,—a very solemn-sounding
Document, commencing (or perhaps it is Aprill himself that so com-
mences, no matter which), “In the Name of the Most High God, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen,”—‘ was given, Wednesday 12th
October, in the Year after Christ our dear Lord and Saviour’s Birth,
1757 Years, To me Georgius Mathias Josephus Aprill, sworn Kaiser-
lich Notarius Publicus; In my Lodging, first floor fronting south, in Ja-
cob Virnrohr the Innkeeper’s House here at Regensburg, called the
Red-Star,” for insinuation into Plotho :

With which solemn Piece, Aprill proceeded next day, Thursday,

148  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

14th-19th Oct. 1757.

half-past 2 p.m., to Plotho’s dwelling-place, described with equal irre-

fragability; and, continues Aprill, “did there, by a servant of the Herr — ¥:
Ambassador von Plotho’s, announce myself; adding that I had some-

thing to say to his Excellency, if he would please to admit me. To

which the Herr Ambassador by the same servant sent answer, that he |

was ill with a cold, and that I might speak to his Secretarius what I
had to say. But, as I replied that my message was to his Excellenz
in person, the same poreerit came back with intimation that I might call
r again tomorrow at noon.’

Tomorrow, at the stroke of noon, Friday 14th October, Aprill punc-
tually appears again, with recapitulation of the pledge given him yester-
day ; and is informed that he can walk up stairs. ‘I proceeded there-
upon, the servant going before, up one pair of stairs, or with the appur-
tenances (Gezeugen) rather more than one pair, into the Herr Ambas-
sador Freiherr von Plotho’s Ante-room; who, just as we were entering,
stept-in himself, through a side-door; in his dressing-gown, and with the
words, ‘Speak now what you have to say.’

“T thereupon slipt into his hand Citatio Fiscalis, and said”—said at
first nothing, Plotho avers; merely mumbled, looked like some poor cai-
tiff, come with Law-papers on a trifling Suit we happen to have in the
Courts here ;—and only by degrees said (let us abridge; Scene, Aprill
and Plotho, Ante-room in Regensburg, first-floor and rather higher) :

Aprill. *“*‘ Lhave to give your Excellenz this Writing,’—(which pri-
vately, could your Excellenz guess it, is) * Citatzo Fiscalis from the
Reichstag, summoning his Majesty to show cause why Ban of the Reich
should not pass upon him!’ His [xcellenz at first took the Citatio
and adjuncts from me ; and looking into them to see what they were,
his Excellenz’s face began to colour, and soon after to colour a little
more; and on his looking attentively at Citatio Fiscalis, he broke into
violent anger and rage, so that he could not stand still any longer; but
with burning face, and both arms held aloft, rushed close to me, Citato
and adjuncts in his right hand, and broke out in this form:

Plotho. “* What; insinuate (insinweren), you scoundrel ””

Aprill. *** Tt is my Notarial Office; I must doit.’ In spite of which
the Freiherr von Plotho fell on me with all rage; grasped me by the
front of the cloak, and said:

Plotho. “* Take it back, wilt thou!’ And as I resisted doing so, he
stuck it in upon me, and shoved it down with all violence between my
coat and waistcoat ; and, still holding me by the cloak, called to the two
servants who had hon there, * Fling him down stairs !"—which they,
being discreet fellows, and in no flurry. did not quite, nor needed quite
to do (‘ Must, sir, you see, unless'’), and so forced me out of the house ;
Exceellenz Plotho retiring through his Ante-room, and his Body-serv-

:
2
:
}
‘

Bie

- Cuap. VII. ] FRIEDRICH IN THURINGEN. 149

14th-19th Oct. 1757.

ant, who at first had been on the stairs, likewise disappearing as I got
under way, ’—and have to report, in such manner, to the Universe and
Reichs Diet, with tears in my eyes.*’

What became of Reichs Ban after this, ask not. It fell dead by
Friedrich’s victories now at hand; rose again into life on Friedrich’s
misfortunes (August 1758), threatening to include George Second in it ;
upon which the Corpus Evangelicorum made some counter-mumble-
ment ;—and,I have heard, the French privately advised : ** Better drop
it, these two Kings are capable of walking out of you, and dangerously
kicking the table over as they go!"’"— Whereby it again fell dead, posi-
tively for the last time, and, in short, is worth no mention or remem-
brance more.

Corpus Evangelicorum had always been against Reichs Ban; a few
Dissentients, or Half-Dissentients excepted,—as Mecklenburg wholly
and with a will: foolish Anspach wholly; and the Anhalts haggling
some dissent, and retracting it (why, | never knew) ,—for which Meck-
lenburg and the Anhalts, lying within clutch of one, had to repent bit-
terly in the years coming! Enough of all that.

The Haddick invasion, which had got its gloves, leftchand or
not, and part of its road expenses, brought another consequence
much more important on the per contra side. The triumphing,
te-deum-ing and jubiliation over it,—‘ His Metropolis captured ;
Royal Family in flight !’’"—raised the Dauphiness Army, and es-
pecially Versailles, into such enthusiasm, that Dauphiness came
bodily out (on order from Versailles); spread over the Country,
plundering and insulting beyond example; got herself reinforced
by a 15,000 from the Richelieu Army; crossed the Saale; de-
termined on taking Leipzig, beating Friedrich, and I know not
what. Keith, in Leipzig with a small Party, had summons from
Soubise’s vanguard (October 24th): Keith answered, He would
burn the suburbs ;—upon which, said vanguard, hearing of Fried-
rich’s advent withal, took itself rapidly away. And Soubise
and it would fain have recrossed Saale, I have understood, had
not Versailles been peremptory.

In a word, Friedrich arrived at Leipzig, October 26th; Fer-
dinand, Moritz, and all the others, coming or already come:
and there is something great just at hand. Friedrich’s stay in
Leipzig was only four days. Cheering prospect of work now
ahead here ;—add to this, assurance from Preussen that Apraxin

37 Preuss, ii. 397-401; in Helden- Geschichte, iv. 745-9, Plotho’s Account.

150  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL. —
26th-30th Oct. 1757

is fairly going home, and Lehwald coming to look after the
Swedes. Were it not that there is bad news from Silesia, things
generally are beginning to look up.

Of the hour spent on Gottsched, in these four days, we ex-

pressly take no notice farther; but there was another visit much

less conspicuous, and infinitely more important: that of a cer-
tain Hanoverian Graf von Schulenburg, not in red or with
plumes, like a Major-General as he was, but ‘‘in the black suit
of a Country Parson,’—coming, in that unnoticeable guise, to
inform Friedrich officially, ‘‘ That the Hanoverians and Majesty
of England have resolved to renounce the Convention of Klos-
ter-Zeven ; to bring their poor Stade Army into the field again;
and do now request him, King Friedrich, to grant them Duke
Ferdinand of Brunswick to be General of the same.”%®

Here is an unnoticeable message, of very high moment indeed.
To which Friedrich, already prepared, gives his cheerful consent ;
nominations and practicalities to follow, the instant these present
hurries are over. Who it was that had prepared all this, whose
suggestion it first was, Friedrich’s, Mitchell’s, George’s, Pitt’s, I
do not know,—I cannot help suspecting Pitt; Pitt and Fried-
rich together. And certainly of all living men, Ferdinand,—
related to the English and Prussian royalties, a soldier of ap-
proved excellence, and likewise a noble-minded, prudent, patient
and invincibly valiant and stedfast man,—was, beyond compari-
son, the fittest for this office. Pitt is now fairly in power; and
perceives,—such Pitt’s originality of view,—that an Army with
a Captain to it may differ beautifully from one without. And
in fact we may take this as the first twitch at the reins, on Pitt’s
part; whose delicate strong hand, all England running to it
with one heart, will be felt at the ends of the earth before many
months go. ‘To the great and unexpected joy of Friedrich, for
one. ‘‘England has taken long to produce a great man,’’ he
said to Mitchell; ‘‘ but here is one at last!”

38 Mauvillon, i. 256; Westphalen, i. 315: indistinct both, and with
slight variations. Mitchell Papers (in British Museum), likewise indis-
tinct: Additional Mss., 6815, pp. 96 and 1038 (‘‘ Lord Holderness to Mitch-
ell,” doubtless on Pitt’s instigation, ‘‘ 10th October 1757,” is the beginning

of it, —two days before Royal Highness got home from Stade); see ib. 6806,
pp. 241-252.

fewer

a eT

ee ee

i
i)
|

i

-Cuapr. VIIT.] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 151

80th Oct.—5th Nov. 1757.

CHAPTER VIII.
BATTLE OF ROSSBACH.

Friepricu left Leipzig, Sunday October 30th; encamped,
that night, on the famous Field of Liitzen; with the vanguard,
he (as usual, and Mayer with him, who did some brisk smiting
home of what French there were) ; Keith and Duke Ferdinand
following, with main body and rear.

Movements on the Soubise-Hildburghausen part are all retro-
grade again ;—can Dauphiness Bellona do nothing, then, except
shuttle forwards and then backwards according to Friedrich’s
absence or presence? ‘The Soubise-Hildburghausen Army does
immediately withdraw on this occasion, as on the former; and
makes for the safe side of the Saale again, rapidly retreating
before Friedrich, who is not above one to two of them,—more
like one to three, now that Broglio’s Detachment is come to
hand. Broglio got to Merseburg, October 26th,—guess 15,000
strong ;—considerably out of repair, and glad to have done with
such a march, and be within reach of Soubise. ‘This is the
Second Son of our old Blusterous Friend; a man who came to
some mark, and to a great deal of trouble, in this War; and
ended, readers know how, at the Sicge of the Bastille forty
years afterwards !

So soon as rested, Broglio, by order, moves leftwards to Halle,
to guard Saale Bridge there; Soubise himself edging after him
to Merseburg, on a similar errand ; and leaving Hildburghausen
to take charge of Weissenfels and the Third Saale Bridge.*
That is Dauphiness’s posture while Friedrich encamps at Liit-
zen:—let impatient human nature fix these three places for it-
self, and hasten to the catastrophe of wretched Dauphiness.
Soubise, it ought to be remembered, is not in the highest spir-
its; but his Officers in over-high, “‘ Doing this petit Marquis de

Brandebourg the honour to have a kind of War with him (de lu:

* Map at p. 209.

152  SEVEN-YEARS -WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. _

31st Oct. 1757.

faire une espéce de guerre),” as they term it. Being puffed up

with general vanity, and the newspaper rumour about Haddick’s
feat, och like the gloves it got, is going all to left hand i in
this way. Hildburghausen and the others overrule Soubise;

and indeed there is no remedy: ‘ Provision almost out;—how —

retreat to our magazines and our fastnesses, with Friedrich once
across Saale, and sticking to the skirts of us?” Here, from eye-
witnesses where possible, are the successive steps of Dauphiness
towards her doom, which is famous in the world ever since.

“‘ Monday, 31st October 1757,” as the Town-Syndic of Weis-
senfels records, ‘‘ about eight in the morning,! the King of Prus-
sia, with his whole Army” (or what seemed to us the whole,
though it was but a half; Keith with the other half being with-
in reach to northward, marching Merseburg way), ‘‘ came before
this Town.” Has been here before; as Keith has, as Soubise
and others have: a town much agitated lately by transit of
troops. It was from the eastern, or high landward side, where
the so-called Castle is, that Friedrich came: Castle built orig-
inally on some ‘ White Crag (Weisse Fels,” not now conspicu-
ous), from which the town and whilom Duchy take their name.

“We have often heard of Weissenfels, while the poor old drunken
Duke lived, who used to be a Suitor of Wilhelmina’s, liable to hard
usage ; and have marched through it, with the Salzburgers, in peaceable
times. A solid pleasant-enough little place (6,000 souls or so); lies
leant against high ground (White Crags, or whatever it once was) on
the eastern or right bank of the Saale; 2 Town in part flat, in part very
steep ; the streets of it, or main street and secondaries, running off level
enough from the River and Bridge; rising by slow degrees. but at last
rapidly against the high ground or cliffs, just mentioned , a stiff accliv-
ity of streets, till crowned by the so-called Castle, the ‘ Augustus Burg’
in those days, the ‘ Friedrich-Wilhelm Barrack’ in ours. It was on this
crown of the cliffs that his Prussian Majesty appeared.

“Saale is of good breadth here; has done perhaps two hundred
miles, since he started, in the Fichtelgebirge (Pine Mountains), on his
long course Hlbe-ward; received, only ten miles ago, his last big
branch, the wide-wandering Unstrut, coming in with much drainage

1 Miller, Schlacht bet Rossbach (‘*a Centenary Piece,” Berlin, 1857,—
containing several curious Extracts), p. 44; Zelden-Geschichte, iv., 643,
651-668.

‘
:
1

J

Cuap. VIII. ] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 153
— 31st Oct. 1757.
from the northern parts:—in breadth, Saale may be compared to
Thames, to Tay or Beauley; his depth not fordable, though nothing
like so deep as Thames’s; main cargo visible is rafts of timber: banks
green, definite, scant of wood: river of rather dark complexion, mainly
noiseless, but of useful pleasant qualities otherwise.”

From this Castle or landward side come Friedrich and his
Prussians, on Monday morning about eight. “The garrison,
some 4,000 Reichs folk and a French Battalion or two, shut the
Gates, and assembled in the Market-place,’’—a big square, close
at the foot of the Heights ; ‘“‘on the other hand, from the top of
the Heights (A/ammerk, the particular spot), the Prussians can-
nonaded Town and Gates; to speedy bursting open of the same;
and rushed in over the walls of the Castle-court, and by other
openings into the Town: so that the Garrison above-said had to
quit, and roll with all speed across the Saale Bridge, and set the
same on fire behind them.” This was their remedy for all the
Three Bridges, when attacked; but it succeeded nowhere so
well as here.

“The fire was of extreme rapidity; prepared beforehand :”.

Bridge all of dry wood coated with pitch ;—“ fire reinforced too,
in view of such event, by all the suet, lard and oleaginous matter
the Garrison could find in Weissenfels; some hundredweights
of tallow-dips, for one item, going up on this occasion.” Bridge
“worth 100,000 thalers,” is instantly ablaze: some 400 finding
the Bridge so flamy, and the Prussians at their skirts, were
obliged to surrender ;—Feldmarschall Hildburghausen, sleeping
about two miles off, gets himself awakened in this unpleasant
manner. Flying garrison halt on the other side of the River,

where the rest of their Army is; plant cannon there, against.

quenching of the Bridge; and so keep firing, answered by the
Prussians, with much noise and no great mischief, till 38 p.m.,
when the Bridge is quite gone (Tollkeeper’s Lodge and all), and

the enterprise of crossing there had plainly become impossible. ~

Friedrich quickly, about a mile farther down the River, has
picked out another crossing-place, in the interim, and founded
some new adequate plank or raft bridge there; which, by dili-
gence all night, will be crossable tomorrow. So that, except for
amusing the enemy, the cannonading may cease at Weissenfels.

G2

154 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. —
31st Oct. 1757.

A certain Duc du Crillon, in -command at this Weissenfels
Bridge - burning and cannonade, has a chivalrous Anecdote
(amounting nearly to zero when well examined) about saving or

sparing Friedrich’s life on this interesting occasion: How, be-~
ing now on the safe side of the River, he Crillon with his staff

taking some refection of breakfast after the furious flurry there
had been; there came to him one of his Artillery Captains, sta-
tioned in an Island in the River, asking, ‘‘Shall I shoot the
King of Prussia, Monseigneur? He is down reconnoitering his
end of the Bridge: shan’t I then?” ‘To whom Crillon gives a
glass of wine, and.smilingly magnanimous answer to a negative
effect.2, Concerning which, one has to remark, Not only jirst,

that the Artillery Captain’s power of seeing Friedrich (which is -

itself uncertain) would indeed mean the power of aiming at him,
but differs immensely from that of hitting him with shot; so
that this “ Shall I kill the King?” was mainly thrasonic wind
from Captain Bertin. But secondly, that there is no ‘ Island”
in the River thereabouts, for Captain Bertin to fire from! So
that probably the whole story is wind or little more: dreamlike,
or at best, some idle thrasonic-theoretic question, on the part of
Bertin; proper answer thereto (consisting mainly in a glass of
wine) from Monseigneur:—all which, on retrospection, Mon-
seigneur feels, or would fain feel, to have been not theoretic-
thrasonic but practical, and of a rather godlike nature. Zero
mainly, as we said; Friedrich thanks you for zero, Monseigneur.

The Prussians were billeted in the Town that night,” says
our Syndic; “and in many a house there came to be twenty
men, and even thirty and above it, lodged. All was quiet
through the night, the French and the Reichs folk were drawn
back upon the higher grounds, about Burgwerben and on to
Tagwerben ;* and we saw their watchfires burning.” Fried-
rich’s Bridge meanwhile, unmolested by the enemy, is getting
ready.

Keith, looking across to Merseburg on the morrow morning
(Tuesday, Noy. 1st), whither he had marched direct with the
other Half of the Army, finds Merseburg Bridge destroyed, or

3 © Mémoires militaires de Louis §c. Duc de Crillon (Paris, 1791), p. 166 ;”
—as cited by Preuss, ii. 88. * Sketch of Plan, p. 209 a.

8

Se ee er ee

=~. =

——_e ae

~~ —

ee

Cuap. VIITI.] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 155
2d-4th Nov. 1757

broken; and Soubise with batteries on the farther side, intend-
ing to dispute the passage. Keith despatches Duke Ferdinand
to Halle, another twelve miles down, who finds Halle Bridge de-
stroyed in like manner, and Broglio intending to dispute ; which,
however, on second thoughts, neither of them did. Friedrich’s
new Bridge at Herren-Muhle (Lordships Mill) is of course an
important point to them; Friedrich’s passage now past dispute!
“Let us fall back,” say they, ‘and rank ourselves a little; we
are 50 or 60,000 strong; ill off for provisions, but well able to
retreat; and have permission to fight on this side of the River.”

The combined Army, “ Dauphiness,” or whatever we are to
call it, does on Wednesday morning (November 2d) gather-in its
cannon and outskirts, and give up the Saale question ; retire
Jandwards to the higher grounds some miles; and diligently get
itself united, and into order of battle better or worse, near the
Village of Miicheln (which means Kirk Michael, and is still writ-
ten “ Sanct Michél” by some on this occasion). ‘There Dauphin-
ess takes post, leaning on the heights, not in a very scientific
way ; leaving Keith and Ferdinand to rebuild their Bridges un-
molested, and all Prussians to come across at discretion. Which
they have diligently done (2d-3d November), by their respective
Bridges; and on Thursday afternoon are all across, encamped
at Bedra, in close neighbourhood to Miicheln ; which Friedrich
has been out reconnoitering, and finds that he can attack next
morning very early.

Next morning, accordingly, “by two o’clock, with a bright
moon shining,” Friedrich is on horseback, his Army following.
But on examining by moonlight, the enemy have shifted their
position; turned on their axis, more or less, into new wood-
patches, new batteries and bogs; which has greatly mended
their affair. No good attacking them so, thinks Friedrich; and
returns to his Camp; slightly cannonaded, one wing of him,
from some battery of the enemy ; and immoderately crowed over
by them: ‘Dare not, you see! Tried, and was defeated !” cry
their newspapers and they,—for one day. Friedrich lodges
again in Bedra this night, others say in Rossbach; shifts his own
Camp a little; left wing of it now at Rossbach (Horse-Brook, or
Beck, soon to be a world-famous Hamlet): the effects of hunger

‘play the prank she did next morning, Friedrich had not ven-

156 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES' TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII}, —

: 5th Nov. 1757.
on the Dauphiness, so far from her supplies, will, he calculates, —
be stronger than on him, and will bring her to better terms —
shortly. Dauphiness needs bread; one may have fine clipping

at the skirts of her, if she try retreat. That Dauphiness would

tured to calculate.

Catastrophe of Dauphiness (Saturday, 5th November 1757).

Meandering Saale is on one of his big turns, as he passes
Weissenfels; turning, pretty rapidly here, from south-eastward,
which he was a dozen miles ago, round to north-eastward or
northward altogether, which he gets to be at Merseburg, a dozen ~
farther down. Right across from Weissenfels, lapped in this
crook of the Saale, or washed by it on south side and on east,
rises, with extreme laziness, a dull circular lump of country, six
or eight miles in diameter; with Rossbach and half-a-dozen other
scragey sleepy Hamlets scattered on it ;—which, till the morning
of Saturday, 5th November 1757, had not been notable to any
visitor. The topmost point or points, for there are two (not
discoverable except by tradition and guess), the country people —
do call Hills, Janus Hiigel, Polzen-Hiigel,—Hill sensible to wag- .
on-horses in those bad loose tracks of sandy mud, but unim- —
pressive on the Tourist, who has to admit that there seldom —
was so flat a Hill. Rising, let us guess, forty yards in the three
or four miles it has had. Might be called a perceptibly pot- —
bellied plain, with more- propriety; flat country, slightly puffed
up;—in shape not steeper than the mould of an immense tea-
saucer would be. ‘Tea-saucer 6 miles in diameter, 100 feet in
depth, and of irregular contour, which indeed will sufficiently
represent it to the reader’s mind.

Saale, at four or five miles distance, bounds this scraggy lump
on the east and-on the south. Westward and northward, spring-
ing about Miicheln on each hand, and setting off to right and to
left Saale-ward, are what we take to be two brooks; at least
are two hollows: and behind these, the country rises higher; —
undulating still. on lazy terms, but now painted azure by the dis-
tance, not unpleasant to behold, with its litter all lapped out of
sight, and its poor brooks tinkling forward (as we judge) into

ig

Cur. VIII.) BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 157

5th Nov. 1757. .

the Saale. Southward from our Janus Height, eight or nine
miles off, may be seen some vestige of Freiburg; steeple or gilt
weathercock faintly visible, on the Unstrut yonder ;— which I
take to be Soubise’s bread-basket at present. And farther off,

and opposite the mouth of the Unstrut, well across the Saale,

lies another nameable Town (visible in clear weather, as a

_ smoke-cloud at certain hours, about meal-time, when the ket-

tles are on boil), the Town of Naumburg,—one of several Ger-
man Naumburgs,—the Naumburg of Gustaf Adolf; where his
slain body lay, on the night of Liitzen Battle, with his poor
Queen and others weeping over it.. Naumburg is on the other
side of Saale, not of importance to Soubise in such posture.
This is the circular block or lump of country, on the north
or north-west side of which Friedrich now lies, and which will
become, he little thinks how memorable on the morrow. Over
the heights, immediately eastward of Friedrich, there is a kind
of hollow, or scooped-out place; shallow valley of some extent,
which deserves notice against tomorrow; but in general the
ground is lazily spherical, and without noticeable hollows or
valleys when fairly away from the River. <A dull blunt lump
of country; made of sand and mud,—may have been grassy
once, with broom on it, in the pastoral times; is now under
poor plough-husbandry, arable or scratchable in all parts, and
looks rather miserable in winter-time. No vestige of hedge on
it, of shrub or bush; one tree, ugly but big, which may have
been alive in Friedrich’s time, stands not far from Rossbach
Hamlet; one, and no more, discoverable in these areas.
Various Hamlets lie sprinkled about: very sleepy, rusty, ir-
regular little places; huts and cattle-stalls huddled down, as if
shaken from a bag; much straw, thick thatch and crumbly
mud-brick ; but looking warm and peaceable, for the Fourfooted
and the Twofooted; which latter, if you speak to them, are sol-
id reasonable people, with energetic German eyes and hearts,
though so ill-lodged. ‘These Hamlets, needing shelter and
spring-water, stand generally in some slight hollow, if well up
the Height, as Rossbach is; sometimes, if near the bottom, they
are nestled in a sudden dell or gash,—work of the primeval
rains, accumulating from above, and ploughing out their way-

158 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIUL

. 5th Nov. 1757,
The rains, we can see, have been busy ; but there is seldom the
least stream visible, bottom being too sandy and porous. On
the western slope, there is in our time a kind of coal, or coal-
dust, dug up; in the way of quarrying, not of mining; and one —
or two big chasms of this sort are confusedly busy: the natives —
mix this valuable coal-dust with water, mould into bricks, and
so use as fuel: one of the features of these hamlets is the strange —
black bricks, standing on edge about the cottage doors, to drip,
and dry in the sun. For this or for other reasons, the westward
slope appears to be the best; and has a major share of hamlets —
on it: Rossbach is high up, and looks over upon Micheln, and
its dim belfry and appurtenances, which lie safe across the hol-
low, perhaps two miles off,—safe from Friedrich, if there were
eatables and lodging to be had in such a place. _ Friedrich’s left
wing is in Rossbach. Bedra where Friedrich’s right wing is;
Branderode where the Soubise right is, then Grost, Schevenro-
da, Zeuchfeld, Pettstiidt, Lunstadt,—especially Reichartswerben,
where Soubise’s right will come to be: these the reader may
take note of in his Map. Several of them lie in ashes just then;
plundered, replundered, and at last set fire to; so busy have
Soubise’s hungry people been, of late, in the Country they came
to ‘‘deliver.”” The Freiburg road, the Naumburg road, both to-
wards Merseburg, cross this Height; straight like the string,
Saale by Weissenfels being the bow.

The Herrenhaus (Squire’s Mansion) still stands in Rossbach,
with the littery Hamlet at its flank: a high, pavilion-roofed,
and though dilapidated, pretentious kind of House; some kind
of court round it, some kind of hedge or screen of brushwood
and brickwall: terribly in need of the besom, it and its envi-
ronment throughout. King, I suppose, did lodge there over-
night: certain it is the Squire was absent; and the Squire’s
Man, three days afterwards, reported to him as follows: * *
“Saturday the 5th, about 8 a.m., his Majesty mounted to the
roof of the Herrenhaus here, some tiles having been removed”
(for that end, or by accident, is not said), “and saw how the
French and Reichs Army were getting in movement,”—wrig-
gling out of their Camp leftwards, evidently aiming towards

|

~

Cuap. VIL] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 159

5th Nov. 1757.
Grist. ‘In about an hour, near half their Army was through
Grést, and had turned southward, rather south-eastward, from
Grést, out in the Rossbach and Almsdorf region, and proceed-
ing still towards Pettstiidt,”—towards Schevenroda more pre-
cisely, not towards Pettstadt yet. ‘* His Majesty looked always
through the perspective: and to me was the grace done to be
ever at his side, and to name for him the roads the French and
Reichs Army was marching.’

The King had heard of this phenomenon hours before, and

had sent out hussars and scouts upon it; but now sees it with

his eyes:— “Going for Freiburg, and their bread-cupboard,”
thinks the King; who does not as yet make much of the move-
ment; but will watch it well, and calculates to have a stroke at
the rear end of it, in due season. With which view, the caval-
ry, Seidlitz and Mayer, are ordered to saddle; foot regiments,
and all else, to be in readiness. This French-Reichs Dauphiness
is not rapid in her field exercise; and has a great deal of wrig-
gling and unwinding before she can fairly pick herself out, and
get forward towards Schevenroda on the Freiburg road. In
three or in two parallel columns, artillery between them, horse
ahead, horse arear; haggling along there ;—making for their
breadbaskets, thinks the King. ‘A body of French, horse chiefly,
under St. Germain, come out, in the Schortau-Almsdorf part,
with some salvoing and prancing, as if intending to attack about
Rossbach, where our left wing is: but his Majesty sees it to be
a pretence merely: and St. Germain, motionless, and doing noth-
ing but cannonade a little, seems to agree that it is so. Dau-
phiness continues her slow movements; King, in this Squire’s
Mansion of Rossbach, sits down to dinner, dinner with Officers
at the usual hour of noon,—little dreaming what the Dauphin-
ess has in her head.

Truth is, the Dauphiness is in exultant spirits, this morning ;
intending great things against a certain “little Marquis of Bran-
denburg.” to whom one does so much honour. Generals look-
ing down yesterday on the King of Prussia’s Camp, able to count
every man in it (and half the men being invisible, owing to
bends of the ground), counted him to 10,000 or so; and had

? Miiller, p. 50; Rodenbeck, p 326.

47

160  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
5th Nov. 1757.

said, ‘‘ Pshaw, are not we above 50,000; let us endit! Take —
him on his left. Round yonder, till we get upon his left, and —

even upon his rear withal, St. Germain codperating on the other

- side of him: on left, on rear, on front, at the same moment, is

not that a sure game?” A very ticklish game, answers surly
sagacious Lloyd: ‘‘ No general will permit himself to be taken
in flank with his eyes open; and the King of Prussia is the un-
likeliest you could try it with !”

Trying it meanwhile they are; marching along by the low
grounds here, intending to sweep gradually leftwards towards
Janus-Hill quarter; there to sweep home upon him, coil him
up, left and rear and front, in their boa-constrictor folds, and
end his trifle of an Army and him. ‘ Why not, if we do our
duty at all, annihilate his trifle of an Army; fake himself pris-
oner, and so end it?” Report says, Soubise had really, in some
moment of enthusiasm lately, warned the Versailles populations
to expect such a thing; and that the Duchess of Orleans, for-

getful of poor King Louis’s presence, had, in her enthusiasm, ex-

claimed: “ Zant mieux, I shall at last see a King, then!” But
perhaps it is a mere French epigram, such as the winds often
generate there, and put down for fact.—Friedrich’s retreat to
Weissenfels is cut off for Friedrich: an Austrian party has been
at the Herren-Miihle Bridge this morning, has torn it up and
pitched it into the river; planks far on to Merseburg by this
time. And, in fact, unless Friedrich be nimble—But that he
usually 1s.

Friedrich’s dinner had gone on with dehberation for about
two hours, Friedrich’s intentions not yet known to any, but ev-
erybody, great and small, waiting eagerly for them, like grey-
hounds on the slip,—when Adjutant Gaudi, who had been on

the Housetop the while, rushes into the Dining-room faster than:
he ought, and, with some tremor in his voice and eyes, reports

hastily: ‘‘ At Schevenroda, at Pettstadt yonder! Enemy has
turned to left. Clearly for the left.”—‘ Well, and if he do?
No flurry needed, Captain!” answered Friedrich,—(not in these
precise words; but rebuking Gaudi, with a look not of laughter
wholly, and with a certain question, as to the state of Gaudi’s
stomachic part, which is still known in traditionary circles, but is

es

2

A eB.) EN Pike see a=

»
»

ite attas tn

‘jm

“el ie
,
A
q
7 ¥
es

—Cuar. VIIL] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 161
5th Nov. 1757.

not mentionable here) ;—and went, with due gravity, himself to
the roof, with his Officers. ‘To the left, sure enough; meaning
to attack us there:” the thing Friedrich had despaired of is vol-
untarily coming, then ;—and it is a thing of stern qualities with-
al; a wager of life, with glorious possibilities behind.

Friedrich earnestly surveys the phenomenon for some min-
utes; in some minutes, Friedrich sees his way through it, at
least into it, and how he will do it. Off, eastward; march!
Swift are his orders; almost still swifter the fulfilment of them.
Prussian Army is a nimble article in comparison with Dauphin-
ess! In half an hour’s time, all is packed and to the road;
and, except Mayer and certain Free-Corps or Light-Horse, to
amuse St. Germain and his Almsdorf people, there is not a Prus-

_ sian visible in these localities to French eyes. ‘At half-past.
two,” says the Squire’s Man,—or let us take him a sentence
earlier, to lose nothing of such a Document: “At noon his Maj-
esty took dinner; sat till about two o’clock; then again went to
the roof; and perceived that the Enemy’s Army at Pettstidt
were turning about the little Wood there north-eastward, as if
for Lunstiidt” (into the Lunstiidt road) ;—‘* such cannonading,
too,” from those Almsdorf people, “that the balls flew over our
heads,’’—or I tremulously thought so. ‘At half-past two, the
word was given, March! And good speed they made about it,
in this Herrenhaus, and out of doors too, striking their tents,
and cording up and trimly shouldering everything with incredi-
ble brevity,” as if machinery were doing it; “‘and at three, on
the Prussian part, all was packed and out tato the court for be-
ing carried off; and, in fact, the Prussian Army was on march
at three.” Seidlitz, with all his Horse, vanishing round the cor-
ner of the Height; speeding along, invisible on his northern
slope there, straight for the Janus-Pélzen Hill part; the Infant-
ry following, double-quick ;—well knowing, each, what he has
got to do.

But at this interesting point, the Editors,—small thanks to
them, authentic but thrice-stupid mortals,—cut short our Eye-
witness, not so much as telling us his name, some of them not
even his date or whereabouts; and so the curtain tumbles down
(as if its string had been cut, or suddenly eaten by unwise ani-

162  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII > he
5th Nov. 1757. —
mals), and we are left to gray hubbub, and our own resources at
secondhand. Except only that a French Officer,—one of those _
cannonading from Almsdorf, no doubt,—declares that “fit was
like a change of scene in the Opera (décoration d@’ Opéra),”* so
very rapid; and that “they all rolled off eastward at quick
time.” At extremely quick time ;—and soon, in the slight hol-
low behind Janus Hiigel, vanished from sight of these Almsdorf
French, and of the Soubise-Hildburghausen Army in general.
Which latter is agreeably surprised at the phenomenon; and —
draws a highly flattering conclusion from it. “Gone, then; off
at double-quick for Merseburg; aha!” think the Soubise-Hild- _
burghausen people: ‘ Double-quick you too, my pretty men, lest
they do whisk away, and we never get a stroke at them !”’—

Seidlitz, meanwhile, with his cavalry (thirty-eight squad-
rons, about 4,000 horse), is rapidly doing the order he has had.
Seidlitz at a sharp military trot, and the infantry at double- _
quick to keep up near him, which they cannot quite do, are,
as we have said, making right across for the Pélzen-Hill and _
Janus-Hill quarter; their route the string, French route the bow;
and are invisible to the French, owing to the heights between.
Seidlitz, when he gets to the proper point eastward, will wheel
about, front to southward, and be our left wing; infantry, as i.
centre and right, will appear in like manner; and—we shall
see !

The exultant Dauphiness, or Soubise- Hildburghausen Army
(let us call it, for-brevity’s sake, Dauphiness or French, which
it mainly was), on that rapid disappearance of the Prussians,
never doubted but the Prussians were off on flight for Merse-
burg, to get across by the bridge there. Whereat Dauphiness,
doubly exultant, mended her own pace, cavalry at a sharp trot,
infantry double-quick, but unable to keep up,—for the purpose
of capturing or intercepting the runaway Prussians. Speed, my
friends,—if you would do a stroke upon Friedrich, and show
the Versailles people a King at last! Thus they, hurrying on,
in two parallel columns,—infantry, long floods of it, coming _

data’

* Letter in Miiller, p.60. In Westphalen (ii. 128-133) is a much supe-
rior French Letter, intercepted somewhere, and fallen to Duke Ferdinand; —
well worth reading, on Rossbach and the previous Affairs.

‘eee

4}

|

lke x

?
Cuap. VIII.] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 163
5th Nov. 1757.

double-quick but somewhat fallen behind; cavalry 7,000 or so,
as vanguard,—faster and faster; sweeping forward on their
southern side of the Janus-and-Poélzen slope, and now rather
climbing the same.

Seidlitz has his hussar pickets on the top, to keep him in-
formed as to their motions, and how far they are got. Seidlitz,

invisible on the south slope of the Pélzen Hiigel, finds about

half-past 3 p.M., that he is now fairly ahead of Dauphiness ;
Seidlitz halts, wheels, comes to.the top, ‘‘Got the flank of them,
sure enough!”—and without waiting signal or farther orders,
every instant being precious, rapidly forms himself; and plunges
down on these poor people. ‘Compact as a wall, and with an
incredible velocity (dune vitesse incroyable),” says one of them.
Figure the astonishment of Dauphiness; of poor Broglio, who
commands=the horse here. ‘Taken in flank, instead of taking
other people; intercepted, not in the least needing to intercept !
Has no time to form, though he tried what he could. Only the
two Austrian regiments got completely formed; the rest very
incompletely ; and Seidlitz, in the blaze of rapid steel, is in upon
them. The two Austrian regiments, and two French that are
named, made what debate was feasible ;—courage nowise want-
ing, in such sad want of captaincy; nay Soubise in person gal-
loped into it, if that could have helped. But from the first, the
matter was hopeless; Seidlitz slashing it at such a rate, and
plunging through it and again through it, thrice, some say four
times: so that, in the space of half an hour, this luckless caval-
ry was all tumbling off the ground; plunging down hill, in full
flight, across its own infantry or whatever obstacle, Seidlitz on
the hips of it; and galloping madly over the horizon, towards
Freiburg as it proved; and was not again heard of that day.

In about half an hour, that bit of work was over; and Seid-
litz, with his ranks trimmed again, had drawn himself southward
a little, into the Hollow of Tageswerben, there to wait impend-
ing phenomena. For Friedrich with the Infantry is now emerg-
ing over Janus-Hill, in a highly thunderous manner,—eighteen
pieces of artillery going, and “ four big guns taken from the walls
of Leipzig ;’’ and there will be events anon. It is said, Hild-
burghausen, at the first glimpse of Friedrich over the hill-top,

164  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
5th Nov. 1757.

whispered to Soubise, “We are lost, Royal Highness!” ae

their utmost in this extremely bad predicament they had Se
into.
Friedrich’s artillery goes at a murderous rate; had come in—
view, over the hill-top, before Seidlitz ended,—“ nothing but the — i
muzzles of it visible’ (and the fire-torrents from it) to us poor
French below. Friedrich’s lines; or rather his one line, mere tip _
of his left wing,—only seven battalions in it, five of them under — |
Keith from the second or reserve line; whole centre and “at

ee

4
wing standing “refused,” in oblique rank, invisible, behind the 4
Hill,—Friedrich’s line, we say, the artillery to its right, shoots _
out in mysterious Prussian rhythm, in echelons, in potences, i}
obliquely down the Janus-Hill side; straight, rigid, regular as }
iron clockwork; and strides towards us, silent, with the light-_
ning sleeping in it:—Friedrich has got the flank of Dauphiness,
and means to keep it. Once and again and a third time, poor
Soubise, with his poor regiments much in an imbroglio, here
heaped on one another, there with wide gaps, halt being so sud- —
den, —attempts to recover the flank, and pushes out this regi- ‘
ment and the other, rightward, to be even with Friedrich. But
sees with despair that it cannot be; that Friedrich with his .
echelons, potences and mysterious Prussian resources, pulls him- }

!

§

self out like the pieces of a prospect-glass, piece after piece, hope-
lessly fast and seemingly no end to them; and that the flank is
lost, and that— Unhappy Generals of Dauphiness, what a phe-
nomenon for them! A terrible Friedrich, not fled to Merseburg !
at all; but mounted there on the Janus-Hill, as on his saddle-
horse, with face quite the other way ;—and for holster-pistol, has 1
plucked out twenty-two cannon. Clad verily in fire; Chimzera- —
like, riding the Janus-Hill, in that manner; left leg (or wing) of
him spurning us into the abysses, right one ready to help at diss
cretion !

Hildburghausen, I will hope, does his utmost ; Soubise, Brogs
lio, for certain do. The French line is in front, next the Prus-
sians: poor Generals of Dauphiness are panting to retrieve them-
selves. But with regiments jammed in this astonishing way,
and got collectively into the lion’s throat, what can be done?

.
|

a

— Cnap. VII] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 165
4 Bth Nov. 1757. ;

| Steady, rigid as iron clockwork, the Prussian line strides for-
ward; at forty-paces distance delivers its first shock of light-
ning, bursts into platoon fire; and so continues, steady at the
rate of five shots a minute,—hard to endure by poor masses all
inacoil. ‘The artillery tore down whole ranks of us,’”’ says
the Wiirtemberg Dragoon ;° ‘*the Prussian musketry did terri-
ble execution.”

Things began to waver very soon, French reeling back from
the Prussian fire, Reichs troops rocking very uneasy, torn by
such artillery; when, to crown the matter, Seidlitz, seeing all
things rock to the due extent, bursts out of Tageswerben Hollow,
terribly compact and furious, upon the rear of them. Which
sets all things into inextricable tumble; and the Battle is be-
come a rout and a riding into ruin, no Battle ever more. Last-
ed twenty-five minutes, this second act of it, or till half-past
four: after which, the curtains rapidly descending (Night’s cur-
tain, were there no other) cover the remainder; the only stage-
direction, Hxeunt Omnes. Which for a 50 or 60,000, ridden
over by Seidlitz Horse, was not quite an easy matter! ‘They
left, of killed and wounded, near 3,000; of prisoners, 5,000;
(Generals among them 8, officers 300): in sum, about 8,000;
not to mention cannon, 67 or.72; with standards, flags, kettle-
drums and meaner baggages ad ibitum in a manner. ‘The Prus-
sian loss was, 165 killed, 376 wounded ;—between a sixteenth
and a fifteenth part of theirs; in number the Prussians had been
little more than one to three; 22,000 of all arms,—not above
half of whom ever came into the fire ; Seidlitz and seven bat-
talions doing all the fighting that was needed. St. Germain
tried to cover the retreat; but “‘ got broken,” he says,—Mayer
bursting in on him,—and soon went to slush like the others.

_ Seldom, almost never, not even at Crecy or Poictiers, was
any Army better beaten. And truly, we must say, seldom did
any better deserve it, so far as the Chief Parties went. Yes,
Messieurs, this is the petit Marquis de Brandebourg; you will
know this one, when you meet him again! The flight, the
French part of it, was towards Freiburg Bridge; in full gallop,
long after the chase had ceased; crossing of the Unstrut there,
* His Letter in Miller, p. 83.

burnt, when Friedrich arrived next morning. He had encamped
at Obschiitz, short way from the field itself. French Army
Reichs Army, all was gone to staves, to utter chaotic wreck,
Hildburghausen went by Naumburg; crossed the Saale there; _
bent homewards through the Weimar Country; one wild flood 4
of ruin, swift as it could go; at Erfurt ‘‘only one regiment val
in rank, and marched through with drums beating.” His Army, 4
which had been disgustingly unhappy from the first, and was
now fallen fluid on these mad terms, flowed all away in differ-
ent rills, each by the course straightest home; and Hildburg-
hausen arriving at Bamberg, with hardly the ghost or mutilated
skeleton of an Army, flung down his truncheon,—“ A murrain-
on your Reichs Armies and regimental chaoses!”—and went
indignantly home. Reichs Army had to begin at the beginning
again; and did not reappear on the scene till late next Year, _
under a new Commander, and with slightly improved conditions.
Dauphiness Proper was in no better case; and would have
flowed home in like manner, had not home been so far, and the
way unknown. ‘Twelve thousand of them rushed straggling
through the Eichsfeld; plundering and harrying, like a
or Calmucks: “Army blown asunder, over a circle of forty
miles radius,” writes St. Germain: “had the Enemy pursued ~
us, after I got broken” (burst in upon by Mayer and bis Free-
Corps people), ‘‘ we had been annihilated. Never did Army be-
have worse; the first cannon salvo decided our rout and our
shame.”® ;
In two-days time (November 7th), the French had got to
Langensalza, fifty-five miles from the Battlefield of Rossbach;
plundering, running, sacre-dieu-ing; a wild deluge of molten

o)
wreck, filling the Eichsfeld with its waste noises, making night

hideous and day too ;—in the villages, Placards were stuck up, .
appointing Nordhausen and Heiligenstadt for rallying place.*
Soubise rode, with few attendants, all night towards Nord- |
hausen,—eighty miles off, foot of the Brocken Country, where
the Richelieu resources are ;—Soubise with few attendants, face

® St. Germain to Verney: different Excerpts of Letters in the two weeks
after Rossbach and before (given in Preuss, ii. 97). - ” Milley, p. 73.

Cuar. VIII. ] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 167
5th Nov. 1757.

| set towards the Brocken ; himself, it is like, in a somewhat hag-
ridden condition.

“The joy of poor Teutschland at large,” says one of my Notes,
“ and how all Germans, Prussian and Anti-Prussian alike, flung up their
caps, with unanimous Lede-hoch, at the news of Rossbach, has often
been remarked ; and indeed is still almost touching to see. ‘The per-
haps bravest Nation in the world, though the least braggart, very cer-
tainly ein tapferes Volk (as their Goethe calls them); so long insult-
| ed, snubbed and trampled on, by a luckier, not a braver :—has not your
| exultant Dauphiness got a beautiful little dose administered her; and
is gone off in foul shrieks, and pangs of the interior,—let no man ask
whitherward! ‘Siz un Allemand peut avoir de esprit (Can a Ger-
man possibly have sharpness of wits)? Well, yes, it would seem:
| here is one German graduate who understands his medicine-chest, and
| the quality of patients!—Dauphiness got no pity anywhere ; plenty of
| epigrams, and mostly nothing but langhter even in Paris itself. Napo-
leon long after, who much admires Friedrich, finds that this Victory of
| Rossbach was inevitable; ‘but what fills me with astonishment and
shame,’ adds he, ‘is that it was gained by six battalions and thirty
| squadrons’ (seven properly, and thirty-eight) ‘ over such a multitude!"
| —It is well known, Napoleon, after Jena, as if Jena had not been
| enough for him, tore down the first Monument of Rossbach, some poor
| ashlar Pyramid or Pillar, raised by the neighbourhood, with nothing
| more afflictive inscribed on it than a date; and sent it off in carts for
_— Paris (where no stone of it ever arrived, the Thiiringen Carmen slink-
ing off, and leaving it scattered in different places over the face of
| ‘Thiiringen in general) ; so that they had the trouble of a new one late-

ay”?

From Friedrich the “ Army of the Circles,” that is, Dauphiness and
Company,—called Hoopers or “ Coopers” (Tonneliers), with a desper-
ate attempt at wit by pun,—get their Adieu in words withal. This is
the famed Congé de l’Armée des Cercles et des Tonneliers ; a short
metrical Piece; called by Editors the most profane, most indecent,
most &c.; and printed with asterisk veils thrown over the worst pas-
sages. Who shall dare, searching and rummaging for insight into
Friedrich, and complaining that there is none, to lift any portion of the
veil; and say, “See—Faugh!” The cynicism, truly, but also the ir-
repressible honest exultation, has a kind of epic completeness, and ful-

* Montholon, Mémoires §c. de Napoléon (Napoleon’s Précis des Guerres
de Frédéric IT, vii. 210).

* Rédenbeck, Beitrdge, i. 299; ib. p. 385, Lithograph of the poor extinct
Monument itself.

168 SEVEN-YEARS WAk RISES TO A uxIGHT. [Book XV
5th Nov. 1 |
ness of sincerity ; and, at bottom, the thing is nothing like so wicked as |
careless commentators have given out. Dare to look a little: aa
“ Adieu, grands écraseurs de rows,” so it starts: ‘Adieu, grand
crushers of Kings; arrogant windbags, Turpin, Broglio, Soubise,—
Hildburghausen with the gray beard, foolish still as when your beard
was black in the Turk-War time :—brisk journey to you all!” That
is the first stanza; unexceptionable, had we room. ‘The second stanza
‘is,—with the veils partially lifted ;—-with probably ‘ Movse” put into the
first blank ; and into the third, something of or belonging to ‘ Cesar,”—
“¢ Je vous ai vu comme...
Dans des ronces en certain lieu
Eut Chonneur de voir...
Ou comme au gré de sa luxure
Le bon Nicoméde a (écart
Aiguillonnait sa flamme impure

Tt Pee ae x

Enough to say, the Author, with a wild burst of spiritual enthusiasm,
sings the charms of the rearward part of certain men; and what a roy-
_al ecstatic felicity there sometimes is in indisputable survey of the
same. He rises to the heights of Anti-Biblical profanity, quoting Mo-
ses on the Hill of Vision; sinks to the bottomless of human or ultra-hu-
man depravity, quoting, King Nicomedes’s experiences on Cesar happi-
ly known only to the learned) ; and in brief, recognises that there is, on
occasion, considerable beauty in that quarter of the human figure, when
it turns on you opportunely. A most cynical, profane affair: yet, we
must say by way of parenthesis, one which gives no countenance to Vol-
taire’s atrocities of rumour about Friedrich himself in this matter; the
reverse rather, if well read ; being altogether theoretic, scientific ; sings
with gusto the glow of beauty you find in that unexpected quarter,—
while kicking it deservedly and with enthusiasm. ‘To see the”’—
what shall we call it: seat of honour, in fact, ‘“‘ of your enemy :” has it
not an undeniable charm? “I own to you in confidence, O Soubise —
aud Company, this fine laurel I have got, and was so in need of, is
nothing more or other than the sight of your”—four asterisks. “ Oblige
me, whenever clandestine Fate brings us together, by showing me that”
—always that, if you would give me pleasure when we meet. ‘And
oh,” next stanza says, “to think what our glory is founded on,”—on
view of that unmentionable object, I declare to you!—And through ;
other stanzas, getting asin ty enough (though in theory only), which we
need not prosecute farther '° A certain heartiness and epic greatness

§

10 Giuvres de Frédéric, xii. 70-738 (written at Freiburg, 6th November,
when his Majesty got thither, and found the Bridge burnt).

4

|

CHAP. VIL] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 169
5th Nov. 1757.

of cynicism, life’s nakedness grown almost as if innocent again; an
immense suppressed insuppressible Haha, on the part of this King.
Strange Te-Deum indeed, Coming from the very heart, truly, as few
of them do ; but not, in other points, recommendable at all!—Here, of
the night before, is something better :

To Withelmina.
‘‘Near Weissenfels” (Obschiitz, in fact; does not yet know what
the Battle will be called), ‘‘ 5th November 1757.
“ At last, my dear Sister, 1 can announce you a bit of good news,
You were doubtless aware, that the Coopers with their circles had a

mind to take Leipzig. I ran up, and drove them beyond Saale. The .

Due de Richelieu sent them a reinforcement of twenty battalions and
fourteen squadrons” (say 15,000 horse and foot); “they then called
themselves 63,000 strong. Yesterday I went to reconnoitre them ;
could not attack them in the post they held. This had rendered them
rash. ‘Today they came out with the intention of attacking me; but I
took the start of them (les at prévenu). It was » Battle en douceur
(soft to one’s wish). ‘Thanks to God I have not a hundred men killed ;
the only General ill wounded is Meinecke. My Brother Henri and
General Seidlitz have slight hurts” (gunshots, not so slight, that of Seid-
litz) “in the arm. We have all the Enemy’s cannon, all the” * *
“T am in full march to drive them over the Unstrut” (already driven,
your Majesty ; bridge burning).

“You, my dear Sister, my good, my divine and affectionate Sister”
(faithful to the bone, in good truth, poor Wilhelmina), ‘* who deign to in-
terest yourself in the fate of a Brother who adores you, deign also to
share in my joy. The instant [ have time,I will tell you more. I em-
brace you with my whole heart. Adieu. FF."

Ulterror Fate of Dauphiness ; flies over the Rhine in bad
Fashion: Dauphiness’s Ways with the Saxon Populations
in her Deliverance- Work.

Friedrich had no more fighting with the French. November
9th, at Merseburg, in all stillness, Duke Ferdinand got his Bri-
tannic Commission, his Full Powers, from Friedrich and the
parties interested; in all stillness, made his arrangements, as if
for Magdeburg and his Governorship there,—Friedrich hasten-
ing off for Silesia the while. Duke Ferdinand did stay six days
in Magdeburg, inspecting or pretending to inspect; very pleas-
11 Thid. xxvii. 1. 310.

Vou. V.—H

/

170 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. rBobie XVIII.
9th Nov. 1757—31st March 1758.

ant with his Sister and the Royalties that are now there; but

at midnight of day sixth, shot off silently on wider errand, nei
And, in sum, on Wednesday, 24th November 1757, appeared i in a +
Stade, on horseback at morning parade there; intimating, to —
what joy of the poor Brunswick ies enadiers and others, That he —

was come to take command; that Kloster-Zeven is abolished;
that we are not an ‘‘Observation Army,” rotting here in the

parish pound, any longer, but an “ Allied Army” (such now our

title), intending to strike for ourselves, and get out of pound —
straightway !—

“ Wednesday 24th November—Monday 29th. Duke Ferdinand did

accordingly pick up the reins of this distracted Affair; and, in a way
wonderful to see, shot sanity into every fibre of it; and kept it sane and
road-worthy for the Five Years coming. With a silent velocity, an

energy, an imperturbable stedfastness, and clear insight into cause and j

effect; which were creditable to the school he came from; and were a

very joyful sight to Pitt and others concerned. So that from next Mon-

day, ‘ Novemher 29th, before daylight,’ when Ferdinand’s batteries be-
gan playing upon Harburg (French Fortress nearest to Stade), the

reign of the French ceased in those Countries ; and an astonished Rich- —

elieu and his French, lying scattered over all the West of Germany, in

readiness for nothing but plunder, had to fall more or less distracted in —

their turn; and do a number of astonishing things. To try this and

that, of futile, more or less frantic nature; be driven from post after —

post; be driven across the Aller first of all;—Richelieu to go home
thereupon, and be succeeded by one still more incompetent.

“* December 13th, a fortnight after Ferdinand’s appearance, Richelieu
had got to the safe side of the Aller (burning of Zelle Bridge and Zelle
Town there, his last act in Germany); Ferdinand’s quarters now wide
enough; and vigorous speed of preparation going on for farther chase,

ee ee, eee ee

were the weather mended. February 17th (1758), Ferdinand was on

foot again; Prince de Clermont, the still more incompetent successor
of Richelieu, gazing wide-eyed upon him, but doing nothing else: and
for the next six weeks, there was seen a once triumphant Richelieu-
D’Estrées French Army, much in rags, much in disorder, in terror, and
here and there almost in despair,—winging their way; like clouds of
draggled poultry, caught by a mastiff in the corn. Across Weser,

across Ems, finally across the Rhine itself, every feather of them,—their —

long-drawn cackle, of a shrieky type, filling all Nature in those months;

the mastiff steadily following.’? ‘To the astonishment of Pitt and man- —

‘2 Mauvillon, i. 252-284 (“‘ 9th November 1757-1st April 1758”); West-

ka

- Cuar. VIII. ] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 171

| 9th Nov. 1757—31st March 1758.

kind. Can this be the same Army that Royal Highness led to the Sea
and the Parish Pound? ‘The same identically, wasted to about two-
thirds by Royal Highness ; not a drum in it changed otherwise, only
One Man different,—and he is the important one !

* Pitt, when the news of Rossbach came, awakening the bonfires and
steeple-bells of England to such a pitch, had resolved on an emphatic
measure : that of sending English ‘Troops to reinforce our Allied Army,
and its new General ;—such an Ally as that Rossbach one being rare in
the eyes of Pitt. ‘ Postpone the meeting of Parliament, yet a few days,
your Majesty,’ said Pitt,‘ till 1 get the estimates ready!'* To which
Majesty assented, and all England with him: ‘ England’s own Cause,’
thinks Pitt, with confidence : ‘ our way of Conquering America,—and,
in the circumstances, our one way!’ English did land, accordingly ;
first instalment of them, a 12,000 (in August next), increased gradually
to 20,000 ; with no end of furnishings to them and everybody : with re-
sults again satisfactory to Pitt; and very famous in the England that
then was, dim as they are now grown.”

The effect of all which was that Pitt, with his Ferdinands
and reinforcements, found work for the French ever onwards
from Rossbach; French also turning as if exclusively upon per-
fidious Albion: and the thing became, in Teutschland, as else-
where, a duel of life and death between these natural enemies,
—Teutschland the centre of it,—Teutschland and the accessible
French Sea-Towns,—but the circumference of it going round
from Manilla and Madras to Havannah and Quebec again.
Wide-spread furious duel; prize, America and life. By land
and sea; handsomely done by Pitt on both elements. Land
part, we say, was always mainly in Germany, under Ferdinand,
—in Hessen and the Westphalian Countries, as far east as Min-
den, as far west as Frankfurt-on-Mayn, generally well north of
Rhine, well south of Elbe: that was, for five years coming, the
cockpit or place of deadly fence between France and England.
Friedrich’s arena lies eastward of that, occasionally playing. inte
it a little, and played into by it, and always in lively sympathy

phalen, i. 316-503 (abundantly explicit, authentic, and even entertaining,
—with the ample Correspondences, ib. ii. 147-350); Schaper, Vie militaire
du Maréchal Prince Ferdinand (2 tomes, 8vo, Magdebourg, 1796, 1799), i.
7-100 (a careful Book; of an official exactitude, like Westphalen’s, —and
appears to be left incomplete like -his). 13 Thackeray, i. 310.

172  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES To A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL
5th Nov. 1757,

and consultation with it: but, except the French subsidisings, |

diplomatisings and great diligence against him in foreign Courts, _

Friedrich is, in practical respects, free of the French; and ever
after Rossbach, Ferdinand and the English keep them in full é
work,—erowing yearly too full. A heavy Business for England
and Ferdinand; which is happily kept extraneous to Friedrich —
thenceforth; to him and us; which is not on the stage of his
affair and ours, but is to be conceived always as vigorously pro-
ceeding alongside of it, close beyond the scenes, and liable, at any —
time, to make tragic entry on him again:—of which we shall
have to notice the louder occurrences and cardinal phases, but,
for the future, nothing more.

Soubise, who had crept into the skirts of the Richelieu Army
in Hanover or Hessen Country, had of course to take wing in
that general flight before the mastiff. Soubise did not cross the
Rhine with it; Soubise made off eastward ;'‘—found new roost —
in Hanau-Frankfurt Country ; and had thoughts of joining the
Austrians in Bohemia next Campaign; but got new order,—
such the pinches of a winged Clermont with a mastiff Ferdinand —
at his poor draggled tail;—and came back to the Ferdinand
scene, to help there; and never saw Friedrich again. Both
Broglio and he had a good deal of fighting (mostly beating) from
Ferdinand; and a great deal of trouble and sorrow in the course
of this War; but after Rossbach it is not Friedrich or we, it is
Ferdinand and the Destinies that have to do with them. . Poor
Soubise, except that he was the creature of Generalissima Pom-
padour, which had something radically absurd in it, did not de-
serve all the laughter he got: a man of some chivalry, some
qualities. As for Broglio, I remember always, not without hu-
man emotion, the two extreme points of his career as a soldier:
Rossbach and the Fall of the Bastille. He was towards forty,
when Friedrich bestrode the Janus-Hill in that fiery manner;
he was turned of eighty when, from the pavements of Paris, the
Chimera of Democracy rose on him, in fire of a still more hor-
rible description.

_ Dauphiness-Bellona, in her special and in her widest sense,
14 Westphalen, i. 501 (‘fend of March 1758”).

Cur. VIIL] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 173

5th Nov. 1757.

has made exit, then. Gone, like clouds of draggled poultry
home across the Rhine. She was the most marauding Army
lately seen, also the most gasconading, and had the least capac-
ity for fighting: three worse qualities no army could have.
How she fought, we have seen sufficiently. Before taking leave
of her forever, readers, as she is a paragon in her kind, would
perhaps take a glance or two at her marauding qualities,—by a
good opportunity that offers. Plotho at Regensburg, that a su-
preme Reichs Diet may know what a ‘deliverance of Saxony”’
this has been, submits one day the following irrefragable Docu-
ments, ‘“ which have happened,” not without good industry of
my own, “to fall into my’ (Plotho’s) “hands.” They are Doc-
uments partly of epistolary, partly of a Petitionary form, pre-
sented to Polish Majesty, out of that Saxon Country; and have
an affidavit quality about them, one and all.

1°. Big Dauphiness (that is, D’Estrées) in the Wesel Countries, at
an early Stage,—while still endeavouring what she could to behave
well, hanging 1,000 marauders and the like (A private Letter) :

“ Country Mark, 20th June 1757. The French troops are going
on here in a way to utterly ruin us. Schmidt, their President of Jus-
tice, whom they set up in Cleve, has got orders to change all the Mag-
istracies of the Country” (Protestant by nature), “so as that half the
members shall be Catholic. Bielefeld was openly plundered by the
French for three hours long. You cannot by possibility represent to
yourself what the actual state of misery in these Countries is. A
scheffel of rye costs three thalers sixteen groschen” (who knows how
many times its natural price!). ‘And now we are to be forced to eat
the spoiled meal those French troops brought with them; which is
gone to such a state no animal would have it. This poisoned meal we
are to buy from them, ready money, at the price they fix; and that
famine may induce us, they are about to stop the mills, and forcibly
take away what little bread-corn we have left. God have pity on us,
and deliver us soon! Next week we are to have a transit of 6,000
Pfalzers” (Kur-Pfalz, foolish idle fellow, and Kur-Baiern too, are both
in subsidy of France, as usual; 6,000 Pfalzers just due here) ; ‘‘ these,
I suppose, will sweep us clean bare.”!5

Wesel Fortress, Gate of the Rhine, could not be defended by Fried-
rich: and the Hanover Incapables, and England still all in St. Vitus,
would not hear of undertaking it; left it wide open for the French;

18 Felden-Geschichte, iv. 399.

s

174 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. rRoeke! XVI I. |

5th Nov. 1757.

never could recover it, or get the Rhine-Gate barred again, during iad .

whole War. One hopes they repented ;—but perhaps it was only Pitt

and Duke Ferdinand that did so, instead! ‘The Wesel Countries were ‘
at once occupied by the French; ‘a conquest of her Imperial Majes- _
ty’s ;” continued to be administered j in Imperial eG, Ss name,—and ~

are thriving as above.

2°. Dauphiness Proper (that is, Soubise) in Thuringen, at a late
Stage:
“ Letter from Freiburg, shortly after Rossbach.—It was on the 23d
October, a Sunday, that we of Freiburg had our first billeting of French;
a body of cavalry from different regiments” (going to take Leipzig,

take Torgau, what not): “and from that day, Freiburg never emptied

of French, who kept marching through it in extraordinary quantities.
The marching lasted fourteen days, namely, till the 6th November”
(day after Rossbach; when they burnt our poor Bridge, and marched
for the last time); “ and often the billeting was so heavy, that in a sin-
gle house there were forty or fifty men. Who at all times had to be
lodged and dieted gratis; nay many householders, over and above the
ordinary meal, were obliged to give them money too; and many poor
people, who can scarcely get their own bit of bread, had to run and
bring at once their sixteen or eighteen groschen” (pence) “ worth of
wine, not to speak of coffee and sugar. And a great increase of the
mischief it was always, that the soldiers and common people did not
understand one another’s language.”—Heavy billeting; but what was
that? * * “Vast, nearly impossible, quantities of forage and pro-
vision,” were wrung from us, as from all the other Towns and Villages
about, “‘ under continual threatening to burn and rase us from the earth.
Often did our French Colonel threaten, ‘He would have the cannon
opened on Freiburg straightway.’ Nay, had it stood by foraging, we
might have reckoned ourselves lucky. But our straits increased day
by day; and sheer plundering became more and more excessive.
“The robbing and torturing of travellers, the plundering and burning
of Saxon Villages”—* Almost all the Towns and Villages hereabouts
are so plundered out, that many a one now has nothing but what he
carries on his body. Plundering was universal: and no sooner was
one party away, than another came, and still another; and often the
same house was three or four times plundered. Branderode, a Village
two leagues from this” (stands on the Field of Rossbach, if we look),
“is so ruined out, that nobody almost has anything left: Chief-Inspect-
or Baron von Bose’s Schloss there, with its splendid appointments, they
ruined utterly ;. took all money, victuals, valuables, furniture, clothes,
linen and beds, all they could carry ; what could not be carried away,

4

;

+
}
;
,

~ Car. VIII] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 175

5th Nov. 1757.
they cut, hewed and smashed to pieces; broke the wine-casks; and
even tore up the documents and letters they found lying in the place.
Branderode Dorf was twice set fire to by them; and was, at last, with
Zeuchfeld, which is an Amtsdorf,—after both had been plundered,—
reduced to ashes. The Churches of Branderode and Zeuchfeld, with
several other Churches, were plundered; the altars broken, the altar-
cloths and other vestures cut to pieces, and the sacred vessels and cups
carried away,—except” (for we have a notarial exactness, and will ex-
aggerate nothing) ‘that in the case of Branderode they sent the cup
back. Of the pollution of the altars, and of the blasphemous songs
these people sang in the churches, one cannot think without horror.
“And it was merely our pretended Allies and Protectors that have
desecrated our divine service, utterly wasted our Country, reduced the
inhabitants to want and desperation, and, in short, have so behaved that
you would not know this region again. ‘Truly these troops have real-
ised for us most of the infamies we heard reported of the Cossacks, and

‘their ravagings in Preussen lately.

“It is one of their smallest doings that they robbed a Saxon Clergy-
man” (name and circumstances can be given if required), “ three times
over, on the public Highway; shot at him, tied him to a horse’s tail,
and dragged him along with them; so that he is now lying ill, in dan-
ger of his life. On the whole, it is our beloved Pastors, Clergymen
most of all, that have been plundered of everything they had.

“ Balgart and Zschieplitz, both Villages half a league from this, have
likewise been heavily plundered ; they have even left the Parson noth-
ing but what he wore on his back. Grost,” another Rossbach place,
“which belongs to the Kammerjunker Heldorf, has likewise” * *
Ohe, satis !—“ All this happened between the 23d and 31st October ;

‘consequently before the Battle.” * * “In many Villages, you see

the trees and fields sprinkled with feathers from the beds that have
been slit up.

“‘In several Villages belonging to the Royal Electoral Privy Coun-
cillor von Brihl” (who is properly the fountain of all this and of much
other misery to us, if we knew it!), “the plundering likewise had be-
gun; and a quantity of about a hundred swine” (so ho!) had been cut
in pieces: but in the midst of their work, the Allies heard that these
were Briihl estates, and ceased their havoc of them. ‘These accord-
ingly are the only lands in all this region whose fate has been toler-
able.

“The apellation, every moment renewed, of ‘ Heretic !’ was the cour-
teous address from these people to our fellow Christians; ‘ heretic dogs
(ketzerische Hunde)’ was a Pradicat always in their mouth.

“In Weischiitz,” a mile or two from us, up the Unstrut, “a French

~

176 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVI I,
5th Noy. 1757.

Colonel who wanted to ride out upon the works, made the there Pas-
tor, Magister Schren, stoop down by way of horse-block, and mounted
into the saddle from his back.” (Messieurs, you will kindle the wrath a4
of mankind some day, and get a terrible plucking, with those high way
of yours !) ;
“Churches are all smashed; obscene songs were sung, in form of
litany, from the pulpits and altars; what was done with the commun, |
ion-vessels, when they were not worth stealing,”—is hideous to the re.
ligious sense, and shall not be mentioned in human speech.

. The Broglio Reinforcement coming across to join Soubise, and
iets at Rossbach (Humble Petition from the Magistrates of San-
gerhausen, To the King of Poland’s Majesty) :

Sangerhausen, 23d October 1757.—“ Scarcely had we, with pro-.
found submission (allerunterthanigst), under date of the 13th current, —
represented to your Royal Majesty and Electoral Translucency how ~
heavily we were pressed down by the forage-requisitions and transits —
of troops, and the consequent expenditure in food, drinking, in oats and |
hay, which no one pays,—when directly thereafter, on the 14th of Oc-
tober, anew French party, of the Fischer Corps,”—F ischer is a mighty
Hussar, scarcely inferior to Turpin; and stands in astonishing author-
ity with Richelieu, and an Army whose object is plunder,‘°—“ new party
of the Fischer Corps, of some sixty men and horse, arrived in the Town;
demanded meat, drink, oats and hay, and all things necessary; which
they received from us ;—and not only paid not one farthing for all this,
but furthermore some of them, instead of thanks to their Landlord,
Rossold, forcibly broke up his press, drank his brandy, and carried off |
a Toute (gather-all) with money init. From a Tanner, Lindauer by
name, they bargained for a buckskin; and having taken, would not pay |
it. In the Rathskeller (Town Public-house) they drank much wine, —
and gave nothing for it: nay on marching off,—because no mounted
guide (reitender Bolte) was at hand, and though they had before ex-
pressly said none such would be needed,—they rushed about like dis-
tracted persons (we rasende Leute) in the market-place and in the
streets ; beat the people, tumbled them about, and lugged them along,
in a violent manner; using abusive language to a frightful extent, and
threatening every misfortune.

“ Hardly were we rid of this confusion and astonishment, when, on
October 21st, a whole swarm of horses, men, women, children and
' wagons, which likewise all belonged to the Fischer Corps, and were
commanded by First-Lieutenant Schmidt, came into our Town. This
troop consisted of 80 men, part infantry, part cavalry; with some 80

76 Ferdinand’s Correspondents, scepins ( Westphalen, i. 40-127); &e. &e.

Cuap. VIII. ] BATTLE OF ROSSBACH. 177
5th Nov. 1757.

work-horses, 10 baggage-wagons, and about 100 persons, women, sick

people and the like. They staid the whole night here; made meat,
drink, corn, hay and whatever they needed be brought them; and went
off next day without paying anything.

“Our Inns were now almost quite exhausted of forage in corn or
hay ; and we knew not how we were to pay what had been spent,—
when the thirty French Light Cavalry, of whom we, with profound
submission, on the 13th hugus gave your Royal Majesty and Electoral
Translucency account, renewed their visit upon us, came, under the
command of Rittmeister de Mocu, on the 22d of October” (while the
baggage-wagons, work-horses, women, sick, and so forth were hardly
gone), “ towards evening, into the Town; consumed in meat and drink,
oats and hay, and the like, what they could lay hold of; and next morn-
ing early marched away, paying, as their custom is, nothing.

‘Not enough that,—besides the great forage-contribution (Liefe-
rung), which we already, with profound submission, notified to your
Royal Majesty and Electoral Translucency as having been laid upon
us; and that, by order of the Duc de Broglio, a new requisition is now
laid on us, and we have had to engage for sixty-four more sacks of
wheat, and thirty-two of rye (as is noted under head A, in the enclosed
copy),—there has farther come on us, on the part of the Reichs Army,
from Kreis-Commissarius Heldorf” (whose Schloss of Grost, we per-
ceive, they have since burnt, by way of thanks to him’’), “the simul-
taneous Order for instant delivery of Forage (as under head B, here
enclosed)! Thus are we, at the appointed places, all at once to furnish
such quantities, more than we can raise; and know not when or where
we shall, either for what has been already furnished, or for what is still
to be, receive one penny of money: nay, over and above, we are to sus-
tain the many marchings of troops, and provide to the same what meat,
drink, oats, hay and so on they require, without the least return of pay-
ment!

“So unendurable, and taken all:together, so hard (sc) begins the
conduct of these troops, that profess being come as friends and helpers,
to appear to us.. And Heaven alone knows how long, under a continu-
ance of such things, the subjects (whom the Hailstorm of last year had
at any rate impoverished) shall be able to support the same. We would,
were a reasonable delivery of forage laid upon us even at a low price,
and the board and billet of the marching troops paid to us even in part,
lay out our whole strength in helping to bear the burdens of the Father-
land ; but, if such things go on, which will soon leave us only bare life
and empty huts, we can look forward to nothing but our ruin and de-
struction. But, as it is not your Royal Majesty’s and Electoral Trans-

17 Supra, No. 2.
H 2

178 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII,
5th Nov. 1757,
lucency’s most gracious will that we, your Most Supreme Self’s most _
faithful subjects, should entirely perish, therefore we repeat our former
most submissive prayer once again with hot (sic) sorrow of mind to _

Highest -the-Same; and sob most. submissively for that help which  __

your Most Supreme Self, through most gracious mediation with the
Duc de Richelieu, with the Reichs Army or wherever else, might per- —
haps most graciously procure for us. Who, in deepest longing thither-
wards, with the most deepest devotion, remain —”!* (Names, unfortu-
nately, not given).

How many Saxons and Germans generally,—alas, how many men
universally,— cry towards celestial luminaries of the governing kind
with the most deepest devotion, in their extreme need, under their un-
sufferable injuries; and are truly like dogs in the back-yard barking at
the Moon. ‘The Moon won’t come down to them, and be eaten as green
cheese ; the Moon can’t !—

4°. Dauphiness after Rossbach. “ Excise-Inspector Neitsche, at Be-
bra, near Weissenfels” (Bebra is well ahead from Freiburg and the
burnt Bridge, and a good twenty-five miles west of Weissenfels),
“writes To the King of Poland’s Majesty, 91h November 1757:

“‘ May it please your Royal Majesty and Electoral Translucency, out
of your highest grace, to take knowledge, from the accompanying Reg-
isters sub signo Martis” (sign unknown to readers here), of the things
which, in the name of this Township of Bebra, the Biirgermeister Jo-
hann Adam, with the Raths and others concerned, have laid before the
Excise-Inspection here. As follows:

“Tt will be already well known to the Excise-Inspection that on the
7th of November (a. c.) of the current year” (day before yesterday, in
fact!) “‘the French Army so handled this place as to have not only
taken from the inhabitants, by open force, all bread and articles of food,
but likewise all clothes, beds, linens (Wasche), and other portable goods ;
that it has broken, split to pieces, and emptied out, all chests, boxes,
presses, drawers; has shot dead, in the backyards and on the thatch-
roofs, all manner of feathered-stock, as hens, geese, pigeons; also car-
ried forth with it all swine, cow, sheep, and horse cattle; laid violent
hands on the inhabitants, clapped guns, swords, pistols to their breast,
and threatened to kill them unless they showed and brought out what-
ever goods they had; or else has hunted them wholly out of their
houses, shooting at them, cutting, sticking, and at last driving them
away, thereby to have the freer room to rob and plunder: flung out hay

and other harvest-stock from the barns into the mud and dung, and had — ,

it trampled to ruin under the horses’ feet; nay, in fact, has dealt with
18 Helden- Geschichte, iv. 688-691.

ae ,
| 3 q *

all this, we may give up the notion of War.””°

Cuar.IX.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 179

5th Nov. 1757.
this place in so unpermitted a way as even to the most hard-hearted
man must seem compassionable.”— — Poor fellows: cetera desunt;
but that is enough! What can a Polish Majesty and Electoral Trans-
lucency do? Here too is a sorrowful howling to the Moon.'®

* * ‘For a hundred miles round,” writes St. Germain, “ the Coun-
try is plundered and harried as if fire from Heaven had fallen on it;
scarcely have our plenderers and marauders left the houses standing.”
—‘] lead a band of robbers, of assassins, fit for breaking on the wheel ;
they would turn tail at the first gunshot, and are always ready to muti-
ny. Ifthe Government (la Cour,” with its Pompadour presiding, very

unlikely for such an enterprise ') ‘cannot lay the knife to the root of
* *

Such a pitch have French Armies sunk to. When was there
seen such a Bellona as Dauphiness before?’ Nay, in fact, she is
the same devil-serving Army that Maréchal de Saxe command-
ed with such triumph,—Maréchal de Saxe in better luck for op-
ponents; Army then in a younger stage of its development.
Foaming then as sweet must, as new wine, in the hands of a
skilful vintner, poisonous but brisk ; not run, as now to the vin-
egar state, intolerable to all mortals. She can now announce
from her camp-theatres, the reverse of the Roucoux program,
“Tomorrow, Messieurs, you are going to fight; our Manager
foresees” — you will be beaten; and we cannot say what or
where the next Piece will be! Impious, licentious, high-flaring
efflorescence of all the Vices is not to be redeemed by the one
Quasi-Virtue of readiness to be shot ;—sweet of that kind, and
sour of this, are the same substance, if you only wait. How
kind was the Devil to his Saxe; and flew away with him in
rosepink, while it was still time !

CHAPTER IX.
FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA.

TE fame of Friedrich is high enough again in the Gazetteer
world ; all people, and the French themselves, laughing at their
grandiloquent Dauphiness- Bellona, and writing epigrams on

19 Helden- Geschichte, iv. 692.
20 St. Germain, after Rossbach and before (in Preuss, ubi supra).

180  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
13th Nov. 1757,

Soubise. But Friedrich’s difficulties are still enormous. One
enemy coming with open mouth, you plunge in upon, and ruiny
on this hand; and it only gives you room to attempt upon an- , |
other bigger one on that. Soubise he has finished handsomely,
for this season; but now he must try conclusions with Prince _
Karl. Quick, towards Silesia, after this glorious Victory which _
the Gazetteers are celebrating. ft

The news out of Silesia are ominously doubtful, bad at the —
best. Duke Bevern, once Winterfeld was gone, had, as we ob-_
served, felt himself free to act; unchecked, but also unsupported,
by counsel of the due heroism; and had acted unwisely. Made 1;
direct for Silesia, namely, where are meal-magazines and _
places. Vrince Karl, they say, was also unwise; took no thought —
beforehand, or he might have gained marches, disputed rivers, —
Bober, Queiss, with Bevern, and as good as hindered him from —
ever getting to Silesia. So say critics, Retzow and others; per-
haps looking too fixedly on one side of the question. Certain it
is, Bevern marched in peace to Silesia; found it by no means —
the better place it had promised to be.

Prince Karl,—Daun there as second, but Karl now the domi-

nant hand,—was on the heels of Bevern, march after march.
‘
‘
t
{
}
:

of

Prince Karl cut athwart him by one cunning march, in Liegnitz —
Country; barring him from Schweidnitz, the chief stronghold of —
Silesia, and to appearance from Breslau, the chief city, too. Be-_
vern, who did not want for soldiership, when reduced to his i
shifts, now made a beautiful maneeuvre, say the critics; struck
out leftwards, namely, and crossed the Oder, as if making for '
Glogau, quite beyond Prince Karl’s sphere of possibility,—but
turned to right, not to left, when across, and got in upon Bres-
lau from the other or east side of the River. Cunning maceu-
vre, if you will, and followed by cunning manceuvres: but the
result is, Prince Karl has got Schweidnitz to rear, stands between
Breslau and it; can besiege Schweidnitz when he likes, and no~
relief to it possible that will not cost a battle. A battle, thinks
Friedrich, is what Bevern ought to have tried at first; a well-
fought battle might have settled everything, and there was no —
other good likelihood in such an expedition: but now, by de- i
taching reinforcements to this garrison and that, he has weak- ©

|
»

Cuap.TX.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 181
13th Noy. 1757. :

ened himself beyond right power of fighting.!. Schweidnitz is
liable to siege; Breslau, with its poor walls and multitudinous
population, can stand no siege worth mentioning; the Silesian
strong places, not to speak of meal-magazines, are like to go a
bad road. Quite dominant, this Prince Karl ; placarding and
proclaiming in all places, according to the new ‘“ Imperial Pat-
ent,” That Silesia is her Imperial Majesty’s again! Which
seems to be fast becoming the fact ;—unless contradicted better.
Quick !

Bevern has now, October Ist, no manceuvre left but to draw
out of Breslau ; post himself on the southern side of it, in a safe
angle there, marshy Lohe in front, broad Oder to rear, Breslau
at his right-hand with bread; and there entrenching himself by
_the best methods, wait slowly, in a sitting posture, events which
are extensively on the gallop at present. One fancies, Had Win-
terfeld been still there! It is as brave an Army,30,000 or
more, as ever wore steel. Surely something could have been
done with it;—something better than sit watching the events
on full gallop all round! Bevern was a loyal, considerably skil-
ful and valiant man; in the Battle of Lobositz, and elsewhere,
we have seen him brave as a lion; but perhaps in the other kind
of bravery wanted here, he—Well, his case was horribly diffi-
cult; full of intricacy. And he sat, no doubt in a very wretch-
ed state, consulting the oracles, with events (which are them-
selves oracular) going at such a pace.

Schweidnitz was besieged, October 26th. Nadasti, with
20,000, was set to do it; Prince Karl, with 60,000, ready to
protect him; Prince Bevern asking the oracles :—what a bit of
news for Friedrich; breaking suddenly the effulgency of Ross-
bach with a bar of ominous black! Friedrich, still in the thick
of pure Saxon business, makes instant arrangement for Silesia
as well: Prince Henri, with such and such corps, to maintain
the Saale, and gaurd Saxony ; Marshal Keith, with such and
such, to step over into Bohemia, and raise contributions at least,

1 Guvres de Frédéric, iv. 141,159.

*In Helden-Geschichte (iv. 832, 883), Copy of it: ‘‘ Absolved from all
prior Treaties by Prussian Majesty’s attack on us, We” &c. &c. (‘‘ 21st Sept.
1757”).

182 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL.
13th—22d Nov. 1757,

and tread on the tail of the big Silesian snake: all this Fried. _
rich settles within a week; takes certain corps of his own, effec-

tive about 13,000; and on November 13th, marches from Leip- a
zig. Round by Torgau, by Miihlberg, Grossenhayn; by Baut-_

zen, Weissenberg, across the Queiss, across the Bober ; and so,
with long marches, strides continually forward, all hearts will-_
ing, and all limbs, though in this sad winter weather, towards —
relief of Schweidnitz.

At Grossenhayn, fifth day of the march, Friedrich learns that —
Schweidnitz is gone. November 12th—14th, Schweidnitz went
by capitulation ; contrary to everybody’s hope or fear; certainly
a very short defence for such a fortress. Fault of the Com-
mandant, was everybody’s first thought. Not probably the best
of Commandants, said others gradually; but his garrison had
Saxons in it;—one day “180 of them in a lump threw down
their arms, in the trenches, and went over to the Enemy.” Ow-
ing to whatsoever, the place is gone. Such towers, such cur-
tains, star-ramparts; such an opulence of cannons, stores, muni-
tions, a 30,000/. of hard cash, one item. All is gone, after a —
fortnight’s siege. What a piece of news, as heard by Friedrich,
coming at his utmost towards the scene itself! As seen by Be-
vern, too, in his questioning mood, it was an event of very orac-
ular nature.

On Tuesday 14th, Schweidnitz fell; Karl, with Nadasti re-
united to him, was now 80,000 odd; and lost no time. On
Thursday next, November 22d, 1757, ‘at three in the morning,”
long hours before daybreak, Karl, with his 60,000, all learnedly
arranged, comes rolling over upon hapless Bevern: with no end
of cannonading and storm of war: Battle of Breslau, they call it ;
ruinous to Bevern. Of which we shall attempt no description ;
except to say, that Karl had five bridges on the Lohe, came
across the Lohe by five Bridges; and that Bevern stood to his
arms, steady as the rocks, to prevent his getting over, and to en-
tertain him when over; that there were five principal attacks,
renewed and re-renewed as long as needful, with torrents of
shot, of death, and tumult; over six or eight miles of country,
for the space of fifteen hours. Battle comparable only to Mal-
plaquet, said the Austrians; such a hurricane of artillery, strong-

a hs
t ~~,
7.

Cuap.1X.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 183

24th Noy. 1757.

ly entrenched enemy, and loud doomsday of war. Did not end
till nine at night; Austrians victorious, more or less, in four of
their attacks or separate enterprises: that is to say, masters of
the Lohe, and of the outmost Prussian villages and posts in
front of the Prussian centre and right wing; victorious in that
northern part ;— but plainly unvictorious in the south-east or
Prussian left wing,—farthest off from Breslau, and under Zie-
then’s command,— where they were driven across the Lohe
again, and lost prisoners and cannons, or a cannon.?

Some of Bevern’s people, grounding on this latter circum-
stance, and that they still held the Battlefield, or most part of
it, wrote themselves victorious ;—though in a dim brief manner,
as if conscious of the contrary. Which indeed was the fact. At
the council of war, which he summoned that evening, there were
proposals of night-attack, and other fierce measures: but Bevern,
rejecting the plan for a night-attack on the Austrian camp as
too dubious, did, in the dark hours, through the silent streets of
Breslau, withdraw himself across the Oder, instead; leaving 80
cannon, and 8,000 killed and wounded; an evidently beaten
man and Army. And indeed did straightway disappear person-
ally altogether, as no longer equal to events. Rode out, namely,
to reconnoitre in the gray of his second sad morning, on this
new Bank of the Oder; saw little except gray mist; but rode
into a Croat outpost, only one poor groom attending him; and
was there made prisoner :—intentionally, thought mankind; in-
tentionally, thinks Friedrich, who was very angry with the poor
man.*

The poor man was carried to Vienna, if readers care to know;
but being a near Cousin there (second-cousin, no less, to the late
Empress-Mother), was by the high now-reigning Empress-Queen
received in a charmingly gracious manner, and sent home again
without ransom. ‘To Stettin!” beckoned Friedrich sternly
from the distance, and would not see him at all: “To Stettin, I
Say, your official post in time of peace! Command me the in-

* In Seyfarth, Three Accounts; Beylagen, ii. 198, 221, 234 et seq.

* Preuss, ii. 102. More exact in Kutzen, Der Tag von Leuthen (Breslau,
1857,—an excellent exact little Compilation, from manifold sources well
studied), pp. 166-169, date “24th November.”

K v4 ‘ : |
y)

184  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book aa |
24th Nov. 175

valid Garrison there; you are fit for nothing better !”—I will |

add one other thing, which unhappily will seem strange to read- _

ers: that there came no whisper of complaint Sia Bevern ;

mere silence, and loyal industry with his poor means, from Be- -
vern; and that he proved heroically useful in Stettin two years _
hence, against the Swedes, against the Russians in the Siege-of- _

Colberg time; and gained Friedrich’s favour again, with other
good results. Which I observe was a common method with
Prussian Generals and soldiers, when, unjustly or justly, they
fell into trouble of this kind; and a much better one than that
of complaining in the Newspapers, and demanding Commissions
of Inquiry, presided over by Chaos and the Fourth-Estate,
now is.

Bevern being with the Croats, the Prussian Army falls to_

General Kyau, as next in rank; who (directly in the teeth of

fierce orders that are speeding hither for Bevern and him) —
marches away, leaving Breslau to its fate; and making towards
Glogau, as the one sure point in this wreck of things. And ~

Prince Karl, that same day, goes upon Breslau; which is in no
case to resist and be bombarded: so that poor old General Lest-

witz, the Prussian Commandant,—always thought to be a val-_ :

iant old gentleman, but who had been wounded in the late Ac-
tion, and was blamably discouraged,—took the terms offered,

a

and surrendered without firing a gun. Garrison and he to —

march out, in “ Free Withdrawal ;” these are the terms: Gar-
rison was 4,000 and odd, mostly Silesian recruits; but there
marched hardly 500 out with poor Lestwitz; the Silesian re-
cruits,—persuaded by conceivable methods, that they were to be
prisoners of war, and that, in short, Austria was now come to be
king again, and might make inquiry into men’s conduct,—found

owls

it safer to take service with Austria, to vanish into holes in Bres- —

lau or where they could; and, for instance, one regiment (or bat-

talion, let us hide the name of it), on marching through the Be ;

conabetbd only of nine chief officers and four men.> ©
There were lost 98 pieces of cannon; endless magazines, Re

5 Miller, Schlacht bei Leuthen (Berlin, 1857 ,—professedly a mere abridg-
ment and shadow of Autzen: unindexed like*it), p. 12 (with name and par-
_ ticulars).

be ve

Cuap. IX.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 185
23d—-26th Nov. 1757.

stores of war. A Breslau scandalously gone ;—a Breslau preach-
ing next day (26th, which was Sunday), in certain of its church-
es, especially Cardinal Schaffgotsch in the Dom Insel doing it,
Thanksgiving Sermons, as per order, with unction real or official,
“That our ancient sovereigns are restored to us:” which Ser-
mons,—except in the Schaffgotsch case, Prince Karl and the
high Catholic world all there in gala,—were “sparsely attend-
ed,’’ say my authors. The Austrians are at the top of their
pride; and consider full surely that Silesia is theirs, though
Friedrich were here twice over. ‘What is Friedrich? We
beat him at Kolin. His Prussians at Zittau, at Moys, at Bres-
lau in the new Malplaquet, were we beaten by then? Hnh!”
—and snort (in the Austrian messrooms), and snap their fingers
at Friedrich and his coming.

It was at Gorlitz (scene of poor Winterfeld’s death) that Fried-
rich, “on November 23d, the tenth day of his march,”’ first got
rumour of the Breslau Malplaquet : ‘‘ endless cannonading heard
thereabouts all yesterday!” said rumour from the east,—more

and more steadily, as Friedrich hastened forward ;—and that it
was ‘*a victory for Bevern.” ‘Till, at Naumburg on the Queiss,
he gets the actual tidings: Bevern gone to the Croats, Breslau
going, Kyau marching vague; and what kind of victory it was.

Ever from Grossenhayn onwards there had been message. on
message, more and more rigorous, precise, and indignant, ‘‘ Do
this, do that; your Dilection shall answer it with your head!”
—not one message of which reached his Dilection, till Dilection
and Fate (such the gallop of events) had done the contrary: and
now Dilection and his head have made a finish of it. ‘* No,”
answers Friedrich to himself; ‘not till we are all finished !”—
and pushes on, he too, like a kind of Fate. ‘‘ What does or can
he mean, then?” say the Austrians, with scornful astonishment,
and think his head must be turning: ‘“ Will he beat us out of
Silesia with his Potsdam Guard-Parade, then?’’ ‘* Potsdamsche
Wacht-Parade :’—so they denominate his small Army; and are
very mirthful in their messrooms. ‘‘I will attack them, if they

' stood on the Zobtenberg, if they stood on the steeples of Bres-
lau!” said Friedrich; and tramped diligently forward. Day
after day, as the real tidings arrive, his outlook in Silesia is be-

_ 186  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII
28th Nov.—38d Dec. 1757. 4

coming darker and darker: a sternly dark march this alto]
gether. Prince Karl has thrown a garrison into Liegnitz on
Friedrich’s road; Prince Karl les encamped with Breslau at_
his back; has above 80,000 when fully gathered; and reigns
supreme in those parts. Darker march there seldom was: all
black save a light that burns in one heart, refusing to be
quenched till death.

Friedrich sends orders that Kyau shall be put in arrest; that
Ziethen shall be general of the Bevern wreck, shall bring it
round by Glogau, and rendezvous with Fr Given at a place ange
day,—Parchwitz, 2d of December coming;—and be steady, my
old Ziethen. fF riedrich brushes past the Liegnitz Garrisongal
leaves Liegnitz and it a trifle to the right; arrives at Parchwitz, _
November 28th; and there rests, or at least his weary troops
do, till Ziethen come up; the King not very restful, with so
many things to prearrange; a life or death crisis now nigh. —
Well, it is but death; and death has been fronted before now! —
We who are after the event, on the safe sunny side of it, can
form small image of the horrors, and the inward dubieties, to
him who is passing through it ;—and how Hope is needed to
shine heroically eternal in some hearts. Fire of Hope, that does —
not issue in mere blazings, mad audacities and chaotic despair,
but advances with its eyes open, measuredly, counting its steps,
to the wrestling-place,—this is a godlike thing; much available
to mankind in all the battles they have; battles with steel, or
of whatever sort.

Friedrich, at Parchwitz, assembled his Captains, and spoke
to them; it was the night after Ziethen came in, night of De-
cember 3d, 1757; and Ziethen, no doubt, was there: for it is an
authentic meeting, this at Parchwitz, and the words were taken
down.

peat =

on. taliltieant

Mel.

hn:
OE OCS I i CIE IE ME i

a
gt

=e

_—
i

Friedrich’s Speech to his Generals (Parchwitz, 3d December 1757).§ —

“It is not unknown to you, Meine Herren, what disasters
have befallen here, while we were busy with the French and
Reichs Army. Schweidnitz is gone; Duke of Bevern beaten; =
Breslau gone, and all our war-stores there; good part of Silesia

® From Retzow, i. 240-242 (slightly abridged).

2 ent .57 wiege ies

NOL g! tt
a eee

 Onar. IX.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 187

| “8d—5th Dec.1757.

| gone: and, in fact, my embarrassments would be at the insu-

_ perable pitch, had not I boundless trust in you, and your quali-
ties, which have been so often manifested, as soldiers and sons
of your Country. Hardly one among you but has distinguished
himself by some nobly memorable action: all these services to
the State and me I know well, and will never forget.

“J flatter myself, therefore, that, in this case too, nothing will
be wanting which the State has a right to expect of your valour.
The hour is at hand. I should think I had done nothing, if I
left the Austrians in possession of Silesia. Let me apprise you,
then: I intend, in spite of the Rules of Art, to attack Prince
Karl’s Army, which is nearly thrice our strength, wherever I
find it. ‘The question is not of his numbers, or the strength of
his position: all this, by courage, by the skill of our methods,
we will try to make good. ‘This step I must risk, or everything
is lost. We must beat the enemy, or perish all of us before his
batteries. So I read the case; so I will act in it.

““Make this my determination known to all Officers of the
Army; prepare the men for what work is now to ensue, and
say that I hold myself entitled to demand exact fulfilment. of
orders. For you, when I reflect that you are Prussians, can I
think that you will act unworthily? But if there should be
one or another who dreads to share all dangers with me, he,”—
continued his Majesty, with an interrogative look, and then
pausing for answer, ‘‘can have his Discharge this evening, and
shall not suffer the least reproach from me.’’—Modest strong
bass murmur; meaning ‘‘No, by the Eternal!” if you looked
into the eyes and faces of the group. Never will Retzow Junior
forget that scene, and how effulgently eloquent the veteran
physiognomies were.

“ Hah, I knew it,” said the King, with his most radiant
smile, “none of you would desert me! I depend on your help,
then; and on victory as sure.’’—The speech winds up with a
Specific passage: ‘The Cavalry regiment that does not on the
instant, on order given, dash full plunge into the enemy, I will,
directly after the Battle, unhorse, and make it a Garrison regi-
ment. The Infantry battalion which, meet with what it may,
shows the least sign of hesitating, loses its colours and its sa-

188 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII
3d-5th Dec. 1757,

bres, and I cut the trimmings from its uniform! Now good 4
night, Gentlemen: shortly we pene either beaten the Enemy
or we never see one another again.”

An excellent temper in this Army; a rough vein of heroism
_ in it, steady to the death ;—and plenty of hope in it too, hope in
Vater Fritz. ‘‘ Never mind,” the soldiers used to say, in John —
Duke of Marlborough’s time, ‘‘ Corporal John will get us through
it !”—That same evening Friedrich rode into the Camp, where —
the regiments he had were now all gathered, out of their can-
tonments, to march on the morrow. First regiment he came —
upon was the Life-Guard Cuirassiers: the men, in their accus- —
tomed way, gave him good evening, which he cheerily returned. if
Some of the more veteran sort asked, ruggedly confidential, as _
well as loyal: “‘ What is thy news, then, so late?” ‘‘Good_
news, children (Kinder): tomorrow you will beat the Austrians
tightly!” “That we will, by—!” answered they.—“ But think _
only where they stand yonder, and how they have entrenched ~
themselves?” said Friedrich. ‘And if they had the Devil in a
front and all around them, we will knock them out; only thou
lead us on!”—“ Well, I will see what you can do: now lay you”
down, and sleep sound, and good sleep to you.” ‘Good night,
Fritz!” answer all;’ as Fritz ambles on to the next regiment,
to which, as to every one, he will have some word. a

Was it the famous Pommern regiment, this that he next 1
spoke to,—who answered Loudon’s summons to them once (as _
shall be noticed by and by) in a way ineffable, though unforget- _
table? Manteuffel of Foot; yes, no other!’ They have their —
own opinion of their capacities against an enemy, and do not —
want for a good conceit of themselves. ‘ Well, children, how
think you it will be tomorrow? They are twice as strong as
we.” ‘Never thou mind that; there are no Pommerners
among them; thou knowest what the Pommerners can do!”—
Friedrich: “Yea, truly, that do I; otherwise I durst not risk —
the battle. Now good sleep to you; tomorrow, then, we shall —
either have beaten the Enemy or else be all dead.’”’ ‘ Yea,” —
answered the whole regiment; ‘dead, or else the Enemy beat-_
en:” and so went to deep sleep, preface to a deeper for many of —

7 Miiller, p. 21. ® Archenholtz, ii.61; and Kutzen, p. 35.

we

f ee abo

{ae

|
|
|
}

|

.- :

‘Cuar.IX.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 189
8d-5th Dec. 1757.

them,—as beseems brave men. In this world it much beseems
the brave man, uncertain about so many things, to be certain of
himself for one thing.

These snatches of Camp Dinan. much more the Speech
preserved to us by Retzow Junior, appear to be true; though
as to the dates, the circumstances, there has been debating.°
Other Anecdotes, dubious or more, still float about in quanti-
ty ;—of which let us give only one; that of the Deserter (which
has merit as a myth). ‘What made thee desert, then?” ‘‘Hm,
alas, your Majesty, we were got so down in the world, and had
such a time of it!”—“ Well, try it one day more, and if we can-
not mend matters, thou and I will both desert.”

A learned Doctor, one of the most recent on these matters, is
astonished why the Histories of Friedrich should be such dreary
reading, and Friedrich himself so prosaic, barren an object; and
lays the blame upon the Age, insensible to real greatness; led
away by claptrap Napoleonisms, regardless of expense. Upon
which Smelfungus takes him up with a twitch:

“To my sad mind, Herr Doctor, it seems ascribable rather to the
Dryasdust of these Ages, especially to the Prussian Dryasdust, sitting
comfortable in his Academies, waving sublimely his long ears as he
tramples human Heroisms into unintelligible pipeclay and dreary con-
tinents of sand and cinders, with the Doctors all applauding.

“ Had the sacred Poet, or man of real Human Genius, been at his
work, for the thousand years last past, instead of idly fiddling far away
from his work,—which surely is definable as being very mainly, That
of wnterpreting human Heroisms; of painfully extricating, and extort-
ing from the circumambient chaos of muddy babble, rumour and men-
dacity, some not inconceivable human and divine Image of them, more
and more clear, complete and credible for mankind (poor mankind dumb-
ly looking up to him for guidance, as to what it shall think of God and
of Men in this Scene of Things) ;—I calculaté, we should by this time
have had a different Friedrich of it; O Heavens, a different world of
it,in so many respects!

“‘My esteemed Herr Doctor, it is too painful a subject. Godlike fab-
ulous Achilles, and the old Greek Kings of men, one perceives, after
study, to be dim enough Grazier Sovereigns, ‘ living among infinite dung,’
till their sacred Poet extricated them. And our unsacred all-desecra-
ting Dryasdust,—Herr Doctor, I must say, it fills me with despair! Au-

® Kutzen, pp. 175-181.

190 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVHI \!

dd-5th Dee. 1757,

thentic human Heroisms, not fabulous a whit, but true to the bone, and - ef

by all appearance very much nobler than those of godlike Achilles and
pious Afneas ever could have been,—left in this manner, trodden under
foot of man and beast; man and beast alike insensible that there is any-

thing but common mud under foot, and grateful to anybody that will as- 7

sure them there is nothing. Oh Doctor, oh Doctor! And the results

of it—You need not go exclusively ‘to France’ to look at them. They —

are too visible in the so-called ‘Social Hierarchies,’ and sublime gilt

Doggeries, sacred and secular, of all Modern Countries! Let us be si- |

lent, my friend.” —
‘“‘ Prussian Dryasdust,” he says elsewhere, ‘‘ does make a terrible job
of it; especially when he attempts to weep through his pipeclay, or rise

with his long ears into the moral sublime. As to the German People, |

I find that they dimly have not wanted sensibility to Friedrich; that
their multitudes of Anecdotes, still circulating among them in print and
viva voce, are proof of this. Thereby they have at least made a Myth

of Friedrich’s History, and given some rhythmus, life and cheerful hu-— :

man substantiality to his work and him. Accept these Anecdotes as_

the Epic they could not write of him, but were longing to hear from _

somebody who could. Who has not yet appeared among mankind, nor —
will for some time. Alas, my friend, on piercing through the bewilder-

ing nimbus of babble, malignity, mendacity, which veils sevenfold the

Face of Friedrich from us, and getting to see some glimpses of the Face

itself, one is sorrowfully struck dumb once more. What a suicidal set _

of creatures ; commanding as with one voice, That there shall be no He-
roism more among them; that all shall be Doggery and Commonplace
henceforth. ‘ Ach, mein lieber Sulzer, you don’t know that damned
brood !"— —Well, well. ‘Solomon’s Temple,’ the Moslem say,‘ had to
be built under the chirping of ten thousand Sparrows.’ ‘Ten thousand
of them; committee of the whole house, unanimously of the opposite
view ;—and could not quite hinder it. That too is something !”—

- More to our immediate purpose is this other thing: That the
Austrians have been in Council of War; and, on deliberation,
have decided to come out of their defences; to quit their strong
Camp, which lies so eligibly, ahead of Breslau and arear of Lissa
and of Schweidnitz Water yonder; to cross Schweidnitz Water,
leave Lissa behind them; and meet this offensively aggressive
Friedrich in pitched fight. Several had voted, No, why stir ?—
Daun especially, and others with emphasis. ‘‘ No need of fight-
ing at all,” said Daun: “we can defend Schweidnitz Water ;
ruin him before he ever get across.”.. ‘“‘ Defend? Be assaulted

el sd

a

‘

Cuar. I[X.] FRIEDRICH MARCHES FOR SILESIA. 191

h December 1757.

by an Army like his?” urges Lucchesi, the other Chief General :

‘Tt is totally unworthy of us! We have gained the game; all
the honours ours; let us have done with it. Give him battle,
since he fortunately wishes it; we finish him, and gloriously fin-
ish the War too!” So argued Lucchesi, with vivacity, persist-
ency,—to his own ill luck, but evidently with approval from
Prince Karl. Everybody sees, this is the way to Prince Karl’s
favour at present. “ Have not I reconquered Silesia?” thinks
Prince Kar! to himself; and beams applause on the high course,
not the low prudent one.!° In a word, the Austrians decide on
stepping out to meet Friedrich in open battle: it was the first
time they ever did so; and it was likewise the last.

Sunday, December 4th, at four in the morning, Friedrich has
marched from Parchwitz, straight towards the Austrian Camp ;"!
he hears, one can fancy with what pleasure, that the Austrians
are advancing towards him, and will not need to be forced in
their strong position. His march is in four columns, Friedrich
in the vanguard; quarters to be Neumarkt, a little Town about
fourteen miles off. Within some miles of Neumarkt, early in
the afternoon, he learns that there are a thousand Croats in the
place, the Austrian Bakery at work there, and engineer people
marking out an Austrian Camp. ‘On the Height beyond Neu-
markt, that will be?” thinks Friedrich; for he knows this

_ ground, having often done reviews here; to Breslau all the way

on both hands, not a rood of it but is familiar to him. Which
was a singular advantage, say the critics; and a point the Aus-
trian Council of War should have taken more thought of.
Friedrich, before entering Neumarkt, sends a regiment to ride
quietly round it on both sides, and to seize that Height he knows
of. Height once seized, or ready for seizing, he bursts the bar-
rier of Neumarkt; dashes in upon the thousand Croats; flings
out the Croats in extreme hurry, musketry and sabre acting on
them; they find their Height beset, their retreat cut off, and
that they must vanish. Of the 1,000 Croats, ‘569 were taken
prisoners, and 120 slain,’ in this unexpected sweeping out of
Neumarkt. Better still, in Neumarkt is found the Austrian
1° Kutzen, pp. 45-48. _ es 11 Miiller, p. 26.

. | ae |
192 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. |
4th Dee. 175 “4
Bakery, set up and in full work ;—delivers you 80,000 bread-ra-
tions hot and hot, which little expected to go such a road. On
the Height, the Austrian stakes and engineer-tools were found —
sticking in the ground; so hasty had the flight been. Th
How Prince Karl came to expose his Bakery, his staff of life
so far ahead of him? Prince Karl, it is clear, was a little puffed
up with high thoughts at this time. The capture of Schweid-
nitz, the late ‘‘ Malplaquet” (poorish Anti-Bevern Malplaquet),
capture of Breslau, and the low and lost condition of Friedrich’s
Silesian affairs, had more or less turned everybody’s head,—ey-
erybody’s except Feldmarschall Daun’s alone :—and witty mess-
tables, we already said, were in the daily habit of mocking at
Friedrich’s march towards them with aggressive views, and call-
ed his insignificant little Army the “‘ Potsdam Guard-Parade.”!2
That was the common triumphant humour; naturally shared in ~
by Prince Karl; the ready way to flatter him being to sing in |
that tune. Nobody otherwise can explain, and nodody in any-_ |
wise can justify, Prince Karl’s ignorance of Friedrich’s advance,
his almost voluntary losing of his staff of life in that manner.
Prince Karl’s soldiers have each (in the cold form) three-days |
provision in their haversacks: they have come across the Weis- |
tritz River (more commonly called Schweidnitz Water), which —
was also the height of contemptuous imprudence; and lie en-
camped, this night,—in long line, not ill chosen (once the River _
1s behind),—perpendicular to Friedrich’s march, some ten miles
ahead of him. Since crossing, they had learned with surprise, —
How their Bakery and Croats had been snapt up; that Fried-
rich was not at a distance, but near ;—and that arrangements
could not be made too soon! Their position intersects the Great
Road at right angles, as we hint; and has villages, swamps, ,
woody knolls; especially, on each wing, good defences. Their |
right wing leans on Nypern and its impassable peatbogs, a Vil-
lage two or three miles north from the Great Road; their cen- |
tre is close behind another Village called Leuthen, about as far” |
south from it: length of their bivouac is about five miles; which
will become six or so, had Nadasti once taken post, who is to _
form the left wing, and go down as far as Sagschiitz, southward
12 Cogniazo, ii. 417-422.

i s a
mer =z

| Cuapr. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. | 193
| 5th Dec. 1757.

of Leuthen.* Seven battalions are in this Village of Leuthen,
eight in Nypern, all the Villages secured; woods, scraggy abatis,
redoubts, not forgotten: their cannon are numerous, though of
light calibre. Friedrich has at least 71 heavy pieces; and 10
of them are formidably heavy,—brought from the walls of Glo-
gau, with terrible labour to Ziethen; but with excellent effect,
on this occasion and henceforth. ‘They got the name of ‘ Boom-
ers, Bellowers (Die Brummer),” those Ten. Friedrich was in
great straits about artillery ; and Retzow Senior recommended
this hauling up of the Ten Bellowers, which became celebrated
in the years coming. And now we are on the Battle-ground,
and must look into the Battle itself, if we can.

CHAPTER X.
BATTLE OF LEUTHEN.

From Neumarkt, on Monday, long before day, the Prussians,
all but a small party left there to guard the Bakery and Army
Properties, are out again ; in four columns; towards what may
lie ahead. Friedrich, as usual in such cases, for obvious rea-
sons, rides with the vanguard. ‘To Borne, the first Village on
the Highway, is some seven or eight miles. The air is damp,
the dim incipiences of dawn struggling among haze; a little way
on this side Borne, we come on ranks of cavalry drawn across
the Highway, stretching right and left into the dim void: Aus-
trian Army this, then? Push up to it; see what it is, at least.

It proves to be poor General Nostitz, with his three Saxon
regiments of dragoons, famous since Kolin day, and a couple of
Hussar regiments, standing here as outpost; who ought to
have been more alert ; but they could not see through the dark,
and so, instead of catching, are caught. The Prussians fall
upon them, front and flank, tumble them into immediate wreck ;
drive the whole outpost at full gallop home, through Borne,
upon Nypern and the right wing,—without news except of this
symbolical sort. Saxon regiments are quite ruined, ‘540 of

* Plan at p. 209.

Vou. V.—I

194 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII i
5th Dec. 1757

them prisoners” (poor Nostitz himself not prisoner, but wounded | .
to death'); and the ground clear in this quarter. in|
Friedrich, on the farther side of Borne, calls halt, till the
main body arrive; rides forward, himself and staff, to the high. _
est ofa range or suite of knolls, some furlongs ahead ; sees thers
in full view, far and wide, the Austrians drawn up before him,
From Nypern to Sagschiitz yonder; miles in length; and so
distinct, while the light mended and the hazes faded, “ that you
could have counted them” (through your glasses), ‘‘man by
man.” A highly interesting sight to Friedrich; who continues |
there in the profoundest study, and calls up some horse regi- '
ments of the vanguard to maintain this Height and the range
of Heights running south from it. And ther e, I think, the King
is mainly to be found, looking now at the Austrians, now at his |
own people, for some three hours to come. His sla of Battle it
is soon clear to him: Nypern, with its bogs and scrags, on the |
Austrian right wing, is tortuous impossible g eround, as he well
remembers, no good prospect for us there: better prone for us :
on their left yonder, at Leuthen, even at Sagschiitz farther south,
whither they are stretching thecnditver Attempt their left |
wing ; try our ‘Oblique Order” upon that, with all the skill
that. is in us; perhaps we can do it rightly this time, and pros: |
per accordingly! ‘That is Friedrich’s plan of action. The four ' |
columns once got to Borne, shall fall into two; turn to the
right, and go southward, ever southward :—they are to become |
our two lines of Battle, were they once got to the right point —
southward. Well opposite Sagschiitz, that will be the point for |
facing to left, and marching up,—in “ Oblique Order,” with the |
utmost faculty they have !*

“The Oblique Order, Schrage Stellung,” let the hasty reader pause |
to understand, “is an old plan practised by Epaminondas, and revived |
by Friedrich,—who has tried it in almost all his Battles more or less, |
from Hohenfriedberg forward to Prag, Kolin, Rossbach; but never |
could, in all points, get it rightly done till now, at Leuthen, in the high- |
est time of need. ‘It is a particular maneuvre,’ says Archenholtz,
rather sergeant-wise, ‘which indeed other troops are now’ (1793) ‘in

1 Died in Breslau, the twelfth day after (Seyfarth, ii. 362).
* See Sketch of Plan, p. 209 a.

is ,
|

|

4 +

ee

|
i
r
i
it

Cuapr. X. | BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 195
5th Dee. 1757.

the habit of imitating; but which, up to this present time, none but
Prussian troops can execute with the precision and velocity indispensa-
ble to it. You divide your line into many pieces; you can push these
forward stair-wise, so that they shall halt close to one another,’ oblique-
ly, to either hand; and so, on a minimum of ground, bring your mass
of men to the required point at the required angle. T'riedrich invented
this mode of getting into position; by its close ranking, by its depth,
and the manner of movement used, it had some resemblance to the
Macedonian Phalanx,’—chiefly in the latter point, I should guess; for
when arrived at its place, it is no deeper than common. ‘ Forming it-
self in this way, a mass of troops takes up in proportion very little
ground ; and it shows in the distance, by reason of the mixed uniforms
and standards, a totally chaotic mass of men heaped on one another,’
going in rapid mazes this way and that. ‘ But it needs only that the
Commander lift his finger; instantly this living coil of knotted intrica-
cies develops itself in perfect order, and with a speed like that of
mountain rivers, when the ice breaks,-—is upon its Enemy.””?

“Your Enemy is ranked as here, in long line, three or two to one.
You march towards him, but keep him uncertain as to how you will at-
tack ; then do on a sudden march up, not parallel to him, but oblique, at
an angle of 45°,—swift, vehement, in overpowering numbers, on the
wing you have chosen. Roll that wing together, ruined, in upon its
own line, you may roll the whole five miles of line into disorder and
ruin, and always be in overpowering number at the point of dispute.
Provided, only, you are swift enough aboit it, sharp enough! But ex-
traordinary swiftness, sharpness, precision is the indispensable condi-
tion ;—by no means try it otherwise ; none but Prussians, drilled by an
Old Dessauer, capable of doing it. This is the Schrage Ordnung,
about which there has been such commentating and controversying
among military people : whether Friedrich invented it, whether Cesar
did it, how Epaminondas, how Alexander at Arbela; how’ —Which -
shall not in the least concern us on this occasion.

The four columns rustled themselves into two, and turned
southward on the two sides of Borne ;—southward henceforth,
for about two hours; as if straight towards the Magic Mount-
ain, the Zobtenberg, far off, which is conspicuous over all that
region. Their steadiness, their swiftness and exactitude were
unsurpassable. ‘It was a beautiful sight,’ says Tempelhof, an
Eyewitness: “The heads of the columns were constantly on the
same level, and at the distance necessary for forming; all flowed

2 Archenholtz, i. 209.

196 | SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVUL |
Sth Dee. 1757,

on exact, as if in a review. And you could read in the eyes of ©
our brave troops the noble temper they were in.”° I know not
at what point of their course, or for how long, but it was from
the column nearest him, which is to be the first line, that the _
King heard, borne on the winds amid their field-music, as they —
marched there, the sound of Psalms,—many-voiced melody of a
Church Hymn, well known to him; which had broken out, band
accompanying, among those otherwise silent men. ‘The fact is
very certain, very strange to me: details not very precise, except
that here, as specimen, is a verse of their Hymn: :

‘*Grant that with zeal and skill, this day, I do
What me to do behoves, what thou command’st me to;
Grant that I do it sharp, at point of moment fit,
And when I do it, grant me good success in it.”

‘¢ Gieb dass ich thw’ mit Fleiss was mir zu thun gebiihret,
Wozu mich dein Befehl in meinem Stande fihret,
Gieb dass ich’s thue bald, zu der Zeit da ich’s soll;
Und wenn ich’s thw, so gieb dass es gerathe wohl.”*

One hus heard the voice of waters, one has paused in the mount+
ains at the voice of far-off Covenanter psalms; but a voice like
this, breaking the commanded silences, one has not heard,
‘Shall we order that to cease, your Majesty?’ ‘By no
means,” said the King; whose hard heart seems to have been _
touched by it, as might well be. Indeed there is in him, in-
those grim days, a tone as of trust in the Eternal, as of real re-
ligious piety and faith, scarcely noticeable elsewhere in his His-
tory. His religion, and he had in withered forms a good deal.
of it, if we will look well, being almost always in a strictly |
voiceless state,—nay, ultra-voiceless, or voiced the wrong way, —
as is too well known. ‘By no means!” answered he; anda
moment after, said to some one, Ziethen probably: ‘‘ With men
like these, don’t you think I shall have victory this day ?”

The loss of their Saxon Forepost proved more important to
the Austrians than it seemed ;—not computable in prisoners, or
killed and wounded. The Height named Scheuberg,—“ Borne
Rise” (so we might call it, which has got its Pillar of memorial

® Tempelhof, i. 288, 287.
: ‘* Hymn- Book of Porst’’ (Prussian ee ee ‘Sn, 689s
cited in Preuss, ii. 107. ‘

 Cnapr. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 197

5th Dec. 1757.

since, with gilt Victory atop®);—where Friedrich now is and
where the Austrians are not, is at once a-screen and a point of
vision to Friedrich. By loss of their Nostitz Forepost, they had
lost view of Friedrich, and never could recover view of him;
could not for hours learn distinctly what he was about; and
when he did come in sight again, it was in a most unexpected
place! On the farther side of Borne, edge of the big expanse
of open country there, Friedrich has halted; ridden with his ad-
jutants to the top of “the Scheuberg (Shy-/zl/),” as the Books
call it, though it is more properly a blunt Knoll or ‘ Rise,”—the
nearest of a Chain of Knolls, or swells in the ground, which runs
from north to south on that part.

Except the Zobtenberg, rising blue and massive, on the south-
ern horizon (famous mythologic Mountain, reminding you of an
Arthur’s Seat in shape too, only bigger and solitary), this Coun-
try, for many miles round, has nothing that cquld be called a
Hill; it is definable as a bare wide-waving champaign, with
slight bumps on it, or slow heavings and sinkings. Country
mostly under culture, though it is of sandy quality; one or two
sluggish brooks in it; and reedy meres or mires, drained in our
day. It is dotted with Hamlets of the usual kind ;,and has
patches of scraggy fir. Your horizon, even where bare, is limit-
ed, owing to the wavy heavings of the ground; windmills and
church-belfries are your only resource, and even these, from
about Leuthen and the Austrian position, leave the Borne quar-
ter mostly invisible to you. Leuthen Belfry, the same which
may have stood. a hundred years before this Battle, ends in a

small tile-roof, open only at the gables:—‘“ Leuthen Belfry,’’
says a recent Tourist, “is of small resource for a view. To
south you can see some distance, Sagschiitz, Lobetintz, and oth-
er Hamlets, amid scragey fir-patches, and meadows, once miry
pools; but to north, you are soon shut in by a swell or slow
rise, with two windmills upon it” (important to readers at pres-
ent); “‘and to eastward” (Breslau side and Lissa side), “ or to
westward” (Friedrich’s side), ‘‘ one has no view, except of the
old warped rafters and their old mouldy tiles within few inches ;
or, if by audacious efforts at each end, to the risk of your neck,
> Not till 1854 (Kutzen, pp. 194, 195).

aad

198  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RIsEs TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII, |
5th Dec. 1757, ©

you get a transient peep, it is stopt, far short of Borne, by the ;
slow irregular heavings, with or without fir about them.”® =f
In short, Friedrich keeps possession of that Borne ridge of
Knolls, escorted by Cavalry in good numbers; twinkling about —
in an enigmatic way :—“ Prussian right wing yonder,” think the
Austrians ; “‘whitherward, or what can they mean ?”—and keeps
his own columns and the Austrian lines in view; himself and
his movements invisible, or worse, to the Austrian Generals
from any spyglass or conjecture they can employ.
The Austrian Generals are in windmills, on church- -belfries, ai
here, there; diligently scanning the abstruse phenomenon, of _
which so little can be seen. Daun, who had always been against |
this adventure, thinks it probable the vanished Prussians are re-
tiring southward: for Bohemia and our Magazines probably. |
“These good people are smuggling off (Die guten Leute paschen |
ab),” said he: “let them go in peace.”? Daun, that morning,in |
his reconnoiterings, had asked of a peasant, ‘‘ What is that, |
then ?” (meaning the top of a Village-steeple in the distance, but y
thought by the peasant to be meaning something nearer hand). _
“That is the Hill our King chases the Austrians over, when he _ i
is reviewing here!” Which Daun reported at head-quarters
with a grin.®
Lucchesi, on the other hand, scanning those Borne Hills, and
the Cavalry of Friedrich’s escort twinkling hither and thither
on them, becomes convinced to a. moral certainty, That yonder is |
the Prussian Vanguard, probable extremity of left wing; and —
that he, Lucchesi, here at Nypern, is to be attacked. ‘ Attack-—
ed, you?” said one Montazet, French Agent or Emissary here:
‘unless they were snipes, it is impossible!” But Lucchesi saw
it too well.
He sends to say that such is the evident fact, and that he,
Lucchesi, is not equal to it, but must have large reinforcement
of Horse to his right wing. “Tush!” answer Prince Karl and _
Daun; and return only argument, verbal consolation, to dis- |
tressed Lucchesi. Lucchesi sends a second message, more pas- — |
sionately pressing, to the like effect; also with the like return. :

° Tourist’s Note, penes me. 7 Miiller, p. 36.
8 Nicolai, Anekdoten, iv. 34.

; bol

» : .
Cuar. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN, 199
5th Dec. 1757.

| Upon which he sends a third message, quite passionate: “If

Cavalry do not come, I will not be responsible for the issue!”
And now Daun does collect the required reinforcement; “ all
the reserve of Horse, and a great many from the left wing ;”—
and, Daun himself heading them, goes off at a swift trot; to look
into Lucchesi and his distresses, three or four miles to right, five
or six from where the danger lies. Now is Friedrich’s golden
moment.

Wending always south, on their western or invisible side of
those Knolls, Friedrich’s people have got to about the level, or
latitude as we might call it, of Nadasti’s left. To Radaxdorf,
namely, to Lobetintz, or still farther south, and perhaps a mile
to west of Nadasti. Friedrich has mounted to Lobetintz Wind-
mill; and judges that the time is come. Daun and Cavalry
once gone to support their right wing, and our sdétth latitude be-
ing now sufficient, Friedrich, swift as Prussian manceuvering can
do it, falls with all his strength upon their left wing. Forms in
oblique order,—horse, foot, artillery, all perfect in their paces
and comes streaming over the Knolls at Sagschiitz, suddenly like
a fire-deluge on Nadasti, who had charge there, and was expect-
ing no such adventure! How Friedrich did the forming in
oblique order was at that time a mystery known only to Fried-
rich and his Prussians: but soldiers of all countries, gathering
the secret from him, now understand it, and can learnedly ex-
plain it to such as are curious. Will readers take a touch more
of the Drill-Sergeant ?

“You go stair-wise (en échelon),” says he: “first battalion
starts, second stands immovable till the first have done fifty
steps; at the fifty-first, second battalion also steps along; third
Waiting for zs fifty-first step. First battalion’ (rightmost bat-
talion or leftmost, as the case may be; rightmost in this Leu-
then case) “doing fifty steps before the next stirs, and each bat-
talion in succession punctually doing the same:” march along
on these terms,—or halt at either end, while you advance at the
other,—it is evident you will swing yourself out of the parallel
position into any degree of obliquity. And furthermore, merely
by halting and facing half-round at the due intervals, you shove
yourself to right or to left as required (always to right in this

200 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIIE
5th Dec. 1757. )

Leuthen case): and ah -abeaeiled you can march as a pair of
compasses would,—you will, in the given number of minutes, im-
pinge upon your Enemy’s extremity at the required angle, and
overlap him to the required length: whereupon, At him, in flank, ;
in front, and rear, and see if he can stand it! ‘A beautiful
manceuvre,” says Captain Archenholtz; “devised by Friedrich,”
by Friedrich inheriting Epaminondas and the Old Dessauer; |
‘¢and which, perhaps, only Friedrich’s men, to this day, coulddo |
with the requisite perfection.” |

:

Nadasti, a skilful War-Captain, especially with Horse, was
beautifully posted about Sagschiitz; his extreme left folded up
en potence there (elbow of it at Sagschiitz, fore-arm of it running
to Gohlau eastward); potence ending in firwood Knolls with
Croat musketeers, in ditches, ponds, difficult ground, especially |
towards Gohlau. He has a strong battery, 14 pieces, on the |
Height to rear of him, at the angle or elbow of his potence;
strong abatis, well manned in front to rightwards; upon this, |
and upon the Croats in the firwood, the Prussians intend their |
attack. General Wedell is there, Prince Moritz as chief, with —
six battalions, and their batteries, battery of ten Brummers and
another; Ziethen also and Horse: coming on, in swift fire- |
flood, and at an angle of forty-five degrees. Most unexpected, |
strange to behold! From south-west yonder; about one o’clock —
of the day. |

Nadasti, though astonished at the Prussian fire-deluge, stands |
to his arms; makes, in front, vigorous defence; and even takes,
in some sort, the initiative,—that is, dashes out his Cavalry on
Ziethen, before Ziethen has charged. Ziethen’s Horse, who are —
rightmost of the Prussians, and are bare to the right,—ground
offering no bush, no brook there. (though Ziethen, foreseeing
such defect, has a clump of infantry near by to mend it),—reel
back under this first shock, coming downhill upon them; and
would have fared badly, had not the clump of infantry instantly
opened fire on the Nadasti visitors, and poured it in such floods _
upon them, that they, in their turn, had to reel back. Back —
they, well out of range ;—and leave Ziethen free for a counter-—
attack shortly, on easier terms, which was successful to him.

»

Cuapr. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 201
Sth Dec. 1757.
For, during that first tussle of his, the Prussian Infantry, to left
of Ziethen, has attacked the Sagschiitz Firwood; clears that of
Croats; attacks Nadasti’s line, breaks it, their Brummer battery
potently assisting, and the rage of Wedell and everybody being
extreme. So that, in spite of the fine ground, Nadasti is in a
bad way, on the extreme left or outmost point of his potence, or
tactical knee. Round the kneepan or angle of his potence, where
is the abatis, he fares still worse. Abatis, beswept by those ten
Brummers and other Batteries, till bullet and bayonet can act
on it, speedily gives way. ‘‘‘They were mere Wiirtemburgers,
these, and could not stand!” cried the Austrians apologetically,
at a great rate, afterwards; as if anybody could well have stood.
Indisputably the Wiirtembergers and the abatjs are gone; and
the Brandenburgers, storming after them, storm Nadasti’s inte-
rior battery of 14 pieces; and Nadasti’s affairs are rapidly get-
ting desperate in this quarter. Figure Prince Karl’s scouts,
galloping madly to recal-that Daun Cavalry! Austrian Battal-
ions, plenty of them, rush down to help Nadasti; but they are
met by the crowding fugitives, the chasing Prussians; are them-
selves thrown into disorder, and can do no good whatever.
They arrive on the ground, flurried, blown; have not the least
time to take breath and order: the fewest of them ever got
fairly ranked, none of them ever stood above one push: all goes
rolling wildly back upon the centre about Leuthen. Chaos
come on us;—and all for mere lack of time: could Nadasti but
once stretch out one minute into twenty! But he cannot. WNa-
dasti does not himself lose head; skilfully covers the retreat,
trying to rally once and again. Not for the first few furlongs,
till the ditches, till the firwood, quagmires are all done, could
Ziethen, now on the open ground, fairly hew in; ‘‘ take whole
battalions prisoners ;” drive the crowd in an altogether stormy
manner; and wholly confound the matter in this part.

Prince Karl, his messengers flying madly, has struggled as
man seldom did to put himself in some posture about Leuthen,
to get up some defences there. Leuthen itself, the churchyard
of it especially, is on the defensive. Men are bringing cannon
to the windmills, to the swelling ground on the north side of

[2

make Tithe halt, andl Friedrich with him, for one quarter of amet
hour! But they cannot. By the extreme of diligence, the |
Austrians have in some measure swung themselves into a new.
position, or imperfect Line round Leuthen as a centre,—Luc-—
chesi, voluntarily or by order, swinging southwards on the one
hand; Nadasti swinging northwards by compulsion ;—new Line
at an angle say of 75° to the old one. And here, for an hour ©
more, there was stiff fighting, the stiffest of the day ;—of which, —
take one direct glimpse, from the Austrian side, furnished by an |

a2

Young Gentleman famous afterwards: af |

Leuthen, let us premise, is a long Hamlet of the usual littery sort;
with two rows, in some parts three, ‘of farm- houses, barns, cattle-stalls;_
with Church, or even with two Churches, a Protestant and a Catholic ; i
goes from east to west above a mile in length. With the wrecks of — if
Nadasti tumbling into it pell-mell from the south-east, and Lucchesi _
desperately endeavoring to swing round from the north-west, not quite — aH
incoherently, and the Prussian fire-storm for accompaniment, Leuthen
is probably the most chaotic place in the Planet Earth, during that
hour or so (from half-past two to half-past three) while the agony last-—
ed. At one o’clock Nadasti was attacked; at two, he is tumbling in — }

|
{4

ame

t

mid-career towards Leuthen: I guess the date of this Excerpt, or tes-
timony by a Notable Eyewitness, may be half-past two; crisis of the
agony just about to begin; and before four it was all finished again.
Eyewitness is the young Prince de Ligne, now Captain in an Austrian —
regiment of Foot; and standing here in this perilous posture, having i
been called in as part of the Reserve. He says: Hi
“Cry had risen for the Reserve,” in which was my regiment, “and —
that it must come on as fast as possible,’—to Leuthen, west of us yon-
der. “We ran what we couldrun. Our Lieutenant-Colonel fell killed —
almost at the first; beyond this we lost our Major, and indeed all the Of- al
ficers but three—three only, and about eleven or twelve of the Volun- |
teer or Cadet kind. We had crossed two successive ditches, which
lay in an orchard to left of the first houses in Leuthen; and were be-
ginning to form in front of the Village. But there was no standing of
it. Besides a general cannonade such as can hardly be imagined, there
was a rain of case-shot upon this Battalion, of which I, as there was
no Colonel left, had to take command; and a third Battalion of the —
Royal Prussian Footguards, which had already made several of our
regiments pass that kind of muster, gave, at a distance of eighty paces,
the liveliest fire on us. It stood as if on the parade-ground, that third
Battalion, and waited for us, without stirring. pal
e

Pe

ade

Cuap. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 203

5th Dec. 1757.

“The Austrian regiment Andlau, at our right hand, could not get it-

self formed properly by reason of the houses; it was standing thirty

deep, and sometimes its shot hit us on the back. On my left the Aus-
trian regiment Merci ran its ways; and I was glad of that, in compari-
son. By no method or effort could I get the dragoons of Batthyani,
who stood fifty yards in rear of me, to cut-in a little, and help me out,”
—no good cutting hereabouts, think the dragoons of Batthyani. ‘“‘ My
soldiers, who were still tired with running, and had no cannon (these
either from necessity or choice they had left behind), were got scatter-
ed, fewer in number, and were fighting mainly out of sullenness. More
our honour, than the notion of doing good in the affair, prevented us
rrom running off. An Ensign of the regiment Arberg helped me a
wnile to form, from his and my own fragments, a kind of line ; but he
was shot down. ‘Two Officers of the Grenadiers brought me what
they still had. Some Hungarians, too, were luckily got together. But
at last, as, with all helps and the remnants of my own brave Battalion,
I had come down to at most 200, I drew back to the Height where the
Windmill is,’°’—where many have drawn back, and are standiitg in shel-
tered places, a hundred deep, say our Books.

Stiff fightmg at Leuthen; especially furious till Leuthen
Churchyard, a place with high stone walls, was got. Leuthen
Village, we observe, was crammed with Austrians spitting fire
from every coign of vantage ; Church and Churchyard especially
are a citadel of death. Cannon playing from the Windmill
Heights, too;—moments are inestimable. The Prussian Com-
mander (name charitably hidden), at Leuthen Churchyard, seems
to hesitate in the murderous fire-deluge: Major Modllendorf,
nameable from that day forward, growling, ‘No time this for
study,” dashes out himself, *‘ Hin andrer Mann (Follow me who-
ever is a man)!’’—smashes-in the Church Gate of the place,
nine muskets blazing on him through it ; smashes, after a des-
perate struggle, the Austrians clean out of it, and conquers the
citadel.10

The Austrians, on confused terms, made stiff dispute in this
second position, for about an hour. The Prussian Reserve was
ordered up by Friedrich; the Prussian left wing, which had
stood ‘‘ refused,” about Radaxdorf, till now: at one time nearly

all the Prussians were in fire. Friedrich is here, is there, wher-

* Kutzen, p. 103 (from ‘“ Prince de Ligne’s Diary, i.63, German Trans-
lation”). 10 Miiller, p. 42.

204  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVI aa!
5th Dec. 17575 |

ever the press was greatest; “‘ Prince Ferdinand,” whom we
now and then find named, as a diligent little new and ascer-—
tain to be here in this and other Battles of Friedrich’s >—‘ Prince —
Ferdinand at one time pointed his cannon on the Bush or Fa
Clump of Radaxdorf;—an aide-de-camp came to him with mes-
sage: ‘You are firing on the King; the King is yonder! At
which Ferdinand” (his dear little Brother) ‘ erschrack,” or al-
most fainted with terror.!} ’

Stiff dispute; and had the Austrians possessed the Prussian.
dexterity in manceuvering, and a Friedrich been among them,— ~
perhaps? But on their own terms, there was from the first lit-
tle hope in it. ‘Behind the Windmills they are a hundred —
men deep;’’ by and by, your Windmills, riddled to pieces, have —
to be abandoned ; the Prussian left wing rushing on with bayo- |
nets, will not all of you have to go? Lucchesi, with his abun. |
dant Cavalry, seeing this latter movement and the Prussian
flank bare in that part, will do a stroke upon them ;—and this —
proved properly the finale of the matter, final to both Lucchesi
and it.

The Prussian flank was to appearance bare in that leftwantl ‘|
quarter; but only to appearance: Driesen with the left wing of |
Horse is in a Hollow hard by; strictly charged by F iédcee to |
protect said flank, and take nothing else in hand. Driesen lets |
Lucchesi gallop by, 1 in this career of his; then emerges, ranked, — |
and comes storming in upon Lucchesi’s back,—entirely confound- |
ing his astonished Cavalry and their career. Astonished Cav-— tr
alry, bullet-storm on this side of them, edge of sword on that, |
take wing in all directions (or all except to west and south
quite over the horizon; Lucchesi himself gets killed,—crosses a
still wider horizon, poor man. He began the ruin, and he ends
it. For now Driesen takes the bared Austrians in flank, in —
rear; and all goes tumbling here too, and in few minutes is a
general deluge rearward towards Saara and Lissa side.

At Saara the Austrians, sun just sinking, made a third at-_
tempt to stand; but it was hopelessly faint this time; went all
asunder at the first push; and flowed then, torrent-wise, towards |
all its Bridges over the Schweidnitz Water, towards Breslau by |

11 Kutzen, p. 110. ,

,
‘
|
I

Sided rte

Cuap. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 205
5th Dec. 1757.

every method. There are four Bridges, Stabelwitz below Lissa:
Goldschmieden, Hermannsdorf, above ; and the main one at Lis-
sa itself, a standing Bridge on the Highroad (also of wood); and
by this the chief torrent flows; Prussian horse pursuing vigor-
ously; Prussian Infantry drawn up at Saara, resting some min-
utes after such a day's work.'2

Truly a memorable bit of work ; no finer done for a hundred
years, or for hundreds of years; and the results of it manifold,
immediate and remote. About 10,000 Austrians are left on the
field, 3,000 of them slain; prisoners already 12,000, in a short
time 21,000; flags 51, cannon 116 ;—‘“ Conquest of Silesia’’
gone to water; Prince Karl and Austria fallen from their high
hopes, in one day. The Prussians lost in killed 1,141, in wound-
ed 5,118; 85 had been taken prisoners about Sagschiitz and
Gohlau, in the first struggle there.!2 There and at Leuthen
Village had been the two tough passages; about an hour each;
in three hours the Battle was done. ‘ Meine Herren,” said
Friedrich, that night at parole, “after such a spell of work, you
deserve rest. This day will bring the renown of your name, and
of the Nation's, to the latest posterity.” |

High and low had shone this day; especially these four: Zie-
then, Driesen, Retzow,—and above all Moritz of Dessau. Rid-
ing up the line, as night fell, Friedrich, in passing Moritz and
the right wing, drew bridle for an instant: “I congratulate you
on the Victory, Herr Feldmarschall!”’ cried he cheerily, and
with emphasis on the last word. Moritz, still very busy, an-
swered slightly ; and Friedrich repeated louder, ‘‘ Don’t you hear
that I congratulate you, Herr Feldmarschall !’—a glad sound to
Moritz, who ever since Kolin had stood rather in the shadow.
** You have helped me, and performed every order, as none ever
did before in any battle,” added the grateful King.

Riding up the line, all now grown dusky, Friedrich asks, ‘* Any
battalion a mind to follow me to Lissa?” Three battalions vol-

™ Archenholz, i. 209; Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 2438-252 (by an eyewitness,
intelligent succinct Account of the Battle and previous March; ib. 252-
272, of the Sieges &c. following); Preuss, ii. 112, &c.; Tempelhof, i. 276.
‘S Kutzen, pp. 118, 125.

206 8sEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII, _
5th Dec. 1757,

unteering, follow him; three are plenty. At Saara, on the

Great Road, things are fallen utterly dark. ‘‘ Landlord, bring a
lantern, and escort.” Landlord of the poor Tavern at Saara es-
corts obediently; lantern in his right hand, left hand holding by

the King’s stirrup-leather,—King (Excellency or General, as the —

Landlord thinks him) wishing to speak with the man. Will
the reader consent to their Dialogue, which is dullish, but singu-
lar to have in an authentic form, with Nicolai as voucher ?!4
Like some poor old horse-shoe, ploughed-up on the field. Two
farthings worth of rusty old iron; now little other than a curve

of brown rust: but it galloped at the Battle of Leuthen; thatis —

something !—

King. “ Come near; catch me by the stirrup-leather” (Landlord
with lantern does so). ‘‘ We are on the Breslau Great Road, that goes
through Lissa, aren’t we ?”

Landlord. “ Yea, Excellenz.”

King. “ Who are you?”

Landlord. “ Your Excellenz, I am the Kratschmer” (Silesian for
Landlord) ‘at Saara.”

King. “ You have had a great deal to suffer, I suppose.”

Landlord. “ Ach, your Excellenz,had not I! For the last eight-and-
forty hours, since the Austrians came across Schweidnitz Water, my
poor house has been crammed to the door with them, so many servants
they have; and such a bullying and tumbling :—they have driven me
half mad; and I am clean plundered out.”

King. ‘“‘1l am sorry indeed to hear that!—Were there Generals too
in your house? What said they? Tell me, then.”

Landlord. “ With pleasure, your Excellenz. Well; yesterday noon,
I had Prince Karl in my parlour, and his Adjutants and people all
crowding about. Such a questioning and bothering! Hundreds came
dashing in, and other hundreds were sent out: in and out they went
all night; no sooner was one gone, than ten came. I had to keep a
roaring fire in the kitchen all night; so many officers crowding to it to
warm themselves. And they talked and babbled this and that. One
would say, That our King was coming on, then, ‘with his Potsdam
Guard-Parade.’ Another answers,‘Oach, he daren’t come! He will
run for it; we willlethim run.’ But now my delight is, our King has
paid them their fooleries so prettily this afternoon!”

King. ‘‘ When got you rid of your high guests ?”

Landlord. “ About nine this morning the Prince got to horse; and

14 Anekdoten, iii. 231-235.

> 4
B43
ei
’

by

ES

ee.
yr

-

a

r

‘| | aoe ;
| «

Cuap.X.] _ BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 207
5th Dec. 1757.

not long after three, he came past again, with a swarm of officers; all
going full speed for Lissa. So full of bragging when they came; and
now they were off, wrong side foremost! J saw how it was. And
ever after him, the flood of them ran, High-road not broad enough,—an
hour and more before it ended. Such a pellmell, such a welter, cay-
alry and musketeers all jumbled: our King must have given them a
dreadful lathering. ‘That is what they have got by their bragging and
their lying,—for, your Excellenz, these people said, too,‘ Our King was
forsaken by his own Generals, all his first people had gone and left
him: what I never in this world will believe.” .

King (not liking even rumour of that kind). “There you are right;
never can such a thing be believed of my Army.”

Landlord (whom this “my” has transfixed). “ Mein Gott, you are
our gnadigster Konig (most gracious King) yourself! Pardon, par-~
don, if, in my stupidity, | have’—

King. “ No, you are an honest man :—probably a Protestant ?”

Landlord. “ Joa, joa, Ihr Majestat, 1 am of your Majesty’s creed !”

Crack-crack! At this point the Dialogue is cut short by
sudden musket-shots from the woody fields to right; crackle of
about twelve shots in all; which hurt nothing but some horse’s
feet,—had been aimed at the light, and too low. Instantly the
light is blown out, and there is a hunting out of Croats; Lissa
or environs not evacuated yet, it seems; and the King’s En-
trance takes place under volleyings and cannonadings.

King rides directly to the Schloss, which is still a fine hand-
some house, off the one street of that poor Village,—north side
of street; well railed off, and its old fences now trimmed into
flower-pots. The Schloss is full of Austrian Officers, bustling
about, intending to quarter, when the King enters. They, and
the force they still had in Lissa, could easily have taken him:
but how could they know? Friedrich was surprised; but had
to put the best face on it.15 “ Bon soir, Messieurs /’” said he, with
a gay tone, stepping in: “Is there still room left, think you?”
The Austrians, bowing to the dust, make way reverently to the
divinity that hedges a King of this sort; mutely escort him to
the best room (such the popular account); and for certain,
make off, they and theirs, towards the Bridge, which lies a little
farther east, at the end of the Village.

1° In Kutzen (pp. 121, 209 et seq.), explanation of the true circumstances,
and source of the mistake.

208  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. —
5th Dec. 1757,

Weistritz or Schweidnitz Water is a biggish muddy streamin —
that part; gushing and eddying; not voiceless, vexed by mills
and their wears. Some firing there was from Croats in the
lower houses of the Village, and they had a cannon at the far-
ther Bridge-end; but they were glad to get away, and vanish in
the Night; muddy Weistritz singing hoarse adieu to their can-
non and them. Prussian grenadiers plunged indignant into the
houses ; made short work of the musketries there. In few min-

-utes, every Croat and Austrian was across, or silenced other-
wise too well; Prussian cannon now going in the rear of them,
and continuing to go,—such had been the order, “ till the pow-
der you have is done.” Fire of musketry and occasional can-
non lasts, all night, from the Lissa or Prussian side of the River,
—‘‘lest they burn this Bridge, or attempt some mischief.”’? A
thing far from their thoughts, in present circumstances.

The Prussian Host at Saara, hearing these noises, took to its
arms again; and marched after the King. Thick darkness; si-
lence; tramp, tramp: a Prussian grenadier broke out, with sol-
emn tenor voice again, into Church-Music; a known Church-
Hymn, of the homely Te-Deum kind; in which five-and-twenty
thousand other voices, and all the regimental bands, soon join:

&¢ Nun danket alle Gott ‘Now thank God, one and all,
Mit Herzen, Mund und Handen, With heart, with voice, with hands-a,
Der grosse Dinge thut Who wonders great hath done
An uns und allen Enden.”'® To us and to all lands-a.”’

And thus they advance; melodious, far-sounding, through the
hollow Night, once more in a remarkable manner. A _ pious
people, of right Teutsch stuff, tender though stout; and, except
perhaps Oliver Cromwell’s handful of Ironsides, probably the
most perfect soldiers ever seen hitherto. Arriving at the end
of Lissa, and finding all safe as it should be there, they make
their bivouac, their parallelogram of two lines, miles long across
the fields, left wing resting on Lissa, right on Guckerwitz; and,
—having, I should think, at least tobacco to depend on, and
healthy joyful hearts,—pass the night in a thankful, comfortable
manner. |
16 Miiller, p. 48.

Geese:

a
kretiste y

Zésch_— Ege oe
{ WY WG iy

fos »
{5 chortaus he

eet ye

Cuap. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 209 °
5th-26th Dee. 1757. ;

Leuthen was the most complete of all Friedrich’s victories ;
two hours more of daylight, as Friedrich himself says, and it
would have been the most decisive of this century.!7 As it was,
the ruin of this big Army, 80,000 against 30,000,'® was as good
as total; and a world of Austrian hopes suddenly collapsed ;
and all their Silesian Apparatus, making sure of Silesia beyond
an if, was tumbled into wreck,—by this one stroke it had got,
smiting the corner-stone of it as if with unexpected lightning.
On the morrow after Leuthen, Friedrich laid siege to Breslau ;
Karl had left a garrison of 17,000 in it, and a stout Captain,
one Sprecher, determined on defence: such interests hung on
Breslau, such immensities of stores were in it, had there been
nothing else. Friedrich, pushing with all his strength, in spite
of bad weather and of Sprecher’s industrious defence, got it in
twelve days.!9 Sprecher had posted placards on the gallows
and up and down, terrifically proclaiming that any man con-
victed of mentioning surrender should be instantly hanged: but
Friedrich’s bombardment was strong, his assaults continual;
and the ditches were threatening to freeze. On the seventh day
of the siege, a Laboratorium blew up; on the ninth, a Powder-
magazine, carrying a lump of the rampart away with it. Spre-
cher had to capitulate: Prisoners of War, we 17,000; our
cannons, ammunitions (most opulent, including what we took
from Bevern lately); these, we, and Breslau altogether; alas, it
is all yours again.

Liegnitz Garrison, seeing no hope, consented to withdraw on
leave.2° Schweidnitz cannot be besieged till Spring come: ex-
cept Schweidnitz, Maria Theresa, the high Kaiserinn, has no foot
of ground in Silesia, which she thought to be hers again. Gone
utterly, Patents and all; Schweidnitz alone waiting till Spring.
To the lively joy of Silesia in general; to the thrice-lively sor-
row and alarm of certain individuals, leading Catholic Ecclesi-

17 (Huvres de Frédéric, iv. 167.

18 <¢89 200 was the Austrian strength before the Battle” (deduct the
Garrisons of Schweidnitz and Liegnitz): Preuss, ii. 109 (from the Staff-
Officers).

19 7th-19th December: Diarium &c. of it in Helden-Geschichte, iv. 955—
961. 20 26th December: Helden- Geschichte, iv. 1016.

Zev

fine

ig =
Witte, (FS
NM Ar

2
ZUG
Sy

Firs

"
w=

NTA

SIEGE OF OLMUTZ.

12TH MAY — 2N° JULY 1756.
@.a. Stages of the Prussian, March. b. Dauns Encampment.
ce. Prassian Batteries and Entrenchments. d.d.d. Prussian Camps.
e.e¢. Loudons March against Moses Convoy.
ff Moses resting quarters. g. Convey attacked and ruined.

x ya ) 9 a

SY,
mag AN 38)
SEIN)

Sonnenkurg, Min
2. oO

0G,
» & aap

ant

ya own $

BATTLE OF ZORNDORF.

2534 AUGUST 1758.

a.m. Prussian Army about to cross the Miitzel.
bbb. Russian Army ranked for Battle. c. Russian Baggage
d.d.Prussiarn Infantry. ¢.e. Prussian Cavalry, f. Prussian Baggage.

Cuap. X.] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN, 209°
5th-26th Dec. 1757. ;

Leuthen was the most complete of all Friedrich’s victories ;
two hours more of daylight, as Friedrich himself says, and it
would have been the most decisive of this century.17_ As it was,
the ruin of this big Army, 80,000 against 30,000,'® was as good
as total; and a world of Austrian hopes suddenly collapsed ;
and all their Silesian Apparatus, making sure of Silesia beyond
an if, was tumbled into wreck,—by this one stroke it had got,
smiting the corner-stone of it as if with unexpected lightning.
On the morrow after Leuthen, Friedrich laid siege to Breslau ;
Karl had left a garrison of 17,000 in it, and a stout Captain,
one Sprecher, determined on defence: such interests hung on
Breslau, such immensities of stores were in it, had there been
nothing else. Friedrich, pushing with all his strength, in spite
of bad weather and of Sprecher’s industrious defence, got it in
twelve days.!9 Sprecher had posted placards on the gallows
and up and down, terrifically proclaiming that any man con-
victed of mentioning surrender should be instantly hanged: but
Friedrich’s bombardment was strong, his assaults continual;
and the ditches were threatening to freeze. On the seventh day
of the siege, a Laboratorium blew up; on the ninth, a Powder-
magazine, carrying a lump of the rampart away with it. Spre-
cher had to capitulate: Prisoners of War, we 17,000; our
cannons, ammunitions (most opulent, including what we took
from Bevern lately); these, we, and Breslau altogether; alas, it
is all yours again.

Liegnitz Garrison, seeing no hope, consented to withdraw on
leave.2° Schweidnitz cannot be besieged till Spring come: ex-
cept Schweidnitz, Maria Theresa, the high Kaiserinn, has no foot
of ground in Silesia, which she thought to be hers again. Gone
utterly, Patents and all; Schweidnitz alone waiting till Spring.
To the lively joy of Silesia in general; to the thrice-lively sor-
row and alarm of certain individuals, leading Catholic Ecclesi-

17 (Huvres de Frédéric, iv. 167.

18 <¢89 200 was the Austrian strength before the Battle” (deduct the
Garrisons of Schweidnitz and Liegnitz): Preuss, ii. 109 (from the Staff-
Officers).

19 7th-19th December: Diarium &c. of it in Helden-Geschichte, iv. 955—
961. 20 26th December: Helden- Geschichte, iv. 1016.

!

210 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII |
5th-26th Dec. 1757. |

astics mainly, who had misread the signs of the times in late
months! There is one Schaffgotsch, Archbishop or head-man
. of them, especially, who is now in a bad way. Never was such —
royal favour; never such ingratitude, say the Books at weari-
some length. Schaffgotsch was a showy man of quality, neph- |
ew of the quondam Austrian Governor, whom Friedrich, across
a good deal of Papal and other opposition, got pushed into the
Catholic Primacy, and took some pains to make comfortable
there,—Order of the Black Eagle, guest at Potsdam, and the
like ;—having a kind of fancy for the airy Schaffgotsch, as well
as judging him suitable for this Silesian High-Priesthood, with — |
his moderate ideas and quality ways,—which I have heard were |
a little dissolute withal. To the whole of which Schaffgotsch
proved signally traitorous and ingrate; and had plucked off the
Black Eagle (say the Books, nearly breathless over such a sacri-
lege) on some public occasion, prior to Leuthen, and trampled it
under his feet, the unworthy fellow. Schaffgotsch’s pathetic
Letter to Friedrich, in the new days posterior to Leuthen, and
Friedrich’s contemptuous inexorable answer, we could give, but
do not: why should we? Oh King, I know your difficulties,
and what epoch itis. But, ofa truth, your airy dissolute Schaff-
gotsch, as a grateful ‘‘ Archbishop and Grand-Vicar,”’ is almost
uglier to me than as a Traitor ungrateful for it; and shall go to
the Devil in his own way! They would not have him in Aus-
tria; he was not well received at Rome; happily died before
long.?!_ Friedrich was not cruel to Schaffgotsch or the others,
contemptuously mild rather; but he knew henceforth what to
expect of them, and slightly changed this and that in his Silesian
methods in consequence.

Of Prince Karl let us add a word. On the morrow after
Leuthen, Captain Prince de Ligne and old Papa D’Ahremberg
could find little or no Army; they stept across to Gribschen, a
village on the safe side of the Lohe, and there found Karl and
Daun: “rather silent, both; one of them looking, ‘Who would
have thought it!’ the other, ‘ Didn’t I tell you ?”’—and know-
ing nothing, they either, where the Army was. Army was, in

21 Preuss, ii. 113, 114; Kutzen, pp. 12, 155-160, for the real particulars.

Cuap. X. ] BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. | 211

5th-26th Dec. 1757.

fact, as yet nowhere. “Croat fellows, in this Farmstead of

ours,” says De Ligne, “had fallen to shooting pigeons.” ‘The
night had been unusually dark; the Austrian Army had squat-

ted into woods, into office-houses, farm-villages, over a wide
space of country; and only as the day rose, began to dribble in.

By count, they are still 50,000; but heart-broken, beaten as

men seldom were. ‘What sound is that?” men asked yester-
day at Brieg, forty miles off; and nobody could say, except that

it was some huge Battle, fateful of Silesia and world. Breslau

had it louder; Breslau was still more anxious. ‘ What is all
that?” asked somebody (might be Deblin the Shoemaker, for
anything I know) of an Austrian sentry there: “That? That
is the Prussians giving us such a beating as we never had.”
What news for Deblin the Shoemaker, if he is still above
ground !|—

“Prince Karl, gathering his distracted fragments, put 17,000 into
Breslau by way of ample garrison there ; and with the rest made off
circuitously for Schweidnitz; thence for Landshut, and down the Mount-
ains, home to Konigsgratz,—self and Army in the most wrecked con-
dition. Chased by Ziethen; Ziethen ‘ sticking always to the hocks of
them,’ as Friedrich eagerly enjoins on him ; or sometimes it is, ‘ sitting
on the breeches of them:’ for about a fortnight to come.** Ziethen
took 2,000 prisoners ; no end of baggages, of wagons left in the difficult
places: wild weather even for Ziethen, still more for Karl, among the
Silesian-Bohemian Hill-roads: heavy rains, deep muds, then sudden
glass, with cutting snowblasts: ‘An Army not a little dilapidated,’
writes Prince Karl, almost with tears in his eyes ; ‘ Army without lin-
ens, without clothes; in condition truly sad and pitiable; and has al-
ways, so close are the enemy, to encamp, though without tents.’** Did
not get to Konigsgratz, and safe shelter, for ten days more. Counted,
at Konigsgratz in the Chrismas time, 37,000 rank and file,—‘ 22,000
of whom are gone to hospital,’ by the Doctor’s report.

“Universal astonishment, indignation, even incredulity, is the humour
at Vienna: the high Kaiserinn herself, kept in the dark for some time,
becomes dimly aware ; and by Kaiser Franz’s own advice, she relieves
Prince Karl from his military employments, and appoints Daun instead,
Prince Karl withdrew to his Government of the Netherlands; and with

*2 Eleven Royal Autographs: in Blumenthal, Life of De Ziethen (i, 94-
111), a feeble incorrect Translation of them.
*° Kutzen, p. 134 (‘‘ Prince Karl to the Kaiser, December 14th”).

|
i)

i és } |
212 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVID

Bth-26th Dec. 1757.

the aid of generous liquors, and what natural magnanimity he had, spent

a noiseless life thenceforth ; Sword laid entirely on the shelf; and im-

mortal Glory, as of Alexander and the like, quite making its exit from |

the scene, convivial or other. ‘The first General in the world, so he
used to be ten years ago, in Austria, in England, Holland, the thrice-
greatest of Generals: but now he has tried Friedrich in Five pitched
Battles (Czaslau, Hohenfriedberg, Sohr, then Prag, then Leuthen) ;—
been beaten every time, under every form of circumstance ; and now,
at Leuthen, the fifth beating is such, no public, however ignorant, can
stand it farther. The ignorant public changes its long-eared eulogies

into contumeliously horrid shrieks of condemnation; in which one is_

still farther from joining. ‘ That crossing of the Rhine,’ says Friedrich,
‘was a belle chose ; but flatterers blew him into dangerous self-conceit ;

besides he was ill-obeyed, as others of us have been.”** Adieu to him, |
poor redfaced soul ;—and good liquor to him,—at least if he can take it —

in moderation !”

The astonishment of all men, wise and simple, at this sudden
oversetting of the scene of things, and turning of the gazetteer-
diplomatic theatre bottom uppermost, was naturally extreme, es-
pecially in gazetteer and diplomatic circles; and the admiration,
willing or unwilling, of Friedrich, in some most essential points
of him, rose to a high pitch. Better soldier, it is clear, has not
been heard of in the modern ages. Heroic constancy, courage
superior to fate: several clear features of a hero ;—pity he were
such a liar withal, and ignorant of common honesty; thought
the simple sort, in a bewildered manner, endeavouring to forget
the latter features, or think them not irreconcilable. Military
judges, of most various quality, down to this day, pronounce
Leuthen to be essentially the finest Battle of the century; and
indeed one of the prettiest feats ever done by man in his Fight-
ing Capacity. Napoleon, for instance, who had run over these
Battles of Friedrich (apparently somewhat in haste, but always
with a word upon them which is worth gathering from such a
source), speaks thus of Leuthen: ‘‘ This Battle is a masterpiece
of movements, of manceuvres, and of resolution; enough to im-
mortalise Friedrich, and rank him among the greatest Generals.

24 «Prince de Ligne, Mémoires sur Frédéric (Berlin, 1789), p, 38"
(Preuss, ii. 112).

* .
-
i} >
| ae
1 -

Cuap. X.] | ; BATTLE OF LEUTHEN. 213
5th-26th Dec. 1757.
Manifests, in the highest degree, both his moral qualities and his
military.’’*°

How the English Walpoles, in Parliament and out of it; how
the Prussian Sulzers, D’ Argenses, the gazetteer and vague pub-
lic, may have spoken and written at that time, when the matter
was fresh and on everybody’s tongue,—judge still by two small
symptoms which we have to show:

1°. A Letter of Friedrich’s to D’ Argens (Dirgoy, near Breslau, 19th
December 1757).—“ Your friendship seduces you, mon cher; I am but
a paltry knave (polisson) in comparison with ‘ Alexander,’ and not wor-
thy to tie the shoe-latchets of ‘Cesar!’ Necessity, who is the mother
of industry, has made me act, and have recourse to desperate remedies
in evils of a like nature.

“We have got here” (this day, by capitulation of Breslau) ‘ from
fourteen to fifteen thousand prisoners: so that, in all, I have above
twenty-three thousand of the Queen’s troops in my hands, fifteen Gen-

erals, and above seven hundred Officers. Tis a plaster on my wounds, °

but it is far enough from healing them.

“tT am now about marching to the Mountain region, to settle the
chain of quarters there; and if you will come, you will find the roads
free and safe. I was sorry at the Abbe’s treason,’—paltry De Prades,

'— of whom we heard enough already.*®

2°. A Potiery-Apotheosis of Friedrich.—“ There stands on this
mantelpiece,” says one of my Correspondents, the amiable Smelfungus,
in short, whom readers are acquainted with, “‘a small China Mug, not
of bad shape; declaring itself, in one obscure corner, to be made at
Worcester, ‘ R. I., Worcester, 1757’ (late in the season, I presume, de-
mand being brisk); which exhibits, all round it, a diligent Potter’s-
Apotheosis of Friedrich, hastily got up to meet the general enthusiasm
of English mankind. Worth, while it lasts unbroken, a moment’s in-
spection from you in hurrying along.

“Front side, when you take our Mug by the handle for drinking from
it, offers a poor well-meant China Portrait, labelled Kine or Prussia:
copy of Friedrich’s Portrait, by Pesne, twenty years too young for the
time, smiling out nobly upon you; upon whom there descends with
rapidity a small Genius (more like a Cupid who had hastily forgotten

25 Montholon, Mémoires &c. de Napoléon, vii. 211. ‘This Napoleon Sum-
mary of Friedrich’s Campaigns, and these brief Bits of Criticism, are pleas-
ant reading, though the fruit evidently of slight study, and do credit to Nae
poleon perhaps still more than to Friedrich.

26 (Kuvres de Frédéric, xix. 47.

¢

7

214 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. |
5th-26th Dee. 1757, |
his bow, and goes headforemost on another errand) to drop a wreath on |
this deserving head ;—wreath far too small for ever getting on (owing |
to distance, let us hope), though the artless Painter makes no sign; and |
indeed both Genius and wreath, as he gives them, look almost like a big |
insect, which the King will be apt to treat harshly if he notice it. On |
the opposite side, again, separated from Friedrich’s back by the handle, |
is an enormous image of Fame, with wings filling half the Mug, with |
two trumpets going at once (a bass, probably, and a treble), who flies |
with great ease; and between her eager face and the unexpectant one |
of Friedrich (who is 180° off, and knows nothing of it) stands a cir- |
cular Trophy, or Imbroglio of drums, pikes, muskets, cannons, field-flags |
and the like ; very slightly tied together,—the knot, if there is one, be- |
ing hidden by some fantastic bit of scroll or escutcheon, with a Fame |
and one trumpet scratched on it ;—and high out of the Imbroglio rise |
three standards inscribed with Names, which we perceive are intended |
to be names of Friedrich’s Victories; standards notable at this day, |
with Names which I will punctually give you.
‘Standard first, which flies to the westward or leftward, has‘ Reis-
berg’ (no such place on this distracted globe ; meaning Bevern’s Rezch-
enberg, perhaps),—‘ Reisberg,’ ‘ Prague,’ ‘Collin.’ Middle standard
curves beautifully round its staff, and gives us to read, ‘ Welham’ (non-
extant, too; may mean Welmina or Lobositz), ‘ Rossbach’ (very good),
‘ Breslau’ (poor Bevern’s, thought a victory in Worcester, at this time !).
Standard third, which flies to eastward or right hand, has ‘ Neumark’
(that is, Newmarkt and the Austrian Bread-ovens, 4th December) ;
‘Lissa’ (not yet Leuthen in English nomenclature; and ‘ Breslau’
again, which means the capture of Breslau City this time, and is a real
success, 7th-19th December ;—giving us the approximate date, Christ-
mas 1757, to this hasty Mug. A Mug got up for temporary English
enthusiasm, and the accidental instruction of posterity. It is of tolera-
ble China; holds a good pint, ‘To the Protestant Hero, with all the
honours ;’—and offers, in little, a curious eye-hole into the then En-
gland, with its then lights and notions, which is now so deep hidden
from us, under volcanic ashes, French Revolutions, and the wrecks of
a Hundred very decadent Years.”

| a
{) 7

Cuap. XI.] WINTER IN BRESLAU. 215
Jan.—April 1758.

CHAPTER XI.
WINTER IN BRESLAU: THIRD CAMPAIGN OPENS.

FRIEDRICH, during those grand victories, is suffering sadly in
health, “‘colque depuis huit jours, neither sleep nor appetite ;’”
“eight months of mere anguishes and agitations do wear one
down.” He is tired, too, he says, of the mere business talk,
coarse and rugged, which has been his allotment lately; longs
for some humanly roofed kind of lodging, and a little talk that
shall have flavour in it.!| The troops once all in their Winter-
quarters, he sits down in Breslau as his own wintering place:
place of relaxation,—of rest, or at least of changed labour,—no
man needing it more. There for some three months he had a
tolerable time; perhaps, by contrast, almost a delightful. Read-
ers must imagine it; we have no details allowed us, nor any
time for them even if we had.

There come various visitors, various gaieties,—King’s Birth-
day (January 24th); quality Balls, “at which Royal Majesty
sometimes deigned to show himself.” A lively Breslau, in com-
parison. Sister Amelia paid a beautiful visit of a fortnight or
more: Sister Amelia, and along with her two married Cousins
(once Margrayines of Schwedt), whose Husbands, little Brother
Ferdinand, and Eugene of Wiirtemburg, are wintering here.
The Marquis D’ Argens, how exquisitely treated we shall see, is
a principal figure; Excellency Mitchell, deep in very important
business just now, is another. Reader de Catt (he who once, in
a Dutch River-Boat, got into conversation with the snuffy gen-
tleman in black wig) made his new appearance, this ,Winter,—
needed now, since De Prades is off. ‘Should you have known
me again?” asked Friedrich. ‘‘ Hardly, in that dress; besides,
your Majesty looks thinner.” ‘That I can believe, with the
cursed life I have been leading!”? ‘There came also, day not

1 Letters of his to Prince Henri (December 26th &c.: Cfuvres, xxvi.
167, 169; Stenzel, v. 123). ? Rodenbeck, i. 285.

216  sEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

Jan.—April 1758,
given, a Captain Guichard (‘‘ Major Quintus Icilius’’ that is to
be) with his new Book on the Art Military of the Ancients, ©
Mémoires Militaires sur les Grecs et les Romains ;3 which cannot |
but be welcome to Friedrich. A solid account of that matter, |
by the first man who had ever understood both War and Greek. —
Far preferable to Folard’s, a man without Greek at all, and with |
military ideas not a little fantastic here and there. Of Captain |
Guichard, were his Book once read, and himself a little known, |
there will be more to say. For the present, fancy him retained |
as a supernumerary :—and in regard to Friedrich’s Winter gen- |
erally, accept the following small hints, small but direct: {|

Friedrich to D'Argens (three different times). !
1°. On the road to Leuthen ( Torgau, 15th November 1757). * . |
I have been obliged to have the Abbé arrested” (De Prades, of whom |
enough, long since); “he has been playing the spy, and I have many |
evident proofs of it. That is very infamous and very ungrateful—I ‘|
have made a prodigious quantity of verses ( prodigieusement de vers). |
If I live, I will show them you in Winter-quarters : if I perish, they are |
bequeathed to yuu, and I have ordered that they be put into your hand.”
‘“‘ Adieu, my dear Marquis. I fancy you to be in bed: don’t rot there ;
—and rememver you have promised to join me in Winter-quarters :”—
on this latter point Friedrich is very urgent, amiably eager; prepared to
wrap the poor Marquis in cotton, and carry him and lodge him, like
glass with care.* For example:
2°. While settling the Winter-quarters (“ Striegau, 26th December
1757:” Siege of Breslau done ten days ago). * * ‘ What a pleasure
to hear you are coming! Your travelling you can do in your own way.
I have chosen a party of Light Horse (Jager), who will appear at Ber- _ |
lin to conduct you. You can make short journeys: the first to Frank- |
furt, the second to Crossen, the third to Griinberg, fourth to Glogau,
- fifth to Parchwitz, sixth to Breslau. J have directed that horses be
ordered for you, that your rooms be warmed everywhere, and good fowls _|
ready on all roads. Your apartment in th's House” (Royal House in |
Breslau, which the King has built for himsel7 years ago) “is carpeted,
hermetically shut. You shall suffer nothing from draughts or from
noise.”*—Lucky Marquis; what a landlord! Came accordingly ; staid
till deep in April,—waiting latterly for weather, I perceive ; long after
the King himself was off. Thus:

5 La Haye, 2 tomes, 4to, 1757 (Nicolai, Anekdoten, vi. 134).
¢ GHuvres de Frédéric, xix. 438. 5. Tb. xix. 48.

a ‘

Cuap. XI]. WINTER IN BRESLAU. 217
Jan.—April 1758.

3°. Friedrich on the field again for five weeks past (“ Minsterberg,
23d April 1758”). “Adieu, dear Marquis; I fancy you are now in
Berlin again. Go to Charlottenburg whenever and how you like;
take care of yourself; and be ready for the beginning of October next!
—As to me, mon cher, I am off to fight windmills and ostriches (Au-
truches), that is Russians and Austrians (Autrichiens). Adieu, mon
vher.”®

There circulated in the Newspapers, this Winter, something of
what was called a Letter from Friedrich to Maria Theresa, form-
ally proposing Peace, after these magnificent successes. And
certainly, of all things in the earth, Friedrich would have best
liked Peace, this year, last year, and for the next five years:
“Go home, then, good neighbours; don’t break into my house,
don’t cut my poor throat, and we will be friends again!” Fried-
rich, it appears, had actually, finding or making opportunity,
sent some polite Letter, of pacific tenor, in his light clever way,
to that address ;—not without momentary hopes of perhaps get-
ting good from it.7.| And the Kaiserinn herself, Austria’s high
Mother, did, they say, after such a Leuthen coming on the back
of such a Rossbach, feel discouraged ; but the Pompadour (not
France’s Mother, whatever she might be to France) was of far
other mind: ‘‘ Do not speak of it, ma Reine! Double or quits,
that is our game: can we yield for a little ill-luck? Never!”

France dismisses its D’Argenson, ‘‘ What Armies are these
of his; flying home on us, like draggled poultry, across the
Rhine!’’—summons the famed Belleisle to be War-Minister,
and give things an eagle-quality :° France engages to pay its
subsidies better (France now the general paying party, Austria,
Sweden, Russia itself, all looking to France,—would she were
as punctual as England used to be !),—in a word, engages to be
magnanimous extremely, and will hear of nothing but persist-
ence. ‘Shall not we reap, then, where there is such a harvest
standing white to us?” Kaunitz admits that there never will

6 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix. 49.

7 In Preuss, ii. 130 (Friedrich’s Letter mostly given ;—bearer a Prince
von Lobkowitz, prisoner at Leuthen, now going home on handsome terms):
Stenzel, v. 124 (for the per-contra feeling).

§ “96th February 1758” (Barbier, iv. 258).

Vor. V.—K

pA ee a SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII.
Jan.—April 1758.

again be such a chance.—Peace, it is clear enough, will not be
got of these people by any Letter, or human device whatever, —
except simply by uttermost, more or less miraculous fighting for |
it. Friedrich is profoundly aware of this fact ;—is busy com- _
pleting his Army: 145,000 for the field, this Year, 53,000 the _
Silesian part, “a good many of them Austrian deserters ;”? and | |
is closing an important Subsidy Treaty with England,—of which ©
more anon.
And if this is the mood in France and Austria, think what |
Russia’s will be! The Czarina is not dead of dropsy, as some ©
had expected, but, on the contrary, alive, and fiercer than ever; —
furious against Apraxin, and determined that Fermor, his suc- ;
cessor, shall defy Winter, and begin work at once. She has in- ;
dignantly dismissed Apraxin (to be tried by Court Martial, he);
dismisses Bestuchef the Chancellor; appoints a new General, ~
Fermor by name; orders Fermor to go and lose not a moment,
now in the depth of Winter since it was not done in the crown
of Summer, and take possession of East Preussen in her name. ~
Which Fermor does; 16th January, crosses the border again,
31,000 in all, without opposition except from the frost; plants
himself up and down,—only two poor Prussian battalions there;
who retire with their effects, especially “ with seven wagons of
money.’ January 22d, Fermor enters K6nigsberg; publishes
no end of proclamations, manifestoes, rescripts, to inform the
poor people, trembling at the Cossack atrocities of last Year,
“That his august Sovereign Elizabeth of All the Russias has |
now become Proprietress of East Preussen, which shall be per-
fectly protected and exquisitely well governed henceforth; and _
that all men of official or social position have accordingly, to
come and take the oath to her, with the due alacrity and punc- __
tuality, at their peril.” 4
No man is willing for the operation, most men shudder at it;
but who can help them? Surely it was an unblessed operation.
Poor. souls, one pities them; for at heart they were, and contin-
ued, loyal to their own King; thoroughly abhorrent of becoming
Russian, as Czarish Majesty has thoroughly resolved they shall.
Some few absconded, leaving all their property as spoil; the rest
® Stenzel, v. 155.

oe

vin bel Re Se

IR, wit MEE es AN NN a Rte ICI GOAT

cy Le hla, oe

-Cuar. XL] WINTER IN BRESLAU. 219
| Jan.—April 1758.
‘swore, with mental reservation, with shifts, such as they could
| devise :—for example, some were observed to swear with gloves
‘on; the right hand, which they held up, was a mere right fist
‘with a stuffed glove at the end of it,—so help me Beelzebub
‘(or whoever is the recording Angel here)!!° And thus does
'Preussen, with astonishment, as by the spell of a Czarina Circe,
find itself changed suddenly to Russian: and does not recover
‘the old human form till four years hence,—when, again sud-
‘denly, as we shall see, the Circe and her wand chance to get
broken.

Friedrich could not mend or prevent this bad Business; but
“was so disgusted with it, he never set foot in East Peousead
| again,—never could bear to behold it, after such a transforma-
‘tion into temporary Russian shape. I cannot say he abhorred

this constrained Oath as I should have done: on the contrary,
in the first spurt of indignation, he not only protested aloud, but
/made reprisals,—‘‘ Swear me those Saxons, then!” said he; and
‘some poor magistrates of towns, and official people had to make
a ficure of swearing (if not allegiance altogether, allegiance for
! ‘the time being), in the same sad fashion, till one’s humour cooled
| ‘again.!! East Preussen, lost in this way, held by its King as
before, or more passionately now than ever; still loved Fried-
‘rich, say the Books; but it is Russia’s for the present, and the
‘mischiefis done. East Preussen itself, Ciree Czarina cherishing
it as her own, had a much peaceabler time: in secret it even
‘sent moneys, recruits, numerous young volunteers to Friedrich ;
much more, hopes and prayers. But his disgust with the late
| transformation by enchantment was inexpiable.
! It was May or June, as had been anticipated, before the Rus-
sian main Army made its practical appearance in those parts.
| Fermor had, in the interim, seized Thorn, seized Elbing (‘No
| offence, magnanimous Polacks, it is only for a time!”),—and
| would fain have had Dantzie too, but Dantzig wouldn’t. Not
| till June 16th did the unwieldy mass (on paper 104,000, and
in effect, and exclusive of Cossack rabble, about 75,000) get on
way, and begin slowly staggering westward. Very slowly, and
1° Helden-Geschichte, v. 147-9; Preuss, ii. 145, iii. 578, iv. 477, &e.
| © Preuss, ii. 163; Oath given in Hedden- Geschichte, v. 631.

220  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVI

Jan.—April 1
amid incendiary fire and horrid cruelty, as heretofore ;—and in
August coming we shall be sure to hear of it.

Lehwald was just finishing with the Swedes,—and got them |
all bottled up in Stralsund again, about New-year’s time, when |
these Russians crossed into Preussen. We said nothing of the |
Swedish so-called Campaign of last Year;—and indeed are
bound to be nearly silent of that and of all the others. Five
Campaigns of them, or at least Four and a half; such Cam.
paigns as were never made before or since. Of Campaign 1757,
the memorable feature is that of the whole ‘Swedish Divi-
sion,’ as the laughing Newspapers called it, which was ‘ put to
flight by five Berlin Postillions ;”—substantially a truth, as fol
lows: : |

“Night of September 12th-13th, the Swedes, 22,000 strong, did at
last begin business; crossed Peene River, the boundary between their |
Pommern and ours; and, having nothing but some fractions of Militia
to oppose them, soon captured the Redoubts there; spread over Prus- |
sian Pommern, and on into the Uckermark; diligently raising contri-
butions, to a heavy amount. No less than 90,000/. in all for this poor
Province ; though, by a strange accident, 60,000/. proved to be the act- |
ual sum. | .

“Towards the end of October they had got as much as 60,0002. from '
the northern parts of Uckermark, Prentzlow being their headquarter
during that operation; and they now sent out a Detachment of 200 |
grenadiers and 100 dragoons towards Zehdenick, another little Town, |
some forty miles farther south, there to wring out the remaining sum.
The Detachment marched by night, not courting notice; but people
had heard of its coming, and five Prussian Postillions,—shifty fello
old hussars it may be, at any rate skilful on the trumpet, and furnished
with hussar jackets and an old pistol each, determined to do something
for their Country. The Swedish Detachment had not marched many
miles, when,—after or before some flourishes of martial trumpeting, —
there verily fell on the Swedish flank, out of a clump of dark wood, five
shots, and wounded one man. ‘To the astonishment and panic of t
other Two hundred and ninety-nine; who made instant retreat, und
new shots and trumpet-tones, as if it were from five whole hussar re
ments ;—retreat, double-quick, to Prentzlow ; alarm waxing by th
speed ; alarm spreading at Prentzlow itself: so that the whole Division |
got to its feet, recrossed the Peene; and Uckermark had nothing more |
to pay, for that bout! This is not a fable, such as go in the Newspa-

rm

aes
ee .
Rh

[SS

i

—

\

re

| Crap. XI.] - ‘WINTER IN BRESLAU. . 221

} Jan. pear 1758.

| pers,” adds my Authority,“ but an accurate fact ”!*—probably, in our
| day, the alone memorable one of that “ Swedish War.”

“The French,” says another of my Notes, “ who did the subsidying
all round (who paid even the Russian Subsidy, though in Austria’s
name), had always an idea that the Swedes,—22,000 stout men, this
year, 4,000 of them cavalry,—might be made to co-operate with the
Russians; with them or with somebody ; and-do something effective in
the way of destroying Friedrich. And besides their subsidies and
bribings, the French took incredible pains with this view ; incessantly

contriving, correspondencing, and running to and fro between the par-
ties ;** but had not, even from the Russians and Czarish Majesty, much
of a result, and from the Swedes had absolutely none at all. By French
industry and flagitation, the Swedish Army was generally kept up to
about 20,000: the soldiers were expert with their fighting-tools, knew
their field-exercise well; had fine artillery, and were stout hardy fel-
lows: but the guidance of them was wonderful. ‘They had no field-
commissariat,’ says one Observer, ‘no field-bakery, no magazines, no
pontoons, no light troops; and,’ among the Higher Officers, ‘no subor-
dination."'* Were, in short, commanded by nobody in particular. Com-
manded by Senator Committee-men in Stockholm ; and, on the field, by
Generals anxious to avoid responsibility ; who, instead of acting, held
continual Councils of War. The history of their Campaigns, year after
‘year, is, in summary, this :

“ Late in the season (always late, War-Offices at home, and Captain-
cies here, being in such a state), they emerge from Stralsund, an im-
pregnable place of their own,—where the men, I observe, have had to
live on dried fishy substances, instead of natural boiled oatmeal ;'° and
have died extensively in consequence :—they march:from Stralsund, a
forty or thirty miles, till they reach the Swedish-Pommern boundary,
Peene River; a muddy sullen stream, flowing through quagmire mead-

12 Helden-Geschichte, iv. 764, 807; Archenholtz, i. 160.

13 For example: M. le Marquis de Montalembert, Correspondance avec
&c. étant employé par le Roi de France & l Armée Suédoise, 1757-1761
(‘‘with the Swedish Army,” yes, and sometimes with the Russian,—and
sometimes on the French Coasts, ardently fortifying against Pitt and his
Descents there: —a very intelligent, industrious, observant man; still
amusing to read, if one were idler), @ Londres (evidently Paris), 1777, 3
voll,, small 8vo. Then, likewise very intelligent, there is a Montazet, a
Mortaigne, a Caulaincourt; a Campagne des Russes en 1757; &c. &c.—in
short, a great deal of fine faculty employed there in spinning ropes from
sand. 14 Archenholtz, i. 158.

18 Montalembert, i. 32-37, 335, 394 &c. (that of the demand for Norse
porridge, which interested me, I cannot find again).

222 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. “Rage XVIII,
Jan.—April 1758. :
ows, which are miles broad, on each shore: River unfordable every-
where ; only to be crossed in four or five places, where paved causem |
ways are. The Swedes, with deliberation, cross Peene; after sa | |
time, capture the bits of Redoubts, and the one or two Prussian Towle
upon it; Anklam Redoubt, Peenemunde (Peene-mouth) Redoubt; and
rove forward into Prussian Pommern, or over into the Uekeriaild for —
fifty, for a hundred miles ; exacting contributions ; foraging what a)
can; making the poor country people very miserable, and themselves
not happy;—their soldiers ‘growing yearly more plunderous,’ says Arch-
enholtz, ‘till at length they got, though much shyer of murder, to resem- \ |
ble Cossacks,’ in regard to other pleas of the crown i

“ There is generally some fractional regiment or so of Prussian force,
left under some select General Manteuffel, Colonel Belling ; who hangs &|
diligently on the skirts of them, exploding by all opportunities a |
have been Country Militias voluntarily got on foot, for the occasion ;
five or six small regiments of them; officered by Prussian Veterans :
the Squirearchy in those parts; who do excellent service. The Gove
ernor of Stettin, Bevern, our old Silesian friend, strikes out now and
then, always vigilant, prompt and effective, on a chance offering. a
through Summer, is what opposition can be made: and the a
without magazines, scout-service, or the like military appliances, but —
willing enough to fight” (when they can see), “ and living on their shifts,
will rove inward, perhaps 100 miles; say south-westward, say south-
eastward” (towards Ruppin, which we used to know),—*‘ they love to
keep Mecklenburg usually on their flank, which is a friendly Country.
Small fights befal them, usually beatings; never anything considerable.
That is their success through Summer.

“Then, in Autumn, some remnant more of Prussian regulars arrive,
disposable now for that service; upon which the Swedes are driven
over Peene again (quite sure to be driven, when the River with its —
quagmires freezes) ; lose Anklam Redoubt, Peenemiinde Redoubt ; lose
Demmin, Wollin; are followed into Swedish Pommern, oftenest to the
gates of Stralsund, and are locked up there, there and in Riigen adjoin-
ing, till a new season arrive.”—This year (1757-8), Lehwald, on turn-
ing the key of Stralsund, might have done a fine feat; frost having
come suddenly, and welded Riigen to the mainland. ‘* What is to hin-
der you from starving them into surrender ?” signifies Friedrich, hasti-
ly: “ Besiege me Stralsund!” Which Lehwald did; but should have
been quicker about it; or the thaw came too soon, and admitted ships
with provision again. Upon which Lehwald resigned, to a General
Graf von Dohna; and went home, as grown too old: and Dohna kept
them bottled there till the usual Russian Advent (deep in June); by
which time, what with limited stockfish diet, what with sore labour

r. — avr

“9 ae,

we ote"
or

Cuap. XI. | WINTER IN BRESLAU. 223

ith April 1758.

(breaking of the ice, whenever frost reappeared) and other hardship,
more than half of them had died.—* Every new season, there was a
new General tried; but without the least improvement. There was
mockery enough, complaint enough; indignant laughter in Stockholm
itself, and the Dalecarlians thought of revolting: the Senator Com-
mittee-men held firm, ballasted by French gold, for four years.

“The Prussian Militias are a fine trait of the matter; about fifteen
- regiments in different parts —about five in Pommern, which set the ex-
ample ; which were suddenly raised last Autumn by the Stande them-
selves, drilled in Stettin continually, while the Swedes were under way,
and which stood ready for some action, under veterans of the squire-
archy, when the Swedes arrived. They were kept up through the
War. The Stande even raised a little fleet,’ river fleet and coast
fleet, twelve gunboats, with a powerful carronade in each, and effective
men and captain; a great check on plundering and coast-mischief, till
the Swedes, who are naval, at last made an effort and destroyed them
all.”

Friedrich was very sensible of these procedures on the part
of his Stdnde; and perhaps readers are not prepared for such, or
for others of the like, which we could produce elsewhere, in a
Country without Constitution to speak of. Friedrich raises no
new taxes,—except upon himself exclusively, and these to the
very blood :—Friedrich gets no Life-and-Fortune Addresses of
the vocal or printed sort, but only of the acted. Very much the
preferable kind, where possible, to all parties concerned. These
poor militias and flotillas one cheerfully puts on record; cheer-
fully nothing else, in regard to such a Swedish War ;—nor shall
we henceforth insult the human memory by another word upon
it that is not indispensable.

Of the English Subsidy.

One of Friedrich’s most important affairs, at present,—vitally
connected with his Army and its furnishings, which is the all-
important,—was his Subsidy Treaty with England. It is the
third treaty he has signed with England in regard to this War ;
the second in regard to subsidy for it; and it is the first that
takes real practical effect. It had cost difficulty in adjusting,
not a little correspondence and management from Mitchell;
for the King is very shy about subsidy, though grim necessity

16 Archenholtz, i. 110.

224 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII

11th April 1758.
prescribes it as inevitable; and his pride, and his reflections on
the last Subsidy Treaty, “‘One Million sterling, Army of Ob-
servation, and Fleet in the Baltic,’’ instead of which came Zero
and Kloster-Zeven, have made him very sensitive. However, all
difficulties are got over; Plenipotentiary Knyphausen, Pitt, Bri-
tannic Majesty and everybody striving to be rational and prac-
tical; and at London, 11th April 1758, Subsidy Treaty, admira-

‘bly brief and to the point, is finished :!7 “That Friedrich shall —

have Four Million Thalers, that is, 670,0002.; payable in Lon-
don to his order, in October, this Year; which sum Friedrich
engages to spend wholly in maintenance and increase of his Ar-
my for behoof of the common object ;—neither party to dream
of making the least shadow of peace or truce without the oth-
er.” Of Baltic Fleet, there is nothing said; nor, in regard to
that, was anything done, this year or afterwards; highly import-
ant as it would have been to Friedrich, with the Navies so-
called of both Sweden and Russia doing their worst upon him.
‘“Why not spare me a small English squadron, and blow these
away?” Nor was the why ever made clear to him; the private
why being, that Czarish Majesty had, last year, intimated to
Britannic, ‘‘ Any such step on your part will annihilate the now
old friendship of Russia and England, and be taken as a direct
declaration of War !”— which Britannic Majesty, for commercial
and miscellaneous reasons, hoped always might be avoided. Be
silent, therefore, on that of Baltic Fleet.

In all the spoken or covenanted points, the Treaty was accu-
rately kept: 670,000/., two-thirds of a million very nearly, will,
in punctual promptitude, come to Friedrich’s hand, were Octo-
ber here. And in regard to Ferdinand (a point left silent, this
too), Friedrich’s expectations were exceeded, not the contrary,
so long as Pitt endured. This is the Third English-Prussian
Treaty of the Seven-Years War, as we said above; and it is the
First that took practical effect: this was followed by three oth-
ers, year after year, of precisely the sane tenor, which were like=
wise practical and punctually kept,—the last of them, ‘12th De-
cember 1760,” had reference to Subsidy for 1761 :—and before
another came, Pitt was out. So that, in all, Friedrich had Four

‘7 In four short Articles; given in Helden-Geschichte, v. 16-17.

’ ¥ we
Reg gt ree 2

. XI.] WINTER IN BRESLAU. . 225
| = Jan. —April 1758.

_ Subsidies; 670,0002. x 4=2,680,000/. of English money alto-
, gether :—and it is computed by some, there was never as much
good fighting otherwise. had out of all the 800,000,000/. we have
| funded in that peculiar line of enterprise.!®

| Pitt had no difficulty with his Parliament, or with his Public,
| in regard to this Sibsidy; the contrary rather. Seldom, if
ever, was England in such a heat of enthusiasm about any For-
eign Man as about Friedrich, in these months since Rossbach
| and what had followed. Celebrating this ‘ Protestant Hero,”
authentic new Champion of Christendom; toasting him, with all
| the honours, out of its Worcester and other Mugs, very high in-
deed. ‘Take these Three Clippings from the old Newspapers,
omitting all else; and rekindle these, by good inspection and
| consideration, into feeble symbolic lamps of an old illumination,
| now fallen so extinct.

| No. 1. Reverend Mr. Whitfield and the Protestant Hero. “ Mon-
day, January 2d,” 1758,‘ was observed as a Day of Thanksgiving, at
the Chapel in Tottenham-Court Road” (brand-new Chapel, still stand-
ing and acting, though now in a dingier manner), -‘ by Mr. Whitfield’s
people, for the signal Victories gained by the King of Prussia over his
Enemies.'°—‘ Why rage the Heathen; why do the people imagine a
vain thing?. Sinful beings we, perilously sunk in sin against the Most
High :—but they, do they think that, by earthly propping and hoisting,
their unblessed Chimera, with his Three Hats, can sweep away the
Eternal Stars?’?”—In this strain, 1 suppose: Protestant Hero and
Heaven’s long-suffering Patiences and Mercies in raising up such a one

for a backsliding generation; doubtless with much unction by Mr.
Whitfield.

~

No. 2. King of Prussia’s Birthday (Tuesday, January 24th).
“This being the Birthday of the King of Prussia, who then entered
into the forty-seventh year of his age, the same was observed with il-

18 First Treaty, 16th January 1756 (is in [Hedlden-Geschichte, iii. 681),
‘‘We will oppose by arms any foreign Armament entering Germany ;
Second Treaty, 11th January 1757 (never published till 1802), is in Schdll,
iii. 30-32: ‘‘ one million subsidy, a Fleet &c.” (not kept at all); after which,

Third Treaty (the first really issuing in subsidy and performance) is 11th
April 1758 (given in Helden-Geschichte, v.17); Fourth (really second), 7th
December 1758 (Ib. v. 752); Fifth (third), 9th November 1759; Sixth
( fourth), 12th December 1760. See Preuss, ii. 124 n.

19 Gentleman’s Magazine, xxviii. (for 1758), p. 41.

K 2

226 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boor XVII.

x
Jan.—April 1758, | ;
luminations and other demonstrations of joy ;”—throughout the Citied =

of London and Westminster, ‘‘ great rejoicings and illuminations,” it ap-
pears,?’—now shining so feebly at a century’s distance !—No. 3 is still
more curious ; and has deserved from us a little special inquiring into.

No. 3. Miss Barbara Wyndham’s- Subsidy. ‘“ March 13th, 1758,”

—while Pitt and Knyphausen are busy on the Subsidy Treaty, still not
out with it, the Newspapers suddenly announce,—

“Miss Bab. Wyndham, of Salisbury, sister of Henry Wyndham, —
Esq., of that City, a maiden lady of ample fortune, has ordered her —
banker to prepare the sum of 1,000/. to be immediately remitted, in her —

own name, as a present to the King of Prussia.”*! Doubtless to the

King of Prussia’s surprise, and that of London Society, which would

not want for commentaries on such a thing!
Before long, the Subsidy ‘Treaty being now out, and the Wyndham
topic new again, London Society reads, in the same Newspaper, a Doc-

umentary Piece, calculated to help in its commentaries. There is —

good likelihood of guess, though no certainty now attainable, that the
“ English Lady” referred to may be Miss Bab. herself; of whose long-
vanished biography, and brisk, airy, nomadic ways, we catch hereby a
faint shadow, momentary, but conceivable, and sufficient for us:

“ To the Authors of the London Chronicle.**

“The following Account, which is a real fact, will serve to show
with what punctuality and exactness the King of Prussia attends to the
most minute affairs, and how open he is to applications from all per-
sons.

“An English Lady being possessed of actions” (shares) “in the
Embden Company, and having occasion to raise money on them, re-
paired to Antwerp” (some two years ago, as will be seen), ‘and made
application for that purpose to a Director of the Company, established
there by the King of Prussia for the managing all affairs relative there-
to. This person,” Van Erthorn the name of him, “ very willingly en-
tered into treaty with her; but the sum he offered to lend being far
short of what the actions would bring, and he also insisting on forfeit-
ure of her right in them, if not redeemed in twelve months,—she broke
off with him, and had recourse to some merchants at Antwerp, who
were inclinable to treat with her on much more equitable terms. The
proceeding necessarily brought the parties before this Director for re-

0 Tb. p. 43; and vol. xxix. p. 42, for next year’s birthday, and P- 81 for
another kind of celebration.

*1 London Chronicle, March 14th-16th, 1758; Lloyd's Filaisn Post ;
&e. &e. 23 London Chronicle of 13th-15th April 1758.

Cuap. XI.] WINTER IN BRESLAU. 227
_ Jan.—April 1758.
ceiving his sanction, which was essential to the solidity of the agree-

ment; and he, finding he was like to lose the advantage he had flattered

himself with, disputed the authenticity of the actions, and thereby threw
her into such discredit, as to render all attempts to raise money on them
ineffectual. Upon this the Lady wrote a Letter by the common post
to his Majesty of Prussia, accompanied with a Memorial complaining
of the treatment she had received from the Director; and she likewise
enclosed the actions themselves in another letter to a friend at Berlin.
By the return of the post, his Majesty condescended to answer her Let-
ter; and the actions were returned authenticated; which so restored
her credit, that in a few hours all difficulties were removed relating to
the transaction she had in hand; and it is more than probable that the
Director has felt his Majesty’s resentment for his ill behaviour. — The
Lady’s Letter was as follows:

‘«¢ Antwerp, 19th February 1756.

“< Sir,—Having had the happiness to pay my court to your Majesty
during a pretty long residence at Berlin’ (say in Voltaire’s time; Miss
Barbara’s ‘ Embden Company,’ I observe, was the first. of the two, date
1750; that of 1753 is not hers), ‘and to receive such marks of favour
from their Majesties the Queens’ (a Barbara capable of shining in the
Royal soirées at Monbijou, of talking to, or of, your Voltaires and lions,
and investing moneys in the new Embden Company) ‘as | shall ever re-
tain a grateful sense of,—I presume to flatter myself that your Majesty
will not be offended at the respectful liberty I have taken in laying be-
fore you my complaints against one Van Erthorn, a Director of the
Embden China Company, whose bad behaviour to me, as set forth in
my Memorial, hath forced me to make a very long and expensive stay
at this place ; and, as the considerable interest I have in that Company
may further subject me to his caprices, I cannot forbear laying my griev-
ances at the foot of your Majesty’s throne; most respectfully supplica-
ting your Majesty that you would be graciously pleased to give orders
that this Director shall not act towards me for the future as he hath
_ done hitherto.

“*T hope for this favour from your Majesty’s sovereign equity ; and
[ shall never cease offering up my ardent prayers for the prosperity of
your glorious reign ; having the honour to be, with the most respect-
ful zeal, Sir, your Majesty’s most humble, most obedient, and most devo-
ted servant, bre ihe

“¢ The King of Prussia’s Answer.
‘¢ ¢ Potsdam, 26th February, 1756.
“¢*Madam,—I received the Letter of the 19th instant, which you

228 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Bone XVII.
Jan.—April 1758,
thought proper to write to me, and was not a little displeased to hear of —
the bad behaviour of one of the Directors of the Asiatic Company of
Embden towards you, of which you were forced to complain. I shall
direct your grievances to be examined, and have just now despatched _
my orders for that purpose to Lenz, my President of the Chamber of
Fast Friesland,’ Chief Judge in those parts.** ‘ You may assure your- —
self the strictest justice shall be done you that the case will admit, —
God keep you in his holy protection.—F riepricu.’” |
Whether this refers to Miss Barbara or not, there is no affirming. |
But the interesting point is, Friedrich did receive and accept Miss Bar-
bara’s 1,000/. The Prussian account, which calls her ‘**an English | |
Jungfrau, Lady Salisbury, who actually sent a sum of money,”’** would |
not itself be satisfactory : but, by good chance, there is still living, in |
Salisbury City, a very aged Gentleman, well known for his worth, and i
intelligence on such matters, who, being inquired of, makes reply at —
once: That the First Earl of Malmesbury (who was of his acquaintance, — i
and had many anecdotes and reminiscences of Friedrich, all noted + |
down, it was understood, with diplomatic exactitude, but never yet pub-
lished or become accessible) did, as “ I well remember, among other
things, mention the King’s telling him that he,” the King, “‘ had received
a Thousand Pounds from Miss Wyndham; with a part of which he had
bought the Flute then in his hand.’’® Which latter circumstance, too,
is curious. For. at all times, however straitened Friedrich’s Exche- |
quer might be, it was his known habit, during this War, to have always, — |
before the current year ended, the ways and means completely settled
and provided for the year coming ; so that everything could be at once |
paid in money (good money or bad—good still up to this date) :—and
nothing was observed to fall short, so much as the customary liberality |
of his gifts to those about him. I infer, therefore: Friedrich had de- |
cided to lay out this 1,000/. in what he would call luxuries, chiefly gifts,
—and, among other things, had said to himself, “I will have a new flute, |
too!” Probably one of his last; for I understand he had, by this time

|

*3 Seyfarth, ii. 139. |
_ 4 Preuss, ii. 124, whose reference is merely ‘‘ Gentleman's Magazine for
1758.” Both in the Annual Register of that Year (i. 86), and in the Gentle-
man’s Magazine, pp. 142, 177, the above Paragraph and Letters are copied _
from the Newspapers, sia without the smallest commentary (there or else-
where), or any mention of a ‘‘ Lady Salisbury.”’

** Letter from John Fowler, Esq., ‘Salisbury, 2d April 1860,” to a — |
Friend of mine (penes me): of Barbara’s identity, or otherwise, with the
Antwerp-Embden Lady, Mr. F. can say nothing.

HAP. XT. ] WINTER IN BRESLAU. 229
March 15th—April 16th 1758.
(Malmesbury? s base 1772), ceased much playing, and ceased altogether
not long after.”°
_- James Harris, First Earl of Malmesbury, was Resident at Berlin,
1772: that is all the date we have for the King’s saying, “‘ And with
part of it I bought this Flute!” Date of Lord Malmesbury’s mention
of itat Salisbury we have none,—likeliest there might be various dates;
| a thing mentioned more than once, and not improvable by dating. The
Wyndhams still live in the Close of Salisbury ; a respected and well-
| _ known Family: record of them (none of Barbara there, or elsewhere
| except here) to be found in the County Histories.?’? I only know far-
| ther, Barbara died, May 1765, “aged and wealthy,” and “ with the bulk
of her fortune endowed a Charity, to be called ‘ Wyndham College,’ ”?*
—which I hope still flourishes. Enough on this small Wyndham mat-
ter; which is nearly altogether English, but in which Friedrich too has
s his indefeasible property.

Friedrich, as indeed Pitt's People and Others have done, takes
the Field uncommonly early: Hriedrich goes upon Schweid-
nitz, as the Preface to whatever his Campaign may be.

While this Subsidy Treaty is getting settled in England, Duke »
Ferdinand has his French in full cackle of universal flight; and
before the signing of it (April 11th), every feather of them is
over the Rhine; Duke Ferdinand busy preparing to follow.
Glorious news, day after day, coming in, for Pitt, for Miss Bar-
bara and for all English souls, Royal Highness of Cumberland
hardly excepted! ‘The ‘‘ Descent on Rochefort,” last Autumn,
had a good deal disappointed Pitt and England ;—an expensive-
ly elaborate Expedition, military and naval; which could not
“descend” at all, when it got to the point; but merely went
groping about, on the muddy shores of the Charente, holding
councils of war yonder; “cannonaded the Isle of Aix for two
hours ;” and returned home without result of any kind, Courts-
martial following on it, as too usual. This was an unsuccessful
first-stroke for Pitt. Indeed, he never did much succeed in those
Descents on the French Coast, though never again so ill as this

eae Prevss, 1: 371,373:

27 Britton’s Beauties of England and Wales, xv. part ii. p. 118; Hoare’s
Salisbury (mistaken, p. 815); &c. |

#8 Annual Register (for 1765), viii. 86.

230  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

March 15th—April 16th 1758, 1
time. Those are a kind of things that require an exactitude as
of clockwork, in all their parts: and Pitt’s Generalcies and War- |

_ Offices, —we know whether they were of the Prussian type or

of the Swedish! A very grievous hindrance to Pitt ;—which |

he will not believe to be quite incurable. Against which he, for
his part, stands up, in grim earnest, and with his whole strength ;
and is now, and at all times, doing what in him lies.to abate or
remedy it:—successfully, to an unexpected degree, within the
next four years. From America, he has decided to recal Lord
Loudon, as a cunctatory haggling mortal, the reverse of a Gen-

eral; how very different from his Austrian Cousin !°9  ‘ Aber- —

crombie may be better,” hopes he ;—was better, still not good.
But already in the gloomy imbroglio over yonder, Pitt discerns
that one Amherst (the son of people unimportant at the hust-
ings) has military talent: and in this puddle of a Rochefort Fu-
tility, he has got his eye on a young Officer named Wolfe, who
was Quartermaster of the Expedition; a young man likewise
destitute of Parliamentary connection, but who may be worth
something. Both of whom will be heard of! In a four-years
determined effort of this kind, things do improve: and it was
wonderful, to what amount,—out of these chaotic War-Offices
little better than the Swedish, and ignorant Generalcies fully
worse than the Swedish,—Pitt got heroic successes and work
really done.

On Pitt, amid confused clouds, there is bright dawn rising ;
and Friedrich, too, for the last month, in Breslau, has a cheerful
prospect on that Western side of his horizon. Here ig one of
his Postscripts, thrown off in Autograph, which Duke Ferdinand
will read with pleasure: ‘I congratulate you, mon cher, with my

2° Cousins certainly enough: their Progenitors were Brothers, of that
House, about 1568,—when Matthew, the cadet, went ‘‘into Livonia,” into
foreign Soldiering (Papa having fallen Prisoner ‘‘at the Battle of Lang-
side,” 1568, and the Family Prospects being low); from this Matthew
comes, through a series of Livonian Soldiers, the famed Austrian Loudon.
Douglas, Peerage of Seotland, p. 425; &¢.&c. Vie de Loudon (ill inform-
ed on that point and some others) says, the first Livonian Loudon came
from Ayrshire, ‘‘in the fourteenth century !”

eee

Cuap. XI. WINTER IN BRESLAU. 25)

March 15th—April 16th 1758.

whole heart! May you fleur-de-lys every French skin of them;
cutting out on their”—what shall we say (leur mprimant sur le
ceul)!—‘‘the Initials of the Peace of Westphalia, and packing

- them across the Rhine,” tattooed in that latest extremity of fash-

ion !°°

Friedrich, grounding partly on those Rhine aspects, has his
own scheme laid for Campaign 1758. It is the old scheme tried
twice already: to go home upon your Enemy swiftly, with your
utmost collective strength, and try to strike into the heart of
him before he is aware. Friedrich has twice tried this; the
second time, with success, respectable though far short of com-
plete. Weakened as now, but with Ferdinand likely to find the
French in employment, he means to try it again; and is busy
preparing at Neisse and elsewhere, though keeping it a dead se-
cret for the time. ‘There is, in fact, no other hopeful plan for
him, if this prove feasible at all. Double your velocity, you
double your momentum. One’s weight is given,—weight grow-
ing less and less ;—but not, or not in the same way and degree,
one’s velocity, one’s rightness of aim. Weight given: it is only
by doubling or trebling his velocity that a man can make his
momentum double or treble, as needed! Friedrich means to try
it, readers will see how,—were the Fort of Schweidnitz once
had; for which object Friedrich watches the weather like a very
D’Argens, eager that the frost would go. Recapture of Schweid-
nitz, the last speck of Aystrianism wiped away there; that is
evidently the preface to whatsoever dayswork may be ahead.

March 15th, frost being now off, Friedrich quits Breslau and
D’Argens,—his Headquarter thenceforth Kloster-Griissau, near
Landshut, troops all getting cantoned thereabout, to keep Bohe-
mia quiet,—and goes at once upon Schweidnitz. With the top
of the morning, so to speak; means to have Schweidnitz before
campaigning usually can begin, or common labourers take their

3° Friedrich to Duke Ferdinand, ‘‘ Griissau, 19th March 1758 :” in Knese-
beck, Herzog Ferdinand, i. 64. Herzog Ferdinand wéhrend des 7-jahrigen
Krieges (‘‘from the English and Prussian Archives’) is the full Title of
Knesebeck’s Book: Letters altogether; not very intelligently edited, but
well worth reading by every student, military and civil: 2 voll. 8vyo, Han-
nover, 1857.

232 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII,
1st-16th April 1758,

tools in this trade. The Austrian Commandant has been greatly
strengthening the works; he had, at first, some 8,000 of garri- __
son; but the three-months blockade has been tight une him 4) jj

and them; and it is hoped the thing can be done.

April 1st-2d,—Siege-material being got to the ground, and
Siege Division and Covering Army all in their places,—in spite
of the heavy rains, we open our first parallel, Austrian Com-
mandant not noticing till it is nearly done. April 8th, we have
our batteries built; and burst out, at our best rate, into cannon-
ade; aiming a good deal at ‘Fort No. 1,” called also “ Galgen
or Gallows Fort,” which we esteem the principal. Cannonade
continues day after day, prospers tolerably on Gallows Fort,—
though the wet weather, and hardship to the troops, are grievous

circumstances, and make Friedrich doubly urgent. * Try it by —

storm!’ counsels Balbi, who is Engineer. Night of April 15th-
16th, storm takes place; with such vigour and such cunning,
that the Gallows Fort is got for almost nothing (loss of ten
men) ;—and few hours after, Austria beat the chamade.*! Fifty-
one new Austrian guns, for one item, and about 7,000/. of mon-
ey. Prisoners of War the garrison, 8,000 gone to 4,900; with
such stores as we can guess, of ours and theirs added: Balbi
was Prussian Engineer-in-Chief, Treskau Captain of the Siege ;
—other particulars I spare the reader.

Unfortunate Schweidnitz underwent four Sieges, four captures
or recaptures, in this War ;—upon all of which we must be quite
summary, only the results of them important to us. For the
curious in sieges, especially for the scientifically curious, there is,
by a Captain Tielcke, excellent account of all these Schweidnitz
Sieges, and of others ;—Artillery-Captain Tielcke, in the Saxon
or Saxon-Russian service; whom perhaps we shall “transiently
fall in with, on a different field, in the course of this Year.

3! Tempelhof, ii. 21-25; Helden- Geschichte, v. 109-123: above all,
Tielcke, Beytrage zur Kriegs-Kunst und zur Geschichte des Krieges von 1756
bis 1763 (6 voll. 4to, Freyberg, 1775-1786), iv. 43-76. Vol. iv. is wholly
devoted to Schweidnitz and its successive Sieges.

ie CHAP. XII] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 233
fe eee 25th April 1758.

CHAPTER XII.
SIEGE OF OLMUTZ.

FouqueEt, on the first movement towards Schweidnitz, had
been detached from Landshut to sweep certain Croat Parties
out of Glatz; Ziethen, with a similar view, into Troppau Coun-
try; both which errands were at once perfectly done. Daun
lies behind the Bohemian Frontier (betimes in the field, he too,
“arrived at Konigsgritz, March 13th’’); and is, with all dili-
gence, perfecting his new levies; entrenching himself on all
points, as man seldom did; ‘felling whole forests,” they say,
building abatis within abatis ;—not doubting, especially on these
Ziethen-Fouquet symptoms, but Friedrich’s Campaign is to be
an Invasion of Bohemia again. ‘ Which he shall not do gratis !”’
hopes Daun ; and, indeed, judges say the entrance would hardly
have been possible on that side, had Friedrich tried it; which
he did not.

Schweidnitz being done, and Daun deep in the Bohemian prob-
lem,—Friedrich, in an unintelligible manner, breaks out from
Griissau and the Landshut region (April 19th—25th), not straight
southward, as Daun had been expecting, but straight south-east-
ward through Niesse, Jiigerndorf: all gone, or all but Ziethen
and Fouquet gone, that way ;——meaning who shall say what, when
news of it comes to Daun? In two divisions, from 30 to 40,000
strong; through Jigerndorf, ever onward through Troppau, and
not till then turning southward :* indubitable march of that cun-
ning Enemy ; Aenidty proceeding, his 40,000 and he, along those
elevated upland countries, watershed of the Black Sea and the
Baltic, bleakly illumined by the April sun; a march into the
mists of the future tense, which do not yet clear themselves to
Daun. Seeing the march turn southward at Troppau, a light
breaks on Daun: “Ha! coming round upon Bohemia from the
east, then?” That is Daun’s opinion, for some time yet; and

* See Map, p. 275 a.

r)
234  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII

19th-25th April 1758,
he immediately starts that way, to save a fine magazine he hag ©

at Leutomischl over there. Daun, from Skalitz near Konigs-
griitz where he is, has but some eighty miles to march, for the
King’s hundred-and-fifty ; and arrives in those parts few days

after the King; posts himself at Leutomischl, veiled in Pandours.

Not for two weeks more does he ascertain it to have been a
march upon the Olmiitz Country, and the intricate forks of the
Morawa River; with a view to besieging Olmiitz, by this wily
Enemy! Upon which Daun did strive to bestir himself thither-

ward, at last ; and, though very slow and hesitative, his measures
_ otherwise were unexceptionable, and turned out luckier than had
been expected by some people.

Olmiitz is an ancient pleasant little City, in the Plains of —
Mihren, romantic, indistinct to the English mind ; with Domes,
with Steeples eminent beyond its size iupopiilation little above
10,000 souls ;—has its Prince-Archbishop and ecclesiastical out- _
fittings, with whom Friedrich has lodged in his time. City

which trades in leather, and Russian and Moldavian droves of —

oxen. Memorable to the Slavic populations for its grand Czech
Library, which was carried away by the Swedes, happily into
thick night ;! also for that poor little Wentzel of theirs (last heir
of the Bohemian Czech royalties, whom no reader has the least

|

\

|
|
at

\
1!

|

é
J

]

|
|
'

>

memory of) being killed on the streets here ;—uncertain, to this _ :

day, by whom, though for whose benefit that dagger-stroke
ended is certain enough :*—poor little Wenzel’s dust lies under
that highest Dome, of the old Cathedral yonder, if anybody
thought of such a thing in hot practical times. Poor Lafayette,
too, lodged here in prison, when the Austrians seized him. City
trades in leather and live stock, we said; has much to do with
artillery, much with ecclesiastry ;—and Friedrich besieged it, for
seven weeks, in the hot summer days of 1758, to no purpose.
Friedrich has been in Olmiitz more than once before; his Schwer-
in once took it in a single day, and it was his for months, in

the old Moravian-Foray time: but the place is changed now; '

become an arsenal or military storehouse of Austria; strongly

1 To Stralsund (1645), ‘‘and has not since been heard of.”
? Supra, vol. i. p. 110.

>

*
4

_ Cuar. XI], SIEGE OF OLMUTz. 235

—-:19th-25th April 1758.

fortified, and with a Captain in it, who distinguishes himself by
yaliant. skill and activity on this occasion.

Friedrich’s Olmiitz Enterprise, the rather as it was unsuccess-
ful, has not wanted critics. And certainly, according to the or-
dinary rules of cautious prudence, could these have been Fried-
rich’s in his present situation, it was not to be called a prudent
Enterprise. But had Friedrich’s arrangements been punctually
fulfilled, and Olmiitz been got in fair time, as was possible or
probable, the thing might have been done very well. Duke Fer-
dinand, in these early May days, is practically making prepara-
tions to follow the French across the Rhine; no fear of French
Armies interfering with us this year. Dohna has the Swedes
locked in Stralsund (capable of being starved, had not the thaw

- come); and in Hinter-Pommern he has General Platen, with

a tolerable Detachment, watching Fermor and his Russians;
Dohna, with Platen, may entertain the Russians for a little,
when they get on way,—which we know will be at a slow pace,
and late in the season. Prince Henri commands in Saxony, say
with 30,000 ;—King’s vicegerent and other self there, “ Do your
wisest and promptest ; hold no councils of war!” Prince Hen-
ri, altogether on the aggressive as yet, is waiting what Reichs
Army there may be ;—has already had Mayer and Free Corps
careering about in Franken Country once and again, tearing up
the incipiencies and preparations, with the usual emphasis; and
is himself intending to follow thither, in a still more impressive
manner. Friedrich’s calculation is, Prince Henri will have his
hands free for a good few weeks yet. Which proved true
enough, so far as that went.

And now, supposing Olmiitz ours, and Vienna itself open to
our insults, does not, by rapid suction, every armed Austrian
flow thitherward ; Germany all drained of them: in which case,
what is to hinder Prince Henri from stepping into Bohmen, by
the Metal Mountains; capturing Prag; getting into junction
with us here, and tumbling Austria at a rate that will astonish
her! Her, and her miscellaneous tagraggery of Confederates,
one and all. Kénigsberg, Stralsund, Bamberg; Russians, Swedes,
Reichsfolk,—here, in Mihren, will be the crown of the game for
all these. Prosper in Mihren, all these are lamed; one right

\

236  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

27th April—1l2th May 1758.
stroke at the heart, the limbs become manageable quantities!
This was Friedrich’s program; and had not imperfections of
execution, beyond what was looked for, and also a good deal of

plain ill-luck, intervened, this bold stroke for Miihren might have

turned out far otherwise than it did.

The march thither (started from Neisse, April 27th) was
beautiful: Friedrich with vanguard and first division; Keith
with rearguard and second, always at a day’s distance; split
into proper columns, for convenience of road and quarter in the
hungry countries; threading those silent mountain villages, and
upper streamlets of Oder and Morawa: Ziethen waving intru-
sive Croateries far off; Fouquet, in thousands of wagons, shov-
ing on from Neisse, “in four sections,” with the due intervals,
under the due escorts, the immensity of stores and siege-furni-
ture, through Jiigerndorf, through Troppau, and onwards ;? —
punctual everybody ; besiegers and siege-materials ready on their
ground by the set day. Daun too had made speed to save his
Magazine. Daun was at Leutomischl, May 5th,—a forty miles
to west of the Morawa,—few days after Friedrich had arrived
in those countries by the eastern or left bank, by Troppau, Gi-
bau, Littau, Aschmeritz, Prossnitz; and a week before Friedrich
had finished his reconnoiterings, campings, and taken position
to his mind. Camps, four or more (shrank in the end to three),
on both banks of the River: a matter of abstruse study; so that
it was May 12th before Friedrich first took view of Olmiitz
itself, and could fairly begin his Problem,—Daun, with his best
Tolpatcheries, still unable to guess what it was.

Of the Siege I propose to say little, though the accounts of it
are ample, useful to the Artillerist and Engineer. If the reader

can be made to conceive it as a blazing loud-sounding fact, on —

which, and on Friedrich in it, the eyes of all Europe were fixed

for some weeks, it may rest now in impressive indistinctness to

us. Keith is Captain of the Siege, whom all praise for his punc-

tual firmness of progress; Balbi, as before, is Engineer, against

whom goes the criticism, Keith’s first of all, that he “ opened his

first parallel 800 yards too far off,”—-which much increased the
° Table of his routes and stages, in Tempelhof, ii. 46.

7

» Pe

Cuap. XII. ] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 237
12th-27th May 1758.

labour, and the expenditure of useless gunpowder, shot having
no effect at such a distance. ‘There were various criticisms:
some real, as this; some imaginary, as that Friedrich grudged
gunpowder, the fact being that he had it not, except after car-
riage from Neisse, say a hundred and twenty miles off,—Trop-
pau, his last Silesian ‘Town, or safe place (jis for the moment),
is eighty miles ;—and was obliged to waste none of it.

Friedrich is not thought to shine in the sieging line as he does
in the fighting; which has some truth in it, though not very
much. When Friedrich laid himself to engineering, I observe,
he did it well: see Neisse, Graudenz, Magdeburg. His Balbi
went wrong with the parallel on this occasion; many things
went wrong: but the truly grievous thing was his distance from
Silesia and the supplies. A hundred and twenty miles of hill-
carriage, eighty of them disputable, for every shot of ammuni-
tion, and for every loaf of bread; this was hard to stand :—and
perhaps no War-apparatus but a Prussian, with a Friedrich for
sole chief-manager, could have stood it so long. Friedrich did
stand it, in a wonderfully tolerable manner; and was continuing
to stand it, and make fair progress; and it is not doubted he
would have got Olmiitz, had not there another fact come on him,
which proved to be of unmanageable nature. The actual loss,
namely, of one Convoy, after so many had come safe, and when,
as appears, there was now only one wanted and no more !—Let
us attend to this a little.

Had Daun, at Olmiitz, been as a Duke of Cumberland reliev-
ing Tournay, rushing into fight at Fontenoy, like a Hanover
White-Horse, neck clothed with thunder, and head destitute of
knowledge,—how lucky it had been for Friedrich! But Daun
knows his trade better. Daun, though superior in strength, sits
on his Magazine, clear not to fight. By no art of manceuver-
ing, had Friedrich much tried it, or hoped it, this time, could
Daun have been brought to give battle. As Fabius Cunctator
he is here in his right place; taking impregnable positions, no
man with better skill in that branch of business ; pushing out par-
ties on the Troppau road; and patiently waiting till this danger-
ous Enemy, with such endless shifts in him, come in sight perhaps
of his last cartridge, or perhaps make some stumble on the way

238  SIVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII.
12th-27th May 1758, _

towards that consummation. Daun is aware of Friedrich’s sur- |

prising qualities Bos against Leo, Daun feels these procedures
to be altogether feline (felis leonine); such stealthy glidings
about, deceptive motions, appearances; then such a rapidity of
spring upon you, and with such a set of claws,—destructive to

bovine or rhinoceros nature: in regard to all which, Bos, if he ©

will prosper, surely cannot be too cautious. It was remarked
of Daun, that he was scrupulously careful; never, in the most
impregnable situations, neglecting the least precaution, but punc-
tiliously fortifying himself to the last item, even to a ridiculous
extent, say Retzow and the critics. It was the one resource of
Daun: truly a solid stubborn patience is in the man; stubborn
courage too, of bovine-rhinoceros type ;—stupid, if you will, but
doing at all times honestly his best and his wisest without flur-
ry; which character is often of surprising value in War; capa-
ble of much mischief, now and then, to quicker people. | Rhi-
noceros Daun did play his Leo a bad prank, more than once;
and this of barring him out from Olmiitz was one of them, per-
haps the worst after Kolin.

Daun’s management of this Olmiitz business is by no means
reckoned br iMag even in the Fabius line; but, on the contra-
ry, inert, dim-minded, inconclusive; and in reality, till almost
the very last, he had been of little help to the besieged. For
near three weeks (till May 23d) Daun sat at Leutomischl, im-
movable on his bread-basket there, forty or more miles from
Olmiitz; and did not see that a Siege was meant. May 27th—
28th, Balbi opened his first parallel, in that mistaken way; four
days before which, Daun moves inwards a march or so, to Zwit-
tau, to Gewitsch (still thirty miles to west of Olmiitz); still
thinking of Bohemia, not of any siege; still hanging by the
mountains and the bread-basket. And there, about Gewitsch,
siege or no siege, Daun sits down again; pretty much immova-
ble, threugh the five weeks of bombardment; and,—except that
Loudon and the Light*Horse are very diligent to do a mischief,
‘attempting our convoys more than once, to no purpose, and
alarming some of our outposts almost every night, but every
night beaten off,’—does, in a manner, nothing; sits quiet, be-
hind his impenetrable veil of Pandours, and lets the bombard-

SHAR. XIT.] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 239
3th May—26th June 1758.

ment take its course. Had not express Order come from Vi-
enna on him, it is thought that Daun would have sat till Olmiitz
was taken; and would then have gone back to Leutomischl and
impregnable posts in the Hills. On express order, he—But
gather, first, these poor sparks in elucidation :

| “The ‘destructive sallies’ and the like, at Olmiitz, were principally

|

an affair of the gazetteers and the imagination: but it is certain, Ol-
miitz, this time, was excellently well defended ; the Commandant, a vig-
orous skilful man, prompt to seize advantages; and Garrison and
Townsfolk zealously helping: so that Friedrich’s progress was unusu-
ally slow. Friedrich’s feelings, all this while, and Balbi’s (who ‘ spent
his first 1220 shots entirely in vain,’ beginning so far off), may be
judged of,—the sound of him to Balbi sometimes stern enough! As
when (June 9th) he personally visits Balbi’s parallels (top of the Tafel-
berg yonder) ; and inquires, ‘ When do you calculate to get done, then ?”
West side of Olmiitz and of the River (east side lies mostly under wa-
ter), there is the bombarding; seventy-one heavy guns; Keith, in his
expertest manner, doing all the captaincies: Keith has about 8,000 of
foot and horse, busy and vigilant, with their faces to the east: in a ring

of four camps, or principally three (Prossnitz, Littau, and Neustadt,

which is across the River), all looking westward or north-westward,
some ten or twenty miles from Keith, Friedrich (headquarters oftenest
Prossnitz, the chief camp) stands facing Daun; who lies concentric to
him, at the distance of another ten or twenty miles, in good part still
thirty or forty miles from Olmiitz, veiled mostly under a cloud of Pan-
dours.. |

“ Of Friedrich’s impatiences we hear little, though they must have
been great. Prince Henri is ready for Prag; many things are ready,
were Olmiitz but done! May 22d, Prince Henri had followed Mayer
in person, with a stronger corps, to root out the Reichsfolk,—and is
now in Bamberg City and Country. And is even in Baireuth itself,
where was lately the Camp of the new Reichs General, Serene High-
ness of Zweibriick, and his nascent Reichs Army; who are off bodily
to Bohemia, ‘ to Eger and the Circle of Saatz,’ a week before.* Fancy
that visit of Henri’s to poor Wilhelmina; the last sight she ever had
of a Brother, or of the old Prussian uniforms, clearing her of Zwei-
briicks and sorrowful guests! Our poor Wilhelmina, alas she is sunk
in sickness, this year more than ever; journeying towards death, in
fact ; and is probably the most pungent, sacredly tragic, of Friedrich’s

* Helden-Geschichte, v. 206-209. Wilhemina’s pretty Letter to Fried-

rich (‘‘ Baireuth, 10th May”); Friedrich’s Answer (** Olmutz, June 1758”):
in Guvres de Frédéric, xxvii. 1. 315-3165.

240 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII,

28th May—26th June 1758,
sorrows, now and onwards. June 12th, Friedrich’s pouting Brother, |
the Prince of Prussia, died; this also he had to hear in Camp at O]- |
miitz. ‘ What did he die of? said Friedrich to the Messenger, a Ma- ©
jor Something. ‘Of Chagrin,’ said the Major, ‘Aus Gram.’ Fried- |
rich made no answer.

“On the last night of May, by beautiful management, military and
other, Duke Ferdinand is across the Rhine; again chasing the French
before him; who, as they are far the more numerous, cannot surely but
make some stand: so that a Battle there may be expected soon,—let
us hope, a Victory ; as indeed it beautifully proved to be, three weeks
after.° On the other hand, Fermor and his Russians are astir; contin- —
ually wending towards Brandenburg, in their voluminous manner, since |
June 16th, though at a slow rate. How desirable the Siege of Olmiitz |
were done !”

On express from Vienna, Daun did bestir himself; cautiously —
got on foot again; detached, across the River, an expert Hussar —
General (‘Be busy all ye Loudons, St. Ignons, Zikowitzes, —
doubly now!”),—expert Hussar General, one item of whose |
force is 1100 chosen grenadiers ;—and himself cautiously stept —
southward and eastward, nearer the Siege Lines. The Hussar
General’s meaning seemed to be some mischief on our Camp of |
Neustadt and the outposts there; but in reality it was to throw
his 1100 into Olmiitz (useful to the Commandant); which,—
by ingenious manceuvering, and guidance from the peasants
‘through bushy woods and bypaths” on that east side of the -
River,—the expert Hussar General, though Ziethen was sent
over to handle him, did perfectly manage, and would not quit
for Ziethen till he saw it finished. Which done, Daun keeps
stepping still farther southward, nearer the Siege Lines; and at
Prossnitz, morning of June 22d, Friedrich, with his own eyes,
sees Daun taking post on the opposite heights; says to some-
body near him, “ Voila les Autrichiens, i/s apprennent & marcher,
There are the Austrians; they are learning to march, though!”
—getting on their feet, like infants in a certain stage (“ marcher”
having that meaning too, though I know not that the King in-
tended it);—they have learned a great many things since your
Majesty first met them. Friedrich took Daun to be, now at
last, meaning Battle for Olmiitz, and made some slight arrange

® Battle of Crefeld, 23d June. §

‘Cuar. XILJ SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 241

26th June 1758. ~

ments accordingly; but that is not Daun’s intention at all; as
Friedrich will find to his cost, in few days. ‘That very day,
Daun has vanished again, still in the southerly direction, again
under veil of Pandours.

Meanwhile, in spite of all things, the Siege makes progress;
“ June 22d, Balbi’s sap had got to their glacis, and was pushing
forward there,’—June 22d, day when Daun made momentary
appearance, and the reinforcement stole in :—within a fortnight
more, Balbi promises the thing shall be done. But supplies are
indispensable: one other convoy from Troppau, and let it be a
big one, “between 3 and 4,000 wagons,” meal, money, iron,
powder; Friedrich hopes this one, if he can get it home, will
suffice. Colonel Mosel is to bring this Convoy; a resolute, ex-
pert Officer, with perhaps 7,000 foot and horse: surely sufficient
escort: but, as Daun is astir, and his Loudons, Ziskowitzes, and
light people, are gliding about, Friedrich orders Ziethen to meet
this important Convoy, with some thousands of new force, and
take charge of bringing it in. Mosel was to leave Troppau,
June 26th; Ziethen pushes out to meet him from the Olmiitz
end, on the second day after; and, one hopes, all is now safe on
that head.

The driving of 3,000 four-horse wagons, under escort, ninety
miles of road, is such an enterprise as cannot readily be con-
ceived by sedentary pacific readers ;—much more the attack of
such! Military science, constraining chaos into the cosmic
state, has nowhere such a problem. ‘There are twelve thousand
horses, for one thing, to be shod, geared, kept roadworthy and
regular; say six thousand country wagoners, thicksoled peas-
ants: then, hanging to the skirts of these, in miscellaneous crazy
vehicles and weak teams, equine and asinine, are one or two
thousand sutler people, male and female, not of select quality,
though on them, too, we keep a sharp eye. The series covers
many miles, as many as twenty English miles (says Tempelhof),
unless in favourable points you compress them into five, going
four wagons abreast for defence’s sake. Defence, or escort, goes
in three bulks or brigades; vanguard, middle, rearguard, with
sparse pickets intervening ;—wider than five miles, you cannot
get the parts to support one another. An enemy breaking in

Von. V.—L

242  SBYEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVUL

26th June 1758, ‘ 4

upon you, at some difficult point of road, woody hollow or the -
like, and opening cannon, musketry and hussar exercise on such —
an object, must make a confused transaction of it! Some com-
manders, for the road has hitherto been mainly pacific, divide
their train into parts, say four parts; moving with their partial

escorts, with an interval of one day between each two: this has —

its obvious advantages, but depends, of course, on the road being

little infested, so that your partial escort will suffice to repel at- _

tacks. ‘Toiling forward, at their diligent slow rate, I find these
trains from ‘Troppau take about six days (from Neisse to Olmiitz
they take eleven, but the first five are peaceable®) ;—can’t be
hurried beyond that pace, if you would save your laggards, your
regulars, and prevent what we may call raggery in your rear-
ward parts; the skirts of your procession get torn by the bushes
if you go faster. This time Colonel Mosel will have to mend
his pace, however, and to go in the lump withal; the case being
critical, as Mosel knows, and more than he yet knows.

Daun, who has friends everywhere, and no lack of spies in
this country, generally hears of the convoys. He has heard, in
particular, of this important one, in good time. Hitherto Daun
had not attempted much upon the convoys, nor anything with
success: King’s posted corps and other precautions are of such
a kind, not even Loudon, when he tried his best, could do any
good; and common wandering hussar parties are as likely to get
a mischief as to do one, on such service. Cautious Daun had
been busy enough keeping his own Camp safe, and flinging a
word of news or encouragement, at the most a trifle of reinforce-
ment, into Olmiitz when possible. But now it becomes evident
there must be one of two things: this convoy seized, or else a
battle risked ;—and that in defect of both these, the inevitable
third thing is, Olmiitz will straightway go.

Major-General Loudon, the best partisan soldier extant, and
ripening for better things, has usually a force of perhaps 10,000
under him, four regiments of them regular grenadiers; and has
been active on the convoys, though hitherto unsuccessful. Leé
an active Loudon, with increased force, try this, their vitally im:
portant convoy, from the west side of the River; an active Zis'

§ Tempelhof, ii. 48.

_ Cuap. XII] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 243
26th-28th June 1758. '

kowitz co-operating on the east side, where the road itself is;
and do their uttermost! That is Daun’s plan,—now in course
of execution. Daun, instead of meaning battle, that day when
Friedrich saw him, was cautiously stealing past, intending to
cross the River farther down; and himself support the opera-
tion. Daun has crossed accordingly, and has doubled up north-
ward again to the fit point; Ziskowitz is in the fit point, in the
due force, on this east side too. Loudon, on the west side, goes
by Muglitz, Hof;* making a long deep bend far to westward
and hillward of all the Prussian posted corps and precautions,
and altogether hidden from them; Loudon aims to be in Trop-
pau neighbourhood, ‘‘ Giintersdorf, near Bautsch,” by the proper
day, and pay Mosel an unexpected visit in the passage there.
Colonel Mosel, marshalling his endless Trains with every ex-
cellent precaution, and the cleverest dispositions (say the Books),
against the known and the unknown, had got upon the road,
and creaked forward, many-wheeled, out of Troppau, Monday,
26th June.’ The roads, worn by the much travelling and wet
weather, were utterly bad; the pace was perhaps quicker than
usual; the much-jolting train got greatly into a jumble:—Mo-
sel, to bring up the laggards, made the morrow a rest-day; did
get about two-thirds of his laggards marshalled again; ordered
the others to return, as impossible. They say, had it not been
- for this rest-day, which seemed of no consequence, Loudon would
not have been at Giintersdorf in time, nor have attempted as he
. did at Giintersdorf and afterwards. At break of day (Wednes-
day 28th), Mosel is again on the road; heavily jumbling forward
from his quarters in Bautsch. Few miles on, towards Giinters-
dorf, he discovers Loudon posted ahead in the defiles. What a
\ sight for Mosel, in his character of Wagoner up with the dawn!
But Mosel managed the defiles and Loudon, this time; halted
his train, dashed up into the woody heights and difficult grounds;
stormed Loudon’s cannon from him, smote Loudon in a valiant
tempestuous manner; and sent him travelling again, for the
present.
Loudon, I conjecture, would have struggled farther, had not he
known that there would be a better chance again not very many
* See Map, p. 275 a. 7 Tempelhof, ii. 89-94.

244 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL y |
28th June 1758. —

miles ahead. Loudon has studied this Convoy; knows of Zie-
then coming to it with so many ; of Ziskowitz coming to him, Lou-
don, with so many; that Ziethen cannot send for more (roads

being all beset by our industry yesterday), that Ziskowitz can, —

should it be needful ;—and that at Domstidtl there is a defile,

or confused woody hollow, of unequalled quality! Mosel jum-— |

bles on all day with his Train, none molesting; at night gets to

his appointed quarters, Village of Neuddrfi;8 and there finds —

Ziethen: a glad meeting, we may fancy, but an anxious one,
with Domstiidtl ahead on the morrow. Loudon concerts with
Ziskowitz this day; calls in all reinforcements possible, and
takes his measures. ‘Thursday morning, Ziethen finds the Train
in such a state, hardly half of it come up, he has to spend the

whole day, Mosel and he, in rearranging it: Friday morning, |

June 30th, they get under way again ;—Friday, the catastrophe
is waiting them.

The Pass of Domstiidtl, lapped in the dim Moravian distance,
is not known to me or to my readers; nor indeed could the
human pen or intellect, aided by ocular inspection or whatever
helps, give the least image of what now took place there, render-

ing Domstiidtl a memorable locality ever since. Understand that 24

Ziethen and Mosel, with their waste slow deluge of wagons,
come jumbling in, with anxiety, with precautions,—precautions
doubled, now that the woody intricacies about Domstiadtl rise in
sight. “Pooh, it is as we thought: there go Austrian cannon-
salvoes, horse-charges, volleying musketries, as our first wagons -
enter the Pass ;—and there will be a job!’’ Indecipherable to
mankind, far off, or even near. Of which only this feature and
that can be laid hold of, as discernible, by the most industrious
man. Escort, in three main-bodies, vanguard, middle, rearguard,
marches on each side; infantry on the left, cavalry on the right,
as the ground is leveller there. Length of the Train in stat-
ute miles, as it jumbles along at this point, is not given; but
we know it was many miles; that horses and wagoners were in
panic hardly restrainable; and we dimly descry, here especial-
ly, human drill-sergeantcy doing the impossible to keep chaos

° The /, or e/, is a diminutive in these names: ‘‘ New-Thorplet,” “Ca-
thedral-Town/et,” and the like.

a Guar. XIT.] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 245

80th June 1758.

"plugged down. The poor wagoner, cannon playing ahead, whirls

homeward with his vehicle, if your eye quit him,—-still better,
and handier, cuts his traces, mounts in a good moment, and is
off at heavy-footed gallop, leaving his wagon. Seldom had hu-
man drill-sergeantcy such a problem.

The Prussian Vanguard, one Krockow its commander, re-
pulsed that first Austrian attack ; swept the Pass clear for some
minutes; got their section of the carriages, or some part of it,
250 in all, hurried through; then halted on the safe side, to
wait what Ziethen would do with the remainder. Ziethen does
his best and bravest, as everybody does; keeps his wagon chaos
plugged down; ranks it in square mass, as a wagon-fortress
(Wagenburg); ranks himself and everybody, his cannon, his
platoon musketry, to the best advantage round it; furiously
shoots out in all manner of ways, against the furious Loudon on
this flank, and the furious Ziskowitz on that; takes hills, loses
them; repels and is repelled (wagon chaos ever harder to keep
plugged); finally perceives himself to be beaten; that the wag-
on chaos has got unplugged (fancy it!)—and that he, Ziethen,
must retreat; back foremost if possible. He did retreat, fight-
ing all the way to Troppau; and the Convoy is a ruin and a
prey.

Krockow, with the 250, has got under way again, hearing the
powder-wagons start into the air (fired by the enemy), and hear-
ing the cannon and musketry take a northerly course, and die
away in that ominous direction. These 250 were all the car-
riages that came in:—happily, by Ziethen’s prudence, the mon-
ey, a large sum, had been lodged in the vanmost of these. ‘The
rest of the Convoy, ball, powder, bread, was of little value to
Loudon, but beyond value to Friedrich at this moment; and it
has gone to annihilation and the belly of Chaos and the Croats.
Among the tragic wrecks of this Convoy there is one that still
goes to our heart. <A longish, almost straight row of young
Prussian recruits stretched among the slain, what are these?
These were 700 recruits coming up from their cantons to the
Wars; hardly six months in training: see how they have fought
to the death, poor lads, and have honourably, on the sudden, got
manumitted from the toils of life. Seven hundred of them stood

246  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL

30th June-Ist July 1758. |

to arms, this morning; some sixty-five will get back to Trop-
pau; that is the invoice account. ‘They he there, with their
blond young cheeks and light hair; beautiful in death ;—could
not have done better, though the sacred poet has said nothing
of them hitherto,—nor need, till times mend with us and him.
Adieu, my noble young Brothers ; so brave, so modest, no Spar-
tan nor no Roman more; may the silence be blessed to you!

Contrary to some current notions, it is comfortably evident
that there was a considerable fire of loyalty in the Prussians
towards their King, during this War; loyalty kept well under
cover, not wasting itself in harangues or noisy froth; but com-
ing out, among all ranks of men, in practical attempts to be of
help in this high struggle, which was their own as well as his.
The Stdnde, landed Gentry, of Pommern and other places, we
heard of their poor little Navy of twelve gunboats, which were
all taken by the Swedes. Military Regiments too, which did
good service at Colberg, as may transiently appear by and by:
—in the gentry or upper classes, a respectable zeal for their
King. Then, among the peasantry or lower class—Here are
Seven Hundred who stood well where he planted them. And
their Mothers—Be Spartan also, ye Mothers! In peaceable
times, Tempelhof tells us the Prussian Mother is usually proud
of having her son in this King’s service: a country wife will say
to you: “Ihave three of them, all in the regiment,” Billerbeck,
Itzenplitz, or whatever be the Canton regiment; ‘the eldest is
ten inches”’ (stands five feet ten), “ the second is eleven, the third
eight, for indeed he is yet young.”

Daun, on the day of this Domstiidtl business, and by way of
masking it, feeling how vital it was, made various extensive
movements, across the River by several Bridges; then’ hither,
thither, on the farther side of Olmiitz, mazing up and down:
Friedrich observing him, till he should ripen to something defi-
nite, followed his bombarding the while; perhaps having hopes
of wager of battle ensuing. Of the disaster at Domstiidtl, Fried-
rich could know nothing, Loudon having closed the roads. Daun
by no means ripens into battle: news of the disaster reached
Friedrich early next day (Saturday, July 1st),—who “ immedi-

;
|
|
|

Guar. XII] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 247
-Qd-8th July 1758.

_ ately assembled his Generals, and spoke a few inspiring words to

them,” such as we may fancy. Friedrich perceives that Olmiitz
is over; that his Third Campaign, third lunge upon the Enemy’s
heart, has prospered worse, thus far, than either of the others;
that he must straightway end this of Olmiitz, without any suc-
cess whatever, and try*the remaining methods and resources.
No word of complaint, they say, is heard from Friedrich in such
cases; face always hopeful, tone cheery. A man in Fr iedrich’: s
position needs a good deal of Stoicism, Greek or other.

That Saturday night the Prussian Barifar dment is quite un-
commonly furious, long continuing; no night yet like it:—the
Prussians are shooting off their superfluous ammunition this
night; do not quite end till Sunday is in. On Sunday itself,
packings, preparations all completed; and ‘‘ Keith, with above
4,000 wagons, safe on the road since 2 a.m.”—the Prussians

_ softly vanish in long smooth streams, with music playing, unmo-

lested by Daun; and leaving nothing, it is boasted, but five or
three mortars, which kept playing to the last, and one cannon to
which something had happened. :

Of the retreat, there could be much said, instructive to mili-
tary men who were studious; extremely fine retreat, say all
judges ;—of which my readers crave only the outlines, the re-
sults. Daun, it was thought, should have ruined Friedrich in
this retreat; but he did nothing of harm to him. In fact, for a
week he could not comprehend the phenomenon at all, and did
not stir from his place,—which was on the other, or wrong, side
of the River. Daun had never doubted but the retreat would
be to Silesia; and he had made his detachments, and laid him-
self out for doing something upon it, in that direction: but, lo,
what roads are these, what motions whitherward? In about a
week it becomes manifest that the retreat, which goes on various
roads, sometimes three at once, has converged on Leutomischl ;
straight for Bohemia instead of Silesia; and that Daun is fallen
seven days behind it; incapable now to do anything. Not even
the Magazine at Leutomischl could be got away, nor could even
the whole of it be burnt.

Keith and the baggage once safe in Leutomischl i uly sth),

oe,

s

248  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

14th July-3d Aug, 1758,

all goes in deliberate long column; Friedrich ahead to open the

passages. July 14th, after five more marches, Friedrich bursts _ |

up Konigsgriitz; scattering any opposition there is; and sits
down there, in a position considered, he knows well how inex-
pugnable; to live on the Country, and survey events. The
4,000 baggage-wagons came in about entire. JF ouquet had the

first division of them, and a secondary charge of the whole; an—

extremely strict, almost pedantic man, and of very fiery temper:
“‘ Hé, dou venez-vous ?’ asked he sharply of Retzow senior, who

had broken through his order, one day, to avert great mischief:
‘‘ How come you here, Mon Général?” ‘ By the Highway, your

Excellency!” answered Retzow in a grave stiff tone.®

Keith himself takes the rear-guard, the most ticklish post of —
all, and manages it well, and with success, as his wont is. Un- —
der sickness at the time, but with his usual vigilance, prudence, —
energy ; qualities apt to be successful in War. Some brushes —
of Croat fighting he had from Loudon ; but they did not amount —

to anything. It was at Holitz, within a march of Konigsgritz,

that Loudon made his chief attempt; a vehement, well-intended __

thing; which looked well at one time. But Keith heard the
cannonading ahead; hurried up with new cavalry, new sagacity

and fire of energy; dashed out horse charges, seized hill tops,

of a vital nature; and quickly ended the affair. A man fiery
enough, and prompt with his stroke when wanted, though com-
monly so quiet. ‘‘'Tell Monsieur,—” some General who seemed
too stupid or too languid on this occasion,—‘ Tell Monsieur
from me,” said Keith to his Aide-de-Camp, ‘‘he may be a very
pretty thing, but he is not a man (qu’dl peut étre une bonne chose,
mais qui nest pas un homme)!’!° The excellent vernacular
Keith ;—still a fine breadth of accent in him, one perceives!
He is now past sixty; troubled with asthma; and I doubt not
may be, occasionally, thinking it near time to end his campaigns.
And in fact, he is about ending them; sooner than he or any-
body had expected.

Daun, picking his steps and positions, latterly with threefold
precaution, got into Kénigsgriitz neighbourhood, a week after
* Retzow, 1.302. 3° Varnhagen, Leben des Sc. Jacob von Keith, p. 227.

.

Cuar. XII.] | SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 249
14th July—3d Aug. 1758.

Friedrich ; and looked down with enigmatic wonder upon Fried-
rich’s new settlement there. Forage abundant all round, and
the corn-harvest growing white:—here, strange to say, has
Friedrich got planted in the znside of those innumerable Daun
redoubts, and “ woods of abatis ;” and might make a very pretty
“Bohemian Campaign” of it, after all, were Daun the only
adversary he had! Judges are of opinion, that Daun, with all
_his superiority of number, could not have disrooted Friedrich
this season.!! Daun did try him by the Pandour methods,
1,000 Croats stealing in upon Konigsgriitz at one in the
morning,” and the like; but these availed nothing. By the one
effectual method, that-of beating him in battle, Daun never would
have tried. What did disroot Friedrich, then ?—Take the fol-
lowing dates, and small hints of phenomena in other parts of
the big Theatre of War. “ Konitz’ is a little Polish Town,
midway between Dantzig and Friedrich’s Dominions:

“ Konitz, 16th June 1758. ‘This day Feldmarschall Fermor arrives
in his principal Camp here. For many weeks past, he has been drib-
bling across the Weichsel hitherward, into various small camps, with
Cossack Parties flying about, under check of General Platen. But
now, being all across, and reunited, Fermor shoots out Cossack Parties
of quite other weight and atrocity; and is ready to begin business,—
still a little uncertain how. His Cossacks, under their Demikows, Ro-
manzows, capable of no good fighting, but of endless incendiary mis-
chief in the neighbourhood ;—shoot far ahead into Prussian territory :
Platen, Hordt with his Free-Corps, are beautifully sharp upon them;
but many beatings avail little. ‘They burn the town of Driesen’
(Hordt having been hard upon them there) ; ‘town of Ratzebuhr, and
nineteen villages around ;—burn poor old women and men, one poor
old clergyman especially, wind him well in straw-roping, then set fire,
and leave him;—and are worse than fiends or hyenas. Not to be
_ checked by Platen’s best diligence; not, in the end, by Platen and
Dohna together. Dohna (18th June) has risen from Stralsund in check
of them,—leaving the unfortunate Swedes to come out” (shrunk to
about 7,000, so unsalutary their stockfish diet there),— these hyzna

1 Tempelhof, ii. 170-176, 185 ;—who, unluckily, in soldier fashion, here
as too often elsewhere, does not give us the Arithmetical numbers of each,
but counts by ‘‘ Battalions” and ‘‘ Squadrons,” which, except in time of
Peace, are a totally uncertain quantity: — guess vaguely, 75,000 against
30,000.

L2

250  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

14th July—3d Aug. 1758.
Cossacks being the far more pressing thing. Dohna is diligent, gives
them many slaps and checks; Dohna cannot cut the taproot of them in
two; that is to say, fight Fermor and beat him: other effectual check
there can be none. ‘?

“Tschopau (in Saxony), 21st June. Prince Henri has. quitted
Bamberg Country ; and is home again, carefully posted, at ‘T'schopau
and up and down, on the southern side of Saxony; with his eye well
on the Passes of the Metal-Mountains,—where now, in the turn things
at Olmiitz have taken, his clear fate is to be invaded, not to invade.
The Reichs Army, fairly afoot in the Circle of Saatz, counts itself
35,000; add 15,000 Austrians of a solid quality, there is a Reichs
Army of 50,000 in all, this Year. And will certainly invade Saxony,
—though it is in no hurry; does not stir till August come, and will
find Prince Henry elaborately on his guard, and little to be made of
him, though he is as one to two.

“ Crefeld (Rhine-Country), 23d June. Duke Ferdinand, after skil-
ful-shoving and advancing, some forty or fifty miles, on his new or
French side of the Rhine, finds the French drawn up at Crefeld (June
23d), 47,000 of them versus 33,000: in altogether intricate ground ;
canal-ditches, osier-thickets, farm-villages, peat-bogs. Ground defen-
sible against the world, had the 47,000 had a Captain; but reasonably
safe to attack, with nothing but a Clermont acting that character.
Ferdinand, I can perceive, knew his Clermont; and took liberties with
him. Divided himself into three attacks: one in front, one on Cler-
mont’s right flank, both of which cannonaded, as if in earnest, but did
not prevent Clermont going to dinner. One attack on front, one on
right flank; then there was a third, seemingly on left flank, but which
winded itself round (perilously imprudent, had there been a Captain,
instead of a Clermont deepish in wine by this time), and burst in upon
Clermont’s rear; jingling his wine-glasses and decanters, think at what
a rate ;—scattering his 47,000 and him to the road again, with a loss
of men, which was counted to 4,000 (4,000 against 1,700), and of hon-
our—whatever was still to lose !”'?

Ferdinand, it was hoped, would now be able to maintain himself, and
push forward, on this French side of the Rhine: and had Wesel been
his (as some of us know it is not!), perhaps he might. At any rate,
veteran Belleisle took his measures :—dismissal of Clermont Prince of
the Blood, and appointment of Contades, a man of some skill; recal of
Soubise and his 24,000 from their Austrian intentions ; these and other
strenuous measures,—and prevented such consummation. A gallant

12 Helden-Geschichte, v. 149 et seq. ; Tempelhof, ii. 135 &c.
*? Mauvillon, i. 297-309; Westphalen, i. 588-604; Tempelhof; &c. &c.

|
|
|

re

‘
ws

4

~ Cuar. XID] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ.. — . 251
14th July—8th Aug. 1758.
young Comte de Gisors, only son of Belleisle, perished in that disgrace-
ful Crefeld :—unfortunate old man, what a business that of “ cutting
Germany in four” has been to you, first and last!

“ Louisburg (North America), July 8th. Landing of General bal
herst’s people, at Louisburg in Cape Breton; with a view of besieging
that important place. Which has now He tire extremely difficult; the
garrison, and their defences, military, naval, being in full readiness for
such an event. Landing was done by Brigadier Wolfe; under the eye
of Amherst and Admiral Boscawen from rearward, and under abundant
fire of batteries and musketries playing on it ahead: in one of the surf-
iest seas (but we have waited four days, and it hardly mends), tossing
us about like corks ;—so that ‘many of the boats were broken;’ and
Wolfe and people ‘had to leap out, breast deep,’ and make fight for
themselves, the faster the better, under very intricate circumstances!
Which was victoriously done, by Wolfe and his people; really in a
rather handsome manner, that morning. As were all the subsequent
Siege-operations, on land and water, by them and the others :—till (Au-
gust 8th) the Siege ended: in complete surrender,—positively for the
last time (Pitt fully intends); no Austrian Netherlands now to put one
on revoking it !'*

“These are pretty victories, cheering to Pitt and Friedrich: but the
difficult point still is that of Fermor. Whose Cossacks, and their devil-
like ravagings, are hideous to think of :—unrestrainable by Dohna, un-
less he could cut the root of them; which he cannot. June 27th”
(while Colonel Mosel, with his 3,000 wagons, still only one stage trom
Troppau, was so busy), “slow Fermor rose from Konitz ; began hitch-
ing southward, southward gradually to Posen,—a considerably stronger
Polish Town; on the edge both of Brandenburg and of Silesia ;—and,
has been sitting there, almost ever since our entrance into Bohemia;
his Cossacks burning and wasting to great distances in both Countries ;
no deciding which of them he meant to invade with his Army. Sits
there almost a month, enigmatic to Dohna, enigmatic to Friedrich: till
Friedrich decides at last that he cannot be suffered longer, whichever
of them he mean; and rises for Silesia (August 2d). Precisely about
which day Fermor had decided for Brandenburg, and rolled over thither,
towards Ciistrin and the Frankfurt-on-Oder Country, heralded by fire
and murder, as usual.”

Friedrich’s march to Landshut is again much admired. Daun
had beset the three great roads, the two likeliest especially,
with abundant Pandours, and his best Loudons and St Ignons;

14 General Amherst’s Diary of the Siege (in Gentleman’s Magazine, xxviii.
384-89).

252 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGUT. {Book XVIIL _
Yth August 1758,
Friedrich, making himself enigmatic to Daun, struck into the
third road by Skalitz, Nachod; circuitous, steep, but lying Glatz.
ward, handy for support of various kinds. He was attempted,
once or more, by Pandours, but used them badly; fell in with
Daun’s old abatis (well wind-dried now), in different places,
and burnt them in passing. And in five days, was in Kloster-
Griissau, safe on his own side of the Mountains again. One —
point only we will note, in these Pandour turmoilings. From
Skalitz, the first stage of his march, he answers a Letter of
Brother Henri’s: |

To Prince Henri (at Tschopau in Saxony). “ What you write to —
me of my Sister of Baireuth” (that she has been in extremity, cannot
yet write, and must not be told of the Prince of Prussia’s death Jest it
kill her) “makes me tremble! Next to our Mother, she is what I
have the most tenderly loved in this world. She is a Sister who has
my heart and all my confidence; and whose character is of price be-
yond all the crowns in this universe. From my tenderest years, I was
brought up with her: you can conceive how there reigns between us
that indissoluble bond of mutual affection and attachment for life, which
in all other cases, were it only from disparity of ages, is impossible.
Would to Heaven I might die before her ;—and that this terror itself
don’t take away my life without my actually losing her!”'5 * *

At Griissau (August 9th) he writes to his dear Wilhelmina herself:
** Oh, you the dearest of my family, you whom I have most at heart of
all in this world,—for the sake of whatever is most precious to you,
preserve yourself, and let me have at least the consolation of shedding
my tears in your bosom! Fear nothing for ws, and’—O King, she is
dying, and I believe knows it, though you will hope to the last! Theré
is something piercingly tragical in those final Letters of Friedrich to
his Wilhelmina, written from such scenes of wreck and storm, and in
Wilhelmina’s beautiful ever-loving quiet Answers, dictated when she
could no longer write."®

Friedrich had last left Griissau, April 18th; he has returned

15 (uvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 179, ‘‘Klenny, near Skalitz, 3d August
1758 ;” Henri’s Letter is dated, ‘‘Camp of Tschopau, 28th July” (ib. 177).

16 «¢ July 18th” is the last by her hand, and ‘‘ almost illegible;”—still ex-
tant, it seems, though withheld from us. Was received at Griissau here,
and answered at some length ((@uwvres, xxvii. 1. 316), according to the
specimen just given. Two more of hers follow, and Four of the King’s
(ib. 317-322). Nearly meaningless, as printed there, without commentary
for the unprepared reader.

i fertben wx
ie,

Cuap. XII.] SIEGE OF OLMUTZ. 253
8th-1lth Aug. 1758.

to it, August 8th: after sixteen weeks of a very eventful ab-
sence. In Griissau he staid two whole days ;—busy enough he,
probably, though his people were resting! August 10th, he
draws up, for Prince Henri, “‘ under seal of the most absolute
secrecy,’ and with admirable business-like strictness, brevity
and clearness, forgetting nothing useful, remembering nothing
useless, a Paper of Directions in case of a certain event: “I
march tomorrow against the Russians: as the events of war
may lead to all sorts of accidents, and it may easily happen to
me to be killed, I have thought it my duty to let you know what
my plans were,” and what you are to do in that event,—“ the
rather as you are Guardian of our Nephew” (late Prince of
Prussia’s Son) ‘with an unlimited authority.” Oath from all
the armies the instant I am killed: rapid, active, as ever; the

enemy not to notice that there is any change in the command.

I intend to “beat the Russians utterly’’ («@ plate couture, “ splay-
seam’’), ‘‘if it be possible ;”’ then to &c. :—gives you his ‘ itiner-
ary,” too, or probable address, till “the 25th” (notably enough) ;
in short, forgets nothing useful, nor remembers any thing that is
not, in spite of his hurry.17. For Minister Finck also there
went a Paper; seal not needing to be opened, for the moment.

With Mareraf Karl, and Fouquet under him, who are to
guard Silesia, he leaves in two divisions about half the late Ol-
miitz Army :—added to the other force, this will make about
40,000 for that service.!8 Keith has the chief command here;
but is ordered to Breslau, in the mean time, for a little rest and
recovery of health, Friday, 11th August, Friedrich himself,
with the other Half, pushes off towards Fermor and the Cos-
sack demons; through Liegnitz, through Hohenfriedberg Coun-
try, straight for Frankfurt, with his best speed.

17 “¢ Disposition Testamentaire”’ (so they have labelled it); given in G’u-
vres, iv. (Appendice) 261-262. Friedrich’s Testament proper is already
made, and all in order, years ago (‘‘11th January 1752”’): of this there
followed Tsvo new Redactions (new editions with slight improvements,
*“7th November 1768,” and ‘‘ 8th January 1769” the jinally valid one);
and various Supplements, or summary Enforcements (as here), at different
times of crisis: See Preuss, iv. 277, 401, and Guvres de &rédeéric, vi. p. 18
(of Preface), for some confused account of that matter.

17 Stenzel, v. 163.

254 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox | AV
20th-25th Aug. 1706s

CHAPTER XIII.
BATTLE OF ZORNDORF.

Sunpay, 20th August, Friedrich, with his small Army, hard-
ly above 15,000 I should guess, arrived at Frankfurt-on-Oder:
‘his Majesty,’ it seems, “‘lodged in the Lebus Suburb, in the
house of a Clergyman’s Widow; and was observed to go often
cut of doors, and listen to the cannonading which was going on
at Ciistrin.”! From Landshut hither, he has come in nine days;
the swiftest marching; a fiery spur of indignation being upon all
his men and him, for the last two days fierier than ever,—long-
ing all to have a blow at those incendiary Russian gentlemen.
Five days ago, the Russians, attempting blindly on the Garrison
of Ciistrin, had burnt,—nothing of the Garrison at all,—but the
poor little Town altogether. Which has filled everybody with
lamentation and horror. And, listen yonder, they are still busy
on the solitary Garrison of Ciistrin ;—audible enough to Fried-
rich, from his northern or Lebus Suburb, which lies nearest the
place, at a distance of some twenty miles.

Of Fermor’s redhot savagery on Ciistrin, it is lamentably
necessary we should say something: to say much would be a
waste of record; as the thing itself was a waste of powder. A
thing hideous to think of; without the least profit to Fermor,
but with total ruin to all the inhabitants, and to the many stran-
gers who had sought refuge there. One interior circumstance
is memorable and lucky to us. Artillery-Captain Tielcke hap-
pened to be with these people; had come in the train of “two
Saxon Princes, serving as volunteers ;’’ and, with a singular lu-
cidity, and faithful good sense, not scientific alone, he illumi-
nates these black Russian matters for such as have to do with
them.

Tielcke’s Book of Contributions to the Art of War? is still in

' Ridenbeck, 1. 347.
* Beytrage zur Kriegs-Kunst und (zur) Geschichte des Krieges von 1756 bis
1763 (six thin vols. 4to, with many Plates); cited above.

_

~ nar. XU] _ BATTLE OF ZORNDORE, 255.
20th-25th Aug. 1758.

~ repute with Soldiers, especially in the Artillery line; and indeed

*

shows a sound geometrical head, and contains bits of excellent
Historical reading interspersed among the scientific parts. This
Tielcke, it appears, was a common foot-soldier, one of those Pir-
na 14,000 made Prussian against their will; but Tielcke had a
milkmaid for sweetheart in those regions, who, good soul, gave
him her generous farewell, a suit of her clothes, perhaps a pair
of her pails; and in that guise he walked out of bondage. Clear
away; to Warsaw, to favour with the King and others (being
of real merit, an excellent, studious, modest little man); and
here he now reappears, in a higher capacity; as articulate Eye-
witness of the Ciistrin Business and the Zorndorf, among much
other Russian darkness, which shall remain comfortably blank
to us.

Up to Ciistrin, the Journal of the Operations of the Russian
Army, which I could give from day to day,? is of no interest
except to the Nether Powers of this Universe; the Russian Op-
erations hitherto having consisted in slow marches, sluttish

-cookeries, cantoonings, bivouackings, with destruction of a poor

innocent Country, and arson, theft and murder done on the great
seale, by inhuman vagabonds, Cossacks so-called, not tempered
on this occasion by the mercy of Calmucks. ‘The regular Rus-
sian Army, it appears, participates in the common horror of
mankind against such a method of making war; but neither
Feldmarschall Fermor, nor General Demikof (properly Thémi-
coud, a Swiss, deserving little thanks from us, who has taken in
hand to command these Missionaries of the Pit), can help the
results above described. Which are justly characterised as
abominable, to gods and men; and not fit to be recorded in
human Annals; execration, and if it were possible, oblivion,
being the human resource with them. The Russian Officers, it
seems, despise this Cossack rabble incredibly ; for their fighting
qualities withal are close on zero, though their talent for arson
and murder is so considerable. And, contrariwise, the Cos-
sacks, for their part, have no objection to plunder or even, if ob-

3 “* Tagebuch beyder &§c. (Diary of both Armies from the beginning of the
Campaign till Zorndorf”), in Tielcke, ii. 1-75 ; Tempelhof, ii. 136, 216-
224; Helden-Geschichte, v.; &c. &e.

‘el

256  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII

20th-25th Aug. i768

streperous, to kill, any regular Officer they may meet unescorted
in a good place. ‘Their talent for arson is great. They do nie
countable damage to the Army itself; provoking all the Coun-
try people to destroy by fire what could be eaten or used, the

foraging, food and equipments of horse and man; so that horse

and man have to be fed by victual carted hundred of miles out
of Poland; and the Russian Army sticks, as it were, tethered
with a welter of broken porridge-pots and rent mealbags hung
to every foot it has.

East Preussen is quiet from the storms of War; holds its

tongue well, and hopes better days: but the Russians themselves”
are little the better for it, a country so lately burned bare; they
are merely flung so many scores of miles forward, farther from

home and their real resources, before they can begin work.
They have no port on the Baltic: poor blockheads, they are
aware how desirable, for instance, Dantzig would be; to help

feeding them out of ships; but the Dantzigers won’t. Colberg, _

a poor little place, with only 700 militia people in it, would be
of immense service to them as a sea-haven ; but even this they
have not yet tried to get; and after trying, they will find it a
job. “Why not unite with the Swedes and take Stettin (the

finest harbour in the Baltic), which would bring Russia, by ships, —

to your very hand?” ‘This is what Montalembert is urgent

upon, year after year, to the point of wearying everybody; but —

-

yee
me ey

he can get no official soul to pay heed to him,—the difficulties —
are so considerable. ‘Swedes, what are they?” say the Rus- ©

sians: ‘Russians what?’ say the Swedes. ‘‘Sweden would
be so handy for the Artilleries,” urges Montalembert; ‘ Rus-
sians for the Soldiery, or covering and fighting part.”—“ Can't
be done!” Officiality shakes its head: and Montalembert is
obliged to be silent.

The Russians have got into the Neumark of Brandenburg, on
those bad terms; and are clearly aware that, without some For-
tress as a Place of Arms, they are an overgrown Incompetency
and Monstrosity in the field of War; doing much destruction,
most of which proves self-destructive before long. But how
help it? Ifthe carrying of meal so far be difficult, what will

>i

edi. XIII. ] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 257
20th-25th Aug. 1758.
the carrying of siege-furniture be? A flat impossibility. Fer-
mor, aware of these facts, remembers what happened at Ocza-
kow,—long ago, in our presence, and Keith’s and Munnich’s, if
the reader have not quite forgot. Miinnich, on that occasion,
took Oczakow without any siege-furniture whatever, by boldly
marching up to it; nothing but audacity and good luck on his
side. Fermor determines to try Ciistrin in the like way,—if
peradventure Prussian soldiery be like Turk ?—

Fermor rose from Posen, August 2d, almost three weeks ago;
making daily for the Neumark and those unfortunate Oder
Countries; nobody but Dohna to oppose him,—Dohna in the
ratio of perhaps one against four. Dohna naturally laid hold
of Frankfurt and the Oder Bridge, so that Fermor could not
cross there; whereupon Fermor, as the next best thing, struck
northward for the Warta (black Polish stream, last big branch
of Oder); crossed this, at his ease, by Landsberg Bridge, Au-
gust 10th ;' and after a day or two of readjustment in Lands-
berg, made for Ciistrin Country (his next headquarter is at
Gross Kamin*); hoping, in some accidental or miraculous way
to cross Oder thereabouts, or even get hold of Ciistrin as a
Place of Arms. If peradventure he can take Ciistrin without
proper siege-artillery, in the Oczakow or Anti-Turk way?  Fer-
mor has been busy upon Ciistrin since August 15th ;—in what
fashion we partly heard, and will now, from authentic sources,
see a little for ourselves.

The Castle of Ciistrin, built by good Johann of Ciistrin, and “ roofed
with copper,” in the Reformation times,—we know it from of old, and
Friedrich has since had some knowledge of it. Ciistrin itself is a
rugged little Town, with some moorland traffic, and is still a place of
great military strength, the garrison of those parts. Its rough pave-
ments, its heavy stone battlements and barriers, give it a gnarled ob-
stinate aspect,—stern enough place of exile for a Crown-Prince fallen
into such disfavour with Papa! A rugged, compact, by no means
handsome little Town, at the meeting of the Warta and the Oder;
stands naturally among sedges, willows and drained mire, except that
human industry is pleasantly busy upon it,and has long been. So that
the neighbourhood is populous beyond expectation ; studded with rough
_ cottages in whitewash; hamlets in a paved condition; and comfortable

* Tempelhof, ii. 216. * Map at p. 275 a.

258 SEVEN-YEARS. WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVUI |
20th-25th Aug. 1758,

signs of labour victoriously wrestling with the wilderness. Cistrin, — |

an arsenal and garrison, begirt with two rivers, and with awful bul-
warks, and bastions cased in stone, —“ perhaps too high,” say the
Jearned,—is likely to be impregnable to Russian engineering on those
terms. Here, with brevity, is the catastrophe of Cistrin.

Tuesday, 15th August 1758, At two in the morning, several thou-
sand Russians, grenadiers, under Quarter - Master General Stoffeln,
whom the readers of Mannstein know from old Oczakow times, are
astir; pushing along from Gross Kamin, through the scraggy fir-woods,
and flat peat countries; intending a stroke on Ciistrin, if perhaps they
can get it :°—not the slightest chance to get Ciistrin; Prussian soldier-
ship and Turkish being two quite different things! The pickeering
and maneuvering of Stoffeln shall not detain us. Stoffeln came along

by the Landsberg road (course of the now Konigsberg-Cistrin Rail-
way); and drove in the Prussian out-parties, who at first took him for
Cossacks. Stoffeln set himself down on the north side of the place;
planted cannon in certain claypits thereabouts, and about nine o'clock
began firing shells and incendiary grenadoes ata great rate. Tielcke _
saw everything ;—and had the honour to take luncheon, that evening,
with certain chief Officers, sitting on the ground, after all was over, ©

and only a few shots from the Garrison still dropping.°
At the third grenado, which, it seems, fell into a straw magazine,

Ciistrin took fire; could not be quenched again, so much dry wood in ©

it, so much disorder too, the very soldiers some of them disorderly (a

bad deserter set); so that it soon flamed aloft,—from side to side one
sea of flame: and man, woman and child, every soul (except the Gar-
rison, which sat enclosed in strong stone), had to fly across the River,

under penalty of death by fire. Of Ciistrin, by five in the evening,
there was nothing left but the black ashes; the Garrison standing un-
harmed, and the Church, School-house, and some stone edifices in a
charred skeleton condition. “No life was lost, except that of one
child in arms.” All Neumark had lodged its valuables in this place
of strength; all are fled now in horror and terror across the Oder, by
the Bridge, before it also unquenchably takes fire, at the western or
Non-Russian end of the place. Such a day as was seldom seen in
human experience ;—Fermor responsible for it, happily not we. i
Fermor, in the evening, said to his Artillery People: ‘‘ Why have
you ceased to fire grenadoes?” ‘“ Excellency, the Town is out; noth-
ing now but ashes and stone.” ‘ Never mind; give them the rest, one
every quarter of an hour. We shall not need the grenadoes again.
The cannon-balls we shall; them, therefore, do not waste.” On the

* Tempelhof, ii. 217; but Tielcke, ii. 69 et seq., the real source.
® Tielcke, ii. 75 n.

|
}
I
| ‘
\

Cnr. XIII] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 259
. 20th-25th Aug. 1758.

‘morrow morning, after this performance on the Town, Fermor sends a
Trumpeter: “Surrender, or else —!” rather in the tremendous style.
“Or else?” answers the Commandant, pointing to the ashes, to the
black inconsumable stones ; and is deaf to this ex-postfacto ‘Trumpeter.
The Russians say they sent one yesterday morning, not ex-postfacto,
but he was killed in the pickeerings, and never heard of again. A mile
or so to rear of Ciistrin, on the westward or Berlin side of the River,
lies Dohna, for the last four days; expecting that the Laws of Nature
will hold good, and Ciistrin prove tenable against such sieging. So
stands it on Friedrich’s arrival.

We left Friedrich in the Lebus Suburb of Frankfurt, Sunday,
August 20th, listening to the distant cannonade. Next morning,
he is here himself; at Dohna’s Camp of Gorgast, taking survey
of affairs; came early, under rapid small escort, leaving his

| Army to follow; scorn and contemptuous indignation the hu-
| mour of him, they say; resolution to be swiftly home upon that
surprising Russian armament, and teach it new manners. The
black skeleton of Ciistrin stares hideously across the River ;
** Ciistrin Siege’’ so-called still going on:—had better make
despatch now, and take itself away! He greatly despises Rus-
sian soldiership: ‘ Pooh, pooh,” he would answer, if Keith from
experience said, “‘ Your Majesty does not do it justice ;”’—and
Keith has been known to hint, ‘If the trial ever come, your
Majesty will alter that opinion.” A day or two hence, amid
, these hideous Russian fire-traceries, the Hussars bring him a
dozen of Cossacks they have made prisoners: Friedrich looks at
the dirty green vagabonds; says to one of his staff: ‘ And this
is the kind of Doggery I have to bother with!”—The sight of
the poor country people, and their tears of joy and of sorrow, on
his re-appearance among them, much affected him. ‘Taking in-
spection at Dohna, he finds Dohna wonderfully clean, pipe-clay-
ed, complete: “You are very fine indeed, you;—I bring you
a set of fellows, rough as grasteufeln’’ (‘‘ grass-devils,” I never
__ know whether insects or birds) ; “‘ but they can bite,”—hope you
can !

Tuesday, August 22d, at five in the morning our Army has
all arrived, the Frankfurt people just come in; 380,000 of us
now in Camp at Gorgast. Friedrich orders straightway that a
certain Russian Redoubt on the other side of the River, at

,
if
.

260  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII

20th—25th Aug. 1758,

Schaumburg, a mile or two down stream, be well cannonaded

into ruin,—as if he took it for some incipiency of a Russian

Bridge, or were himself minded to ‘cross here, under cover of —

Ciistrin. Friedrich’s intention very certainly is to cross,—here
or not just here ;—and that same night, after some hours of rest
to the Frankfurt people,—night of ‘Tuesday-Wednesday, Fried-
rich, having persuaded the Russians that his crossing-place will |
be their Redoubt at Schaumburg, marches ten or twelve miles

!

down the River, silently his 30,000 and he, till opposite the Vil-

lage of Giistebiese ; rapidly makes his Bridges there, unmolested:

Fermor, with his eye on the cannonaded Redoubt only, has ex-_

pected no such matter; and is much astonished when he hears
of it, twenty hours after. Friedrich, across with the vanguard,

at an early hour of Wednesday, gets upon the knoll at Giiste-
biese for a view: and all Giistebiese, hearing of him, hurries—

out, with low- voiced tremulous blessings, irrepressible tears:

‘God reward your Majesty, that have come to us!”—and there

is a hustling and a struggling, among the women especially, to
kiss the skirts of his coat. Poor souls: one could have stood
tremendous cheers; but this is a thing I forgive Friedrich for
being visibly affected with.

Friedrich leaves his baggage on the other side of the Oder,
and the Bridge guarded; our friend Hordt, with his Free-Corps,
doing it. Friedrich marches forward some ten miles that night;
eastward, straight for Gross Kamin, as if to take the Russians
in rear; encamps at a place called Klossow, spreading himself
obliquely towards the Miitzel (black sluggish tributary of the
Oder in those parts), meaning to reach Neu Damm on the Miit-
zel tomorrow, there almost within wind of the Russians, and be
ready for crossing on them. It was at Klossow (23d August,
evening), that the Hussars brought him in their dozen or two of
Cossacks, and he had his first sight of Russian soldiery; by no
means a favourable one, “‘ Ugh, only look !’’— As we are now
approaching Zorndorf, and the monstrous tug of Battle which
fell out there, readers will be glad of the following:

“From Damm on the Miitzel, where Friedrich intends crossing it to-

J

‘

morrow night, south to Gross Kamin, not far from the Warta, where ©
Fermor’s headquarter lately was, may be about five miles. From -

aN -~S

& Oe

Suir. XIII] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 261
20th-25th Aug. 1758.
Ciistrin, Kamin lies north-east about eight or ten miles: Zorndorf, the
most considerable Village in this tract, lies,—little dreaming of the sad
glory coming to it,—pretty much in the centre between big Warta and
smaller Miitzel. ‘The Country is by nature a peat-wilderness, far and
wide ; but it has been tamed extensively ; grows crops, green pastures ;
is elsewhere covered with wood (Scotch fir, scraggy in size, but evi-
dently under forest management); perhaps half the country is in Fir
_ tracts, what they call Hezden (Heaths); the cultivated spaces lying like
light-green islands with black-green channels and expanses of circum-
ambient Fir. The Drewitz. Heath, the Massin or Zicher Heath, and
others about Zorndorf, will become notable to us. ‘The Country is now
touch drier than in Friedrich’s time; the human spade doing its duty
everywhere: so that much of the Battle-ground has become irrecog-
nisable, when compared with the old marshy descriptions given of it.
Zorndorf, a rough substantial Hamlet, has nothing of boggy now visible
near by; lies east to west, a firm broad highway leading through: a sea
of forest before it, to south; to north, good dry barley-grounds or rye-
grounds, sensibly rising for half a mile, then waving about in various
slow slight changes of level towards Quartschen, Zicher, &c.: forming
an irregular cleared ‘ island,’ altogether of perhaps four miles by three,
with unlimited circumambiencies of wood. It was here, on this island
as we Call it, that the Battle, which has made Zorndorf famous, was
fought.

** Zorndorf (or even the open ground half a mile to north of it, which
will be more important to us) is probably not 50 feet above the level
of the Miitzel, nor 100 above Warta and Oder, six miles off; but it is
the crown of the Country ;—the ground dropping therefrom, every way,
in lazy dull waves or swells; towards Tamsel and Gross Kamin on
south-east; towards Birken-Busch, Quartschen, Darmiitzel’ on north-
west; as well as towards Damm and its Bridge north-east, where Fried-
rich will soon be, and towards Ciistrin south-west, where he lately was,
each a five or six miles from Zorndorf. !

“Such is the poor moorland tract of Country; Zorndorf the centre
of it,—where the Battle is likely to be :—Zorndorf and environs a bare
quasi-island among these woods ; extensive bald crown of the landscape,
girt with a frizzle of firwoods all round. Boggy pools there are, es-
pecially on the western side (all drained in our time). Miitzel, or north
side, is of course the lowest in level: and accordingly,” what is much
to be marked by readers here, “from the south, or Zorndorf side, at
wide intervals, there saunter along, in a slow obscure manner, Three
miserable continuous Leakages, or oozy Threads of Water, all making
for Quartschen, to north or north-west, there to disembogue into the

7 Dar of the Miitzel, whatever ‘* Dar” may be.

262  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.
20th-25th Aug. 1758,
Miitzel. Each of these has its little Hollow; of which the western- —

most, called Zabern Hollow (Zaberngrund),is the most considerable, |

and the most important to us here: Galgengrund (Gallows Hollow) is
also worth naming in this Battle; the third Leakage, though without
importance, invites us to name it, Hosebruch, quasi Stocking-quagmire,
—because you can use no stockings there, except with manifest disad-
vantage.” —Take this other concluding trait :

* * “YTnexpressible fringe of marsh, two or three miles broad,
mostly bottomless, woven with sluggish creeks and stagnant pools, bor-

ders the Warta for many miles, towards Landsberg ; Ciistrin-Landsberg |

Causeway the alone sure footing in it; after which, the country rises’
insensibly, but most beneficially, and is mainly dryer till you get to the
Miitzel again, and find the same fringe of mud lace-work again. Zorn-
dorf we called the crown of it. ‘Tamsel, Wilkersdorf, Klein Kamin,
Gross Kamin, and other places known to us, lie on the dry turf-fuel

country, but looking over close upon the hem of that marsh-fringe, and |

no doubt getting peats, wild-ducks, pike-fishes, eels, and snatches of
summer pasture and cow-hay out of it.” y

Thursday, August 24th, Friedrich is again speeding on; oc- |
cupying Darmiitzel, and other crossing places of the Miitzel ;5—_
by no means himself crossing there; on the contrary, carefully
breaking all the Bridges before he go (“No retreat for those —
Russian vagabonds, only death or surrender for them!”)—him- |
self not intending to cross till he be up at Damm, Neu Damm,
well eastward of his Russians, and have got them all pinfolded _
between Miitzel and Oder in that way. In the evening, he |
reaches Damm and the Mill of Damm, some three or four miles
higher up the Miitzel ;—and there pushes partly across at once.
That is to say, his vanguard at once, and takes a defensive posi- —
tion; his Artillery and other Divisions, by degrees, in the silent
night hours ; and, before daybreak tomorrow, every soul will be
across, and the Bridge broken again ;—and Fermor had better
have his accounts settled.

Fermor’s roving Cossack clouds seldom bring him in intelli-
gence; but only return stained with charcoal grime, and red
murder: up to late last night, he had not known where Fried-
rich was at all; had idly thought him busy with the Schaum-
burg Redoubt, on the other side of Oder, fencing and precaution-

8 Mitchell to Holderness, ‘‘ Dermitzel, 24th August 1758” (Memoirs and
Papers, i. 425;. Ib. ii. 40-47, Mitchell’s Private Journal).

_—

’
a

 Cuar. XIII.] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 263
—-20th-25th Aug. 1758.

ing: but now (night of the 23d), these Cossacks do come in with
news, “Indisputable to our poor minds, the Prussians are at
Klossow yonder,—captured a dozen green vagabonds of us, and
have sent us galloping !”—which news, with the night closing in
on him, was astonishing, thrice and four times important to
Fermor.

Instantly he raises the siege of Ciistrin, any siege there was;
gets his immense baggage-train shoved off that night to Klein
Kamin, Landsberg way; summons the force from Landsberg to
join him without loss of a moment ;—and in the mean while,
pitches himself in a long bivouac in the Drewitz Wood or Fir-
Heath, with the Quaggy Zaberngrund in front. Quaggy Za-
berngrund,—do readers remember it ; one of those ** Three con-
tinuous Leakages,” very important to Fermor and us at pres-
ent? ‘This is the safest place Fermor can find for himself; scrag-
gy firs around, good quagmires and Zabern Hollow in front;
looking to the east, waiting what a new day will bring. That
was Fermor’s posture, while Friedrich quitted Klossow in the
dawn of the 24th. Be busy, ye Cossack doggeries ; return with
news, not with mere grime and marks of blood on your mouths!

Evening of the 24th, Cossacks report that Friedrich has got
to Damm Mill; has hold of the Bridge there; and may be look-
ed for, sure as the daylight tomorrow. fF ermor is 50,000 odd,
his Landsberg forces all coming in; one Detachment out Stet-
tin way, which cannot come in; Fermor finds that his baggage-
train is fuirly on the road to Klein Kamin ;—and that he will
have to quit this bosky bivouac, and fight for himself in the
open ground, or do worse.

Theseus and the Minotaur over again,—that is to say, Firied-
rich at Handgrips with Fermor and his Russians (25th
August 1758).

Artless Fermor draws out to the open ground, north of Zorn-
dorf, south of Quartschen ; arranges himself in huge quadrilater-
al mass, with his “ staff-baggage” (lighter baggage) in the centre,
and his front, so to speak, every where.? Mass, say two miles

> Excellent Plan of him, or rather Plans, in his successive shapes, in

264 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII

25th Aug. 1758,
long by one mile broad; but it is by no means regular, and has
many zigzags according to the ground, and narrows and droops |

southward on the eastern end: one of the most artless arranges

ments; but known to Fermor, and the readiest on this pinch of — |

time. Miinnich devised this quadrilateral mode; and found it
good against the Turks, and their deluges of raging horse and
foot: Fermor could perhaps do better; but there is such a press

of hurry. Fermor’s western flank, or biggest breadth of quadri-

lateral, leans on that Zabern Hollow, with its fine quagmires;
his eastern, narrowest part, droops down on certain mud-pools
and conveniences towards Zicher. Gallows Hollow, a slighter
than the Zabern, runs through the centre of him; and, with his

best people, he fronts towards the Miitzel Bridges, especially to- il
wards Damm Mill Bridge, whence Friedrich will emerge, sure as __
the sunrise, one knows not with what issue. Artless Fermor is_

nothing daunted; nor are his people; but stand patiently under
arms, regardless of future and present, to a degree not common
in soldiering.

Friday, August 25th, by half-past three in the morning, Fried-
rich is across the Miitzel; self and Infantry by Damm-Miitzel

Bridge, cavalry by another Bridge (Kersten-briigge, means “ Chris-

tian Bridge,” in the dialect of Charlamagne’s time, a very old
arrangement of Successive Logs up there!) some furlongs high-

er up. The Bridge at Damm is perhaps some three miles from ~
the nearest Russians about Zicher ; but Friedrich has no thought —

of attacking Fermor there; he has a quite other program laid,
and will attack Fermor precisely on the side opposite to there.
Friedrich’s intention is to sweep quite round this monstrous
Russian Quadrilateral; to break in upon it on the western flank,
and hurl it back upon Miitzel and its quagmires. He has bro-

ken his two bridges after passing, all bridges are gone there, and —

the country is bottomless: surrender at discretion if once you
are driven thither! And Friedrich’s own retreat, if he fail, is
short and open to Ciistrin. ‘Admirable!” say the critics, “and
altogether in Friedrich’s style !”—Friedrich, adds one Critic, was
not aware that the Russian Heavy-Baggace Train, which is their

Tielcke, ii. (Plates 4, 5, 6, 7, 8). Our poor sketch at p. 275 a, strives to
represent him as he stood when first attacked.

~-

— Cmar. XID] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. - 965

25th Aug. 1758.

-powderflask and breadbasket and staff of life, lies at Klein Ka-

min, within few miles on his left just now, Russians themselves
on his right; that the Russians could have been abolished from
those countries without fighting at all!!° This is very true.

_ Friedrich’s haste is great, his humour hot; and he has not heard

of this Klein-Kamin fact, which in common times he would have
done, and of which in a calmer mood he would, with a fine sci-
entific gusto, have taken his advantage. |
Friedrich pours incessant southward; cavalry parallel to
infantry and a certain distance beyond it, eastward of it; and
they have burnt the Bridges; which is a curious fact! Contin-
ually southward, as if for 'T'amsel :—poor old Tamsel, do readers
recollect it at all, does Friedrich at all? No pleasant dinner, or
lily-and-rose complexions, there for one to-day !—Some distance
short of Tamsel, Friedrich, emerging, turns westward ;—intend-
ing what on earth? thinks Fermor. Friedrich has been mostly
hidden by the woods all this while, and enigmatic to Fermor.
Fermor does now at last see the colour of the facts ;—and that
one’s chief front must change itself to southward, one’s best leg
and arm be foremost, or towards Zorndorf, not towards the Miit-

-zel as hitherto. Fermor stirs up his Quadrilateral, makes the

required change, ‘‘ You, best or northern line, step across, and
front southward; across to southward, I say; second-best go
northward in their stead :” and so, with some other slight pol-
ishings, suggested by the ground and phenomena, we anew await
this Prussian Enigma with our best leg foremost. The march
or circular sweep of these Prussian lines, from Damm Bridge

through the woods and champaign to their appointed place of

action, is seven or eight miles; lines when halted in battle-order
will be two miles long or more.

Friedrich pours steadily along, horse and foot, by the rear of
Wilkersdorf, or Zorndorf,—Russian Minotaur scrutinising him
in that manner with dull bloodshot eyes, uncertain what he will
do. Itis eight in the morning, hot August; wind a mere lull,
but southernly if any. Small Hussar pickets ride to right of the

main Army March; to keep the Cossacks in check: who are

roving about, all on wing; and pert enough, in spite of the Hus-
10 Retzow, i. 305-329.
Vor. V.—M

266 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII]

25th Aug. 1758, |

sar pickets. Desperado individuals of them gallop up to the In- ‘|

fantry ranks, and fire off their pistols there,—without reply ; re-
ply or firing, till the word come, is strictly forbidden. Infantry
pours along, like a ploughman drawing his furrow, heedless of
the circling crows. Crows or Cossacks, finding they are not re-
garded, set fire to Zorndorf, and gallop off. Zorndorf goes up
readily, mainly wood and straw; rolls in big clouds of smoke
far northward in upon the Russian Minotaur, making him still
blinder in the important moments now coming.

Friedrich rides up to view the Zabern Hollow: ‘“ Beyond ex-

pectation deep; very boggy, too, with its foul leakage or brook:

no attacking of their western flank through this Zabern-grund ;

—attack the corner of them, then; here on the south-west!” —
That is Friedrich’s rapid resource. The lines halt, accordingly; |
make ready. Behind flaming Zorndorf stands his extreme left, _
which is to make the attack; infantry in front; horse to rear f
and farther leftwards,—and under the command of Seidlitz in —
this quarter, which is an important circumstance. Right wing, |

reaching to behind Wilkersdorf, is to refuse itself; whole force
of centre is to push upon that Russian corner, to support the

left in doing it ;—according to the Leuthen or Leuctra principle, -

once more. May no mistakes occur in executing it this day !—

The first division of the Prussian Infantry, or extreme Left, \|

marches forward by the west end of flaming Zorndorf; next di-

vision, which should stand close to right of it, or even behind it,
in action, and follow it close into the Russian fire, has to march

by the east end of Zorndorf; this is a farther road, owing to the
flames; and not a lucky one. Second division could never get
into fair contact with that first division again: that was the
mistake: and it might have been fatal, but was not, as we shall
see. First division has got clear of Zorndorf, in advancing to-
wards its Russian business ;—is striding forward, its left flank
safe against the Zabern-grund; steadily by fixed stages, against
the fated Russian Corner, which is its point of attack. Yirst di-
vision, second division, are clear of Zorndorf, though with a wide

we
ae

gap between them; are steadily striding forward towards the —
Russian Corner. ‘Two strong batteries, wide apart, have plant- —

ed themselves ahead; and are playing upon the Russian Quad:

Se
Bie s wer:

) eCiap: XIN] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 267
95th Aug. 1758.

_ rilateral, their fires crossing at the due Corner yonder, with ter-
rible effect ; Russian artillery, which are multitudinous and all
gathered down to this south-western corner, are responding,
though with their fire spread, and far less effectual. The Prus-
sian line steps on, extreme left perhaps in too animated a manner ;
their cannon batteries enfilade the thick mass of Russians at a
frightful rate (“‘ forty-two men of a certain regiment blown away
by a single ball,” in one instance!!), drive the interior baggage-
horses to despair: a very agitated Quadrilateral, under its grim
canopy of cannon smoke, and of straw smoke, heaped on it from
the Zorndorf side here. Manteuffel, leader of that first. or left-
most division, sees the internal simmering; steps forward still
more briskly, to firing distance; begins his platoon thunder, with
the due steady fury,—had the second division but got up to sup-
port Manteuffel! The second division is in fire too; but not
close to Manteuffel, where it should be.

Fermor notices the gap, the wavering of Manteuffel unsup-
ported ; plunges out in immense torrent, horse and foot, into the
gap, into Manteuffel’s flank and front; hurls Manteuifel back,
who has no support at hand: “‘Arah, Arah/ Victory, Victory
(Hurrah, Hurrah)!” shout the Russians, plunging wildly for-
ward, sweeping all before them, capturing twenty-six pieces of
cannon, for one item. What a moment for Friedrich; looking
on it from some knoll somewhere near Zorndorf, I suppose ;
hastily bidding Seidlitz strike in: ‘ Seidlitz, now!” The hur-
rahing Russians cannot keep rank at that rate of going, like a
buffalo stampede ; but fall into heaps and gaps: Seidlitz, with a
swiftness, with a dexterity beyond praise, has picked his way
across that quaggy Zabern Hollow ; falls, with say 5,000 horse,
on the flank of this big buffalo stampede; tumbles it into instant
ruin ;—which proves irretrievable,as the Prussian Infantry come
on again, and back Seidlitz.

In fifteen minutes more (I guess it now to be ten o’clock), the
Russian Minotaur, this end of it, on to the Gallows Ground, is
one wild mass. Seldom was there seen such a charge; issuing
in such deluges of wreck, of chaotic flight, or chaotic refusal to fly.
The Seidlitz cavalry went sabring till, for very fatigue, they gave

11 Tielcke.

268 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

i

25th Aug. 1758,
it up, and could no more. The Russian horse fled to Kutzdorf, —

$)|

i
|
|

—Fermor with them, who saw no more of this Fight, and did —

not get back till dark ;—had not the Bridges been burnt, and no
crossing of the Miitzel possible, Fermor never would have come

back, and here had been the end of Zorndorf. Luckier if it had! |

But there is no crossing of the Miitzel, there is only drowning
in the quagmires there: death any way; what can be done
but die?

The Russian infantry stand to be sabred, in the above manner, - H
as if they had been dead oxen. More remote from Seidlitz, they
break open the sutlers’ brandy-casks, and in few minutes get —
roaring drunk. ‘Their officers, desperate, split the brandy-casks; _
soldiers flap down to drink it from the puddles; furiously re- _

monstrate with their officers, and “kill a good many of them”
(viele, says Tielcke), especially the foreign sort. “A frightful

f

blood-bath,” by all the Accounts: blood-bath, brandy-bath, and —

\

chief Nucleus of Chaos then extant above ground. Fermor is

of
ri

swept away: this chaos, the very Prussians drawing back from it,
wearied with massacring, lasts till about one o'clock. Up to the |
Gallows-ground, the Minotaur is mere wreck and delirium: but —
beyond the Gallows-ground, the other half forms a new front to _
itself; becomes a new Minotaur, though in reduced shape. This —

is Part First of the Battle of Zorndorf; Friedrich,—on the edge

of great disaster at one moment, but miraculously saved, — has —
still the other half to do (unlucky that he left no Bridges on the —

Miitzel), and must again change his program.

Half of the Minotaur is gone to shreds in this manner; but
the attack upon it, too, is spent: what is to be done with the
other half of the monster, which is again alive; which still
stands, and polypus-like has arranged a new life for itself, a new
front against the Galgen-grund yonder? Friedrich brings his
right wing into action. Rapidly arranges right wing, centre, all
of the left that is disposable, with batteries, with cavalry; for
an attack on the opposite or south-eastern end of his monster.
If your monster, polypus-like, come alive again in the tail part,
you must fell that other head of him. Patteries, well in advance,
begin work upon the new head of the monster, which was once

ai
=

— Cuap. XII.) BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 269

25th Aug. 1758.
his tail; fresh troops, long lines of them, pushing forward to
begin platoon volleying:—time nowy I should guess, about half-
past two. Our infantry has not yet got within musket range,—
when torrents of Russian Horse, Foot too following, plunge out;
wide-flowing, stormfully swift; and dash against the coming at-
tack. Dash against it; stagger it; actually tumble it back, in
the centre part; take one of the batteries, and a whole battalion
prisoners. Here againisamoment! Friedrich, they say, rush-
ed personally into this vortex; rallied these broken battalions,
again rallied and led them up; but it was to no purpose: they
could not be made to stand, these centre battalions ;—“ some
sudden panic in them, a thing unaccountable,” says ‘Tempelhof ;
“they are Dohna’s people, who fought perfectly at Jiigersdorf,
and often elsewhere’ (they were all in such a finely burnished
state, the other day; but have not biting talent, like the grass-
devils): enough, they fairly scour away, certain disgraceful bat-
talions, and are not got ranked again till below Wilkersdorf,
above a mile off; though the grass-devils, on both hands of them,
stand grimly steady, left in this ominous manner.

What would have become of the affair, one knows not, if it
had not been that Seidlitz once more made his appearance. On
Friedrich’s order, or on his own, I do not know; but sure it is,
Seidlitz, with sixty-one squadrons, arriving from some distance,
breaks in like a Deus ex Machind, swift as the storm-wind, upon
this Russian Horse-torrent; drives it again before him, like a
mere torrent of chaff, back, ever back, to the shore of Acheron
and the Stygian quagmires (of the Miitzel, namely); so that it
did not return again; and the Prussian Infantry had free field
for their platoon exercise. Their rage against the Russians was
extreme; and that of the Russians corresponded. Three of these
erass-devil battalions, who stood nearest to Dohna’s runaways,
were natives of this same burnt-out Zorndorf Country; we may
fancy the Platt-Teutsch hearts of them, and the sacred lightning,
with a moisture to it, that was in their eyes. Platt-Teutsch
platooning, bayonet-charging,—on such terms no Russian or
mortal Quadrilateral can stand it. The Russian Minotaur goes
all to shreds a second time; but will not run. ‘No quarter!”
—‘“ Well, then none !”

270 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

25th Aug. 1758, —
“Shortly after four o’clock,”’ say my Accounts, * the firing,”

regular firing, “altogether éeased ; ammunition nearly spent, on
both sides; Prussians snatching cartridge-boxes of Russian dead ;”
and then began a tug of deadly massacring and wrestling man to
man, “ with bayonets, with butts of muskets, with hands, even
with teeth” (in some Russian instances), ‘‘such as was never
seen before.” ‘The Russians, beaten to fragments, would not run:
whither run? Behind is Miitzel and the bog of Acheron ;—on
Miitzel is no bridge left; ‘‘ the shore of Miitzel is thick with men
and horses, who have tried to cross, and lie there swallowed in
the ooze”’—* like a pavement,” says Tielcke. ‘The Russians,—
never was such vis inertie as theirs now. ‘They stood like sacks
of clay, like oxen already dead; not even if you shot a bullet
through them, would they fall at once, says Archenholtz, but
were deliberate about it.

Complete disorder reigned on both sides; except that the
Prussians could always form again when bidden, the Russians
not. This lasted till nightfall, — Russians getting themselves
shoved away on these horrid terms, and obstinate to take no
other. ‘Towards dark, there appeared, on a distant knoll, some-
thing like a ranked body of them again,—some 2,000 foot and
half as many horse; whom Thémicoud (superlative Swiss Cos-
sack, usually written Demikof or Demikow) had picked up, and
persuaded from the shore of Acheron, back to this knoll of van-
tage, and some cannon with them. Friedrich orders these to be
dispersed again: General Forcade, with two battalions, taking
the front of them, shall attack there; you, General Rauter, bring
up those Dohna fellows again, and take them in flank. Forcade
pushes on, Rauter too,—but at the first taste of cannon-shot, these
poor Dohna people (such their now flurried, disgraced state of
mind) take to flight again, worse than before; rush quite through
Wilkersdorf this time, into the woods, and can hardly be got to-
gether at all. Scandalous to think of. No wonder Friedrich
‘“‘ looked always askance on those regiments that had been beaten
at Gross Jigersdorf, and to the end of his life gave them proofs
of it,”!? very natural, if the rest were like these!

7? Retzow ;—and still more emphatically, Briefe eines alten Preussischen
Officiers (Hohenzollern, 1790), i. 84, ii. 52, &e.

:

j
y
c)
i
j
|

:

~ Cuap. XIII.) BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 271
25th Aug. 1758.

Of poor General Rauter, Tempelhof and the others, that can
help it, are politely silent; only Saxon Tielcke tells us that

Friedrich dismissed him, ‘‘ Go, you, to some othef trade !’’—

which, on Prussian evidence too, expressed in veiled terms, I
find to be the fact: JLilitair-Leaxikon, obliged to have an article
on Rauter, is very brief about it; hints nothing unkind; records
his personal intrepidity ; and says, ‘‘in 1758, he, on his request,
had leave to withdraw,’’—poor soul, leave and more!

Forcade, left to himself, kept cannonading Thémicoud ; Thé-
micoud responding, would not go; stood on his knoll of van- ~
tage, but gathered no strength: ‘Let him stand,” said Fried-
rich, after some time; and Thémicoud melted in the shades of
night, gradually towards the hither shore of Acheron,—that is,
of Acheron-Miitzel, none now attempting to pave it farther, but
simmering about at their sad leisure there. Feldmarschall Fer-
mor is now got to his people again, or his people to him; re-
united in place and luck: such a chaos as Fermor never saw
before or after. No regiment or battalion now is; mere sim-
mering monads, this fine Army; officers doing their utmost to
cobble it into something of rank, without regard to regiments! or
qualities. Darkness seldom sank on such a scene.

Wild Cossack parties are scouring over all parts of the field ;
robbing the dead, murdering the wounded; doing arson, too,

wherever possible; and even snatching at the Prussian cannon

left rearwards, so that the Hussars have to go upon them again.
One large mass of them plundering in the Hamlet of Zicher, the
Hussars surrounded: the Cossacks took to the outhouses; squat-
ted, ran, called in the aid of fire, their constant friend: above
400 of them were in some big barn, or range of straw houses;
and set fire to it,—but could not get out for Hussars; the Hus-
sars were at the outgate: Not a devil of you! said the Hussars ;
and the whole four hundred perished there, choked, burnt, or
slain by the Hussars, and this poor Planet was at length rid of
them.}8

Friedrich sends for his tent-equipages ; and the Army pitches
its camp in two big lines, running north and south, looking to-
wards the Russian side of things; Friedrich’s tent in front of

13 Helden- Geschichte, v. 166.

272  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A uEIGuT. [Book XVIII |

26th Aug.—2d Sept. 1758, |
the first line; a warrior King among his people, who have had
a day’s work of it. The Russian loss turns out, when counted,
to have been 21,529 killed, wounded and missing, 7,990 of them
killed; the Prussian sum-total is 11,390 (above the Prussian |
third man), of whom 8,680 slain. And on the shores of Ache-
ron northward yonder, there still is a simmering. And far and |
wide the country is alight with incendiary fires,—many devils —
still abroad. Excellency Mitchell, about eight in the evening, |
is sent for by the King; finds various chief Generals, Seidlitz |
among them, on their various businesses there; congratulates |
‘‘on the noble victory” (not so conclusive hitherto) ‘‘ which ~|
Heaven has granted your Majesty.” ‘Had it not been for i
him,” said Friedrich,—“ Had it not been for him, things would
have had a bad icok by this time!” and ‘iaeuen his sun-eyes
upon Seidlitz, with a fine expression in them.'* ‘To which Seid-_
litz’s reply, I find, was an embarrassed blush, and of articulate |
only, “ Hm, no, iad it was your Majesty’s Cavalry that did their —
duty,—but Wakenitz” (my second) ‘does deserve promotion !” 4%
—which Wakenitz, not in a too overflowing measure, got.

Fermor, during the night-watches, having cobbled himself into
some kind of ranks or rows, moves down well westward of Za-
bern Hollow; to the Drewitz Heath, where he once before lay, |
and there makes his bivouac in the wood, safe under the fir- _
trees, with the Zabern-ground to front of him. By the above
reckoning, 28 or 29,000 still hang to Fermor, or float vapor- —
ously round him; with Friedrich, in his two lines, are some if
18,000 :—in whole, 46,000 tired mortals sleeping thereabouts; _
near 12,000 others have fallen into a deeper sleep, not liable to
be disturbed ;—and of the wounded on the field, one shudders
to imagine.

Next day, Saturday 26th, Fermor, again brought into some
kind of rank, and safe beyond the quaggy Zabern-ground, sent —
out a proposal, ‘‘ That there be Truce of Three Days for burying
the dead !”—Dohna, who happened to be General in command
there, answers, ‘‘’That it is customary for the Victor to take
charge of burying the slain; that such proposal is surprising,

4
5

ae > ate

14 Preuss, ii. 153. Mitchell (ii. 432) mentions the Interview, nothing of
Seidlitz.

!

i
e

 Cnar. XII. ] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 273

.
yl

26th Aug.—2d Sept. 1758.
and quite inadmissible, in present circumstances.” Fermor, in
the mean while, had drawn himself out, fronting his late battle-
field and the morning sun; and began cannonading across the

Zabern-ground ; too far off for hitting, but as if still intending

* fight: to which the Prussians replied with cannon, and drew

out before their tents in fighting order. In both armies there
was question, or talk, of attacking anew; but in both “ there
was want of ammunition,” want of real likelihood. On Fer-
mor’s side, that of ‘attacking,’ could be talk only, and on
Friedrich’s, besides the scarcity of ammunition, all creatures,
foot and especially horse, were so worn out with yesterday’s
work, it was not judged practically expedient. A while before
noon, the Prussians retired to their Camp again; leaving only
the artillery to respond, so far as needful, and bow-wow across
the Zabern-ground, till the Russians lay down again.

Friedrich’s Hussars knew of the Russian Wagenbdurg, or gen-
eral Baggage reservoirs, at Klein Kamin, by this time. ‘The
Hussars had been in it, last night; rummaging extensively, at
discretion for some time; and had brought away much money
and portable plunder. Why Friedrich, who lay direct between
Fermor and his Wagenburg, did not, this day, extinguish said
Wagenburg, I do not know; but guess it may have been a fault
of omission, in the great welter this was now grown to be to
the weary mind. Beyond question, if one had blown up Fer-
mor’s remaining gunpowder, and carried off or burnt his meal-
sacks, he must have cowered away all the faster towards Lands-
berg to seek more. Or perhaps Friedrich now judged it imma-
terial, and a question only of hours?

About midnight of Saturday-Sunday, there again rose bow-
wowing, bellowing of Russian cannon; not from beyond the
Zabern-ground this time, nor stationary anywhere, but from the
south some transient part of it, and not far off ;—a ball struck
a carriage near the King’s tent, and shattered it. Thick mist
mantles everything, and it is difficult to know what the Rus-
sians have on hand in their sylvan seclusions. After a time, it
becomes manifest the Russians are on retreat; winding round,
through the southern woods, behind Zorndorf and the charred
Villages, to Klein Kamin, Landsberg way. Friedrich, following

M 2

274  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. 4 |
26th Aug.—2d Sept. 1758. —

now on the heel of them, finds all got to Klein Kamin, to break- |
fast there in their Wagenburg refectory,—sharply vigilant, many __
Jfleches (little arrow-shaped redoubts, so called) and much artil- — |
lery round them. Nothing considerable to be done upon them, —
now or afterwards, except pick up stragglers, and distress their
rear a little. The King himself, in the first movement, was —
thought to be in alarming peril, such a blaze of case-shot rose
upon him, as he went reconnoitring foremost of all.'®

And this was, at last, the end of Zorndorf Battle; on the |
third day this. Was there ever seen such a fight of Theseus |
and the Minotaur! Theseus, rapid, dextrous, with Heaven’s - }|
lightning in his eyes, seizing the Minotaur; lassoing him by the —
hinder foot, then by the right horn; pouring steel and destruc-
tion into him, the very dust darkening all the air. Minotaur
refusing to die when killed; tumbling to and fro upon its The- —
seus; the two lugging and tugging, flinging one another about,
and describing figures of 8 round each other, for three days be-
fore it ended. Minotaur walking off on his own feet, after all.
It was the bloodiest battle of the Seven-Years War; one of the
most furious ever fought; such rage possessing the individual
elements; rage unusual in modern wars. Must have altered
Friedrich’s notion of the Russians, when he next comes to speak _
with Keith. It was not till the fourth day hence (August 31st),
so unattackably strong was this position at Klein Kamin, that — ;
the Russian Minotaur would fairly get to its feet a second time,
and slowly stagger off, in real earnest, Landsberg way, Konigs-
berg way ;—Friedrich right glad to leave Dohna in attendance
on it; and hasten off (September 2d) towards Saxony and Prince
Henri, where his presence is now become very needful. ;

Fermor, walking off in this manner,—not till the third day,
nay not conclusively till the seventh day, after Zorndorf,—strove
at first to consider himself victorious. “I passed the night on
the field of battle” (or not far from it, for good reasons, Miitzel
being bridgeless): ‘‘may not I, in the language of enthusiasm, .

Bt GA Reis i qe See

=

*® Tempelhof, 11. 216-238 ; Tielcke, ii. 79-154 ; Archenholtz, i. 253-264;
Helden-Geschichte, y. 156-179 (with many Lists, private Letters and the like
details); &c.

BY

se
«

WZ

AV

Se, ft
S ig
4 Ty. = Spiel

>

ba
LOTT
sy

Urn
4

wes
DYA\

iz rw A,

Te r
woe ey
a" 1 Byiihittous

“Ni by
tmp
S

SIEGE OF OLMUTZ.
127h MAY — 2N© JULY 1758.

y.a. Stages of the Prussian March. b, Dans Encampment.
c.: Prassian Batteries and Entrenchments. d.d.d. Prussian Camps.

c.e. Loudons March against Mosels Convoy.
tf Moses resting quarters. g. Convey attacked and ruined.

eae
thes pr Massis

i a “Dy v

Sorry” in,

°
lt a

ie
AW

N wwe

CNW,

i
i

wey!
WNW

i
‘

i

BATTLE OF Z

257 AUGUST 1758.
sian Army about to cross the Miitzel.
stan Army ranked for Battle, c. Russian Baggage
star, Infantry. ¢.e. Prussian Cavalry, f. Prussian Baggage.

Cuap. XIII.] BATTLE OF ZORNDORF. 275
26th Aug.—2d Sept. 1758,

be considered conqueror? Here are 26 of their cannon, got
when I cried ‘ Arah’ prematurely. (Where the 103 pieces of
my own are, and my 27 flags, and my Army-chest and sundries ?
Dropped somewhere; they will probably turn up again!)”
thinks Fermor,—or strives to think, and says. So that, at Pe-
tersburg, at Paris and Vienna, in the next three weeks, there
were Ze Deums, Ambrosian chantings, fires-of-joy ; and consider-
able arguing among the Gazetteers on both parts,—till the dust
settled, and facts appeared as they were. ‘To the effect: ‘‘ Ze
Deum Non laudamus; alas no, we must retract; and it was good
gunpowder thrown after. bad!”

On always homewards, but at its own pace, waited on by
Dohna, goes the Russian Monster; violently case-shotting if you
prick into its rearward parts. One Palmbach, with a Detach-
ment of 15,000, which was thought sufficient for the object, did
try to make a dash on Colberg,—how happy had we any port
on the Baltic, to feed us in this Country! But though Colberg
is the paltriest crow’s-nest (bicoque), according to all engineers,
and is defended only by 700 militia (the Colonel of them, one
Heiden, a gray old Halfpay, not yet renowned in the soldier
world, as he here came to be), Palmbach, with his best diligence,
could make nothing of it; but, after battering, bombarding, even
scalading, and in all ways blurting and blazing at a mighty rate
for four weeks, and wasting a great deal of gunpowder and 2,000
Russian lives, withdrew on those remarkable terms.!® And did
then, as tail of Fermor, what Fermor and the Russian Monster
was universally doing, make off at a good pace,—having nothing
to live upon farther,—and vanish from those Countries, to the
relief of Dohna and mankind.

September 2d, Friedrich, leaving all that, had marched for
Saxony; his presence urgently required there. Daun ought to
to be far on with the conquest of that Country? Might have
had it, say judges, if he had been as swift as some.—At Zorn-
dorf, among the Russian Prisoners were certain Generals, Solti-

16 In Helden-Geschichte, v. 349-365 (‘‘8d-31st October 1758”), a com-

plete and minute Journal of this First Siege of Colberg, which is interesting
to read of, as all the Three of them are.

276 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII.
17th Aug.—12th Sept. 1758.

kof, Czernichef, Sulkowski the Pole, proud people in their own
eyes: no lodging for them but the cellars of Ciistrin. Russian
Generals complained, “Is this a lodging for Field Officers of —
rank!’? Friedrich was not used to profane swearing, or vitu-
perative outbursts ; but he answered to the effect: ‘Silence, ye
incendiary individuals. Is there a choice left of lodgings, and
for you above others!” Upon which they lay silent for some
days, till better suited; in fact, till exchanged,—and perhaps
will soon turn up on us again.

CHAPTER XIV.
BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH.

So soon as Friedrich quitted Bohemia and Silesia for his Rus-
sian Enterprise, there rose high question at Vienna, “To what
shall our Daun now turn himself?” A Daun, a Reichs Army,
free for new employment; in Saxony not much to oppose them,
in Silesia almost nothing in comparison. ‘ Recapture of Sile-
sia?” Yes truly; that is the steady pole-star at Vienna. But
they have no Magazines in Silesia, no Siege-furnitures; and the
season is far spent. ‘They decide that there shall be a stroke
upon Dresden, and recovery of Saxony, in Friedrich’s absence.
Nothing there at present but a Prince Henri, weak in numbers,
say one to two of the Reichs Army by itself. Let the Reichs
Army rise now, and advance through the Metal Mountains from
south-east on Prince Henri; let Daun circle round on him,
through the Lausitz from north-east: cannot they extinguish
Henri between them; snatch Dresden, a weak ill-fortified place,
by sudden onslaught, and recapture Saxony? That will be mag-
nanimous to our august Allies ;—and that will be an excellent
scaffolding for recapture of Silesia next year. And cannot Daun
leave a Force in the Silesian vicinities,—Deville with so many
thousands, Harsch with so many,—to besiege one of their Front-
ier Places; Neisse, for example? Siege-furnitures to come from
Mibren: Neisse is not farther from Olmiitz than Olmiitz was
from it. |

That was the scheme fallen upon ; now getting executed while

Cuap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 277
17th Aug.—12th Sept. 1758.

Friedrich is at Zorndorf well away. And that, if readers fix it
intelligently in their memory, will suffice to introduce to them
the few words more that can be allowed us here upon it. A
very few words, compressed to the utmost,—merely as preface
to Hochkirch, whither we must hasten; Hochkirch being the one
incident which, except to studious soldiers, has now and here any
interest, out of the very many incidents which, then and there,
were so intensely interesting to all mankind. ‘To readers who
are curious, and will take with them any poorest authentic Out-
line of the Localities concerned,* the following condensed Note
will not be unintelligible.

Daun and the Reichs Army invade Saxony, in Friedrich’s
Absence.

‘* Daun, pushing out with his best speed, along the Bohemian-Silesian
border, had got to Zittau, August 17th; which poor City is to be his
basis and storehouse; the greatest activity and wagoning now visible
there,’-—among the burnt walls getting rebuilt. ‘“ And in the same
days, Zweibriick and his Reichs Army are vigorously afoot ; Zweibriick
pushing across the Metal Mountains, the fastest he can ; intending to
plant himself in Pirna Country. Not to mention General Dombale,
Zweibriick’s Austrian Second ; who has the Austrian 15,000 with him ;
and, by way of preface, has emerged to westward, in Zwickau-Tscho-
pau Country; calculating that Prince Henri will not be able to attend
to him just now. And in effect Prince Henri, intent upon Zweibriick
and the Pirna Country, takes position in the old Prussian ground there
(‘headquarter Gross Seidlitz,’ as in 1756); and can only leave a De-
tachment in Tschopau Country to wait upon Dombale; who does at
least shoot out Croat parties, ‘quite across Saxony, to [alle all the
way,’ and entertain the Gazetteers, if he can do little real mischief.

“ August 19th, from Zittau, Daun, after short pause, again pushes for-
ward,—nothing but Ziethen attending him in the distance, till we see
whitherward ;— Margraf Karl waiting impatient, at Griissau, till Zie-
then see.t' Daun, soon after Zittau, shoots out Loudon, Brandenburg
way, as if magnanimously intending ‘cooperation with the Russians ;”
which would give Daun pleasure, could it be done without cost. Lou-
don does despatch a 500 hussars to Frankfurt” (Frvedrich now gone for
Ciistrin), “‘ who, I think, carry a Letter for Fermoy there ; but lose it by
the way,”—for the benefit of readers, if they will wait.‘ Loudon cap-
tures a poor little place in Brandenburg itself; bullies it into surrender,

* Map at p. 297. 1 Tempelhof? ii. 258, 260 et seq.

/

278 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT..[Boox XVIII.

17th Aug.—12th Sept. 1758.
after a day (the very day of Zorndorf Battle, ‘August 25th’): place
ealled Peitz, garrisoned by forty-five invalids; who go on ‘ free with-
drawal,’ poor old souls, and leave their exiguous stock of salt-victual
and military furnitures to Loudon.?, Upon which Loudon whirls back
out of those Countries ; finding his skirts trodden on by Ziethen,—who
now sees what Daun and he are at; and warns Margraf Karl” (prop-
erly Keith, who has now joined again, as real president or chief ) “ ‘That
hither is the way. Margraf Karl, on the slip for some time past, starts

from Griissau instantly (I should guess, not above 25,000 of all arms); _

leaving Fouquet with perhaps 10,000 to do his utmost; when Generals
Harsch and Deville with their 20 or 30,000 come upon Silesia and him,
—as indeed they are already doing ; already blockading Neisse, more
or less, with an eye to besieging it so soon as possible.

** Meanwhile, Serene Highness of Zweibriick, the Reichsfolk and
some Austrians with him, prefaced by Dombale more to westward, is
wending into Pirna Country ; and, in spite of what Prince Henri can do
(Mayer and the Free Corps shiningly diligent, and Henri one of the
watchfullest of men), Zweibriick does get in; sets Maguire with Aus-
trians upon besieging Pirna, that is to say, the Sonnenstein of Pirna;
3d-5th September, gets the Sonnenstein, a thought sooner than was
counted.on;° and roots himself there,—‘ headquarters in Struppen’
again, ‘bridge at Ober-Raden’ again, all as in 1756; which, if nothing
else can well do it, may give his Highness a momentary interest with
some readers here. Prince Henri is at Gross Seidlitz, alive every fibre
of him: but with Daun circling round to northward on his left, intend-
ing evidently to take him in flank or rear; with Dombdle already to
rear, in the above circumstances, on his right; and Zweibriick himself
lying here in front free to act, and impregnable if acted upon: what is
Prince Henri to do? It is for Henri’s rear, not his flank, that Daun
aims: August 26th, Daun, who had got to Gorlitz, a march or two from
Zittau, started again at his best step by the Bautzen Highway towards
Meissen Bridge, a 70 or 80 miles down the Elbe: there Daun intends
to cross, and to double back upon Dresden and Prince Henri; who will
thus find himself enclosed between three fires,—if two were not enough,
or even if one (the Daun one itself, or the Zweibriick itself, not to count
the Dombale), in such strength as Prince Henri has!

** A lost Prince Henri,—if there Ye not shift in him, if there be not
help coming to him! Prince Henri, seeing how it was, drew back
from Gross Seidlitz ; with beautiful suddenness, one night; unmolest-

2 In Helden-Geschichte, v. 229-232, the ‘‘ Capitulation” in extenso.
* In ib. v. 223-228, account of this poor Siege, and of the movements be-
fore and after.

at
Ses aria er

a a

te

ec ae

.

: 4 Cuap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 279
~ 17th Aug.—12th Sept. 1758.

*
ed: in the morning, Zweibriick’s hussars find him posted inexpugnable

on the Heights of Gahmig,—which is nearer Dresden a good step;
nearer Dombale ; and not so ready to be enclosed by Daun, without en-
closure of Dresden too. Prince Henri’s maneuvering, in this difficult
situation, is the admiration of military men: how he stuck by Gahmig ;
but threw out, in the vital points, little camps,— camp of Kesselsdorf”
(a place memorable), on the west of Dresden; and on the east, in the
north Suburb of Dresden itself, across the River (should we have to go
across the River for Daun’s sake), a ‘strong abatis;’ and neglected
nothing ; self, and everybody under him, lively as eagles to make them-
selves dangerous, Mayer in particular distinguishing himself much.
Prince Henri would have been a hard morsel for Daun. But beyond
that, there is help on the road.”

Friedrich intervening, Daun draws back ; entrenches himself,
in Neighbourhood to Dresden and Pirna; Friedrich fol-
lowing him. Hour Armies standing there, in dead Lock,
Jor a Month ; with Issue, a Plank March on the Part of
Priedrich’s Army,—which halts at Hochkirch (September
12th—October 10th, 1758).

Daun, since August 26th, is striding towards Meissen Bridge ;
without rest, day after day, at the very top of his speed,—which
I find is “nine miles a day,”+ Bos being of heavy foot, at his
best. September Ist, Daun has got within ten miles of Meissen
Bridge, when—Here is news, my friends; King of Prussia has
beaten our poor Russians ; will soon be in full march this way!
King of Prussia and Margraf Karl both bending hitherward; at
the rate, say of “‘ nineteen miles a day,” instead of nine :~-Meis-
sen Bridge is not the thing we shall want! Daun instantly
calls halt, at this news; waits, entrenches; and, in a day or
two, finding the news true, hurries to rearward all be can.
From the Russian side too, Daun has heard of Zorndorf, and
the grand “ Victory” of Fermor there; but knows well, by this
sudden reémergence of the Anti-Fermor, what kind of Victory
it is.

Was it here while waiting about Meissen, or where was it,
that Daun got his Letter to Fermor answered in that singular
way? The Letter of two weeks ago, — carried by Loudon’s

* Tempelhof, ii. 261.

280  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII

9th-12th Sept. 1758,
Hussars or by whomsoever,—for certain, it was retorted, or re-
turned upon Daun; not as if from the Dead-Letter Office, but
with an answer he little expected! Here is what record Ihave;
very vague for a well-known little fact of sparkling nature:

“A curious Letter fell into Friedrich’s hands” (Bearer, 1 always
guess, the Loudon-Hussar Captain with his 500, pretending to form —
junction with Fermor), “ Prussian Hussars picking it up somewhere,—
date, place, circumstances, blurred into oblivion in those poor Books;
Letter itself indisputable enough, and Answer following on it; Letter
and Answer substantially to this effect:

** Daun to Fermor’’ (Probably from Zittau, by Loudon’s Hussars) :

ERE A OR) MOI

“Your Excellenz does not know that wily Enemy asI do. By no
means get into battle with such a one. Cautiously manceuvre about;
detain him there, till | have got my stroke in Saxony done: don’t try
fighting him.—Davn.”

* Answer as from Fermor (Zorndorf once done, Daun, by the first op-
portunity got his Answer, duly signed ‘ Fermor,’ but evidently in a
certain King’s handwriting) :

5 i a i LS Mp ET GREE IOLA INE oH SaaS Oo 8

“Your Excellenz was in the right to warn me against a cunning
Enemy, whom you knew better than J. Here have I tried fighting
him, and got beaten. Your unfortunate—Frrmor.’”

September 9th, Friedrich and Margraf Karl, correct to their
appointment, meet at Grossenhayn, some miles north of Meissen
and its Bridge; by which time Daun is clean gone again, back
well above Dresden again, strongly posted at Stolpen (a place
we once heard of, in General Haddick’s time, last Year), well in
contact with Daun’s Pirna friends across the River, and out of
dangerous neighbourhoods. Friedrich and the Margraf have
followed Daun at quick step; but Daun would pause nowhere,
till he got to Stolpen, among the bushy gullets and chasms.
September 12th, Friedrich had speech of Henri, and the pleas-
ure of dining with him in Dresden. Glad to meet again, under

ii, OP hl OE lg PS RO AA RG ™

a

5 Miller, Kurzgefasste Beschreibung der dret Schlesischen Kriege (Berlin,
1755); in whom, alone, of all the reporters, is the story given in an intel-
ligible form. This Miiller’s Book is a meritoriously brief Summary, incor-
rect in no essential particular, and with all the Battle-Plans on one copper-
plate: Lieutenant Miiller, this one; not Professor Miller alias Schottmiil-

ler by any means!

>

@ Cnrar. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 281

12th Sept.—10th Oct. 1758.
fortunate management on both parts; and with much to speak
and consult about.

A day or two before, there had lain (or is said to have lain)
a grand scheme in Daun: Zweibriick to burst out from Pirna,
by daybreak, and attack the Camp of Gahmig in front (35,000
against 20,000); Daun to cross the River on pontoons, some
hours before, under cloud of night, and be ready on rear and left
flank of Gahmig (with as many supplemental thousands as you
like): what can save Prince Henri? Beautiful plan; on which
there were personal meetings and dinings together by Zwei-
briick and Daun; but nothing done. At the eleventh hour,
say the Austrian accounts, Zweibriick sent word, ‘‘ Impossible
tomorrow ; cannot get in my Out-Parties in time !’—and next
day, here is Friedrich come, and a collapse of everything. Or
perhaps there never seriously was such a plan? Certain it is,
Daun takes camp at Stolpen, a place known to him, one of the
strongest posts in Germany; entrenches himself to the teeth,—
good rearguard towards Zittau and the Magazines; River and
Pirna on our left flank; Loudon strong and busy on our right
flank, barring the road to Bautzen ;—and obstinately sits there,
a very bad tooth in the jaw ofa certain King; not to be extract-
ed by the best kinds of forceps and the skilfullest art, for nearly
a month to come. Four Armies, Friedrich’s, Henri’s, Daun’s,
Zweibriick’s, all within sword-stroke of each, —the universal
Gazetteer world is on tiptoe. But except Friedrich’s eager
shiftings and rubbings upon Stolpen (west side, north, and at
length north-east side), all is dead-lock, and nothing comes of it.

Friedrich has his food convenient from Dresden; but a road
to Bautzen withal is what he cannot do without ;—and there
lies the sorrow, and the aching, as this tooth knows well, and
this jaw well! Harsch and Deville are busy upon Neisse, have
Neisse under blockade, perhaps upon Kosel too, for some time
past,’ and are carting the siege-stock to begin bombardment: a
road to Silesia, before very long, Friedrich must and will have.

® Tempelhof, ii. 262-265.

7 Neisse ‘‘ blockaded more and more” since August 4th (Kosel still ear-
lier, but only by Pandour people); not completely so, till September 30th,
or even till October 26th: Helden-Geschichte, vy. 268-270.

—

282 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

lst-5th Oct. 1758 9)

Friedrich’s operations on Daun in this post are patiently artful,

and curious to look upon, but beyond description here: enough |

to say, that in the second week he makes his people hut them-
selves (weather wet and bad); and in the fourth week, finding
that nothing contrivable would provoke Daun into fighting,—he
loads at Dresden provisions, for I think nine days; makes, from
two or from three sides, a sudden spurt upon Loudon, who is
Daun’s northern outpost; brushes Loudon hastily away; and
himself takes the road for Bautzen, by Daun’s right flank, thrown
bare in this manner.®

Road for Bautzen; which is the road for Zittau withal, for
Daun’s breakfast, as well as for Neisse and Harsch! Nine-
days provision; that is our small outfit, that and our own right
hands; and the waste world lies all ahead. October 1st, Retzow,
as vanguard, sweeps out the few Croats from Bautzen, deposits
his meal-wagons there; occupies Hochkirch, and the hilly envi-
rons to east; is to take possession of Weissenberg especially,
and of the Stromberg Hill and other strong points: which Ret-
zow punctually does, forgetting nothing,—except perhaps the
Stromberg, not quite remembered in time ; a thing of small con-
sequence in Retzow’s view, since all else had gone right.

Hearing of which, Daun, with astonishment, finds that he
must quit those beautifully chasmy fastnesses of Stolpen, and
look to his bread; which is getting to he under the enemy’s
feet, if Zittau road be left yonder as it is. October 5th, after
councils of war and deliberation enough, Daun gets under way ;9
cautiously, favoured by a night very dark and wet, glides through
to right of Friedrich’s people, softly along between Bautzen and
the Pirna Country; nobody molesting him, so dark and wet:
and after one other march in those bosky solitudes, sits down at
Kittlitz,—ahead or to east of Bautzen, of Hochkirch, of Retzow
and all Friedrich’s people ;—and again sets to palisading and
entrenching there. Kittlitz, near Lobau, there is Daun’s new
headquarter; Lébau Water, with its intricate hollows, his line
of defence: his posts going out a mile to north and to south of
Kittlitz. And so sits; once more blocking Zittau road, and
quietly waiting what Friedrich will do,

8 Tempelhof, ii. 278. ® Thid. ii. 279.

. — x=
ee nae

eee ae tes ree ee

JHAP. XIV. ] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 288
th-10th Oct. 1758.

Friedrich is at Bautzen since the 7th; impatient enough to
be forward, but must not till a second larger provision convoy’
from Dresden come in. Convoy once in, Friedrich hastens off,
Tuesday 10th October, towards heweberd Country, where
Retzow is; some ten or twelve miles to eastward »—Zittau-ward,
if that chance to suit us; Silesia-ward, as is sure to suit. At

the “ Pass of Jenkowitz,” short way from Bautzen, Pandours at-

tempt our baggage ; need to be battered off, and again off: which
apprises Friedrich that Daun’s whole Army is ahead in the
neighbourhood somewhere. Marching on, Friedrich, from the
knoll of Hochkirch, shoulder of the southern Hills, gets complete
view of Daun,—stretching north and south, at right angles to
the Zittau roads and to Friedrich, in the way we described ;—
and is a little surprised, and I could guess piqued, at seeing
Daun in such a state of forwardness. ‘ Encamp here, then,’ he
says,—here, on this row of Heights parallel to Daun, within a
mile of Daun: just here, I tell you! under the very nose of
Daun, who is above two to one of us; and see what Daun will
do. Marwitz, his favourite Adjutant, one of those free-spoken
Marwitzes, loyal, skilful, but liable to stiff fits, takes the liberty
to remonstrate, argue; says at length that He, Marwitz, dare
not be concerned in marking out such an encampment; not he,
for his poor part! And is put under arrest; and another Ad-
jutant does it; cannon playing on his people and him, while
engaged in the operation.

Friedrich’s obstinate rashness, this Tuesday Evening, has not
wanted its abundant meed of blame,—rendered so emphatic by
what befel on Saturday morning next. His somewhat too au-

_ thoritative fixity ; a certain radiancy of self-confidence, danger-

ous to a man; his sovereign contempt of Daun, as an inert dark
mass, who durst undertake nothing: all this is undeniable, and
worth our recognition in estimating Friedrich. One considera-
bly extenuating circumstance does at last turn up,—in the shape
of a new piece of blame to the erring Friedrich; his sudden an-
ger, namely, against the meritorious General Retzow; his put-
ting Retzow under arrest that Tuesday Evening: “ How, Gen-
eral Retzow? You have not taken hold of the Stromberg for

284  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII
10th-14th Oct. 175

me!” That is the secret of Retzow: and on studying the |
‘ground you will find that the Stromberg, a blunt tabular Hill, —
of good height, detached, and towering well up over all that re
gion, might: have rendered Friedrich’s position perfectly safe.
‘Seize me the Stromberg tomorrow morning, the first thing e Li |
ordered Friedrich. And a Detachment went atcordingly 3

but found Daun’s people already there,—indisposed to go ; nay. |
determined not to go, and getting reinforced to unlimited
amounts. So that the Stromberg was left standing, and re«
mained Daun’s; furnished with plenty of cannon by Daun. —
Retzow’s arrest, Retzow being a steady favourite of Friedrich’s,
was only of a few hours: “pardonable that oversight,” thinks
Friedrich, though it came to cost him dear. For the rest, I
find, Friedrich’s keeping of this Camp, without the Stromberg,
was intended to end, the third day hence: ‘‘ Saturday 14th, then,
since Friday proves impossible!” Friedrich had settled. And it
did end, Saturday 14th, though at an earlier hour, and with oth-
er results than had been expected. Keith said, ‘‘'The Austrians
deserve to be hanged if they don’t attack us here.” ‘+ We must
hope they are more afraid of us than even of the gallows,” an-
swered Friedrich. A very dangerous Camp; untenable without
the Stromberg. Let us try to understand it, and Daun’s posi-
tion to it, in some slight degree. 4

Hochkirch (Highkirk) is an old Wendish-Saxon Village, siandiaaa
pleasantly on its Hilltop, conspicuous for miles around on all sides, or
on all but the south side, where it abuts upon other Heights, a
gradually rise into Hills a good deal higher than it. The Village hangs _
confusedly, a jumble of cottages and cole-garths, on the crown and north
slope of the Height; thatched, in part tiled, and built mostly of rough ©
stone-blocks, in our time,—not of wood, as probably in Friedrich’s. A
solid, sluttishly comfortable-looking Village ; with pleasant hay-fields, —
or long narrow hay-stripes (each villager has his stripe), reaching down
to the northern levels. The Church is near the top; Churchyard, and
some little space farther, are nearly horizontal ground, till the next
Height begins sloping up again towards the woody Hills southward. —
The view from this little esplanade atop, still better from the Church :
belfry, is wide and pretty. Free on all sides except the south: pleas-
ant Heights and Hollows, of arable, of wood, or pasture ; well-watered —
by rushing Brooks, all making northward, direct for Spree (the Berlin

Cuap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH, 285
th-14th Oct. 1758.

| Spree), or else into the Lobau Water, which is the first big branch of

‘Spree. z
“The place is_still partly of Wendish speech; the Parson has te
preach one half of the Sunday in Wend, the other in German. Among

the Hills to south,” well worth noting at present, “is one called Czar-

nabog, or ‘ Devil’s Hill,’ where the Wendish Devil and his Witches
(equal to any German on his Blocksberg, or preternatural Brocken of
the Harz) hold their annual Witches’-Sabbath,—a thing not to be con-
templated without a shudder by the Wendish mind. Thereabouts, and
close from Hochkirch southward, all is shadowy intricacy of thicket and
wild wood. Northward too from Hochkirch, and all about, 1 perceive
the scene was woodier then than now ;—and must have looked pictur-
esque enough (had anybody been in quest of that), with the multifari-
ous uniforms, and tented people sprinkled far and wide among the leafy
red-and-yellow of October 1758."°

In the Village of Wuischke, precisely at the northern base of

_ that shaggy Czarnabog or Devil’s-Hill, stand Loudon and 3,000

Croats and grenadiers, as the extreme left of Daun’s position.
Wuischke is nearly straight south of Hochkirch; so far west-

_ ward has Loudon pushed forward with his Croats, hidden among

the Hills; though Daun’s general position lies a good mile to
east of Friedrich’s :—irregularly north and south, both Friedrich
and Daun; the former ignorant what Croats and Loudonries
there may be, among those Devil’s Hills to his right; the latter
not ignorant. Friedrich’s right wing, Keith in command of it,
stretches to Hochkirch and a little farther: beyond Hochkirch,

_ it has Four flank Battalions in potence form, with proper ve-

dettes and pickets; and above all, with a strong Battery of
Twenty Guns, which it maintains on the next Height immediate-

ly adjoining Hochkirch, and perceptibly higher than Hochkirch.

This is the finis of Keith on his right; and,—except those ve-
dettes, and pickets of Free-corps people, thrown out a little way
ahead, into the bushes, on that side, — Friedrich’s right wing
knows nothing of the shaggy elevations horrent with wood,
which lie to southward; and merely intends to play its Twenty
Cannon upon them, should they give birth to anything. ‘This is

Friedrich’s posture on his right or south wing.
From Hochkirch northward or nearly so, but sprinkled about

10 Tourist’s Note, September 1858.

> =a “ea 4 ae
‘ ‘
;

286 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT, [Boox x a

7

in all the villages and points of strength, as far up as Drehaad nd
beyond Drehsa, to near Kotitz, a less important village, Friedrich
extends about four miles; centre at Rodewitz, where his own
headquarter is, above two miles north of Hochkirch. Not far
from Rodewitz, but a little to left and ahead, stands his second
and best Battery, of Thirty Guns; ready to play upon Lauska, |
a poor village, and its roadway,* should the Austrians try any~
thing there, or from their Stromberg post, which is a good mile
behind Lauska. His strength, in these lines, some count to be
only 28,000, or less. Four or five miles to north-east, in and
behind Weissenberg (which we used to know last summer), lies
Retzow, with perhaps 10 or 12,000, which will bring him up
to 40,000, were they properly joined with him as a left wing.

:
Daun’s force counts 90,000; with Friedrich lying under his
'
-
-

nose in this insolent manner.
Daun’s headquarter, as we said, is Kittlitz; a Village some
two miles short of Libau, in the direction south-east of Fried-
rich; perhaps five miles to south-east of Rodewitz, Friedrich’s”
lodging. It is close upon the Bautzen-Zittau Highway; Zittau
some twenty miles to south of it, Herrnhuth and the pacific Breth-_
ren about halfway thither. Kittlitz les more to south than
Hochkirch itself; and Daun’s outposts, as we saw, circle quite
round among those Devil’s Hills, and envelop Friedrich’s right
flank. But Daun’s main force lies chiefly northward, and well.
to west, of Kittlitz; parallel to Friedrich, and eastward of him;
with elaborate entrenchments; every village, brook, bridge, height
and bit of good ground, Stromberg to end with, punctually se- —
cured. QObliquely over the Stromberg, holding the Stromberg —
and certain Villages to south-east and to north-west of it, lies
D’ Ahremberg, as right wing: about 20,000 he, put into oblique
potence ; looking into Kotitz, which is Friedrich’s extreme left;
and in a good measure dividing Friedrich from the Retzow
10,000. And lately, as reserve, in front of Reichenbach, eight
or nine miles to east of all that, lies the Prince of Baden-Durlach,
25,000 or so; barring Retzow on that side, and all attempts on
the Silesian Road there. Daun’s lines, not counting-in the south:
érn outposts or Devil's-Hill parties, are considerably longer than _
* Plan at p. 297.

4

 Cuar. XIV.) BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 287
{4th Oct. 1758.

_ Friedrich’s, and also considerably deeper. The two headquar-
ters are about five miles apart: but the two fronts,—divided by
a brook and good hollow running here (one of many such, making
all for Lébau Water),—are not half a mile apart. Towards
Hochkirch and the top of this brook, the opposing posts are quite
crammed close on one another; divided only by their hollow.
Many brooks, each with a definite hollow, run tinkling about
here, swift but straitened to get out; especially Libau Water,
which receives them all, has to take a quite meandering circling
course (through Daun’s quarters and beyond them) before it can
disembogue in Spree, and decidedly set out for Berlin under that
new name. The Landscape,—seen from Hochkirch Villlage,
still better from the Church-steeple which lifts you high above it,
and commands all round except to the south, where Friedrich’s
battery-height quite shuts you in, and hides even those Devil’s
Hills beyond,—is cheerful and pretty. Village belfries, steeples
and towers; airy green ridges of heights, and intricate greener
valleys: now rather barer than youlike. The Tourist tells me,
in Friedrich’s time there must have been a great deal more of
wood than now.

What actually befel at Hochkirch (Saturday, 14th October
1758).

Friedrich, for some time, — probably ever since Wednesday
morning, when he found the Stromberg was not to be his,—had
decided to be out of this bad post. In which, clearly enough,
nothing was to be done, unless Daun would attempt something
else than more and more entrenching and palisading himself.
Friedrich, on the second day (Thursday 12th), rode across to
Weissenberg, to give Retzow his directions, and take view of the
ground; “ Saturday night, Herr Retzow, sooner it cannot be”
(Friedrich had aimed at Friday night, but finds the Provision
Convoy cannot possibly be up); ‘‘ Saturday night, in all silence,
we sweep round out of this,—we and you ;—hurl Baden-Durlach
about his business; and are at Schéps and Reichenbach, and the
Silesian Highway open next morning to us!!! Quietly every-
thing is speeding on towards this consummation, on Friedrich’s

11 Tempelhof, ii. 320.

288 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. _
14th Oct. 1758, —

part. But on Daun’s part there is,—started, I should guess, on i
the very same Thursday,—another consummation getting ready, be
which is to fa!l out on Saturday morning, fifteen hours before

that other, and entirely supersede that other !—

Keith’s opinion, that the Austrians deserve to be hanged if :
they don’t attack us here, is also Loudon’s opinion and Lacy’s, —

and indeed everybody’s,—and at length Daun’s own; who de-

termines to try something here, if never before or after. His

plan, all judges admit, was elaborate and good; and was well
executed too,—Daun himself presiding over the most critical part
of the execution. A plan to have ruined almost any Army, ex-
cept this Prussian one and the Captain it chanced to have. A
universal camisado, or surprisal of Friedrich in his Camp, before
daylight: everybody knows that it took effect (Hochkirch, Sat-

urday 14th October 1758, 5 a.m. of a misty morning); nobody —

expects of an unassisted fellow-creature much light on so doubly
dark athing. But the truth is, there are ample accounts, exact,
though very chaotic; and the thing, steadily examined, till its
essential features extricate themselves from the unessential, proves
to be not quite so unintelligible, and nothing like so destructive,
overwhelming and ruinous as was supposed.

Daun’s plan is very elaborate, and includes a great many com-
binations; all his 90,000 to come into it, simultaneously or in
succession. But the first and grandly vital part, mainspring
and father to all the rest, is this: That Daun, in person, after
nightfall of Friday, shall, with the pick of his force, say 30,000
horse and foot, with all their artilleries and tools, silently quit
his now position in front of Hochkirch, Friedrich’s right wing.
Shall sweep off, silently to southward and leftward, by Wuisch-
ke; thence westward and northward, by the northern base of
those Devil Mountains, through the shaggy hollows and thick
woods there, hitherto inhabited by Croats only, and unknown to
the Prussians: forward, ever forward, through the night-watches
that way; till he has fairly got to the flank of Hochkirch and
Friedrich: Daun to be standing there, all round from the
southern environs of Hochkirch, westward through the woods,
by Meschwitz, Steindérfel, and even north to Waditz (if readers
will consult their Map), silently enclosing Friedrich, as in the

ae >

2h ARNE OSS GMO AMI beat te Se Ag PEP

rae

~ Cuar. XIV.) BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 289
14th Oct. 1758.

bag of a net, in this manner;—ready every man and gun by
about four on Saturday morning. Are to wait for the stroke of
five in Hochkirch steeple; and there and then to begin business,
—there first ; but, on success there, the whole 90,000 everywhere,
—and to draw the strings on Friedrich, and bag and strangle his
astonished people and him.

The difficulty has been to keep. it perfectly secret from so
Vigilant a man as Friedrich: but Daun has completely succeed-
ed. Perhaps Friedrich’s eyes have been a little dimmed by con-
tempt of Daun: Daun, for the last two days especially, has been
more diligent than ever to palisade himself on every point ; noth-
ing, seemingly, on hand but felling woods, building abatis, against
some dangerous Lion’s-spring. They say also, he detected a
traitor in his Camp; traitor carrying Letters to Friedrich under
pretence of fresh eggs,—one of the eggs blown, and a Note of
Daun’s Procedures substituted as yolk. ‘ You are dead, sirrah,”
said Daun: ‘hoisted to the highest gallows: Are not you?

But put-in a Note of my dictating, and your beggarly life is
saved.” Retzow Junior, though there is no evidence except of
the circumstantial kind, thinks this current story may be true.!2
Certain it is, neither Friedrich nor any of his people had the
least suspicion of Daun’s project, till the moment it exploded on

_ them, when the clock at Hochkirch struck five. Daun, in the

last two days, has been felling even more trees than they are
aware of,—thousands of trees in those Devil’s wildernesses to

Friedrich’s right ; and has secretly hewn himself roads, passable

by night for men and ammunition-wagons there :—and in front
of Friedrich, especially Hochkirch way, Daun seems busier than
ever felling wood, this Friday night; numbers of people running
about with axes, with lanterns over there, as if in the push of
hurry, and making a great deal of noise. “ Intending retreat
for Zittau tomorrow!” thinks Friedrich, as the false egg-yolk had
taught him; or merely, ‘‘ That poor precautionary fellow !”’ sup-
posing the false yolk a myth. In short, Daun has got through
his nocturnal wildernesses with perfect success. And stands,

dreamt of by no enemy, in the places appointed for his 80,000

and him; and that poor old clock of Hochkirch, unweariedly
12 Retzow, 1. 347.
Vou. V.—N

a
Pate
>

290  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL —

14th Oct. 1758.
grunting forward to the stroke of five, will strike up something
it is little expecting !—

The Prussians have vedettes, pickets, and small outposts of
Free-corps people scattered about within their border of that
Austrian Wood, the body of which, about Hochkirch as every-

where else, belongs wholly to Croats. Of course there are

guard-parties, sentries duly vigilant, in the big Battery to south-
east of Hochkirch,—and along south-westward in that potence,
or fore-arm of Four Battalions, which are stationed there. Four
good Battalions looking southward there, with Cavalry to right ;
Ziethen’s Cavalry, whose horses stand saddled through the night,
ready always for the nocturnal ‘‘ Pandourade,” which seldom fails
them. ‘There, as elsewhere, are the due vigilances, watchmen,
watch-fires. The rest of the Prussian Army is in its blankets,
wholly asleep, while Daun stands waiting for the stroke of five.

4

That Daun, bursting in with his chosen 30,000, will trample —

down the sleeping Prussian potence at Hochkirch; capture its

big Battery to left, its Village of Hochkirch to rear, and do ex- -
tensive ruin on the whole right wing of Friedrich ; rendering —

Friedrich everywhere an easy conquest to the rest of Daun’s
people, who stand, far and wide, duly posted and prepared, wait-

ing only their signal from Hochkirch: much of this, all of it

that had regard to Hochkirch Battery and Village, and the Prus-

sians stationed there, Daun did execute. And readers, from the

data they have got, must conceive the manner of it,—human de-

scription of the next Two Hours, about Hochkirch, in the thick ~
darkness there, and stormful sudden inroad, being manifestly an —

impossible thing. Nobody was “massacred in his bed,” as the
sympathetic gazetteers fancied; nobody was killed, that I hear
of, without arms in his hand: but plenty of people perished,
fierce of humour, on both sides; and from half-past five till to-

wards eight, there was a general blaze of fiery chaos pushing out —

ever and anon, swallowed in the belly of night again, such as
was seldom seen in this world. Instead of confused details, and
wearisome enumeration of particulars, which nobody would lis-
ten to or understand, we will give one intelligent young gentle-
man’s experience, our friend Tempelhof’s, who stood in this part
of the Prussian Line; experience distinct andindubitable to us;

a

- Cuapr. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 291
— 14th Oct. 1758.

» and which was pretty accurately symbolical, I otherwise see, of

what befel on all points thereabouts. Faithfully copied, and in
the essential parts, not even abridged, here it is:

Tempelhof, at that time a subaltern of artillery, was stationed with a
couple of 24-pounders in attendance on the Battalion Plothow, which
with three others and some cavalry lay to the south side of Hochkirch,
forming a kind of fore-arm or potence there to right of the big Battery,
with their rear to Hochkirch; and keeping vedettes and Free-corps
parties spread out into the woods and Devil’s Hills ahead. ‘Tempelhof
had risen about three, as usual; had his guns and gunners ready; and
was standing by the watch-fire, “‘ expecting the customary Pandourade,”
and what form it would take this morning. ‘Close on five o’clock;
and not a mouse stirring! We are not to have our Pandourade, then ?”
On a sudden, noise bursts out; noise enough, sharp fire among the
Free-corps people ; fire growing ever sharper, noisier, for the next half
hour, but nothing whatever to be seen. ‘‘ Battalion Plothow had soon
got its clothes on, all to the spatterdashes; and took rank to right and
left of the fleche,and of my two guns, in front of its post: but on ac-

count of the thick fog everything was totally dark. I fired off my can-
nons” (shall we say straight southward?) “to learn whether there was
anything in front of us. No answer: ‘ Nothing there—Pshaw, a mere
crackery (Geknacker) of Pandours and our Free-corps people, after
all!’ But the noise grew louder, and came even nearer; I turned my
guns towards it” (southward, south-eastward, or perhaps a gun each
way ?)—“‘ and here we had a salvo in response, from some battalions who
seemed to be two hundred yards or so ahead. ‘The Battalion Plothow
hereupon gave fire ; I too plied my cannons what I could,—and had per-
haps delivered fifteen double shots from them, when at once I tumbled to
the ground, and lost all consciousness” for some minutes or moments.

Awakening with the blood running down his face, poor ‘Tempelhof
concluded it had been a musket-shot in the head; but on getting to his
hands and knees, he found the place “ full of Austrian grenadiers, who
had crept in through our tents to rear; and that it had been a knock
with the butt of the musket from one of those fellows, and not a bullet,”
that had struck him down. Battalion Plothow, assailed on all sides, re-
sisted on all sides; and Tempelhof saw from the ground,—I suppose,
by the embers of watchfires, and by rare flashes of musketry, for they
did not fire much, having no room, but smashed and stabbed and cut,—
“an infantry fight which in murderous intensity surpasses imagination.
I was taken prisoner at this turn; but soon after, got delivered by our
cavalry again.”**

13 Tempelhof, ii. 324 n.

292  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

+a
,

14th Oct. 1758, |

This latter circumstance, of being delivered by the Cavalry,
I find to be of frequent occurrence in that first act of the busi-

ness there: the Prussian Battalion, surprised on front and rear,

always makes murderous fight for itself; is at last overwhelmed,
obliged to retire, perhaps opening its way by bayonet-charge ;—

upon which our Cavalry (Ziethen’s, and others that gathered to —

him) cutting in upon the disordered surprisers, cut them into
flight, rescue the prisoners, and for a time reinstate matters.
The Prussian battalions do not run (nobody runs); but when
repulsed by the endless odds, rally again. ‘The big Battery is
not to be had of them without fierce and dogged struggle; and

is retaken more than once or twice. Still fiercer, more dogged, —

was the struggle in Hochkirch Village; especially in Hochkirch —

Church and Churchyard,—whither the Battalion Margraf-Karl }

had flung themselves; the poor Village soon taking fire about
them. Soon taking fire, and continuing to be a scene of capture
and recapture, by the flame-light ; while Battalion Margraf-Karl
stood with invincible stubbornness, pouring death from it; not
to be compulsed by the raging tide of Austrian grenadiers; not
by “six Austrian battalions,” by “ eight,’ or by never so many.
Stood at bay there; levelling whole masses of them,—till its
cartridges were spent, all to one or two per man; and Major
Lange, the heroic Captain of it, said, “‘ We shall have to go, then,
my men; let us cut ourselves through !”—and did so, in an
honourably invincible manner; some brave remnant actually
getting through, with Lange himself wounded to death.

I think it was not till towards six o’clock that the right wing
generally became aware what the case was: ‘“ More than a Pan-
dourade, yes ;’—though what it might be, in the thick fog which
had fallen, blotting out all vestiges of daylight, nobody could well
say. JRallied Battalions, reinforced by this or the other Battalion
hurrying up from leftward, always charge in upon the enemy, in

hm

Hochkirch or wherever he is busy; generally push him back into |

the Night; but are then fallen upon on both flanks by endless
new strength, and obliged to draw back in turn. And Ziethen’s
Horse, in the mean while, do execution; breaking in on the tu-
multuous victors; new Cuirassiers, Gensdarmes dashing up te
help, so soon as saddled, and charging with a will: so that, on

dtp:
Bag oS eee ©

_ Crap. XIV.) BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 293
14th Oct. 1758.

_ the whole, the enemy, variously attempting, could make nothing

_ of us on that western, or rearward side,—thanks mainly to Zie-
then and the Horse. ‘“ Had we but waited till three or four of
our Battalions had got up!” say the Prussian narrators. But
it is thick mist; few yards ahead, you cannot see at all, unless
it be flame; and close at hand, all things and figures waver in-
distinct,—hairy outlines of blacker shadows on a ground of
black.

It must have been while Lange was still fighting, perhaps be-
fore Lange took to the Church of Hochkirch, scarcely later than
half-past six (but nobody thought of pulling out his watch in
such a business !)—about six, or half-past six, when Keith, who
has charge of this wing, and lodges somewhere below or north of
Hochkirch, came to understand that his big Battery was taken ;

that here was such a Pandourade as had not been before; and
that, of a surety, said Battery must be retaken. Keith springs

_ on horseback ; hastily takes “‘ Battalion Kannacker” and several
_ remnants of others; rushes upwards, “leaving Hochkirch a little
to right; direct upon the big Battery.” Recaptures the big
Battery. But is set upon by overwhelming multitudes, bent to
have it back ;—is passionate for new assistance in this vital point ;
but can get none: had been “disarted by both his Aide-de-

_ camps,” says poor John Tebay, a wandering English horse-sol-
dier, who attends him as mounted groom ; # asked twenty times,
and twenty more, ‘Where are my Aide-de-camps!’’’!*— but
could get no response or reinforcement; and at length, quite
surrounded and overwhelmed, had to retire; opening his way by
the bayonet; and before long, suddenly stopping short,—falling

_ dead into Tebay’s arms; shot through the heart. ‘Two shots
on the right side he had not regarded; but this on the left side
was final: Keith’s fightings are suddenly all done. Tebay, in
distraction, tried much to bring away the body; but could by no

14 «* Cantens Cockcey and Goudy” he calls them—( Coccejz, whose Father
the Kanzler we have seen, and Gaudi whose self ),—who both had, in suc-
cession, struck into Hochkirch as the less desperate place, according to Te-
bay: See Tebay’s Letter to Mitchell, ‘‘ Crossen, October 29th” (in Memoirs
and Papers, ii. 501-505) ;—which is probably true every word, allowing for
Tebay’s temper; but is highly indecipherable, though not entirely so after
many readings and researchings.

294  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIIL |
14th Oct. 1758. |
present means; distractedly ‘rid for a coach ;” found, on return,
that the Austrians had the ground, and the body of his master;
Hochkirch, Church and all, now undisputedly theirs.

To appearance, it was this news of Keith’s repulse (I know
not whether of Keith’s death as yet) that first roused Friedrich
to a full sense of what was now going on, two miles to south of
him. Friedrich, according to his habits, must have been awake
and afoot when the Business first broke out; though, for some |
considerable time, treating it as nothing but a common crackery
of Pandours. Already, finding the Pandourade louder than:
usual, he had ordered out to it one battalion and the other that
lay handy: but now he pushes forward several battalions under
Franz of Brunswick (his youngest Brother-in-law), with Mar-
graf Karl and Prince Moritz: “Swift you, to Hochkirch yon-
der!”—and himself springs on horseback to deal with the affair. —
Prince Franz of Brunswick, poor young fellow, cheerily coming —
on, near Hochkirch had his head shorn off by a cannon-ball. —
Moritz of Dessau, too, ‘riding within twenty yards of the Aus- —
trians,” so dark was it, he so nearsighted, got badly hit,—and
soon after, driving to Bautzen for surgery, was made prisoner by —
Pandours ;!5 never fought again, “died next year of cancer in —
the lip.” Nothing but triumphant Austrian shot and cannon-
shot going yonder; these battalions too have to fall back with
sore loss. |

Friedrich himself, by this time, is forward in the thick of the —
tumult, with another body of battalions; storming furiously }
along, has his horse shot under him; storms through, “ success-
fully, by the other side of Hochkirch” (Hochkirch to his left) :—
but finds, as the mist gradually sinks, a ring of Austrians massed
ahead, on the Heights; as far as Steindérfel and farther, a gen-
eral continent of Austrians enclosing all the south and south-
west ; and, in fact, that here is now nothing to be done. ‘That
the question of his flank is settled; that the question now is of _
his front, which the appointed Austrian parties are now upon —
attacking. Question especially of the Heights of Drehsa, and
of the Pass and Brook of Drehsa (rearward of his centre part),

15 In Archenholtz (i. 289-290), his dangerous adventures on the road to
Bautzen, in this wounded condition. f

a ee
a ae

-.* ; -~
q .

_ Cuap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 295
14th Oct. 1758.

where his one retreat will lie, Steindérfel being now lost. Part
first of the Affair is ended; Part second of it begins.

Rapidly enough Friedrich takes his new measures. Seizes
Drehsa Height, which will now be key of the field; despatches
Mollendorf thither (Méllendorf our courageous Leuthen friend) ;
who vigorously bestirs himself; gets hold of Drehsa Height
before the enemy can; Ziethen codperating on the Heights of
Kumschiitz, Canitz and other points of vantage. And thus, in

- effect, Friedrich pulls up his torn right skirt (as he is doing all
his other skirts) into new compact front against the Austrians:
so that, in that south-western part especially, the Austrians do
not try it farther; but ‘retire at full gallop,” on sight of this
swift seizure of the Keys by Méllendorf and Ziethen. Friedrich
also despatches instant order to Retzow, to join him at his speed-
iest. riedrich everywhere rearranges himself, hither, thither,
with skilful rapidity, in new Line of Battle; still hopeful to dis-
pute what is left of the field ;—longing much that Retzow could
come on wings.

By this time (towards eight, if I might guess) Day has got the

_upper hand; the Daun Austrians stand visible on their Ring of
Heights all round, behind Hochkirch and our late Battery, on to
_ westward and northward, as far as Steindérfel and Waditz ;—
extremely busy rearranging themselves into something of line;
there being much confusion, much simmering about in clumps
and gaps, after such a tussle. In front of us, to eastward, the
appointed Austrian parties are proceeding to attack: but in day-
light, and with our eyes open, it is a thing of difficulty, and does
not prosper as Hochkirch did. Duke D’Ahremberg, on their
extreme right, had in charge to burst in upon our left, so soon
as he saw Hochkirch done: D’Ahremberg does try; as do oth-
ers in their places, nearer Daun; but with comparatively little
success. D’Ahremberg, meeting something of check or hin-
drance where he tried, pauses, for a good while, till he see how
others prosper. Their grand chance is their superiority of num-
ber; and the fact that Friedrich can try nothing upon them, but
must stand painfully on the defensive till Retzow come. To
Friedrich, Retzow seems hugely slow about it. But the truth

296 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII.
14th Oct. 1758.
is, Baden-Durlach, with his 20,000 of Reserve, has, as per or- —
‘der, made attack on Retzow, 20,000 against 12: one of the fee-
blest attacks conceivable; but sufficient to detain Retzow till he
get it repulsed. Retzow is diligent as Time, and will be here.

Meanwhile, the Austrians on front do, in a sporadic way, at-
tack and again attack our batteries and posts; especially that
big Battery of Thirty Guns, which we have to north of Rode-
witz. The Austrians do take that Battery at last; and are be-
ginning again to be dangerous,—the rather as D’Ahremberg
seems again to be thinking of business. It is high time Retzow
were here! Few sights could be gladder to Friedrich than the
first glitter of Retzow’s vanguard,—horse, under Prince Eugen of
Wiirtemberg,—beautifully wending down from the Weissenberg
yonder; skilfully posting themselves, at Belgern and elsewhere,
as thorns in the sides of D’Ahremberg (sharp enough, on trial by
D’Ahremberg). Followed, before long, by Retzow himself; se-
renely crossing Liébau Water; and, with grave celerity, and the
best of skill, likewise posting himself,—hopelessly to D’Ahrem-
berg, who tries nothing farther. The sun is now shining; it is
now ten in the day. Had Retzow come an hour sooner; before
we lost that big Battery and other things! But he could come
no sooner; be thankful he is here at last, in such an overawing
manner. :

Friedrich, judging that nothing now can be made of the affair,
orders retreat. Retreat, which had been getting schemed, I sup-
_ pose, and planned in the gloom of the royal mind, ever since loss
of that big Battery at Rodewitz. Little to occupy him, in this
interim; except indignant waiting, rigorously steady, and some
languid interchange of cannon-shot between the parties. Retreat
is to Klein-Bautzen neighbourhood (new headquarter Dober-
schiitz, outposts Kreckwitz and Purschwitz); four miles or so
to north-west. Rather a shifting of your ground, which aston-
ishes the military reader ever since, than a retreating such as
the common run of us expected. Done in the usual masterly
manner; part after part wending off, Retzow standing minatory
here, Méllendorf minatory there, in the softest quasi-rhythmic
sequence ; Cavalry all drawn out between Belgern and Kreck-
witz, baggage-wagons filing through the Pass of Drehsa ;—not an

Vol.Vp.370a

AD,
Meee
‘

"ss
eaGeLs done

°
Gq ©
Runs chwitk
ot oft B > Sy %
yeckewits, Weisserberg
Z A. Rea eran

cro

SRB aco - €

i ‘pity

AAAS Mee ety yy
; Cz army BO
aR rt ed
ih 5 *

DN nce Shi

BATTLE OF HOCH KIRCH.
147 OCTOBER, (758.
a.a.a. First position of the Austrian Army. ~~ 6.6. Extreme left, under Loudon.
c.c. Austrian Reserve under Baden-Durlach. ha. 7
a.d.d, Frussian Army. e.¢. The two main Frussian Batteries. * Liethers Cavalry.
g.9. Trussian Vanguard under Retzow.

haan. Advance of Austrian Army. t. Right wing under DAhremberg.
kkk Position taken by the Prussians after the Battle.
RO SONY <a en

|
@

|

Crap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 297
14th Oct. 1758.

‘Austrian medddling with it, less or more; Daun and his Aus-

trians standing in their ring of five miles, gazing into it like
stone statues; their regiments being still in a confused state,—
and their Daun an extremely slow gentleman.!®

And in this manner Friedrich, like a careless swimmer caught
in the Mahlstrom, has not got swallowed in it; but has made
such a buffetting of it, he is here out of it again, without bone
broken,—not, we hope, without instruction from the adventure.
He has lost 101 pieces of cannon, most of his tents and camp-
furniture ; and, what is more irreparable, above 8,000 of his
brave people, 5,381 of them and 119 Officers (Keith and Moritz
for two) either dead or captive. In men the Austrian loss, it
seems, is not much lower, some say is rather a shade higher; by
their own account, 325 Officers, 5,614 rank and file, killed and
wounded,—not reckoning 1,000 prisoners they lost to us, and
“at least 2,000” who took that chance of deserting in the in-
tricate dark woods.!”

Friedrich, all say, took his punishment in a wonderfully cheer-
ful manner. De Catt the Reader, entering to him that evening
as usual, the King advanced, in a tragic declamatory attitude ;
and gave him, with proper voice and gesture, an appropriate
passage of Racine:

‘¢ Enfin apres un an, tu me revois, Arbate,
Non plus comme autre fois cet heureux Mithridate
Qui, de Rome toujours balangant le destin,
Tenait entre elle et moi V'univers incertain.
Je suis vaincu; Pompée a saisi lavantage
Dune nuit qui laissait peu de place au courage ;
Mes soldats presque nus, dans—” * *

Not a little to De Catt’s comfort.!8 During the retreat itself,
Retzow Junior had come, as Papa’s Aide-de-camp, with a mes-
sage to the King; found him on the heights of Klein-Bautzen,
watching the movements. Message done with, the King said, in
a smiling tone, ‘Daun has played me a slippery trick today!”

16 Tempelhof, ii. 319-336; Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 482-453; Helden- Ge-
schichte, vy. 241-257; Archenholtz, &c. &c.
17 Tempelhof, ii. 336; but see Kausler, p. 576. 18 Roédenbeck, i. 354.
N2

%

>

298  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. |
14th Oct. 1758.
‘‘T have geen it,” answered Retzow; ‘but it is only a scratch,
which your Majesty will soon manage to heal again.’’—“ Glaubt
Er dies, Do you think so?” ‘Not only I, but the whole Army
firmly believe it of your Majesty.’ —‘“‘ You are quite right,”
added the King, in a confidentially candid way: “We will

manage Daun. What I lament is the number of brave men

that have died this morning.’’!® On the morrow, he was heard —
to say publicly: ‘ Daun has let us out of check-mate; the game
is not lost yet. We will rest ourselves here a few days; then go —
for Silesia, and deliver Neisse.” The Anecdote-Books (perhaps —
not mythically) add this: ‘‘ Where are all your guns, though?” —
said the King to an Artilleryman, standing vacant on parade, |
next day. ‘Thro Majestit, the Devil stole them all, last night!”

—‘‘Hm, well, we must have them back from him.’’2°
Nothing immoderately depressive in Hochkirch, it appears ;—

though, alas, on the fourth day after, there came a message from ©
Baireuth ; which did strike one down: “ My noble Wilhelmina —
dead; died in the very hours while we were fighting here !”’2! —
Readers must conceive it: coming unexpected more or less, black —

as sudden universal hurricane, on the heart of the man; a sorrow

sacred, yet immeasurab!e, irremediable to him; as if the sky too _

were falling on his head, in aid of the mean earth and its raven-

ings :—of all this there can nothing be said at present. Fried-—

rich’s one relief seems to have been the necessity laid on him of

ui

%
f

i
;

perpetual battling with outward business;—we may fancy, in ©

the rapid weeks following, how much was lying, at all times, in
the background of his mind suppressed into its caves.

Daun, it appears, was considerably elated: spent a great deal
of his time, so precious just at present, in writing despatches, in
congratulating and being congratulated ;—did an elaborate Te-
Deum, or Ambrosian Song, in artillery and vox humana,—which
with the adjuncts, say splenetic people, as at Kolin, sensibly
assisted Friedrich’s affairs. Daun was by no means of braggart

19 Retzow,.1. 359 n. 20 Archenholtz, i. 299.

7? On a common Business-Letter to Prince Henri, ‘ Doberschiitz, 18th —

October 1758,” is this sudden bit of Autograph: ‘‘ Grand Dieu, ma Seur
de Bareith!”—(Schoning, Der Siebenjéhrige Krieg, nach der Original-Cor-
respondenz &c., aus den Staats-Archiven; Potsdam, 1851: i. 287.)

mS inghay My

Cuap. XIV.] BATILE OF HOCHKIRCH. 299
14th Oct. 1758:

turn ; but the recognition of his matchless achievement by the
gazetteer public, whether in exultation or in lamentation, was
loud and universal; and the joy, in Vienna and the cognate
quarters, knew no bounds for the time being. Thus, among
other tokens, the Holiness of our Lord the Pope, blessing Heaven
for such success against the Heretic, was pleased to send him “a
Consecrated Hat and Sword,”—such as the old Popes were wont,
very long ago, to bestow on distinguished Champions against the
Heathen,—(much jeered at, and crowed over, by a profane Fried-
rich”): ‘the effect of which miraculous furnishings,’’ says Tem-
pelhof, “turned out to be that the Feldmarschall never gained
any success more ;”—in fact, except that small thing on Finck
next Year, never any, as it chanced. Daun had withdrawn to
his old camp, on the day of Hochkirch; leaving only a detach-
ment on the field there: it was not for six or seven days more
that he stept out to the Kreckwitz and Purschwitz neighbour-
hood; more within sight of his vanquished enemy,—but nothing
like vigilant enough of what might still be in him, after such
vanquishing !—We must spare this Note, for the sake of a heroic
kind of man, who had not too much of reward in the world:

“'Tebay could not recover Keith’s body: Croats had the plundering
of Keith; other Austrians, not of Croat kind, carried the dead General
into Hochkirch Church: Lacy’s emotion on recognising him there,—
like a tragic gleam of his own youth suddenly brought back to him, as
in star-light, piercing and sad, from twenty-years distance,— is well
known in Books. On the morrow, Sunday October 15th, Keith had
honourable soldier’s-burial there,— twelve cannon’ salvoing thrice, and
‘the whole Corps of Colloredo’ with their muskets thrice; Lacy as
chief mourner, not without tears. Four months after, by royal order,
Keith’s body was conveyed to Berlin; reinterred in Berlin, in a still
more solemn public manner, with all the honours, all the regrets; and
Keith sleeps now in the Garnison-Kirche :—far from bonny Inverugie ;
the hoarse sea-winds and caverns of Dunottar singing vague requiem
to his honourable line and him, in the imaginations of some few. ‘My
Brother leaves me a noble legacy,’ said the old Lord Marischal: ‘last
year he had Bohemia under ransom; and his personal estate is 70 duc-
ats’ (about 25/.).**

22 (Huvres de Frédéric, xv. 122, 124, 126, &e. &e. : in Preuss, ii. 196, com-
plete List of these poor Pieces; which are hearty, not hypocritical, in their
contemptuous hilarity, but have little other merit. 7? Varnhagen, p. 261.

300  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII. |

14th Oct. 1758.

“Tn Hochkirch Church there is still, not in the Churchyard as for-
merly, a fine, modestly impressive Monument to Keith; modest Urn of
black marble on a Pedestal of gray,—and, in gold letters, an Inscription
not easily surpassable in the lapidary way: * * ‘ Dum in Pra&io Non
PROBUL HINC INCLINATAM svUoRUM AacIEM MENTE MANU VOCE ET
EXEMPLO ResTiTuEBAT PUGNANS UT HEROAS DECET OccvBuIT.
D. xiv. Ocrosris—These words go through you like the clang of
steel.** Friedrich’s sorrow over him (‘ tears,’ high eulogies, ‘loua ex-
trémement’) is itself a monument. ‘Twenty years after, Keith had from
his Master a Statue, in Berlin. One of Four; to the Four most de-
serving: Schwerin (1771), Winterfeld (1777), Seidlitz (1778), Keith
(when ?)?®—which still stand in the Wilhelm Platz there.

“ Hochkirch Church has been rebuilt in late years: a spacious airy
Church, with galleries, and requisites, especially with free air, light and
cleanliness. Capable perhaps of 1,500 sitters: half of them Wends.
‘Above 700 skeletons, in one heap, were dug out, in cutting the new
foundations.’ The strong outer Door of the old Church, red oak, I
should think, is still retained in that capacity ; still shows perhaps half-
a-dozen rough big quasi-keyholes, torn through it in different parts, and
daylight shining in, where the old bullets passed. The Keith Monu-
ment, perhaps four feet high, is on the flagged floor, left side of the pul-
pit, close by the wall,—‘ the bench where Keith’s body lay has had to
be cased in new plank’ (zine would be better) ‘against the knives of
tourists.’ ”’

Old Lord Marischal,—George, “‘ Maréchal d’ Ecosse,’’ as he al-
ways signs himself,—was by this time seventy-two; King’s
Governor of Neufchatel, for a good while past and to come
(1754-1763). In “James,” the junior, but much the stronger
and more solid, he has lost, as it were, a father and younger
brother at once; father, under beautiful conditions; and the
tears of the old man are natural and affecting. ‘Ten years older
than his Brother; and survived him still twenty years. An
excellent cheery old soul, he too; honest as the sunlight, with a

** In Rédenbeck, i. 149. Given also (very nearly correct) in Correspond-
ence of Sir Robert Murray Keith (London, 1849), i. 151. This is the jun-
ior of the two Diplomatic Sir Roberts, genealogical cousins of Keith; by
this one (in 1771, not 1776 as German Guide-books have it) the Hochkirch
Monument was set up. A very interesting Collection of Letters, those of
his ;—edited with the usual darkness, or rather more.

*° Nicolai (Beschreibung der Residenzstddte, i. 193, 194) gives these dates
for the Three, and for Keith’s no date.

gi

+
*

‘,

Cuap. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 301

22d Oct.—9th Nov. 1758.

fine small-vein of gaiety, and “pleasant wit,” in him: what a
treasure to Friedrich at Potsdam, in the coming years; and how
much loved by him (almost as one doy loves another), all readers
would be surprised to discover. Some hints of him will perhaps
be allowed us farther on.

Sequel of Hochkirch, the Campaign ends in a Way surpris-
ing to an atlentive Public (22d October—20th November
1758).

There followed upon Hochkirch five weeks of rapid events ;
such as nobody had been calculating on. ‘To the reader, so
weary of marchings, manceuverings, surprisals, campings, and de-
tails of war, not many words, we hope, may render these results
conceivable.

Friedrich staid ten days, refitting himself, in that Camp of
Klein Bautzen, on one of the branches of the Spree. Daun, who
had retired to his old strong place, on the 14th, scarcely occupy-
ing Hochkirch Field at all, came out in about a week ; and took
a strong post near Friedrich; not attempting anything upon
him, but watching him, now better within sight. Friedrich’s
fixed intention is, to march to Neisse all the same; what proba-
bly Daun, under the shadow of his laurels and his new Papal
Hat, may not have considered possible, with the road to Neisse
blocked by 80,000 men. Friedrich has refitted himself with the
requisite new cannon and furnitures, from Dresden; especially
with Prince Henri and 6,000 foot and horse,—led by Prince
Henri in person ; so Prince Henri would have it, the capricious

little man; and that Finck should be left in Saxony instead of

him. All which weakens Saxony not a little. But Friedrich
hopes the Reichs Army is a feeble article; ill off for provision
in those parts, and not likely to attempt very much on the sud-
den. Accordingly :

Friedrich marches, enigmatically, not on Glogau, but on Reichenbach
and Gérlitz ; to Daun’s astonishment.

Sunday Evening, October 22d, Convoy of many wagons quits Baut-
zen (Bautzen Proper, not the Village, but the Town), laden with all the

302 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

22d Oct.—9th Nov. 1758.
wounded of Hochkirch ; above 3,000 by count, to carry them to Dresden
for deliberate surgery. Keith's Tebay, I perceive, is in this Convoy;
not ill hurt, but willing to lie in Hospital a little, and consider. These
poor fellows cannot get to Dresden: on the second day,a Daun De-
tachment, hussaring about in those parts, is announced ahead; and (by
new order from headquarters) the Convoy turns northward for Hoyers-
werda,—(to Tebay’s disgust with the Commandant ; “ shied off,” says
‘Tebay, “ for twelve hussars!”?°)—and I think, in the end, went on to
Glogau instead of Dresden. Which was very fortunate for Tebay and
the others. The poor wounded being thus disposed of, Friedrich next
night, at 10 o’clock, Monday 23d, in the softest manner, pushes off his
Bakery and Army Stores a little way, northward down the Spree Val-
ley, on the western fork of the Spree (fork farthest from Daun); fol-
lows, himself, with the rest of the Army, next evening, down the eastern
fork, also northward. “ Going for Glogau,” thinks Daun, when the hus-
sars report about it (late on Tuesday night): ‘* Let him go, if he fancy
that a road to Neisse! But, indeed, what other shift has he,’ considers
Daun, “ but to try rallying at Glogau yonder, safe under the guns ?”—
and is not in the slightest haste about this new matter.’

United with his baggage-column. Friedrich proceeds north-eastward ;
crosses Spree still northward or north-eastward ; encamps there, in the
dark hours of Tuesday ; no Daun heeding him. Before daylight, how-
ever, Friedrich is again on foot; in several columns now, for the bad
country-roads ahead ;—and has struck straight south-eastward, if Daun
were noting him. And, in the afternoon of Wednesday, Daun is aston-
ished to learn that this wily Enemy is arrived in Reichenbach vicinity ;
sweeping-in our poor posts thereabouts ; immovably astride of the Sile-
sian Highway after all! Anastonished Daun hastens out, what he can,
to take survey of the sudden Phenomenon. Tries it, next day and next,
with his best Loudons and appliances; finds that this Phenomenon can
actually march to Neisse ahead of him, indifferent to Pandours, or giv-
ing them as good as they bring ;—and that. nothing but a battle and
beating (could we rashly dream of such a thing, which we cannot) will
prevent it. ‘ Very well, then!” Daun strives to say. And lets the
Phenomenon march (from Gorlitz, October 30th) ; Loudon harassing
the rear of it, for some days; not without counter harassment, much
waste of cannonading, and ruin to several poor Lausitz Villages by fire,
—‘** Prussians scandalously burn them, when we attack!” says Loudon.
Till, at last, finding this march impregnably arranged, “split into two
routes,” and ready for all chances, Loudon also withdraws to more prom-
ising business Poor General Retzow Senior was of this march; ab-

7° Second Letter from Telbay, in Mitchell, wbi supra,
37 Tempelhof, ii. 341-347.

Si Se

ai cca i nal

Se oe

Ame

cee es

pc RF 8

}

| aa
 Cnar. XIV.) BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 303
_—- 9th-16th Nov. 1758.

~ solutely could not be excused, though fallen ill of dysentery, like to die;
—and did die, the day after he got to Schweidnitz, when the difficulties

and excitement were over.” ¥
Of Friedrich’s march, onward from Gorlitz, we shall say noth-
ing farther, except that the very wind of it was salvatory to his
Silesian Fortresses and interests. ‘That at Neisse, on and after
November 1st,—which is the third or second day of Friedrich’s
march,—General Treskow, Commandant of Neisse, found the
bombardment slacken more and more (‘ King of Prussia com-
ing,” said the Austrian deserters to us); and that, on Novem-
ber 6th, Treskow, looking out from Neisse, found the Austrian
trenches empty, Generals Harsch and Deville hurrying over the
Hills homewards,—pickings to be had of them by Treskow,—
and Neisse Siege a thing finished.*9 It had lasted, in the way of
blockade and half-blockade, for about three months; Deville, for
near one month, half-blockading, then Harsch (since September
380th) wholly blockading, with Deville under him, and an army
of 20,000; though the actual cannonade, very fierce, but of no
effect, could not begin till little more than a week ago,—so diffi-
cult the getting up of siege-material in those parts. Kosel, un-
der Commandant Lattorf, whose praises, like Treskow’s, were
great,—had stood four months of Pandour blockading and as-
saulting, which also had to take itself away on advent of Fried-
rich. Of Friedrich, on his return-journey, we shall hear again
before long; but in the mean while must industriously follow

Daun.

EKeldmarschall Daun and the Reichs Army try some Siege of Dres-
den (9th-16th November).

October 30th, Daun, seeing Neisse Siege as good as gone to water,
decided with himself that he could still do a far more important stroke :
capture Dresden, get hold of Saxony in Friedrich’s absence Daun
turned round from Reichenbach, accordingly ; and, at his slow-footed

‘pace, addressed himself to that new errand. Had he made better de-
spatch, or even been in better luck, it is very possible he might have

28 Retzow, i. 372.
1 °° Tagebuch, &e. (*‘Diary of the Siege of Neisse,” 4th Angust,—26th
October, —G6th November 1758, ‘‘1 a.m. suddenly”), in Seyfarth, Beylagen,
ii. 468-472: of Treskow’s own writing; brief and clear. Helden-Geschichte,
v. 268-270.

804  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Boox XVIII.

7th-12th Nov, 1758.
done something there. In Dresden, and in Governor Schmettau with
his small garrison, there is no strength for a siege; in Saxony is noth-
ing but some poor remnant under Finck, much of it Free-Corps and
light people: capable of being swallowed by the Reichs Army itself,—
were the Reichs Army enterprising, or in good circumstances other-
wise. It is true the Russians have quitted Colberg as impossible ; and
are flowing homewards dragged by hunger: the little Dohna Army
will, therefore, march for Saxony: the little Anti-Swedish Army, un-
der Wedel], has likewise been mostly ordered thither; both at their
quickest. For Daun, all turns on despatch; loiter a little, and Fried-
rich himself will be here again!

Daun, I have no doubt, stirred his slow feet the. fastest he could.
November 7th, Daun was in the neighbourhood of Pirna Country again,
had his bridge at Pirna, for communication; urged the Reichs Army
to bestir itself, Now or never. Reichs Army did push out a little
against Finck; made him leave that perpetual Camp of Gahmig, take
new camps, Kesselsdorf and elsewhere ; and at length made him shoot
across Elbe, to the north-west, on a pontoon bridge below Dresden,
with retreating room to northward, and shelter under the guns of that
City. Reichs Army has likewise made powerful detachments for cap-
ture of Leipzig and the north-western towns; capture of Torgau, the
Magazine town, first of all: summon them, with force evidently over-
powering, “ Free-withdrawal, if you don’t resist; and if you do—!”—
At Torgau there was actual attempt made (November 12th), rather
elaborate and dangerous-looking ; under Haddick, with near 10,000 of
the “ Austrian- auxiliary” sort: to whom the old Commandant,—judging
Wedell, the late Anti-Swedish Wedell, to be now near,—rushed out
with “300 men and one big gun ;” and made such a firing and gesticu-
lating as was quite extraordinary, as if Wedell were here already: till
Wedell’s self did come in sight; and the overpowering Reichs Detach-
ment made its best speed elsewhither.*° The other Sieges remained
things of theory; the other Reichs Detachments hurried home, I think,
without summoning anybody.

Meanwhile, Daun, with the proper Artilleries at last ready, comes
flowing forward (November 8th-9th); and takes post in the Great
Garden, or south side of Dresden; minatory to Schmettau and that
City. The walls, or works, are weak; outside there is nothing but
Mayer and the Free-Corps to resist,—who indeed has surpassed him-
self this season, and been extraordinarily diligent upon that lazy Reichs
Army. Commandant Schmettau signifies to Daun, the day Daun
came in sight, “If your Excellenz advance farther on me, the grim

3° Tempelhof, &c.; ‘‘ Letter from a Prussian Officer,” in Helden-Ge-
schichte, y. 286.

gabe ame aks arb ~2 ces

Cuar. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. | 805
9th Nov. 1758.

Rules of War in besieged places will order That I burn the Suburbs,
which are your defences in attacking me,’—and actually fills the fine
houses on the Southern Suburb with combustible matter, making due
announcements, to Court and population, as well as to Daun. ‘ Burn
the Suburbs?” answers Daun: “In the name of civilised humanity,
you will never think of such thing!” “That will I, your Excellenz.
of a surety, and do it!” answers Schmettau. So that Dresden is full
of pity, terror and speculation. The common rumour is, says Excel-
lency Mitchell, who is sojourning there for the present, “That Briihl”
(nefarious Bruhl, born to be the death of us!) “ has persuaded Polish
Majesty to sanction this enterprise of Daun’s,’”’—very careless, Briihl,
what become of Dresden or us, so the King of Prussia be well hurt or
spited !

Certain enough, November 9th, Daun does come on, regardless of
Schmettau’s assurances ; so that, “ about midnight,” Mayer, who “can
hear the enemy busily building four big batteries” withal, has to report
himself driven to the edge of those high Houses (which are filled with
combustibles), and that some Croats are got into the upper windows.
“ Burn them, then!” answers Schmettau (such the dire necessity of
sieged places): and, “at 3 a.m.” (three hours notice to the poor in-
mates), Mayer does so; hideous flames bursting out, punctually at the
stroke of 3; ‘whole suburb seemed on blaze” (about a sixth part of it
actually so), “ nay you would have said the whole Town was environed
in flames.” Excellency Mitchell climbed a steeple: “ will not describe
to your Lordship the horror, the terror and confusion of this night;
wretched inhabitants running with their furniture” (what of it they had
got flung out, between 12 o’clock and 3) ‘‘ towards the Great Garden ;
all Dresden, to appearance, girt in flames, ruins-and smoke.” Such a
night in Dresden, especially in the Pirna Suburb, as was never seen
before.*t This was the sad beginning, or attempt at beginning, of
Dresden Siege; and this also was the end of it, on Daun’s part at
present. For four days more, he hung about the place, minatory, hesi-
tative ; but attempted nothing feasible; and on the fifth day,—* for a
certain weighty reason,” as the Austrian Gazettes express it,—he saw
good to vanish into the Pirna Rock-Country, and be out of harm’s way
in the mean while!

The truth is, Daun’s was an intricate case just now; need-
ing, above all things, swiftness of treatment; what, of all
things, it could not get from Daun. His denunciations on that

3t Mitchell, Memoirs and Papers,i. 459. In Helden-Geschichte, v. 295-
302, minute account (corresponding well with Mitchell’s); ib. 303-33, the
certified details of the damage done: ‘‘ 280 houses lost ;” ‘*4 human lives,”

306  SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVII.
20th Noy. 1758.

burnt Suburb were again loud; but Séutoeiee continues deaf to

all that, — means “to defend himself by the known rules of
war and of honour ;” declares, he ‘‘ will dispute from street to
street, and only finish in the middle of Polish Majesty’s Royal
Palace.” Denunciation will do nothing! Daun had above

100,000 men in those parts. Rushing forward with sharp shot — i

and bayonet storm, instead of logical denunciation, it is proba-
ble Daun might have settled his Schmettau. But the hour of
tide was rigorous, withal ;—and such an ebb, if you missed it
in hesitating! November 15th, Daun withdrew; the ebbing
come. ‘That same day, Friedrich was at Lauban in the Lausitz,
within a hundred miles again; speeding hitherward; behind
him a Silesia brushed clear, before him a Saxony to be brushed.
“ Reason weighty’? enough, think Daun and the Austrian Ga-
zettes! But such, since you have missed the tide-hour, is the
inexorable fact of ebb,—going at that frightful rate., Daun
never was the man to dispute facts.

November 20th, Friedrich arrived in Dresden; heard, next
day, that Daun had wheeled decisively homeward from Pirna
Country; that the Reichs Army and he are diligently climbing
the Metal Mountains; and that there is not in Saxony, more
than in Silesia, an enemy left. What a Sequel to Hochkirch!
“‘Neisse and Dresden both!’’ we had hoped as sequel, if lucky:
~“*Neisse or Dresden” seemed infallible. And we are climbing
the Metal Mountains, under facts superior to us.

And Campaign Third has closed in this manner ;—leaving
things much as it foundthem. Essentially a draw match; Con-
tending Parties little altered in relative strength ;—both of them,
it may be presumed, considerably weaker. Friedrich is not tri-
umphant, or shining in the light of bonfires, as last Year; but,
in the mind of judges, stands higher than ever (if that could help
him much) ;—and is not “annihilated” in the least, which is the
surprising circumstance.

Friedrich’s marches, especially, have been wonderful, this
Year. In the spring time, old Maréchal de Belleisle, French
Minister of War, consulting officially about future operations,
heard it objected once: ‘ But if the King of Prussia were to

Cuar. XIV.] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 307
20th Nov. 1758.

burst-in upon us there?” ‘The King of Prussia is a great sol-
dier,” answered M. de Belleisle; ‘‘ but his Army is not a shut-
tle (navelte),”—to be shot about, in that way, from side to side
of the world! No surely; not altogether. But the King of
Prussia has, among other arts, an art of marching Armies, which
by degrees astonishes the old Maréchal. To ‘‘come upon us en
navette,’’ suddenly ‘‘like a shuttle” from the other side of the
web, became an established phrase among the French concerned
in these unfortunate matters. °2

“The Pitt-and-Ferdinand Campaign of 1758,” says a Note, which I
would fain abridge, “is more palpably victorious than Friedrich’s, much
more an affair of bonfires than his; though it too has had itsrubs. Loss
of honour at Crefeld; loss of Louisburg and Codfishery: these are se-
rious blows our enemy hashad. But then, to temper the joy over Lou-
isburg, there was, at Ticonderago, by Abercromby, on the small scale
(all the extent of scale he had), a melancholy Platitude committed : that
of walking into an enemy without the least reconnoitering of him, who
proves to be chin-deep in abatis and fieldworks ; and kills, much at his
ease, about 2,000 brave fellows,'brought 5,000 miles for that object.
And obliges you to walk away on the instant, and quit Ticonderago,
like a—surely like a very tragic Dignitary in Cocked-hat! To be
cashiered, we will hope; at least, to be laid on the shelf, and replaced
by some Wolfe or some Amherst, fitter for the business! Nor were
the Descents on the French Coast much to speak of: ‘Great Guns
got at Cherbourg,’ these truly, as exhibited in Hyde-Park, were a com-
fortable sight, especially to the simpler sort: but on the other hand, at
Morlaix, on the part of poor old General Bligh and Company, there had
been a Platitude equal or superior to that of Abercromby, though not so
tragical in loss of men. ‘ What of that?’ said an enthusiastic Public,
striking their balance, and joyfully illuminating.—Here is a Clipping
from Ohio Country, ‘ Letter of an Officer’ (distilled essence of Two Let-
ters), ‘ dated, Fort-Duquesne, 28th November 1758 :

“** Our small Corps under General Forbes, after much sore scram-
bling through the Wildernesses, and contending with enemies wild and
tame, is, since the last four days, in possession of Fort-Duquesne’ ( Pitts-
burg henceforth): ‘ Friday 24th, the French garrison, on our appear-
ance, made off without fighting ; took to boats down the Ohio, and van-
ished out of those Countries,'—forever and a day, we will hope. ‘ Their
Louisiana-Canada communication is lost; and all that prodigious tract

82 Archenholtz, i.316; Montalembert, seepius, for the phrase ‘‘en navette.”

a

308 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A HEIGHT. [Book XVIII.

20th Nov. 1758.
of rich country,—which Mr. Washington fixed upon long ago, is ours
again,if we can turn it to use. ‘ This day a detachment of us goes to
Braddock’s field of battle’ (poor Braddock !), ‘to bury the bones of our
slaughtered countrymen; many of whom the French butchered in cold
blood, and, to their own eternal shame and infamy, have left lying above
ground ever since. As indeed they have done with all those slain
round the Fort in late weeks.;’—calling themselves a civilised Nation
io.

Lower Rhine, July—November 1758. “ Ferdinand’s maneeuvres, af-
ter Crefeld, on the F'rance-ward side of Rhine, were very pretty: but,
without Wesel, and versus a Belleisle as War-Minister, and a Contades
who was something of a General, it would not do. Belleisle made un-
common exertions, diligent to get his broken people drilled again ; Con-
tades was wary, and counter-mancavered rather well. Finally, Sou-
bise” (readers recollect him and his 24 or 30,000, who stood in Frank-
furt Country, on the hither or north side of Rhine), famed Rossbach
Soubise,—“ pushing out, at Belleisle’s bidding, towards Hanover, in a
region vacant otherwise of troops—became dangerous to Ferdinand.
‘Making for Hanover? thought Ferdinand : ‘Or perhaps meaning*to
attack my 12,000 English that are just landed? Nay, perhaps, my
Rhine-Bridge itself, and the small Party left there” Ferdinand found
he would have to return,and look after Soubise Crossed, according-
ly (August 8th), by his old Bridge at Rees,—which he found safe, in
spite of attempts there had been ;**—and never recrossed during this

War. Judges even say his first crossing had never much solidity of |

outlook in it; and though so delightful to the public, was his question-
ablest step.

“On the 12,000 English, Soubise had attempted nothing. Ferdi-
nand joined his English at Soest (August 20th); to their great joy and
his ;*° 10 or 12,000 as a first installment :—Grand-looking fellows, said
the Germans. And did you ever see such horses, such splendour of

equipment, regardless of expense? Not to mention those Bergschotten -

83 Old Newspapers (in Gentleman’s Magazine for 1759, pp. 41, 39).

34 Fight of Meer’ (Chevert, with 10,000, beaten off, and the Bridge
saved, by Imhof, with 3,000 ;—both clever soldiers; Imhof in better luck,
and favoured by the ground: ‘‘5th August 1758”): Mawvillon, i. 315.

85 Duke of Marlborough’s heavy-laden Letter to Pitt, ‘‘ Koesfeld, August
15th:” ‘Nothing but rains and uncertainties ;” ‘‘marching, latterly, up
to our middles in water ;” have come from Embden, straight south towards
Wesel Country, almost 150 miles (Soest still a good sixty miles to south-
east of us). Chatham Correspondence (Iagndon, 1838), i. 334, 837. The
poor Duke died in two months hence; and the command devolved on Lord
George Sackville, as is too well known. ;

ee ee oe, eee
Es OR er ee

¥

Cuap. XIV. ] BATTLE OF HOCHKIRCH. 309
20th Nov. 1758.

(Scotch Highlanders), with their bagpipes, sporrans, kilts, and exotic
costumes and ways ; astonishing to the German mind.** Out of all whom
(Bergschotten included), Ferdinand, by management,—and management
was needed,—got a great deal of first-rate fighting, in the next Four
Years. .

“Nor, in regard to Hanover, could Soubise make anything of it;
though he did (owing to a couple of stupid fellows, General Prince von
Ysenburg and General Oberg, detached by Ferdinand on that service)
escape the lively treatment Ferdinand had prepared for him; and even
gave a kind of Beating to each of those stupid fellows,*?’—one of
which, Oberg’s one, might have ruined Oberg and his Detachment al-
together, had Soubise been alert, which he by no means was! ‘* Paris
made such jeering about Rossbach and the Prince de Soubise,’ says
Voltaire,** ‘ and nobody said a word about these two Victories of his, next
Year!’ For which there might be two reasons: one, according to
Tempelhof, that ‘the Victories were of the so-so kind (sze waren auch
darnach) ;’ and another, that they were ascribed to Broglio, on both oc-
casions,—how justly, nobody will now argue!

“ Contades had not failed, in the mean while, to follow with the main
Army; and was now elaborately manceuvering about; intent to have
Lippstadt, or some Fortress in those Rhine-Weser Countries. On the
tail of that second so-so Victory by Soubise, Contades thought, Now
would be the chance. And did try hard, but without effect. Ferdi-
nand was himself attending Contades; and mistakes were not likely.
Ferdinand, in the thick of the game (October 21st-30th), ‘ made a mas-
terly movement’—that is to say, cut Contades and his Soubise irretriev-
ably asunder: no junction now possible to them; the weaker of them
liable to ruin,—unless Contades, the stronger, would give battle;
which, though greatly outnumbering Ferdinand, he was cautious not to

°° Romantic view of the Bergschotten (2,000 of them, led by the Junior
of the Sir Robert Keiths, above mentioned, who is a soldier as yet), in
Archenholtz, i. 351-353; ib. and in Preuss, ii. 186, of the “‘ uniforms with
gold and silver lace,” of the superb horses, ‘‘one regiment all roan horses,
another all black, another all” &e.

37 1°, **Fight of Sandershausen’’ (Broglio, as Soubise’s vanguard,
12,000; versus Ysenburg, 7,000, who stupidly would not withdraw till beat-
en: ‘23d July 1758,” before Ferdinand had come across again). 2°.
Fight of Lutternberg (Soubise, 30,000; versus Oberg, about 18,000, who —
stupidly hung back till Soubise was all gathered, and then &c., still more
stupidly: ‘*10th October 1758”). See Mauvillon, i. 312 (or better, Archen-
holtz, i. 8345); and Mauvillon, i. 327. Both Lutternberg and Sandershausen
are in the neighbourhood of Cassel;—as many of those Ferdinand fights
were. 38 Histoire de Louis XV.

310 SEVEN-YEARS WAR RISES TO A uErcut. [Book XVII.
23d Noy. 1758.

do. A melancholic cautious man, apt to be over-cautious,—nicknamed
‘ I Apothécaire’ by the Parisians, from his down looks,—but had good
soldier qualities withal. Soubise and he haggled about, a short while,
—not a Jong, in these dangerous circumstances; and then had to go
home again, without result, each the way he came; Contades himself
repassing through Wesel, and wintering on his own side of the Rhine.”

How Pitt is succeeding, and aiming to succeed, on the French
Foreign Settlements: on the Guinea Coast, on the High Seas
everywhere; in the West Indies; still more in the East,—where
General Lally (that fiery O’Mulladly, famous since Fontenoy),
missioned with “ full-powers,’’ as they call them, is raging up
and down, about Madras and neighbourhood, in a violent, im-
petuous, more and more bankrupt manner :—Of all this, we can
say nothing for the present, little at any time. Here are two
facts of the financial sort, sufficiently illuminative. The much-
expending, much subsidying Government of France cannot now
borrow except at 7 per cent Interest; and the rate of Marine
Insurance has risen to 70 per cent.S° One way and other, here
is a Pitt clearly progressive; and a long-pending Jenkins’s-Ear
Question in a fair way to be settled !—

Friedrich stays in Saxony about a month, inspecting and ad-
justing; thence to Breslau, for Winter-quarters. His Winter
is like to be a sad and silent one, this time; with none of the
gaieties of last Year; the royal heart heavy enough with many
private sorrows, were there none of public at all! This is a
word from him, two days after finishing Daun for the season :

Friedrich to Mylord Marischal (at Colombier in Neufchatel).

Dresden, 23d November, 1758.

“There is nothing left for us, mon cher Mylord, but to mingle and
blend our weeping for the losses we have had. If my head were a
fountain of tears, it would not suffice for the grief I feel.

“ Our Campaign is over; and there has nothing come of it, on one
side or the other, but the loss of a great many worthy people, the misery
of a great many poor soldiers crippled forever, the ruin of some Prov-
inces, the ravage, pillage and conflagration of some flourishing Towns.
Exploits these which make humanity shudder : sad fruits of the wick-

3° Retzow, ii. 5.

and ambition of certain n People in Power, who sacrifice every- ah
' wish you, mon a aes noth- ue

* (Huvres de a xx. 278.

eB

- Jan.—April 1759.

BOOK XIX.

FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED IN THE SEVEN-
YEARS WAR.

1759-1760.

CHAPTER I.
PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN.

TueE posting of the Five Armies this Winter,—Five of them
in Germany, not counting the Russians, who have vanished to
Cimmeria over the horizon, for their months of rest,— is some-
thing wonderful, and strikes the picturesque imagination. Such
a Chain of Posts, for length, if for nothing else! From the
centre of Bohemia eastward, Daun’s Austrians are spread all
round the western Silesian Border and the south-eastern Saxon ;
waited on by Prussians, in more or less proximity. Next are
the Reichsfolk ; scattered over Thiiringen and the Franconian
Countries; fronting partly into Hessen and Duke Ferdinand’s
outskirts:—the main body of Duke Ferdinand is far to west-
ward, in Miinster Country, vigilant upon Contades, with the
Rhine between. Contades and Soubise, — adjoining on the
Reichsfolk are these Two French Armies: Soubise’s, some
25,000, in Frankfurt-Ems Country, between the Mayn and the
Lahn, with its back to the Rhine; then Contades, onward to
Maes River and the Dutch Border, with his face to the Rhine,
—and Duke Ferdinand observant of him on the other side.
That is the “ Cordon of Posts” or winter-quarters, this Year.
“From the Giant Mountains and the Metal Mountains, to the
Ocean ;—to the mouth of Rhine,’”’ may we not say; ‘‘and back
again to the Swiss Alps or springs of Rhine, that Upper-Rhine
Country being all either French or Austrian, and a basis for
Soubise?”! Not to speak of Ocean itself, and its winged War-

t Archenholtz, i. 306.

Vou. V.—O

314 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. |

Jan.—April 1759.

Fleets, lonesomely hovering and pein or of the Americas |

and Indies beyond!

“This is such a Chain of mutually vigilant Winter-quarters,”
says Archenholtz, ‘as was never drawn in Germany, or in Eu- :
rope, before.” Chain of about 300,000 fighting men, poured |
out in that lengthy manner. ‘Taking their winter siesta there, |

asleep with one eye open, till reinforced for new business of
death and destruction against Spring. Pathetic surely, as well
as picturesque. ‘Three Campaigns there have already been,”
sighs the peaceable observer: ‘‘‘Three Campaigns, surely furious

enough; Eleven Battles in them,? a Prag, a Kolin, Leuthen, {|

Rossbach ;—must there still be others, then, to the misery of
poor mankind?” thus sigh many peaceful persons. Not consid-
ering what are, and have been, the rages, the iniquities, the loud
and silent deliriums, the mad blindnesses and sins of mankind;
and what amount of calcining these may reasonably take. Not
calcinable in three Campaigns at all, it would appear! Four
more Campaigns are needed: then there will be innocuous
ashes in quantity ; and a result unexpected, and worth marking
in World-History.

It is notably one of Friedrich’s fond hopes, — of which he
keeps up several, as bright cloud-hangings in the haggard inner
world he now has,—that Peace is just at hand; one right strug-
gle more, and Peace must come! And on the part of Britan-
nic George and him, repeated attempts were made,—one in the
end of this Year 1759 :—but one and all of them proved futile,
and, unless for accidental reasons, need not be mentioned here.
Many men, in all nations, long for Peace; but there are Three
Women at the top of the world who do not; their wrath, vari-
ous in quality, is great in quantity, and disasters do the reverse
of appeasing it.

The French people, as is natural, are weary of a War which
yields them mere losses and disgraces; “‘ War carried on for
Austrian whims, which likewise seem to be impracticable!’ think
they. And their Bernis himself, Minister of Foreign Affairs,

? Stenzel, v. 185. This, I suppose, would be his enumeration: Lobositz
(1756); Prag, Kolin, Hastenbeck, Gross-Jagersdorf, Rossbach, Breslau, Leu-
then (1757); Crefeld, Zorndorf, Hochkirk (1758): ‘eleven hitherto in all.”

«

_ Cup. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 315
| 9 Jan.—April 1759.

_ who began this sad French-Austrian Adventure, has already been

remonstrating with Kaunitz, and grumbling anxiously, “‘ Could
not the Swedes, or somebody, be got to mediate? Such a War
is too ruinous!’ Hearing which, the Pompadour is shocked at
the favourite creature of her hands; hastens to dismiss him (‘Be
Cardinal, then, you ingrate of a Bernis; disappear under that
Red Hat !”)—and appoints, in his stead, one Choiseul (known
hitherto as Stainville, Comte de Stainville, French Excellency at
Vienna, but now made Duke on this promotion), Duc de Choi-
seul ;? who is a Lorrainer, or Semi-Austrian, by very birth; and

_ probably much fitter for the place. A swift, impetuous kind of

man, this Choiseul, who is still rather young than otherwise;
plenty of proud spirit in him, of shifts, talent of the reckless sort;
who proved very notable in France for the next twenty years.

French trade being ruined withal, money is running dreadfully
low: but they appoint a new Controller-General; a M. de Sil-
houette, who is thought to have an extraordinary creative genius
in Finance. Had he but a Fortunatus-Purse, how lucky were it!
With Fortunatus Silhouette as purseholder, with a fiery young
Choiseul on this hand, and a fiery old Belleisle on that, Pompa-
dour meditates great things this Year,—Invasions of England;
stronger German Armies; better German Plans, and slashings
home upon Hanover itself, or the vital point ;—and flatters her-
self, and her poor Louis, that there is on the anvil, for 1759, such
a French Campaign as will perhaps astonish Pitt and another
insolent King. Very fixed, fell, and feminine is the Pompadout’s
humour in this matter. Nor is the Czarina’s less so; but more,
if possible; unappeasable except by death. Imperial Maria
Theresa has masculine reasons withal; great hopes, too, of late.
Of the War’s ending till flat impossibility stop it, there is no
likelihood.

To Pitt this Campaign 1759, in spite of bad omens at the out-
set, proved altogether splendid: but greatly the reverse on Fried-
rich’s side; to whom it was the most disastrous and unfortunate
he had yet made, or did ever make. Pitt at his zenith, in public
reputation; Friedrich never so low before, nothing seemingly but

> Minister of Foreign Affairs, ‘‘ 11th November 1758” (Barbier, iv. 294).

316 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Jan.—April 1759,

extinction near ahead, when this Year ended. The truth is, apart
from his specific pieces of ill-luck, there had now begun for Fried- —

rich a new rule of procedure, which much altered his appearance
in the world. Thrice over had he tried by the aggressive or in-
vasive method; thrice over made a plunge at the enemy’s heart,

hoping so to disarm or lame him: but that, with resources spent —

to such a degree, is what he cannot do a fourth time; he is too
weak henceforth to think of that.

Prussia has always its King, and his unrivalled talent; but
that is pretty much the only fixed item. Prussia versus France,
Austria, Russia, Sweden and the German Reich, what is it as a
field of supplies for war! Except its King, these are failing,
year by year; and at a rate fatally swift in comparison. Fried-
rich cannot now do Leuthens, Rossbachs; far-shining feats of
victory, which astonish all the world. His fine Prussian veter-
ans have mostly perished; and have been replaced by new levies
and recruits; who are inferior both in discipline and in native
quality ;—though they have still, people say, a noteworthy taste
of the old Prussian sort in them ;-and do, in fact, fight well to
the last. But ‘‘it is observable,’ says Retzow somewhere, and
indeed it follows from the nature of the case, “that while the
Prussian Army presents always its best kind of soldiers at the
beginning of a war, Austria, such are its resources in population,

always improves in that particular, and its best troops appear in.

the last campaigns.” In a word, Friedrich stands on the defen-
sive henceforth ; disputing his ground inch by inch: and is re-
duced, more and more, to battle obscurely with a hydra-coil of
enemies and impediments; and to do heroisms which make no
noise in the Gazettes. And, alas, which cannot figure in History
either,—what is more a sorrow to me here!

Friedrich, say all judges of soldiership and human character
who have studied Friedrich sufficiently, ‘is greater than ever,”
in these four Years now coming.* And this, I have found more
and more to be a true thing; verifiab'e and demonstrable in time
and place,—though, unluckily for us, hardly in this time or this
place at all! A thing which cannot, by any method, be made
manifest to the general reader; who delights in shining sum-

+ Berenhorst, Kriegskunst; Retzow; &e.

| Cuap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 31%
— Jan.—April 1759.
_ mary feats, and is impatient of tedious preliminaries and inves-
_ tigations,—especially of maps, which are the indispensablest req-
uisite of all. A thing, in short, that belongs peculiarly to sol-
 dier-students ; who can undergo the dull preliminaries, most dull
but most inexorably needed; and can follow out, with watchful
intelligence, and with a patience not to be wearied, the multi-
_ farious topographies, details of movements and manceuverings,
year after year, on such a Theatre of War. What is to be done
with it here! If we could, by significant strokes, indicate, under
features true so far as they went, the great wide fireflood that
was raging round the world; if we could, carefully omitting
very many things, omit of the things intelligible and deciphera-
ble that concern Friedrich himself, nothing that had meaning:
if indeed—! But it is idle preluding. Forward again, brave
reader, under such conditions as there are!

Friedrich’s Winter in Breslau was of secluded, silent, sombre
character, this time; nothing of stir in it but from work only:
in marked contrast with the last, and its kindly visitors and
gaieties. A Friedrich given up to his manifold businesses, to
his silent sorrows. ‘I have passed my winter like a Carthusian
monk,” he writes to D’Argens: “I dine alone; I spend my life
in reading and writing; and I do not sup. When one is sad, it
becomes at last too burdensome to hide one’s grief continually ;
and it is better to give way to it by oneself, than to carry one’s
gloom into society. Nothing solaces me but the vigorous appli-
cation required in steady and continuous labour. This distrac-
tion does force one to put away painful ideas, while it lasts: but,
alas, no sooner is the work done, than these fatal companions
present themselves again, as if livelier than ever. Maupertuis
was right: the sum of evil does certainly surpass that of good :—
but to me it is all one; I have almost nothing more to lose; and
my few remaining days, what matters it much of what com-
plexion they be ?’’®

The loss of his Wilhelmina, had there been no other grief, has
darkened all his life to Friedrich. Readers are not prepared for
the details of grief we could give, and the settled gioom of mind

* Breslau, 1st March 1759,” To D’Argens (uvres de Frédéric, xix. 56).

318 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.
Jan.—April 1759.

they indicate. A loss irreparable and immeasurable; the light
of life, the one loved heart that loved him, gone. His passionate
appeals to Voltaire to celebrate for him in verse his lost treasure,
-and at least make her virtues immortal, are perhaps known to
readers:® alas, this isa very feeble kind of immortality, and Fried-
rich too well feels it such. All Winter he dwells internally on—
the sad matter, though soon falling silent on it to others. ;
The War is ever more dark and dismal to him; a wearing,
harassing, nearly disgusting task; on which, however, depends
life or death. ‘This Year, he “ expects to have 300,000 enemies
upon him;” and ‘is, with his utmost effort, getting up 150,000
to set against them.” Of business, in its many kinds, there can
be no lack! In the intervals he also wrote considerably: one
of his Pieces is a Sermon on The last Judgment; handed to Reader
De Catt, one evening :—to De Catt’s surprise, and to ours; the
Voiceless in a dark Friedrich trying to give itself some voice in
this way!’ Another Piece, altogether practical, and done with
excellent insight, brevity, modesty, is On Tactics ;s—properly it
might be called, ‘‘Serious very Private Thoughts,” thrown on
paper, and communicated only to two or three, “On the new
kind of Tactics necessary with those Austrians and their Allies,”
who are in such overwhelming strength. ‘To whose continual
sluggishness, and strange want of concert, to whose incoherency
of movements, languor of execution, and other enormous faults,
we have owed, with some excuse for our own faults, our escaping
of destruction hitherto,”—but had better not trust that way any
longer! Fouquet is one of the highly select, to whom he com-
municates this Piece; adding along with it, in Fouquet’s case,
an affectionate little Note, and, in spite of poverty, some New-
year’s Gift, as usual,—the ‘“‘ Widow’s Mite” (3002, we find) ;

§ Ode sur la mort de S. A. S. Madame la Princesse de Bareith (in Cuvres
de Voltaire, xviii. 79-86): see Friedrich’s Letter to him (6th November
1758); with Voltaire’s Verses in Answer (next month); Friedrich’s new
Letter (Breslau, 23d January 1759), demanding something more,—followed
by the Ode just cited (Ib. Ixxii. 402; Ixxviii. 82, 92; or (euvres de Fréd-
éric, xxiii. 20-24; &c.).

7 (Euvres de Frédéric, xv. 1-10 (see Preuss’s Preface there; Formey,
Souvenirs, i. 87; &e. &e.).

® Réflexions sur la Tactique: in Geuvres de Frédéric, xxviii. 153-166.

a

Cuap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 319
Jan.—April 1759.

“receive it with the same heart with which it was set apart for
you: a small help, which you may well have need of, in these
calamitous times.”? Fouquet much admires the new Tactical
Suggestions ;—seems to think, however, that the certainly prac-
ticable one is, in particular, the last, That of ‘“‘improving our
Artillery to some equality with theirs.” For which, as may
appear, the King has already been taking thought, in more ways
than one.

Finance is naturally a heavy part of Friedrich’s Problem ; the
part which looks especially impossible, from our point of vision!
In Friedrich’s Country, the War Budget does not differ from the
Peace one. Neither is any borrowing possible; that sublime Art,
of rolling over on you know not whom the expenditure, needful
or needless, of your heavy-laden self, had not yet,—though Eng-
land is busy at it,—been invented among Nations. Once, or
perhaps twice, from the Stdnde of some willing Province, Fried-
rich negotiated some small Loan; which was punctually repaid
when Peace came, and was always gratefully remembered. But
these are as nothing, in face of such expenses; and the thought
how he did contrive on the Finance side, is and was not a little
wonderful. An ingenious Predecessor, whom I sometimes quote,
has expressed himself in these words:

“Such modicum of Subsidy” (he is speaking of the English
Subsidy in 1758), ‘‘how useful will it prove in a Country bred
everywhere to Spartan thrift, accustomed to regard waste as sin,
and which will lay out no penny except to purpose! I guess
the Prussian Exchequer is, by this time, much on the ebb; idle
precious metals tending everywhere towards the melting-pot.
At what precise date the Friedrich-Wilhelm balustrades, and
enormous silver furnitures, were first gone into, Dryasdust has
not informed me: but we know they all went; as they well
might. To me nothing is so wonderful as Friedrich’s Budget
during this War. One day it will be carefully investigated, elu-
cidated and made conceivable and certain to mankind: but that
as yet is far from being the case. We walk about in it with as-

® ‘Breslau, 23d December 1758;” with Fouquet’s Answer, 2d January
1759: in Ceuvres de Frédéric, xx. 114-117,

320 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Jan.—April 1759.
tonishment; almost, were it possible, with incredulity. Expen-
diture on this side, work done on that: human nature, especial-
ly British human nature, refuses to conceive it. Never in this
world, before or since, was the like. ‘Vhe Friedrich miracles in
War are great; but those in Finance are almost greater. Let
Dryasdust bethink him ; and gird his flabby loins to this Enter-
prise ; which is very behoveful in these Californian times !”—
The general Secret of Prussian Thrift, I do fear, is lost from
the world. And how an Army of about 200,000, in field and
garrison, could be kept on foot, and in some ability to front
combined Europe, on about Three Million Sterling annually
(‘* 25 million thalers’’=8,150,0002., that is the steady War-Budg-
et of those years), remains to us inconceivable enough ;—mourn-
fully miraculous, as it were; and growing ever more so in the
Nugget-generations that now run. Meanwhile, here are what
hints I could find, on the Origins of that modest Sum, which
also are a wonder :!”

“The Hoarded Prussian Moneys, or ‘ Treasures’ (two of them,
Kleine Schatz, Grosse Schatz, which are rigidly saved in Peace years,
for incidence of War), “ being nearly run out, there had come the En-
glish Subsidy: this, with Saxony, and the Home revenues and remnants
of Schatz, had sufficed for 1758; but will no longer suffice. Next to
Saxony, the English Subsidy (670,0002. due the second time this year)
was always Friedrich’s principal resource: and in the latter years of
the War, I observe, it was nearly twice the amount of what all his Prus-
sian Countries together, in their ravaged and worn-out state, could yield
him. In and after 1759, besides Home Income, which is gradually di-
minishing, and English Subsidy, which is a steady quantity, Friedrich’s
sources of revenue are mainly Two.

“ First, there is that of wringing money from your Enemies, from
those that have deserved ill of you,—such of them as you can come at.
Enemies, open or secret, even I]l-wishers, we are not particular, provi-
ded only they lie within arm’s-length. Under this head fall principally
three Countries (and their three poor Populations, in lieu of their Gov-
ernments) : Saxony, Mecklenburg (or the main part of it, Mecklenburg-
Schwerin), and Anhalt; from these three there is a continual forced
supply of money and furnishings. Their demerits to Friedrich differ
much in intensity ; nor is his wringing of them,—which in the cases of
Mecklenburg and Saxony increases year by year to the nearly intolera-

10 Preuss, ii. 888-392; Stenzel, v. 1387-141.

_ Cnap.I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTIL CAMPAIGN. 321
Jan.—April 1759.

ble pitch,—quite in the simple ratio of their demerits ; but in a compound
ratio, of that and of his indignation and of his wants.

“Saxony, as Prime Author of this War, was from the first laid hold
of, collared tightly: ‘ Pay the shot, then, what you can’ (in the end it
was almost what you cannot)! As to Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the grudge
against Prussia was of very old standing, some generations now; and
the present Duke, not a very wise Sovereign more than his Ancestors,
had always been ill with Friedrich; willing to spite and hurt him when
possible: in Reichs Diet he, of all German Princes, was the first that
voted for Friedrich’s being put to Ban of the Reich,—he; and his poor
People know since whether that was a wise step! The little Anhalt
Princes too, all the Anhalts, Dessau, Bernburg, Cothen, Zerbst” (per-
haps the latter partially excepted, for a certain Russian Lady’s sake),
“had voted, or at least had ambiguously half-voted, in favour of the Ban,
and done other unfriendly things, and had now to pay dear for their bits
of enmities. Poor souls, they had but One Vote among them all Four;
—and they only half gave it, tremulously pulling it back again. I should
guess it was their terrors mainly, and over-readiness to reckon Fried-
rich a sinking ship: and to leap from the deck of him,—with a spurn
which he took for insolent! The Anhalt-Dessauers particularly, who
were once of his very Army, half Prussians for generations back, he
reckoned to have used him scandalously ill.

“This Year the requisition on the Four Anhalts,—which they submit
to patiently, as people who have leapt into the wrong ship,—is, in pre-
cise tale: of money, 330,000 thalers (about 50,000/.) ; recruits, 2,200 ;
horses, 1,800. In Saxony, besides the fixed Taxes, strict confiscation
of Meissen Potteries and every Royalty, there were exacted heavy
‘Contributions,’ more and more heavy, from the few opulent Towns,
chiefly from Leipzig; which were wrung out, latterly, under great se-
verities,—‘ chief merchants of Leipzig all clapt in prison, kept on bread
and water till they yielded,—as great severities as would suffice, but
not greater; which also was noted. Unfortunate chief merchants of
Leipzig,— with Brihl and Polish Majesty little likely to indemnify
them! Unfortunate Country altogether. An intelligent Saxon, who is
vouched for as impartial, bears witness as follows: ‘ And this I know,
that the oppressions and plunderings of the Austrians and Reichsfolk,
in Saxony, turned all hearts away from them ; and it was publicly said,
We had rather bear the steady burden of the Prussians than such help
as these our pretended Deliverers bring.‘ Whereby, on the whole,
the poor Country got its back broken, and could never look up in the
world since. Resource First was abundantly severe.

** Resource Second is strangest of all:—and has given rise to criti-

1! Stenzel (citing from Ariegskanzlei, which I have not), v. 187 n.

O02

322 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. |

Jan.—April 1759, s
cism enough! ~It is no other than that of issuing base money ; mixing }
your gold and silver coin with copper,—this, one grieves to say, is the i]
Seebad and extreme resource. ‘A rude method,—would we had a bet-
ter,—of suspending Cash-payments, and paying by bank-notes instead! —

thinks Friedrich, 1 suppose. From his Prussian Mints, from his Sax-

on” (which are his for the present), “‘and from the little Anhalt-Bern-_

burg Mint” (of which he expressly purchased the sad privilege,—for we
are not a Coiner, we are a King reduced to suspend Cash-payments, for
the time being), “ Friedrich poured out over all Germany, in all manner
of kinds, huge quantities of bad Coin. This, so long as it would last, is
more and more a copious fountain of supply This, for the first time,
has had to appear as an item in War-Budget 1759; and it fails in no
following, but expands more and more. It was done through Ephraim,
the not lovely Berlin Jew, whom we used to hear of in Voltaire’s time ;
—through Ephraim and two others, Ephraim as President: in return
for a net Sum, these shall have privilege to coin such and such amounts,
so and so alloyed; shall pay to General ‘Tauentzien, Army Treasurer,
at fixed terms, the Sums specified: ‘Go, and do it; our Mint-Officers
sharply watching you; Mint-Officers, and General Tauentzien’ (with a
young Herr Lessing as his Chief Clerk, of whom the King knows
nothing): ‘Go, ye unlovely !) And Ephraim and Company are making
a great deal of money by the unlovely job. Ephraim is the pair of
tongs; the hand, and the unlovely job, are a royal man’s. Alas, yes.
And none of us knows better than King Friedrich, perhaps few of us as
well, how little lovely a job it was; how shockingly unkingly it was,—
though a practice not unknown to German Kings and Kinglets before
his time, and since down almost to ours.*? In fact, these are all un-
kingly practices ; and the English Subsidy itself is distasteful to a proud
Friedrich : but what, in those circumstances, can any Friedrich do?
“The first coinages of Ephraim had, it seems, in them about 3-7ths
of copper ; something less than the half.and more than the third,’—your
gold sovereign grown to be worth 28s 6d. ‘“ But yearly it grew worse ;
and in 1762” (English subsidy having failed) “ matters had got invert-
ed; and there was three times as much copper as silver.. Commerce,
as was natural, went rocking and tossing, as on a sea under earthquakes ;
but there was always ready money among Friedrich’s soldiers. as among
no other: nor did the common people, or retail purchasers. suffer by it.
‘Hah, an Ephraimite!’ they would say, grinning not ill-humouredly at
sight of one of these pieces ; some of which they had more specifically
named ‘ Blue-gowns’”* (owing to a tint of blue perceivable, in spite of

12 In Stenzel (v. 141), enumer ation of eight or nine unhappy Potentates,
who were busy with it in those same years.

Minch wees SS 7S
cy sade Seep ptn ee ~~ - na

Cuap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 323
Jan.—April 1759.

the industrious plating in real silver, or at least “boiling in some solu-
tion” of it); “‘ these they would salute with this rhyme, then current:
**<Von aussen schin, von innen schimm; — Outside noble, inside slim:

Von aussen Friedrich, von innen Eph- Outside Friedrich, inside Eph-

raim.’ raim.

“ By this time, whatever of money, from any source, can be scraped
together in Friedrich’s world, flows wholly into the Army-Chest, as the
real citadel of life. In these latter years of the War, beginning, I could
guess, from 1759, all Civil expenditures, and wages of Officials, cease
to be paid in money ; nobody of that kind sees the colour even of bad
coin; but is paid only in ‘ Paper Assignments,’ in Promises to Pay
‘after the Peace.’ These Paper Documents made no pretence to the
rank of Currency: such holders of them as had money, or friends, and
could wait, got punctual payment when the term did arrive; but those
that could not, suffered greatly; having to negotiate their debentures
on ruinous terms,—sometimes at an expense of three-fourths.—I will
add Friedrich’s practical Schedule of Amounts from all these various
Sources; and what Friedrich’s own view of the Sources was, when he
could survey them from the safe distance. .

“ Schedule of Amounts” say for 1761. “To make up the Twenty-
five Million thalers necessary for the Army, there are:

‘‘From our Prussian Countries, ruined, harried as whdlorss
REGE OAV EGE D «oi sien pen ceed de oes danas apasvabueres 4 millions only.
From Saxony and the other Wringings.............. 7 millions.
English Subsidy (4 of goéd gold; becoppered into
double} ssshedi ts ie seexsas aia ck ab LEE DR. Gur
From Ephraim and his Farm of the Mint (Miinz-
ELERE hon Guabrpasisns 2) vides Vaetinia ts baa thank eceawules anes ak uae

“Tn sum Twenty-six Millions; leaving you one Million of margin,—
and always a plenty of cash in nan for_incidental sundries.'*

“ Friedrich’s own view of these sad matters, as he closes his History
of the Seven-Years War” (at “ Berlin, 17th December 1763”), is in
these words: “‘* May Heaven grant,—if Heaven deign to look down on
the paltry concerns of men,—that the unalterable and flourishing des-
tiny of this Country preserve the Sovereigns who shall govern it from
the scourges and calamities which Prussia has suffered in these times
of trouble and subversion; that they may never again be forced to recur
to the violent and fatal remedies which we (/’on) have been obliged to
employ in maintenance of the State against the ambitious hatred of the
Sovereigns of Europe, who wished to annihilate the House of Bran-
denburg, and exterminate from the world whatever bore the Prussian
name! 19 2914

13 Preuss, ii. 388. 14 (Huvres de Frédéric, v. 234.

*

324 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Jan.—April 1759.

Of the Small-War in Spring 1759. There are Five Dis-

ruptions of that grand Cordon (February—April); and

erdinand of Brunswick fights his Batile of Bergen (April
13th).

Friedrich, being denied an aggressive course this Year, by no
means sits idly expectant and defensive in the interim; but, all
the more vigorously, as is observable, from February onwards,
strikes out from him on every side: endeavouring to spoil the
Ienemy’s Magazines, and cripple his operations in that way. So
that there was, all winter through, a good deal of Small-War
(some of it not Small), of more importance than usual,—chiefly

of Friedrich’s originating, with the above view, or of Ferdinand

his Ally’s, on a still more pressing score. And, on the whole,
that immense Austrian French Cordon, which goes from the
Carpathians to the Ocean, had by no means a quiet time; but
was broken into, and violently hurled back, in different parts:
some four, or even five, attacks upon it in all; three of them by
Prince Henri,—in two of which Duke Ferdinand’s people co-
jperated; the business being for mutual behoof. These latter
Three were famous in the world, that Winter; and indeed are
still recognisable as brilliant procedures of their kind; though,
except dates and results, we can afford almost nothing of them
here. ‘These Three, intended chiefly against Reichs people and
their Posts and Magazines, fell out on the western and middle
part of the Cordon. Another attack was in the extreme east-
ward, and was for Friedrich’s own behoof; under Fouquet’s
management ;—intended against the Austrian-Moravian Maga-
zines and Preparations, but had little success. Still another
assault or invasive outroad, northward against the Russian Mag-
azines, there also was; of which by and by. Besides all which,
and more memorable than all, Duke Ferdinand, for vital reasons
of his own, fought a Battle this Spring, considerable Battle, and
did not gain it; which made great noise in the world.

It is not necessary the reader should load his memory with
details of all these preliminary things; on the contrary, it is
necessary that he keep his memory clear for the far more im-

— - A
? >

| ;
_ Cuap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 325

2d Jan. 1759.

portant things that lie ahead of these, and entertain these in a

summary way, as a kind of foreground to what is coming. Ter-
haps the following Fractions of Note, which put matters in some-
thing of Chronological or Synoptical form, will suffice him, or
more than suffice. He is to understand that the grand tug of
War, this Year, gradually turns out not ‘to be hereabouts, nor
with Daun and his adjacencies at all, but with the Russians,
who arrive from the opposite Northern quarter; and that all else
will prove to be merely prefatory and nugatory in comparison.

January 24,1759: Frankfurt-on-Mayn, though it is a Reichstadt,
finds itself suddenly become French. “ Prince de Soubise lies between
Mayn and Lahn, with his 25,000; beautifully safe and convenient,—
though ill off for a place-of-arms in those parts. Opulent Frankfurt,
on his right; how handy would that be, were not Reichs Law so ex-
press! Marburg, Giessen are outposts of his; on which side one of
Ferdinand’s people, Prince von Ysenburg, watches with an 8 or 10,000,
capable of mischief in that quarter.

“On the Eve of Newyear’s day, or on the auspicious Day itself,
Soubise requests, of the Frankfurt Authorities, permission for a regi-
ment of his to march through that Imperial City. To which, by law
and theory, the Imperial City can say Yes or No; but practically can- ©
not, without grave inconvenience, say other than Yes, though most
Frankfurters wish it could. ‘ Yes, answer the Frankfurt Magnates ;
Yes, surely, under the known conditions. Tuesday, January 2d, about
5 in the morning, while all is still dark in Frankfurt, regiment Nassau
appears, accordingly, at the Sachsenhausen-Gate, Townguard people all
ready to receive it and escort it through; and is admitted as usual.
Quite as usual: but instead of being escorted through, it orders, in calm
peremptory voice, the Townguard, To ground arms; with calm rapidity,
proceeds to admit ten other regiments or battalions, six of them German ;
seizes the artillery on the Walls, seizes all the other Gates :—and poor
Frankfurt finds itself tied hand and foot, almost before it is out of bed!
Done with great exactitude, with the minimum of confusion, and with-
out a hurt skin to anybody. ‘The Inhabitants stood silent, gazing; the
Townguard laid down their arms, and went home. ‘Totally against law ;
but cleverly done; perhaps Soubise’s chief exploit in the world; cer-
tainly the one real success the French have yet had.

“‘Soubise made haste to summon the Magistrates: ‘ Law of Neces-
sity alone, most honoured Sirs! Reichs Law is clear against me. But
all the more shall private liberties, religions, properties, in this Imperial
Free-Town, be sacred to us. Defence against any aggression; and the

o26 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
16th Feb.—31st March 1759. |
strictest of discipline observed. Depend on me, I bid you !'—And kept ||
his word to an honourable degree, they say; or in absence, made it be |
kept, during the Four Years ‘that follow. Most Frankfurters are, at |]
heart, Anti-French: but Soubise’s affability was perfect; and he gave |
evening parties of a sublime character; the Magistrates all appearing
there, in their square perukes and long gowns, with a mournful joy.”*>
Soubise soon went home, to assist in important businesses,—Invasion —
of England, no less; let England look to itself this Summer !—and
Broglio succeeded him, as Army-Cuaptain in the Frankfurt parts; with
laurels aceruing, more orless. Soubise, like Broglio, began with Ross-
bach; Soubise ends with Frankfurt, for the present; where Broglio
also gains his chief laurels, as will shortly be seen. Frankfurt is a
great gain to France, though an illicit one. It puts a bar on Duke Fer-
dinand in that quarter; secures a starting-point for attacks on Hessen,
Hanover; for cooperation with Contades and the Lower Rhine. It is
the one success France has yet had in this War, or pretty much that it
ever had in it. Due to Prince de Soubise, in that illegal fashion.—A
highly remarkable little Boy, now in his tenth year, Johann Wolfgang _
Goethe, has his wondering eyes on these things: and, short while hence, ~
meets daily, on the stairs and lobbies at home, a pleasant French Offi-
cial Gentleman who is quartered there; between whom and Papa oc-
cur rubs,—as readers may remember, and shall hear in April coming. .
Grand Cordon Disrupted: Erfurt Country, 16th February—2d
March. ‘ About six weeks after this Frankfurt achievement, certain
Reichsfolk and Austrian Auxiliaries are observed to be cutting down
endless timber, ‘18,800 palisades, 6,000 trees of 60 feet,’ and other —
huge furnishings, from the poor Duke of Gotha’s woods; evidently _
meaning to fortify themselves in Erfurt. Upon which Prince Henri
detaches a General Knobloch thitherward, Duke Ferdinand contributing
4,000 to meet him there; which combined expedition, after some sharp
knocking and shoving, entirely disrooted the Austrians and Reichsfolk,
and sent them packing. Had them quite torn out by the end of the
month; and had planned ‘ to attack them on two sides at once’ (March
2d), with a view of swallowing them whole,—when they (these Reichs
Volscians, in such a state of flutter) privately hastened off, one and all
of them, the day before.””’®
This was Breakage First of the Grand Cordon; an explosive hurl-.
ing of it back out of those Erfurt parts. Done by Prince Henri’s peo-
ple, in concert with Duke Ferdinand’s,—who were mutually interested
in the thing.
Breakage Second: Erfurt-Fulda Country, 31st March—8th April.
19 Tempelhof, iii. 7-8; Stenzel, v. 198-200. :
16 Narrative, in Helden-Geschichte, v. 1022 et seq.

Cuap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 327
4th-3lst March 1759.

* About the end of March, these intrusive Austrian Reichsfolk made
some attempt to come back into those Countries; but again got nothing
but hard knocks ; and gave up the Erfurt project. For, close following
on this First, there was a Second still deeper and rougher Breakage,
in those same regions; the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick dashing
through, ona special Errand of Ferdinand’s own” (of which presently),
“with an 8 or 10,000, in his usual fiery manner; home into the very
bowels of the Reich (April 3d, and for a week onward); and returning
with ‘above 2,000 prisoners’ in hand; especially with a Reich well
frightened behind him ;—still in time for Duke Ferdinand’s Adventure”
(in fact, for his Battle of Bergen, of which we are to hear). ‘* Had
been well assisted by Prince Henri, who ‘ made dangerous demonstra-
tions in the distance,’ and was extremely diligent,—though the interest
was chiefly Ferdinand’s, this time.”'’—Contemporary with that First
Erfurt Business, there went on, 300 miles away from it, in the quite op-
posite direction, another of the same ;—too curious to be omitted.

Across the Polish Frontier: February 24th—March 4th. ‘In the
end of February, General Wobersnow, an active man, was detached
from Glogau, over into Poland, Posen way, To overturn the Russian
provision-operations thereabouts; in particular, to look into a certain
high-flying Polack, a Prince Sulkowski of those parts; who with all
diligence is gathering food, in expectation of the Russian advent; and
indeed has formally *‘ declared War against the King of Prussia ;’ hav-
ing the right, he says, as a Polish Magnate, subject only to his own high
thought in such affairs. ‘The Russians and their wars are dear to Sul-
kowski. He fell prisoner in their cause, at Zorndorf, last Autumn;
was stuck, like all the others, Soltikof himself among them, into the
vaulted parts of Ciistrin Garrison: ‘I am sorry I have no Siberia for
you,’ said Friedrich, looking, not in a benign way, on the captive Digni-
taries, that hot afternoon ; ‘go to Ciistrin, and see what you have pro-
vided for yourselves!’ Which they had to do; nothing, for certain
days, but cellarage to lodge in; King inexorable, deaf to remonstrance.
Which possibly may have contributed to kindle Sulkowski into these
extremely high proceedings.

“At any rate, Wobersnow punctually looks in upon him: seizes his
considerable stock of Russian proviants; his belligerent force, his high
person itself; and in one luckless hour, snuffs him out from the list of
potentates. His belligerent force, about 1,000 Polacks, were all com-
pelled, ‘ by the cudgel,’ say my authorities, to take Prussian service” (in
garrison regiments, and well scattered about, I suppose) ; ‘‘ his own high
person found itself sitting locked in Glogau, left to its reflexions. Sat
thus ‘till the War ended,’ say some; certainly till the Sulkowski War

17 Tempelhof, iii. 19-22.

328 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

13th April 1759.
had been sufficiently exploded by the laughter of mankind.” Here are,
succinctly, the dates of this small memorability :

“ End of February, Wobersnow gathers, at Glogau,a force of about
8,000 horse and foot. Marched 24th February, over Oder Bridge,
straight into Poland; that same night, to the neighbourhood of Lissa
and Reisen (Sulkowski’s dominion), about thirty miles north-east of
Glogau. Sulkowski done next day ;—part of the capture is ‘ fifteen
small guns.’ Wobersnow goes, next, for Posen; arrives, 28h Februa-
ry; destroys Russian Magazine, ransoms Jews. Shoots out other de-
tachments on the Magazine Enterprise ;—detaches Platen along the
Wartha, where are picked up various items, among others ‘ eighty tuns
of brandy,’—but himself proceeds no farther than Posen. March 4th,
sets out again from Posen, homewards."* We shall hear again of Wo-
bersnow, in a much more important way, before long.

To the Polish Republic so-called, Friedrich explained politely, not
apologetically : “Since you allow the Russians to march through you
in attack of me, it is evident to your just minds that the attacked party
must have similar privilege.” ‘* ‘Truly!’ answered they, in their just
minds, generally ; and made no complaint about Sulkowski (though Po-
lish Maejsty and Primate endeavoured to be loud about “ Invasion” and
the like) :—and indeed Polish Republic was lying, for a long while past,
as if broken-backed, on the public highway; a Nation anarchic every
fibre of it, and under the feet and hoofs of travelling Neighbours, espe-
cially of Russian Neighbours; and is not now capable of saying much
for itself in such cases, or of doing any thing at all.

Frankfurt Country, April 13th: Duke Ferdinand’s Batile of Ber-
gen. “Duke Ferdinand, fully aware what a stroke that seizure of
Frankfurt was to him, resolved to risk a long march at this bad season,
and attempt to drive the I'rench out. Contades was absent in Paris,—
no fear of an attack from Contades’s Army; Broglio’s in Frankfurt,
grown now to about 35,000, can perhaps be beaten if vigorously attack-
ed. Ferdinand appoints a rendezvous at Fulda, of various Corps, Prince
Ysenbury’s and others, that lie nearest, Hessians many of them, Hano-
verians others; proceeds, himself, to Fulda, with a few attendants” (a
drive of about 200 miles) :—“ having left Lord George Sackville” (mark
the sad name of him!) ‘*—Sackville, head of the English, and General
Sporken a Hanoverian,—to take charge in Miinster Country during
his absence. It was from Fulda that he shot out the Hereditary Prince
on that important Errand we lately spoke of, under the head of ‘ Break-

18 Nachricht von der Unternehmung des General-Majors von Wobersnow in

Polen, im Feb. und Marz 1759: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 526-529. Helden-
Geschichte, v. 829.

seen ON Be Ni a AME AEA LEAP AS * aoe Ses — — Me

i eg iis

-

Reta Et AA al AP AE AAO Fob

el

—iew. 1° Oa’ the

~Cuar.J.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTIT CAMPAIGN. 329
13th April 1759.

age Second,’—namely, to clear his right flank, and scare the Reich well
off him, while he should be marching on Frankfurt. All which, Henri
assisting from the distance, the Hereditary Prince performed to perfec-
tion,—and was back (Apri/ 8th), in excellent time for the Battle.

“ }’erdinand stayed hardly a day in Fulda, ranking himself and get-
- ting on the road. Did his long march of above 100 miles, without acci-
dent or loss of time ;—of course, scaring home the Broglio Outposts in
haste enough, and awakening Broglio’s attention in a high degree ;—
and arrives, Thursday, April 12th, at Windecken, a Village about fifteen
miles north-east of Frankfurt; where he passes the night under arms;
intending Battle on the morrow. Broglio is all assembled, 35,000
strong; his Assailant, with the Hereditary Prince come in, counts rath-
er under 30,000. Broglio is posted in, and on both sides of, Bergen, a
high-lying Village, directly on Ferdinand’s road to Frankfurt. Win-
decken is about fifteen miles frora Frankfurt; Bergen about six :—idle
Tourists of our time, on their return from Homburg to that City, leave
Bergen a little on their left. The ground is mere hills, woody dales,
marshy brooks; Broglio’s position, with its Village, and Hill, and ra-
vines, and advantages, is the choicest of the region; and Broglio’s meth-
ods, procedures and arrangements in it, are applauded by all judges.

“ Friday, 13th April, 1759, Ferdinand is astir by daybreak ; comes
on, along one of those woody valleys, pickeering, reconnoitering ;—in
the end, directly up the Hill of Bergen; straight upon the key-point.
It is about 10 a.m., when the batteries and musketries awaken there;
very loud indeed, for perhaps two hours or more. Prince von Ysen-
burg is leader of Ferdinand’s attacking party. Their attack is hot and
fierce, and they stick to it steadily; though garden-hedges, orchards
and impediments are many, and Broglio, with much cannon helping,
makes vigorous defence. These Ysenburgers fought till their car-
tridges were nearly spent, and Ysenburg himself lay killed; but could
not take Bergen. Nor could the Hereditary Prince; who, in aid of
them, tried it in flank, with his own usual impetuosity rekindling theirs,
and at first with some success; but was himself taken in flank by Brog-
lio’s Reserve, and obliged to desist. No getting of Bergen by that
method.

* Military critics say coolly, ‘ You should have smashed it well with
cannon, first’ (which Ferdinand had not in stock here); ‘and especially
have flung grenadoes into it, till it was well in flame: impossible other-
wise!" The Ysenburgers and Hereditary Prince withdraw. No pur-
suit of them; or almost less than none; for the one or two French regi-
ments that tried it (against order), nearly got cut up. Broglio, like a

19 Mauvillon, ii. 19.

330 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
14th—2U0th April 1759, —
very Daun at Kolin, had strictly forbidden all such attempts: ‘On no
temptation quit your ground !’ ‘ 7

“The Battle, after this, lay quiet all afternoon; Ferdinand still-in
sight; motioning much, to tempt French valour into chasing of him.
But allin vain: Broglio, though his subalterns kept urging, remonstrat-
ing, was peremptory not to stir. Whereupon, towards evening, across —
certain woody Heights, perhaps still with some hope of drawing him out, |
Ferdinand made some languid attempt on Broglio’s wing, or wings ;—
and this also failing, had to give up the affair. He continued cannon-
ading till deep in the night; withdrew to Windecken: and about two
next morning, marched for home,—still with little or no pursuit: but
without hope of Frankfurt henceforth. And in fact, has a painful Sum-
mer ahead.

‘** Ferdinand had Jost 5 cannon, and of killed and wounded 2,500; the
French counted their loss at about 1,900.*° The joy of France over
this immense victory was extraordinary. Broglio was made Prince of
the Reich, Maréchal de France; would have been raised to the stars,
had one been able,—for the time being. ‘ And your immense victory,’
so sneered the bystanders, ‘ consists in not being beaten, under those ex-
cellent conditions ;—perhaps victory is a rarity just now!’ ”

This is the Battle which our Boy-Friend Johann Wolfgang watched
with such interest, from his garret-window, hour after hour; all Frank-
furt simmering round him, in such a whirlpool of self-contradictory emo-
tions ; till towards evening, when, in long rows of carts, poor wounded
Hessians and Hanoverians came jolting in, and melted every heart into
pity, into wailing sorrow, and eagerness to help. A little later, Papa
Goethe, stepping down stairs, came across the Official French Gentle- —
man; who said radiantly: ‘‘ Doubtless you congratulate yourself and us
on this victory to his Majesty’s arms.” “ Not a whit (Keineswegs),”
answered Papa Goethe, a stiff kind of man, nowise in.the mood of con-
gratulating: ‘on the contrary, I wish they had chased you to the Devil,
though I had to go too!” Which was a great relief to his feelings,
though a dangerous one in the circumstances.*! .

Breakage Third: Over the Metal Mountains into Bohmen (April
14th-20th). ‘‘Ferdinand’s Battle was hardly ending, when Prince Hen-
ri poured across the Mountains,—in two columns, Hiilsen leading the in-
ferior or rightmost one,—into Leitmeritz-Eger Country; and made a
most successful business of the Austrian Magazines he found there.
Magazines all filled; Enemy all galloping for Prag :—Daun himself,
. who is sitting vigilant, far in the interior, at Jaromirtz this month past,

20 Manvillon, ii. 10-19; Tempelhof, iii. 26-31.
*t Gocthe’s Werke (Stuttgart und Tiibingen, 1829), xxiv. (Dichtung und
Wahrheit, i.) 153-157.

Cup. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 331
5th May—lIst June 1759.

was thrown into huge flurry, for some days! Speedy Henri (almost
on the one condition of being speedy) had his own will of the Maga-
zines: burnt, Hiilsen and he, ‘ about 600,000/. worth’ of Austrian proy-
ender in those parts, ‘ what would have kept 50,000 men five months
in bread’ (not to mention hay at all); gave the Enemy sore slaps (caught
about 3,000 of him, not yet got on gallop for Prag); burnt his 200 boats
on the Elbe :—forced him to begin anew at the beginning ; and did, in
effect, considerably iame and retard certain of his operations through
the Summer. Speedy Henri marched for home, April 20th; and was
all across the Mountatns, April 23d: a profitable swift nine days.”??—
And on the sixth day herze, he will have something similar, and still
more important, on foot. A swift man, when he must!

Breakage Fourth: Inta Manren (April 16th-21st). “ This is Fou-
quet’s attempt, alluded to abeve; af which,—as every reader must be
satisfied with Small-War,—we wid give only the dates. fouquet, rank-
ing at Leobschiitz, in Neisse Country, did break through into Mahren,
pushing the Austrians before him’ but sound the Magazines either emp-
tied, or too inaccessible for any worth taey had ;—could do nothing on
the Magazines; and returned without resus ; home at Leobschiitz again
on the fifth day.”** This, however, had a sequel for Fouquet; which,
as it brought the King himself into those neigtibourhoods, we shall have
to mention, farther on.

Breakage Fifth: Into Franken (May 5th—.June 1st). “This was
Prince Henri’s Invasion of the Bamberg-Niirnbe.g Countries; a much
sharper thing than in any former Year. Much the most famous, and,”
luckily for us, “the last of the Small-War affairs for the present.
Started,—from T'schopau region, Bamberg way,—A pzil 29th—May 5th.
In three Columns: Finck leftmost, and foremost (Finck had marched,
April 29th, pretending to mean for Bohemia); after whom Knobloch ;
and (May 5th) the Prince himself. Who has an eye to the Reichs
Magazines and Preparations, as usual ;—nay, an eye to their Camp of
Rendezvous, and to a fight with their miscellaneous Selves and Auxili-
aries, if they will stand fight. ‘ You will have to leave Saxony, and
help us with the Russians, soon: beat those Reichs people first’ urged
the King; ‘ well-beaten, they will not trouble Saxony for a while.” If
they will stand fight? But they would not at all. They struck their
tents everywhere ; burnt their own Magazines, in some cases; and only
went mazing hither and thither,—gravitating all upon Nurnberg, and
an impregnable Camp which they have in that neighbourhood. Su-
preme Zweibriick was himself with them ; many Croats, Austrians, led
by Maguire and others; all marching, whirling at a mighty rate; with
22 Tempelhof, iii. 47-53 ; Helden- Geschichte, v. 963-966.

23 Helden-Geschichte, y. 958-963 ; Tempelhof, iii, 44-47.

332 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. |
5th May—tIst June 1759, —

a countenance sometimes of vigour, but always with Niirnberg Camp in
rear. ‘There was swift marching, really beautiful manceuvering here

and there; sharp bits of fighting, too, almost in the battle-form :—Ma-

guire tried, or was for trying, a stroke with Finck ; but made off hastily,
glad to get away.** May 11th, at Himmelskron in Baireuth, one Rie-
desel of theirs had fairly to ground arms, self and 2,500, and become
prisoners of war.” Much of this manceuvering and scuffling was in
Baireuth Territory. ‘Twice, or even thrice, Prince Henri was in Bai-
reuth ‘Town: ‘marched through Baireuth,’ say the careless Old Books.
Through Baireuth:—No Wilhelmina now there, with her tremulous
melodies of welcome! Wilhelmina’s loves, and terrors for her loved,
are now all still. Perhaps her poor Daughter of Wiirtemburg, wander-
ing unjustly disgraced, is there ; Papa, the widower Margraf, is for mar-
rying again :**—march on, Prince Henri!

“In Bamberg,” says a Note from Archenholtz, “ the Reichs troops
burnt their Magazine; and made for Nirnberg, as usual; but left some
thousand or two of Croats, who would not yet. Knobloch and his
Prussians appeared shortly after ; summoned Bamberg, which agreed to
receive them; and were for taking possession; but found the Croats
determined otherwise. Fight ensued; fight in the streets; which, in
hideousness of noises, if in nothing else, was beyond parallel. The in-
habitants sat all quaking in their cellars; not an inhabitant was to be
seen: a City dead,—and given up to the demons, in this manner. Not
for some hours were the Croats got entirely trampled out. Bamberg,
as usual, became a Prussian place-of-arms ; was charged to pay ransom
of 40,0007. ;— cannot possibly !'"—did pay some 14,000/., and gave bills
for the remainder.’’*® Which bills, let us mark withal, the Kaiser in
Reichs Diet decreed to be invalid: “ Don’t pay them!” A thing not
forgotten by Friedrich ;—though it is understood the Bambergers, lest
worse might happen, privately paid their bills. ‘ ‘The Expedition last-
ed, in whole, not quite four weeks: June Ist, Prince Henri was at the
Saxon frontier again ; the German world all ringing loud,—in jubilation,
counter-jubilation, and a great variety of tones,—with the noise of what
he had done. A sharp swift man; and, sure enough, has fluttered the
Reichs Volscians in their Corioli to an unexpected degree.”*’

A Colonel Wunsch (Lieutenant-Colonel of the Free-Corps Wunsch)
distinguished himself in this Expedition ; the beginning of notably great

** Tempelhof, iii. 64.

25 Married, 20th September 1759 (a Brunswick Princess, Sister’s daughter
of his late Wife); died within four years. 78 Archenholtz, i. 371-3.

27 Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 5387-563; Bericht von der Unternehmung des
Prinzen Heinrich in Franken, im ake 1759; STIG GER y. 1033-
1039; Tempelhof, iii. 58 et seq.

|

Car. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 333
_ 5th May—lIst June 1759.

- things to him in the few following months. Wunsch is a Wirtem-
burger by birth; has been in many services, always in subaltern posts,
and, this year, will testify strangely how worthy he was of the higher.
What a Year, this of 1759, to stout old Wunsch! In the Spring, here
has he just seen his poor son, Lieutenant Wunsch, perish in one of these
scuffles; in Autumn, he will see himself a General, shining suddenly
bright, to his King and to all the world; before Winter, he will be Pris-
oner to Austria,and eclipsed for the rest. of this War !—Kleist, of the
Green Hussars, also made a figure here; and onwards rapidly ever
higher; to the top of renown in his business :—fallen heir to Mayer’s
place, as it were. A Note says: “‘ Poor Mayer of the Free Corps does
not ride with the Prince on this occasion. Mayer, dangerously worn
down with-the hard services of last Year, and himself a man of too
sleepless temper, caught a fever in the New-year time; and died with-
in few days: burnt away before his time ; much regretted by his Breth-
ren of the Army, and some few others. Gone in this way ; with a high
career just opening on him at the long last! Mayer was of Austrian,
of half Spanish birth: a musical, really melodious, affectionate, but in-
dignant, wildly stormful mortal; and had had adventures without end.
Something of pathos, of tragedy, in the wild Life of him.*® A man of
considerable genius, military and other :—genius in the sleepless kind,
which is not the best kind; sometimes a very bad kind. The fame of
Friedrich invites such people from all sides of the world; and this was
no doubt a sensible help to him.”—But enough of all this.

Here, surely, is abundance of preliminary Small-War, on the
part of a Friedrich reduced to the defensive !—Fouquet’s Se-
quel, hinted at above, was to this effect. On Fouquet's failing
to get hold of the Moravian Magazines, and returning to his
Post at Leobschiitz, a certain rash General Deville, who is Aus-
trian chief in those parts, hastily rushed through the Jigerndorf
Hills, and invaded Fouquet. Only for a few days; and had
very bad success, in that bit of retaliation. The King, who is
in Landshut, in the middle of his main cantonments, hastened
over to Leobschiitz with reinforcement to Fouquet; in the
thought that a finishing stroke might be done on this Deville;
—and would have done it, had not the rash man plunged off

28 Still worth reading: in Pauli (our old watery Brandenburg-History
Friend), Leben grosser Helden (Halle, 1759-1764, 9 voll.), ili. 142-188 ;—
much the best Piece in that still rather watery (or windy) Collection, which,
however, is authentic, and has some tolerable Portraits.

334 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
May—June 1759, —

again (May Ist, or the night before); homewards, at full speed.
So that Friedrich, likewise at full speed, could catch nothing of
him; but merely cannonade him in the Passes of Zuckmantel,
and cut off his rearguard of Croats. Poor forlorn of Croats,
whom he had left in some bushy Chasm; to gain him a little
time, and then to perish if they must! as Tempelhof remarks.9
Upon which Friedrich returned to Landshut ; and Fouquet had
peace again.

It was from this Landshut region, where his main canton-
ments are, that Friedrich had witnessed all these Inroads, or all
except the very earliest of them; the first Erfurt one, and the
Wobersnow-Sulkowski. He had quitted Breslau in the end of
March, and gone to his cantonments; quickened thither, proba-
bly, by a stroke that had befallen him at Griefenberg, on his Si-
lesian side of the Cordon. At Griefenberg stood the Battalion
Diiringshofen, with its Colonel of the same name,—grenadier
people of good quality, perhaps near 1,000 in whole. Which
Battalion, General Beck, after long preliminary study of it, from
his Bohemian side,—marching stealthily on it, one night (March
25th-26th), by two or more roads, with 8,000 men, and much
preliminary Croat-work,—contrived to envelope wholly, and car-
ry off with him, before help could come up. This, I suppose,
had quickened Friedrich’s arrival. He has been in that region
ever since,—in Landshut for the last week or two; and returns
thither after the Deville affair.

And at Landshut,—which is the main Pass into Bohemia or
from it, and is the grand observatory point at present,—he will
have to remain till the first days of July; almost three months.
Watching, and waiting on the tedious Daun, who has the lifting
of the curtain this Year! Daun had come to Jaromirtz, to his
cantonments, ‘* March 24th” (almost simultaneously with Fried-
rich to his); expecting Friedrich’s Invasion, as usual. Long
days sat Daun, expecting the King in Bohemia :— There goes
he, at last ! thought Daun, on Prince Henri’s late flamy appear-
ance there (Breakage Third we labelled it) ;—and Daun had hast-
ily pushed a Division thitherward, double-quick, to secure Prag;

2° Tempelhof, iii. 56.

‘Cuar. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 335
May—June 1759.

~ but found it was only the Magazines. ‘Above four-millions
_ worth’ (600,0002.,, counting the thalers into sterling), above four-
_ millions worth of bread and forage gone to ashes, and the very
boats burnt? Well; the poor Reichsfolk, or our poor Auxilia-
ries to them, will have empty haversacks :—but it 1s not Prag !”’
thinks Daun.

At what exact point of time Daun came to see that Friedrich
was not intending Invasion, and would, on the contrary, require
to be invaded, I do not know. But it must have been an inter-
esting discovery to Daun, if he foreshadowed to himself what
results it would have on him: “ Taking the defensive, then?
And what is to become of one’s Cunctatorship in that case?”
Yes, truly. Cunctatorship is now the trade needed; there is
nothing to be made of playing Fabius-Cunctator :—and Daun’s
fame henceforth is a diminishing quantity. The Books say he
“wasted above five weeks in corresponding with the Russian
Generals.’’ In fact, he had now weeks enough on hand; being
articulately resolved (and even commanded by Kriegshofrath) to
do nothing till the Russians came up ;—and also (imarticulately
and by command of Nature) to do as little as possible after!
This Year, and indeed all years following, the Russians are to be
Daun’s best card. ,

Waiting for three months here till the curtain rose, it was
Friedrich that had to play Cunctator. A wearisome task to
him, we need not doubt. But he did it with anxious vigilance ;
ever thinking Daun would try something, either on Prince Henri
or on him, and that the Play would begin. But the Play did
not. ‘There was endless scuffling and bickering of Outposts ;
much hitching and counter-hitching, along that Bohemian-Sile-
sian Frontier,—Daun gradually hitching up, leftwards, north-
wards, to be nearer his Russians; Friedrich counter-hitching,
and, in the end, detaching against the Russians, as they ap-
proached in actuality. The details of all which would break
the toughest patience. Not till July came had both parties got
into the Lausitz; Daun into an impregnable Camp near Mark-
Lissa (in Gérlitz Country); Friedrich, opposite and eastward
of him, into another at Schmittseifen :—still after which, as the

336 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
May—June 1759. —

Russians still were not come, the hitching (if we could concern
ourselves with it), the maze of strategic shuffling and counter-
dancing, as the Russians get nearer, will become more intricate
than ever.

Except that of General Beck on Battalion Diringshofen,—if

that was meant as retaliatory, and was not rather an originality ~

of Beck’s, who is expert at such strokes,—Daun, in return for

all these injurious Assaults and Breakages, tried little or no re-'

taliation; and got absolutely none. Deville attempted once, as
we saw; Loudon once, as perhaps we shall see: but both proved
futile. For the present absolutely none. Next Year indeed,
Loudon, on Fouquet at Landshut—But let us not anticipate!
Just before quitting Landshut for Schméttseifen, Friedrich him-
self rode into Bohemia, to look more narrowly; and held ‘Trau-
tenau, at the bottom of the Pass, for a day or two—But the
reader has had enough of Small-War! Of the present Loudon
attempt, Friedrich, writing to Brother Henri, who is just home
from his Franconian Invasion (Breakage Jfth), has a casual
word, which we will quote. ‘‘ Reich-Hennersdorf” is below
Landshut, farther down the Fass; “ Liebau” still farther down,
—and its *‘ Gallows,’’ doubiless, is on some knoll in the envi-
rons!

Reich-Hennersdorf, 9th June. “ My congratulations on the ex-
cellent success you have had” (out in Frankenland yonder)!
‘Your prisoners, we hear, are 3,000; the desertion and confu-
sion in the Reichs Army are affirmed to be enormous :—TI give
those Reichs fellows two good months” (scarcely took so long)
‘to be in a condition to show face again. As for ourselves, I
can send you nothing but contemptibilities. We have never yet
had the beatific vision of Him with the Hat and Consecrated
Sword’’ (Papal Daun, that is); “ they amuse us with the Sieur
Loudon instead ;—who, three days ago” (7th July, two days),
‘did us the honour of a visit, at the Gallows of Liebau. He
was conducted out again, with all the politeness imaginable, on
to near Schatzlar,” well over the Bohemian Border; ‘‘ where we
flung a score of cannon volleys into the”—into the “derriére of
him, and everybody returned home.”°°

3° In Schéning, ii.65: ‘9th June 1759.”

~~

<r

SOO ate Me

CTR EP AT 8 Rg ta

cae Ee Tie EN EI NA OL a

PS

<p 80% ee Soom ~ eager — 2: ee ee ee

age ME Dimes ag me

JHAP. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. ~ 837
May—June 1759.

Perhaps the only points now noticeable in this tedious Eads
shut interim, are ‘Two, hardly noticed then at all by an expect-
ant world. ‘The first is: ‘Vhat in the King’s little inroad down
to Trautenau, just mentioned, four cannon drawn by horses were
part of the King’s fighting gear,—the first appearance of Horse
Artillery in the world. “ A very great invention,” says the mil-
itary mind: “ guns and carriages are light, and made of the best
material for strength; the gunners all mounted as postillions to
them. Can scour along, over hill and dale, wherever horse can;
and burst out, on the sudden, where nobody was expecting artil-

.lery. Devised in 1758; ready this Year, four light six-pound-

ers; tried first in the King’s raid down to Trautenau” (June
29th-30th). ‘* Only four pieces as yet. But these did so well,
there were yearly more. Imitated by the Austrians, and gradu-
ally by all the world.”*!

The second fact is: That Herr Guichard (Author of that fine
Book on the War-methods of the Greeks and Romans) is still
about Friedrich, as he has been for above a year past, if readers
remember; and, during those tedious weeks, is admitted to a
great deal of conversation with the King. Readers will consent
to this note on Guichard; and this shall be our ultimatum on
the wearisome Three Months at Landshut.

Major Quintus Icilius. “ Guichard is by birth a Magdeburger, age
now thirty-four; a solid, staid man, with a good deal of hard faculty in
him, and of culture unusual for a soldier. A handy, sagacious, learned
and intelligent man; whom Friedrich, in the course of a year’s experi-
ence, has grown to see willingly about him. There is something of
positive in Guichard, of stiff and, as it were, gritty, which might have
offended a weaker taste; but Friedrich likes the rugged sense of the
man; his real knowledge on certain interesting heads; and the preci-
sion with which the known and the not rightly known are divided from
one another, in Guichard.

“‘ Guichard’s business about the King has been miscellaneous, not worth

~ mention hitherto; but to appearance was well done. Of talk they are

beginning to have more and more: especially at Landshut here, in these

days of waiting ; a great deal of talk on the Wars of the Ancients, Gui-

chard’s Book naturally leading to that subject. One night, dateable ac-
3. Seyfarth, ii. 543.

Vor. V.—P

338 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. —

26th May 1759.
eidentally about the end of May, the topic happened to be Pharsalia, and
the excellent conduct of a certain Centurion of the Tenth Legion, who,
seeing Pompey’s people about to take him in flank, suddenly flung him-
self into oblique order” (schrage Stellung, as we did at Leuthen),
“thereby outflanking Pompey’s people, and ruining their manceuvre and
them. ‘A dexterous man, that Quintus Icilius the Centurion !’ observed

Friedrich. ‘Ah, yes: but, excuse me, your Majesty, his name was ~

Quintus Cecilius,’ said Guichard. ‘ No, it was Icilius,’ said the King,
positive to his opinion on that small point ; which Guichard had not the
art to let drop; though, except assertion and counter-assertion, what
could be made of it there? Or of what use was it anywhere ?

‘Next day, Guichard came with the Book” (what “ Book” nobody

would ever yet tell me), “and putting his finger on the passage, ‘ See,”

“your Majesty: Quintus Cecilius!’ extinguished his royal opponent.
‘Hm,’ answered Friedrich, ‘ so?—Well, you shall be Quintus Icilius, at
any rate!’ and straightway had him entered on the Army-Books as
‘Major Quintus Icilius :’ his Majorship is to be dated, ‘ 10th April 1758”
(to give him seniority) , and from and after this ‘26th May, 1759,’ he is
to command the late Du Verger’s Free-Battalion. All which was done;
—the War-Offices somewhat astonished at such advent of an antique
Roman among them; but writing as bidden, the hand being plain, and
the man an undeniable article. Onward from which time there is al-
ways a‘ Battalion Quintus’ on their Books, instead of Battalion Du Ver-
ger; by degrees two Battalions Quintus, and at length three, and Quin-
tus become a Colonel :—at which point the War ended; and the three
Free-Battalions Quintus, like all others of the same type, were dis-
charged.” ‘This is the authentic origin of the new name Quintus, which
Guichard got, to extinction of the old; substantially this, as derived
from Quintus himself,—though in the precise details of it there are ob-
scurities, never yet solved by the learned. Nicolai, for example, though
he had the story from Quintus in person, who was his familiar acquaint-
ance, and often came to see him at Berlin, does not, with his usual punc-
tuality, say, nor even confess that he has forgotten, what Book it was
that Quintus brought with him to confute the King on their Icilius-Ca-
cilius controversy ; Nicolai only says, that he, for his part, in the fields
of Roman Literatnre and History, knows only three Quintus-Iciliuses,
not one of whom is of the least likelihood; and in fact, in the above
summary, I have had to invert my Nicolai on one point, to make the
story stick together.*?

“Quintus had been bred for the clerical profession ; carefully, at va-
rious Universities, Leyden last of all; and had even preached, as candi-
date for license,—I hope with moderate orthodoxy ;—though he soon

32 Nicolai, Anekdoten, vi. 129-145.

a

se ek

Ae AL REAL

Cuap.1.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 339
May—June 1759. .
renounced that career. Exchanged it for learned and vigorous general
study, with an eye to some College Professorship instead. He was
still hardly twenty-three, when, in 1747, the new Stattholder,” Prince
of Orange, whom we used to know, “ who had his eye upon him as a
youth of merit, graciously undertook to get him placed at Utrecht, in a
vacancy which had just occurred there,—whither the Prince was just
bound, on some ceremonial visit of a high nature. The glad Quintus,
at that time Guichard and little thinking of such an alias, hastened to
set off in the Prince’s train; but could get no conveyance, such was the
press of people all for Utrecht. And did not arrive till next day,—and
found quarter, with difficulty, in the garret of some overflowing Inn.
‘In the lower stories of his Inn, solitary Guichard, when night fell,
heard a specific gaudeamus going on; and inquired what it was. ‘A
company of Professors, handselling a newly-appointed Professor ;’—ap-
pointed, as the next question taught, to the very Chair poor Quintus
had come for! Serene Highness could not help himself; the Utrecht-
ers were so bent on the thing. Quintus lay awake, all night, in his
truckle-bed ; and gloomily resolved to have done with Professorships,
and become a soldier. ‘If your Serene Highness do still favour me,
said Quintus, next day, ‘I solicit, as the one help for me, an ensign’s
commission !'—And persisted rigorously, in spite of all counsellings,
promises and outlooks on the professorial side of things So that Se-
rene Highness had to grant him his commission; and Quintus was a
soldier thenceforth. Fought, more or less, in the sad remainder of that
Cumberland-Saxe War; and, after the Peace of 1748, continued in the
Dutch service. Where, loth to be idle, he got his learned Books out
again, and took to studying thoroughly the Ancient Art of War. After
years.of this, it had grown so hopeful that he proceeded to a Book upon ~
it; and, by degrees, determined that he must get to certain Libraries in
England, before finishing. In 1754, on furlough, graciously allowed
and continued, he came to London accordingly ; finished his manuscript
there (printed at the Hague, 1757°*): and new War having now begun,
went over (probably with English introductions) as volunteer to Duke
Ferdinand. By Duke Ferdinand he was recommended to Friedrich, the
goal of all his efforts, as of every vagrant soldier's in those times :—and
here at last,as Quintus Icilius, he has found permanent billet, a Battal-
ion and gradually three Batailons, and will not need to roam any farther.
“They say, what is very credible, that Quintus proved an active, stout
and effectual soldier, in his kind; and perhaps we may hear of some of
his small-war adventures by and by: that he was a studious, hard-head-
ed, well-informed man, and had written an excellent Book on his sub-
*3 Mémoires Militaires sur les Se. (a La Haye, 1757: 2 voll. 4to) ;—was
in the 5th edition, when IJ last heard of it.

‘N

340 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
: June—July 1759.

ject, is still eualidaitly clear. Readers may look in the famous Gibbon’s

Autobiography, or still better in the Guichard Book itself, if they want —

evidence. The famous Gibbon was drilling and wheeling, very peace-
ably indeed, in the Hampshire Militia, in those wild years of Kuropean
War. Hampshire Militia served as key, or glossary in a sort, to this
new Book of Guichard’s, which Gibbon eagerly bought and studied; and
it was Guichard, alias Quintus Icilius, who taught Gibbon all he ever
knew of Ancient War, at least all the teaching he ever had of it, for his
renowned Decline and Fall.’’**

It was in the last days of June that Daun, after many hitch-
ings, got into more decisive general movement northward ; and
Slowly: but steadily planted himself at Mark-Lissa in the Lausitz:
upon which, after some survey of the phenomenon, Friedrich got
to Schmittseifen, opposite him, July 10th. Friedrich, on notic-
ing such stir, had ridden down to Trautenau (June 29th—30th),
new Horse-Artillery attending, to look closer into Daun’s affairs ;
and, seeing what they were, had thereupon followed. Above a
month before this, Friedrich had detached a considerable force
against the Russians,—General Dohna, of whom in next Chap-
and he again sit waiting, till they see far-
ther. Rapid Friedrich is obliged to wait; watching Daun and
the Dohna-Russian adventure: slow Daun will continue to wait
and watch there, long weeks and months, after that is settled,
that and much else, fully to his mind! Lach is in his impreg-
nable Camp; and each, Daun especially, has his Divisions and
Detachments hovering round him, near or far, on different stra-
tegic errands; each Main-Camp like a planet with various moons
—Mark-Lissa especially, a kind of sun with planets and comets
and planetary moons :—of whose intricate motions and counter-
motions, mostly unimportant to us, we promised to take no no-
tice, in face of such a crisis just at hand.

By the 6th of July, slow Daun had got hitched into his Camp
of Mark-Lissa; and four days after, Friedrich attending him,

5 See Gibbon’s Works (4to, London, 1796: Memoirs of my Life and
Writings), i. 97; and (Extraits de mes Lectures) ii. 52-54, of dates, May
14th-26th, 1762,—during which days Gibbon is engaged in actual reading
of the Mémoires Militaires; and already knows the Author by his alias of
Quintus Icilius, ‘fa man of eminent sagacity and insight, who was in the
Dutch, and is now, I believe, in the Prussian service.” ;

Fe OO Sf thet gar

TN ee Si ae ee

a A eT, Sap tees a Sareea

as
3
”

Crap. I.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN. 341

June—July 1759.

was in Schméttseifen : where again was pause; and there passed
nothing mentionable, even on Friedrich’s score; and till July
was just ending, the curtain did not fairly rise. Pause of above
two weeks on Friedrich’s part, and of almost three months on
Daun’s. Mark-Lissa, an impregnable Camp, is on the Lausitz
Border; with Saxony, Silesia, Bohemia all converging here-
abouts, and Lrandenburg itself in the vicinity,—there is not a
better place for waiting on events. Here, accordingly, till well
on in September, Daun sat immovable; not even hitching now,—
only shooting out Detachments, planetary, cometary, at a great
rate, chiefly on his various Russian errands.

Daun, as we said, had been uncomfortably surprised to find,
by degrees, that Invasion was not Friedrich’s plan this Year;
that the dramatic parts are redistributed, and that the playing
of Fabius-Cunctator will not now serve one’s turn. Daun, who
may well be loth to believe such a thing, clings to his old part,
and seems very lazy to rise and try another. In fact, he does
not rise, properly speaking, or take up his new part at all. ‘This
Year, and all the following, he waits carefully till the Russian
Lion come; will then endeavour to assist,—or even do jackal,
which will be safer still. The Russians he intends shall act
lion; he himself modestly playing the subaltern but much safer
part! Diligent to flatter the lion; will provide him guidances,
and fractional sustenances, in view of the coming hunt; will eat
the lion’s leavings, once the prey is slaughtered. This really was,
in some sort, Daun’s yearly game, so long as it would last !—

July ending, and the curtain fairly risen, we shall have to look
at Friedrich with our best eyesight. Preparatory to which, there
is, on Friedrich’s part, ever since the middle of June, this Anti-
Russian Dohna adventure going on:—of which, at first, and till
about the time of getting to Schméttseifen, he had great hopes:
ereat, though of late rapidly sinking again :—into which we must
first throw a glance, as properly the opening scene.

Fouquet has been left at Landshut, should the Daun remnants
still in Bohemia think of invading. Fouquet is about rooting
himself rather firmly into that important Post; fortifying various
select Hills round Landshut, with redoubts, curtains, commu-

342 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
June—July 1759,

nications; so as to keep ward there, inexpugnable to a much
stronger force. There for about a year, with occasional short sal-
lies, on errands that arise, Fouquet sat successfully vigilant; resist-
ing the Devilles, Becks, Harsches: protecting Glatz and the Passes
of Silesia; in about a year we shall hear of his fortunes worsen-
ing, and of a great catastrophe to him in that Landshut Post.
Friedrich allowed the Reichsfolk ‘two good months,” after
all that flurrying and havoc done on them, ‘‘ before they couid
show face in Saxony.” They did take about that time; and
would have taken more, had not Prince Henri been called away
by other pressing occasions in Friedrich’s own neighbourhood;
and Saxony, for a good while (end of June to beginning of Sep-
tember), been left almost bare of Prussian troops. Which en-
courages the Reichs Army to hurry afield in very unprepared
condition,—still rather within the two months. End of July,
Light people of them push across to Halberstadt or Halle Coun-
try; and are raising Contributions, and plundering diligently, if
‘nothing else. Of which we can take no notice farther: if the
reader can recollect it, well; if not, also well. The poor Reichs
Army nominally makes a figure this Year, but nominally only ;
the effective part of it, now and henceforth, being Austrian Aux-
iliaries, and the Reichs part as flaccid and insignificant as ever.
Prince Henri’s call to quit Saxony was this. Daun, among
the numerous Detachments he was making, of which we can
take no notice, had shot out Two (rather of cometary type, to use
our old figure),—which every reader must try to keep in mind.
Two Detachments, very considerable: Haddick (who grew at
ast to 20,000), and Loudon (16,000); who are hovering about
mysteriously over the Lausitz;— intending what? Their in-
tention, Friedrich thinks, especially Haddick’s intention, may be
towards Brandenburg, and even Berlin: wherefore he has sum-
moned Henri to look after it. Henri, resting in cantonments
about Tschopau and Dresden, after the late fatigues, and idle for
the moment, hastens to obey; and is in Bautzen neighbourhood,
from about the end of June and onward. Sufficiently attentive
to Haddick and Loudon: who make no attempt on Branden-
burg; having indeed, as Friedrich gradually sees, and as all of
us shall soon see, a very different object in view !—

Sy galas

2. aa ROT nee ene nen nn enn een ee ee ee arene aad

hy At MERA IOLA EEO EET Tee

Tle

Wi: weap We Ve

CHAPTER II.
GENERAL DOHNA; DICTATOR WEDEL: BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU.

Tue Russian Livn, urged by Vienna and Versailles, made his
entry, this Year, earlier than usual,—coming now within wind
of Mark-Lissa, as we see ;—and has stirred Daun into motion,
Daun and everybody. From the beginning of April, the Rus-
sians, hybernating in te interior parts of Poland, were awake,
and getting slowly under weigh. April 24th, the Vanguard of
10,000 quitted Thorn; June Ist, Vanguard is in Posen; fol-
lowed by a First Division and a Second, each of 30,000. ‘They

called it “Soltikof crossing the Weichsel with 100,000 men ;”

but, exclusive of the Cossack swarms, there were not above
75,000 regulars! nor’ was Soltikof their Captain just at first;
our old friend Fermor was, and continued to be till Soltikof, in
a private capacity, reached Posen (June 29th), and produced his
new commission. At Fermor’s own request, as Fermor pre-
tended, — who was skilled in Petersburg politics, and with a
cheerful face served thenceforth as Soltikof’s second.

At Posen, as on the road thither, they find Sulkowski’s and
the other burnt provenders abundantly replaced: it is evident
they intend, in concert with Daun, to enclose Friedrich between
two fires, and do something considerable. Whether on Bran-
denburg or Silesia, is not yet known to Friedrich. Friedrich,
since the time they crossed Weichsel, has given them his best
attention ; and more than once has had schemes on their Maga-
zines and them,—once a new and bigger Scheme actually afoot,
under Wobersnow again, our Anti-Sulkowski friend; but was

obliged to turn the force elsewhither, on alarms that rose. He

himself cannot quit the centre of the work; his task being to
watch Daun, and especially, should Daun attempt nothing else,
to prevent junction of Soltikof and him.

Daun still lies torpid, or merely hitching about; but now
when the Russians are approaching Posen, and the case becomes

— Cnap. I.] GENERAL DOHNA. 343
~ Ist-29th June 1759. :

‘

344 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boor XIX.

June-July 1759.
pressing, Friedrich, as is usual to fae draws upon the Anti-
Swedish resources, upon the Force he has in Pommern. That
is to say, orders General Dohna, who has the Swedes well driven
in at present, to quit Stralsund Country, to leave the ineffectual
Swedes with some very small attendance; and to march,—with
certain reinforcements that are arriving (Wobersnow already,
Hiilsen with 10,000 out of Saxony in a few days),—direct against
the Russians; and at once goin upon them. ‘Try to burn their
Magazines, again; or, equally good, to fall vigorously on some
of their separate Divisions, and cut them off in the vagrant
state ;—above all, to be vigorous, be rapid, sharp, and do some~
thing effectual in that quarter. These were Dohna’s Instruc-
tions. Dohna has 18,000; Hiilsen with his 10,000 is industri-
ously striding forward, from the farther side of Saxony, Wober-
snow with at least his own fine head is already there. Friedrich,

watching in the Anti-Junction position, ready for the least chance —

that may turn up.

Dohna marched accordingly ; ; but was nothing like rapid
enough: an old man, often in ill health too; sind no doubt
plenty of impediments about him. He consumed some time ral-
lying at Stargard; twelve days more at Landsberg, on the War-
ta, settling his provision-matters: in fine, did not get to Posen
neighbourhood till June 23d, three weeks after the Russian Van-
guard of 10,000 had fixed itself there, and other Russian parties
were daily dropping in. Dohna was 18,000, a Wobersnow with

him: had he gone at once on Posen, as Wobersnow urged, it is _

thought he might perhaps have ruined this Vanguard and the
Russian Magazine; which would have been of signal service for
the remaining Campaign. But he preferred waiting for Hiilsen
and the 10,000, who did not arrive for seven or eight days more;
by which time Soltikof and most of the Russian Divisions had
got in;—and the work was become as good as hopeless, on those
languid terms. Dohna did try upon the Magazine, said to be
ill-guarded in some Suburbs of Posen; crossed the Warta with
that view, found no Magazine; recrossed the Warta; and went
manceuvering about, unable to do the least good on Soltikof or
his Magazines or operations. JT riedrich was still in Landshut
region, just about quitting it,—just starting on that little Trau-

at ee

~- 7 ae oe epee ee

Cuap. II.] GENERAL DOHNA. 345
17th July 1759.

tenau Expedition, with his Four Pieces of Horse-Artillery (June
29th), when the first ill-news of Dohna came in; which greatly
disappointed Friedrich, and were followed by worse, instead of
better.

The end was, Soltikof, being now all ready, winded himself out
of Posen one day, veiled by Cossacks; and, to Dohna’s horror,
had got, or was in the act of getting, between Dohna and Bran-
denburg; which necessitated new difficult manceuvres from
Dohna. Soltikof too can manceuvre a little: Soltikof edges
steadily forward; making for Crossen on Oder, where he ex-
pects to find Austrians (Haddick and Loudon, if Friedrich could
yet guess it), with 30,000 odd, especially with provisions, which
is wearing scarce with him. ‘Twice or so there was still a pretty

opportunity for Dohna on him; but Dohna never could resolve

about it in time. Back and ever back goes Dohna; facing
Soltikof; but always hitching back; latterly in Brandenburg
ground, the Russians and he ;—having no provisions, he either.
In fine, July 17th (one week after Friedrich had got to Schm6ott-
seifen), Dohna finds himself. at the little Town of Ziillichau
(barely in time to snatch it before Soltikof could), within thirty
miles of Crossen; and nothing but futility behind and before.?

We can imagine Friedrich’s daily survey of all this; his
gloomy calculations what it will soon amount to if it last. He
has now no Winterfeld, Schwerin, no Keith, Retzow, Moritz :—
whom has he? His noblest Captains are all gone; he must
put up with the less noble. One Wedell, Lieutenant-General,
had lately recommended himself to the royal mind by actions of
a prompt daring. The royal mind, disgusted with these Dohna
hagelings, and in absolute necessity of finding somebody that had
resolution, and at least ordinary Prussian skill, hoped Wedell
was the man. And determined, the crisis being so urgent, to
send Wedell in the character of Alter-Hgo, or “ with the powers
of a Roman Dictator,” as the Order expressed it.? Dictator
Wedell is to supersede Dohna; shall go, at his own swift pace,
fettered by nobody ;—and, at all hazards, shall attack Soltikof
straightway, and try to beat him. ‘“ You are grown too old for

1 Tempelhof, iii. 78-88; Helden-Geschichte, v. 835-847.

* Given in Preuss, ii. 207, 208; in Stenzel, v. 212, other particulars..

1 Sa’.

346 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XTX.

20th-22d July 1759,

that intricate hard work; go home a little, and recover your
health,” the King writes to Dohna. And to the Dohna Army,
‘“‘ Obey this man, all and sundry of you, as you would myself;”
the man’s-private Order being, “Go in upon Soltikof; attack
him straightway; let us have done with this wriggling and hag-
gling.” Date of this Order is, “Camp at Schmittseifen, 20th
July, 1759.” The purpose of such highflown Title, and solem-
nity of nomination, was mainly, it appears, to hush down any
hesitation or surprise among the Dohna Generals, which, as We-
dell was “ the youngest Lieutenant-General of the Army,’’ might
otherwise have been possible.

Wedell, furnished with some small escort and these Documents,
arrives in Camp, Sunday evening 22d July:—poor Dohna has
not the least word or look of criticism; and every General, sup-
pressing whatever thoughts there may be, prepares to yield loyal
obedience to Dictator Wedell. ‘* Wobesnow was the far better
soldier of the two!” murmured the Opposition party, then and
long afterwards,’—all the more, as Wobersnow’s behaviour un-
der it was beautiful, and his end tragical, as will be seen. Wo-
bersnow I perceive to have been a valiant sharp-striking man,
with multifarious resources in his head; who had faithfully
helped in these operations, and I believe been urgent to quicken
them. But what I remember best of him is his hasty admirable
contrivance for field-bakery in pressing circumstances,—the sub-
stance of which shall not be hidden from a mechanical age:

“You construct six slight square iron frames, each hinged to the oth-
er; each, say, two feet square, or the breadth of two common tiles, and
shaped on the edges so as to take in tiles ;—tiles are to be found on
every human cottage. This iron frame, when you hook it together, be-
comes the ghost of a cubic box, and by the help of twelve tiles becomes
a compact field-oven; and you can bake with it, if you have flour and
water, and a fewsticks. The succinctest oven ever heard of; for your
operation done, and your tiles flung out again, it is capable of all folding
flat like a book.** Never till now had Wobersnow’s oven been at fault;
but in these Polish Villages, all of mere thatched hovels, there was not
a tile to be found; and the Bakery, with astonishment, saw itself unable
to proceed.

Wedell arrived, Sunday evening 22d July; had crossed Oder
> Retzow, &c. * Id. ii, 82 n.

rs

Crap. IT. ] DICTATOR WEDELL. 347
22d July 1759.

at T'schischerzig,—some say by Crossen Bridge; no matter
which. Dohna’s Camp is some thirty miles west of Crossen;
in and near the small Town called Ziillichau, where his head-
quarter is. In those dull peaty Countries, on the right, which
is thereabouts the northern (not eastern) bank of Oder ; between

‘the Oder and the Warta; some seventy miles south-by-east of
Landsberg, and perhaps as far south-west of Posen :* thither has

Dohna now got with his futile manceuverings. Soltikof, drawn
up amid scrubby woods and sluggish intricate brooks, is about a
mile to east of him.

Poor Dohna demits at once; and, I could conjecture, vanishes
that very night; glad to be out of such a thing. Painfully has
Dohna manceuvered for weeks past; falling back daily; only
anxious latterly that Soltikof, who daily tries it, do not get to
westward of him on the Frankfurt road, and so end this sad
shuffle. Soltikofas yet has not managed that ultimate fatality ;
Dohna, by shuffling back, does at least contrive to keep between
Frankfurt and him ;—will not try attacking him, much as Wo-
bersnow urges it. Has agreed twice or oftener, on Wobersnow’s
urgency: ‘‘ Yes, yes; we have a chance,” Dohna would an-
swer; ‘only let us rest till tomorrow, and be fresh!” by which
time the opportunity was always gone again.

Wedell had arrived with a grenadier battalion and some horse
for escort; had picked up 150 Russian prisoners by the way.
Retzow has understood he came in with a kind of state; and
seemed more or less inflated ; conscious of representing the King’s
person, and being a Roman Dictator,—though it is a perilously
difficult office too, and requires more than a Letter of Instruc-
tions to qualify you for it! This is not Leonidas Wedell, whom
readers once knew; poor Leonidas is dead long since, fell in the
Battle of Sohr, soon after that heroic feat of Ziethen’s and his at
Elbe-Teinitz (Defence of Elbe against an Army) ;—this is Leon-
idas’s elder Brother. Friedrich had observed his fiery ways on
the day of Leuthen: ‘‘ Hah, a new Winterfeld perhaps?” thought
Friedrich, ‘“* Ail the Winterfeld I now have !”—which proved a
fond hope. Wedell’s Dictatorship began this Sunday towards
sunset; and lasted—in practical fact, it lasted one day.

* See Map, last page of this Volume.

348 FYRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [ Book Xike
23d July 1759,

Dictator Wedell fights his Battle (Monday, 28d July 1759),

without Success.

Monday morning early, Wedell is on the heights, reconnoiter-
ing Soltikof; cannot see much of him, the ground being so
woody; does see what he takes to be Soltikof’s left wing; and
judges that Soltikof will lie quiet for this day. Which was far
from a right reading of Soltikof; the fact being that Soltikof, in
long columns and divisions, beginning with his right wing, was
all on_march since daybreak; what Wedell took for Soltikof’s
‘left wing” being Soltikof’s rearguard and baggage, waiting till
the roads cleared. Wedell, having settled everything on the
above footing, returns to Ziillichau about 10 o’clock ; and about —
11, Soltikof, miles long, disengaged from the bushy hollows,
makes his appearance on the open grounds of Palzig: he, sure
enough (though Wedell can hardly believe it),—five or six miles
to north-east yonder; tramping diligently along, making for
Crossen and the Oder Bridge ;—and is actually got ahead of us,
at last!

This is what Wedell cannot suffer, cost what it may. We,
dell’s orders were, in such case, Attack the Russians. Wedell
instantly took his measures ; not unskilfully, say judges,—though
the result proved disappointing; and Wobershow himself earn-
estly dissuaded: ‘Too questionable, I should doubt! Soltikof
is 70,000, and has no end of Artillery; we are 26,000 and know
not if we can bring a single gun to where Soltikof is !’’5

Wedell’s people have already, of their own accord, got to arms
again; stand waiting his orders on this new emergency. No
delay in Wedell or in them. “ May not it be another Rossbach »
(if we are lucky)?” thinks Wedell: ‘‘ Cannot we burst-in on their

flank, as they march yonder, those awkward fellows; and tum- _

ble them into heaps?” The differences were several fold: First,

that Friedrich and Seidlitz are not here. Many brave men we

have, and skillful; but not a master and man like these Two.

Secondly, that there is no Janus-Hill to screen our intentions;

but that the Russians have us in full view, while we make ready.

Thirdly, and still more important, that we do not know the
®> Tempelhof, iii. 182-134.

4
s
@

e ie i te

~

Cuap. II. ] BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU. 349
23d July 1759.

ground, and what hidden inaccessibilities lie ahead. This last
is judged to have been the killing circumstance. Between the
Russians and us there is a paltry little Brook, or line of quag-
mire; scarcely noticeable here, but passable nowhere except at
the Village-Mill of Kay, by one poor Bridge there. And then,
farther inwards, as shelter of the Russians, there is another quag-
gy Brook, branch of the above, which is without bridge altogeth-
er. Hives will be required to get 26,000 people marched up
there, not to speak of heavy guns at all.

The 26,000 march with their usual mathematical dispatch:
Manteuffel and the Vanguard strike-in with their sharpest edge,
foot and horse, direct on the Head of the Russian Column, Man-
teuffel leading on, so soon as his few battalions and squadrons
are across. Head means brain (or life) to this Russian Column ;
and these Manteuffel people go at it with extraordinary energy.
The Russian head gives way; infantry and cavalry :—their cav-
alry was driven quite to rear, and never came in sight again aft-
er this of Manteuffel. But the Russians have abundance of
Reserves; also of room to manceuvre in,—no lack of ground
open, and ground defensible (Palzig Village and Churchyard, for
example) ;—above all, they have abundance of heavy guns.

Well in recoil from Manteuffel and his furies, the beaten Rus-
sians succeed in forming ‘*a long Line behind Palzig Village,”
with that Second, slighter or Branch Quagmire between them
and us; they get the Village beset, and have the Churchyard of
it lined with batteries,—say seventy guns. Manteuffel, unsup-
ported, has to fall back ;—unwillingly, and not chased or in dis-
order,—towards Kay-Mill again; where many are by this time
across. Hiilsen, with the Centre, attacks now, as the Vanguard -
had done; with a will, he too: Wobersnow, all manner of peo-
ple attack; time after time, for about four hours coming: and it
proves all in vain, on that Churchyard and new Line. Without
cannon, we are septilaeds torn away by those Russian volcano-
batteries; never enough of us at once!

Hiilsen, Wobersnow, everybody in detail is repulsed, or finds
his success unavailing. Poor Wobersnow did wonders; but he
fell, killed. Gone he; and has left so few of his like: a man

_ Lee Ls

350 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [ Book XIX.

23d July 1759.
that could ill be spared at present !—Day is sinking; we find we
have lost, in killed, wounded and prisoners, some 6,000 men.
‘¢ About sunset,”—flaming July sun going down among the moor-
lands on such a scene,—Wedell gives it up; retires slowly to-
wards Kay Bridge. Slowly; not chased, or molested; Soltikof
too glad to be rid of him. Soltikof’s one aim is, and was, to-
wards Crossen; towards Austrian Junction, and something to
live upon. Soltikof’s loss of men is reckoned to be heavier even
than Wedell’s: but he could far better afford it. He has gain-
ed his point; and\the price is small in comparison. Next day»
he enters Crossen on triumphant terms.

Poor Wedell had returned over Kay-Mill Bridge, in the night-
time after his Defeat. On the morrow (Tuesday 24th, day of
 Soltikof’s glad entry), Wedell crosses Oder; at Tschischerzig,
the old place of Sunday evening last,—in how different a hu-
mour, this time !—and in a day more, posts himself opposite to
- Crossen Bridge, five or six miles south; and again sits watchful
of Soltikof there. At Crossen, triumphant Soltikof has found
no Austrian Junction, nor anything additional to live upon. A
very disappointing circumstance to Soltikof: ‘Austrian Junc- —
tion still a problem, then; a thing in the air? And perhaps the _
King of Prussia taking charge of it now!’’ Soltikof, more and
more impatient, after waiting some days, decided Not to cross
Oder by that Bridge ;—“ shy of crossing anywhere” (think the
French Gentlemen, Montazet, Montalembert), ‘‘to the King of
Prussia’s side!’ Which is not unlikely, though the King is
above 100 miles off him, and has Daun on his hands. Certain
enough, keeping the River between him and any operations of
the King, Soltikof set out for Frankfurt, forty or fifty miles far-
ther down. In the hope probably of finding something of hu-
man provender withal? July 30th, one week after his Battle,
the vanguard of him is there.

Thus, in two days, or even in one, has Wedell’s Dictatorship
ended. Easy to say scoffingly, “‘ Would it had never begun !”
Friedrich knows that, and Wedell knows it ;—a/fter the event

® Stenzel, iv. 215 (indistinct, and giving a wrong citation of ‘ Montalem-
bert, ii. 87”). ?

OO Adah he spell clang d= ae liana
SO a Br SG

Cnapr. II. ] BATILE OF ZULLICHAU. 351
23d July 1759.
_ eyerybody knows it! Friedrich said nothing of reproachful; the
_reyerse rather, — ‘I dreaded something of the kind; it is not
your fault ;”’*—-ordered Wedell to watch diligently at Crossen
Bridge, and be ready on farther signal. ‘The Wedell Problem,
in such ruined condition, has now fallen to Friedrich himself.

This is the Battle of Ziilhchau (afternoon of 23d July 1759) ;
the beginning of immense disasters in this Campaign. Battle
called also of Kay and of Palzig, those also being main localities
in it. It was lost, not by fault of Wedell’s people, who spent
_ themselves nobly upon it, nor perhaps by fault of Wedell him-
self, but principally, if not solely, by those two paltry Brooks, or
threads of Quagmire, one of which turns Kay-Mill: memorable
Brooks in this Campaign, 1759.8

Close in the same neighbourhood, there is another equally c con-
temptible Brook, making towards Oder, and turning the so-called
Krebsmiihle, which became still more famous to the whole Eu-
ropean Public, twenty years hence. Krebsmiihle (Crab-Mill), as
yet quite undistinguished among Mills; belonging to a dusty in-
dividual called Miller Arnold, with a dusty Son of his own for
Miller’s Lad: was it at work this day? Or had the terrible
sound from Palzig quenched its clacking ?—

Some three weeks ago (4th-6th July), there occurred a sudden
sharp thing at Havre-de-Grace on the French Coast, worth a
word from us in this place. The Montazets, Montalemberts,
watching, messaging about, in the Austrian-Russian Courts and
Camps, assiduously keeping their Soltikofs in tune, we can ob-
serve how busy they are. Soubise with his Invasion of England,
all the French are very busy; they have conquered Hessen from
Duke Ferdinand, and promise themselves a glorious Campaign,
that Seizure of Frankfurt. Soubise, intent on his new Enter-
prise, is really making ardent preparations: at Vannes in the
Morbihan, such rendezvousing and equipping ;—especially at
Havre, no end of flat-bottomed boats getting built; and much
bluster and agitation among the weaker sorts, in both Nations.
Whereupon,

* To Wedell, from the King, ‘‘Schmottseifen, July 24th, 1759” (in Schén-
ing, ii. 118. ° Tempelhof, iii. 125-131.

* ; i a

352 FRIEDRICH. LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XDIGS
4 29th July—6th Aug. 1759,
“July 1st” (just in the days while Friedrich was first trying Horse —
Artillery), “‘ Rear-Admiral Rodney sails from Portsmouth with a few :
Frigates, and Six Bomb-ketches” (Firedrake, Basilisk, Blast, and a
nomenclatures’); ‘and in the afternoon of Tuesday 3d, arrives in the
frith or bay of Havre. Steers himself properly into the Channel of
Honfleur” before dark ; and therefrom, with his Firedrake, Basilisk and
Company, begins such a bombardment of Havre and the flat-bottomed
manufactories, as was quite surprising. Fifty-two incessant hours of —
it, before he thought poor Havre had enough. Poor Havre had been
on fire six times ; the flat manufactory (unquenchable), I know not how
many ; all the inhabitants off in despair ; and the Garrison building this
battery to no purpose, then that; no salvation for them but in Rodney’s
‘mortars getting too hot.’ He had fired of shells 1900, of carcasses
1150: from Wednesday about sunrise til] Friday about 8 a.m.—about
time for breakfast; which I hope everybody had, after such a stretch
of work. ‘ No damage to speak of,’ said the French Gazetteers; ‘ we
will soon refit everything!’ But they never did; and nothing came of ©
Havre henceforth. Vannes was always, and is now still more, to be the
main place; only that Hawke,—most unexpectedly, for one fancied all
their ships employed in distant parts,—rides there with a Channel Fleet
of formidable nature ; and the previous question always is: ‘ Cannot we
beat Hawke? Can we! Or will not he perhaps go, of himself, when
the rough weather comes? ”

CHAPTER III.

FRIEDRICH IN PERSON ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM; NOT
WITH SUCCESS.

Brerore Wedell’s catastrophe, the Affair of those Haddick:
Loudon Detachments had become a little plainer to Friedrich.
The intention, he begins to suspect, is not for Berlin at all; but
for junction with Soltikof,—at Crossen or wherever it may be.
This is in fact their real purpose; and this, beyond almost Ber-
lin itself, it is in the highest degree important to prevent. Im-
portant ; and now as if become impossible !

Prince Henri had come to Bautzen with his Army, specially
to look after Loudon and Haddick; and he has, all this while,

° List of him, in Beatson, Naval and Military Memoirs (London, 1804), —
ii. 241; his Despatch (excellently brief), ib. ii. 323. .«

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

~ @nap.III.] WE ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 353
29th July—6th Aug. 1759.

had Finck with some 10,000 diligently patroling to westward
of them, guarding Berlin; he himself watching from the south-
ern side,—where, as on the western, there was no danger from
them. Some time before Wedell’s affair, Friedrich had pushed
out Eugen of Wiirtemberg to watch these people on the eastern
side ;—suspicious that thitherward lay their real errand. Eugen
had but 6,000; and, except in conjunction with Finck and
Henri, could do nothing,—nor can, now when Friedrich’s sus-
picion turns out to be fatally true. Friedrich had always the
angry feeling that Finck and Prince Henri were the blame-
worthy parties in what now ensued; that they, who were near,
ought to have divined these people’s secret, and spoiled it in
time ; not have left it to him, who was far off, and so busy other-
wise. To the last, that was his fixed private opinion; by no
means useful to utter,—especially at present, while attempting
the now very doubtful enterprise himself, and needing all about
him to be swift and zealous. ‘This is one of Friedrich’s famous
labours, this of the Haddick-Loudon junction with Soltikof;
strenuous short spasm of effort, of about a week’s continuance ;
full of fiery insight, velocity, energy; still admired by judges,
though it was unsuccessful, or only had half success. Difficult
to bring home, in any measure, to the mind of modern readers,
so remote from it.

Friedrich got the news of Ziillichau next day, July 24th ;—
and instantly made ready. ‘The case is critical; especially this
Haddick-Loudon part of it: add 30 or 36,000 Austrians to
Soltikof, how is he then to be dealt with? A case stringently
pressing :—and the resources for it few and scattered. For
several days past, Haddick, and Loudon under him, whose mo-
tions were long enigmatic, have been marching steadily eastward
through the Lausitz,—with the evident purpose of joining Sol-
tikof; unless Wedell could forbid. Wedell ahead was the grand
opposition ;—Finck, Henri, Wiirtemberg, as good as useless ;—
and Wedell being now struck down, these Austrians will go,
especially Loudon will, at a winged rate. They are understood
to be approaching Sagan Country; happily, as yet, well to west-
ward of it, and from Sagan Town well north-westward ;—but all
accounts of them are vague, dim: they are an obscure entity to

354 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

29th July—6th Aug. 1759, —

Friedrich, but a vitally important one. Sagan Town may be
about 70 miles northward of where Friedrich now is: from Sa-

gan, were they once in the meridian of Sagan, their road is free —

eastward and northward ;—to Crossen is about 60 miles north-
by-east from Sagan, to Frankfurt near 100 north. Sagan is on
the Bober; Bober, in every event, is between the Austrians and
their aim.

Friedrich feels that, however dangerous to quit Daun’s neigh-
bourhood, he must, he in person, go at once. And who, in the
interim, will watch Daun and his enterprises?  Friedrich’s
reflexions are: ‘‘ Well, in the crisis of the moment, Saxony,
—though there already are marauding Bodies of Reichsfolk in
it,—must still be left to itself for a time; or cannot Finck and
his 10,000 look to it? Henri, with his Army, now useless at
Bautzen, shall instantly rendezvous at Sagan; his Army to go
with me, against the Russians and their Haddick-Loudons; Henri
to Schmittseifen, instead of me, and attend to Daun; Henri, I
have no other left? TF inck and his 10,000 must take charge of
Saxony, such charge as he can:—how lucky those Spring Fo-
rays, which destroyed the Reichs Magazines! Whereby there is
no Reichs Army yet got into Saxony (nothing but preliminary
pulses and splashings of it); none yet, nor like to be quite at
once.’ That is Friedrich’s swift plan.

Henri rose on the instant, as did everybody concerned: July
29th, Henri and Army were at Sagan; Army waiting for the
King; Henri so far on his road to Schmittseifen.* He had
come to Sagan ‘‘by almost the rapidest marches ever heard of,”
—or ever till some others of Henri’s own, which he made in that
neighbourhood soon. Punctual, he, to his day; as are Eugen
of Wiirtemberg’s people, and all Detachments and Divisions:
Friedrich himself arrives at Sagan that same 29th, ‘‘about mid-
night,”—and finds plenty of work waiting: no sleep these two
nights past; and none coming just yet! A most swift rendez-
vous. The speed of everybody has been, and needs still to be,
intense. ;

This rendezvous at Sagan,—intersection of Henri and Fried-

* Map, end of Volume.

Cuar. II.] ue ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 355
9th July—6th Aug. 1759.

rich, bound different roads (the Brothers, I think, did not person-
, ally meet, Henri having driven off for Schmottseifen by a shorter
road),—was, Sunday, July 29th. Following which, are six days
of such a hunt for those Austrian reynards as seldom or never
was! Most vehement, breathless, baffling hunt; half of it spent
_ in painfully beating cover, in mere finding and losing. Not right-
ly successful, after all. So that, on the eighth day hence, Au-
gust 6th, at Miillrose, near Frankfurt, 80 miles from Sagan, there
is a second rendezvous,—rendezvous of Wedell and Friedrich,
who do not now “ intersect,’’ but meet after the hunt is done ;—
-—and in the interim, there has been a wonderful performance,
though an unsuccessful. Friedrich never could rightly get hold
of his Austrians. Once only, at Sommerfeld, a long march
north-west of Sagan, he came upon some outskirts of them.
And in general, in those latter eight days, especially in the first
six of them, there is, in that Kotbus-Sagan Country, such an
intersecting, checking, pushing, and multifarious simmering of
marches, on the part of half a dozen Strategic Entities, Friedrich
the centre of them, as—as, I think, nobody but an express sol-
dier-student, well furnished with admiration for this particular
Soldier, would consent to have explained to him. One of the
maziest, most unintelligible whirls of marching; inextricable
Sword-Dance, or Dance of the Furies,—five of them (that is the
correct number: Haddick, Loudon, Friedrich, Wiirtemberg, We-
dell) ;—and it is flung down for us, all in a huddle, in these in- »
human Books (which have several errors of the press, too): let
no man rashly insist with himself on understanding it, unless he
have need! Humanly pulled straight, not inhumanly flung down
at random, here the essentials of it are,—in very brief state:
“Sagan, Monday, 30th July. Friedrich is at Sagan, since midnight
last, busier and busier ;” beating over, as we termed it, and getting his
hounds (his new Henri-Army) in leash; “‘ endeavouring, especially, to
get tidings of those Austrian people; who are very enigmatic,— Loudon
a dexterous man,—and have hung up such a curtain of Pandours be-
tween Friedrich and them as is nearly impenetrable. In the course
of this Monday, Friedrich ascertains that they are verily on the road;
coming eastward, for Sommerfeld,—‘ thence for Crossen!’ he needs no
ghost to tell him. Wherefore,
“ Tuesday, Sagan to Naumburg. 'Tuesday before daybreak, Fried-

— a lg
<

*

a

ie

iste

Bi icc aaa

PN al RN i Pam A abe alge dy

, » sa

na

Pisce,

356 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boor 2 :

of the swiftest ; he himself 3 is ahead, as usual, with the Varga of

Horse. He reaches Naumburg (northward, a march of 20 miles);
finds, not Haddick or Loudon, but a Detachment of theirs: which he
at once oversets with his Cavalry, and chases,—marking withal that
‘westward is the way they run.” Westward; and that we are stil
ahead, thank Heaven!

“* Before his Infantry are all up, or are well rested in Naumburg, Fried-
rich ascertains, on more precise tidings, That the Austrians are in Som-
merfeld, to westward (again a 20 miles); and judges That, no doubt
they will bear off more to leftward, by Guben probably, and try to avoid
him,—unless he can still catch them in Sommerfeld: About nightfall,
he marches for Sommerfeld, at his swiftest ; arrives, Wednesday early ;
find Z|
“ Sommerfeld, Wednesday morning, August 1st, Friedrich finds that
Loudon was there last night,—preterite tense, alas; the question now
being, Where is he?" In fact, Loudon had written yesterday to Daun
(Letter still extant, “ Sommerfeld, July 31st”), That “ being swift and
light,” consisting of horse for most part, “ he may probably effect June-
tion this very night ;"—but has altered his mind very much, on sight of
these fugitives from Naumburg, since! And has borne off more to left-_
ward. Straight north now, and at a very brisk pace; being now all of
horse; and has an important conference with Haddick at Guben, when
they arrive there. ‘ Not in Sommerfeld?’ thinks Friedrich (earnestly
surveying, through this slit he has made in the Pandour veil): “ Gone
to Guben, most likely, bearing off from us to leftward ?”—Which was —
the fact; though not the whole fact. And indeed the chase is now
again fallen uncertain, and there has to be some beating of covers. For
one thing, he learns today (August Ist) that the Russians are gone to—
Frankfurt: “ Follow them, you Wedell,”—cries Friedrich: them we
shall have to go into.—however this hunt end !—

“ To Markersdorf, Thursday, August 2d. Friedrich takes the road
for Guben: reaches Markersdorf (twenty miles march, still seven or
eight from Guben) ; falls upon—What phenomenon is-this? The Aus-
trian heavy Train; meal-wagons not a few, and a regiment of foot in
charge of it;—but going the wrong way, not towards the Russians, but —
from them! What on earth can this be? This is Haddick,—if Fried-
rich could yet clearly know it——Haddick and Train, who for his own
part has given up the junction enterprise. At Guben, some hours ago,
he had conference with Loudon; and this was the conclusion arrived

‘ Impossible, with that King so near! You, Herr Loudon, push on,
without heavy baggage, and with the Cavalry altogether; you can get.

| Cuap. III.) HE ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 357
29th July—6th Aug. 1759.
| b in, almost 20,000 strong ; I, with the Infantry, with the meal and heavy
|, guns, will turn, and make for the Lausitz again !’
i “This mysterious Austrian train, going the wrong way, Friedrich at-
tacks, whatever it be (hoping, I suppose, it might be the Austrians alto-
; gether); chases it vigorously ; snatches all the meal-wagons, and about
1,000 prisoners. Uncertain still what it is,—if not the Austrians alto-
gether? ‘T’o his sorrow, he finds, on pushing farther into it, that it is
only Haddick and the Infantry: that Loudon, with the 20,000 Horse,
| will have gone off for Frankfurt ;—irretrievably ahead, the swift Lou-
| don,—ever careering northward all this while, since that afternoon at
Sommerfeld, when the fugitives altered his opinion: a now unattainable
Loudon. In the course of Thursday night, Friedrich has satisfied him-
self that the Loudon junction is a thing as good as done :—in effect,
Loudon did get to Frankfurt, morning of August 3d, and joined the Rus-
 sians there ; and about the same time, or only a few hours sooner, Fried-
| rich, by symptoms, has divined that his hunt is ended, in this rather un-
successful way; and that chasing of Haddick is not the road to go.”*

Not Haddick now; with or without their Austrians, it shall
| be the Russians now! ‘Two days ago (Wednesday, as was men-
| tioned), before sight of those enigmatic meal-wagons, Friedrich
| had learned that the Russians were to be in Frankfurt again ; and
had ordered Wedell to march thitherward, at any rate. Which
Wedell is doing, all this Thursday and the four following days.
As does likewise, from and after “ Friday, August 3d, 1 A.M.’”) hunt
then over) Friedrich himself,—renouncing Haddick and the hunt.
Straight towards Frankfurt thenceforth ; headquarters Beeskow
that night; next night, Miillrose, whither Wedell is appointed,
within twelve miles of Frankfurt. This is the end of Friedrich’s
sore Chase and March; burnt deeply into his own weary brain,
if ours still refuse it admittance! Here, of utterly fatigued tone,
is a note of his, chiefly on business, to Minister Finckenstein.
Indeed there are, within the next ten days, Three successive
Notes to Finckenstein, which will be worth reading in their due
places. This is the First of them:

The King to Graf von Finckenstein (at Berlin).
Beeskow, 3d August 1759.
“Tam just arrived here, after cruel and frightful marchings (Checks
himself, however). ‘There is nothing desperate in all that; and I be-
1 Tempelhof, ili. 185-139.

,

ia

Vee
358 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox xX x; :
Ist Aug. 1759,
lieve the noise and disquietude this hurlyburly has caused will be the
worst of it. Show this Letter to everybody, that it may be known the
State is not undefended. I have made above 1,000 prisoners from Had-
dick. All his meal-wagons have been taken. Finck, I believe, will
keep an eye on him,” and secure Berlin from attempts of his. “This
is all I can say.
“Tomorrow I march to within two leagues of Frankfurt” (to Mall.
rose, namely). ‘‘ Katte” (the Minister who has charge of such things)
‘“‘ must send me instantly Two Hundred Wispels” (say tons) “ of Meal, —
and Bakers one Hundred, to Fiirstenwalde. I shall encamp at Wul- —
kow. I am very tired. For six nights 1 have not closed an eye.
Farewell.—F.”

During the above intricate War-Dance of Five,—the day —
while Friedrich was at Sommerfeld, the day before he came in
sight of Haddick’s meal-wagons going the wrong road,—there-
went on, at Minden on the Weser, three hundred miles away, a
beautiful feat of War, in the highest degree salutary to Duke
Ferdinand and Britannic Majesty’s Ministry; feat which requires -
a word from us here. A really splendid Victory, this of Min-
den, August Ist: French driven headlong through the Passes
there; their ‘* Conquest of Hanover and Weser Country” quite —
exploded and flung over the horizon; and Duke Ferdinand re-
lieved from all his distresses, and lord of the ascendant again in
those parts. Highly interesting to Friedrich ;—especially to
Prince Henri; whose apprehensions about Ferdinand and the
old Richelieu Hastenbeck-Halberstadt time returning on us, have.
been very great ; and who now, at Schmittseifen, fires feu-de-jove
for it with all his heart. This is a Battle still of some interest
to English readers. But can English readers consent to halt in
this hot pinch of the Friedrich crisis; and read the briefest thing
which is foreign to it? Alas, I fear they can;—and will insert
the Note here:

Battle of Minden: Wednesday August 1st, 1759.—“ Evet since
Bergen, things have gone awry with Ferdinand, and in spite of skilful
management, of hard struggles, and bright sparkles of success, he has
had a bad Campaign of it. The French, it would seem, are really got
into better fighting order; Belleisle’s exertions as War-Minister have
been almost wonderful,—in some respects, too wonderful, as we shall
hear!—and Broglio and Contades, in comparison with Clermont and
Soubise, have real soldier qualities. Contades across Rhine again, in

'
’ ;
t |
\

Cuap. III.] HE ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM, 859
Ist Aug. 1759.

those Weser Countries, who is skilful in his way, and is stickied on by

emulation of Broglio, has been spreading himself out steadily progress-

ive there; while  Broglio, pushing along from Frankfurt-on-Mayn, has

_ conquered Hessen ; is into Hanover; on the edge of conquering Hano-
ver,—which how is Ferdinand to hinder? Ferdinand has got two, if

not three Armies to deal with, and in number is not much superior to

one. If he run to save Hanover from Broglio, he loses Westphalia :

Osnabriick (his magazine), Minster, Lippstadt, — Contades, if left to
himself, will take these, after short siege ; and will nestle himself there,

| BY and then advance, not like a transitory fever-fit, but like visible death,
on Hanover. Ferdinand, rapid yet wary, maneuvered his very best

among those interests of his, on the left bank of Weser; but after the
surprisal of Minden from him (brilliantly done by Broglio, and the aid
of a treacherous peasant), especially after the capture of Osnabriick, his
outlooks are gloomy to a degree: and at Versailles, and at Minden
where Contades has established himself, ‘the Conquest of Hanover’
(beautiful counterweight to all one’s Josses in America or elsewhere) is

| regarded as a certainty of this Year.

‘* For the last ten days of July, about Minden, the maneuvering, es-
pecially on Ferdinand’s part, had been intense ; a great idea in the head
of Ferdinand, more or less unintelligible to Contades. Contades, with
some 30,000, which is the better half of his force, has taken one of the
unassailablest positions. He lies looking northward, his right wing on
the Weser with posts to Minden (Minden perhaps a mile north-west-
ward there), on his left impassable peatbogs and quagmires; in front a
quagey River or impassable black Brook, called the Bastau, coming from
the westward, which disembogues at Minden :*—there lies Contades, as
if in a rabbit-hole, say military men; for defence, if that were the sole
object, no post can be stronger. Contades has in person say 30,000;
and round him, on both sides of the Weser, are Broglio with 20,000;
besides other Divisions, I know not how many, besieging Miinster, cap-

_ turing Osnabriick (our hay magazine), attempting Lippstadt by surprise

(to no purpose), and diligently working forward, day by day, to Ferdi-
nand’s ruin in those Minden regions. ‘Three or four Divisions busy in
that manner ;—and above all, we say, he has Broglio with a 20,000 on
the right or east bank of the Weser,—who, if Ferdinand quit him even
for a day, seems to have Hanover at discretion, and can march any day
upon Hanover City, where his light troops have already been more than
once. Why doesn’t Ferdinand cross Weser, re-cross Weser; coerce
Broglio back; and save Hanover? cry the Gazetteers and a Public of
weak judgment. Pitt’s Public is inclined to murmur about Ferdinand ;

Pitt himself never. Ferdinand persists in sticking by Minden neigh-

* Sketch of Plan, p. 363.

360 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX,

ist Aug. 1759. _

bourhood ; and,in a scarcely accountable way, manceuvering there, shoot-
ing out therefrom what mischief he can upon the various Contades peo-
ple in their sieges and the like. .

“On Contades himself he can pretend to do nothing,—except hood-
wink him, entice him out, and try to get a chance on him. But for his
own subsistence and otherwise, he is very lively ;—snatches, by a sud-
den stroke, Bremen City: ‘ Yes truly, Bremen is a Reichstadt; nor shall
you snatch it,as you did Frankfurt; but I will, instead: and my En.
glish proviant-ships shall have a sure haven henceforth!’ Snatches
Bremen by one sudden stroke ; re-snatches Osnabriick by another (‘our
magazine considerably zncreased since you have had it, many thanks!’);
does lose Minster, to his sorrow ; but nevertheless sticks by his ground
here ;-—nay detaches his swift-cutting Nephew, the Hereditary Prince,
who is growing famous for such things to cut out Contades’s strong

_ post to southward (Gohfeld, ten miles up the Weser), which guards his — }

meal-wagons, after their long journey from the south. That is Con-
tades’s one weak point, in this posture of things: his meal is at Cassell,
seventy miles off. Broglio and he see clearly,‘ Till we can get a new
magazine much nearer Hanover, or at lowest, can clear out these people
from infesting us here, there is no moving northward!’ ‘To both Con-
tades and Broglio that is an evident thing: the corollary to which is,

They must fight Ferdinand ; must watch lynx-like till a chance turn —

up of beating him in fight. That is their outlook ; and Ferdinand knows
it is,—and maneeuvres accordingly. Military men admire much, not his
movements only, but his clear insight into Contades’s and Broglio’s tem-
per of mind, and by what methods they were to be handled, they and
his own affairs together, and brought whither he wanted them.’

“This attempt on Gohfeld was a serious mischief to Contades, if it ©

succeeded. But the detaching of the Prince of Brunswick on it, and
weakening one’s too weak Army, ‘ What a rashness, what an oversight!’
thinks Contades (as Ferdinand wished him to do): ‘Is our skilful ene-
my, in this extreme embarrassment, losing head, then? Look at his left
wing yonder.—(General Wangenheim, sitting behind batteries, in his
Village of Todtenhausen, looking into Minden from the north) :—‘ Wan-
genheim’s left Jeans on the Weser, yes; but Wangenheim’s right, ob-
serve, has no support within three miles of it: tear Wangenheim out,
Ferdinand’s flank is bare!’ These things seemed to Contades the very
chance he had been waiting for; and brought him triumphantly out of
his rabbit-hole, into the Heath of Minden, as Ferdinand hoped they
would do.

“And so, Tuesday Evening, July 31st, things being now all ripe,
upwards of 50,000 Trench are industriously in motion. Contades has

? In Mauvillon (ii. 41-44) minute account of all that.

et ee

Cuap. III.] HE ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 361
Ist Aug. 1759.

nineteen bridges ready on the Bastau Brook, in front of him; tattoo
this night, in Contades’s Camp, is to mean general-march, ‘ March, all
of you, across these nineteen Bridges, to your stations on the Plain or
Heath of Minden yonder,—and be punctual, like the clock!’ Broglio
crosses Weser by the Town Bridge, ranks himself opposite Todtenhau-
sen; and through the livelong night there is, on the part of the 50,000
French, a very great marching and deploying. Contades and Broglio
together are 51,400 foot and horse. LF erdinand’s entire force will be
near 46,000; but on the day of Battle he is only 36,000,—having de-
tached the Hereditary Prince on Gohfeld, in what view we know.—
The Battle of Minden, called also of Tonhausen (meaning Todten-
hausen), which hereupon fell out, has still its fame in the world; and, I
perceive, is well worth study by the soldier mind: though nothing but
the rough outline of it is possible here.

“ Ferdinand’s posts extend from the Weser river and Todtenhausen
round by Stemmern, Holzhausen, to Hartum and the Bog of Bastau
(the chief part of him towards Bastau),—in various Villages, and woody
patches and favourable spots; all looking in upon Minden, from a dis-
tance of five or seven miles; forming a kind of arc, with Minden for
centre. He will march up in eight Columns; of course, with wide in-
tervals between them,—wide, but continually narrowing as he advances ;
which will indeed be ruinous gaps, if Ferdinand wait to be attacked ;
but which will coalesce close enough, if he be speedy upon Contades.
For Contades’s line is also of arc-like or almost semicircular form, be-
hind it Minden as centre ; Minden, which is at the intersection of Weser
and the Brook; his right flank is on Weser, Broglio versus Wangen-
heim the extreme-right; his left, with infantry and artillery, rests on
that black Brook of Bastau with its nineteen Bridges. As the ground
on both wings is rough, not so fit for Cavalry, Contades puts his Cav-
alry wholly in the centre: they are the flower of the French Army,
about 10,000 horse in all; firm open ground ahead of them there, with
strong batteries, masses of infantry to support on each flank ; batteries
to ply with cross-fire any assailant that may come on. Broglio, we
said, is right wing; strong in artillery and infantry. Broglio is to root
out Wangenheim: after which,—or even before which, if Wangenheim
is kept busy and we are nimble,—what becomes of Ferdinand’s left
flank, with a gap of three miles between Wangenheim and him, and
10,000 chosen horse to take advantage of it! Had the French been
of Prussian dexterity and nimbleness in marching, it is very possible
something might have come of this latter circumstance: but Ferdinand
knows they are not; and intends to take good care of his flank.

“‘Contades and his people were of willing mind; but had no skill
‘in marching up:’ and, once got across the Bastau by their nineteen

Vor. V.—Q

362 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

: Ist Aug. 1759.
Bridges, they wasted many hours :—‘ Too far,am I? not far enough?
Too close; not close enough ?’—and broiled about, in much hurry and
confusion, all night. Fight was to have begun at 5 in the morning.
Broglio was in his place, silently looking into Wangenheim, by 5 o’clock;
but unfortunately did nothing upon Wangenheim (‘ Not ready you, I
~see !”), except cannonade a little ;—and, indeed, all through, did nothing
(‘Still not ready you others!’); which surely was questionable conduct,
though not reckoned so at Versailles, when the case came to be argued
there. As to the Contades people, across those nineteen Bridges, they
had a baffling confused night; and were by no means.correctly on their
ground at sunrise, nor at 7 o’clock, nor at 8; and were still pepe
themselves when the shock came, and time was done.

“The morning is very misty; but Ferdinand has himself been out
examining since the earliest daybreak: his orders last night were,
‘Cavalry be saddled at 1 in the morning,—having a guess that there
would be work, as he now finds there will. From 5 a.m. Ferdinand is
issuing from his Camp, flowing down eastward, beautifully concentric,
closing on Contades; horse no¢ in centre, but English Infantry in centre
(Six Battalions, or Six Regiments by English reckoning); right oppo-
site those 10,000 Horse of Contades’s, the sight of whom seems to be
very animating to them. The English Cavalry stand on the right wing,
at the Village of Hartum: Lord George Sackville had not been very
punctual in saddling at 1 o’clock ; but he is there, ranked on the ground,
at 8,—in what humour nobody knows; sulky and flabby, I should rather
guess. English Tourists, idle otherwise, may take a look at Hartum
on the south side, as the spot where a very ugly thing occurred that day.

** Soon. after 8, the Fight begins: attack, by certain Hessians, on
Hahlen and its batteries; attempt to drive the French out of Hahlen,
as the first thing,—which does not succeed at once (indeed took three
attacks in all); and perhaps looks rather tedious to those Six English
Battalions. Ferdinand’s order to them was, ‘ You shall march up to
attack, you Six, on sound of drum;’ but, it seems, they read it, ‘dy sound
of drum :’ ‘ Beating our own drums ; yes, of course !"—and, being weary
of this Hahlen work, or fancying they had no concern with it, strode
on, double-quick, without waiting for Hahlen at all! To the horror of
their Hanoverian comrades, who nevertheless determined to follow as
second line. The Contades cross-fire of artillery, battery of 30 guns
on one flank, of 36 on the other, does its best upon this forward-minded
Infantry, but they seem to heed it little; walk right forward; and, to
the astonishment of those French Horse and of all the world, entirely
break and ruin the charge made on them, and: tramp forward in chase
of the same. The 10,000 Horse feel astonished, insulted; and rush
out again, furiously charging; the English halt and serry themselves:

Bj

4]

4

Cuap. III.] HE ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 368
Ist Aug. 1759.

“No fire till they are within forty paces ;’ and then such pouring tor-
rents of it as no horse or man can endure. Rally after rally there is,
on the part of those 10,000; mass after mass of them indignantly
plunges on,—again, ever again, about six charges in all ;—but do not
break the English lines: one of them (regiment Mestre-de-Camp, raised
to a paroxysm) does once get through, across the first line, but is blown
back in dreadful circumstances by the second. After which they give
it up, as a thing that cannot be done. And rush rearward, hither, thither,
the whole seventy-five squadrons of them ; and ‘ between their two wings
of infantry, are seen boiling in complete disorder.’

“This has lasted about an hour: this is essentially the soul of the
Fight,—though there wanted not other activities, to right of it and to
left, on both sides; artil- ,
leries going at a mighty
rate on both wings; and
counter - artilleries (su-
perlative practice ‘by
Captain Phillips’ on our
right wing) ; Broglio can-
nonading Wangenheim
very loudly, but with lit-
tle harm done or suffered,
ontheir right wing. Wan-
genheim is watchful of
that gap between Ferdi-
nand and him, till it close
itself sufficiently. Their
right wing Infantry did
once make some attempt @a. Contades's Camp. bb. Broglio’s Camp.
there; but the Prussian cc. Ferdinand’s position, night of July 31st.
Hors e—(alway S$ a-small dd. Wangenheim's position, night of July 31st.

J ee. Ferdinand’s Line of Battle.
body of Prussians serve ¢. French Line of Battle.

in this Allied Army)— — 9.. French Cavalry. h. English Infantry.

shot out, an din a brilliant i. English and Hanoverian Cavalry, under Sackville.
manner swept them home again. Artillery, and that pretty charge ot
Prussian Horse, are all one remembers, except this of the English and
Hanover Foot in the centre : ‘an unsurpassable thing,’ says Tempelhof
(though it so easily might have been a fatal!)—which has set Contades’s
centre boiling, and reduced Contades altogether to water, as it were.
Contades said bitterly ; ‘I have seen what I never thought to be possible,
—a single line of infantry break through three lines of cavalry, ranked
in order of battle, and tumble them to ruin !’8

3 Stenzel, v. 204.

364 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

ist Aug. 1759.

“This was the feat, this hour’s work in the centre, the essential soul
of the Fight :—and had Lord George Sackville, General of the Horse,
come on when galloped for and bidden, here had been such a ruin, say
all judges, as seldom came upon anArmy. Lord George,—everlasting
disgrace and sorrow on the name of him,—could not see his way to
coming on; delayed, haggled; would not even let Granby, his lieuten-
ant, come; not for a second Adjutant, not for a third; never came on
at all; but rode to the Prince, asking, ‘ How am I to come on? Who,
with a politeness I can never enough admire, did not instantly kill him,
but answered, in mild tone, ‘ Milord, the opportunity is now past!’
Whereby Contades escaped ruin, and was only beaten. By about 10
in the morning, all was over. When a man’s centre is gone to water,
no part of him is far frgm the fluid state. Contades retreated into his
rabbit-hole by those nineteen bridges,—well tormented, they say, by
Captain Phillip’s artillery, till he got beyond the knolls again. Brog-
Jio, who had never been in musket-fire at all, but had merely barked on
Wangenheim all morning, instead of biting, covered the retreat, and
withdrew into Minden. And we are a beaten Army,—thanks to Lord
George, not an annihilated one. Our loss being only 7,086 (with heavy
guns, colours, cavalry flags and the like); theirs being 2,822,—full half
of it falling on those rash Six Battalions.*

“And what is this one hears from Gohfeld in the evening? The
Hereditary Prince, busy there on us during the very hours of Minden,
has blown our rearguard division to the winds there ;—and we must
move southward, one and all of us, without a moment’s delay! Out of
this rabbit-hole the retreat by rearward is through a difficult country,
the Westphalian Gates so-called: fatal to Varus’s Legions long ago.
Contades got under way that very night; lost most of his baggage,
all his conquest, that shadow-conquest of Hanover, and more than all
his glories (Versailles shrieking on him,‘ Resign you; let Broglio be
chief*) ;—and, on the whole, jumbled homeward hither and thither, grav-
itating towards the Rhine, nothing but Wesel to depend on in those
parts, as heretofore. Broglio retreated Frankfurt-way, also as usual,
though not quite so far; and at Versailles had clearly the victory.
Zealous Belleisle could not protect his Contades; it is not known
whether he privately blamed Contades or blamed Broglio for loss of

* Mauvillon, ii. 44-60; Tempelhof, iii. 154-179, &c. &e.: and Proceed-
ings of a Court-Martial, held at the Horse-Guards, Tth-24th March, and 25th
March—ith April 1760, in Trial of Lord George Sackville (London, 1760).
In Knesebeck, Ferdinand wahrend des Sieben-jahrigen Krieges (i. 395), Fer-
dinand’s Letter to Friedrich of ‘‘ July 31st ;” and (ib. 398-418 and ii. 33-
36) many special details about Sackville, and “ August Ist.”

eg * Reet a a Sd
a ee ee eee eee

<a ie oor ee

Pe wy: 0s
pepper of

— Cuar. I.] we atremprs THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 365
Ist Aug. 1759.

Minden. Zealous old man, what a loss to himself withal had Minden
been ! -That shadow-conquest of Hanover is quite vanished : and worse,
in Ferdinand’s spoil were certain Letters from Belleisle to Contades,
inculcating strange things :—for example, ‘ J/ faut faire un désert du
Pays’ (all Hessen, I think, lest Ferdinand advance on you) ‘ devant
?Armee, and the like. Which Ferdinand saw good to publish, and
which resounded rather hideously through the general mind.’”*

Ignominious Sackville was tried by Court-martial; cashiered, de-
clared incapable of again serving his Majesty “in any military capaci-
ty :’—perhaps a mild way of signifying that he wanted the common
courage of a soldier? Zealous Majesty, always particular in soldier
matters, proclaimed it officially to be “a sentence worse than death ;”
and furthermore, with his own royal hand, taking the pen himself, struck
out Sackville from the list of Privy Councillors. Proper surely, and
indispensable ;—and should have been persisted in, like Fate ; which, in
a new Reign, it was not! For the rest, there was always, and is, some-
thing of enigma in Sackville’s palpably bad case. It is difficult to think
that a Sackville wanted common courage. ‘This Sackville fought duels
with propriety ; in private life, he was a surly, domineering kind of fel-
low, and had no appearance of wanting spirit. It is known, he did not
love Duke Ferdinand ; far from it! May not he have been of peculiar-
ly sour humour, that morning, the luckless fool; sulky against Ferdi-
nand, and his “‘ saddling at one o’clock ;” sulky against himself, against
the world and mankind; and flabbily disinclined to heroic practices for
the moment? And the moment came; and the man was not there,
except in that foggy flabby and forever ruinous condition! Archen-
holtz, alone of Writers, judges that he expressly wanted to spoil the
Battle of Minden and Ferdinand’s reputation, and to get appointed Com-
mander in his stead. Wonderful; but may have some vestige of basis,
too! ‘True, this Sackville was as fit to lead the courses of the stars as
to lead armies. But such a Sackville has ambition, and, what is fatally
more peculiar to him, a chance of unfolding it ;—any blockhead has an
ambition capable, if you encourage it sufficiently, of running to the infi-
nite. Enough of this particular blockhead; and may it be long before
we see his like again !—

The English Cavalry was in a rage with Sackville. Of the English
Infantry, Historians say, what is not now much heard of in this Coun-
try, ‘‘ That these unsurpassable Six” (in industrious valour unsurpassa-
ble, though they mistook orders, and might have fared badly!) “are
ever since called the Minden Regiments; that they are the 12th, 20th,

5 Were taken at Detmold (Tempelhof, iii. 223); Old Newspapers full of
Excerpts from them, in the weeks following.

366 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX,

29th July—tth Aug. 1759,
23d, 25th, 87th and SIst of the British line; and carry ‘Minden’ on
their colours,”**—with silent profit, I hope !

Fancy how Pitt’s public, lately gloomy and dubious, blazed
aloft into joyful certainty again! Pitt's outlooks have been real-
ly gloomy all this season; nor are the difficulties yet ended,
though we hope they will end. Let us add this other bit of
Synchronism, which is still of adverse aspect, over Seas; and
will be pungently interesting to Pitt and England, when they
come to hear of it.

“ Before Quebec, July 31st, 1759. This same Evening, at Quebec,
on the other side of the Atlantic.—evening at Quebec, 9 or 10 at night
for Contades and his nineteen Bridges,—there is a difficult affair going
on. Above and below the Falls of Montmorenci, and their outflow into
the St. Lawrence : attempt on General Wolfe's part to penetrate through
upon the French, under Marquis de Montealm, French Commander-in-
chief, and to get a stroke at Quebec and him. From the south side
of the St. Lawrence, nothing can be done upon Quebec, such the dis-
tance over. From Isle d'Orléans and the north side, it is also impossi-
ble hitherto. Easy enough to batter the Lower Town, from your ships
and redoubts: but the High Town towers aloft on its sheer pinnacles,
inaccessible even to cannon; looks down on the skilfullest British Ad-
miral and Fleet, as if with an air of indifference,—trying him on dark
nights with fire-ships, fire-rafts, the cunningest kinds of pyrotechny,
which he skilfully tows aside.

“A strenuous thing, this of Wolfe's; though an unsuccessful. To-
wards evening, the end of it; all Quebee assembled on the southern
ramparts, witnessing with intense interest; the sublime Falls of Mont-
morenci gushing on, totally indifferent. For about a month past, Gen-
eral Wolfe, with the proper equipments, and about 10,000 men, naval
and military, who was expressly selected by Pitt to besiege Quebec, and
is dying to succeed, has been trying every scheme to get into contact
with it:—to no purpose, so lofty, chasmy, rocky is the ground, cut by
mountainous precipices and torrent streams, branches of the grand St.
Lawrence River; so skilfully taken advantage of by Montcalm and his
people, who are at home here, and in regulars nearly equal Wolfe, not
to speak of Savages and Canadians. Wolfe’s plan of the 3Ist was not
ill laid ; and the execution has been zealous, seamen and landsmen alike
of willing mind ;—but it met with accidents. Accidents in boating;
then a still worse accident on landing; the regiment of grenadiers,
which crossed below the Falls, having, so soon as landed, rushed off on

© Kausler, Schlachien, &c. p. 587.

oy -

hae titel he An

yr a en é

¥
q
3
=
s
4
i

~ Cuar. ILI.] He ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM. 367

8th Aug. 1759,

the redoubt there on their own score, without waiting for the two bri-
gades that were to cross and cooperate above the Falls! Which cut
Wolfe to the heart; and induced him, especially as the tide was making
again, to give up the enterprise altogether, and recal everybody, while
it was yet time.” Wolfe is strict in discipline ; loves the willing mind,
none more, and can kindle it among those about him; but he loves dis-
cipline withal, and knows how fatal the too willing may be. For six
weeks more, there is toil on the back of toil everywhere for poor Wolfe.
He falls into fevers, into miseries, almost into broken heart ;—nothing
sure to him but that of doing his own poor utmost to the very death.
After six weeks, we shall perhaps hear of him again. Gliding swiftly
towards death ; but also towards victory and the goal of all his wishes.”

And now, after this flight half round the world, it is time we
return to Oder Country, and a Friedrich on the edge of formida-
ble things there. Next day after Beeskow, where we left him,
he duly arrived at Miillrose; was joined by Wedell there, Au-
gust 6th; and is now at Wulkow,—‘‘ encamped between Lebus
and Wulkow,” as we hear elsewhere ;—quite in the environs of
Frankfurt, and of great events.

Friedrich to Graf von Finckenstein (Second Note).

Wulkow, 8th August 1759.

“Tf you hear of firing tomorrow, don’t be surprised; it is our rejoic-
ing for the Battle of Minden. I believe I shall have to keep you in
suspense some days yet. I have many arrangements to make; I find
great difficulties to surmount,—and it is required to save our Country,
not to lose it: I ought both to be more prudent and more enterprising
than ever. In a word, I will do and undertake whatever I find feasible
and possible. With all that, I see myself in the necessity of making
haste, to check the designs Haddick may have on Berlin. Adieu,
mon cher. Ina little, you will have either a De Profundis or a Te
Deum.—F¥.”*

1 Gentleman’s Magazine for 1759, pp. 470-3; Thackeray, i. 488.
® (Huvres de Frédéric, xxv. 305, 306.

368 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
30th July—12th Aug. 1759,

CHAPTER IV.
BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF.

Sunpay July 29th, at Frankfurt-on-Oder divine worship was
broken in upon, and the poor City thrown into consternation, by
actual advent, or as good as advent, of the Russians: “ On the
Crossen road, close by; coming, come!”” And they did unde-
niably appear, next morning, in force; on the opposite, eastern
or Kunersdorf side of the River, on the top of the Oder-Dam
there; and demanded instant admission, under penalty of gen-
eral death by fire.

Within the Town stood Major Arnim, a Veteran of those parts,
with 400 militia; these, with their muskets and with two can-
non, are the only defence of Frankfurt. The Town has Gates;
but its walls, I doubt, are mainly garden-walls and house-walls.
On the eastern side, the River, especially if you have cannon on
the Bridge, gives it something of protection ; but on the western
and all other sides, it is overhung by heights. This Frankfurt,
like its bigger Namesake on the Mayn, is known as a busy trad-
ing place, its Fairs much frequented in those Eastern parts; and
is believed by the Russians to be far richer than it is. The
reader, as there happens to be ocular testimony extant,' may
like to see a little how they behaved there:

“‘ Arnim, taking survey of the Russian party, values it, or what he
can see of it, at 1,000” (they really were 6,000); “‘ keeps his Draw-
bridge up; and answers stoutly enough, ‘ No.’ Upon which, from the
Oder-Dam, there flies off one fiery grenado: one and no more,—which
alighted in the house of ‘Mrs. Thielicke, a Baker’s Widow, who was
standing at the door ;—killed poor Mrs. Thielicke, blew the house con-

siderably to wreck, but did not set fire to it. Arnim, all the Magistrates
intreating him for the love of Heaven to leave them, is secretly shoving

‘ Johann Ludwig Kriele, Schlacht bei Kunersdorf, mit §c. (Berlin, 1801).
Kriele was subsequent Pastor in the Parish, an excellent intelligent man ;
has compiled in brief form, with an elaborate Chart too, a clear account
of everything, in the Battle and before and after it.

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. _ 369
30th July—12th Aug. 1759.

off his two cannon to the Northern Gate; and in fact, is making his
packages with full speed: ‘ Push for Ciistrin,’ thinks Arnim, ‘and save
selves and cannon, since no good is to be done here!’

“Tt was about 11 a.m. when the Thielicke grenado fell: obstinate
Arnim would by no means go; only packed all the faster. A second
summons came: still, No. For the third and last time the Russians
then summon : ‘ Grenadoes, a hundred more of them lie ready, unless—"”
‘We will, we will ; O merciful servant of Czarish Majesty !’ passionate-
ly signify the Magistrates. But Arnim is still negative, still keeps the
Bridge up. One of the hundred does go, by way of foretaste: this
lighted ‘near the Ober-Kirche, in the chimney of the Town-Musikus;’
brought the chimney crashing down on him” (fancy a man with some
fineness of ear); “tore the house a good deal to pieces, but again did
not set it on fire. ‘ Your obstinate Town can be bombarded, then,—
cannot it?’ observes the Russian Messenger.—‘Give us Free With-
drawal!” proposes Arnim. ‘No; you to be Prisoners of War; Town
at Czarish Majesty’s discretion.’ ‘ Never!’ answers Arnim (to the out-
ward ear).—‘ Go; oh, for the love of Heaven, go" ery all Official peo-
ple. f

“ Arnim, deaf to clamour, but steadily diligent in getting ready, does
at last go; through the Lebus Suburb, quick march; steady, yet at his
best step ;—taking the Town-keys in his pocket, and leaving the Draw-
bridge up. One is sorry for poor Arnim and his 400 militia; whose
conduct was perfect, under difficulties and alarms; but proved unsuc-
cessful. The terrified Magistrates, finding their Keys gone, and the
conflagrative Russians at their gates, got blacksmiths on the instant;
smote down, by chisel and mallet, the locked Drawbridge. smote open
the Gates: ‘ Enter, O gracious Sirs; and may Czarish Majesty have
mercy on us!’ So that Arnim had small start for marchers on foot ;
and was overtaken about half-way. Would not yield still, though the
odds were overwhelming; drew himself out on the best ground discov-
erable; made hot resistance; hot and skilful; but in vain. About six
in the evening, Arnim and Party were brought back, Prisoners, to Frank-
furt again,—self, surviving men, cannons and all (self in a wounded
state) ;—and ‘were locked in various Brewhouses;’ little of careful
surgery, I should fear. Poor Arnim; man could do no more; and he
has been unfortunate.”

It is by no means our intention to describe the Iliad of mis-
eries, the agitations, terrors and disquietudes, the tribulation and
utter harrowing to despair, which poor Frankfurt underwent,
incessantly from that day forward, for about five weeks to come.
“The furnishings of victual” (Russian stock quite out) ‘“ were

Q 2

370 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX,

30th July—12th Aug. 1759,
to an inconceivable amount; surrender of arms, of linens, cloths,
of everything useful to a hungry Army; above all things, of
horses, so that at last there were but four horses left in all Frank-
furt ; and’’—But we must not go into details.

“On the second day, besides all this,” what will be significant of it
all, “there was exacted ‘ransom of 600,000 thalers (90,000/.), or you
shall be delivered to the Cossacks! Frankfurt has not above 12,000
inhabitants within its bounds; here is a sudden poll-tax of 7/. 10s. per
head. Frankfurt has not such a sum; the most rigorous collection did
not yield above the tenth part of it. And more than once those san-
guinary vagabonds were openly drawn out, pitch-link in hand: ‘ The
90,000/. or—!’ Civic-Presidency Office in Frankfurt was not a bed
of roses. The poor Magistrates rushed distractedly about ; wrung out
moneys to the last drop; moneys, and in the end plate from those that
had it; went in tearful deputation to General Soltikof,—a severe proud
kind of man, capable perhaps @f being flattered —who usually locked
them up instead. Magistrates were locked in Russian ward, at one
time, for almost a week ; sat in the blazing sun; if you try for the shade
of a tree, the sentry handles arms upon you ;—and were like todie. To
me, Kriele, it is a miracle how the most of us lived; nay we never re-
ally wanted food, so kind was Providence, so generous our poor neigh-
bours out of all the Towns round. ‘The utmost of money that could be
raised was 6,000/; nothing but some little of plate, and our Bill for the
remainder. Soltikof, a high kind of gentleman, saw at last how it stood;
let the Magistrates out of ward; sent back the plate—‘ Nothing of
that !"—nay Czarish Majesty was herself generous; and forgave the
Bill, on our petition, next Year. Cossacks, indeed, were a plunderous
wild crew; but the Russians kept them mostly without the gates. The
regular Russians were civil and orderly, officers and men,— greatly
beyond the Austrians in behaviour.”® By these few traits conceive
Frankfurt: this, now forgotten in most books, is a background on which
things were transacted still memorable to everybody.

“ Friday, August 3d, General Loudon came to hand: arrived early,
in the Guben” (or Western) “ Suburb, his 18,000 and he. In high
spirits, naturally, and somewhat exultant to have evaded Friedrich ; but
found a reception that surprised him. 'The Russians had been living in
the hope of junction ; but still more vividly in that of meal. ‘ Auxilia-
ries ; humph,—only 18,000 of them; how much welcomer had been as
many hundredweights of meal!’ Loudon had pushed his baggage direct
into Frankfurt; and likewise a requisition of such and such proviants,

® Kriele, Schlacht bet Kunersdorf, pp. 1-15 (in compressed state).

) 7
,
*»

3
.

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 371
30th July—12th Aug. 1759.

weights of meal and the like, in exuberant amount, to be furnished
straightway by the City: neither of which procedures would the Rus-
sians hear of fora moment. ‘ Out with you!’ said they roughly to the
baggage-people: ‘ quarter in the Guben Suburb, or where you like ; not
here!’ And with regard to the requisition of proviant, they answered
in a scornful angry key, ‘ Proviant? You too without it? You have
nct brought us meal, according to covenant; instead of meal, you bring
us 18,000 new eaters, most of them on horseback,—Satan thank you!
From Frankfurt be very certain you can get no ounce of meal; Frank-
furt is our own poor meal-bag, dreadfully scanty : stay outside, and feed
where and how you can"

* All this, Loudon, though of hot temper, easily capable of rising to
the fierce point, had to endure in silence, for the common interest.
Loudon’s own table is furnished from Frankfurt: no other Austrian
man’s: all others have to shift how they can. Sad requisitioning need-
ed, and sad plunder to supplement it: the Austrian behaviour was very
bad, say the Frankfurters; ‘in particular, they had burnt gradually all
the corn-mills in the country ; within many miles not one mill standing
when they left us,—and four horses all the conveyance-power we had.
Soltikof lodges in great pomp, much soldiery and cannon parading be-
fore his doors; not an undignified man, or an inhuman or essentially
foolish, but very high in his ways, and distasteful to Austrian dignitaries.”

The Russian Army lies mainly across Oder; encamped on the
Judenberg, and eastward there, along the Heights, near three
miles, to Kunersdorf and beyond. ‘They expect Friedrich at
the gates of Frankfurt shortly; know well that they cannot de-
fend Frankfurt. They calculate that Friedrich will attack them
in their Judenberg Encampment, but hope they are nearly ready
for him there. Loudon, from the Guben Suburb, will hasten
across, at any moment;— welcome on such fighting occasion,
though ill seen when the question is of eating! The Russians
have their Wagenburg on an Island southward, farther up the
River; they have three Pontoon Bridges leading thither, a free
retreat should they be beaten. And in the mean while are en-
trenching themselves, as only Daun would,—cannon and re-
doubts all round those Heights;—and except it be screwing
Frankfurt to do its impossible duty, and carting provender with
all the horses except four, have not much farther to do but wait
till the King come. Which will be speedily, it is probable !—

Wednesday August 8th, Russian and Austrian Generals, a

372 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX, Fei

9th Aug. 1759.
cheerful party of them, had rendezvoused at Fischers Mihle; a
Mill not yet burnt, and a pleasant Tavern as well; in one of
the prettiest valleys in the Western Environs ; — intending to
dine there, and have a pleasant day. But the Miller’s Boy runs
in upon them, wide-eyed, ‘‘Himmel und Erde, Prussian Hussars!”
It was in verity Prussian Hussars; the King of Prussia with
them in person. He is come out reconnoitering,—the day after
his arrival in those parts. The pleasuring Generals, Russian
and Austrian, sprang to horseback, at their swiftest,—hope of

dinner gone futile, except to the intervening Prussian Hussars;—
and would have all been captured, but for that Miller’s Boy; —

whose Mill too was burnt before long. This gallop home of the
undined Generals into Frankfurt was the first news we poor
Frankfurters had of the King’s arrival.

The King has been punctual to his reckoning: he picked up
Wedell at Miillrose,—not too cordial to Wedell’s’people: ‘ None
of you speak to those beaten wretches,” ordered he; ‘till per-
haps they wipe off their Ziillichau ‘stain!’’’ On the 7th, Fried-
rich advanced to Frankfurt neighbourhood; took Camp between
Wulkow and Lebus;— and has just been out reconnoitering.
And has raised, fancy what emotion in poor Frankfurt lying
under its nightmare! ‘“ Next day, August 9th, from Wulkow-
Lebus hand, we” of Frankfurt “heard a great firing; cannon-
salvoes, musket-volleys: ‘ Nothing of fight,’ the Russian Officers
told us; ‘it is the King of Prussia doing joy-fire for Minden,’
of which we till now knew nothing.”

Friedrich, on survey of this Russian-Austrian Army, some
90,000 in number, with such posts, artilleries, advantages, judges
that he, counting only 40,000, is not strong enough. And in-
deed had so anticipated, and already judged; and, accordingly,
has Finck on march hitherward again,—Berlin must take its
risk, Saxony must shift for itself in the interim. Finck is due
in two days,—not here at Lebus precisely, but at another place
appointed; Finck will raise him to 50,000; and then business
can begin! Contrary to Russian expectation, Friedrich does
not attack Frankfurt; seems quite quiet in his cantonments ;—
he is quietly (if one knew it) making preparations farther down

8

|
4\

.
|

ee Catar. IV] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 373

9th Aug. 1759.
the River. About Reitwein, between this and Ciistrin, there
arrangements are proceeding, by no means of a showy sort.

The Russian-Austrian Army quits Frankfurt, leaving only
some hundreds of garrison: Loudon moves across, Soltikof
across; to the Oder-Dam and farther; and lie, powerfully en-
trenched, on those Kunersdorf Heights, and sandy Moorlands,
which go eastward at right-angles to Oder-Dam. One of the
strongest Camps imaginable. All round there, to beyond Kun-
ersdorf and back again, near three miles each way, they have a
ring of redoubts, and artillery without end. And lie there, in
order of battle, or nearly so; ready for Friedrich, when he shall
attack, through Frankfurt or otherwise. ‘They face to the North
(Reitwein way, as it happens); to their rear, and indeed to their
front, only not so close, are woods and intricate wilds. Loudon
has the left flank; that is to say, Loudon’s left-hand is towards
the Oder-Dam and Frankfurt; he lies at the Rothe Vorwerk,
(‘‘Red Grange,” a Farmstead much mentioned just now); rather
to north-westward of the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard (Juden-
berg and Judenkirchhof, likewise much mentioned); and in ad- ~
vance of the general Mass.* Soltikof’s headquarter, I rather
understand, is on the right wing; probably in Kunersdorf itself,
or beyond that Village; there, at least, our highly important
Russian right-wing is; there, elaborately fortified; and, half a
mile farther, ends,—on the edge of steep dells; the Russian
brink of which is strongly fringed with cannon, while beyond,
on the farther brink, they have built an abatis; so making assur-
ance doubly sure. Looking to the northward, all these 90,000 ;
their left rather southward of Frankfurt Bridge, over which
Friedrich will probably arrive. Leftward, somewhat to rear-
ward, they have bridges of their own; should anything sinister
befal ; three bridges which lead into that Oder Island, and the
Russian Wagenburg there.

August 10th, Finck, punctual to time, arrives in the neigh-
bourhood of Reitwein (which is some ten miles down-stream
from Lebus, from Frankfurt perhaps fifteen); Friedrich, the
same day, is there before him; eager to complete the Bridges,

* Map at p. 462.

374 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX, |
lith Aug. 1759, —

and get to business. One Bridge is of pontoons; one of “ Oder- —
boats, floated up from Ciistrin.” Bridges are not begun till
nightfall, lest eyes be abroad; are ready in the minimum of ~
time. And so, during the same night of the 10th, all the Infan-
try, with their artilleries and battle-furnitures, pour over in two
columns; the Cavalry, at the due point of time, riding by a ford,
short way to the right. And at four, in the gray of the August
morning (Saturday 11th August 1759), all persons and things
find themselves correctly across: ranked there, in those barren,
much indented “ Pasture-grounds of Géritz” or of Oetscher ;*
intending towards Kunersdorf; ready for unfolding into order
of battle there. ‘They leave their heavy baggage at Géoritz,
Wunsch to guard the Bridges and it; and, in succinct condition,
are all under way. At one in the afternoon, we are got to Leis-
sow and Bischofsee; scrubby hamlets (as the rest all are), not
above two miles from Kunersdorf. ‘The August day is windless,
shiny, sultry; man and horses are weary with the labours, and
with the want of sleep: we decide to bivouack here, and rest on
the scrubby surface, heather or whatever it is, till tomorrow.
Finck is Vanguard, ahead short way, and with his left on a
bit of lake or bog; the Army is in two lines, with its right on
Leissow, and has Cavalry in the kind of wood which there is to
rear. I*riedrich, having settled the positions, rides out recon-
noitering; hither thither, over the Heights of Trettin. ‘The
day being still hot, he suffers considerably from thirst” (it is our
one Anecdote), “in that arid tract: at last a Peasant does bring
him, direct from the fountain, a jug of pure cold water; whom,
lucky man, the King rewarded with a thaler; and not only so,
but, the man being intelligent of the localities, took with him
to answer questions.” Readers too may desire to gain some
knowledge of the important ground now under survey.

“Frankfurt, a very ancient Town, not a very beautiful,” says my
Note, “ stands on an alluvium which has been ground down from certain
clay Hills on the left bank of Oder. It counted about 12,000 inhabit-
ants in Friedrich’s time; has now perhaps about 20,000; not half the
bulk of its namesake on the Mayn; but with Three great Fairs annually,
and much trade of the rough kind. On this left or west bank of Oder,

* Map at p. 462.

Ree a

‘a

|
}

%

tn

Cuar. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. . 375

11th Aug. 1759.

the country is arable, moderately grassy and umbrageous, the prospect
round you not unpleasant, but eastward, over the River, nothing can
be more in contrast. Oder is of swift current, of turbid colour, as it
rolls under Frankfurt Bridge,—Wooden-Bridge, with Dam Suburb at
the end ;—a River treeless, desolate, as you look up and down: which
has, evidently, often changed its course, since grinding down that allu-
vium as site for Frankfurt ; and which, though now holding mainly to
northward, is still given to be erratic, and destructive on the eastern low
grounds,—had not the Frankfurters built an ‘Oder Dam’ on that side;
a broad strong Earth-mound, running for many miles, and confining its
floods. Beyond the Dam, there are traces of ‘Old Oder (Alte Oder);’
and, in fact, Oder, in primeval and in recent time, has gone along, many-
streamed; indenting, quarrying, leaving lakelets, quagmires, miscellane-
ous sandy tumult, at a great rate, on that eastern shore. Making of it
one of the unloveliest scenes of chaotic desolation anywhere to be met
with ;—fallen unlovelier than ever in our own more recent times.

* What we call the Heights of Kunersdorf is a broad Chain of
Knolls; coming out, at right angles, or as a kind of spur, from the
eastern high grounds; direct towards Oder and Frankfurt. Mill-Hill
(Muhilberg) is the root or easternmost part of this spur. From the
Milberg, over Kunersdorf, to Oder Dam, which is the whole length
of the spur, or Chain of Knolls, will be little short of four miles; the
breadth of the Chain is nowhere one mile,—which is its grand defect
as a Camp: ‘too narrow for maneuvering in.’ Here, atop and on the
three sides of this Block of Knolls, was fought the furious Battle of
Kunersdorf” (to be fought tomorrow), ‘‘ one of the most furious ever
known. A Block of Knolls memorable ever since.

“‘To all appearance, it was once some big Island or chain of Islands
in the Oder deluges: it is still cut with sudden hollows,—Kuhgrund
(Cow-Hollow) Tiefe Weg (Deep Way), and westernmost of all, and
most important for us here, Hohle Grund (Big Hollow, let us call it ;
‘ Loudon’s Hollow’ people subsequently called it) ;—and is everywhere
strangely tumbled up into knolls blunt or sharp, the work of primeval
Oder in his rages. In its highest knolls——of which let readers note
specially the Spitzberg, the Miihlberg, the Judenberg,—it rises nowhere
to 150 feet; perhaps the general height of it may be about 100. On
each side of it, especially on the north, the Country is of most intricate
character: bushy, scraggy, with brooklets or muddy oozings wandering
about, especially with a thing called the Hunerfliess (Hen-F loss), which
springs in the eastern woods, and has inconceivable difficulty to get into
Oder,—if it get at all! This was a sore Floss to Friedrich tomorrow.
Hen-Floss struggles, painfully meandering and oozing, along the north-
ern side (sometimes close, sometimes not) of our Chain of Knolls: along

376 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. —

11th Aug. 1759,
the south side of it (in our time, through the middle of it), goes the High-
way to Reppen” (“ From that Highway will his attack come!” thought
the Russians, always till today) : ‘on the north, to Leissow, to Trettin,”
where Friedrich is now on survey, “go various wheel-tracks, but no
firm road. A mostintricate unlovely Country. Withered bent-grasses,
heath, perhaps gorse, and on both sides a great deal of straggling Forest-
wood, reaching eastward, and especially southward, for many miles.

‘For the rest,” to our ill-luck in this place, “the Battlefield of Kun-
ersdorf has had a peculiar fate in the world; that of being blown away
by the winds! The then scene of things exists no longer ; the descrip-
tions in the Old Books are gone hopelessly irrecognisable. In our time,
there is not anywhere a tract more purely of tumbled sand, than all this
between Kunersdorf and Dam Vorstadt; and you judge, without aid of
record or tradition, that it is greatly altered for the worse since Fried-
rich’s time,—some rabbit-colony, or other the like insignificancy, eating
out the roots, till all vegetation died, and the wind got hold and set it
dancing ;—and that, in 1759, when Russian human beings took it for a
Camp, it must have been at least coherent, more or less; covered, held
together by some film of scrubby vegetation ; not blowing about in ev-
ery wind as now! Kunersdorf stands witia its northern end pushed into
that Kuhgrund (Cow-Hollow) ; which must then have been a grassy
place. Hastward of Kunersdorf the ground has still,some skin of peat,
and sticks together: but westward, all that three miles, it is a mere tu-
mult of sandhills, tumbled about in every direction (so diligent have the
conies been, and then the winds); no gullet, or definite cut or hollow,
now traceable anywhere, but only an endless imbroglio of twisted sand-
heaps and sand-hollows, which continually alter in the wind-storms.
Sand wholly, and,—except the strong paved Highway that now runs
through it (to Reppen, Meseritz, and the Polish Frontier, and is strong-
ly paved till it get through Kunersdorf),—chaotie wholly ; a scene of
heaped barrenness and horror, not to be matched but in Sahara; the
features of the Battle quite blown away, and indecipherable in our time.

“A hundred years ago, it would have some tattered skin,—of peat,
of heather and dwarf whins, with the sand cropping out only here and
there. So one has to figure it in Soltikof’s day,—before the conies
ruined it. Which was not till within the last sixty years, as appears.
Kriele’s Book (in 1801) still gives no hint of change: the Kuhgrund,
which now has nothing but dry sand for the most industrious ruminant,
is still a place of succulence and herbage in Kriele’s time ; ‘ Deep Way,’
where ‘ at one point two carts could not pass,’ was not yet blown out of
existence, but has still ‘a Well in it? for Kriele; Hohle Grund (since

called Loudon’s Hollow), with the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard be-_

yond, seem tolerable enough places to Kriele. Probably not unlike

. at
i

|
|

PR ne “-
Pea j

Bm Ceasar. [V.|. ~ BATILE OF KUNERSDORF. 377
llth Aug. 1759.

what the surrounding Country still is. A Country of poor villages, and
of wild ground, flat generally, and but tolerably green; with lakelets,
bushes, scrubs, and intricate meandering little runlets and oozelets ; and
in general with more of Forest so-called than now is :—this is Kuners-
dorf Chain of Knolls; Soltikof’s Entrenched Camp at present; des-
tined to become very famous in the world, after lying so long obscure
under Oder and its rages.’’*

From the Knolls of Trettin, that Saturday afternoon, Fried-
rich takes view of the Russian Camp. All lying bright enough
there ; from Miihlberg to Judenberg, convenient to our glass;
between us and the evening Sun. Batteries most abundant, dif-
| ficulties great: Soltikof just ahead here, 72,000: Loudon at the
Red Grange yonder, on their extreme left, with 18,000 more.
An uncommonly strong position for 90,000 against 50,000.
One thing strikes Friedrich: On front in this northern side, close
by the base of the Russian Camp, runs,—for the present, away
from Oder, but intending to join it elsewhere,—a paltry little
Brook, ‘‘ Hen-Floss” so-called, with at least two successive Mills
on it (Kleine Mihle, Grosse Mihle); and on the northern shore
of it, spilling itself out into a wet waste called Elsbruch (Alder
Waste), which is especially notable to Friedrich. Adder Waste?
Watery, scrubby; no passage there, thinks Friedrich; which his
peasant with the water-jug confirms. ‘‘'Tell me, however,” in-
quires Friedrich, with strictness, ‘‘ From the Red Grange yon-
der, where General Loudon is, if you wished to get over to the
Hohle Grund, or to the Judenberg, would you cross that Hen-
| Floss?” ‘It is not crossable, your Majesty; one has to go
| round quite westward, by the Dam.” ‘What, from Rothe
Vorwerk to Big Hollow, no passage, say you; no crossing?”
“None, your Majesty,” insists the Peasant ;—who is not aware
| that the Russians have made one of firm trestles and logs, and
use it daily for highway there; an error of some interest to
Friedrich within the next twenty-four hours!

Friedrich himself does not know this bit of ground; but there
is with him, besides the Peasant, a Major Linden, whose Regi-
ment used to lie in Frankfurt, of whom Fredrich makes minute,
questioning. Linden answers confidently; has been over all

3 Tourist’s Note (Autumn 1852).

ee

378 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX, |
llth Aug. 1759,

this tract a hundred times; ‘*but knows it only as a hunter,”
says Tempelhof, 4 “not as a soldier,” which he ought to have
done. His answers are supposed to have misled Friedrich on
various points, and done him essential damage.

Friedrich’s view of the case, that evening, is by no means 0
despondent as might be imagined: he meine the thing as diffi-
cult, not as impossible,—and one of his anxieties is, that he be
not balked of trying it straightway. © Retiring to his hut in Bis-
chofsee, he makes two Dispositions, of admirable clearness, brev-
ity, and calculated for two contingencies :° That of the enemy
retaining his now posture; and That of the enemy making off
for Reppen ;—which latter does not at all concern us, as mat-
ters turned! Of the former the course will unfold resol t to us,
in practice, shortly. At 2 a.m. Friedrich will be on foot again,
at 8 on march again.—The last phenomenon, at Bischofsee this
night, is some sudden glare of disastrous light rising over the
woods :—*“ Russians. burning Kunersdorf!’’ as neighbours are
sorry to hear. That is the finale of much Russian rearranging
and tumbling, this day; that barbarous burning of Kunersdorf,
before going to bed.. Tomorrow various other poor Villages. got
burnt by them, which they had better have left standing.

The Russians, on hearing that Friedrich was across at Gritz,
and coming on them from the north side, not from Frankfurt by
the Reppen Highway, were in great agitation. Not thrown into
terror, but into manifold haste, knowing what hasty adversary
there was. Endless readjustments they have to make; a day
of tumultuous business with the Russians, this Saturday 11th,
when the news reached them. ‘They inverted their front” (say
all the Books but Friedrich’s own): ‘‘ Not coming by the Rep-
pen Highway, then!” think they. And thereupon changed rear
to front, as at Zorndorf, but more elaborately ;—which I should
not mention, were it not that hereby their late “left wing on the
Miihlberg” has, in strict speech, become their ‘ right,” and there
is ambiguity and discrepancy in some of the Books, should any
poor reader take to studying them on this matter. Changed
their front ; which involves much interior changing; readjusting
of batteries and the like. That of burning Kunersdorf was the

* Tempelhof, iii. 186. ° Given in Tempelhof, iii. 182, 183.

bit he a

ps -
| Cuap. IV.) _ BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 379
12th Aug. 1759.

barbaric winding-up of all this: barbaric, and, in the military
| gense, absurd; poor Kunersdorf could Leos been burnt at any
moment, if needful; and to the Russians the keeping of it stand-

ing was the profitable thing, as an impediment to Friedrich in

his advance there. They have laid it flat and permeable: ashes

all of it,—except the Church only, which is of stone; not so
combustible, and may have uses withal. Has perhaps served as
temporary lock-up, prison for the night, to some of those Frank- .
furt Deputations and their troublesome wailings; and may serve
as temporary hospital tomorrow, who knows ?

- Readjustments in the Russian Camp were manifold : but these
are as nothing, in the tumultuous business of the day. Carting
of their baggage, every article of value, to that safe Wagenburg in
the River ; driving of cattle,—the very driving of cattle through
Frankfurt, endless herds of them, gathered. by the Cossacks from
far and wide, “lasted for four-and-twenty hours.’’ Oxen in
Frankfurt that day were at the rate of ten shillings per head.
Often enough you were offered a full-grown young steer for a
loaf of bread; nay the Cossacks, when there was absolutely no
bidder, would slaughter down the animal, leave its carcass in
the streets, and sell the hide for a tympf,—fivepence (very bad
silver at present). Never before or since was seen in Frankfurt
such a Saturday, for bellowing and braying, and raging and tu-
multing, all through the day and through the night ; ushering
in such a Sunday too!

Sunday about 3 in the morning, Friedrich is on march again,
—Russians still in their place; and Disposition First, not Second
at all, to be our rule of action! Friedrich, in ‘Two Columns,
marches off, eastward through the woods, as if for Reppen quite
away from the Russians and their Miihlberg; but intending to
circle round at the due point, and come down upon their right
flank there (left flank, as he persists to call it), out of the woods,
and clasp.it in his arms in an impressive, unexpected way. In
Two Columns; which are meant, as usual, to be the Two Lines
of Battle: Seidlitz, with chosen Cavalry, is at the head of Col-
umn First, and will be Left. Wing, were we on the ground; Eu-
gen of Wiirtemberg, closing the rear of Column First, will, he,
or Finck and he together, be Right Wing. That is the order of

aa
380 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XD
12th Aug.1759,
march ;—order of battle, we shall find, had to alter itself some-
what, for reasons extremely valid ! a
Finck with his 12,000 is to keep his present ground; to have ; |
two good batteries got ready, each on its knoll ahead, which shall —
wait silent in the interim: Finck to ride out reconnoitering,
with many General Officers, and to make motions and omen
tions; in a word, to persuade the Russians that here is the Main
Army coming on from the north. All which Finck does; avoid-— t
ing, as his orders were, any firing, or serious commencement of |
business, till the King reappear out of the woods. The Russians —
give Finck and his General Officers a cannon salvo, here and- q
there, without effect, and get no answer. ‘The King does not
see his way, then, after all?” think the Russians. Their Cos- yy
sacks go scouring about; on the southern side, ‘‘ burn Schwetig it

Peet

and Reipzig,” without the least advantage to themselves: most
of the Cavalry, and a regiment or two of excellent Austrian
Grenadiers, are with Loudon, near the Red Grange, in front of
the Russian extreme left ;—but will have stept over into Big
Hollow, at a moment of crisis ! .

| ;
The King’s march, through the Forest of Reppen, was nothing —
like so expeditious as had been expected. ‘There are thickets,
intricacies, runlets, boggy oozes; indifferent to one man well —
mounted, but vitally important to 30,000 with heavy cannon to
bring on. Boggy oozings especially,—there is one dirty stream
or floss (Hiinerfliess, Hen-F loss) which wanders dismally through
those recesses, issuing from the far south, with dirty daughters
dismally wandering into it, and others that cannot get into it (be-
ing of the lake kind); these, in their weary, circling, recircling, —
course towards Oder,—J’aule Laacke (Foul Lake, Lither-mere, as
it were), Foul Bridge, Swine’s Nook (Schweinebucht), and many
others,—occasion endless difficulty. Whether Major Linden
was shot that day, or what became of him after, I do not know: j
but it was pity he had not studied the ground with a soldier’s
eye instead of ahunter’s! Plumping suddenly, at last, upon Hen-
Floss itself, Friedrich has to turn angularly; angularly, which. | |

E pat = arte ae Sag ee

occasions great delay: the heavy cannon (wall-guns brought from
Ciistrin) have twelve horses each, and cannot turn among the

F

| Crap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 381

_ trees, but have to be unyoked, reyoked, turned round by hand:
_ —in short, it was eight in the morning before Friedrich arrived
__ at the edge of the wood, on the Klosterberg, Walckberg, and oth-

er woody ergs or knolls, within reach of Miihlberg, and behind
the preliminary abatis there (abatis which was rather of service
to him than otherwise) ;—and began privately building his bat-
teries.

At eight o’clock he, with Column First, which is now becom- _
ing Line First (centre of Line First, if we reckon Finck as right-
wing), is there; busy in that manner: Column Second, which
was to have been Rear Line, is still a pretty way behind; and
has many difficulties before it gets into Kunersdorf neighbour-
hood, or can (having wriggled itself into’a kind of left-wing) codp-
erate on the Russian Position from the south side. On the north
side, Finck has been ready these five hours.—Friedrich speeds
the building of his batteries: ‘Silent, too; the Russians have
not yet noticed us!” By degrees the Russians do notice some-
thing ; shoot out Cossacks to reconnoitre. Cossacks in quanti-
ty; who are so insolent, and venture so very near, our gunners
on the north battery give them a blast of satisfactory grape-shot :
one and then another, four blasts in all, satisfactory to the gun-
ner mind,—till the King’s self, with a look, with a voice, came

- galloping: ‘Silence, will you!” The Russians took no offence ;

still considering Finck to be the main thing, and Friedrich some
scout party,—till at last,

Half-past eleven, everything being ready on the Walck Hill,
Friedrich’s batteries opened there, in a sudden and volcanic way.
Volcanically answered by the Russians, as soon as possible; who
have 72 guns on this Miihlberg, and are nothing loth. Upon
whom Finck’s battery is opening from the north, withal: Fried-
rich has 60 cannon hereabouts; on the Walckberg, on the Little
Spitzberg (called Seidiitz Hill ever since); all playing diligently —
on the head and south shoulder of this Miihlberg: while Finck’s
battery opens on the north shoulder (could he but get near
enough). Volcanic to a degree, all these; nor are the Russians
wanting, though they get more and more astonished: Tempel-
hof, who was in it, says he never, except at Torgau next Year,
heard a louder cannonade. Loud exceedingly ; and more or less

382 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED,

appalling to the Russian imagination: but not destructive inp
portion; the distance being too considerable,—** 1,950 peice
the nearest,” as ‘Tempelhof has since ascertained by measuring
Friedrich’s 8 batteries, however, as they took the Russians in 1
the flank or by entilade, did good execution. ‘The Russian guns
were ill pointed ; ; the Russian batteries wrong built; batteries s
built as did not allow them sight of the Hollow they were nha
to defend.”®

After above half an hour of this, Friedrich orders storm of
the Miihlberg: Forward on it, with what of enfilading it has
had! Eight grenadier Battalions, a chosen vanguard appoinitell
for the work (names of Battalions all given, and deathless in the
Prussian War-Annals), tramp forth on this service: cross the-
abatis, which the Russian grenadoes have mostly burnt; down
into the Hollow. Steady as planets; “with a precision and
coherency,” says Tempelhof, “ which even on the parade-ground
would have deserved praises. Once well in the Hollow, they
suffer nothing; though the blind Russian fire, going all over
their heads, rages threefold:” suffered nothing in the Hollow;
nor till they reached almost the brow of the Miihlberg, and were |
within a hundred steps of the Russian guns. These were the-
critical steps, these final ones; such torrents of grape-shot and
musket-shot and sheer death bursting out, here at last, upon the
Eight Battalions, as they come above ground. Who advanced,
unwavering, all the faster,—speed one’s only safety. They —
poured, into the Russian gunners and musketry battalions, one
volley of choicest quality, which had a shaking effect; then,
with level bayonets, plunge on the batteries: which are all emp-
ty before we can leap into them; artillery-men, musketeer bat-
talions, all on wing; general whirlpool spreading. And so, in
ten minutes, the Miihlberg and its guns are ours. Ever since
Zorndorf, an idea had got abroad, says Tempelhof, that the Rus-
sians would die instead of yielding; but it proved far otherwise
here. Down as far as Kunersdorf, which may be about a mile
westward, the Russians are all in a whirl; at best hanging in
tatters and clumps, their Officers struggling against the flight;
“mixed groups you would see huddled together a hundred men

* Tempelhof, iii. 186, 187.

|

i. ~Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 383
2 12th Aug. 1759.
deep.” ‘The Russian left wing is beaten: had we our cannon up
here, our cavalry up here, the Russian Army were in a bad way !
| This is a glorious beginning ; completed, I think, as far almost
as Kunersdorf by one o’clock: and could the iron continue to be
struck while it is at white heat as now, the result were as good
as certain. ‘That was Friedrich’s calculation: but circumstances
which he had not counted on, some which he could not count on,
_ sadly retarded the matter. His Left Wing (Rear Line, which
should now have been Left Wing) from southward, his Right
Wing from northward, and Finck farther west, were now on the
instant to have simultaneously closed upon the beaten Russians,
and crushed them altogether. The Right Wing, conquerors of
the Miihlberg, are here: but neither Finck nor the Left can be
simultaneous with them. Finck and his artillery are much re-
‘tarded with the Flosses and poor single Bridges; and of the Left
Wing, there are only some Vanguard Regiments capable of help-
ing (“who drove out the Russians from Kunersdorf Churchyard,”
as their first feat),—no Main Body yet for a long while. Such
impediments, such intricacies of bog and bush! The entire Wing
does at last get to the south-east of Kunersdorf, free of the wood ;
but finds (contrary to Linden with his hunter eye) an intricate
meshwork of meres and straggling lakes, two of them in the burnt
_ Village itself; no passing of these except on harrow isthmuses,
which necessitate change of rank and re- aici ; and our Left
Wing cannot, with all its industry, “march up,” that is, arrive
at the enemy in fighting line, without the painfullest delays.
~ And then the getting forward of our cannon! On the Miihl-
berg itself the seventy-two Russian guns, “ owing to difference
of calibre,” or artillery-men know what, cannot be used by us:
| a few light guns, Tempelhof to one of them, a poor four in all,
with perhaps 100 shot to each, did, by the King’s order, hasten
to the top of the Miihlberg; and never did Tempelhof see a finer
chance for artillery than there. Soft sloping ground, with Rus-
sians simmering ahead of you, all the way down to Kunersdorf,
a mile long: by horizontal pointing, you had such reboundings
(ricochets); and carried beautiful execution! Tempelhof soon
spent his hundred shots: but it was not at once that any of our
sixty heavy guns could be got up thither. Twelve horses to

f

%

F

384 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE- OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
12th Aug. 1759. i.

each: fancy it, and what baffling delays here and elsewhere :— ¥
and how the Russian whirlpool was settling more and more, in
the interim! And had, in part, settled; in part, got through to yi
the rear, and been replaced by fresh troops! fi

Friedrich’s activities, and suppressed and insuppressible im-
patiences in this interval, are also conceivable, though not on —
record for us. The swiftest of men; tied down, in this manner, — ,
with the blaze of perfect victory ahead, were the moments noé i?
running out! Slower or faster, he thinks (I suppose), the victory —
is his; and that he must possess his soul till things do arrive.

It was in one and more of those embargoed intervals that he
wrote to Berlin? (which is waiting, as if for life or death, the
issue of this scene, sixty miles distant): ‘* Russians beaten ; re-—
joice with me!” Four successive couriers, I believe, with mes-
sages to that effect; and at last, a Fifth with dolefully contrary
news !|—

In proportion as the cannon and other necessaries gradually
got in, the Fight flamed up from its embers more and more:
and there ensued,—the Russians being now ranked again (front-
ing eastward now) “in many lines,” and very fierce,—a second
still deadlier bout; Friedrich furiously diligent on their front —
and right flank; Finck, from the Alder Waste, battering and
charging (uphill, and under difficulties from those Flosses and
single Bridges) on their left flank. This too, after long deadly —
efforts on the Prussian part, ended again clearly in their favour;
their enemies broken a second time, and driven not only out of
Kunersdorf and the Kuhgrund, but some say almost to the foot
of the Judenberg,—what can only be very partially true. Bro- _
_ken portions of the Russian left flank,—some of Finck’s people, —
in their victorious wrath, may have chased these very far: but : |
it is certain the general Russian mass rallied again a long way
short of the Judenberg ;—though, the ground being all obliter- —
ated by the rabbits and the winds, nobody can now know with
exactitude where.

And indeed the Battle, from this point onwards, becomes
blurred and confused to us, only its grosser features visible
henceforth. Where the ‘“ Big Spitzberg” was (so terribly im-

? Preuss, ii. 212 n.

SS ee Te ee

gr

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 385
12th Aug. 1759.

portant soon), nobody can now tell me, except from maps. Lou-
don’s motions too are obscure, though important. I believe his
grenadiers had not yet been in the fire; but am certain they are
now come out of Big Hollow; fresh for the rescue ; and have
taken front rank in this Second Rally that is made. Loudon’s
Cavalry, Loudon himself has in hand, and waits with them in a
fit place. He has 18,000 fresh men; and an eye like few others
on a field of war. Loudon’s 18,000 are fresh: of the Prussians
that can by no means be said. I should judge it must be three
of the afternoon. The day is windless, blazing; one of the hot-
test August days; and “nobody, for twelve hours past, could
command a drink of water :” very fresh the poor Prussians can-
not be! They have done two bouts of excellent fighting; tum-
bled the Russians well back, stormed many batteries; and taken
in all 180 cannon.

At this stage, it appears, Finck and many Generals, Seidlitz

among the others, were of opinion that, in present circumstances,

with troops so tired, and the enemy nearly certain to draw off,
if permitted, here had been enough for one day, and that there
ought to be pause till tomorrow. Friedrich knew well the need
of rest; but Friedrich, impatient of things half-done, especially
of Russians half-beaten, would not listen to this proposal; which
was reckoned upon him as a grave and tragic fault, all the rest
of his life ; though favourable judges, who were on the ground,
Tempelhof for one,® are willing to prove that pausing here,—
at the point we had really got to, a little beyond the Kuhgrund,
namely ; and not a couple of miles westward, at the foot of the
Jew Hill, where vague rumour puts us,— was not feasible or
reasonable. Friedrich considers with himself, “Our left wing
has hardly yet been in fire!”—calls out the entire left wing,
foot and horse: these are to emerge from their meshwork of
Lakes about Kunersdorf, and bear a hand along with us on the
Russian front here,—especially to sweep away that raging Bat-
tery they have on the Big Spitzberg, and make us clear of it.
The Big Spitzberg lies to south and ahead of the Russian right
as now ranked; fatally covers their right flank, and half ruins
| ® Tempelhof, iii. 194.
Vou. V.—R

386 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
12th Aug. 1759, —

the attack in front. Big Spitzberg is blown irrecognisable in
our time; but it was then an all-important thing.

The left-wing Infantry thread their lake-labyrinth, the soon-
est possible ; have to rank again on the hither side, under a tear-
ing fire from that Spitzberg; can then at last, and do, storm —
onwards, upwards; but cannot, with their best effort, take the
Spitzberg: and have to fall back under its floods of tearing case-
shot, and retire out of range. To Friedrich’s blank disappoint-
ment: “ Try it you, then, Seidlitz; you saved us at Zorndorf!”
Seidlitz, though it is an impossible problem to. storm batteries
with horse, does charge in for the Russian flank, in spite of its
covering battery: but the torrents of grape-shot are insufferable ;
the Seidlitz people, torn in gaps, recoil, whirl round, and do not
rank again tilt beyond the Lakes of Kunersdorf. Seidlitz him-
self has got wounded, and has had to be carried away.

And, in brief, from this point onwards all goes aback with the
Prussians more and more. Repeated attempts on that Spitzberg
battery prove vain ;\to advance without it is impossible. Fried-
rich’s exertions are passionate, almost desperate; rallying, ani-
mating, new-ordering: everywhere in the hottest of the fire.
‘Thrice he personall¥ led on the main attack.’’ He has had
two horses shot down under him; mounting a third, this too
gets a bullet in an artery of the neck, and is about falling, when
two Adjutants save the King. In his waistcoat-pocket some
small gold case (étui) has got smitten flat by a bullet, which
would otherwise haye. ended matters. The people about him
remonstrate on such exposure of a life beyond value; he answers
curtly, ‘‘ We must all of us try every method here, to win the
Battle: I, like every other, must stand to my duty here!”
These and a second brief word or two farther on, are all of ar-
ticulate that we hear from him this day.

Friedrich’s wearied battalions here on the Heights, while the
Spitzberg to left goes so ill, fight desperately; but cannot pre-
vail farther; and in spite of Friedrich’s vehement rallyings and
urgings, gradually lose ground,—back at last to Kunersdorf and
the Kuhgrund again. The Loudon grenadiers, and masses of
fresh Russians, are not to be broken, but advance and advance.
Fancy the panting death-labours, and spasmodic toilings and

Cuar. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 387
12th Aug. 1759.

bafflings, of those poor Prussians and their King! N othing now
succeeding; the death-agony now come; all hearts growing
hopeless; only one heart still seeing hope. The Spitzberg is
impossible; tried how often I know not. Finck, from the Al-
der Waste, with his Infantry, attacks, and again attacks; with-
out success: ‘‘ Let the Cavalry go round then, and try there.
Seidlitz we have not; you Eugen of Wiirtemberg lead them!”
Eugen leads them (@uirassiers, or we will forget what); round
by the eastern end of the Milberg: then westward, along the
Alder Waste ; finally southward, against the Russian flank, him-
self foremost, and at the gallop for charging ;—Eugen, “looking
round, finds his men all gone,” and has to gallop the other way ;
gets wounded to boot. Puttkammer, with Hussars, then tried
it; Puttkammer was shot dead, and his Hussars too could do
nothing.

Back, slowly back, go the Prussians generally, nothing now
succeeds with them. Back to the Kuhgrund again; fairly over
the steep brow there; the Russians serrying their ranks atop,
rearranging their many guns. ‘There, once more, rose frightful
struggle; desperate attempt by the foredone Prussians to retake
that Height. |‘ Lasted fifteen minutes, line to line not fifty
yards asunder ;” such musketry,—our last cartridges withal.
Ardent Prussian parties trying to storm up; few ever getting to
the top, none ever standing there alive one minute. ‘This was the
death-agony of the Battle. Loudon, waiting behind the Spitz-
berg, dashes forward now, towards the Kuhgrund and our Left
Flank. At sight of which a universal feeling shivers through
the Prussian heart, ‘‘ Hope ended, then !”—and their solid ranks
rustle everywhere; and melt into one wild deluge, ebbing from
the place as fast as it can. b

It is towards six o’clock; the sweltering Sun is now fallen
low and veiled; gray evening sinking over those wastes. ‘ Wy
a-t-il donc pas un bougre de boulet qui puisse m’atteindre (Is there
not one b— of a ball that can reach me, then)?’ exclaimed
Friedrich, in his despair. Such a day he had never thought to
see. The pillar of the State, the Prussian Army itself, gone to
chaos in this manner. Friedrich still passionately struggles, ex-
horts, commands, entreats even with tears, ‘‘ Children, don’t for-

388 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. ae
12th Aug. 1759. _
sake me, in this pinch (Xinder, verlasset heute mich, euren Kénig,
euren Vater, nicht)!!°—but all ears are deaf. On the Mihl-
berg, one regiment still stood by their guns, covering the retreat.
But the retreat is more and more a flight; “no Prussian Army
was ever seen in such a state.” At the Bridges of that Hen-
Floss, there was such a crowding, all our guns got jammed ; and
had to be left, 165 of them of various calibre, and the whole of
the Russian 180 that were once in our hands. Had the chase
been vigorous, this Prussian Army had been heard of no more.
But beyond the Miihlberg, there was little or no pursuit ; through
the wood the Army, all in chaos, but without molestation other-
wise, made for its Oder Bridges by the way it had come."
Friedrich was among the last to quit the ground. He seemed
stupefied by the excess of his emotions; in no haste to go; un-
certain whether he would go at all. His Adjutants were about |
him, and a small party of Zeithen Hussars under Captain Pritt-
witz. Wild swarms of Cossacks approached the place. * Pritt-
witz, ich bin verloren (Prittwitz, 1am lost)!” remarked he. ‘ Vein,
Thro Majestét /” answered Prittwitz with enthusiasm; charged
fiercely, he and his few, into the swarms of Cossacks; cut them
about, held them at bay, or sent them elsewhither, while the Ad-
jutants seized Friedrich’s bridle, and galloped off with him. At
Oetscher and the Bridges, Friedrich found of his late Army not
quite 3,000 men. Even Wunsch is not there till next morning.
Wunsch with his Party had, early in the afternoon, laid hold of
Frankfurt, as ordered ; made the garrison prisoners, blocked the
Oder Bridge ; poor Frankfurt tremulously thanking Heayen for
him, and for such an omen. In spite of their Wagenburg and
these Pontoon-Bridges, it appears, there would have been-no re-
treat for the Russians except into Wunsch’s cannon: Wagenburg
way, latish in the afternoon, there was such a scramble of runa-
ways and retreating baggage, all was jammed into impassability ;
scarcely could a single man get through. In case of defeat, the

1° Kriele, p. 169.

11 Tempelhof, iii. 179-200; Retzow, ii. 80-115: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii.
589-598, Bericht von der am 12 August 1759 bey Kunersdorf vorgefallenen
Schlacht (Official); and Jb. 598-603, Beschreibung der §c. (by a Private
Hand): Jucidly accurate both.

»
+
*

L

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORE. 389
12th Aug. 1759.

Russian Army would have had no chance but surrender or ex-
termination.” At dark, however, Wunsch had summons, so
truculent in style, he knew what it meant; and answering in
words peremptorily, ‘‘ No,” with a like emphasis, privately got
ready again, and at midnight disappeared. Got to Reitwein
without accident.

Friedrich found at Oetscher nothing but huts full of poor
wounded men, and their miseries and surgeries ;—he took shel-
ter, himself, in a hut ‘“‘ which had been plundered by Cossacks”
(in the past days), but which had fewer wounded than others,
and could be furnished with some bundles of dry straw. Kriele
has a pretty Anecdote, with names and particulars, of two poor
Lieutenants, who were lying on the floor, as he entered this hut.
They had lain there for many hours; the Surgeons thinking.
them desperate; which Friedrich did not. ‘Ach Kinder, Alas,
children, you are badly wounded, then?” ‘Ja, your Majesty:
but how goes the Battle?’ (Answer, evasive on this point):
“Are you bandaged, though? Have you been let blood?”
“ Nein, Euer Majestit, kein Teufel will uns verbinden (Not a devil
of them would bandage us)!” Upon which there is a Surgeon
instantly brought; reprimanded for neglect: ‘ Desperate, say
you? ‘These are young fellows; feel that hand, and that; no
fever there: Nature in such cases does wonders!” Upon which
the leech had to perform his function; and the poor young fel-
lows were saved,—and did new fighting, and got new wounds,
and had Pensions when the War ended.'? ‘This appears to have
been Friedrich’s first work in that hut at Oetscher. Here next
is a Third Autograph to Finckenstein, written in that hut, prob-
ably the first of several Official things there:

The King to Graf von Finckenstein (at Berlin): Third Note.
Oetscher, ‘*12th August,” 1759.
“T attacked the Enemy this morning about eleven; we beat him back
to the Judenkirchhof (Jew Churchyard,”—a mistake, but now of no mo-
ment), ‘‘ near Frankfurt. All my troops came into action, and have done

12 Tempelhof, iii. 194: in Retzow (ii. 110) is some dubious traditionary
stuff on the matter.
13 Kriele, pp. 169, 170; and in all the Anecdote-Books,

390 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

12th Aug. 1759, _
wonders. I reassembled them three times; at length, 1 was myself
nearly taken prisoner; and we had to quit the Field. My coat is rid-
dled with bullets, two horses were killed under me ;—my misfortune is
that I am still alive. Our loss is very considerable. Of an Army of
48,000 men, I have, at this moment while I write, not more than 3,000
together ; and am no Jonger master of my forces. In Berlin you will
do well to think of your safety. It is a great calamity; and I will not
survive it: the consequences of this Battle will be worse than the Battle
itself. I have no resources more; and, to confess the truth, I hold all
for lost. I will not survive the destruction of my Country. Farew "
forever (Adieu pour jamais).—F."'!*

Another thing, of the same tragic character, is that of handing
over this Army to Finck’s charge. Order there is to Finck of
that tenor: and along with it the following notable Autograph,
—a Friedrich taking leave both of Kingship and of life. The
Autograph exists; but has no date,—date of the Order would
probably be still Oetscher, 12th August; date of the Autograph,
Reitwein (across the River), next day.

Friedrich to Iieutenant-General Finck (at Oetscher or Reitwein).

“General Finck gets a difficult commission; the unlucky Army
which I give up to him is no longer in condition to make head against
the Russians. Haddick will now start for Berlin, perhaps Loudon too;
if General Finck go after these, the Russians will fall on his rear ; if
he continue on the Oder, he gets Haddick on his flank (so Arigt er den
Hadek diss Seit) :—however, I believe, should Loudon go for Berlin,
he might attack. Loudon, and try to beat him: this, if it succeeded,
would be a stand against misfortune, and hold matters up. Time gained
is much, in these desperate circumstances. The news from Torgau and
» Dresden, Coper my Secretary” (Coper mein Segreter, kind of lieuten-
ant to Eichel'*) “ will send him. You (£7) must inform my Brother”
(Prince Henri) “ of everything; whom I have declared Generalissimo
of the Army. ‘To repair this bad luck altogether, is not possible: but
what my Brother shall command, must be done :—the Army swears to
my Nephew” (King henceforth).

“This is all the advice, in these unhappy circumstances, I am in a
condition to give. Had I still had resources, I would have stayed by
them (so wehre ich darbei geblieben).—F riepricu.”**

1¢ Tn orig. ‘ce 12,” no other date (Ceuvres de Frédéric, xxv. 306).

1S See Preuss, i. 349, iii. 442.

16 Exact Copy, two exact Copies, in Preuss (i. 450, and again, ii. 215),

7

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 391
13th Aug. 1759.

All this done, the wearied Friedrich flung himself into his
truss of dry straw; and was seen sound asleep there, a single
sentry at the door, by some high Generals that ventured to look
in. On the morrow he crossed to Reitwein; by tomorrow night,
there had 23,000 of his fugitives come in to him;—but this is
now to be Finck’s affair, not his! That day, too (for the Paper
seems to be misdated), he signed, and despatched to Schmettau,
Commandant in Dresden, a Missive, which proved more fatal
than either of the others; and brought, or helped to bring, very
bitter fruits for him, before long. 7

To Lieutenant-General von Schmettau (at Dresden).
‘¢ Reitwein, 14th” (probably 13th) ‘‘ August 1759.

“You will perhaps have heard of the Check” (/’Echec, Kunersdorf
to wit!) I have met with him from the Russian Army on the 13th” (12th,
if you had the Almanac at hand) “of this month. Though at bottom
our affairs in regard to the Enemy here are not desperate, I find I shall
not now be able to make any detachment for your assistance. Should
the Austrians attempt anything against Dresden, therefore, you will see
if there are means of maintaining yourself; failing which, it will behove
you to try and obtain a favourable Capitulation,—to wit, Liberty to
withdraw, with the whole Garrison, Moneys, Magazines, Hospital and
all that we have at Dresden, either to Berlin or elsewhither, so as to
join some Corps of my Troops.

“Asa fit of illness” (maladie, alas!) ‘‘ has come on me,—which I do
not think will have dangerous results,—I have for the present left the
command of my Troops to Lieutenant-General von Finck ; whose Or-
ders you are to execute as if coming to you directly from myself. On
this I pray God to have you in his holy and worthy keeping.—F.”!’

At Berlin, on this 13th,—with the Five Couriers coming in success-
ively (and no¢ in the order of their despatch, but the fatal Fifth arriving
some time ahead of the Fourth, who still spoke of progress and victory),
—there was such a day as Sulzer (ach mein lieber Sulzer !) had never
seen in the world. ‘* Above 50,000 human beings on the Palace Es-
planade and streets about ;? swaying hither and thither, in agony of ex-
pectation. in alternate paroxysm of joy and of terror and woe; often
enough the opposite paroxysms simultaneous in the different groups,
and men crushed down in despair met by men leaping into the air for
very gladness: Sulzer (whose sympathy is of very esthetic type)

17 Preuss, li. Urkundenbuch, p. 48.

392 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book cIX.

13th Aug. 1 759.
“would not, for any consideration, have missed such a scene.” The ; :

“scene” is much obliged to you, mein Lieber !—

Practically we find, in Rodenbeck, or straggling elsewhere, this Note :
“On the Day after Kunersdorf, Queen and Court fly to Magdebanae
this is their second flight. Their first was on Haddick’s Visit, October
1757; but after Rossbach they soon returned, and Berlin and the Court
were then extremely gay: different gentlemen, French and others of
every Nation, fallen prisoners, made the Queen's soirees the finest in.
the world for splendour and variety. at that time.”?°

One other Note we save, for the sake of poor Major Kleist,“ Poet of. _

the Spring,” as he was then called. A valiant, punctual Soldier, and
with a turn for Literature as well ; who wrote really pleasant fine things,
new at that time and rapturously welcome, though too much in the sen-
timental vein for the times which have followed. Major Kleist,—there
is a General Kleist, a Colonel Kleist of the Green Hussars (called
Grine Kleist, a terrible cutting fellow) :—this is not Griine Kleist;
this is the Poet of The Spring ; whose fate at Kunersdorf made a trag-
ic impression in all intelligent circles of Teutschland. Here is Kriele’s
Note (abridged) :

“Christian Ewald von Kleist, ‘Poet of the Spring’” (a Porshe
gentleman, now in his forty-fourth year), “ was of Finck’s Division ; had
come on, after those Eight Battalions took the first Russian battery”
(that is, Mihlberg); ‘“‘and had been assisting, with zeal, at the taking
of three other batteries, regardless of twelve contusions, which he grad-
ually got. At the third battery. he was farther badly hurt on the left
arm and the right. ‘Took his Colonel’s place nevertheless, whom he
now saw fall; led the regiment muéhzg forward on the fourth battery.
A ease-shot smashed his right leg to pieces; he fell from his horse”
(hour not given, shall we say 3 p.m.); ‘sank, exclaiming, ‘ Kinder, My
children, don’t forsake your King!’ and fainted there. Was carried to.
rear and leftward; laid down on some dry spot in the Elsbruch, not far
from the Kuhgrund, and a Surgeon brought. The Surgeon, while ex-
amining, was torn away by case-shot: Kliest lay bleeding without help.
A friend of his, Pfau” (who told Kriele), “one of Finck’s Generals,
came riding that way: Kliest called to him; asked how the Battle
went; uncommonly glad to hear we are still progressive. Pfau under-
took, and tried his utmost, for a carriage to Kleist; did send one of
Finck’s own carriages; but after such delays that the Prussians were
now yielding: poor Kleist’s had become Russian ground, and the ear-
triage could not get in.

18 Briefe der Schweitzer Bodmer, Sulzer, Gessner; aus Gleim’s literdrischen
Nachlasse: herausgegeben von Wilhelm Korte (Ziirich, 1804), pp. 316-319.
19 Rodenbeck, i. 390; &c. &e.

4
"9

Cuap. IV.] BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF. 393
13th Aug. 1759.

“ Kleist lay helpless ; no luck worse than his. In the evening, Cos-
sacks came round him; stript him stark naked; threw him, face fore-
most, into the nearest swampy place, and went their way. One of these
devils had something so absurd and Teniers-like in the face of him, that
Kleist, in his pains, could not help laughing at remembrance of it. In
the night some Russian Hussars, human and not Cossack, found Kleist
in this situation ; took him to a dry place; put a cloak over him, kin-
dled a watch-fire for themselves, and gave him water and bread. To-_
wards morning they hastened away, throwing an 8 groschen stuck”
(nine-penny piece, shilling, say half-crown) ‘ on his cloak,—with human
farewell. But Cossacks again came; again stript him naked and bare.
Towards noon on the 13th, Kleist contrived to attract some Russian
Cavalry troop passing that way, and got speech of the Captain (one
Fackelberg, a German); who at once:set about helping him ;—and had
him actually sent into Frankfurt, in a carriage, that evening. To the
House of a Professor Nikolai; where was plenty of surgery and watch-
ful affection. After near thirty hours of such a lair, his wounds seemed
still curable ; there was hope for ten days. In the tenth night (22d-
23d August), the shivered pieces of bone disunited themselves; cut an
artery,—which, after many trials, could not be tied. August 24th, at 2
in the morning, he died.—Great sorrow. August 26th, there was sol-
dier’s funeral; poor Kleist’s coffin borne by twelve Russian grenadiers ;
very many Russian Officers attending, who had come from the Camp
for that end; one Russian Staff-Officer of them unbnckling his own
sword to lay on the bier, as there was want of one. King Friedrich
had Kleist’s Portrait hung in the Garnison Kirche. Freemason Lodge,
in 1788, set up a monument to him,”?°—which stands on the Frankfurt
pavement, and is now in sadly ruinous state.

The Prussian loss, in this Battle, was, besides alJ the cannon
and field-equipages: 6,000 killed, 13,000 wounded (of which
latter 2,000 badly, who fell to the Russians as prisoners) ; in all,
about 19,000 men. Nor was the Russian loss much lighter; of _
Russians and Austrians together, near 18,000, as ‘Tempelhof
counts: ‘ which will not surprise your Majesty,” reports Solti-
kof to his Czarina; “who are aware that the King of Prussia
sells his defeats at a dear rate.” And privately Soltikof was
heard to say, “Let me fight but another such Victory, and I
may go to Petersburg with the news of it myself, with the staff
in my hand.” ‘The joy at Petersburg, striving not to be brag-
| gart or immodest, was solemn, steady and superlative: a great
20 Kriele, pp. 89-43. .
| R2

394 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.

feat indeed for Russia, this Victory over such a King,—though
a kind of grudge, that it was due to Loudon, dwelt, in spite of
Loudon’s politic silence on that point, unpleasantly in the back-
ground. ‘The chase they had shamefully neglected. It is said,
certain Russian Officers, who had charge of that business, stept
into a peasant’s cottage to consult on it; contrived somehow to
find tolerable liquor there; and sat drinking instead.?!

CHAPTER V.
SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE: SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN.

Friepricu’s despair did not last quite four days. On the
fourth day,—day after leaving Reitwein,—there is this little
Document, which still exists, of more comfortable tenor: ‘* My
dear Major-General von Wunsch,—Your letter of the 16th to
Lieutenant-General von Finck punctually arrived here: and for
the future, as I am now recovered from my illness, you have to
address your Reports directly to Myself—F.”! Finding that,
except Tottleben, warily reconnoitering with a few Cossacks, no
Russians showed themselves at Reitwein; that the Russians
were encamping and entrenching on the Wine-Hills south of
Frankfurt, not meaning anything immediate,—he took heart
again; ranked his 23,000; sent for General Kleist from Pom-
mern with his anti-Swedish handful (leave the Swedes alone, as
usual in time of crisis); considered that artilleries and furnish-
ings could come to him from Berlin, which is but 50 miles; that
there still lay possibility ahead, and that, though only a miracle
could save him, he would try it to the very last.

A great relief, this of coming to oneself again! ‘Till death,
then ;—rage on, ye elements, and black savageries!” Friedrich’s
humour is not despondent, now or afterwards; though, at this

21 Preuss, ii. 217.

+ “ Madlitz,’’ on the road to Fiirstenwalde, ‘17th August:” in Preuss,
Friedrich der Grosse ; eine historische Portrait-Skizze (kind of Lecture, so let
us call it, if again citing it; Lecture delivered, on Friedrich’s Birthday, to
Majesty and Staff-Officers as Audience, Berlin, 24th January 1855), p. 18.

ME SIRS

cieciachamend ee teoenaintdtdiacendaiah aerial

\

Cuap. V. SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE. 395
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.

time, it is very sad, very angry, and, as it were, scorning even to
hope: but he is, at all times, of beautifully practical turn; and
has, in his very despair, a sobriety of eyesight, and a fixed stead-
iness of holding to his purpose, which are of rare quality. His
utterances to D’Argens, about this time and onward,—brief
hints, spontaneous, almost unconscious,—give curious testimony
of his glooms and moody humours. Of which the reader shall
see something. For the present, he is in deep indignation with
his poor Troops, among other miseries. ‘ Actual running away!”
he will have it to be; and takes no account of thirst, hunger,
heat, utter weariness and physical impossibility! This lasts for
some weeks. But in general there is nothing of this injustice to
those about him. In general, nothing even of gloom is manifest-
ed; on the contrary, cheerfulness, brisk hope, a strangely con-
tinual succession of hopes (mostly illusory) ;—though within
there is traceable very great sorrow, weariness and misery. A
fixed darkness, as of Erebus, is grown habitual to him; but is
strictly shut up, little of it shown to others, or even, in a sense,
to himself. He is as a traveller overtaken by the Night and its
tempests and rain-deluges, but refusing to pause; who is wetted
to the bone, and does not care farther for rain. A traveller
grown familiar with the howling solitudes ; aware that the Storm-
winds do not pity, that darkness is the dead Earth’s Shadow :—
a most lone soul of man; but continually toiling forward, as if
the brightest goal and heaven were near and in view.

Once more the world was certain of Friedrich’s ruin ;—Fried-
rich himself we have seen certain of it, for some few desperate
hours :—but the world and he, as had been repeatedly the world’s
case, were both disappointed. Intrinsically there could be little
doubt but Friedrich’s enemies might now have ruined him, had
they been diligent about it. Now again, and now more than
ever, they have the winning-post in sight. At small distance is
the goal and purpose of all these four-years battlings and march-
ings, and ten-years subterranean plottings and intriguings. He
himself says deliberately, ‘* They had only to give him the fin-
ishing stroke (cowp-de-grdce).”? But they never gave him that

* Quvres de Frédéric, v. 20.

396 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.

stroke; could not do it, thou heartily desirous. Which was,
and is, matter of surprise to an observant public.

The cause of failure may be considered to have been, in good
part, Daun and his cunctations. Daun’s zeal was unquestionable;
ardent and continual is Daun’s desire to succeed: but to try it
at his own risk was beyond his power. He expected always to
succeed by help of others: and to show them an example, and
go vigorously to work himself, was what he never could resolve
on. Could play old Fabius Cunctator, it would seem; and
never was that part less wanted than now! Under such a Chief
Figure, the ‘“ incoherency of action,” instead of diminishing, as
Friedrich had feared, rose daily towards its maximum; and lat-
terly became extreme. ‘The old Lernean Hydra had many heads;
but they belonged all to one body. The many heads of this An-
ti-Friedrich Hydra had withal each its own body, and separate
set of notions and advantages. J riedrich was at least a unity;
his whole strength going one way, and at all moments, under his
own sole command. ‘The value of this circumstance is incalcu-
lable; this is the saving-clause of Pitt and his England (Pitt also
a despotic sovereign, though a temporary one); this, second only
to Friedrich’s great gifts from Nature, and the noble use he
makes of them, is above all others the circumstance that saved
him in such a duel with the Hydras.

On the back of Kunersdorf, accordingly, there was not only
no finishing stroke upon Friedrich, but, for two months, no stroke
or serious attempt whatever in those neighbourhoods where
Friedrich is. There are four Armies hereabouts: The Grand
Russian, hanging by Frankfurt; Friedrich at Fiirstenwalde
(whitherward he marched from Reitwein, August 16th), at Fiir-
stenwalde, or farther south, guarding Berlin ;—then, unhurt yet
by battle of any kind, there are the Grand Daunish or Mark-Lis-
sa Army, and Prince Henri’s of Schmittseifen. Of which latter
Two the hitchings and mancuverings from time to time become
vivid, and never altogether cease; but in no case come to any-
thing. Above two-months scientific flourishing of weapons, strat-
egie counter-dancing; but no stroke struck, or result achieved,
except on Daun’s part irreparable waste of time :—all readers
would feel it inhuman to be burdened with any notice of such

eat tae ie Sete Sy ese fe ne a aaa

Cuap. V.} SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE. 397
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.

things. One march of Prince Henri’s, which was of a famous
and decisive character, we will attend to, when it comes, that is,
were the end of September at hand: the rest must be imagined
as a general strategic dance in those frontier parts,—Silesia to
rearward on one side, the Lausitz and Frankfurt on the other,
_—and must go on, silently for most part, in the background of
the reader’s fancy. Indeed, Saxony is the scene of action; Fried-
rich, Henri, Soltikof, Daun, comparatively inactive, for the next.
six weeks and more.

Some days before Kunersdorf, Daun personally, with I will
forget how many thousands, had made a move to northward
from Mark-Lissa, 60 miles or so, through Sagan Country; and
lies about Priebus, waiting there ever since. Priebus is some 40
miles north of Gérlitz, about 60 west of Glogau, south of Frank-
furt 80. ‘This is where the Master-Smith, having various irons
in the fire, may be handiest for clutching them out, and forging
at them, as they become successively hot. Daun, as Master-
Smith, has at least three objects in view. The first is, as al-
ways, Reconquest of Silesia: this is obstructed by Prince Henri,
who sits, watchful on the threshold, at Schméttseifen yonder.
The second is, as last year, Capture of Dresden: which is much
the more feasible at present,—there being, except the Garrisons,
no Prussian force whatever in Saxony; and a Reichs Army now
actually there at last, after its long haggling about its Magazines ;
and above all, a Friedrich with his hands full elsewhere. To
keep Friedrich’s hands full,—in other words, to keep the Rus-
sians sticking to him,—that is the third object: or indeed we
may call it the first, second and third; for Daun is well aware
that unless Soltikof can manage to keep Friedrich busy, Silesia,
Saxony and all else becomes impossible.

Ever since the fortunate junction of Loudon with Soltikof,
Daun has sat, and still sits, expectant; elaborately calculative,
gathering Magazines in different parts, planting out-parties, this
way, that way, with an eye to these three objects, all or each,—
especially to the third object, which he discerns to be all and
each. Daun was elaborately calculative with these views: but
to try any military action, upon Prince Henri for example, or
bestir himself otherwise than in driving provender forward, and

398 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. —
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759,
marching detachments hither and thither to the potentially fit
and fittest posts, was not in Daun’s way,—so much the worse
for Daun, in his present course of enterprise. :
Prince Henri had lain quiet at Schméttseifen, waiting his
Brother's adventure; did not hear the least tidings of him till _
six days after Kunersdorf, and then only by rumour; hideous, _
and though still dubious, too much of it probable! On the very —
day of Kunersdorf, Henri had begun effecting some improvements
on his right flank,—always a sharply strategic, most expert crea-
ture,—and made a great many motions, which would be unin-
telligible here.’ Henri feels now that upon him lies a world of
duties ; and foremost of all, the instant duty of endeavouring to
open communication with his Brother. Many marches, in con-
sequence; much intricate marching and manceuvering between
Daun and him: of which, when we come to Henri’s great march
(of 25th September), there may be again some hint. }
For the present, let readers take their Map, and endeavour to
fix the following dates and localities in their mind. Here, in
summary, are the King’s various Marches, and Two successive
Encampments, two only, during those Six Weeks of forced in-
action, while he is obliged to stand watching the Russians, and
to witness so many complicacies and disasters in the distance ;
which he struggles much and fruitlessly to hinder or help:

“ Encampment First (Fiirstenwalde, August 18th-30th). Friedrich
left Reitwein, August 16th; 17th, he is at Madlitz” (Note to Wunsch
written there, which we read); “ 18th, to Fiirstenwalde, and encamp.
Fiirstenwalde is on the Spree, straight between Frankfurt and Berlin ;
25 miles from the former, 35 from the latter. Here for near a fortnight.
At first, much in alarm about the Russians and Berlin; but gradually
ascertaining that the Russians intend nothing.

“In effect, all this while Soltikof lay at Lossow, 10 miles south of
Frankfurt, with his right on Oder; totally motionless, inactive, except
listening, often rather gloomily, to Daun’s and Montalembert’s suasive
eloquences and advices,—and once, August 22d, in the little Town
of Guben, holding Conference with Daun” (of which by and by). “In
consequence of which, August 28th, Soltikof and his Russians and Aus-
trians got under weigh again ; southward, but only a few marches: first

* Detailed, every fibre of them (as is the soul-confusing custom there),
in Tempelhof, iii. 228 et seq.

Crap. V.] SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE. ~~ 399
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.
to Millrose, then Lieberose :— whom, the instant he heard of their
movements, Friedrich, August 30th, hastened to follow; but had not to
follow very far. Whereupon ensues

“ Encampment Second (Waldau, till September 15th). August 30th,
Friedrich, we say, rose from Fiirstenwalde; hastened to follow this Rus-
sian movement, and keep within wind of it: up the valley of the Spree ;
first to Millrose neighbourhood” (where the Russians, loitering some
time, spoiled the canal locks of the Friedrich-Wilhelm Canal, if nothing
more),—* thence to Lieberose neighbourhood; Waldau, the King’s new
place of encampment,—Waldau, with Spree Forest to rear of it: silent
both parties till September 15th, when Soltikof did fairly march, not
towards Berlin, but quite in the opposite direction.”

By the middle of September, when the Russians did get on
foot, and moved eastward; especially on and after September
25th, when Henri made his famous March westward; then it
will behove us to return to Friedrich and these localities. For
the present, we must turn to Saxony, where, and not here, the
scene of action is. Take, farther, only the following bits of Note,
which will now be readable. First, these Utterances to D’Ar-
gens; direct glimpses into the heavy-laden, indeed hag-ridden
and nearly desperate inner man of Friedrich, during the first
three weeks after his defeat at Kunersdorf:

The King to Marquis D’Argens (at Berlin): Six Notes.

1°. “ Madlitz” (road from Reitwein to Fiirstenwalde), “16h August
1759. We have been unfortunate, my dear Marquis; but not by my
fault. The victory was ours, and would even have been a complete one,
when our infantry lost patience, and at the wrong moment abandoned
the field of battle. The enemy today is on march to Miillrose, to unite
with Haddick” (not to Miillrose for ten days yet; Haddick had already
got united with them). “The Russian infantry is almost totally de-
stroyed: Of my own wrecks, all that I have been able to assemble
amounts to 32,000 men; with these I am pushing on to throw myself
across the enemy’s road, and either perish or save the Capital. That
is not what you” (you Berliners) “ will call a deficiency of resolution.

“For the event I cannot answer. If I had more lives than one, I
would sacrifice them all to my Country. But if this stroke fail, I think
I am clear-scores with her, and that it will be permissible to look a little
to myself. There are limits to everything. I support my misfortune ;
courage not abated by it: but I am well resolved, after this stroke if it

400 ‘FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XTX,

16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.
fail, to open an outgate for myself” (that small glass-tube which never
quits me), “and no longer be the sport of any chance.”

2°. Furstenwalde,20th August. * * ‘ Remain at Berlin, or retire
to Potsdam; in a little while there will come some catastrophe; it is
not fit that you suffer by it. If things take a good turn, you can be back
to Berlin” (from Potsdam) “in four hours. If ill-luck still pursue us,
go to Hanover or to Zelle, where you can provide for your safety.

‘“‘T protest to you that, in this late Action, 1 did what was humanly
possible to conquer; but my people’—Oh, your Majesty !

3°. Furnstenwalde, 21st August. * * ‘ The enemy is intrenching
himself near Frankfurt; a sign he intends no attempt. If you will do
me the pleasure to come out hither, you can in all safety. Bring your
bed with you; bring my Cook Noél; and I will have you a little cham-
ber ready. You will be my consolation and my hope.”—

This day,—let readers mark the circumstance,—Friedrich, in better
spirits, detaches Wunsch with some poor 6,000, to try if he can be of
help in Saxony; where the Reichs Army, now arrived in force, and
with nothing whatever in the field against them, is taking all the North-
ward Garrison-Towns, and otherwise proceeding at a high rate. Too
possibly with an eye towards Dresden itself! Wunsch sets out, August
2ist.* And we shall hear of him in those Saxon Countries before long.

4°. Furstenwalde, 22d August. “ Yesterday I wrote to you to come;
but today I forbid it. Daun is at Kotbus; he is marching on Liiben and
Berlin” (nothing like so rash !).—“ Fly these unhappy Countries !—This
news obliges me again to attack the Russians between here and Frank-
furt. You may imagine if this is a desperate resolution. It is the sole
hope that remains to me, of not being cut off from Berlin on the one side
or the other. I will give the discouraged troops some brandy”—alas !—
“but I promise myself nothing of success. My one consolation is that
I shall die sword in hand.”

5°. Same place and day (after a Letter from D’Argens). ‘“ You
make the panegyric, mon cher, of any Army that does not deserve any.
The soldiers had good limbs to run with, none to attack the enemy.”
(Alas, your Majesty ; after fifteen hours of such marching and fighting!)

“For certain I will fight; but don’t flatter yourself about the event.
A happy chance alone can help us. Go, in God’s name, to Tanger-
miinde” (since the Royal Family went, D’Argens and many Berliners
are thinking of flight), “‘ to Tangermiinde, where you will be well; and
wait there how Destiny shall have disposed of us. I will go to recon-
noitre the enemy tomorrow. Next day, if there is anything to do, we
will try it. But if the enemy still holds to the Wine-Hills of Frankfurt,
I shall never dare to attack him.

Tempelhof, iii, 211.

SN oath

Wit a

ae ee

—- i) an

+e [hig Ss we alee &

fs

——

Cuap. V. | SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE. 401
16th Aug.—15th Sept. 1759.

** No, the torment of Tantalus, the pains of Prometheus, the doom of
Sisyphus, were nothing like what I suffer for the last ten days” (from
Kunersdorf till now, when destruction has to be warded off again, and
the force wanting.) ‘‘ Death is sweet in comparison to such a life.
Have compassion on me and it; and believe that I still keep to myself
a great many evil things, not wishing to afflict or disquiet anybody with
them; and that I would not counsel you to fly these unlucky Countries,
if | had any ray of hope. Adieu, mon cher.”

Four days after, August 25th, from this same Fiirstenwalde, the
Russians still continuing stagnant, Friedrich despatches, to Schmettau,
Commandant of Dresden (by some industrious hand, for the roads are
all blocked), a Second Letter, “‘ That Dresden is of the highest moment :
that in case of Siege there, relief” (Wunsch, namely, and perhaps more
that may follow) “zs on the road ; and that Schmettau must defend him-
self to the utmost.” Let us hope this Second Missive may counteract
the too despondent First, which we read above, should that have pro-

_ duced discouragement in Schmettau !’—D’Argens does run to Wolfen-
biittel: stays there till September 9th. Nothing more from Friedrich
till 4th September, when matters are well cooled again.

6°. Waldau, 4th September. “I think Berlin is now in safety; you
may return thither. The Barbarians” (Russians) “are in the Lausitz ;
I keep by the side of them, between them and Berlin, so that there is
nothing to fear for the Capital. The imminency of danger is past; but
there will still be many bad moments to get through, before reaching
the end of the Campaign. These, however, only regard myself; never
mind these. My martyrdom will last two months yet; then the snows
and the ices will end it.’”°

Thus at Fiirstenwalde, then at Waldau, keeping guard, forlorn
but resolute, against the intrusive Russian-Austrian deluges,
Friedrich stands painfully vigilant and expectant,—still for about
a fortnight more. With bad news coming to him latterly, as we
shall hear. He is in those old moorland Wusterhausen Coun-
tries, once so well known under far other circumstances. Thir-
ty years ago, in fine afternoons, we used to gallop with poor Du-
han de Jandun, after school-tasks done, towards Mittenwalde,
Fiirstenwalde and the furzy environs, far and wide; at home,
our Sister and Mother waiting with many troubles and many
loves, and Papa sleeping, Pan-like, under the shadow of his big
tree:—Thirty years ago, ah me, gone like a dream is all that;

5 Second Letter is given in Schmettaws Leben, pp. 436, 7.
6 (fuvres de Frédéric, xix. 78, 82, 83, 85, 86.

402 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
22d Aug. 1759,

and there is solitude and desolation and the Russian-Austrian
death-deluges instead! These, I suppose, were Friedrich’s occa-
sional remembrances; silent always, in this locality and time.
The Sorrows of Werter, of the Giaour, of the Dyspeptic Tailor
in multifarious forms, are recorded in a copious heart-rending
manner, and have had their meed of weeping from a sympathetic
Public: but there are still a good few Sorrows which lie wrapt
in silence, and have never applied there for an idle tear !—Let
us look now into Daun’s side of things.

Daun, after Negotiation, has an Interview with Soltikof (at Guben,
August 22d).—* Daun, who had moved to Priebus, with a view to be
nearer Soltikof, had scarcely got his tent pitched there (August 13th),
when a breathless horseman rode in, with a Note from Loudon, dated
the night before: ‘‘ King of Prussia beaten, to the very bone, beyond
mistake this time,—utterly ruined, if one may judge!” What a vision
of the Promised Land! Delighted Daun moves forward, one march, to
Triebel on the morrow : to be one march nearer the scene of glory, and
endeavour to forge this biggest of the hot irons to advantage.

“ At Triebel Soltikof’s own account, elucidated by oral messengers,
eye-witnesses, and, in short, complete conspectus of this ever-memora-
ble Victory, await the delighted Daun. Who despatches messengers,
one and another ; Lacy, the first, not succeeding quite : To congratulate
with enthusiasm the most illustrious of Generals ; who has beaten King
Friedrich as none else ever did or could; beaten to the edge of extine-
tion ;—especially to urge him upon trampling out this nearly extinct
King, before he gleam up again. Soltikof understands the congratula-
tions very well; but as to that of trampling out, snorts an indignant neg-
ative: ‘“* Nay, you, why don’t you try it? Surely it is more your busi-
ness than my Imperial Mistress’s or mine. We have wrenched two
victories from him this season. Kay and Kunersdorf have killed near
the half of us: go you in, and wrench something! This is Soltikof’s
logic ; which no messenger of Daun’s, Lacy or another, aided by never
such melodies and suasions from Montalembert and Loudon, who are
permanently diligent that way, can shake.

“ And truly it is irrefragable. How can Daun, if himself merely spec-
ulative, calculative, hope that Soltikof will continue acting? Men who
have come to help you in a heavy job of work, need example. If you
wish me to weep, be grieved yourself first ofall. Soltikof angrily wipes
his countenance at this point,and insists'on a few tears from Daun.
Without metaphor, Soltikof has shot away all his present ammunition,
his staff of bread is quite precarious in these parts; and Soltikof thinks
always, “Is it my business, then, or is it yours 2”

/

ee as a

eu ae lk?

i

} Cuar. V.] _ SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE. 403
22d Aug. 1759. .

‘‘ Soltikof has entrenched himself on the Wine-Hills at Lossow, com-
fortably out of F'riedrich’s way, and contiguous to Oder and the provis-
jon-routes ; sits there, angrily deaf to the voice of the charmer ; nothing
to be charmed out of him, but gusts of indignation, instead of consent.
A proud, high-going, indignant kind of man, with a will of his own.
And sees well enough what is what, in all this symphony of the Lacys,
the Montalemberts, and surrounding adorers. Montalembert, who is
here this season, our French best man (unprofitable Swedes must put
up with an inferior hand), is extremely persuasive, tries all the arts of
French rhetoric, but effects nothing. ‘To let the Austrians come in
for the finishing stroke,—Excellence, it will be to let them gain, in His-
tory, a glory which is of your earning. Daun and Austria, not Soltikof
and Russia, will be said to have extinguished this pestilent King; whom
History will have to remember!’’ ‘ With all my heart,’ answers Solti-
kof; ‘I make the Austrians and History perfectly welcome! Monsieur,
my ammunition is in Posen; my bread is fallen scarce; in Frankfurt
can you find me one horse more?’ Indignant Soltikofis not to be taken
by chaff; growls now and then, if you stir him to the bottom: “ Why
should we, who are volunteer assistants, take all the burden of the work ?
I will fall back to Posen, and home to Poland and East Preussen, if this
last much longer.’

“ Austria has a good-deal disgusted these Soltikofs and Russian
Chief Officers ;—who are not so stupid as Austria supposes. Austria’s
steady wish is, ‘ Let them do their function of cat’s-paw for us ; we are
here to eat the chestnuts; not,if we can help it,to burn our own poor
fingers for them!’ After every Campaign hitherto, Austria has been
in use to raise eager accusations at Petersburg; and get the Aprax-
ins, Fermors into trouble; this is not the way to conciliate Russian
General Officers. Austria, taught probably by Daun, now tries the
other tack: heaps Soltikof with eulogies, flatteries, magnificent pres-
ents. All which Soltikof accepts, but with a full sense of what they
mean. An unmanageable Soltikof; his answer always,— Your turn
now to fight a victory ! I will go my ways to Posen again, if you don’t.’
And, in these current weeks, in Soltikof’s audience-room, if anybody
were curious about it, we could present a very lively solicitation going
on, with answers very gruff and negatory. No suasion of Montalem-
bert, Lacy, and Daun-Embassies, backed by diamond-hilted swords, and
splendour of gifts from Vienna itself, able to prevail on the barbarous
people.

” Choiseul’s Letter (not Duc de Choiseul, but Comte, now Minister at Vi-
enna) to Montalembert, ‘‘ Vienna, 16th August ;” and Montalembert’s An-
swer, ‘‘ Lieberhausen” (means Lieberose), ‘‘ 31st August 1759:” in Mont-
alembert, Correspondance, ii. 58-65.

a aot
er
%, .
#

“

404 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
22d Aug. 1759,

‘“‘ Daun at length resolves to go in person; solicits an Interview with
the Bist malslied Russian Conqueror ; gets it, meets Soltikof at Guben,
half-way house between Frankfurt and Triebel ; select suite attending

both Excellencies (August 22d); and exerts whatever rhetoric is in —

him on the barbarous man. ‘The barbarous man is stiff as brass; but
Daun comes into all his conditions: ‘ Saxony, Silesia,—Excellenz, we

have them both within clutch: such our exquisite angling and mancu- —

vering, in concert with your immortal victory, which truly gives the
life-breath to everything. Oh, suffer us to clutch them: keep that King
away from us; and see if they are not ours, Saxony first, Silesia next!
Provisions of meal? I will myself undertake to furnish bread for you’
(though I have to eart it from Bohemia all the way, and am myself ter-

ribly off; but fixed to do the impossible) ; ration of bread shall fail no

Russian man, while you escort us as protective friend. ‘Towards Sax-
ony first, where the Reichs Army is, and not a Prussian in the field;
the very Garrisons mostly gone by this time. Dresden is to be be-
sieged, within a week ; Dresden itself is ours, if only you please! Come
into the Lausitz with us, Magazines are there, loaves in abundance:
Saxony done, Dresden ours, cannot we turn to Silesia together ; besiege
Glogau together (I am myself about trying Neisse, by Harsch again) ;

capture Glogau as well as Neisse ; and crown the successfullest cam--

paign that ever was? Oh, Excellenz—! "—

In a word, Excellenz, strictly fixing that condition of the
loaves, consents. Will get ready to leave those Frankfurt Wine-
Hills in about a week. “But the loaves, you recollect; no

Bread, no Russian!” Daun returns to 'Triebel a victorious man,

—though with an onerous condition incumbent. Tempelhof,
minutely computing, finds that to cart from Bohemia such a ci-
pher of human rations daily into these parts, will surpass all the
vehiculatory power of Daun.®

The “ Reichs Army” so-called has entered Saxony, under fine
Omens ; does some Feats of Sieging (August 7th-23d),—
with an Hye on Dresden as the crowning one.

The Reichs Army, though it had been so tumbled about, in
Spring, with such havoc on its magazines and preparations, could
not wait to refit itself, except superficially ; and showed face over
the Mountains almost earlier than usual. The chance was so
unique: a Saxony left to its mere Garrisons,—as it continued

® Tempelhof, iii. 225.

| =

| Cuar. V.] — SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 405
 Fth-23d Aug. 1759.

to be, for near two months this Year. On such golden oppor-
tunity the Reichs Army,—first, in light mischievous precursor
parties, who roamed as far as Halle or even as Halberstadt; then
the Army itself, well or ill appointed, under Generalissimo the
Prince von Zweibriick,—did come on, winding through Thiirin-
~ gen towards the North-western Towns; various Austrian Aux-
iliary-Corps making appearance on the Dresden side. Eight
Austrian regiments, as a permanency, are in the Reichs Army .
itself. Commander, or part Commander, of the eight is (what
alone I find noteworthy in them) “ Herr General Thomas von
* Blonquet:” Irish by nation, says a footnote ;>—sure enough some
adventurous ‘‘'‘Thomas Plunket,” visible this once, soldiering, in
those circumstances; never heard of by a sympathetic reader
before or after. It was while the King was hunting the Had-
dick-Loudon people in Sagan Country in such vehement fashion,
that Zweibriick came trumpeting into Saxony,—King, Prince
Henri, and everybody, well occupied otherwise, far away!

The Reichs Army has a camp at Naumburg (Rossbach neigh-
bourhood): and has light troops out in Halle neighbourhood ;
which have seized Halle; are very severe upon Halle, and other
places thereabouts, till chased away. August 7th, the Reichs
Army begirt Leipzig; summoned the weak garrison there. It
is a Town capable of ruin, but not of defence: ‘ Free-with-
drawal,” proposes the Reichs Army,—and upon these terms
gets hold of Leipzig, for the time being. Leipzig, Torgau, Wit-
tenberg; in a fortnight or less, all the Prussian posts in those
parts fall to the Reichs Army. Its marchings and siegings,
among those North-western places, not one of them capable of
standing above a few days’ siege, are worth no mention, except
to Parish History: enough that, by little after the middle of
August, Zweibriick had got all these places, “ Free-withdrawal”
the terms for all; and that, except it be the following feature in
their Siege of Torgau, feature mainly Biographic, and belonging
to a certain Colonel Wolfersdorf concerned, there is not one of
those Sieges now worth a moment’s attention from almost any
mortal. This is the Torgau feature,—feature of human nature,
soldiering under difficulties:

® Seyfarth, ii, 831 n.

" sr) *~
’ 4 fe

406 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. _

a

7th-23d Aug. 1759.

Colonel von Wolfersdorf beautifully defends himself in Torgau
(August 9th-14th). Two days after Leipzig was had, there appeared
at Torgau a Body of Pandours, 2,000 and more; who attempted some

kind of scalade on Torgau and its small Garrison (of 700 or so),—where ~
are a Magazine, a Hospital and other properties: not capable, by any
garrison, of standing regular siege; but important to defend till you —

have proper terms offered. The multitudinous Pandours, if I remem-
ber, made a rush into the Suburbs, in their usual vociferous way; but
were met by the 700 silent Prussjans,—silent except through their fire-

arms and field-pieces,—in so eloquent a style as soon convinced the —
Pandour mind, and sent it travelling again. And in the evening of —

the same day (August 9th), Colonel Wolfersdorf arrives, as new Com-
mandant, and with reinforcements, small though considerable in the
circumstances. .

Wolfersdorf, one dimly gathers, had marched from Wittenberg on
this errand; the whole force in T'orgau is now of about 3,000, still with
only field-cannon, but with a Captain over them ;—who, as is evident,
sets himself in a very earnest manner to do his utmost in defence of the
place. Next morning Reichs General Kleefeld (‘‘ Cloverfield”), with
6 or 8,000 Pandour and Regular, summons Wolfersdorf: ‘‘ Surrender

instantly ; or —!” “We will expect you!” answers Wolfersdorf. —

Whereupon, same morning (August 10th), general storm; storm No. 1:
beautifully handled by Wolfersdorf; who takes it in rear (to its astonish-
ment), as well as in front; and sends it off in haste. On the morrow,
Saturday, a second followed; and on Sunday a third; both likewise
beautifully handled. This third storm, readers see, was “‘ Sunday, Au-
gust 12th:” a very busy stormful day at Torgau here,—and also, for
some others of us, during the heats of Kunersdorf, over the horizon far
away! Wolfersdorf tumbles back all storms; furthermore makes mis-
chievous sallies: a destructive, skilled person; altogether prompt, fer-
tile in expedients ; and evidently is not to be managed by Kleefeld.
So that Prince von Stolberg, Second to supreme Zweibriick himself,
has to take it in hand. And,

Monday 13th, at break of day, Stolberg arrives with a train of bat-
tering guns, and 6,000 new people; summons Wolfersdorf: “ No,” as
before. Storms him, a fourth time; likewise “‘ No,” as before : attacks,
thereupon, his Elbe Bridge, and his Redoubt across the River; finds a
Wolfersdorf party rush destructively into his rear there. And has to
withdraw, and try battering from behind the Elm Dam. Continues
this, violently for about two hours; till again Wolfersdorf, whose poor
fieldpieces, the only artillery he has, ‘cannot reach so far with leaden
balls” (the iron balls are done, and the powder itself is almost done),
manages, by a flank attack, to quench this also. Which produces

Be. .

iienenencsilieeeertninias eencstiietitinedtnaenaa

ee ee Se ee

*
-

a

> RE

iz Cuap. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 407

7th--23d Aug. 1759.

entire silence, and considerable private reflexion, on the part of indig-
nant Stolberg. Stolberg offers him the favourablest terms devisable :
‘Withdraw freely, with all your honours, all your properties; only
withdraw!” Which Wolfersdorf, his powder and ball being in such a
state of ebb, and no relief possible, agrees to; with stipulations very
strict as to every particular.’°

Colonel von Wolfersdorf withdraws, also beautifully (August 15th).
Accordingly, Wednesday August 15th, at eight in the morning, Wolf-
ersdorf by the Elbe Gate moves out; across Elbe Bridge, and the -
Redoubt which is on the farther shore yonder. Near this Redoubt,
Stolberg and many of his General Officers are waiting to see him go.
He goes in state; flags flying, music playing. Battalion Hessen-Cassel,
followed by all our Packages, Hospital convalescents, King’s Artillery,
and whatever is the King’s or ours, marches first. Next comes,
as rearguard to all this, Battalion Grollmann;—along with which is
Wolfersdorf himself, knowing Grollmann for a ticklish article (Saxons
mainly): followed on the heel by Battalion Hofmann, and lastly by
Battalion Salmuth, trusty Prussians both of these.

Battalion Hessen-Cassel and the Baggages are through the Redoubt,
Prince of Stolberg handsomely saluting as saluted. But now, on Bat-
talion Grollmann’s coming up, Stolberg’s Adjutant cries out with a loud
voice of proclamation, many Officers repeating and enforcing: ‘* Who-
ever is a brave Saxon, whoever is true to his Kaiser; or was of the
Reichs Army, let him step out: Durchlaucht will give him protection!”
At sound of which Grollmann quivers as if struck by electricity ; and
instantly begins dissolving ;—dissolves, in effect, nearly all, and it is in
the act of vanishing like a dream! Wolfersdorfis a prompt man; and |
needs to be so. Wolfersdorf, in Olympian rage, instantly stops short:
draws pistol: “TI will shoot dead every man that quits rank!” vocifer-
ates he; and does, with his pistol, make instant example of one ; invit-
ing every true Prussian to do the like: “ Jagers, Hussars, a ducat for
every traitor you shoot down!” continues Wolfersdorf (and punctually
paid it afterwards): unable to prevent an almost total dissolution of
Grollmann. For some minttes, there is a scene indescribable: storm
of vociferation, menace, musket-shot, pistol-shot ; Grollmann disappear-
ing on every side,—‘ behind the Redoubt, under the Bridge, into Elbe
Boats, under the cloaks of the Croats ;’—3in spite of Wolfersdorf’s
Olympian rages and efforts.

At sight of the shooting, Prince Stolberg, a hot man, had said indig-

nantly, “ Herr, that will be dangerous for you (das wird nicht gut
gehn)!” Wolfersdorf not regarding him a whit; regarding only Groll-

10 In Anonymous of Hamburg (iii. 350) the Capitulation, ‘‘ August 14th,”
given in extenso.

4 ae

ae
408 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX, |
7th-23d Aug. 1759.

mann, and his own hot business of coercing it at a ducat per head.
Grollmann gone, and Battalion Hofmann in due sequence come up,
Wolfersdorf,—who has sent an Adjutant, with order, ‘* Hessen-Cassen,
halt,’—gives Battalion Hofmann these three words of command:
“ Whole Battalion, halt !—Front !—Make ready !” (with due simultane-
ous click of every firelock, on utterance of that last) ;—and turning to
Prince Stolberg, with a brow, with a tone of voice: ‘* Durchlaucht, Ar-
ticle 9 of the Capitulation is express on this point; ‘All desertion _
strictly prohibited; no deserter to be received erther on the Imperial
or on the Prussian side!” (Durchlaucht silently gives, we suppose,
some faint sniff.) ‘ Since your Durchlaucht does not keep the Capitu-
lation, neither will I regard it farther. I will now take you and your @
Suite prisoners, return into the Town, and again begin defending my-
self. Be so good as ride directly into that Redoubt, or I will present,
and give fire!”

A dangerous moment for the Durchlaucht of Stolberg; Battalion
Salmuth actually taking possession of the wall again; Hofmann here
with its poised firelock on the cock, “ready” for that fourth word, as
above indicated. A General Lusinsky of Stolberg’s train, master of
those Croats, and an Austrian of figure, remarks very seriously : “ Ev-
ery point of the Capitulation must be kept!” Upon which Durchlaucht
has to renounce and repent ; eagerly assists in recovering Grollmann,
restores it (little the worse, little the fewer); will give Wolfersdorf
“command of the Austrian escort you are to have,” and every satisfac-
tion and assurance ;—wishful only to get rid of Wolfersdorf. Who
thereupon marches to Wittenberg, with colours flying again, and a name
mentionable ever since."!

This Wolfersdorf was himself a Pirna Saxon; serving Polish
Majesty, as Major, in that Pirna time; perhaps no admirer of
“Feldmarschall Briihl” and Company ?—at any rate, he took
Prussian service, as then offered him; and this is his style of
keeping it. A decidedly clever soldier, and comes out, hence-
forth, more and more as such,—unhappily not for long. Was
taken at Maxen, he too, as will be seen. Rose, in after times,
to be Lieutenant-General, and a man famous in the Prussian
military circles; but given always, they say, to take the straight
line (or shortest distance between self and object), in regard to
military matters, to recruiting and the like, and thus getting him-
self into trouble with the Civil Officials.

1. Tempelhof, iii. 201-204; Seyfarth, ii, 562 n., and Beylagen, ii. 587;
Miltair-Lexikon, iy. 283. ;

<—

ta Nea

ee oe

’

CHAP. V.4 SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 409
18th-19th Aug. 1759. \

Wolfersdorf, at Wittenberg or farther on, had a flattering
word from the King; applauding his effective procedures at
Trogau; and ordering him, should Wittenberg fall (as it did,
August 23d), to join Wunsch, who is coming with a small Party
to try and help in those destitute localities. Wunsch, the King
had detached (21st August), as we heard already. Finck the
King finds, farther, that he can detach (from Waldau Country,
September 7th) ;!* Russians being so languid, and Saxony fallen .
into such a perilous predicament.

“Few days after Kunersdorf,” says a Note, which should be inserted
here, “ there had fallen out a small Naval matter, which will be consol-
atory to Friedrich, and go to the other side of the account, when he
hears of it: Kunersdorf was Sunday, August 12th; this was Saturday
and Sunday following. Besides their Grand Brest Fleet, With new
flat bottoms, and world-famous land-preparations going on at Vannes,
for Invasion of proud Albion, all which are at present under Hawke’s
strict keeping, the French have, ever since Spring last, a fine subsidiary
Fleet at Toulon, of very exultant hopes at one time; which now come
to finis : .

“ Sea-Fight (properly Sea-Hunt of 200 miles), in the Cadiz Wa-
ters, August 18th-19th. The fine Toulon Fleet, which expected at
one time, Pitt's ships being so scattered over the world, to be ‘ mistress
of the Mediterranean,’ has found itself, on the contrary (such were Pitt’s
resources and promptitudes), cooped in harbour all Summer; Boscawen
watching it in the usual strict way. No egress possible; till, in the
sultry weather (8th July—4th August), Boscawen’s need of fresh pro-
visions, fresh water, and of making some repairs, took him to Gibraitar,
and gave the Toulon Fleet a transient opportunity, which it made use
of.

‘“‘ August 17th, at 8 in the evening, Boscawen, at Gibraltar (some of
his ships still in dishabille or under repair), was hastily apprised by one
of his Frigates, That the Toulon Fleet had sailed ; been seen visibly at
Ceuta Point so many hours ago. ‘Meaning,’ as Boscawen guesses, ‘ to
be through the Straits this very night!’ By power of despatch, the
dishabille ships were rapidly buttoned together (in about two hours) ;
and by 10 p.m. all were under sail. And soon were in hot chase; the
game being now in view,—going at its utmost through the Straits, as
anticipated. At 7 next morning (Saturday August 18th) Boscawen
got clutch of the Toulon Fleet; still well east of Cadiz, somewhere in
the Trafalgar waters, I. should guess. Here Boscawen fought and

; '2 Tempelhof, iii. 211, 237.

SY OL. V oes

410 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book X xi
26th Aug.—4th Sept. 1759,

chased the Toulon Fleet, for 24 hours coming; drove it finally ashore,

at Lagos on the coast of Portugal, with five of its big ships burnt or

taken, its crews and other ships flying by land and water, its poor Ad-

miral mortally wounded ; and the Toulon Fleet a ruined article. The
wind had been capricious, here fresh, there calm; now favouring the
hunters, now the hunted; both Fleets had dropped in two. De la Clue,
the French Admiral, complained bitterly how his Captains lagged, or
shore off and forsook him. Boscawen himself, who for his own share
had gone at it eagle-like, was heard grumbling, about want of speed in
some people; and said: ‘It is well; but it might have been better !?? _

“De la Clue —fallen long ago from all notions of ‘ dominating the
Mediterranean, —had modestly intended to get through, on any terms,
into the Ocean ; might then, if possible, have joined the grand ‘ Invasion
Squadron,’ now lying at Brest, till Vannes and the furnishings are ready,
or have tried to be troublesome in the rear of Hawke, who is blockading
all that. A modest outlook in comparison ;—and this is what it also
has come to. As for the Grand Invasion Squadron, Admiral Conflans,
commanding it, still holds up his head in Brest Harbour, and talks big.
Makes little of Rodney's havoe on the Flatbottoms at Havre, ‘ Will
soon have Flatbottoms again; and you’shall see !'—if only Hawke, and
wind and weather and Fortune, will permit.”

Austrian Reichs Army does its crowning Feat (August 26th
—September 4th): Diary of what ts called the “ Siege of
Dresden.” :

Since the first weeks of August there have been Austrian de-
tachments, Wehla’s Corps, Brentano’s Corps, entering Saxony
from the north-east or Daun-ward side, and posting themselves
in the strong points looking towards Dresden ; waiting there till
the Reichs Army should capture its Leipzigs, 'Torgaus, Witten-
bergs, and roll forward from north-west... To all which it is
easy to fancy what an impetus was given by Kunersdorf and
August 12th; the business, after that, going on double-quick,
and pointing to immediate practical industry on Dresden. The
Reichs Army hastens to settle its north-western Towns, puts due
garrison in each, leaves a 10 or 12,000 movable for general pro-
tection, in those parts; and, August 23d, marches for Dresden.
There are only some 15,000 left of it now; almost half the.

1S Beatson, ii. 313-9; ib. iii. 237, 8, De Ia Clue, the French Admiral’s
Despatch ;—Boscawen's Despatch, &c., in Gentleman's Magazine, xxix. 434.

Cusp. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. _ 411
26th Aug.—4th Sept. 1759.

Reichs Army drunk up in that manner; were not Daun now
speeding forth his Maguire with a fresh 12,000; who is to com-
mand the Wehlas and Brentanos as well. And, in effect, to be
Austrian Chief, and as regards practical matters, Manager of
this important Enterprise,—all-important to Daun just now.
Schmettau in Dresden sees clearly what mischief is at hand.

To Daun this Siege of Dresden is the alpha to whatever ome-
gas there may be: he and his Soltikof are to sit waiting this;-
and can attempt nothing but eating of provender, till this be
achieved. As the Siege was really important, though not quite
the alpha to all omegas, and has in it curious points and physi-
ognomic traits, we will invite readers to some transient inspec-
tion of it,—the rather as there exist ample contemporary Narra-
tives, Diarviums, and authentic records to render that possible and
easy.'4

“ Ever since the rumour of Kunersdorf,” says one Diarium, compiled
out of many ‘in the last two weeks of August, Schmettau’s need of
vigilance and diligence has been on the increase, his outlooks becoming
grimmer and grimmer. He has a poorish garrison for number (3,700
in all’*), and not of the best quality; deserters a good few of them:
willing enough for strokes; fighting fellows all, and of adventurous turn,
but uncertain as to loyalty in a case of pinch. He has endless stores
in the place; for one item, almost a million sterling of ready money.
Poor Schmettau, if he knew it, has suddenly become the Leonidas of
this Campaign, Dresden its Thermopyle ; and”—But readers can con-
ceive the situation.

“August 20th, Schmettau quits the Neustadt, or northern part of
Dresden, which lies beyond the River: unimportant that, and indefensi-
ble with garrison not adequate ; Schmettau will strengthen the River
bank, blow up the Stone Bridge if necessary, and restrict himself to
Dresden Proper. The Court is here; Schmettau does not hope that
the Court can avert a Siege from him; but he fails not to try, in that
way too, and may at least gain time.

“ August 25th, He has a Mine put under the main arch of the Bridge:
* mine ill-made, uncertain of effect,’ reports the Officer whom he sent to
inspect it. But it was never tried, the mere rumour of it kept off at-
tacks on that side. Same day, August 25th, Schmettau receives that

14 In Tempelhof (iii. 210-216-222), complete and careful Narrative; in
Anonymous of Hamburg (iii. 371-377), express ‘‘ Day-book” by some Eye-
witness in Dresden. 15 Schmettau’s Leben (by his Son), p. 408.

2 z ee |
fe

412 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

26th Aug.—-4th Sept. 1759,
unfortunate Royal Missive’® written in the dark days of Reitwein, mor-
row of Kunersdorf (14th or 13th August),” which we read above,
“That there is another Letter on the road for him, indicating ‘ Relief
shall be tried,’ is unknown to Schmettau, and fatally continues unknown.
While Schmettau is reading this (August 25th), General Wunsch has
been on the road four days: Wunsch and Wolfersdorf with about 8,000,
at their quickest pace, and in a fine winged frame of mind withal, are
speeding on: will cross Elbe at Meissen tomorrow night,—did Schmet-
tau only know. People say he did, in the way of rumour, understand
that Kunersdorf had not been the fatal thing it was thought; and that
efforts would be made by a King like his. In his place, one might have,
at least, shot out a spy or two? But he did not, then or afterwards,

“ Already, ever since the arrival of Wehla and Brentano in those

parts, he has been labouring under many uncertainties; too many for a
Leonidas! Hanging between Yes and No, even about that of quitting
the Neustadt, for example; carrying over portions of his goods, but
never heartily the whole; unable to resolve; now lifting visibly the
Bridge pavement, then again visibly restoring it ;—and,I think, though
the contrary is asserted, he had at last to leave in the Neustadt a good
deal of stores, horse-provender and other, not needful to him at present,
or impossible to carry, when dubiety got ended. He has put a mine
under the Bridge; but knows it will not go off.
' Schmettau has been in many wars, but this is a case that tries his
soldier qualities as none other has ever done. A case of endless intri-
cacy,—if he be quite equal to it; which perhaps he was not altogether,
Nobody ever doubted Schmettau’s high qualities as a man and captain ;
but here are requisite the very highest, and these Schmettau has not.
The result was very tragical; I suppose, a pain to Friedrich all his life
after ; and certainly to Schmettau all his. This is Saturday night 25th
August : before Wednesday week (September 4th) there will have sad
things arrived, irremediable to Schmettau. Had Schmettau decided to
defend himself, Dresden had not been taken. What a pity Schmettau
had not been spared this Missive, calculated to produce mere doubt!
Whether he could not, and should not, after a ten days of inquiry and
new discernment, have been able to read the King’s true meaning, as
well as the King’s momentary humour, in this fatal Document, there is
no deciding. Sure enough, he did not read the King’s true meaning
in it, but only the King’s momentary humour ; did not frankly set about
defending himself to the death,—or ‘seeing’ in that way ‘ whether he
could not defend himself,—with a good capitulation lying in the rear,
after he had.

“ Sunday, August 26th, Trumpet at the gates. Messenger from

16 Tempelhof, iii. 208; Schmettau’s Leben (p. 421) has ** August 27th.”

\

>.

oe a te

oh aang eS poutine
ee a a

ae +

mee
eae"

rw ie Fy eo

-
—- ——- 2

de

on ales

eed Eee

-

 Cuar. V.] = SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 413
26th Aug.—-4th Sept. 1759.
Zweibrick is introduced blindfold; brings formal Summons to Schmet-
tau. Summons duly truculent: ‘ Resistance vain; the more you resist,
the worse it will be,—and there is a worst’ (that of being delivered to
the Croats, and massacred every man), ‘ of which why should I speak 2
Especially if in anything you fail of your duty to the Kur-Prinz’ (Elec-
if toral Prince and Heir-Apparent, poor crookbacked young Gentleman,
who has an excellent sprightly Wife, a friend of Friedrich’s, and daugh-
ter of the late Kaiser Karl VII., whom we used so beautifully), ‘ imag-
ine what your fate will be’— ‘To which Schmettau answers: ‘Can
Durchlaucht think us ignorant of the common rules of behaviour to
Persons of that Rank? For the rest, Durchlaucht knows what our du-
ties here are, and would despise us if we did not do them ;’—and, in
F short, our answer again is, in polite forms,‘ Pooh, pooh; you may go
: your way!’ Upon which the Messenger is blindfolded again; and
Schmettau sets himself in hot earnest to clearing out his goods from
the Neustadt; building with huge intertwisted cross-beams and stone
B and earth-masses, a Battery at his own end of the Bridge, batteries on
4 each side of it below and above ;—locks the Gates; and is passionately
busy all Sunday,—though divine service goes on as usual.

“Hardly were the Prussian guns got away, when Croat people in
quantity came in, and began building a Battery at their end of the
‘Bridge, the main defence-work being old Prussian meal-barrels, handily
filled with earth. ‘If you fire one cannon-ball across on us,’ said
Schmettau, ‘1 will bombard the Neustadt into flame in few minutes’ (I
have only to aim at our Hay Magazine yonder): ‘be warned!’ Nor
did they once fire from that side ; Electoral Highness withal and Royal
Palace being quite contiguous behind the Prussian Bridge-Battery.
Electoral Highness and Household are politely treated, make polite an-
swer to everything; intend going down into the *‘ Apotheke’ (Kitchen
suite), or vaulted part of the Palace, and will lodge there when the can-
nonade begins.

“This same Sunday, August 26th, Maguire arrived ; and set instant-
ly to building his bridge at Pillnitz, a little way above Dresden: at
Uebigan, a little below Dresden, the Reichsfolk have another. Reichs-
folk, Zweibriick in person, come all in on Wednesday ; post themselves
there, to north and west of the City. What is more important, the
siege-guns, a superb stock, are steadily floating, through the Pirna re-
gions, hitherward; get to hand on Friday next, the fifth day hence."
Korbitz (half way out to Kesselsdorf) is Durchlaucht’s headquarter :—
¥ Chief General is Durchlaucht, conspicuously he, at least in theory, and
shall have all the glory; though Maguire, glancing on these cannon,
were it nothing more, has probably a good deal to say.. Maguire too, 1

17 Tempelhof, p. 210,

——_, se

=

;

414 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

26th Aug.—4th Sept. 1759.
observe, takes post on that north or Kesselsdorf side ; contiguous for the
Head General. Wehla and Brentano post themselves on the south or
up-stream side; it is they that hand-in the siege-guns: batteries are
a:ready everywhere marked out, 13 cannon batteries and 5 howitzer.
In short, from the morrow of that truculent Summons, Monday morning
to Thursday, there is hot stir of multifarious preparation on Schmettau’s
part; and continual pouring in of the hostile force, who are also prepar-
ing at the utmost. Thursday, the Siege, ifit can be called a Siege, be-
gins. Gradually, and as follows—

“ Thursday Morning (August 30th), Schmettau, who is, night and
day, ‘palisading the River,’ and much else,—discloses (that is, Break
of Day discloses on his part) to the Dresden public a huge Gallows,
black, huge, of impressive aspect ; labelled ‘ For Plunderers, Mutineers
and their Helpers.”* The Austrian heavy guns are not yet in battery;
but multitudes of loose Croat people go swarming about everywhere,
and there is plentiful firing from such artilleries as they have. This
same Thursday morning, two or three battalions of them rush into the
Pirna Suburb; attack the Prussian Guard-parties there. Schmetiau
instantly despatches Captain Kollas and a Trumpet :—Durchlaucht, have
the goodness to recal these Croat parties; otherwise the Suburb goes
into flame! And directly on the arrival of this Messenger, may it please
Durchlaucht. For we have computed the time: and will not wait be-
yond what is reasonable for his return!’ Zweibriick is mere indigna-
tion and astonishment ; ‘ will burn Halle,’ burn Quedlinburg, Berlin itself,
and utterly ruin the King of Prussia’s Dominion in general :—the re-
joinder to which is, burning of Pirna Suburb, as predicted; seventy
houses of it, this evening, at six o’clock.

“ Onward from which time there is on both sides, especially on
Schmettau's, diligent artillery practice; cannonade kept up wherever
Schmettau can see the enemy busy; enemy responding with what
artillery he has: —not much damage done, I should think, though a
great deal of noise; and for one day (Saturday September Ist), our
/Diarist notes, ‘ Not safe to walk the streets this day." But, in effect,
the Siege, as they call it,—which fell dead on the fifth day, and was
never well alive,—consists mainly of menace and counter-menace, in
the way of bargain-making and negotiation;—-and, so far as I ean
gather, that superb Park of Austrian Artillery, though built into bat-
teries, and talked about in a bullying manner, was not fired from at all.

“ Schmettau affects towards the enemy (and towards himself, I dare
say) an air of iron firmness; but internally has no such feeling,—‘ calls
a Council of War, and the like. Council of War, on sight of that
King’s Missive, confirms him with one voice: ‘ Surely, surely, Excel-

18 Anonymous of Hamburg, iii. 373.

Cuap. V.|  SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 415
26th Aug.—4th Sept. 1759.

lenz; no defence possible!’ Which is a prophecy and a fulfilment,
both in one. Why Schmettau did not shoot forth a spy or two, to
ascertain for him What, or whether Nothing whatever, was passing
outside Dresden? I never understand! Beyond his own Walls, the
world is a vacancy and blank to Schmettau, and he seems eontent it
should be so.

“ Sunday September 2d. Though Schmettau’s cannonade was very
loud, and had been so all night, Divine Service was held as usual, streets
safe again,-—Austrians, I suppose, not firing with cannon. About 4 p.M.,
after a great deal of powder spent, General Maguire, stepping out on
Elbe Bridge, blows or beats Appeal, three times; ‘wishes a moment’s
conversation with his Excellency.’ Granted at once; witnesses at-
tending on both sides. ‘ Defence is impossible; in the name of human-
ity, consider!’ urges Maguire. ‘ Defence to the last man of us is cer-
tain, answers Schmettau, from the teeth outwards ;—but, in the end,
engages to put on paper, in case he, by extremity of ill-luck, have at
any time to accept terms, what his terms will inflexibly be. Upon
which there is ‘ Armistice till Tomorrow :’ and Maguire, I doubt not,
reports joyfully on this feeling of the enemy’s pulse. Zweibriick and ,
Maguire are very well aware of what is passing in these neighbourhoods
(General Wunsch back at Wittenberg by forced marches; blew it open
in an hour); and are growing highly anxious that Dresden on any terms
were theirs.

““ Monday September 3d, The death-day of the Siege; an uncom-
monly busy day,—though Armistice lasted perfect till 3 p.m., and soon
came back more perfect than ever. A Siege not killed by cannon, but
by medical industry. Let us note with brevity the successive symp-
toms and appliances. About seven in the morning, Maguire had his
Messenger in Dresden, ‘ Your Excellency’s Paper ready?’ ‘ Nearly
ready,’ answers Schmettau; ‘we will send it by a Messenger of our
own.’ And about eleven of the day, Maguire does get it ;—the same
Captain Kollas (whose name we recollect) handing it in; and statue-
like waiting Answer. ‘ Pshaw, this will never do,’ ejaculates Maguire ;
‘terms irrationally high!’ Captain Kollas ‘knows nothing of what is
in the Paper; and is charged only to bring a Written Answer from
Excellenz.’ Excellenz, before writing, ‘ will have to consult with
Darchlaucht ;’ can, however, as if confidentially and from feelings of
friendship, ‘can assure you, Sir,on my honour, That the Garrison will
be delivered to the Croats, and every man of it put to the sword.’
‘The Garrison will expect that (wird Das erwarten), said Kollas,
statue-like ; and withdrew, with the proper bow.'? Something inter-

19 Tempelhof, iii. 211.

416 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

4th Sept. 1759.
esting to us in these Military diplomatic passages, with their square-
elbowed fashions, and politeness stiff as iron!

“Not till three of the afternoon does the Written Answer reach
Schmettau: *Such Terms never could be accepted.’—‘ Good,’ answers
Schmettau: ‘ To our last breath no others will be offered.’ And com-
mences cannonading again, not very violently, but with the order, “Go
on, then, night and day !’

* About 10 at night, General Guasco, a truculent kind of man, whom
I have met with up and down, but not admitted to memory, beats
Appeal on the Bridge: ‘Inform the Commandant that there will now
straightway 13 batteries of cannon, and 5 ditto of howitzers open on
him, unless he bethinks himself!” Which dreadful message is taken to
Schmettau. ‘Wish the gentleman good evening,’ orders Schmettau ;
‘and say, we will answer with 100 guns.’ Upon which Guasco van-
ishes ;—but returns in not many minutes, milder in tone; requests ‘a
sight of that Written Paper of Terms again.’ ‘There it still is,’ an-
swers Schmettau, ‘not altered, nor ever shall be.” And there is Armis-
tice again :—and the Siege, as turns out, has fired its last shot; and is
. painfully expiring in paroxysms of negotiation, which continue a good
many hours. Schmettau strives to understand clearly that his terms

(of the King’s own suggesting, as Schmettau flatters himself) are

aecepted: nor does Durchlaucht take upon him to refuse in any point;
but he is strangely slow to sign, still hoping to mend matters.

““Much hithering and thithering there was, till 4 next morning
(Durchlaucht has important news from Torgau, at that moment); till
11 next day; till 4 in the afternoon and later,—Guasco and others com-
- Ing with message after message, hasty and conciliatory: ‘ Durchlaucht
at such a distance, his signature not yet come; but be patient; all is
right, upon. my honour! © Very great hurry evident on the part of
Guasco and Company; but nothing suspected by Schmettau. Till,
dusk or darkness threatening now to supervene, Maguire and Schmet-
tau with respective suites have a Conference on the Bridge,— rain
falling very heavy.’ Durchlaucht’s signature, Maguire is astonished to
say, has not yet come; but Maguire pledges his honour ‘ that all shall
be kept without chicane :’ and adds (what to some of us seemed not
superfluous afterwards), ‘I am incapable of acting falsely or with chi-
cane.’ In fact, till 9 in the evening there ‘was no signature by Durch-
laucht: but about 6, on such pledge by Maguire of his hand and his
honour, the Siege entirely gave up the ghost; and Dresden belonged to
Austria. Tuesday Evening, 4th filigree 1759; Sun just setting,
could anybody see him for the rain.

“ Schmettau had been over-hasty ; what need had Schmettau of haste?
The terms had not yet got signature, perfection of settlement on every

,

“ee

= =a

Cuap. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 417
4th Sept. 1759.

point; nor were they at all well kept, when they did! Considerable
flurry, temporary blindness, needless hurry, and neglect of symptoms
and precautions, must be imputed to poor Schmettau ; whose troubles

began from this moment, and went on increasing. The Austrians are

already besetting Elbe Bridge; rooting up the herringbone balks; and
approaching our Blockhouse,—sooner than was expected. But that is
nothing. On opening the Pirna Gate, to share it with the Austrians,
Friedrich’s Spy (sooner had not been possible to the man) was waiting :
who handed Schmettau that Second Letter of Friedrich’s, ‘Courage ;
there is relief on the road'’ Poor Schmettau !”

What Captain Kollas and the Prussian Garrison thought of
all this, they were perhaps shy of saying, and we at such distance
are not informed,—except by one symptom: that of Colonel
Hoffman, Schmettau’s Second, whose indignation does become
tragically evident. Hoffman, a rugged Prussian veteran, is in-
dignant at the Capitulation itself; doubly and trebly indignant
to find the Austrians on Elbe Bridge, busy raising our Balks
and Battery: ‘‘ How is this, Sir?”’ inquires he of Captain Sydow, .
who is on guard at the Prussian end; ‘ How dared you ‘make
this change, without acquainting the Second in Command?
Order out your men, and come along with me to clear the Bridge
again!” Sydow hesitates, haggles; indignant Hoffman, grow-
ing loud as thunder, pulls out a pistol, fatal-looking to disobedi-
ent Sydow; who calls to his men, or whose men spring out un-
called ; and shoot Hoffman down,—send two balls through him,
so that he died at 8 that night. With noise enough, then and
afterwards. Was drunk, said Schmettau’s people. Friedrich
answered, on report of it: ‘I think as Hoffman did. If he was
‘drunk,’ it is pity the Governor and all the Garrison had not
been so, to have come to the same judgment as he.’*° Fried-
rich’s unbearable feelings, of grief and indignation, in regard to
all this Dresden matter,—which are not expressed except coldly
in business form,—can be fancied by all readers. One of the
most tragical bits of ill-luck that ever befel him. A very sore
stroke, in his present condition; a signal loss and affront. And
most of all, unbearable to think how narrowly it has missed being

20 P.S. in Autograph of Letter to Schmettau, ‘‘ Waldau, 11th September
1759” (Preuss, ii. : Urkundenbuch, p. 45).
S 2

al

418 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
; 4th Sept. 1759.

a signal triumph ;—missed actually by a single hair’s-breadth,
which is as good as by a mile, or by a thousand miles!

Soon after 9 o’clock that evening, Durchlaucht in person came
rolling through our battery and the herringbone balks, to visit
Electoral Highness,—which was not quite the legal time either.
Durchlaucht had not been half an hour with Electoral Highness,
when a breathless Courier came in: ‘‘ General Wunsch within
ten miles” (took Torgau in no-time, as Durchlaucht well knows,
for a week past); ‘‘and will be here, before we sleep!” Durch-
laucht plunged out, over the herringbone balks again (which
many carpenters are busy lifting); and the Electoral Highnesses,
in like manner, hurry off to Téplitz that same night, about an
hour after. What a Tuesday night! Poor Hoffman is dead at
8 o'clock; the Saxon Royalties, since 11, are galloping for Pirna,
for Toplitz; Durchlaucht of Zweibriick we saw hurry off an
hour before them,—Capitulation signature not yet dry, and
terms of it beginning to be broken; and Wunsch reported to be
within ten miles!

The Wunsch report is perfectly correct. Wunsch is at Gros-
senhayn, this evening; all in a fiery mood of swiftness, his peo-
ple and he ;—and indeed it is, by chance, one of Wolfersdorf’s
impetuosities that has sent the news so fast. Wunsch had been
as swift with Torgau as he was with Wittenberg: he blew out
the poor Reichs Garrison there, by instant storm, and packed it
off to Leipzig, under charge of ‘‘an Officer and Trumpet :”—he
had, greatly against his will, to rest two days there for a few indis-
pensable cannon from Magdeburg. Cannon once come, Wunsch,
burning for deliverance of Dresden, had again started at his
swiftest, “ Monday 8d September’? (death-day of the Siege),
‘very early.”

“ He is under 8,000; but he is determined to do it ;—and would have
done it, think judges, half-thinks Zweibriick himself: such a fire in that
Wunsch and his Corps as is very dangerous indeed. At 4 this morn-
ing, Zweibriick heard of his being on march: ‘numbers uncertain’—
(numbers seemingly not the important point,—blows any number of us
about our business!)—and since that moment, Zweibriick has driven the
capitulation at such a pace; though the flurried Schmettau suspected
nothing.

Cuap. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 419
4th Sept. 1759.

“‘ Afternoon of Tuesday 4th, Wunsch, approaching Grossenhayn, had
detached Wolfersdorf with 100 light horse rightwards to Grodel, a boat-
ing Village on Elbe shore, To seek news of Dresden; also to see if
boats are procurable for carrying our artillery up thither. At Grodel,
Wolfersdorf finds no boats that will avail: but certain boat-people, new
from Dresden, report that no capitulation had been published when they
left, but that it was-understood to be going on. New spur to Wolfers-
dorf and Wunsch. Wolfersdorf hears farther in this Village, That there
are some 30 Austrian horse in Grossenhayn :—‘ Possibly these may es-
cape General Wunsch,’ thinks Wolfersdorf; and decides to have them.
Takes 30 men of his own; orders the other 70 to hold rightward, gath-
er what intelligence is going, and follow more leisurely; and breaks
off for the Grossenhayn-Dresden Highway, to intercept those fellows,

“Getting to the highway, Wolfersdorf does see the fellows; sees
also, with what degree of horror I do not know, that there are at least.
100 of them against his 30! Horror will do nothing for Wolfersdorf,
nor are his other 70 now within reach. Putting a bold face on the
matter, he commands, Stentor-like, as if it were all a fact: ‘Grena-
diers, march ; Dragoon®,to right forwards, wheel ; Hussars, forward:
Marcu !’—and does tcirifically dash forward with the 30 Hussars, or
last item of the invoice; leaving the others to follow. The Austrians
draw bridle with amazement; fire off their carbines ; take to their heels,
and do not stop for more. Wolfersdorf captures 68 of them, for behoof
of Grossenhayn: and sends the remaining 32 galloping home.*! Who
bring the above news to Durchlaucht of Zweibriick : ‘12,000 of them,
may it please your Durchlaucht ; such the accounts we had !’—Fancy
poor Schmettau’s feelings!

“On the morrow, Dresden was aroused from its sleep by loud firing
and battle, audible on the north side of the River; ‘before daybreak,
and all day.’ It is Wunsch impetuously busy in the woody countries
there. Durchlaucht had shot out Generals and Divisions, Brentano,
Wehla, this General and then that, to intercept Wunsch: these the fiery
Wunsch,—almost as if they had been combustible material coming to
quench fire,—repels and dashes back, in a wonderful manner, General
after General of them. And is lord of the field all day :—but cannot.
hear the least word from Dresden; which is a surprising circumstance.

“Tn the afternoon, Wunsch summons Maguire in the Neustadt:
* Will answer you in two hours,’ said Maguire. Wunsch thereupon is
for attacking their two Pontoon Elbe-Bridges; still resolute for Dres-
den,—and orders Wolfersdorf on one of them, the Uebigau Bridge, who
finds the enemy lifting it at any rate, and makes them do it faster. But
night is now sinking; from Schmettau not a word or sign. ‘Silence

# ‘Tempelhof, ili. 214.

420 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

5th-8th Sept. 1759.
over there, all day; not a single cannon to or from,’ say Wunsch and
Wolfersdorf to one another. ‘Schmettau must have capitulated ! con-
clude they, and withdraw in the night-time, still thunderous if molested ;
bivouack at Grossenhayn, after twenty-four hours of continual march
and battle, not time even for a snatch of food.*?

“ Resting at Grossenhayn, express reaches Wunsch from his Com-
mandant at Torgau: ‘ Kleefeld has come on me from Leipzig, with
14,000; I cannot long hold out, unless relieved.” Wunsch takes the
road again ; two marches, each of twenty miles. Reaches Torgau late ;
takes post in the ruins of the North Suburb, finds he must fight Klee-
feld. Refreshes his men ‘ with a keg of wine per Company,’ surely a
judicious step; and sends to Wolfersdorf, who has the rearguard, ‘ Be
here with me tomorrow at 10.’ Wolfersdorf starts at 4,is here at 10;
and Wunsch, having scanned Kleefeld and his Position” (a Position
strong if you are dexterous to maneuvre in it; capable of being ruinous
if you are not,—part of the Position of a bigger Battle of Torgau, which
is coming),—“ flies at Kleefeld and his 14,000, like a cat-o’-mountain ;
takes him on the left flank :—Kleefeld and such overplus of thousands
are standing, a little to west-and-south of Trogau, with the Entefang”
(a desolate big reedy mere, or Place of Ducks, still offering the idle
Torgauer a melancholy sport there) “as a protection to their right; but
with no evolution-talent, or none in comparison to Wunsch’s ;—and ac-
cordingly are cut to pieces by Wunsch, and blown to the winds, as their
fellows have all been.”’*°

Wunsch, absolute Fate forbidding, could not save Dresden:
but he is here lord of the Northern regions again,—nothing but
Leipzig now in the enemy’s hand ;—and can await Finck, who is
on march with a stronger party to begin business here. It is
reckoned, there are few more brilliant little bits of Soldiering
than this of Wunsch’s. All the more, as his men, for most part,
were not Prussians, but miscellaneous Foreign spirits, of uncer-
tain fealty: roving fellows, of fighting turn, attracted by Fried-
rich’s fame, and under a Captain who had the art of keeping
them in tune. Wunsch has been soldiering, in a diligent though
dim miscellaneous way, these five-and-twenty years; fought in
the old Turk Wars, under disastrous Seckendorf,—Wunsch a

2 Bericht von der Action des General-Majors von Wunsch, bey Reichenberg,
den 5 September 1759: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 606-608.

*8 Hof bericht von der, am 8 September 1759, bey Torgau, vorgefallenen Ac-
tien; in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 609, 610, Tempelhof, iii, 219-222.

Cuapr. V.] | SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 421
5th-8th Sept. 1759.
poor young Wiirtemberg ensign, visibly busy there (1737-1739),
as was this same Schmettau, in the character of staff-officer, far
enough apart from Wunsch, at that time !—fought afterwards,
in the Bavarian service, in the Dutch, at Roucoux, at Lauffeld,
again under disastrous people. Could never, under such, find
anything but subaltern work, all this while; was glad to serve,
under the eye of Friedrich, as Colonel of a Free Corps; which
he has done with much diligence and growing distinction: till
now, at the long last, his chance does come; and he shows him-
self as a real General. Possibly a high career lying ahead ;—a
man that may be very valuable to Friedrich, who has now so few
such left? Fate had again decided otherwise for Wunsch; in
what way will be seen before this Campaign ends: ‘an infernal
Campaign,” according to Friedrich, ‘‘ cette Campagne infernale.”
Finck, whom Friedrich had just detached from Waldau (Sep-
tember 6th), with a new 8 or 6,000, to command in chief in those
parts, and, along with Wunsch, put Dresden out of risk, as it
were,—Finck does at least join Wunsch, as we shall mention in
a little. And these ‘T'wo, with such Wolfersdorfs and people
under them, did prove capable of making front against Reichsfolk
in great overplus of number. Nor are farther sieges of those
Northern Garrisons, but recaptures of them, the news one hears
from Saxony henceforth ;—only that Dresden is fatally gone.
Trrecoverably, as turned out, and in that unbearable manner.
Here is the concluding scene:

Dresden, Saturday September 8th; Exit Schmettau. ‘ A thousand
times over, Schmettau must have asked himself,‘ Why was I in such a
hurry? Without cause for it I, only Maguire having cause !'"—The
Capitulation had been ended in a huddle, without signature: an unwise
Capitulation ; and it was scandalously ill kept. Schmettau was not to
have marched till Monday 10th,—six clear days for packing and pre-
paring ;—but, practically, he has to make three serve him; and to go
half-packed, or not packed atall. Endless chicanes do arise, ‘ upon my
honour !’—not even the 800 wagons are ready for us; ‘Can’t your bag-
gages go in boats, then?’ ‘No, nor shall!’ answers Schmettau, with
blazing eyes, and heart ready to burst ; a Schmettau living all this while
as in Purgatory, or worse. Such bullyings from truculent Guasco, who
is now without muzzle. Capitulation, most imperfect in itself, is avow-
edly infringed: King’s artillery—which we had haggled for, and ended

422 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

; 8th Sept. 1759.
by ‘hoping for,’ to Maguire that rainy evening: why were we in sucha
hurry, too, and blind to Maguire’s hurry !—King’s Artillery, according
to Durchlaucht of Zweibriick, when he actually signed within the walls,
is ‘ Nicht accordirt (Not granted), except the Field part.’ King’s regi-
mental furnishings, all and sundry, were ‘ accordirt, and without visita-
tion,’—but on second thoughts, the Austrian Officials are of opinion there
must really be visitation, must be inspection. ‘May not some of them
belong to Polish Majesty?’ In which sad process of inspection there
was incredible waste, Schmettau protesting ; and above half of the new
uniforms were lost to us. Our 80 pontoons, which were expressly bar-
gained for, are brazenly denied us: ‘ 20 of them are Saxon,’ cry the Aus-
trians : ‘ who knows if they are not almost all Saxon,’—upon my honour ?
At this rate, only wait a day or two,and fewer wagons than 800 will be
needed! thinks Schmettau; and consents to 18 river Boats; Boats in
part, then; and let us march at once. Accordingly,

“ Saturday 8th, at 5 in the morning, Schmettau, with goods and peo-
ple, does at last file out: across Elbe Bridge through the Neustadt ;
Prussians five deep ; a double rank of Austrians, ranged on each side,
in ‘espalier’ they call it,—espalier with gaps in it every here and there,
to what purpose is soon evident. The march was so disposed (likewise
for a purpose) that, all along, there were one or two Companies of Prus-
sian Foot; and then in the interval, carriages, cannon, cavalry and hus-
sars. Schmettau’s carriage is with the rearguard, Madam Schmettau’s
well in the van:—in two other carriages are two Prussian War-and-
Domain Ministers.** ‘ Managers of Saxon Finance,’ these Two ;—who
will have to manage elsewhere than in Dresden henceforth. Zinnow,
Borck, they sit veritably there, with their multiform Account Papers:
of whom I know absolutely nothing,—except (if anybody cared) that
Zinnow, who ‘ died of apoplexy in July following,’ is probably of pursy
red-nosed type; and that Borck, for certain, has a very fine face and
figure ; delicacy, cheerful dignity, perfect gentlemanhood in short,
written on every feature of him; as painted by Pesne, and engraved by
Schmidt, for my accidental behoof.*® Curious to think of that elaborate
court-coat and flowing periwig, with this specific Borck, ‘old as the
Devil’ (whom I have had much trouble to identify), forming visible part
of this dismal Procession: the bright eye of Borck not smiling as usual,
but clouded, though impassive! But that of Borck or his Limners is
not the point.

“The Prussians have been divided into small sections, with a mass
of baggage-wagons and cavalry between every two. And no sooner is

24 Anonymous of Hamburg, iii. 376.
*> Fredericus Wilhelmus Borck (Pesne pinxit, 1732; Schmidt, sculptor
Regis, sculpsit, Berolint, 1764): an excellent Print and Portrait.

\

Cuap. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 423
8th Sept. 1759.

the mass got in movement, than there rises from the Austrian part, and
continues al] the way, loud invitation, ‘ Whosoever is a brave Saxon,a
brave Austrian, Reichsman, come to us! Gaps in the espalier, don’t
you see!’ And Schmettau, in the rear, with baggage and cavalry in-
tervening,—nobody can reach Schmettau. Here is a way of keeping
your bargain! ‘The Prussian Officers struggle stoutly; but are bel-
lowed at, struck at, menaced by bayonet and bullet,—none of them shot,
I think, but a good several of them cut and wounded ;—the Austrian Offi-
cers themselves in passionate points behaving shamefully, ‘Yes, shoot ~
them down, the (were it nothing else) heretic dogs ;’ and being through-
out evidently in a hot shivery frame of mind, forgetful of the laws.
Seldom was such a Procession ; spite, rage and lawless revenge blazing
out more and more. On the whole, there deserted, through those gaps
of the espalier, about half of the whole Garrison. On Madam Schmet-
tau’s hammercloth, there sat, in the Schmettau livery, a hard-featured
man, recognisable by keen eyes as lately a Nailer, of the Nailer Guild
here ; who had been a spy for Schmettau, and brought many persons
into trouble: him they tear down, and trample hither and thither,—at
last, into some Guardhouse near by.”

Schmettau’s Protest against all this is vehement, solemnly
circumstantial: but, except in regard to the trampled Nailer
(Zweibriick on that point, “‘ heartily sorry for the insult to your
Excellency’s livery; and here the man is, with a thousand
apologies”), Schmettau got no redress. Nor had Friedrich any,
now or henceforth. Friedrich did at once, more to testify his
disgust than for any benefit, order Schmettau: “ Halt at Wit-
tenberg, not at Magdeburg as was pretended to be bargained.
Dismiss your Escort of Austrians there; bid them home at once,
and out of your sight.’’ Schmettau himself he ordered to Berlin,
to idle waiting. ‘Never again employed Schmettau: for sixteen
years that they lived together, never saw his face more.

Schmettau’s ill-fortune was much pitied, as surely it deserved
to be, by all men. About Friedrich’s severity there was, and still
occasionally is, controversy held. Into which we shall not enter
for Yes or for No. ‘‘You are like the rest of them!” writes
Friedrich to him; ‘* when the moment comes for showing firm-
ness, you fail in it.’”*7 Friedrich expects of others what all Sol-

‘6 The Schmettau Diarium in Anonymous of Hamburg, iii. 864-376 (cor-
rected chiefly from Tempelhof): Protest, and Correspondence in conse-
quence, is in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 611-621 ; in Helden- Geschichte, &e. &e.

27 «Waldau, 10th September 1759:” in Preuss, ii., Urkunden, p. 44.

424 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
8th Sept. 1759.

diers profess,—and what is in fact the soul of all nobleness in
their trade,—but what only Friedrich himself, and a select few,
are in the habit of actually performing. Tried by the standard
of common practice, Schmettau is clearly absolvable ; a broken
veteran, deserving almost tears. But that is not the standard
which it will be safe for a King of men to go by. Friedrich, I
should say, would be ordered by his Office, if Nature herself did
not order him, to pitch his ideal very high; and to be rather
Rhadamanthine in judging about it. Friedrich was never ac-
cused of over-generosity to the unfortunate among his Captains.

After the War, Schmettau, his conduct still a theme of argu-
ment, was reduced to the Invalid List: age now sixty-seven,
but health and heart still very fresh, as he pleaded ; complaining
that he could not live on his retiring Pension of 3002. a year.
‘‘ Be thankful you have not had your head struck off by sentence
of Court-Martial,” answered Friedrich. Schmettau, after some
farther troubles from Court quarters, retired to Brandenburg, and
there lived silent, poor but honourable, for his remaining fifteen
years. Madam Schmettau came out very beautiful in those bad
circumstances: cheery, thrifty, full of loyal patience; a constant
sunshine to her poor man, whom she had preceded out of Dres-
den in the way we saw. Schmettau was very quiet, still studi-
ous of War matters ;25 “sent the King” once,—in 1772, while
Polish Prussia, and How it could be fortified, were the interesting
subject,—“ a Journal,” which he had elaborated for himself, “of
the Marches of Karl Twelfth in West-Preussen ;” which was well
received: ‘‘ Apparently the King not angry with me farther ?”
thought Schmettau. A completely retired old man; studious,
social,—the best men of the Army still his friends and famil-
jars :—nor, in his own mind, any mutiny against his Chief; this
also has its beauty in 2 human life, my friend. So long as Madam
Schmettau lived, it was well; after her death, not well, dark
rather, and growing darker: and in about three years Schmet-
tau followed (27th October 1775), whither that good soul had
gone. The elder Brother,—who was a distinguished Academi-
cian, as well as Feldmarschall and Negotiator,—had died at

8 See Leben (by his Son, ‘‘ Captain Schmettau ;” a modest intelligent
Book), pp. 440-47.

sets
on

s w all

—
wr c

x

Pal hee

Jn ae ae

sts Seas ee eh ade PE,

os. eed

+ pe

‘yenate

=.

ES ee ee

ee

Cuap. V.] SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN. 425
8th Sept. 1759.

Berlin, in Voltaire’s time, 1751. Each of those Schmettaus had
a Son, in the Prussian Army, who wrote Books, or each a short
Book, still worth reading.*® But we must return.

On the very morrow, September 5th, Daun heard of the glori-

ous success at Dresden; had not expected it till about the 10th

at soonest. From Triebel, he sends the news at gallop to Liebe-
rose and Soltikof: ‘“ Rejoice with us, Excellenz: did not I pre-
dict it? Silesia and Saxony both are ours; fruits chiefly of your
noble successes. Oh, continue them a very little!” ‘Umph!”
answers Soltikof, not with much enthusiasm: ‘‘Send us meal
steadily; and gain you, E:xcellenz’s self, some noble success!”
Friedrich did not hear of it for almost a week later; not till
Monday 10th,—as a certain small Anecdote would of itself
indicate.

Sunday Evening, 9th September, General Finck, with his new
6,000, hastening on to join Wunsch for relief of Dresden, had
got to Grossenhayn; and was putting up his tents, when the
Outposts brought him in an Austrian Officer, who had come
with a Trumpeter inquiring for the General. The Austrian
Officer “is in quest of proper lodgings for General Schmettau
and Garrison” (fancy Finck’s sudden stare !) ;—“ last night they
lodged at Gross-Dobrita, tolerably to their mind: but the ques-
tion for the Escort is, Where to lodge this night, if your E-xcel-
lency could advise me?” ‘ Herr, I will advise you to go back
to Gross-Dobritz on the instant,’ answers Finck, grimly; ‘I
shall be obliged to make you and your Trumpet prisoners, other-
wise!” Exit Austrian Officer. That same evening, too, Cap-
tain Kollas, carrying Schmettau’s sad news to the King, calls on
Finck in passing; gives dismal details of the Capitulation and
the Austrian way of keeping it; filling Finck’s mind with sor-
rowful indignation.°°

Finck,—let us add here, though in date it belongs a little else-
where,—pushes on, not the less, to join Wunsch at Torgau ; joins
Wunsch, straightway recaptures Leipzig, garrison prisoners (Sep-

29 Bavarian War of 1778, by the Feldmarschall’s Son; and this Leben
we have just been citing, by the Lieutenant-General’s.
30 Tempelhof, iii. 237.

426 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
15th-25th Sept. 1759.

tember 13th); recaptures all those north-western garrisons,—
multitudinous Reichsfolk trying, once, to fight him, in an amaz-
ingly loud, but otherwise helpless way (‘ Action of Korbitz,”
they call it); cannonading far and wide all day, and manceuver-
ing about, here bitten in upon, there trying to bite, over many
leagues of Country ; principally under Haddick’s leading ;3! who
saw good to draw off Dresden-ward next day, and leave Finck
master in those regions. ‘To Daun’s sad astonishment,—in a
moment of crisis,—as we shall hear farther on! So that Sax-
ony is not yet conquered to Daun; Saxony, no, nor indeed will
be :—but Dresden is. Friedrich never could recover Dresden ;
though he hoped, and at intervals tried hard, for a long while
to come.

CHAPTER VI.

PRINCE HENRI MAKES A MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS; THE RUSSIANS
CANNOT FIND LODGING IN SILESIA.

Tue eyes of all had been bent on Dresden latterly; and there
had occurred a great deal of detaching thitherward, and of
marching there and thence, as we have partly seen. And the
end is, Dresden, and to appearance Saxony along with it, is
Daun’s. Has not Daun good reason now to be proud of the
cunctatory method? Never did his game stand better; and all
has been gained at other people’s expense. Daun has not played
one trump card; it is those obliging Russians that have played
all the trumps, and reduced the Enemy to nothing. Only con-
tinue that wise course ;—and cart meal, with your whole strength,
for the Russians !—

Safe behind the pools of Lieberose, Friedrich between them
and Berlin, lie those dear Russians ; extending, Daun and they,
like an impassable military dike, with spurs of Outposts and
cunningly-devised Detachments, far and wide,—from beyond
Bober or utmost Crossen on the east, to Hoyerswerda in Elbe

31. Hof bericht von der am 21 September bey Korbitz (in Meissen Country,
south of Elbe; Krdégis too is a Village in this wide-spread ‘‘ Action”) vorge-
Jallenen Action (Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 621-630). ‘Tempelhof, iii, 248, 258.

Bt

a 2

i?

Cnap. VI] = ENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY I10URS. 427
15th-25th Sept. 1759.

Country on the west ;—dike of eighty miles long, and, in some
eastern parts, of almost eighty broad; so elaborate is Daun’s
detaching quality, in cases of moment. ‘The King’s broken
Army on one side of us,” calculates Daun; “ Prince Henri’s on
the other; incommunicative they; reduced to isolation, power-
less either or both of them against such odds. ‘They shall wait
there, please Heaven, till Saxony be quite finished. Zweibriick,
and our Detachments and Maguires, let them finish Saxony,
while Soltikof keeps the King busy. Saxony finished, how will
either Prince or King attempt to recover it! After which, Sile-
sia for us ;—and we shall then be near our Magazines withal,
and this severe stress of carting will abate or cease.” In fact,
these seem sound calculations: Friedrich is 24,000; Henri,
38,000; the military dike is, of Austrians 75,000, of Russians
and Austrians together 120,000. Daun may fairly calculate on
succeeding beautifully, this Year: Saxony his altogether; and
in Silesia some Glogau or strong ‘Town taken, and Russians and
Austrians wintering together in that Country.

If only Daun do not too much spare his trump cards! But
there is such a thing as excess on that side too: and perhaps it
is even the more ruinous kind,—and is certainly the more de-
spised by good judges, though the multitude of bad may notice
it less. Daun is unwearied in his vigilances, in his infinite cart-
ings of provision for self and Soltikof,—long chains of Magazines,
big and little, at Guben, at Gorlitz,at Bautzen, Zittau, Fried-
land ;—and does, aided by French Montalembert, all that man
can to keep those dear stupid Russians in tune.

Daun’s problem of carting provisions, and guarding his mul-
tifarious posts, and sources of meal and defence, is not without
its difficulties. Especially with a Prince Henri opposite; who
has a superlative manceuvering talent of his own, and an indus-
try not inferior to Daun’s in that way. Accordingly, ever since
August 11th-13th, when Daun moved northward to Triebel,
and Henri shot out detachments parallel to him, “to secure the
Bober and our right flank, and try to regain communication with
the King,” —still more, ever since August 22d, when Daun un-
dertook that onerous cartage of meal for Soltikof as well as self,

~

428 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
15th-25th Sept. 1759.

the manceuvering and mutual fencing and parrying, between
Henri and him, has been getting livelier and livelier. Fain
would Daun secure his numerous Roads and Magazines; assidu-

ously does Henri threaten him in these points, and try all means
to regain communication with his Brother. Daun has Maga-
zines and interests everywhere; Henri is everywhere diligent to
act on them. .

Daun in person, ever since Kunersdorf time, has been at Trie-
bel; Henri moved to Sagan after him, but has left a leutenant
at Schméottseifen, as Daun has at Mark-Lissa :—here are stll new
planets, and secondary ditto, with revolving moons. In short, it
is two interpenetrating solar-systems, gyrating, osculating and
colliding, over a space of several thousand square miles,—with
an intricacy, with an embroiled abstruseness Ptolemean or more!
Which indeed the soldier who would know his business—(and not
knowing it, is not he of all solecisms in this world the most fla-
erant?)—ought to study, out of Tempelhof and the Books; but
which, except in its results, no other reader could endure. ‘The
result we will make a point of gathering: carefully riddled down,
there are withal in the details five or six little passages which
have some shadow of interest to us; these let us note, and care-
fully omit the rest: |

Of Fouquet at Landshut. “ Fouquet was twice attacked at Land-
shut ; but made a lucky figure both times. Attack first was by Deville;
attack second by Harsch. Early in July, not Jong after Friedrich had
left for Schmottseifen, rash Deville (a rash creature, and then again a
laggard, swift where .he should be slow, and vice versd) again made
trial on Landshut and Fouquet; but was beautifully dealt with; taken
in rear, in flank, or I forget how taken, but sent galloping through the
Passes again. with a loss of many Prisoners, most of his furnitures, and
all his presence of mind: whom Daun thereupon summoned out of those
parts, ‘ Hitherward to Mark-Lissa with your Corps; leave Fouquet
alone !”"

“ After which, Fouquet, things being altogether quiet round him, was
summoned, with most part of his force, to Schmottseifen ; left General
Goltz (a man we have met before) to guard Landshut; and was in fair
hopes of proving helpful to Prince Henri,—when Harsch” (Harsch by

? Hof bericht von den Unternehmungen des Fouquetschen Corps, im Julius
1759: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 582-586,

+> ii el Mi

I

§
—~ Cuar. VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 429

15th-25th Sept. 1759.

himself this time, not Harsch and Deville as usual) ‘‘ thought here was
his opportunity; and came with a great apparatus, as if to swallow
Landshut whole. So that Fouquet had to hurry off reinforcements
thither; and at length to go himself, leaving Stutterheim in his stead
at Schmottseifen. Goltz, however, with his small handful, stood well
to his work. And there fell out sharp fencings at Landshut :—espe-
cially one violent attack on our outposts; the Austrians quite triumph-
ant; till ‘a couple of cannon open on them from the next Hill,’—till
some violent Werner or other charge in upon them with Prussian Hus-
sars ;—a desperate tussle, that special one of Werner’s; not only sabres
flashing furiously on both sides, but butts of pistols and blows on the
face :? till, in short, Harsch finds he can make nothing of it, and has
taken himself away, before Fouquet come.” This Goltz, here playing
Anti-Harsch, is the Goltz who, with Winterfeld, Schmettau and others,
was in that melancholy Zittau march, of the Prince of Prussia’s, in
1757: it was Goltz by whom the King sent his finishing compliment,
“* You deserve, all of you, to be tried by Court-Martial, and to lose your
heads!” Goltz is mainly concerned with Fouquet and Silesia, in late
times ; and we shall hear of him once again. Fouquet did not return to
Schmottseifen; nor was molested again in Landshut this year, though
he soon had to detach, for the King’s use, part of his Landshut force,
and had other Silesian business which fell to him.

Fortress of Peitz. ‘The poor Fortress of Peitz was taken again ;—
do readers remember it, ‘ on the day of Zorndorf, last year? This year,
a fortnight after Kunersdorf, the same old Half-pay Gentleman with his
Five-and-forty Invalids have again been set adrift, with the honours of
war,” poor old creatures; lest by possibility they afflict the dear Rus-
sians and our meal-carts up yonder.* I[ will forget who took Peitz:
perhaps Haddick, of whom we have lately heard so much? He was
captor of Berlin in 1757, did the Inroad on Berlin that year,—and pro-
duced Rossbach shortly after. Peitz, if he did Peitz, was Haddick’s
last success in the world. Haddick has been most industrious, ‘ guard-
ing the Russian flank,’ —standing between the King and it, during that
Soltikof march to Miillrose, to Lieberose ;—but that once done, and
the King settled at Waldau, Haddick was ordered to Saxony, against
Wunsch and Finck ;—and readers know already what he made of these
Two in the ‘ Action at Korbitz, September 21st,-—and shall hear soon
what befel Haddick himself in consequence.” -
Colonel Hordt is captured. “ It was in that final marching of Sol-
tikof to Lieberose that a distinguished Ex-Swede, Colonel Hordt, of
the Free Corps Hordt, was taken prisoner. At Trebatsch; hanging
on Soltikof’s right flank, on that occasion. It was not Haddick, it was

* Tempelhof, iii. 238: August 31st. 3 Jb. ili. 231: 27th August,

430 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX,

15th-25th Sept. 1759.
a swarm of Cossacks who laid Hordt fast ; his horse having gone to the
girths in a bog.* Hordt, an Ex-Swede of distinction,—a Royalist
Exile, on whose head the Swedes had set a price (had gone into
‘ Brahe’s Plot,’ years since, Plot on behalf of the poor Swedish King,
which cost Brahe his life),—Hordt now might have fared ill, had not
Friedrich been emphatic, ‘'Touch a hair of him, retaliation follows on
the instant!’ He was carried to Petersburg; ‘lay twenty-six months
and three days’ in solitary durance there ; and we may hear a word
from him again.

Ziethen almost captured. “ Prince Henri, in the last days of Au-
gust, marched to Sagan in person ;° Ziethen along with him; multifari-
ously maneuvering ‘to regain communication with the King.’ Of
course, with no want of counter-maneuvering, of vigilant outposts, cun-
ningly devised detachments, and assiduous small measures, on the part
of Daun. Who, one day, had determined on a more considerable thing ;
that of cutting-out Ziethen from the Sagan neighbourhood. And would
have done it, they say,—had not he been too cunctatory. September
2d, Zrethen, who is posted in the little town of Sorau, had very nearly
been cut off. In Sorau, westward, Daun-ward, of Sagan a short day’s
march: there sat Ziethen, conscious of nothing particular,—with Daun
secretly marching on him; Daun in person, from the west, and two
others from the north and from the south, who are to be simultaneous
on Sorau and the Zietheners. A well-laid scheme; likely to have
finished Ziethen satisfactorily, who sat there aware of nothing. But it
all miswent: Daun, on the road, noticed some trifling phenomenon
(Prussian party of horse, or the like), which convinced his cautious
mind that all was found out; that probably a whole Prussian Army,
instead of a Ziethen only, was waiting at Sorau; upon which Daun
turned_home again, sorry that he could not turn the other two as well.
The other two were stronger than Ziethen, could they have come upon
him by surprise; or have caught him before he got through a certain
Pass, or bit of bad ground, with his baggage. But Ziethen, by some
accident, or by his own patrols, got notice; loaded his baggage in-
stantly ; and was through the Pass, or half through it, and in a con-
dition to give stroke for stroke with interest, when his enemies came
up. Nothing could be done upon Ziethen; who marched on, he and
all his properties, safe to Sagan that night,—owing to Daun’s over-
caution, and to Ziethen’s own activity and luck.’

All this was prior to the loss of Dresden. During the crisis

_* Mémoires du Comte de Hordt (a Berlin, 1789), ii. 58-58 (not dated or
intelligible there): in Tempelhof (iii. 235, 6) clear account, ‘‘ Trebatsch,
September 4th.” ° Tempelhof, iii..231: 29th August. © Ib. iii. 238.

‘ ‘A

2 Megan a ee ne eae

=>

ht

i]

Cuap. VI.] | HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 431
15th-25th Sept. 1759.

of that, when everybody was bestirring himself, Prince Henri
made extraordinary exertions: ‘‘ Much depends on me; all on
me !” sighed Henri. A cautious little man; but not incapable of
risking, in the crisis of a game for life and-death. Friedrich and
he are wedged asunder by that dike of Russians and Austrians,
which goes from Bober river eastward, post after post, to Hoy-
erswerda westward, eighty miles along the Lausitz-Brandenburg
Frontier, rooting itself through the Lausitz into Bohemia, and
the sources of its meal. Friedrich and he cannot communicate
except by spies (“ the first Jéger,” or regular express “from the
King, arrived September 13th’’): but both are of one mind;
both are on one problem, ‘“‘ What is to be done with that im-
passable dike?”—and codperate sympathetically without com-
municating. What follows bears date after the loss of Dresden,
but while Henri still knew only of the siege,—that Jdger of the
13th first brought him news of the loss.

“A day or two after Ziethen’s adventure, Henri quits Sagan, to move
southward for a stroke at the Bohemian-Lausitz magazines; a stroke,
and series of strokes. September 8th, Ziethen and (in Fouquet’s ab-
sence at Landshut) Stutterheim are pushed forward into the Zittau
Country ; first of all upon Friedland,—the Zittau Friedland, for there
are Friedlands many! September 9th, Stutterheim summons Fried-
land, gets it; gets the bit of magazine there ; and next day, hastens on
to Zittau. Is refused surrender of Zittau; learns, however, that the
magazine has been mostly set on wheels again, and is a stage forward
on the road to Bohemia; whitherward Stutterheim, quitting Zittau as
too tedious, hastens after it, and next day catches it, or the wnburnt
remains of it. A successful Stutterheim. Nor is Ziethen idle in the
mean while; Ziethen and others; whom no Deville or Austrian Party
thinks itself strong enough to meddle with, Prince Henri being so near.

‘Here is a pretty tempest in the heart of our Bohemian meal-conduit!
Continue that, and what becomes of Soltikof and me? Daun is off from
Triebel Country to this dangerous scene ; indignantly cashiers Deville,
‘Why did not you attack these Ziethen people? Had not you 10,000,
Sir? Cashiers poor Deville for not attacking ;—does not himself at-
tack: but carts away the important Gorlitz magazine, to Bautzen, which
is the still more important one; sits down on the lid of that (according
to wont); shoots out O’Donnell (an Irish gentleman, Deville’s suc-
cessor), and takes every precaution. Prince Henri, in presence of

7 Tempelhof, iii. 207.

a wr ey

432 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX,

15th Sept. 1759.
O’Donnell, coalesces again; walks into Gorlitz; encamps there, on
the Landskron and other Heights (Moys Hill one of them, poor Winter-
feld’s Hill!),—and watches a little how matters will turn, and whether
Daun, severely vigilant from Bautzen, seated on the lid of his magazine,
will not perhaps rise.”

First and last, Daun in this business has tried several things;
but there was pretty much always, and emphatically there now
s, only one thing that could be effectual: ‘lo attack Prince
Henri, and abolish him from those countries ;—as surely might
have been possible, with twice his strength at your disposal ?—
‘This, though sometimes he seemed to be thinking of such a thing,
Daun never would try: for which the subsequent Facts, and all
good judges, were and are inexorably severe on Daun. Certain

it is, no rashness could have better spilt Daun’s game than did _

this extreme caution.

Daun, Soltikof and Company again have a Colloquy (Baut-
zen, September 15th); after which Hverybody starts on
his special Course of Action.

Soltikof’s disgust at this new movement of Daun’s was great

and indignant. ‘‘Instead of going at the King, and getting some
victory for himself, he has gone to Bautzen, and sat down on his
meal-bags! Meal? Is it to be a mere fighting for meal? I will
march tomorrow for Poland, for Preussen, and find plenty of
meal!” And would have gone, they say, had not Mercury, in
the shape of Montalembert with his most,zealous rhetoric, inter-
vened; and prevailed with difficulty. ‘One hour of personal
interview with Excellency Daun,” urges Montalembert; “one
more!” “No,” answers Soltikof.— “Alas, then, send your
messenger!” ‘To which last expedient Soltikof does assent, and
despatches Romanzof on the errand.

September 15th, at Bautzen, at an early hour, there is meeting
accordingly; not Romanzof, Soltikof’s messenger, alone, but
Zweibriick in person, Daun in person; and most earnest coun-
sel is held. ‘A noble Russian gentleman sees how my hands
are bound,” pleads Daun. ‘“ Will not Excellency Soltikof, who
disdains idleness, go himself upon Silesia, upon Glogau for in-

LI ls

Cuap. VI.] | HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 433
15th-25th Sept. 1759.

stance, and grant me a few days?” ‘‘ No,” answers Romanzof;
“Excellency Soltikof by himself will not.. Let Austria furnish
Siege-Artillery ; daily meal I need not speak of; 10,000 fresh

Auxiliaries beyond those we have: on these terms Excellency

Soltikof will perhaps try it; on lower terms, positively not.”
‘¢ Well then, yes!’’ answers Daun, not without qualms of mind.
Daun has a horror at weakening himself to that extent; but
what can he do? ‘General Campitelli, with the 10,000, let
him march this night, then; join with General Loudon where
you please to order: Excellency Soltikof shall see that in every
point I conform.’’®—An important meeting to us, this at Bautzen;
and breaks up the dead-lock into three or more divergent courses
of activity ; which it will now behove us to follow, with the best
brevity attainable. ‘ Bautzen, Saturday 15th September, early
in the morning,” that is the date of the important Colloquy.
And precisely eight-and-forty hours before, “on Thursday 13th,
about 10 a.m,’’ in the western Environs of Quebec, there has
fallen out an Event, quite otherwise important in the History
of Mankind! Of which readers shall have some notice, at a
time more convenient.— |

Romanzof returning with such answer, Soltikof straightway
gathers himself, September 15th—16th, and gets on march. To
Friedrich’s joy; who hopes it may be homeward; waits two
days at Waldau, for the Yes or No. On the second day, alas,
it is No: “Going for Silesia, I perceive; thither, by a wide
sweep northward, which they think will be safer!” Upon
which Friedrich also rises; follows, with another kind of speed
than Soltikof’s; and, by one of his swift clutchings, lays hold
of Sagan, which he, if Soltikof has not, sees to be a key-point
in this operation. Easy for Soltikof to have seized this key-
point, key of the real road to Glogau; easy for Loudon and the
new 10,000 to have rendezvoused there: but nobody has thought
of doing it. A few Croats were in the place, who could make
no debate. |

From Sagan Friedrich and Henri are at length in free com-
munication; Sagan to the Landskron at Gérlitz is some fifty
miles of country, now fallen vacant. From Henri, from Fou-

8 Tempelhof, iii. 247-249.
Vor. V.—T

es

434 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. |
15th-25th Sept. 1759,

quet (the dangers of Landshut being over), Friedrich is getting
what reinforcement they can spare (September 20th-24th); will
then push forward again, industriously sticking to the flanks of
Soltikof, thrusting out stumbling-blocks, making his march very
uncomfortable. :

Strange to say, from Sagan, while waiting two days for these
reinforcements, there starts suddenly to view, suddenly for Fried-
rich and us, an incipient Negotiation about Peace! Actual Pro-
posal that way (or as good as actual, so Voltaire thinks it), on
the part of Choiseul and France; but as yet in Voltaire’s name
only, by a sure though a backstairs channel, of his discovering.
Of which, and of the much farther corresponding that did actually
follow on it, we purpose to say something elsewhere, at a better
time. Meanwhile Voltaire’s announcement of it to the King
has just come in, through a fair and high Hand: how Friedrich
receives it, what Friedrich’s inner feeling is, and has been for a
fortnight past—Here are some private utterances of his, throw-
ing a straggle of light on those points:

Four Letters of Friedrich’s (10th-24th September).

No, 1. “ To Prince Ferdinand (at Berlin).” Poor little Ferdinand,
the King’s Brother, fallen into bad health, has retired from the Wars,
and gone to Berlin; much an object of anxiety to the King, who dili-
gently corresponds with the dear little man,—giving-earnest medical
advices, and getting Berlin news in return.

**Waldau, 10th September 1759.

“Since my last Letter, Dresden has capitulated,—the very day while
Wunsch was beating Maguire at The Barns” (north side of Dresden,
September 5th, day after the capitulation). ‘ Wunsch went back to
Torgau, which St. André, with 14,000 Reichs-people under him, was
for retaking: him too Wunsch beat, took all his tents, kettles, haver-
sacks and utensils, 300 prisoners, six cannon, and some standards.
Finck is uniting with Wunsch; they will march on the Prince of
Zweibriick, and retake Dresden” (hopes always, for a year and more,
to have Dresden back very soon). ‘TI trust before long to get all these
people gathered round Dresden, and our own Country rid of them: that,
I take it, will be the end of the Campaign.

‘“‘Many compliments to the Prince of Wiirtemberg” (wounded at
Kunersdorf), ‘and to all our wounded Generals: I hope Seidlitz is
now out of danger: that bleeding fit (ebullztion de sang) will cure him

A

Cuar. VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 435
15th~25th Sept. 1759. |
of the cramp in his jaw, and of his colics ; and as he is in bed, he won’t
take cold. I hope the viper-broth will do you infinite good ; be assidu-
ous in patching your constitution, while there is yet some fine weather
left: I dread the winter for you; take a great deal of care against cold.
I have still a couple of cruel months ahead of me before ‘ending this
Campaign. Within that time, there will be, God knows what up-
shot.”’— This is “September 10th:” the day of Captain Kollas’s
arrival with his bad Dresden news; Daun and Soltikof profoundly quiet
for three days more.

“No. 2. “ To the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha” (at Gotha). Voltaire
has enclosed his Peace-Proposal to that Serene Lady, always a friend
of Friedrich’s and his; to whom Friedrich, directly on receipt of it,
makes answer :

- Sagan, 22d September 1759.

‘“‘Madame,—lI receive on all occasions proofs of your goodness, to
which I am as sensible as a chivalrous man can be. Certainly it is not
through your hands, Madame, that my Correspondence with V.” (with
Voltaire, if one durst write it in full) “ought to be made to pass!
Nevertheless, in present circumstances, I will presume to beg that you
would forward to him the Answer here enclosed, on which I put no
Address. The difficulty of transmitting Letters has made me choose
my Brother,” Ferdinand, at Berlin, ‘‘to have this conveyed to your
hand.

“Tf I gave bridle to my feelings, now would be the moment for de-
veloping them; but in these critical times, I judge it better not; and
will restrict myself to simple assurances of—” F.

No. 3. “ To Voltaire, at the Délices” (so her Serene Highness will
address it). Here is part of the Enclosure to “V.” Friedrich is all
for Peace ; but keeps on his guard with such an Ambassador, and writes
in a proud, light, only half-believing style:

‘‘Sagan, 22d September 1759.

“The Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha sends me your Letter. I never
received your ‘packet of the 29th :’ communications all interrupted
here; with much trouble I get this passed on to you, if it is happy
enough to pass.

“My position is not so desperate as my enemies give out. I expect
to finish my Campaign tolerably ; my courage is not sunk :—it appears,
however, there is talk of Peace. All I can say of positive on this arti-
cle is, That I have honour for ten; and that, whatever misfortune befal
me, I feel myself incapable of doing anything to wound, the least in the

9 (Quvres de Frédéric, xxvi. 544.

~

436 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. _

15th-25th Sept. 1759.
world, this principle,—which i is so sensitive and delicate for one who
thinks like a gentleman (pense en preux chevalier); and so little re-
garded by rascally politicians, who think like tradesmen.

“TJ know nothing of what you have been telling me about” (your
backstairs channels, your Duc de Choiseul and his humours): “ but for
making Peace there are two conditions which I never will depart from :
1°. To make it conjointly with my faithful Allies” (Hessen and Eng-
land; I have no other); ‘2°. to make it honourable and glorious.

Observe you, I have stil] honour remaining; I will preserve that, at the —

price of my blood.

“If your people want Peace, let them propose nothing to me which
contradicts the delicacy of my sentiments. I am in the convulsions of
military operations; I do as the gamblers who are in ill-luck, and ob-
stinately set themselves against Fortune. I have forced her to return
to me, more than once, like a fickle mistress, when she had run away.
My opponents are such foolish people, in the end I bid fair to catch
some advantage over them; but, happen whatsoever his Sacred Majesty
Chance may please, I don’t disturb myself about it. Up to this point, I
have a clear conscience in regard to the misfortunes that have come to
me. As to you, the Battle of Minden, that of Cadiz” (Boscawen versus
De la Clue; Toulon Fleet running out, and caught by the English, as
we saw), these things perhaps, “and the loss of Canada, are arguments
capable of restoring reason to the French, who had got confused by the
Austrian hellebore.

“This is my way of thinking. You do not find me made of rose-
water: but Henri Quatre, Louis Quatorze,—my present enemies even,
whom I could cite” (Maria Theresa, twenty years ago, when your Belle-
isle set out to cut her in Four),—‘‘ were of no softer temper either.
Had I been born a private man, I would ee everything for the love
of Peace ; but one has to take the tone of one’s position. This is all I
can tell you at present. In three or four weeks the ways of corre-
spondence will be freer.—F.”"

No. 4. “To Prince Ferdinand.” ‘Two days later: has got on foot

again,—end of his first march upon Soltikof again :
‘‘Baunau, 24th September 1759.

“Thank you for the news you send of the wounded Officers,” Wiirtem-
berg, Seidlitz and the others. ‘‘ You may well suppose that in the pass
things are at, I am not without cares, inquietudes, anxieties; it is the
frightfullest crisis | have had in my life. This is the moment for dying
unless one conquer. Daun and my Brother Henri are marching side
by side” (not exactly!). “It is possible enough all these Armies may

\© Guvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 60, 61.

4 , F oe
Ve se ee ips td tine? abisigeass oF ee ee a 3 © =

3

Cuar. VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 437
22d Sept. 1759.

assemble hereabouts, and that a general Battle may decide our fortune
and the Peace. Take care of your health, dear Brother.—F.”"?

Baunau is on Silesian ground, as indeed Sagan itself is; at Baunau,
Friedrich already, just on arriving, has done a fine move on Soltikof,
and surprisingly flung the toll-gate in Soltikof’s face. As we shall see
by and by ;—and likewise that Prince Henri, who emerges tomorrow
morning (September 25th), has not been “ marching side by side with
Daun,” but at a pretty distance from that gentleman !—

‘

Soltikof is a man of his word; otherwise one suspects he
already saw his Siege of Glogau to be impossible. Russians are
not very skilful at the War-minuet: fancy what it will be danc-
ing to such a partner! Friedrich, finding they are for Glogau,
whisks across the Oder, gets there before them: ‘ No Glogau for
you!” ‘They stand agape for some time; then think, “ Well
then, Breslau!” Friedrich again whisks across from them,
farther up, and is again ahead of them when they cross: ‘ No
Breslau either!” In effect it is hopeless; and we may leave the
two manceuvering in those waste parts, astride of Oder, or on
the eastern bank of it, till a fitter opportunity; and attend to
Henri, who is now the article in risk.

Zweibriick’s report of himself, on that day of the general Col-
loquy, was not in the way of complaint, like that of the Russians,
though there did remain difficulties. ‘* Dresden gloriously ours ;
Maguire Governor there, and everything secure; upon my hon-
‘our. But in the northwest part, those Fincks and Wunsches,
Excellenz?”—And the actual truth is, Wunsch has taken Leip-
zig, day before yesterday (September 13th), as Daun sorrowfully
knows, by news come in overnight. And six days hence (Sep-
tember 21st), Finck and Wunsch together will do their “ Action
of Korbitz,”’ and be sending Haddick a bad road! These things
Zweibriick knows only in part; but past experience gives him
ominous presentiment, as it may well do; and he thinks decid-
edly: “ Excellenz, more Austrian troops are indispensable there ;
in fact, your Excellenz’s self, were that possible ; which one feels
it is not, in the presence of these Russians!”

Russians and Reichsfolk, these are a pair of thumbscrews on

11 (uvres de l'rédéric, xxvi. 545.

a

438 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XTX.
23d-25th Sept. 1759.
both thumbs of Daun; screwing the cunctation out of him;
painfully intimating: ‘“‘ Get rid of this Prince Henri; you must,
you must!’ And, in the cdurse of the next eight days, Daun
has actually girt himself to this great enterprise. Goaded on,
I could guess, by the “Action of Korbitz” (done on Friday,
thirty hours ago); the news of which, and that Haddick, instead
of extinguishing Finck, is retreating from him upon Dresden,—
what a piece of news! thinks Daun: “ You Zweibriick, Haddick,
Maguire and Company, you are 36,000 in Saxony; Finck has
not 12,000 in the field: How is this?”—and indignantly dismisses
Haddick: “Go, Sir, and attend to your health.”!* News poig-
nantly astonishing to Daun, as would seem ;—like an oxgoad in
the lazy rear of Daun. Certain it is, Daun had marched out to
Girlitz in collected form; and, on Saturday afternoon, Septembder
22d, is personally on the Heights (not Moys Hill, I should judge,
but other points of vision), taking earnest survey of Prince Hen-
ri’s position on the Landskron there. ‘Tomorrow morning we
attack that Camp,”’ thinks Daun; “storm Prince Henri and it:
be rid of him, at any price!”

“Tomorrow morning,” yes :—but this afternoon, and earlier,
Prince Henri has formed a great resolution, his plans all laid,
everything in readiness; and it is not here you will find Prince
Henri tomorrow. This is his famous March of Fifty Hours,
this that we are now come to; which deserves all our attention,
—and all Daun’s much more! Prince Henri was habitually a
man cautious in War; not aggressive, like his Brother, but de-
fensive, frugal of risks, and averse to the lion-springs usual with
some people; though capable of them, too, in the hour of need.
Military men are full of wonder, at the bold scheme he now fell
upon; and at his style of executing it. Hardly was Daun gone
home to his meditations on the storm of the Landskron tomor-
row, and tattoo beaten in Prince Henri’s Camp there, when, at 8
that Saturday evening, issuing softly, with a minimum of noise,
in the proper marching columns, baggage columns, Henri alto-
gether quitted this Camp; and vanished like a dream. Into

12 Tempelhof, iii. 276, 258-261.
*3 Thid. iii. 253-256 (for the March now ensuing): iii. 228-234, 241-247
(for Henri’s anterior movements).

Cuar. VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 439
93d-25th Sept. 1759.

the Night; men and goods, every item :—who shall say whither-
ward? Leaving only a few light people to keep up the watch-
fires and sentry-cries, for behoof of Daun! Let readers here,
who are in the secret, watch him a little from afar.

Straight northward goes Prince Henri, down Neisse Valley,
20 miles or so, to Rothenburg ;* in columns several-fold, with
much delicate arranging, which was punctually followed: and
in the course of tomorrow Prince Henri is bivouacked, for a
short rest of three hours,—-hidden in unknown space, 20 miles
from Daun, when Daun comes marching up to storm him on the
Landskron! Gone veritably; but whitherward, Daun cannot
form the least guess. Daun can only keep his men under arms
there, all day; while his scouts gallop far and wide,—bringing
in this false guess and the other; and at length returning with
the eminently false one, misled by some of Henri’s baggage-
columns, which have to go many routes, That the Prince is on
march for Glogau: — ‘Gone north-east; that way went his
wagons; these we saw with our eyes.” ‘North-east? Yes, to
Glogau possibly enough,” thinks Daun: ‘Or may not he, cun-
ning as he is and full of feints, intend a stroke on Bautzen, in
my absence ?”—and hastens thither again, and sits down on the
magazine-lid, glad to find nothing wrong there.

This is all that Daun hears of Henri for the next four days.
Plenty of bad news from Saxony in these four days: the Finck-
Haddick Action of Korbitz, a dismal certainty before one start-
ed,—and Haddick on his road to some Watering Place, by this
time! But no trace of Henri farther; since that of the wagons
wending north-east. ‘‘Gone to Glogau, to his Brother: no use
in pushing him, or trying to molest him there!’’ thinks Daun ;
and waits, in stagnant humour, chewing the cud of bitter enough
thoughts, till confirmation of that guess arrive :—as it never will
in this world! Read an important Note:

*'To northward of Bautzen forty miles, and to westward forty miles,
the country is all Daun’s; only towards Glogau, with the Russians and
Friedrich thereabouts, does it become disputable, or offer Prince Henri
any chance. Nevertheless it is not to Glogau, it is far the reverse,

* Map at end of Volume.

~

440 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

23d-25th Sept. 1759.
that the nimble Henri has gone. Resting himself at Rothenburg ‘ three
hours’ (speed is of all things the vitallest), Prince Henri starts again,
Sunday afternoon, straight westward this time. Marches, with his best
swiftness, with his best arrangements, through many sleeping Villages,
to Klitten, not a wakeful one: a march of 18 miles from Rothenburg ;—
direct for the Saxon side of things, instead of the Silesian, as Daun had
made sure.

“ At Klitten, Monday morning, bivouack again, for a few hours,—
‘has no Camp, only waits three hours,’ is Archenholtz’s phrase: but-I
suppose the meaning is, Waits till the several Columns, by their calcu-
lated routes, have all got together ; and till the latest in arriving has had
‘three hours’ of rest,—the earliest having perhaps gone on march again,
in the interim? ‘There are 20 miles farther, still straight west, to Hoy-
erswerda, where the utmost Austrian Division is: ‘ Forward towards
that; let us astonish General Wehla and his 3,000, and our March is
over!’ All this too Prince Henri manages; never anything more con-
summate, more astonishing to Wehla and his Master.

‘“*Wehla and Brentano, readers perhaps remember them busy, from
the Pirna side, at the late Siege of Dresden. Siege gloriously done,
Wehla was ordered to Hoyerswerda, on the north-west frontier; Bren-
tano to a different point in that neighbourhood; where Brentano escaped
ruin, and shall not be mentioned; but Wehla suddenly found it, and will
require a word. Wehla, of all people on the War-theatre, had been the
least expecting disturbance. He is on the remotest western flank; to
westward of him nothing but Torgau and the Finck-Wunsch people,
from whom is small likelihood of danger: from the eastern what danger
can there be? A Letter of Daun’s, some days ago, had expressly in-
formed him that, to all appearance, there was none.

‘“* And now suddenly, on the Tuesday morning, What is this? Prus-
sians reported to be visible in the Woods! ‘Impossible!’ answered
Wehla ;—did get ready, however, what he could; Croat Regiments,
pieces of Artillery behind the Elster River and on good points; labour-
ing more and more diligently, as the news proved true. But all his
efforts were to no purpose. General Lentulus with his Prussians (the
mute Swiss Lentulus, whom we sometimes meet), who has the Vanguard
this day, comes streaming out of the woods, across the obstacles; can-
nonades Wehla both on front and rear; entirely swallows Wehla and
Corps; 600 killed; the General himself, with 28 Field-Officers, and of
subalterns and privates 1,785, falling prisoners to us; and the remainder
scattered on the winds, galloping each his own road towards covert and
a new form of life. Wehla is eaten, in this manner, Tuesday September
25th :—metaphorically speaking, the March of Fifty Hours ends in a

PRI

Cuap. VI.]  HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 441.
25th Sept. 1759.

comfortable twofold meal (military-cannibal, as well as of common cul-
inary meat), and in well-deserved rest.’’!*

The turning-point of the Campaign is reckoned to be this
March of Henri’s; one of the most extraordinary on record.
Prince Henri had a very fast March into these Silesian-Lausitz
Countries, early in July,!® and another very fast, from Bautzen,
to intersect with Schmttseifen, in the end of July: but these
were as nothing compared with the present. Tempelhof, the
excellent solid man,—but who puts all things, big and little, on
the same level of detail, and has unparalleled methods of arrang-
ing (what he reckons to be ‘“ arranging’), and no vestige of
index,—is distressingly obscure on this grand Incident; but at
length, on compulsion, does yield clear account.!®6 In Archen-
holtz it is not dated at all; who merely says as follows: ‘ Most
extraordinary march ever made; went through 50 miles of
Country wholly in the Enemy’s possession ; lasted 56 hours, in
which long period there was no camp pitched, and only twice a
rest of three hours allowed the troops. During the other 50
hours the march, day and night, continually proceeded. Ended
(no date) in surprise of General Wehla at Hoyerswerda, cutting
up 600 of his soldiers, and taking 1,800 prisoners. Kalkreuth,
since so famous,” in the Anti-Napoleon Wars, “ was the Prince’s
Adjutant.”!7

This is probably Prince Henri’s cleverest feat,—though he
did a great many of clever; and his Brother used to say, glanc-
ing towards him, “‘ There is but one of us that never committed
a mistake.’ A highly ingenious dextrous little man in affairs
of War, sharp as needles, vehement but cautious; though of
abstruse temper, thin-skinned, capricious, and giving his Brother
a great deal of trouble with his jealousies and shrewish whims.
By this last consummate little operation he has astonished Daun
as much as anybody ever did; shorn his elaborate tissue of cunc-
tations into ruin and collapse at one stroke; and in effect, as
turns out, wrecked his campaign for this Year.

Daun finds there is now no hope of Saxony, unless he himself

14 Tempelhof, iii. 255, 256; Seyfarth, Beylagen; &c.
18 Seyfarth, ii. 545. 16 Tempelhof, iii. 253-258,
17 Archenholtz, i. 426.

T2

442 ‘FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
24th Sept.—24th Oct. 1759.

at once proceed thither. At once thither ;—and leave Glogau
and the Russians to their luck,—which in such case, what is it
like to be? Probably, to Daun’s own view, ominous enough;
but he has no alternative. To this pass has the March of Fifty
Hours brought us. There is such a thing as being too cuncta-
tory, is not there, your Excellency? Every mortal, and more
especially every Feldmarschall ought to strike the iron while it
is hot. The remainder of this Campaign, we will hope, can be
made intelligible in a more summary manner.

Friedrich manages (September 24th—October 24th) to get the
Russians sent home; and Himself falls lamed with Gout.

Friedrich’s manceuvres against Soltikof,—every reader is pre-
pared to hear that Soltikof was rendered futile by them; and
none but military readers could take delight in the details. Two
beautiful short cuts he made upon Soltikof; pulled him up both
times in mid career, as with hard check-bit. The first time was
at Zobelwitz: September 24th, Friedrich cut across from Sagan,
which is string to bow of the Russian march; posted himself on
the Heights of Zébelwitz, of Baunau, Milkau (at Baunau Fried-
rich will write a Letter this night, if readers bethink themselves ;
Milkau is a place he may remember for rain-deluges, in the First
Silesian War'’): ‘Let the Russians, if they now dare, try the
Pass of Neustadtel here!” A fortunate hour, when he got upon
this ground. Quartermaster-General Stoffel, our old Ciistrin
acquaintance, is found marking out a Camp with a view to that
Pass of Neustiidtel ;!° is greatly astonished to find the Prussian
Army emerge on him there; and at once vanishes, with his
Hussar-Cossack retinues. ‘September 24th,” it is while Prince
Henri was on the last moiety of his March of Fifty Hours.
This severe twitch flung Soltikof quite out from Glogau,—was

like to fling him home altogether, had it not been for Montalem- ~

bert’s eloquence ;—did fling him across the Oder. Where, again
thanks to Montalembert, he was circling on with an eye to Bres-
lau, when Friedrich, by the diameter, suddenly laid bridges,
crossed at Kében, and again brought Soltikof to halt, as by turn<
pike suddenly shut: ‘* Must pay first ; must beat us first!”

18 Supra, vol. iii. p. 148. ‘9 Tempelhof, iii. 293; Retzow, ii. 163.

a ee ee ee elle eee eee ree

tr’

Cuap, VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 443
24th Sept.—24th Oct. 1759.

These things had raised Friedrich’s spirits not a little. Get-
ting on the Heights of Zébelwitz, he was heard to exclaim,
‘‘'This is a lucky day; worth more to me than a battle with
victory.”?° Astonishing how he blazed out again, quite into his
old pride and effulgence, after this, says Retzow. Had been so
meek, so humbled, and even condescended to ask advice or opin-
ion from some about him. Especially “from two Captains,”
says the Opposition Retzow, whose heads were nearly turned
by this sunburst from on high. Captain Marquart and another,
—I believe, he did employ them about Routes and marking of
Camps, which Retzow calls consulting: a King fallen tragically
scarce of persons to consult; all his Winterfelds, Schwerins,
Keiths, and Council of Peers now vanished, and nothing but
some intelligent-looking Captain Marquart, or the like, to con-
sult:—of which Retzow, in his splenetic Opposition humour,
does not see the tragedy, but rather the comedy: how the poor
Captains found their favour to be temporary, conditional, and

had to collapse again. One of them wrote an “ Hssay on the

Coup-@ ail Militaire,’ over which Retzow pretends to weep.
This was Friedrich’s marginal Note upon the Ms., when sub-
mitted to his gracious perusal: ‘* You (#7) will do better to ac-
quire the Art of marking Camps than to write upon the Military
Stroke of Eye.” Beautifully written too, says Retzow; but what,
in the eyes of this King, is beautiful writing, to knowing your
business well? No friend he to writing, unless you have got
something really special, and urgent to be written.

Friedrich crossed the Oder twice. Took Soltikof on both
sides of the Oder, cut him out of this fond expectation, then of
that; led him, we perceive, a bad life. Latterly the scene was
on the right bank: Sophienthal, Koben, Herrnstadt and other
poor places,—on that big eastern elbow, where Oder takes his
final bend, or farewell of Poland. Ground, naturally, of some
interest to Friedrich: ground to us unknown; but known to
Friedrich as the ground where Karl XII. gave Schulenburg his
beating,?! which produced the ‘ beautiful retreat’’ of Schulenburg.

70 Retzow, ti. 163.

“1 ¢ Near Guhrau” (while chasing August the Strong and him out of

Poland), ‘¢12th October 1704:"’ vague account of it, dateless, and as good
as placeless, in Voltaire (Charles Douze, liv. 111.), Guvres, xxx. 142-65.

-

444, FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
24th Sept.—24th Oct. 1759.

The old Feldmarschall Schulenburg whom we used to hear of
once,—whose Nephew, a pipeclayed little gentleman, was well
known to Friedrich and us. . 7

For the rest, I do not think he feels this outmanceuvering of
the Russians very hard work. Already, from Zobel witz Country,
25th September, day of Henri at Hoyerswerda, Friedrich had
written to Fouquet: ‘‘ With 21,000, your beaten and maltreated
Servant has hindered an Army of 50,000 from attacking him,
and compelled them to retire on Neusatz!" Evidently much
risen in hope; and Henri’s fine news not yet come to hand. By
degrees, Soltikof, rendered futile, got very angry; especially when
Daun had to go for Saxony. ‘‘ Meal was becoming impossible,
at any rate,” whimpers Daun: “ Oh Excellency, do but consider,
with the nobleness natural to you! Our Court will cheerfully
furnish money, instead of meal.””—‘“ Money? My people cannot
eat money!” growled Soltikof, getting more and more angry;
threatening daily to march for Posen and his own meal-stores.
What a time of it has Montalembert, has the melancholy Loudon,
with temper so hot!

At Sophienthal, October 10th, Friedrich falls ill of gout ;—
absolutely lamed; for three weeks, cannot stir from his room.
Happily the outer problem is becoming easier and easier ; almost
bringing its own solution. At Sophienthal the lame Friedrich
takes to writing about Charles XII. and his Military Character,
—not a very illuminative Piece, on the first perusal, but I intend
to read it again ;**—-which at least helps him to pass the time.
Soltikof, more and more.straitened, meal itself running low, gets
angrier and angrier. His treatment of the Country, Montalem-
bert rather encouraging, is described as “horrible.” One day
he takes the whim, whim or little more, of seizing Herrnstadt ;
a small Town, between the Two Armies, where the Prussians
have a Free-Battalion. The Prussian Battalion resists; drives
Soltikof’s people back. ‘‘ Never mind,” think they: ‘a place
of no importance to us; and Excellency Soltikof has ridden else-
whither.” By ill-luck, in the afternoon, Excellency Soltikof
happened to mention the place again. Hearing that the Prus-

2° Réflexions sur les talens militaires et sur le caractére de Charles XII.
((Qfuvres de Frédéric, vii, 69-88).

“

Cap. VI.]  HENRI'S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. © 445
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

sians still have it, Soltikof mounts into a rage; summons the
place, with answer still No; thereupon orders instant bombard-
ment of it, fiery storms of grenadoes for it; and has the satis-
faction of utterly burning poor Herrnstadt; the Prussian Free-
Corps still continuing obstinate. It was Soltikof’s last act in
those parts, and betokens a sulphurous state of humour.

Next morning (October 24th), he took the road for Posen,
and marched bodily home.”?. Home verily, in spite of Monta-
lembert and all men. “And for me, what orders has Excel-
lency ?”’? Loudon had anxiously inquired, on the eve of that event.
‘‘ None whatever !” answered Excellency: ‘‘ Do your own pleas-
ure; go whithersoever seems good to you.” And Loudon had
to take a wide sweep round, by Kalish, through the western
parts of Poland; and get home to the Troppau-Teschen Coun-
try, as he best could.

By I<alish, by Czenstochow, Cracow, poor Loudon had to go:
a dismal march of 300 miles or more,—waited on latterly by
Fouquet, with Werner, Goltz and others, on the Silesian Border ;
whom Friedrich had ordered thither for such end. Whom Lou-
don skilfully avoided to fight; having already, by desertion and
by hardships, lost half his men on the road. Glad enough to get
home and under roof, with his 20,000 gone to 10,000; and to
make bargain with Fouquet: ‘ Truce, then, through Winter ;
neither of us to meddle with the other, unless after a fortnight’s
warning given.”2 November 1st, a month before this, the King,
carried on a litter by his soldiers, had quitted Sophienthal; and,
crossing the River by Kében, got to Glogau.*© The greater part
of his force, 13,000 under Hiilsen, he had immediately sent on
for Saxony; he himself intending to wait recovery in Glogau,
with this Silesian wing of the business happily brought to finis
for the present.

On the Saxon side, too, affairs are in such a course that the
King can be patient at Glogau till he get well. Everything is
prosperous in Saxony since that March on Hoyerswerda; Henri,
with his Fincks and Wunsches, beautifully posted in the Meissen-

*3 Tempelhof, iii. 299, 291-300 (general account, abundantly minute),
*4 Th. iii. 328-831. 25 Rodenbeck, i. 396,

446 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

Torgau region ; no dislodging of him, let Daun, with his big mass
of forces, try as he may. Daun, through the month of October,
is in various Camps. in Schilda last of all: Henri successively
in two; in Strehla for some ten days; then in Torgau for about
three weeks, carefully entrenched,*°—where traces of him will
turn up (not too opportunely) next year. Daun, from whatever
Camp, goes labouring on this side and on that; on every side the
deft Henri is as sharp as needles; nothing to be made of him by
the cunning movements and contrivances of Daun. Very fine
manceuvering it was, especially on Henri’s part; a charm to the
soldier mind ;—given minutely in Tempelhof, and capable of
being followed (if you have Maps and Patience) into the last
details. Instructive really to the soldier ;—but must be, almost
all, omitted here. One beautiful slap to Duke d’ Ahremberg (a
poor old friend of Daun’s and ours) we will remember: * Action
of Pretsch” they call it; defeat, almost capture of poor D’Ahrem-
berg; who had been sent to dislodge the Prince, by threatening
his supplies, and had wheeled, accordingly, eastward, wide away ;
but, to his astonishment, found, after a march or two, Three se-
lect Prussian Corps emerging on him, by front, by rear, by flank,
with Horse-artillery (quasi-miraculous) bursting out on hilltops,
too,—and, in short, nothing for it but to retreat, or indeed to run,
in a considerably ruinous style: poor D’Ahremberg!”’ On the
whole, Daun is reduced to a panting condition; and knows not
what todo. His plans were intrinsically bad, says Tempelhof;
without beating Henri in battle, which he cannot bring himself
to attempt, he, in all probability, will, were it only for difficulties
of the commissariat kind, have to fall back Dresden-ward, and
altogether take him himself away.?8

After this sad slap at Pretsch, Daun paused for consideration ;
took to palisading himself to an extraordinary degree, slashing
the Schilda Forests almost into ruin for this end; and otherwise

26 Tempelhof, iii. 276, 281, 284 (Henri in Strehla, October 4th-17th;
thence to Torgau: 22d October, Daun “quits his Camp of Belgern,” for
that of Schilda, which was his last in those parts).

*7 Seyfarth (Beylagen, ii. 634-637), ‘‘ Hofbericht von der am 29 October
1759 bey Meuro” (chiefly bey Pretsch) ‘‘ vorgefallenen Action ;” ib. ii. 548 n.

8 ‘Tempelhof, iii. 287-289.

a

Cuap. VI.]  HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 447
4th Oct.—4th Noy. 1759.

sat absolutely quiet. Little to be done but take care of oneself.
Daun knows withal of Hiilsen’s impending advent with the Sile-
sian 13,000 ;—November 2d, Hiilsen is actually at Muskau, and
his 13,000 magnified by rumour to 20,000. Hearing of which,
Daun takes the road (November 4th); quits his gloriously pal-
isaded Camp of Schilda; feels that retreat on Dresden, or even
home to Bohemia altogether, is the one course left.

And now, the important Bautzen Colloquy of Saturday Sep-
tember 15th, having here brought its three or more Courses of
Activity to a pause,—we will glance at the far more important
Thursday 13th, other side the Ocean:

Above Quebec, Night of September 12-13tA, In profound silence, on
the stream of the St. Lawrence far away, a notable adventure is going
on. Wolfe, from two points well above Quebec (“As a last shift, we
will try that way”), with about 5,000 men, is silently descending in
rafts; with purpose to climb the Heights somewhere on this side the
City, and be in upon it, if Fate will. An enterprise of almost sublime
nature; very great, if it can succeed. The cliffs all beset to his left
hand, Montcalm in person guarding Quebec with his main strength.

Wolfe silently descends; mind made up; thoughts hushed quiet into
one great thought; in the ripple of the perpetual waters, under the grim
cliffs and the eternal stars. Conversing with his people, he was heard
to recite some passages of Gray’s Elegy, lately come out to those parts ;
of which, says an ear-witness, he expressed his admiration to an enthu-
siastic degree: “ Ah, these are tones of the Eternal Melodies, are not
they? A man might thank Heaven had he such a gift; almost as we
might for succeeding here, Gentlemen !’?? Next morning (Thursday
13th September 1759), Wolfe, with his 5,000, is found to have scram-
bled up by some woody Neck in the heights, which was not quite pre-
cipitous ; has trailed one cannon with him, the seamen busy bringing
up another; and by 10 of the clock, stands ranked (really somewhat
in the Friedrich way, though on a small scale); ready at all points for
Montcalm, but refusing to be over-ready.

Montcalm, on first hearing of him, had made haste: ‘ Ouz, je les vois
ou us ne dowent pas étre; je vats les écraser (to smash them)!” said

#9 Professor Robinson, then a Navy-lieutenant, in the raft along with
Wolfe, afterwards a well-known Professor of Natural Philosophy at Edin-
burgh, was often heard, by persons whom I have heard again, to repeat
this Anecdote. See Playfair, Biographical Account of Professor Robinson,
—in Transactions of Royal Society of Edinburgh, vii. 495 et seq.

448 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.

4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759,
he, by way of keeping his people in heart. And marches up, beauti-
fully skilful, neglecting none of his advantages. His numerous Cana-
dian sharpshooters, preliminary Indians in the bushes, with a provoking
fire: ‘* Steady!” orders Wolfe; “from you, not one shot till they are
within thirty yards!” And Montcalm, volleying and advancing, can
get no response, more than from Druidic stones; till at thirty yards,
the stones became vocal,—and continue so at a dreadful rate: and, in a
space of seventeen minutes, have blown Montcalm’s regulars, and the
gallant Montcalm himself, and their second in command, and their third,
into ruin and destruction. In about seven minutes more, the agony was
done; “ English falling on with the bayonet, Highlanders with the clay-
more ;” fierce pursuit, route total :—and Quebec and Canada as good as
finished. The thing is yet well known to every Englishman;*° and
how Wolfe himself died in it, his beautiful death.

Truly a bit of right soldierhood, this Wolfe. Manages his small re-
sources in a’consummate manner; invents, contrives, attempts and re-
attempts, irrepressible by difficulty or discouragement. How could a
Friedrich himself have managed this Quebec in a more artistic way ?
The small Battle itself, 5,000 to a side, and such odds of Savagery and
Canadians, reminds you of one of Friedrich’s: wise arrangements; ex-
act foresight, preparation corresponding; caution with audacity ; inflex-
ible discipline, silent till its time come, and then blazing out as we see.
The prettiest soldiering I have heard of among the English for several
generations. Amherst, Commander-in-chief, is diligently noosing, and
tying up, the French military settlements, Niagara, Ticonderago; Can-
ada all round: but this is the heart or windpipe of it; keep this firm,
and, in the circumstances, Canada is yours.

Colonel Beatson, in his recent Pamphlet, The Plains of Abraham,—
which, especially on the military side, is distressingly ignorant and shal-
low, though not intentionally incorrect anywhere,—gives Extracts from
a Letter of Montcalm’s (“ Quebec, 24th August 1759”) which is highly
worth reading, had we room. It predicts toa hairsbreadth, not only the
way “ M. Wolfe, if he understands his trade, will take to beat and ruin
me if we meet in fight ;” but also,—with a sagacity singular to look at,

30 The military details of it seem to be very ill known (witness Colonel
Beatson’s otherwise rather careful Pamphlet, The Plains of Abraham, writ-
ten quite lately, which we are soon to cite farther); and they would well
deserve describing, in the Seyfarth-Beylagen, or even in the Tempelhof way,
—could an English Officer, on the spot as this Colonel was, be found to do
it !—Details are in Beatson (quite another ‘‘ Beatson”), Naval and Military
History, ii. 300-308 ; in Gentleman's Magazine for 1759, the Despatches and
particulars: see also Walpole, George the Second, iii. 217-222.

Cuap. VI.] HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 449
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

in the years 1775-7, and perhaps still more in the years 1860-3,—what
will be the consequences to those unruly English, Colonial and other.
“If he beat me here, France has lost America utterly,” thinks Mont-
calm: ‘“ Yes;—and one’s only consolation is, In ten years farther,
America will be in revolt against England!” Montcalm’s style of
writing is not exemplary; but his power of faithful observation, his sa-
gacity, and talent of prophecy are so considerable, we are tempted to
give the zpsissuma verba of his long Letter in regard to those two points,
—the rather as it seems to have fallen much out of sight in our day :

Montcalm to a Cousin in France.
‘Camp before Quebec, 24th August 17 5D

“ Monsieur et cher Cousin,—Here I am, for more than three months
last, at handgrips with M. Wolfe; who ceases not day or night te bom-
bard Quebec, with a fury which is almost unexampled in the Siege of a
Place one intends to retain after taking it.” . . , ‘* Will never take
it in that way, however, by attacking from the River or south shore:
only ruins us, but does not enrich himself. Not an inch nearer his ob-
ject than he was three months ago; and in one month more the equi-
noctial storms will blow his Fleet and him away.—Quebec, then, and
the preservation of the Colony, you think, must be as good as safe?
Alas, the fact is far otherwise. The capture of Quebec depends on
what we call a stroke-of-hand”—(But let us take to the Original now,
for Prediction First) :—

“La prise de Quebec dépend dun coupde main. Les Anglais sont
maitres dela riviere: tls n’ont qu’a effectuer une descente sur la rive
ou cette Ville, sans fortifications et sans défense, est située. Les voila
en état de me presenter la bataille; que je ne pourrais plus refuser,
et que je ne devrais pas gagner. M. Wolfe, en effet, sul entend son
meétier, n'a qua essuyer le premier feu, venir ensuite a grands pas sur
mon armée, faire a bout portant sa décharge ; mes Canadiens, sans
discipline, sourds ala voix du tambour et des instrumens militaires,
dérangés par cetle escarre, ne sauront plus reprendre leurs rangs
Ils sont dailleurs sans baionettes pour repondre a celles de l’ennemi:
il ne leur reste qua fuir,—et me voila battu sans resource.” (This is
a curiously exact Prediction!) ‘I won’t survive, however; defeat here,
in this stage of our affairs, means loss of America altogether: ‘2/ est
des situations ou il ne reste plus a un Général que de perir avec hon-
neur.’”—“ Mes sentimens sont francais, et ils le seront gusque dans
le tombeau, si dans le tombeau on est encore quelque chose.

“Je me consolerat du moins de ma défaite, et de la perte de la Col-
onie, par Vintime persuasion ou je suis” (Prediction Second, which is
still more curious), “que cette défaite vaudra, un jour, 4 ma Patrie

450 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boor XIX.

4th Oct.—4th Noy. 1759.
plus qu’une victoire; et que le vaingueur, en s'agrandissant, trouve-
rait (sic) un tombeau dans son agrandissement méme.

“ Ce que j'avance ici, moncher Cousin, vous paraitra un paradoze :
mais un moment de réflexion politique, un coup d @il sur la situation
des choses en Amérique, et la vérité de mon opinion brillera dans tout
son jour.” ‘ Nobody will obey, unless necessity compel him: voila les
hommes ; géne of any kind a nuisance to them; and of all men in the
world Jes Anglais are the most impatient of obeying anybody. ‘ Mais
si ce sont- la les Anglais de [ Europe, c’est encore plus les Anglats
d’ Amérique. Une grande partie de ces Colons sont les enfans de ces
hommes qui s’expatriérent dans ces temps de trouble ou Tancienne
Angleterre, en prove aux divisions, était attaguée dans ses privileges”
ét dpoits ; et allérent chercher en Amérique une terre ou ils pussent
vit¥e et mourir libres et presque indépendants :—et ces enfans n'ont
pas dégénére des sentimens républicains de leurs péres. D’autres
sont des hommes ennemis de tout frein, de tout assujétissement, que
le gouvernement y a transportés pour leurs crimes. D autres, enfin,
sont un ramas de différentes nations de [ Europe, qui ttennent trés-peu
a Vancienne Angleterre par le ceur et le sentiment ; tous, en général,
ne se soucient guéres du Roi ni du Parlement d Angleterre.

“* Je les connais bien,—non sur des rapports étrangers, mais sur des
correspondances et des informations secrétes, gue j’ai moiméme mena-
gées; et dont, un jour, si Dieu me préte vie, je pourrai faire usage a
Vavantage de ma Patrie. Pour surcrvit de bonheur pour eux, tous
ces Colons sont parvenues, dans un état trésflorissant; ils sont nom-
breux et riches :—1ls recueillent dans le sein de leur patrie toutes les
nécessités dela vie. L’ancienne Angleterre a été assez sotte,et assez
dupe, pour leur laisser établir chez eux les arts, les métiers, les manu-
factures :—c’est a dire, qu'elle leur a laissé briser la chaine de besoins
gut les liait, qui les attachait a elle, et qui les fait dependants. Aussi
toutes ces Colonies Anglaises auraient-elles depuis long-temps secoueé
le joug, chaque province aurait formé une petite république indépen-
dante, sila crainte de voir les Francais a leur porte n'avait été un frein
quit les avait retenu. Maitres pour maitres, ils ont préferé leurs com-

_patriotes aux étrangers ; prenant cependant pour maxime de n'obéir
que le moins qu’tls pourraient. Mats que le Canada vint @ étre con-
quis, et que les Canadiens et ces Colons ne fussent plus gu’une seul
peuple—et la premiere occasion ou Vancienne Angleterre semblerait
toucher a leurs intéréts, croyez-vous, mon cher Cousin, gue ces Colons
obéiront? Et quwauratent-ils a craindre en se révoliant?? * * ‘Je
suis st sur de ce que j’écris, que je ne donnerais pas dix ans aprés la
conguéte du Canada pour en voir l’accomplissement.

“* Voila ce que, comme Francais, me console aujourd’hui du danger

Cuap. VI.] -HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 451
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

imminent, gue court ma Patrie, de voir cette Colonie perdue pour
elle.’ 231

Montcalm had been in the Belleisle Retreat from Prag (De-
cember 1742); in the terrible Hzilles Business (July 1747),
where the Chevalier de Belleisle and 4 or 5,000 lost their lives
in about an hour. Captain Cook was at Québec, Master in the
Royal Navy; “sounding the River, and putting down buoys.”
Bougainville, another famous Navigator, was Aide-de-Camp of
Montcalm. ‘There have been far-sounding Epics built together
on less basis than lies ready here, in this Capture of Quebec;
—which itself, as the Decision that America is to be English
and not French, is surely an Epoch in World-History! Mont-
calm was forty-eight when he perished; Wolf, thirty-three.
Montealm’s skull is in the Ursulines Convent at Quebec, —
shown to the idly curious to this day.*?

It was on October 17th,—while Friedrich lay at Sophienthal,
lamed of gout, and Soltikof had privately fixed for home (went
that day week),—that this glorious bit of news reached England.
It was only three days after that other, bad and almost hopeless
news, from the same quarter; news of poor Wolfe’s Repulse,

on the other or eastern side of Quebec, July 31st, known to us.

already, not known in England till October 14th. Heightened
by such contrast, the news filled all men with a strange mixture
of emotions. ‘The Incidents of Dramatic Fiction,” says one
who was sharer in it, “ could not have been conducted with more
address to lead an audience from despondency to sudden exulta-
tion, than Accident had here prepared to excite the passions of
a whole People. They despaired; they triumphed; and they
wept,—for Wolfe had fallen in the hour of victory! Joy, grief,
curiosity, astonishment, were painted in every countenance: the
more they inquired, the higher their admiration rose. Not an
incident but was heroic and affecting.’’°> America ours; but
the noble Wolfe now not!

3! Tn Beatson, Lieutenant-Colonel R.E., The Plains of Abraham ; Notes
original and selected (Gibraltar, Garrison Library Press, 1858), pp. 38 et seq. :
Extract from ‘‘ Lettres de M. le Marquis de Montcalm a MM. De Berryer
et De la Molé: 1757-1759 (Londres, 1777),”—which is not in the British-
Museum Library, on applying; and seems to be a forgotten Book.

32 Lieutenant-Colonel Beatson, pp. 28, 15. 33 Walpole, iii. 219.

-

452 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX, |
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

What Pitt himself said of these things, we do not much hear,
On the meeting of his Parliament, about a month hence, his
Speech, somebody having risen to congratulate and eulogise him,
is still recognisably of royal quality, if we evoke it from the
Walpole Notes. Very modest, very noble, true; and with fine
pieties and magnanimities delicately audible in it: ‘‘ Not a week
all Summer but has been a crisis, in which I have not known
whether I should not be torn to pieces, instead of being com-
mended, as now by the Honourable Member. The hand of
Divine Providence; the more a man is versed in business, the
more he everywhere traces that!” . . . “Success has given us
unanimity, not unanimity success. For my own poor share, I
could not have dared as I have done, except in these times.
Other Ministers have hoped as well, but have not been so cir-
cumstanced to dare so much.”’ . .. I think the stone almost
rolled to the top of the hill; but let us have a care; it may re-
bound, and hideously drag us down with it again.”5+

The essential truth, moreover, is, Pitt has become King of
England; so lucky has poor England, in its hour of crisis, again
been. And the difference between an England guided by some
kind of Friedrich (temporary Friedrich, absolute, though of in-
secure tenure), and by a Newcastle and the Clack of Tongues,
is very great! But for Pitt, there had been no Wolfe, no Am-
herst; Duke Ferdinand had been the Royal Highness of Cum-
berland,—and all things going round him in St. Vitus, at their
old rate. This man is a King, for the time being,—King really
of the Friedrich type ;—and rules, Friedrich himself not more
despotically, where need is. Pitt's War-Offices, Admiralties,
were not of themselves quick-going entities; but Pitt made
them go. Slow-paced Lords in Office have remonstrated, on
more than one occasion: ‘Impossible, Sir; these things can.
not be got ready at the time you order!” ‘My Lord, they in
dispensably must,” Pitt would answer (a man always reveren¢
of coming facts, knowing how inexorable they are); and if the
Negative continued obstinate in argument, he has been known to
add: “My Lord, to the King’s service, it is a fixed necessity of
time. Unless the time is kept, I will impeach your Lordship !”

%* Walpole, iii. 225; Thackeray, i. 446.

Cuap. VI.]  HENRI’S MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS. 453
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759.

Your Lordship’s head will come to lie at your Lordship’s feet !
Figure a poor Duke of Newcastle, listening to such a thing ;
—and knowing that Pitt will do it; and that he can, such is
his favour with universal England ;—and trembling and obeying.
War-requisites for land and for sea are got ready with a Prus-
sian punctuality,—at what multiple of the Prussian expense, is
a smaller question for Pitt.

It is about eighteen months ago that Pownal, Governor of
New England, a kind of half-military person, not without sound
sense, though sadly intricate of utterance,—of whom Pitt, just
entering on Office, has, I suppose, asked an opinion on America,
as men do of Learned Counsel on an impending Lawsuit of
magnitude, —had answered, in his long-winded, intertwisted,
nearly inextricable way, to the effect, “Sir, I incline to fear, on
the whole, that the Action will not lie,—that, on the whole, the
French will eat America from us in spite of our teeth.”35 Jan-
uary 15th, 1758, that is the Pownal Opinion-of-Counsel ;—and
on September 13th, 1759, this is what we have practically come
to. And on September 7th, 1760, within twelve months more,
—Amherst, descending the Rapids from Ticonderago side, and
two other little Armies, ascending from Quebec and Louisburg,
to meet him at Montreal, have proved punctual almost to an
hour; and are in condition to extinguish, by triple pressure (or
what we called noosing), the French Governor-General in Mon-
treal, a Monsieur de Vaudreuil, and his Montreal and his Canada
altogether; and send the French bodily home out of those Con-
tinents.°° Which may dispense us from speaking farther on the
subject. —

From the Madras region, too, from India and outrageous Lal-
ly, the news are good. Early in Spring last, poor Lally,—a man
of endless talent and courage, but of dreadfully emphatic loose
tongue, in fact of a blazing ungoverned Irish turn of mind,—had
instantly, on sight of some small Succours from Pitt, to raise his

*$ In Thackeray, ii. 421-452, Pownal’s intricate Report (his ‘‘ Discourse,”
or whatever he calls it, ‘‘on the Defence of the Inland Frontiers,” his &ce..
&c.), of date, ‘*15th January 1758.”

36 Capitulation between Amherst and Vaudreuil (‘‘ Montreal, 8th Sep-
tember 1760”), in 55 Articles: in Beatson, iii. 274-283.

454 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX. —
4th Oct.—4th Nov. 1759,

siege of Madras, retire to Pondichery ;—and, in fact, go plunging
and tumbling downhill, he and his India with him, at an ever-
faster rate, till they also had got to the Abyss. ‘ My policy is
in these five words, Vo Englishman in this Peninsula,” wrote he,
a year ago, on landing in India; and now it is to be No French-
man, and there is one word in the five to be altered !—Of poor
Lally, zealous and furious over-much, and nearly the most unfor-
tunate and worst-used ‘‘man of genius” I ever read of, whose
lion-like struggles against French Official people, and against
Pitt’s Captains and their sea-fights and siegings, would deserve
a volume to themselves, we have said, and can here say, as good
as nothing,—except that they all ended, for Lally and French
India, in total surrender, 16th January 1761; and that Lally,
some years afterwards, for toils undergone and for services done,
got, when accounts came to be liquidated, death on the scaffold.
Dates I give below.** ‘‘Gained Fontenoy for us,” said many
persons ;—undoubtedly gained various things for us, fought for
us Bersekir-like on all occasions ; hoped, in the end, to be Maré-
chal de France, and undertook a Championship of India, which
issues in this way! America and India, it is written, are both
to be Pitt’s. Let both, if possible, remain silent to us hence-
forth.

3? 28th April 1758, Lands at Pondichery; instantly proceeds upon Fort
St. David. 2d June 1758, Takes it: meant to have gone now on Madras ;
but finds he has no money ;—goes extorting money from Black Potentates
about, Rajah of Travancore, &c., in a violent and extraordinary style; and
can get little. Nevertheless, 14th December 1758, Lays Siege to Madras.

16th February 1759, Is obliged to quit trenches at Madras, and retire
dismally upon Pondichery,—to mere indigence, mutiny (‘ten mutinies”’),
Official conspiracy, and chaos come again.

22d January 1760, Makes outrush on Wandewash, and the English
posted there; is beaten, driven back into Pondichery. April 1760, Is
besieged in Pondichery. 16th January 1761, Is taken, Pondichery, French
India, and he ;—to Madras he, lest the French Official Party kill him, as
they attempt to do.

23d September 1761, Arrives, prisoner, in England; thence, on parole,
to France and Paris, 21st October. November 1762, to Bastille; waits
trial nineteen months; trial lasts two years. 6th May 1766, To be be-
headed,—-9th May, was. See Beatson, ii. 869-3872, 96-110, &e. ; Voltaire

(Fragments sur (Inde), in Giuvres, xxix. 183-253; Biographie Universelle,
§ Lally.

Cuap. VII.] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. 455
— 13th Nov. 1759.

As to the Invasion-of-England Scheme, Pitt says he does not
expect the French will invade us; but if they do, he is ready.38

CHAPTER VIL.

FRIEDRICH REAPPEARS ON THE FIELD, AND IN SEVEN DAYS
AFTER COMES THE CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN.

NoveEMBER 6th—8th, Daun had gone to Meissen Country : fair-
ly ebbing homeward ; Henri following, with Hiilsen joined,—not
vehemently attacking the rhinoceros, but judiciously pricking
him forward. Daun goes at his slowest step: in many divisions,
covering a wide circuit; sticking to all the strong posts, till his
own time for quitting them: slow, sullenly cautious; like a man
descending dangerous precipices back foremost, and will not be
hurried. So it had lasted about a week ; Daun for the last four
days sitting restive, obstinate, but. Henri pricking into him more
and more, till the rhinoceros seemed actually about lifting him-
self,—when Friedrich in person arrived in his Brother’s Camp.}

At the Schloss of Herschstein, a mile or two behind Lom-
matsch, which is Henri’s headquarter (still to westward of Meis-
sen; Daun hanging on, seven or eight miles to south-eastward
ahead ; loth to go, but actually obliged),—it was there, Tuesday
November 13th, that the King met his Brother again. A King
free of his gout; in joyful spirits; and high of humour,—like a
man risen indignant, once more got to his feet, after three-months
oppressions and miseries from the unworthy. ‘Too high,”
mourns Retzow, in a gloomy tone, as others do in perhaps a
more indulgent one. Beyond doubt, Friedrich’s farther proced-
ures in this grave and weighty Daun business were more or less
imprudent; of a too rapid and rash nature; and turned out bit-
terly unlucky to him. ‘‘ Had he left the management to Hen-
ri!” sighed everybody, after the unlucky event.

Friedrich had not arrived above four-and-twenty hours, when
news came in: “The Austrians in movement again; actually
rolling off Dresden-ward again!’ ‘Haha, do they smell me
already !” laughed he: ‘ Well, I will send Daun to the Devi,”

38 Speech, 4th November, supra. ! Tempelhof, iii. 301-305.

456 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.
14th Nov. 1759.

—not adding, “if I can.” And instantly ordered sharp pursuit,
—and sheer stabbing with the oxgoad, not soft and delicate prick-
ing, as Henri’s lately.2 Friedrich, in fact, was in a fiery condi-
tion against Daun: ‘ You trampled on me, you heavy buffalo,
these three months; but that is over now!”—and took person-
ally the vanguard in this pursuit. And had a bit of hot fighting
in the Village of Korbitz (scene of that Finck-Haddick “ Action,”
21st September last, and of poor Haddick’s ruin, and retirement
to the Waters);—-where the Austrians now prove very fierce
and obstinate; and will not go, till well slashed into, and torn
out by sheer beating: — which was visibly a kind of comfort
to the King’s humour. ‘Our Prussians do still fight, then,
much as formerly! And it was all a hideous Nightmare, all
that, and Daylight and Fact are come, and Friedrich is himself
again !”
They say Prince Henri took the liberty of counselling him,
even of entreating him: ‘ Leave well alone; why run risks?”
said Henri. Daun, it was pretty apparent, had no outlook at
the present but that of sauntering home to Bohmen; leaving
Dresden to be an easy prey again, and his whole Campaign to
fall futile, as the last had. Under Henri’s gentle driving he
would have gone slower; but how salutary,*if he only went!
These were Henri’s views: but Friedrich was not in the slow
humour; impatient to be in Dresden; ‘ will be quartered there
in a week,” writes he, ‘“‘and more at leisure than now.”? He
is thinking of Leuthen, of Rossbach, of Campaign 1757, so glo-
riously restored after ruin; and, in the fire of his soul, is hoping
to do something similar a second time. That is Retzow’s no-
tion: who knows but there may be truth in it? A proud Fried-
rich, got on his feet again after such usage ;—nay, who knows
whether it was quite so unwise to be impressive on the slow
rhinoceros, and try to fix some thorn in his snout, or say (figur-
atively), to hobble his hind feet; which, I am told, would have
been beautifully ruinous; and, though riskish, was not impossi-

? Retzow, ii. 168; Tempelhof, iii. 306.

* <¢Wilsdruf, 17th November 1759,” and still more ‘‘ 19th November,”
Friedrich to Voltaire, in high spirits that way (Qfuvres de Frédéric, xxiii,
66).

——

= —=>

Cuap. VII.] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. 457
14th: Nov. 1759.

ble?+ Ill it indisputably turned out; and we haye, with brevi-
ty, to say how, and leave readers to their judgment of it.

It was in the Village of Krogis, about six miles forward, on the Meis-
sen-Freyberg road, a mile or two on from Korbitz, and directly after
the fierce little tussle in that Village,—that Friedrich, his blood still up,
gave the Order for Maxen. which proved so unlucky to him. Wunsch
had been shot off in pursuit of the beaten Atstrians; but they ran too
fast; and Wunsch came back without farther result, still early in the
day. Back as far as Krogis, where the next Head-quarter is to be ;—
and finds the King still in a fulminant condition ; none the milder, it is
likely, by Wunsch’s returning without result. ‘Go straight to General
Finck; bid him march at once!” orders the King; and rapidly gives
Wunsch the Instructions Finck is to follow. Finck and his Corps are
near Nossen, some ten miles ahead of Krogis, some twenty west from
Dresden. There, since yesterday, stands Finck, infesting the left or
western flank of the Austrians,—what was their left, and will be again,

when they call halt and face round on us :—Let Finck now march at

once, quite round that western flank; by Freyberg, Dippoldiswalde,
thence east to Maxen; plant himself at Maxen (a dozen miles south of
Dresden, among the rocky Hills), and stick diligently in the rear of
those Austrians, cutting off, or threatening to cut off, their communica-
tions with Bohemia, and block the Pirna Country for them.

Friedrich calculates that, if Daun is for retreating by Pirna Country,
this will, at lowest, be a method to quicken him in that movement; or
perhaps it may prove a method to cut off such retreat altogether, and
force Daun to go circling by the Lausitz Hills and Wildernesses, ex-
posed to tribulations which may go nigh to ruin him. That is Fried-
rich’s proud thought: “ An unfortunate Campaign ; winding up, never-
theless, as 1757 did, in blazes of success!” And truly, if Friedrich
could have made himself into Two; and, while flashing and charging in
Daun’s front, have been in command at Maxen in Daun’s rear,—Fried-
rich could have made a pretty thing of this Maxen Enterprise; and
might in good part have realised his proud program. But there is no
getting two Friedrichs. Finck, a General of approved quality, he is the
nearest approach we can make to a second Friedrich ;—and he, ill-luck
too superadding itself, proves tragically inadequate. And sets all the
world, and Opposition Retzow, exclaiming: ‘See: Pride goes before
a fall !”— :

At 3 in the afternoon, Friedrich, intensely surveying from the heights
of Krégis the new Austrian movements and positions, is astonished, not
agreeably (“ What, still only here, Herr General!”’), by a pea visit

4 Tempelhof, ili. 317, &.

Vor. 4 eee G

458 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

15th-17th Nov. 1759.
from Finck. Finck finds the Maxen business intricate, precarious ; wish-
es farther instructions, brings forward this objection and that. Friedrich
at last answers, impatiently : ‘“‘ You know I can’t stand making of diffi-
culties (Hr weiss dass ich die Difficultaten nicht lerden kann; mache
dass Er fort Kommt); contrive to get it done!” With which poor
comfort Finck has to ride back to Nossen; and scheme out his disposi-
tions overnight.

Next morning, Thursday 15th, Finck gets on march; drives the
Reichsfolk out of Freyberg ; reaches Dippoldiswalde :—* Freyberg is
to be my Magazine,” considers Finck ; “ Dippoldiswalde my half-way
house; Four Battalions of my poor Kighteen shall stand there, and se-
cure the meal-carts.” Friday 16th, Finck has his Vanguard, Wunsch
leading it, in possession of Maxen and the Heights; and on Saturday
gets there himself, with all his people and equipments. I should think
about 12,000 men: in a most intersected, intertwisted Hill Country ;
full of gullets, dells and winding brooks ;—it is fore-court of the Pirna
rocks, our celebrated Camp of Gahmig lies visible to north, Dohna and
the Rothwasser bounding us to east ;*—in grim November weather,
some snow falling, or snow-powder, alternating with sleet and glazing
frosts: by no means a beautiful enterprise to Finck. Not one of his
own choosing, had one a choice in such cases.

To Daun nothing could be more unwelcome than this news of Finck,
embattled there at Maxen in the inextricable Hill-country, direct on the
road of Daun’s meal-carts and Bohemian communications. And truly
withal,—what Daun does not yet hear, but can guess,—there is gone, in
supplement or as auxiliary to Finck, a fierce Hussar party, under Grune
Kleist, their fiercest Hussar since Mayer died; who this very day, at
Aussig, burns Daun’s first considerable Magazine; and has others in
view for the same fate.° An evident thing to Daun, that Finck being
there, meal has ceased.

On the instant, Daun falls back on Dresden; Saturday 17th, takes
post in the Dell of Plauen (Plauen’sche Grund) ; an impassable Chasm,
with sheer steeps on both sides, stretching southward from Dresden in
front of the Hill Country: thither Daun marches, there to consider what
is to be done with Finck. Amply safe this position is; none better in
the world: a Village, Plauen, and a Brook, Weistritz, in the bottom of
this exquisite Chasm; sheer rock-walls on each side,—high especially
on the Daun, or south side ;—head-quarters can be in Dresden itself ;
room for your cavalry on the plain ground between Dresden and the
Chasm. <A post both safe and comfortable ; only you must not loiter in

* Map at p. 462.

5 Friedrich’s second Letter to Voltaire, Wilsdruf, ‘‘ 19th November 1759.”

|
|

RU WEP ee ee ee ae

Cuap. VII.] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. 459
18th Nov. 1759.

making up your mind as to Finck; for Friedrich has followed on the
instant. Friedrich’s head-quarter is already Wilsdruf, which an hour
or two ago was Daun’s: at Kesselsdorf vigilant Ziethen is vanguard.
So that Friedrich looks over on you from the northern brow of your
Chasm ; delays are not good near such a neighbour.

Daun,—urged on by Lacy, they say,—is not long in deciding that, in
this strait, the short way out will be to attack Finck in the Hills. Daun
is in the Hills,as well as Finck (this Plauen Chasm is the boundary-
ditch of the Hills): Daun with 27,000 horse and foot, moving on from
this western part ; 3,000 light people (one Sincere the leader of them),
moving simultaneously from Dresden itself, that is, from northward or
north-westward ; 12,000 Reichsfolk, horse and foot, part of them already
to south-eastward of Finck, other part stealing on by the Elbe bank
thitherward : here, from three different points of the compass, are 42,000.
These simultaneously dashing in, from west, north, south, upon Finck,
may surely give account of his 12,000 and him! If only we can keep
Friedrich dark upon it ; which surely our Pandours will contrive to do.

Finck, directly on arriving at Maxen, had reported himself to the
King; and got answer before next morning: “ Very well; but draw in
those Four Battalions you have left in Dippoldiswalde ; hit with the
whole of your strength, when a chance offers.” Which order Finck,
literally and not too willingly, obeys; leaves only some light remnant
in Dippoldiswalde, and reinforcement to linger within reach, till a cer-
tain Bread-convoy come to him, which will be due next morning (Mon-
day 19th) ; and which does then safely get home, though under annoy-
ances from cannonading in the distance.

Sunday 18th, Finck fails not to reconnoitre from the highest Hill-
top; to inquire by every method: he finds, for certain, that the enemy

_ are coming in uponhim. With his own eyes he sees Reichsfolk march-

ing, in quantity, south-eastward by the Elbe shore: “ Intending towards
Dohna, as is like ?”—and despatched Wunsch, who, accordingly, drove
them out of Dohna. Of all this Finck, at once, sent word to Friedrich.
Who probably enough received the message ; but who would get no new
knowledge from it,—vigilant Ziethen having, by Austrian deserters and
otherwise, discovered this of the Reichsfolk ; and furthermore that Sin-
cere with 3,000 was in motion, from the north, upon Finck. Sunday
evening, Friedrich despatches Ziethen’s Report: which punctually
came to Finck’s hand; but was the last thing he received from Fried-
rich, or Friedrich from him. The intervening Pandours picked up all
the rest. The Ziethen Report, of two or three lines, most succinct but
sufficient, like a cutting of hard iron, is to be read in many Books: we
may as well give the Letter and it:

460 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. _

18th-19th Nov. 1759.

Friedrich’s Letter (Wilsdruf, 18th November 1759). “ My dear
General-Lieutenant von Finck! I send you the enclosed Report trom _
General Ziethen, showing what is the lie of matters as seen from this
side; and leave the whole to your disposition and necessary measures.
I am your well-affectioned King,—F.” The Enclosure is as fol-
lows :

General Ziethen’s Report (Kesselsdorf, 18th November 1759).
“To your Royal Majesty, send” (no pronoun “ I” allowed) “ herewith
a Corporal, who has deserted from the Austrians. He says, Sincere
with the Reserve did march with the Reichs Army; but a league —
behind it, and turned towards Dippoldiswalde. General Brentano”
(Wehla’s old comrade, luckier than Wehla), “as this Deserter heard
last night in Daun’s headquarter,—which is in the southern Suburb of
Dresden, in the Countess Moschinska’s Garden,— was yesterday to have
been in Dohlen” (looking into our outposts from the hither side of their
Plauen Dell), “ but was not there any longer,” as our Deserter passed,
“and it was said that he had gone for Maxen at three in the afternoon.”®

Thus curtly is Finck authorized to judge for himself in the new
circumstances. Marginally is added, in Friedrich’s own hand: “ Er
wird entweder mit den Reichern oder mit Sinceren einen Gang
haben,—Either with the Reichers or with Sincere you will have a
bout, I suppose.”

Finck, from his own Hill-top, on Sunday and Monday, sees all this
of Ziethen, and much more. Sees the vanguard of Daun himself
approaching Dippoldiswalde, cannonading his meal-carts as they issue
there; on all sides his enemies encompassing him like bees ;—and has
a sphinx-riddle on his mind, such as soldier seldom had. Shall he
manceuvre himself out, and march away, bread-carts, baggages and all
entire? There is still time, and perfect possibility, by Dippoldiswalde
there, or by other routes and methods. But again, did not his Majesty
expect, do not these words “a bout” still seem to expect, a bit of fight-
ing with somebody or other? Finck was an able soldier, and his skill
and courage well known; but probably another kind of courage was
wanted this day, of which Finck had not enough. Finck was not king
of this matter; Finck was under a King who perhaps misjudged the
matter. If Finck saw no method of doing other than hurt and bad
service to his King by staying here, Finck should have had the courage
to come away, and front the King’s unreasonable anger, expecting
redress one day, or never any redress. That was Finck’s duty: but
everybody sees how hard it was for flesh and blood.

Finck, truer to the letter than to the spirit, determined to remain.

§ Tempelhof, ili. 309.

Cuar. VIT.] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. 461
20th Nov, 1759.

Did, all that Monday, his best to prepare himself; called in his out-
posts (“‘ Was not I ordered?” thinks Finck, too literally) ; and sees his
multitudes of enemies settle round him ;—Daun alone has 27,000 men,
who take camp at Dippoldiswalde; and in sum-total, they are as 4 to 1
of Finck :—a Finck still resolute of face, though internally his thoughts
may be haggard enough. Doubtless he hopes, too, that Friedrich will
do something :—unaware that none of his messages reach Friedrich.
As for Daun, having seen his people safely encamped here, he returns
to Dresden for the night, to see that Friedrich is quiet. Friedrich is
quiet enough: Daun, at seven next morning (Tuesday 20th), appeared
on the ground again; and from all sides Finck is assaulted,—from
Daun’s side nearest and soonest, with Daun’s best vigour.

Dippoldiswalde is some seven miles from Maxen. Difficult hill-road
all the way: but the steepest, straitest and worse place is at Reinharts-
grimma, the very first Hamlet after you are out of Dippoldiswalde.
There is a narrow gullet there, overhung with heights all round. The
roads are slippery, glazed with sleet and frost; Cavalry, unroughened,
make sad sliding and sprawling ; hardly the Infantry are secure on their
feet : a terrible business, getting masses of artillery-wagons, horse and
man, through such a Pass! It is thought, had Finck garnished this
Pass of Reinhartsgrimma with the proper batteries, the proper musket-
ries, Daun never would have got through. Finck had not a gun or a
man in it: ‘‘ Had not I order?” said he,—again too literally. As it
was, Daun, sliding and sprawling in the narrow steeps, had difficulties
almost too great: and, they say, would have given it up, had it not been
that a certain Major urged, ‘‘ Can be done, Excellenz, and shall!” and
that the temper of his soldiers was everywhere excellent. Unfortunate
Finck had no artillery to bear on Daun’s transit through the Pass.
Nothing but some weak body of hussars and infantry stood looking into
it, from the Hill of Hausdorf: even these might have given him some
slight hindrance; but these were played upon by endless Pandours,
“issuing from a wood near by,” with musketries, and at length with
cannon batteries, one and another ;—and had to fall back, or to be called
back, to Maxen Hill, where the main force is.

In the course of yeSterday, by continual reconnoitering, by Austrian
deserters, and intense comparison of symptoms, Finck had completely
ascertained where the Enemy’s Three Attacks were to be,—‘ on
Maxen, from Dippoldiswalde, Trohnitz, Dohna, simultaneously three
attacks,” it appears ;—and had with all his skill arranged himself on
the Maxen summits to meet these. He stands now elaborately divided
into Three groups against those Three simultaneities ; forming (sadly
wide apart, one would say, for such a force as Finck’s) a very obtuse-
angled triangle:—the obtuse vortex of which (if readers care to look on

462 YRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

! 20th Nov. 1759.
their Map) is Trohnitz, the road Brentano and Sincere are coming.*
On the base-angles, Maxen and Dohna, Finck expects Daun and the
Reich. From Trohnitz to Maxen is near two miles; from Maxen to
Dohna above four. At Dohna stands Wunsch against the Reich ;
Finck himself at Maxen, expecting Daun, as the pith of the whole
affair. In this triangular way stands Finck at the topmost heights of
the country,—‘‘ Maxen highest, but Hausdorf only a little lower,”—and~
has not thought of disputing the climb upwards. ‘Too literal an eye to
his orders: alas, he was not himself king, but only king’s deputy !

The result is, about 11 a.m., as I obscurely gather, Daun has con-
quered the climb; Daun’s musketries begin to glitter on the top of
Hausdorf; and 26 or 32 heavy cannon open their throats there; and
the Three Attacks break loose. Finck’s Maxen batteries (scarcely
higher than Daun’s, and far inferior in weight) respond with all dili-
gence, the poor regimental field-pieces helping what they can. Mutual
cannonade, very loud for an hour and a half; terrific, but doing little
mischief; after which Daun’s musketries (the ground now sufficiently
clear to Daun), which are the practical thing, begin opening, first from
one point, then from another: and there ensues, for five hours coming,
at Maxen and at the other two points of Finck’s triangle, such a series
of explosive chargings, wheelings, worryings and intricate death-wrest-
lings, as it would provoke every reader to attempt describing to him.
Except indeed he were a soldier, bound to know the defence of posts ;
in which case I could fairly promise him that there are means of under-
standing the affair, and that he might find benefit in it.’

Daun’s Grenadiers, and Infantry generally, are in triumphant spirits ;
confident of victory, as they may reasonably be. Finck’s people, too,
behave well, some of them conspicuously well, though in gloomier mood ;
and make stubborn fight, successful here and there, but, as a whole, not
capable of succeeding. By 3 inthe afternoon, the Austrians have forced
the Maxen Post; they “enter Maxen with great shoutings;” extrude
the obstinate Prussian remnants; and, before long, have the poor Vil-
lage ‘‘ on fire in every part.” Finck retreating northward to Schmors-
dorf, towards the obtuse angle of his triangle, if haply there may be help
in that quarter for him. Daun does not push him much; has Maxen
safely burning in every part.

From Schmorsdorf, Finck pushes out a Cavalry charge on Brentano.
“Could we but repulse Brentano yonder,” thinks he, “I might have

* Sketch of Plan opposite. :

7 Tempelhof, iii. 307-317. Journal und Nachricht von der Gefangenneh-
mung des Finck’schen Corps bey Maxen, im Jahre 1759 (Seyfarth, Beylagen,
ii. 687-654).

Yot Vp S74 a.

ae TAM Se Hany
d Segschen wi
" BZ SS .

PS sO
Aw

= iN ty

A\Quilt,. 7
Hm

on)

\S

YS
Ya WN
yw

Wil
BS
FF
yy

7 }

le
Se '
ik wild
‘ Ae AW
Saale

Ls
=

WiNli
SWZ,
a Ge \!
Meth. =o = Ni
Vis ORS
= ES A

BATTLE Of KMUNERSDORF.
22°" AUQUST 1759.
a.a a. Russian Army. b.b. Austrians under Loudon.
cc. Russian Abatiis. ad. Russian Wagenburg.

e. e. Position of Prusstan Army Lremng of ff Vanguard, under Fink. }

GF Prussian heavy Baggage.
h. Attack of Prussian Grenadiers, i. 7%, Prussian main Army.
k. ko. Fink's line of Attack.

BATTLE OF )
MAXEWN.

20" NOVEMAER 1759.

a. a. Prussian Army.
b, Prussian Detatchment,|
under Wunsch .
¢. c. dustrian Attack
under Daun .
d.d. Attack of Brentano,
and Sincere.
e.e.e. Reichs Army.

cS, ae)

on

Cuar. VIE} CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. — 468
20th Nov. 1759.

those Four Battalions to hand, and try again!” But Brentano makes
such cannonading, the Cavalry swerve to a Hollow on their right; then
find they have not ground, and retire quite fruitless. Finck’s Cavalry,
and the Cavalry generally, with their horses all sliding on the frosty
mountain-gnarls, appear to be good for little this day. Brentano, vic-
torious over the Cavalry, comes on with such storm, he sweeps through
the obtuse angle, home upon Finck ; and sweeps him out of Schmors-
dorf Village to Schmorsdorf Hill, there to take refuge, as the night
sinks,—and to see himself, if his wild heart will permit him to be can-
did,a ruined man. Of the Three Attacks, Two have completely suc-
ceeded on him; only Wunsch, at Dohna, stands victorious; he has held
back the Reich all day, and even chased it home to its posts on the
Rothwasser (Red Water), multitudinous as it was.

Finck’s mood, as the November shadows gathered on him,—the equal
heart may, at least, pity poor Finck! His resolution is fixed: “Cut
ourselves through, this night: Dohna is ours; other side that Red
Water there are roads ;—perish or get through!”’ And the Generals
(who are rallied now “on the Heights of Falkenhain and Bloschwitz,”
midway between Maxen and Dohna) get that Order from him. And
proceed to arrange for executing it,—though with outlook more and
more desperate, as their scouts report that every pass and post, on the
Red Water, is beset by Reichsfolk. ‘*‘ Wunsch, with the Cavalry, he
at least may thread his way out, under cloud of night, by the opposite
or Daun side,” calculates Finck. And Wunsch sets out accordingly :
a very questionable, winding, subterranean march; difficult in the ex-
treme,—the wearied slipshod horses going at a snail’s pace; and, in
the difficult passes, needing to be dragged through with bridle, and even
to be left altogether :—in which, withal, it will prove of no use for
Wunsch to succeed! Finck’s Generals, endeavouring to rank and re-
arrange through the night, find that their very cartridges are nearly
spent, and that of men, such wounding, such deserting has there been,
they have, at this time, by precise count, 2,836 rank and file. Evi-
dently desperate.

At daylight, Daun’s cannon beginning again from the Maxen side,
Finck sends to capitulate. ‘‘ Absolute surrender,” answers Daun:
‘prisoners of war, and you shall keep your private baggage. General
Wunsch with the Cavalry, he too must turn back and surrender!”
Finck pleaded hard, on this last score: ‘‘ General Wunsch, as head of
the Cavalry, is not under me; is himself chief in that department.”
But it was of no use; Wunsch had to return (not quite got through
Daun’s Lines, after such a night), and to surrender, like everybody else.
Like eight other Generals; like Wolfersdorf of Torgau, and many a

464 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
21st Nov. 1759.

brave Officer and man. Wednesday morning, 21st November 1759 :
it is Finck’s fourth day on Maxen; his last in the Prussian Service.

That same Wednesday Afternoon, there were ranked in the Grosse
Garten at Dresden, of dejected Prussian Prisoners from Maxen, what
exact number was never known: the Austrians said 15,000; but no-
body well believed them; their last certain instalment being only, in
correct numbers, 2,836. Besides the killed, wounded, and already cap-
tured, many had deserted, many had glided clear off. It is judged that
Friedrich lost, by all these causes, about 12,000 men. Gone wholly,—
with their equipments and appurtenances wholly, which are not worth
counting in comparison. Finck and the other Generals, 8 of them, and
529 Officers,—Finck, Wunsch, Wolfersdorf, Mosel (of the Olmiitz Con-
voy), not to mention others of known worth, this is itself a sore loss to
Friedrich, and in present circumstances an irreparable.®

The outburst and paroxysm of Gazetteer rumour, which arose
in Europe over this, must be left to the imagination; still more
the whirlwind of astonishment, grief, remorse and indignation
that raged in the heart of Friedrich on first hearing of it. ‘The
Caudine Forks ;” ‘* Scene of Pirna over again, in reverse form ;”
“Ts not your King at last over with it?” said and sang multifa-
riously the Gazetteers. As counter-chorus to which, in a certain
Royal Heart: ‘‘That miserable purblind Finck, unequal to his
task ;—that over-hasty I, who drove him upon it! This dis-
grace, loss nigh ruinous; in fine, this infernal Campaign (cette
Campagne infernale)’’ ‘The Anecdote-Books abound in details
of Friedrich’s behaviour at Wilsdruf, that day; mythical all, or
in good part, but symbolising a case that is conceivable to every-
body. Or would readers care to glance into the very fact with
their own eyes? As happens to be possible:

1°. Before Maren: Friedrich to D’ Argens and others.

“ To D’Argens (Krogis, 15th November,” order for Maxen just giv-
en. ‘* Yesterday I joined the Army” (day before yesterday, but took
the field yesterday), ‘‘ and Daun decamped. I have followed him thus
far, and will continue it to the frontiers of Bohemia. Our measures are
so taken” (Finck, to wit) “that he will not get out of Saxony without
considerable losses. Yesterday cost him 500 men taken at Krogis
here. Every movement he makes will cost him as many.”®

* Seyfarth, ii. 576: in Helden-Geschichte (v. 1115), the Vienna Account.
9 (Huvres de Frédéric, xix, 101.

Cuap. VII. ] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN. 465
21st Noy. 1759.

“To Voltaire (Wilsdruf, 17th November).” ‘We are verging on
the end of our Campaign: and I will write to you in eight days from
Dresden, with more composure and coherency than now.”?°

“ To the same (Wilsdruf, 19th November).” ‘The Austrians are
packing off to Bohemia,—where, in reprisal for the incendiary opera-
tions they have done in my countries, I have burnt them two big maga-
zines. I render the beautiful Hero’s retreat as difficult as possible: and
I hope he will come upon some bad adventures within a few days.”

** Same day and place, to D’Argens.” <A volley of most rough-paced
off-hand Rhyming, direct from the heart; ‘‘ Ode” (as he afterwards
terms it, or irrepressible extempore La/t) “to Fortune :” |

“ Marquis, quel changement, what a change! J,a poor heretic crea-
ture, never blessed by the Holy Father ; indeed, little frequenting Church,
nor serving either Baal or the God of Israel; held down these many
months, and reported by more than one shaven scoundrel” (priest-pam-
phleteer at Vienna) “to be quite extinct, and gone vagabond over the
world,—see how capricious Fortune, after all her hundred preferences
of my rivals, lifts me with helpful hand from the deep, and packs this
Hero of the Hat and Sword,—whom Popes have blessed what they
could, and who has walked in Pilgrimage before now” (to Marienzell
once, I believe, publicly at Vienna),—* out of Saxony ; panting, harassed
goes he, like a stranger dog from some kitchen where the cook had
flogged him out!"!? * * (A very exultant Lilt, and with a good deal
more of the chanticleer in it than we are used to in this King!)

2°, After Mazen.

“To D’ Argens (Wilsdruf, 22d Nov.).” ‘Do with that” (some small
piece of business) “‘ whatever you like. my dear Marquis. I am so stu-
pefied (étourd:) with the misfortune which has befallen General Finck,
that I cannot recover from my astonishment. It deranges all my meas-
ures; it cuts me to the quick. IIl-luck, which persecutes my old age.
has followed me from the Mark” (Kunersdorf, in the Mark of Branden-
burg) “to Saxony. I will still strive whatI can. The little Ode I sent
you, addressed To Fortune, had been written too soon! One should
not sing victory till the battle is over. I am so crushed down by these
incessant reverses and disasters, that I wish a thousand times I were
dead ; and from day to day I grow wearier of dwelling in a body worn-
out and condemned to suffer. I am writing to you in the first moment
of my grief. Astonishment, sorrow, indignation, scorn, all blended to-
gether, lacerate my soul. Let us get to the end, then, of this execrable

10 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 66. 1 Tbid. xxiii. 66.
12 Thid. xix. 103-106.
U2

466 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox xix:
21st Noy. 1759.

Campaign ; I will then write to you what is to become of me; and we
will arrange the rest. Pity me;—and make no noise about me; bad
news go fast enough of themselves. Adieu, dear Marquis.”!*

All this, of course, under such pressing call of actualities, had
very soon to transform itself into silence; into new resolution,
and determinate despatch of business. But the King retained
a bitter memory of it all his days. To Finck he was inexora-
ble :—ordered him, the first thing on his return from Austrian
Captivity, Trial by Court-Martial; which (Ziethen presiding,
June 1763) censured Finck in various points, and gave him, in
supplement to the Austrian detention, a Year’s imprisonment in
Spandau. No ray of pity visible for him, then or afterwards, in
the Royal mind. So that the poor man had to beg his dismis-
sal; get it, and go to Denmark for new promotion and appreci-
ation. —* Far too severe !’’ grumbled the Opposition voices, with
secret counter-severity. And truly it would have been more
beautiful to everybody, for the moment, to have made matters
soft to poor Finck,—had Friedrich ever gone on that score with
his Generals and Delegates; which, though the reverse of a cru-
el man, he never did. And truly, as we often observe, the Laws
of Fact are still severer than Friedrich was:—so that, in the
long-run, perhaps it is beautifullest of all, for a King, who is just,
to be radamanthine in important cases.

Exulting Daun, instead of Bohemia for winter-quarters, pushes
out now for the prize of Saxony itself. Daun orders Beck to at-
tack suddenly another Outpost of Friedrich’s, which stands rear-
ward of him at Meissen, under a General Dierecke,—the same
whom, as Colonel Dierecke, we saw march out of flamy Zit-
tau, summer gone two years. Beck goes in accordingly, 3d De-
cember; attacks Dierecke, not by surprise, but with overwhelm-
ing superiority; no reinforcement possible: Dierecke is on the
wrong side of the Elbe, no retreat or reinforcement for him;
has to fight fiercely all day, Meissen Bridge being in a broken
state; then, at night, to ship his people across in Elbe boats,
which are much delayed by the floating ice, so that daylight
found 1,500 of them on that northern side; all of whom, with

13 (uvres de Frédéric, xix. 107.

{
Cuapr. VII.] CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN, 467 |
21st Nov. 1759.

General Dierecke himself, were made prisoners by Beck.4 A
comfortable supplement to Maxen, though not of the same mag-
nificence.

_ After which, Daun himself issued minatory from the Plauen
Chasm ; expecting, as all the world did, that Friedrich, who is
36,000 of Unfortunate against, say, 72,000 of Triumphant,
will, under penalty, take himself away. But it proved other-
wise. ‘If you beat us, Excellency Feldmarschall, yes; but till
then —}” Friedrich draws out in battalia; Leo, in wild ragged
state and temper, versus Bos in the reverse: ‘‘ Come on, then!”
Rhinoceros Bos, though in a high frame of mind, dare not, on
cool survey ; but retires behind the Plauen Chasm again. Will
at least protect Dresden from recapture; and wait here, in the
interim; carting his provision out of Bohemia,— which is a
rough business, with Elbe frozen, and the passes in such a choked
wintry state. Upon whom Friedrich, too, has to wait under.
arms, in grim neighbourhood, for six weeks to come: such a
time as poor young Archenholtz never had before or after. It
was well beyond Newyears-day, before Friedrich could report
of himself, and then only in a sense, as will be seen: ‘ We re-
tired to this poor cottage” (cottage still standing, in the little
Town of Freyberg); ‘‘ Daun did the like; and this unfortunate
Campaign, as all things do, came actually to an end.”’

Daun holds Dresden and the Dell of Plauen ; but Saxony,
to the world’s amazement, he is as far as ever from holding.
“Daun’s front is a small are of’a circle, bending round from
Dresden to Dippoldiswalde; Friedrich is at Freyberg in a bigger
concave are, concentric to Daun, well overlapping Daun on that
southward or landward side, and ready for him, should he stir
out; Kesselsdorf is his nearest post to Daun; and the Plauen
Chasm for boundary, which was not overpassed by either.” In
Dresden, and the patch of hill country to the south-eastward of
it by Elbe side, which is instep or glacis of the Pirna rock coun-
try, 70 square miles or so, there rules Daun; and this,—with
its heights of Gahmig, valuable as a defence for Dresden against
Austria, but not otherwise of considerable value,—was all that

14 Tempelhof, iii. 221: ‘*8d-4th December 1759.” —-
‘8 Archenholtz, ii. 11-18.

468 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

Daun this year, or pretty much in any coming year, could realise
of conquest in Saxony.

Fabius Cunctator has not succeeded, as the public expected.
In fact, ever since that of Hochkirch and the Papal Hat, he has
been a waning man, more and more questionable to the undis-
cerning public. Maxen was his last gleam upwards; a round
of applause rose again on Maxen, feeble in comparison with
Hochkirch, but still arguing hope,—which, after this, more and
more died out; so that, in two years more, poor Madam Daun,
going to Imperial Levee, ‘‘ had her state-carriage half-filled with
nightcaps, thrown into it by the Vienna people, in token of her
husband’s great talent for sleep.” 16

CHAPTER VIII.
MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS, 1759-60.

FRIEDRICH was very loth to quit the field this Winter. In
spite of Maxen and ill-luck and the unfavourablest weather, it
still was, for about two months, his fixed purpose to recapture
Dresden first, and drive Daun home. ‘‘ Had I but a 12,000 of
Auxiliaries to guard my right flank, while trying it!’ said» he.
Ferdinand magnanimously sent him the Hereditary Prince with
12,000, who staid above two months;! and Friedrich did march
about, attempting that way,?—pushed forward to Maguire and
Dippoldiswalde, looked passionately into Maguire on all sides;
but found him, in those frozen chasms, and rock-labyrinths
choked with snow, plainly unattackable; him and everybody,
in such frost-element ;—and renounced the passionate hope.

It was not till the middle of January that Friedrich put his
troops into partial cantonments, Head-quarter Freyberg; troops
still mainly in the Villages from Wilsdruf and southward, close
by their old Camp there. Camp still left standing, guarded by

16 Archenholtz (Anno 1762, ‘‘last Siege of Schweidnitz”’).

1 Ti] February 15th ;” List of the Regiments (German all), in Sey-
Jarth, ii. 578 n.

2 (Euvres de Frédéric, y. 32. Old Newspaper rumours: in Gentleman’s
Magazine, xxix. 605, ‘‘ 29th December,” &c,

Cuap. VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 469
30th Nov. 1759.

Six Battalions; six after six, alternating week about: one of
the grimmest Camps in Nature; the canvas roofs grown mere
ice-plates, the tents mere sanctuaries of frost:—never did poor
young Archenholtz see such industry in dragging wood-fuel, such
boiling of biscuits in broken ice, such crowding round the embers
to roast one side of you, while the other was freezing. But
Daun’s people, on the opposite side of Plauen Dell, did the like;
their tents also were left standing in the frozen state, guarded
by alternating battalions, no better off than their Prussian neigh-
bours. This of the Tents, and Six frost-bitten Battalions guard-
ing them, lasted till April. An extraordinary obstinacy on the
part both of Daun and of Friedrich; alike jealous of even seem-
ing to yield one inch more of ground.

The Hereditary Prince, with his 12,000, marched home again
in February ; indeed, ever after the going into cantonments, all
use of the Prince and his Force here visibly ceased; and, on the
whole, no result whatever followed those strenuous antagonisms,
and frozen tents left standing for three months; and things re-
mained practically what they were. So that, as the grand
** Peace Negotiations” also came to nothing, we might omit this
- of Winter-quarters altogether; and go forward to the opening
of Campaign Fifth ;—were it not that characteristic features do
otherwise occur in it, curious little unveilings of the secret hopes
and industries of Friedrich ;—besides which, there have minor
private events fallen out, not without interest to human readers.
For whose behoof mainly a loose intercalary Chapter may be
thrown together here.

Serene Highness of Wiirtemberg, at Fulda (November 380th,
1759), as just about ‘firing Victoria,” and giving a Ball to
Beauty and Fashion, in Honour of a certain Event ;—but
is unpleasantly interrupted.

November 21st, the very day while Finck was capitulating in
the Hills of Maxen, Duke Ferdinand, busy ever since his Victory
at Minden, did, after a difficult Siege of Miinster, Siege by Imhof,
‘with Ferdinand protecting him, get Miinster into hand again,
which was reckoned a fine success to him. Very busy has the

2 Archenholtz (ut supra), ii. 11-15.

470 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. —

30th Nov. 1759.
Duke been; industriously reaping the fruits of his Victory at
Minden ; and this, the conclusive rooting-out of the French from
that Westphalian region, is a very joyful thing; and puts Ferdi-
nand in hopes of driving them over the Mayn altogether. Which
some think he would have done; had not he, with magnanimous
oblivion of self and wishes, agreed to send the Hereditary Prince
and those 12,000 to assist in Friedrich’s affairs, looking upon
that as the vital point in these Allied Interests. Friedrich’s at-

tempts, we have said, turned out impossible; nor would the He-.

reditary Prince and his 12,000, though a good deal talked about
in England and elsewhere,‘ require more than mention; were it
not that on the road thither, at Fulda (“ Fulda is half-way house
to Saxony,” thinks Ferdinand, “should Pitt and Britannic Maj-
esty be pleased to consent, as I dare presume they will’), the
Hereditary Prince had, in his swift way, done a thing useful for
Ferdinand himself, and which caused a great emotion, chiefly of
laughter, over the world, in those weeks.

‘No Enemy of Friedrich’s,” says my Note, “ is of feller humour than
the Serenity of Wirtemberg, Karl Eugen, Reigning Duke of that unfor-
tunate Country ; for whom, in past days, Friedrich had been so fatherly,
and really took such pains. ‘ Fatherly? Step-fatherly, you mean; and
for his own vile uses" growled the Serenity of Wiirtemberg :—always
an ominous streak of gloom in that poor man; streak which is spread
now to whole skies of boiling darkness, owing to deliriums there have
been! Enough, Karl Eugen, after divorcing his poor Wife, had distin-
guished himself by a zeal without knowledge, beyond almost all the
- enemies of Friedrich ,—and still continues in that bad line of indus-
try. His poor Wife he has made miserable in some measure; also
himself; and, in a degree, his poor soldiers and subjects, who are with
him by compulsion in this Enterprise. ‘The Wiirtembergers are Prot-
estants of old type; and want no fighting against ‘ the Protestant Hero,’
but much the reverse! Serene Karl had to shoot a good few of these
poor people, before they would march at all; and his procedures were
indeed, and continued to be, of a very crying nature, though his poor
Populations took them silently. Always something of perverse in this
Serene Highness; has it, I think, by kind.

“‘ Besides his quota to the Reich, Karl Eugen has 12,000 more on
foot,—and it is of them we are treating at present. In 1757, he had
lent these troops to the Empress Queen, for a consideration: it was

* Walpole, George Second, iii. 248 (in a sour Opposition tone); &e. &e.

» le
a VO ee eee

os

te

Cuap. VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 471
30th Noy. 1759.

they that stood on the Austrian left, at Leuthen ; and were the first that
got beaten, and had to cease standing,—as the Austrians were abundant-
ly loud in proclaiming. ‘To the disgust of Serene Highness: ‘ Which
of you did stand,then? Was it their blame, led as they were?’ argued
he. And next year, 1758, after Crefeld, he took his 12,000 to the
French (* subsidy,’ or consideration, ‘to be paid in salt, it appears®) ;
with whom they marched about, and did nothing considerable. The
Serenity had pleaded,‘ I must command them myself!’ ‘ You? said
Belleisle, and would not hear of it. Next year again, however, that is
1759, the Duke was positive, ‘1 must;’ Belleisle not less so,‘ You can-
not ;—till Minden fel] out; and then, in the wreck of Contades, Belle-
isle had to consent. Serenity of Wiirtemberg, at that late season, took
the field accordingly ; and Broglio now has him at Fulda,‘ To cut off
Ferdinand from Cassel ;’ to threaten Ferdinand’s left flank and his pro-
vision-carts in that quarter. May really become unpleasant there to
Ferdinand ,—and ought to be cut out by the Hereditary Prince. ‘To
Fulda, then, and cut him out!’

“ Fulda, Tuesday, 30th November 1759. Serene Highness is lying
here for a week past; abundantly strong for the task on hand,—has his
own 12,000, supplemented by 1,000 French Light Horse ;—but is wide-
ly scattered withal, posted in a kind of triangular form; his main posts
being Fulda itself, and a couple of others, each thirty miles from Fulda,
and five miles from one another,—with ‘ patrols to connect them,’ better
or worse. Abundantly strong for the task, and in perfect security ; and
indeed intends this day to ‘ fire victoria’ for the Catastrophe at Maxen,
and in the evening will give a Ball in farther honour of so salutary an
event :—when, about 9 a.M., news arrives at the gallop, ‘ Prussians in
full march ; are within an hour of the Town Bridge!’ Figure to what
flurry of Serene Highness; of the victoria-shooting apparatus ; of busy
man-milliner people, and the Beauty and Fashion of Fulda in gen-
eral!

“The night before, a rumour of the French Post being driven in by
somebody had reached Serene Highness ,; who gave some vague order,
not thinking it of consequence. Here, however, is the Fact come to
hand, in a most urgent and undeniable manner! Serene Highness
gets on horseback ; but what can that help? One cannon (has nothing
but light cannon) he does plant on the Bridge: but see, here come pre-
monitory bombshells one and another, terrifying to the mind ;—and a
single Hessian dragoon, plunging forward on the one unready cannon,
and in the air making horrid circles,—the gunners leave said cannon
to him, take to their heels; and the Bridge is open. The rest of the
affair can be imagined. Retreat at our swiftest, ‘running fight,’ we

5 (Euvres de Frédéric, y. 10.

472 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

would fain call it, by various roads ; lost two flags, two cannon ; prison-
ers were above 1,200, many of them Officers. ‘A merciful Providence
saved the Duke’s Serene Person from hurt,’ say the Stuttgard Gazet-
teers: which was true,—Serene Highness having been inspired to gal-
lop instantly to rearward and landward, leaving an order to somebody,
‘Do the best you can!’ ;

‘So that the Ball is up; dress-pumps and millineries getting all
locked into their drawers again,—with abundance of teehee-ing (I hope,
mostly in a light vein) from the fair creatures disappointed of their dance
this time. Nextday,Serene Highness drew farther back, and next day
again farther,—towards F'rankenland and home, as the surest place ;—
and was no more heard of in those localities.”

Making his first exit, not yet quite his final, from the War-The-
atre, amid such tempests of haha-ing and teehee-ing. With what
thoughts in his own lofty opaque mind ;—like a crowned mule,
of such pace and carriage, who had unexpectedly stepped upon
galvanic wires !—

As to those poor Wiirtembergers, and their notion of the
‘‘Protestant Hero,” I remark farther, that there is a something
of real truth in it. Friedrich’s Creed, or Theory of the Uni-
verse, differed extremely, in many important points, from that of
Dr. Martin Luther: but in the vital all-essential point, what we
may call the heart’s-core of all Creeds which are human, human
and not simious or diabolic, the King and the Doctor were with
their whole heart at one: That it is not allowable, that it is
dangerous and abominable, to attempt believing what is not true.
In that sense, Friedrich, by nature and position, was a Protest-
ant, and even the chief Protestant in the world. What kind of
‘“‘ Hero,” in this big War of his, we are gradually learning ;—in
which too, if you investigate, there is not wanting something of
“¢ Protestant Heroism,” even in the narrow sense. For it does
appear,—Maria Theresa having a real fear of God, and poor
Louis a real fear of the Devil, whom he may well feel to be
getting dangerous purchase over him,—some hope-gleams of act-
ing upon Schism, and so meriting Heaven, did mingle with their
high terrestrial combinations, on this unique opportunity, more
than are now supposed in careless History Books.

* Buchholz, ii. 332; Mauvillon, ii. 80; Helden- Geschichte, v. 1184-11938;
Old Newspapers, in Gentleman’s Magazine, xxix. 603.

a

Cuap. VIII] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 473
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

What is Perpetual President Maupertuis doing, all this
While? Is he still in Berlin; or where in the Universe ts
he? Alas, poor Maupertuis /

In the heat of this Campaign, “ July 27th,’-—some four days
after the Battle of Ziillichau, just while Friedrich was hurrying
off for that Intersection at Sagan, and breathless Hunt of Lou-
don and Haddick,—poor Maupertuis had quitted this wor!d,
July 27th, 1759; at Basel, on the Swiss Borders, in his friend
Bernouilli’s house, after long months of sickness painfully spent
there. And our poor Perpetual President, at rest now from all
his Akakia burns, and pains and labours in flattering the Earth
and otherwise, is gone.

Many beautifuller men have gone within the Year, of whom
we can say nothing. But this is one whose grandly silent, and
then occasionally fulminant procedures, Akakia controversies,
Olympian solemnities, and flamy pirouettings under the contra-
diction of sinners, we once saw; and think with a kind of human
pathos that we shall see no more. From his goose of an adorer,
La Beaumelle, I have riddled out the following particulars, chiefly

- chronological,—and offer them to susceptible readers. La Beau-

melie is, in a sort, to be considered the speaker ; or La Beaumelle
and this Editor in concert:

Final Pilgrimings of the Perpetual President. ‘ Maupertuis had
quitted Berlin soon after Voltaire. That threat of visiting Voltaire with
pistols,—to be met by ‘my syringe and vessel of dishonour’ on Vol-
taire’s part,—was his last memorability in Berlin. His last at that
time ; or indeed altogether, for he saw little of Berlin farther.

“ Kind of April 1753, he got leave of absence; set out homewards,
for recovery of health. Was at Paris through summer and autumn :
very taciturn in society; ‘ preferred pretty women to any man of sci-
ence ;’ would sententiously say a strong thing now and then, ‘bitter
but not without donhomie, shaking slightly his yellow wig. Disdain-
ful, to how high a degree, of Akakia brabbles, and Voltaire gossip for
or against! In winter, went to St. Malo; found his good Father gone ;
but a loving Sister still there.

“ June 1754, the King wrote to him, ‘ Venez vite, Come quickly :’
July 1754, he came accordingly,’ saw Berlin again; did nothing no-

7 Quvres de Frédéric, xx. 49.

474 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

; Nov. 1759—March 1760.
ticeable there, except get worse in health; and after eleven months,
June 1756, withdrew again on leave,—never to return this time, though
he well intended otherwise. - But at St. Malo, when, after a month or
two of Paris, he got thither (Autumn 1756), and still more, next sum-
mer, 1757, when he thought of leaving St. Malo,—what wars, and ru-
mours of war, all over the world!

“ June 1757, he went to Bordeaux, intending to take ship for ‘ Ham-
burg, and return; but the sea was full of English cruisers’” (Pitt’s De-
“scents lying in store for St. Malo itself). “‘ No getting to Berlin by the
Hamburg or sea route! ‘ Never mind, then,’ wrote the King: ‘Im-
prove your health; go to Italy, if you can.’

“Summer 1757, Maupertuis made for Italy ; got as far as Toulouse ;
—staid there till May following; sad, tragically stoical; saying, spar-
ingly, and rather to women than men, strong things, admired by the
worthier sort. Renounced thoughts of Italy; ‘ Europe bleeding, and
especially France and Prussia, how go idly touring 2

“May 1758, Maupertuis left Toulouse ; turned towards Berlin; slow,

sad, circuitous ;—never to arrive. Saw Narbonne, Montpellier, Nimes ;
with what meditations. At Lyons, under honours sky-high, health get-

ting worse, stays two months; vomits clots of blood there. Thence,
July 24th, to Neufchatel and the Lord Marischal ; happy there for three
months. Hears there of Professor Konig’s death (Akakia Konig):
‘One scoundrel less in the world,’ ejaculated he; ‘ but what is one ’—
October 16th, to the road again, to Basel; stays perforce, in Bernouilli’s
house there, all Winter; health falling lower and lower.

“ April 1759, one day he has carriage at the door (¢ Homeward, at
all rates’); but takes violent spasms in the carriage; can’t ;—can no
farther in this world. Lingers here, under kind care, for above three
months more: dying slowly, most painfully. With much real stoicism ;
not without a stiff-jointed algebraic kind of piety, almost pathetic in its
sort. ‘T'wo Capuchins from a neighbouring Convent daily gave him
consolations,’ not entirely satisfactory ; for daily withal, ‘unknown to
the Capuchins, he made his Valet, who was a Protestant, read to him
from the Geneva Bible ;—and finds many things hard to the human
mind. July 27th, 1759, he died.”®

Poor Maupertuis; a man of rugged stalwart type; honest;
of an ardour, an intelligence,—not to be forgotten for La Beau-
melle’s pulings over them. A man of good and even of high
talent; unlucky in mistaking it for the highest! His poor
Wife, a born Borck,—hastening from Berlin, but again and

8 La Beaumelle, Vie de Maupertuis, pp. 196-216.

So

a —

re ee ee ee ee ee Oe eee eee

i
sl lian

Ceo sa. el err ON ieee Pe Se ee a ae

ee

A as

ee

eT Pea ee ee

Cuap, VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 475
20th Nov. 1759.

again delayed by industry of kind friends, and at last driving
on in spite of everything,—met, in the last miles, his Hearse and
Funeral Company. Adieu, a pitying adieu to him forever,—
and even to his adoring La Beaumelle, who is rather less a block-
head than he generally seems.

This of the ‘Two Capuchins, the last consummation of collapse
in man, is what Voltaire cannot forget, but crows over with his
shrillest mockery ; and seldom mentions Maupertuis without that
last touch to his life-drama.

Grand French Invasion-Scheme comes entirely to Wreck
(Quiberon Bay, 20th November 1759): of Controller-
General Silhouette, and the Outlooks of France, financial
and other.

On the very day of Maxen, Tuesday November 20th, the
grand French Invasion found its terminus,—not on the shores
of Britain, but of Brittany, to its surprise. We saw Rodney
burn the Flatbottom manufactory at Havre; Boscawen chase
the Toulon Squadron, till it ended on the rocks of Lagos.
From January onwards, as was then mentioned, Hawke had
been keeping watch, off Brest Harbour, on Admiral Conflans,
who presides there over multifarious preparations, with the last
Fleet France now has. At Vannes, where Hawke likewise has
ships watching, are multifarious preparations ; new Flatbottoms,
18,000 troops,—could Conflans and they only get to sea. At
the long last, they did get ;—in manner following:

‘November 9th, a wild gale of wind had blown Hawke out of sight;
away home to Torbay, for the moment. ‘ Now is the time!’ thought
Conflans, and put to sea (November 14th); met by Hawke, who had
weighed from Torbay to his duty ; and who, of course, crowded every
sail, after hearing that Conflans was out. At break of day, November
20th” (in the very hours when poor Finck was embattling himself
round Maxen, and Daun sprawling up upon him through the Passes),

“ Hawke had had signal, ‘ A Fleet in sight ;’ and soon after, ‘ Conflans

in sight,—and the day of trial come.

* Conflans is about the strength of Hawke, and France expects much
of him; but he is not expecting Hawke. Conflans is busy, at this
moment, in the mouth of Quiberon Bay, opening the road for Vannes
and the 18,000 ;—in hot chase, at the moment, of a Commodore Duff

476 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

2Uth Nov. 1759.
and his small Squadron, who have been keeping watch there, and are
now running all they can. On a sudden, to the astonishment of Con-
flans, this little Squadron whirls round, every ship of it (with a sky-
rending cheer, could he hear it), and commences chasing! Conflans,
taking survey, sees that it is Hawke; he, sure enough, coming down
from windward yonder, at his highest speed; and that chasing will not
now be one’s business !—

“ About 11 a.m., Hawke is here; eight of his vanward ships are
sweeping on for action. Conflans, at first, had determined to fight
Hawke; and drew up accordingly, and did try a little: but gradually
thought better of it; and decided to take shelter in the shoaly coasts
and nooks thereabouts, which were unknown to Hawke, and might ruin
him if he should pursue, the day being short, and the weather ex-
tremely bad. Weather itself almost to be called a storm. ‘Shore- ©
ward, then; eastward, every ship!’ became, ultimately, Conflans’s plan.
On the whole, it was 2 in the afternoon before Hawke, with those van-
ward Hight, could get clutch of Conflans. And truly he did then strike
his claws into him, in a thunderously fervid manner, he and all hands,
in spite of the roaring weather :—a man of falcon, or accipitral, nature
as well as name.

“Conflans himself fought well; as did certain of the others,—all,
more or less, so long as their plan continued steady :—thunderous mis-
cellany of cannon and tempest ; Conflans with his plan steady, or Con-
flans with his plan wavering, versus those vanward Eight, for two hours
ormore. But the scene was too dreadful; this ship sinking, that obliged
to strike ; things all going awry for Conflans. Hawke, in his own Flag-
ship, bore down specially on Conflans in his,—who did wait, and ex-
change a couple of broadsides ; but then sheered off, finding it so heavy.
French Vice-Admiral next likewise gave Hawke a broadside ; one only,
and sheered off, satisfied with the return. Some four others, in succes-
sion, did the like; ‘ One blast, as we hurry by’ (making for the shore,
mostly)! So that Hawke seemed swallowed in volcanoes (though, in-
deed, their firing was very bad, such a flurry among them), and his Blue |
Flag was invisible for some time, and various ships were hastening to
help him,—till a Fifth French ship coming up with her broadside, Hawke
answered her in particular (La Superbe, a Seventy-four) with all his
guns together; which sent the poor ship to the bottom, in a hideously
sudden manner. One other (the T’hésée) had already sunk in fighting ;
two (the Sole and the Heros) were already running for it,—the Heros,
in a very wnheroic manner! But on this terrible plunge-home of the
Superbe, the rest all made for the shore ;—and escaped into the rocky
intricacies and the darkness. Four of Conflans’s ships were already
gone,—struck, sunk, or otherwise extinct,—when darkness fell, and

Cuap. VIII.] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 477
20th Noy. 1759.

veiled Conflans and his distresses. ‘Country people, to the number of
10,000,’ crowded on the shore, had been seen watching the Battle; and,
‘as sad witnesses of the White Flag’s disgrace,’ disappeared into the in-
terior.’”

Tt was such a night as men never witnessed before. Walpole says:
“The roaring of the elements was redoubled by the thunder from our
ships ; and both concurred in that scene of horror, to put a period to the
Navy and hopes of France. Seven ships of the line got into the River
Vilaine” (lay there fourteen months, under strict watching, till their
backs were broken, “* thumping against the shallow bottom, every tide,”
and only “ three, with three frigates,” ever got out again) ; “ eight more
escaped to different ports,” into the River Charente, ultimately. “Con-
flans’s own ship and another were run on shore, and burnt. One we
took.” Two, with their crews, had gone to the bottom; one under
Hawke’s cannon; one partly by its own mismanagement. “Two of
ours were lost in the storm” (chasing that Sole: and Heros), “ but the
crews saved. Lord Howe, who attacked La Formidable, bore down on
her with such violence, that her prow forced-in his lower tier of guns.
Captain Digby; in the Dunkirk, received the fire of twelve of the ene-
my’s ships, and lost not a man. Keppel’s was full of water, and he
thought it sinking: a sudden squall emptied his ship; but he was in-
formed all his powder was wet; ‘ Then.’ said he, ‘I am sorry I am safe.’
They came and told him a small quantity was undamaged ; ‘ Very well,’
said he; ‘then attack again.’ Not above eight of our ships were en-
gaged in obtaining that decisive victory. The Invasion was heard of
no more.””!°

Invasion had been fully intended, and even, in these final days, con-
siderably expected. In the London Newspapers we read this notice :
Monday November 19th: ‘Today there came Three Expresses,”—
Three Expresses, with what haste in their eyes, testifying successively
of Conflans’s whereabout. But it was believed that Hawke would still
manage. And, at any rate, Pitt wore such a look,—and had, in fact,
made such preparation on the coasts, even in failure of Hawke,—there

~ was no alarm anywhere. Indignation rather ;—and naturally, when the

° Beatson, ii. 327-345; and Ib. iii. 244-250. In Gentleman’s Magazine
(xxix. 557), ‘(A Chaplain’s Letter,” &c. |

19 Walpole, George Second, iii. 232.—Here is the List, accurately riddled
out: 1. Formidable, struck (about 4 p.m.): 2. Thésée, sunk (by a tumble
it made, while in action, under an unskilful Captain): 3. Superbe, sunk:
4, Héros, struck; could not be boarded, such weather; and recommenced
next day, but had to run and strand itself, and be burnt by the English :—
as did (5.) The Soleil Royal (Conflans’s Flagship), Conflans and crew (like
those of the //4ros) getting out in time.

7 5 Sige of 2 vee
” a 1

478 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX. -~
Nov. 1759—March 1760.
news did come, what an outburst of Illumination in the windows andthe __
hearts of men! ; H
‘“‘ Hawke continued watching the mouths of the Vilaine and Charente ;
Rivers, for a good while after, and without interruption henceforth,—
till the storms of Winter had plainly closed them for one season. Sup- Di
plies of fresh provisions had come to him from England, all Summer ; 4
but were stopped latterly by the wild weather. Upon which, in the 5
Fleet, arose this gravely pathetic Stave of Sea-Poetry, with a wrinkle

of briny humour grinning in it: ;
‘¢Till Hawke did bang Monsieur Conflans’ ( Congflang), ;
You sent us beef and beer;

Now Monsieur’s beat, we’ve nought to eat,
Since you have nought to fear.”"

Ph SP eet,

The French mode of taking this catastrophe was rather pecul-
iar. Hear Barbier, an Eyewitness; dating, Paris, December
1759: ‘Since the first days of December, there has been cried,
and sold in the streets, a Printed Detail of all that concerns the
Grand Invasion projected this long while: to wit, the number

ees NS wt ee

of Ships of the Line, of Frigates, Galiots—among others 500 5
Flatbottomed Boats, which are to carry over, and land in En-
gland, more than 54,000 men ;—with list of the Regiments, and

Re os ol

number of the King’s Guards, that are also to go: there are an-
nounced for Generals-in-Chief, M. le Prince de Conti” (do read-
ers remember him since the Broglio-Maillebois time, and how
King Louis prophesied in autograph that he would be “the
Grand Conti” one day ?)—*“ Prince de Conti, Prince de Soubise”
(left his Conquest of Frankfurt for this greater Enterprise),
‘and Milord Thomont” (Irish Jacobite, whom I don’t know).
‘* As sequel to this Detail, there is a lengthy Song on the Disem-
barkment in England, and the fear the English must have of it!’
Calculated to astonish the practical forensic mind.

*¢ Tt is inconceivable,” continues he, “how they have permit-
ted such a Piece to be printed; still more, to be cried, and sold
price one halfpenny (deux liards). This Song is indecent, in the
circumstances of the actual news from our Fleet at Brest (20th
of last month) ;—in regard to which bad adventure M. le Mar-
quis de Conflans has come to Versailles, to justify himself, and
throw the blame on M. le Marquis de Beauffremont” (his Rear-

11 Beatson, ii, 342 n.

Se ee ee eS ne

GN ee ee eee ae ee oe eee

See eee

ee eS Se ee ee ee ee Bee ee poe ea ee ee i :

Cuap. VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 479
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

admiral, now safe in the Charente, with eight of our poor ships).
“Such things are the more out of place, as we are in a bad
enough position,—no Flatbottoms stirring from the ports, no
Troops of the Mason du Roi setting out ;—and have reason to
believe that we are now to make no such attempt.’’!?

Silhouette, the Controller-General, was thought to have a cre-
ative genius in finance: but in the eighth month of his gestation,
what phenomena are these? October 26th, there came out
Four Decrees of Council, setting forth, That, “as the expenses
of the War exceed not only the King’s ordinary revenues, but
the extraordinaries he has had to lay on his people, there is noth-
ing for it but,” in fact, Suspension of Payment; actual Tempo-
rary Bankruptcy :—‘‘Cannot pay you; part of you not for a
year, others of you not till the War end; will give you 5 per
cent. interest instead.’ Coupled with which, by the same crea-
tive genius, is a Declaration in the King’s name, “That the
King compels nobody, but does invite all and sundry of loyal
mind to send their Plate (on loan, of course, and with due receipt
for it) to the Mint to be coined, lest Majesty come to have other-
wise no money,’—his very valets, as is privately known, having
had no wages from him for ten months past.

Whereupon the rich Princes of the Blood, Duc d’Orléans fore-
most, and Official persons, Pompadour, Belleisle, Choiseul, do
make an effort ; and everybody that has Plate feels uneasily that
he cannot use it, and that he ought to send it. And, November
5th, the King’s own Plate, packed ostentatiously in carts, went
to the Mint ;—the Dauphiness, noble Saxon Lady, had already
volunteered with a silver toilet-table of hers, brand-new, and of
exquisite costly pattern; but the King forbade her. On such
examples, everybody had to make an effort, or uneasily try to
make one. King Friedrich, eight days after Maxen, is some-
what amused at these proceedings in the distance:

“The kettles and spoons of the French seem to me a pleasant
resource for carrying on War!” writes he to D’Argens.!3 “A
bit of mummery to act on the public feeling, I suppose. The

12 Barbier, iv. 336.
13 «+ Wilsdruf, 28th November 1759,” Guvres de Frédéric, xix. 108.

:
480 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

result of it will be small: but as the Belleisle Letters’ (taken in
Contades’s baggage, after Minden, and printed by Duke Ferdi-
nand for public edification) ‘‘ make always such an outcry about
poverty, those people are trying to impose on their enemies, and
persuade them that the carved and chiselled silver of the King-
dom will suffice for making a vigorous Campaign. I see nothing
else that can have set them on imagining the farce they are now
at. There is Miinster taken from them by the English-Hano-
verian people ; it is affirmed that the French, on the 25th, quitted
Giessen, to march on Friedberg and repass the Rhine” (might
possibly have done so;—but the Hereditary Prince and his
12,000 come to be needed elsewhere! )—‘* Poor we are opposite
our enemies here, cantoned in the Villages about; the last truss
of straw, the last loaf of bread will decide which of us is to re-
main in Saxony. And as the Austrians are extremely squeezed
together, and can get nothing out of Bohmen,”—one hopes it
will not be they !

All through November, this sending of Plate, I never knew
with what net result of moneys coinable, goes on in Paris; under
what astonishments abroad and at home, and in the latter region
under what execrations on Silhouette, may be imagined. ‘ Tout
le monde. jure beaucoup contre M. de Silhouette, All the world
swears much against him,” says Barbier ;—but I believe prob-
ably he was much to be pitied: “‘ A creative genius, you; and
this is what you come to?”

November 22d, the poor man got dismissed; France swearing
at him, I know not to what depth; but howling and hissing,
evidently, with all its might. ‘The very tailors and milliners
took him up,—trousers without pockets, dresses without flounce
or fold, which they called a da Silhouette ;—and, to this day, in
France and Continental Countries, the old-fashioned Shadow-
Profile (mere outline, and vacant black) is practically called a
silhouette. So that the very Dictionaries have him; and, like bad
Count Reinhart, or Reynard, of earlier date, he has become a
Noun Appellative, and is immortalised in that way. The first
of that considerable Series of Creative Financiers, Abbé Terray
and the rest,—brought in successively with blessings, and dis-
missed with cursings and hissings,—who end in Calonne, Lo-

a a ena eT

Pe ctr ae!

a

Cuap. VIII.] miscenLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 481
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

ménie de Brienne, and what Mirabeau Ptre called ** the General
Overturn (Culbute Générale).” Thitherward, privately, straight
towards the General Overturn, is France bound;—and will
arrive in about thirty years.

Friedrich, strange to say, publishes (March—June 1760) an
Lidition of his Poems. Question, ‘Who wrote Matinées
du Roi de Prusse?”—jor the second, and positively the
last Time.

In this avalanche of impending destructions, what can be more
surprising than to hear of the Editing of Poems on his Majesty’s
part! -Actual publication of that Guvre de Pozsie, for which
Voltaire, poor gentleman, suffered such tribulation seven years
ago. Now coming out from choice: Reprint of it, not now to
the extent of twelve copies for highly special friends, but in co-
pious thousands, for behoof of mankind at large! The thing
cost Friedrich very little meditating, and had become necessary,
—and to be done with speed.

Readers recollect the G/uvre de Poésie, and satirical hits said
to be in it. At Paris, about New-year’s time 1760, some help-
ful Hand had contrived to bring out, under the pretended date
“Potsdam,” a cheap edition of that interesting Work.'* Merely
in the way of theft, as appeared to cursory readers, to D’Argens,
for example:!> but, in deeper fact, for the purpose of apprising
certain Crowned Heads, friendly and hostile,—Czarish Majesty
and George II. of England the main two,—what this poetising
King was pleased to think of them in his private moments.
D’Argens declares himself glad of this theft, so exquisitely clever
is the Book.. But Friedrich knows better: ‘‘ March 17th, when
a Copy of it came to him,’’ Friedrich sees well what is meant,—
and what he himself has to do in it. He instantly sets about
making a few suppressions, changes of phrase; sends the thing
to D’Argens: ‘‘ Publish at once, with a little prefatory word.”
And, at the top of his speed, D’Argens has, in three-weeks time,
the suitable Avant-propos, or Avis au Libraire, ‘circulating in

14 <¢(Huvres du Philosophe de Sans-Souct:’ 1 vol. 12mo, ‘‘ Potsdam”
(Paris, in truth), 1760.”

15 His Letter to the King, Qiuvres de Frédéric, xix. 138.

Vor. V.—xX

x

482 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

great quantities, especially in London and Petersburg” (“ Thief
Kditor has omitted; and, what is far more, has malignantly in-
terpolated: here is the poor idle Work itself, not a Counterfeit
of it, if anybody care to read it”), and an Orthodox Edition
ready.'6 The diligent Pirate Booksellers, at Amsterdam, at
London, copiously reproduced this authorised Berlin Edition
too,—or added excerpts from it to their reprints of the Paris
one, by way of various-readings. And everybody read and com-
pared, what nobody will now do; theme, and treatment of theme,
being both now so heartily indifferent to us.

Who the Perpetrator of this Parisian maleficence was, re-
mained dark ;—and would not be worth inquiring into at all,
except for two reasons intrinsically trifling, but not quite with-
out interest to readers of our time. First, that Voltaire, whom
some suspected (some, never much Friedrich, that I hear of),
appears to have been perfectly innocent ;—and indeed had been
incapacitated for guilt, by Schmidt and Freytag, and their
dreadful Frankfurt procedures! This is reason first; poor Vol-
taire mutely asking us, Not to load him with more sins than his
own. Reason second is, that, by a singular opportunity, there
has, in these very months,’ a glimmering of light risen on it to
this Editor; illustrating two other points as well, which readers
here are acquainted with, some time ago, as riddles of the in-
significant sort. The Demon News-writer, with his “Idea” of
Friedrich, and the ‘* Matinees du Roi de Prusse :’’ readers recol-
lect both those Productions; both enigmatic as to authorship;
—but both now become riddles which can more or less be read.

For the surprising circumstance (though in certain periods,
when the realm of very Chaos reémerges, fitfully, into upper sun-
shine now and then, nothing ought to surprise one as happening
there) is, That, only a few months ago, the incomparable Matinees
(known to my readers five years since) has found a new Editor

** ““Came out, April 9th” (see Mitchell, ii. 153), ‘and a second finer
Edition in June:” in Quvres de Frédéric, x. p. x., xix. 137 n., 138; espe-
cially in Preuss, 1.467, 468 (if you will compare him with himself on these
different occasions, and patiently wind out his bit of meaning), all manner
of minutest details. 17 Spring 1863.

Cup. VIII.] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 483
Nov. 1759—March 1760. 5

and réviver. Editor illuminated ‘by the Secretary of the Great
Napoleon,” “by discovery of manuscripts,” “by the Duc de
Rovigo,” and I know not what; animated also, it is said, by
religious views. And, in short, the Matinées is again abroad
upon the world,—‘ your London Edition twice reprinted in
Germany, by the Jesuit party since” (much good may it do the
Jesuit party !)—a Matinees again in comfortable circumstances,
as would seem. Probably the longest-eared Platitude now walk-
ing the Earth, though there are a good many with ears long.
Unconscious, seemingly, that it has been killed thrice and four
times already; and that indeed, except in the realm of Night-
mare, it never was alive, or needed any killing; belief in it,
doubt upon it (I must grieve to inform the Duc de Rovigo and
honourable persons concerned), being evidence conclusive that
you have not yet the faintest preliminary shadow of correct,
knowledge about Friedrich or his habits or affairs, and that you
ought first to try and acquire some.

To me, argument on this subject would have been too unen-
durable. But argument there was on it, by persons capable and
willing, more than one: and in result this surprising brand-new
London mooncalf of a Matinees was smitten through, and slit in
pieces, for the fifth time,—as if that could have hurt it much!
“ Mit der Dummheit,” sings Schiller ; “ Human stupidity is
stronger than the very Gods.” However, in the course of these
new inspections into matters long since obsolete, there did,—
what may truly be considered as a kind of profit by this Resus-
citating of the mooncalf MJatinées upon afflicted mankind, and is
a net outcome from it, real, though very small,—some light rise
as to the origin and genesis of Matinees; some twinkles of light,
and, in the utterly dark element, did disclose other monstrous
extinct shapes looming to right and left of said monster: and,
in a word, the authorship of Matinecs, and not of Matinees only,
becomes now at last faintly visible or guessable. ‘To one of
those industrious Matadors, as we may call them, Slayers of
this mooncalf for the fourth or fifth time, I owe the following
Note; which, on verifying, I can declare to be trustworthy :

“The Author of Matinées, it is nearly certain,” says my Correspond-
ent, “is actually a‘ M..de Bonneville, —contrary to what you wrote five

~

484 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [ Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.
» years ago.'§ Not, indeed, the Bonneville who is found in Dictionaries,
who is visibly impossible; but a Bonneville of the preceding genera-
tion. who was Maréchal de Saxe’s Adjutant or Secretary, old enough
to have been the Uncle or the Father of that revolutionary Bonneville.
Maréchal de Saxe died, November 30th, 1750; this senior Bonneville,
still a young man, had been with him to Potsdam on visit there.
Bonneville, conscious of genius, and now out of employment, naturally
went thither again, lived a good deal there, or went between France
and there: and authentic History knows of him, by direct evidence,
and by reflex, the following Three Facts (the second of them itself
threefold), of which I will distinguish the indubitable from the inferen-
tially credible or as good as certain :

“1°, Indubitable, That Bonneviile sold to Friedrich certain Papers,
military Plans, or the like, of the late Maréchal, and was paid for them;
but by no means met the recognition his genius saw itself to merit.
These things are certain, though not dated, or datable except as of the
year 1750 or 1751. After which, for above twenty years, Bonneville
entered upon a series of adventures, caliginous, underground, for most
part ; ‘soldiering in America,’ ‘ writing anonymous Pamphlets or
Books,’ roaming wide over the world; and led a busy, but obscure and
uncertain life, hanging by Berlin as a kind of centre, or by Paris and
Berlin as his two centres; and had a miscellaneous series of adven-
tures, subterranean many of them, unluminous all of them, not courting
the light; which lie now in naturally a very dark condition. Dimly
discernible, however, in the general dusk of Bonneville, dim and vague
of outline, but definitely steady beyond what could have been expected,
it does appear farther,—what alone entitles Bonneville to the least
memory here, or anywhere in Nature now or henceforth,—

“2°. That, shortly after that first rebuff in Potsdam, he, not another,
in 1752, was your ‘ Demon News-writer,, whom we gazed at, some
time since, devoutly crossing ourselves, for a little while!

“ Likewise that, in 1759-60, after or before his American wander-
ings, he, the same Bonneville, as was suspected at the time,’® stole and
edited this surreptitious mischief-making Ciuvres du Philosophe de
Sans-Souci (Paris or Lyon, pretending to be ‘ Potsdam,’ January

760),” which we are now considering! “ Encouraged, probably
enough, by Choiseul himself, who, in any case, is now known to have
been the promoter of this fine bit of mischief,*°—and who may there-

18 4p, 1858 (supra, i. 155, 156).

19 Nicolai, Ueber Zimmermanns Fragmente, i. 181, 182, ii. 253, 254.
Sketch of what is authentically known about Bonneville: ‘suspected both
of Afatinées, and of the Stolen Edition.’ ”

2° Choiseul’s own Note, ‘‘ To M. de Malesherbes, Directeur de la Libraire,

SS ee —s

Cuap. VIII.] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 485
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

upon” (or may as probably, not “thereupon,” if it were of the least
consequence to gods or men) “‘ have opened to Bonneville a new mili-
tary career in America? Career which led to as good as nothing;
French soldiering in America being done for, in the course of 1760.
Upon which Bonneville would return to his old haunts. to his old sub-
terranean industries in Paris and Berlin.

~ “ And that, finally, in 1765, he, as was again suspected at the time,'®
he and no other, did write those Matinées, which appeared next year
in print (1766), and many times since; and have just been reprinted, as
a surprising new discovery, at London, in Spring 1863.

“3°. That either after or before those Editorial exploits, Bonneville
had sold the Marechal de Saxe’s Plans and Papers, which were al-
ready the King’s, to some second person, and been a second time paid
for them. And was, in regard to this Swindling exploit, found out;
and by reason of that sale, or for what reason is not known, was put
into Spandau, and, one hopes, ended his life there.”’*!

Fact No. 2, which alone concerns us here,—and which, in its
three successive stages, does curiously cohere with itself and
with other things,—comes, therefore, not by direct light, which
indeed, by the nature of the case, would be impossible. Not by

10th December 1759:” ‘‘ By every method screen the King’s Government
from being suspected ;—and get the Edition out at once.’’ (Published in
the Constitutionnel, 24 December 1850, by M. Sainte-Beuve; copied in
Preuss, Guvres de Frédéric, xix. 168 n.)

21 “¢ Nicolai, ub supra ;—and besides him, only the two following refer-
ences, out of half a cartload: 1°. Bachaumont, Mémoires secrétes, ‘ 7th Feb-
ruary 1765’ (see Barbier, Dictionnaire des Anonymes, § Matinées), who calls
Matinées ‘a development of the Idée de la Personne,’ &c. (that is, of your
‘ Demon News-writer ;’ already known to Bachaumont, this ‘ Jdée,’ it seems,
as well as the Matinées in Manuscript).” 2°. ‘* Letter of Grimm to Duch-
ess of Sachsen-Gotha” (our Duchess), ‘‘dated ‘ Paris, 15th April 1765 :’
not in printed Correspondance de Grimm, but still in the Archives of Gotha,
in company with a Ms. of Matinées, probably the oldest extant (see,—in
the Grenzboten Periodical, Leipzig, 1863, pp. 473-484, 500-519, —K. Sam-
wer, who is Chief Malleus of this new London mooncalf, and will inform
the curious of every particular).”

Matinées was first printed 1766 (no vies), and seven or eight times
since, in different Countries; twice or thrice over, as ‘‘an interesting new
discovery :’-—very wearisome to this Editor; a read Matinées (in poor
London print, that too), many years ago,—with complete satisfaction as to .
Matinées, and sincere wish not to touch it again even with a pair of tongs;
—and has since had three ‘‘ priceless Mss. of it” offered him, at low rates,
as a guerdon to merit,

486 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

direct light, but by various reflex lights, and convergence of
probabilities old and new, which become the stronger the better
they are examined; and may be considered as amounting to
what is called a moral -certainty,—“ certain” enough for an in-
quiry of that significance. To a kind of moral certainty: kind
of moral consolation too; only One individual of Adam’s Pos-
terity, not three or more, having been needed.in these multifa-
rious acts of scoundrelism ; and that One receiving payment, or
part payment, so prompt and appropriate, in the shape of a per-
manent cannon-ball at his ankle.

This is the one profit my readers or I have yet derived from
the late miraculous Resuscitation of Matinees Royales; the other
items of profit in that Enterprise shall belong, not to us in the
least measure, but to Bonneville, and to his well or ill disposed
Coadjutors and Copartners in the Adventure. Adieu to it, and
to him and to them, forever and a day !

Peace- Negotiations hopeful to Friedrich, all through Winter ; but
the French won't. Voltaire, and his Style of Corresponding.

This Winter, there was talk of Peace, more specifically than
ever. November 15th, at the Hague, as a neutral place, there
had been, by the two Majesties, Britannic and Prussian, official
Declaration, ** We, for our part, deeply lament these horrors, and
are ready to treat of Peace.” This Declaration was presented,
November 15th, 1759, by Prince Ludwig of Brunswick (Head
General of the Dutch, and a Brother of Prince Ferdinand our
General's, suitable for such case), to the Austrian-French Excel-
Jencies at the Hague. By whom it had been received with the
due politeness, ‘* Will give it our profoundest consideration ;”22—
which indeed the French, for some time, privately did; though
the Austrians privately had no need to do so, being already fixed
for a negative response to the proposal. But hereby rose actual
talk of a “Congress ;” and wagging of Diplomatic wigs as to
where it shall be. ‘In Breda,’’ said some; ‘ Breda a place

22 Declaration (by the two Majesties) that they are ready to treat of
Peace, 15th November 1759, presented by &c. (as above); Answer from
France, in stingy terms, and not till 3d April 1760: are in London Gazette;
in Gentleman’s Magazine, xxix. 603,-xxx. 188; in &e. &e.

Cuap, VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER- QUARTERS. 487
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

used to Congresses.” ‘ Why not in Nanci here?” said poor old
Ex-Polish Stanislaus, alive to the calls of benevolence, poor old
Titular soul. Others said ‘ Leipzig; others ‘‘ Augsburg ;’’—
and indeed in Augsburg, according to the Gazetteers, at one
time, there were ‘“‘upholsterers busy getting ready the Apart-
ments.” So that, with such rumour in the Diplomatic circles,
the Gazetteer and outer world was full of speculation upon
Peace; and Friedrich had lively hopes of it, and had been hoping
three months before, as we transiently saw, though again it came
to nothing. All to nothing; and is not, in itself, worth the least
attention from us here,—a poor extinct fact, loud in these months
and filling the whole world, now silent and extinct to everybody,
—except, indeed, that it offers physiognomic traits here and there
of a certain King, and of those about him. For which reason we
will dwell on it a few minutes longer.

Nobody, in that Winter 1759-60, could guess where, or from
whom, this big world-interesting Peace-Negotiation had its birth;
as everybody now can, when nobody now is curious on the ques-
tion! At Sagan, in September last, we all saw the small private
source of it, its first outspurt into daylight ; and read Friedrich’s
Answers to Voltaire and the noble Duchess on it :—for the sake
of which Two private Correspondents, and of Friedrich’s relations
to them, possibly a few more Excerpts may still have a kind of
interest, now when the thing corresponded on has ceased to have
any. To the Duchess, a noble-minded Lady, beautifully zealous
to help if she could, by whose hand these multifarious Peace-
Papers have to pass, this is always Friedrich’s fine style in trans-
mitting them. Out of many specimens, following that of Sagan
which we gave, here are the Next Three :

Friedrich to the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha (Three other Letters on
the “‘ Peace”).
1.
‘¢Wilsdruf, 21st November 1759” (day after Maxen, surrender
was this morning, —of which he has not heard).

“ Madame,—Nothing but your generosities and your indulgence could
justify my incongruity” (:ncongruité, in troubling you with the En-
closed). ‘‘ You will have it, Madame, that I shall still farther abuse
those bounties, which are so precious to me: at least remember that

488 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

Nov. 1759—March 1760.
it is by your order, if I forward through your hand this Letter, which
does not merit such honour.

* Chance, which so insolently mocks the projects of men, and delights
to build up and then pull down, has led us about, thus far, —to the end
of the Campaign” (not quite ended yet, if he knew). “The Austrians
are girt-in by the Elbe on this side; I have had two important Maga-
zines of theirs in Bohemia destroyed” (Kleist’s doing). ‘There have
been some bits of fighting (affazres), that have turned entirely to our ad-
vantage :—so that I am in hopes of forcing M. Daun to repass the Elbe,
to abandon Dresden, and to take the road for Zittau and Bohemia.

“T talk to you, Madame, of what Iam surrounded with; of what, be-
ing in your neighbourhood, may perhaps have gained your attention. I
could go to much greater length, if my heart dared to explain itself on
the sentiments of admiration, gratitude and esteem, with which I am,—
Madame my Cousin,—Your most faithful Cousin, Friend and Servant,
—F.”

2.
‘¢ Freyberg, 18th December 1759.

“ Madame,— You spoil me so by your indulgence, you so accustom me
to have obligations to you, that I reproach myself a hundred times with
this presumption. Certainly I should not continue to enclose these Letters
to your care, had not | the hope that perhaps the Correspondence may
be of some use to England, and even to Europe,—for without doubt
Peace is the desirable, the natural and happy state for all Nations. It
is to accelerate Peace, Madame, that I abuse your generosities. This
motive excuses me to myself for the incongruity of my procedures.

“The goodness you have to take interest in my situation obliges me
to give you some account of it. We have undergone all sorts of mis-
fortune here” (Maxen, what not), “ and at the moment we were least ex-
pecting them. Nevertheless, there remains to us courage and hope ;

here are Auxiliaries” (Hereditary Prince and 12,000) ‘‘on the point of ,

arriving; there is reason to think that the end of our Campaign will be
less frightful than seemed likely three weeks ago. May you, Madame,
enjoy all the happiness that I wish you. May all the world become
acquainted with your virtues, imitate them, and admire you as I do.
May you be persuaded that . . . —F.”

3.
‘Freyberg, 16th February 1760.

“* Madame,—It is to my great regret that I importune Your Highness
so often with my Letters. Your bounties, Madame, have spoiled me :—
it will teach you to be more chary of them to others. I regard you as
an estimable Friend, to whose friendship I have recourse in straits.

‘
1
'
]
;
4

_

ad.

——_

Cuap. VIII.] mMIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 489
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

The question is still Peace, Madame; and were not the object of my
importunities so beautiful, Madame, I should be inexcusable.”—Goes
then into practical considerations, about “ Cocceji” (King’s Aide-de-
Camp, once Keith’s, who carries this Letter), about a “* Herr von Edels-
heim,” a “ Bailli de Froulay,” and the possible “ Conditions of Peace,”
—not of consequence to us just now.*®

As to Voltaire again, and the new Friedrich-Voltaire Style
of Correspondence, something more of detail will be requisite.
Ever since the black days of 1757, when poor Wilhelmina, with
Rossbach and Leuthen still hidden from her in a future gloomy
as death, desperately brought Voltaire to bear upon Cardinal
Tencin and this matter, without success, there has been a kind
of regular corresponding between Voltaire and Friedrich; char-
acteristic on both sides. A pair of Lovers hopelessly estranged
and divorced; and yet, in a sense, unique and priceless to one
another. The Past, full of heavenly radiances, which issued,
alas, in flames and sooty conflagrations as of Erebus,—let us for-
get it, and be taught by it! The Past is painful, and has been
too didactic to some of us: but here still is the Present with its
Future; better than blank nothing. Pleasant to hear the sound
of that divine voice of my loved one, were it only in common-
place remarks on the weather,—perhaps intermixed with secret
jibings on myself:—let us hear it while we can, amid those
world-wide crashing discords and piping whirlwinds of war.

Friedrich sends his new Verses or light Proses, which he is
ever and anon throwing off; Voltaire sends his, mostly in print,
and of more elaborate turn: they talk on matters that are pass-
ing round them, round this King, the centre of them,—Friedrich
usually in a rather swaggering way (lest his Correspondent think
of blabbing), and always with something of banter audible in
him ;—as has Voltaire too, but in a finer treble tone, being al-
ways female in this pretty duet of parted lovers. It rarely
comes to any scolding between them; but there is or can be

23 (Huvres de Frédéric, xviii. 174, 173, 172. Correspondence on this sub-
ject lasts from 22d September 1759 to 8th May 1760: 26. pp. 170-186. In
that final Letter of 8th May, is the phrase, hardly worth restoring to its
real ownership, though the context considerably redeems it there,—‘‘ the
prejudice I can’t get rid of, that, in war, Dieu est pour les gros escadrons.”

X 2

490 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Nov. 1759—March 1760.
nothing of cordiality. Nothing, except in the mutual admira-
tion, which one perceives to be sincere on both sides; and also,
in the mutual practical estrangement: ‘‘ Nothing more of you,
—especially of you, Madam,—as a practical domestic article !”
After a long reading, with Historical views, in this final sec-
tion of the Friedrich-Voltaire Correspondence, at first so barren
otherwise and of little entertainment, one finds that this, too,
when once-you can ‘‘ read” it (that is to say, when the scene and
its details are visible to you), becomes highly dramatic, Shake-
spearean-comic or more, for this is Nature’s self, who far excels
even Shakespeare ;—and that the inextricably dark condition
of these Letters is a real loss to the ingenuous reader, and espe-
cially to the student of Friedrich. Among the frequently-re-
curring topics, one that oftenest turns up on Voltaire’s side is
that of Peace: Oh, if your Majesty would but make Peace!
Does it depend on me? thinks Friedrich always; and is, at met
once provoked to say so:

Friedrich to Voltaire.

‘¢ Reich-Hennersdorf, 2d July 1759” (shortly before Schmétt-
seifen, while waiting Daun’s slow movements).

“Asking me for Peace: there is a bitter joke!”—(In verse, this ;
flings off a handful of crackers on the Bren-Aimé, whose Chamberlain
you are, on the Hongr oise gu’il adore, on the Russian gue 7 ‘abhorre ;
—then continues in prose) :

“Tt is to him,” the Well-beloved Louis, “ that you must address your-
self, or to his Amboise in Petticoats” (his Pompadour, acting the Car-
dinal-Premier on this occasion). ‘ But these people have their heads
filled with ambitious projects: these people are the difficulty; they
wish to be the sovereign arbiters of sovereigns ; and that is what per-
sons of my way of thinking will by no means put up with. I love
Peace quite as much as you could wish; but I want it good, solid and
honourable. Socrates or Plato would have thought as I do on this sub-
ject, had they found themselves placed in the accursed position which
is now mine in the world. _

‘Think you there is any pleasure in leading this dog of a life”
(chienne, she-dog)? ‘In seeing and causing the butchery of people
you know nothing of; in losing daily those you do know and love; in
seeing perpetually your reputation exposed to the caprices of chance;
in passing year after year in disquietudes and apprehensions; in risk-
ing, without end, your life and your fortune ? !

Cuap. VIII.] MiscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 491
Nov. 1759— March 1760.

“J know right well the value of tranquillity, the sweets of society,
the charms of life; and I love to be happy, as much as anybody what-
ever. But much as I desire these blessings, I will not purchase them.
by baseness and infamies. Philosophy enjoins us to do our duty ; faith-
fully to serve our Country, at the price of our blood, of our repose, and
of every sacrifice that can be required of us. The illustrious Zadig
went through a good many adventures which were not to his taste,
Candide the like ; and nevertheless took their misfortune in patience.
What finer example to follow than that of those heroes ?

“Take my word, our ‘ curt jackets,’ as you call them” (habits écou-=
tés, peculiar to the Prussian soldier at that time), “‘ are as good as your
red heels, as the Hungarian pelisses, and the green frocks of the Rox-
elans” (Russians). ‘ We are actually on the heels of the latter” (at
least poor Dohna is, and poor Dictator Wedell will be, not with the ef-
fect anticipated !)—“ who by their stupidities give us fine chance. You
will see that I shall get out of the scrape this Year too, and deliver
myself both from the Greens and the Dirty-Whites” (Austrian colour
of coat). ‘‘ My neighbour of the Sacred Hat,—I think in spite of Holy
Father’s benediction, the Holy Ghost must have inspired him the re-
verse way ; he seems to have a great deal of lead in his bottom. * *
F.,"24 :

Voltaire in Answer.
“The Delicés,” guessed to be some time in ‘* August 1759.” —

“In whatever state you are, it is very certain that youre a great
man. It is not to weary your Majesty that I now write; it is to con-
fess myself,—on condition you will give me absolution! I have be-
trayed you; that is the fact”—(really guilty this time, and have shown
something of your writing ; as your Majesty, oh how unjustly, is often
suspecting that I do, and with mischievous intention, instead of good,
ah, Sire !)—* In fact, I have received that fine ‘ Marcus-Aurelius’ Let-
ter” (Letter we have just read); “ exquisite Piece, though with biting
‘Juvenal’ qualities in it, too; and have shown it, keeping back the bit-
ing parts, to a beautiful gillflirt of the Court, minaudzere” (who seems
to be a Mistress: of Choiseul’s), who is here attending Tissot for her
health: minaudiére charmed with it; insists on my sending it to Choi-
seul, “‘‘ He admires the King of Prussia, as he does all nobleness and
genius ; send it!’ And I did so;—and look here, what an Answer
from Choiseul” (Answer lost): “‘and may it not have a fine effect, and
perhaps bring Peace—Oh, forgive me, Sire. But read that Note of the
great man. ‘Try if you can decipher his writing. One may have
very honest sentiments, and a great deal of esprit, and yet write like a
cat.’ — —

24 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 53.

492 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

“ Sire, there was once a lion anda mouse (rat); the mouse fell in
love with the lion, and went to pay him court. ‘The lion, tired of it,
gave him a little scrape with his paw. The mouse withdrew into his
mousehole (sourzciére) ; but he still loved the lion; and seeing one day
a net they were spreading out to catch the lion and kill him, he gnawed
asunder one mesh of it. Sire, the mouse kisses very humbly your
beautiful claws, in all submissiveness :—he will never die between two
Capuchins, as at Bale, the mastiff (dogue) of St. Malo has done” (27th
July last). ‘He would have wished to die beside his lion. Believe
that the mouse was more attached than the mastiff.”—V.*°

To which we saw the Answer, pair of Answers, at Sagan, in
September last. ‘This Note from Choiseul, conveyed by Vol-
taire, appears to have been the trifling well-spring from which
all those wide-spread waters of Negotiation flowed. Pitt, when
applied to, on the strength of Friedrich’s hopes from this small
Document of Choiseul’s, was of course ready, ‘“‘ How welcome,
every chance of a just Peace!” and agreed to the Joint Declara-
tion at the Hague; and took what farther trouble I know not,
—probably less sanguine of success than Friedrich. — Friedrich
was ardently industrious in the affair; had a great deal of de-
vising and directing on it, a great deal of corresponding with
Voltaire and the Duchess, only small fractions of which are now
left. He searched out, or the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha did it
for him, a proper Secret Messenger for Paris: Secret Messen-
ger, one Baron von Edelsheim, properly veiled, was to consult a
certain Bailli de Froulay, a friend of Friedrich’s in Paris ;—
which loyal-hearted Bailli did accordingly endeavour there; but
made out nothing. Only much vague talking; part. of it, or
most of it, subdolous on Choiseul’s side. Pitt would hear of no
Peace which did not include Prussia as well as England: some
said this was the cause of failure ;—the real cause was that
Choiseul never had any serious intention of succeeding. «Light
Choiseul, a clever man, but an unwise, of the sort called “dash-
ing,” had entertained the matter merely in the optative form,—
and when it came nearer, wished to use it for making mischief
between Pitt and Friedrich, and for worming out Edelsheim’s
secrets, if he had any,—for which reason he finally threw Edels-
heim into the Bastille for a few days.?¢

25 (Huvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 59, 60.
76 In ibid, v. 38-41, detailed account of the Affair.

Cuap. VIII.] MiscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 493
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

About the end of March I guess it to have been that Choiseul,
by way of worming out poor Edelsheim’s secrets, flung him into
the Bastille for a day or two. Already in December foregoing,
we have seen Choiseul’s Black-Artist busy upon the Stolen
Edition of Friedrich’s Verses. A Choiseul full of intrigues;
adroit enough, ambitious enough; restlessly industrious in mak-
ing mischief, if there were nothing else to be made; who greatly
disgusted Friedrich, now and afterwards.

And this was what the grand Voltaire Pacification came to,
though it filled the world with temporary noise, and was so in-
teresting to Voltaire and another. What a heart-affecting gen-
erosity, humility, and dulcet pathos in that of the poor Mouse
gnawing asunder a mesh of the Lion’s net! ‘There is a good
deal of that, throughout, on the Voltaire side,—that is to say,
while writing fo Friedrich. But while writing of him, to third
parties, sometimes almost simultaneously, the contrast of styles
is not a little startling; and the beautiful affectionately chirping
Mouse is seen suddenly to be an injured Wild-cat with its fur up.
All readers of Voltaire are aware of this; and how Voltaire
handles his “ Luc’ (mysterious nickname for King Friedrich),
when Luc’s back is turned. For, alas, there is no man or thing
but has its wrong-side too; least of all, a Voltaire,—doing treble
voice withal, if you consider it, in such a Duet of estranged Lov-
ers! Suppose we give these few Specimens,—treble mostly, and
a few of bass as well,—to illustrate the nature of this Duet, and
of the noises that went on round it, in a war-convulsed world ?
And first of all, concerning the enigma “‘ What is Luc ?”

What the Luc in Voltaire is? Shocking explanations have been hit
upon: but Wagniére (Wagner, an intelligent Swiss man), Voltaire’s old
Secretary, gives this plain reading of the riddle: “ M. de Voltaire had,
at the Délices” (near by Ferney, till the Chateau got built), “a big Ape,
of excessively mischievous turn; who used to throw stones at the pass-
ers-by, and sometimes would attack with its teeth friend or foe alike.
One day it thrice over bit M. de Voltaire’s own leg. He had called it
Tuc (Luke); and in conversation with select friends, as also in Letters
to such, he sometimes designated the King of Prussia by that nickname :
‘ He is like my Luc here; bites whoever caresses him !’"—In 1756, M.
de Voltaire, having still on his heart the Frankfurt Outrage, wrote curi-
ous Mémoires” (ah, yes, Vie Privée); “ and afterwards wished to burr

494 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

Nov. 1759—March 1760.
them ; but a Copy had been stolen from him in 1768,”—and they still
afflict the poor world.

To the same effect speaks Johannes von Miller: “ Voltaire had an
Ape called Luc; and the spiteful man, in thus naming the King, meant
to stigmatise him as the mere ape of greater men; as one without any
greatness of his own.”—-No; Luc was mischievous, flung stones after
passengers; had, according to Clogenson, “bitten Voltaire himself,
while being caressed by him ;” that was the analogy in Voltaire’s mind.
Preuss says, this Nickname first occurs, “ 12th December 1757.” Sup-
pose 11th December to have been the day of getting one’s leg bitten
thrice over; and that, in bed next morning, —stiff, smarting, fretful
against the sad ape-tricks and offences of this life,— before getting up
to one’s Works and Correspondences, the angry similitude had shot,
slightly fulgurous and consolatory, athwart the gloom of one’s mood 2?”
That will account for Luc.

Many of the Voltaire-Friedrich Letters are lost; and the remainder
lie in sad disorder in all the Editions, their sequence unintelligible with-
out lengthy explanation. So that the following Snatches cannot well
be arranged here in the way of Choral Strophe and Antistrophe, as
would have been desirable. We shall have to group them loosely
under heads; with less respect to date than to subject-matter, and to
the reader’s convenience for understanding them.

Voltaire on Friedrich, to different Third-Parties, during this War.

To D’Argental (Has not yet heard of Leuthen, which happened five
days before). * * “TI have tasted the vengeance of consoling the
King of Prussia, and that is enough for me. He goes beating on the
one side, and getting beaten on the other: except for another miracle”
(like Rossbach), “ he will be ruined. Better have really been a philos-
opher, as he pretended to be.”*®

To the Reverend Comte de Bernis (outwardly still our flourishing
Prime-Minister, by grace of Pompadour, but soon to be extinguished
under a Red Hat. Date is six days before Zorndorf). * * “TI can-
not imagine how some people have gone into suspecting that my heart
might have the weakness to lean a little towards whom you know, to-
wards my Ingrate that was! One is bound to have politeness; but one

27 Longchamp et Wagniere, Mémorres, i. 34; Johannes von Miiller,
Werke (12mo, Stuttgart, 1821), xxxi. 140 (Letters to his Brother, No. 218,
“July 1796”); Clogenson’s Note, in (uvres de Voltaire, |xxvii. 103;
Preuss, ii. 71.

28 (Huvres de Voltaire, \xxvii. 139 (‘‘ The Délices, 10th December 1757’’).

Cuap. VIII.] mMiscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 495
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

has memory as well ;—and one is attached, as warmly as superfluously,
to the Good Cause, which it belongs only to you to defend. Certain it
is, poor I am not like the three-fourths of the Germans in these days”
(since Rossbach, above all)! “I have everywhere seen Ladies’-Fans
with the Prussian Eagle painted on them, eating the Fleur-de-Lis; the-
Hanover Horse giving a kick to M. de Richelieu’s bottom ; a Courier
carrying a bottle of.Queen-of-Hungary Water to Madame de Pompa-
dour. My Nieces shall certainly not have that fashion of Fans, at my
poor little Delices, whither I am just returning.”*°

To Madame D’ Argental (on oceasion of Minden; Kunersdorf three
days ago, but not yet heard of). * * ‘Truly, Madame, when M. de
Contades leads to the butchery all the descendants of our ancient cheva-
liers, and sets them to attack eighty pieces of cannon” (not in the least,
if you knew it; the reverse, if you knew it),—“ as Don Quixote did the
windmills! This horrible day pierces my soul. I am French to ex-
cess, especially since those new favours’ (not worth mentioning here),
“which I owe to my divine Angels and to M. le Duc de Choiseul.

“‘ Tuc,—you know who Luc is” (as do we),—‘“‘is probably giving
Battle to the Austrians and Russians” (Kunersdorf, 12th; three days
ago, did it, and was beaten to your mind), “at the moment while I have.
the honour of writing to you; at least, he told me such was his Royal
intention. If they beat him, as may happen, what a shame for us to
have been beaten by the Duke of Brunswick! I wish you knew this
Duke” (as I have done; a Duke of no esprit, no gift of tongue, in fact
no talent at all that I could discern), ‘‘ you would be much astonished ;
and would say, ‘ The people whom he beats must be great blockheads.’
The truth of the fact is, that all these troops are better disciplined than
ours :”°°—Yes indeed, my esteemed Voltaire; and also, perhaps, that.
esprit, or gift of tongue, is not the sole gift for Battles and Campaigns ?—

To D’Argental (seventh day after Kunersdorf: “mouse upon lion’s,
net” nearly contemporaneous). ‘At last, then, I think my Russians
must be near Great Glogau” (might have been, one thinks, after such a
Kunersdorf; did not start for a month yet; never could get very near
at all). “Who would have thought that Barbarina” (Mackenzie’s
Dancer once; sent to Glogau, Cocceij and she, when their marriage
became public) ‘was going to be besieged by the Russians, and in
Glogau: Oh Destiny !—

*‘ T don’t love Lue, far from it: I never will pardon him his infamous
procedure with my Niece” (at Frankfurt that time); nor the face he
29 (Huvres de Voltaire, Ixxvii. 35 (‘‘ Soleure, 19th August 1758”).

30 Thid. Ixxviii. 186, 187 (‘‘ Délices, 15th August 1759”).

496 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

Novy. 1759-—-March 1760.
has to write me flattering things twice a month; without having ever
repaired his wrongs. I desire much his entire humiliation, the chas-
tisement of the sinner; whether his eternal damnation, I don’t quite
know.”'! (Hear, Hear !)—

To the same (a month after Mazen: “ Peace” Negotiation very live-
ly). * * “Meanwhile, if Lue could be punished before this happy
Peace! If, by this Jast stroke of General Beck” (tussle with Dierecke
at Meissen, 4th December, capture of Dierecke and 1,500; stroke not
of an overwhelming nature, but let us be thankful for our mercies),
“which has opened the road from the Lausitz to Berlin” (alas, not in
the least), “ some Haddick could pay Berlin a visit again! You see, in
Tragedy I wish always to have crime punished.
~ “There is talk of a great Battle fought the 6th” (not a word of truth
in it) “ between Luc and him of the Consecrated Hat: said to have been
very murderous. I interest myself very much in this Piece” now play-
ing under the Sun. ‘Whenever the Austrians have any advantage,
Kaunitz says to Madame de Bentinck” (litigant wandering Lady, known
to me at Berlin and elsewhere), “ ‘ Write that to our Friend Voltaire.’
Whenever Luc has the least success, he tells me,‘ I have battered the
oppressors of mankind.’ Dear Angel, in these horrors I am the only
one that has room to laugh :—and yet I don’t laugh either; owing to
the Culs-noirs’’ (Priests, I suppose), “to the Annuities, Lotteries, and
to Pondichery,—for I am always afraid about that latter!” (Going,
that, for certain; going, gone, and your East Indies along with it!)*?

To Perpetual Secretary Formey (in forwarding a “ Letter left with
me.”) . “ Health and peace, Monsieur; and be Secretaire Eternel.
Your King is always a man unique, astonishing, inimitable. He makes
charming verses, in times when others could not write a line of prose;
he deserves to be happy: but will he be so?. And if not, what becomes
of you? For my own part, I will not die between two Capuchins.
Hardly worth while, exalting one’s soul for such a future as that. What
a stupid and detestable farce is this world!’

To D’ Argental (“ Peace” Negotiations still at their briskest). * *
“ But, my dear Angel, you will see on Tuesday the great man who has
turned my head (dont je suis fou), M. le Duc de Choiseul. The Let-
ters he honours me with enchant me. God will bless him, don’t doubt
it,’—after all! ‘‘ We have at Pondichery a Lally, a devil of an Irish

31 (Euvres de Voltaire, Ixxviii. 195 (‘* 19th August 1759”).

32 Thid. Ixxviil. 346 (‘22d December 1759”).

33 Ibid. Ixxviii. 348 (from Souvenirs d’un Citoyen, i. 302), “11th Janu-
ary 1760.”

=e ee, ee

Cuap. VIII.] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 497
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

spirit,—who will cost me, sooner or later, above 20,000 livres annually”
(have rents in our India Company, say 1,000]. a-year, as my Angels
know), ‘ which used to be the readiest item of my Pittance. But M.
le Duc de Choiseul will triumph over Luc in one way or other; then
what joy! I suppose he shows you my impertinent reveries. Do you
know, Luc is so mad, that I don’t despair of bringing him to reason” (per-
suading him to give up Cléve, and knuckle as he should, in this Peace
Affair), ‘That were what Tshould call the true Comedy! I should
like to have your advices on the conduct of that Dramatic Piece.”**

The late “‘ mouse” gnawing at its mesh of net, what a subtle and
mighty hunter has it grown! This of Cléve, however, and of knuck-
ling, would not do. Hear the stiff Answer that comes: “‘ Conditions
of Peace, do you call them? The people that propose such can have
no wish to see Peace. What a logic theirs! ‘I might yield the
Country of Cléve, because the inhabitants are stupid’ What would
your Ministers say if one required the Province of Champagne from
them, because the Proverb says, ‘ Ninety-nine sheep and one Cham-
pagner make a Hundred head of cattle ?’”*°—

Again to D’ Argental (three or four months after ; Luc having proved
obstinate, and still unsuccessful). * * ‘TI conjure you make use of
all your eloquence to tell him” (the supreme Duc de Choiseul), “ that
if Luc misgo, it will be no misfortune to France. That Brandenburg
will always remain an Electorate; that it is good there be no Elector
in it strong enough to do without the protection of our King; and that
all the Princes of the Empire will always have recourse to that august
protection” (Most Christian Majesty’s) ‘‘ contra Paquila grifagna——
were the Prussian Kingship but abolished. Nota bene, if Luc were
discomfited this Year, we should have Peace next Winter.’’*®

To supreme Choiseul (a year later), * * ‘He has been a bad
man, this Luc , and now, if one were to bet,—by the law of probability it
would be 3 to 1 that Luc would go to pot (sera perdu), with his rhym-
ings and his banterings, and his injustices and politics, all as bad as him-
self.”’?”

Voltaire on surrounding Objects, chiefly on Maupertuis, and the
Battles.

To D’ Alembert (in the Rossbach-Leuthen interval: on the Battle of
Breslau, 22d November 1757; called by the Austrians ‘‘ a Malplaquet,”

34 (Euvres de Voltaire, \xxviii. 375 (‘‘ Délices, 15th February 1760”).

35 Friedrich to Voltaire, ‘‘ Freyberg, 3d April 1760:” Ciuvres de Fréd-
éric, xxiii. 73, 74. 36 (Fuvres de Voltaire, xxix. 110 (‘*July 1760”).

37 Tbid. Ixxx. 313 (‘‘ Chateau de Ferney, 13th July 1761”).

498 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Nov. 1759--March 1760,
and believed by Voltaire to be a Malplaquet and more). * * ‘ The
Austrians do avenge us, and humble us” (us, and our miserable Ross-
bachs), “in a terrible manner. ‘Thirteen attacks on the Prussian en-
trenchments, lasted six hours; never was Victory bloodier, or more hor-
ribly beautiful” (in the brain of certain men). ‘ We pretty French fel-
lows, we are more expeditious, our job is done in five minutes. The
King of Prussia is always writing me Verses, now like a desperado,
now like a hero; and as for me,I try to live like a philosopher in my
hermitage He has obtained what he always wished; to beat the
French, to be admired by them, to mock them; but the Austrians are
mocking him in a very serious way. Our shame of November 5th has
given him glory; and with such glory, which is but transient and dear-
ly bought, he must content himself. He will lose his own Countries,
with those he has seized, unless the French again discover’ (which they
will) “ the secret of losing all their Armies, as they did in 1741.”*°

To Clairaut, the Mathematician (Maupertuis lately dead). ‘An
excellent Treatise, this you have sent me, Monsieur!’ “ Your war with
the Geometers on the subject of this Comet appears to me like a war
of the gods in Olympus, while on Earth there is going on a fight of dogs
and cats.” * * “Would to Heaven our friend Moreau-Maupertuis
had cultivated his art like you! ‘That he had predicted comets, instead
of exalting his soul to predict the future; of dissecting the brains of.
giants to know the nature of the soul; of japanning people with pitch
to cure them of every malady ; of persecuting Konig; and of dying be-
tween ‘wo Capuchins” (dead three weeks ago, on those terms, poor
soul) !””59

To D’ Alembert (a week later). * * “ What say you of Mauper-
tuis dying between two Capuchins! He was ill, this long while, of a
repletion of pride; but I had not reckoned him either a hypocrite or an
imbecile. I don’t advise you ever to go and fill his place at Berlin;
you would repent that. T am Astolpho warning Roger (Ruggiero) not
to trust himself to the Enchantress Alcina; but Roger was unadvisa-
bleye"

To the same (two years later: Luc, on certain grounds, may as well
be saved). ‘‘ With regard to Luc, though I have my just causes of an-
ger against him, I own to you, in my quality of Frenchman and think-
ing being, I am glad that a certain most Orthodox House has not swal-
38° (Fuvres de Voltaire, \xxvii. 1383, 4 (‘‘ Délices, 6th December 1757,”

day after Leuthen). *° Ibid. Ixxviii. 191 (‘‘ Délices, 19th August 1759”).
4° Ibid. Ixxviii. 197 (‘‘ Délices, 25th August 1759”).

Cuap. VIII.] misceELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 499
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

lowed Germany, and that the Jesuits are not confessing in Berlin.
Over towards the Danube, superstition is very powerful.” * * “The
infame”— —“ You are well aware that I speak of superstition only ;
for as to the Christian religion, I respect and love it, like you. Cour-
age. Brethren’ Preach with force, and write with address: God will
bless you.—Protect, you, my Brother, the Widow Calas all you can!
She is a poor weak-minded Huguenot, but her Husband was the victim
of the White Penitents. It is the concern of Human Nature that the
Fanatics of Toulouse be confounded.” (The case of Calas, second act
of it. getting on the scene: a case still memorable to everybody. Stu-
pendous bit of French judicature: and Voltaire’s noblest outburst, into
mere transcendent blaze of pity, virtuous wrath, and determination to

bring rescue and help against the whole world).*'

Friedrich to Voltaire, before and during these Peace Negotiations.

At Schmottseifen, five days before Zillichau, ten days before that
Hunt of Loudon and Haddick (Voltaire, under rebuke for indiscretion,
has been whimpering a little. ‘“ My discreet Niece burnt those last
verses, Sire; no danger there, at least!” ‘Truculent Bishop Some-
thing-ac tried to attack your Majesty ; but was done for, by a certain
person). ‘In truth, you are a singular creature. When I think of
scolding you, you say two words, and the reproach expires. Impossi-
ble to scold you,even when you deserve it.” * *

“As to your Niece, let her burn me or roast me, I care little. Nor
are you to think me so sensitive to what your Bishops in ze or in ac
may say of me. I have the lot of all actors who play in public; ap-
plauded by some, despised by others. One must prepare oneself for
satires, for calumnies, for a multitude of lies, which will be sent abroad
into currency against one: but need that trouble my tranquillity? I
go my road; I do nothing against the interior voice of my conscience ;
and I concern myself very little in what way my actions paint them-
selves in the brain of beings, not always very thinking, with two legs
and without feathers.’**?

At Wilsdruf, just before Mazen (an exultant exuberant curious
Letter; too long for insertion—part of it given above). * * “For
your Tragedy of Socrate, thanks. At Paris, they are going to burn it,
the wretched fools,—not aware that absurd fanaticism is their domi-
nant vice. Better burn the dose of medicine, however, than the useful
Doctor. I, can I join myself to that set? If I bite you, as you com-
plain, it is without my knowledge. But I am surrounded with enemies,

41 (uvres de Voltaire, \xxviii. 52, 53 (‘‘ Ferney, 28th November 1762”).
42 “¢Schmittseifen, 18th July 1759 ;” Cvuvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 55, 56.

500 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [| Book XIX.

Nov. 1759—March 1760.
one hitting me, another pricking me, another daubing me with mud ;—
patience at last yields, and one flies abroad into a general rage, too in-
discriminate perhaps.

“You talk of my Verses on Rossbach” (my Adieu to the Hoopers
on finding their Bridge -burnt**). “ This Campaign I have had no bea-
tific vision in the style of Moses. The barbarous Cossacks and Tar-
tars, infamous to look at on any side, have burnt and ravaged countries,
and committed atrocious inhumanities. This is all I saw of them.
Such melancholy spectacles don’t tend to raise one’s spirits.” (Breaks
off into metre:) ‘‘ La Fortune inconstante et fiere, Fortune incon-

stant and proud Does not treat her suitors Always in an equal man-

ner. ‘Those fools called heroes, who run the country,

“ Ces fous nommeés heros, et qui courent les champs,
Couverts de sang et de poussiere,
Voltaire, n’ont pas tous les ans
La faveur de voir le derriére
De leurs ennemis insolents.

Can’t expect that pleasure every year! * *

“‘Maupertuis, say you?” ‘ Don’t trouble the ashes of the dead; let
the grave at least put an end to your unjust hatreds. Reflect that even
Kings make peace after long battling; cannot you ever make it? I
think you would be capable, like Orpheus, of descending to Hell, not to
soften Pluto and bring back your beautiful Emilie, but to pursue into
that Abode of Woe an enemy whom your wrath has only too much per-
secuted in the world: for shame!”**—and rebukes him, more than
once elsewhere, in very serious terms.

In Winter-quarters, on Peace and the Stolen Edition. (Starts in
verse, which we abridge :) ‘ With how many laurels you have covered
yourself in all the fields of Literature! One laurel yet is wanting to
the brow of Voltaire. If, as the crown of so many perfect works, he
could by a skilful manceuvre bring back Peace, I, and Europe with me,
would think that his masterpiece!” (Takes to prose :)

* This is my thought and all Europe’s. ‘Virgil made as fine Verses
as you; but he never made a Peace. It will be a distinction you will
have over all your brethren of Parnassus, if you succeed.

“J know not who has betrayed me, and thought of printing” (the
Edition ;—not you, surely!) “a pack of rhapsodies which were good
enough to amuse myself, but were never meant for publication. After
all, I am so used to treacheries and bad maneuvres,’—what matters
this insignificant one ?

. © Supra, p. 167.
_** Guvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 61-65 (*‘ Wilsdruf, 17th November 1759”).

Cuap. VIII.] MIscELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 501
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

“‘T know not who the Bredow is; but he has told you true. The
sword and death have made frightful ravages among us. And the
worst is, we are not yet at the end of the tragedy. You may judge
what effect these cruel shocks make on me. I wrap myself in my sto-
icism, the best 1 can. Flesh and blood revolt against such tyrannous
command ; but it must be followed. If you saw me, you would scarce-
ly know me again: I am old, broken, grayheaded, wrinkled ; I am los-
ing my teeth and my gaiety: if this go on, there will be nothing of me
left, but the mania of making verses, and an inviolable attachment to
my duties and to the few virtuous men whom I know.”**

In Winter-quarters, a month later (comes still on “ Peace” again).
* * “YT will have you paid that bit of debt” (perhaps of postage or
the like), “ that Louis of the Mill (Louis du Moulin,” at Fontenoy, who
got upon a Windmill with his Dauphin, and caught that nickname from
the common men) “ may have wherewithal to make war on me. Add
tenth-penny tax to your tax of twentieth-penny ; impose new capita-
tions, make titular offices to get money; do, in a word, whatever you
like. In spite of all your efforts, you will not get a Peace signed by
my hands, except on conditions honourable to my Nation. Your peo-
ple, blown up with self-conceit and folly, may depend on these words.
Adieu, live happy; and while you make all your efforts to destroy
Prussia, think that nobody has less deserved it than I, either of you or
of your French.’’*®

Still in Winter-quarters (on “ Peace” still; but begins with “ Mau-
pertuis,” which is all we will give). ‘‘ What rage animates you against
Maupertuis? You accuse him of having published that Furtive Edi-
tion. Know that his Copy, well sealed by him, arrived here after his
death, and that he was incapable of such an indiscretion.” (Breaks
into verse :)

“ Leave in peace the cold ashes of Maupertuis :
~ Truth can defend him, and will.
His soul was faithful and noble :
He pardoned you that scandalous Akakia (ce vil libelle
Que votre fureur criminelle
Prit son chez moi de griffoner) ; he did :—
And you? Shame on such delirium as Voltaire’s!
What, this beautiful, what, this grand genius,
Whom I admired with transport,
Soils himself with calumny, and is ferocious on the dead ?

45 (Ruvres de Frédéric, xxiii. 69 (“ Freyberg, 24th Feb, 1760”).
46 Ibid. xxiii. 72 (‘‘ Freyberg, 20th March 1760”).

502 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

Flocking together, in the air uttering cries of joy, .
Vile ravens pounce down upon sepulchres,
And make their prey of corpses :**—

Blush, repent, alas!

These Specimens will suffice. ‘‘ The King of Prussia ?” Vol-
taire would sometimes say: ‘* He is as potent and as malignant
as the Devil; but he is also as unhappy, not knowing friend-
ship,’”’—having such a chance, too, with some of us!

Friedrich has sent Lord Marischal to Spain: other fond
Hopes of Friedrich’s.

In the beginning of this Year, 1759, Earl Marischal had been
called out of his Neufchatel stagnancy, and launched into the
Diplomatic field again; sent on mission into Spain, namely.
The case was this. Ferdinand VI. of Spain (he who would not
pay Friedrich the old Spanish debt, but sent him merino rams,
and a jar of Queen-Dowager snuff) had fallen into one of his
gloomy fits, and was thought to be dying ;—did, in fact, die, in
a state nearly mad, on the 10th August following. By Treaty
of Aix-la-Chapelle, and by all manner of Treaties, Carlos of
Naples, his Half-Brother (Termagant’s Baby Carlos, whom we
all knew), was to succeed him in Spain; Don Philip, the next
Brother, now of Parma and Piacenza, was to follow as King in
Naples,—ceding those two litigious Duchies to Austria, after
all. Friedrich, vividly awake to every chance, foresaw, in case
of such disjunctures in Italy, good likelihood of quarrel there.
And has despatched the experienced old Marischal to be on the
ground, and have his’ eyes open. Marischal knows Spain very
well; and has often said, ‘‘ He left a dear old friend there, the
Sun.” Marischal was aaace way, about New-Year’s time; but
lingered by the road, waiting how Ferdinand “would turn,—and
having withal an important business of his own, as he sauntered
on. Did not arrive, I think, till Summer was at hand, and his
dear Old Friend coming out in vigour.

August 10th, 1759, Ferdinand died ; and the same day Carlos
became King of Spain. But, instead of giving Naples to Don
Philip, Carlos gave it to a junior son of his own; and left poor
Philip to content himself with Parma and Piacenza, as hereto-

Cuap. VIII.] MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS. 503
Nov. 1759—March 1760.

fore. Clear against the rights of Austria; Treaty of Aix-la-
Chapelle is perfectly explicit on that point! Will not Austria
vindicate its claim? Politicians say, Austria might have recoy-
ered not only Parma and Piacenza, but the kingdom of Naples
itself,—no France at present able to hinder it, no Spain ever
able. But Austria, contrary to expectation, would not: a Coun-
try tenacious enough of its rights, real and imaginary; greedy
enough of Italy, but of Silesia much more! The matter was
deliberated in Council at Vienna; but the result was magnani-
mously, No. ‘Finish this Friedrich first; finish this Silesia.
Nothing else till that!”

The Marischal’s legationary function, therefore, proved a sine-
cure; no Carlos needing Anti-Austrian assistance from Fried-
rich or another ; Austria magnanimously having let him alone.
Doubtless a considerable disappointment to Friedrich. In-
dustrious Friedrich had tried, on the other side of this affair,
Whether the King of Sardinia, once an adventurous fighting
kind of man, could not be stirred up, having interests involved ?
But no; he too, grown old, devotional, apprehensive, held by his
rosaries, and answered, No. Here is again a hope reasonable to
Jook at, but which proves fallacious.

Marischal continued in Spain, corresponding, sending news
(the Prussian Archives alone know what), for nearly a couple
of years.!7 His Embassy had one effect, which is of interest to
us here. On his way out, he had gone by London, with a view
of getting legal absolution for his Jacobitism,—so far, at least,
as to be able to inherit the Earldom of Kintore, which is likely
to fall vacant soon. By blood it is his, were the Jacobite inca-
pacities withdrawn. Kintore is a cadet branch of the Keiths;
“‘ John, younger Son of William Sixth Lord Marischal,” was the
first Kintore. William Sixth’s younger Son, yes;—and Wil-
liam’s Father, a man always venerable to me, had (4.p. 1593)
founded Marischal College, Aberdeen, — where, for a few, in
those stern granite Countries, the Diviner Pursuits are still
possible (thank God and this Keith) on frugal oat-meal. Mar-
ischal- College Keith, or Fifth Lord Marischal, was grandfather’s

47 Returned “ April 1762” (Friedrich’s Letter to him, ‘‘10th April 1762”
in (uvres de Frédéric, xx. 285).

504 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Noy. 1759—March 1760.

grandfather of our Potsdam Friend, who is tenth and last.‘®
Honour to the brave and noble, now fallen silent under foot not
of the nobler! In a word, the fourth Kintore was about dying
childless; and Marischal had come by London on that heritage
business.

He carried, naturally, the best recommendations. Britannic
Majesty, Pitt, and everybody met him with welcome and further-
ance ; what he wished was done, and in such a style of prompt-
ness and cordiality, Pitt pushing it through, as quite gained the
heart of old Marischal. And it is not doubted, though particu-
lars have not been published, ‘That he sent important Spanish
notices to Pitt, in these years,—and especially informed him
that King Carlos and the French Bourbon had signed a Family
Compact (15th August 1761), or solemn covenant, to stand by
one another as brothers. Which was thenceforth, to Pitt pri-
vately, an important fact, as perhaps we shall see; though to
other men it was still only a painful rumour and dubiety.
Whether the old Marischal informed him, That King Carlos
hated the English; that he never had, in his royal mind, forgiven
that insult of Commodore Martin’s (watch laid on the table, in
the Bay of Naples, long ago), I do not know; but that also was
a fact. A diligent, indignant kind of man, this Carlos, I am
told; by no means an undeserving King of Spain, though his
Portraits declare him an ugly: we will leave him in the discreet
Marischal’s hands, with the dear Old Friend shining equally on
both.

Singular to see how, in so voracious an intellect as Fried-
rich’s, so many fallacies of hope are constantly entertained.
War in Italy, on quarrel with King Carlos; Peace with France
and the Pompadour, by help of Edelsheim and the Bailli de
Froulay ; Peace with Russia and the znfame Catin, by help of
English briberies (Friedrich sent an agent this winter with
plenty of English guineas, but he got no farther than the Front-
ier, not allowed even to try): sometimes, as again this winter,
it is hope of Denmark joining him (in alarm against the Russian
views on Holstein; but that, too, comes to nothing); above all,
there is perennially, budding out yearly, the brighter after every

*8 Douglas’s Scotch Peerage, pp. 448 et seq., 387 et seq.

CHAP. TX] PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 505
Jan.—April 1760.

disappointment, a hope in the Grand Turk and his adherencies.
Grand Turk, or failing him, the Cham of Tartary,—for certain,
some of these will be got to fasten on the heels of Austria, of
Russia; and create a favourable diversion? Friedrich took an
immense deal of trouble about this latter hope. It is almost
pathetic to see with what a fond tenacity he clings to it; and
hopes it over again, every new Spring and Summer.?9

The hope that an infame Catin might die some day (for she is
now deep in chaotic ailments, deepish even in brandy), seems
never to have struck him; at least there is nowhere any articu-
late hint of it,—the eagle-flight of one’s imagination soaring far
above such a pettiness! Hope is very beautiful; and even falla-
cious hope, in such a Friedrich. The one hope that did not de-
ceive him, was hope in his own best exertion to the very death;
and no fallacy ever for a moment slackened him in that. Stand
to thyself: in the wide domain of Imagination, there is no other
certainty of help. No other certainty ;—and yet who knows
through what pettiness Heaven may send help!

CHAPTER IX.
PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN.

Ir was April 25th before Friedrich quitted Freyberg, and
took Camp; not till the middle of June that anything of serious
Movement came. Much discouragement prevails in his Army,
we hear: and indeed, it must be owned, the horoscope of these
Campaigns grows yearly darker. Only Friedrich himself must
not be discouraged! Nor is;—though there seldom lay ahead
of any man a more dangerous-looking Year than this that is now
dimly shaping itself to Friedrich. His fortune seems to have
quitted him; his enemies are more confident than ever.

This Year, it seems, they have bethought them of a new de-
vice against him. ‘We have 90 million Population,” count
they; ‘‘he has hardly 5; in the end, he must run out of men!
Let us cease exchanging prisoners with him.’ At Jigerndorf,
in April 1758 (just before our march to Olmiitz), there had been

Von V.—Y

506 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Jan.—April 1760.
exchange ; not without haggles; but this was the last on Aus-
tria’s part. Cartel of the usual kind, values punctually settled :
a Fieldmarshal is worth 3,000 common men, or 1,500/.; Colonel
worth 130 men, or 65/.; common man is worth 10s. sterling, not
a high figure.! The Russians haggled still more, no keeping of
them to their word; but they tried it a second time, last year
(October 1759); and by careful urging and guiding, were got
dragged through it, and the prisoners on both sides sent to their
colours again. After which, it was a settled line of policy, “No
more exchanging or cartelling; we will starve him out in that
article!” And had Friedrich had nothing but his own 5 mil-
lions to go upon, though these contributed liberally, he had in
truth been starved out. Nor could Saxony, with Mecklenburg,
Anhalt, Erfurt, and their 10,000 men a year, have supplied him,
—‘‘had not there,” says Archenholtz (a man rather fond of su-
perlatives),—

“ Had not there risen a Recruiting system,” or Crimping system, “the
like of which for kind and degree was never seen in the Earth before.
Prisoners, captive soldiers, if at all likely fellows, were by every means
persuaded, and even compelled, to take Prussian service. Compelled,
cudgel in hand,’ says Archenholtz (who is too indiscriminating, I can
see,—for there were Pfalzers, Wiirtembergers, Reichsfolk, who had first
been compelled the other way): “not asked if they wished to serve,
but dragged to the Prussian colours, obliged to swear there, and fight
against their countrymen.” Say at least, against their countrymen’s
Governors, contumacious Serene Highnesses of Wurtemberg, Mack-
lenburg and the like. Wiirtemberg, we mentioned lately, had to shoot
a good few of his first levy against the Protestant Champion, before
they would march at all!—I am sorry for these poor men; and wish
the Reich had been what it once was, a Veracity and Practical Reality,
not an Imaginary Entity and hideously contemptible Wiggery, as it now
is! Contemptible, and hideous as well ;—setting itself up on that fun-
damental mendacity ; which is eternally tragical, though little regarded
in these days, and which entails mendacities without end on parties con-
cerned !—But, apart from all this, certain it is,

“The whole German Reich was deluged with secret Prussian En-
listers. The greater part of these were not actual Officers at all, but
hungry Adventurers, who had been bargained with, and who, for their
own profit, allowed themselves every imaginable art to pick up men.

1 Archenholtz, ii. 53. :

Cuap. IX.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 507
Jan.—April 1760,

Head and centre of them was the Prussian Colonel Colignon,” one of
the Free-Corps people; “‘a man formed by nature for this business”
(what a beautiful man !)—“ who gave all the others their directions, and
taught them by his own example. Colignon himself,” in winter-time,
“travelled about in all manner of costumes and characters ; persuading
hundreds of people into the Prussian service. He not only promised
Commissions, but gave such,—nominating loose young fellows (Laffen),
students, merchants’ clerks and the like, to Lieutenantcies and Captain-
cies in the Prussian Army” (about as likely as in the Seraphim and
Cherubim, had they known it): ‘in the Infantry, in the Cuirassiers,
in the Hussars,—it is all one, you have only to choose. The renown
of the Prussian arms was so universal, and combined with the notion of
rich booty, that Colignon’s Commission-manufactory was continually
busy. No need to provide marching-money, hand-money” (shillings
for earnest) ; “‘Colignon’s troops travelled mostly of will, and at their
own charge. In Franken, in Schwaben, in the Rhine Countries, a dis-
solute son would rob his father,—as shopmen their masters’ tills, and
managers their cash-boxes,—and hie off to those magnanimous Prus-
sian Officials, who gave away companies like kreutzers, and had a value
for young fellows of spirit. ‘They hastened to Magdeburg with their
Commissions ; where they were received as common recruits, and put
by force into the regiments suitable. No use in resisting: the cudgel
and the drill-sergeant,’—who doubts it ?—‘ till complete submission.
By this and other methods, Colignon and his helpers are reckoned to have
raised for the King, in the course of this War, about 60,000 recruits,’

This Year, Daun, though his reputation is on the decline late-
ly, is to have the chief command, as usual; the Grand Army,
with Saxony for field of conquest, and the Reichsfolk to assist,
is to be Daun’s. But, what is reckoned an important improve-
ment, Loudon is to have a separate command, and Army of his
own. Loudon, hot of temper, melancholic, shy, is not a man to
recommend himself to Kriegshofrath people; but no doubt Im-
perial Majesty has had her own wise eye on him. His merits
are so undeniable; the need of some Commander not of the
Cunctator type is become so very pressing. ‘‘ Army of Silesia,
50,000 ;” that is to be Loudon’s, with 40,000 Russians to codp-
erate and unite themselves with Loudon; and try actually for
conquest of Silesia, this Year ; while Daun, conquering Saxony,
keeps the King busy.

2 Archenholtz, ii. 53.

508 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
Jan.—April 1760.

At Petersburg, Versailles, Vienna, much planning there has
been, and arduous consulting: first at Petersburg, in time and
in importance, where Montalembert has again been very urgent
in regard to those poor Swedish people, and the getting of them
turned to some kind of use: ‘‘Stettin in conjunction with the
Swedes; oh, listen to reason, and take Stettin!’ ‘ Would not
Dantzig by ourselves be the advisable thing?” answers Soltikof:
“Dantzig is an important ‘Town, and the grand Baltic Haven ;
and would be so convenient for our Preussen, since we have de-
termined to maintain that fine Conquest.” So thinks Czarish
Majesty, as well as Soltikof, privately, though there are difficulties
as to Dantzig; and, in fine, except Colberg over again, there can
be nothing attempted of sieging thereabouts. A Siege of Colberg,
however, there is actually to be ; Second Siege,—if perhaps it will
prove luckier than the First was, two years since? Naval Arm-
ament Swedish-Russian, specific Land Armament wholly Rus-
sian, are to do this Second Siege, at a favourable time; except
by wishes, Soltikof will not be concerned in it; nor, it is to be
hoped, shall we,—in such pressure of haste as is probably ahead
for us.

‘¢ Silesia would be the place for sieges!” say the Vienna peo-
ple always; and Imperial Majesty is very urgent; and tries all
methods,—eloquence, flatteries, bribes,—to bring Petersburg to
that view. Which is at last adopted; heartily by Czarish Maj-
esty, ever ready for revenge on Friedrich, the more fatal and the
more direct, the better. Heartily by her; not so heartily by
Soltikof and her Army people, who know the Austrian habits;
and privately decide on not picking chestnuts from the fire, while
the other party’s paws keep idle, and only his jaws are ready.

Of Small-War there is nothing or little to be said; indeed
there occurs almost none. Roving Cossack-Parties, under one
Tottleben, whom we shall hear of otherwise, infest Pommern,
bickering with the Prussian posts there; not ravaging as for-
merly, Tottleben being a civilized kind of man. One of these
called at the Castle of Schwedt, one day; found Prince Eugen
of Wiirtemberg there (nearly recovered of his Kunersdorf
wounds), who is a Son-in-law of the House, married to a

‘

CHAP. IX. ] PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 509
21st Feb. 1760.

Daughter of Schwedt ;—ancestor of the now Russian Czars too,
had anybody then known it. Him these Cossacks carried off
with them, a march or two; then, taking his bond for a certain
ransom, let him go. Bond and bond-holder being soon after
captured by the Prussians, Eugen paid no ransom; so that to
us his adventure is without moment, though it then made some
noise among the Gazetteers.

Two other little passages, and only two, we will fantinn 3
which have in themselves a kind of memorability. First, that
of General Czetteritz and the Manuscript he lost. Of posts
across the Elbe, I find none mentionable here, and believe there
is none, except only Czetteritz’s; who stands at Cosdorf, well
up towards Torgau Country, as sentry over Torgau and the
Towns there. On Czetteritz there was, in February, an attempt
made by the active General Beck, whom Daun had detached
for that object. Extremely successful, according to the Aus-
trian Gazetteers; but in reality amounting to as good as noth-
ing :—Surprisal of Czetteritz’s first vedette, in the dawn of a
misty February morning (February 21st, 1760); non-surprisal
of his second, which did give fire and alarm, whereupon debate ;
and Czetteritz springing into his saddle; retreat of his people to
rearward, with loss of 7 Officers, and 200 prisoners ;—but. end-
ing in re-advance, with fresh force, a few hours after ;? in re-
pulse of Beck, in recovery of Cosdorf, and a general state of
As-you-were in that part. A sputter of Post-War, not now
_worth mentioning at all,—except only for one small circum-
stance: That in the careering and swift ordering, such as there
was, on the rearguard especially, Major-General Czetteritz’s
horse happened to fall; whereby not only was the General taken
prisoner, but his quarters got plundered, and in his luggage,——
what is the notable circumstance,—there was found a small
Manuscript, Militairische Instrukzion fiir die Generale, such .as
every Prussian General has, and is bound to keep religiously
secret. ‘This, carried to Daun’s headquarters, was duly. prized,

 $ Seyfarth, ii. 655.

4 Stands now in (ures de Frédéric, xxviii. 8 et seq. 3 was finished (the
revisal of it was), by the King, ‘‘ 2d April 1748 :” see Preuss, 1, 478-480;
and Cfuvres de Frédéric, xxviii. Preface, for endless indistinct details about

we

510 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.
15th March 1760.

copied; and in the course of a year came to print, in many
shapes and places; was translated into English, under the Title,
Military Instructions by the King of Prussia, in 1762 (and again,
hardly so well, in 1797); and still languidly circulates among
the studious of our soldiers. Not a little admired by some of
them; and unfortunately nearly all they seem to know of this
greatest of modern Soldiers.°

Next, about a month after, we have rae to report of
Loudon from Silesia, or Pion of the Enemies he meets there;
for it is not a victorious thing. But it means a starting of the
Campaign by an Austrian invasion of Silesia; long before sieg-
ing time, while all these Montalembert-Soltikof pleadings and
counter-pleadings hang dubious at Petersburg, and Loudon’s
‘¢ Silesian Army”’ is still only in a nascent or theoretic state, and
only Loudon himself is in a practical one.

Friedrich has always Fouquet at Landshut, in charge of the
Silesian Frontier; whose outposts, under Goltz as head of these,
stretch, by Neisse, far eastward, through the Hills to utmost
Mihren; Fouquet’s own headquarter being generally Landshut,
the main gate of the Country. Fouquet, long since, rooted
himself rather firmly into that important post; he has a beauti-
ful ring of fortified Hills around Landshut; battery crossing bat-
tery, girdling it with sure destruction, under an expert Fouquet,
—but would require 30,000 men to keep it, instead of 13,000,
which is Fouquet’s allotment. Upon whom Loudon is fully in-
tending a stroke this Year. Fouquet, as we know, has strenu-
ously managed to keep ward there for a twelve-month past; in
spite, often enough, of new violent invadings and attemptings
(violent, miscellaneous, but intermittent) by the Devilles and
others ;—and always under many difficulties of his own, and
vicissitudes in his employment: a Fouquet coming and going,
waxing and waning, according to the King’s necessities, and

the translations and editions of it. London Edition, 1818, calls itself the
Fifth.

5 See, for example, in Life of General Sir Charles Napier, by his Brother
(London, ]857), iii. 365 and elsewhere,—one of the best judges in the world
expressing his joy and admiration on discovery of Friedrich; discovery, if
you read well, which amounts to these Jnstructions, and no more.

Cuap. TX.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 511
15th March 1760.

to the intermittency or Sehotailin of pressures on Landshut.
Under Loudon, this Year, Fouquet will have harder times than
ever ;—in the end, too hard! But will resist, judge how, by the
following small sample :

“ Besides Fouquet and his 13,000,” says my Note, “the Silesian
Garrisons are all vigilant, are or ought to be; and there are far eastward
of him, for guarding of the Jagerndorf-Troppau Border, some 4 or 6,000,
scattered about, under Lieutenant-General Goltz, in various Hill Posts,
—the chief Post of which, Goltz’s own, is the little Town of Neustadt,
northward of Jagerndorf” (where we have billetted in the Old Silesian
Wars): * Goltz’s Neustadt is the chief; and Leobschiitz, south-west-
ward of it, under ‘ General Le Grand’” (once the Major Grant of Kolin
Battle, if readers remember him, “ Your Majesty and I cannot take the
Battery ourselves !’’), “is probably the second in importance. Loudon,
cantoned along the Moravian side of the Border, perceives that he can
assemble 32,000 foot and horse; that the Prussians are 13,000 plus
6,000; that Silesia can be invaded with advantage, were the weather
come. And that, in any kind of weather, Goltz and his straggle of
posts might be swept into the interior, perhaps picked up and pocketted
altogether, if Loudon were sharp enough. Swept into the interior Goltz
was ; by no means pocketted altogether, as he ought to have been.

© March 13th, 1760, Loudon orders general muster hereabouts for
the 15th, everybody to have two-days bread and forage; and warns
Goltz, as bound in honour: ‘ E:xcellenz, tomorrow is March 14th; to-
morrow our pleasant time of Truce is out,—the more the pity for both
of us!’ ‘Yea, my esteemed neighbour Excellenz!’ answers Goltz, with
the proper compliments ; but judges that his esteemed neighbour is in-
tending mischief almost immediately. Goltz instantly sends orders to
all his posts: ‘ You, Herr General Grant, you at Leobschiitz, and all
the rest of you, make your packages; march without delay ; rendezvous
at Steinau, and Upper-Glogau’ (far different from Great-Glogau),
‘ Neisse-ward ; swift!’ And would have himself gone on the 14th, but
could not,—his poor little Bakery not being here, nor wagons for his
baggages quite to be collected in a moment,—and it was Saturday 15th,
5 a.M., that Goltz appointed himself to march.

“ The last time we saw General Goltz was on the Green of Bautzen,
above two years ago,—when he delivered that hard Message to the
King’s Brother and his party, ‘ You deserve to be tried by Court-mar-
tial. and have your heads cut off!’ He was of that sad Zittau business
of the late Prince of Prussia’s,—Goltz, Winterfeld, Ziethen, Schmettau
and others. Winterfeld and the Prince are both dead; Schmettau is
fallen into disaster; Goltz is still in good esteem with the King. A

512 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Boox XIX.

15th March 1760, ©
stalwart, swift, flinty kind of man, to judge by the Portraits of him;
considerable obstinacy, of a tacitly intelligent kind, in that steady eye,
in that droop of the eyebrows towards the strong cheek-bones; plenty
of sleeping fire in Lieutenant-General Goltz.

“His principal force, on this occasion, is one Infantry Regiment;
Regiment Manteuffel :—readers perhaps recollect that stout Pommern
Regiment, Manteuffel of Foot, and the little Dialogue it had with the
King himself, on the eve of Leuthen: ‘Good night, then, Fritz! To-
morrow all dead, or else the Enemy beaten.’ ‘Their conduct, I have
heard, was very shining at Leuthen, where everybody shone; and since
then they have been plunging about through the death-element in their
old rugged way,—and reémerge here into definite view again, under
Lieutenant-General Goltz, issuing from the north end of Neustadt, in
the dim dawn of a.cold spring morning, March 15th, 5 a.m, ; weather
latterly very wet,as I learn, They intend Neisse-way, with their con-
siderable stock of baggage-wagons; a company of Dragoons is to help
in escorting: party perhaps about 2,000 in all. Goltz will have his
difficulties this day ; and has calculated on them. And, indeed, at the
first issuing, here they already are.

** Loudon, with about 5,000 horse,—four Regiments drawn up here,
and by and by with a fifth (happily not with the grenadiers, as he had
calculated, who are detained by broken bridges, waters all in flood from
the rain),—is waiting for him, at the very environs of Neustadt, Lou-
don, by a trumpet, politely invites him to surrender, being so outnum-
bered ; Goltz, politely thanking, disregards it,and marches on: Loudon
escorting, in an ominous way; till, at Buchelsdorf, the fifth Regiment
(best in the Austrian service) is seen drawn out across the highway,
plainly intimating, No thoroughfare to Goltz and Pommern, Loudon
sends a second trumpet: ‘Surrender prisoners; honourablest terms;
keep all your baggage: refuse, and you are cut down every man.’
‘You shall yourself hear the answer,’ said Goltz. Goltz leads this
second trumpet to the front; and, in Pommern dialect, makes known
what General Loudon’s proposal is. The Pommerners answer, as one
man, a No of such emphasis as I have never heard; in terms which
are intensely vernacular, it seems, and which do at this day astonish
the foreign mind: ‘ We will for him something, Wir wollen thm was—
But the powers of translation and even of typography fail; and feeble
paraphrase must give it: ‘ We will for him something ineffable concoct,
of a surprisingly contrary kind! ‘ Wir wollen thm was’ (with ineffable
bai done verb governing it)! growled one indignant Pommerner;

“and it ran like file-fire along the ranks,’ says Archenholtz; everybody
growling it, and bellowing it, in fierce bass chorus, as the indubitable
vote of Pommern in those circumstances.

Cuar. [X.] PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 513
15th March 1760.

** Loudon’s trumpet withdrew. Pommern formed square round its
-baggage; Loudon’s 5,000 came thundering in, fit to break adamant;
but met such a storm of bullets from Pommern, they stopped about ten
paces short, in considerable amazement, and wheeled back. Tried it
again, still more amazement ; the like a third time ; every time in vain.
After which, Pommern took the road again, with vanguard, rearguard ;
and had peace for certain miles,—Loudon gloomily following, for a new
chance. How many times Loudon tried again, and ever again, at good
places, I forget,— say six times in all. Between Siebenhufen and
Steinau, in a dirty defile, the jewel of the road for Loudon, who tried -
his very best there, one of our wagons broke down ; the few to rear of
it, eighteen wagons and some country carts, had to be left standing.
Nothing more of Pommern was left there or anywhere. Near Steinau
there, Loudon gave it up as desperate, and went his way. His loss,
they say, was 300 killed, 500 wounded; Pommern’s was 35 killed, and
above 100 left wounded or prisoners. One of the stiffest day’s works I
have known: some twelve miles of march, in every two an attack.
Pommern has really concocted something surprising, and kept its prom-
ise to Loudon! ‘Thou knowest what the Pommerners can do,’ said
they once to theirown King. An obstinate, strong-boned, heavy-browed
people; not so stupid as you think. More or less of Jutish or Anglish
type; highly deficient in the graces of speech, and, I should judge, with
little call to Parliamentary Eloquence,”®

Friedrich is, this Year, considered by the generality of man-
kind to be ruined: ‘‘ Lost 60,000 men last Campaign ; was beat-
en twice; his luck is done: what is to become of him?” say his
enemies, and even the impartial Gazetteer, with joy or sorrow.
Among his own people there is gloom or censure; hard com-
mentaries on Maxen: ‘So self-willed, high, and deaf to counsel
from Prince Henri!” Henri himself, they say, is sullen: threat-
ening, as he often does, to resien “for want of health ;’’ and as
he quite did, for a while, in the end of this Campaign, or inter-
val between this and next.

Friedrich has, with incredible diligence, got together his finance
(copper in larger dose than ever, Jew Ephraim presiding as us-
ual); and, as if ay art-magic, has on their feet 100,000 men
against his enemy’s 280,000. Some higher Officers are secretly

6 Preuss, ii. 241 (incorrect in some small points); Archenholtz, ii. 61;
Seyfarth, ii. 640, and Beylagen, ii. 657-660 ; Tempelhof, iv. 8-10; in Anon-
ymous of Hamburg (iv. 68), the Austrian account.

Xe2

514 FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED. [Book XIX.

; Jan.—April 1760,
in bad spirits; but the men know nothing of discouragement.
Friedrich proclaims to them at marching, ‘For every cannon
you capture, 100 ducats; for every flag, 50; for every standard
(cavalry flag), 40 ;”—-which sums, as they fell due, were accord-
ingly paid thenceforth.7 But Friedrich, too, is abundantly
gloomy, if that could help him; which he knows well it cannot,
and strictly hides it from all but a few ;—or all but D’Argens
almost alone, to whom it can do no harm. Read carefully by
the light of contemporary occurrences, not vaguely, in the vacant
haze, as the Editors give it, his correspondence with D’Argens
becomes interesting almost to a painful degree: an unaffected
picture of one of the bravest human souls, weighed down with
dispiriting labours and chagrins, such as were seldom laid on
any man; almost beyond bearing, but incurable, and demanding
to be borne. _ Wilhelmina is away, away; to D’Argens alone of
mortals does he whisper of these things; and to him not weari-
somely, or with the least prolixity, but in short sharp gusts, sel-
dom now with any indignation, oftenest with a touch of humour
in them, not soliciting any sympathy, nor expecting nearly as
much as he will get from the faithful D’Argens.

J am unfortunate and old, dear Marquis; that is why they
persecute me: God knows what my future is to be this Year!
I grieve to resemble Cassandra with my prophecies; but how
augur well of the desperate situation we are in, and which goes
on growing worse? I am so gloomy today, I will cut short.”
. . - Write to me when you have nothing better to do; and
don’t forget a poor Philosopher who, perhaps to expiate his in-
credulity, is doomed to find his Purgatory in this world.”’8 . . .
To another Friend, in the way of speech, he more deliberately
says: ‘The difficulties I had, last Campaign, were almost infi-
nite: sucha multitude of enemies acting against me; Pommern,
Brandenburg, Saxony, Frontiers of Silesia, alike in danger, often
enough all at one time. If I escaped absolute destruction, I
must impute it chiefly to the misconduct of my enemies; who
gained such advantages, but had not the sense to follow them up.
Ixxperience often corrects people of their blunders: I cannot

7 Stenzel, v. 236, 237; ib. 248.
8 (EHuvres de Frédéric, xix. 138, 139 (‘‘ Freyberg, 20th March 1760").

CuapP. Pan PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN. 515
Jan.——April 1760.

expect to profit by anything of that kind, on their part, in the
course of this Campaign :” judge if it will be a light one, mon
cher.®

The symptoms we decipher in these Letters, and otherwise,
are those of a man drenched in misery; but used to his black
element, unaffectedly defiant of it, or not at the pains to defy it;
occupied only to do his very utmost in it, with or without suc-
cess, till the end come. Prometheus, chained on the Ocean-
cliffs, with the New Ruling-Powers in the upper hand, and their
vultures gradually eating him; dumb Time and dumb Space
looking on, apparently with small sympathy: Prometheus and
other Titans, now and then, have touched the soul of some A%s-
chylus, and drawn tones of melodious sympathy, far heard among
mankind. But with this new Titan it is not so: nor, upon the
whole, with the proper Titan, in this world, is it usually so; the
world being a—what shall we say ?—a poorish kind of world,
and its melodies and dissonances, its loves and its hatreds, worth
comparatively little in the.long-run. Friedrich does wonderful-
ly, without sympathy from almost anybody ; and the indifference
with which he walks along, under such a cloud of sulky stupid-
ities, of mendacities and misconceptions, from the herd of man-
kind, is decidedly admirable to me.

But let us look into the Campaign itself. Perhaps,—contrary
to the world’s opinion, and to Friedrich’s own when, in ultra-
lucid moments, he gazes into it in the light of cold arithmetic,
and finds the aspect of it “ frightful,’”—this Campaign will be a
little luckier to him than the last? Unluckier it cannot well
be: or if so, it will at least be final to him !

® To Mitchell, one evening, ‘“‘Camp of Schlettau, May 23d” (Mitchell,
ii. 159).

END OF VOL. V.

tin 1h aan ne eke lav eiiiokmel uate
"3 ae fey Dominios Sad anon 1 Oto ibaa) gies
mdnctsel, “ipeytir, ld) 04, ae aes Loni ge, orto waned
a t dag’ bev, Sey igabe. sald enged gleeeae
Fal. biforkoourtt Cheeta. Lice iw ethene an

ce Bs Sa toh to. Linge <ackt daghungti awed! adhering
Oe aber ined ak slag, anojloligrio goede
3 add gees ere: ine Tipe, eh Sh sia, ‘faa ‘sy topa Lie + Sat is ab at
pet) ig ; at EGG Fea tetenty, tt ai fibrare. aie. fe “vache Sshistng i
sie Se cee A s feadat iLabroong. abhi’ we os hepa aH
a ccs Aborort a Dosaael oi aygauorathi bow eis i ke
aay stint toh cc. aqnb: dotsboix: To atinngantol niobate
: gedit ont baw. 2 hodvna tenanleznante euorcaaa
5 femen cbigin2 hie, We Descits. @ sksies, alveatt latala win ot siaities it
ee Wd My easy Sit apes ae Hit ep bet: velar Gi)
SM She a Na AS Nd eR OF aaa ines s
eM ee or iiss hie ae
‘Hae Oe kay PE a Hoe 7 niece SD wdhateeh doad-werd aa
BM cathe, nb culye.re79 #'doksiain'li of Lvrim paeseaay <hisae
ae e | Bipiren Shig. ta sell of ai ai eiak mY, och ad ceo
Le oie eae Uinta. compensa’): eich hos!” jeddtcliyi 36 dep SPER calls ohall
¢ Powe teria Mh weds lealt: | i Tdenk adh, ant eait of ial
re ie Pt Sonia fpall ob tenok fy ibe th aad
; aah aw Es? sha wae deal gales alto Robbe
7 iG a SLL Pa Se o fut s Dak ie SS af.
eae tS ah. NRA Sut s OPPh) SRM if ime ta. ee ee Se Re
oh Gap 7 See ee ee ae Me cee SA ue ites
aS ae Sane: : Sit aer * ait hy 22 Gt are at ene ee ro} ‘4
; é ny ies efit bat, bd Daath Cue a. at 40: pe a
: 4 ue tea fae fires Laser, ras py a Die <4 aaeere D

=>

<A . ‘ es
aa iz Seas 17) en) ba Lo Pat a . hae? 2
Mico fhe ienaced Spies Loe Stage Page

epto

Ly at
° 9 Gr Ka
&

Se) 4 Pader| es

MF slo tf
Cracows

FOR THE THIRD SILESIAN
OR THE

SEVEN YEARS WAR.

Longitude East 14 fram Greenwich
JW.Lowry faulp!

Ao e fhe

feeds

iin

U ® The Libs rat ¥
2701 Spring Street

Fort Wayne, Indiana 46808

AXA

=

WA v7 F
~~
IM

SEA \ \\ NN IS RU ee

Ate

ee be

a
EP

Yd

. «

tus

SS \
<<

Yt

“ie

\

\

\ MAAN .

\ \ \\

NS SN ~
\<

Coe,

ty
ty

CELI
Yi
ty
tj
CL
wy

iy

SS
~ ROA
