HISTORY

0 £

FRIEDRICH II. OF PRUSSIA,

CALLED

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

THOMAS CARLYLE.

[1858-1865.]

IN TEN VOLUMES.
VOL. IV.

LONDON!

IpHAfMAN AND HALL (LlteLD),

BOBSOV AHB fiOKSt PRUTTIBitS* FAKCRAS BOAl^SC.W

CONTENTS OF VOLUME IV.

-f-

BOOK XL

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS ?N HAND. 1740.

CHAP

I. Phenomena of Friedrich’s Accession .

Friedrich will make Men happy; Corn-Magazines, p. 6.
Abolition of Legal Torture, 8.

Will have Philosopbcn about him, and a real Academy
of Sciences, 9.

And Every One shall get to Heaven in his own Way, ii.
Free Press, and Newspapers tlic best Instructors, 12.
Intends to be Practical withal, and every inch a King, 15.
Behaviour to his Mother; to his Wife, 21,

No Change in his Father’s Methods or Ministries, 23.

H, The Homagings.

Friedrich accepts the Homages, personally, in Three
Places, p, 31.

III. Friedrich makes an Excursion, not of direct

SORT, INTO THE ClEVE COUNTRIES .

Friedrich strikes off to the left, and has a View of Stras-
burg for Two Days, p.*tS.

Friedrich finds M. de Maupertuis; not yet M. dc Vol¬
taire, 55.

IV. Voltaire's First Interview with Friedrich .

i' Particulars of First Interview, on <«vere Scrutiny, p. 63.
What Voltaire thought of the Interview Twenty Years
afterwards, 65.

Voltaire thought of the tntervievr it the 'fhee. 07.

FAGB

I

.29

39

■ 58

r CONTENTS OF VOLUMIE IV»_

cwAr. rXcB

V. Afpa^i of Herstal. 70

Hqw the Harstallers had behaved to Friedrich'Wilheltn,

p, 7a*

Friedridt taJces the Rod out of Pickle. 75.

' What Voltaire though of Harstal, 79.

VI. Returns bv Hanover; does not call on his

Royal Uncle there • . • . 83

VII. Withdraws to Reinsberg, hoping a Peaceable

Winter 89

Wilhelmina’s Return-Visit, p. 90,

Unexpected News at Reinsberg, 93.

vni. The Kaiser’s Death . * - t . • $5

IX. Resolution formed at Reinsberg in conse¬
quence .lOI

Mystery in Berlin, for Seven Weeks, while the Prepara¬
tions go on ; Voltaire visits Friedrich to decipher it,
but cannot, p. Z04.

View of Friedrich behind the Veil, xo8.

Excellency Botta has Audience; then Excellency Dickens,
and others: December 6th, tlie Mystery is out, zxa.

Masked Ball, at Berlin, X2th-X3th December, xz6.

BOOK XIT.

FIRST SILESIAN WAR, AWAKENING A GENERAL EUROPEAN

ONE, BEGINS. ^40*1741.

I. Of ScHLESiEN, OR Silesia . . . ir8

Historical Epochs of Schlesien ;—after the Quads and
Marchmen, p. lao.

Friedrich marches on Glogau . .134

Friedrich at Crossen, and still in his own Territory, 14th-
i6th Dec.steps into Schlesien, p. 125.

What Clogaa, and the Government at Breslau, did upon

it, X28.

March to Weichau (Saturday xyth, and stay Sunday
there); to Milkau (Monday 19th); get to H^ndorf,
wHhin sight of Glo^u, Dec. asd, 133,

gONT|NTS OF VOLUME IV.

atfit*

HI. Problem of ^logau . . • . .

What Berhn is saying; what Fdedrlch is thlnhingi p*

143-

Schwerin at liegnita; Fnedrich^a^es>n]^ the Glo^u
Problem, and starts with Jiis besjt speed fox Breslau,

147.

IV. Breslau under soft ISiessure

fCmg enters Breslau, stays there, gracious And vigilant,

' Four Days (Jan. 2d-6th, 1741), p. 153.

V. Friedrich poshes forward towards Bricg and

Neisse.

*

Fnednch comes across toOttmachau; sits (here, m sur¬
vey of Neisse, till his Cannon come, p 159.

VI. Neisse is Bombarded * . . . ,

^ Browne vanislies m a slight Flash of Fire, p. i68.

VII. At Versaillls, the Most Christian Matesty

CHANipES HIS Shirt, and Bllleislf is seen
WITH Papers .

Of lielleisle and his Plans, p. 174.
viH. Phenomena in Petersburg ....

IX. Friedrich rciurns to Silesia

Skirmish of Baiimgarten, 27th February 1741, p. 192.
Aspects of Breslau, i9<;.

Austria is standing to Arms, 197.

The Young Dessauer c^tures Glogau (March 9tb), the
Old Dessauer, by lus Camp of Gottm (April 2d),,check'
mates certain Designing Persons, soa.

Friedrich takes the Field with some Pomp, goes into the
Mountains,—but comes fast back, 208.

•

X. Battle of MBllwitz.

Of Fnedneh's Disappearance into Fairyland, in the in¬
terim , and of Maupertois’s similar Adventure, p. 233.

XI. Thi#Bursting-forth of Bedlams: Belleisle

and THE Breakers ofPragmatic Sanction
Who was to blame for the Austnan-Succcsslon War? p.

W

TA««

140

ISO

163

169

180

i$8

216

239

VI

atAP.

XII.

XIII.

CONTENTS OF VOLUlf[E I\L

w

PIGS

How Belleisle made Visit to TeutschlatM; and there was
no fit Henry the Fowler to welcome nin», 244.

of Fragmatic Sanction; Manner of the chief
Artists in handling tlieir Covenants, 248.

Concerning the Im^rial Election {JCatserwaAI) that is to
be; Candidates for Kalsership, 255.

Teutschland to be carved into something of Symmctiy,
should the Belleislc Enterprises succeed, 259,

Delleisle on Visit to Friedrich; sees F^edrich besii^ge
Brieg, with Effect, 261.

Sorrows of his Britannic Majesty . . 267

1. Snatch of Parliamentary Eloquence by Mr. Viner (19th

April 1741). p. 268. •

2. Constitutional Historian on the I^enomcnon of Wal¬
pole in England, 271.

3. Of the Spanish War, or the Jenkins's-Ear Question,

274.

Succinct History of the Spanish War, which began in
1739; and ended—Wlien did it end ? 277.

Small-War : First Emergence of Zietiien the

Hussar General into Notice . . 286

MAPS.

Battle of Mollwitz
First Two Silesian Waps

. iofaci> p. 238
. at end of Volume,

FREDERICK THE GREAT.

BOOK XL

FKIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS IN HAND.
June—December 1740.

CHAPTER I.

PaSNOMENA OF FRIEDRICH'S ACCF^SION.'

Tuesday 3 ist May 1740. day of the late King’s
tiU the Thursday following, the post was stopped and
the gates closed; no estafette can be dispatched, though
Bltheios and all the Ambassadors are busy writing. On the
Thursday^ Regim^mts, Officers, principal Officials having sworn,
and the new King being f;^irly in the saddle, estafettes and
posthoys shoot forth at the top of their speed; and Rumour,
towards every point of the compass, apprises mankind what
immense news there is,i

tA Klng^s Accession is always a hopeful phenomenon to
the puhhe; more cipedally a young King’s, who has been
^alk;^ of for his talents and aspirings,—^for his sufferings, were
it nothing more^-*~'and^ whose Anti^Macchiavet is understood
to be in the press. Vaguely everywhere there has a notion
abroad that this young King will prove considerable.
Mere at last has a lover of Philosophy got upon the throng
iddlantluo^es and magnanimities are to be expected,

tVf \

9

2 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE llEIHS. MkXt,

X74«v

think rash editors and idle mankind. H^h oditofS in
land and elsowhoro, we ob8erve> are ready to belies thai:
Friedrich has not only disbanded die Pot^m G^ts; but
meana to ‘redtite the Frusrian AtOif one haUf or $o, fnr ease
(temporary ease* which we ho^ will be lasting) of parties cott'*
cerned; and to go much upon emancipation* political rose¬
water, and friendship to huma'hity, as we now cs^ it.

At his first meeting of Council, they say^ he put this ques¬
tion, ** Could not the Prussian Army be r^uced to 4S,ooo
The excellent young man. To which the Council had ans¬
wered, “ Hardly, your Majesty! The Julich-and-Berg affair
is so ominous hitherto !" These may be secrets, and dubious
to people out of doors, thinks a wise editor; but one thing
patent to the day was this, surely symbolical enough ; On oim
of his Majesty's first drives to Potsdam or from it, a thousand
children,'—in round numbers a thousand of them, all with the

siring round their necks, and liable to be taken f*r sol¬
diers, if needed in the regiment of their Canton,—a thousand
children met this young King at a turn of his road ; and with
shrill unison of wail, sang out: Oh, deliver us from slavery,”
—from the red threads, your Majesty. Why should poor we
be liable to suffer hardship for our Country or otherwise, your
Majesty! Can no one else be got to do it? sang out the
thousand children. And his Majesty assented on the spot,
thinks the rash editor.^ ** Goose, Madam ?” exclaimed a phi¬
lanthropist projector once, whose scheme of sweeping chim¬
neys by pulling a Jive goose down through them ^was objected
to: “ Goose, Madam ? You can take two ducks, then, if you
are so sorry for the goose R^h editors think there is to
be a reign of Astraea Redux in Prussia, by means of this young
King; and forget to ask themselves, as the young King must
by no means do, How far Astraea may be possible, for Pnmsia
and him ?

At home, too, there is prophesying bnough, vague hope
enough, which for most part goes wide of the mark. T^
young King, we know, did prove considerable; but not in the
Way sbap^ out for him by the public was in far other
wnys 1 For no public in the least knows, in such oases: nor
d«>es the man himself know, except gradually and if he strive
to. teem. As to the putdb,-^* Doubtless,’ says a friend id
A GmUmtuis ,a 3;(S; %

PgjBHollENA OF THE ACCfesSION. 5

n!»ine» ^ <l^btle93 the Atlentie Ocea,ii diat^eatTied €«*>

* hiihbttd to America; hicky for the Atlantic^ and for Colum**

* bos ahd us} but the Atlantic did not qu^ vote that umy

* ftom the 0 ^ p nay votea» I be|evei urere very vatibiis at
< di^toht stages of the matter This is a truth Urhich kiiigs
and men* not intending to be drift-logs or waste brine obedient
to the Moon, are much called to have in mind withal, from
perhaps an early stpge of their voyage.

Friedrich's actual demeanour in these his first weeks, which
is still'dec'ipberable if one study well, has in findt a good deal
of the brilliant, of the popular-magnanimous; but manifests
strong solid quality withd, and a head steadier than might
have been expected. For the Berlin world is all in a rather *
Auroral condition; and Friedrich too is,—the chains suddenly
cut loose, and such hopes opened for the young man. He has
great things ahead ; feels in himself great things, and doubt¬
less efialts in the thought of i^lising them. Magnanimous
enough, popular, hopeful enough, with Voltaire and the highest
of the worid looking on :—but yet he is wise, too; creditably
aware that thero are limits, that this is a bargain, and the
terms of it inexorable. We discern with pleasure the old
veracity of character shining through this giddy new element;
that all these fine procedures are at least unaffected, to a sin¬
gular degree true, and the product of nature, on his part; and
that, in short, the complete respect for Fact, which used to
be a quality of his, and which is among the highest and also
rarest in man, has on no side deserted him at present.

A trace of airy exuberance, of natural exultancy, not quite
repressible, on the sudden jhange to freedom and supreme
power fi’om what had gone before: perhaps that also might
be legible, if in those opaque beadroUs which are called His¬
tories of Friedrich anything human could with certainty be
read I He flies much about from j^ilace to place; now at Pots-
daxh, now at Berlini* at Charlottenburg, Reinsberg ,* nothing
loath to run whither business calls him, and appear in pubUc:
the gazetteer world, as we noticed, which has been hitherto a
most tnute world, Isreaks out here and there into a kind oi
husky juhHation over the great things hs is daily doing, and
rejoices in the prospect of having a Philosopher Kii^; which
fimction the young man, only twenty-eight gone, cannot but
wish to fulfil hr the ^mzetteem and ^ world. He is a busy

4 FKIEDRICH TAKES THE &EINS. Book XT,

man; and walks boldly into his grand enter|«1se of ‘ making
men happy,’ to the admiration pf Voltaire and an en]i|htened
public far and near.

Bielfeld speaks of imn^i^nse concourses of people crowding
about Charlottenburg, to congratulate, to solicit^ to 8 t<c*i tells
us how he himself had to lodge almost in outhouses^ in that
royal village of hope. His eActions at Reinsberg, and every¬
body’s, while Friedrich Wilhelm lay dying, and all stood like
greyhounds on the slip; and with what arrow-swiftifkss they
shot away when the great news came : all this he has already
described at wearisome length, in his fantastic semi-fabulous
way.* Friedrich himself seemed moderately glad to see Biel¬
feld ; received his high-flown congratulations with a benevo¬
lent yet somewhat composed air; and gave him afterwards,
in the course of weeks, an unexpectedly small appointinent:
To go to Hanover, under Truchsess von Waldburg, and an¬
nounce our Accession. Which is but a simple, mostly <fonnal
service; yet perhaps what Bielfeld is host equal to.

The Britannic Majesty, or at least his Hanover people
have been beforehand with this civility; Barpn Mtinchhauscn,
no doubt by orders given for such contingency, had appeared
at Berlin with the due compliment and condolence almost on
the first day of the New Reign; first messenger of all on that
errand; Britannic Majesty evidently in a conciliatory humour,
—having his dangerous Spanish War on hand. Britannic
Majesty in person, shortly after, gets across to Hanover; and
Friedrich dispatches Truchsess, with Bielfeld adjoined, to re¬
turn the courtesy.

Friedrich does not neglect these points of good manners;
along with which something of Substantial may be privately
conjoined. For example, if he had in secret his eye on Jiilich
and Berg, could anything be fitter than to ascertain what the
French will think of such an enterprise? What the French ;
and next to them what the English, that ii^to say, Hanoverians,
who meddle much in affairs of the Reich. For these reasons
and others he likewise, probably with more study than in the
Bielfeld case, dispatches Colonel Camas to make his compli¬
ment at the French Cqurt, and in an expert way tak^ soundings
there}, Camas, a fat sedate military gentleman, of advanc^
years, full of observation, experience and sound sense,

* !• (18*77: ih Sz. ;

PHENOMENA QT'THE ACCXSSION. $

* otie dim, which ie makes do the work of two,^d nobody

* can notice that the other arm resting in his coat-lnreast is of

* corkf so expert is he,’^—will do in this matter what is feasible;
probably not much for the present# He is to call on Voltaire,
as he passes, who is in Holland^again, at the Hague for some
months back; and deliver him little cask of Hungary Wtne,*
which probably his Majesty had thought exquisite. Of which,
and thjg other insignificant passages between them, we hear
more than enough in the writings and correspondences of Vol¬
taire about this time.

In such way Friedrich disposes of his Bielfelds ; who are
rather numerous about him now and henceforth. Adventurers
from all quarters, especially of the literary type, in hopes of*
being employed, much hovered round Friedrich through his
whole reign. But they met a rather strict judge on arriving;
it cannot be said they found it such a Goshen as they expectedL
^^vour, friendly intimacy, it is visible from the first, avails
nothing with this young King ; beyond and before all things
he will have his work done, and looks out exclusively for the
man ablest to db it. Hence Bielfeld goes to Hanover, to grin-
out euphuisms, and make graceful court-bows to our sublime
little Uncle there. On the other hand, Friedrich institutes a
new Knighthood, Order of Merit so-callcd ; which indeed is
but a small feat, testifying mere hope and exuberance as yet;
and may even be made worse than nothing, according to the
Knights he shall manage to have. Happily it proved a suc¬
cessful new Order in this last all-essential particular; and, to
the end of Friedrich’s life, continued to be a great and coveted
distinction among the Prusisians.

Beyond doubt this is a radiant enough young Majesty;
entitled to hope, and to be the cause of hope. Handsome, to
begin with; decidedly well-looking, all say, and of graceful
presence, though h/hdly five feet seven, and perhaps stouter ot
limb than the strict Belvedere standard.* Has a fine free ex¬
pressive face ; nothing of austerity in it; not a proud face, or
not too proud, yet rapidly flashing on you all manner of high

♦ Hcigft, it appeal^ was five feet five inches (Rhenish), which in EnigtKh mea¬
sure u five feet seven nr a hairsbreadth Irs<i Preuss, twice over, by a nustake un-
Jisaai with him, gives 'five feet two inches three lines’ as the correct cipher {which
it is of measure in Frettch feet); then settles on the above dimension!,

tpexcrptionable authority (Preuss, StKAfitry*dermatu$t i sS, Preuss, Fned-
39 md 4*9}>

« FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. Book xi.

k 1 June 1740.

me^ings.^ ^Such a man, in the bloom of Ks years; with such
a possibility ahead, and Voltaire and mankind waiting applau*
sive 1—Let us try to select, and extricate into coherence and
visibility out of those Hisij6)rical dustheaps, a few of the symp¬
tomatic phenomena, or physiognomic procedures of Friedrich
in his 6rst weeks of Kingship^ by way of contribution to some
Portraiture of his then inner-man.

• lb.

Friedrich will make Mm happy: Cam-Magazines,

On the day after his Accession, Officers and chief Ministers
taking the Oath, Friedrich, to his Officers, “on whom he
counts for the same zeal now which he had witnessed as their
comrade," recommends mildness of demeanour from the higher
to the lower, and that the common soldier be not treated with
harshness when not deserved : and to his Ministers he is still
more emphatic, in the like or a higher strain. Officia.My an¬
nouncing to them, by Letter, that a new Reign has commenced,
he uses these words, legible soon after to a glad Berlin public.

* Our grand care will be, To further the Country’s wellbeing,

* and to make every ont of our subjects (einen jeden unserer

* Unierihanen) contented and happy. Our will is, not that you
" strive to enrich Us by vexation of Our subjects ; but rather

* that you aim steadily as well towards the advantage of the
' Country as Our particular intesest, forasmuch as We make
‘ no dilfiference between these two objects,' but consider them
one and the same. This is written, and gets into print within
the month ; and his Majesty, that same day (Wednesday 3d
June), when it came to personal reception, and actual taking
of the Oath, was pleased to add ^in words, which also were
printed shortly, this comfortable corollary: ‘My will hence-
' forth is, If it ever chance that my particular interest and the
‘ general good of my Countries should seem to go against each
‘ other,—in that case, my wilf is, That the^tter always be pre-
' ferred.’®

This is a fine dialect for incipient Royalty; and it is brand-
new at that time. It excites an admiration m the then popu¬
lations, which to us, so jong used to it and to what qpmmonly

^ Wilte's Engraving after Pesne (excellent, both Picture and Engraving) t*
reckoned the best Likeness in that form.

* Dickens. Despatdt. 4th June 1740; PreuM. Friedricha Jugand wtd TSkfVM-
liaiaiipuMginttixB, 1840},p. 3a5;--<iuotingfromueSerlinNewsiiapenofaStbJua#
and ad July 1740.

7

Oap. I. PHENOirtpNA OE THE ACCESSION.

ad June 1740, •

comes of it, is nQtxonceivajble at once. There can be no doubt
the young King does faithfully intend to develop oimself in the
way of nuddng men happy; but here, as elsewhere, are limits
which he will recognise ahead, some of them perhaps nearer
than was expected.

Meanwhile his first acts, ih this direction, correspond to
these fine words. The year 1740, still grim with cold into the
heart of summer, bids fair to have a late poor harvest, and
famin# threatens to add itself to other hardships there have
been. "Recognising the actualities of the <;ase, what his poor
Father could not, he opens the Public Granaries,—a wise re¬
source they have in Prussian countries against the year of
scarcity^orders grain to be sold out, at reasonable rates, to
the sufiering poor; and takes the due pains, considerable in
some cases, that this be rendered featible everywhere in his
dominions. ♦Berlin, 2d June,' is the first date of this import¬
ant carder; fine program to his Ministers, which, we read, is
no sooner uttered than some performance follows. An evident
piece of wisdom and humanity; for which doubtless blessings
of a very sinegre kind rise to him from several millions of his
fellow-mortals.

Nay furthermore, as can be dimly gathered, this scarcity
continuing, some continuous mode of management was set on
foot for the Poor; and there is nominated, with salary, with
outline of plan and other requisites, as “ Inspector of the Poor,”
to his own and our surprise, M. Jordan, late Reader to the
CrowH'-Prince, and still much the intimate of his royal Friend.
Inspector who seems to do his work very well. And in the
November coming this is what we see ; ‘ One thousand poor
old women, the destitute ot Berlin, set to spin,’ at his Majesty’s
charges; vacant houses, hired for them in certain streets and
suburbs, have been new-planked, partitioned, warmed; and
spinning is there for any diligent female soul. There a thou¬
sand of them sit^*under proper officers, proper wages, treat¬
ment;—and the hum of their poor spindles, and of their poor
inarticulate old hearts, is a comfort, if one chance to think of
it.—Of distressed needlewomen” who cannot sew, nor be
taughtif:o do it; who, in private trutji, are mutinous maid-ser¬
vants come at last to the net upshot of their anarchies; of
these^ or of the like incurable phenomena, I hear nothing in
Berlin ; •and can believe that, under this King, Indigence it-

8 FRIEDRICH TA^S THE^EII^.

" ad JUM tf40k .

self may still have something of a human ^spect, not a brutal
or diabolic *as is commoner in some places.-—This is one of
J'riedrich’s first acts, this opening of the Corn-magazines, and
arrangements for the Destitute -J and of this there can be no
criticism. The found of fiungry pots set boiling, on judicious
principles; the hum of those bid women’s spindles in the warm
rooms: gods and men arc well pleased to hear such sounds;
and accept the same as part, real though infinitesimally smalh
of the sphere-harmonies of this Universe!

Abolition of Legal Torture.

Friedrich makes haste, next, to strike into Law-improve¬
ments. It is but the morrow after this of the Corn-magazines,
by Kahineis-Ordre (Act of Parliament such as they can have in
that Country, where the Three Estates sit all under one Three-
cornered Hat, and the debates are kept silent, and onl^' the
upshot of them, more or less faithfully, is made public),—^by
Cabinet Order, 3d June 1740, he abolishes the use of Torture
in Criminal Trials.® Legal Torture, ‘Question/ as they mildly
call it, is at an end from t^s date. Not m any Prussian Court
shall a * question’ try for answer again by that si vage method.
The use of Torture had, I believe, fallen rather obsolete in
Prussia ; but now the very threat of it shall vanish,—^thc threat
of it, as we may remember, had reached Friedrich himself, at
one time. Three or four years ago, it is farther said, a dark
murder happened in Bcriin • Man killed one night in the open
streets ; murderer discoverable by no method,—unless he wete
a certain Candidatus of Divinity to whom some trace of evid¬
ence pointed, but who sonowfully^persisted in absolute and
total denial. This poor Candidatus had been threatened with
the rack; and would most likely have at length got it, had not
the real murderer been discovered,—much to the discredit of
the rack in Berlin. This CandMatus was only threatened; nor
do I know when the last actual instance in Prussia was; but
in enlightened France, and most other countries, there was as

7 Heldcn-Gf^ckicMey i. 367, Rtldenbetk, Ta^bmb aui Fr{ed>i(hs dt<! (irossen
RtgmtenubeH (Berlin, 1840), i, 2, 26 (2d June, October, T740): a mentorMu^ labo¬
rious, though et.eittially chaotic ^ok, unexpectedly futile ofre^bult to the leader;
settles for each Day 01 Fiiednch s Reign, so (kr as possible, where Friedrich was
and wlua doing; fotally wants all Index &c , as usual.

* Preuss, Friednehs yugend und Tkrotmsteigung (Beriui, 1840,—a mittor Book
of Prouti’sh p. 34 Q« Rbdeabcck, i< (*3d Jaafi7« *

Omp-I. PH|;NOlStEHA OF«THE ACCESSION. 9

JatMi^Sept 1740.

' yet no scruple uponiit. Barbier, the Diarist at Paris, some time
after this, tells us of a gang of thieves there, who were regularly
put to the torture; and * they blabbed too, Us ont jas 4 t says
Barbier with official jocosity.®

Friedrich's Cabinet Order, we need not say, was greeted
everywhere, at homo and abroad, by three rounds of applause;
—^in which surely all of us stitt join ; though the per-contra
also is becoming visible to some of us, and our enthusiasm
grows less complete than formerly. This was Friedrich's first
step in Law-Reform, done on his fourth day of Kingship. - A
long career in that kind lies ahead of him; in reform of Law,
civil as well as criminal, his efforts ended with life only. For
his love of Justice was really great; and the mendacities and
wiggeries, attached to such a necessary of life as Law, found
no favour from him at any time.

hate Philosophers about him, and a real Acadetny
of Sciences.

To neglerl the Philosophies, Fine Arts, interests of Human'
Culture he h k\ot ill likely. Tlu; idea of building up the
Academy of Sciences to its pristine height, or far higher, is
evidently me of those that have long lain in the Crown-Prince’s
mind, eager *^0 realu"' themselves. Immortal Wolf, exiled but
safe It Marburg, and refusing to return in Friedrich Wilhelm’s
time, had lately dedic.uci . Book to the Crown-Prince ; indi¬
cating that perhaps, under a new Reign, he might be more per¬
suadable. Friediich makes haste to persuade; instructs the
proper person, Rmcrend Hen Reinbeck, Head of the Consis-
torium at Berlin, to write add negoiiate. ' All reasonable con-

* ditions shall he granted’ the Immortal Woli,—and Friedrich
adds with his own hand as Postscript. ‘ I request you (Ihn) to
‘ use all diligence about Wolf. A man that seeks truth, and

* loves it, must be retkoued prcci^tus m an> human society; and

* 1 think you will moke a * onquesl in the realm of truth if you

‘ persuade Wolf hilhei This is of date June 0 th; not

yet a week since Fnediicli came to be King. The Rcmbeck-
Wolf negotiation which ensued can be read m Busching by the
curious. It represents to \is a croa1c>, thrifty, long-beaded

5 * Earlier, y^irual Htsioriqitt duRfme de Louts XV (P.uis, 1840), 11. ^38 (dav#
‘Dec. 174ft' )• , “ lo CEuvrtfs do Frederic <xxvu. il. 185), tke Leit’er srven.

» Ba4dua|’» Bmm* a Frayhcrr von Wolf), i. 63-137.

lo FRIEDRICH T^^yCES THfi'REIJTS.

oM Herr f rofessor, in no haste to quitfMarburg except for
something better: ** obliged to wear woollen shoes and leggings
'* bad at mounting stairs and otherwise needing soft treat¬
ment. Willing, though ^ith caution, to work at an Academy
of Sciences—^but dubious if the French are so admirable as
they seem to themselves in such operations. Veteran Wolf,
one dimly begins to Icam, cbuld himself build a German Aca¬
demy of Sciences, to some purpose, if encouraged! This lat¬
ter was probably the stone of stumbling in that direction. Vete¬
ran Wolf did not get to be President in the new Academy of
Sciences; but was brought back, * streets all in triumph/ to
his old place at Halle; and there, with little other work that
was heard of, but we hope in warm shoes and without much
mounting of stairs, lived peaceably victorious the rest of his
days.

Friedrich’s thoughts are not of a German home-built Aca¬
demy, but of a P'ranch one : and for this he already lAows a
builder ; has silently had him in his eye, these two years past,
—^Voltaire giving hint, in the Letter we once heard of at Loo.
Builder shall be that sublime Maupertuis ;*scientific lion of
Pans, ever since his feat in the Polar regions, and the charm¬
ing Narrative he gave of it. "What a feat, what a bookT
exclaimed the Parisian cultivated circles, male and female, on
that occasion; and Maupertuis, with plenty of bluster in him
carefully suppressed, assents in a grandly modest way. His
Portraits are in the Printshops ever since; one very singuhtr
Portrait, just coming out (at which there is some laughing): a
coarse-featured, blusterous, rather triumphant-looking man,
blusterous, though finely complacent for the nonce ; in copious
dressing-gown and fur cap ; comfortably squeezing the Earth
and her meridians fiat (as if he had done it), with his left hand;
and with the othci, and its outstretched finger, asking mankibd,
**Are not you aware, then Are not !” answers Voltaire
by and by, with endless waggeries upon him, though at present
so reverent. Friedrich, in these same days, writes this Auto¬
graph ; which who of men or lions could resist ?

To Monsieur de Maupertuis^ at Paris.

(No date j—<iateable, June 1740.)

* My heart and my inclination exdtcd in me, horn the tnomeiot 1
' mounted the throne^ the desire ol haring you h^ thdt you

Gup,I. phenomena OF-THE ACCESSION. it

,a»i June 1740.

* pat oar Berlb. Acaddhy into the shape you alone are capable of giving

* it. Come, ^en, come and insert into this wild crablree the graft of

* the Sciences, that it may bear fruit. You have shown the Figure of
^ the Earth to mankind; show also to a King how sweet it is to pos-

* sm such a man as you.

‘ Monsieur de Maupertuis,— trh-a^ectmin^

‘FtD&Ktc*

This Letter,—how could Maupertuis prevent some accident
in such * case?—^got into the Newspapers ; glorious for Fried¬
rich, glorious for Maupertuis; and raised matters to a still
higher pitch, Maupertuis is on the road, and 'vfe shall see him
before long*

Atui Every One shall get to Heaven in his own Way.

Here is another little fact which had immense renown at
home and abroad, in those summer months and long after-
wardaa

June azd, 1740, the Gehflicht Departimeut (iloard of Religion, we
may term it) reports that tlic Roman-Catholic Schools, which have been
in use these eight ^ears past, foi children of soldiers nriongtng to that
persuasion, ‘are, especially in Beilin, pervetted, directly in the teeth of
'Royal Ordinance, 1732, to seducing Protestants into Catholicism;'
annexed, or ready for annexing, ‘ is the specific Report of Fiscal-Ge-
‘ neral to this effect—^upon which, what would it please his Majesty to
direct us to do?

His Majesty writes on the margin these words, rough and
ready, which we give with all their grammatical blotches on
them; indicating a mind made-up on one subject, which was
much more dubious then, to most other minds, than it now is;

* Die Rdi^onm Miism (musjen) alh TliZ/rm? (tolcrirt) wmirw, und

* Mus (muss) der Fiuai nuhr (nur) </ar Attge darauf kaben, das (dass)

* heiw der andem abntg Take (Abbruch thiiel, den (denn) hier mus

* (muss) «» Jeder nach seiner Fasson Selich (Fa^'on selig) tsferdtn.*^'*

Which in English Height run as follows :

'AH Religions mtfSt be tolerated {Toiletated), and the Fiscal must

* have an eye that none of them make unjust encroachment on the

* other; for in this Country evciy man must get to Heaven in bis own
‘ way.’

Wonderful words ; precious to the |hen leading spirits, and
which (the spelling and grammar being mended) flew abroad

pi CEuvete, wii. 1. 335, The fantastic “ FedAic," instead erf “FirfdAic," is, by
tmk nme, die ewnmoa signatare to French Letters,.

« Pteues, Tnjvninidtitnie, p, 333 ; Rodeaheeh, m die-

e «

IS FRIEDKICH TAKES THE REINS. BookXl.

X740>

over all thfc world; the enlightened Puhl^: everywhere answer*
ing his Majesty, once more, with its loudest “ Bravissimo I”
on this occasion. With what enthusiasm of admiring wonder,
it is now difficult to faniw* ^fter the lapse of sixscore years t
And indeed, in regard to all these worthy acts of Human Im*
prov^ment which we are no^w concerned with, account should
be held (were it possible) on Friedrich’s behalf how extremely
original, and bright with the splendour of new gold,«th€y then
were : and how extremely they are fallen dim, by general cir¬
culation, since that. Account should be held; and yet it is not
possible, no human imagination is adequate to it, in the times
we are now got into.

Free Press^ and Newspapers the best fnstruidarSk

Toleration, in Friedrich’s spiritual circumstances, was per¬
haps no great feat to Friedrich : but what the reader*hatdly
expected of him was Freedom of the Press, or an attempt that
way ! From England, from Holland, Friedrich had heard of
Free Press, of Newspapers the best Instruetors: it is a fact
that he hastens to plant a seed of that kind at Berlin; sets
about It * on the second day of his reign,’ so eager is he. Ber¬
lin had already some meagre Inielhgenz-Blatt (Weekly or
Thrice-Weekly Advertiser), perhaps two ; but it is a real News¬
paper, frondent with genial leafy speculation, and food for Uie
mind, that Friedrich is intent upon: a "Literary-Political News¬
paper,” or were it even two Newspapers, one French, one Oer-
man; and he rapidly makes the arrangements for it; dispatches
Jordan, on the second day, to seqk some fit Frenchman. AJt*
rangements are soon made: a Bookselling Printer, Haude,
Bookseller once to the Prince-Royal,—^whom we saw once in
a domestic fiash-of-lightning long ago,^*—is encouraged to pro¬
ceed with the improved Ger^n article, ^ercuty or whatever
they called it; vapid Formey, a facile pAi, but not a forcible,
is the Editor sought out by Jordan for the French one. And,
in short, No. i of Formey shows itself in print within a month
and Haude and he, Haude picking-up some grand Editor in
Hamburg, do their be;^ for the instruction of mankflid.

In not many months, Formey, a facile and learned but ra-

w Ant«^, Book vk c. 7.

M July 1740:' PreuBs, ThrMtiateigmet P* sSo? Mul S(nnfem*i k

107 , nnaificil py tm Hm

CI«M. PHENOMfeNA OF THE ACCESSION. i*

JVtte-Sept:. 1740. *

vapid gentlem^f demitted or was dismissed; and the
Joamals coalesced ieto one, or split into two again''; and went
X know not what road, or roads, in time connng,'—none that
led to results worth naming. Freedom of the Press, in the
case of these Journals, was never vlldated, nor was any need
for violating it. General Freedom of the Press Friedrich did
not grant, in any quite Official or*steady way; but in practice,
tmder him, it always had a kind of real existence, though a
ductualiifg, ambiguous one. And we have to note, through
Friedrich's whole reign, a marked disinclination to concern him¬
self with Censorship, or the shackling of men’s poor tongues
and pens; nothing but some officious report that there was of¬
fence to Foreign Courts, or the chance of offence, in a poor
man’s pamphlet, could induce Friedrich to interfere with him*
or it,—and indeed his interference was generally against his
Ministers for having wrong informed him, and in favour of the
poor ilamphleteer appealing at the fountain-head.To the
end of his life, disgusting Satires against him, Vie Privie by
Voltaire, Matindes d» Roi de Prusse, and still worse Lies and
Nonsenses, werq freely sold at Berlin, and even bore to be
printed there, Friedrich saying nothing, caring nothing. He
has been known to burn pamphlets publicly,—one Pamphlet
mto shall ourselves see on fire yet;—but it was without the least
hatred to them, and for official reasons merely. To the last,
he would answer his reporting Ministers, ** La presse est libre
(Free pres^, you must consider)!’’—grandly reluctant to meddle
with the press, or go down upon the dogs barking at his door.
Those ill effects of Free Press (first stage of the ill effects) he
endured in this manner; but the good effects seem to have
fallen below his expectation.^ Friedrich’s enthusiasm for free¬
dom of the press, prompt enough, as we see, never rose to the
extreme pitch, and it rather sank than increased as he con-
tinned his e^eperiences of men and things. This of Formey and
the two Newspapers®was the only express attempt he made in
that direction; an<f it proved a rather disappointing one. The
two Newspapers went their way thenceforth, Friedrich some¬
times making use of them for small purposes, once or twice
writing dfi article himself, of wildly quizzical nature, perhaps to

** AtioArmou* (Loveaux), Fw de Fvidinc II, Roi df Prusse (Stra^ibourg, 1787),
iv. Sa. A woitUes$, now nearly foreotten Book. but competent on chiii point, if on
any; T.aveaux ta himdy fellow, fuiptive Ex-Monk with fugitive Ex-Nuti attached)
uv<|<l much at Bttrtfii, always ifi tho paipphloteenog line.

14 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE^EINS. BoAXt

Jtt9»^0jpe^ )(74il9k

be noticed ^ us when the time comes; b^t a]:e otheiwis^ *
cept for chronological purposes, of the last degree of indigni*
ficance to gods or men. •

* Freedom of the Press,’ says my melancholic Friend, * fe

* a noble thing; and in certain Nations, at certain efMichs/prb-

* duces glorious effects,—chiefly in the revolutionary hn^, where

* that has grown indispensable. Freedom of the Press is pofr

* sible, where everybody disapproves the least abuse of it;

‘ where the “ Censorship" is, as it were, exercised Uy alt thO
‘ world. When the world (as, even in the freest countries^ it

* almost irresistibly tends to become) is no longer in a caseto^

* exercise that salutary function, and cannot keep^own loud

* unwise speaking, loud unwise persuasion, and rebuke it into

‘ silence whenever printed, Freedom of the Press will notanso ^

* wer very long, among sane human creatures: and indeed,

* in Nations not in an exceptional case, it becomes impossible
‘ amazingly soon -

All these are phenomena of Friedrich’s first week# Let
these suffice as sample, in that first kind. Splendid indications
surely; and shot-forth in swift enough succession, flash follow*
ing flash, upon an attentive world. Betokening, shall we say,
what internal sea of splendour, struggling to disclose Hself,
probably lies in this young King ; and how high his hopes go
for mankind and himself? Yes, surely;—and introducing, we
remark withal, the " N''w Era," of Philanthropy, Enlighten¬
ment and so much else; with French Revolution, and a ‘world
well suicided’ hanging in the rear! Clearly enough, to this
young ardent Friedrich, foremost^man of his Time, and cap¬
able oi its inarticulate or dumb aspirings, belongs that
questionable honour: and a very singular one it would have
seemed to Friedrich, had he lived to sec what it meant 1

Friedrich’s rapidity and activity, in the first months Of his
reign, were wonderful to man*kind; as in^tped through life he
continued to be a most rapid and active King. He flies about 1
mustering Troops, Ministerial Boards, passing Edicts, inspect¬
ing, accepting Homages of Provincesdecides and does,
every day that passes, amazing number of things.** Writes
many Letters, too; finds moments even for some verses; and
occasionally draws a snatch of melody from his flute.

His Letters are copiously preserved; but, as usual, they af^

I

PHENOMfeNA OF THE ACCESSION. is

T740> *

in swift oMcial fone,^d tell us almost nothing. To^his Sisters
he writes assurances; to his friends, his Suhmst Duhans, Vol-
taircs, eager invitations, general or particular, to come to him*

* My state has changed/ is his phrase to Voltaire and other
dear intimates; a tone of pensivenels, at first even of sorrow
and pathos tracteable in it; Come to me,’^—and the tone, in
an old dialect, different from Friedrich’s, might have meant,
Pray for me.“ An immense new scene is opened, full of
possibilities of good and bad. His hopes being great, his
anxl^ies, the shadow of them, are proportionate. Duhan (his
good old Tutor) does arrive, Algarotti arrives, warmly welcomed,
both: with Voltaire there are difficulties; but surely he too will,
before long, manage to arrive. The good Suhm, who had^
been Saxon Minister at Petersburg to his sorrow this long while
back, got in motion soon enough; but, alas, his lungs were
ruined by the Russian climate, and he did not arrive. Some¬
thing pathetic still in those final Letters of Suhm. Passionately
speeding on, like a spent steed struggling homeward; he has
to pause at Warsaw, and in a few days dies there,—in a way
mournful to Friedrich and us! To Duhan, and Duhan's chil¬
dren afterwards, he was punctually, not too lavishly, attentive;
in like manner to Suhm’s Nephews, whom the dying man had
recommended to him.-—We will now glance shortly at a second
and contemporaneous phasis of Friedrich’s affairs.

Lntends to be Practical withal^ and mery inch a King.

Friedrich is far indeed from thinking to reduce his Army,
as the Foreign Editor imagines. On the contrary, he is, with
all industry, increasing it. He changed the Potsdam Giants
into four regiments of the usual stature, he is busy bargaining
with his Brother-in-law of Brunswick, and- with other neigh¬
bours, for still new regiments;—makes up, within the next few
months, Eight Regijj| 5 .ents, an iifbrease of, say, 16,000 men.
It would appear he means to keep an eye on the practicalities
withal; means to have a Fighting-Apparatus of the utmost
potentiality, for one thing! Here arc other indications.

We sew the Old Dessauer, in a sad hour lately, speaking
beside the mark; and with what Olympian glance, suddenly
tearless, the new King flashed out upon him, knowing nothing
pf >* authority^ that could reside in any Dessauer. Nor was

i6 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE^ REINS.

that a solitary experience; the like befdl wherevet ntede^/
Heinrich ot Schwedt, the lU Margraf, a(mncing with jocose^
countenance in the way of old comradeship^ in those days*
met unexpected rebuff^ and was reduced to gravity Oti^the
sudden: " yetzi h’n ich Cousin, I am now King f * '

a fact which the III Margraf could never get forgotten again.
Lieutenant-General Schulenbnrg, too, the didactic Schulenbttrg;
presuming on old familiarity, and willing to wipe-out thfs tni$t
fortune of having once condemned us to death, which nobody
is now upbraiding him with, rushes up from Landsberg, un¬
bidden, to pay his congratulations and condolences, driven by
irresistible exuberance of loyalty: to his astonishment, he is
reminded (thing certain, manner of the thing not known). That
an Officer cannot quit his post without order; that he, at this
moment, ought to be in Landsberg Schulenbtirg has a hard
old military face; but here is a young face too, which has
grown unexpectedly rigorous. Fancy the blank look of little
Schulenburg; the light of him snuffed-out in this manner on a
sudden. It is said he had thoughts of resigning, so indignant
was he: no doubt he went home to Landsberg gloomily refiec-
rive, with the pipeclay of his mind in such a ruinous condition.
But there was no serious anger, on Friedrich's part; and he
consoled his little Schulenburg soon after, by expediting some
promotion he had intended him. “ Terribly proud young Ma¬
jesty this,” exclaim the sweet voices. And indeed, if they are
to have a Saturnian Kingdom, by appearance it will be On
conditions only!

Anticipations there had been, that c^d unkindnesses against
the Crown-Prince, some of which were cruel enough, might be
remembered now: and certain pebple had their Just fears, con¬
sidering what account stood against them; others, via vzfzd,
their hopes. But neither the fears nor the hopes realised them¬
selves ; especially the fears proved altogether groundless. t)cr-
schau, who had voted Death«in that Cdpbnick Court-Martial,
upon the Crown-Prince, is continued in ffis functions, in the
light of bis King’s countenance, as if nothing such had been.
Derschau, and all others so concerned; not the least question
was made of them, nor of what they had thought or^ad done
or sai4» on nn occasidb once so tragically vital to a certaii^
HUUl,

n 3WQ2el, iv, 41; Pjwui, Tkrcf^$^igunir; flec. #

Cbij. t. PHBNOMENA OF THE ACCESSION. tj

1740*

Nor IS reward m#ch regulated by past services to*the Crown*
Prince, or even by sufferings endured for him. “ Shocking in-
gratitydef’ exclaim the sweet voices here too,—being of weak
, judgment, many of them! Poor KaKc’s Father, a faithful old
Soldier, not capable of being more, he docs, rather conspicu¬
ously, make Feldmarschall, make Reichsgraf; happy, could
these honours be a consolation to the old man. The Munchows
of Custrii^—readers remember their kindness in that sad time;
Mow the young boy went into petticoats again, and came to tlie
Crown-Prince’s cell with all manner of furnishings,—>the Mun--
chowS, Either and sons, this young gentleman of the petticoats
among them, he took immediate pains to reward by promotion:
eldest son was advanced into the General Directoiiuni; two
younger sons, to Majorship, to Captaincy, ’n thcir respective
Regiments; him of the petticoats ‘ he had already taken, alto¬
gether to himself,’^® and of him we shall sec a glimpse at Wil-
helmiith s shortly, as a ‘ milkbeard {Jcune morveux)' in personal
attendance on his Majesty. This was a notable exception.
And in effect there came good public service, eminent some of
it, from these Miftichows in their various departments. And
it was at length perceived to have been, in the main, because
they were of visible faculty for doing work that they had got
work to do; and the exceptional case of the Munchows became
confirmatory of the rule.

I-ieutenant Keith, again, whom we once saw galloping from
Wesel to save* his life in that bad affair of the Crown-Prince’s
and his, was nothing like so fortunate. Lieutenant Keith, by
speed on that Wcscl occasion, and help of Chesterfield’s Secre¬
tary, got across to England; tgot into the Portuguese service;
and has there been soldiering, very silently, these ten years
past,—skin and body safe, though his effigy was cut in four
quarters and nailed to the g<illovvs at Wesel;—w.iiting a time
that would come. Tinje being coinp, Lieutenant Keith hastened
home; appealed to l»s effigy on the gallows;—and was made
a Lieutenant-Colonel merely, with some slight appendages, as
that of Stallmdster (Curator of the Stables) and something
else; income still straitened, though enough to live upon.’’-*
Small proflioiion, in comparison with hope, thought the poor
Lieutenant; but had to rest satisfied with it; and struggle to

M i. <',6.

Friedtkk mii VtrtmHditn und FriKhdcn, p, aSi.

VOt. IV. • • C

U FRIEDRICH TAKES THl^ REINS. BookXit,

understani^that perhaps he was fit for nothing bigger, and that
he must exert himself to do this small thing well. Hardness
of heart in high places! Fdedrich, one is glad to see, had not
forgotten the poor fellow, could he have done better with him-
Some ten years hence, quite incidentally, there came to Keith,
one morning, a fine purse of money from his Majesty, emo
pretty gift in Keith's experience;—much the topic in Beflin,
while a certain solemn English gentleman happened to be
passing that way (whom we mean to detain a little and by),
who reports it for us with all the circumstances,

Lieutenant Spaen too had got into trouble for the Crown-
Prince’s sake, though we have forgotten him again; had * ad¬
mitted Katte to interviews,’ or we forget what;—-had sal his
' year in Spandau’ in consequence; been dismissed the Prus¬
sian service, and had i.iken si 1 vice with the Dutch. Lieutenant
Spaen either did not return at all, or disliked the aspects when
he did, and immediately withdrew to Holland again, rWhich
probably was wise of him. At a late period, King Friedrich,
then a great King, on one of his Clevc Journey^, fell in with
Spaen; who had become a Dutch (rcucralof rank, and was of
good manners and style of couvcisaiion: King Friedrich was
charmed to see him; became his guest for the night; conversed
delightfully witli him, about old J'russian matters and about
new; and in the colloquy never once alluded to that interest¬
ing passage in his young life and Spaen’s,’-^^ Haid as polished
steel! thinks Spaen peihaps; but, if candid, mqst ask himself
withal, Are facts any soiter, or the Laws of Kingship to a man
that holds it,'*—Keith silently did his Lieutenant-Colonelcy with
the appendages, while life Us^ted^: of the Page Keith, his Bro¬
ther, who indeed had blabbed unon the Pnnee, as wc remem¬
ber, and was not entitled to be clamorous, I never heard that
there was any notice taken; and figure him to myself as walking
with shouldered firelock, a private Fusilcer, all his life after¬
wards, with many reflertioni on things l^^gonc,--

Old friendship, it would seem, is without weight in public
appointments here: old friends are somewhat astonished to find
this friend of theirs a King cvciy inch! To old comrades, if

5® Sir Jonas Hanwa}', T’/A.rW?, &c. (f.ondnn 11 aoa, IMte of the Gift la

J750- ^ Nu vi. 178.

These 'axvl the other Pnivian K«*Ii ii ,iro .ill dI St otc li cxu.tt tion . the PfuSMattS,
ill natural German fa<.l)i'>n, nmnoniitc ihcn luinu' /CuA /^(Kn»fh<th "Kite" with no*
(lung ol' the Tt in it), as may be wurih rcmciubcnng m a more impoitant ui:*iai)ce.

!* t

dap. 1. PHENOMENA OF THE ACCESSION. 19

Ju»e>8qpt4 X740. •

they were useless, much more if they were worse than useless,
how disappointing I *'One wretched Herr’ (name suppressed,
hut known at the time, and talked of, and whispered of), ‘ who
‘ had, like several others, hoping to rise that way, been indys-

* trious in encouraging the Crown-PHkice's vices as to women,

* was so shocked at the return he now met, that in despair he
‘ hanged himself in LObe/un’ (UiljcgUn, Magdeburg Country):
here is a case for the humane!—

Friend Keyscrling himself, "Cmsarion” that ysed to be, can
get nothing, though wc love him much; being an idle topsy-
tprvy lellow with revenues of his own. Joi'dah, with his finC'
drawn wit, French logics, Literary Travels, thin exactitude;
what can be done for Jordan? Him also his new Mjjesty loves
much; and knows that, without some ohtcial living, poor jor- *
dan has no resource. Jordan, after some waiting and survey,
b made “ Inspector of the Poor;”—ousy this Autumn looking
out for vacant houses, and arrangements for the thousand spin¬
ning women;—continues to be employed in mixed literary ser¬
vices (hunting-up of Formey, for editor, was one instance), and
to be in much real intimacy. That also was perh.ips about the
real amount of dhiiable Jordan. To get Jordan a livuig by
planting him in some office which he could not do; to warm
Jordan by burning our royal bed for him: that had not entered
into the mind of Jordan’s royal fneud. The M unchows he did
promote; the Finks, sons of his tutor Finkenslcin: to these
and other old conirado.s, in whom he had discovered fitness, it
is no doubt abundantly grateful to iiim to ro< otinise and employ
it. As he notably docs, in these and in other in'itances. But
before all things he has decided to remember th.it he is King;
that he must accept the se%(.?'e iaws of tnai uusl, and do it, or
not have done anything.

An inverse sign, pointing in the same way, is the passion¬
ate search he is making in Foreign Countries for such men as
will suit him. In tbuKC same moikths, for example, he bethinks
him of two Counts tSchmetlau, in the Austn.m Service, w’ith
whom he had made acquaintance in the Rhine Campaign :
of a Count von Rothenburg, whom he saw in the French Camp
there; .and is negotiating to have them if possible. The Schaiet-
laus are T^russian by birth, though in Austi'i..n Service ; them
he obtains under form of an Order home, with good conditions

CharacUrsH^ des Circ. vjn Suitxsrn (UciiiH, p.

• •

30 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BookXt.

J«ma«Se|^ 1740.,

under it; t^iey came, and proved useful Uien to him. Rothen^
burg, a Shining kind of figure in Diplomacy as well as Soldier¬
ship, was Alsatian German, foreign to Prussia; but him too
Fnedrich obtained, and f^de much of, as will be notable by and
by. And in fact the soul of all these noble tendencies in Fried-
nrh, udiich surely are considerable, is even this, That he loves
men of merit, and does not love men of none; that he has an
endless appetite for men of merit, and feels, consciously and
otherwise, theft they are the one thing beautiful, the one thing
needful to him.

This, which is the product of all fine tendencies, is likewise
their centre or focus out of which they start again, with some
chance of fulfilment;—and we may judge in how many direc¬
tions Friedrich was willing to expand himself, by the multifa¬
rious kinds he was inviting, and negotiating for. Academicians,
—^and not Maupertuis only, but all manner of mathematical
geniuses (Euler whom he got, 's Gravesande, Muscherfhroek,
whom he failed of); and Literary geniuses innumerable, first
and last. Academicians, Musicians, Players, Dancers even;
much more Soldiers and Civil-Service men: no man that car¬
ries any honest "Can do” about with him but may expect some
welcome here. Which continued through Friedrich’s reign; and
involved him in much petty trouble, not always successful in
the lower kinds of it. For his Court was the cynosure of ambi¬
tious creatures on the wing, or inclined for taking wing: like
a lantern kindled in the darkness of the world;—and many
owls impinged upon him; whom Jie had to dismiss with bre¬
vity.

Perhaps it had been better to stand by mere Prussian or
German merit, native to the ground? Or rather, undoubtedly
it had I In some departments, as m the military, the adminis¬
trative, diplomatic, 1* riedrich was himself among the best of
judges; but in various otherp he had mainly (mainly, by no
means blindly or solely) to accept noise of reputation as evidence
of merit; and in these, if we compute with rigour, his success
was intrinsically not considerable. The more honour to him
that he never wearied of trying. * A man that does not care
for merit,' says the ad^ge, 'cannot himself have any.’ But a
King that does not care for merit, what shall we say of such
a King!—

1

Ctap. 1. PHENOMENA OF THE ACCESSION.

.June*Sepl. 1740.

21

Behaviour to his Mother; to his Wife,

One other fine feature^ significatg; of many’, let us notice;
his affection for his Mother. When his Mother addressed him
as Your Majesty," he answered, as the Books are careful to
tell us: “ Call me Son; that is the Title of all others most
agreeable to me!" Words which, there can be no doubt, came
from the ^eart. Fain would he shoot forth to greatness in filial
piety, as olherwise; fain solace himself in doing something kind
to his Mother, Generously, lovingly; though again with clear
view of the limits- He decrees for her a Title higher than had
been customary, as well as more accordant with his feelings; •
not “Queen Dowager," but " Her Majesty the Queen Mother.”
He decides to build her a new Palace; * under the Lindens' it
is to be, and of due magnificence: in a month or two, he bad
even got bits of the foundation dug, and the Houses to be pulled
down bought or bargained for —which enterprise, however,
was renounced, no doubt with consent, as the public aspects
darkened. Notliing in the way of honour, in the way of real
affection heartily felt and demonstrated, was wanting to Queen
Sophie in her widowhood. But, on the other hand, of public
influence no vestige was allowed, if any was ever claimed; and
the good kind Mother lived in her Monbijou, the centre and
summit of Berlin society; and restricted herself wisely to pri-
vate matters. She has her domesticities, family affections, read¬
ings, speculations; gives evening parties at Monbijou. One
glimpse of her in 1742 we get, that of a perfectly private royal
Lady; which though it has lit|le meaning, yet as it is authentic,
coming from Busching’s hand, may serve as one little twinkle
in that total darkness, and shall be left to the reader and his
fancy:

A Count Henfcel, a TShuringian gentleman, of high speculation, high
pietislic w^ys, extrenaeljr devout, and given even to writing of religion,
came to Berlin about some Silesian properticb,—a itimi I should tiunk
of lofty melancholic aspect; and, in severe type, somewhat oi a lion,
on account of his Book called ^Deaikkd Sc^nes^ m four Volumes.’ Cam a
to Berlin; on the 15th August 174s, towards evening (as the cvei-
punclual Busching looking into flenkePs Papers gives it), ‘was pie-
‘ seated to the Queen Mother; who retained liim to supper; supper not
* beguming till about ten o’clock. The Queen Mother was extremely

M ROdeabeek, |S (30^1 Jun^asd Aug. 1740); and correct Stened (iv. 44).

22 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. Book XI.

a ^ Jane-Sept. 17401,

‘ gracious to Henkel; but investigated him a good deal, and put a great
‘ many ((ucstions/ not quite easy to answer in that cirdo, ‘a.s> Wlty he
‘ did not play? What he thought ot comedies and operas? Wl^t
‘ Preachers he was acquain^d with in Berlin? Whether he too was a

* Writer of Books?’ (covertly alluding to the Deathbed Scein^s, notes
Biisching). ‘ And abundance other questioning. She also Recounted
‘ many ihntastic anecdotes (zvV/ Abentett^rliches) about Count von ZitUten-

* dorf’ (Kountler oi H<rrHJmth^ f.ir-shining spiritual Paladin of that day,
whom her Majesty tijinks rather a spiritual Quixote); ' and declared

* that they were strictly true.’^* Upon whicli, exit Ilenkch borne by
Busching, and our light is .snuffed out.

This is one momentary glance I have met with of Queen
Sophie in her Dowager state. The rest, though there were
seventeen years of it in all, is silent to mankind and me; and
only her death, and her Son’s great grief about it, so great as
to be surprising, is mentioned in the Books.

Actual painful sorrow about his Father, much more ^iny
new outburst of weeping and lamenting, is not on record, after
that first morning. Time does its work; and in such a whirl
of occupations, sooner than elsewhere: and riie loved Dead lie
silent in their mausoleum in our hearts*—serenely sad as Eter¬
nity, not in loud .soriow as of Time. Friedrich was pious as a
Son, however he might be on other heads. To the last years
of his life, as from the first days of his reign, it was evident ib
what honour he held Friedrich Wilhelm’s memory; and the
words “my Father," when they turned-up in discourse, had in
that fine voice of hi^ a tone winch the observers noted. ‘To
‘ his Mother he failed no da\, when in Berlin, however busy,

‘ to make his \iiit; and be never spoke to her, except hat in
‘ hand.’

With his own Queen, Friedrich still consorts a good deal,
in these first times; is with hei at Charlottenburg, Berlin,
Potsdam, Reinsberg, for a or two, as^pecasion gives; some¬
times at Reinsberg for weeks running, iriithe intervals of war
and business: glad to be at rest amid his old pursuits, by the
side of a kind innocent being fafniliar to him. So it lasts for
a length of time. But these happy intervals, we can remark^
grow rarer: whether the Lady’s humour, as they bedame rarer,
might not sink withal, and produce an acceleration in the rate
of decline? She was thought to be capable of 'pouting {fairi
la/achi€)t at one period 1 We arc left to our guesses; there ai

< t

** Bibching’s BeytrA^e^ iv. a?.

Chap. I. PHKNOMENA OF THE ACCESSION. 23

.Jun«-S«pt. 1740.

not anywhere the siliallest whisper to guide us. Deep silence
1‘eigns in all Prussiim Hooks,—Tu feci yr to suspect yourseU
neglected, and to become more amiable theratpon {in which
course alone lies hope), is di/hcult fcr any (^ueen! Enough,
we can*observe these meetings, within two or three years, have
become much rarer; and perhai>s about the end of the third
or fourth year, they altogether L.-As’e; and pass merely into the
formal cljaractcr. In which state they continued fixed, liable
to no uncertainty; and were transacted, to the end of Fried¬
rich’s life, with inflexible regularity as the annual reviews were.
This is a curious section of his life; which there will be other
opportunities of noticing. But there is vet no thought of it
anywhere, nor for years to come; though fahks to the contrary.
were once current in Books.2(i

f

Change in hh Father's Met ho its or Minis fries.

In the old mode of Administration, in the Ministries, Go¬
vernment Boards, he made no change. These administrative
methods of his wise Father’s arc .idnurablc to Friedrich, who
knows them well; and they continue to be so These men of
his Father’s, iheru also Fiicdrich know^ ,inc’ thai they were
well chosen. In methods or in men, he is inclined to makt- the
minimum of alteration at present. One Finance Hofiath of a
projecting turn, named Eckart, who had abused the last weak
years of Friedrich Wilhelm, and much afflicted mankind by
the favour he was in: this Eckart Friedrich appointed a com¬
mission to inquire into; found the public right in regard to
Eckart, and dismissed him with ignominy, not with much other
punishment. Minister Boden, on the contrary, high in the
Finance Department, wlio had also been much grumbled at,
Friedrich found to be a good man : and Friedrich not only
retained Boden, but^ advanced |^im ; and continued to make
more and more uset of him in time coming. His love of per¬
fection in work done, his care of thrift, seemed almost greater
than his late Father's had been,—to the disappointment 01
many. In the other Departments, Podewils, Thulmeyer and
the rcst^ent on as heretofore;—only^in general with less to
do, the young King doing more himself than had been usual.
Valon, *mongros Valori (my fat Valori),’ French Minister here,

^ Laveaux: &c.

24 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BockXt;

Junt’Sept. 1740,

whom we shall know better, writes home# of the new King Of
Prussia; * fte begins his government, as by all appearance he

* will carry it on, in a highly satisfactory way: everywhere

* traits of benevolence, sympathy for his subjects, respect shown

* to the memory of the Dllccased,'®'—-no change madet where
it evidently is not for the better.

Friedrich's "Tliree principal Secretaries of State,* as we
should designate them, arc very remarkable. Three Clerks he
found, or had known of, somewhere in the Public Offices; and
now took, under some advanced title, to be specially his own
Private Clerks: three vigorous long-headed young fellows,
•Eichel, Schuhmacher, Lautensack’ the obscure names of
them out of whom, now and all along henceforth, he got
immensities of work in that kind. They lasted all his life;
and, of course, grew ever more expert at their function. Close,
silent; exact as machinery: ever ready, from the smallest clear
hint, marginal pencilmark, almost from a glance of the e^ e, to
clothe the Royal Will in official form, with the due rugged
clearness and thrift of words. ‘ Came punctually at four in. the
morning in summer, five in winter;’ did daily,the day's work;
and kept their mouths well shut. Avery notable Trio of men;
servipg his Majesty and the Prussian Nation as Principal Se¬
cretaries of State, on those cheap termsnay almost as Houses
of Parliament with Standing Committees and appendages, so
many Ac(s of Parliament admittedly rather wise, being passed
daily by his Majesty’s help and theirs!—Friedrich paid them
rather well; they saw no society; lived wholly to their work,
and to their own families. Eichel alone of the three was men¬
tioned at all by mankind, and th^t obscurely; an ‘ abstruse,

* reserved, long-headed kind of manand ' made a great deal

* of money in the end,’ insinuates Buschingj^’-^ no friend of
Friedrich’s or his.

In superficial respects, again, Friedrich finds that the Prus¬
sian King ought to have a Kirxg's Establislii^ent, and maintain
a decent splendour among his neighbours,—-as is not quite the
case at present. In this respect he does make changes. A
certain quantity of new Pages, new Goldsticks; some con¬
siderable, not too considenible, new-furbishing of the Royal

Mimoires dtsNigocuttums du Marquis de Valori (Ji Faiis, 1830), i
13th, a valuable Boole, which we shall often have to quote: edited in a la¬
mentably ignorant manner. t,,

5 W Rhdenbeck, 15th June 1740^ ® y. 338, Htc.

Cbap.l. PHENOMENA OF THE ACCESSION. *5

^uue^pt. 174P.

Household,—as it ♦ere, a fair coat of new paint, ^ith gilding
not profuse,—brought it to the right pitch for this King. About
*a hundred and fifty’ new figures of the Page and Goldstick
kind, is the reckoning given.^® So juanjr of tliese and there
is an increase of 16,000 to one’s Army going on : that is the
proportion noticeable. In the facts as his Father left them
Friedrich persisted all his life; *'in the semblances or outer
vestures he changed, to this extent for the present.—^These
are the i^ienomena of Friedrich’s Accession, noted by us.

Readers see there is radiance enough, perhaps slightly in
excess, but of intrinsically good quality, in the Aurora of this
new Reign, A brilliant valiant young King ; much splendour
of what Vycould golden or soft nature (visible in thosrf

‘ New-^/ doings of his, in those strong alTections to his
Friend^^ and also, what wc like almost better In him, some¬
thing**'./^ a sieeldfright or stellar splendour (meaning, clearness
of e^ight, intrepidity, severe loyalty to fact),—which is a
fiiji^ii^ddition to the softer clement, and will keep it and its

lanthropies atid magnanimities well under lale. Such a
Ian is rare in this world ; liow extremely rare such a man
lOrn King ! He is swift and he is persistent; sharply dis¬
cerning, fearless to resolve and perform ; carries his great en¬
dowments lightly, as if they were not heavy to him. He has
known hard misery, been taught by stripes; a light stoicism
sits gracefully on him.

“ What he will grow to ?" Probably to something con¬
siderable. Very certainly to something far short of his aspi¬
rations;^ far different fromiihis own hopes; and the world's
concerning him. It is not wc, it is Father Time that does
the controlling and fulfilling of our hopes ; and strange work
he makes of them and us. For example, has not Friedrich’s
grand * New Era,’ inaugurated by* him in a week, with the
leading spirits all adoring, issue^d since in French Revolution
and a ‘world well suicided,’—the leading spirits much thrown-
out in consequence! New Era has gone to great lengths since
Friedrich's time; and the leading spirits do not,now adore
it, but y%wn over it, or worse I Which changes to us the then
aspect of Friedrich, and his epoch and his aspirations, a good
deal.—On the whole, Friedrich will go his way, Time and the

S® 1. ^53*

26 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RElks. B^krt.

June-Scpt, 174a.

leading spirits going theirs ; and, like the rest ol us, will grow
to what he can. llis actual size is not great among the King¬
doms : his outward resources are ratlier to be called small.
The Prussian Dominion tit that date is, in extent, about Four-
fifths of an England Proper, and perhaps not onc'fifth so fertile;
subject Population is well under Two Millions and a Half;
Revenue not much above One Million Sterling,—very small,
were not thrift such a vecUgal.

This young King is magnanimous ; not much to be called
ambitious, or not in the vulgar sense almost at all,—strange
as it may sound to readers. His hopes at this time are many;
—and among them, I perceive, there is not wanting secretly,
in spite of his experiences, some hope that he himself may be
a good deal “ happier” than formerly. Nor is there any as¬
cetic humour, on his part, to forbid trial. He is much deter¬
mined to try. Probably enough, as we guess and gathtr, his
agreeablcst anticyiations, at this time, w^erc of Reinsberg: How,
in the intervals of work well done, he would live there wholly
to the Muses; have his chosen spirits round him, his collo¬
quies, his suppers of the gods. Why not ? There might be
a King of intellects conceivable w’ithal; protecting, cheri.shing,
practically guiding the chosen Illuminative Souls of this world.
A new Charlemagne, the smallest new Charlemagne of Spi¬
ritual type, with /iis I'alaclins round him ; how gloriou.s, how
salutary in the dim generations now going!—These too were
hopes which proved signally futile. Rigorous Time could no^
grant these at all;—granted, in his own hard way, other thing!
instead. But, all along, the Lifcaelement, the Epoch, thougl
Friedrich took it kindly and never complained, was’ungenia
to such a man.

‘ Somewhat of a rotten ICpoch, thi.s into which Friedrich has beei

* bom, to shape liimsclf and liis activities roy^l and other.’’ exclaim
Smelfungus ontc: ‘ In an older <%inest Time, w'jien the eternally awfti

* meanings o.f this Umverse had not yet .sunk into dubieties to any oijc
‘ much less into levities or into mendacities, into huge hypocrisies care
‘ fally regulated,—so luminous, vivid and itigenuou.s a young cieatur
‘ had not w’tinted divine manna in his Pilgrimage through Life. Not

* in that case, had ho con»e out of it in so lean a condition* But th

* highe-st mau of us is born brother to his Contemporaries; struggle a

iW 'Hie exact statistic cipher is, at Friedrich's Accession ; Prussian
3 ,a 7 S 5«iuare mile^Gcnnan (56,875 Knjflush); PopuintioH, 9,240,000: A mmol Rtvensu ,
7,371,707 thalers 7 groschen (1,105,7^6/. without the pence). Sec Prcuu, Bitck/Rt
i* 49: Stenzel, iii. 6g2i Set. ® «

.Chap.!. PHENOMENA OF THE ACCESSION. 27

June-Sept. 1740.

* he may, there is no escaping the family likeness. By .spasmodic in-

* dignanl contradiction of them, by stupid compliance with them,—you
‘ will inversely resemble, if you do not directly j like the starling, you

* can’t get out!—Most surely, if there dl fall manna from Heaven, in

* the given Generation, and nourish in us reverence and genial nOble-
‘ ness day by day, it is blessed and well. Failing that, in reganl to our

* poor spirimal interests, there Ls sure to be one of two results; mockery,

‘ contempt, disbelief, what we may call skort-diei to the length of very

* famine twhich was Friedrich’s case); or else slo\v>poison, carefully

* ^aborated and provided by way of daily nourishment.

* Unhappy souls, these same 1 The slow-poison has gone deep into

* them. Instead of manna, thi.s long while back, they have been living

* on mouldy corrupt meats sweetened by sugar-of-lead-or perhaps,

* like Voltaire, a few individuals prefer hunger, as the cleaner altema- ^

* tive; and in contemptuou,s, barren, mocking humour, not yet got the
‘ length of geniality or indignation, snuff the ei.sl-wind by way of spi-

* ritual diet. Pilgriming along on such nourlshnmnt, the best human

* souk^ils to become very ruddy!—Tidings al)out Heaven are fallen so
‘ uncertain, but the Earth and her joys are still interesting: “ Take to
‘ the Barth and her joys;—let your soul go out, since it must; let your

* five senses and their appetites be well alive.” That i.s a drea 4 ful
‘ Sham-Christiah Dispensation'' to he' born under' \ou wonder at

* the W'ant of heroism in the Eighteenth t.’<‘ntury. Wonder rather at

* the degree of heroism it had ; wonder how many souls there still are
‘ to be met with in it of some effective capability, though dieting in

* that way,—nothing ehc to be had in the shops aborit. Carterets,

‘ Belleisles, Friedrichs, Voltaires; Clnthams. Franklins, Cholseuls:

‘ there is an effective stroke of work, a fine fire of hcn)ic pride, in this

* man and the other; not yet extinguished by spiritual famine or slow-

* poison; so robust is Natuie the mighty Motlier!—

‘Butin general, that sad Gospel, “Souls extinct, Stomachs well
' ‘ alive 1” is the credible one, nbt articulately preached, but practically
' * believed by the abject generations, and aclefl on as it never wai» be-
‘•fore. What immense seastialities there were, is known; and also {as

* some small offset, though that has not yet begun in 1740) ’ivhat im-
’ * mense quantities of Physical Lalmur and contrivance were got out of

‘ mankind, in that Epbch and down&to this day. As if, having lost its
‘ Heaven, it had strufk desperately down into the F«arth; as if it were
‘ a ^A»2W-kind, and not a mankind any more. We had once a Barba-

* rossa; and a world all grandly true. But from that to Karl VL, and

‘ his Holy Romish Reich in such a state of “ Holiness”—!’—I here
ettt-short#ny abstruse Friend. ^

Readers are impatient to have done with these miscel¬
laneous preludings, and to be once definitely under way, such
a Journey lying ahead. Yes, readers; a Journey indeed!
And, at this ipoint, permit me to warn you that, where the

a8 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BjAXL

/ Junc^Scpt. 1740.'

ground, where Dryasdust and the Destiiiies, yield anything^^
humanly illustrative of Friedrich and his Work, one will have
to linger, and carefully gather it, even as here. Large tracts
occur, bestrewn with mare pedadtisms, diplomatic cobweh*
beries, learned marine^stores, and inhuman matter, over which
we shall have to skip empt^handed : this also was among the
sad conditions of our Enterprise/that it has to go now too
slow and again too fast; not in proportion to natural import*
ance of objects, but to several inferior considerations vdthah
So busy has perverse Destiny been on it; perverse Destiny,
edacious Chance;—and the Dryasdusts, too, and Nightmares,
in Prussia as elsewhere, we know how strong they are !

Friedrich’s character in old age has doubtless its curious
affinities, its disguised identities, with these prognostic features
and indications of his youth : and to our readers,—if we do
ever get them to the goal, of seeing Friedrich a little witl^their
own eyes and judgments,—there may be pleasant contrasts
and comparisons of that kind in store, one day. But the far
commoner experience (which also has been my own),—here
is ISmelfungus’s stern account of that:

‘ My friend, you will be luckier than I, if, after ten years, not to say,

* in a sense, twenty years, thirty years, of reading and rumiiw^ging in

* those sad Prussian Books, ancient and new (which often are laudably
‘ authentic, too, and exact as to details), you can gather any character

* whatever of Friedrich, in any period of his life, or conceive him as a
‘ Human Entity at all! It is strange, after such thousandfold writing,

‘ but it is true, his Hijjtory is considerably unintelligible to mankiod at
‘ this hour; left chaotic, enigmatic, in a good many points,-thdmili-
‘ tary part of it alone being brought to* clearness, and rendered fairly
' conceivable and credible to those who will study. And as to the Man
‘ himself, or what his real Physiognomy can have been—I—Well, it

* must be owned few men were of such rapidity of face and aspect; so

* difficult to seizte the features of. In his action, too, there was such

* rapidity, such secrecy, suddenn^.?; a man that could not be read,

* even by the candid, except as in flashes of lightning. And then the

* anger of bystanders, wwcandid, who got hurt by him; the hasty ma-

* levolences, the stupidities, the opacities: enough, in modem times,

* what is saying much, perhaps no man’s motives, intentions, and pro-

* cedure have been more belied, misunderstood, imsrepresentef’, during

* his life. Nor, I think, sinc^ that, have many men fared, worse, by the

* Limner or Biographic class, the favourable to him and the unfavour-

* able; or been so smeared oi and blotched ot, and reduced to a mere

* blur and dazzlement oi crosslights, incoherences, incredibilities) in

THE HOMAGINGS.

tt.

Jun&<Sept. Z740.

^9

* * which nothing, not fo much as a human nose, is clea|j^y discernible
*by way of featvure!’—Courage, reader, nevertheless; on the above
terms let us march according to promise.

CHAPTER ri.

THE HOMAGINGS.

Young Friedrich, as his Father had done, considers it un¬
necessary to be crowned. Old Friedrich, first of the name,
and of the King scries, we did see crowned, with a pinch of
snuff tempering th^ solemnities. I’hat Coronation once well
done suffices all his descendants hitherto. Such an expense
of money,'—of diluted mendacity too ! Such haranguing, ges-^
taring, symbolic fugling, all grown half-falseavoid lying,
even with your eyes, or knees, or the coat upon your back, so
far as you easily can !

Mothing of Coronation ; Ixit it is thought needful to have
the Huldigungen (Homagings) done, the Fealties sworn; and
the young Majesty in due course goe^ about, or gives direc¬
tions, now here .now there, in hjs various ProMnees, getting
that accomplished. But even in that, Friedrich is by no means
strait-laced or punctilious; does it commonly by Deputy: only
in three places, Konigsberg, Berlin, Clevc, docs he appear in
petson. Mainly by deputy; and always with the minimum of
fuss, and no haranguing that could be avoided. Nowhere are
the old Stands (Provincial Parliaments) assembled, now or
afterwards : sufficient for this and for every occasion are the
“ Permanent Committees of the Stande;" nor is much speak¬
ing, unessential for dispaiclwof business, used to these.

‘ of Rittcrschaft mainly, of Gcntiv small and great,—cx-

* isted once in all those Counliics, as elsewhcic,’ ^ays one Historian;
‘ and some of them, in Preu.ssoa, lor example, used to he rather loud,

* and indiued to luibul<^ce, till tlic curb, fiom a judicious, bridle-hand,

* would admonish them. But, for .ifong while past,—especially since

* the Great Elector's lime, who got an “ Excise Law” passetl, or the
‘ foundations of a good Excise Law laid and, what w’ilh Excise, what

* with Domain-Farms, had a fixai Annual Budget, which he reckoned

* fair to both parties,—they have been dying out for w.ant of woik;

* and, umftir Frie<lrich Willielm, may be said to have gone quite dead.

* What work was left for them? Prussian Budget is fixeil, many things

* are fixed : w’hy talk of them farther? The Prussian King, nothing of

• ^ Preuss, iv. 433; and ThroHhtUi^Hg^ pp, 179-383.

30 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS Boole Xt

• Juijie«^ept 17401.

* a fool like certain others,*-«-which indeed is the Cardinal poi?it, though
my Author d(jjas not say so,—‘is respectfully avMte of the fects round
‘ him, and can listen to the rumours too, so far as he finds good The

* King sets himself teiribly interested to get into the right course m all
‘ things, and avoid the virong one' Piobahly he does, in his way, seek
‘ “wise Advice concerning tlfil arduous matters of the Kingdom;*’ nay
‘ Ibeheie he is diligent to have it of the wisest —ivho knows itStande

* would ilwnys give it unser, especially Standg in the haranguing con-

* dition?’—Enough, they are not’applied to There is no Pieedom m
that Country ‘ No h reedom to speak of ’ contmues he * but I do a
‘ little envy them their Fixed Budget, and some other things What
‘ pleasure there tan bt m h iving your household arrangements tumbled
‘ into disorder e\ery new Year by a new contrived scale of expenses

* for you, f never could ascertain»’— *

Friedrich is not the man to awaken Parliamentary sleep
ing^iogs well settled b) his Ancestors Once or twice, out of
Preussen, in f ncdrich Wilhelm s time, there was heard some
whimper, which sounded like the beginning of a bark But
Friedrich Wilhelm was on the licit for it Are you coming m
with your Au Pozwalam (your Liberum Veto), then? None
of your Polish viganes here ‘ Lou^ le fiays sera rmnd (the
Uil^ole Country will be ruined;, say you? /Such had been
the poor Marshal or Provincial Speakers Remonstrance on
one occasion) ‘ I don t believe a word of that But I do be-
‘ Ueve the Government b> Jwikcr\ (Country Squires) ‘ and Ato

* Pozwalam will be ruined, —as it is fully meant to be I ‘I

* am establishing the King s Sovereignty like a rock of bronite
‘ {Ich stabilise die byouvitainetat wte emeu Rocker von Bronse)'
some extremely strong kind of rock This was one of Fried¬
rich Wilhelms marginalia in icsponse to such a thing, and
the mutinous whimper died out ag^nn Parliamentary Assem¬
blages are sometimes ( ollp«.tive Wisdoms, but by no means
always so In Magdeburg we remember what tioub’e Fried¬
rich Wilhelm had with his imieasonable Ritters Ritters there,
m their assembled apacity, had the Reich behind them, and
could not be dealt with like Pfoussen bu? Friedrich Wilhelm,
by wise slow methods, managed Magdeburg too, and reduced
It to silence, or to words necessary for dispatch ot business

In each Province, a Permanent Committee,—chosen, I
suppose, by King and Knights assenting, chosen I know not
how, but admitted to be wisely chosen,—represents the once

^ FUnrter b in ( Urhtndenhuch, 1 sp) Breuss, vt 4400, **£iuPwvffdam * (th*
fgroiula ol Ltierum Vtto) ugoifies “ i Don’t Pcrnut i'

THE HOMAGINGS.

31

Cbap. 11.

June-Sept. 1740. •

Paidiament or and has its potency for doing good

service in regard to^ all Provincial matters, from*roads and
bridges upwards, and is impotent to do the least harnni. Roads
and bridges, Church matters, repartition of the Land-dues,
Army matters,—-in fact they are anactfectivc non-haranguing
Parliament, to the King's Deputy m every such Province; well
calculated to illuminate and forward his subaltern Amfmen
and him. Nay, we observe it ih*oftenest in the way of gifts
and solacgmcnts that the King articulately communicates with
these Committees or their Rittcrschafts. Projects for draining
of Bogs, for improved Highways, for better Husbandry ; loans,
granted them, Loan-Banks established for the Province’s be¬
hoof ;—no need of parliamentary eloquence on such occasions,
but of something far different.

It is from this quiescent, or busy but noiseless kind of
and Populations that Friedrich has Jiis Huldigung Xct
takeand the operation, whether done person.ally or by de¬
puty, must be an abundantly simple one. He, for his part,
is fortunate enough to find everywhere the Sovereignty es-
iablisheds “ rock of bronze” not the least shaken in bis time,
lie will graciously undertake, by Written Act, which is read
before the Stdnde, King or King’s Deputy witnessing there,
‘To maintain the privileges’ of his Sfande and Populations;
the Sldnde answer, on oath, with lifted hand, and express
invocation of Heaven, That they will obey him as true subjects:
And so,'—doubtless with something of dining superaddecl, but
no whisper of it put on record,—the HuUiigimg will everywhere
very quietly transact itself.

The Huldigung itself is j^othing to us, even with Friedrich
there,—as at Kdnigsberg, Berlin, Clcve, the three exceptional
places. To which, nevertheless, let us briefly attend hmi, for
tlic sake of here and there some direct glimpse we may get of
the then Friedrich’s actual physiognomy and ways. Other
direct view, or the chfance of suc^, is not conceded us out of
those Had Prussian Books ; which are very full on this of the
Huhiigungi if silent on so many other points.^

Friedrich accepts tiu Homages^ personally^ in Three Places,

To Kfinigsberg is his first excursion* on this errand. Preus-
sen has perhaps, or may be suspected of having, some rem-
3 Preuss, p. 382.

32 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RFJNS. BookXt

7tli July *740,.

nants of s<%ir humours left in it, and remembrances of SULnde
with haranguings and even mutinies: there it anywhere the
King in person may do good on such an occasion. He left
Berlin, July 7th, bound thitherward ; here is Note of that first
Royal Tour,—specimen of several hundreds such, which he
,had to do in the course of the next Forty-five years.

e

‘ Friend Algarotti, charming talker, attended him; who else, official
‘ and non-official, ask not. The Journey is to be cirCuitouS j to com-
‘ bine various busines.ses, and also to have its amusements. They went

* by Ciistrin; glancing at old known Countiy, which is at its greenest
‘ in this season. By Custrin, across the Neumark, into Pommem; after
‘ that by an intricate winding joute; reviewing regiments, inspecting
‘ garrisons, now heie now there; doing all manner of inspections; talk-

* ing I know not w'hal; oftenest lodging with favoured Generals, if it
‘ suited. Distance to Konigsberg, by the direct road, is about 500 miles;

* bythi? winding one, it must h.ave been 800; Journey thither took nine

* days in all. Obliquely thioiigh l^mimeni, almost to the coast]%of the
‘Hadtic; their ultimatum tluie a place called Coslin, wdiere they re-
‘ viewed with strictness,—omitting Colbcrg, a small Sca-Fortress not
‘ far rearward, time being short, 'riience into West-Preirsen, into
‘Polish Territory, and swiftly across that; kceprag Dant/ig and its
‘ noises mcle enough to the Kft: one night in Poland ; and the next
‘ they are in Ost-Preussen, place called Liebstadt,—again on home-
‘ ground, and diligently reviewing there.

‘ The review at Liebstadt is remarkable in this, That the regiments,
‘ one regiment espccuiUy, not being what was ft, a certain Grpnadier-
‘ Captain got cashiered on the spot; and the old Command<ant himself

* was soon after pcnsionerl, and more gently sent his ways. So strut
‘ is his Majesty. Contrariwise, he found Lieutenant-General von Katie’s
‘Garrison, at Angerbuig, next d.Ty, in a very high perfection; and
‘ Colonel Posadowsky’s regiment specie lly so; with which latter gentle-
‘ man he lodged that night, and made him farther happy by the Ordef
‘ ofMent: Colonel Posadowsky, Gaiiison of Angerburg, faroffinlCast-
‘ Preussen, Chevalier of the Older of Merit henceforth, if wo ever meet
‘ him again. 'Po the good old Lieutenant-General von Katte, who no
‘ doubt dined with them, his Majesty handed, on the same occasion, a
‘ Patent of Feldmanschall;—intends soon to make him Graf; and did

* it, as readers know. Both Colonel and General attended him ihence-
‘ forth, still by a circuitous route, to Konigsberg, to assist in the solem-
‘ nities there. By Gumbinnen, by Trakchnen,—the Stud of Trakehneu:
‘ that also his Majesty saw, and made review of; not withouj!; emotion,

* we can fancy, as the sleek colts w’ere trotted out on those new terms!

* At Trakehnen, Katte and the Colonel would be his Majesty’s guests,

* for the night they stayed. This is their extreme point eastward;

* Konigsberg now lies a good way west of them. But ai Trakehnen

THE HOMAGINGS.

33

Chap. 11.

Jutie«Sept. 1740.

*’they tmm j aii( 3 , Satmlay 16th July 1740, after another hi^i^xed miles

* or so, along the pleasant valley of the Pregel, get to J^onigsberg:

* ready to begin business on Moiiday morumg,—on Sunday if neces-

* iary.'*

On Sunday there did a kind of nfemorability occur: The
Huldigungs-Predigt (Homage Sermon) by a Reverend Hen*
Quandt, Chief Preacher there. Which would not be worth men-
tioning, except for this circumstance, that his Majesty exceed¬
ingly admired Quandt, and thought him a most Demosthenic
genius, and the best of all the Germans. QuandPs text was in
these words : ‘ Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou Son

* Jesses Peace, peace he unto thee, and peace he to thine

* helpers } for thy Godhe/petk thee'^ Quandt began, in a sonor¬
ous voice, raising his face with respectful enthusiasm to the
King, “ Thine are we, O Friedrich, and on thy side, thou Son
of Friedrich Wilhelm;” and so went on : sermon brief, sonor¬
ous, coiipact, and sticking close to its text. Friedrich stood
ithmovable, gazing on the eloquent Demosthenic Quandt, with
admiration heightened by surprise ;—wrote of Quandt to Vol¬
taire ; and, with sustained enthusiasm, to the Publu long after¬
wards ; and to the epd of his days was wont to make Quandt
an exception, if perhaps almost the only one, from German bar¬
barism, and disharmony of mind and tongue. So tliat poor
Quandt cannot ever since get entirely forgotten, but needs al¬
ways to be raked up again, for this reason when others have
ceased ; an almost melancholy adventure for poor Quandt and
Another t—

The Huldigung was rather grand; Harangue and Coun¬
ter-harangue permitted to the lue length, and proper festivities
following : but the Stdnde could not manage to get into vocal
covenanting or deliberating at all; Friedrich before leaving
Berlin had answered their hint or request that way, in these
words : ‘ We are likewise graciously inclined to give to the
' said Stdnde, before their Honiaginfi', the same assurance which

* they got from our llerr Father’s Majesty, who is now with

* God,’-—general assurance that their, and everybody’s, ‘Rights
shall be maintained’ (as we see they are),—' with which, it is

* hoped ipoffcntlich), they will be content, ^nd get to peace upon

* this matter {sick dahei beruhigen werden).'^ It will be best
for them t

* Ffom Prauss, Thronbesteigimg, pp. 382, 385; Rfidenbeck, p. x6; &a

* Pint Chrontcles, xii, 18. <* neuss, Threntmteigung, p. 38a,

VOL. JV. ‘ D

34

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BmkXi.

fl ' JuDe>Se{>t. jJ4P»

FriedrjjCh gave away much corn heref; that is, opened his
Corn-Granaries, on charitable terms, and took all manner of
measures, here as in other places, for relief of the scarcity there
was. Of the illuminations, n^ver so grand, the reader shall
l^ar nothing. A *Tor^-]Procession of the Students' turned
out a pretty thing:—Students marching with torches, with
hne wind-music, regulated enthusiasm, fine succinct address to
his Majesty; and all the world escorting, with its Live For¬
ever !" Friedrich gave the Students * a Trink-Gela^ (Banquet
of Liquors),* how arranged I do not know: and to the Speaker
of the Address, a likely young gentleman with Von to his name,
he offered an Ensigney of Foot (‘in Camas’s Fusileer Regi*
ment,’—Camas now gone to Paris, embassying), which was
joyfully accepted. Joyfully accepted;—and it turned out wett
for all parties; the young gentleman having risen, where merit
was the rule of rising, and become Graf and Lieutenant-Gene^
ral, in the course of the next fifty years. ^

Huldigung and Torch-Procession over, the Royal Party
dashed rapidly off, next morning (2 ist July), homewards by the
shortest route ; and, in three days more, byJFrankfiirt-on-Oder
(vfhere a glimpse of General Schwerin, a favourite General,
was to be had), were safe in Berlin; received with acclama¬
tion, nay with ‘ blessings and even tears' some say, after this
pleasant Fortnight’s Toui. General Schwerin, it is rumoured,
will be made Feldmarschali straightway, the M unchows are
getting so promoted as wc said ; edicts are coming out, much
business speeding forward, and the tongues of men keep
waggmg.

Berlin Huldtgung ,—and indeed, by Deputy, that of nearly
all the other Towns,—was on Tuesday August 2d. At Berlin
his Majesty was present in the matter : but, except the gazing
multitudes, and hussar regiments, ranked in the Schloss-Plats
and streets adjoining, thdle was little^ of notable in it; the
upholstery arrangements thrifty in the extreme. His Majesty
IS prone to thrift in this of the Huldigung, as would appear;
perhaps regarding the affair as scenic merely. Here, besides
this of Berlin, is anc^her instance just occurring. . It appears,
the Quedlinburg people, shut out from the light of the actual
Royal Countenance, cannot do their Homaging by 0 eputy»

1 Preuss, Thn>nb€iUigtm^^ p. 187. “

CKip. TT, I'Ml!* HUMAGlNCrS. 35;

without at least a P^trait of the King and of the Queen: How
nianagc? aslcs the AiGcial Person. “ Have a coupU of Daubs
done in Berlin, three guineas apiece i send them these/* ans¬
wers the King f®

Here in the Berlin Schloss, scen§ the Large Hall within
doors, there is a * platform raised three steps; and on this,

* by way of a kind of throne, an armchair covered with old

* black velvetthe whole surmounted by a canopy also of old
black velvet: not a sublime piece of upholstery; but reckoned
adequate. Friedrich mounted the tln;ee steps; stood beiorc
the old chair, his Princes standing promiscuously behind it p
his Ritters in quantity, in front and to right and left, on the
floor. Some Minister of the Interior explains suitably, not at
too great length, what they are met for ; some junior ()rficial,
junior but of quality, responded briefly, for hmisclf and Iiis or¬
der, to the eifect, ** Vea, trulythe Huldigim^s - (Jrkundc
(Deed of Homage) was then read by the proper Clerk, and the
Ritteis*all swore; audibly, with lifted hands, 'fhis is the Rit¬
ter Huldigimg.

His Majesty then steps out to the Balcony, Oath and
Homage of the general Population, General population gave
its oaih, and ‘ three great shouts over and above.' “ Es Icbe
der Konig!" thrice, with all their throat^,. Upon which a
shower Medals, ‘'Homage-Medals," gold and silver (quan¬
tity not mentioned) rained down upon them, in due succession;
and were scrambled for, in the usual way, ‘ His Majesty,’
they write, and this is pet haps the one point woith noiicc, 'lu:,

* Majesty, contrary to custom and to etiquolfe, remained on the

* Balcony, some time after ti^ rciemon}, perhaps a full half-
'hour/—silent ihcic. 'with in', look ^]^ed atleuiivcly on the

* immeasurable multitude before the Sdilo^ s ; and acemed sunk

* in deep reilection [Ih'inufinmg )—an almost awfully eloquent
though inarticulate phi.nomeuon to his IMaicsl). that of those
multitudes scrambliiig»and hu/..:aligjg therein

These, with the ^leve one, are all the llomagings Fried¬
rich was personally piesent at; the otheis he did by Deputy,
all in one day (2d August); and without fuss. Scenic mat¬
ters these in which, except where he qpn, as in the Kdnigs-

' fJm&iit /(iiriT /'arioutiier Je Mauvaiiis m ftees& sto ftira.—

Kn ' , tj ( U)>!unLbnbtuh, s. sij}.

» I’lewca, //ii 0 /thsiktsuH^, p. 3S9,

36 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BocItX!.

14th Aug4 r74(i).

berg case,^combine inspections and grive businesses with
them, he t^es no interest. However, he is now, for the sake
chiedy of inspections and other real objects, beht on a Journey
to Clevo;—the fellow of that to Khnigsbefg: Kdnigsberg,
Preussen, the easternmoS outlying wing of his long straggling
Dominions; and then Cleve-Jiilich, its counterpart on the south¬
western side,—there also, with such contingencies hanging
over Cleve-Jiilich, it were proper to make some mustering of
the Frontier garrisons apd affairs.^® His Majesty so*purposes:
and we purpose again to accompany,^—not for inspection and
mustering, but for an unexpected reason. The grave Journey
to Cleve has an appendage, or comic side-piece, hanging to
it; more than one appendage; which the reader must not
missi—Before setting out, read these two Fractions, snatched
from the Diplomatist Wastebag ; looking well, we gain there
some momentary view of Friedrich on the business side. Of
Friedrich, and also of Another;

Sunday J4th Augu&t 1740, Dickens, who has been reporting hitherto
in a favourable, though in a languid exoteric manner, not being in any
height of favour, England or he,—had express Audience of his Majesty;
being summoned out to Volsdam for that end: ‘ Sunday evening, about
7 p.M.,’—Majesty intending to be off on the Cleve Jouniey lomoirow.
Let us accompany Dickens. Readers may remember, George II. has
been at Hanover for .some weeks past; Bielfeld dilig^Ltly grjnnbg
euphemisms and courtly graciosilies to him; Truchsess hinting, on op¬
portunity, that there aie perhaps weighty businesses in the rear; which,
however, on the Britannic side, seem loath to start. Britannic Majesty
is much at a loss about his Si)anish War, so dangerous for kindling
France and the whole world upon him. In regard to wluch Prussia
might be so impoitant, for or agaiilbt—This, in compressed form, is
what Dickens witnessc') at Pol^dam that Sunday evening from 7 P.M. :
‘ Audience lasted above an hour: King turned diicctly upon busi-

* ness; wishes to have ‘‘ Categorical Answers” as to Three Points al-
‘ ready subniitted to his Britanrtic Majesty’s consideration. Cleai footing

* indispen.sAblc between us. "^hat you waiit of me? say it, and be

* plain. What I want of ynu is, These Ihrcc^hings:

‘ I®. Guarantee for Jiilich and Berg. All the world knows
‘ the.se Duchies are. Will his Britannit Majesty guaianiee me ihei’C?

* And if so, How, and to what lengtlis, will he proceed about it?

‘ 2®. Settlement about Ost-Friesland. Expectancy of O^t-Fricsland,

* soon to fall hciiless, wHlch was granted wtflong since, though Hanover

1® In regard to the Day of Jluldigting at Cl«ve, which happily is not of the least
Moaient to us, Yxw\f>{ThrOHbatdgung. p. 390} 403)seem

to be in contradiction.

Cl«ip.n. THE HOMAGINGS. 37

^4th Aug, X740.

* make^ hagglmgs, con'bter-claimings: I must have som# Settlement

* about that.

‘3*. Ihe hki© about those perplexities ia Mecklenburg. No diffi-

* culty there if we try heartily, nor is there^uch pressing haste about it.

* J lies© are my three claims on England; and I will fry to serve

* England as far m return, if It will tell me how, “ Ah, beware of

* Ihiowmg yourself into the arms of h raiyc modestly suggests Dickens

* —“ Well, if h ranee will guarantee me those Duch)e«, and you will
‘ not do anythinganswers his Majesty with a fine laugh England
‘ I consider piy most natural fnend and ally; but I must Know what
‘ there is to depend on there Ennees are ruled by their interest, can-
‘ not follow their feelings Let me have an explicit answer, say, at

* Wesel, whcio I am to be on the 24111,”’—ten days huice. Jlntanmc
Majesty is at Ilanovei, and can answer withm that time ‘This he

* twice told me, “ Wesel, 24th,” m the course of our uiteiview Pennit
‘ me to recommend the matter to your Loidship,’— my Lonl Uaiiing-
ton, now attending the BiUannic Majesty

‘ During the whole audience,’ adds Dickens, ‘the King was m ex-

* tremc ^ood hiimoiu , and not onlyheani with 'itlcntion all the con-
‘ sideiations I offered, but w'as not the least oflended at any objections
‘ I made to what he said It is undoubtedly the best way to behase
‘ with frankness to him ’ Ihcse list aic Dickens’s own woi ts, let them
modestly be a memorandum to )our T ordship Hus King goes himself
direct to the point, and stiaightforwanlncss, as a pnmary condition,
will profit your Loidship with him

Most tnic advice, this,—^and would perhaps lie follow«i, were it
quite easy* But things arc very compileittd And the Britannic Ma¬
jesty, much plagued with Spanish W arand I’lilumentary noises intha*
unquiet I$lmd, is doubtless glad to get awaj’’ to Hanover for a little;
and would fam be on hoUday m these fine rural months Which is not
well possible cither Jenkins’s lai, using at last like a ficiy poitent,
has kindled the London hog over|oiider, m a slimge way, and the
muiky slagnanc) is ill getting on tiu , the Lnglish intent, as seldom
any Nation was, to give the Spaniards an cflectual beating. Which
they hope they can,—-though untxpcctcd dilhculties will occur And,
in the mean w htlc, what a riddle of potentialities for Ins pool Majesty
to lead) and pick his way troni!—

Bieifeld, in spite of ill tins, would fain be full of admiration for the
Bntaimic Majesty Confutes he is below the middle size, in fact a tiny
little cieatuio, but then lus hapo is pcrfei t; leg much to be commendorl,
—which his Majesty knows, standing .always with one leg slightly ad
vanced, and the Onlei of the Garter on it, that minkmd may take notice.
Here is Bidfiiid’ib description Kuthrully abridgccV

‘Bag blue eyes, perliaps rather of parboiled character, though pioud
‘ enongli, eye* flush with his face or inoie, rather m reli</th&n on a
^ level with Jlttir de t/ie, after the manner of a fish, if one might
» Piclcei|^ (m State-Paper Office), rrth Au£u»t 1740

38 FRIEPRICH TAKES THe/rEINS. BookXt

^ June-Sopi. j>4

$ay so, 4tt<l betokenittg such un intellect behind them I * Attitude cOn-

* strained, leg advanced in that vtray; his courtiers call it majestic.

* Biggish mouth, strictly dij^t in the crescent or horseshoe form (fsrmie

* en armsrtnt) I curiy wig (d ncsudsy reminding you of Iambus-wool,

* colour not known) j eyebrows, however, you can see arc ashy-blond j
‘ general tint is fundamentally [ivid j hut wlicu in gocnt case, the royal
‘ skin will take tolejably bri;riit coloujs [pimd dhuses belles (mleurs),
‘As to the royal mind ainl undciituidingr what shall l^ielfeld say?

* That his Majesty sometimes makes ingenious and just rcumrlfs, and is
‘ laudably serious at all times, and can majestically hold his tongue,

‘ and stand with advanced leg, and eyes rather more than flush. .Sense

* of his dignity is high, as il ought to be; on great occasions you see
‘ pride and a kind of joy mantling in the royal counienance. Has been'
‘ known to m.tke cxpio>ious, and to be very ftirious to Prince h'red and
‘others, wl.en initketl into:—but, my fiicnd, what moital is exempt

‘ from failings? ,\ra|C''ty leads the Fnglisli Newspapers every inomihg
‘ in bed, which aie often biting. Majesty has his Walmoden, a Hano-
‘ verian improper-Female, ("nunicss of Yarmouth so-called*; quieb
‘ autumnal, fair-complevioned, stupid ; who is much a comfort to him.

‘ She keeps out of mischief, political or otlver; and gives bielfeld a

* gracious nod now and then.’’* liaiTingion is here loo;—and Britannic
Majesty and he are busy governing the English jJation on these terms*
■—We return now to the Prussian Majesty.

About six weeks after that of Dickens,—Cleve Journey and
much else now ended,—Pratorius the Danish Envoy, whom
we slightly knew at Reinsberg once, gives this testimony;
writing home to an Excellency at Copenhagen, whose name
we need not inefuire into :

‘ To give your Excellency a jusf idea of the new Government here,

* I must observe that hitherto the Kftig of Prussia does as it were pvery-
‘ thing himself; and that, excepting the Finance Minister von lioclen,

‘ who preaches frugality, and finds for that doctrine uncommon accept-
‘ ance, almost greater even than in the former reign, his Majesty allows
‘ no comujclling horn any Minister; so that Herr von Podewils, who is
‘ now the woiking li.md in lly' (lepartmcnt'*of Foreign Affairs, has no-
‘ thing given him to do but to txpeiHte the erders he receives from the
‘ Cabinet, his advice not being a->ked upon any matter; and so it is
‘ With the other Mini-sters. People thought the loss of i I err von Thul-

* meyer/ veteran Foreign Minister whom we have transiently heard of
in the Double-Marrjagf time, and perhaps have even s^en at London
Or elsewhere, ‘ would be irreparable; $o expert was he, and a living
‘ archive in that bu-siness: however, his post seems to have vanished

* with himself. His salary is divided between Herr von Podewils,’
whom the reader will sometimes hear of again, ‘ Kriegsrath (Councillor

rt Bwlfeld, L 158. Died 4th August CRaUenbeCk, p. so).

amp. III. EXCURSION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. 3^

Jiirte-Se}>t. 1740. ft

of War) von ttgen,’ son of the old gentleman we used to^kaow, * and
‘ Hofratli Sellentin who is Kefuiant of Legdti&m-'Kass^ (Ambassa¬
dors* Paymaster, we could gness, Amlmssadov Body having specudty of
casdi assigned it, comparable with the specialty of value reqeivAi from
it, in this strict frugal Country),—'neithet of which two latter names
shall the reader be troubled with farther. ‘ A good many resolutions,

*• and responses by the King, I have seen t they Combine laconic ex-
‘ prcssion with an admirable basinc$s*fcye {GeseJmftshiick). Unhappily,’
—at least for us in the Diplomatic line, for your Excellency and me un¬
happily,—there is nobody alx>utthe King who possesses his complete

* confidence) or whom we can make use of in regard to the necessary

* introductions and preliminary movements. Hereby it comes that,—

* as certain things can only be handled with cautious foresight and cir-

* cumloctttion, and in the way of beginning wide,—an Ambassador here

* is more thrown out of his course than in any other Court: and knows ,

* not, though his object were steadily in sight, what road to strike into

* for getting towards it.’**

CHAPTER III.

'FRIEDRICH MAKES AN EXCURSION, NOT OF DIRECT SORT, INTO

THE CLEVE COUNTRIES.

King Friedrich did not quite keep his day at Wesel; in¬
deed this 24th was not the first day, but the last of several,
he had appointed to himself for finis to that Journey in the
ClevO Countries; Journey rather complex to arrange. He has
several businesses, ahead in those parts; and. as usual, will
group them with good judgment, and thrift of time. Not in¬
spections merely, but amusements, meeting^ with friends, espe¬
cially French friends: the question is, how to group them with
skill, so that the necessary <Sements may converge at the right
moment, and one shot kill three or four birds. This is Fried¬
rich’s fine way, perceptible in all these Journeys. The French
friends, flying each on his own track, with his own load of
impedintents, Voltaire with his Madame for instance, arc a
diffrcult element in«uch problen?; and there has been, and is,
much scheming and corresponding about it, within the last
month especially. *

Voltaire is now at Brussels with his Du Chdtelet, prose¬
cuting tftat endless ' lawsuit with the House of Honsbruck,’—
which he, and we, are both desirous to have done with. He
is at the Hague, too, now and then ; printing, about to print,

** Preuss, ix 477 (nA. October 1740).

40 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. Book XL

, Jtme-Sept *740.

tht^Hti-Macchiavel; corresponding^ to^ght and left, quar¬
relling wi^li Van Duren the Printer; lives, while there, in the
Vitetl/g £our^ in the vast dusky rooms with faded gilding, and
grand old Bookshelves * with the biggest spider-webs in Eu¬
rope/ Brussels is his ^lace for Law-Consnltations, general
family residence; the Hague and that old spider-web Palace
for correcting Proofsheets ;^doing one’s own private studies,
which wc never quite neglect. Fain would Friedrich see him,
fain he Friedrich; but there is a divine Emilie, ^here is a
Maupertuis, there are—In short, never were such difftculties,
in the cooking of an egg with water boiling; and much vain
correspondence has already been on that subject, as on others
. equally extinct. Correspondence which is not pleasant read¬
ing at this time ; the rather as no reader can, without endless
searching, even understand it. Correspondence left to us, not
in the cosmic, elucidated or legible state; left mainly as the
Editorial rubbish-wagons chose to shoot if; like a tqmbled
quarry, like the ruins of a sacked city ;—avoidable by read(^
who are not forced into it 1^ Take the following select bricks
as sample, which are of some use ; the general Heading is.

King Friedrich to M. de Voltaire (at the Hague, or at

Brussels).

* Ckarlottenhur^^ iifh June 1740.—* * My dear Voltaire, resist no
' longer the eagcrnc'.'i I have to see you. Do in my favour whatever

* your humanity allots Jn the end of August Igo to WeseJ, and per-

* haps farthei. Propiise that you will come and join me; for I could

* not live happy, nor die tranquil, without having embraced you! Thou-

* sand compliments to the Marqu'se/jdivinc Emilie. ‘ I am busy wiJh
‘ both hands’ (Corn-Maga7ines. Free Vress, Abolition of Torture, and
much else); ‘ working at the Aimy vilh the one hand, at the People

* and the Fine Arts with the other. ’

*Berliny ^th August 1740.—* I will write to Madame du Chitclct,

‘ in compliance with your wish:' mark it, reader. ^To speak to you

* frankly concerning her journey,, it is Voltaire,St is you, it is my Friend
' that I desire to see; and the divine Emilie wills all her divinity is only

* the Accessory of the Apollo Newtonised.

‘ I cannot yet say whether I shall travel* (incognito into foreign parts
a little) * or not travelthere have been lumours, perhaps private wishes ;
but—* * ^ Adieu, dear friend j sublime spirit, first-born ef thinking

^ M«rr Preuss's edition {CEuartgs de Eridirie, volt xxi. xxit xxitt)}mfi oomo
out since the above wax written: it is a^eeably exceptional: beitig, for the first time,
correctly printed, and the editor hitnb^ having mostly tiiulerstood it,—though
reader sUU caiiDot, on the terms there allowed. *

Chap.JiL EXCURSION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES, 41

Jone-$ept. mo. * i 1

‘ bdngs. Love sincerely, and be p^rsuadeditbat none can

* love and esteem yon more than I. Val^, * FjfiDfiRic**

* BetUn^ August {which is next day).*—‘Yon willhavd reodved

* a Letter from me dated yesterday; thj^ is the second I vnite tcryon

* from Berlin; 1 reier you to W'hat was in the other. If it must be
‘ ijbut) that Emilie accom|>any Apollo, I consent; but if I could see

* you alone, that h what I would prcljpr. I should be too much dsxzled;

* I could not stand so much splendour all at once; it would overpower
‘ me. I should need the veil of Moses to temper the united radiance of
‘ your two divinities,* ® ** In short, don’t bring her, if you please.

* Bmmher^ (poetic for Rnnsberg)^ *‘%th August 1740.-—* * My

* dear Voltaire, I do believe V,an Uiircn costs you more trouble and

* pains than you had with Henri Quatre. In versifying the Life of a

* ttero, you wrote the history Of your own thoughts; but in coercing at

* scoundrel you fence with an enemy who is not worthy of you.’ To
punish him, and cut-short his profits, Sprint, tiien, as you wish’ (your
own edition of the Anti-Maechiavd, to go along with his, and trip the
feet from it). ^FmUs router laprcsse; erase, change, correct; do as

* youfiae best; your judgment about it shall be mine. ’—‘ In eight days I
‘ leave for’—(where thinks the reader? ‘ Dautzfg' deliberately print all
the Etlitors, careful Preuss among them; overturning the terrestrial
azimuths for us, an^ making day night!)—‘for Leipiig, and reckon on
‘ being at Frankfurt on the aad. In case you could be there, I expect,

* on my passc^e, to give you lodging! At Clcve or in Holland, I de*

* pend for certain on embracing you.’*

Intrinsically the Friedrich correspondence at this time»
with Voltaire especially, among many friends now on the wing
towards Berlin and sending letters, has, —if you are forced into
struggling for some understanding ,of it, and do get to read
parts 6f it with the eyes of Friedrich and Voltaire,—has a cer¬
tain amiability; and is nothftig like so waste and dreary as it
looks in the chaotic or sacked-city condition. Friedrich writes
with brevity, oftenest on practicalities (the Anti~Macchiavel,
the coming Interview, and the like), evidently no time to spare;
writes always with considerable sincerity; with friendliness,
much admiratidn, and an ingenuobs vivacity, to M. de Voltaire.
Voltaire, at his leisure in Brussels or the Old-Palace and its
spiderwebs, writes much more expansively; not with insincerity,
he either;—with endless airy graciosities, and ingenious twirls,
and touclips of flattering unction, which latter, he is ayare,
must not be laid*on tqo thick, As thus:

* Pn;us» (Enpres dt xx. pp. s, iji*#!; Vpltairc, 0u9res^ Ixxii. aafi, &C»

(not w«thc.'tujrt* in comoaxisem).

42 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. uwk Xi.

June-SqptK frV*..

In reg^uwl*^^ tke i 4 «/»W<K‘<-Mw/«/,---Sire, d^gn to give me your
permissions as to tbe scoundrel of a Van Duren; well worth while,
Sire,—-‘j^is a monum«ttfor the late$t posterity; the only Book worthy
of a Kii^ for these Fifteen htjjidred years.*

This is a stronglsh trowcliul, thrown oti direct, with adroit¬
ness ; and even this has a kind of sincerity. Safer, however,
to do it in the oblique or reH^x way,—^by Ambassador CofnaSt
for example:

* I will tell you boldly, Sir’ (you M. de Camas), ‘ I put more value
‘ on this Book {Anti-Macchiavel) than on the Emperor Julianas Cassar^

* or on the Maxims of Marcus Aurelius,’—I do indeed, having a kind
of property in it withal!®

In fact, Voltaire too is beautiful, in this part of the Corre¬
spondence : but much in a twitter,—the Queen of Sheba, not
the sedate Solomon, in prospect of what is coming. He plumes
himself a little, we perceive, to his d’Argentals and French
Correspondents, on this sublime intercourse he has gdl into
with a Crowned Head, the cynosure of mankind;—Ferhaps
even you, my best friend, did not quite know me, and what
merits I had! Plumes himself a little; but'-studies to be mo¬
dest withal; has not much of the peacock, and of the turkey
has nothing, to his old friends. All which is very naive and
transparent; natural and even pretty, on the part of M. de
Voltaire as the weaker vessel.—For the rest, it is Certain Hau-
pertuis is getting under way at Paris towards the Cleve ren¬
dezvous. Brussels, too, so near these Cleve Countries;
within two-days good driving :—if only the limes and routes
would rightly intersect }

Friedrich's intention is by no means for a straight journey
towards Cleve : he intends for Baireuth first, then back from
Baireuth to Cleve, —making a huge southward db<m on the
map, with Baireuth for ape^ or turninj^pointin this man¬
ner he will make the times suit, and hiive a convergence at
Cleve. To Baireuth ;—who knows if not farther ? AU summer
there has gone fitfully a rumour, that he wished to see France;
perhaps Pan's itself incognito ? The rumour, which was heard
even at Petersburg, now sunk dead again; bift privately,
there is no doubt, a glimpse of the sublime French Nation

^ Voltaire. CEuvrtSt Ix^iL 280 (To Cama«, iStb October 2740).

4 ItattMersf Beitr&ge (£ngU$h.T(aaaIation, Loadoii, kSjr), pf 15 (tlnch'*
patph, 44 tH June 2740^

caiap.HI. EXCUtSION to CLEVE countries. 43

x5thAug. 1740, '

would be welcome to Friedrich. He could never get to Tra¬
velling in his young time; missed hi? Grand Tour aitoget|ier»
much as he wished it; and he isspajjable of pranks f^Enough*
on Monday morning, isth Augiist 1740,® Friedrich and Suite
leave Potsdam, early enough t go, by Leipzig, by the route al¬
ready known to readers, througjh Coburg and the Voigtland
regions; Wilhelmina lias got warning, sits eagerly.e^cpcctlng
her Profiler in the Hermitage at Baireuth, gladdest of shrill
sisters ; and full of anxieties how her Brother would now be.
The travelling party consisted, besides the King, of seven per¬
sons; Prince August Wilhelm, King’s next Brother, Heir-appar-
ent if there come no children, now a brisk youth of eighteen ;
Leopold Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, Old Dcssaucr’s eldest, what
we may call the “ Young DessauerColonel von liorck, whom
we shall hear of again ; Colonel von Stillc, already heard of
(grate men of fifty, these two); milk-beaid Munchow, an Ad¬
jutant, youngest of the promoted Munchows ; Algarolti, indis¬
pensable for talk; and Fredersdorf, the House-Steward and
domestic Factotum, once pnvatc in Schwerin's Regiment, whom
Bielfcld $0 admired at Reinsbcig, foicsccing what he would
come to. One of Friedrich’s late acts was to give Factotum
Fredersdorf an Estate of Land (small enough, I fancy, but
Mdlh courttry-house on it) for solace to the leisine of so useful
a man,--studious of chemistry loo, as I have heard. Seven
in all, besides the King.^ Direct towaids Baireuth, incognito,
and at the top of their specil. Wednesday 17th, they actually
arrive. Poor Wilhelmina, |lie finds her Brother changed; be¬
come a King in fact, and sternly solitary ; alone m soul, even
as a King must be F—

* Algarotti, one of the first bmux-esprits of this age,’ as Wil¬
helmina defines him,—Friend Algarotti, the young Venetian
gentleman of elegance, in dusky skin, in vciy white linen and
frills, with his fenjid black eyes, ‘ does the expenses of the
conversation,’ He is full of elegant logic, has speculations on
the great world and the little, on Natmo, Art, Papistry, Anti-
Papistry, and takes up the Opera in an earnest manner, as
capable*of being a school of virtue «and the moral sublime.
His respectable Books on the Opera and other topics axe now

p. *s, slightly in eitor; isee DickeuVs takerview, supril, p. 37.

* Ih. P 29 iwa for CiuunlMrlaiQ Fr^eritdotrs esute, p. xs).

f WUbelmi^ ft, 304, 393.

44 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE ^INS. Book XL

f lyth-aoth Aug. ^740*

all foiigotten^ and crave not; to be znentioncd. To me he is
not supremely beautiful, though much the,gentleman In man¬
ners as in ruffles, and ingeniously logical :-^rath0r yellow to
me, in mind as in skin, apd with a taint of obsolete Venetian
Macassar. But lo Friedrich he is thrice-dear; who loves the
sharp facetted cut of the man, and does not object to his yel¬
low or Extinct-Macassar qualities of mind. Thanks to that
wandering Baltimore for picking-up such a jewel and<carrying
him Northward! Algarotti himselfhkes the North: here in
our hardy climates,—especially at Berlin, and were his loved
Friedrich tiof a King,—Algarotti could be very happy in the
liberty allowed. At London, where there is no King, or none
to speak of, and plenty of free Intelligences^ Carterets, Lyttel¬
tons, young Pitts and the like, he is also well, were it for
the horrid smoke upon one’s linen, and the little or no French
of those proud Islanders.

Wilhelmina seems to like him here; is glad, at any rate,
that he docs the costs of convetsation, better or worse. In the
rest is no hope. Stillc, Borck aic accomplished military gentle¬
men; but of tacit nature, reflective, practical,“rather than dis¬
cursive, and do not waste themselves by incontinence of tongue.
Stille, by his military Commentaries, which arc still known to
soldiers that read, maintains some lasting remembrance of him¬
self: Borck we shall see engaged in a small bit of business
before long. As to Miinrhow, the morveut of an Adju¬
tant, he, though his manners aie wcli enough, and he wears
military plumes m his hat, is still an unfledged young creature,
♦bill still yellow,' so to speak;—at.d marks himself chiefly by
a visible hankering aftci that iroablesomc creature Marwitz,
who is always coquetting. 1 * riedrich’s conversation, especially
to me Wilhelmina, seems 'guind<\ set on stilts,’ likewise there
are frequent cuts of banter in him; and it is painfully evident
he distinguishes my Sister of Anspach a^d her foolish Hus¬
band, whom he has invited over hither in a BioSt eager manner,
beyond what a poor Wilhelmina with her old love can pretend
to. Patience, my shrill Princess, Beauty of Baireuth and the
world; let us hope all will come right again! My shrill Prin¬
cess,—who has a melodibus strength like that of war-flfes, too,
—■knows how to be patient; and veils many things, though of
a highly imhypocritical nature.

Chap. III. EXCURSION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. 45

a»d-»sth Aug. 1740.

• to come soon, ancPretwn the visit at Berlin. To wait upon the
King, known though incognito, ‘ the Bishop of Bambqrg’ came
driving over;® ^chdnborti, Austrian Kan^ler, or who? Hiaold
City we once saw (and plenty of hiyjiged malefactors swinging
round it, during that yaurney to the Reich) ;— ^but the Bishop
himself never to our knowledge. Bishop being absent then. I
hope it is the same Bishop o| Bamberg whom a Friend of
Busching‘s, touring there about tnat same time, saw dining in
a very eiitraordinaiy manner, with mediaeval trumpeters, *with
wallers in^ spurs and buff-belts;'® if it is not;‘I have not the
slightest shadow of acquaintance with him,—^Ihere have been
so many Bishops of Bamberg with whom one wishes to have
none! On the third day Fricdrich and his company went away, *
towards Wurzburg; and Wilbelmina Was left alone with her re¬
flections. ‘ 1 had had so much 10 say to him; I had got no¬
thing said at all:’ alas, it is ever so. *The King was so
^ changed, grown so much bigger {grandi), you could not have
^ known him again;’ st'ind'^ finely erect and at full breadth,
every inch a King, his very statuie. you would say, increased.
— Adieu, my PriiK es-s, pearl of Piincessrs ; all readers will
expect your rcturn-\i3il at Berlin, which is to be soon.

Friedrich strikes off to the hff and has a nau 0/ Strashurg

fof Tioo Day<:.

Through Wurzburg, Frankfurt-on-Mayn, speeds Friediicli;
—Wilhehnina and mankind understand that it is homewards
and to Cleve; but at Franljdhit, in deepe'^t privacy, there oc¬
curs a sudden whirl southwafd,—up llie Rhine-Valloy; direct
towards Strasburg, for a sight of Fi.ince in that quarter! So
has Friedrich decided,—not quite suddenly, on new Letters
here, or new computations about Cleve; but by forethought
taken at Baireulh, as rather appears. From Frankfurt to Stras¬
burg, say 150 miles; flfom Strasbufg home, is not much farther
than from Frankfurt^lome: it can be done, then; husht! —
The incognito is to be rigorous: Fncdrich becomes Comie
Du/otir^ aPmssian-Frcncli gentleman; Prince August Wilhelm
is Graf von Schaffgotsch, Algarotti is Graf von Pfuhl, Ger¬
mans thesl two; what Leopold, the Young Dessauer, called
himself,-^still less what the others, or whether the others were

® Helden-GcsiMitkU, 1 419.

^ BUsching^o it Ei^hUmih Century) uina

the 8c«oe. •

46 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RElHS, BdokXL

« Aagi 1740,

th^rc at all, and not shoved on, direct toMf^rds Wese^ Oat of.
the way as Ss lilvelier,—can remain nncertsiin to readers ond
me. From Frankfurt, then, on Monday morning 2 zd August
^740, 1 compute, through old known Philipsbutg-Campaign

country, and the lines of&tthngen and Stollhofen; thare the
Royal Party speeds eagerly {weather very had, as appears):
and it is certain they are at Kebl on Tuesday evening; looking
across the long Rhine Bridgd, Strasburg and its steeples now
dose at hand.

This looks to be a romantic fine passage in the History of
the young Kingthough in truth it is not, and proves but a
feeble story either to him or us. Concerning which, however,
the reader, especially if he should hear that there exists precise
Account of it. Two Accounts indeed, one from the King’s own
hand, will not fail of a certain craving to become acquainted
with details. This ciaving, foolish rather than wise, we con¬
sider it thriftiest to satisfy at once; and shall give the King’s
Narrative entire, though it is a jingling lean scrags Piece,
partly rhyme, ‘ in the manner of Bachanmont and La Chapdte
written at the gallop, a few days hence, and dispalchedto Vol¬
taire:—‘ You,’ dear Voltaire, 'wish to knowVhat I LaNC been
about, since leaving Berlin; annexed you will find a de^rip-
tion of it,’ writes Friedrich.^® Out of Voltaire’s and other
people’s waste-baskets, it has at length been fished-up, patch
by patch, and pasted together by victorious modern Editors;
and here it is again emwe. The other Narrative, which got
into the Newspaperb soon after, is hkewisc of authentic nature,
—Fassmann, our poor old friend confirming it, if that were
needful,—and is happily in piosel^ Holding these two Pieces
well together, and giving the Kmg’s faithfully translated, in a
complete state, it will be possible to satisfy foolish cravings,
and make this Str.'bburg Adventure luminous enough.

King Ffiedrich to Voltaire (^om Wesei,''2dbeplember 1740),

chiefly in Doggerel, concerning the Rtm to Styasbnrgy^

*I have just finished a Journey, intertnlagltxl witJi singular adven-
* tUres, sometimes pleasant, sometimes the reverse. You know I had
10 (Suvres, xxii. 25 (Wescl, 34 September 1740).

u Oiven in Heldtn-Qeuhiiftte, i likewise Fassmsinr's Marktvtiy-

digtterJ<ttf^rHttgs~A*itritii,-pvi(yTQ\A,)&odk oaFriedncUsAceesswi^', s{T/iron‘
pp. 3 ^S* 4 »=)-

Part of it, incorrect, in Vottairc, (E-uvn^t. (scaAdalou^ Ibecc non c riled Me-
fttotreSi on0e Vie Privee tin Pei <ie Prusee), iL 24-36: finally, in Preuss, (JJuTfres de
JPrid^ie, %x\, t56.t6t« the teal and complete afimr, asli»hed*up by vktoiious Fieuss
mdodi^n,

Ciwp. ni. EXCURSION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. 47

Aug. 1740* I

f 8et*out for the bca^ttlUwl French Editor wrote,

which makes Egyptian darkness of the Piece to see a*Sister whom
‘ I love no less than esteem. On the road’ (thither or thence j Or like-
liest, thfr^)i * Algarotti and I consulted the map, to settle our route

* tor returning by VVesel Fraaikfurt-on-lijtayn -eom^ always as a prin-

* cipal fits^eStrasbuig was no great roundabout i we chose that route

* in preference. The iWi5igwf/o was decided, names pitched upon* (Comte
Dufour, and the others)} ‘story we were to tell: in fine, all was ar-
*■ ranged and concerted to a nicety as well as posable. We fancied we
‘’should to Strasburg in three days,’ from Baireuth.

* But Heuven, which dieses of all

‘things,

‘ I^nercntly regulated this thing.

* With lank-sided coursers,

’ descendants bom. Roanante,

* Wi to^^iy ghmen in the dress of pos-

‘ Bbckhe^ of iinpertuieat nature:

‘Our CaCiiages sticking fast a hundred
‘ times in the road,

'‘We went along with gravity at a lei-
'syi<*Iy P'icc,

‘ Knodong against the qraga
‘The atmosphere in uproar with loud
‘ thunder,

‘The ndn-tiorrents 'ttrcaming over the
‘Earth

‘ Threatened mankind Vlth the Day of
‘ Jfudgmenl* f>ad weather],

* And ha spite of our impatience

* Four goOd days are, m penance,

‘ Lost forever ta these junvblings.

Mais /f* del, ym df tout disfite,

Hegla difffremmfui la t;kose.

A vet de tour uers efflanguds,

Ma it gw drotUt mm do Rosinante,

Bt di V /ajtsam e« poUiikfns tnasguis, »

Butors de lit c tv^odiw/tte,

Nohe t,ayyosie en cent Ueux accrocM,

A'otts aliions grivemetif, d’une aU-ureiH^

, dolente,

Gravtfant cmiire Ifs rodtcrs,.

Les ain Imus par le bmyant Unnerre^

Le% torrents d’eait par das smr ia

irrre,

Du Jtntiar jour menagaietU les Au^

Et malgtd uott" impatience,

Quatre bons jours en fSnitence
^ont pour jamais perdus dans les ckar^
ratfu.

* Had all our fataUlies been liimted to stoppages of speed on the
* jounug^, we should have taken patience; but, afiei fnghtful roads, we
‘ found lodging^ still firighlfuler.

' For greedy landlords ja

‘ Secing^ us pressed hy hvtnger ^ j
‘ Bid, in a more than frugal manner, “

* In ttioir infernal hovels,

‘ Potsonttig uistcad of feeding,

* Steal from us our crowns,

‘ 0 age different' (in good cheer) ' from
‘ that of bttculhssl

Car (let fiM s .nteix'sse^,

Ih injxiiin t n Is voyxtHtprrssH,

D H»c fa\,on pint <ji.i tr tzale,

Dans un’ (hauw.?tx injertuile,

tu no at ’tipoitonuaHi, nous volaisnt

KTs UU\

O su\le aiJ}x.reHt dit temps de Lncmh

I‘ft /

‘Frightful roads} ah^ of victual, shoit ol dunk: nor was that all.
‘ We had to undergo a jyariety of accitPetUi.; aud certainly our equipage
‘ must have had a singular air, for in cvtiy new place we came to, they

* took us for something difierent

' Some took us tot Rings,

‘ Some for pi^poclcets well disguised;

* Othms for old acouttiatances.

* At times the peopfo crowded out,

' l«|oked us in the eyes,

' 1^ downs impenmeatly curious.

I.es uns nousptvnauttipour des tots,
tfeiHtres p^r desjilous eeuriots,
D'auires ^ur ^ens de coHHatsst!SHi,.e;
Pai/ois lepeuple s'attroupast,
xBftttv les peux nous regardati
£n itadauds lurieux, templts tfimpertis
fttHte,

4 $

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE M:iNS, B«kXi.

W aad>ssth Aitg, K74o«
Neirv m/ ItttbtHjwrait,

Pour mot JO pTotum faiionot^
iJLejevfu Comto/oi^rtutt

Our i^reW ItRlifiu' (Algarotti) ‘swore*

* For teyseir I tooli; j^tience

youpg Count (my giy younger
Brother, eighteen at present) ‘^uirzed
' and frolicked

* The big Count (ficir apparent o(Q>es>

Stu) Silently swung his head*

* WBlnne this fine Journey to France,

* In the bottom of nis heart, most chns-

' tianly at the Devil 1^

Z< grand Comte oe daftolimttt

Ft c( heat toyagedoFrancf
Dam le fond do io/t ceetfr chriftistttdr
ment dcumnatt

* We failed not, however, to stn^gle gradually aleng, at last we
‘ amved in that Stronghold, where* (as preface to the Wal of 1734*
known to some of us)—

‘ Where the garrison too supple,
‘ Surrendered so piteously
‘ After the first blurt of cxpl ision
* S rom the cannon of the f rench

on la t^Armson, troupe^fimque,
St. rendti st piteusement
A^r^i la promtire hourasqm
Du canon/raitfatsfoudroyanf

* You lecognit-e Kehl in this descnption It was in that fine For-
‘ tress,—where, by the wTy, the breaches arc still lying unrepaired*^
(Reich being 1 slow corpus m regard to such things)—‘that tlte Post**

* master, a man of moie foresight than we, asked If we had go*«paa9-

* ports?

Non lilt dts je des passe ports
JSous n ei^rtu v jOtnats let folto
le enjandrut jeoitvts deforts
I our nsswsnter d la ifte
De clus I lutan le rot des marts!
Mats de I empire germantquo
Au ujpur galant et cyntpts
De Messieurs vosjolts FranfOts,

Un air nlondissaHt etfrau,
Unefue rouge et bftektque^

Sont Us passe po U qu en- nos trettis

V ousprodutf ict noire clique

* No Slid 1 to him of passports

* We never had the whirn
‘ Strong ones I lehe\e it would need

* To fccaII to our side of the limit
‘ Subjects of Pluto Kim, of the Dead

* But, from the Oermanic I mj ire
‘ Into the gallant and cyiiiLil abode

* Of Messieurs your pretty J? rench-

* men,—

* A jolly and beaming air
' Rubicund faces not i^uc lant of win ,

* These are the passports which, lej,ible

‘ if you look on us,

* Our troop produces to > ou for tliat

' end ,

* No, Messieurs, said the provident Master of Passports, no salva-

* tion without piospoil Sctinvi then th it Necessity had got us in the
‘ dilemma of eithci manufictunng passports ourselves or not entering
' Strasburg, we look the fonnei branch of the alteinative and manu*

* faetttred one,—^m which feat the Prussian arms, which I had on my

* seal, were marvellously fuUheisome ' > *

C’

This IS a fact, as the old Newspapers and confiimalory
Fassmann more diiec^^ly apprise us ‘The Landlord* (orPost¬
master) 'at Kclil, having signified that there was no ciossmg
without Passport,’ Fiiednch, at fiist somewhat taken aback,
bethought him of his watch-seal with the Royal Arms on it;

Add soon manufactured the necessary Passpoit, signeted|j|n
due formwhich, however, gave a suspicion totlje Innkeeper
as to the quality of his Guest. After which, Juesday evetung

CI»I..IU. EXCURSION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. 49

Md-asth 1:74a *

23d August^ *they at once got across to Strasburg,* says my
Newsjjaper Frieni ‘ and put-up at the Sign cftMRaven there/
Or in Friedrich’s own jingle:

‘ We arrived at Strasburg \ and the Ci^tom'house corsairi with his

* inspectors, seemed content with our evidences,

* These scoundrels spied us scilirats mus tfimeni,

* With One eye reeding our passport, D'wt a>il te jiasie~p«rt Ihateni^

* With, the other ogling our purse. Dm*autre iorgHaient noire bourse,

< Gold, which was always a resource, Vor^ qui toMoursfui de ressouitrt

* Which brought Jove to the enjoyment Far hquel fubin jouissait

* Of Danae whom he caressed: De Danai, q»tl caretsait;

’ (rold, by which Caesar governed D'or^ Cesar gatraemait

* The world happv under his sw^ i Le monde keureux sotis son empire ;
''Cold, more a divinity than Mars or L'or, plus dint que Mars et CAnumUf

‘Love;

* Woncler<'Wprkuig Gold introduced us, Le tnime or sut nous iniroduire,

* lliat evening, within the walls of Stras- Le soir, dans les murs de Strasbourg.

‘burg.'o

Sad doggerel; permissible perhaps as a sample of the Fried¬
rich manufacture, surely not otherwise! There remains yet
mOife than half of it; readers see what their foolish craving has
brought upon them! Doggerel out of which no clear story,
such story as there is, can be had; though, except the exagger¬
ation and contortiw, there is nothing of fiction in it. We fly
to the Newspaper, happily at least a prose composition, which
begins at this point; and shall use the Doggerel henceforth as
illustration only or as repetition in the Fricdrich-mirror, of a
thing otherwue made clear to us:

Having got into Strasburg and the Raven Hotel; Friedrich now on
French ground at last, or at least on llalf-Frcnch, Geman-Frcnch, is
intent to make the most of circumstances. The Landlortl, with one of
Friedrich’s servants, is straightwiy dispatched into the proper coffee¬
houses to raise a supper-parly of Officers; politely asks any likely Officer,
“ If he will not do a foreign Gentleman” (seemingly of some distinction,
signifies Bonifece) “the honour to sup with him at The Raven?’’ “No,
by Jupiter 1^' answer the most, in their various dialects: “who is he
that we should sup with him?” Three, struck by the singularity of the
thing, undertake; and wilti these we must be content. Friedrich,—or
call himM. le Comte Dolour, with Iffum, Schaffgotsch and such escort
as we see,—-politely apologises on the entiance of tUe.se Officers: “ Many
pardons, gentlemen, and many thanks. Knowing nobody; desirous of
acquaintancesince you are so good, how happy, by a little inform¬
ality, to ha^ brought brave Officers to keep me company, whom I
value beyond other kinds of men 1” *

•*^iven thm fiir, with several slight errors, in Voltaire, ii. 34-26.—the remainder,
long uokaown, had to 64 fished*up, patch by patch (Preubs, (Emrts do
^iv, •

VOL. IV, U

so FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BmIcXI.

a 9 <|rs$tl| AotV * 740 ^

Tlie Qf^cers found their hoft engaginn; i hie

wag superbj^leuty of wine, ‘ and one kind they kid tasted
before, and liked extremely j’—-of which he sent some bottles to their
lodging next day. The conversation turned on military matters, and
'W&s enlivened with the due^allies. This foamgn Count speaks l'*re&ch
, W'Onderfully; a brilliant man, whom the others mthtuf foars perhaps
something more than a Count? The Officers, loath to go, remembered
that their two battalions had to. parade next momii^, that it was time
to be in bed: “I will go to y.mr review," said the Strangm Ofamf;
the delighted Officers imdcrtake to come and fetch him, the^ settle with
him time and method; how happy 1

On the morrow, accordingly, they call and fetch him} he loolc^ at
the review; review done, they ask him to supper for this evenii^:
“ With pleasure!" and ‘ walks with them about the Esplanade, to see
the guard march by.’ Before parting, he takes their names, Writes them
in his tablets; says, with a smile, “He is too much obliged ever to
forget them." This is Wednesday the z4th of August 1740} Field-
Marshal Broglio is Commandant in Stra-sburg, and these obligitig^
Officers are ‘of the regiment Piedmont,*—their names on the King’s
tablets I never heard mentioned by anybody (or never till th^ Kite's
Doggerel was fished-up again). Field-Marshal Broglio my readers haire
transiently seen, afar off;—‘galloping with only one boot,’ some say
‘ almost m his shirt,’ at the Ford of Secchia, in these Italian campaigns,
five years ago, the Austrians having stolen across upon himhe had,
a funous gallop, with no end of ridicule, on that occasion; is now Com¬
mandant hcie; and we shall have a great deal more to do with him
within the next year or two.

‘ This same day, 24tli, while I’ (the Newspaper volunteer Reporter
or Own Correspondent, seemingly a person of some standing, whose
words carry credibility in the lone of them) ‘ was with Field^Marshal
‘ Broglio our Governor here, there came two gentlemen to be presented
‘to him; “German CavaUcri*” tlv'/ weie called; who, 1 now find,

* must have been the Prince of Aussia and AJgaroltL The Field*
‘ Marshal,’—a rather bigh-stalknig white-headed old military gentle¬
man, bordering on seventy, ot Piedmontese mr and breed, apt to be
sudden and make floundcrings, but the soul of honour, ‘was VOry polite
‘ to the two Cavaliers, awl kept them to dinner. After dinner there

* came a so-styled “ Silesian Nobleman," who likewise was presented
‘ to the Field-Marshal, and affected not to know tlie other two; him I
‘ now find to have been the Prince of Anbalt?’

Of his Majesty’s supper with the Officers that Wednesday, we are
left to think how brilliant it was: his Majesty, we hear farther, went to
the Opera that night,—the PoUcbinello or whatever the ‘ Italian
was‘ and a little girF came to his box with two lotteryUickets fifteen
‘ pence each, begging the foreign Gentleman for the love of Heaven to

* buy them of her; which he did, tearing them up at once, and ^ving
' the poor creature four ducats,’ equivalent to two guhteas^ or jMy 10

EXCUIISION TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. 51

i 74 pf

.cUfed; «vtn live {Mmnds of tbe presefit cutreney. The f^me of
this Ibieigii Count atul his partf at The Raven is heconSing voy loud
c^er Stt^ttig, especially in miUtaiy drdes. Our volunteer Owi> Cor¬
respondent proce^ {whom we mean to ccmtrost with the R<yai
Dej^dhy and by):

* Next momingi* Thursday a^th August, ^ as the Marshal with above
^ two hundred OfSoers was out walking on the Esplanade, there came
♦n soldier of the Regiment Luxonburg, who, after some stiff fugling

* motions, of the nature of salutatioiy partly, and partly demand for

* privacy, intimated to the Marshal surprising news: That the Stranger
' in The Raven was the jfCing of Prussia in person; he, the soldier, at

* presmt 0^ the Regiment Luxemburg, had in other days, before he

* deserted, been of the Prussian Crown-Pnnce’s regiment; had conse-

* quently seen him in Berlin, Potsdam and elsewhere a thousand times
and more^ and even stood sentry where he was: the fact is beyond

^■dtspnte, your Excellency! said this soldier.’—Whew!

Whereupon a certain Colonel, Marquis de T oigle, with or without
a hint hnm Broglio, makes off for The Raven; introduces himself, as
was easy; contrives to get invited to stay dinner, which also was easy.
Durinf dinner'the foreign Gentleman expressed some wish to see thdr
^niresst Colonel Loigle sends word to Broglio; Broglio dispatches
Straightway an Officer and fine carnage: “ Will the foreign Gentleman
do me the honour?” The foreign Gentleman, still stnigglmg for in¬
cognito, declines the uppermost seat of honour in the carriage; the two
Office, Lotgle and this new one, insist on taking the inferior place.
Alas, the incognito is pretty much out. Calling at some coffeehouse
or the like on the road, a certain female, ' Madame de Fienne,’ named
the foreign Gentleman “ Sire,”—which so startled him that, though he
ntteriy declined such title, the two Officers saw well how it was.

‘ After survey of the works, the two attendant Officers had retained

* to the Field*Marshal; and about 4 p.m. the high Stranger made ap-

* pearance there. But the thij^^ad now got wind, King of Prusi^
‘ here incognito I” The place w^b full of Officers, who came crowding

* about him: he escaped deftly into the Mar^chal’s own Cabinet; sat

* there, an hour, talking to the Marechal’ {little admiring the Marika’s
talk, we shall find), 'still insisting on the incognito,’—to whichBro*
gllo, put'Ottt in his high paces by this sudden thing, and apt to flounder,
as I ^ve heard, was nottpolite enough to confonn altogether. What
shall 1 do, in this sudden case?” poo* Broglio is thinldng to himsell:
*' must write to Court? perhaps try to detain—?” Fri^rich^ chief
thought naturally is, One cannot be away out of this too soon. ** ShaVt
we go to the play, th(m, Monsieur le Mankhal? Play-hour is come!”
"'‘^Swn Correspe^ent ik the New^aper proceeds:

*The Marechal then wwit to the Play, and all his Officers with

* him; thinking their royal prize was close at their heels. Manictml

* and Officers fiilrly ahead, coast once clear, (heir royal jHize ha.sttiied

* back to Tho Raten, paid his Mil; hastily summoning Schaf%otsch

52 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE ^INS. BookXI.

I Ant. 1740 ^

* and die others within hearing; shot>o£FUke lightning; and was seen-

* in Strasburg no more. Algarotti, who was in the with. BrogUo,

* heard the news in the house; regretful rumour among the Cheers,

* He is gone!” In about a quarter of an hour Alg.arottltoo sUpt out;

* and vanished by extra pos^—straight towards Wesel; but could not
overtake the King < whose road, in the latter part of it, went rigzag, on
business as is likely), nor see him again till they met in that Town.^*

This is the Prose TrutJy of those Fifty or Eight-ahdtforty
hours in Strasburg, which wctc so mythic and romance at that
time. Shall we now apply to the Royal Doggerel ag^n, where
we left off, and see the other side of the picture ? Once set¬
tled in The Raven, within Strasburg’s walls, the Doggerel con¬
tinues :

^You fancy well that theie was now something to exercise ipy
' cariosity; and what desire I had to know the Fiench Nation in Franco
* itself.

* There I saw at length those French,

* Of whom you have sung the glones,

* A people despised bj the English,

* Whom their sad rationality fiMs with

' black bile;

* Those French, whom our Germans
' Reckon ail to be destitute of sense;

* Those French, whose History consists

* of Love-stories, _

* I ntean the wandering kind of Love,

* not the constant,

' Foohsh this Peojile, headlong, bigh-

* going,

‘ Which sings beyond endur.'incc .

' Lofty in Its good fortune, crawling in
' Its bad;

* Of an unpitying extent of babble,

* To hide the vacancy of its ignoi int

‘ mind

‘ Of the Trifling it is a tender lover;

* The Trifling alone takes possession of

‘ its brain.

' People fliglity, indiscreet, imprudent,

* Turning like the weajthcrcock to every

' wind.

* Of the ages of the Caesars those of the

‘ Louises are the shadow;

* Paris is the ghost of Rome, take it how

' you will. ,

* No. of those v4e French you are nlJt

‘ onh;

* You think; they do not think at all.

vis enjin ess Franfais^

Dont vovs rtwa chanii 'a ghirei.

PfuPU mifrisi des AiigU^^

Que lenr tnste raison rtn^lii iU Silt
noire;

Ces Franpais, ^ue nos AtUfKands
Penseni ions Jnsils d« Son se»t^

Ces Franca ts, mni Vamour ^urrait
dieter fAisfoire,

ye dis t'amour volagt, ei nm Vamour
constant;

Ce pevple/out Sf'usgve etgalanU

Ckansonnier inmJ^pOfiaite,

Superhe en sa^/optune, en son tnalheur
rampant,^

D'iin bavardage tmpiioyaile.

Pour cacJ^ le creyx d'lm esprit igHt^
rare,

'J^tMfre amani de la bagatelle,

LUe entre seuU en sa cervelle;

Ltger, indiscrei, imprudent,

Cotnme une giroueite it revirt d tout
vent.

Des Slides des Chars tsux dss Lthis
sont rombrt;

Pome effau Paris 9*t taut sens, on tout
point.

Non, des vih Franfats vans etiies pas
du nomofv ;

Fous peases, its ne penssnt point.

‘Pardon, dear Voltaire, thig definitioft of the French; atwors(t, it
is only of those in Strasburg I speak. To Scrape acquaintance, I had
to invite some Officers on our arrival, whom of course I diSt notknowv

Three Of them came at once, Trois d'euje ied vinrent d la fois,

GairaTj more content than Kings; Flits gads, plus contests que ms rtU^

From NeldenfCssqhiqkte (i. 4ao<434X . *

CtoMIt. EXCUJPION TO

• aitd-^Sth. Avg. 1740.

* SiAgit^' wkh ruity voice,

* In VMs«, Uusir mooous eixploitS,

‘ Set to ft

CLEVE COUNTRIES. S 3

Chaniani d'ane vol* enrouit.

Bn vers, leurs amoureitx exploits,
Ajustes sur tens hoisfrio

‘ M, de la Crocfeaidi^re and M.
lets, third tvanting) * had just come

* not bcjen spared,

* Of thefr hot tHendihi{» X saw the flame

'grow,

' The universe would have taken us for
' perfect firiends:

* mi the iitstant of gpodiught blcw<out

' the bus^ess;

' Fttendcdup disappeared without xe>
‘jgrets,

* With the games, the wine, the table

‘ and the viands.

Malosa' (two names from the tal)-
jfrom% dinner where the wine had

De leur ohaitde amtitdje vis crOttrs U

^ Jiamme,

jMumvers nous e&t pris pour des amis

* paidatts;

Mats Pmstant des adteux en eUtruisit
la trame,

L’amitti duparut, sans causer des re¬
grets,

Avec le jen, le vtn, et la table, et les
mets

* Next day, Monsieur the Gouvemeiir of the Town and Province,

* Marshal of France, Chevalier of the Orders of the King, &c. &c.,

* »-p-Mardchal Due de Broglio, in fact,’ who w:i suqjrx'sed at Sccchia
in the late War,—

* This General always surpi Ued, Ce glnSrat toujours surprts,

' vith regiet young Louis' (your >Quil legret lejtune Louts

King)

* Saw without breeches in Italy*' Vit tans culottes en Unite,

‘ Galloping to hide away his hfe Courtt pour dtoLer \a vie

* From the Germans, iinpobte lighters — Aux Liirmiint, i^tierru v inpolts

* this General wished to investigate youi Comle Dufour,—^foreign Count,

* who tho instant he anives sets about iiivuuig people to supper that are

* perfect strangers. He took the poor Count for a sharper; and prud-
' ently advised M. de la Crochaidiiue not to be duped by him. It was

* unluckily the good Maicchal that proved to be duped.

' H« was horn for surprise.

' His white hair, his gray beard,

* Formed * reverend exienor.

' Outsides are often deceptive:

* He that, by the binding Judges
' Ofa Book and its Author

* May, after a page of reading,

* Chance to recognise his mis^e.

IlitaJ niPour la surprise
Sei cltcveux blancs, sa barbe grist,
Porniatent un sage extlneur.

Le dehors est souvent irompeur;
Qui juge par la rehure
WuH ouvrage et de son auteur
Dans une page de lecture
Pent reconnoitre son erreur.

‘That was my own experience; for of wisdom I could find nothing
‘ egeept in his gray hair and decrepit appearance. His first opening
‘ betrayed him; no great well of wit this Marechal,

* Who, drunk with Ms own geandei;m,

* lUferms you of his name and his titles,

* And authority as good as enbrnited.

‘ He cited to me all the records

' Where hU name is registered,

' Babbled about his iyimense power,

* Apbut hts valour, hit talents
' So hatutary to Fnuibe

' He lUmgat Aat. thiee years ago***

' Men dm not praise his prudence.

Qrti, de sa grandeur enivri,
Dicltne son nom et ses titres,

Ed son pauvotr i rten bond.

It me ctia tons les regtstres
Ou son nom est enregistrl;
Bavard de son pouvotr tmmense,
De sa vaUtir, de ces talents
St salutatres d la France:

Jl oubhatl^ paasS trots ans,
Qu'oh ne bmast Pas sa prudence.

‘With only one boot/ was the ladder rumour; which we adopted (supih, VoL
fil. p. 14:^), but this sadder one, too, was current; and 'BrogUo's breeches,' or the
vain aHraration^er them, hke a vani^d ghost of breeches, often enough tum-up
ia ^0 Old Famphlets* '

t* ^ to a qitarii|!||i,--o‘t$th S^temlibr 1734,’ tf your Maiesty will be exact.

54

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE itfelNS. Book XL

^ aad-a^th Aug, ^749.

* Not AM*)' the Afar<‘clial, I i.aw g^Al■d tnottnt^d

'By these Frenclimea, burning witfa A cei Fr^tn^ais brAlauts d« ghitt,
'glory,

* Wh«x, OH four sous a day, « de qwiitr$ saus f€tr fot$r,

' Will make of Kin^s and HeraS tike Q»i dts reis, dts htrasjmt tm

* memory flourish: ^n^moire,

' Slaves crowmed by tbe hands of Vic* Esclaves courm^s tbes m»i»b dt ifhpie-
‘ tory, ifiiye,

‘ Unlucky herds whom the Court f , Trou/eauv malheur^ux ki ednir
' Tinkles hither and thither by the souii;* Dirige au seni bruit du famhour.

' of fife and drum. ,

* That was my fated term. A deserter from our troops got 0»
' me, recognised me and denounced me.

' This wretched gal!ow5*bird got eye on Ct ntaUuureux Fendard pte vH,

‘me:

' Such is the lot of all earthly things: C'est U sort dt touUs les chests ;

* And 80 of our fine mystery^ A msi de neirt pot aux roses

' ‘Ihe whole secret came to light,' Tout te secret so dicouvrtt.

Well; we must take this glimpse, such as it is, into the
interior of the young man,—fine buoyant, pungent German
spirit, road-ways for it very bad, and universal rain-ton'ents
falling, yet with coruscations from a higher quarter;—and you
can forget, if need be, the ' Literature' of this young Mdjesty,
as you would a staccato on the flute by him! ^In after months,
on new occasion rising, * there was no end to his jibings and
‘ bitter pleasantries on the ridiculous reception Broglin had
‘ given him at Strasburg,’ says Valori,i7—of which this Dog¬
gerel itself offers specimen.

"Probably the weakest Piece I ever translated^' exclaims
one, who has translated several such. Nevertheless there is a
straggle of pungent sense in it,—like the outskirts of lightning;
seen in that dismally wet weather^^t^ich the Royal Party had.
Its wit is very copious, but slashy. bantery, and proceeds maizily
by exaggeration and turning topsy-turvy; a rather barren spe¬
cies of wit. Of humour, in the fine poetic sense, no vestige*
But there is surprising veracity,-—truthfulness onimpeachable,
if you will read well. What promptitude, too;—^what funds for
conversation, when needed 1 CThis scraggyJPiece, which is bet*-
ter than the things people often talk to one another, was evid¬
ently written as fast as the pen could go.—* It is done, if such
a Hand could have done it, in the manner of Bachaumont and
La Chapelle,’ says Vblt|iire scornfully, in that scandalous Vie
Privdej^oi which phrase this is the commentary, if readers
need one;

* Some se!v<enty or yesis before ffutt date, a Id. BadMumeaH

IT Mkttoimf L SS.

cinj.ui. EXCVRiON TO CLEVE COUNTRIES. JS

i;9th Aug. X740.

‘ and a M. la Chapelle^ his intimate^ published, iii,Pxos<»skippiugoff

* into dancings of V«ise every now and then, *^a charming Rtlation of
^ a certain. Vhyagt or Home Tour* (whence or whither, or correctly when,
this Editor forgets), “ which tliey had ma^ in partnership. ^

* *Vw” capable still of being read, if one were tolerably idle j—it was

* found then to be charming, by all the world; and gave rise to a new
^fashion in writing; which Voltaire often adopts, and is supremely

* good at; and in wWch Friedrich, wl# is also fond of it, by no means
‘ succeeds jo well.*

Enough, Friedrich got to Wescl, back to his business, in a
day or two; and had done, as we forever have, with the Stras-
bufg Escapade and its Doggerel.

Pri&irick finds M, de Mauperiuis; not yet M. de Voltaire,

Friedrich got to Wcsel on the 29th; found Maupertuis wait¬
ing there, according to appointment: an elaborately polite,
some’^fhat sublime scientific gentleman; ready to ' engraft on
the Berlin crabtree,’ and produce real apples and Academics
there, so soon as the King, the proprietor, may have leisure for
such a thing. Algarotti has already the honour of some ac¬
quaintance with Maupertuis. Maupertuis has been at Brussels,
on the road hither; saw Voltaira and even Madame,—which
latter was rather a ticklish operation, owing to grudges and
tiffs of quarrel that had risen, but it proved successful under
the delicate guidance of Voltaire. Voltaire is up to oiling the
wheels: ‘There you are, Monsieur, like the’—(don't name
What, though profane Voltaire does, writing to Maupertuis a
month ago)—* Three Kin^ running after you 1 ’ A new Pension
to you from France; Russia outbidding France to have you;
and then that Loiter of Friedrich’s, which is in all the News¬
papers: 'Three Kings,*-—you plainly great man, Trismegistus
of the Sciences called Pure! Madame honours you, has always
done: one word of ajjlology to the high female mind, it will
work wonders;—come now!—*

No reader guesses in our time what a shining celestial body
the Maupertuis, who is now fallen so dim again, then was to

' H ‘Pirstwinted io 1665/ say the Bibliographies; 'but known to La Fontaine
some time blFore.* Goodf—Bachsmmont, practically en. important and distinguished
petson, not literary by trade, or indeed otherwise than by ennui, was he that had
ssveiitsame fifteen years before) the ISriduianie/^fim<i<r (Bickering of Schoolboys) to
loe wratchira Histoncal Objtmt which is still so designated in French annals.

»€F«Ofvr, bpcit aj7, aot^ ^30 (Hague, eist July and Bnissra;,
)•

56 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE IREIW3* Book x!.

' ® Jfani^Sept x74<^

mankind. #In cultivated French society there is no such lion
as Id. Maupertuis since he returned from dattening the Eatth
in the Arctic regions. “ The Exact Sciences, what else is there
to depend On?” thinks French cultivated society: ** and has not
Monsieur done a feat in that line?” Monsieur, with fine ex*
military manners, has a certain austere gravity, reticent lofti¬
ness and polite dogmatisnv which confirms that opinion^ A
studious ex-military man,—vlas Captain of Dragoons once, but
too fond of study,—^who is conscious to himself* or who would
fain be conscious, that he is, in all points, mathematical, moral
and other, the man. A difficult man to live with in society.
Com^ really near the limit of what we call genius, of origi¬
nality, poetic greatness in thinking;—but never once can get
fairly over said limit, though always struggling dreadfully to do
so. Think of it! A fatal kind of man; especially if you have
made a lion of him at any time. Of his envies, deep-hidden
splenetic discontents and rages, with Voltaire’s return fo/'them,
there will be enough to say in the ulterior stages. He wears,
—at least ten years hence he openly wears, though I hope it
is not yet so flagrant,—‘ a red wig with yellcfW bottom {frinilre
jauns )and as Flattener .of the Earth, is, with his own fiattish
red countenance and impregnable stony eyes, a mdn formidable
to look upon, though intent to be amiable if you do the proper
homage. As to the quarrel with Madame take this Note; which
may prove illustrative of some things by and by:.

Maupertuis is well knovm at Cirey; such a lion could not fail there.
All manner of Bcmouillis, Clairauts, hi^ mathematical people, are fre¬
quent guests at Cirey: reverenced byJVS|jidame,—who indeed has bad
her own private Professor of Mathematics; one Kdnig from Switzer¬
land (recommended by those BemouilJis), diligently teaching her the
Pure Sciences this good while back, not without effect; and ha^ only
just parted with him, when she left on this Brussels expedition. A
garipn^ Voltaire says; lliough otherwise, I thi^, a little noisy on occa¬
sion- There has been no end of Madame’s kindness to him, nay to liis
Brother and him, —sons of a Theological Profiessoriai Syriac-Hebrew
kind of man at Berne who has too many sonsand I grieve to report
that this heedless Konig has produced an explosion in Madame’s feel¬
ings, such as little beseemed him. On the road to Paris, namely, as
we drove hitherward to the Honsbruck Lawsuit by way tpf Paris, in
Autumn last, there had fallen out some dispute, about the monads, the
vis vivOf the infinitely little, between Madame and Kbnig; dispute which
rose arsssendo in disharmonious duet, and * ended,* testi^s M. de Ved-
taire, *in a scene tris-disaffr&tble.* Madams with an effort, forgave ffie

Ch»p. III. EXCUrAoN to CLEVE countries, 57

J[un^-Seiit. ijio, *

thoughtless fellow, who is still rather young, and is without malice.
But thoughtless Konig, strong in his opinion about the infinitely little,
appealed to Maupertuis; “ Am not I right, Monsieur ?” ’* lie right
beyond question I” wrote Maupertuis to ^adame; ‘somewhat drily,’
thinks Voltaire: and the result is, there is considerable rage in one
celestial mind ever since against another male one in red wig and yel>
low bottom; and they are not on speaking terms, for a good many
months past, Voltaire has his heart sojk {^^fm cd le coeurper^^\ about
it, needs to double-dose Maupertuis wnh flattery; and in fact has used
the utmost Siplomacy to effect some varnish of a reconcilement as Mau¬
pertuis passed on this occasion. As for Konig, who had studied in some
Dutch university, he went by and by ta be Librarian to the Prince of
Orange; and we shall not fail to hear of him again,—once more upon
the infinitely little.*®

Voltaire too, in his way, is fond of these mathematical people; eager
enough to fish for knowledge, here as in all element=, wlien he has the
chance offered; this is much an interest of his at present. And he does
attain sound ideas, outlines of ideas, in this province,—though privately
defect!^ in the due transcendency of admiration for it;—was wont to
discuss cheerily with Konig, about wW, monads, gravitation and the
infinitely Utile; above all, bows to the ground before the red-wigged
Bashaw, Flattener ofjthe Earth, whom for Mailame’s saki. and his own
he is anxious to be well with. “ Fall on your face nine times, ye eso¬
teric of only Impure Science!”—intimates Maupertuis to mankind.
“ By all means!” answers M. de Voltaire, doing it with alacrity; with
a. kind of loyalty, one can perceive, and also with a hypocrisy grounded
on love of peace. If that is the nature of the Bashaw, and one’s sole
mode of fishing knowledge from him, why not? thinks M. de Voltaire.
His patience with M. de Maupertuis, first and last, was very great. But
we shall find it explode at length, a dozen years, hence, in a conspicu¬
ous manner !— v

#

‘ Maupertuis had conic to us to Cirey, with Jean Ber-

* nouilli,’ says Voltaire ; ‘and thenceforth Maupertuis, who was

* born the most jealous of men, took me for the object of this

‘ passion, which has always been very dear to Husht,

Monsieur!—Here is %poor rheumatic kind of Letter, which
illusti*ates the interinf condition, tifter that varnish of recon¬
cilement at Brussels ;**

ia M. de Maupertuis (at Wesel, waiting for the King,
or with him rather).

‘Brussels, agthtAugust fr74ol, ^^ye^rsinct
^the vuorldpaitetiea.

' * How the Devil* great Philosopher, would you have had me write

* to you at W^ei? I fiuicied you gone from Wesel, to seek the King

n From (Suprts ValtauTi ii. IxxiL (oo, 230), IxiU. (339-339), &c. &c.
« ViePtMt. e- ¥

$8 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE flEms. BdjbkXti

* 740 .

* of Sag«t db bis Joimie^ soitiewbeire. I had understOo^^ tCKV tb<^

* were so delighted to hare you in tliat fortified lodge finiijii}

* that you must be taking pleasure theie, for he that ^ves pleasure

‘ gets it. g.

* You have already seen the jolly Ambassador of the amiablcst Mon-
‘ arch in the world,’-^amas, a fattish man, on his road to Versai{lis$
(who called at Brussels here, with fine compliments, and a keg df Hun¬
gary Wme, as you may have ^eard whispered). * No doubt M. de

* Ounas is with you. For my own share, X think it is of^r you that

* he is running at present. But in truth, at the hour while I say this,

* you are with the King —a lucky guess; King did return to Wesel
this very day. ‘ The Philosopher and the Prince perc(five already that
‘ they are made for each othei. You and M. Algarotti will say, Ahrtfet-

* mus hie tria tabernacula • as to me, 1 can only moke duo *

—profane Voltaiie!

‘ Without doubt I would be with you if I were not at Brussels ; but
‘ my heart is with you all the same; and is the subject, all the same,

‘ of a King who is formed to reign over every thinking and feeling

* being. I do not despair that Madame du CbSltclet will find*herself
' somewhere on your loute ; it will be a scene in a fairy tale;—she will

^ ‘ arrive with a sufficient reawn* (as your Leibnitz says) ‘ and With mo-
‘ nads. She does not love you the less though ^he now believes the
‘ universe a plenum^ and has renounced the notion of void. Over her
‘ you have an ascendant which you will nevei lose. In fine, my dear
‘ Monsieur, I wish as ardently as she to embrace you the soonest pos-
‘ sible. I recommend myself to your friendship in the Court, worthy
‘ of you, where you now are .’—Tout d somewhat rheumatic!**

Always an anxious almost tremulous desire to conciliate
this big glaring geometrical bully in red wig. Through the
sensitive transparent being of M. de Voltaire, you may see
that feeling almost painfully busj \ every Letter he writes to
the Flattener of the Earth.

CHAPTER IV.

VOLTAIRE’S FIRST INTERVIEW WITH FRIEDRICH.

At Wesel, in the rear all this travaUing and excitemexxt,.
Friedrich falls unwell; breaks down there into an aguish fe¬
verish distemper, which, for several months after, impeded his
movements, would he have yielded to it. He has much busi¬
ness on hand, too,—Some of it of prickly nature jifkt now
but is intent as ever on seeing Voltmre, among the first things.
Diligently reading in the Voltaire-Friedrich Cc^espondence

Voltaire, IxaciL 043.

€3n{». IV, VOLT^RE'S FJRST interview. 59

>740*

(which i$ d sad jumble of misdates and opacities, ih the com¬
mon editions),^ this of the aguish condition frequently turns
up; * Quartan ague/ it seems; occasionally very bad; but
Friedrich struggles with it; will nott>e cheated of any of his
purposes by it

He had a busy fortnight here; busier than we yet imagine.
Much employment there naturallil is of the usual Inspection
sort: whigb fails in no quarter of his Dominions, but which
may be particularly important here, in these disputed Berg<
Jfuhch Countries, when the time of decision falls. How he*
does his Inspections we know;—and there are still weightier
matters afoot here, in a silent way, of which we shall have to
speak before long, and all the world will speak. Business
enough,'parts of it grave and silent, going on, and the much
that is public, miscellaneous, small; done, all of it, in a rapid
punctqpi precise manner ;—and always, after the crowded day,
some passages of Supper with the Sages, to wind-up with on
melodious terms. A most alert and miscellaneously busy young
King, in spite of the ague.

It was in these Cleve Countries, and now as probably as
afterwards, that the light scene recorded in Laveaux’s poor
History y and in all the Anecdote-Books, transacted itself one
day. Substance of the story is true; though the details of it
go all at random,—somewhat to this effect:

‘ Inspecting his Finance Affairs, and questioning the parties inter-
‘ ested, Friedrich notices a certain Convent m Cleve, which appears to
^ have, payable from the Forest^ues, considerable revenues bequeathed
‘ by the old Dukes, “for ma»es to be said on their behalf” He

* goes to look at the place; questions the Monks on this point, who

* are all drawn-out in two rows, and have bioken into Te-Dewn at sight

* of him: “ Husht 1 You still say those Masses, then ?” “ Certainly,

‘ your Majesty 1 ”-—“ And what good does anybody get of them?”

* Vour Majesty, those old Sovereigns are to obtain Heavenly mercy

* them, to be delivered out of Purgi\fory by them.”—“ Purgatory?

^ It is A sore thing for the Forests, all this while ! And they are not

* yygi (Mit, those poor souls, after so many hundred years of praying?”
'Monks have a fatal apprehension. No. “When will they be out,

* and the thing complete ?” Monks cannot say. “ Send me a courier

* whenever ie-fj complete!” sneers the King, and leaves them to their
Thikum,'*

t recent latest Editor, and the only well-mfonned one, as we said)

|irakl!!l Wkh ancora^; but cannot be rtad at all (in the sense of undtrsiMi) without

t'CTBudebrandfii h^ikm of the (mostiy dubious) A/tfkdfftm tmd CA«h

to FRIEDRICH TAKES THEj,REiNS. B«*Xf.

Mouritful state of the Catholic ReUgioti $o*caUed 1 How
long must these wretched Monks go on doing their lazy thrice-
deleterious torpid blasphemy; and a King, not histrionic but
real, merely signify thaf he laughs at them and it t Meseems
a heavier whip than that of satire might be in place feere» your
Majesty ? The lighter whip is easier;—Ah yes, undoa&|edly I
cry many men. But horrilie accounts are runnii^gujp, enough
to sink the world at last, while the heavier whip ts lazily with¬
held, and lazy blasphemy, fallen torpid, chronic, and quite un¬
conscious of being blasphemous, insinuates itself into the very
heart's-blood of mankind! Patience, however; the heavy whip
too is coming,—^unless universal death be coming. King Fried¬
rich is not the man to wield such whip. Quite other work is
in store for King PYiedrich; and Nature will not, by any
suggestion of that terrible task, put him out in the one he hae*
He is nothing of a Luther, of a Cromwell; can loo!Jr upon
fakeers praying by their rotatory calabash, as a ludicrous pla¬
titude ; and grin delicately as above, with the approval of his
wiser contemporaries. Speed to him on his own course 1

What answer P'riedrich found to his English proposals,
—answer due here on the 24th from Captain DickenSi-—I do
not pointedly learn ; but can judge of it by Harrington’s reply
to that Despatch of Dickens’s, which entreated candour and
open dealing towards his Prussian Majesty. Harrington is at
Herrenhausen, still with the Britannic Majesty there ; both of
them much at a loss about their Spanish War, and the French
and other aspects upon it: "Suppqse his Prussian Majesty were
to give himself to p'rance againsP us 1” We will hope, not,
Harrington’s reply is to the effect, ‘ Hum, drumBerg and
‘ Julich, say you ? Impossible to answer; minds not ms^e-up
* here;—What will his Prussian Majesty do for usf Not
much, 1 should guess, till something ^ore categorical come
from you ! His Prussian I^ajesty is careful not to spoil any¬
thing by over-haste; but will wait andPtty farther to the ut¬
most, Whether England or France is the likelier bargain for him.

Better still, the Prussian Majesty is intent to do something

atts demLtlen Friedrichs des GrvtseM (and n very ignorant and cardesfi’
Edition u U: 6 voll. lamo, Halberstadt, z8mi, ii 160; Laveatix (whom we already
cited), Fie de FfdiUtw; dc. &c. Hicom’sAMkdeteH atone, which ok not ihduded
in thia Hildebrandt Collection, arc of sure auUtentlcUyi the tt8t,(Occasionaily tHw,
And often with a kind of myikte truth in them worth attending to, are othennHuto of
idt degrees of dubiety, dedm to the palpably false and absi^.

Ctap.iv. VCy-TilRE’S FIRST INTERVIEW. fiir
Sept 174 a 1

for himself in that Berg-Jiilich matter: we find hiwi silently
examining these Wesel localities for a proper “Entrenched
Camp,’* Camp say of 40,000, against a certain contingency
that may be looked for. Camp whi^h will much occupy the
Gazetteers when they get eye on it. This is one of the con-
cms ho silently attends to, on occasion, while riding about in
the Clove Countries* Then them is another small item of
business^ important to do well, \wich is now in silence dili¬
gently getting under way at Wesel; which also is of remark¬
able nature, and will astonish the Gazetteer and Diplomatic
circles. This Is the affair with the Bishop of Lidge, called also
the Affmr of Herstal, which his Majesty has had privately
|aid»up in the corner of his mind, as a thing to be done during
this Excursion. Of which the reader shall hear anon, to great
lengths,—were a certain small preliminary matter, Voltaire's
Arrival in these parts, once off our hands.

IRE'S FIRST INTERVIEW.

Friedrich’s First Meeting with Voltaire 1 These other high
things were once loud in the Gazetteer and Diplomatic circles,
and had no dovth^/Aejf were the World’s llistoiy; and now
they are sunk wholly to the Nightmares, and all mortals have
forgotten them,—and it is such a task as seldom was to re¬
suscitate the least memory of them, on just cause of a Fried¬
rich or the like, so impatient are men of what is putrid and
extinct:—and a quite unnoticed thing, Voltaire’s First Inter¬
view, all readers are on the alert for it, and ready to demand
of me impossibilities about it! Patience, readers. You shall
see it, without and within, ia such light as there w.is, and form
some actual notion of it, ifyou will cooperate. From the cir¬
cumambient inanity of Old Newspapers, H1storic.1l shot-rub¬
bish, and unintelligible Correspondences, we sift-out the fol¬
lowing particulars, of this Fu-st Meeting, or actual Osculation
of the Stars. f

The«Newspapers, though iheif eyes were not yet of the
Argus quality now familiar to us, have been intent on Fried¬
rich during this Baireuth-Cleve Journey, especially since that
sudden eclipse of him* at Strasburg lately; forming now one
scheme of ^joute for him, now another; Newspapers, and even
private friends, being a good deal uncertain about his move¬
ments, Rumour now ran, since his reappearance in the CIcvc
Countries, thtt^ Friedrick ptoant to have a look at Holland

62 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE UEIpTS.

befora goii^g home. And that had, in lact, been a notion ok
intention of Friedrich's. ** Holland ? We could pass through
Brussels on the way, and see Voltake!" thought he.

In Brussels this was, of course, the runtour of rumours.
As Voltaire’s Letters, visibly in a twitter, still testify to us.
King of Prussia coming I Madame du Chitelet, the * Princess
Tour’ (that is, Tour^and-T^is), all manner of high Dames,
are on the tiptoe. * Princess Tour hopes she shall lodge this
unparalleled Prince in her Talace : You, Madame ans*
wers the Du Chitelet, privately, with a toss of her bead ; ” His
Mayesty, I hope, belongs more to M. de Voltaire and me: he
shall lodge here, please Heaven 1 ” Voltaire, I can obsetve, has
sublime hostelry arrangements chalked-out for his Majesty, in
case he go to Pans ; which he doesn’t, as we know. Voltaiee
is all on the alert, awake to the great contingencies far and
near; the Chdlelet-Voltaire breakfast-table,—-fancy it on those
interesting mornings, while the post comes round,

Alas, in the first days of September,—Fnedrich’^ Letter
is dated ‘ Wesel, 2d’ (and ha^ the Straslfurg Doggerel enclosed
in It),—^the Brussels Postman delivers far <>ther intelligence at
one’s door; very mortifying to Madame: ‘That his Majesty is

* fallen ill at Wesel; has an aguish fever hanging on him, and
‘ only hopes to come:’ Votlet, Madame!—Next Letter, Weed,
Monday Sth Sept., is to the effect; ‘ Do still much hope to
‘ come; tomorrow is my trembling day; if that prove to be
‘ off!’—Out upon It, that proves not to be off; that is oft:
next Letter, Tuesday Sept 6th, which comes by express (Cou¬
rier dashing up with it, say on tii(; Thursday following) is,^—►
alas, Madame!—here it is :

King Friedrich to M, de Voltaire at Srustels^

' Wesel, 6 th Sq>t. 1740.

dear Voltaire,—In spite of myself, I have to yield tO the

* Quartan Feve’-, which is mofe tenacious tbsai a Jaftsenlst; and what-
‘ ever desire T had of going to Antwerp and Brussels, 1 find tnyself aof

* in a (xuidition to undertake such a joutney without risk. I wcmld
‘ ask of you, then, if the road from Brussels to Clcve would not to>u«
‘ seem too long for a n^eeting; it is the one means of seeing you which

* remains to me. Confess that I am unlucky; for now when 1 <»uld

* dispose of my person, and nothing hinders me from seeing you, thd

* Vohaire, IxxU. a38<a56 (Letten sad August—md S^teftber (740!.

Cb>i>. nr. VOJ-TAr^’S- FIRST INTERVIEW. 63

xxth $ 9 pt, Z740.

**|erer gets its hand into buaiii^, and seems to intend dispnUag

* me tbat satisfaction.

* Let us deceive the fever^ my dear Voltaire j and let me at least

* have the pleasure of embradi^ you. Make my best excuses^ (polite^
rather than sincere) * to Madame the Marqime^ that 1 cannot have the

* satis^ction of seeing her at Brussels. All that are about me know
the intention I was in; wliich certainly nothing but the fever could

‘ have made me change.

* Sunday next I shall be at a littl^Flace near Cleve,’—Schloss
Moyland, v^iich, and the route to whmh, this Courier can tell you of;

vdiere I stiall be able to possess you at my ease. If the sight of

* yon don't cure 1 will send for a Confessor at once. Adieu; you'

* know toy sentiments and my heart.’*—FfiDV.Ric.

After which the Correspondence suddenly extinguishes it-
ceases for about a fortnight,—in the bad w/^dated Edi¬
tions even does worse ;— and we are left to thick darkness, to
our own poor shifts; Dryasdust being grandly silent on this
small jpterest of ours, What is to be done ?

Partuulars of First Intenneiv, on sei’Cf'e. Scrutiny.

Here, from a {Amful Predecessor whose Papers I inherit,
are some old Documents and Studies on the subject,—sorrow-
lul collection, in fact, of what poor sparks of certainty were to
be found hovering in that dark element;—which do at last (so
luminous are certainties always, or 'sparks’ that will shine
steady) coalesce into some febble general twilighi, feeble but
indubitable ; and even show the sympathetic reader how they
were searched out and brought togelhei. We number and
label these poor Patches cx Evidence on so small a matter;
and leave them to the curious ;

No, j. Date of the Fir^t IntennmK It is certain Voltaire did arrive
at the little Schloss of Moyland, Sept, i ith, Sunday night,—which is
the * Sunday' just specified in Friedrich’s Letter. Voltaire had at once
decided on complying,—-wiiat else?—and lost no time in packing him*
self: King's Courier or. Thursday lale;*Vollaire on the road on Satur¬
day early, or the niglit b^ore. Witl\ Madame's shrill blessing (not the
most mudcdl in this vexing case), and plenty of fuss. ‘ Was wont to
tmvel in considerable style,’ I am toldj ‘the innkeepers calling him
Your Ixir^ship {M. k Contiey^ ’ Arrives, sure enough, Sunday night;
old Schloss of Moyland, six miles from Cleve;* ‘moonlight,' I find,—
the Harvest Moon. VLsit lasted three days.*

* PreuSs, (Eitvtrs ^ Fridfrie, xxiL »f,

* UddebDvck, p> as; fta

64 FRIEDRICH TAKES TbE llEVNS. BorfcXt

^ iith>x4th S«pt X74<x
No, Vo!(edi^*$ Drivo thithor, ScUo&s Moyland: How far frooi
■Ritissels, and by what route? By Louvain, Tillemont, Tongrea to
Macstnchtj then from MaellHcht up the Maas (left banlc) to Vehio,
where cross; through Geldem and Goch to Cleve: between the Maas
and Rhine this last portione Flat damp country; toletably under till¬
age ; origraal constituents bog and sand. Distances I guess to be: To
Tongres 6o miles and odd; to Maestncht ta or 15, ftorti Maestricht
75, m all 150 miles English Two days driving > There is e<inincx:lnl
mooH) and still above twelve hwrs of sunlight for ‘ M. le Comte.*

No 3. Of the Place Whet e */oltaire, who should have Vuown, calls
it petit Chdteau deMnneP' which is a Castle existing nowhere but m
Dream*!. Other Fiench Biographers are still more imaginary. The
little Schloss of Mojland,—by no means ‘ Meuse/ nor even Mors^
which Voltaire piobably means lu saymg Chdfcau de ivas, as

the least inquiry settles be) ond question, the place where Voltaiie and
Friednch first met hiiednch Wilhelm used often to lodge there In his
Cleve jouincys he made thitlier for shelter, in the sickness that over¬
took Inm m fnend Ginktl’s house, coming home from the Rhine Cam¬
paign m 1734., there for several weeks after quitting Ginkel’s Any
other light I can get upon it, is darkneas visible, Buschmg pomtedly
informs me,® ‘ It is a Parish’ (or patch of country under one priest),

‘ and Till and it are a Junscliction’ (pair of pitches under one court of
justice) *—which docs not much illuminate the laquinng mmd. Small
patch, this of Moyland, sire not given, ‘was bought,’ siys be, *m 1695,

* by Fnednch afterwards hirst King, from the Family of Spaen,’-—we
once knew a Lieutenant Spaen, of those Dutch regions,-—‘and was

* named a Royal Mansion ever theuafter ’ Who lived m it; wllat
kind of thing was it, is it^ Aliiim nlentium, fiom Buschmg and man
kind. Belonged to the Spiens, fifty years ago;—some shadow of our
poor bamslied tiicnd the J icutenanL lesting on it ? Dim enough olrl
Mansion, with ‘court’ to it, with modicu n of equipment, lying there
m the moonlight,—did not look lubhyie to VoUaiic on stepping out.
So that all our knowledge reduces tseif to this one point of finding
Moyland in the Map, with dah, with amntscence to us, hanging by it
henceforth J Good ^

Mors,—which is near the Town of Ruhrort, about midway between
Wesel and Dusscldorf,—must be some forty miles from Moyland, forty-
five from Cleve; southward of both So thi<t the place, dtaix lieueo
do Clives* is, even by Voltairs’s showing, this Moylandt were there
otherwise any doubt upon it. ‘ Chdteau de hanging out a

prospect of Mors to us,—is bad usige to leaders. Of an intelligent
man, not to say a Tnsmegistus of men, one expects he will know m
what town he is, after three clays evpenence, as here But he does not
always; he hangs-out dr mere ‘sliadow of Mors by moonlight,’ till we

® Frdi>’schretliune, v 650, 677

r Sciefer s Deuismland (excellent Map in 25 Pieces), Piece la —Till is a mile or
two north east from Moyland, Moyland about ids 6 soutlveast fr 5 in Cleve.

VOliTA^RE’S FIRST INTERVIEW. • 6 $

Xith*Z4th Srpt. X740> •

leftm better. Diivernet, bis Biographer, even calk it * ^lifts-Afeuse ;*
S03dcie wonderful idea of Sl\xices and a Riv^r attached to it, in Duver*
net’s head J*

Whai Voltaire thought of the Inie^i&w Twenty Years

afterwards.

Of the Interview itself, with ge^ral bird’s-eye view of the
Visit combined (in a very incorrec/state), there is direct testi¬
mony by Voltaire himself. Voltaire himself, twenty years after,
in far other humour, all jarred into angry sarcasm, for causes
we shall see by and by,—^Voltaire, at the request of friends,
writes down, as his Friedrich Reminiscences, that scandalous
Vi^ Privie above spoken of, a most sad Document; and this
is the passage referring to ‘ the little Place in the neighbour¬
hood of Cleve,' where Friedrich now waited for him : errors
corrected by our laborious Friend. After quoting something
of that Strasburg Doggerel, the whole of which is now too well
known to us, Voltaire proceeds :

‘ From Strasburg |je, ’ King Friedrich, ‘ went to see nis Lower

* German Provinces; he said he would come ami sec me incognito at

* Brussels. We prepared a fine house for him,’—were ready to pre¬
pare such hired house as we had for him, with many apologies for its
^ight degree of perfection [error first ),—‘ but having fallen ill in the
' little Mansion-Royal of Meuse [Chdimu de Meisse), a couple of leagues
‘ from Cleve,*—fell ill at Wesel; and there is no Chateau de Meuse in
the world (errors %d and yi ),—* he wrote to me that he expected I
‘ would make the advances. I went, accoidingly, to present my pro-

* found homages. Maupertuis, who aheady had his views, and was
‘ possessed with the rage of being President to an Academy, had of his

* own accord, ’—no, being invited, and at my suggestion [error —

* presaited himself there; and was lodged with Algaiolti and Keyscr-
‘ ling’ (which latter, I suppose, had come from Berlin, not being of the
Strasburg party, he) * in a garret of tins Palace.

‘ At the door of the I found, by way of guard, one soldier.

* Privy-Councillor Rambonet, Minister o|State’—(very subaltern man;
never heard of him except in the Herstal Business, and here)—* was

* walking in the court; blowing in his fingers to keep them warm.’ Sun¬
day night nth September 1740; world all bathed in moonshine; and
mortals mostly shrunk into their huts, out of the raw air. ‘ He’ Ram¬
bonet ‘wore Mg linen ruffles at his wrists, very dirty’ (visibly so in the
moonlight ? Error ^th extends ml libitum over all the following de¬
rails) ; ‘ a holed hat; an old official periwig,’-—ruined into a totally on*

• Duvemet of hba,--th<)S is, Vie eU Voltaire par T. J. D. V.), p. 117,

yOL, IV, F

06

FRIEDRICH TAKES TH^Ri^INS. Bookxi.

I Yith*i4th Sept. X74^
syia^netric^ate, as would seem,-*-* one side of which huug down into
**one of his pockets, and tj^e other scarcely crassed his shoulder. was

* told, this man was now intrusted with an afiair qf impoitaniee here;

* and that proved truej^-^the Herstal Affair.

*1 was led into his hfeajesty’s apartment Nothing but fmtr bare
‘ walls there. By the light of a candle, I perceived, in a closet, a lit-

* tie truckle-bed two feet and a half broad, on which lay a little man
‘muffled-up in a d^essmg-g«wn^of coarse blue duffel: this Was the
‘ King, sweating and shivering under a wretclied blanket there, in a
‘ violent fit of fever. I mad^my reverence, and began «ithe acquaint-

* ance by feeling his pulse, as if I had been his chief physician. The
‘ fit over, he dressed himself, and took his place at table. Algarotti,

* Keyserling, Maupeituis, and the King’s Envoy to the States-General*
—one Rasfeld (skdled in H^rstal matters, I could guess),—* wq were
‘ of this supper, and discussed, naturally in a profound mmmer, the

* Immortality of the Soul, Liberty, Fate, the Androgynes of Plato’ (the
Androgymi^ or Men-Women, in Plato’s Comnvium; by no means the
finest symbolic fancy of the divine Plato), — *and other small topics of

* that nature.**

This is Voltaire’s account of the Visit,—^whicH included
three ‘Suppers,’ all huddled into one by him here;-—and he
says nothing moie of it; launching off jiow into new errdrs,
aboutthe Anti-Macchiavel^ and so forth: new and
uglier errors, with much more of mendacity and seripus malice
in them, than in this harmless half-dozen now put on the score
against him.

Of this Supper-Party, I know by face four of the guests \
Maupertuis, Voltaire, Algarotti, Keyserling;—Rasfeld, Ram-
bonet can sit as simulacra or mute accompaniment. Voltaire
arrived on Sunday evening : stajj^ed till Wednesday. Wednes¬
day morning, 14th of the mon*^h, the Party broke up: Voltaire
rolling off to left hand, towards Brussels, or the Hague; King
to right, on inspection business, and circuitohsly homewards.
Three Suppers there had been, two busy Days intervening;
discussions about Fate and the Ail^Ogynoi of Plato by no
means the one thing don< by Voltaire and the rest, on this oc¬
casion. We shall find elsewhere, * he Seclaimed his Makotnet
(sublime new Tragedy, not yet come out), in the course of
these tliree evenings, to the ‘speechless admiration’ of his Royal
Host, for one; andj in the daytime, that he evenedrew his p«a
about the Herstal Business, which is now getting to its crisis,
and wrote one of the Manifestos, still discoverable. Ahd We

» Voludre, (Etforet (Piece once called Vit PrMe\ it. *6, *7.

(

Chap. IV. V04TA|IE'S FIRST INTERVIEW. 6f

zt(;h>i4th Sept. 1740. ^

nec4 not doubt, in spite of his now sneering tone, t^at things
ran high and grand here, in this paltsy little Schloss of Moy-
land; and that those three were actually Suppers of the Cods,
for the time being.

* Councillor Rambonet/ with the holed hat and umymmetric vrig,
continues Voltaire in the satirical vein, ‘ had meanwhile mounted .a

* hired hack {cheval de louag&f mischievous Voltaire, I have no doubt
he went on wheels, probably of bis ownb ‘ he rode all night; and next
‘ mt^ng aijived at the gates of Lieg^; where lie took Act in the
‘ name of the Kjlng his Master, whilst 4,000 men of the Wesel Troops
‘ laid Id^e under contiibutiou. The pretext of this hue Marching ol
‘ Troops,'—^not a pretext at all, but the atocrtion, correct in all points,
of just claims long trodden down, and now made good with more spirit
than had been expected,'—‘was certain rights which the King pretende<l
‘ to, over a suburb of JUi^gc. He even charged me to work at a Mani-
‘ festo j and I made one, good or liad ; not doublirg out a King with
‘ whom I suppetl, and who called nu- his friend, must be in the right.

‘ The aflair soon settled itself by mean-, of a million of ducatsi,—^nothing
like the iShm, as we shall see,—‘ which ho evneted by weight, to clear
‘ the costs of the Tour to Strasburg, w'hich, according to his complaint
‘ in that Poetic Letter' (Doggerel above given), ‘ were so heavy.’

That is Voltaire’Ti view; grown very corrosive after Twenty
Years. He admits, with all the satire : ‘ I natur.illy felt my-
‘ self attached to him; for he had wit, graces ; and moreover
‘ he was a King, which always forms a potent seduction, so

* weak is human nature. Usually it is we of the writing sort
‘ that flatter Kings; but this King praisi d me from he.id to foot,

‘ while the Abbd Desfontaines and other scoundrel.s {gf^dins)

* were busy defaming me in Paris at least once a week.’

H 7 iaf Voitaire thought of the Infervieuf at the Time.

But let us take the contemporary account, which also we
have at first hand; which is almost pathetic to read ; such a
contrast between rudtj^y if.orning and the storms of the after¬
noon I Here are iTwo Letters from yoltaire ; fine transparent
human Letters, as his generally are . the first of them written
directly on getting back to the Hague, and to the feeling of
his eclipsed condition.

VolPMre to M, de Maufertnis (wiil^the King).

*'fhe Hague, iSlh September 1740^

* I serve you, Monsieur, sooner than I promised; and that is the

* way you ought fo be served. I send you the answer of M. Smith,*

£8 FRIEDRICH TAKES TH£)'R^NS. Book XL

^ zxth‘i4th Stept *740.
•*^probab 1 | some German or Dutch Schmidt^ spelt here in EnglUhi^ con*-
nected with the Sciences, s^y with water-carriage, the typc^phiw, or
one need not know what;—* you will see where the question stands.

* When we both left Cleve,'—r4th of the month, Wednesday last;
18th is Sunday, in this cobwebby Palace, where 1 am correcting

* Attti‘Macchtavd ^—‘and you took to the right,’—King, homewards,
got to Ham that evening,—* I could have thought 1 was at the lAst

* Judgment, where the Bon I^icu separates the elect from the damned.

* Divus Fredericus said to you^ “Sit down at my right hand in the Para-
' dise of Berlinand to me, V Depart, thou accursed, HoUaad.”

* Here I am accordmgly id this phlegmatic place of punishment,

* far from the divine fire which animates the Friedrichs, the Mauper-

* tuis, the Algarottis. For God’s love, do me the charity of some sparks
‘ in these stagnant waters wheie I am,’—stitfening, cooling,—‘stupe-

* fying to death. Instruct me of your pleasures, of your designs. You

* will doubtle«;s see M de Valori,*—readers know de Valori; his Book
has been published; edited, as too usual, by a Human Nightmare,
ignorant of his subject and indeed of almost all other things, and liable
to mistakes in every page; yet paitly readable, if you carry lanterns,
and love ^^mon ^ros Valon ”—‘offer him, I pray you, my lespccts.

‘ If I do not wiitc to him, the icason is, I have no news to send: I

* should be as exact as I am devoted, if my correspondence could be

* useful or agreeable to him. u

‘ Won’t you have me send you some Books? If I be still in Hoi-
‘ land when your oiders come, I will obey in a moment. 1 pray yoU

* do not foiget me to M. de Keyserling,’—Csesarion whom we once
had at Cirey; a headlong dusky little man of wit (libraiy turned topsy¬
turvy, as Wilbelmina called him), whom we have seen.

‘Tell me, I beg, if the enormous monad of Volfius,’—(Wolf, tvould
the readci like to heai about him? If so, he has only to speak!)—

‘ IS aiguing at Marburg, at Beilin, or at Ilall’ {HalU, which is a very
different place).

‘Adieu, Monsieur: you cae address your orders to me “ At the
‘ Haguethey will be forwarded wherever I am; and I shall be, any-
‘ where on earth,—^Yours forever (d vmts four

Letter Second, of which a fra^ent may be given, is to
one Cjdeville, a month later; all tne more genuine as there
was no chance of the King’s hearing about this one. Cide-
ville, some kind of literary Advocate at Rouen (who is weari¬
somely known to the reader of Voltaire^s Letters), had done,
what is rather an endemical disorder at this time, some Verses
for the King of Pigussia, which he wished to b% pres0hted to
his Majesty. The presentation* owing to accidents, did not
take place; hear how Voltaire, from his cobweb Palace at th$

^ Yoltrire, Ixxiii ifst.

Chap. IV. VOITAIRFS FIRST INTERVIEW. 6 g

xxth*]:4lb Sept. 1740. i

league, busy with AniUMacchiav^h Van Duren and many other
things,^! 8th October 1740* on whioh day we find him writ¬
ing many Letters,—explains the sad accident:

VoltcUrs t<f M* de CidevilU (at Rouen).

* At the Hague, King of Prussia's Palace,
$ ‘ iSih October 1740,

* * * t Tills is nay case, dear G deville. When yon sent me,

* enclosed iif your Letter, tliose Verses^among which there are some ot
‘ charming and inimitable turn) for our Marcus Aurelius of the North,

* I did well design to pay my court to him with them. He was at that
‘ time to have come to Brussels incognito: we expected him there; but
‘ the Quartan Fever, which unhappily he still has, deranged all his pro-
‘ jects. He sent me a courier to Brussels,’—^maik that point, my Cide-
villej'—‘and so I set out to find him in the neigh bom hood of Cleve.

‘ It was there I saw one of the amiabkst men in the world, who

* forms the charm of society, who would be everywhere sought after if
‘ he we«e not King; a philosopher wnUiout austenty; lull of sweetness,

‘ complaisance and obligiifg ways {airf'ihfit’us); not leniembering that he

* is King when he meets his fuends; indeed so completely forgetting it

* that he made me too almost foiget it, and I needed an elTo' < ot memory

* to recollect that I hefe saw sitting at the foot of my bed a Sovereign

* Who Iiad an Axmy of 100,000 men. That was the moment to have

* read your amiable Verses to him:’—yes; but then?—‘ Madame da
‘ ChUtelet, who was to have sent them to me, did not, ne i*a />tis fait.'
Alas, no, they are still at Biussels, those charming Verses; and I, for
a month past, am here in my cobweb Palace I But I swe ir to you, the
instant X return to Brussels, I &c. &.c. “

Finally, here is what Friediich thought of it, ten days after
parting with Voltaire. We will read this also (though other¬
wise ahead of us as yet); to be ceitified on all sides, and sated
for the rest of our lives, concerning the Friedrich-Voltaire
First Interview,

Fmdrtkh to M. Jordan (at Berlin).

(| ‘ Potsdam, 34th September 174a

‘Most respectable Inspector of the poor, the invalids, orphans,

* crazy people and Bedlams,—I have read with mature meditation the
‘ very profound Jordanic Letter which was waiting here—and do
accept your learned proposal.

* I Kave^een that Voltaire whom I was so*curious to know; but I
‘ saw him with the Quartan hanging on me, and ray mind as unstrung

* as my bony. Wi^ men of his kind one ought not to be sick; cme

n Lodi al9>

70 FRIEDRICH TAKES THElREtNS. BookXl.

t S^pti *740.

* ought eveq^ to be spectalljr well, and in better health than cotouftoni if

* one cottld. f,

* He has the eloquence of Cicero, the mildness of Pliny, thendsdpm
‘ of Agrippa; he combines, in short, what is to be collected of virtues

* and talents from the threlP greatest men of Antiquity. His intellect is

* at work incessantly; every drop of ink is a trait ot wit from his pen.

* He declaimed his Mahomet to us, an admirable Tragedy which he has
‘ done^’“-which the Official pj^ple smelling heresies in it (‘toleration,’

‘ horrors of fanaticism,’ and th» like) will not let him act, as readers too
well know‘ he transported u» out of ourselves j I could*only admire
‘ and hold my tongue. The Du Chatelet is lucky to have him; ftU" of
‘ the good things he flings out at random, a person who had no faculty
‘ but memory might make a brilliant Book That Minem has just
‘ published her Work on Phvdts • not wholly bad. It was Kbnig,’—
whom we know, and whose late tempest in a certain teapot,—* that dic¬
tated the theme to her; she has adjusted, ornamented here and there

‘ with some touch picketl from Voltaire at her Slippers. The Chapter on

* Space is jiitiable; the’—in short, she is still raw in the Pure Sciences,

and should have waited. * * * ,

‘ Adieu, most learned, most scientific, Aost profound Jordan,—or
‘ lather most gallant, most amiable, most jovial Jordan;—I salute thee,

‘ with assurance of all those old feelings which thou hast the art of in-
‘ spiring in every one that knows thee. Vale,

‘ 1 write the moment of my arrival: be obliged to me, friend; for
‘ I have been working, I am going to work still, like a Turk, or like a
‘ Jordan.

This is hastily thrown-off for Friend Jordan, the iniitant
after his Majesty’s circuitous return home. Readers cannot yet
attend his Majesty there, till they have brought the Affair of
Herstal, and other remainders of the Cleve Journeyi along with

them.

CHAPTER V.

AFFAIR OF HERSTAL.

This Rambonet, whom Voltaire found walking in the court
of the old Castle of Moylaftd, is an off^pial gentlentan, other¬
wise unknown to History, who has lately been engaged in a
Public Affair; and is now off again about it, * on a hired hack*
or otherwise,—with very good instructions in his head. Affair
which, though in itself but small, is now beginning to make’
great noise in the world, as Friedrich wends homewards out of
his Cleve Journey, He has set it fairly alight, Voltaire and he,

CBwfts (ft itrUMct xtii, 71.

f

AFIFAIR OF HERSTAL.

7*

4'tIvftdtlL Bejit S740.

before quitting Moyinnd; and now it wiU go of itBeif, The
Affair of Herstal, or of the Bishop of Lidge; Friedrich's first
appearance on the stage of politics. Concerning which some
very brief notice, if intelligible, will sulfice readers of the pre¬
sent day.

Heristal, now called Herstal, was once a Castle known to
all mankind; King Pipin's Castle^ho styled himself “ Pipin
of Heristal,’^ before he became mng of the Franks and begot
Charlemagne. It lies on the Maas, in that fruitful Spa Coun¬
try ; left bank of the Maas, a little to the noith of Li^ge; and
probably began existence as a grander place than Lidge (Zu/-
tich)^ which was, at first, some Monastery dependent on secu¬
lar Herstal and its grandeurs :—think only how the race has
gone between these two entities; spiritual Lidge now a big City,
black ^ith the smoke of forges and steam mills , Herstal an
insignificant Village, accidentally talked of for a few weeks in
1740, and no chance ever to be mentioned again by men.

Herstal, in the^orpfused vicissitudes of a thoi. ind years,
had passed through various fortunes, and uinlergonc change of
owners often enough. Fifty years ago it was in the liands of
the Nassau-Orange House; Dutch William, our English Pro¬
testant King, who probably scaice knew of his possessing it,
was Lord of Herstal till liis death. Dutch William had no
children to inherit Herstal: he was of kinship to the Prussian
House, as readers are aware ; and from that circumstance, not
without a great deal of discussion, and difficult ‘ Division of
the Orange Heritage,’ this Herstal had, at the long last, fallen
to Friedrich Wilhelm’s share; it and Neuchdtel, and the Cob¬
web Palace, and some other places and pertinents.

For Dutch William was df kin, we say; Friedrich I. of
Prussia, by his Mothef the noble Wife of the Great Elector,
was full cousin to Dutch William: and the Marriage Contracts
were express,—though the High idightinesses made difficulties,
and the collateral Orange branches were abundantly reluctant,
when it came to the fulfilling point. For indeed the matter was
intricate. ^Orange itselfi for example, what was to be done with
the Principality of Orange ? Clearly Prussia’s; but it lies im¬
bedded deep in the belly of France: that will be a Caesarean-
Operation for you I Had not Neuchfitel happened just then
to fall home to Fran(!;e (ot in soifie measure to France) and be

1 % FRIEDRICH TAKES THE ksi^S. Book'U.

* 4111481:]^ Sept '

heirless, I^fus$ia’s Heritage of Orange would have don^ little
for Prussia 1 Principality^of Orange was, by this chance, long
since, mainly in the First King's time, got settled :* but there
needed many years motfE: of good waiting, and of good push¬
ing, on Friedrich Wilhelm’s part; and it was not till 1732 that
Friedrich Wilhelm got the Dutch Heritages finally brought to
tile square: Ncuchitel anh Valengin, as aforesaid, in lieu of
Orange; and now furthermit re, the Old Palace atJLoo (that
Vieille Cour and biggest com/ebs), with pertinents, with Gar¬
den of Honslardik; and a string of items, bigger and less, not
worth enumerating. Of the items, this Herstal was one;—and
truly, so far as this went, Friedrich Wilhelm often thought he
had better never have seen it, so much trouble did it bring him.

JT<m/ the Herstalkrs had behaved to Friedrich Wilhelm,

The Herstal people, knowing the Prussian recruitif.g-sys-
tem and other rigours, were extremely unwilling to come under
Friedrich Wilhelm’s sway, could they have helped it. They
refused fealty, swore they never would" svK"ar: nor did they,
till the appearance, or indubitable foreshine, of Friedrich Wil¬
helm's bayonets advancing on them from the East, brought
compliance. And always after, spite pf such quasi-fealty, they
showed a pig-like obstinacy of humour; a certain insignificant,
and as it were impertinent, deep-rooted desire to thwart, irri¬
tate and contradict the said Friedrich Wilhelm. Especially
in any recruiting matter that might arise, knowing that to be
the weak side of his Pnissian Majesty. All this would have
amounted to nothing, had it not been that their neighbour, the
Prince Bishop of Lidge, who imagined himself to have some
obscure claims of sovereignty pver Herstal, and thought the
present a good opportunity for assertinr these, was diligent to
aid and abet the Herstal people in such their mutinous acts.
Obscure claims; erf which thiit is the sumn^ry, should the reader
not prefer to skip it:

‘ Tlie Bishop of Liege’s claims on Herstal {which lie wrapt from

* mankind in the extensive jungle of his law-pleadings, like a Bedlam

* happily fallen extinct) geem to me to have grown mainly from twq

* facts more or less radical.

* Neuchitel, 3d November 1707, w Friedrich I,, natives preferring htfa to 'Fif-
teeb other Oedmants;* Louis XIV. loudly protesting: not till Treaty bfutiecht (14th
March 17x3, first month of Friedrich Wuheiin's reign) Would Louis on cesuoa

of Oranve, consent and sanction.

€ 3 »i». V. AFFAIR OF HERSTAL. . 73

Sept. X740. *

^ Fact first. In Kaiser Barbarossa^s time, year ii7i,*Herstal had

* been given in pawn to the Church of Liege, for a by the then.

* proprietor, Duke of Lorraine and Brabant. Loan was repaid, I do
‘ not learn when, and the Pawn given back; to the satisfaction of said
‘ Duke, or Duke^s Heirs; never cjuite to t'Re satisfaction of the Church,

* which had been in possession, and was loath to quit, after hoping to

* continue, “Give us back Herstal; it ought to be ours I” Unappeas-

* able sigh or grumble to this effect if heard thenceforth, at intervals,

* in the Chapter of Li^ge, and has ceased in Friedrich’s lime. But

* as the wdfld, in its loud thoroughfaps, seldom or never heard, or could
‘ hear, feudi sighing in the Chapter, nothing had come of it,—till—

Fact second. In Kaiser Karl V.’s time, the Prince Bishop of Liege

* happened to be a Natural Son of old Kaiser Max’s;—and had friends

* at headquarters, of a very choice nature. Had, namely, in this sort,

‘ Kaiser Karl for Nephew or Half-Nephew; and what peihaps was still

better, as nearer hand, had Kail’s Aunt, Marn Queen of Hungary,

* then Governess of the Netherlands, for Half-Sister, Liege, in these
‘ choice circumstances, and by other good chances that turned up, j^ain

* got temporary clutch or half-clutch* of Herstal, for a couple of years

* (date I546-'8, the Prince of Or.xiige, real proprietor, whose Ancestor
‘ had bought it for money dosvn, being then a minor); once, and per-

* haps a second time i^Ae circumstance; but had always to renounce
‘it again, when tffe Trince of Oiange came to niatuiity. And ever

* since, the Chapter of I.,i^ge sighs as before, “ Ileistal is perhaps in a
‘ sense ours. We had once some kind of right to it!”—sigh inaudible
‘ in the loud public thoroughfares. That is the Bishop’s claim. The
‘ name of him, if anybody care for it, is “ <ieorg Ludwig, titular Cmnt

* of Berg now a very old man: Bishop of Liege, he, and has been
‘ snatching at Herstal again, very e.ngeily by any skill or tagrag that
‘ might liappen to fly loose, these eight ye.irb past, m .a rash and pro-

* yoking manner ;*—age eighty-two at present; jioor old fool, he bad
‘ better have sat quiet. There lies a rod in pickle for him, during these
‘ late months; and will be surprisingly laid-on, were the time come!’

“I have Law Authority over Herstal, and power of judging
there in the last appeal,” said this Bishop:—“You!” thought
Friedrich Wilhelm, wh^^was far off, and had little time to waste.

Any Prussian recruiter that behaves ill, bring him to me!”
said the Bishop, whottwas on the Ipot. And accordingly it had
been done; one notable instance two years ago: a Prussian
Lieutenant locked in the Lidge jail, on complaint of riotous
Herstal; thereupon a Prussian Officer of rank (Colonel Kreiit-
zen, worthy old Malplaquet gentleman) 6oming as Royal Mes¬
senger, not admitted to audience, nay laid hold of by the Lidge
bailiff in$tea^; and other unheard-of procedures.^ So that

* Dilices du f^is de Liige 1738); BteUteH^schicMf, ii. 57^9.

* HeidethGesefUet^*, iL 03-73,

74 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RElAs. BaokXi.

< 4^*a8t}iSi^. 1740.^

Friedrich 'WHlhelm had nothing but trouble with this pettf^Her*
stal, Stud must have thovi)ght hia neighbour Bisht^ e very con«
teniious highflying gentleman, who todt great liberties With
the Lion's whiskers, whe% he had the big animal at an advan¬
tage.

The episcopal procedures, eight years ago, about the First
Homaging of Herstal, had^een of similar complexion; nor
had other such failed in the unterim, though this last outran
exceeded them all. This lasShegan in the end of 1738; and
span itself out through 1739, when Friedrich Wilhelm lay in
his final sickness, less able to deal with it them formerly. Being
a peaceable man, unwilling to awaken conflagrations for a
small matter, Friedrich Wilhelm had offered, through Kreut-
zen on this occasion, to part with Herstal altogether; to sell
it, * for 100,000 thalers,’ say 16,000/., to the highflying Bishop,
and honestly wash his hands of it. But the highflying Bishop
did not consent, gave no definite answer; and so the diatter
lay,—like an unsettled extremely irritating paltry little matter,
—at the time Friedrich Wilhelm died. *

The Gazetteers and public knew little'itbout these particu¬
lars, or had forgotten them again; but at the Prussian Court
they were in lively remembrance. What the young Friedrich's
opinion about them had been we gather from this succinct
notice of the thing, written seven or eight years afterwards,
exact in all points, and still carrying a breath of the old hum¬
our in it. 'A miserable Bishop of Lidge thought it a proud
' thing to insult the late King. Some subjects of Herstal, wbich

* belongs to Prussia, had revolted; the Bishop gave them his

* protection. Colonel Kreutzen was sent to Lidge, to compose
' the thing by treaty; credentials with him, full power, and sill

* in order. Imagine it the Bishop would not receive him!

* Three days, day after day, he saw t|is Envoy apply at Ins

* Palace, and always denied him entrance. These things had

* grown past endurance.’^ •And Friedrish had taken note of
Herstal along with him, on this Cleve Journey; privately in¬
tending to put Herstal and the highflying Bishop on a suitabler
footing, before his return from those countries.

For indeed, on Ffiedrich’s Accession, matters fiad grown
worse, not better. Of course there was Fealty to be sworn;
but the Herstal people, abetted by the highflying JBbhop, have
* Ptetils, {MUm. de lirand)how>^\ iL 53,

AFFAIR OF HERSTAL.

75

Chap. V.

4th Sept. X740.

declined swearing it. Apology for the past< prospfllt of amend*
ment for the future, there is less tham^ever. What is the young
King to do with this paltry little Hamlet of Herstal? ke eould,
in theory, go into some Reiebs-Hofira^h, some Reiths-Kammer-
gerlcht (kind of treble and tenfold English Court*of-Chanccry,
which has lawsuits 280 years old),—if he were a theoretic
German King, He can plead in^the Diets, and the Wetslar
Reichs-Kammergericht withoutjmd: ‘All German Sovereigns
* have p^wer to send theii Amjfessador thither, who is like a
' mastiff chained in the backyard' (observes Friedrich else¬
where) ‘with privilege of barking at the Moon,’—unrestricted
privilege of barking at the Moon, if that will avail a practical
man, 01 King’s Ambassador. Or perhaps the Bishop of Li^ge
will bethink him, at last, what considerable liberty he is taking
with some people’s whiskers? Four months are gone; Bishop
of Li^ge has not in the least bctliought him : we arc in the
neigffijourhood in person, with "note of the thing in our me¬
mory.

FriedrJ^^jMakes the Rod out of Pickk.

Accordingly the Rath Rambonet, whom Voltaire found at
Moyland that Sunday night, had been over at Lidge; went ex¬
actly a week before ; with this message of very peremptory
tenor firom his Majesty:

To the Prince Bishop of Lkge,

‘Westl, 4th September 1740.

‘ My Cousin,—Knowing all the .issaults {attdniei) made by you up-
my indisputable rights over my ftce Baiony of Herstal; and how
‘ the seditious ringleaders there, for sevcial years past, have been coun-

* tenanced {bestHrkd) by you in their detestable acts of disobedience
‘ j^inst me ,—1 have commanded my Pnvy Councillor Rambonet to
‘ repair to your presence, and in my name to require from you, withm

* tw0 days, a distinct andlcategorical answer to this question: Whether

* you ore still minded to assert your protended sovereignty over Herstal;

* and whether you will protect the rebirls at Herstal, in their disorders

* and abominable disobedience?

‘ In case you refuse, or delay beyond the term, the Anr U'er which I

* hereby of right demand, you will render yourself alone responsible,
‘ before th^world, for the consequences which infallibly will follow. 1
‘ am, with much consideration,—My Cousin,—

‘ Your very affectionate Cousin,

, ‘Friedeich.^*

*

76 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. Book SI

• tithSept. J740b,

Rambprf^t had started straightway for Li^ge^ with this mis¬
sive; and had duly preslAted it there, I guess on the 7th,
with notice that he Would wait forty-eight hours, and then re¬
turn with what answer ovno-answer there might be. Getting
no written answer, or distinct verbal one; getting only some
vague muinblement as good as none, Rambonet had disap¬
peared from LifJge on the ptrf; and was home at Moyland when
Voltaire arrived that Sunday^vening,—just walking^about to
come to heat again, after repomng progress to the above effect,
Rambonet, I judge, enjoyed only one of those divine Sup¬
pers at Moyland; and dashed off again, ‘ on hired hack' or
otherwise, the very next morning; that contingency of No¬
answer having been the anticipated one, and all things put in
perfect readiness for it. Rambonet’s new errand was to ' take
act,^ as Voltaire calls it, 'at the Gates of Lidge,’—to deliver at
Li^e a succinct Manifesto, Pair of Manifestos, both in Print
(ready beforehand), and bearing date that same Sunday, *' We-
sel, nth September;’—much calculated to amaze his Rever¬
ence at Lidge. Succinct good Manifestos, said to be of Fried¬
rich’s own writing; the essential of the twcT is this:

Exposition of the Reasons which have induced his Majesty the
King of Prussia to make just Reprisals on the Prince Bishop
ofLiige.

‘His Majesty the King of Pmssva, being driven beyond bounds by

* the rude proceeding-, of the Prince Bishop of Liege, has with r^^et
‘ seen himself forced to recui to the Method of Aims, m order to repress
‘ the violence and affiont wluch the Bishop lias attempted to put upon

* him. This resolution has cost his Majesty much pain; the rather as
‘ he is, by principle and disposition, far remote from whatever could
‘ have the least relation to rigour and severity.

‘ But seeing himself compelled by the Bi^op of Lidge to take new
‘ methods, he had no other course but to maintain the justice of his
‘ rights {la justice de sa droiu), and demand reparation for the indignity
‘ done upon his Minister von Kicutzen, as well ts for the contempt with
‘ which the Bishop of Liege has neglected even to answer the Letter of

* the King.

^ ‘ As too much rigour borders upon cruelty, so too much patience

‘ resembles weakness. Thus, although the King would willingly have

* sacrificed his interests to the public peace and tranquillity, it was pot
‘ possible to do so in reference to his honour; and that is the chief
‘ motive which has determined him to this resolution^ so eontrary to his
‘int^tiODS.

AFFAIR OF HERSTAL.

77

Chap, V.
xith Sept 2740.

* * In vain has it bSen attempted, by methods of mildness, to come

* to a friendly agreement; it has beoi foiJW, on the conftniy, that the

* King's moderation only increased the iftnce’s arrogance ; that mild-

* ness of conduct on one side only fttmished resourced to pride on the
‘ otiierj and that, in fine, instead of gaini|g by soft procedure, one was

* insensibly becoming an object of vexation and disdain.

‘There being no means to have justice but in doing it for oneself,
‘ and the King being Sovereign enoi^h for such a duty,—-he intends
‘ to make the Prince of Li^e feel how far he was in the wrong to abuse
‘ such rac^eration so unworthily. B^t in spite of so much unhandsome

* behaviour on the part of this Priye, the King will not be inflexible;
‘ satisfied with having shown the said Prince that he can punish hin^

* and too just to overwhelm him. FRfiDjSiuc,*

*Wcsel, September iitb, 174a’

Whether Rambonet insinuated his Paper-Packet into the
Palace of Seraing, left it at the Gate of Lidge (fixed by nail, if
he saw good), or in what manner he ‘ took act,' I never knew;
and indeed Rambonet vanishes from human History at this
point: it is certain only that he did his Formality, say two days
hence;—and that the Fact foreshadowed by it is likewise in
the same hours, ho^ after hour, getting steadily dot\e.

For the Manifestos printed beforehand, dated Wesel, iith
September, were not the only thing ready at Wesel; waiting,
as on the slip, for the contingency of No-answer. Major-Ge¬
neral Borck, with the due battalions, squadrons and equipments,
was also ready. Major-General Borck, the same who was with
us at Baireuth lately,- had just returned from that journey, when
he got orders to collect 2,000 men, horse and foot, with the
due proportion of artillery, from the Prussian Garrisons in these
parts; and to be ready for marching with them, the instant the
contingency of No-answer arrives,—Sunday nth, as can be
foreseen, Borck knows his route: To Maaseyk, a respectable
Town of the Bishop’the handiest for W^csel; to occupy Maas¬
eyk and the adjoining ‘ Counties of Lotz and Hornand lie
there at the Bishop's charge till ^lis Reverence's mind alter.

Borck is ready,\o the last pontoon, the last munition-loaf;
and no sooner is signal given of the No-answer come, than Borck,
that same ‘Sunday nth,’ gets under way; marches, steady as
clockwork, towards Maaseyk (fifty milgs southwest of him, dis¬
tance now lessening every hour); crosses the Maas, by help
of his pontobns; is now in the Bishop's Territory, and enters
0 U> 77, Said to be by Fiiednch hjioself (Stenzel, iv. <$9),

78 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RElllS, BdokXI.

, 14th Sept t;40«

Maaseyk, evening pf * \^fednesday i4th,’-^that very day VpU
taire and his Majesty hu,^ paited, going different ways from
Moyland; and probably about the same hour while Rambonet
was ‘ taking act at the Gate of Lt^e,' by naihhabimer or othesr-
wise. All goes punctual, Swift, cog hitting pinion far and near,
in this small Herstal Business; and there is no mistake made,
and a minimum of time spe^;t.

Borck’s management was throughout good: punctual, quietly
exact, polite, mildly inflexible.^Fain would the Maaseyk Town-
Raths have shut their gates on him; desperately conjuring
him, “ Respite for a few hours, till we send to Lifge for in¬
structions t” But it was to no purpose. Unbolt, ihrHerrm;
swift, or the petard will have to do it 1 ” Borck publishes his
Proclamation, a mikl-spoken rigorous Piece; signifies to the
Maaseyk Authorities, That he has to exact a Contribution of
20,000 thalers (3,000/.; here, Contribution payable in three
days; that he turthermorc, while he continues in these parts,
will need such and such rations, accommodations, allowances,
—* fifty louis (say guineas) daily for his own private expenses,’
one item;—and, in mild rhadainunthine lErntguage, waves aside
aU remonstrance, retusal or delay, as superfluous considera¬
tions: Unless said Contribution and required supplies come in,
it will be his painful duty to bring them in.^

The highflying Bishop, much astonished, docs now eagerly
answer his Prussian Majesty, “Was from home, was ill, thought
he had answered; is the most ill-used of Bishops;” and odter
things of a hysteric character.^ And there came‘forth, as na¬
tural to the situation, multitudinous complainings, manifesto-
ings, applications to the Kaiser, 10 the French, to the Dutch,
of a very shrieky character on the Bishop of Li<$ge’s part; spar¬
ingly, if at all noticed on Friedrich’s: the whole of which we
shall consider ourselves free to leave ui^disturbed in the rub¬
bish-abysses, as hencetorth conceivable to the reader. * Sed

* spem stupende fefellit eventns,' shrieks the poor old Bishop,
making moan to the Kaiser: ' ecce enim, prapUssd duniaxat
‘ und lAterd, ode Letter,’ and little more, < the said King of

* Borussia has, with about 2,000 horse and foot, and warlike

* engines, in this month of September, entered the Ta*ritory of

* X*i^c V®, which is an undeniable truth, but an unavailing.

7 HeldeHfGetcki(kte, L u. 1x3. t

« Hrid. il 85. W (date, xSth September). « Itnd. il 88.

Chap.v. AFFAIR OF HERSTAL. 79

4th<>8th Sept, t74a''

Rorck is there, andP * 2,000 good ar^meuts with him,’ as Vol¬
taire defines the phenomenon. Fnhdrich, exoepi: to explain
pertinently what my readers already Inow, does not write or
speak farther on the subject; and readers and he may consider
the Herstal Affair, thus set agoing utder Borck’s auspices, as
in effect finished; and that his Majesty has left it on a satis¬
factory footing, and may safely turn his back on it, to wmf the
sure issue at Berlin before long.

' VoUctire t}§ught of Herstal,

Voltaire told us he himself * did one Manifesto, good or bad,’
on this Herstal businesswhere is that Piece, then, what has
become of it ? Dig well in the realms of Chaos, rectifying stu¬
pidities more or less enormous, the Piece itself is blill discover¬
able ; and, were pieces by Voltaire much a rarity instead of the
reverse, might be resuscitated by a good Editor, and printed in
his Works, Lies buried in the lOnesome rubbish-mountains of
ll^ax Helden-Geschichte ,— let a. S/s/e Viator, scratched on the
surface, mark where.JJ Apparently that is the P’^'ce by Vol¬
taire? Yes, on reading that, it has every internal evidence;
distinguishes itself from the surrounding pieces, like a slab of
compact polished stone, in a floor rammed together out of ruin¬
ous old bricks, broken bottles and mortar-dust;—agrees, too,
if you examine by the microscope, with the external indications,
which are sure and at last clear, though infinitesimally small;
and is beyond doubt Voltaire’s, if it were now good for much.

It is not properly a Manifesto, but an anonymous memoir
published in the Newspapers, explaining to impartial mankind,
in a legible bri^ manner, what the old and recent History of
Herstal, and the Troubles of Herstal, have been, and how chi¬
merical and ' null to the extreme of nullity {nidles de toute nuU
HU)' this poor Bishop’s pretensions upon it are. Voltaire ex¬
pressly piques himself on this Piece brags also how he
Settled ‘ M. de F^nejon’ (FrcncliiAmbassador at the Hague),
‘ who came to me the day before yesterday,’ muq)i out of square
upon the Herstal Business, till 1 pulled him straight. And it

I

w U. 93-98.

l.etter ftj Friednch: dsitc&ble * Soon alfcr 17th Septemberwhich the

mh dfuk Editors guess misditted ‘Auj^u^t;’or, what was salerfor them,

omitted it altogether. C^itprts dt ygiHairglPxns, 18)8, 40 voll.) gives the Letter,
44a (see al^ ibid. 433, 4S3); later Editors, and even Preuss, take the safer
ftmrse. •

So

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REIJIS. BMkXt

4th-^8th Sept,

is evident ^beautifully your Majesty) Bow Voltaire busied
himself in tne Gazettes |pd Diplomatic circles, setting Fried*
rich’s case right; Voltaire^ery loyal to Friedrich and his Lidge
Cause at that time;—and the contrast between what his con¬
temporary Letters say onfthe subject, and what his ulterior Pas-
quil called ViePrivie says, is again great,

*The dull stagnant world,^shaken awake by this Li^ge advent
ture, gives voice variously; and in the Gazetteer and Diplo¬
matic circles it is much criticised, by no means everywhere in
the favourable tone at this finii blush of the business. “ He
had written an ,< 4 «/«-Macchiavel,” says the Abb^ St. Pierre,
and even says Voltaire (in the Pasgutl, not the contemporary
Letters), “and he acts thus!” Truly he does, Monsieur de Vol¬
taire ; and all men, with light upon the subject, or even with
the reverse upon it, must make their criticisms. For the rest,
Borck’s *2,900 arguments’ are there; which Borck handles
well, with polite calm rigour; by degrees the dust will and

facts everywhere be seen for what they are.

As to the highflying Bishop, finding that hysterics are but
wasted on Friedrich and Borck. and fw^uce no effect with
their 2,000 validities, he flies next to the Kaiser, to the Imperial
Diet, in shrill-sounding Latin obtestations, of which we already
gave a flying snatch: ''Yoxxt Jmmilissimtes 2Lnd.^delissifnus Vos-
saitus, and most obsequient Servant, Georgius Ludovicus;
meek, modest, and unspeakably in the right: was ever Mem¬
ber of the Holy Roman Empire so snubbed, and grasped by
the windpipe, before? O, help him, great Kaiser, bid the iron
gripe loosen itself The Kaiser does so, ifl heavy Latin re¬
scripts, in German Deliortatormni'i more than one, of a sulky,
imperative, and indeed very lofty tenor; “ Let Georgius Ludo¬
vicus go, foolish rash young Dilection {Uedden, not Majesty,
we ourselves being the only Majesty), and I will judge between
you; otherwise—I” said the Kaiser, ponderously shaking his
Olympian wig, and lifting his gilt cane, or scepfre of mankind,
in an Olympian manner. H?re are some^ouches of his second
sublimest DehSrtatorium addressed to Friedrich, in a very com¬
pressed state 'P

Wc Karl the Sixth, JKiiiser of {Titles ettougk), * * * ‘Considering
* in the Holy Roman Reich, almost unheard*of violent Dmngs

U Helden-G^schichte, iL
Ibid, ii, xa7, and milder (IMd. -

Chap, V. AFFAIR OF HERSTAL. 6t

4t^«a8ith Sept. *740. •

* ( 7 ^lichkdten\ which We, in Our SuprCThe*JUidge cannot al-
‘ together justify, nor will endure . . . . have the trust that you
‘ yourself will magnanimously see How evil counsellors have misled

* your Dilection to commence your Reign, ^ot by showing example of

* Obedience to the Laws appointed for all members of the Reich, for

* the weak and for the strong alike, but by such Doings ( ThcUhattd-

* lungen) as in all quarters must cause a j^reat surprise.

* We give your Dilection to know, therefore. That you must straight-

* way withdraw those troops which have^brokeu into the Liege Territory j
‘make spe^y^ restitution of all tha^naa been extorted j—especially

* General von Borck to give back St once those 50 loiiis d’or daily
‘ drawn by him, to renounce his demand of the 20,000 thalers, to make

* good all damage done, and retire with his whole military force

* over »he Liege boundaries;—and in brief, that you will, by law or
‘arbitration, manage to agree with the Piince Bishop of Liege, who
‘ wishes it very much. These things We expect ^rum yoiu Dilection,

‘ as Kurfurst of Brandenburg, willun the space of Two Months from
‘ the Issuing of this; and remain,’—Vours as you shall demean your-

* self,-*ICARL.

‘Given at Wien, 4th of October 1740.’—^The last Dehortatoriuin
ever signed by Karl VI. In two weeks after he ale too many mush¬
rooms,—and immense r' ^.fts followed!

DeBortatoriums had their interest, at Berlin and elsewhere,
for the Diplomatic circles; but did not produce the least effect
on Borck or Friedrich; though Friedrich noted the Kaiser’s
manner in these things, and thought privately to himself, as
was evident to the discerning, “ What an amount of wig on
that old gentleman!” A notable Kaiser’s Ambassador, Herr
Botta, who had come with some Accession compliments, in
these weeks, was treated slightingly by Friedrich ; hardly ad¬
mitted to Audience; and Friedrich’s public reply to the last
Dehortatorium had almost something of sarcasm in it: Evil
counsellors yourself, Most Dread Kaiser I It is you that are

* misled by counsellors, who might chance to set Germany on
‘ fire, were others as unwise as they !’ Which latter phrase
was reifiarkable to mai»kind.—Thet% is a long account already
run-up between that old gentleman, with his Scckendorfs,
Grumkows, with his dull insolencies, wiggeries, and this young
gentleman, who has neatly had his heart broken and his Fa¬
ther’s hous^ driven mad by them 1 Borck*rcmains at his post;
rations duly delivered, and fifty louis a day for his own pri¬
vate expense^; and there is no answer to the Kaiser, or in

VOL. IV. G

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REfNS. Book XI.

• 28th S?pt. i7^a

sharp brief terms (aboul^* chances of setting Germany on fire'),
rather worse than non 5 *

Readers see, as well as Friedrich did, what the upshot of
this affair must be;—w?i will now finish it off, and wash our
hands of it, before following his Majesty to Berlin. The poor
Bishop had applied, shrieking, to the French for help md
there came some colloquial passages between Voltaire and
F€nelon, if that were a resutf. He had shrieked ifi like man¬
ner to the Dutch, but witlioJ?! result of any kind traceable in
that quarter; nowhere, except from the Kaiser, is so much as
a DehortaioriumjiQ be got. Whereupon the once highflying,
now' vainly shrieking Bishop discerns clearly that there is but
one course left,—the course which has lain wide open for some
years past, had not his flight gone too high for seeing it. Be¬
fore three weeks are over, seeing how Dehortatoriums go, he
sends his Ambassadois to Berlin, his apologies, propf'-sals
" Would not your Majesty perhaps consent to sell this Herstal,
as your Father of glorious memory was pleased to be willing
once ?”—

Friedrich answers straightway to the effect: “Certainly!
Pay me the price it was once already offered for: 100,000
thalers, tlic expenses since incuned. That will be 180,000
thalers, besides what you have spent already on General Borck’s
days’ wages. To which wc will add that wretched little frac¬
tion of Old Debt, clear as noon, but never paid nor any part
of it; 60,000 thaleis, due by the .Sec of Li< 5 ge ever since the
Treaty of Utrecht; 60,000, foi winch wc will charge no in¬
terest : that wall make 740,oof thalers,—36,000/., instead oi
the old sum you have had it at Produce that cosh;

and take Herstal, and aJl the dust tliat has risen out of it, well
home with you.'The Bishop thankfully Complies in cdl
points ; negotiation spei^dily done (‘ 2olh Oct' the final date):
Bishop has not, 1 think, ^uite so much cash on hand; %ut
will pay all he has, and 4 per centum interest till the whole be
liquidated. Ilis Ambassadors ' get gold snuffboxes and re¬
turn mildly glad I

And thins, in some six weeks after Borck's arrival in those
parts, Borck’s function is well done. The noise of Gazettes

Amlxis-Kidot^ anlvcd aSth September; last Uehomtorium not yet out, Buii-
ness w.Ts completed 20th October (K0d<‘abeek, in dicha\. '

n Stengel, iv. 60, who counts in gulden, and is not distinct,

Chap.VI. ROYAL UNCLE AT HANOVER. 83

i6jth Sept 1740# •

and Diplomatic circles lays itself agam ; and Herscal, funous
once for King Pipin, and famous a^ain for King Friedrich,
lapses at length into obscurity, which we hope will never end.
Hope j—though who can say ? Roucdkx^ quite close upon it,
becomes a Battle-ground in some few years ; and memorabili¬
ties go much at random in this woi^d !

CHAPT^r'l VI.

RETURNS BY HANOVER ; DOES NOT CALL ON HTS ROYAL UNCLE

THERE.

_ /

Friedrich spent ten days on his circuitous journey home;

considerable inspection to be done, in Miiiden, Magdeburg,
not to speak of other businesses he had. The old Newspapers
are still more intent upon him, now that the Herstal Affair has
brokerT into flame : especially the ‘English Newspapers ; who
guess that there are passages of courtship going on between
great George their Kin<>and him. Here is one fart, correct
in every point, for the old London Public : ' Letters from
‘ Hanover say, that the King of Prussia passed within a small
' distance of that City the i6th inst. n. s., on his return to

* Berlin, but did not stop at Herrenhausen —about which
there has been such hoping and speculating among us lately.^
A fact which the extinct Editor seems to meditate for a day
or two; after which he says (partly in italhi,), opening his
lips the second time, like a Friar Bacon’s Head significant to
the Public : ‘ Letters from Hanover tell us that the Interview,

* which it was said his Majesty was to have with the King of
‘ Prussia, did not take place, for certain private reasons, which
‘ our Correspondent leaves us to guesn at 1’

It is well known Friedrich did not love his little Uncle,
then or thenceforth J still less his little Uncle him : ** What is
this Prussia, rising alongside of us, liigher and higher, as if it
would reach our* own sublime level!” thinks the little Uncle
to himself. At present there is no quarrel between them; on
the contrary, as wc have seen, there is a mutual capability of
helping one another, which both recognise ; but will an inter¬
view tend to forward that useful result ? Friedrich, in the in-

* Haily Past, ash Sept. 1740; other London Newspapers liroin, July 31st dovm-
WArds,

84 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE^ REINS. BookXl.

A ‘ ifith Sept- iJio*

tervals oi an ague, wfa Herstaljust broken out, may have
wisely decided, No. “ Our sublime little Uncle, of the waxy
complexion, with the proudly staring fish-eyes,—no wit in him,
not much sense, and a%reat deal of pride,—stands dreadfully
erect, ‘plumb and more,' with the Garter-leg advanced, when
one goes to see him; and^is remarks are not of an entertain¬
ing nature. Leave him standing there : to him let Truchsess
and Bielfeld suffice, in the^e hurries, in this ague 4 hat is still
upon us.” Upon which the i,^,ll old Newspapers, Owls of Mi¬
nerva that then were, endeavour to draw inferences. The
noticeable fact is, Friedrich did, on this occasion, pass within
a mile or two of his royal Uncle, without seeing him; and had
not, through life, another opportunity; never saw the sublime
little man at all, nor was again so near him.

I believe Friedrich little knows the thick-coming difficulties
of his Britannic Majesty at this juncture ; and is too impatient
of these laggard pioccdures on the part of a man with eyes d
Jleur-de-tCte. Modern readers too have forgotten Jenkins’s Ear:
It is not till after long study and suw^y that one begins to
perceive the anomalous piofunditics of that phenomenon to
the poor English Nation and its poor George 11 .

The English sent off, last year, a scanty Expedition, ‘ six
ships of the line,"only six, under Vernon, a fiery Admiral, a
little given to be fiery in Parliamentary talk withal; and these
did proceed to l^orto-Bello on the Spanish Main of South
America ; did hurl-out on Porto-Bello such a fiery destructive
deluge, of gunnery and bayonet-woik, as quickly reduced the
poor place to the verge of ruin, and forced it to surrender with
whatever navy, garrison, goods and resources were in it, to the
discretion of fiery Vernon,—who Joes not prove implacable,
he or his, to a petitioning enemy. Yes, humble the insolent,
but then be merciful to them, say the admiring Gazetteers.

‘ The actual morater,’ hqyr cheering to think, ‘who tore-off
‘ Mr. Jenkins’s Ear, was got hold of’ {dfctual monster, or even
three or four different monsters who each did it, the ‘ hold got'
being mythical^ as readers see), ‘and naturally thought he
* would be slit to ril^ons; but our people magnanijmously par-
‘ doned him, magnanimously flung him aside out of sight
impossible to shoot a dog in cold blood.

Whereupon Vernon returned home triumphant; and there
• CetUIeman't Magazine^ x. 124,145 (date pfthe Event is 3d Dec, w.S. *739),

Chap. VI. ROYAL UNCLE AT HANOVER. 85

t£th Sept X740, * (L I

burst forth such a jubilation. Over thl^day of snaall things, as
IS now astonishing to think of. Hhd the Termagant's own
Thalamus and Treasury been bombarded suddenly one night
by redhot balls, Madrid City laid in %shes, or Baby Carlos’s
Apanage extinguished from Creation, there could hardly have
been greater English joy (witness t^e “ Porto-Bellos^' they still
have, new Towns so-named); so flamy is the murky element
growing 0(1 that head. And indeed had the cipher of tar-bar¬
rels burnt, and of ale-barrels dj^ink, and the general account
of wick and tallow spent in illuminations and in aldermanic
exertions on the matter, been accurately taken, one doubts if
Porto-Bello sold, without shot fired, to the highest bidder, at
its flowriest, would have covered* such a sum. For they arc
a singular Nation, if stirred-up from their st.’gnancy ; and are
much in earnest about this Spanish War.

Il^is said there is now another far grander Expedition on
the stocks; military this time as well as naval, intended for
the Spanish Main ;—but of that, for the present, we will defer
speaking. Enough, Spanish War is a most snious and
most furious business to those old English; and, to us, after
forced study of it, shines out like far-off conflagration, with a
certain lurid significance in the then night of things. Night
otherwise fallen dark and somniferous to ^modern mankind.
As Britannic Majesty and his Walpoles have, from the first,
been dead against this Spanish War, the problem is all the
more ominous, and the dreadful coiollaries that may hang by
it the more distressing to the royal mind.

For example, there is known, or as good as known, to be
virtually some Family Compact, or covenanted Biotheihood of
Bourbonism, French and Spanish : political people quake to
ask themselves, ** How will the French keep out of this War,
if it continue any length of time ? And in that case, how will
Austria, Europe at large ? Jenkiijs’s Ear will have kindled
the Universe, not the^Jpanisli Mam only, and we shall be at
a fine pass !" The Britannic Majesty reflects that if France
take to fighting him, the first stab given will probably be in the
acceasibles^quarter and the intensely mosf sensitive,—our own
Electoral Dominions where no Parliament plagues us, our dear
native country, Hanover. Extremely interesting to know what
Friedrich of Prussia wiU do in such contingency ?

WeU, truly it might have been King Geozge's best bargain

86 FRIEDUICH TAKES THE HEINS. Uookxy.

^ m fejcprt. I3'4a

to close with Friedrijp; to guarantee Jiilich and Berg, and
get Friedrich to staiKf between the French and Hanover;
while George, with an England behind him, in snch humour,
went wholly into that Spanish Business, the one thing needful
to them at present. Truly; but then again, there are con¬
siderations : “ What is |.his Friedrich, just come out upon
the world? What real fighting power has he, after all that
ridiculous drilling and letruiting Friedrich Wilh«lni made?
Will he be faithful in bargaiU; is not, perhaps, from of old, his
bias always toward Fiance rather? And the Kaiser, what will
the Kaiser say to ii ?” I'licst arc questions for a Britannic
Majesty I Seldom was seen such an insoluble imbroglio of
potentialities; dangerous to touch, dangerous to leave lying;
—and his Brit.miiic Majesty’s procedures upon it are of a very
slow intricate sort; and will grow still more so, year after year,
in the new intricacies that arc coming, and be a weariness to
my readers and me. For observe the simultaneous fact. All
this while, Robinson at Vienna is dunning the Imperial Majesty
to remember old Marlborough days ifftd the Raws of Nature ;
and declare for us agamsi T ranee, in case of the worst. What
an attempt! Impcrird IMajcsty has no mohey ; Imperial Ma¬
jesty remembers recent d.iys rather, and his own last quarrel
with France (on the Polish-Election score), in which you Sea
I*owcrs cruelly stood neuter! One comlort, and pretty much
one only, is left to a nearly bankmpt Imperial heart ; that
France docs at any rate ratify Pragmatic Sanction, and instead
of enemy to that inestimable Document has become friend,—if
only she be well let alone. " Let well alone,“ says the sad
Kaiser, bankrupt of heart as well as purse: *^1 have saved
the Pragmatic, got Fleiiry to guarantee it; I will hunt wild
swine and not shadows any more : ask me not 1 ” And now
this Herstal business; the Imperial Debortatoriums^ perhaps
of a high nature, that are like to come ? More hopeless pro¬
position the Britannic Majesty never tnade than this to the
Kaiser. Put he persists in it, orders Kobinson to persist;
knocks at the Austrian door with one hand, at the Prussian,
or Anti-Austrian with the other; and gazes, with those proud
fish-eyes, into perils and potentialities and a sea of troubles.
Wearisome to think of, ypere not one bound to it I Here, from
a singular Constitutional History of England, not yet got ifito
print, arc two Excerpts; which I will request the reader to

Chap. VI. RCJYAL UNCLE AT HANOVER. 87

iCtli Sept. 1740.

try if he can take along with him,itn view of innich that is
coming:

I. A just This War, which posterity scofis at as the War

* for Jettkins^s Ear, was, if we examine <juite indispensable one;

‘ the dim mtich-bewildered English, driven into it by their deepest in-
‘ stincls were, in a chaotic inarticulate way, light and not wrong in
‘ taking it as the Commandment of llefven. For .such, in a sense, it
‘ WAS; as .shall by and by appear. Not perhaps since tlie grand Refor-
‘ ination C(^itrover$y, under Oliver Cromwell and Elizalieth, had there,

‘ to this poor ^English People (whoj>re essentially dumb, warticulate,

‘ from the weight of meaning they^ave, uotwitlistanding the palaver
‘ one hears from them in certain epochs), been a more authentic cauae
^ of War, And, what was the fadl and yet k»olidi circumafance, their
‘ Constitutional Captains, espcu.illy then King, would never and could

* never reganl it as such; but had to be forced into it by the public

* rage, there being no other method left iii the ci ..

‘ I »ay, .a most necessary W.ir, though of a most stii^sid app<>arance;
‘such the fatality of it;—begun, eanud on, ended, ii I^y-i Peoj)le
‘ in \ ftate of somnambulism! More Confu>e<l opeiation never was. A
‘ solid placid I’eople, heavily as!ee]>—(and smvi//^ muili, shall we say,

‘ and inarticulately grunting and struggling imdei indigestions. Con
‘ slitutional and other? ‘Tio but listen lu th hmn of those extinct
‘ ramphlets and Parliamentary Oratoiies of theirs!),—\ct an honestly
‘ intending People; and keenly alive to any cmnmandmeiV horn Ilf,,!-
‘ ven, that could pierce through the thick skm ot them mto iheir big
‘obstinate heart. Such a commandment, them and tluir, v/is that
' monition about Jenkins’s Ear. Upon which, so pungent was it to
‘them, they started violently out of bed, into jumful skep-walking;
‘ and went, for twenty years and more, cl.imbcrmg.iud spiawliugabout,

‘ Ur aud wide, on the giddy edge of ptccipiccs, ovei liousetops and

* fiigiitful cornices and parapets; in a dim fulfilment of the slid Hea-
‘ ven’s command. 1 reckon that this War, though there were intervals,

‘ Treaties of Peace more than one, and the War had various names,—
‘ did not end till 1763. And then, by degrees,* the poor:English Nation
‘ found that (at, say, a thousand times the necessary expense, and with
‘ imminent peril to its ]K)or head, and all the bones of its body) it had
‘ Actually succeeded,^—by dreadful exei tions in its sleep! 'fhis will be
‘ more apparent by and by; and may a kind of comfort to the sad
‘ English reader, drearily^urveying such somnambulibms on the part of
‘ bis poor ancestors,’

Two DiJ^cuUks. — ‘ There are Two grand Difficulties in this
‘ Fttrcc'Tragedy of a War; of which only one, and that not the worst

* of the Pair, is in the least surmised by the English hitherto. Difn

* cttlly First, which K even worse than the other, and will surprisingly
‘ attend the Eng)kh in all their Wars now coming, is; That their fighl-

* ing'-apparatusftwugh made of excellent material, cannot fight,—being

88 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. Book XI.

t6th Sept, ifio*

* in disorgRjiic condition; ope branch of it, especially the *'* Military^*

' one as they are pleased t<^alt it, being as good as totally chaotic, and

* this in a quite habitual rsmoitu, this long while back. With the Naval
‘branch it is otherwise,; which also is habitual there. The English
‘ almost as if by nature cm| sail, and fight, in ships; cannot well help

* doing it. Sailors innulnerable are bred to them; they are planted in
‘ the Ocean, opulent stormy Neptune clipping them in all his moods

* forever; and then by naturdf being a dumb, much-endluring, much-:

‘ reflecting, stout, veracious and valiant kind of People, they shine in
‘ that way of life, which specially requires such. Withou^^much fOre-
‘ thought, they have sailors inmin^'rable, and of the best quality. TUa
‘ English have among them also, strange as it may seem to the cursory
‘ observer, a great gift of organising ;«'Witness ^eir Arkw'righls and
‘ others: and this gift they may often, in matters Naval more than else-
‘ where, get the chance of exercising. For a Ship’s Crew, or even a
' Fleet, unlike a land Army, is of itself a unity, its fortunes disjoined,

* dependent on its own management j and it falls, moreover, as no land

* Army can, to the undivided guidance of one man,—who (by hypo-
‘ thesis, being English) has now and then, from of old, chanced to be an
‘ oiganising man; and who is always much interested to know and prac-
‘ tise what //as been well organised. For you are in contact with verities,

* to an unexampled degree, when you get uwn the Ocean, with intent
‘ to sail on it, much more to fight on it;—^b^omless de.struction raging

* beneath you and on all hands of you, if you neglect, for any reason,

‘ tije methods of keeping i/ down, and making it float you to your aim !

‘ The English Navy i.s in tolerable order at that period. But as to

* the English Army,—we may .say it is, in a wrong .sense, the wonder
‘ of the world, and continues so throughout the whole of this Plistory

* and farther! Never before, among the rational sons of Adam, Were

* Annies sent out on such tenns,—namely without a General, or with

* no General understanding the least of lu* business. The English have

* a notion that Generalship is not wanted; that War is not an Art, as
‘ playing Chess is, a.s finding the Longitude, and doing the Diflerential

* Calculus are (and a much deeper An than any of these); that War is

* taught by Nature, as erfeing Is; that courageous soldiers, led on by a
‘ courageous Wooden Pole with Cocked-hat on it will do very well.

* In the world I have not found opacity of platitude go deeper among

* any People. This is Difficulty First,—not yet suspected by an Eng-
‘ lish People, capable of great ppacity on some subjects.

* ‘ Difficulty Second is, That their Ministry,* whom they had to force.

‘ into this War, perhaps do not go zealously upon it. And perhaps
‘ even, in the abdve circumstances, they totdly want knowledge , hpw
‘ to go upon it, were they never $o zealous! Difficulty Second might

* be much helped, were not for Difficulty Fir$t. But the administer*

* ihg of war is a thing also that does not come to a man like eating.—^

* This Second Difficulty, suspicion that Walpole and perhaps still higher
‘ heads want zeal, gives bis Britannic Majesty infinite trouble; and^

C1>.P.VI!. WITHDRAWS TO REINSBERG. 89

Sc]}t.*z5th Oct. 1740. • .

--•And so^ in short, he stands therewith the OaAet-leg ad¬
vanced, looking loftily into a considtrable sea of troubles,—
that day when Friedrich drove past himi, Friday 16th'Septem¬
ber 1740, and never came so near him again.

The next business for Friedrich was a Visit at Brunswick,
to the Affinities and Kindred, in jlissing; where also was an
important little act to be done: Betrothal of the young Prince,
August Wtlhelm, Heir-Presumptive whom we saw in Strasburg,
to a Princess of that House, Li^isa Amelia, younger Sister of
Friedrich’s own Queen. A modest promising arrangement;
which turned out well enough,—though the young Prince, Fa¬
ther to the Kings that since are, was not supremely fortunate
otherwise.® After which, the review at Magdeburg; and home
on the 24th, there to ‘be busy as a Turk or as a M. Jordan/
—according to what we read long since,

CHAPTER VII.

j0

WITHDRAWS TO REINSBERG, HOPING A PEACEABLE WINTER.

By this Herstal token, which is now blazing abroad, now
and for a month to come, it can be judged that the young King
of Prussia intends to stand on his own footing, quite peremp¬
torily if need be; and will by no means have himself led about
in Imperial harness, as his late Father was. So that a dull
Public (Herrenhausen very specially), and Gazetteer Owls of
Minerva everywhere, may expect events. All the more indubit¬
ably, when that spade-work comes to light in the Wesel Coun¬
try. It is privately certain (the Gazetteers not yet sure about
it, till they see the actual spades going), this new King does
fully intend- to assert his rights on Berg-Julich; and will appear
there witl)i his iron ramrods, the instant old Kur-Pfalz shall de¬
cease, let France and the Kaiser No to it or say Yes. There
are, in fact, at a fit pface, ' Biiderich in the neighbourhood of
Wesel,’ certain rampart-w-orks, beginnings as of an Entrenched
Camp, going on;—“for Review purposes merely,” say the
Gazetteers, in italics^ Here, it privately is Friedrich's resolu¬
tion, shall a Prussian Army, of the due strength (could be well
nigh iOQ,oo<^trong if needful), make its appearance, directly

. ') Betrothal was ebth September Manias, Sth January 1749 (Bucbholr, h

W)- .

90

FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RE*[NS. B«kX!.

^ S4th Sept.-?5tb Oct. 1^40.

oa. old Ki^^-Pfalz’s decejpe, if one live to sec such event. ^ y ranee
and the Kaiser will pro^bly take good survey of that BUderlch
phenomenon before meddling*

To do his work lik<> a King, and shun no peril and no toil
in the course of what his work may be, is Kriedneh’s rule and
intention. Nevertheless i* is <lear he expects to approve him¬
self magnanimous rather in the Peaceable operations than in
the Warlike; and his outlooks are, of all places and pursuits,
towards Rcinsberg and the Fi^c Arts, for the time being. Hi»
Public activity meanwhile they describe as * prodigious,’ though
the ague still clings to him; such building, instituting, man¬
aging: Opera-House, French Theatre, Palace for hisi'Mother;
—day by day, inany things to be recorded by Editor Formey,
though the rule about them here is silence except on cause.

No doubt the ague is itself privately a point of moment.
Such a vexatious paltry little thing, in this bright whirl qf Acti¬
vities, Public and other, which he continues managing in spite
of it; impatient to be nd of it. But it will not go: there t£
re.appears always, punctual to hi, ‘ fourtli day,*—like a snarling
stieet-dog, in the high Bnll-room and Work-room. ‘He is
drinking I’yrmont water;’ has himself proposed Quinquina, a
remedy just come up, but the Doctors shook their heads; has
tried snatches of Reinsberg, too short; he intends soon to be
out there for a right spell of country, there to be “ happy,” and
get quit of his ague. The ague went,—and by a remedy which
surprised the whole world, as will be seen 1

Wilhdmtndi, Return- Visit

V

• ^

Monday 17th October, came the Baireuth Visitors; Wilhel-
mina all in a flutter, and tremor of joy and sorrow, to see her
Brother again, her old kindred and the altered scene of things.
Poor L.ady, she is perceptibly more tremulous than usual; and
her Nairative, not in dates < 4 ily, but in mt»re memorable points,
dances about at a sad rate; interior agitations and tremulous
sbnlt feelings shivering her this way and that, and throwing
things topsyturvy in one's recollection. Like the magnetic
needle, shaky but steSfast {agii^e mats <;0HStante), Truer no¬
thing can be, points forever to the Pole; but what obli¬
quities it makes; will shiver aside in mad esi^apkdes, if you

1 Stenicl iv. 61.

9 =

Chflp.^Vll. WITHDRAWS TO REINSBKRG.

B4tJi S5ept.-2Sth OcL 1740. • »

lioH the paltriest bit of old iron n!^ it,—paltri&t clack ot
gossip about this loved Brother of miiie! Brother, we will hope,
silefiitly continues to be Pole, so that the needle always comes
back again; otherwise all would go to»rcck. Here, in abridged
and partly rectihed form, are the plienoinena witnessed:

‘ We anived al Berlin the end of Oftoucr’ (Mondtiy as above
said). ‘My youiiijer Biothers, followed by the Prlnee'> of the Blood
‘ and by al| the Coml, receucfl us ai tlie horioui of the stairs. I was
‘ led to uiy pparlmeat, where I iound uic lieiLt'TJii; Queen, niy Sisters’
iUlrique, Amelia), ‘and the runcem.s’ (of tl.e Blood, as above, Sehwcdt
and the rest). *I Icaruerl with much ch.-igim th.u ilie King was ill of
‘ teitian ague’ (tjuartan; but that i-. no matter). ‘He sent me word
‘ that, bemg in his fit, he could not sec me; but that he depended on

* having that pleasure tomorrow. The Queen .Moilier, to whom I went
‘ without delay, was in a daik condition; 100. is all hung with their
‘ lugubrious drapery j everything yet in the depth of mourning for ray

* Father. What a scene foi me! Nalmc has li<a r.giUs; 1 can say
‘ w'itlPtruth, I have almost nevci in* uiy Jnie been so moved as on this
‘ occasion.’ Interview wdth Mamnn,—we can /ciiicy it,—‘was of the
‘ most touching. ’ Wilbclmina had been absmt i igbt 3 c.ns She scarcely
knows the young on.C'- agatn, ill so gtow n . — hnd 1 c h itig* on c h mge;
and that Time, as he always is, ha > been bu-.y. I hat night the Supper
Party was exclusively a Fanuly one.

fler Brother’s welcome to heron the moriow, though aidcnt enough,
.she found ejeficient in .sincerity, deficient in several points; as indeed a
Brother up to the neck in hubine-.s, and jus^ come out olan ague-lit, does
not appear to the best advantage. Wilhclmma notued hon ill be
looked, so lean and broken-down it difart) w ithm the last two

months; but seems to have mken no account of it faither, in sinking
her balance.s with Friedrich. And indeed in her Narrative of this Visit,
not, we will hope, in the Visit itself, she must have been m a high state
of magnetic deflection,—^pretty nearly her maxinmui of such, discover¬
able in those famous Memoirs, —such a tuuKilt is there m her state¬
ments^ all gone to ground-and-lofty tumbling in this place; so discrepant
are the still ascertainable facts from this topsyturvy picture of them,
sketched by her four years hence (in 1744). The tiuest of magnetic
needles; but so sensitive, if you bring foreign iron near it 1

Wilhehnina was loa«itd with honouro by an impartial Berlin Public,
that is, Court Public j ‘ but, all being in mourning, the Court was not
‘ brilliant. The Queen Mother saw little company, and was .sunk in

* sorrow;—had not the least influence in aftairs, so jealous was the nehr
‘ King of his Authority,—to the Queen MotRer’s surprise, ’ says Wil-
helmina. For the rest, here is a King ‘becoming truly unpopular’ (or,
we fancy so, i nm tf deflected state, and judging by the rumour of cliques);
‘ a general disTOment reigning in the Country, love of his subjects pretty

* much gone; people speaking of him in no measured terms’ (in certain

92 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE ReInS. BjokXI.

- * ii4th Sept-isth Oct4174a

diques). ’ tares nothing |^ut those who helped him as Prince Royal,

* say some; others complln^p of his avarice* (meaning steady violence
in outlay) * as surpassing the late King's $ this one complained of his

* violences of temper {enip^rtmens); that one of his saispicions, of his

* distrust, his haughtiness^, his dissimulation’ (meaning polite impeno'
trability when he saw good). Several circumstances, known to WU-
hclmina’s own experience, coiftpel Wilhelmina’s assent on those points.

* I would have spoken to him about them, if my Brother of l^ussia’
(young August Wilhelm, betrothed the other day) ‘and the^ueen R^-

* nant had not dissuaded me. Farther on I will give the explanation
‘ of all this,’—^never did it anywh^are. ‘ I beg those who may one day

* read these Memoirs, to suspend their judgment on the character of
‘ this great Prince till I have developed It.’* Oh my Princess, you are
true and bright, but you are shrill; and I admire the effect of atmo*
spheric electricity, not to say, of any neighbouring marine-store shop,
or miserable bit of bioken pan, on one of the finest imgnetic needles
ever made and set trembling 1

Wilhelmina is incapable of deliberate falsehood; apd this
her impression or reminiscence, with all its exaggeration, is
entitled to be heard in evidence so far. From this, and from
other sources, readers will assuie themselves that discontents
were not wanting; that King Friedrich was not amiable to
everybody at this time,—which indeed he never grew to be at
any other time. He had to be a King; that was the trade he
followed, not the quite different one of being amiable all round.
Amiability is good, my Princess; but the question rises, “ To
whom?—for example, to the young gentleman who shot him¬
self in Lobegun ?” There are young gentlemen and old some¬
times in considerable quantities, to whom, if you were in your
duty, as a King of men (or even as a ‘ King of one man and
his affairs,’ if that is all your kingdom), you should have been
hateful instead of amihble I That is a stern truth; too much
forgotten by Wilhelmina and others. Again, what A deadening
and killing circumstance is it in the career of amiability, that
you are bound not to be communicative of your inner man, but
perpetually and strictly the^reverse! Ilpmay be doubted if a
good King ran be amiable; certainly he cannot in any but the
noblest ages, and then only to a select few. I should guess
FViedrich was at no rime fairly loved, not by those nearest to
him. He was rapid, decisive; of wiry compact nature; had
nothing ot his Father’s amplitudes, simplicities; nothing to
sport ^vith and fondle> far from it Tremui(/jf!& Sensibilities,

9 VTihtdimuA, it

Chuv-VH. WITHDRAWS TO REINSBERG. 93

a4th Sept -35lh Oct 1740 ,

ardent affections; these we clearly ^cover in hiili, in extra¬
ordinary vivacity; but he wears thenikinder his polished pan¬
oply, and lb outwardly a radiant but metallic object to mankin^.
Let us carry this along with us in ^udying him; and thank
Wilhellnina for giving us hint of it m her oblique way.—Wil-
helmma's love for her Brother rose to quite hcioic pitch m
coming years, and was at its highe* when she died. That con¬
tinuation of her Memotrs in which she is to develop her Bro¬
ther’s chdfirapter, was never written • it has been sought fot m
modem tunes; and a few ms^fenificant pages, with evidence
that there is not, and was not, any more, aie all that has turned
up.®

Incapable of falsity ptepense, we say; but the known facts,
which stand abundantly on record if you ciire to ccirch them
out, are metely as follows Friedrich, with such sincerity as
theie might be, did welcome Wilhclmina on the monow of her
amvll, spoke of Remsberg, and ‘of au and rest, and how plea¬
sant It would be; rollcd-off next morning, having at last ga-
thered-up his business!^, and got them A\ell in han'i, to Reins-
bergaccordingly, whither Wilhelniina, with the Queen Regnant
and others of agieeablc qualit>, followed in two d i) s, intending
a long and pleasant spell of country out there Which hope
was tolerably fulfilled, even foi Wilhclmina, though there did
come unexpected mteiruptions, not of Friedrich’s bringing.

Unexpected News at Reunbefg

Friedrich’s pm suits and intended conquests, for the present,
are of peaceable and even gay nature French 'I heatre, Italian
Opera-House, these are among the immediate outlooks. Vol¬
taire, skilled m French acting, if anybody (ver wcic, is multi¬
fariously negotiating for a Company of that kind,—let him be
swift, be successful.^ An Italian Opeia ihcie shall be the
House is still to be built. Captain Knobelsdoif, who built
Remsberg, whom wt^ have know!, is to do it Knobclsdorf
has gone to Italy on that eiiand, ‘went by Dresden, carefully
* examining the Opera-House there, and all the famed Opera-
‘ Houses on his road.’ Graun, one of jhe best judges living,
is likewise off to Italy, gathering singers. Our Opera too shall

s Pert?, derMarf^^r^n vm. Bayreuth (Paper re^d

{aBerlin, asth Apnl 1850)

* Letters of Yoltaiio in these months).

94 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REI^S. BookXl.

^ a4th Sept.>95th Qct. 1740.

be a successful thing;, we hope, a speedy. Such are Fried¬
rich’s outlooks at this tone,

A miscellaneous plealant company ts here; Trudhsess and
Mielfeld, home from H|^nover, among them; Wilhelmina is
hereVoltaire himself perhaps coming again, Friedrich drinks
his Pyrmont waters; works at his public businesses all day,
which are now well in hanll, and manageable by couriers; at
evening he appears in company, and is the astonishment of
everybody; brilliant, like a new-risen sun, as if he knew of no
illness, knew of no business, lived for amusement only.

* He intends Private Theatricals withal, and is getting ready
Voltaire's Morf de Chary* These were pretty days at Reins-
berg. This kind of life lasted seven or eight weeks,—in spite
of interruptions of subtenanean* volcanic nature, some of which
were surely considetablc. Here, in the very first week, coming
almost volcanically, is one, which indeed is the sum of them
all.

Tuesday forenoon 25th October 1740, Express arrives at
RemsUerg; diuti fiom Vicniri five days agd; finds Friedrich
under cdii)'5C, hidden in the interior, labouring under his ague-
fit: question uses, Shall the Expicss be introduced, or be held
back.? The news he brings is huge, unexpected, transcendent,
and may agitate the suk King. Six or seven heads go wag¬
ging on this point,—who by accident are nameable, if readers
caie: ‘ Prince August Wilhe’m,’ lately betrothed; * Graf Truch-
sess,’ home fiom Hanover; ‘ Colonel Graf von Fmkenstein,’
old Tutor’s Son, <i familiar from boyhood upwards; ‘Baron
Pollnitz,’ kind of chief Goldstick now, or Master of the Cere¬
monies, not too witty, but the cause of wit; ‘Jordan, Bielfeld,*
known to us; and lastly, * Fredorsdorf,’ Major-domo and Fac¬
totum, who is grown from Valet t'o be Purse-Keeper, confi¬
dential Manager, and almost friend,—a notable personage in
Friediich’s llistoiy. Thejr c^ride, “ ]jdlt|ir wait 1 ”—

They wait accordingly; and then, after about an hour, the
trembling-fit being over, and Fredersdorf having cautiously pre¬
luded a little, and prei 5 ared the way, the Despatch is delivered,
and the King left with his immense piece of news. News
that his Imperial Majesty Karl VI, died, after short illfiess, on
Thursday the 20th last. Kaiser dead: House of Jf„.,psburg, and

* Preuss, Throhiesteienn^t p, 413.

•THE KAISER’S DEATH.

Owp-Vlll.
aotb Oct. I74P.

95

it? Five Centuries of^tough wrestling,uneasy Dominancy
in this world, ended, gone to the distlff:—the countcr-wrcst-
ling Ambitions ^nd Cupidities not dead; and nothing but Prag¬
matic Sanction left between the fallen House and them I Fried¬
rich kept silence; showed no sign h^w transfixed he was to
hear such tidings; which, he foresaw, would have immeasurable
consequences in the world. •

One o^thc first was, that it cured Fncdrich of his ague.
It braced hmY (it, and peihap^^'a little quinquina which he
now insisted on’) into such a tensity of spmt as drove out his
ague like :i mere hiccup; quite gone m the comse of next week;
aitd we heal no more of that impoitunatc annojance He sum¬
moned SecretaryEichel, “Beread) m so manyminutes hence;”
rose from hjs l>ed, dressed himself,*"—and (.hen, by Eichel’s
help, sent off expresses for .Scliwenn his chief Geneial, and
Podevwls hib chief Minister A lusoluliou, which is rising or
has risen m the Royal mind will bo leady for c onimunic.iling
to these Two by the time they aiuvc, on the second day licncc.
This done, Fnedrkh, T believe, jomcil Ins Lonij'au) in the
evening; and was as light and bnlliant au if nothing had hap¬
pened.

CHAPTER VIII.

THF KAISl K’S DLAIU.

The Kaiser’s death (.line upon the Public unexpectedly;
though not quite so upon obscivnnt pcibons clo*oi dt hand.
He was not yet filty-six out; a ium-built min, hid been of
sound constitution, of active, not intcmpci.ito habits, but in
the last SIX years^ theie had come such toircntv ol ill-luck loll¬
ing clown on him, he had sutfeicd immensely, fai bc)ond what
the world knew of; and to those near hmi, and anxious for
him, Ins strength seemed mucli undermined, hive yeais ago,
in summer 1735, Robinson rcpoitife, from a sure band: * No-

* thing can equal the Emperor’s agitation undei these disasters’
(brought upon him by Fleury and the Spaniards, as aftcrcl.ip
to Ins Polish-IClection feat). * His good Jilmpress is terrified,

* many times, he will die in the course of the night, when

* singly with he gives a loose to his affliction, confusion

' « Preuss, ThretUffsttigungt P* 4 i 6 »

96 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE RHNS. SookXt.

Both Oct 1740^

‘ ami desjkair.’ Sea-Poy^rs will not help; Fleury and mere rdin
will engulf! *What atl^ments this agitation is his distrust in

* every one of his own iftinisters, except perhaps Bartenstein,'^

who is not much gf a support either, though a gnarled
weighty old stick in his way (‘ Professor at Strasburg once’):
not interesting to us here. The rest his Imperial Majesty con-^
siders to be of sublimatedf-blockhead type, it appears, rrince
Eugene had died lately, and with Eugene all good fortune.

And then, close following, the miseries of that Turk War,
crashing down upon a man! They say, Duke Frans, Maria
Theresa's Husband, nominal Commander in those Campaigns,
with the Seckendorfs and Wallises under him going such a
road, was privately eager to have done with the Business, on
any terms, lest the Kaiser should die first, and leave it welter¬
ing. No wonder the poor Kaiser felt broken, disgusted with
the long Shadow-Hunt of Life; and took to practical field-
sports rather. An Army that cannot fight, War-General!, good
only to be locked in Fortresses, an Exchequer that has no
money; after such wagging of the wi^s, and such Privy-Coun-
cilling and such War-Councilling:—let us hunt wild-swine, and
not think of it! That, thank Heaven, we still have; that, and
Pragmatic Sanction well engrossed, and generally sworn to by
mankind, after much effort!—

The outer Public of that time, and Voltaire among them
more deliberately afterwards, spoke of ‘mushrooms,’ an ‘indi¬
gestion of mushroomsand it is probable there was some¬
thing of mushrooms concerned in the event. Another subse¬
quent Frenchman, still more irreverent, adds to this of the

* excess of mushrooms,’ that the Kaisei made light of it. ‘When
' the Doctors told him he had few hours to live, he would not

* believe it; and bantered his Physicians on the sad news.
‘ “Look me in the eyes,” said he; “have I the air of one

* dying? When you see njy sight growing dim, then let the

* sacraments be administered, whether I order or not.” ’ Doc¬
tors insisting, the Kaiser replied: ‘ “Since you are foolish fel-

* lows, who know neither the cause nor the state of my disorder,

* I command that, once I am dead, you open my body, to know

* what the matter was; you can then cqfmc and let me know!”

1 Rohln'-rtn to Lord Harrington, 5th July *735 Office),

> Anci.dotet Gervtmiques (Parit, *7^), p, 699.

CfcaihVHi. THE KAISER'S DEATH. 97

Both Oct i74dk • If i

—in which also there is perhaps a glimir|rmg ofdistoAed truth,
though, as Monsieur mistakes even t|j! day (‘18th October,'
says he, not 20th), ohe can only accept it as rumour from the
outside. •

Here, by an extremely sombre domestic Gentleman of great
punctuality and great dulness, are |^e authentic particulars,
such as it was good to mention in Vienna circles.® An ex¬
tremely dull Gentleman, but to appearance an authentic; and
so little defective in reverence that he delicately expresses some
astonishment at Death’s audacisy this year, in killing so many
Crowned Heads. * This year 1740,’ says he, ‘ though the wea-

* ther throughout Europe had been extraordinarily fine,* or fine
for a cold year, *had already witnessed several Deaths of Sove-

* reigns : Pope Clement XII., Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia,

* the Queen Dowager of Spain’ (Termagant’s old stepmother,
not Termagant’s self by a great way). ‘But that was not

* enough: unfathomable Destiny ventured now on Imperial

* Heads {wagte sick auch an Kaiserkronen) : Karl VI., namely,

* and Russia’s great Monsyrehess:’—an audacity to be remarked.
Of Russia's great Monarchess (Czarina Anne, with the big
cheek) we will say nothing at present; but of Karl VI. only,—
abridging much, and studying arrangement.

‘Thursday October 13th, returning from Halbthum, a Hunting

* Seat of his,’ over in Hungary some fifty miles, ‘ to the Palace Favorita

* at Vienna, his Imperial Majesty felt slightly indisposed,’—Indigestion
of mushrooms or whatever it was; had begun at llalbthurn the night
before, we rather understand, and was the occasion of his leaving.

* The Doctors called it cold on the stomach, and thought it of no con-

* sequence. In the night of Saturday, it became alarming;’ inflamma¬
tion, thought the Doctors, inflammation of the liver, and used their
potent appliances, which only made the dangef come cpid go; ‘and on
‘ the Tuesday, all day, the Doctors did not doubt his Imperial Majesty
‘ was dying.* (“Look me in the eyes; pack of fools; you will have
to dissect me, you will then knowAny truth in all that? No matter.)

‘ At noon of that Tuesday he took tlm Sacrament, the Pope’s Nun-
‘ cio administering. His Sfajesty showea uncommonly great composure
‘ of soul, and resignation to the Divine Will;’ being indeed “certain,”
—so he expressed it to ‘a principal Official Person sunk in grief*
(Bortenstein, shall we guess?), who stood by him—“certain of his
cause,” not afraid in contemplating that dread Judgment now near:
“ Look at me I A man that is certain of his cause can enter on such

3 (AnonymOu^^^Ki^. RdmischtnKaiurs CttriVI* teben uft 4 Thattn (Frank¬
furt uad Leipzig, i74t), pp.

VOL, lY,

H

98 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BoQkXl.

, 9«th Oct t7v|o-

** t, Joumc^ ttith good crai^age and a composed mind (m{( guim un 4
** gtlassenam MutJy* m th,ie Doctors, duWtating what the disease
was, he said, Crazelli," jay late worthy Doctor, “were still here^

“ you would soon know; hut as it is, you will learn it when you dis-
“ sect me;”—and once feked to be shown the Cup where Heart
would lie after that operation.

* Sacrament being over, Tuesday afternoon, *he sent for his Fa*

‘ mily, to bless them each separately. He had a Icw^ conversation

* 'mth Grand Duke Franz,’ titular of Lorraine, actual of Tuscany, ‘ who

* had assiduously attended him, and continued to do sd, during the
‘ whole illness. The Grand Dij^e’s Spouse,*—-Maria Theresa, the
noble-hearted and the overwhelmed; who is now in an interesting state
again withal; a little Kaherkin (Joseph II.) coming in live months;
first child, a little girl, is now two years old;—* had been obliged to
‘ take to bed three days ago; laid up of grief and terror {vor Schmer»e»

* und Schrecken\ ever since Sunday the i6th. Nor would his Imperial
‘ Majesty permit her to enter this death-room, on account of her con-
‘ dition, so important to the world; but his Majesty, turning towards
‘ that side where her apartment was, raised his right hand, ajjd com-

* manded her Husband, and the Archduchess her younger Sister, to

* tell his Theresa, That he blessed her herewith, notwithstanding her
‘ absence.’ Poor Kaiser, poor Theresa! * Most distressing of all was
‘ the scene with the Kaiserin. The night before, on getting knowledge
‘ of the sad certainty, she had fainted utterly away {starke Ohnmacht)^

‘ and had to be carried into the Grand Duchess’s’ (Maria Theresa’s)

‘ room. Being summoned now with her Children, for the last blessing,

* she cried as in despair, “ Do not leave me, Your Dilection, do not

* {Ach Emr Liebden verlassen mtch dock Poor good Souls I

‘ Her Imperial Majesty would not quit the room again, but remained

* to the last.

‘ Wednesday igtli, all day, anxiety, moamful suspense;* poor weep¬
ing Kaiserin and all the woild waiting; the Inevitable visibly struggling
on. ‘ And in the night of that day* (night of i9th-aoth Oct 1740),

* between one and two in the morning, Death snatched away this most
‘ invaluable Monarch {den pr&sumrdigstett Mona-rchen) in tihe 56th year

* of his lifeand Kaiser Karl VI., and the House of Hfi^sburg and its
Five tough Centuries of good and evil in this world had endeS. The
poor Kaiserin ‘ closed the eyes’ that cottld now no more behold her J

* kissed his hands, and was cj^rned out more dead than alive.**

^ Anoft3nnous, wt su^ri, pp. 220-227.—Adelttng', PrajgTHaiitcki Siaaisgesdkiehte
(Ootha, i 76»- i 767), ij. tao. Johan Chntiofih Ad«{ucj; , same who did the JDic-
fionaty and many other deserving Books, here is the yrttrise Title j ^Pragmatm/tg
Staaikgescldchte Europens^ that is,’ ‘ Docutneptaiy Hwtoiy of Emope, from Kaiser

* Karl s Death, 1740, till Peace of Pans, 17^3.' A solids labcHioUs ahd meritorihVS
Werk, ctf its kind: extrrntfely exteiuivo (9 v<^ 4to, 06414 of wMck are douMe knd
eyea treble), mostly in the undigested, sometimes in the ipute uncooked or Htw cOn-
didoni perhaps about a fifth part of It conusts of * XSktOliwents* ptopw; which are
skippable. It cannot help being dull, waste, dreary, but is^-ywhert intelligibly
fi^ceileot Indexes too),—and offers an Qt>ha}$iy teader \ifm tfie best fetoiicrce ««•
tnunawe for survey of that sad Period,

Ctaj-Viu. THE KAISER’S DEATH. 99

aotih Oct. X740.

, A good aifectiot^kte Kaiserln* X Ho bi^lieve; htnourable,
truthful, though unwitty of speech, and clmverted by Grandpiipa
in a peculiar manner. For her Kaiser too, after all, I have a
kind of love. Of brilliant articulate intellect there is nothing ;
nor of inarticulate (aS in Friedrich Wilhelm's case) anything
considerable: in fact his Shadotv-Hunting, and Duelling with
the Termagant, seemed the reverse^ of wise. But there was
something of a high proud heart in it, too, if we examine; and
even the Pgagmatic Sanction, though in practice not worth one
re^ment of Hon ramrods, indicates a ]profoundly fixed deter¬
mination, partly of loyal naturefsuch as^he gods more or less
reward. ‘ He had been a great builder,’ aay the Histories;

* was a great musician, fit to lead orchestras, and had com-

* posed an Opera,’*---poor Kaiser. There came out large traits
of him, in Maria Theresa again, under an improved form, which
were much admired by the world. He looks, in his Portraits,
intensely serious; a handsome mao, stoically grave; much the
gentleman, much the Kaiser or Supreme Gentleman. As, in
life and fact, he was; “ something solemn in him, even when
he laughs,” the people used to say. A man honestly doing his
very best with his poor Kaisership, and dying of chagrin by it.

* On opening the body, the liver-region proved to be entirely

* deranged; in the place where the gall-bladder should have
' been, a stone of the size of a pigeon’s egg was found grown

* into the liver, and no gall-bladder now there.'

That same morning, with earliest daylight, 'Thursday 20th,
six A.M.,’ Maria Theresa is proclaimed by her Heralds over
Vienna; ‘According to Pragmatic Sanction, Inheritress of all

* the’ &c. &c*-Sovereign Archduchess of Austria, Oucen of
Hungary and Bohemia, for chief items. 'At sevon her Majesty
‘ took the Oath from the Generals and Presidents of Tribunals,
‘ 1—said, through her tears, “ AU was to stand on the old footing,
' each in hi^ post,” and the other needful words. Couriers
shoot forth towards all Countries;—line express courier to Re¬
gensburg, and the Dnchantcd Wiggerics there, to say That a
new Kaiser will be needed; /vV<ry 5 !j-Vicar or Vicars (Kur-Sachsen
and whoever more, foif they aje sometime^ disagreed about it)
wiU have to administer in the interim.

A second courier we saw arrive at Reinsberg; he likewise
may be impoRSuiH The Bavarian Minister, Karl Albert Kur-

100 FRIEDRlfcH TAKES THE REINS. Book XL

iMth Oot 1740*

Baiem^s ttfen, shot off h(s express, like the others; answer is,
by return of courier, 0^ even earlier (for a messenger was al¬
ready on the road), MaJCe protest! “ We Kur-Baiem solemnly
protest against Pragmatic Sanction, and the assumption of such
Titles by the Daughter^of the late Kaisen King of Bohemia,
and in good part even of Austria, it is not you, Madam, bat of
right wc; as, by Hcaven’i help, it is our fixed resolution to
make good T’ Protest was presented, accordingly, with all the
solemnities, without loss of a moment. To which Bartenstein
and the Authorities answered Pooh-pooh,” as if it were no¬
thing. It is the first ripple of an immeasurable tide or deluge
in that kind, threatening to submerge the new Majesty of Hun¬
gary ;—as had been foreseen at Reinsberg; though Barsenstein
and the Authorities made light of it, answering “ Pooh-pooh,'*
or almost “ Ha-ha," for the present.

Her Hungarian Majesty’s chief Generals, Seckendorf, Wallis,
Neipperg, sit in their respective prisonwards at this time (from
which she soon liberates them): Kur-Baiern has lodged pro¬
test ; at Reinsberg there will be an important resolution ready:
—and in the Austrian Treasury (which employs 40,000 per¬
sons, big and little) there is of cash or available resource,
100,000 florins, that is to say, 10,000/. net.** And unless Prag¬
matic sheepskin hold tighter than some persons expect, the
affairs of Austria and of this young Archduchess are in a threat¬
ening way.

His Britannic Majesty was on the road home, about Hel-
voetsluys or on the sea for Harwich, that night the Kaiser died;
of whose illness he had heard nothing. At London, ten days
after, the sudden news struck dismally upon his Majesty and
the Political Circles there: “ No help, then, from that quarter,
in our Spanish War; perhaps far other than helpt”—Nay, cer¬
tain Gazetteers were afraid the grand new Anti-Spanish Expe¬
dition itself, which was now, at the long last, after such con¬
fusions and delays, lying ready, in grc&t strength, Naval and
Military, would be countermanded,—.on Pragmatic-Sanction
considerations, and the crisis probably imminent.® But it was
not countermanded# it sailed all the same, ♦ November 6th*
- (seventh day after the bad news); and made towards—ShAll

Cbapi IX. RESOLUTION FORMED^T REINSBf RG. loi

ajlth 0<;t-i3th Dec. 174a ’

we tell the reader, what is Officiallv’^ dead secret, though
by this time well guessed at by the Public, English and also
Spanish?—towards Carthagena, to r^force fiery Vernon, in
the tropical latitudes; and overset Spanish America, beginning
with that important Town! I

Commodore Anson, he also, after long fatal delays, is off,
several weeks agoround Cape Horn; hoping (or perhaps
already not hoping) to cooperate from the Other Ocean, and
be simultaneous with Vernon,on these loose principles of
keeping time I Commodore Anson does, in effect, make a Voy¬
age which is beautiful, and to mankind memorable; but as to
keeping tryst with Vernon, the very gods could not do it on
those terms I

CHAPTER IX.

RESOLUTION FORMED AT REINSBCRG IN CONSEQUENCE,

Thursday 27th Ocfbber, two days after the Expresses
went for them, Schwerin and Podewils punctually arrived at
Reinsberg. They were carried into the interior privacies, ‘ to

* long conferences with his Majesty that day, and for the next

* four days; Majesty and they even dining privately together;’
grave business of state, none guesses how grave, evidently
going on. The resolution Friedrich laid before them, fruit of
these two days since the news from Vienna, was probably the
most important ever formed in Prussia, or in Europe during
that Century: Resolution to make good our Rights on Silesia,
by this great opportunity, the best that wjll ever offer. Reso¬
lution which had sprung, I find, and got to sudden fixity in
the head of the young King himself; and which met with little
save opposition from all the other sons of Adam, at the first
blush and for long afterwards. And, indeed, the making of
it good (of it, and of tlA immense results that hung by it) was
the main business of this young King’s Life henceforth; and
cost him Labours like those of Hercules, and was in the highest
degree momentous to existing and not yeUexisting millions of
mankind,—to the readers of this History especially.

It is almosj^ touching to reflect how unexpectedly, like a
bolt Out of th*l Difte, all this had come upon Friedrich; and

7 a^th (tSth) Sqjteobtt

192 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BMkXL

* ^ a^h Oct-x 3 Ui Dftc*

^K>w h overset his fin# program for the winter at Keinsberg,
and for his Life generally. Not the Peaceable m^animides,
but the Warlike, are tl^ ^ing appointed PnedHch this winiter^
and mainly henceforth. Those * golden or soft radiances* wbich
we saw in him, admirably to Voltaire and to Friedrich* aijd to
an esurient philanthropic'world,-.-it is not those, it is *the
steel-bfight or stellar kind,’ that are to become predominant
in Friedrich’s existence; grim hailstorms, thunders md tprnado
for an existence to him, instead of the opulent genialities Jind
halcyon weather, anticipated by himself and others I Indis¬
putably enough to us, if not yet to Friedrich, “JEteinsberg and
Life to the Muses” are done. On a sudden, from the oppo¬
site side of the horizon, see, miraculous Opportunity, rushirig
hitherward, — swift, terrible, clothed with lightning like a
courser of the gods: dare you clutch him by the thunder-mane,
and fling yourself upon him, and make for the Empyrean by
that course rather ? Be immediate about it, then; the time is
now, or else never!—No fair judge can blame the young man
that he laid hold of the flaming Opportunity in this mannei,
and obeyed the new omen. To seize such an opportunity, and
perilously mount upon it, was the part of a young magnani¬
mous King, less sensible to the penis, and more to the other
considerations, than one older would have been.

Schwerin and Podewils were, no doubt, astonished to learn
what the Royal purpose was ; and could not want for common¬
place objections many and strong, had this been the scene for
dwelling on them, or dressing them out at eloquent length.
But they knew well this was not the scene for doing more
than, with eloquent modesty, hint them ; that the Resolution,
being already taken, would not alter for commonplace; and
that the question now lying for honourable members was, How
to execute it ? It is on this, as I collect, that Bchwerin and
Podewils in the King’s company did, with extreme intensity,
consult during those four*' days; and %ere, most probably, of
considerable use to the King, though some of their modifica¬
tions adopted by him turned out, not as they had predicted,
but as he. On alkthe Military details and ontUnes, and on
all the Diplomacies of thb business, here are two Oracles«sx-
tremejy worth consulting by the youhg King. ,

i

To seize Silesia is e4sy: a Country open on all but the

ctap. tx. RESOtUTION FORMED AT REINSBERG, 103

«7th 0<!t.>>3th Seti. Z7fo>

sotttii side; open especiaUy on onr sioe, where a, oattalion of
foot might force it; the three or four fortresses, of which only
two, Glogaa wo 4 Neiese, can be reckoned strong, are provided
with nothing as they ought to be; n#t above 3,00a fighting
men in the whole Province, and these little expecting fight.
Silesia can be^selzed; but the mai»taining of it ?—^We must
try to mountain it, thinks Friedrich.

At Reinsberg it is not yet known that Kur-Baiern has pro¬
tested; bStJt is well guessed he means to do so, and that
France is at his back in soane sort. Kur-Baiern, probably
Kur-Sachsen, and plenty more, France being secretly at their
back. What low condition Austria stands in, all its ready re-
aoprees run to the lees, is known; and that France, getting
lively at present with its Belleisles and adventurous spirits not
restrainable by Fleury, is always on the watch to bring Aus¬
tria lower-capable, in spite of Pragmatic Sanction, to snatch
the golden moment, and spring huntcr-hke on a moribund Aus¬
tria, were the hunting-dogs once out and in cry. To Fried¬
rich it seems unlikely tfac Pragmatic Sanction will be a Law
of Nature to mankind, in these cucumstances. His opinion
is, * the old political system has expired with the Kaiser.’
Here is Europe, burning m one corner ot it by Jenkins’s Ear,
and such a smoulder of combustible material awakening nearer
hand: will not Europe, probably, blaze into general War;
Pragmatic Sanction going to waste sheepskin, and universal
scramble ensuing? In which he who has 100,000 good sol¬
diers, and can handle them, may be an important figure in
urging claims, and keeping what he has got hold of!—

Friedrich’s mind, as to the fact, is fixed: seize Silesia We
will: but as to the manner of doing it, Schwerin and Podewils
modify him. Their counsel is: ** Do not ste^ out in hostile
attitude jst tbe very first, saying, ‘ These Duchies, Liegnitz,

* Brieg^ Wohlau^ Jagerndorf, are mine, and I will fight for

* themsay ouly^ * IJaving, as is^well known, interests of va-
^ rious kinds in this Silesia, I venture to take charge of it in

* the perilous times now come, and will keep it safe for the

* real owuet,* Silesia seized in this fashion,” continue they,
“ negotiate with the Queen of Hungary*, offer her help, large
Itelp in men kud money, against her other enemies ; perhaps
she Will coti^nj^to do Us right ?”—“ She never will consent,”
is Friedrichs opinion. But it is worth trying urge the

104 FRIEDRi'CH TAKES THE REIHS. SodcliEl.

I ' , I 87thO<Jt.rt3ith

Ministtrs.^—** Well/* answers Friedrich, “ be it in that form;
that is the soft-spoken^utious form: any form will do^ if the
^ct be there/’ That is understood to have been the £gure of
the deliberation in this conclave at Reinsberg, during the four
days.^ And now it remains only to hx tlie Military details, to
be ready in a minimum of|time; and to keep our preparations
and intentions in impenetrable darkness from all men, in the
interim. Adieu, Messieurs. ^

And so, on the ist of November, fifth morning since they
came, Schwerin and Podewils,^ world of new business silently
ahead of them, return to Berlin, intent to begin the same. All
the Kings will have to take their resolution on this matter;
wisely, or else unwisely. King Friedrich’s, let it prove the
wisest or not, is notably the rapidest,—complete, and fairly
entering upon action, on November ist. At London the news
of the Kaiser’s death had arrived the day before; Britannic
Majesty and Ministry, thrown much into the dumps by it, much
into the vague, are nothing like so prompt with their resolution
on it. Somewhat sorrowfully in the vague. In fact* they will
go jumbling hither and thither for about three years to come,
before making up their minds to a resolution; so intricate is
the aifair to the English Nation and them I Intricate indeed ;
and even imaginary,—definable mainly as a bottomless abyss
of nightmare dreams to the English Nation and them! Pro¬
ductive of strong somnambulisms, as my friend has it I—

Mystery in Berlm^for Seven JVeeh, while the Preparations
go on; Voltaire visits Friedrkh to decipher it, but cannot

Podewils apd Schwerin gone, King Friedrich, though still
very busy in working-hours, returns to his society and its
gaieties and brilliancies; apparently with increased appetite
after these four days of abstinence. Still busy in his working-
hours, as a King must be j couriers comiog and going, hun¬
dreds of businesses dispatched each day; and in the evening
what a relish for society,— Prdtorius is quite astonished at it.
Music, dancing, play-acting, suppers of thfe gods, * not done
till four in the morning sometimes,’ these are the accoui\tS
Pratorius hears at Berlin. ‘ From all persons Who return from

1 Stenz^l (from what ■tourcc*) he does not dearly say, tad doubt from aofureea of
aome Authenticity) rives this as summary of It, iv. 6 i- 0 |.

Clw IX. RESOLUTION FORMED ifr REINSBERG. 105

»7tlv Oot’X^th Dec. 1740W

Reinsberg/ writes he, * the tmaDimoiiS r^ort is, That the

* King works, the whole day throu|^, with an assiduity that
^ is unique; and then, in the evening, gives himsdf to the plea-

* sures of society, with a vivacity of injrth and sprightly humour

* which makes those Evening-Parties charming.'^ So it had to
last, with frequent short journcys|on Friedrich’s part, and at
last with change to Berlin as headquarters, for about seven
weeks to come,—^till the beginning of December, and the day
of actiotg namely. A notable little Interim in Friedrich’s His¬
tory and tliat of Europe,

Friedrich’s secret, till almost the very end, remained im¬
penetrable ; though, by degrees, his movements excited much
guessing in the Gazetteer and Diplomatic world everywhere. *
Military matters do seem to be getting brisk in Prussia; arsenals
much astir; troops are seen mustering, marching, plainly to
a singular degree. Marching towards the Austrian side, to¬
wards Silesia, some note. Yes'; but also towards Cleve, cer¬
tain detachments of troops are marcliing,—do not men see ?
And the Entrenchment at Buderich in those parts, that is get¬
ting forward withal,—though privately there is not the least
prospect of using it, in these altered circumstances. Friedrich
already guesses that if he could get Silesia, so invaluable on
the one skirt of him, he will probably have to giverup his Berg-
Julich claims on the other ; I fancy he is getting ready to do
so, should the time come for such alternative. But he labours
at Buderich, all the same, and ‘ improves the roads in that
quarter,’—^which at least may help to keep an inquisitive pub¬
lic at bay. These are seven busy weeks on Friedrich’s part,
and on the world's: constant realities of preparation, on the
one part, industriously veiled ; on the other part, such shadows,
giiessings, spyings, spectral movements above“ground and be¬
low ; |}ipIomatic shadows fencing, Gazetteer shadows rumour¬
ing ndreams ot a world as if near awakening to something
great I ' All Officers on futiougl^ have been ordered to their

* posts,’ writes Biel^eld, on those vague terms of his: ‘ On

* arriving at Berlin, you notice a great agitation in all depart-

* meats of the State. The regiments arc ordered to prepare

* their equipages, and to hold themsdlves m readiness for

•marching. There are magazines being formed at Frankfiirt-
‘ on-Od?r ^ Crossen,’—-handy for Silesia, you would say ?

^ lA Preus% TArm6esicig;i*/ii^, p.

I06 FRIEDRIcSl TAKES THE REIMS. b<k«iXI.

I I ct7th,Opt.*Y3Ci|X><li^ 9^401,

* Tl^afe are considei-abl^trains of ArtUlery getting and

* the King has frequent conferences with Ws Generals/® tht
Authentic fact is : * By the twiddle of Novettlher^ Ttoops^ to thU

* extent of 30,000 and igore, had got otders to he ready fot
' marching in three weeks hence ;* their {mUic xUotions very
visible ever since, their actual purpose a mystery to aii mor*
tals except Three.

Towards the end of November, it becomes the prevailing
guess that the business is immediate, not prospective; that Bi*
lesia may be in the wind, not J ulich and Berg. Which infinitdy
quickens the shadowy rumourings and Diplomatic fencings
of mankind. The French have their special Ambassador h^e j
a Marquis de Beauvau, observant military gentleman, who
came with the Accession Compliment some time ago, and keeps
his eyes well open, but cannot see through millstoni^s. Fleury
is intensely desirous to know Friedrich’s secret; but would
fain keep his own (if he yet have one), and is himself quite
tacit and reserved. To Fleury’s Marquis de Beauvau Fried¬
rich IS very gracious ; but m regard to secrets, is for a reci¬
procal procedure. Could not Voltaire go and try ? It is thought
Fleury had let fall some hint to that effect, carried by a bird
of the air. Sure enough Voltaire does go ; is actually on visit
to his royal Friend; ‘six days with him at Reinsberg;’ per¬
haps near a fortnight m all (20 November—2 December or
so), hanging about those Berlin regions, on the survey. Here
is an unexpected pleasme to the parties;—^but in regard to
penetrating of secrets, an unproductive one I

Voltaire’s ostensible errand was, To report progress about
the Anti~Macchiavd, the Van Durtn nonsense; and, at any
rate, to settle the Money-accounts on these and other scores;
and to discourse Philosophies, for a day or tyro, with the First
of Men. The real errand, it is pretty cleat, was as above.
Voltaire has always a wistful eye towards political employment,
and would fain make himse?f useful in high quartets. ‘Flwry
and he have their touches of direct Correspondence now and
then; and obliquely there are always intermediates and chan¬
nels. Small hint, thf slightest twinkle of )Fleury^s eydashes,
would be duly speeded to Voltaire, and Set him goings
shall see him expressly missioned hither, cm similar errand, by
and by; though with as bad success as at

> Bielfeld, L 165 (Berlin, ^oih lS[oveit»ber, is the date he puts (o it).

Owp^ lx. RESOLUTION FORMED At REINSBERG. 107

aSt^iHoV, 1740.

Of this Fim Visit to Berlin/ ms Second 10 Friedrich,
Voltiire in ike Pm^ says nothi||r, Bnt in his Si^fU de
ZdUdi KP^kt dropsy with proud modesty, n little'footnote upon
it: ‘The Author was. with the' Kin^^of Prussia at that time;

* and can affirm that Cardinal de Fleury was totally astray in
‘ regard to thO Prince he had novi to do with.’ To which a

slightly wrong is added ; the rest being perfectly correct,*
No Qthe^ details, are to be got anywhere, if they were of im¬
portance ; ihe very dates of it in the best Prussian Books are
iir slightly awry. Here, by accident, are two poor flint-sparks
ji^aught from the dust whirlwind, which yield a certain sufficing
t^ight, when put in their place ; and show us both sides of
this matter, the smooth side and the seamy:

I. Friedrich io Aigarotti, at Berlin. From ‘ Reinsberg,
2ist Nov.,’ showing the smooth side.

‘My dear Swan of Padua,—Voltaire has arrived; all sparkling with
‘new beauties, and far more sociable than at Clove. He is in very
‘ good humour; and malAs less complaining about his ailments than
‘usual. Nothing can be more frivolou-i than our occupations here
mere verse-making, dancing, philo.sophising, then card-playing, dining,
luting; merry as birds on the bough (and Silesia «»visible, except to
oneself and two others),^

2. Friedrich to yordan, at Berlin. ‘ Ruppin, 28th November/

* ‘ Thy Miser’ (Voltaire, now gone to Berlin, of whom Jordan

is to send news, as of all thing.? else), ‘ thy Miser shall drink to the
‘ lees of hig iasatmble desire {sic) to enrich himself: be shall have the
‘ 3,000 thalers (450/.), He was with me six days: that will be at the

* mte of 500 thdws (75/.) a day. That is pjiying dear for one’s merry-

/andrew {ddt Hen ^yer un fm)\ never had coiftrt-fool such wages
‘b^re/* , ' '

Wixich also at fi,rst hand, shows us the seamy side. And
here, fmally* with d^e happily appended, is a poetic snatch, in
Voltaire^S Cacquisite style, which with the response gives us the
medium, viey?:

. ^ jLiOuil! XV, c. 6), xxviii. 74.

. *, w Xvui as, «•

m * Ibid. kvU, 7*.'' Farjaculu^ the <noncy*paymcilt (travelling expenses chiefly,
UUher exorbitant,, and iMs ioUrney added to tfe list; and no whit^per of the con-
;.^derameyaM^^*'irett inofteysr,,apd pop^tighi ptAnii^Mctcchiavel, in abateuieiit,).are
m j.' itTfta Kjfact ijuifi paid i!« 3,300 thalers;, a,ooo a good while ago, r,3oo

ipm, uri^h the hiih '

io8 FRIEDRICH TAKES THE REINS. BMkxt

^ ^ ad Z)«c. 174%

Voltaire’s Adieu de Con^i^ z D^cerabet 1740’)*

* Non, malfrS mrim, tton, nuUgrA Has

' Afm Awe w'mF ^tni zisttsfaih;

' Non, vovi fCeies au'une cogiuiU,

* Qu%. suoju^'tez le^adur^, ei He ooifs dannes

Friedrich’s Response.

* Mm Ame sent le de ves drPins aPj^ ;

* Man Hi. prisumes pomt qu'elk sad Sidtf/aite*

‘ Tfaitre, Hous me qmttez pour sutvre utte coquatitf

' Moi je He vous qutiterats past^ #

—Meaning, perhaps, in brief English; V. y Ah, you are but a
beautiful coquette; you charm away our hearts, and do not givo
your own” (won’t tell me your secret at all)! 7 **. ** Treachet^
ous Lothario, it is you that quit me for a coquette” (your divinfe
Emilie; and won’t stay here, and be of my Academy); but
however—!”—Friedrich looked hopingly on the French, but
could not give his secret except by degrees and with reciprocity.
Some days hence he said to Marquis de Beauvau, in the Audi¬
ence of leave, a word which was remembered.

View of Friedrich behind the Veil.

As to Friedrich himself, since about the middle of Novem¬
ber his plans seem to have been definitely shaped cut in all
points ; Troops so many, when to be on march, and how; no
important detail uncertain since then. November 17th, he jots-
down a little Note, which is to go to Vienna, were the due hour
come, by a special Ambassador, one Count Gotter, acquainted
with the ground there ; and explain to her Hungarian Majesty,
what his exact demands are, and what the exact services he
will render. Of which important little Paper readers shall hear
again. Cotter’s demands are at first to be high: Qur Four
Duchies, due by* law so long; these and even more, coosidefT
ing the important services we propose; this is to be his first
word;—^but, it appears, he is privately prepared to put-up with
Two Duchies, if he can hav^them peace^ly: Duchies of Sa¬
gan and Glogau, which are not of the Four at alb but which
lie nearest us, and aiic far below the value of the Four, to Aus¬
tria especially. This intricate point Friedrich has already set¬
tled in bis mind. Anfl indeed it is notably the habit of this
young King to settle matters with himself in good time: anj
m regard^ to all manner of points, he will be the day

* (BuoHs4eFid44rk{^^^ t6r}i (Smre^de ^

Chap. IX. RESOLUTION FORMED A* REINSBERG. 109

ad Dtc. <740. «

e( tjargaining about them, to have nis own resolution formed
and definitely fixed ;—much to his a<f(rantage over conflicting
parties, who have theirs still flying Idose.

Another thing of much concernnapt is. To secure himself
from danger of Russian interference. To this end he dispatches
Major Winterfeld to Russia, a man well known to him;—day
of Winterfeld’s departure is not given; day of his arrival in
Petersburg is * 19th December’ just coming. Russia, at pre¬
sent, is rather in a staggering condition ; hopeful for Winter¬
feld’s object. Oh the 28th of October last, only eight days
> after the Kaiser, Czarina Anne of Russia, she with the big
cheek, once of Courland, had died; ‘ audacious Death,’ as our
poor friend had it, ‘venturing upon another Crowned Head*
there. Biercn her dear Courlandcr, onco U^tlc better than a
Horse-groom, now Duke of Courland, Quasi-Husband to the
late Big Cheek, and thereby sovereign of Russia, this long
while past, is left Official Head‘in Russia. Poor little Anton
Ulrich and his august Spouse, well enough known to us, have
indeed produced a Czar Iwan, some months ago, *0 the joy of
mankind : but Czar Iwah is in his cradle ; Father and Mother’s
function is little other than to rock the cradle of Iwan ; Bieren
to be Regent and Autocrat over him and them in the inteiim.
To their chagrin, to that of Feldmarschall Munnich and many
others: the upshot of which will be visible before long. Czarina
Anne’s death had seemed to Friedrich the opportund removal
of a dangerous neighbour, known to be in the pay of Austria:
here now are new mutually hostile parlies springing up ; chance,
surely, of a bargain with some of them ? He dispatches Win¬
terfeld on this errand ;—probably the fittest man m Prussia for
it. How soon and perfectly Winterfeld succeeded, and what
Winterfeld was, and something of what a Russia he found it,
we pre^ose to mention by and by,

These, and all points of importance, Friedrich has settled
with himself some time ago. What his own private thoughts
on the Silesian Adveitture are, reaaers will wish to know, since
they can at first hand. Hear Friedrich himself, whose veracity
is unquestionable to such as know anything of him;

‘This Silesian Project fulfilled all his (the^’King’s) political views, ‘
i^ummed them all well up into one head, ‘ It was a means of ac-
‘ quiring repu|9.tion j of increasing the power of the .State; and of tox-
* minating whiu tjtincemed that long-litigated question of the Berg-

no FRlEDRibH TAKES THE REINS. 8«fcXI.

. I adt>«Cr#«08

* jUlieh Sttcces«on ;’-Hcan be sure of getting tfeat, nt intend

to give that up, if necessasf,

'Meanwhile, before enttjrely determining, the King weighed the

* risks there were in tmdartaking such a War, and the ^vnn^ges that
' were to be hoped trom itf On one side, presented ilself tire potent
' house of Austria, not likely to want resources with so many vast
'Provinces under it; an Emferor’s Daughter attacked, Who wohM

* naturally find allies in the King of England, in the Dutch Eepuhtti^f

* and so many Princes, of the Empire who had sighed the Piaginhtio

' Sanction.’ Russia was,—or had been, and might in the

pay of Vienna. Saxony might have some clippings from fiohemia
thrown to it, and so be gained over.^ Scanty Harvest, 1740, threatened
difficulties as to provisioning of (roops. ' The risk^ weim great. One

* had to apprehend the vicissitudes of ^var. A sih^e battle lost might
‘ be decisive. The King had no allies; and bis troops, hitherto with*

' out experience, would have to front old Austrian soldiers, grown gmy
' in harness, and trained to war by so many campaigns.

‘On the other side were hopeful considerations,’—four in number:
Weak condition of the Austiian Comt, Tieasury empty, Wax-
Apparatus broken in pieces; inespeiienced young Princess to defend a
disputed succession, on those terms. Scrontf, There will be allies;
France and England always m rivaliy, botl^ meddling in these matters,
King is suie to get either the one 01 the other. Thirds Silesian War
lies handy to us, and is the only kind of Offensive War luat does;
Country bordering on our frontier, and with the Oder running through
it as a sure highroad for everything. Fourth^ ‘ What suddenly turned
the balance,’ or at least what kept it steady in that posture,—'news of
the Czaiina’s death arrivesRussia has ceased to coiuit against us; and
become a manageable quantity. On, therefore!—

‘Add to these reasons,’ says Ihe King, with a candour which has
not been well treated in the Hisloiy Books ‘ Add to these reasons, an

* Army ready for acting; Funds, Supplies all found’ (Ijdng barrelled
in the Schloss at Berlin);—‘and perhaps the desire of making oneself
‘ a name,’ from which tew of mortals able to achieve it are exempt in
their young time^i ‘ all tins was cause of the War which the Ki*^ now
' entered upon.

" Desire to make himself a name; how shocking I*'* exclaim
several Historians. “ Candour of confession that he may have
had some such desire ; ho^ honest 1” i# what they do not ex¬
claim. As to the justice of his Silesian Cbims, or even to his
own belief about their justice, Friedrich affords not the least
light which can be new to readers here. He sp^ks, when
business requires it, of ' those known rights’ of his, and wi<4i
the air of a man who expects to be believed on hj| word; but

* i. »S.

cirtRlx. RESOLUTION FORMED AI^REINSBERG. m

P 6 cv » 74 <L I .

iif i0 ^cteoriiy, and in tjje business way only': and tnere is not
here of elsewhere the least pleading man, you would say,
considerably indifferent to our belief on that head ; his eye set
on the practical merely. Just Kig]jts ? What are rights,
n^r so just, which you cannot make valid ? The world is
fidl of such. If you have rights and^can assert them into facts,
do it; that is worrii doing t”—

We must add two Notes, two small absinthine drops, bit*
ter but wMbl^wome, administered by him lo the Old Dessauer,
whose gloomy wonder over al^this military whirl of Prussian
tl^gS, and ^scontent that he, lately the head authority, has
hever once been spoken to on it, have been great. Guessing,
at last, that it was meant for Austria, a Power rather dear to
Leopold, he can suppress himself no longer; but breaks out
into Cassandra prophesyings, which have piqued the young
King, and provoke this return ;

%

X, ^ JReinsher^t 24/A Novemky 1740. — I Invc received your Letter,
' and seen with what inquietude you view the upiiroaching march of
‘ my Troops. I hope you will set your mind at ease c'n that score;
‘ and wait with patience what 1 intend with them ami you. I have
‘ made all my dispositions; and Your Serenity will loam, time enough,

* what my orders are, without disquieting yourself about them, as no-

* thing has been forgotten or delayed.’—F rildricii.

Old Dessauer, cut to the bone, perceives he will have to
quit that method and never resume it; writes next how pain¬
ful it is to an old General to see himself neglected, as if good
for nothing, while his scholars are allowed to gather laurels.
Friedrich’s answer is of soothing character:

2. ^Berlin, December 1740.—You may be assured T honour your

‘ ments and capacity as a young Officer ougjit to honour an old one,

* Who has given the world so many proofs of his lrd:jnt {Dexteritat);

‘ nor will I neglect Your fJerenity on any occa-iiou when you can help
■ me hy your good counsel and eoopciation.’ But it is a mere ‘ baga
telle’ this that I arix now upon; though, next year, it may beconn
serious. ^

For the rest, SaxOny being a neighbour whose intentions one doc!
not know, 1 have privately purposed Your Serenity should keep an out
look that way, in my absence. Plenty of employment coming foi Youi
Serenity. ‘ But as to this present Expedition, I reserve it for mysel
‘^one; tMtthe world may not think the King of Prussia marchej

wttb a Tutor to the Field.’*—F rusdrich.®

<

^ Orlich, dtrSdUisischm Kriepgili^xUn, 1841)1 i 98 40 .

ttt FKIEOR^H TAKES THE KEIKS. KooItXl.'

^ 6 A D*!» X74&*

And tWewith Leopold, eagerly complying, has to rest satished*;
and beware of too muclT freedom with this young King again.

‘Berlin, December 2S is the date of that last Note to the
Dessauer; date also of yoltaire’s Adtm with the
on which same day, ‘ Friday December 2d,’ as I find from the
Old Boohs, his Majesty, q^^tting the Reinsbcrg sojourn, * had
‘ arrived in Berlin about 2 p.m. ; accompanied by Prince Au-

* gust Wilhelm’ (betrothed at Brunswick lately); ‘ such a crowd

* on the streets as if they had never seen him before.^ He con¬
tinued at Berlin or in the neighbourhood thenceforth, Bu$y
days these; and Berlin a much whispering City, as Regiment
after Regiment marches away. King soon to follow, as is
thought,—' who himself sometimes deigns to lake the Regi¬
ments into highest own eyeshine, hockst-dgenen AMgenscheiwl
(that is, to review them), say the reverential Editors. Decem¬
ber 6th—But let us follow the strict sequence of Phenomena
at Berlin.

Excellency Bolt a has Audience; then Excellency Dickens^ and
others: December Gtli, the Mystery is out

Of course her Hungarian Majesty, and her Bartensteins
and Ministries, heard enough at those Prussian rumours, in¬
terior Military activities, and enigmatic movements ; but they
seem strangely supine on the matter; indeed, they seem
strangely supine on such matters; and lean at ease upon the
Sea-Powers, upon Pragmatic Sanction and other Laws of Na¬
ture. But at length even they become painfully interested as
to Friedrich’s intentions ; and d'apatch an Envoy to sift him
a little : an expert M?ithese di BoUt'*, Genoese by birth, skil¬
ful m the Ru^'’oian and other intricacies; whp was here at Ber¬
lin lately, doing the Accession Compliment (rather ill received
at that time), and is fit for the job. Peihaps Botta will pene¬
trate him ? That is becoming desirable, in spite of the gay
Private Theatricals at Reinsbcrg, and thfe Berlin Carnival Balls
he is so occupied with.

England is not less interested, and the diligent Sir Guy is
doing his best; but €an make out nothing satisfactorymuch
the reverse indeed ; and falls into angry black anticipaticNi;s«
♦Nobody here, great or small,* says his Excellency, ‘dares

* make any representation to this young Prince against the

cw» IX. KESOLUTION FORMED A^l REIKSBERG. liJ

3 ec, *74®,

* ULcasttres lie i$ pursuing; though ait are sensible if the coOf

* fusion which must follow. A Prince who had the least regird

* to honour, truth and justice, couId*^not act the part he is

* going to do.’ Alas, no, Excellency Dickens! ' But it is plain

* hie only view was, to deceive us all, and conceal for a while
' his ambitious and mischievous de^gns.’i® “ Never was such
dissimulation I” exclaims the Diplomatic world everywheri^
being angered at it, as if it were a vice on the part of a King
about to invade Silesia. Dissimulation, if that mean menda-
city, is not the name of the thing; it is the art of wearing a
pohte cloak of darkness, and tite King is little disturbed what
name they call it.

Botta did not get to Berlin till December ist, had no Audi¬
ence till the 5th;—by which time it is beroming evident to
Excellency Dickens, and to everybody, that Silesia is the thing
meant. Botta hints as much in that first Audience, December
5th: “ Terrible roads, those Silesutn ones, your Majesty!" says
Botta, as if historically merely, but with .1 glance of the eye.
“ Hm,” answers his Majesty m the same tone, “ the -'’orst that
conies of them is a little*mud!"—Next day, Dickens had ex¬
press Audience, ‘Berlin, Tuesday 6ih ’ a smartish, somewhat
flurried Colloquy with the King; which, well abridged, may
stand as follows:

Diclms. ^ “ Indhisibillty of the An'?f’ian Momrchy, Sire!”—

“ Inrlmsibihty'* Wlut do you mean ■*’— DuLw! “ The main¬
tenance of the Pragmatic Sanction ”— h.in^ “ Do you intend to sup¬
port it? I hope not; for such is not my intention.” (Theic is for
you!) * ® ^

2 )khens. “England and Holland will much wonder at the mea¬
sures your Majesty was taking, at the moment when your Majesty pro¬
posed to join with them, and weie mxkmg friendly proposals!” (Has
been a deceitful man, Sir Guy, at least an impenetratebut this
latter is rathersttong on your part!) “ What shall I wnt^to England?”
(‘When I mention^ thi*!,' says Dickens, ‘the King grexv red in the
face,* eyes considerably llashmg, I should think.)

King, “You can hav# no mstiuctioiEs to ask that question! And
if you had, I have an, answer ready for you. England has no right to
inqttUa into my'designs Your great Sea-Ainiaments, did I ask you
any questions about them? No; 1 was and am silent on that head;
only wishing-you good luck, and that you may*not get beaten by the
SfMiiiarda” (Dickens hastily draws in his rash horns again; after a
pass or two, ling’s natural colour returns.) ** ^

^ » Cc^atch, Nftvenhpr—3d December 11740; Haumer, p. sff.

VOU IV, ^ l

114 FRIEDEj/CH TAKES THE REINS. BookXt

I I Dec. X4r49,

J^Hg, “Austria as a Povrer is necessary against the Turks^ But
in Germany, .what need ©^Austria being so superlative? Why should
irot, say, Three Electors imitftd be able to oppose her? ^ ^ Monsieur,

I it is your notion in England, as well as theirs in France, td bring
Other Sovereigns under yOlr tutorage, and lead them ttbouh Undfr*
stand that I will not be led by either. ^ ^ Tush, you are like the
^Athenians, who, when PhiJip^of Macedon was ready U> invade them^
spent their lime in haranguing!” y

Dickens. * 0 Petg and JuJich, if we were to guarantee thethl^*'-*-
King. “Hm. Don't bO much mind that Rhine Country t difficulties
there,—Dutch always jealous of one. But, on the other Frontier,
neither England nor Holland could'^take umbrage,”—points clearly to
Silesia, then, your Excellency Dickens ?“

A1.1S, yes! Troops and military equipments are, for days
past, evidently wending towards Frankfurt, towards Crossen,
and even the Newspapers now hint that something is ou hand
in that quarter. Nay, this same day, Tttesday hth Decemher^
there has come out brief Official Announcement, to all the
Foreign Ministers at Berlin, Excellency Dickens among them,

‘ That his Royal Majesty, our most oll-gracious Herr, has taken
* the resolution to advance a Body oi Troops into Schlesien,’
—rather out of friendly views towards Austria (much business
lying between us about Schlesien), not out of hostile views by
any means, as all £x( ellencies shall assure thetr respective
Courts.^2 Announcement which had thrown the Excellency
Dickens into such a frame of mind, before he got his Audience
today!—

Saturday following, which was December loth, Marquis
de Beauvau had his Audience of leave; intending for Paris
shortly : Audience very gracious; covertly hinting, on both
sides, more than it said; ending m these words, on the King’s
side, which h? /e be<?omc famous: “ Adieu, then, M. le Mar-
“ quis. T bilicve I am going to play your game; if the aces
“ fall to me, wc will share ije vais^je rrt>is,Jauer voire Jeu.'
“ «' ies as me vimnent^ nous par tager<>ns)X'y^

To Botta, all this whu'w*, FriediichiStrove to be specially
civil; took him out to Charlottenburg, that same Saturday, with
the Queen and other guests; but Botta, and all the world, being
now certain about Syesia, and that no amount of mud, or other
terror on the roads, would be regarded, Botta'sthoughts in

n Raumer (from $tate-Pap«r Officokpp. 63, 64. .

Copy of tho I'aper in tfeUen.^GefchuMie, i. <,^7.

^ Voita^rs, CBrnn^i (Si^h totijs XV, c, fl), xxval 74,

Chap. IX. RESOLUTION

ijiltb t)«c. 174ft

FORMEDiA'ArEINSBJIRG. 115

evening party are not of cheerful natuie. Next day, Sunday
December i ith, he too gets his Audieifce of leave; and cannot
help buj«ting-out, when the King plainly tells him what is now
afoot, and t^t the Prussian Ambassador has got instructions
whkt to offer upon it at Vienna. " ^ire, you are going to ruin
** the House of Austria," cried Botta, '* and to plunge yourself
** into destruction {vous adim^r) at the same timer—*'De-
*'* pends on the Queen," said Friedrich, *'to accept the Offers
” I have made her.” Botta sank silent, seemed to reflect, but ‘
gathering himself again, added with an ironical air and tone
of voice, '‘They are fine Troops, those of yours, Sire. Ours
** have not the same splendour of appearance; but they have
“ looked the wolf in the face. Think, I conjure you, what you
“ are getting into!" Friedrich answered with vivacity, a little
nettled at the ironical tone of Botta, and his mixed sympathy
and menace; “You find my troops are bcdutiful; perhaps I
“ shall convince you they arc good too.” Yes, Excellency
Botta, goodish troops; and very capable ‘to look the tvolf in
the face,’—or perhaps iifthe tail too, before all endl ‘Botta
‘ urged and entreated that at least there should be some delay
‘ in executing this project. But the King gave him to under-
* stand that it was now too late, and that the Rubicon was
‘ passed.'^^

The secret is now out, therefore; Invasion of Silesia cer¬
tain and close at hand. ‘ A day or two before marching,’ may
have been this very day when Botta got his audience, the King
assembled his Chief Generals, all things ready out in the Frank¬
furt-Crossen region yonder; and spoke to them as follows;
briefly and to the point:

“Gentlemen, 1 am undertaking a War, in which^li^ave no allies
“ but your valour and your goodwill. My cause is just^my resources
“ are what we ourselve.*! can do j and the issue lies in Fortune. Re-
“ member continually the glory which your Ancestors acquired in the
“ plains of Warsaw, at Fehrbellin, and ^ the Expedition to Prensseu”
[across the Frische Haf on ice, that time). “Your lot ls in your own
" hands: distinetiofis and rewartls wait upon your fine actions which
“ sliall merit them.

“ But what need have f to excite yon to glory? It is the one thing
“ you keep before your eyes; the sole object worthy of your labours.

“ we ate going to front troops who, under I'rinre Eugene, had the
“ highest repiftdtiOn,^ Though Prince Kugene is gone, we shall have

''I Frirdiich’s own Account {<Stivrrs, il. 57).

ii6 FRIEDMCH takes the reins. BookXI.

I ^ Dec.

to measure our strength against brave soldiers: the greatertriU be
** the honour if we can cifhquer. Adieu, go forth. I wUl follow you
** straightway, to the leadt&vous of glory which awaits us.*’**

Masked Badly il Berlin, 12M-13M

On the evening of Monday 12th, there was, as usuah
(or Half-Masked) Ball, at the Palace. As usual; but this tlbte
it has become mentionable in World-History. Bi^lfeld> ptMf*
sonally interested, gives us a vivid glance into it;—^which* though
pretending to be real and contemporaneous, is unjfortunat^y
mythical only, and done at a great interval of years (dates, and
even slight circumstances of fact, refusing to conform) ,*-**whkh,
however, for the truth there is in it, we will give, as better than
nothing. Bielfeld's pretended date is, * Berlin, 15th Decem¬
ber;’ should have been 14th,—^wrong by a day, after one’s best
effort!

* Berlin, \^th December 1740. As for me, dear Sister, I am like a

* shuttlecock whom the Kings of Prussia and of England hit with their

* rackets, and knock to and fro. The n’ght before last, I was at the

* Palace Evening Parly {Assemble); which is a sort of where you

* go in dommo, but without mask on the face. The Queen was theie,

* and all the Couit. About eight o’clock the King also made his ap-
‘ pearance. Ills Majesty, noticing M. de G * *’ (that is tie Gtathken,
or Guy Dickens), ‘ English Minister, addressed him; led him into the

* embrasure of a window, and talked alone with him for more than an

* hour’ (uncertain, probably apocryphal this). ‘ I threw, from lime to

* time, a stolen glance at this dndogue, which appeared to me to be very
‘ lively. A moment aftei, being just dancing with Madame the Counters

* de— Thru'-Asterisks ^—I felt myseKtwitched by the domino; and tum-
‘ ing, was much surprised to see thau it was the King j who took me

* aside, and said, “Are your booG oiled {Vos bottes soni-eilesgraissies,

* Are you read for a jourriey^ ?” I replied, “ Sire, they will always
‘ be so for Majesty’s service.”—“Well, then, Truchsess and you

* are for England; the day after tomorrow you go, Speak to M. de

* Podewils I”—.-This was said like a flash of lightning. His Majesty

* passed into another apartment; and 1 , I went to finish my minuet

* with the Lady; who had beeh not less asto^bed to see me disappear

* from her eyes, m the middle of the dance, than I was at what the

* King said to me.’** Next morning, I—

The fact is, next«moming, Truchsess and I began prepare
tion for the Court of London,—and we did there, for mJAy
yponths afterwards, strive our best to keep the Britannic Ma<«

t* (Effvres de li. Bidifeld| i* i6y, 168,

Ctap. IX. RESOLUTION FORMEIl A'^ REINSBERG. 117
Z740. f I

jesty in some kind of tune, amid th^ prevailbg discord of
eventsfact interesting to some. the other fact, inter- '
cfitihg to everybwiy, thoogh Bielfeld has not mentioned it, is,
That King Friedrich, the same nextanoming, punctually 'at
the stroke of 9,' rolled away Frankfurt-ward,—into the First
Silesian War! Tuesday ' 13th DAember, this morning, the

* fCing, privatdy quitting the Ball, has gone* (after some little
snatch of sleep, we will hope) 'for Frankfurt, to put himself at
*■ the Keaa of his Troops.Bellona his companion for long
years henceforth, instead of Msnerva and the Muses, as he had
been anticipating..

Hereby is like to be ful 61 led (except that Friedrich himself
is perhaps this ‘little stone’) what Friedrich prophesied to his
Voltaire, the day after hearing of the Kais^j 's Death: ‘ I be-

* lieve there will, by June next, be more talk of cannon, sol-

* diers, trenches, than of actresses, and dancers for the ballet.

‘ This small Event changes the entire system of Europe. It is
' the little stone which Nebuchadnezzar saw, in his dream,

* loosening itself, and rciling down on the Image made of Four

* Metals, which it shivers to ruin.’^®

U Dickens (in State-Paper Office), i3th<Deceinbcr 1740: see also Helden-Ge-
Khkhte, i, 452; &c. &c.

w Friedrich to Voltaire, busy gathering actors at that time, 26th Oct. 1740
\(Euvtes dt FriddriCf xku. 49 ),

b@ok: XII,

FIRST SILESIAN WAR, AWAKENING A GF-NERAL
EUROPEAN ONE. BEGINS.

C

December 1740—May 1741*

CHAPTER I.

OP «:CIILESIEN, OR SILESIA.

ScuLESiEN, what we call Silesia, lies in elliptic shape, spread
on the top of Europe, partly giit with mountains, like the crown
or crest to that part of the Earth;—highest table-land of Ger¬
many or of the Cisalpine Countries; and sending rivers into
all the seas. The summit or highest level of it is in the south¬
west; longest diameter.IS from north-west to south-east. From
Crossen, whither Friedrich is now driving, to the Jablunka Pass,
which issues upon Hungary, is above 250 miles; the axis^ there¬
fore, or longest diameter, of our Ellipse we may call 250 Eng¬
lish miles;—its shortest or conjugate diameter, from Friedland
in Bohemia (Wallenstein's old Friedland), by Breslau across
the Oder to the Polish Frontier, is about 100. The total area
of Schlesien is £« 3 tinted*to be some 20,000 square miles, nearly
the third of Ij^land Proper.

Snhlesien,—will the reader learn to call it by that name,
on occasion? for in these sad Manuscripts of ours the names
alternate,—-is a line, fertile, Useful and beautiful Country. It
leans sloping, as wc hinted, to the East and to the North; a
long curved buttress of Mountains Rm^ngebirge^ Giant Moun¬
tains/' is their best-known name in foreign countries) holding
it up on the South and West sides. This Giant-Mountain Range,
*-^Virhich is a kind of continuation of the SaxonuBohemian
“ Metal Mountains {^^mgipirgey and of the Straggling I-ausit«

OF SCHLESIENi

Chap. I.

t3thrt6thP«C« 1740.

119

Mountains, to westward of these,—-shapes itselflike^blU-hook
(or eUiptically, as was said): handle ansi hook together may be
some aoo miles in length. The preetpitous side of this is, in
gen^ral^ turned outwards, towards ashmen, Mithren, Ungam
(Bohemia, Moravia, Hungary, in our Siaiects); and Sehlesien
lies inside, irregularly sloping dowjj^, towards the Baltic and
towards the utmost East. From* the Bohemian side of these
Mountains there rise Two Rivers: Elbe, tending for the West;
Motawa f«r the South;—Morawa, crossing Moravia, gets into
the Donau, and thence into the lUack-Sea; while Elbe, after
intricate adventures among tlfe mountains, and then prosper¬
ously across the plains, is out, with its many ships, into the
Atlantic. Two rivers, wo say, from the Bohemian or steep
side: and again, from the Silesian side, there rise other Two,
the Oder and the Weichsel ( Vistula ); wbica start pretty n^
one another in the South-East, and, after wide windings, get
both into the Baltic, at a good distance apart.

For the first thirty, or in parts, fifty miles from the Moun¬
tains, Silesia slopes somewhat rapidly; and is still to be called
a Hill-countr)^, rug-;e 1 exicnsive elevations diversifying it: but

after that, the slope is gentle, and at length insensible, or notice¬
able only by the way the waters run. From the central part of
it, Schlesien pictures itself to yon as .a plain; growing ever
flatter, ever sandier, as it abuts on the monotonous endless
sand-flats of Poland, and the Jlrandenijurg territories; nothing
but Boundary Stones with their biass inscriptions marking
where the transition is; and only some Fortified Town, not far
off, keeping the door of the Country secure in that quarter.

On the other hand, the Mountain part of Schlesien is very
picturesque; not of Alpine height anyAvhere (the Schnec-Koppe
Itself is under 5,000 feet), so that verdure anTl’^'jrest wood fail
almost nowhere among the Mountains ; and multiplex industry,
besung by rushing torrents and the swift young rivers, nestles
itself high up; and from wheat-husbandry, madder and maize
husbandry, to damasAc-weaving, tl^etallurgy, charcoal-burning,
tar-distiUery, Schlesien has many trades, and has long been
expert and busy at them to a high degree. A very pretty Ellip¬
sis, or irregular Oval, on the summit of the European Conti¬
nent;—"like the palm of a left-liand well stretched-out, with
the Rieseng^birge for thumb I” said a certain Herr to me, stretch-
ins: out his arm ftk that fashion towards the north»west. Palm,

t20

FII^T SILESIAN WAR.

, Book XII.
Dec. >740.

veil stretched-out, measuring 250 miles; and the crosst^way
100, Inhere are still bfavers in Schlesien; the Katabach River
has gold grains in it, alcind of Pactolus not now worth work-
ing; and in the scraggy Jpnesome pine-woods, grimy individuals,
with kindled mounds of pine-branches and' smoke carehdly kept
down by sods, are sweatii%-out a substance which they inform
you is to be tar. ^

Historical Epochs of Schlesien ^•^after the Quads and

Marchmcn,

Who first lived in Schlesien, or lived long since in it, there
is no use in asking, nor in telling if one knew. ‘ The Qttadi
and the Lygii,‘ says Dryasdust, in a groping manner: Quadi
and consorts, in the fifth or sixth Century, continues he with
more confidence, shifted Romc-ward, following the general track
of contemporaneous mankinu; weak remnant of Quadi was
thereupon overpowered by Slavic populations, and their Coun¬
try became Polish, which the eastern rim of it still essentially is.
That was the end of the Quadi in those parts, says History.
But they cannot speak nor appeal for themselves; History has
them much at discretion. Rude burial urns, with a handful of
ashes in them, have been dug up in differefit places; these are
all the Archives and Histories the Quadi now have. It appears
their name signifies Wicked. They are those poor Quadi
(Wicked People) who always go along with the Marcomauni
{Marckmen), in the bcadroll Histories one reads; and I almost
guess they must have been of the same stock; “Wickeds and
Borderersconsidered, on both sides of the Border, to belong
to the Dangerous Classes in those times. Two things are cer¬
tain.* First, quad and its derivatives have, to this day, in the
speech of rus^ Germans, something of that meaning,-—* ne¬
farious,’ at klast ‘ injurious,’ * hateful, and to be avoided :* for
example, guadAoi, ‘a nettle-bum;’ $r»tf/schen, *to smash’ (say»
your thumb while hammering); &c. &c. And then a second
thing; The Polish equivalentVord is Zle (feiisching says Zlezi );
hence Zieivm^ Schlesitn, meaning merely
what we might call Dama^i\2^y or Country where you get into
Trouble. That is the*etymology, or what passes for such. As
to the History of Schlesien, hitherwards of these burial uibs
dug up in different places, 1 notice, as not yet, entirely buriable,
Thtee Epochs.

131

Chap. I. OF SCHLFSIENJ

i3th-i6tK Dee. 1^40. , ^

Pint Epoch; Christianity: A.\). 966. IntroductioTi ofChiistiahityj
to the leogth of founding a Bishoprick Iha^ year, so hopeful were the
aspects; *‘Bishopricfc ofSchmoger” (Sch»<tffram, dim little Village
still discoverable on the Polish frontier, not far from the Town of Nams-
lau); Bishoprick which, after one removal farther inward, got across
the Oder, to " WratislavP^ which we pow call Breslau; and sticks
there, as Bishoprick of Breslau, to this day. Year 966: it was in Adal¬
bert, our Prussian Saint and Missionary’s younger time. Preaching,
by zealous il^olacks, must have been going on, while Adalbert, Bright
in Nobleness, ^was studying at Magdeburg, and iipeningfor high things
in the general estimation. Tins a new gift from the Polacks, this
of Christianity; an infinitely more important one than that nickname of
01 stuck upon the pooi Country, had been,

yvh , Cc'/ ifiadnally tu looie ftom Poland a.d. 1139*
1159. 1 ’weniy yeais of great trouble m Poland, which wtie of lasting
benefit to btlileiien. In 1139 the Polack Kmg, r vo.y potent Majesty
wrho’t could uai but do no*, dn I; lud left his TJominions shared
by ]>imi,tuai htqurst iniong Ins hve soih Punctual bcqiicst dui avail:
but th* eldest bon {who was Kmg, 'Od bid v^chlosien with much eke
to hi -hire) began to cmioach, to -’.la p upon winch the others rose
upon bnn. Hung him out into csile; icdivulcd; and hoped now they
might nave quiet ir<»pc'C f^ut weic disappointed ; and could come to
no siue Iiaigair. for the iic\t twenty yeais,—not till ‘the eldest brother,’
first autlu . f iht'.o stufts, ‘died an exile in Ilolstcm,’ or was just
about dying 11 lud igrccd to Uke Schlesien foi all claims, and be
(piiet thenceiorth.

Hi-., this eldesl’s, 'rhiee Soiib did accordingly, in 1159, get Schlc-
sirn Mislead of him, then unebs proving hoaouralile Schlesien thereby
w is happy enough to get cut loo‘e fiom Pol md, and to continue loose;
stecimg a couisc of its own,—pitting fiithei and faithei from Poland
and Us habits and loi tunes. These Ihiee Sons, of the late Polish Ma¬
jesty who died m exile 111 Holstein, aie the “ Pust Dukes,” much talked
of in Silesian Histones: ol whose meiits I specify this only, That they
so soon as possible dio\e to be Getmau. Tluy weje Progenitors of all
the “Piast Dukes,” Piopnetors of b^hlesien thencemlisb, till the last of
them died-out in 1675,—and a certain Irffd^rr/fl^they had en¬
tered into could not take effect at that lime. Their merits as Sovereign
Dukes seem to have been considerable; a certain piety, wisdom and
nobleness of mind not r^ijre among th^m; and no doubt it was partly
their merit, if paUly also their good luck, that they took to Germany,
and leant thitherward; steering looser and looser from Poland, in their
new circumstances. They themselves by degrees became altc'gether
German; their Countries, by silent immigiation, introduction of the
arte, the composures and sobrieties, became essentially so. On the
eastern nm t^iere is still a Polack remnant, its territories very sandy, its
condition very bad remnant which surely ought to cease its Polack
jargon, and leana some dialect of intelligible Teutscb| as the first con*

122

FIHIST SILESIAN WAR.

BooV XK.

^ i3th'‘z6|;}} Pi^d. Z)'40t

iitiofl of improvement Ip. all othepf parts Teutsch reigns; ^4 Scjile-
siert a gieeu abundant ^oimtry; Ml of metallttigy, damas>lc--woavin|pf»
^prwn-husbandry,—^msteadaof gasconade, gilt anorcliy, yags, dirfe^ and
l^ie jPawwalam.

A.D. 1327; Get completely cut loirse. Tbe Piast Dukes, wkp soOn
ceased to be Pobsb, and hung rather upon Bohemia, and thereby iiqpon
Germany, made a great step ^ that direction, when King Johann, old
leh’Dun whom we ought to lecollcct, peisuaded most of them, all
of them but two, ^petic at prcui^^ to become Feudfttones (Quasi-Feuda-
tones, but of a sovereign soit) to his Crown of Bohemia '?he two Vho
stood out, rtsisling pi ij-ct and pnte, were the Luke of Jauer and the
Duke of Sdiwtidnit/,—lofty minddfl gentlemen, peihaps a thought too
lofty. But these also foliann’s son, little ICaisei Karl IV., ‘mariying
their heiress,’ coiitrned to bimg in,—one fruitful adventure of little
Karl’s, among the in iny wasteful he made, in the German Reich.
Schkbien is henccfoith a bit ot the Kingdom of Bohemia; indissolubly
hookcfl to Cruiinnj, lud i , pro>;iess in the ails and composures, under
wise Pmts with imnngialin, (rcinians, we guess to have become doubly
rapid '

Tktfd I'pflch idopt tlu K fo) motion AD. 141^-1517 Schlesien,
hanging to loluimi u' tin imiinci c\ltn‘^i\<l^ idoptcd lluss’s doc¬
trines; still moic ixtcinivtly 1 uthci’s iij tUit was a difficult cldtnenl
in its lot, though, J lithcvt, an iin^ eak.ibly pienous ont It Cost above
a Century of sad tumults, 7 ist i Wai , ni> ibovi Two t entunes in¬
cluding the snd llmtj jeus V-ii,-wlu<’i luiviic , in Bohemia Pro
pci, uClc somt,times iciy sad ind even houible But VhUsien, the
outlying Countr) did lu ill this, siifltci less than Bohemix Piopcr, and
did not lose it'' 1 vnn < bcil Docti nc m result is nafoitumte Bohemia
did, and sink into slutti h ‘Imdi il tor]>oi, hm big ( riuifi\( s of j 1
panned fin b) tht. n lysnU ’ iJ rmji ju the ci aisc of subsiqueiit >eaih,
named ol Peat c, it \\ is iiv. it donu'' so 11 ' ie aie the steps, or unavail¬
ing (ounter steps, m tint Jii'n d/tcftion

AD 1537 Onmicd, i isi k'l i t / / jhitlaun^j Duke of
Liegnitz, and ofotlui c'Lin i\t lu itnc m iMn Dec lot Biotheihood
with Kvn Bnndj '}( d n’ll and so fn as might lx,

rubbed out aiii^nndiihtcd 1 ) lhe"lhf n King of Bohemia, subsequently
Kaisci henliTOud J , Ivol V ‘ BirUtur Duke of 1 itgnUz had to givc-
up his parchments, and biconu zero iii that matter. Kur Brandenbuig
entirely lefused to do so, kept lisp utlimcnts, to see if they would not
turn to something • *

A D 1624 '^shlesien, cspttially the then Ihike of I ic'ginl?' (peat-
grandson of the Fob i^b%udituH<- one), and poor Johai.a (moigt, l)uke
of jagemdorf, cadet of yiie then Kur Brandenbmg, went warmly ahead
into the Winter-King project, first fire of the Thirty-years War; suffer¬
ings from Papal encroachment, m high quartern, being leally eJetyemo.
Warmly ahead; and had to smart sharply for it;--^oor JohannGtsoige
> BQsduag, Srdbisckreibun^f Vui. 795, Hfiboer, t 94.

CUp.i. OB' SCHLESIENl 123

I3rtirt6th L>ec. 1740.

with forfeiture of jfugemdorf, with Kekhes^Achi fBaa of tbo I'bnpire),
atuj. total rum; figbimg; agaiast which he $<#n rlied. Act of J>an and
Forfeiture was done tyranrioqsly, ioid mo*: men; and it was persisted
in ecjually so, till men, ceased speaking of it,—^J<^emdorf Duchy, fruit
of the Act, was held by Austria, ever afteif in dehanco of the Law's of
the Eeich* Religious Oppression lay heavy on Protestant Schlesien
thenceforth; and many lukewarm indiviiualities were brought back to
Orthodoxy by that method, successful in the diligent bkillecl hands of
Jesuit Reverend Fathers, with fiscals nad soldiers in the rear of them.

h,J>. Treaty of Westphalia mended mudii of this, and set fair
limits to Papist encroachment;—liad said Treaty been kept: but how
CQidd it ? By Orthodox Authority, anxious to recover lost souls, or at
least to have loyal subjects, it was publicly kept in name; and tacitly,

^ iit substance, it was violated more and more. Of the “ Blossoming of
Silesian Literature,” spoken of in Books; of the Poet Opitz, Poets
liOgau, Hoffmannswaldau, who burst into a kind of Song better or
worse at this I’eriod, we will remember nothing; out ret]ucst the reader
to remember it, if he is tunefully given, or thinks it a good symptom pf
Schlesien.

A,D. 1707. Treaty of Altranstadt: between Kaiser Joseph I. and
Karl XII. Swedish Karl, marching ihiough those pai^—out of Po¬
land, in chase of August th^ Pliy'-ically Strong, tovvauls Saxony, there
to beat him soft,—was waited upon by Silesian Deputations of a lament¬
able nature; was entreated, lor the love of Christ and Ilis Jwangel, to
“Protect us poor Protestants, and get the Treaty of Westphalia ob¬
served on our behalf, and fair-play shown !” Which Karl did; Kaiser
Joseph, with such weight of French Wai lying on him, being much
struck with the lone of that dangeious Swede. 'I’he I’ope rebuked
Kaiser Joseph for .such coiuplianco in the Silesian matter: “ Holy Fa¬
ther,” answeied lhi.s Kaiser {not of di^-tinguishcfl orthodoxy in the
House), “lam too glad ho did not ask me to become Lutheran; I
know not how I should have helped myself 1”-

These are the Three P'pochs;—most things, in respect of
this Third or Reformation Epoch, steppmg ...in^gdily downward
hitherto. As to the Fourth Epoch, dating ‘ 13*1’’Dec. 1740,’
'which contiwies, up to our day and farther, and is me final and
crowning Epoch of Silesian History,—read in the following
Chapters. ^ „

* '?wXi^Affj^emeht&Prtt(SsmhfSiaa$s^Gesehichie{\ri'a. 2^8-593); BQschinf, jEnT-
htschreibun^ 700*739): &c,'—ficitirioh W^'iiitke, Friedtichs dts Groi,sen Besitz-
trgreVrtng ven itemestm of Silesia by Friedrich, j voll. Leipzig, 1843), I

mcntfoii only lest iDgenuoiiii readefi. should be tcinptcd Iw the Title to buy it. Wuttke
bejgins at the Creatiou the World: and having, in two heavy volume.?, at last stnig-
g1e4 down ulose rn the liesitutfgrt^UHg or Seizure iu questiou, calls halt; aud stands
(at ease, wc will h<^e) immov^y there far the seveatecu years since.

124 FIIV'iT ^ILESIAN WAK Book XU.

^ * >ath-i£0a >74<k

Chapter ii.

FRIEDRICJH MARCHES ON CLOCAH.

At what hour Friedrich ceased dancing on that iknjfdus
Ball-night of Bielfeld’s, and how long he slept after, or whether
at all, no Bielfeld even mythically says r but next morniiig', as
is patent to all the world, Tuesday 13th tleccmber 1740* at
the stroke of nine, he steps into his carriage ; and with small
escort rolls away towards Fra‘*jkfurt“On-Qder out upon an
Enterprise which will have results for himself and others.

Two youngish military men, Adjutant-Generals both, Were
with him, Wartenslcben, Borck ; both once fellow Captains itt
the Potsdam Giants, and much in his intimacy ever since.
Wartenslcben wc once saw at Brunswick, on a Masonic occa¬
sion ; Borck, whom we here see for the first time, is not the
Colonel Borck (properly Major-General) who did the Herstal
Operation lately; still less is he the venerable old Minister,
Marlborough Veteran, and now Fit'.d-Marshal Borck, whom
Hotham treated with, on a certain occasion. There are numer¬
ous Borcks always in the King’s service; nor are these three,
except by loose cousinry, related to one another, The Borcks
all come from Stettin quarter; a brave kindred, and old enough,
—“ Old as the Devil, Das ist so old als de Borcken und d^
DUwel," says the Pomeranian Proverb ;—the Adjutant-Gene¬
ral, a junior member of the clan, chances to be the notablest
of them at this moment. Wartensleben, Borck, and a certain
Colonel von der Golz, whom also the King much esteems, these
are his company on this drive. For escort, or guard of honour
out of Berlin t?) next stages, there is a small body of Hus¬
sars, Lifeguard and other Cavalry, * perhaps 500 horse in all.*

They drive rapidly, through the gray winter; reach Fran)h*
fiirt-on-Oder, sixty miles or more; where no doubt there is
military business waiting. ^ They are fo,pvard, on the irtorrow,
for dinner, forty miles farther, a small Town called Crossen,
which looks over into Silesia; and is, for the present, head¬
quarters to a Prussian Army, standing ready there afid in the
environs. Standing ready, or hourly niarching in, and rendez¬
vousing ; now about 38,000 strong, horSe and foot. A Rear¬
guard of Ten or Twelve Thousand will maw:h frbm Berlin in
1 i. 45a; frem, p. 49 ^.

ChAp. XL FRIEDRICH MARCHEfS CiN GLOcIaU. 125
x^th De(!< 1740

two days, pause hereabouts, and follow according to circum¬
stances : Prussian Army will then jil some 40,000 in alL
Schwerin has been Commander, manager and mainspring of
the business hitherto: henceforth it«s to be the King; but
Schwerin under him will still have a Division of his own.

Among the Regiments, we notice ‘ Schulenburg Horse-
Graiadiers/—come along from Landsberg hither, these Horse-
Grenadiers, with little Schulenburg at the head of them ;—

* Dragoon Regiment Bayreuth,’ ‘ Lifeguard Carbineers/ * Der-
achau of Footand other Regiments and figures slightly known
to us, or that will be better known. ^ Rearguard, just getting
under way at Berlin, has for leaders the Prince of Holstein-
Beck (** Holstein-Vatss£Ue,'* say wags, since the Principality
went all to Silver-Plate) and the Hereditarj Piijice of Anhalt-
Dessau, whom we called the Young Dessaucr, on the Strasburg
Journey lately : Rearguard, we say, is of 12,000 ; mam Army
is 28,000 ; Horse and Foot are in the proportion of about i to
3. Artillery ‘ consists of 20 three-pounders ; 4 twelve-pounders;

• 4 howitzers (Jfauhitsen^\ 4 big mortars, calibre fiity-pounds;
■ and of Artillerymen 166 m all.’

With this Force the young King has, on his own basis
(pretty much in spite of all the world, as we find now and
afterwards), determined to invade Silesia, and lay hold of the
Property he has long had there;—not computing, for none
can compute, the sleeping whirlwinds he may chance to awaken
thereby. Thus lightly does a man enter upon Enterprises which
prove unexpectedly momentous, and shape the whole remainder
of his days for him; crossing the Rubicon as it were in his
sleep. In Life, as on Railways at certain points,—whether
you know it or not, there is but an incbrtlAr jvay or that, into
what tram you are shunted; but try to get ouj of it again I
*' The man is mad, cet homme-l^ est foil" said Lodis XV. when
he heard it.®

JPHedrkh tut Crovsent and sltfl in his own Terriloryy
iddh-X^th Dec.;-^steps into Schlesien.

At all events, the man means to try:—and is here dining
at Crossen, noon of Wednesday the i4tn; certain important

T Wst »n H^«tt-GeiChichte< l<

» Kau wr, (English TmnsUtton, called Frtderich IT. amt his Times ;

Jraw British Mussum^nd StaiS'Pa^r Office}—n. very indistinct jpoew Book, in
comparisQif yritb vhat ft might have h^n), jp. 73 (a^th Peo 1^40),

126 FIRffr eitESIAN WAR. Boolcxa

i6th Dec. 1740 »

pcrscms,—especially tV]K> Silesian Gentlemen, deputed from
GrUnberg, the nearest Sifiesian Town, who have come across
the border on business,-—having the honour to dine with him.
To whom liis manner is^ively and affable j lively in mood, as
if there lay no load upon ^is spirits. The business of these
two Silesian Gentlemen, a Baron von Hocke one of them, a
Baron von Kestlitz the other, was To present, on the part of
the Town and Arat of Griinberg, a solemn Protest against this
meditated entrance on the Territory of Schlesien; Government
itself, from Breslau, ordering theVn to do so. Protest was duly
presented; Friedrich, as his manner is, and continues to be
on his march, glances politely into or at the Protest; hands
it, in silence, to some page or secretary to deposit in the due
pigeon-hole or waste-basket; and invites the tw,o Silesian Gen¬
tlemen to dine with him ; as, we see, they have the honour to
do. “ He (A>) lives near Grunberg, then, Mein Herr von
Hocke ?” “ Close to it, Ihro Majestdt. My poor mansion,
Schloss of Dcutsch-Kessel, is some fifteen miles hence; how
infinitely at your Majesty’s sci vice, Should the march prove
inevitable, and go that way 1”—“ Well, perhaps 1 ” I find Fried¬
rich did dine, the second day hence, with one of these Gentle¬
men ; and lodged with the other. Government at Breslau has
ordered such Protest, on the part of the Frontier populations
and Official persons : and this is all that comes of it.

During these hours, it chanced that the big Bell of Crossen
dropped from its steeple,—fulness of time, or entire rottenness
of axletree, being at last completed, at this fateful moment.
Perhaps an ominous thing ? Friedrich, as Csesar and others
have done, cheerfully interprets the omen to his own advant¬
age : “ Sign th;:^ the fligh is to be brought low 1 *’ says Fried¬
rich. Were^^thc march-routes, wagon-trains, and multifarious
adjustments perfect to the last item here at Crossen, he will
’ with much cheerfulness step into Silesia, independent of all
Grunberg Protests and falKi Bells. o

On the second day he does actually cross; ‘the regiments
• marching in, at different points; some reaching as far as
‘ miles in.’ It ic Friday i6th Dec. 1740; there has a
game begun which will last long I They went through the
Village of LSisgen; that was the first point of SUe^^an ground
(“Circle of Schwiebu^,” our old frieiid, is oif the left: near by);
and ‘ Schwerin's Regiment was the foremost.' Others cross

FRIEDRICH MARCHES PHI GLOGAJt. 117

Pec. x)'4a

n

more to the left or right; ‘ marchihg through the Village of
Lessen/ and other dim Villajges and little Towns» round and
beyond Griinberg; all regflments and divisions bearing upon
Gfiinberg and the Great lload; but arflstically portioned out,
-p-geveral miles m breadth (for the ^ike of quarters), and, as
itf generally the rule, about a day’s march in length. This
evening nearly the whole Army was on Silesian ground.

Printed^'Patent’ or Proclamation, biicfty assuring all Si¬
lesians, of whatever rank, coudiiion or religion, “That we
have come as friends to them, «.nd will protect ali persons in
their privileges, and molest no peaceable mtntai,” is posted on
Churcb-doots, and extensively distiibutcd by hand. Soldiers
are forbidden, ‘under penalt> ot the lodi),’ Dfficcis undoi that
of ‘cassation with infamy/ to take an>thing, .viihout hrst bar¬
gaining and paying ready-money tor it. On these terms tlie
Silesian villages chcerlully enough rf^iccept ilieu new guests, in¬
teresting to the rural mmd; .ind though the billeting was
rather heavy, ‘as many as 24 soldicis to a rominon Farmer
{Gartner),' no complaints %eic made. In one Schloss, where
the owners had fled, and no human icbponse was to be had
by the wayworn soldiery, there did occui some breakages and
impatient kickings about; which it gi icvcd Ins Majesty to
hear of, neirt morning ;—in one, not m more.

Oiheial persons, we perceive, study to be absolutely pas¬
sive, This was the Burgermcisici’s «ouise at Grunberg to¬
night; Grunberg, first Town on the Fronliei, sets an example
of passivity which cannot be surpassed. Piussian troops being
at the Gate of Grunberg, Buigermcister and adjuncts sitting
in a tacit expectant condition m their Townhall, there arrives
a Prussian Lieutenant requiring of the Btfrgri. :dster the Key
of said Gate. “To deliver such Key ? Would to God I durst,
“ Mem Herr Lieutenant; but how dare I! T here\s the Key
“ lying : but to give it-—You arc not the Queen of Hungary’s
“ OfScer, I doubt F'—“'J'ho Prvissiai\,Lieutenant has to put out
hand, and take the Key; which he leadily does. And on the
morrow, in returning it, when the march recommences, there
are the same phenomena 1 Burgcrmcistei^ or assistants dare
not for the life of them touch that Key : It lay on the table;
and\nay again, hi the course of Providesnce, come to he !—
The Prussia^'Lieutenant lays it down accordingly, and hurries
put, with a grin on his lace. There was mhcli small laughter

is8 k FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BoAXrt,

V (f 9 X74|X

over this'transaetion; Majesty hiioself laughing at'it.
Higher perfection of ^ssivity no Burgermeister could §how.

The inarch, as readers understand, is towards Glogau; a
stronglsh Garrison To^n» now some 4.0 miles ahead; the key
of Northern Schlesicn. Gninberg (where my readers once
slept for the night, in the late King’s time, though they hive
forgotten it) is the first and only considerable Town on the
hither side of Glogau. On to Glogau, I rather perceive, the
Army is in good part provisioned before starting: after Glogau,
—^we must see. BreaA-wagonS|.Baggage‘’Wagons, Ammunition-
and“Artillery wagons, all is in order; Army artistically por¬
tioned out. That is the form of march; With Glogau ahead.
King, as we said above, dines with his Baron von Hocke, at
the Schloss of Deutsch-Kessel, short way beyond Griinberg,
this first day : but he by no means loiters there j—cuts across,
a dozen miles westward, through a country where his vanguard
on its various lines of march ought to be arriving ;—and goes
to lodge, at the Schloss of Schweinitz, with his other Baron,
the Von Kestlitz of Wednesday at Crosscm'* This is Friday
16th December, his first night on Silesian ground.

Whai Glogau^ and the Government at Breslau^ did upon it

Silesia, in the way of resistance, is not in the least prepared
for him. A month ago, there were not above 3,000 Austrian
Foot and 600 Horse m the whole Province : neither the mili¬
tary Governor Count Wallis, nor the Imperial Court, nor any
Official Person near or far, had the least anticipation of such
a Visit. Count Wallis, who commands in Glogau, did in per¬
son, nine or ten jdays ago, as the rumours rose ever higher,
run over to Crflsscn ; saw with his eyes the undeniable there;
and has b^h zealously endeavouring ever since, what he could,
to take measures. Wallis is now shut in Glogau; hls second,
the now Acting Governor, General ^ Browne, a still more re¬
flective man, is doing likewise his utmo^; but on forlorn terms,
and without the least guidance from Court. Browne has, by
violent industry, raked together, from Mahren and the neigh¬
bouring countries, (Sertain fractions which raise his Force to
7,000 Foot; these he throws, in small parties, into thch de¬
fensible points; or, in larger, into the Chief Gawons. Neiy

Cluo.li. FRIEDRICH MARCHES ON OLOGkU. 129

x6th Dec. 3740. |L I

Cavalry be cannot get; the old 600 Horse be keeps for him¬
self all the marching Army he has.® ^

Fain would he get possession oS Breslau, and throw-in
some garrison there; but cannot. Neither he nor Wallis could
compass that. Breslau is a City divieftd against itself, on this
matter; full of emotions, of expec^tions, apprehensions for
and against, There is a Supreme Silesian Government {Ober-
Amiy * Head-Office,’ kind of Austrian Vice-Royalty) in Breslau;
and there»is, on Breslau’s own score, a Town-Rath; strictly
Catholic both these, Vienna the breath of their nostrils. But
then also there are forty-four Incorporated Trades ; Oppressed-
Protestant in majority; to whom Vienna is not breath, but
rather the want of it. Lastly, the City calls itself Free; and
has crabbed privileges still valid ; a jus preesidii" (or right
to be one’s own garrison) one of them, and the most inconve-
' nient just now. Breslau is a Reichs-Stadt; in theory, sove¬
reign member of the Reich, and supreme over its own affairs,
even as Austria itself:—and the truth is, old Theory and new
Fact, resolved not to quarrel, have lapsed into one another’s
arms in a quite inextrid&ble way, in Breslau as elsewhere 1
With a Head Government which can get no orders from Vi¬
enna, the very Town-Rath has little al.icrity, inclines rather
to passivity like Griinbcrg; and a silent population threatens
to become vocal if you press upon it.

Breslau, that is to say the Ober-Atnt has sent courier
on courier to Vienna for weeks past: not even an answer;—
what can Vienna answer, with Kur-Baiern and others threat¬
ening war on it, and only 10,000/. in its National Purse?
Answer at last is, “ Don’t bother! Danger is not so near.
Why spend money on couriers, and get imo such a taking ?”
Qenerzd Wallis came to Brijslau, after ^ifet he had seen at
Grossen; nnd urged strongly, in the name of relf-preserva-
tion, first law of Nature, to get an Austrian real Garrison in¬
troduced; wished much (horrible to think of!i ‘the suburbs
should be burnt, andjbetter ramjarts raisedbut could not
succeed in any of these points, nor even mention some of them
in a public manner. “ You shall have a Protestant for com-
‘ mandant,” suggested Wallis ; “there is Count von Roth, Sile-

in i. 465: total of Austrian Force seems to bo

9,800 horse

^ VOU IV. . K

130 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. B<»kX«.

iMi Dtc. >1)10.

$ian-Latlierah, an excellent Soldiet !”—•** Thanks,“ answer^
they, *' we can defend ourselves; we had rather not have any V*
And the Breslau Buirghdi^s have, accordingly, set to drill them*'
Selves; arc bringing out old cannort in quanjtity; repairing
breaches ; veiy strict iS sentry*-work : “ Perfectly able to de*
fend our City,—so far as^.we see good !’*—-Tuesday last, De*
cember 13th (the very day Friedrich left Berlin^ as this matt^
of the Garrison, long urged by the Ober-Amt, had at last been
got agfeed to by the Town-Rath, ‘on proviso of (Consulting
the Incorporated Trades,’ or at least consulting their Guild*
Masters, who arc usually a sftisnt folk,—the Guild-Masters
suddenly became in part vocal ; and their Forty-four Guilds
unusually so :—and there was tumult in Breslau, in the Saht-
Ring (big central Square or marketplace, which they call
such as had not been ; idle population, and guild-brethren of
suspicious humour, gathering in multitudes into and round the
fine old Townhall there ; questioning, answering, in louder
and louder key; at last bellowing quite m alt; and on the
edge of flaming into one knew not what:®—till the matter of
Austrian Garrison (much more, of burning the suburbs 1 ) had
to be dropt; settled in what way we see.

Head Government \Ober~Amt) has, through its Northern-
official people, sent Protest, strict order to the Silesian Popu¬
lation to look sour on the Prussians :—and we saw, in conse¬
quence, the Two Silesian Gentlemen did dine with Friedrich,
and he has returned their visits ; and the Mayor of Griinberg
wouW not touch his keys. Head Government is now redact¬
ing a ' Patent,” or still more solemn Protest of its own; which
likewise it will affix in the Salz-Rmg here, and present to King
Friedrich : and t)tiis,—except ‘ dispatching by boat down the
river a great dttfi'onncal to Glogau,’ which was an important
quiet thing,.?of Wallis’s euforting,—is pretty much all it can
do. No Austrian Garrison can be got in (^‘ Perfectly able to
defend ourselves!”)—let Government and Waljis or Browne
contrive as they may. And as to burn^g the suburbs, better
not whisjfier of that again. Breslau feels, or would fain feel
itself “ perfectly able—has at any rate no wish to be bom¬
barded ; and contains privately a great deal of Protestant
humour. Of all which, Friedrich, it is not doubted, has notice
more or less distinct; and quickens his march the ipore.

* Heldafu-Gtickkht*^ i. 469. *

FRIEDRICH MARCHES ON GLOGifJ. 131

s6thD«c. 174 a. * 1 '

* General Browne is at present in the Southern parts; an
able active man and soldier; but with %uch a force what can
he attempt to do ? There are three string places in the Coun¬
try, Glogau, then Brleg, both on the 0 <j^r river; lastly Neisse,
on the Neisse river, a branch of the Oder {one of the four
Neisse rivets there are in German/, mostly in Silesia,—not
handy to the accurate reader of German Books). Browne is
in Neisse; and will start into a strange stare when the dying
reaches him : Prussians actually on inarch! Debate with
them, if debate there is to be,^Browne himself must contrive
to do; from Breslau, from Vienna, no Government Supreme
or Subordinate can yield his 8,000 and him the least bdp.

Glogau, as we saw, means to defend itself; at least, Gene¬
ral Wallis the Commandant does, in spite of the Glogau public;
and is, with his whole might, digging, palisading, getting-in
meal, salt meat and other provender ;—likewise burning sub¬
urbs, uncontrollable he, in the small place ; and clearing down
the outside edifices and sh^^lters, at a diligent rate. Yesterday,
15th December, he bumt-down the ‘ three Oder-Mills, which
' lie outside, the big suburban Tavern, also the Ziegel-Scheum

* (Tile-Manufactory),’ and other valuable buildings, careless of
public lamentation,—fire catching the Town itself^, and need¬
ing to be quenched again.’ Nay, he was clear for burning-
down, or blowing-up, the Protestant Church, indispensable
sacred edifice which stands outside the walls: “ Prussians will
make a blockhouse of it 1 ” said Wallis. A chief Protestant,
Baron von Something, begged passionately for only twelve
hours of respite,—to lay the case before his Prussian Majesty.
Respite conceded, he and another chief P^r.stant had posted
off accordingly; and did the next^morning (Friaay i6th), short
way from Crossen, meet his Majesty’s carriage; whl^raciously
pulled-up for a few instants, and listened to their story. "Meine
Memn, you are the first that ask a favour of me on Silesian
ground; it shall be done you 1 ” said the King; and straight¬
way dispatched, in polite style, his written request to Wallis,
engaging to make no military use whatever of said Church,

* but to attack by the other side, if attaak were necessary.'
Thu|his Majesty saved the Church of Glogau; which of course
was a popul^ act. Getting to sec this Church himself a few

^ i, 473*5.

FIRST SILESIAN WAR,

13*

Book XU,
i6th I3ec. If 4/a,

days hence, he said, “ Why, it must come down at any rate,
and be rebuilt; so ug^^ a thing T’

Wallis is making strenuous preparation; forces the iBha*
bitants, even the upper Jcinds of them, tp labour day and nigJit
by relays, in his rampartings, palisadings; is for bu!ming all
the adjacent Villages,—alid would have done it, had not the
peasants themselves turned out in a dangerous state of ihihd.
He has got together about 1,000 men. His powder, they say,
is fifty years old; but he has eatable provender from Breslau,
and means to hold-out to the utmost. Readers must admit
that the Austrian military, Graf von Wallis to begin with,—still
more, General Browne, who is a younger man and has now
the head charge,—behave well in their present forsaken con¬
dition, Wallis (Graf Franz Wenzel this one, not to be
confounded with an older Wallis heard of in the late
Turk War) is of Scotch descent,—as all these Wallises are ;
* came to Austria long generations ago; Reichsgrafs since
‘1612 —Browne is of Irish; age now thirty-five, ten years
younger than Wallis. Read this Note on the distinguished
Browne:

‘ A German-Irish Gentleman, this General (ultimately Fieldmarshal)

*■ Graf von Browuej one of those &acl exiled Irish Jacobitel, or sons of
‘ Jacobites, who are fighting in foreign armies; able and notable men
‘ several of them, and this Browne considerably the roost so. We shall
‘ meet him repeatedly within the next eighteen years. Maximilian-
‘ Ulysses Graf von Browne: 1 said he was born Gorman; Basel hU
‘ birthplace (13d October 1701;), Father also a soldier: he must not he
^ confounded with a contemporary Cousin of his, who is also “Field-

* marshal Biowne,” but serves in Piissia, Governor of Riga for a long

* time in the coming jears. Tins Austrian General, Fieldmarshal
‘ Browne, wdll by fnd by concern us somewhat j aUd the reader may
‘ take note of hwff;"* *“*

‘ Who Ae Irish Brothers Btowne, the Fathers of these Marshals
‘ Browne, were ? I have looked in what Iri^ Peerages and printed
‘ Records there were, but without the least result. One big dropsical
‘ Book, of languid quality, called King JameiU Irish Army-ldstj has
‘ multitudes of Brownes and Bthers, in an, indistinct form; but the one
‘ Browne wanted, the one Lacy, almost the one Lally, like the part of

* Hamlet^ are omitted. There are so many Irish in the like case with

* these Brownes. A Jl-acy we once slightly saw or heard of; busy in
‘ the Polish-Election time,—^besieging Sautrig (investing bantrig, that

* Mhnnich might beside it);—that l^cy, Governor of Riga,’’'Whom

‘ the Browne w'ill succeed, is also Irish: a conspicuous Rusriait

* man; and will'have a 3on Lacy, ^onsplcuou^ amox^ the Austrians*

Ottp.!!. FRIEDRICH MARCHES 0 ]| GLOCilU. 133

xftl) Pec- 1740.

* Maguires, Ogilvies (of the Irish stock), LienJ««mts ^^Fitzgeralj’* veiy

* many Irish; and there ia not the least distmct account to he had M

* my of them.’*

, Let us attend his Majesty on the nAct few marches towards
Glo^u, to see the manner of the thjng a little; after which it
will behove us to be much more summary, and stick by the
main incidents.

March to tVeichau {Saturday i yth, and stay Sunday there)
to Milkau {Monday i^th) ^get to Merrendorf within sight
of GlogaUf Dec, 22d,

Friedrich‘$ march proceeds with speed and regularity.
Strict discipline is maintained; all things paid for, damage
carefully avoided : “ We come, not as invasive enemies of you
or of the Queen of Hungary, but as protective friends of Silesia
and of her Majesty's rights there ;—her Majesty once allowing
us (as it is presumable she will) our own rights in this Pro¬
vince, no man shall medd|^ with hers, while we continue here.’*
To that effect tuns the little “ Patent,” or initiatory Proclama¬
tion, extensively handed out, and posted in public places, as
was said above; and the practice is conformable.

To all men, coming with Protests or otherwise, we per¬
ceive, the young King is politeness itself; giving clear answer,
and promise which will be kept, on the above principle. No¬
thing angers him except that gentlemen should disbelieve, and
run away. That a mansion be found deserted by its owners,
is the one evil omen for such mansion. Thus, at the Schloss
of Wcichau (which is still discoverable on the Map,’*^ across
the ‘ Black Ochel’ and the ‘ White,’ streams which

saunter eastward towards the Oder there, nothing yet running
westward for the Bober, our other limitary rivcr)'^next night

* For Brmmit see ^'Anonymous of Bambuig" (so I Ivive bad to label a J. F. S.
GitithicMe iies&»e,-An fact, History of Seven-Years VVar,«in successive volumes,
doAe chiedyby the scissors; Leipzig; and Fr^kfurt, 1759 et seqq ), i. X33>i3in.:
elaborate Note of eight pagea^ere; intimaiii% withal that he, J. F. S<, wrote the
^a l^ok 1 had in vain sought for, and can now guess to consist
Dflhose same ehbomte eight pages, water and lathering to the due amount.
Ationymous “of Hamburg” I c»U my J. F. S.,— haying fished him out of the dust-
abysses in thatC!Uy: a very poor take, yet worth citing>omecimes, being authentic,
as even the darkest Germans genefJlHy are.—For a glimpse ol Lcicy (the Elder £.acy)
see Ite$ching, BeytrOgty v». tfia —For (tombstone Note on Wallis) s^e (among

Btheif who are copious in that kind of attide. and keep laige sacks of it, in admired
disorder) Auon^ovM Seyfarth, QtsckkhU FrteJneht ties . 4 wi/rrr* (Leipzig, 1:784-
>788), i. lieu.; Mia Aimnymoos, Z>eie*t dsr Marie Tkerfsm i Leipzig, 1781 ),
ay n.: bborkHisly auUientig Uoblta both; essentially i 7 tc/ibmisfw,--«tufi[ed its into a
row d c^d wets. * At end cS tais VokaOMs

* 34 - FIRSTtSItESIAN WAR. BookXil.

' ' i8th jD«c.

irfter Schweinit?, ^co|(i niifht in Silesia, there was no Owner
t6 be met with; and iheJook of his Majesty grew ;

remembering what had passed yesterni^t, in like <Mt, at
that other Schloss fro^h which the owner with his best port¬
able furniture had vanisl^d. At which Schloss, as above no¬
ticed, some disorders were committed by angry parties of the
march^doors burst open (doors standing impudently dumb
to the rational proposals made them !), inferior remainders of
furniture smashed into firewood, and the like,—-no doubt to
his Majesty's vexation. Here* at Weichau stricter measures
were taken : and yet difficulties, risks were not wanting; and
the Amtmann (Steward of the place) got pulled about, and
once even a stroke or two. Happily the young Herr of Wei¬
chau appeared in person on the morrow, hearing his Majesty
was still there: “ Papa is old; lives at another Schloss; could
not wait upon your Majesty ; nor, till now, could I have that
honour."—“ Well: lucky that you have come: stay dinner T
Which the young Count did, and drove home in the evening
to reassure Papa; his Majesty continuing there another night,
and the risk over.^’

This day, Sunday i8th, the Army rests; their first Sunday
in Silesia, while the young Count pays his devoir: and here
in Weichau, as elsewhere, it is in the Church, Catholic nearly
always, that the Heretic Army does its devotions, safe from
weather at least: such the Royal Order, they say; which is
taken note of, by the Heterodox and by the Orthodox. And
ever henceforth, this is the example followed; and in aU places
where there is no Protestant Church and the Catholics have
one, the Prussian Army-Chaplain assembles his buff-belted
audience in the^-ttwr: "No offence, Reverend Fathers, but
there are hgurs for us, and ffiours for you; and such is the
King's Ordfcr." There is regular divine-service m this Prus¬
sian Army ; and even a good deal of inarticulate religiox^ as
one may see on examining^ ^

Country Gentlemen, Town Mayors and other civic Authori¬
ties, soon learn that on these terms they are safe with his Mar
jesty; march after ^march he has interviews with such, to
regulate the supplies, the necessities and accidents of the quar¬
tering of his Troops. Clear, frank, bpen to reasonable r^ire-
sentation» correct to his promise; in fact„,md|tisi^cmsly coti*

0 N^itim^GttcMicki 0 , h 459 .’

a»p.H. FRIEDRICH MARCHES ON GLOGKU. i»s

jr^h l>ec. ?74o, •' ^

ciliatoiy and paci6catory: sucl;i is Fjiedricli to aU Silesian
tx^n. provincial Authorities, who cai% get no instructions trom
Headquarters; Vienna sayjj^g nothing, Breslau nothing, and
jOeputy-Govemor Browne being far sAith in Neisse,—^are na-
tur^ly in difficulties : How shall jj^ey act ? Best not to act
at all, if one can help it; and follow the Mayor of Grunberg’s
unsurpassable pattern 1—

'These Silesians,’ says an Excerpt I have made, ‘are still in ma-

* iority Protestant j especially in this Northern portion ot the I’rovince;
‘ they have had to suffer much onjliat and other scores; and are secretly

* or openly in fiivour of the Prussians. Ofticial persons, ail ol the Ca-

* thoUc creed, liave leant heavy, not always conscious of doing it, against

* Protestant rights. The Jesuits, consciously enough, have been and
‘ are busy with them; intent to recall a Heretic Population by all me-
‘ thpds, fair and unfair. We heard of Charles XII. ’s interference, three-

* and'thixty years ago; and how the Kaiser, hard bested at that time,

‘ had to profess repentance and engage for complete amendment. Araend-

* ment did, for the moment, accoidmgly take place 'I'realy ot West-

* phalia in all its stipulations, with precautionary improvements, was

* reenacted as Treaty of Alt^istadt; with faithful mtcniioa oi keeping
‘it too, on Kaisar Joseph’s pail, who was not a supeistitious man:
‘ “ Holy Father, I was too glad he did not demand my own conversion

* to the Protestant Heresy, bested as I am,—with Loui') Quatorze and
‘ Company upon the neck of me !” Some improvement of perforra-
‘ ance, very marked at first, did ensue upon this AUransladt Treaty.

* But the sternly accumte Kari of Sweden soon disappeared from the
‘ scene; Kaiser Joseph of Austria soon disappearetl; and his Brother,
‘ Karl VI., was a much mote orthodox person.

‘ The Austrian Government, and Kaisei Karl’.s in particular, i.<j not
‘ to be called an intentionally unjust one; the contrary, I rather find;
‘ but it is, beyond others, ponderous ; based bioad on such multiplex

* formalities, old habitudes; and ^avttafion has a gieat powei over it.

* In brief, Official human nature, with the Kaisers atop, llag^-

*tated continually by Jesuit Confej^ors, does throw Us weight on a

* certain side:—sad fact is, in a lew years the bnjrhtness of that

* Altranstadt improvement began to wax dim; and no\^, under long
‘ Jesuit manipulation, Silesian things arc nearly at their old pat»s; and
‘ the patience of men i% heavily lader^ To .see your Chapel made a

* Soldiers’ Bmrrack, your Protestant School become a Jesuit one,—^Men

* not then think of revolting under injuries; but the poor Silesian

* weaver, trudgit^ twenty miles tor his Sunday sermon; and perceiving

* that, unless th^ Mother could teach the Srt of leading, his boys,

* eiUC^t under soul’s peril, would now never learn it i such a Silesian
^cOulci notflwuifidfor refloctions> Voiceless, hopeless, but heavy; and

dwelling secir^y, is Under nightmare, in a mUUon hearts. Austrian

* wflfiiljy nidust, or pot wilfully so, is admitted to be in a

136 FiqiST«SlLESIAN WAR. Bookxil.

kBth Dec. X74a

* most h^avy-footcd cond^oia; can adtwnistdf tidthiog well. Good Go-

* vexnment is any kind is gpt known here i Possibly the Pjtissian wiU

* be better; who omi say?

* The secret joy of these populations, as Friedrich advances among

* them, becomes more and more a manifest one. Catholic Ofhckds 4 o

* not venture on any definite lk>pe, or dehnite balance of hope and fear;

‘ but adopt the Mayor of Grunberg's course, and study to be pa$siye
‘ and silent. The Jesuit-Priest kind are clear in their minds for Austria;

* but think, Perhaps Prussia itself will not prove very tyrannous^ At
‘ all events, be silent; it is unsafe to stir. We notice generally, it is
‘ only in the Southern or Mountain i-^gions of Silesia, where the €^thOi>
‘ lies are in majority, that the population is not ardently on the Prussian

* side. I’assive, if they are on the other side; accurately passive at

* lowest, this it IS prescribed all prudent men to be. *

On the 18th, while divine-service went on at Wcichan,
there was at Breslau another phenomenon observable. Pro¬
vincial Government m Breslau had, at length, after intense
study, and across such difficulties as we have nO idea of» got
its *' Patent," or carefully-worded Protestation against Prussia,
brought to papei ; and does, this Sky, with considerable SO*
lenmity, affix it to the Rathhaus door there, for the perusal of
mankind; dispatching a Copy for his Prussian Majesty withal,
by two Messengers of dignity. It has needed courage ^crewed
to the sticking-place to venture on such a step, without in¬
struction from Head-quarters ; and the utmost powers of the
Official mind have been taxed to couch this Document in lan¬
guage politely ambiguous, and yet strong enough;—too strong,
some of us now think it. In any case, here it now is; Pro¬
vincial Government’s bolt, so to speak, is shot. The affixing
took place under dark weather-symptoms; actual outburst of
thunder and rain^SFThe moment, not to speak of the other
surer omens. So that, to thS common rniiid at Breslau, it
did not sedfn there would much fruit dome of this diffi^h
performance. Breslau is secretly a ♦much-agitated City; and
Prussian Hussar Parties, ihooting for|h to great distances
ahead, were, this day for the first time, Observed within sight
of it

And on the same«Sunday we remark farther, what is atift
more important: Herr von Gutter, Friedrich’s special E^^^y
to Vienna, has his first interview with the Queen Hungary,
or with Grand-Duke Franz the Queer's Hpsband and Co-Re*
gent; and presents there, from Friedridh's own hand, wrhtun

Chap.II. FRIEDRICH MARCHES,OH GLOGA 17 . 137

39^ Pec. 3740.

vre remember ^vhen, brief distinct Note bf his Prussian Ma¬
jesty’s actual Proposals and real me^iflng iu regard to this
Silesian Affair, Proposals anxiously conciliatory in tone, but
the heavy purport of which is, known i* us : Cotter had been
dispatched, time enough, with these J[*roposals (written above
a month ago); but was instructed not to arrive with them, till
after the actual entraiice into Silesia. And now the response
to them is~? As good as nothing; perhaps worse. Let
that suffice us at present. Readers, on march for Glogau,
would grudge to pause over St^te-papers, though we shall have
to read this of Friedrich’s at some freer moment.

Monday 19th, before daybreak, the Army is astir again,
simultaneously wending forward ; spread over wide areas, like
a vast cloud (potential thunder in it) steadily advancing on
the winds. Length of the Army, artistically portioned out*
may be ten or fifteen miles, breadth already more, and grow¬
ing more; Schwerin always on the right or western wing,
close by the Bober River as yet, through Naumburg and the
Towns on that side,—Liegnitz and other important Towns
lying ahead for Schwerin, still farther apart from the main
Body* were Glogau once settled.

So that the march is in Two Columns; Schwerin, with
the westernmost small column, intending towards Liegnitz, and
thence ever farther southward, with his right leaning on the
high lands which rise more and more into mountains as you
advance. Friedrich himselt commands the other column, has
his left upon the Oder, in a country mounting continually to¬
wards the South, but with less irregularity of level, and gener¬
ally flat as yet. From beginning to end, the entire field of
inarch lies between the Oder and lts#^r:’'’>utary the Bober;
climbing slowly towards the sources of both. Which two
rivers,, as the reader may observe, form here a rectangular or
trapezoidal spacer ever widening as we go southward. Both
rivers, coming from the Giant Mountains, hasten directly
north; but Oder, bul^ng-out easferly in his sandy course, is
obtiged to turn fairly westward again; and at Glbgau, and a
good space farther, flbws in that direction ;—till once Bober
stril^ in, almost at right angles, carrying Oder with htnt,
thdkgh he^s but a branch, straight northward again. North-
Ward, but ever $l|^wer, to the swollen Pommern regions, and
sluggish exit into the BMtic there.

138 FIRSi; SILESIAN WAS. BockXll.

90th Dec.

One of the worst features is the state of the weather. On
Sunday, at Breslau, *^e noticed thunder hnrsting<out on an
important occasion; *'omkious/^ some men thought
for one thing, that the weather was breaking. At Weichan*
that same day, rain began,—the young Herr of Weichaa,
driving home to Papa from dinner with Majesty, would get
his share of it;—and on Monday 19th, there rms such a pour
of rain as kept most wayfarers, though it could not the I’rus-
sian Army, within doors. Rain in plunges, fallen and falling,
through that blessed day; malqng roads into mere rivers of
mud. The Prussian hosts inarched on, all the same. Head¬
quarters, with the van of the wet Army, that night, were at
Milkau ;—from which place we have a Note of Friedrich’s jfor
Friend Jordan, perhaps producible by and by. His Majesty
lodged in some opulent Jesuit Establishment there. And In¬
deed he continued there, not idle, under shelter, for a Cou|de
ol days. The Jesuits, by their two head men, had welcomed
him with their choicest smiles; to whom the King was very
gracious, asking the two to dinner^as usual, and styling them
“Your Reverence." Willing to ingratiate himself with per¬
sons of interest in this Country; and likes talk, even with
Jesuits of discernment.

On the morrow (20th), came to him, here at Milkau,-—
probably from some near stage, for the rain was pouring worse
than ever,—that Breslau “Patent,” or strongish Protestation,
by its two Messengers of dignity. The King looked over it
‘ without visible anger’ or change of countenance; * handed
it,’ we expressly see, ‘ to a Page to reposit' in the proper waste¬
basket ;—spoke politely to the two gentlemen; asked each or
one of them, “ |rnii of the Ober-Amt at Breslau, then Pa¬
using the style of Er (He).—No, your Majesty j we areotdy
of the La^-Stande” (Provincial Parliament, such as it ii),
* Upon which' (do you mark!) ‘his Majesty became still more
' polite; asked them to dinner, and used the style of Sie' For
their Patent, now lying saf^ in its wast^-basket, he gave them
signed receipt; no other answer.

Rain still heavier, rain as of Noah, Continued through this
Tuesday, and for dSys afterwards: but the Prussian hosts#
hastening towards Glogau, marched drill om This Tuesd&y’^s
march, fot the rearward of the Atmy, to,ogo foof and
horse; march of ten hours lone# Welchaa to the hdmlet

Chapin. FRIEDRICH MARCHES ON GLOdKU* 139

i^xSt-aad Dec. 1740. • ^

Milkau (where his Majesty sits busy and affable),—is thought
to be the wettest on record. Waters® all out, bridges down,
the Country one wild lake of eddying mud. Up to the knee
|br many miles together; up to the fiddle for long spaces ;
sometimes even up to^the chin or deeper, where your bridge
was washed away. The Pi ussiansiP marched through it, as if
they had been slate or iron. Rank and file, nobody quitted
his rank, nobody looked sour in the face; they took the pour¬
ing of the skies, and the red seas of terrestrial liquid, as mat¬
ters that must be; cheered one another with jocosities, with
choral snatches (tobacco, l^consider, would not burn); and
swashed unweariedly forward. Ten hours some of them were
out, their march being twenty or twenty-five miles; ten to
fifteen was the average distance come. >'or, singular to say,
did any loss occur; except of almost one poor Army-Chaplain,
and altogether of one poor Soldier’s Wife ,—sank dangerously
both of them, beyond redemption she, taking the wrong side
of some bridge-parapet. Poor Soldier’s Wife, she is not named
to me at all; and has history save this, and thttt ‘ she was
of the regiment Bredow.’ But I perceive she washed herself
away in a World-Transaction ; and there was one rough Bre-
dower, who probably sat sad that night on getting to quarters.
His Majesty surveyed the damp battalions on the morrow
(21st), not without sympathy, not without satisfaction; allowed
them a rest-day here at Milkau, to get dry and bright again;
and gave them ‘fifteen thalers a company,’ which is about
nine-pence apiece, with some words of piaise-^**

Next day, Thursday 22d, his Majesty and they marched
on to Herrendorf; which is only five miles from Glogau, and
near enough for Headquarters, in the now humour of the
pbtee. Wajilis has his messenger at*Herrendorf, “Sorry to
warn your Majesty, That if there Idc the least hostility com¬
mitted, I shall have to resist it to the utmost." Headquarters
continue six days at Herrendorf, Army (main body, or left
Column, of the Army) cantone«d all round, till we consider
what to do.

As^to the right Column, or Schwerin’s Division, that, after
a rest-day or two, gathers itself into more complete separation
hgrei tucking-in its eastern skirts ; and gets on march again,
by its own route. Steadily southward ;-^d from Liegnits,

L 483.

140 FIRST.SILESIAN WAR. BooleXlI.

ind'sSth X)ec.

and the upland Countries, there will be news of Sohwerin and
it before long. Rain ending, there ensued a ringing frost
npt favourable for Sieg^-operations on Glogau ;-r-iind Silesia
became all of flinty glafs, with white peaks to the South-west,
Whither Schwerin is gone.

CHAPTER III.

PROBLEM OF GLOGAU.

Friedrich was over from rferrendorf with the first day¬
light, * reconnoitring Glogau, and rode up to the very glacis
scanning it on all sides. ^ Since Wallis is so resolute, here is
an intricate little problem for Friedrich, with plenty of corol¬
laries and conditions hanging to it. Shall we besiege Glogau,
then? We have no siege-cannon here. Time presses, Breslau
and all things in such crisis; and it will take time. By what
methods cou/d Glogau be besieged ? — Readers can consider
what a blind many-threaded coil offings, heaping itself hero
in wide welters round Glogau, and straggling to the world's
end, Friedrich has on hand: probably those Six days, of Head¬
quarters at Herrendorf, were the busiest he had yet had.

One thing is evident, there ought to be siege-cannon got
straightway; and, still more immediate, the right posts and
battering-places should be ready against it.« coming,—" Let the
Young Dessauer with that Rearguard, or Reserve of 10,000,
which is now at Crossen, come up and assist here," orders
Friedrich; " and let him be swift, for the hours are pregnant T
On farther reflection, perhaps on new rumours from Breslau,
Friedrich perceives that there can be no besieging of Glogau at
this point of time; t^ the Reserve, Half of the Reserve, must
be left to ‘ mask’ it; to hold it in strict blockade, with tovur
tion daily advancing as an ally to us, and with capture by bom¬
barding possible when we like. That Is the ultimate decision;
-.-arrived at through a weltel of dubieties? counterpoisings and
perilous considerations, which we now take no account of. A
most busy week; Friedrich incessantly in motion, now herp
now there; and a greaii deal of heavy work got well and rapidly
done. The details of which, jn these exdberant Manuscripts,
would but weary the reader. Choosing Of the propel posts and

Chap-m. PROBLEM OF GLOGAU. 141

jtsd^Sth Dee, X740.

Ijattering-places (post * on the other side of the River, ‘ * on this
side of it,' * on the Island in the middle of it'), and obstinate
entwnching and preparing of the same^n spite of frost ; ‘wooden
bridge built’ farther tip; with * regulation of the river-boats,
the Polish Ferry,’ and much else: all this we omit; and will
glance only at one pregnant point, fiy way of sample :

0 Most indispensable of all, the King has to provide Subsist-

* ences;—and enters now upon the new plan, which will have to be
‘ followed henceforth,^ The Provincial Chief-men {Landes-j^ltesimt

* \jaxx^'&'EMcsts, their title) are ^uinmoncd, from nine or ten Circles
‘ which are likely to be interests^: they appeal punctually and in num-
‘ berSj’^lest contumacy wo«*en the inevitable. King dines them, to

* stsuft withj as many as “ninety-five covers,”—day not given, but
^probably one of the first in Hcrrenclorf: not Chri^tma- itself, one
‘hopes!

‘ Dinner done, the ninety-five Land’s-Eldest are instructed by proper
‘ parties, What the Infantry’s ration js, in meat, in biead, exact to the
‘ ounce; what the Cavalry’s is, and that of the Cavalry’s Horse. Ta-
‘ bular statement, succinct, conect, clear to the simplest capacity, shows

* what quotities of men on foot, and of men on horseback, or men with
‘draught-cattle, will march^hrough their re-'jU'ctive Circles; Land’s-
‘ Eldests conclude what amount of meal and butclier’s-meat it will be
‘ indispensable to have in readiness;—what Land’s-Eldest can deny the
‘ fact? These Papers still exist, at least the long-winded Summary of

* them does; and I own the reading of it far less insupportable than

* that of the mountains of Proclamalory, Manifesto and Diplomatic

* matter. Nay it leaves a certain wholesome impression on the mind,
‘ as of business thoroughly well done; and a matter, capable, if left in
‘ the chaotic State, of running to all manner of depths and heights,

* compendiously forced to become cosmic in tliis manner.

‘ TTieae Land’s-Eldest undertake, in a mildly resigned or even hope-

* fill humour. They will man.rge as required, in their own Circles;

* will communicate with the Circles farthe^ on; and everywhere the
*. due pxoviants, prestations, fuitheranccs, sfiali be got together by fair
‘ l^portionment on the Silesian Community, and be punctually ready
‘ as the Army advances. Book-keeping there is to be,^legible recqfd

* of everything; on all hands “ quittance” for everything furnished: and

* a time is Coming, when such quittance, presented by any Silesian
‘ man, Will be counted* money paid "tiy him, and iemitted at the next
‘ lajt^day, or otherwise made good. Which promise also was accurately
‘ kept, the Koped-for time having come. It must be owned the Prus-

* juan Army understands business; and, wUh brevity, reduces to a
‘ jjinimum its own trouble, and Utat of other people, non-fighters, who
‘ have to with it Non-fighters, I say; to fighters we hope it will
t |[ive a respectably maximum of trouble when applied to

> k 49 a<' 4 $ 9 >

148 FIRST MILESIAN WAR. , iMtXli.

Dec. 1746.

The Gotten Negotiation at Vientia, vhicli we saw bfegin
there that wet Sundayf is now fast ending, as good as ended;
without result except of®a negative kind. Cotter's Proposals,
—would the reader wi^ to hear these Proposals, which were
so intensely interesting at one time? They are fivefold; given
with great brevity by Friedrich, by us with still greater:

I®. *^WiU fling myself heartily into the Austrian scale, and-en¬
deavour for the interest of Austria in this Pragmatic matter, with my
whole strength against every comer.

jt®. “ Will make treaty with Vmuna, with Russia and the Sea-
Powers, to that effect, *

3®. “ Will help by vote, and with whole amount of interest will
endeavour, to have (Irand-Duke Fran^, the Queen’s Husband, chosen
Kaiser; and to maintain such choice against all and sundry. Feel my¬
self strong enough to accomplisli this result; and may, without exagger¬
ation, ventute to say it shall be done.

4®. “ To help the Court of Vienna in getting its affairs into good
order and fencible condition,—will present to it, on the shortest notice,
Two Million Gulden (200,000/.) ready-money.”-—Infinitely welcome
this Fourth Proposition; and indeed all the other Three are welcome.
but they are saddled with a final condition, which pulls down all again.
This, which is .studiously worded, politely evasive in phrase, and would
fain keep old controversies asleep, though in substance it is so fatally
distinct,—^we give in the King’s own words 1

5®. “ For such essential services as those to which I bind myself
“ by the above very onerous conditions, I naturally require a propor-
tionate lecompense; some suitable assurance, as indemnity for all the
dangers I risk, and for the part {rd/e) 1 am ready to play; in short,
I require hereby the entire and compete cession of all Siksut, ais
“ reward for my labours and dangers which I take upon myself in this
“ course now to be entered upon Itn the preservation and renown of
the House of Austria;”—Silesia all and whole; and we say nothing
of our ‘rights’ to it; politely evasive to her Hungarian Majesty, though
in substance we are so fatally distinct.®

^ These wjre Friedrich’s Proposals; written down with his
own hand atReinsberg, five or six weeks ago (November lyth
is the date of it); in what mood, and how wrought upon by
Schwerin and Podewils, we ^aw above. *Gotter has fulfilled
bis instructions in regard to this important little Document;
and now the effect of it is—?—Gotter caff report Ho good
effect whatever. “ Be*cautious,’* Friedrich instructs him far¬
ther; “modify that Fifth Proposal; I will take less^,tha» tEe

* Freuss, Tktmhest^img, p, 452; Okuscbkger, da TttUf*

mati* (FVaukfi^t, *746),^*.

Oup. la PROBLEM OF GLOGAU. 143

D«e. 1740* 7

whokp ^ if attention is paid to my just olailis on Schtesien.’ '*
To that effect unites Friedrich once or Ijirice. But it is to no
purpose; nor can Gotter, with all hisfindustry^ report other
than worse and worse. Nay, he reports before long, not refusal
only, but refusal with mockery: “How%trange that his Prus-
“ sian Majesty, Whose official post in*Germany, as Kur-Bran-
“ denburg and Kaiser’s Chamberlain, has been to present ewer
“ and towel to the House of Austria, should now set-up for
'* prescribing ^les to it f’ A piece of wit, which could not but
provoke Friedrich; and warn him that negotiation on this mat¬
ter might as well terminate. Swch had been his own thought,
from the iirst; but in compliance with Schwerin and Podewils
he was willing to try.

Better for Maria Theresa, and for all the w'oild how much
better, could she have accepted this Fifth Proposition! But
how could she,the high Imperial Lady, keystone of F-urope,
though by accident with only a few‘pounds of ready-money at
present? Twenty years of bitter fighting, and agony to herself
and all the world, were necessary hrst, a new Fact of Nature
having tumcd-up, a new European Kingdom with leal King to
it; not recognisable as such, by the young Queen of Hungary
or by any other person, till it do its proofs.

What Berlin i$ saying; what Friedrich is thinking.

What Friedrich’s own humour is, what Friedrich’s own
inner man is saying to him, while all the world so babbles about
his Silesian Adventure.^ Of this too there are, though in di¬
luted states some glimmerings to be had,—chiefly in the Corre¬
spondence with Jordan.

Ingenious Jordan, Inspector^of the Poor at Berlin,—his
thousand old women at their wheels humming pleasantly in the
background of our hnaginations, though he says ^nothing of
that, —writes twice a week to his Majesty: pleasant goS’sipy
Letters, with an easy respectfulness not going into sycophancy
anywhere; which keep the campaigning King well abreast of
the Berlin news and rumours: something like the essence of
an Old Newspaper; not without worth in our present Enier-
pri^« One specimen* if we had room I

144 , FIRST SJLESIAN WAR. “ Book XII.

^' s«id* 29 Ui Dec,

'ytrdm to the lung (siccSssively 6:<»n Berlin.—somewhat

P abridged).

N6. 1. ^Btrliny Dee^her *740’ (day siReif Ws Majesty left),

‘ Everybody here is on l^ptoe for the Evewt j ot which both hti^n and

* etid are a riddle to the most. I am charmed to see a part ofyouf Ma-

* je'sty’s Dominions in a stsCte of Pyrrhonism; the disease is epidemical
‘ here at present. Those who, in the style of theologians, consider
' themselves entitled to be certain, maintain That ypur Majesty is ex-

* pected with religious impatience by the Protestants, and that the Ca-

* tholics hope to see themselves delivered from a multitude of imposts

* which cruelly tear-up the beautify bosom of their Church. You can-

* not but succeed in your vahant axi^ stoical Enterprise, riilcc both
‘ religion and u'orldly interest rank thertiselves under your flag.

* Wallis, * Austrian Commandant in Glogau, ‘ they say, has punished

* a Silesian Heretic of enthusiastic turn, as blS^hemer, for announcing
‘ that a new Messiah is just coming. I have a taste for that kind of
‘ martyrdom. Critical persons consider the present step as directly op-
‘ posed to certain maxims in the Anti-Macchiavd,

‘ The word Manifesto' —(your Majesty's little Batent on entering
Silesia, which no reader shall be troubled with at present)-—' is the
‘ burden of every conversation. Rumour goes, there is a short Piece
‘ of the kind to come out today, by way of pieface to a large complete
' exposition, which a certain Jurisconsult is now busy with. People
' crowd to the Bookshops for it, as if looking-out for a celestial pheno-
‘ menon that had lieen pretheted —This is the beginning of my Gazette;
‘ can only come out twice a week, owing to the arrangement of the
‘ Posts. Friday, the day your Majesty crosses into Silesia, I shall
' spend in prayer and devotional exercises: Astronomers pretend that

* Mais will that day enter’—no matter what.

Note, The above Manifesto rumour is correct; Jurisconsult is pon¬
derous Herr Ludwig, Kanzler (ChanceUor) of Halle University, monster
of law-learning,—who has money also, and had to help once with a
House in Berlin for one Nussler, a son-ih-Jaw of his, trani^ently known
to us;—^ponderous LuiJivig, matchless or difficult to match in learning
of this kind, will w'nte ample enough Deductions (which lie in print
still, to the extent of tons weight), and explain the Mrin^hUdirung^
and violencft done upon it, so that he who runs may read, Po'stpone
him to a calmer lime.

No. a. ‘ Berlin^ SatnrdayDecember^ Manifesto has appeared,’
—can be seen, under thick strata of cobwebs, ip'many Books;* is not
worth reading now: Incontestable rights which oor House has for *^es
had on Schlesien, and which doubtless the Hungarian Majesty will re¬
cognise ; not the slightest injury intended, frut Weed fmm that; and so

* In Heldon^GeschicJUe, i. 448, 453 (what Jordao now aUudea|to); ib, 5^0-599
(*^Dedtictknr itself; Ludwig in all his strength, same thr^e weelm mnee); hOSif
(doubtless); in &e. &c. 4.

PROBLEM OF dLOGAU. 14S

stvd'pjth Dee. 1740.

on*!"—*|>eaple are surprised at its brevity; and, studpng it as theologians

* do a passage of Scripture, can make almosAiothing of it. Clear a»

* crystal, says one; dexterously obscure by <fesign, says another.

^Humour that the Ctanijl-Puke of Lorrake,* Maria Theresa’s Hus¬
band, *was at ^einsbrag incognito lately,’— 55 rand-Duke a concerting
party, think people looking into the thing with strong spectacles on
their nose! ‘ M, de Beauvali’ (French Ambassador Extraordinary, to
whom the aces were promised if they came) ‘ said one thing that sur-

* prised met “What put the King on taking this, step, 1 do not know;
‘ but perhaps it is not such a bad one.” Surprising news that the Elec-
‘ tor of Saxony, King of Poland, is fallen into inconsolable remorse for

* changing his religion’ (to Paj|srf^, on P.apa’s hesr, many long years
ago); ‘and that it is not to tb^ope, but to the King of Prussia, that
‘ he opens his heart to steadf his staggering orthodoxy.’ Very astonish¬
ing to Jordan. ‘ Qne thing is certain, all Paris rings with yonr Majesty’s
^ change of religion’ (over to Catholicism, say those astonishing people,
first conjurors of the universe)!

No. 3, 'Berlin, ^Qth December. M, dc Beauvau,’ French Ambas¬
sador, ‘is gone. Ended, yestciday, his survey of the Cabinet of Medals;

* charmed with the same: charmed too, as the public is, with the rich
‘ present be ba$ got from said Cabinet’ (coronation medal or n>cdals in
gold, I could guess); ‘ people say the Kang of France’s Mtdal given to

* our M. de Camas is nothing to it.

‘Rumour of alliance between your Majesty and Fiance with Sweden,*
"—premature rumour. Item, ‘ Queen of Ilungaiy dead in child-birth;’
—ditto with still more emphasis! ‘ The day bcfoic yesteiday, in all

‘ churches, was prayer to Heaven for success *0 your Majesty’s arms;

* interest of the Protestant religion being the one cause of the War, or

* the only one assigned by the reverend gentlemen. At sound of these
‘ words, the zeal of the people kindles; “Bless Ch)d for racing such a

* Defender!. Who dared suspect our King’s uidiffcieuce to Piotcsl-
‘ antistn ?” ’

A right clever thing this last ((5 le beau coup d\'lat )! exclaims Jor-
ddm,—though it is not clever or the coutiary,jnot being dramatically
prearranged, as Jordan exults to think. Joidan, though there are dregs
Of old devotion lying asleep in him, lAiich will start into new activity
when atirred again, is for ^he present a very uubeheiing Ullc gentle¬
man, 1 can perceive.—This is the substance of public rumour at Berlin
for one week’. Friedrich answer^:

5^0 Af. Jordan, at Berlin,

' ^ ^umrter at Millton<, imards Gtogau, i^tA December 1740* (comfort*
able lesait-Establishment at Milkau, Friedrich just got in, out of the
nain).—-‘■ Seigneur Jordan, thy Letter has given me a deal of pleasure
‘ in regard to all these^talklngs thou repoitcsf. Tomorrow* (not tomor-
rou^ nor next day; wet troops need a rest) ‘ I arrive at our last station
v^ni IV T

146 FIRST •SILESIAN WAR. BotokXa

* aad-aSth Bee, tp/x

ttiH side Glogau, which clace I hope to get in la few dajps. All favours
my designs; and I hopeT<^return l<> Berlin^ after et^ecating them glori-
ou.sly and in a way to he content with. Let the Ignorant and the envious
talk; it is not they that s^all ever serve as loadstar to my designs; not

* they, hut Glory' \la Gldre: Fame, depending not on them); * with the

* love of that I am penetrated more than ever; my troops have thdr
‘ hearts big with it, and 1 answer to thee for success. Adieu, dear Jordan,
‘ Write me all the ill that the imhlic .says of thy Friend, and he per-
‘ suaded that I love and will esteem thee always,*—F.

Jordan iocfhe King,

No. 4. * I^rrlin, 24//; December. Voin^Majesty's I^ettcr fills me with
‘ joy anti conleiitincnt. 'J'he Town declar©! your Majesty to he already
‘ in Breslau; founding on some Letter to a Merchant here. Ever since
‘ they think of your M.ijesty acting for Protestantism, they make you
‘ step along with .strides of Achilles to the ends of Silesia,—Foreign
‘ Courts are all rating theit Am])ass.iclors here for not finding you out.

‘Wolf,’ his negotiations conclurlc<i at last, ‘has entered Halle al-
‘ most like the triumphant Kutiy to Jerusalem. A concourse of pedants
‘ escorted him to his house, f.-lngc’ (his old enemy, who accused.faixn
of Atheism and other things) ' ha^ caiierl to see him, and loaded him
‘ with civilities, to the asUmishment of the old Orthodox.’ There let
him rest, well hnltoi)c<l in gaitens, and avoiding to mount stairs. *

‘ Madame de R<Hicoii]le has sent me the three objects adjoined, for your
* Majesty’s behoof,’—woollen achievements, done by the needle, good
again-st the winter We.nlhcr (01 one she nursed. The good old soul.
Enough now of Jordan.*

Voltaire, who left Bcrliit 2d or 3d December, seems to have
been stopt by overflow of rivers about Clevc, then to have
taken boat; and is, about this very time, writing to Friedrich
‘ from a vessel on the Coast? of Zealand, where I am driven
‘ mad.’ (Intcncls,^|3rivatcly, for Paris before long, to get hi^
Mahomet acted, if possible.) To Voltaire, here is a Note ctwn*
ing: *

KmgtoM, de Voltaire fat Brussels, if once got thilhef)*

‘ Qitarter of Herreudvrf ii(^ Silesia^ %yi J}xember 1740. My dear

* Voltaire ,—1 h.nvc received two ofyour Lett«r)lf;^but could not answer
‘sooner; I am like Charles Twelfth’s Che^-King, who was always

* kept on the move. ^For a fortnight past, we have been continually
‘ afoot and under way, in such weather as you never saw.

^ I am too tired to reply to your charming Verses; and sHvartog

* too much with cold to taste all the charm of them: butdhat wUJ come

* round again. Do not ask poetry frOm a man who is uctuajly dohig

* Qiiarres dk FrifUrkf xrii. 75-78,

Ch4p.iir. PROBLE-M t)F G^OGAU. 147

ayth D«c. 1740

‘'th« Ai'ork of a wagonei, and sometimes even of a wngoner stuck in the
‘ mud. Would you like to know my way^f hfe? We anarch from
‘ seven in. the moniing till four m the afternoon. I dine then; afler-
^ wards I work, 1 receive tiiesomo visits; %ith these comes a detail of

* insipid matteis of busmdss. *Tis wronj^eadtd men, punculiously

* difficult, who are to be set right; heads too hot winch must be re-
‘ straittttl, idle fellows that must be urged, mijiatient men that must be
‘ lendered docile^ plunderers to restrain within the Loumls of equity,
‘ babblers to hear babbling, dumb people to keep m talk: m fine, one

* has to drink with those that like it, to cat uithtlio^e that aie hungry;
' one has to become a Jew with Jews, a Pagan a ith PagaTr

* Such arc my occupatio^ifj^which 1 would willingly make over
' to another, if the Phanton^^*y call hame(G/t«r/) did not rise on me

* too otten. In truth, it fs a gieat folly, but a folly diificult to cast
‘away when once you are smitten by it.‘ (Phantom cl (r/oi/-<. some¬
what rampant in those first weeks; let us see whether it will not lay
itself again, forevermore, before long’)

‘Adieu, my dear Voltaiie; may Heiven pic^crve fiom misfortune
‘ the man I should so like to sup with at night, after fighting in the
‘ moinitig! The Swan ofPatlua’ (AlgaioUi, wiili his big hook-nose
and duslcy solemnly greedy tounlenancc) ‘is gomg, f tliiiiK, to ]*ans,

‘ to piofit by my absence; the^’hilo-.ophei Geometer’ (big Maupertuis,
m retl wig and yellow fru/les, vainest ot luimin kind) ‘is sipiaimg
‘ curves; poor little Jordan’ (with the kindly ha/el eyes, and pen that
pleasantly gossips to us) ‘is doing nothing, oi ]nobably something near
‘it. Adieu once more, deal Voltaue; do not foigel the absent wdio
‘ love you.—FC d^ric.’*

Schwerin at Li^nit%; Friedrich hnsJus-np iJic Glogaii Pro¬
blem^ and starts with hn bcj^t speedJor Bresiau,

Meanwhile, on the Western road, and along the foot of the
Snowy peaks over yonder, Schwciin with the small Right co¬
lumn is going prosperously fonvaids. Two columns always, as
the reader recollects,—two pai^Ucl mihtaiy cunentb, flowing
steadily bn, shooting out estafettes, or horse-partiCs, rjn the right
and left; steMily submerging all Silesia as they ilow forward.
Left column or qurren^ is in slight^ause at C^logau lieic; but
tvill directly be abreast again. On Tuesday 27th, Schwerin is
tyithih wind of Liegnitz; on Wednesday morning, while the
ftfes are hardly lighted, or the smoke of Liegnitz risen among
the Hills, Schwerih lias done his feat with the usual deftness;
Prussian gt^dadicrs came softly on the sentry, softly as a
dream; but with sadden levelling of bayonets, sudden beckon-

^ O^itvfvs de SrCdMe, xxii. 57.

148 ' FIRST .SILESIAN WAR. Bogicm

r Md* 28 thl^.

ing, ’*To your Guardhouse!”—and there, turn the key upon his
poor company and hin£ ^hereupon the i«^hole Pwissian colutnh
marches in; tramp tramp, without music, through the streets:
m the Market-place they fold themselves into a talked mass,
and explode into wind-h^fmony and rolling of drums. Lieg-
nitz, mostly in nightcap, looks cautiously out of windCW; it is
a deed done, ihr Hcrren; Liegnitz ours, better late than never;
and after so many years, the King has his own again. Schwerin
is sumptuously lodged in the Jesuits’ Palace: Liegnitz, essenti¬
ally a Protestant Town, has ms^py thoughts upon this event,
but as yet will be stingy of spcakil*/ them.

Thus IS Liegnitz managed. A plea j\nt Town, amid pl^sant
hills on the rocky Katzbach; of which swift stream, and other
towns and passes on it, we shall yet hear more. Population,
Silently industrious in weaving and otherwise, is now above
14,000; was then perhaps about half that number. Patiently
inarticulate, by no means bright m speech or sentiment; a
much-endurmg, steady-going, fiugal, pious and very desirable
people.

The situation of Breslau, all this while, is very critical.
Much bottled emotion m the place; no Austrian Garrison ad¬
missible , Authorities daie not again propose auch a thing,
though Browne is turning every stone for it,—lest the emotion
burst bottle, and take hre. I have dim account that Browne
has been there, has got 300 Austrian dragoons into the Dom
Insel {CathedralIsland; “Not in the City, you perceive 1” says
General Browne: “no, separated by the Oder, on both sides,
from the lest of the City; that stately mass of edifices, and
good military post");—and had hoped to get the suburbs burnt,
after all. But the bottled emotion was too dangerous, Fbr,
undergroi^nd, there are .<4«/r-Brownes: one especialilyj a cer¬
tain busy Deblin, Shoemaker by craft, whom Friedrich Sp^akS
of, but gives no name to; this zealous Cordwaitier, Pebjin, and
he is not the only individual of like h&mour, operates on the
guild-brothers and lower populations things seem to be look¬
ing worse and wors^e the Authorities, in spite of
Browne and his actWities and dragoons,

What the issue will be? Judge if^Friedrich^wish^ the
Young Dcssauercome! Friedrich’s Hu5sar{]^ties(o1^’SchlK^erih*s«

7 jE*reus 9 , ThroiAtsUig;ms, p. 469; CB^tvns d$ IL

Chap< III. PROBLEM OF GliOGAU. 14^

instructed by Friedrich) go to look if the Breslau suburbs are
burnt. Far from it* if Friedrich kney ;-^the suburbs merely
sit quaking at Such proposal, and wish the Prussians were
here. But there is time ahead of us/%aid everybody at Bres¬
lau; “ Glogau will take some sieging^” Browne, in the course
of a day or two,—guessing, I almost think, that Glogau was
not to be besieged,—‘ranked his 300 Austrian dragoons, and
rode away; sending the Austrian State-Papers, in half a score
of Wagons, ahead of him. “Archives of Breslau I" cried the
general pO|)ulation, at sight oj^ese wagons; and largely turned
out, with emotion againto unbottle itself. “ Mere Tax-
Le^ers, and records m the Government Offices; come and
convince yourselves!” answered the Authorities. And the ten
wagons went on; calling at Ohlau and Brieg, tor farther lading
of the like kind. Which wagons the Prussian light horse chased,
but could not catch. On to Mahren went these Archive-wagons;
to Brtinn, far over the Giant Mountains;—did not come back
for a long while, nor to their former Proprietor at all.

Tuesday 27th, Lcopoltf the Young Dessaucr does finally
arrive, with his Reserve, at Glogau: never man more welcome; •
such a fermentation going on at Breslau,—known to Friedrich,
and what it will issue in, if he delay, not known. With dis¬
patch, Leopold is put into his charge; posts all yielded to him;
orders given,—blockade to be strictness itself, but no fighting
if a voidable; “ starvation will soon do it, two months at most,”
hopes Friedrich, too sanguine as it proved:—and With earliest
daylight on the 28th, Friedrich's Army, Friedrich himseli in
the van as usual, is on march again; at its best speed for Bres¬
lau. Read this Note for Jordan;

. JFni&dnch to M, Joidan^ at Berlin.

* Bee. 1740. Sicur Jordan,—I march tomorrow

* for Bteslau; and ^all be there in four days.,’—(three, A happened*

there rh'ing, as would seem, new reason lor haste), ‘You Berliners’
(of the last) ‘ have a spirit oi pronhccy, which goo's beyond me.

‘ * fu fine,.!! go my road; and thou wilt shortly see Silesia ranked m the
*l}st dfour iVovuites* Adieu; this is all I have time to tell thee.

(SBesian Protestantism, and Breslaujj^ Cordwainer), ‘religion

* and our brave soldiers wiE do the rest.

‘ t ^eU B^pertuia 1 grant those Pensiems he proposes for his Aca-
‘ and that 1 hope to find good subjects for that dignity

* Ik tho Country wheite I am, wiffial. Give him my Gomplim^ts.-—

ISO FIRST ;5ILESIAN war,

98th«3Ut zj(4ab

The march was of the swiftest,-^swifter even than had been
expected;—which, as Silesia is all ringing glass, becotnes more
achievable than lately. ^ But certain regiments nhidid them¬
selves in marching; lin three marches, near upon seventy
miles,’ with their baggag^ingling in due proximity. Through
GlSsersdorf, thence through TarchwUz, Neumarkt, Lissa, places
that will be better known to uson Saturday, last night bf
the Year, his Majesty lodged at a Schloss called Pilsnit?^, five
miles to west ofBicslau; and van-ward regiments, a good few,
quartered in the Western and Southern suburbs of Breslau it¬
self ; suburbs decidedly glad to ^?t\;^them, and escape confla¬
gration. The T own-gates are het meticJv?Jy shut;—plenty of emo¬
tion bottled in the 100,000 hearts within. The sentries on
the walls presented arms; nay, it is affirmed, some could not
help exclaiming, •' WUkommm^ Ihr U&ben thrren (Welcome,
dear Sirs)

Colonel Posadowsky (active Horse Colonel whom we have
seen before, who perhaps has been m Breslau before) left orders
•at the Scultet Garden-House,’ that all must be ready and the
rooms warmed, his Majesty intending to arrive here early on the
morrow. Which happened ac cordmgly; Majesty alighting duly
at said Gaiden-House, near by the bchweidnitz Gate,—1 fancy
almost before break of day.

CHAPTER IV.

BRKSr.AU IJNDLR SOFT PRESSURE.

The issue of this Breslau transaction is known, or could be
stated m few words; nor is the manner of it such as would,
for Breslau’s sake, deserve many. But we are looking mto
Friedrich, wish to know his manners and aspects; and here,
ready to oir hand, a Paper turns up, compiled by an exact
person with better leisure than ours, minutely detailing every '
part of the affair. This Paper, after thaoquestion. Burn Or in¬
sert? IS to have the lot of appearing here, with what abridg¬
ments arc possible;

*Sundav IT/ 1741. The King having Wabli^ed hiwself

* in 1 lerm Scultci’s tlarden-iloase, not far from the Sqhweidnit^ Gate,

‘ there began a delicate and great operation. The PrusM^aSy

♦ cautions manner, in the gray of the motuii^, prsh out their s^tri^

^ fielden^Gisckickie, t. 534.

Chap. IV BRESLAU UNDER SOFT PRESSL^E, 151

* 74 *, •

‘ towards thd 'Ihree Gatos oi> this* $idb of the CM&r; seize any “Excise
‘ tlottse,” Of the like, that may be fit for a post,' and fioftly put twenty

* grenadiers” in it. All this before siimisd? Breslau is rigidly shut;
‘ Breslau thought always it could bUind ujifm its jguard, if attacked*
‘ lb now, in Official quarters, dismally unctigtam if it can; general po-
‘ pulation becoming certain that it eannot, and ivaitmg anxious on the

* deitilopmeiit of this grand diama. •

‘About 7 AM. a Prus^iian subiltern idvanting within cry of the
‘ Schweidnilz Gate, lequests of the Town guard thci<, 1 o send him out

* a Town-Officer. Town Officer appears, is infoimed, “ That Colonels
‘ Posadowsky and Borck, Commissioneis 01 plcmpotentiaiy Messengers
‘ from Ills Prussian Majesty, desm^j admittance to ihc Ctnet Magi,ti.i,te
‘ of Bicslau, for the purpose j^tfigiiifying winl Ins Piussiau Majesty’s
‘instructions aie.” Foniy^icti bows, and goc-. upon his errand.
‘ Town-Officer IS some cTOsiderable tunc befoie he tan ictum; City
‘ Autliorities being, as we know’, vaiious, partly Tinpeiinl partly Civic;

* elderly; and some of them gone to church,—• foi matins, 01 to be out of
‘ the way However, he does at li'-t itlurn; admits the tvo ( olonels,

‘ and escoils them honourably, to the il oid Mayoi)

‘ old Herr von Gutsmar’s; where the jiooi old “Tie idtnt of the Ohy
‘ (Von Sebaffgotsch the name of this hilterj is likewise m at

‘ tendance. •

‘Prussian Majesty's proposals aie cif the mildest sou ‘ Nothing
‘ demanded of Breslau but the plainly indispensable nd indisputable,

‘ That BiUbsia be in it what Austria has been in all else, sfaf/t^ tmo

* btrict neutiality to Breslau, lespiU for its pniiUgcs as i Free City
‘ of the Reich; protection to all its lights and piivilegc» wbatsoescr
‘ Shill be guarded by Us owm Ganison, no I’mssnn soldier to mtei
‘ except wdth side-arms; only 3^ t iiaids for the Ring s peison, who will

* Msit the City foi a lew days,—intends to foirn j M iga/inc, with guaid
‘ of 1,000 men, but only outside the City no lequi'sHions, leady-money
‘for everything. Chief Syndic Gutzmai aiifl Pie ulent Schifigotsch

* shall consider these points.”* Syndic and Piesidciit answer, Surely!
‘ Cannot, however, decide till they have assembled the Towm-Rath;

* the two IleriCEQ Colonels will please to be guests of Breslau, and lodge

‘ m the City till then. •

‘ And they lodgeii, accordingly, m the “ C9 0s<! (called .iRo

* big Central Squaic^ wheie the Rathliaus *); and they

* made and received visits, —visited especially the ( hief President’s
‘Office,, the Ober-Amt, ;|pd signified tjjeie, that his Piussian Majesty’s
‘ expeotatiOA was, They would gne some account ol that ralhei high
‘ PiOelamation or “Patent” they had published ag.ainst him the olhei
‘ day, amid thunder amt lightning here, and ^hal they now’ thought
‘ would be expedient upon it ? All m grave onicial terms, but of such

* A purport a$ wrasK not exliilaratmg to everybody in ihtise Ubei-Arat

« 1 i 537^

I $2 f J?lKSi SlJ-li:blAN WAK. BoofeXH,

* fid Jati, if4x.

mornin^%i January, s The Rath is asseiiihlfedj and tdh*

* suits,—consults at greatlenglh* i^a/A-Housc atid Syndic Gut2|»ar,

* in such crisis, would, fam^h^ve advice from House or President

* Schaflfgotbch j but can get none; comiderablt coming and going be-

* tween them; at length, #i.boat 5 in ibe afternoon, the Treaty is got

* drawn up; is signed by the^due Breslau hands, and by the two Prus-

* sian Colonels,—which lattS: ride out with it, about 4 of the dock;

* victorious after thiilyhoins. Sliajght towards the Scultet Garden

* ride they; Town-guard presenting Arms, at the Schweidnita Gate;

* nay Town-band bieaking-out into music, which is never done but to

* Ambassadors and high people. By thirty hours of steady soft pres-
' sure, they have bi ought it thus far<^

‘ Friedrich bad wailed patiently all v^jday, keeping steady guard

* at the Gates; but on Monday, naturally, the thirty hours began to
‘ hang heavy; at all events, he perceived that it would l>e Well to liicili*

* tate conclusions a liitle fioni without Breslau stands tm the West,

* more strictly speaking, on the South side of the Oder, which makes
‘ an elbow licre, and thus bounds it, or mostly bounds it, oa two sides.

‘ The big diab-colouicd River spreads out into Islands, of a confused

* soil, as it passes; which aie paiily built upon, and constitute suburbs

* of the Toivn,—stretching over, here Jkid there, into straggles of far

‘ ther suVmrb beyond the River, where a road with its bndge happens

* to cross foi the Eastern parts The principal of these Islands is the

* Dom /mel ,’—known to General BiownV and us,—‘on which U the
‘ Cathedral, and the C/cfse witli rich Canons and their edifaces; Island

* filled with strong high architecture; and a superior militaiy post.

‘ Fiiednch has already as good as possessed himself of the Three

* landward Gates, wlucli look to the south and to the west; the nver-
‘ ward gates, or those on the norlli and, the east, he perceives that it
‘ weie good now also to h.ive; these, and even perhaps something
‘more? “Gathei all the nvei-boats, make a biidge of them across

* the Oder; push acro<-s 400 menthis is done on Monday morning,

‘ under the King’s own eye. This done, “ March up to that riVerwaid
‘ Gate, and also to that othei, in a mild but dai^rous-looking man-

* ner; hew the beams of said Gafc2 in two; start tho big locks; fling

* wide open said Gate and Gatesthis too is don© J Town-gUfird look*
‘ ing moumfiflly on. This done, “ March forward swiftly, m tw0 haiv<^

* without beat of drum,—whitherward you know I”

‘ Those three hundred Austrian DragootiSf we saw them leave the

* Dom Island, three days ago; there aie at present only Sijt Men, of
*the Bishop’s Guard, walking under arms there,—At the end of the
** Chief bridge, on the TijwnWard side of theft Dom Islatid. See, Pms-
‘ siatt caps and muskets, ye six men under Arms I Tho six men clutch

* at theft drawbridge, and hastily set about hoistingsdas, ano^CP
«Prussian corps, which has come privately by the easteta (or Counfty-

* ymi) Bridge, King himself with ft, tap^ thefn oflf the shohHer at

Ch«i>.IV. BRESLAU UNDER SOBT PRESSU!lE. IJJ

3dT$ib Jait« 3741*

‘ } nuMty constrains the six into their guardliouse: the dnnivx

‘ bridge falls; 400 Prussian grenadiers take <^iet possession of the Dorn

* Island: King may return to the Scultet* Garden, having quickened
‘ the laav hours in tins manner, To such^f the Canons as he came
' upon, hi*. Majesty \ras diOst polite; they most bubmiss. The six sol-

* diefii of the drawbridge, having spoken 4 little loud,-—still more a too
‘ z€alo«i> beef-eater of old Schaffgotsch’s found here, who had been very
‘ loud,—were put under arrcbi; but more for form’s sake; and were let
‘ go, in a day or two,*

Nothing could be gentler on Friedrirh's part, and on that
of his Two Colonels, than djis delicate operation throughout:
-1—and at 4 p.m., after hours of waiting, it is done, and
ftobody^s scyatch^u Old Syndic Gutzmar, and the Town-
Rath, urged by perils and a Town Population who are Pro¬
testant, have signed the Surrender with goodwill, at least with
resignation, and a feeling of relief. The Ober-Aint Officials
have likewise had to sign; full of all the silent spleen an'd de¬
spondency which is natural to the situation: spleen which, in
the case of old Schaffgotsch, weak with age, becomeb passion¬
ately audible here and theHre. He will have to give account of
that injurious Proclamation, or Queen’s “ Patent, " to this King
that has now come.

Kin^ enters Breslau; stays there, gracious and vigilant.
Four Days (Jan. 2d-6th, 1741).

In the Royal Entrance which took place next day, note
these points. Syndic Gutzmar and the Authorities came out,
in grand coaches, at 8 in the morning; had to wait a while;
the King,^ having ridden away to look after his manifold affairs,
did not get back till 10. Town Guard and Garrison are all
drnwn out; Gates all flung open. Prussian sentries withdrawn
from nnd from the Excise-houses they had seized: King’s
Kitchqn-And-Proviaiit Carriages (four mules to each, with bells,
with ttrtcornmonly rich housings): King’s Body*- Coach very
grand indeed, and grandly escorted, the Thirty Bodyguards
riding ah^ad; but nothing in itf only a most superfine cloak

* lined wholly with ermine’ dung upon the seat. Other Coaches,

more or less grandly escorted; Head Qip-bearers, Seneschals,
Pjpnces, Maygraves >—but Where is the King ? King had rid¬
den awaft a h^ond time, with chief Generals, taking survey of
the Town Wifts^^ound aS far as the ZiegeUTkor (Tile-Gate,
i^trettie by the river-edge); he has thus made the

154 I'lKiiTjSlLKSIAN WAR. BookXir.

9d*4tH Jm'

whole circuit of Bre$rau ;-^unwearied in picking-^upi useftif know?-
ledge, ‘ though it was v4i’v cold,’ while that Procession of Coacies
went on. ‘

At noon, his Majesty, thrifty of time, did enter: on hor?e
back, Schwerin riding with him; behind him miscellaneous
chief Officers; Borck ana Posadowsky among others; some
miscellany of Page-people following. With this natural escort,,
he rode in; Town-Major (Commandant of Town-guard), with
drawn sword going ahead;—^King wore his usual Cocked Hat,
and practical Blue Cloak, both a^'ttle dimmed by service; but
his gray horse was adniji able; antHpavir starlet Footmen, grand
as galoon and silver fringe could makSi^hem, did the due mag¬
nificence in dress. He was very gracious; saluting to this side
and to that, wheie he noticed people of condition in the win¬
dows. ' Along Schweidnitz Street, across the Great Ring, down
Albrecht Street,’ He alighted, to lodge, at the Count-Schlegen-
berg House; which used to be the Austrian Cardinal von Sin-
zendorf Piimate of Silesia’s hired lodging,—-Sinzendorf’s fur¬
niture IS put gently aside, on this ttaw occasion. King came
on the balcony; and stood there for some minutes, that every¬
body might see him. The “immense shoutings,” Dryasdust
assures me, have been exaggerated; and I am warned not to
believe the /Cnej^s-Fama such and such a Numbei, except after
comparing it with liim.—That day there was dinner of more
than thirty covers, ( lucf Syndic Gutzmar and Other such guests;
but as to the viands, says my friend, these, owing to the haste,
were nothing to speak of.^

Dinner, better and better ordered, King more and more
gracious, so It continued all the four days of his Majesty’s stay:
—on the second day lie had to rise suddenly from table, and
leave his guests with an apology; something having gone a^viy,
at one of the Gates. Awry there, between the Town Authori¬
ties and a C^eneral Jeetz of his,—who is on march across the
River at this moment (on what errand we shall hear), and a
little mistakes the terms, ifis Majesty puts Jeetz right; and
even waits, till he sees his Brigade and him clear across. A
junior Schaftgotsch,^ i^t the inconsolable Schaftgotsch senior,
but his Nephew, was ope of the guests this second day? an
ccctesiastic, but of witty fashionable type, and I thjpk a
worthless fellow, though of a family importat)| in the Province^

t t. S45-$4S< ^ IKlb ISa

Chap. IV. BRESLAU UNDER SOFJ PRESSURE. 155

jfao. 1741'.

Diniier falls about noon; does not last above two hours or
three, so that there is space for a ride (’to the Dom,* the first
afternoon, * four runners’ always), and for much in-door work,
before the supper-hour.

As the Austrian Authorities sat sclent in their place, and
gave no explanation of that Patent,*' affixed amid thunder and
lightning,—-they got orders from his Majesty to go their ways
next day ; and went In behalf of old President von Schaff-
gotsch, a chief of the Silesian Nobility, and man much loved,
the Breslau people, and men from every guild and lank of so¬
ciety, made petition That k^hould be allowed to continue in
his Town House hcre^^Which '* first request of yours" his
Majesty, with much grace, is sorry to be obliged to refuse.
The suppressed, and insuppressible, weak indignation of old
Schaffgotsch is visible on the occasion , nor, I think, does
Friedrich take it ill; only sends him out of the way with it, for
the time. The Austrian Ober-Amt vanished bodily fiom Bres¬
lau in this manner; and never returned Propei “War-Com¬
mission {Feld-KHejs^s-Comilfissariat)," with Muncho.v, one of
those skilful Custrin Munchovvs, at the top of it, oiganised it¬
self instead; which, almost of necessity, became Supieme Go¬
vernment in a City ungoverned otherwise .—and truly there
was little regret of the Obor>Amt, m Breslau, and ever less,
to a marked extent, as the ycais went an.

On the Sth of January (fourth and last night here), his
Majesty gave a grand Ball. Had hired, or Colonel Posadowsky
instead of him had hired, the Assembly Rooms {Rcdouien-Saal)
for the purpose: “ Invite all the Nobi]it\ high and low;’’—ex¬
pense by estimate is a ducat (half-guinea) each , do it well,
and his Majesty will pay. About 6 m the evening, bis Majesty
in person <Bd us the honour to gdrive over; opened the Ball
with Madath the Countess von Schlegcnberg (I should guess,
a Dowager Lady), in whose house he lodges. 1 an^not aware
that bis Majesty danced much farther, but he was very con¬
descending, and spokd' and smiletf up and down;—till, about
10 P.M., an Officer came in with a Letter. Which Letter his
Majesty having readj and seemingly ask^ed a question or two
in regard to it, put silently in his pocket, as if it were a fin¬
ished thingj^ Nevertheless, after a few minutes, his Majesty
was found to have silently withdrawn; and did not return, not
even to supper, l^erceiving whicht all the Prussian official

IS6 FIRST, SILESIAN WAR. BoAXn.

* T74>.

people gradually withdrew; though the dancing and aujq&ing
continued not the lesl? to a late hour^*

f

“ Open theAustriawiMaihbag see a little what

they are saying over thejet” Such order had evidently been
given, this night* In consequence of which* people wrote by
Dresden, and not the direct way, in future; wishing to avoid
that o^tYi?i\AQ Fel/eisen. Next morning, January 6th, his Ma¬
jesty had left for Ohlau, — early, I suppose; though there
proved to be nothing dangerousjihead there, after all.

CHAPTER

FRIEDRICH PUSHES FORWARD TOWARDS BRIEG AND NEISSE.

Ohlau is a pleasant little Town, two marches south-east
of Breslau; with the Ohlau River on one side, and the Oder
on the other; capable of some defence, were there a garrison.
Brieg the important Fortress, still on the Oder, is some fifteen
miles beyond Ohlau ; after which, bending straight south and
quitting Oder, Neisse the still more important may be thirty
miles :—from Breslau to Neisse, by this route (which is
not string), sixty-five or seventy miles. One of my Topo¬
graphers yields this Note, if readers care for it;

* Ohlau River, an insignificanl drab-colourcd stream, rises well south
‘ of Breslau, about Strehlen; makes, at first, direct eastward towards

* the Oder; and then, when almost close upon it, breaks off to north,
‘ and saunters along, irregularly paraHel to Oder, for twenty miles farther,
' before it can fall faiily in. To this circumstance both Bre!>lau and a

* Town of Ohlau owe Ihcir existence; 'Powns, both of them, ‘'between
' the waters, ” and otherwise well seated; Ohlau sheltering itself in. the
‘ attempted outfall of its little rive^; Breslau dustering itself about the
' actual outfall: both very defensible places in the pB rude time, and
' good for trgde in all times. Both Oder and Ohlau Rivers have split
' and spread themselves into islands and deltas a, good deal, at their
‘ place of meeting; and even have changed t]jeir courses, and.cut-out
‘ new channels for themselves, in the sandy country; mdking a very

* intricate watery network of a site for Bredan i And indeed the Ohlau

* River here, for centuries back, has been compelled into wide meander.

* ings, mere filling of raMpart-ditches, .so that it issues quite obscurely,

* and in an artificial engineered condition, at Breslau.*

ObBu had been expected to malte some defence; General

aoT.V. FORWARD ON BRIEG AND NEISfE. 157

7tli*nUi Jaiu i74t. *

Bfdwne having thrown 300 men into it^^and done what he
coul 4 for the works. And Ohiau did at^rst threaten to make
SQJhe; but thought better of it overni^t, and in effect made
none; but was got (morning of January 9th) on the common
terms, by merely marching up to it in minatory posture.

“ Prisoners of War, if yOu make resi^ance; Free Withdrawal”
(Liberty to march away, arms shouldered, and not serve against
us for a year), “ if you have made none this is the common
course, wher^ there arc Austrian Soldiers at all; the course
where none are, and only a few Syndics sit, with their Town- -
Key laid on the table, a pr^' to the stronger hand, we have
already seen.

From Ohiau, proj^Sr Detachment, under General Kleist,
is pushed forward to summon Bricg; Jeetz from the other side
of the river (whom we saw crossing at Breslau the other day,
interrupting his Majesty's dinner) is to cooperate with Kleist
in that enterprise,—were the Cduntry once cleared on his,
Jeetz’s, east side of Oder ; especially were Namslau once had,
a small Town and Castle,i-ovcr there, which comrxands the
Polish and Hungarian road. Friedrich’s hopes arc buoyant;
Schwerin is swiftly rolling forward to rightward, nothing re¬
sisting him; Detachment is gone from Schwerin, over the
Hills, to Glatz (the Orajschajt, or County Glat/, an Appendage
to Schlesien), under^ excellent guidance ; under guidance,
namely, of Colonel Camas, who has just come ^home from his
Parisian Embassy, and got launched among the wintry moun¬
tains, on a new operation,—which, however, proves of non-
effect for the present.^

Indeed, it is observable that southward of Breslau, the dis¬
pute, what dispute there can be, properly begins; and that
General Browne is there, and shows himself a shining man in
this difficult position. It must'‘be owned, no General could
have made his Small means go farther. Effective, garrisons,
l,6od each, put into Bricg and Neissc; works repaired, maga¬
zines collected, there and elsewhec?; the rest of his poor 7,000
thriftily sprinkled about, in what good posts there are, and
* capable of being got together in six hour'sa superior sol¬
dier, this Browne, though with a very bad task; and seems to
haiiO insphed ^everybody with something of his own temper.

> i S78; Orlleh, Gttehkkh dtr heidm StktgiiscJun

i 49' ‘ o ^

158 ^ FERST SILESIAN WAR. BwkXH.

• 7th-x«th Jfa«. ty^t.

So that there is nfeirching, detaching, miscellaneous difficulty
for Friedrich iti this^^quarten more than had been exp^cte'i
If the fate of Brieg acid Neisse be inevitablei BrbVtfne (stoes
wonders to delay it.

Of the Prussian raaiBches in these parts, recorded by intri¬
cate Dryasdust, there was no point so notable to me as this
unrecorded one: the Stone Pillar which, I see, the Kleist De*-
tachment was sure to find, just now, on the march from Ohlau
to Brieg; last portion of that march, between the village of
Briesen and Brieg. The Oder,W|j^ng on your left hand, is
hereabouts agreeably clothed withw^ds: the country, origin¬
ally a swamp, has* been drained, and ^iven to the plough, in
an agreeable manner; and there is an excellent road paved
with solid whinstone,—quarried in Strehlen, twenty miles away,
among the Hills to the right yonder, as you may guess;—road
very visible to the Prussian soldier, though he does not ask
where quarried. These beautiful improvements, beautiful hu¬
manities,—were done by whom‘Done in 1584,’ say the
records, by ‘ George the Pious Duke of Liegnitz, Brieg and
Wohlaii; 156 years ago. “ Pious” his contemporaries called
this George ; - -he was son of the Erbverbrudentng Duke, who
is so important to us; he was grandfather's grandfather of the
last Duke of all; after whom it was w& that should have got
these fine I'erritories, they should all have fallen to'the Great
Elector, had not the Austrian strong hand provided otherwise.
George did these plantations, recoveries to the plough; made
this perennial whinstone road across the swamps; upon which,
notable to the roughest Prussian (being ‘twelve feet high by
eight feet square’), rises a Hewn Mass with this Inscription on
it,—not of the name or date of George; but of a thought of
his, which is not without p pious beauty to me:

iiiraucruSit alii nobis, nos Posteritati;

Omnibus at Chrisins siranjit ad astni tnam.

Others have made roads for us,' we make them for still others;

Christ made a road to the stars for us all.^

I know not how many Brandenburgers of General KleisPs De¬
tachment, or whether any, read this Stone; but they do all
rustle past it there, claiming the Heritage of this Pious Geotge;

* ZfiUner, Brifi/e tiber Schlesien, i, 175; HOhiiW, i. t tofc

Owp. V. FORWARD ON BRIEG AND NEII^E. 159

fth-rskh Jat». i74t. •

their mute dim interview with him, tn this manner, is a
slightly more memorable than orgers of the day, at this

It was on the i ith, two days aft|r Ohlau, that General
Rleist summoned Brieg; and Brieg answered resolutely, No.
There is a garrison of 1,600 heve.^and a proper magazine;
nothing for it but to ' mask’ Brieg too ; Kieist on this side the
River, Jeetz on that,—had Jeetz once done with Nainslau, which
he has not by any means. Namslau’s answer was likewise
stiffly in the negative ; and Jeetz cannot do Namslau, at least
not the Castle, all at^jnee * -having no sicge-c.innon. Seeing
such stiffness everyFricdnch writes to Glogau, to the
Young Dessauer, " Sitge-artillery hither 1 Swift, by the Oder;
you don't need it where you arc !"—and wisln. j it were .xrrivedk
for behoof of Neisse and these stiff humouis.

Friedrich comes across to Ottmachau ; sits there, in survey
of Neisse, till his Ca?uiofi co?fie.

The Prussians met wj^h serious resistance, foi the first
time (9th January, same day when Ohlau yielded), at a place
called Ottmachau ; a considerable little 'rown and Castle on
the Neissc River, not far west of Neissc Town, almost at the
very south of Silesia, It lay on the route of Schwerin’s Co¬
lumn ; long distances ahead of Licgnit^, — say, by straight
highway a hundred miles ;—during which, to right and to left,
there had been nothing but submission hithcito. No resist¬
ance was expected here either, for then was not hope in any;
only that Browne had been here; industrious to f rente delay
till Neisse were got fully leady. lie is, b> txcry means, gird-
ing-up the loins of Neissc for a tight defence ; has put 1,600
men into it, with proper stores for them* witb .1 resolute skilful
Captain at the top of them ; assiduous Browne had been at
Ottmachau, as the outpost of Neissc, a day or ^0 before;
and, they say, had admonished them ” Not to yield on any
terms, for he would*certainly c«me to their relief.”. Which
doubtless he would have done, had it been in his power; but
how, except by miracle, could it be ? On the 9th of January,
when Schwerin cornea up, Browne is ag;?m waiting hereabouts.
Again in defensive, posture, but without force to undertake
anythipg^ stands on the Southern Uplands, with BOhmenand
Mahren and thOv^iant Mountains at his back;—stands, so to

i 6 o FIRST SILESIAN WAR. .Book XU.

^ « X 3 th<i 5 th Jail. 174 ^.

speak* defensive at |iis tmm House-door, in this manner; and
i«U have, after seeinjg^ Oitmachau’s fate and Neisse*$,' to ducMa
with a felam! At any m^e, K6 had left these Towns in t^e above
final humour, screwed to the sticking-place; and had then
loped elsewhither to scfbw and prepare.

And so the Ottmachau Austrians, * 360 picked grenadiers’
(400 dragoons there also at first were, who, 'after flourishing
about on the outskirts as if for fighting, rode away), fire ‘
perat* says my intricate friend entirely refusing terms from
* Schwerin; kill twelve of his people (Major de R^ge, distin¬
guished Engineer Major, one of so that Schwerin has

to bring petards upon them, fou^annon upon them; and
burst-in their Town Gate, almost thei^'^ffstle Gate, and pretty'
much their Castle itself;—wasting three days of his time upon
this paltry matter. Upon which they do signify a willingness
for “ Free Withdrawal.” “ No, ihr Herren" answers Schwerin;
“not now; after such mad explosion. His Majesty will have
to settle it.” Majesty, who is by this time not far off, comes
over to Ollmachau (January istlji; gives words of rebuke,
rebuke not very inexorable; and admits them Prisoners of
War. ‘The officers were sent to Ciistrin, common men to
Berlinthe usual arrangement in such case. Ottmachau Town
belongs to the Right Reverend von Sipzendorf, Bishop of Bres¬
lau, and Primate; whose especial Palace is in Neisse; though
he ‘ commonly sends his refractory Priests to do their penance
in the Schloss at Ottmachau here,’—and, I should say, had
better himself make terms, and come out hitherward, under
present aspects.

Friedrich continues at Ottmachau; head-quarters there
thenceforth, till he? see Neisse settled. On the morrow, 13th,
he learns that the Siege Artilltry is at Grotkau ; Well forward
towards Neisse ; half way between Brieg and it. Same day,
Colonel Cafcas returns to him out of Glau; five of his men
lost; and reports That Browne has ha^ the roads torn up*
that Glatz is mere ice and obstruction, and that nothing can
be made of it at this season. Good news alternating with not
so good. i

The truth is, Friedrich has got no StifOng Place in Sc^le-
siea; all strengths make unexpected defence; paltry little

* HehUH-Gesehiehtt^ L OfKpk,/. $ 0 .

CIIW.V. FORWARD ON BRIEG AND NEISSE. l6t

sfftH^xsth Jaa. 1741.

I^amslau itself cannot be (juite taken, Castle cannot, till Jeetz
gets bis siege-artillery*—which does no# come along so fast as
that to iMeisse does. Here an Except from my Dryasdust,
exact though abridged, concerning Jeet::

‘ January *4/^, 1741. Prussians, madfers of the Town for a couple
*“ of weeks back, have got into the Church at Namslau, into the Cloisiei;

* are preparing plank floors for batteries, cutting loop-holes j diligent

* as possible,—siege*gTins now at last just coming. The Castle fires

* fiercely on them, makes furious sallies, steals six of our oxen,—makes

* insolent gestures from the walls; at least one soldier does, this day.

* “ Sir, may I give thatl^low a .hot?" asks the Prussian sentry. “Do,

* then,” answers his Major: <'too insolent that one!” And the sentry

* explodes on him; brift^mm plunging down, head foremost {herunier
'• purzdte ); the too jnsol&nt mortal, silent enough tlienc»^rorlh.'*—Jeetz
did get his cannon, thougli not till now, this veiy day I think; and
then, in a couple of days more, jeet/ Imislied-off Namslau (‘ olfi(.ers to
Ctisttin, common men to Berlin’); and thjireujiou blockades the Eastern
side of Brieg, joining hands with Kleist on the Westein : w hereby Brieg,
like Glogau, is completely masked,—till the season mend.

Friedrich, now that hin^artillcry is come, experts no dif¬
ficulty with Neisse. A * paltry hamlet {bicoque)' he playfully
calls it; and, except this, Silesia is now his. Neisse got
(which would be the desirable thing), or put under ‘ mask’ as
Glogau is, and as Brieg is being, Austria possesses not an
inch of land within these borders. Here are some Epistolary
snatches; still in the light style, not to say the flimsy and
uplifted; but worth giving, so transparent are they ; offhand,
like words we had heard his Majesty speak, in his high mood:

to M. Jordan, at Berlin (Two successive Letters).

I®. ‘ Otffn(a:^hau^ 14M Jan. 1741 ’ (second djiy after our arrival there).

* My dear Monsieur Jordan, my swe<^ Monsieur Jordan, my quiet Mon-

* sicur Jordan, my good, my benign, my pacific, my luimanosi Monsieur
< Jordan,—! announce to Thy Serenity the conquest of Sijfisia; I warn
‘ thee of the bewmbardment of Neisse’ (just getting ready), ‘ and I prepaie
' thee for still more impeytaut projects: and instruct thee of the happi-
‘ CSt successes that the womb of Fortune ever bore.

' This ought to suffice thee, Be my Cicero as to the justice of my
cause, and X will be thy Cscsar as to the execution. Adieu: thou

* knowest whether I am not, with the most cordial regard, thy faithful

* fntnd,—F.*

* OtiinacMttf t^th January 1741. I have the honour to infoitn

^ * Ht&kn-Gtuhkhitt h 703,

YOU lY,

M

i6a FIRST SJLESIAN WAR. BookXIl.

, , JflUi. S74*.

* yottr Humanity that are cbristianly preparing to bombawi Neis^ej

* and that if the place w|!il not surrender Of good will,

‘ it be beaten to powder {n^^essit^ sera de Pdkmcr), For the jtest, oar

* affairs go the best in the world; and soon thou wilt hear nothing more

* of us. For in ten days it will all be over; and I shall have the pleu'-
‘ sure of seeing you and heating you, in about a fortnight.

‘ I have seen neither my Brother’ (August Wilhelm, not long ago af
Strasburg Arith. us, and betrotlied since then) * nor KeySerlmg i 1 left

* them at Breslau, not to expose them to the darters of war- They
‘ perhaps will be a little angry; but what can I do?—-The rather as, on
‘ this occasion, one cannot sliare in the glory, unless one is a mortar 1

‘Adieu, M. Ic Conseiller’ (Poor’s'^^M, s^^yled). ‘ Go and amuse
‘ yourself with Horace, study PausaniaSy^nd be gay over Anacreon.

‘ As to me, n ho for amusement have noLhjJii^ but merfons, fescines and
‘ gabions,* I pray God to grant me .soon a pleasanter and peacefuler
‘ occupation, and you health, satisfaction and whatever your hesurt de*
‘ sires.—F.’*

Fricdtich to M. le Contie AlgarotH (gone on a Journey).

* OitniacJian^ 1 •jth January 1741’ (same day as the above to Jordan).

‘ I have begun to hcttle the 1 * igure of Prussia: the outline will not be
‘ altogether regular; for the whole of Silesia is taken, except one miser-

* able hamlet {Ucoqut)^ which perhaps I shall have to keep blockaded

* till next spring.

‘ Up to this time, the whole conquest has cost only Twenty Men,

* and Two Officers, one of nhom is the poorDeR^, whom you have
‘ seen at Berlin,’—De Rtgc, Engineer Major, Jkilled heie atOttmachau,

‘ in Schwerin’s late tussle.

* You are greatly wanting to me here. So Soon as you have talked
‘ that business over, write to me about it.’ (What is the business?
Whither is the du,ky Snan of Padua gone?) ‘ In all these three hun-
‘ dred miles I have found no human rreatare comparable to the Swan

* of Padua. 1 would willingly give ten cubic league.s of ground for a

* genius .similar to yours. But I perceive I was about entreating you
‘to retuin fast, and jofti me again,—while you are not yet arrived
‘ where your errand was. Make haste to arrive, then; to execute your
‘ commission, and fly back to me. T wish you had U Fortunatua Hat j

* it is the offly thing defective in your outfit.

‘Adieu, dear Swan of Padua: think, I pray you, sometimes oftl;iose

* who are getting themselves «ut in slices* ^cHiner^ chined) ‘ for the

* sake of gloiy here, and above all do not forget your friends who think

* a thousand times of you.—FitDtRic.’’

The object of thi dear Swan’s joutnOy, or even the where-

B Merlons aro mounds of earth placed behind the sdBd or PJttn of thtf pftm*

petfthat is, between the embrasures) of a ForU^tion: jEasclnen‘are huudfoi of
brushwood lor ^ing-qp a ditch; gafaioQS, bawoto sBUed uritfi emh, m be tU
de&nce till you get trenches dug. *

«^ Frisiffic, ? Jb, oir

Cl»i>.vt. NEISSE IS BOMBARDED, 163

lath'Xjth Jan. 1741,

abowts of it, cannot be discovered withotA; difficulty; and Is
not nauch worth discovering. ‘Gonegio Turin,* we at last
make out, ' with Secret commissions desirable to sound the
Sardinian Majesty a little, who is Doorkeeper of the Alps, be¬
tween France and Austria, andopens^to the best bidder ? No
great things of a meaning in this itussion, we can guess, or
Algarotti had not gone upon it,—thougli he is handy, at least,
for keeping it unnoticed by the Gazetteer species. Nor was
the Swan successful it would seem ; the more the pity for our
Swan I However, he comes back saie; attends Friedrich in
Silesia ; and in the o<M*rsc ot iiext month leaders will see him,
if any reader wished it.

CHAPTER VI.

NEISSL IS BOMUAUDLIJ,

Nr.issn, which Friedrich calls a paltry hamlet ibicoque) is
a pleasant strongly-fortilied I'own, then of perhaps 6 or 8,000
inhabitants, now of double fhat number; stands on the right
or south bank of the Neisse, - at this day, on both banks.
Pleasant broad streets, high strong houses, mostly of stone.
Pleasantly encircled by green Hills, norihwanl buttresses of
the Giant Mountains; itself standing low aiul level, on rich
ground much inclined to be swampy. A lesser river, Biele,
or Bielau, coming from the South, flows leisurely enough into
the Neisse,—filling all the Fortress ditches, by the road. Or-
chard-groWth and meadow-growth are lordly {Jierthihw aland
rich in fruit, and flowing with milk and honc>. Much given
to weaving, brewing, stocking-making; and, moreover, trades
greatly in these articles, and above all yi Wme. Yearly on
St. Agnes Day, '21st January, jf not a Sunday,’ there is a
Wine-fair here; Hungarian, of every quality from Tokay down¬
ward, is gathered here for distribution into Gcnnarfy and all
the Western Countries. While you drink your I'okay, know
that it comes' through •Neisse. Sf, Agnes Day falls but un¬
handily this year; and I think the Fair vvill, as they say, am-
hieibm<, or not be held, %

Neisse is a Nest of Priests {rfaffin-Nesi), says Friedrich
oncei whi^k cumc iu this way. About 600 years ago, an Ul-

s |>e»iiuL <7DoX i. x^S. A poor vogue Uook: (>nly

toasuuiD.o’ u me oikxttetakv.

I64 0 first SILESIAN WAR. BookXlt.

* istb'isth Jan. A74ii

conditioned Heir-Ayparent of the Liegnitz Sovereign to whom
it then belonged, qua)^el|led with his Father, quarrelled slightly
with the Universe; ar^il, after moping about for some tim^,
went into the Church.. Having Neisse for an apanage already
his oam, he gave it ro the Bishop of Breslau; whose* in spite
of the old Father’s pro^stlngs, it continued, and continues*
Bishops of Breslau are made very grand by it; Bishops of
Breslau have had their own difficulties here. Thus once {In
our Perkin-Warbeck time, a.d. 1497), a Duke of Oppeln, sit¬
ting in some Official Conclave or meeting of magnates here,—»
zealous for country privilege, and fcelijjg himself insufferably
put upon,—started up, openly defiam of Official men; glaring
wrathfully into Duke Casimir of TcscUen (Bohemian-Austrian
Captain of Silesia), and into the Bishop of Breslau himself;
nay at last; tlashed out his sword upon those sublime digni-'
taries. For which, by and by, he had to lay his head on
the block, in the great square here; and died penitent, we
hope.

This place, my Dryasdust informs me, had many accidents
by floudage and by fire; was seized and rc*seized in the Thirty-
Years War especially, at a great rate: Saxon Arnheim, Austrian
Hoik, Swedish Torstenson; no end to the battering and burn¬
ing poor Neisse had, to the big ransoms ' in new Reichsthalers
and 300 casks of wine,’ But it always rebuilt itself, and began
business again. How happy when it could get under some
effectual Protector, of the Liegnitz line, of the Austrian-Bohe-
mian line, and this or the other battering* just sufifered, was to
be the last for some time!—Here again is a battering coming
on it; the first of a scries that are now imminent.

The reader is requested to look at Neisse; for besides the
Tokay wine, there dlill things arrive there.-—Neisse River* let
us again mention, is one of* Four bearing that name, and all
belonging to the Oder:—could not they be labelled, then. Or
numbered, in some way ? This Neisse* which we could call
Neisse the 2 ^'irst{^nA whi(^ careful readers may as well make
acquaintance with on their Map, where too they will find Neisse

Second, ‘ the VViithende or Roaring and two others

which concern us Idls), rises in the ♦ Western Snow-Mountains
{Schneegebirgey South-Western or ,Olai5f district of theOhmt
Mountains; drains Glatz County arid hig thntre; ix^shes
the Tou^n of Glatz; then eastward by Oftma^au* by Neiiso

Ci»».vi. NEISSE IS BOMBARDED. 165

satli Ju. 1741.

Town; whence turning rather abruptly north or north-ea$t, it
geta into the 04 er net feir south of Br^^.

Ndsse as a Place of Arms, the clief Fortress of Silesia
and the nearest to Austria, is extremely desirable for Friedrich;
but there is no hope of it without some kir\d of Siege; and
Friedrich determines to try in that way. From Ottmachau,
accordingly, and from the other sides, the Siege-Artillery being
now at hand, due force gathers itself round Neis^, Schwerin
taking charge; and^jjjjg* above a week there is demonstrating
and posting) summoning and parleying; and then, for three
days, with pauses intg^;cnmg, there is extremely furious bom¬
bardment, red-hot at times: “Will you yielJ, then?”—with
steady negative from Neisse, Friedrich’s quarter is at Ottma-
chau, twelve miles off; from which he can ride over, to see
and superintend. The fury of his bombardment, which natu¬
rally grieved him, testifies the intensity of his wish. But it was
to no purpose. The Commaj;idant, Colonel von Roth ^ihe same
who was proposed for Breslau lately, a wise head and a stout,
tamed in defences) had ‘poured water on his ramparts,’ after
well repairing them,—made his ramparts all ice and glass;—
and done much else. Would the reader care to look for a mo¬
ment? Here, from our waste Papei-uiasscs, is abundance,
requiring only to be abridged;

^yamtary 1741; Monday — jyifnc^^day iiM. Monday 9th,

‘ day when thaf sputter at Ottinach.ru began,—Piu-isian light-troops

* appearetl transiently on the heights about Neisbe, for the firs.t time.

’ iSircetly on sight of whom, C'eminaiidant Roth assembled the Rur-

* ^ers of the place; took a new Oath of Fidelity from one and all;
' admoniUied them to do their utmost, as they sliuuKl see him do.

* The able-bodied and* likeliest of ijiem (say about 400) he has had

* armnged into Miliba Companies, with what drill there conld be in
‘ the interim; and since his coming, has employed every^moment in

* mnking ready, Wednesday nth, he locks all the Gates, and stands

* strictly on his guard. ^ The inhabitants are mostly Catholic; with

* sumptuous BibhOps of Breslau, with fCrmzA/rrm (imaginary Teutsch
‘ or other Ritters with some reality of money), with Jesuit Dignitaries,

* Church and Quasl-Cliurch Officialities, rcsid^t amot^ them: jfopu-
^lation, high and low, Is jiM^ined by creed to the Queen ot Hungary.

* Coinoiandunt Roth ha$ only i,aoo regular soldiers; at the outside

t meif njrtder urmst bat be has gunpowder, he has meal; experi-

* enco also aUd coun^; and hopes these may suffice him for a time,

* 0UO 0f thn most dtcijcmmed CkumnapdtmUr; expert in the defence of

t66 ' FIRST StLESUN WAR. B<»l<xn.

0 iSA Jw If 4 **

* Strong p!ac^ A l)om Silesian (not Saxonj as some think),—and is

* of the Augsbmg Confefewnj but tlxat circumi^anc^ is not iini>ortaBt

* here, though at Breslau Browne thought it whs.

* Thursday i%tk. THb Prussians, in rqgp.tlat' force, appear Oh the
‘ Kanmchen Berg (Cony so-called ftom its rabbits), south of (he

* River, eiideutJy taking piist there, Rotli fires a signal shut> the

* Southein Subuibs ofNeit.se, as \)re^ppomted, go up m flame; crackle

‘ high and far; ni a lamentable manner through the gnm

* wmter air*' 'I his is the day B'ueilriell came over to OttiUdchau, and
settled the sputter there

‘Next day, and next again, the same phenomena at Neisse; the

* Prussians edging i\ei neirtr, ImiJding th«^ oattfcnes, preparing to

* open their cannonade Whereupon Roikburm the lemaining Sub-
‘ urbs, witli hmentable crackle; on all non are mere ludies*

* Bishop’s Mill, hriiKiscan Cloister, Bishop’s Plca&ure-garden, with its

* summer housf^, Bishop’s Hospital, and several Cliurches Roth can
‘ spare none of Ihe^e things, with the Prussians nestling there* hurely
‘the Bishop himself, rtspettiblc Cardinal (Iraf von Smrendotf, liad
‘ better get out of thest. lot ilitics while time yet is?’ “Saturday r4th,*^
that uas the day 1 ncdiicli, it Cttmatiuu, wro^e as above to Jordan
(Letter No i), while the Neisse Subdibs cracklerl lamentably, twelve
miles off, ‘ bcLwciin gt» oi kr to bicak up, nr person, from Ottma-
‘ chau tomoirow, and btgin actual biiunesh on the Kaniuthen Udi
‘ yonder.

^Sunday \yth ‘^diutrin does; mm Hits across the River; takes

* post on the soudi sule of Ntis^i no able to the .Sunday rustics No-

* thmg but burnt vill iges ind bl itk w d!s foi SHiwerm, in that Cpay-
‘ IIill quaiter, and all round, and Roth salufts htm with one twtftiy

* four poundei, which did no hull And so the cannonade bi^ms,
‘ Sunday 15th, and intermittently, 01 both sides of the River, coil
‘ tmucs, alwiy> bursting out igam ai intervals, till Wednestlay, a mere
‘preliminary cannonade on Schwerin’s part; making noise, dotng
‘little hurt intended mote to teriify, but without effect that way on
‘ Roth or the T owmsfolkt Ihe poor Bishop did, on the second day of
‘ i(, come out, and make applit^Uon to Schwerin; was( kiiittUy con-
‘ ducted to In'. Majcsiy, who happ<‘ned to be over there; was kq>t to
‘ dinner, aUifl easily had leave to retire to Freywalde. a C'ouidty House
‘ he ban, m the safe distance * "I here let him be qmet, well out of these
‘ confiiscd batterings and burnipgs of propertg^,

‘ His Majesty's headquarter is at Ottmacliau, but in two hours he
' caiigbe here any day; and looks into everything; soriy that the can*
‘ nonade does not yet anD^wer And remnants Of suburbs are still crauk*
‘ling into name; high,Country-Houses ofKreuzherren, of JeauHs, t*,

* fanatic people seemingly all set again,st ua- ** If Neisse not ‘yieltl
‘ of good'Wilb needs ui it must be beatett to powder,'’ wrote hia Ma-
‘ JfiKirty bo Jorte ni thme ditmmstatices, as we cead above, is

^ Heldt^dSttckiehit, t. 681

CIUP.VI. NEISSE IS BOMB^DED. 167

i8tlk*ji3d Jfan. 17411

* sorry to observe, the Prussians have still one Bishop’$*mflinsia»,

* in a place called the Karlau (Karl-Meadoy|^, with the Be 4 iop’& wm-

* ter {ttel aU ready stacked there; but strides to take order atot Uie

* same*

* Wednesday tiii. This day two provodftions happoaed- First, in
‘ the morning by his Majesty’s order, Co!#ntl liorck (the '?ame we saw

* at Ilciital) had gqne with a Tmnipeiet tow aids Roth; intending to
'inform Roth how mild the terms would be, liow tciT.ble th<‘ penalty

* of not accepting them. But Rvith or Kotii’s people “.inguliTly disre-

* gatd Borck and his Parley Trumpet, answer Us hla'-ti. by musketry;

‘ hre upon it, nay again lire wore wUlii u advintt... i step farther, on
‘ these termsBorck njjdTrumpet lud to leturn W huh much angered
‘ his Majesty atOttmactou that t\ening, as was natmal buiie eveu-
‘ tng, our fine quarters in Me Kailau cnckhd up in ilame, the Bishop’^
' WinJet firewo^ all al^gwith it this was pioMKiOon ccoi. 1 Roth
' had taken order with the Karhu, and got a resolute Butcher to do

* the feat, under pretext ot biinguu’- us li cf It is pieuing loM, only

* blackened walls for us now m the Kirlau or iRcwhcie His Ma^

* jesty, naturally much angeicd oidcis for the nioriow a dose of bomb<

' shells and red-hot balls. Plant a few moitus on the North side too,

* onleis his Majesty.

* Thursday x^ytk. Accordi/igly, by % of the ckxk, cannon batteries

* reawaken with a mighty noise, and usl hot ballN ait noticeable, and

* at 10 the actual bombarding bur^U out ttuiblc 'o hear and see,—

* first shell lalliRg m Haubu/ the kloihici s shop, bat being happily

* got under. Roth has bis City Mihtia compamts, o*-gams€d w ith w aler

* hoses for quenching of tlie red hot baU>, ni wliu h they became ex

* pert. So that though the lire caught many houses, thev always put
‘ it out. Late m the night, hearing no woid from Roih, the Pnissuns

* went to bed.

* T^riday taih. Still no word; on wliuh, about 4 p w thePmssian
'batteries awaken again; volcanic tonent ot led hot shot and shells,
'for seven honja; still no word fioiu Roth About ii at night his

* Majesty again sends a Drum (Paiky Jiaimpct 01 whacvei it u^) to
the Gate; fornully summons Roth; isks l!im, “If he Ins well con-

' suiered what thi"^ c.in lead to? l^'^ccnliv whu he, koih, meant by
^ firing ofa our first Trumpet on Wciincsdiy last^’ Roth aiisw'cred,

* "That as to tihe Trumpet, he had not heird of it bpk»re On the

* other hand, that this mode of sieging by led liot balls stems a little
'^unusual; for the rest^that he hasdnmsdf no order or intentum but

* that of resrstihg to the last.” Some *ly the Drum heieupon by order

* talked of " policing Heisse into powder, mere child's pUy huheilo,”

* t o whieh Roth knswwwd only by lespectfulMumb show.

*S&t$trde^ iU^Matuhy %%d» Midnight of Fnday—Saturday, on

* tJfis answer coming, the fire-volcanoes open again;—nme liours long;

* shells, and ;^ 4 tot nmterial, m temtde abundance Which hit mostly

* JesiAts*S^iiian«tns andCollegiuma; but produced no

l68 FIRST SILESIAN WAR, Bookxn.

•5th Jfui, i7;4t.

* change io Roth, Fs^m 9 A,ikf. the batteries ate silent Silent stUli

* next morning: Divine %!rvice may proceed, if it 10 te, But at 4. of

* the afternoon, the batterifs avaken worse then ovef^ from seven to

* nine boml» going at on«. Universal rage, of noise and horrid glate,

* making night hideous, tnl xo of clock; Rodi continuing indexi>

* ble. This is the last nighteof the Siege.*

Friedrich perceived that Roth would not yield; that the
utter smashing-down of Neisse might more concern Friedrich
than Roth;—that, in fine, it would be better to desist till the
weather altered. Next day, ‘Monday 23d, between noon and
I o’clock,’ the Prussians drew backco^^f.srted the siege into
a blockade. Neisse to be masked, like Brieg and Glogau (Brieg
only half done yet, Jeetz without canndih-vtill tomorrow, a4th,
and little Namslau still gesticulating): * The only thing one

* could try upon it was bombardment. A Nest of Priests

* {Pfaffen-NisO ; not many troops in it: but it cannot well he

* forced at present. If spring were here, it will cost a fort-

* night’s work.'2

A noisy business; * King’s higK person much exposed: a

* boinjjardier and then a sergeant were killed close by him*

* though in all he lost only five men/''*

Browne vanishes in a slight Plash 6 f Fire*

Browne all this while has hung on the Mountain-side, wit¬
nessing these things; sending stores towards GJatz south-west¬
ward, and ’ ruining the ways’ behind them; waiting what would
become of Neisse. Neisse done, Schwerin is upon him; Browne
makes off South-eastward, across the Mountains, for Moravia
and home; Schwerin following hard. At a little place called
Gratz ,4 on the Moravian border, Browne faced round, tried to
defend the Bridge of tfic Oppa sharply though without effect;
and there came (January 25thf a hot sputter biAweea theth fOr
a few minut^ :—after which Browne vanished mto the interior,
and we hear, in these parts, comparatively little more of him
during tins War. Friend and foe must ainit that he has neg-'

* Friedrich to tkeOldDessnuerx Fmetion of L«itfr COttinachaiU, xSth-avst tanu*

ary *741) cu«d by Orlicb. i, 51 —from the Dessau Archivti;, where Hetr Oriidt ha#
ijidustrioasly beea To aii baestHcUy militarypeoijte these fueces of iLatteia are th«
valbnhte feature of Ortich's Boole; and a general raactex Incuts that it does AOir\
coUtibr tit stu^ prc^rly elucidated and labelled uttn accwnumliiy. ^

a //eUen*Geschtehte, u dSo^doo. , 4

* The natne, tn old Slavic apeech, Aignifies Thtva; aad th«y« ara inaQy^mfxer;

Clap. VII. BELUEISLE WITJI PAPERS.! 169

ssth Jan. 174J.

looted nothing; and fairly made the belt of a bad business
here. He is but an interim GeneraUtoo; his Successor just
coming; and the Vienna Board of War is frequently trouble¬
some,—to whose windy speculations Urownc regies with saga¬
cious scepticism, and here andther^a touch of veiled sarcasm,
which was not likely to conciliate in high places. Had her
Hungarian Majesty been able to retain Browne i» his post,
instead of poor Neipperg who wms sent instead, there ihight
have been a considerably different account to give of the se¬
quel But Neipperg was Tutor. (War-Tutor) to the Grand-
Duke* Browne is^liU of young standing (age only thirty-five),
with a touch of veiled sarcasm; and things must go their
course.

In Schtesien, Schwerin is now to command in chief; the
King going off to Berlin for a little, natuially with plenty of
errand there. The Prussian TroOps go into Winter-quarters;
spread themselves wide; beset the good points, especially the
Passes of the Hills,—from jagerndorf, castwaid fo the Ja-
blunka leading towards Hiflhgary;—nay they can, and before
long do, spread into the MoravianTerntoiics, on the other side;
and levy contributions, the Queen piovmg unreasonable.

It was Monday 23d, when the Siege of Neissc was aban¬
doned: on Wednesday, Friedrich himself tut ns homeward;
looks into Schweidnit?, looks into Licgnitz; and arrives at Ber¬
lin as the week ends,—much acclam.ation greeting him from
the multitude. Except those Three masked f ortresses, capable
of no defence to speak of, were Winter over, Silesu is nOk)val
Friedrich’s,'—has fallen wholly to him m the space of about
Seven Weeks, The seizure has been easy; but the retaining
of it, perhaps he himself begins to see more clearly, will have
difficulties I From this point, the about^/cEr^ nearly ceases ir
his Correspondence. In those seven weeks he has, with.g/tfi/'^
or otherwise, cot-out for himself such a life of laboiw as no mar
of his Century had.

CHAPTER VI..

AT VERSAILtES, TWR WOST CHRISTIAN »#AjnSTY CHANGCS HI
SHIRT, ANO RRI,tElSl,E IS SEEN WITH PAPERS.

Friedrich was so busy in Silesia, ibe world was n
asleep atound hhnts the world never iSi though it often seen

170 f FIRST SIlgESlAN WAR. ISookXH.

Jan.

to be, round a man and wbat action he does in it That Sun*
day morning, First Dajtof the Year 1741, in ihoae same hours
while Friedrich, with enei^, with caution^ was himaeH

into Breslau, there wentlon in the Court ojf Versatttes an in**
terior Phenomenon; of which, having by chance got access to
it face to face, we propose to make the reader participant be<*
fore going farther.

Readers are languidly aware that phenomena do go on
round their Friedrich; iluu their busy Friedrich, with his few
Voltaires and renowned persons, are not the only population
of their Century, by any means. Evcryli^Ciy’ is aware of that
fact; yet, in prac tice, almost everybody is as good as not
aware; and the World .all round one’s Hl)ro is a darkness, a
dormant vacancy. Hinv siiange when, as here, some Wastes
paper spill (so to speak; turns up, which you can kiPuiUj and,
by the brief flame of it, bid a reader look with his own, eyesl—
From Herr Doctor Buschmg, who did the Geography and about;
a Hundred other Books, — a man of great worth, almost
genius, could he have el.aboratcd hi^ Hundred Books Into Ten
(or distilled, into flasks of aquavitse, what otherwise lies tum¬
bling as tanks of mash and wort, now run very sour and mal*
odorous);—it is from Herr Busching that we gain the following
rough Piece, illuminative if one can kindle it:

The Titular-HcTr Baion Antuu \on Gcusau, a gentleman of good
parts, schob'.tic liy proft-ssioii, and of Protestant creed, was accoin-
panyingju. 'rravellirig I'utijr, lu those years, a young Craf voti RetUNi.
Graf ton Rcuss is one of those indi'-tittet Counts ReuJ'S, who always
call themselves “Henry;” and, heoag now at the eightieth and fefther,
with uncountable colhteial Henry', intertwwted, are become in effect
anonymous, or of nomenclature luscrutalde to mankind. Kor is the
young one otherwise of the least interest to ii;sj-**except that Herr
Anton, the Travelling Tutor, punAually kept a Journal of everything.
Which Journal, long afterwauls, came into the huuds of Bdsching,
also a punctilhl man; and was by him abridged;, and set forth in print
in his Beytra^siA Offering at piesent a singular daguerreotype glimpse
of the then actual world, wherevfSr Graf vonKdhss and his Geujuau hap¬
pened to be. Nine-tenths of it, even in Buschir^^i Abridgment, are
now fallen useless and w^risome; but to one studying the dayi* that
then were, even the effete commonplace of it occasionally becomes
alive again. And how interesting to eatehi here .and tbero, a
toHcal Figure on these conditions; ifistpricfld Figure’s in his

wm’kdfty attitude; eating his vfetaaB; writing, letters, ^kine

to h» feiioW'Creatures; unaware that PtKtferity, miraculously, (lur^h

Chap. VII. BELLEISLE WIT^ PAPERS. 171

Jm. 1741*

soaje chink of the Travelling Tutor’s ]f»rO(litcin|, has got its eye upon
himJ

‘ Sunday tft January »74t, Geusau an 4 his young Gentleman leave
‘ Paris, at 5 in the woniiiig, and drive out^^o Vcr^aillos; intending to
‘ see the ceremomes of Newyear's clay there. Verj' wet weather it had
‘ been, all Wedneaday, and for days bcfo.%;‘ but tjn this Sunday, New-
‘ year’s morning, all is ice and glassj and they hlid alxiui painfully by

* lamplight,—witU unroughened hoi sc'^, and on ti.e f I illy or Mendon
*T<xvl, having chosen that as futest, ti^c‘^\a[cr<> lieing out;—nOl ar-

* riving at Court till 9. Nor finding very much Ui comfort tiiem, ex-
‘ cept on the side of curiority, when theie. L\]K'r>, hitr^fditcUurs,

* Cabinet $ecretarieii|ii|^re indeed ;ividiu;U'> ut oblige; .ind the King’s
‘ Leveti will be: but if you follow it to the tJiapei Ko).il ict witness
‘ high mass, you must kneel at elevation of the hnsjt; and this as re¬
-formed Cbristiuns, Ircuss ami hi» Tuioi canno' undcitake to do.

‘ They accept a dinner-invitation (17 the houri from some gixxl Sa-

- maritan of Quality; and, for sights. Mill content tliein-i-ive- with the
‘ King’s Levee itself, and generally witli uh.-'i the KmgS Antechamber
‘ and the CEil-de-Boeuf can exhibit to them, 'I he Most C'hi idian King's

* Levee’ {/Icrrw', literally here his Getting out of l>ed) ‘L a daily inira-

- cle of these localities, only <ja;ander on Ncwycads day; and it is to

* the following eftect:

*Till Majesty please to awaken, yc-u saunter in the .Salle <les Am-

- bassadeurs; whole crowds jO',lling one another thcic; gO'.dpmg to-
‘ gclher in a diligent, insipid manner;’ go -.ij) all reportccl; Miiatchcs of
whinh have actiuired a certain this our by long keeping;—which the
reader shall imagine. - Meanwhile you kcoj) y»mi eye ^‘n the (irate of

* the Inner Court, which as- yet is only ajar, Maiesty inaccessible as

* yet. Behold, at last, (irate opens It.self vvivle; sign that Majesty is

* out of bed; that the privileged of mankind may approach, and see

* the ntiiacles.’ (jreusau continues, abridged by Biisching and us:

‘ The whole Assemblage passed now into the King’s Anteroom; had
‘ to wait there about half an hour more, before the King’s bedroom was

* opened. But then at last, lo you,—there the King, visible toGeu-

* «nd everybody, “washing his hamL.” Which effected itself in

* this way: “The King was seated;^ gentleman-in-waiting knelt before
‘ hitOj a^ Iteld the Ewer, a square vessel silver-gilt, firm upon the

* Kill’s breast; ahd* another gentleman-in-waiting pourelf water on the

* King’s hands.’* Merely an official washing, we perceive; the real, it

* is to bb hoped, had, a much inBre effectual vifay, been going on

* during the half-hour just ckpseiL After washing, the King rose for

* an instant; hod his dressing-gown, a gran(| yellow silky article with
^^Weir ffowerii^Si pulled ofi^ and flung round bis loins; upon which

’ h| sat down i^in, and,’-—observe it, ye privileged of m.aukind,—

‘ k {ii-el temble Noah-Uk« weaihw it had been j

mg kriig la SmK tfnahHag^dowa at last into the Seine; t-Aiijsf 0/ Si. Gnu*

vfnu brottf^t out (two days aQoh^eiMAbor 301^ to tty it by inltacle; &c. &c.

17* ' FIRST SV-EStAN WAR. Boofcm

Jail. 1741.

* the Change of Shirt tfiok place! ^*They put the dean shirt down
*over his head,” soya Afton, *‘au<l plucked'-up the dirty one frdra

* within, so that Of the naked skin you saw Uttle or fto|thing.” ‘ Here
is a miracle worth getting gut of bed to look at!

‘His Majesty now quitled chair and drcssing'gowtjpstood up W-
‘ fore the fire; and, after get(?.ig-ou the re5»t of his clothing, whi<^, on

* account of C/arina Anne’^? death’ (readers remember that}, ‘ was ot
‘ violet or mourning erdour, lie had the powder'inanUe thrown round
‘ him, and sat down at thcToilctH' to have his hairfnnled, TheToi-

* lette, a table with nbite rover shoved into the middle of the room,

* had on it a mirror, a powdei-knife, and’—no mortal cares what. ‘The
‘ King,’what all mortals note, as they do t||^fi/*>eavenly omens, ‘is
‘ somewhat talky; speaks souietiraes with the HtiWdi Ambassador,

* sometimes with the Pope’s Nuncio, who seOi;^ a jocose kind of gen-

* tleman; sometimes w'ith diffeient French Lora's, and at last with the
‘ Cardinal FJeury aUo,—to whom, howc\*cr, he does not look paf-

* ticularly gracious,’—not particularly this time. These are the omens;
happy who can read them!—‘Majesty then did his morning-prayer,
‘assisted only by the common Almoners iii-waitmg (Cardinal took no

* band, much less any othcrl; Majesty knelt before his bed, and fmbhed
‘ the business “in less ih.in six secondly” After which mankind can

* ebb out to the Anttroom again; piy their devoir to the Queen’s Ma*

‘ jesty, which all do; or wait furthcTiansil to Morning Chapel, and see
‘ Mesdames of Fiance and the others flitting past in their sedans.

‘Queen’.sMajesty w'as already altogether dressed,’ s.ay.s Geusau, al¬
most as if with some disappointment; ‘all in black; a most aftable courte-

* ous Majesty; stands (ouvorsing with the Russian Ainbait&acior, with

* the Dutch ditto, with the Ladies about her, and at last, “ in a friendly

* and meiry tone,” with old (Cardinal P’leury. Her Ladies, when*the
‘ Qneen spoke with them, showed no constraint at all; leant locweiy

* with their arms on the fire scieens, and took tlung:s easy. Mesdames
‘ of France’—Geusau saw Mesdames, Poor little soul^ they are the
Lcque^ the Cochon (Rag, Pig, so Papa would call them, dear Papa),
who become tragically vbihie again in the Revolution timet—all blwnn-
ing young children as ycl (Queen’s Majesty some Thitty-seven gope)#
and little dreaming what lies fifty ^bars ahead! IvingLouis’s career
extraneous gallantries, which en<led in the Parc-au)t*Ccrfs, is now just
beginning: think of that too; and of her Maje^ty’^s fine behaviour under
it; so affable, so patient, silent, now and alwml—Hn a little while,
their Majesties go along the Greaf^'Gallery toCflftp^}’ whither the Pro¬
testant mind cannot with comfort accompany>*

This is the daily mhade done at Ver^fiilles to the believing
multitude; only that on NewyeaFs-day^ and pertain auprem^
occasio0s» the shirt is handed by ^ Pdnqe of the Bli&od, nhd
the tot drying the royal hands by a 4 ido; with otkot hn*

» Bfisdaufi, it. iswfi.

Ci-p.vn. BELLEISIX WITH PAPERS. 173

Jati< 1741.

.provements; and the thing comes out i}| its highest power of
effulgence,—^especially if you could high mass withal, In

the Antechamber aud CEIl-de-Bceuf^^Geusau, among hundreds
of phenomena fatten dead to us, saw Four following, which
have still some life:

0

1*. Many Knights of the Holy Ghost {Chevali^s du Saint Esprit)
are about; magnificently piebald people, indistinct to us, and fallen
dead to us: but there, among the company, d^ not wc indisputably
see, *in fall Cardinal’s costume,’ Fleury the ancient Prime Minister,
talidng to her Majesty? Blandly smiling; soft as milk, yet with a
flavour of alcoholic in him here and there. Tliat is a man worth
looking at, had thej*ffeiinted him at all. Uc*d hat, red stockings; a
serenely definite olo gentleman, with something of pnident wisdom,
and a touch of irrtpcr^itihle jocosity at times; m Idl) inexpugnable in
manner: this King, Avhose Tutor he was twenty years ago, .still looks
to him as his father; Fleury is the kmI King of Fiance at picseiit. His
age is eigluy-seven gone; the King’^ i'.’llmty (seven year-, younger than
his Queen): and the Cardinal haj red ■vlockings .and lui hat; veiitably
there, successively in both Antechambers, seen by (Jeusau, January ist,

1741; that is all f know.

a**. The Prince do CleimiSBt, a. Piincc of the IjlofHl, 'handed the
shirt,’ /«//'Geusau. Rome othei Prince, notable to Gcu>'au, and to us
liamcleys, had, the honour of the ‘ towel;’ but this Prince dc Cleimont,
a dissolute fellow of wasted paits, kind of Priest, kind of boldier too,
is seen visibly handing the shirt there;—whom the reader and I, if we
cared about it, shall ag.iin see, getting beaten by Pinne Ferdinand, at
Crefeld, within twenty years licncc, Thc-jc aro point-. fa-.t and second,
slightly noticeable, slightly if at all.

Of the actual tmnsit to high mass, Iranvit very visible in the tireat
Gallery or CEU-de-lknuf, why should a human being now s.iy anything?
Queen, poor Stanislaus’s Daughter, and her Ladies, in their sublime
sedans, one flood of jewels, sail fin>t; nest saih King Louis, shirt naim
on his back, with * Thirty'‘four Chevalieis of the Holy (>host’ escorting;
next Hh« Dauphin’ (lioy of eleven, Louis XVL’s Fathei), and ‘Mes-
datnes of France, with’—but eventjyeuvtu stops short. Protestants can¬
not enter that Chapel, without peril of idolatry: viherefoie (»eusau and
Pupil kept stroilmg in the general CEil-rle-Peru f,—and Dutch .km-

basiiador approved of it,’ he for one. And heie now is another point,
slightly noticeable: ,

3*. High inass over, his Majesty sails back from Chapel, in the
same magnificently pkhald manner; and vanishes into the interior;
leaving his Knight$ of the Holy Ghost, andf other Courtier multitude,

_ simmer ubou^ and ebb away as they found good. Geusau uikI his
xiiiing Reuss had now the honour of bsing introduced to various peo-
dej ainoi% otheti ‘to UtePrince de Soubisc.’ prince de Soubise: frivo-
ihsign^caht bfingl whom 1 hav4; no portrait that is not nearly

174 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BwkXP

Jan. X74t.

blank, and content to b# soj—'though Herr vonGeusau would hare One,
with i^atures and costume Jo it, when he heatd of the^Beating at Ross*
bach, long afterl rrince oe Soubii.e is pretty mtodi, a blank to every¬
body;—and no sooner are loose of him, than ^what <^v«ry reader
will do well to note) ♦

4®. Our lien en 'rraveller-^ai c intmducecl to a real Notability: Mon*
seigneur, soon to be Mart^chal, ilic Comte de Bellehle; whom my read¬
ers and I are to be niuth ♦ oncerned with, in time coming. * A tall lean

* man ha}iere^Wa» ti), without much air of quality,’thinks Geu*

sauj but w’ith much *iwift mtcllecl an<J energy, and a distinguished cha¬
racter, whatever G<us.:u )nji:hl ihink. ‘Comte dc BelleUle was vety
‘ civil; but apologiv^d. in .i i ourlly kind wn\\ (or the hurry he wa$

* in; regretting the iTnpO'.silnlity of doing the blraours to the Comte de
^ Reus'' in tlusCountiy,—hi%, ItelIcicle’s, Journey into Gennatty, which

* was close at hand, ovei whelming him with dl^Upations and engage-

* meats at pjcsent. Ami indeed, even while he spoke to u<«,*saysGeti-
sau, ‘all manner of Papers were put into Iiis hand.’*

“Journey to Germany, Papers put into his hand:" there is
perhaps no Human Figure in the world, this Sunday (except the
one Figure now m those sami’ momenis over at Breslau, gently
pressing upon the locked (^ates tha'c), who is so momentous
for our Silesian Opcrafion-i, and indeed he will kindle all
Europe into delirium; and pioduce mere thunder and light¬
ning, for seven years to come,—with almost no result in it,
except Silesia! A tall lean man ; there stands he, age now
fifty-six, just about seltmg-out on such errand. Whom one is
thankful to have seen for a moment, even m that slight man¬
ner.

Of BeUeisk and hi: Flans,

Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, Comte de Belleisle, is
Grandson of that Inteiidant Fouquet, sumptuous Financier,
whom Louis XIV. at last threw out, and locked into the Fort¬
ress of Pigncrol, amid the Sa\foy Alps, tliere to meditate for
life, which lasted thnty years longer. It was never understood
that the surnptuous Fou<iuct had altogether stolen public mo¬
neys, nor indcetl rightly what^he had dom^ to merit Pignerolj
and always, though fallen somehow into such dire disfavour,
he was pitied and resoected by a good portion of the public.
“ Has angered Colbeiv’ said the public; “dangerous rival^
to Colbert; that is what has brought Pigfterol upon him.” ♦

Out of Pignerol that Fouquet never came; but his Family

* BSschio);, ii. 7^; »ee Barbier, u. iSif.

175

aap.vu. BELLEISLE WITH PAPERS.

i 74 t.

bldomed'Up into light again; bad its adventures, sometimes its
troubles, in the Regency time, but was ^ways in a rising way:
—-and here, in this tail lean man get|ing papers put into his
hand, it has risen very high indeed. Gqing as Ambassador Ex¬
traordinary to the Gennanic Diet, assist good neighbours,
as a neighbour and Most Christian Majesty should, in choos¬
ing their new Kaiser to the best advantagethat is the official
colour his mission is to have. Surely a proud mission;—and
B^lleisle intends to execute it in a way that will surprise the
Gennanic Diet and mankind. Privatel>, Bollejsle intends that
he, by his own indiiteltfies, shall himself choose the right Kaiser,
such Kaiser as will suit the Most Chnstiim Majesty and him;
he intends to make q^ew French thing of Germany in general;
and carries in his head plans of an amazing nature! He and
a Brother he has, called the Chevalier dc BcUeisle. who is also
a distinguished man, and seconds M. Ic Comte with eloquent
fire and zeal in all things, arc grandsons (»f that old Fouquet,
and the most shining men in Fiame at piesent, Fr.ii'‘re little
dreams how much better it perhaps were, had they also been
kept safe in Pignerol!—

The Count, lean and growing old, ;s not healthy; is ever
and anon tormented, and laid-upfor weeks, with rheumatisms,
gouts and ailments: but otherwise he is still a swift ^al■dellt
elastic spirit; with grand schemes, with fiery notions and con¬
victions, which captivate and liurry-oiTnicn’s minds more than
eloquence could, so intensely true are they to the Count him¬
self;—and then his Brother the Chevalier is always there to
put them into the due language and logic, where needed."* A
magnanimous high-flowm spirit; thought to be of supreme skill
both in Wtir and in Diplomacy; tit for many things; and is
still full of ambition to distinguish himself, and tell the world
at ail'moments, voilh; \C’arld, I too am here!" — His
plans, just now, which arc dim even to himself, c’^ept on the
hither skirt of them, stretch out iinmc.»surable, and lie piled
Up high aS the skies* The hiilicr skirt of them, which will
suffice the reader at present, is:

That your Grand-Duke Franz, Marifi Theresa's Husband,
in ho wisti;, as the world and Duke Franz expect, be the
Ksdutfr cli^psen. jfJot he, hut another who will suit France bet-
tet« **Kux^chsen pj^thaps, the so-called Ring of Poland? Or

^ xxvUi 74i atxiK. 39si; &c.

176 FIRST SJLfiSIAN WAR. Book Ml.

Jan. 174k.

say it were Karl Albert Kur-Baiern, the hereditary friend atrd
dependant of France? (jWe are not tied to a man: only, at any
and at all rates, not Or^nd-Duke Franz.” This is the grand,
essential and indispensijLble point, alpha and omega of points;
very clear this one to Helleisle,—and towards this the first
steps, if as yet only the first, are also clear to him. Namely
that ‘the 27th of February next,’—which is the time set by
Kur-Mainz and the native Officials for the actual meeting of
their Reichstag to begin Election Business, will be too early a
time; and must be got postponed.® Postponed; which will be
possible, perhaps for long; one knows how long: that

is a first step definitely clear to Belleisle. Towards which, as
preliminary to it and to all the others in^ dimmer state, th6re
is a second thing clear, and has even been officially settled (all
but the day): 'I'hat, in the meanwhile, and surely the sooner
the better, he, Belleisle, Most Christian Majesty’s Ambassador
Extraordinary to the Reichstag coming,—do, in his most daz¬
zling and persuasive manner, make a Tour among German
Courts. Let us visit, in our highe '»4 and yet in our softest splen¬
dour, the accessible German Courts, especially the likely or
well-disposed: Mainz, Koln, Trier, these, the three called Spi¬
ritual, lie on our very route ; then Pfalz, Baiern, Sachsen;—
we will tour diligently up and down; try whether, by optic
machinery and art-magic of the mind, one cannot bring them
round.

In all these preliminary steps and poifits, and even in that
alpha and omega of excluding Grand-Duke Franz, and getting
a Kaiser of his own, Belleisle succeeded. With painful results
to himself and to millions of his fellow-creatures, to readers of
this History, among others. And became in conse<iuence the
most famous of mankind; and filled the whole world with rum¬
our of Belleisle, in those yeai%.—A man of such intrinsic dis¬
tinction as Belleisle, whom Friedrich afterwards deliberately
called a great Captain, and the only Frenchman with a genius
for war; and who, for sometime, played ifi Europe at large a
part like that of Warwick the Kingmaker: how has he fallen
into such oblivion ? ^Maiiy of my read^ never Jieard of him

« Adelang, il. 185 (“47th February—ist ajttficH 1741, at Frank<urt-oil-MayQ,’'
sipppinted by Kur-Mainz ‘ Arch-Chancellor oi the Ji^ichj under ^te
1748^;—ib. 336 (“Delay for a month or twojf* suggests Knr-Ffalz, on laniMiry»iath,
aeoonded by Others in uioFrench interest);—tiponivhidichoa^poiatiamit, after some
ergait«. collapsed into the vasue, and there ensued delay enoughj actual Klectipa

P9t turjmwwy

Chap. VII, BELLEISLE WITH PAPERS.. j77

Jan. 1741.

before; nor* in writing or otherwise, is tli^re symptom that any-
living memory now harbours him, or has the least approach to
an image of him I ‘ Kor the times are bjfcbly,’ says Coeth^ * And
' then again the times are dumb: ^

* DenH §es€hw(iirdg sit^ die Zeitett^

‘ Und sie sind auch mieder siumm*

Alas, if a man soVv only chaff, in never so sublime a man¬
ner, with the whole Earth and the long-eared populations look¬
ing, on, and chorally singing approval, rendering night hideous,

■—it will avail hirj|^pthing. And that, to a lamentable extent,
was Bclleisle’s case. His scheme of action was in most felici¬
tously just accordance with the national sense of France, but
by no means so witlfthe Laws of Nature ana of Fact; his aim,
grandiose, patriotic, what you will, was unluckily false and not
true. How could ‘the times' continue talking of him? They
found th^y had already talked too much. Not to say that the
French Revolution has since come; and has blown all that
into the air, miles aloft,—where even the solid pari of it, which
must be recovered one day, much more the gaseous, which we
tnist is forever irrecoverable, now wanders and whirls; and
many things are abolished, for the present, of more value than
Belleisle!—

For my own share, being, as it were, forced accidentally to
look at him again, I find in Belleisle a really notable man; far
superior to the vulgar of noted men, in his time or ours. Sad
destiny for such a matfl But when the general Life-element
becomes so unspeakably phantasmal as under Louis XV., it is
difficult for any man to be real; to be other than a play-actor,
more or less eminent and artistically dressed. Sad enough,
surely, when the truth of your relation to* the Universe, and the
tragically e^nest meaning of yodr Life, is quite lied out of you,
by a world sunk in lies; and you can, with effort attain to
nothing but to be a more or less splendid lie along with it t
Your very existence become a gesture, a hypocrisy and hear¬
say; nothing left of you but this sad faculty of sowing chaff in
the fashionable manner 1 After Friedric^j and Voltaire, in both
of whom, mnder the given circumstances, one finds a perennial
hre^ty, more or less,—-Bellei^e is next; none fails to escape
(he mouriffUl cm^moh lot by a nearer miss than BcUeisle.
Beyomd ar€ In thi^ man the biggest projects

yOh IV, ‘ ‘ ” H

178 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXli.

Jan. * 741 .

any French head ha^carried, $iAce Louis XIV. with his sublkne
periwig first took to ^riking the stars, How the indolent
Louis XV. and the pacify Fleury have been got into this ^b-
limely adventurous mogd? By Belleisle chiefly, men say;-^
and by King Louis’s first^Mistresses, blown upon by Belleisle;
poor Louis having now, at length, left his poor Queen to het
reflections, and taken, into that sad line, in which by degrees
he earned it so far. There are three of them, it seemsthe
first female souls that could ever manage to kindle, into flame
or into smoke, in this or any other kind, that poor torpid male
soul: those Mailly vSistcrs, three in numbiJC<(I am shocked to
hear), successive, nay m part simultaneous! They are proud
women, especially the two younger, wi^ ambition in them,
with a bravura magnanimity, of the theatrical or operatic kind;
of whom Louis is very fond. " To raise France to its place,
your Majesty: the top of the Universe, namely I" “Well; if it
could be done, — and quite without trouble ?” thinks Louis.
Bravura magnanimity, blown upon by Relleisle, prevails among
these high Improper-Females, a,.d generally in the Younger
Circles of the Coui I; so that poor old Fleury has had no choice
but to obey it or letirc. And so Belleisle stalks across the
QEU-de-Boeuf in that important manner, visibly to Geusau; and
is the shining object in Paris, and much the topic there at
present.

A few weeks hence, ho is farther,—a little out of the com¬
mon turn, but not be)ond his military merits or capabilities,—
made Mardthal de France,*' by way of giving him a new splen¬
dour in the German Political World, and assisting in his opera¬
tions there, which depend much upon the laws of vision. French
epigrams circulate in consequence, and there are witty criti¬
cisms ; to which Belleisle, such a dusky world of Possibility
lying ahead, is grandly mdifterent. Mar^cbal de France
and Gcusg^u heais (what is a fact) that there are to be ‘thirty
young French Lords m his suite;' his very “Livery," or mere
plush retinue, *to consist ilo persons;' such an outfit for
magnificence as was never seen before. And in this equipment,
' early in March’ (ex^nct day not given), magnificence of out¬
side corresponding to grandiosity of faculty and idea-i BeUeisie,
we shall find, does practically set-off towards Germany
a kind of French Belus, or God of the ^nn; capable to dasz^
* FmUs deltwisXV, i (satb X74«).

Ch>ip.vii. BELLEISLE WiTI^ PAPERS. 175

Jan. 3(74t.

we&k German Courts, by optical ma^lunei^, and to set much
rotten thatch on fire I— I

•There are curious daguerreotype gUmil^es of old Paris to be found

* in that Notebook of Geusau’s,’ says anothfr Kxcerpt; ‘which come
‘ strangely home to us, like reality at firsthand;—and a rather unex-
‘ pected Paris it is, to most readers; many things then alive there,

* which are now deep underground. Much Jansenist Theology afloat;
‘ grand French Ladies piously eager to convcit a young Protestant

* Nobleman likfe Reuss; sublime Dorcases, who do not rouge, or dress
‘ higli, but eschew the evil world, and are thrifty for the Poor’s sake,
‘ redeeming the time. There is a Cardinal de I’olignac, venerable sage

* and ex political pei^ 5 ?i^'of astonishing eiudition, collector of Antiques

* (with whom we dined); there is the Chevalier Ramsay, theological
‘ Scotch Jacobite, late l^tor of the young Tureum. .So many shining

* persons, now fallen indistinct again. And then, be.sides gossip, which
‘ is of mild quality and in fair proportion,—what talk, casuistic and

* other^ about the Moral Duties, the sull feasible Pietio, the Constitu-

* tion Unigenitus! All thj.s ahve, ^e^onant at dinnei tables of Conser-
‘ vative stamp; the Miracles of Abbe Pans much a topic there:—and
‘ not a whisper of Infidel Philosophies; the vwy name of Voilairc not
‘ once mentioned in the Reuss 'jettion oi Parisi.m things.

‘There is rumour now and then of a " Comte de Rothenbourg,”
‘ conspicuous in the Parisian circles; a shining military man, but seem-
‘ ingly in want of employment; who has lost in gambling, within the
‘ last four years, upwards of 50,000/. (1,300,000 hvres, the exact cipher
‘ given). This' is the Graf von Rolhenburg whom Frie<lrich made ac-
‘ quaintance with, in the Rhine Campaign six years ago, and has ever
‘ since had in his eye;—whom, in a few weeks hence, Kriecbich beckons
‘ over to him into the Prussian Slates: “ Hither, and you shall have
‘workl” Which Rothenlmrg accepts; with manifold advantage to
‘both parties:—one of Friedrich’s most distinguished friends for the
‘ rest of his life.

‘ Of Cardinal Polignac there is much said, and several dinners with
‘ him are transacted, dialogue partly given: a pkms u isc old gentleman
‘ really, in his kind (age now eighty-fijur); looking mildly forth upon a

* world just about to overset itself and go topsyturvy, as he .siees it will.
‘ His AnH'^LucreHus wa.s once such a Poem 1—but wc Tq|mtion him

* here because his fine Cabinet of Anlique.s came to Berlin on his death,
‘ Friedrich purchasing; aufi one often l^ans of it (if one cared to hear)

* from the Prussian Pryasdusit in subsequent years. ^

‘ Of Friedrich's unejtpected Invasion of Silvia there are also talk-

7 ^ine tQ-Chartotteabuts August 1742 (old Polignac had died November last,
after tho^oGvu^n times): cast of the Polignac Cabinet was ^,000 thalers
(6,000/.^ say some, Kvws t imder 4,000/.) say others; cheap at cither price,'”
siud, by eliiuice, came opyottunelyi ‘ a fire haviag lust bumMowo the Acadenty Edi¬
fice,' and destroyed mueh ware of that kind. Kbdenbeck, i. 73; Seyiarto (Anonym¬
ous), G€^hiehi« JPrkdn(^Mdt* Andtunt i,

i8o FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXll.

I • ^ Jen. 174 **

' ings and surmisittgs, in a mild indifferent toni^ and much in
‘ Vague. And in tlic best'-informed circle)^ it thought Belleisle wUi
. * manage \,okceve Grand-lHike Franz, the Queen of Hungary’s Husband^
* chosen Kaiser, and, in soifie mild good wUy^ put an end all that^’
which is iar indeed froA Belleisie’s intention I

CHAPTER VIII.

PHENOMENA IN PETERSBURG.

I KNOW not whether Major Winterfeld, who was seiit to
Petersburg in December last, had got baiCV-Jo Berlin in Fcbi'u-
ary, now while P'riedrich is there: but for certain the good
news of him had, That he had been con^nletely successful, and
was coming speedily, to resume his soldidl duties in right titne.
As Winterfeld is an important man (nearly buried into dark-
ness in the dull Prussian Books), let us pause for a moment
on this Negotiation of his;—and on the mad Russian vicissi¬
tudes which preceded and followed, so far as they concern us.
Russia, a big demi-s.ivage neighbour next door, with such cn-
prires, such humours and interests, is always an important,
rather delicate object to Friedrich; and Fortune's mad wheel
is plunging and canting in a strange headlong way there, of
late. Czarina Anne, we know, is dead; the Autocrat of All the
Russias following the Kaiser of the Romans within eight days.
Iwan, her little Nephew, still in. swaddling-clothes, is now
Autocrat of All the Russias if he knew it, poor little red-Col-
oured creature; and Anton Ulrich and hts Mecklenburg Rus¬
sian Princess—But let us take up the matter where our Note¬
books left it, in F ricdrich Wilhelm’s time ;

‘ Czarina Anne with the big cheek,’ continues that Notebook,’ ‘was
‘ extremely delighted to bce little Iwan; but enjoyed him only two
‘ months; being herself in dying circumstances. She appointed little
‘ Iwan he^uccessor, his Mother and Father to be Quanban$ over him;

* but one oieren (who writes himself Biron, and Duke of Cpurland,”
‘ being Czarina’s Quasi-Husband these manv yeArs) to be Guardian, as

* it were, over both them and'him. Such uM been the truculent in-
‘ satiable Bieren’s demand on his Czarina. You lire running on your
‘ destruction,” said shdf with tears; butcomtoliedj as she had been wont.

‘ Czarina Anne died aSth October 1740; leaving A Czar in his
‘ little Czar Xwan of two months, with Mother and Father to preside

* over him, and to be themselves presided pvet by i^erenf Inriiiis min*

> Suprk, Vol. ijL f. s^5( ^ ’

Clutp.VnL PHENOMENA IN PETTERSBURd. i8i

JanJ *74iw ^

‘ ner.^ This was the first great diange for Anton Ulrich} but others

* greater are comi^. Little Anton, readers^tnow, is Friedrich's Bro-

* ther-in*Ia^j much patronised by Austria; •Anton’s spouse is the Half-

* Russian Princess Catherine of Mecklenbur^(now wholly Russian, and
‘ called. Princess Anne), whom Friedrich 0$ one lime thought of apply-
'* ing for, in hi$ distress about a Wife. These two, will they side with

* Prussia, TyiU they aide with Austria ? It was hardly worth inquiry,

* had not Fortunes wheel made suddenly a great cant, and pitched

* than to the lop* for the time being.

‘-Bieren lasted only twenty days. He wus very high and arbitrary
‘upon everybody; Aane and Anton Ulrich suffering naturally most
‘ fiom him. They counsel with Feldmarschall Mimnich on tlie
‘ matter; who, after study, declared it a remediable case. Friday i8th
‘November, Miinnichiad, by invitation, to dine vvilli Duke Bieren;

* Munnich went accormngly that clay, and dined; Duke looking a little

* flurried, they say: and the same evetiing, dinner being cpiitc over,

‘ and midnight come, Munnich had diis measures all taken, soldiers
‘ ready, warrant in hand;—and arrested Bieren in liis bed; mere Siberia,

‘ before sunrise, looming upon Bieren, Never was such a change as
‘ this from rSth day to 19th with a supreme Bieren. Our tiiend Maim-
‘ stein,, excellent punctual Aide-dt*-Camp of Munnich, was the executor
‘ of the feat; and has left punctual record of it, as he docs of every-
' thing,—^what Bieren said, and what Madam Bieren, who was a little
‘ obstreperous on the occasion.® What side Anton Ulrich and Spouse
‘ will take in a quarrel between Prussia and Austria, is now well worth
‘ asking.

‘ Anton Ulrich and Wife Anne, that is to say, “ Regent Anne” and
' “ Oeneralissimo Anton Ulrich,” now niled, with Mimnich for right-
‘ hand man; and these were high times for Anton Ulrich, Generalis-
‘ simo and Czar's-Father; who indeed was modest, and did not often
‘ interfere in words, though grieved at the foolish ways his Wife had.

‘ An indolent flabby kind of creature, she, unfit for an Autocrat; .sat

* in her private apartments, all in a huddle of undress; had foolish no-

* tions,—^peciaJly bad sonbrettes who led her about by the ear. And
‘then there was a “Princess Elizabeth,” Cousin-german of Regent
‘ Anne,~^angKter, that is to say, last child there now was, of Peter

* the Great and his little brown Catherine:—^who shou^J have been
‘ better seen to* Harmless foolish Princess, not without cimning; young,
'* plump, and following ruferely her llitt|tions and her orthodox devotions;
‘ Very orthodox and soft^ but capable of becoming dangerous, as a centre

* of Ae disafiected* A9 “ Caiarina Elizabeth!' before long, and ultim-

‘ ately as CctUn du N&rd,*' she-—* mt let us not anticipate 1

was in tfeis posture of affairs, about a month after it had
begun, tBht Winterfeld arrived in Petersburg; and addressed

A '

a Manasteiu. pts fftSdr October, by Russian or Old Style, is ' S 7 tb<*’ we

tratatedi, in thu and ^er Nisos, Russian or £ngUsb« into New Style. unUss the
coatrvy u * Mannstein, p. adS.

FIRST, SII.ESIAK WAR.

iBz

Boi^ XIT<

Jap. iftfik

himself to Miinniclif 6n the Prussian errahd. Winterfeld iwas
Munnich’s Son-in-law ^properly stepson-in-law» havh^ njarried
Milnnich’s stepdaughter^ a Fraulein Von Malzahn, of good Prus¬
sian kin); was acquaAted with the latitudes and longitudes
here, and well equipped fcr the operation in hand. To Madam
Miinnich, once Madam Malzahn, his Mother-in-law, he carried
a diamond ring of r,20o/., "small testimony of his Prussian
Majesty’s regard to so high a Prussian Ladyto Munnjch's
Son and Madam’s a present of 3,000/. on the like score: and
the wheels being oiled m this way, and t^e steam so strong
(son Wjinterfeld an aident man, father Miinnich the like, su¬
preme in Russia, and the thing itself a salutary thing)> the
diplomatic speed obtained was great. Wknterfeld had arrived
in Petersburg December 19 th: Treaty of Alliance to the effect,
"Firm friends and good neighbours, we Two, Majesties of
Prussia and of All the Russias; will help each the other, if
attacked, with 12,000 men,”—was signed on the 27th; whole
Transaction, so important to Friedrich, complete in eight days.
Austrian Botta, directly on the Feel of those unsatisfactory
Dialogues about Silesian roads, about troops that were pretty,
but had never looked the wolf in the face,—^had rushed off,
full speed, for Petersburg, in hopes of running athwart such a
Treaty as Winterfeld’s, and getting one for Austria instead.
But he arrived too late; and perhaps could have done nothing
had he been in time. Botta tried his utmost for years after¬
wards, above ground and below, to obstruct and reverse this
thing; but it was to no purpose, and even to less; and only,
in result, brought Botta himself into flagrant diplomatic trouble
and scandal; which made noise enough in the then Gazetteer
world, and was the finale of Botta’s Russian efforts*^ though
not worth mentioning now. The Russian Notebook contmue$;

‘Munnich, supreme in Russia since Bieren’s remhVal, had

* counsels fof^tbe R^cnt Anne and her Husband; though perhaps,

* being a high old military gentleman, he mig^t bfe somewhat abrupt
‘ in his ways. And there were domestic Oslctmanns, foreign Bottas,

* La Chetatdies, and dangerous Intriguers and Opposition figures, to
‘ improve any grudge that^might arise, Sure enough, in Match 1741,

* Feldmarschall Mmmich was forbid the Court (some Osttrmann

‘ ceeding him there): " Ever true to your two Highnesses, thooghiuo

* longer needed;”—^and withdrew, in a lofty ftiendly sfta^; his Soh'

« adcluflg:, iii. u. sSo; Manastdn," p. 37s Lapusehb jPlot/ i

wand out * Al^St Y743; '-Bona put ip arrbs.t, ).

Chap^vm. PHENOMENA IN PETERSBURa i 8 $

Jan. 1741. ^

“continuing at Court, though Papa had withdrawn. Supreme Miinnich

* hud laJ.ted about four months j Supreme Bieren hardly three weeks;

* tod Siberia is still agape.

‘ Mvmnicli being gone to his’own TowflJ^Tansion, and Regent Anne

* sitting in hers' in a huddle of undiess; u"le accessible to her long-
‘ hearted rtidanchoJic Ostermann, and t< 0 i accessible to her Livonian

* maid; wth poor little Anion Ulrich pouting and remonstrating, but
‘ unable to help,—lljis state of matteis, with such intrigues undermin-
‘ ing it, could not last forever. And had not Princess Klual3eth been

* of indolent luxurious nature, intent upon her prayers and flirtations,

‘ it would have ended sooner even than it did. Pniicess Lluabeth had

* A Surgeon called^Estoc; a Marquis de la Llittaidic, a highflown

* Erench Excellency (who used to be .at Berlin, to oui young FriediichS

* delight), was her—^What shall I say ? La Chctanlie himself bad no

* scruple to say it! 'Jhesc two plotted lor hci ‘hesc weie ready,—

^ could she have been got re.ady; which was not so easy. Regent Anne
‘bad hei suspicions; but the l^rmcess was so indolent, so good: at
‘ last, when diiectly taxed w'lth •'uclv <1 thing, the Princess burst into
‘ ingenuous weeping; quite disatmcd Kcgdit Anne's suspicions;—but
‘ found she had now bettei take L’lsstoc’s advice, and proceed at once.

‘ Which she dul.

‘And so, on the morrow morning, 5lh December 1741, by akl of

* the Preobrazinsky Regiment, and the uiotious u^u.tl on su' h occasions,

‘ —in fact by merely pulling out the jirops irom an undermined state
‘ of matters,—she reduced said stitc gently to rum, ready for carting
‘ to Siberia, like its foregoers; and w.ss heieby C/anna oi All the Rus*

‘ sia.s, piosperoinsly enough for the lest ol her life. Twenty years or
‘ i.ither more. An indylcul, orthodox, ]dunip ciealine, disinclined to
‘ cruelty; “not an ounce of nun’s flesh m liti composition, ” said the wits

‘ She mamtamefi theFiiedrich Fieatj, indignant at r»otla and his plots;
‘ was well with P'neclricli, 01 might have bcc'u kept so by management,

‘ for there was no cause of cpiarrel, but llie reverse, between the Couu-
‘ tries,—could Friedrich have held his witty tongue, when eavcsdioppers

* were by,* But he could not idw*ays; though he tried. And sarcastic
‘ quizzing (especially if it be truth too), on certain female topics, what

* Improper-Female, Czarina of Alb the Rus^-ias, coidd stand it? The
‘ history is but a distressing one, a disgusting one, m human affaire.

‘ Klizal^th was orthodox, too, and Kiiednch not, “ the^borrid manl”

* The fact is,—fact dismally indubitable, though it is huddled into dis-
‘ erect dimness, and aU details of it*(as to wlmt P'riedneh’s witticisms
‘ Weic, and the like) ate icfuscd us m the PniNsian Books,—indigna-

* tion, owing to such dismal cause, became ^ixed liale on the C/arina’s
‘^rt, and there followed terrible results at last: n Czanna risen to the

’ "‘ranmbal pitch upon a roan, in Ids extreme need;—“ injdme Cufin dti

* JVivrf,’‘thinks the roan I Friedrich’s wit cost him dear; him, and half

mUliOii othem ^till dearer, twenty years hence.’—^'X'iU which time
we wilt gladly leaii^the Ctmlna and it

184 . FIRST ^ILESIAN WAR.

Jan. 37 ^.

Mi^or v&n Winteifeld h&d in Russia before this; and
had wooed his feir Maljahn there- He is the sume Winterf^
whom we once saw dining by the wayside with the late Fried¬
rich Wilhelm, on that list Review-Journey his Majesty ma)^.
A Captain in the PotsdaimGiants at that time ; always in great
favour with the late King; and in still greater with the present^
—who 6nds in him, we can dimly discover, and ptettymuch in
him alone, a soul somewhat like his own; the one real “peer’*
he had about him. A man of little education; bted in camps;
yet of a proud natural emmency, and rugged nobleness of ge¬
nius and mind. Let readers mark this fiei: 5 »**hero-spiril, lying
buried in those dull Books, like lightning amUng clay. Here
is another anecdote of his Russian business ;

‘ Winterfelcl had gone, in Fiiedrich Wilhelm's time, with a party

* of PrusMan dnll-sergcants for Petersburg’ (year not given); ‘ and duly
‘ delivered them theie. He naturally saw much of Feldmarschall Mun-

* nich, naturally saw the Step daughter of the Feldmarschall, a shining

* beauty in Petersburg; Winteifeld himself a man of shining gifts, and

* character; and one of the handsomest,tall men in the workL Mutual

* love between the Fraiilein and him Avas the rapid re'Uilt. But how to

* obtain marriage? Winteifeld cannot marry, without leave bad of his
‘ supeiiors: you, fair Mal^ahn, are Hof-Dame of Princess Elizabeth,

‘ all your fortune the jewels you wear; and it is too possible she will

* not let you go!

‘ They agreed to be patient, to be silent; to watch warily till Win-

* terfeld got home to Pnissia, till the Frauldn Mahahn could also con-

* trive to get home. Winterfeld once home, and the King’s consent

* had, the Fraulein applied to Princess Elizabeth for leave of absence;

‘ “ A few months, to see my friends in Peutschland, your Highness t”

* Princess Elizabeth looked hard at her; answered evasively this and

* that. At last, being often importuned, she answered plainly, “ I al-
‘ most feel convinced thou wilt never come bock!” Protestations from

* the Fraulein were not wanting:—“ Well theft,” Ssaid Elizabeth, if
‘ thou art so sure of it, leave me rtiy jewels in pledge. Why not ?”

* The poor Fraulein could not say why; had to leave her jewels, which

* were her whtrfe fine foitune, “worth ioq,ooo roubles” (ao,ooo/.)j and

* is now the brave Wife of Winteifeld;—^bul cOuld never, by direct en-
' treaty or circuitous interest and tegoliation, iMick the least item
‘ of her jewels. Elizabeth, us Princess and as Czarina, was alike deaf

* on that .subject. Now or henceforth that proved an impossible private

* enterprise for Winteifeld, though he had so easily succeeded in thfi-

‘ public one.’* ,

The new Czarina was not unmerciful. Munnlch an 4 Com¬
pany were tried for life; were condemned toedie, and did ap-
tt CharakterUiik Kritget (Seifia, x8os}, i. 43 a.

Cbap-vni. PHENOMENA IN PECERSBURCI iSs

Ja9-I74i,

p<^ on the scaffold (39th January 1743); ready for that ex-
treihe penalty; but were there, on theisudden, pardoned or
hah'-pardoned by a merciful new Czarh^, and sent to Siberia
and outer darkness. "Whither Bieren h^ preceded them. To
. outer darkness also, though a milder destiny had.been intended
the^n at first, went Anton Ulrich and his Household. Towards
native Germany at first; they had got as far as Riga on the
way to Germany, but were detained there, for a long while
{owing to suspicions, to Botta Plots, or I know not what), till
finally they were jg^^lled into Russian exile. Strict enough
seclusion about Archangel and elsewhere; in convents,
in obscure uncomfortable places:—little Iwan, after vicissitudes,
even went undergro<fhd; grew to manhood, md got killed
(partly by accident, not quite by murder), some twenty-three
years hence, in his dungeon in the Fortress of Schlu-iselburg,
below the level of the Ladoga waters there, l^nluckier House¬
hold, which once seemed the luckiest of the world, was never
known. Canted suddenly, this way, from the very top of
Fortune’s wheel to the very bottom; never to rise more;—and
did not even die, at least not all die, for thirty or forty years
after.6

This is the Ch^tardie-L’Estoc conspiracy, of 5th December
1741; the pitching-up of Princess Elizabeth, and the pitching-
down of Anton Ulrich and his Munmehs, who had before pitched
Bieren down. After which, matters lemamed more stationary
at Petersburg: Czarina Elizabeth, fat indolent soul, floated with
a certain native buoyancy, with something of bulky steadiness,
in the turbid plunge of things, and did not sink. On the con¬
trary, her reign, so-called, was prosperous, though stupid; her
big dark Countries, kindled already into growth, went on grow¬
ing rather. And, fot certain, she herself went on growing, in
orthodox devotions of spiritual type (and in strangely heterodox
ditto of rti?«-Spirituall)i* in indolent mansuetudes (filU rages, if

you cut on the raws fir all); in perpetual incongruity; and,
alas, at last, in brandy-aad-watcr,~iill, as **mfdme Catin du

Nard," she became terribly important to^some persons I

® IJlridi. not till ittH MAy 1755 (two Daughters of his went, after this, to

a poor Cohntry*House in Jutland,'wlutliet Catherine II. had manuuutted
thetn,%ith peosiCiR' kHo hnd wished Ant6n Ulnch to go home, many years before;
but he would from iWaA ha 4 perished 5th: August 1764 (Catherine II.

hlemed for his de»thi bth wthdut eause), Iran's Mother, Princess Anne, (merafuUy)
xBth Match 174&, h^C'ihatshutHiiitdrilfiS, Twktt Cat^th ^c.,—none of which, ex-
cent is Soo4 fof or to be trusted witheue scrutiny.

186 first; SILESIAN WAR. Bookxtl

Jan. *74*

At her accessioil, and for two years following* Czarina feliSa
beth, in spite of reaL disinclination that way, had a War On
her hands: the Swedisli War (August 174!—Angust 1743),
which, after long threAening on the Swedish si 4 ^ had broken-
out into unwelcome actuality, in Anton Ulrich's time; and
which could not, with all the Czarina’s industry, be got rid of
or staved off; Sweden being bent upon the thing, reason or no
reason. War not to be spoken of, except on compulsion, imthe
most voluminous History ! It was the unwisest of wars, WO
should say, and in ]jr.ictice probably the contemptibkst ^ if
there were not one otlier Swedish War con^?!^, which vies with
it in these particulars, of which we shall be obliged to speak,
more or less, at a future stage. Of this pre|j?nt Russian-Swedish
war, having liappilj almost nothing to do with it, we can, ex¬
cept in the way of transient chronology, refrain altogether from
speaking or thinking.

Poor Sweden, since it shot Karl Xll. in the trenches at
Fredericshall, could not get a King again; and is very anarchic
under its Phantasm King and fAfe National Palaver,-—Senate
with subaltern Houses;—which generally has French gold in
its pocket, and noise instead of wisdom in its head. Scandal¬
ous to think of or behold. The French, desirous tp keep Russia
in play during these high Belleisle adventures now on foot, had,
after much egging, bribing, flattering, persuaded vain Sweden
into this War with Russia. ‘'At Narva they were 80,000, we
8,000 ; and what became of them!” cry the Swedes always.
Yes, my friends, but you had a Captain at Narva; you had
not yet shot your Captain when you did Narva I ' Faction of
Hats,’ ‘ Faction of Caps’ (that is, «/i^/'/caps, as being somnolent
and disinclined to Frapcc and War): seldom did a once-valiant
far-shining Nation sink to such depths, since they shot their
Captain, and said to Anarchy, " Thou art Captaincy, we see,
and the Dijrinc thing 1 ” Of the Wars and businesses of suob a
set of mortals let us shun speaking, where possible.

Mannstein gives imparts il account,• pleasantly clear and
compact, to such as may be curious about this Swedish-Russian
War; and, in the didrfctic point of view, it is not without value.
To the interesting circumstance is, that it does not intejifese
with our Silesian operations at all; and may be laired *Hs a
mere accompaniment of tumbling discord, or vacant far-off
noise* going on in those Northern parts, which therefore

Chap. VIII. PHENOMENA IN PETERSBURG. 187

Jttn, • ■

we ilope to be strangers in time coming. tHere ate some dates,
which the reader may take with him^ should they chance to
illustrate anything: ^ *

1741* The Swedes cieclaA War? “ Will recover their
' lost portions of Finland, will,” &<'. &:C4 They had long been medi-

* tatilig itj they had Turk negotiations going on, diligent emissaries to
‘ the Turk (it certain Major Sinclair for t)no, whom the Russians way-

* laid and assassinated to get sight of his Papers), during the latcTurk-

* Russian Warbut could conclude nothing while that was in activity;
‘ concluded only after that was done, - -sti ikiiig the iron when grown toid,

‘ A chief point in their Maiiifedo was the assas'.mation of this Sinclair;

* §candal and atr«®*ty, of which there is n<> doubt n<»w the Russians
' Were guilty. Various pretexts toi the W.ir:—^jnhne movers to it, prac-
‘ tically, were the French, intent on keeping Russia employed while

* their Belleisle Gerrriih adventure went on, and who nad even har-

* gained with thin!-parties to get-up a Wai thcie, as we shall see.

^ Septevihty 34/, 1741. At Wilmanstrand,-—key oi Wyboig, their
‘ frontier stronghold in Finland, which was iindei Siege,—the Sw'edes
‘ (about 5,000 of them, for they had nothing to live upon, and lay scat-
‘ tered about in fractions) made fight, oi skirmish, agunsi .1 Russian
‘attacking party: Swwles, ratlwr victorious on tliur hill-toil, rushed

* down; and totally lost then bit of victory, their Wilmanstrand, llieir
‘ Wyborg, and even the War itself;—fur this was, lu literal truth, the
‘ only fighting done by them in the entiie course of it, which lasted
^ near two years more. The rest of it was lelieat, capitulation, loss on
‘ loss without stroke struck; till they liad lost all Finland, and were

* like to lose Sweden itself,—Dalecnban mutiny bui sting out (“Ye
‘ traitors, misgovernors, worthy of death witli invasive Danes to rear
‘ of it;-*—and had to call-in the very Russians to save them from woise.
‘ Czarina F.H/abcth at the tune ofliei acccs'-ioii, six months after Wil-
‘ manstrand, hafl made trace, was eager to m.ake peace: “ By n«> meins 1”

* answered Sweden, taking arms again, oriathei taking legs again; and
‘ rushing ruin-ward, at the old rate, still without stroke.

1743. They did halt; made Peace of Abo (Truce and
‘Preliminaries signed there, that day; Peace itself, August 17th);
‘ Czarina magnanimously restoring most of their P'mland (thinking to
‘ herself, “Not done enough for me yet; cook it a little yet!”);—and
‘ settling udio thCir next King was to be, among other frfendly things.
‘ And in November followuig, Keith, in his Russian galleys, with some
‘ loiooo Russiam? on b<?ard, arrived ^n Stockholm; protective against
‘ Danes and mutinous Dalecarles; stayed tlmre till June of next year

* 1744.’^ Is not this a War! *

tdOii the Rvssiati side, General Keith, under Ficldmarshal
Eacy as fthiefV command (the same Keith whom we saw at

t U. 4^. Mamisteiu, jpp. 397 (WUtnansWamJi Affair, himself present)—

37 ^C£r 4 th'ii|»vr»mVniA his£uleys). Comte deHordt(present also, ott

m FIRST gILESIAN WAR.

^AO. IJfl.

OcEAkow under Muntiich, some time ago), Jiad a great deal o‘f
the work and managemQ|it; which was of a highly miseellsmeous
kind, commanding flee^ of gunboats, and much else; and
readers of ManmUin cih still judge,—much more could Kihg
Friedrich, earnestly watcifing the affair itself As it ^nt on,-^
whether Keith did not do it in a ^olid and quietly ettimcnt und
valiant manner. Sagacious, skilful, imperturbable, without fear
and without noise; a man quietly ever ready. He had, quelled,
once, walking direct into the heart of it, a ferocious Russian
mutiny, or uproar from below, which would have ruined every¬
thing in few minutes more.® He suffered, wittP^cellent silence,
now and afterwards, much ill-usage from above withal;—till
Friedrich himself, in the third year henc<%was lucky enough
to get him as General. Friedrich’s Sister Ulrique, the marriage
of Princess Ulrique,—that also, as it chanced, had something
to do with this Peace of Abo. But we anticipate too far.

CHAPTER IX.

FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA.

Friedrich stayed only three weeks at home; moving about,
from Berlin to Potsdam, to Reinsberg and back: all the gay
world is in Berlin, at this Carnival time; but Friedrich has
more to do with business, of a manifold and ovei-earnest nature,
than with Carnival gaieties. French Valori is here, “my fat
Valori,” who is beginning to be rather a favourite of Fried¬
rich’s ; with Excellency Valori, and with the other Foreign
Excellencies, there was diplomatic passaging in thUse weeks ;
and we gather from Valori, in the inverse way (Valori fallen
sulky), that it was not rill done on Friedrich’^ part. He had
some private consultation with the Old Dessader, too; ‘pro¬
bably on military points,’ thinks Valori. At least there was
noticed more of the drill-sergeant tlian b0fore> iu his handling
of the Army, when he returned to Silesia, continues the sulky
one. ‘ Troops and generals did not knovj^him again,'-^so ex¬
cessively strict was he town, on the suddnti. And truly ‘he
* got into details whicn were beneath/ not only a Prince who

a«p.|X. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SIlIsIA. 189

X9tk >74*. • §

;.ha9 great views, but even a simple Cajptain of Infantry/—
according to my (Valori’s) military notions and experiences!^—

The truth is, Friedrich begins to fte, more dearly than he
did with Gloire darriing him, that position is an exceed¬
ingly grave one, full of rtsk, in the inen mood and condition
of the world; that he, in the,whole world, has no sure friend
but his Army; and that in regard to ti he cannot be too vigil¬
ant 1 The world is ominous to this youngest of the Kings more
than to another. Sounds as of general Political Earthquake
grumble audibly to him from the deeps: all Europe likely, in
any event, to g^to loggerheads on this Austrian Pragmatic
matter; the Nations all watching htm, to see what he will make
of it:—^fugleman he to the European Nations, just about burst¬
ing-up on such an^dventure. It may be a glorioas position,
or a not glorious; but, for certain, it is a dangerous one, and
awfully solitary

Fuglemen the world and its Nations always have, when
simultaneously bent any whither, wisely or unwisely; and it is
natural that the most adven^^rous spirit take that poj*^ Fried¬
rich has not sought the post; but following his own objects,
has got it; and will be ignominiously lost, and trampled to an¬
nihilation under the hoofs of the woild, if he do not mind!
To keepwell ahead;—to be rapid as possible; that were good:
—-to step aside were still better! And Friedrich we find is
very anxious for that; ‘ would be content with the Duchy of
Glogau, and join Austriabut thcie is not the least chance
that way. His Special Envoy to Vienna, Cotter, and along with
him Borck the regular Minister, are come home; all negotia¬
tion hopeless at Vienna; and nothing but indignant war-prepa¬
ration going on there, with the most animated diligence, and
more success than had seemed possible. That is the law of
Friedrich’s SileSian Adventure: **“ Forward, therefore, on these
terms; others there are not: waste no words!" Friedrich re¬
cognises to himself what the law is; pushes stiffly forward, with
a fine silence on al^ that is not practical, really with a fine
steadiness of hope, and audacity against discouragements. Of
his amdeties^ whieli^ could: not well be \|^nting, but which it is
royal to keep strictly undet lock and key, of these there is no
‘hiffPto Iordan or to anybody; and only through accidental
chinks* clpsp scrutiny, can we discover that they exist,

’ k Vidoti* i 99.

190 FIRST §ILESIAN WAR. BookXll.

i^h Feb.

Symptom of despondency, of misgiving or repenting about bis
Enterprise, there is noje anywhere, Friedrich's fine gifts of
silence (which go deeper Jjhan the lips) are noticeable here, as
always; and highly thefi* availed Friedrich in leading Iffe^
though now inconvenient tt Biographers writing of the same 1 —-

It was not on matters of drill, as Valori supposes, that
Friedrich had been consulting with the Old Dessauer: this
time it was on another matter. Friedrich has two next Neigh¬
bours greatly interested, none more so, in the Pragmatic Ques^
tion; Kur-Sachsen, Polish King, a foolish greedy creature, who
is extremely uncertain about his course in it (wRd indeed always
continued so, now against Friedrich, now for him, and again
against); and Kur-Hanover, our little George of England, whose
course is certain as that of the very stars, and direct against
Friedrich at this time, as indeed, at all times not exceptional,
it is apt to be. Both these Potentates must be attended to,
in one’s absence ; method to be gentle but effectual; the Old
Dessauer to do it:—and this is what these consultings had
turned upon ; and in a month or ^wo, readers, and an aston¬
ished Gazetteer world, will see what comes of them.

It was Fcbruaiy 19th when Friedrich left Berlin; the 21st
he spends at Glogau, inspecting the Blockade there, and not
ill content with the measures taken : ** Press that Wallis all
you can,” enjoins he: “Hunger seems to bC’slow about
it! Summon him again, vere your new Artillery come
up; threaten with bombardment; but spare the Town, if
possible. Artiller} is coming: let us have done here, and
soon!” Next day he arrives, not at Breslau as some had ejo
pected, but at Schweidnitz sidewards ; a strong little Town, at
least an elaborately fortified, of which we shall hear much in
time coming. It lies a day’s ride west of Breslau ; and wjU
be quieter for business than a Ibig gazing Capital would be,—
were Breslajji even one’s own city; which it i? not, though per¬
haps tending to be. Breslau is in transition circumstances at
present; a b'ttle uncertain tJ^iose it is, isnder its Miinchows
ai)d new managers: Breslau he did not visit at all on this
occasion. To Sqhweifinitz certain new regiments had been
ordered, there to be disposed of in reinforcing 5 there, ' in^e
Count Hoberg’s Mansion,’ he principally lodges fOr six wSs
to come; shooting-out on continual excursions; but always
returning to Schweidnitz, as the centre, again.

Chap.tx. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA. loi

JOth j$*ob.'loth-March i7+r. *

•' Algarotti, home frpm Turin (not mucl^of a success there*
but always melodious for talk), had tr^elled with him; Al-
garbtti, and not long* after, Jordan an^^laupertuis, bear him
company, that the vacant moments tio be beautiful. We
can fancy he has a very busy, veryfanxious, but not an un¬
pleasant time. He goes rapidly about, visiting his posts,—
chiefly about the Nei&se Valley ; Neisse being the prime ob¬
ject, were the weather once come for siege-work. He is in
many Towns (specified in Rodenbeck and the Books, but which
may be ahonymous here); doubtless on many bteoples and
Hjll-tops ; questiaring intelligent natives, dihgentl> using his
own eyes; intent to make personal acquaintance with this new
Country,'—where, little as he yet dreams of it, the deadly strug¬
gles of his Life lie Waiting him, and which he will know to
great perfection before all is done !

Neisse lies deep enough in Prussian en\ ironment; like
Brieg, like Glogau, strictly blockaded ; our posts thereabouts,
among the Mountains, thought to be impregnable. Neverthe¬
less, what new thing is tins ? Were arc swarms of loose Hussar-
Pandour people, wild Austrian lircgulars, who come pouring out
of Glatz Country ; disturbing the Prussian posts towards that
quarter; and do not let us want for Small War {Kleine Kneg\
so-called. General Browhe, it appears, is got back to Glatz
at this early season, he and a General Lentulus busy theic ;
and these are the compliments they send ! A vciy troublesome
set of fellows, infesting one’s purlieus in winged predatory fa¬
shion; swooping down like a cloud ol vulturous harpies on the
sudden; fierce enough, if tlie cham'c favour ; then to wing
again, if it do not. Communication, especially reconnoitring,
is not safe in their neighbourhood. Prussian Infantry, even
in small paities, generally beats them; Prussian Horse not,
but is oftener beaten,—not drilfed for this rabble and their
ways. In pitched fight they arc not dangerous, rather are
despicable to the disciplined man; but can, on o^casion, do
a great deal of mischiW’. •

Thus, it was not long after Friedi'ich’s coming into these
pitrts, when he learnt with sorrow that a^Body of ‘ 500 Horse
and^oo Foot’ (or say it were only 300 of eacli kind, which is
the fhet®) had eluded our posts iti the Mountains, and actually
got into Neisse. ^ ♦ THe Foot will be of Uttlo consequence,*

^ Odi|ih^ i, 79; (Bttwta d* Frediri<^^ ii. 68.

FIRST SILESIAN WAR, fiaokXIi,

« 97th tfiih ;74T.

writes Friedrich ; * but the Horse, which will disturb our ooiu-
munications, are S considerable mischief/ This was on
5th of March. And 8i>out a week before, on the i 7th of Febru¬
ary, there had well a far graver thing bcfaUen,-«-namely
the capture of Friedn^ himself, and the sudden end of all
these operations.

SMrniish of Bm(mgartm^'t*}ih JFtbrmry 1741.

In most of the Anecdote-Books there used to hgure, and
still does, insisting on some belief from simple persons, a won¬
derful Story in very vague condition: Hovmonce ' in the Sile¬
sian Wars/ the King, in those Upper Neisse regions, in the
Wartha district between Glatz and Neis$e, was, one day, within
an inch of being taken,—clouds of Hiisoars suddenly rising
round him, as he rode reconnoitring, with next to no escort,
only an adjutant or so in attendance. How he shot away,
keeping well m the shade ; and ere long whisked into a Con¬
vent or Abbey, the beautiful Abbey of Kamenz in those parts ;
and found Tobias Stusche, excellent Abbot of the place, to
whom he candidly disclosed his situation. How the excellent
Tobias thereupon instantly ordered the bells to be rung for
a mass extraordinary, Monks not knowing why; and, after
bells, made his appearance m high costume, much to the
wonder of his Monks, with a second Abbot, also in high cos¬
tume, but of shortish stature, whom they never saw 'before or
after. Which tw o Abbots, or at lease Tobias, proceeded to do
the so-called divine office there and then; letting loose the big
chant especially, and the growl of organs, in a singularly ex¬
pressive manner. How the Pandours arrived in clouds mean¬
while ; entered, in searching parties, more or less reverent of
the mass; searched high and low; but found nothing, and
were obliged to take Tobias s blessing Ut last, and go fheir
ways. How the Second Abbot thereupon swore eternal friend¬
ship with Tobias, in the private apartments; and rode off as
—as a rescued Majesty, determined to? be more cautious in
Pandour Countries for the future I®—-Which Story, as to the
body of it, is all myi?i; though, as is oftenest the case> there

s Hildebrandf, Anekdotm, j r-j. Pandemr propter is n.>^-$cddier (t£;_ .

boned ill-w^ashed biped, m copious TurM breechtes, rather b^sn in the top pirta oi
him; cviies a very long musket, and has several pittols and butche[r*b-knives stuck
|a his girdle): specihcally a fbotman; buf^ readers VlU tP use him syidwi*

where, the generic 45 nse. . ‘ v '

Chap. IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA. I93

»yth ?et). 1741, .

li^s in it some soul of fact too. The History-Books, which had
not much heeded the Jittle fact, would have* nothing to do with
this account of it. Nevertheless the people stuck to their Myth ;
so that Dryasdust (in punishment for hl^inful blindness to the
human and divine significance of fact|) was driven to investi¬
gate the business; and did at last victoriously bring it home
to the small occurrence now called Skirmish of BaumgarteUi
which had nearly become so great in the History of the World,
■—to the following effect.

There are Two Valleys with roads that lead from that
Southwest quarter of Silesia towards Glatz, each with a little
Town at the $na of it, looking up into it: Wartha the name
of the one; Silberbcrg that of the other. Through the Wartha
Valley, which is soutjuernmost, young Ncissc River comes rush¬
ing down,—^the blue mountains thereabouts very pretty, on a
clear spring day, says my touring friend. Roth at Wartha, and
at Silberberg the little Town which looks into the mouth of the
northernmost Valley, the Prussians have a post. Old Der-
schau, Malplaquet Derschau, .with headquarters at Franken¬
stein, some seven or eight miles nearer SchweidnlLz, has not
failed in that precaution. Friedrich wished to visit Silberberg
and Wartha; set out accordingly, 27th February, with small
escort, carelessly as usual; the Pandour people had wind of
it; knew his habits on such occasions ; and, gliding through
other roadless valleys, under an adventurous Captain, had de¬
termined to whirl him off. And they weie in fact not far from
succeeding, had not a mistake happened.

Silberberg, and Wartha the southernmost, which stands upon
the Ncisse River (rushing out there into the plainer country),
are each about seven or eight miles from Frankenstein, the

Headquarters ; and there are relays of posts, capable of sup¬
porting one another* all the wayi from Frankenstein to each.
Friedrich rode to Silberberg first; examined the post, found
it right ; then rode across to Wartha, seven or eight miles
southward; examined Wartha likewise; after which, he sat
down to dinner in lha? little Towff, with an Officer or two for

company,—^having, I suppose, found all ri^ht in both the posts.
In the way hither, he had made some change in the relay ar-
rangffhients* which at first involved some diminution of his own
escort, and then some marching about and redistributing : so
that, externally, it setpaed as if the Principal Relay-party were
vou IV. * O

194 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXIL

■ »7th xfM*

now marching on^liamngarten, an intermediate Village,-^at
least so the Pandonr Captain understands the movements gomg
on; and crouches ii!|o the due thickets in consequence hot
doubting but the Kinaliimseif is for Baumgarten, and will be
at hand presently. Frmcipal relay-party, a squadron of Scl^u-
lenburg’s Dragoons, with a stupid Major over them, is not quite
got into Baumgarten, when ' with horrible cries, the Pandour
Captain with about 500 Horse,’ plunges-out of cover, direct
upon the throat of it: and Friedrich, at Wartha, is but just
begun dining when tumult of distant musketry breaks in upon
him. With Fnednch himself, at this time^^ as I count, there
might be 150 Horse ; in Wartha post itself arc at least 'forty
hussars and fifty foot.’ By no means 'nothing but a single
adjutant,' as the Myth bears,

The stupid Major ought to have beaten this rabble, though
above two to one of him. But he could not, though he tried
considerably; on the contrary, he was himself beaten; obliged
to make off, leaving ‘ten dragoons killed, sixteen prisoners,
one standard and two kettle-drums victoty and all this
plunder, ye Pandour gentry; but evidently no King. The Pan-
dour gently, on the instant, made off loo, alarm being abroad;
got into some side-valley, with their prisoners and drum-and-
standard honours, and vanished from view of mankind.

Friedrich had started from dinner; got his escort under
way, with the forty hussars and the fifty foot, and what small
iorce was attainable ; and hurried towards the scene. He did
see, by the road, another strongisli party of Pandours ; dashed
them across the Neisse River out of sight;—but, getting to
Baumgarten, found the field silent, and ten dead men upon it,
“ 1 always told you those Schulenburg Dragoons were good
for nothing!” writes he to the Old Dessauer; but gradually
withal, on companng notes/ finds whkt a danger he had run,
and how rash and foolish he had been, ** An itmirderie (foolish
trick),” lie calls it, writing to Jordan; a-black eye;’* and will
avoid the like. Vienna got its two kettle-drums and flag; ex¬
tremely glad to see them; ahd even sang T^-Deum upon them, to
general edification.'^jf This is the naked primordial substance out
of which the above Myth grew to its present luxuriance in the
popular imagination. Place#the little Village of Baumg...Aten
day 27th February 1741. Of Tobias Stusche pr the Cbnvenc

« Drlich, L

★

Ch.'ip.lX, FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESfA. 195

March 1741. ^

of K^monz, not one authentic word on this pension. Tobias
did get promotions, favours in coming years; a worthy Abbot,
deserving promotion on general grounds ;|and master of a Con¬
vent very picturesque, but twelve miles f|t>m the present scene
of action,

Aspects of Breslau.

Friedrich avoided visiting Breslau, probably for the rea¬
sons above given',* though there are important interests of his
there, especially his chief Magazine; and issues of moment are
silently working fg^rward. Here are contemporary Excerpts
(in abridged form), which are authentic, and of significance
to a lively reader :

^ Breslau, JSfiddh oJ 0 /aftuary 1741. The Prussian Envoy, Herr
‘ von Gotter, had appeared here, returning from Vienna; Goiter, and
‘ llien Borek, who made no secret in BiesUn society, That not the
‘ slightest hope of a peaceable result existed, as society might have
^ flattered itself j but that war and battle would have to decide this
‘matter, A Saxon Ambassador was also heie, waiting some time;
‘ message thought to be insignificaitl:—probably some vagtie adinoni-
‘ lory stuff again from Kur-Sachsen (Polish King, son of August the
‘ Strong, a very insignificant man), who acts ai, Btii /is~ tl'titfhis \n those
‘ Northern parts. ’ For the reader is to know, there arc Reichs-Vicars
more than one (nay more than two on this occasion, with considerable
jarring going on about them); and 1 could say mncli about their digni¬
ties, limits, duties,*— if indeed there were any duties, except dramatic
ones! But the Reich itself, ,and Vicarship along with it, are fallen in¬
to a nearly imaginary condition; and the Regensburg Diet (not I’rinces
now, but mere Delegates of Princes, mostly Bombazine People), which,
‘ever since 1663,’has sat continual, instead of now^ and then, is become
au Enchanted Wiggery, strange to look upon, under those earnest stars.
* As King Friedrich did not call at Breslau,’ after those Neisse bom-
‘ bailments, but rolled past, straight homewards, the three Excellen-
‘ cies all dwarfed,*—Borck and Gotter ^ Berlin, the Saxon home again
‘ with his insignificant message.

‘ January ityth. Schwerin too was here in the course of the winter,
‘ to see how the magawnes and other war-preparations weie^oing on;
‘ Breslau outwardly and it^^rardly is whirling with business, and offers
‘ phenomena. For instance, it is knovfn that the Array-Che.st, heaps
‘ of silver and gold in it, lies in the Scultet Gaqicn-IIouse, where the
‘ King lodged; aad that only one sentry walks there, and that in the
'■ guarrVliouse itself, which is some way off, there are only thirty men.
- January aimul 9 of the clock,alarm rises, That z,ooo Dubs-

* Ad«lung, li. 1^3, &C.; Kt^iler, Relchi-HisUrui, pp.

V i. 700.

igS FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Bookxil.

917th Feb. •9th March 1741.

‘ Gmndel (Collective Thief-rabble of Breslau and dependencies) are'tdose
*by; intending a stroke upon said Garden-House and Amy*Chesfl
‘ Perhaps this rumour sf ran^ of its own accord j—or perhaps noc quite^

‘ It had been very rife 4 tnd ran high! iiot without remonstrances in

* Town-Hall, and the Iil^, which we can imagine. Issue was, The

* Officer on post at Scultft’s loaded his treasure in carts; conveyed it,

‘ that same night, to the interior of the Gty, in fact to the

* Haus (Government-House that was);—^which doubtless vjjps a step

* in the right direction. For now the Two Feld-Kriegs-Commissariat

* Gentlemen (one of whom is the expert MiinChOw, son of our old Cus-

* trin friend), supreme Prussian Authorities here, do Ukewise shift out

* of their inns; and take old Schaffgotsch’s apartments in the same

* Oberamts-Haus; mutely symbollihg that perhaps tfuy are likely to

* become a kind of Government. And the reader can conceive how,

* in such an element, the function of govemii^ would of itself fall more
*■ and more into their hands. They were consuinmately polite, discreet,

* friendly towards all people; and did in effect manage their business,

* tax-gatherings in money and in kind, with a perfection and precision

* which made the evil a minimum.

^February i-jih. ^ ^ This day also, there arrived at Breslau, by

* boat up the Oder, ten heavy cannon, three mortars, and ammunition

* of powder, boml'shells, balls, a^'much as loaded fifty wagons; the

* whole of which were, in like manner, forwarded to Ohlau. This day,

* as on other dajs before and after. Great Magazines forming here;

* the Military chiefly at Ohlau; at Breslau the Provender part,—and
‘ this latter under noteworthy circumstances. In the Dpm-Island, namely;

* which is definable (in a case of such necessity) a.«! being “ outside the

* walls.” Especially as the Keverend Fathers have mostly glided into

* comers, and left the place vacant. In the Dom-Island, it certainly
‘ is; and .such a stock,—all bought for money down, and spurred for-

* W'ard while the roads were under frost,—“ such a stock as was not

* thought to be in all Silesia,” says exaggerative wonder. Tlie vacant

* edifices in the Dom-Island are hlled to the neck with meal and com;

* the Prussian biigadc now quartering there ('‘without the wall.s,” in a
' sense) to guard the Same. And in the Bishop's Garden^ (poor Siiuen-
dorf, far enough away and in no want of it just now) ‘ are mere hay-
‘ mows, bigger than houses: who can object,—dn a case of necessity?

* No mai^ unless he politically meddle, is meddled with; politically

* meddling, you are at once picked up; as one or two are,—clapped
' into gentle arrest, or, like oy. Schaftgotsoh, and even Sinzendoif be-

* fore long, requested to leave the Country till it get settled. Rigour
‘ there is, but not intentional injustice on MUnchow’s part, and there

* is a studious avoidance of harsh manner.

' February — Mareh, Considerable recruiting in Schlesien:" »ix bun-

* dred recruits have enlisted in Breslau alone. Also his Pn.ssian Majesty
‘ has sent a supply of Protestant Preachers, ordained for the occasion,

* to minister where neededwhi^h is piously adknouri^gi^ ^ u

Chfti».IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESI^. 197

Feb.«9th March 1741.

*seQdin various parts of Silesia. Twelve canal first, all Berliners;

* soon afterwards, others from different parta till, in the end, there

* weire about Sixty in all. Rigorous, punctj^mus avoidance of offence

* to the Catholic minorities, or of whatever feast thing Silesian Law
‘does not permit, is enjoined upon themf “to preach in bams or
‘ town-halls, where by Law you have no Chuich.” Tlieir salary is

* about 30/. a year; they are all put under supci-vision of the Chaplain
‘ of Margraf Karl’s Regiment’ (a judicious Chaplain, T have no doubt,
and fit to be a Bishop); an<l so far as appears, mere benefit is got of
them by Schlesien as well as by Fiiedrich, in this function. Friedrich
is careful to keep the balance level between Catholic and Protestant;
but it has hung at an angle, for a long while past! In general,
we observe the Catholic Dignitaries, and the zealous or fanatic of that
creed, especially the Jesuits, are apt to be against him; as ioi the non¬
fanatic, they expect belrfbr government, secular advam ige; these latter
weigh doubtfully, and with less weight whichever way. In the general
population, who are Protestant, he lecognises friends;—and has sent
them Sixty Preachers, which by Law was'thcir due long since. Here
follow two little traits, comic or tiagi-coniic, with which we can con¬
clude :

‘Detached Jesuit parties, here^nd Iheie, seem lo have ini^ohief in
‘ hand in a small way, encouraging de>>eitcrs and the like;—and we
‘ keep an eye on them. No discontent elsewhere, at least none audible;
‘ on the contrary, much enlisting on tlie pait of the Silesian youth,

‘ with other good symptoms. But in the Dom, theie is, singular lo
‘ say, a Goblin found walking, one night;—^advancing, not with airs
‘ from Heaven, upon the Prussian senliy Iheie! The Prussian sentry

* handles arms; pokes determinedly into the Goblin, and finding him
‘ solid, ever more determinedly, till the Goblin shrieked “Je'»tis Maria!”

* and was hauled lo the Guardhouse for investigation.’ A weak Goblin;
doubtless of tlie valet kind; woith only a little whipping; but testifies
what the spirit is.

‘Another time, two deserter Frenchmen getting hanged’ (such the
law in aggravated cases), ‘ certain polite Jesuit^ who had by permission
‘ been praying and extreme-unctionin|f about them, came to thank the
‘ Colonel after all was over. Colonel, a grave practical man, needs no
‘ “tlianks;” would, however, “advise your Reverences to teach your

* pebple that perjury is not permissible, that an oath sw<irn ought to

* be kept;” and in fine would advise you Holy Fathers hereabouts,

* and others, to have a care lest you gef into”—And twitching his reins,

* rode away without saying into what.’^

Austria is standing to Arms.

3chw«ritt has been doing his best in this interim; collect¬
ing magazines with double diligence while the roads are hard,

* t M 0 UUn-Cfiehichi«it L 793.

198 FIRST SILESIAN WAR, Book XII.

asTth Feb.->gtk

taking-up the Key-positions far and wide, from the Jablimka
round to the Frontief Valleys of Glatz again. He was thtough
Jablunka, at ohe tinv^ on into Mkhren, kS far as Olmiitz;
levying contributions, 4ttitting patents: but as tp intimidating
her Hungarian Majesty, if that was the intention, or changing
her mind at all, that is not the issue got. Austria has still
strength, and Pragmatic Sanction and the Laws of Ndture
have! Very fixed is her Hungarian Majesty’s detejfmihation,
to part with no inch of Territory, but to drive the intrusive
Prussians home well punished.

How she has got the funds is, to this day, a niy^atery■
unless George and Walpole, from their Secret-Service Moneys,
have smuggled her somewhat ? For the\"‘arliament is not sit¬
ting, and there will be such jargonings, such delays: a pre¬
liminary 100,000/., say by degrees 2oo,opo/.,—^we should not
miss it, and in her Majesty’s hands it would go far! Hints* in
the English Dryasdust we have; but nothing definite ,* and we
are left to our guesses.^ A romantic story, first set current by
Voltaire, has gone the round of the world, and still appears in
all Histories: How in England there was a Subscription set
on foot for her Hungarian Majesty; outcome of the enthusiasm
of English Ladies of quality,—old Sarah Duchess of Marl¬
borough putting down her name for 40,000/.. or indeed putting
down the*ready sum itself; magnanimous veteran that she
was. Voltaire says, omitting date and circumstance, but speak¬
ing as if It were indubitable, and a thing you could see with
eyes : ‘ The Duchess of Marlborough, widow of him who had
‘ fought for Karl VI.’ (and with such signal returns of gratitude
from the said Karl VI.), ' assembled the principal Ladies of
‘ London; who engaged to furnish J,oo,oooL among them;
‘ the Duchess herself putting down* (^« ekpvsat tabling itt edr-
pore) ‘ 40,000/. of it. The Queen of Hungary had the greatness

* of soul tft refuse this money;—needing only, as she intimated,

* what the Nation in Parliament assembled might please to
' offer her.’*

One is sorry to fun athwart such a piece of mutual mag¬
nanimity ; but the fact is, on considering a little and 'firing
evidence, it turns out to be mythicat One Dilwortii, an onno-
cent English soul (from whom our grandfathers used to learn

* *^401 (:|EX> 497 ) say? aeO/Ocoi,. no date or other particular.

* Voltaire^ (Suvris (/Sfifiit de LonU HV, c. d), xavUi. 79.

Chap. IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILE^A. 199

Feb,-9th March X74X,

Arithmetic t I think), writing on the spol: some years after
Voltaire, has this useful passage: ‘ It i| the great failing of a

* strong imagination to catch greedilypat wonders. Voltaire

* was misinformed; and would pcrl|ips learn, by a second

* inciuiry, a truth less splendid and amusing. A Contribution
‘ was, by News-writers upon their own authority, fruitlessly pro-
‘ posed. It ended in nothing; the Parliament voted a supply;’
—that 4 id it, Mr. Dilworth ; supplies enough, and many ot
them 1 “ Fruitlessly, by News-writers on their own authority
that is the sad

It is certain, little George, who considers Pragm.itic Sanc¬
tion as the Keystone of Nature in a manner, has been venturing
far deeper than puj^lc for that adorable object, uul Indeed has
been diving, secretly, in muddier waters than wc expected, to
a dangerous extent, on behalf of it, at this very lime. In the
first days of March, Friedrich has heard horn his Minister at
Petersburg of a detestablePfoject,^^—^ro]cc\. for “ Partitioning
the Prussian Kingdom,” no less ; for tauly cutting int«. Fried¬
rich, and paring him down <0 the safe pitch, as an enemy to
Pragmatic and mankind. They say, a Treaty, Draught of a
Treaty, for that express object, is now ready; and lies at
Petei'sburg, only waiting signature. Here is a Project! Con¬
tracting parties (Russian signature still wanting) are: Kur-
Sachsen ; her Hungarian Majesty; King George; and that
Regent Anne {Mrs. Anton Ulrich, so to speak 1, who sits in a
huddle of undress, —^impatient of Political objects, but sensible
to the charms of handsome men. To the channs of Count
Uynar, especially; the handsomest of Danish noblemen (more
an ancient Roman than a Dane), whom the Polish Majesty,
calculating cause and effect, had dispatched to her, with that
view, ha the dead of winter lateiy. To whom she has given
ear .'---dismissing her Munnicli, as we saw above;-—and is
ready for signing, or perhaps has signed Friediich’s aston¬
ishment, on hearing^of this “ detestable Project,” was great. ’
Howe^et, he takes his measures on itright lucky that he

Tfu Life mtl fietakh Aefions of Frederu k //A (fa common blunder),.liy
W H. Dilworth, M. A, (London, 1758), p. 25 A poor little Book, one o£ miuy
coidImx bill that subject jiwt then (for a reason we sh.ill <iec tm jJtcttinfi' thither),
whidi coiUaiUs, of av|it.llitUo oov^ th« above sentence and no more. Indeed its bre¬
thren, onethem by Samiiel Johnson the impiUoncd giant), do not

even contain that, and nave gOqe wholly to tcra—Neither little Dilwoith nor hji;
Voltaire mve thn limt ^adoW (A apecillc date; but both evidently mean bprmg 1742
(not 174x1. . •

»* pritch, 1 83 (scts^p of Note 16 Old Oesaauer; no date allowed us; 'early in
March'). ). CBitVfgs tie Fridtnc, ii 68.

200 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXIL

sTth Fe)]v>9t^ March t^4t^ ,

has the Old Dessauir, and machinery for acting on Kur^Sachsen
and the Britannic Malesty, ” Get yonr machinery in gear !*’
is naturally his first And the Old Dessauer does it)

with effect: of which b| and by.

Never did I hear, before or since, of such a plunge into
the muddy unfathomable, on the part of little George, who was
an honourable creature, and dubitative to excess: and truly
this rash plunge might have cost him dear, had not he directly
scrambled out again. Or did Friedrich exaggerate to himself
his Uncle’s real share in the matter ? I al)jfays guess, there
had been more of loose talk, of hypothesis and fond hope, in
regard to George’s share, than of determinate fact or proce¬
dure on his own part. The transactioilb having had to be
dropped on the sudden, remains somewhat dark; but, in sub¬
stance, it IS not doubtful and Parliament itself took after¬
wards to poking into it, though with little effect. Kur-Sachsen’s
objects in the adventure were of the earth, earthy; but on
George’s part it was pure ador0.tion of Pragmatic Sanction,
anxiety for the Keystone of Nature, and lest Chaos come
again. In comparison with such transcendent divings, what
is a little Secret-Service money!—

The Count Lynar of this adventure, who had well nigh
done such a feat in Diplomacy, may turn-up transiently again.

A conspicuous, more or less ridiculous person of those times.
Busching (our Geographical friend) had gone with him, as
Excellency’s Chaplain, in this Russian Journey; which is a
memorable one to Busching; and still presents vividly, through
his Book, those haggard Baltic Coasts in mid-winter, to readers
who have business there. Such a journey for grimness of out*
look, upon pihe-tufts and frozen sand; for Cold (the Count’s
very tobacco-pipe freezing in lx's mouth), for hardship, for bad
lodging, and extremity of dirt in the unfreezable kinds, as sel¬
dom was. *,They met, one day on the road, a Lord Hyndford,
English Ambassador just returning from Petersburg, with his
fourgons and vehicles, and arTangements%r sleep and victual,
in an enviably luxurio^is condition,—whom we shall meet, to
our cost. They saw, in the body, old Fieldmarshal Lacy,
and dined with him. at Riga; who advised brandy schnaj^s ;
a recjpe rejected by Busching. And other memorabilfi^. wmch
by accident hang about this Lynar.—AU through Regent
Arme’s time he continued a dangerous ot^ett to Friedrich;

IS n&dal, XX. 497. BOsdUog, S38-tti4.

Ctop-lX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA. ioj

Ftil^-9th Inarch 1741. *

and it was a relief when Elizabeth Catin Ifecame Autocrat, in¬
stead of Deshabille Anne and her Lyi^r. Adieu to him, for
fifteen years or more.

Of Friedrich’s military operation:^ of his magazines, posts,
diligent plannings and gallopings about, in those weeks; of all
this the reader can form some notion by looking on the map
and retnembering what has gone before: but that subterranean
growling which attended him, prophetic of Earthquake, that
universal breaking-forth of Bedlams, now fallen so extinct, no
reader can imagine. Bedlams totally extinct to everybody ;
but which were then very real, and raged wide as the world,
high as the stars, to a hideous degree among the then sons of
men;—unimaginalfte now by any mortal.

And, alas, this is one of the grand difficulties for my readers
and me; Friedrich’s Life-element_^ having fallen into such a
dismal condition. Most dismal, dark, ugly, that Austrian-
Succession Business, and its world-wide battlings, throttlings
and intriguings ; not Dismal*Swamp, under a coverlid of Lon¬
don Fog, could be uglier ! A Section of *' History” so-called,
which human nature shrinks from ; of which the extant gene¬
ration already knows nothing, and is impatient of hearing any¬
thing I Truly, Oblivion is very due to such an Epoch: and
from me far be it to awaken, beyond need, its sordid Bedlams,
happily extinct. But ’without Life-element, no Life can be
intelligible; and till Friedrich and one or two others are ex¬
tricated from it, Dismal Swamp cannot be quite filled in.
Courage, reader !—Our Constitutional Historian makes this
farther reflection:

‘English moneys, desperate Russian intygues, Treaties made and
‘ Treaties broken—instead of Pragmatic Sanction with eleven Poten-
* tates guaranteeing, Maria Theresa had at this lime had aoo,ooo soldiers
‘ and a full treasury (as Prince Eugene used to advise the late Kaiser),
‘ how different might it have been with her, and with tl>tj whole world
‘ that fell upon one anotherVs tliroats in her quarrel! Some eight years
‘ of the mostdisastrous'*War; and cjfceptthc falling of Silesia to its new
‘ place, no resuH gained by it. War at any rate inevitable, you object?
‘ English-Spanish War having been obliged to kindle it'>elf; Fiench
‘ s'^ to fiftll in, on the Spanish side; sure to fall upon Hanover, so
‘ svon as boaten at sea, and thus to involve all Europe? Well, it is
‘ too likely. But, even in that case, the poor English would have gone
‘ upon their necessary Spanish War, by the direct road and with their
( eyes open, instead'df s<»rmambulating and stumbling over the ebimney-
< tops; and the settlemoit might have come &r sooner, and £u: cheaper

202 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Bookxn.

jsjlh March J7^t.

* to mankind.—"Nay, we ate to admit that the new place for Silesia

* was, likewise, the place ^pointed it by ju&t Heaven; and FriedticK's

* too was a necessary W^,| Heaven makes wse of Sha^ow-hutiting

< Kaisers too; and its wayskin this mad world are through the i^reat
‘ Deep/ '

The Young Dessauer captures Glogau (March 9th); tM Old

Dessauer^ by his Camp of Gottin (April 2d), checkmates

certain Designing Persons,

Money somcwheic her Hungarian Majesty, has got; that
is one thing evident. She has an actual Army on foot, ‘drawn
out of Italy,’ or whence she could; formidable Anny, says
rumour, and getting well equipped;—and^ere are the Pan-
dour Precursors of u, coming down like storm-clouds through
the Glati! valleys;—nearly finishing the War for her at a stroke,
the other day, had accident favoured;—and have thrown rein¬
forcement of 600 mto Neisse. Friedrich not insensible to
these things ; and amid such alarms from far and from near* is
becoming eager to have, at least, Glogau in his hand. Glogau,
he IS of opinion, could now, and should, straightway be done*

Glogau IS not a strong place; after all the repairing, it
could stand little siege, were we careless of hurting it. But
Wallis is obstinate; refuses Free Withdrawal; will hold out
to the uttermost, though his meal is running low. He pre¬
tends there is relief coming ; relief just at hand ; and once, in
midnight time, 'Icts-off a rocket and fires six guns,’ alarming
Prince Leopold as if relief were just in the neighbourhood.
A tough industrious military man ; stiff to his purpose, and
not without shift.

Friedrich thinks thd place might be had by assault; ** Open
trenches; set your batteries going, which need not injure the
Town; need only alarm Wallis, and terrify it; then, under
cover of thia noise and feint of cannonading, storm with vi¬
gour.” Leopold, the Young Dessauer, is cai|^ioas; wants petards
if he must storm, wants two new battalions if he must open
trenches;—he gets these requisites, and is still cunctatory.
Friedrich has himself got the notion, “frOtn clear intelligent,"
true or not, that relief to Glogau is actually on way; and u:^er
such imminences, Russian and other, in so ticklish a^state of
the world, he becomes more and ittons impatmnt that this thing
were done. In the first week ot March, StiU hurrying about
on inspection-business, he writes, from four or five different

Chap IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO 203

Moi'ch 17^1.

places MoUwitz near Bricg’ is one them, a Village we
shall soon know better), Note afteig Note to EeopoW; who
still tnnkes difficulties, and is not ^fperfcct to the last finish
in his pf^arations. Preparatioifi!” answers Friedrich im¬
patiently (date Moltwite, $th March, the third or fourth impa¬
tient Note he has sent); and adds, just while quitting MoUwitz
for Ohlau, this Postscript in his own hand:

jEaS", ‘ I am sorry you have not understood me! They have, in
‘ Bdhmea, a regular canterprise on hand for the rescue of Glogan. I
^ have Infantry^gnough to meet them; Imt ('avahy is quite -wanting.

^ You must therefore, without <]eUy, l)ey;ui the siege. Let us finish
^ there, I pray you

And next day, .^nclay 6th, to cut the mT^tev short, he dis¬
patches bis Genial-Adjutant (Joltz m person (the distance is
above seventy miles), with this Note wholly in aulogiaph,
which nothing vocal on Leopold*s p.ut will answer :

‘ Ohlmt, (ttft March. As 1 nm certainly infoimed that the Enemy
‘will make some atteinpi, 1 Jnreby with all disiinctuc command,

‘ That, so soon as the petaids aie form’ (wlnth they are), ‘you attack
‘ Glogau. And you must make y<jui Airangoimnt {Dihposition) for
‘ more tliau one attack; so that if one fad, the otliei shall ceitainly
‘ succeed. I hope you wilt put-olT no longei;—oiheiwise the blame
‘ of all the mischief that might an-jc out of longei delay must he on
‘ you alone.’'*

Goltz arrived with this emphatic Piece, Tuesday Evening,
after his course of seventy miles • this did at last rouse our
cautious Young Dessauer; and so there is noact obtainable, on
much compression, the following authentic Excerpt:

‘ Glogau, %th March 1741. His T-'uichlaucht the Pnnee Leopold
‘ summoned all the Generals at noon; an^l informed them That, this
‘ very nig^t, Glogatt must be won. He gave them their Instructions in
‘ writing; -where each was to po^t himself; with what detachments;
‘ how to proceed. There are to be Three Attacks: one up stream,
‘ coming on with the River to its right; one down stream, River to its
‘ left,; arwl a third from the landward side, peipendicular to the other
‘ two. The very captflins that sllail go foremost arc specified; at what
‘ hour each is to leave quarters, so that i^ll be ready si’uultaneously,

* waiting in the posts assigned ;—against what points tu advance out
‘ these, and storm Rampart and Wall. Places, limec, particulai-s,
‘fverythiag is fixed with matlmmatical exactitude; “Be steady, be
‘ oorrecT, especially be silent; and so far as Law of Nature will permit,

* be simultaneous f When the big steeple of Glogau peals Midnight,

’* OrKch, i. 7a Ibid. i. 71,

*04 ' FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Book XII.

, 9th March i74So

‘ -^Forward, wirii the ficst stroke; vith the second, muclf more with'

* the twelfth stroke, be one and all of you, in the utmost silence, ad-

* vancing! And, under pa^ of death, two things: Not one shot till

* you are in; No plunderingIvhcn you are.”—In this mahner is the

* silent three-sided avalanche he let go. Whereupon, ’ says my Dryas¬
dust, ‘ the Generals retired; and had, for one item, their nrc-arins

* all cleaned and new-loaded.

Without plans of Glogau, and more detail and study than
the reader would consent to, there can no Narrative be given,
Glogau has Ramparts, due Ring-fence, palisaded and repaired
by Wallis; inside of this is an old Town-Wall, vihich will need
petards: there are about i,ooo men under Wallis, and alto¬
gether on the works, not to count a mortar or two, 6fty-eight
big guns. The reader must conceive a poor "ihwn under block¬
ade, in the wintry night-time, with its tough Count Wallis; ill-
off for the necessaries of life; Town shrouded in darkness, and
creeping quietly to its bed. This on the one hand: and on the
other hand, Prussian battalions marching up, at lo o'clock or
later, with the utmost softness of stop; * taking post behind the
ordinary field-watchesand at length, all standing ranked, in
the invisible dark; silent, like machinery, like a sleeping aval¬
anche; Husht!—No sentry from the walls dreams of such a
thing, ” Twelve!” sings out the steeple of Glogau; and in grim
whisper the word is, “ VorwartsT and the three-winged aval¬
anche is in motion.

They reach their glacises, their ditches, covered ways, cor¬
rect as mathematics; tear-out chevau^-de-frise, hew-down pali¬
sades, in the given number of minutes: Swift, ye Regimcttt’s-
carpenters; smite your best I Four cannon-shot do now booih-
out upon them; which go high over their heads, little
dreaming how close at hand they are. The glacis is tUirty feet
high, of stiff slope, and slippely with frost: no matter, the
avalanche, led on by Leopold in person, by Margraf Karl the
King's CousiA, by Adjutant Goltz and the chief personages,
rushes up with strange impetus ; ^hews*dowi\,a second palisade;
surges in;—Wallis’s sentries extinct, or driven to their main
guards. There is a singular fire in the besieging party. For
example, Four Grenadiers,—I think of this First Column* wl^h
succeeded sooner, certainly of the Regiment Glasenapp^ —fqir
grenadiers, owing to slippery or other accidents, in cUmbing

n fftldeH-Geschiehif, i. 833; U. iSj. f'

C1»P.IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILEfclA. 205

gtli March i74t< ^

the glads, fiad fallen a few steps behind ^i^gcneral body; and
on getting to the top, took the wrong course, and rushed along
rightward instead of leftward. Right#ard, the first thing they
come upon is a mass of Austrians sjtf ranked in arms; Fifty-
two men, as it turned out, with theirCaptain over them. Slight
stutter ensues on the part of the Four Grenadiers; but they
give One another the hint, and dash forward : “ Prisoners?" ask
they sternly, as if all Prussia had been at their rear. The Fifty-
two, in the darkness, in the danger and alarm, answer “Yes.”

“ Pile arms, then 1” Three of the grenadiers stand to see
that done; tlrt^fourth runs off for force, and happily gets back
with it before the comedy had become tragic for his comrades.

* I must make acquaintance with these four men,’ writes Fried¬
rich, on hearing ^ it; and he did reward them by present, by
promotion to sergeantcy (to ensigney one of them), or what
else they were fit for. Grenadiers of Glasenapp: ihese are the
men Friedrich heard sweanng-m under his window, one me¬
morable morning when he burst into tears! At half-past Twelve,
the Ramparts, on all sides, ^ire .ours.

. The Gates of the Town, under axe and petard, can make
little resistance, to Leopold’s Column or the other two. A hole
is soon cut in the Town-Ciate, where Leopold is; and gallant
Wallis, who had rallied behind it, with hfs Artillery-General
and what they could get together, fires through the opening,
kills four men; but is then (by order, and not till then) fired
upon, and obliged to draw back, with his Artillery-General
mortally hurt. Inside he attempts another .rally, some 200
with him; and here and there perhaps a house-window tries to
give shot; but it is to no purpose, not the least stand can be
made. Poor Wallis is rapidly swept back, into the Market¬
place, into the Main Guardhouse; an(f there piles arms: “ Glo-
gau yours, Ihr Herren, and w^prisoners of War!” The steeple
had not yet quite struck One, Here has been a good hofir’s-
work! *

Glogau, as in % dream, orjialf-awake, and timidly peeping
from behind window-curtains, finds that it is a Town taken.
Glogau easily consoles itself, I hear, br even is generally glad;
P4ipssian discipline being so perfect, and ingress now free for
the nqpessaries of life. Theie was no plundering; not the least
insult; no townsman was hurt; not even in houses where sol-
([ffers had tried %mg from windows. The Prussian Battalions

2o6 first SILESIAN WAR. nookXIl.

pth Mai'ch 1741.

rendezvous in theiiJarket-place, and go peaceablytabout their
patrolling, and otbe/busino$s; and medcUe with nothing else.
They lost, in killed, men; had ot killed and wofunded,
forty-eight; the Austriiii rather tnore.^® Wallis was to have
been set free on parole; lut was not,—in retaliation for some
severity of General Browne’s in the interim (picking-up of fwb
Silesian Noblemen, suspected of Prussian tendency, and lock*
ing them in Bninn over the Hills),—and had to go to Berlin,
till that was repaired. To the wounded Artillery-General there
was every tenderness shown, but he died in few days. The
other Prisoners were marched to the Ciistrm-S^ettin quarter;
‘and many of them took Prussian service.’

And this is the Scalade of Glogau: a shining ,feat of those
days; which had great rumour in the Gazettip, and over all the
then feverish Nations, though it has now fallen dim again, as
feats do. Its importance at that time, its utility to Friedrich’s
affairs, was undeniable; and it filled Friedrich with the highest
satisfaction, and with admiration to overflowing. Done 9th
March 1741; in one hour, the vesy earliest of the day.

Goltz posted back to Schweidnitz with the news ; got thi¬
ther about 5 P.M. ; and was received, naturally, with open arms.
Friedrich in person marched out, next morning, to makei^fi'/#-
de-joie and Te-Deuhi-'m ^;—there was Royal Letter to Leopold,
which flamed through all the Newspapers, and ran still be read
in innumerable Books; Letter omissible in this place. Wc re¬
mark only how punctual the King is, to reward in money as
well as praise, and not the high only, but the low that had
deserved: to Prince Leopold he presents 2,000/.; to each pri¬
vate soldier who had been of the storm, say haif-a-guinea,—
doubling and quadrupling, in the special cases, to as high as
twenty guineas, of our pVesent money. To the old Gazetteers,
and tlieir readers everywhere, thss of Glogau is a very effulgent
business; bursting out on them, like sudden BudC-light, in the
uncertain stagnancy and expectancy of mankind. Friedrich
himself writes of it to the Old Dessauer: .

‘ The moie I think, of the Glogau business, the more import^t I
‘find it, Piiiico Leopold has, achieved the prettiest military stroke
‘ {Se schonste Actmi) that has been done in this Century. From my
‘ heart I cougratuLite you on having such a Son* In holdnc^ of re-

Orlich, 1. 75, 78; HeldethGtMchichfe, i. 829: irtecondiable otherwise, iu some
thght pomfs. f

Chap. IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILEflA. 207

9th Marcli-2(1 April 1741.

‘ solution, in plan, in execution, it is alike a(iniir§<blej alid quite gives
^ a turn to my afiairs.’** '

And indeed, it is a perfect exampk of Prussian discipline,
and military quality in kinds; su|]|as it would be difficult
to match elsewhere. Most potently ^rrect; coming out every¬
where with the completeness and exactitude of mathematics;
an 4 has in it such a fund of martial hre, not only ready to
blaze out (which can be exampled elsewhere), but capable of
bottling itself and of lying silently ready. Which is much
rarer; and very essential m soldiering ! Due a little to the-
Old Dessauer^may we not say, as well as to the Young ?
Friedrich Wilhelm is fallen silent; but bis heavy labours, and
military and other drillings to Prussian mankind, still speak
with an audible ^ce.

About three weeks after this of Glogau, Leopold the Old
Dessauer, over in Brandenburg,' docs anotlier thing which is
important to Friedrich, and of great rumour m the woild. Steps
out, namely, with a force of^6,ooo men, horse, foot and artil¬
lery, completely equipped in all points; and takes Camp, at
this early season, at a place called Gottin, not far from Mag¬
deburg, handy at once for Saxony and for Hanover; and
continues there encamped,— “meiely lor review purposes.”
Readers can figure what an astonis>hment it was to Kur-Sach-
sen and British George; and how it struck the wind out of their
Russian Partition-Dream, and awoke them to a sense of the
awful fact! — Capable of being slit in pieces, and themselves
partitioned, at a day’s warning, as it were! It Was on April 2d,
that Leopold, with the first division of the 36,000, planted his
flag near Gottin. No doubt it was the “detestable Project”
that had brought him out, at so early season for tent-life, and
nobody could then guess why.. He steadily paraded here, all
summer; keeping his 36,000 well m drill, since there was no¬
thing else needed of him. ^

The Camp at Gbttin flamed grOvatly abroad through the
timorous imaginatio^Tis of raankftid, that Year; and in the New'S-
papers are many details of it. And% besides the important
general fact, there is still one little point worth special mcn-
ti^; namely, that old Fieldmarshal Katte (Father of poor
Lieuteftant Katie whom we knew) was of it; and perhaps even

Date, x^th Marph 174* (Oritcb, L 77),

2o8 first SILESIAN WAR. BookXiI.

9th cH*3d April i74t.

got his death by it Chief Commander of the Cavalry here/
such honour had he; but died at his post, in a couple of months,
‘at Rckabn, May poor old gentleman, perhaps un¬

equal to the hardships field-life at so early a season of the
year. ®

Friedrich takes the Fields with some Pomp; goes into the
Mountains^—hut comes fast back.

At Glogau there was Homaging, on the very morrow after
the storm: on the second day, the superfluous regtjfncnts marched
off; no want of vigorous activity to settle matters on their neW
footing there. General Kalkstein (Friedrich's old Tutor, whom
readers have forgotten again) is to be Comi7\andant of Glogau;
an office of honour, which can be done b> deputy except in
cases of real stress. The place is to be thoroughly new-forti¬
fied,—which important point they commit to Engineer Wall-
rave, a strong-headed, heavy-built Dutch Officer, long sitfee
acquired to the service, on account of his excellence in that
line; who did, now and afteiwards, a great deal of excellent
engineering for Friedrich; but for himself (being of deep sto¬
mach withal, and of life too dissolute) made a tragic thing of
it ultimately. As will be seen, if we have leisure.

In seven or eight days, Prince Leopold having wound-up his
Glogau affairs, and completed the new preliminaries there, joins
the King at Schweidnitz. In the highest favour, as was natural,
Kalkstein is to take a main hand in the Siege of Neisse; for
which operation it is hoped there will soon be weather, if not
favourable yet supportable. What of the force was superfluous
at Glogau had at once marched off, as we observed; and is
now getting re-distributed where needful. There is much shifc-
ingabout; strengthening ofpos^s, giving-up of posts: the whple
of which readers shall imagine for themselves,—-except only two
points that ^re worth remembering: First, that Kalkstein with
about 12,000 takes post at Grotkau, some twenty-five miles
north of Neisse, ready to move on, and tipen trenches, when
required: zxiA second, tkat Holstein-Beck gets posted at Frank¬
enstein (chief place of that Baumgarten Skirmish), say thirty-
five miles west-by-north of Neisse; and has some 8 or ictioQO
Horse and Foot thereabouts, spread up and doiKrn.-—y|iQ will

ii.

Chan IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILEilA. 209

9th Atwth'dd April X74X. a •

b*e much wsftited, And not procurable, on#a^ Occasion that is
comings

Friedrich has givennip the Jablui 4 a Fass; called-in the
Jablunka and remoter posts j anxlousgo concentrate, before the
Enemy get nigh. That is the King’s notion; and surely a
reasonable one; the arm of the Prussian Army, as. I guess it
from the Maps, being above 2,000 square miles, beginning at
Breslau on^^, and leaving out Glogau. Schwerin thinks differ¬
ently, but vrithout good basis. Both are agreed, The Austrian
Army cannot take the held till the forage come,” till the new
grass Spidng» n^ch its cavalry find convenient. That is the
fair snppoaition; but in that both are mistaken, and Schwerm
the more dangerously of the two. — Meaewlule the Pandour
swarms are obserd^lbly getting rifer, and of stormier quality;
and they seem to harbour farther to the East than formerly,
and not to come all out of Glatz. ‘ Winch perhaps are symptom-‘
atic circumstances? The worst effect of these preliminary Pan-
dour clouds is. Your scout-service cannot live among them ;
they hinder reconnoitring, aftd keep the Enemy veiled from
you. Of that sore mischief Friedrich had, first and last, ample
experience at their hands t This is but the first instalment of
Pandours to Friedrich ; and the mere foictastc of what they
can do in the veiling way.

Behind the Mountains, in this maimer, all is inane dark¬
ness to Friedrich and Schwerin. They know only that Neip-
perg is rendezvousing at Olmutz; and judge that he will still
spend many weeks upon it; the real facts being. flThat Neipperg,
—-’who arrived in Olmutz on the loth of March,’ the veiy day
while Glogau was homaging,—has been, he and those above
him and ^ose under him, driving prepaiations foiward at a
furious rate. That !Meipperg held,—I think at Steinberg his
hithermost post, some twenty mfles hither of Olmutz,—a Coun¬
cil of War, ' ajil the Generals and even Lentulus from Glatz,
present at it,’ day not given; where the unanimous decision
was, *' March straigMway; saveJMcisse, since Glogau is gone 1 ”
—^and in fine, That on the 36th, Neipgeig took the road ac¬
cordingly, ' in spite of furious snow blowing m his face and
ei«r since (30,000 strong, says rumour, but perhaps 10,000
ot them^nere Pandeurs) unweariedly climbing the Mountains,
laboriously forwaird with his heavy guns and ammuni¬

tion-wagons; ♦eentehdfng with the steep spowy icy roads;’—

VOL. IV. p

3 fo I FIRST SiLESiAN WAR,

Mmc^ if4i.

intent upon saving 'a^eissc. -This is the fafclj profoundly un-
knoiim to Friedrich anAScl^etjn; who'wiij^^ch sutprised,
indien it becomes patehU|p ihem ihe wtongriimej

SchmHdniht 27 /^ Mdrch. This day Ftiedrfch, With Con¬
siderable apparatus, pomp and processional cym Wing, greatly
the reverse of his ulterior use and wont in such cases, Cjuil^ed
Schwe^dnits and his Algarottis; solemnly opening Cam2^|h
in this manner; and drove oif for Ottmachau, having work
there for tomorrow, ^ \

The Siege of Neissc is now to proceed forthwi 0 j%enches
to be opened April 4th. Fnedrich is stiR of,oplhib% that Ids
posts lie too wide apart; that especiall)^ ^chweniHt vdio is
Spread among the Hills m Jagemdorl Country, ought tb come
down, and take closer order for covering the Schwerin

answers, That if the King will spare him a reinforcement of
eight squadrons and nine battalions (say i,aoo Horse, 9,000
Foot), he Will maintain himself.where he JS, and no Enem>
shall get across the Mountains at all. Tliat is Schwerin’S no-'
tion; who surely is something of a judgCk FriCdfich assents;
will himself conduct the reinforcement to Schwerin, add Survey
matters, with his own eyes, up yonder. Friedrich marches from
Ottmachau, accordingly, 29th March;*—Kaljcstein, Holstein-
Beck, and others are to be rendezvoused before NeisSe, in the
interim; trenches leady for opening oii the sixth day heitCe;
—and in this manner, climbs these mountains, and sees Jd-
gerndorf Country for the hrst time.

Beautiful blue world of Hills, ridge piled on ridge behind
that Neisse region; fruitful valleys lapped |n them, with gtim
stone Castles and bu< 5 v little Towns disctoslng diemselvcs as
we advance: that is Jagcmdoif Country,•-^Which IfhClo O^ge
of Aflspach, hundreds of years ago, mmeWed with his Own
money; which we have now come to lay htdd of as his Heir!
Fnedrich, I believe, thinks little of all iMSi. and dpes not re¬
member Uncle George at all* *' But ate the facts J and the

Country, regarded or not, is very beautifiil, with the

Spring sun shining on it; Or with thei. Huddm %j;ring storins
gihorSng wildly on the p?uks, as if petm^nhni ?nves^tn«t
hut vanishing again straightway, leaving a pnwhcrisg

211

au^IX. FRIEDRICH returns TO SILeIiA.

Aipri} X7^x.

i$e met Schwe^t^ a« Neustadt, half to JSgemdorf; whi*
thet they ;pto(;eede4 #v- Wh|t news have yoa of the
Enemy was E]de!^h^a,j(itsitittcstic|tf Schwerin has lionews
whatever; only that the Enemy is far off, hanging ia long thin
straggle from dimht* westward. have a spy out/’ said
Sch'v^etin; hut he has not returned yet,”—nor ever will* he
might have added. If diligent readers will now take to their
IjIapjS' attend day hy day, an invincible Predecessor has
compelled what next fidlows into human intelligibility) and into
the I>iary Fom^ for their behoof;—rcadeis of an idler turn
jcalh Imt this confused hurry-skurry of marches issues in
Sometltihg winch all whl have to attend to.

* *741. This is the da) Tvhai the Old Dca-

* sauer makfeb, appeanmee with the firs>t brigades of his Camp at (jottiii.

* Friedrich is ssUisfied witli what he has seen of Jagcmtloil maiterij

* And intends returning towards Nei&sd, fheio to commence On Uic 4tb.

* He IB giving his final oiders, and on the point of selling off, wlten—
Seven Austrian jDeserters, ^‘Diagoons of Lichtcn^lcin/’ tome in;

< and report. That NeippergS Amiy is wilhm a few miles ’ And scarcely

* had they dode answering and explainuig, w hen sounds use of musketry

* and caimon, froih Oiir outposts on that side; intimating that here is

* Ni^Jj^perg’s Anuy itself- Seldom in his life was Pricdncli in an. ugliei

* situation. In Jagemdorf, an open Town^ are only some three or four
‘ thousand tneDi, with three fieldpieces, .ind as much powder us will
‘ charge them forty times.Happily these pioved only the Pandoui
‘ outskirts of Neipperg*s Army, scorning aboul to teconnoilre, and not
‘ dif^cuHtoheat; the renl body of it is ascei tamed to be at Freudentlnl,

* fiffeen mUe'j to vyestward, southwestward; making piwards Neisbe,

* it IS gue^ssed) by IhC other or wo'itein road, which is the nearer to

* Cilati, Add to the Ahslrian force there.

‘ Hud Jf^ppejg known what was in Jageindorl—1 But he does

* not rn^iAes 00, next morning,* it his usual slow late;

,* wide ^^fandhats at^ropniiy^ig and preceding him; skirmish-
^ ing-hi'‘ftpoh in frfafieeS’*' (upmi Jagemdoif, for instance, though fificen
miles wide of roa4)> ‘ to iV&certain if Fruismns are thcie. One can

* judge wh^her Friiedrich and Schwerm were thankful wHfen the huge

* alarm producsedinothirte 1 ‘‘tlie mountain,"as Fnedrtch says, “gave

‘ birth to a mouse it was a ^ mouse” of essential vitil use to

‘ Frifedridd ami A w’snring. That tliey must mstantiy collect

* themselve% men Jh^d’/goo^s; and begone one and all oat of these
‘ hA^^^^dodhle-^ahife thVfAtds Heis$e. Hot now with the hope of be-
' si^gkig'l|pisse^Xr^^h?om ibath^but of getting their wide-scatlcred

* posts ^capSjjgj destruction in detail I

By vioW citation, wi^ the

ai2 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BooitXii.

^^oth .^tnl *741.

* siictii^ce otily of som^r^mot? tittlfii storehouse^ alt is kreudeavigiused at

* Jagemdorf, \^ithintwod|^s; and ibis day th^iuatch) King andvao>

* guard reaching NeuSti^tj^gWtwauty'hve some* twenty

* still frbm Neisse. AtNeui^dt^ the posts thbtltiSd. Stot 4 iu that

* bourhood are ail ass^bled, and march ^tjb {he iCing Of

* Neipperg, except by transitory contact widi his Pandout douda^th*y

* have seen nothing: liis road is pretty much pamllel to theitSjt and

* some fifteen miles left\7ard, Giatawardj goes thton^ JZuekmantch
‘ Ziegenhals, straight upon Neisse.*® Neipperg’s men are wearied with thup

* long climb out of Mahren; and he struggles towards Neisse as the first
‘ object-liolding upon Glatz and Lentulns with his left. Numerous
‘ orders have been speeded from the King’s qusrtersf'4tt J^eTndOrf, and
^ here at Neustadt; order especially to Holsteiii*Bec|c atFjtankenstdn,

* and to Kalkstein at Grotkau, How they are th iliute, first with {me.

* another; and then to cross Neisse River, and 1^ite with ftie Kifig>*-~

* to which end there is already a Bridge laid for^them, or about to be
laid in good time.

‘ A^l 5M, Headquarters Steinau, Steinan is a Ifttle Town tw«lty

* miles east of Neisse, on the road to Kosel’ (sttongish place, on the
Oder, some forty miles farther east): * here Friedrich, with the m?n«

* body, take their quarters } reargua'id being still at Neustadt. Tcm*

' porary Bridge there is, ready or all but ready, at S<hgab’ (twelve
miles to north of us, on our left) : ‘by this Kalkstein, with his 10,000,

* comes punctually across; while other biigades from the Rosel bide
‘ are also pimctual in getting in; which is a g^Cat comfort: but of
‘ Holstein-Beck there is no vestige, nor did there ever appear any.

* Holstein, “whom none of the repeated orders aent him could reach,”
‘says Friedrich, “remamed comfortably in his quarters; smd look^

* at the Enemy rushing past him to right and left, without troubling
‘ his head withfthem.”®* The too easy-mitided Ildstemt Austrian
‘ HeSeiters inform us, That General Neipperg arrived today with bis
‘ Army in Neisse; and has there been joined by LfCntuhi* with the Cilata

* force, chiefly cavalry, a good many thousands* Wp may be attacked,

‘ then, this very night, if they are diligent? Friedfich ipa^ks out ^puud

‘ and plan in such case, and how and where each is to rank lo^^f, ^

* There came nothing of attack ^ *but the poor littlp Vil^e of .

‘ with so many ri-oops in it andbaggage-dtiy^ Stumbling abbot, takes
‘fire; burift to ashes; “and We had gr<^t difticnity in saving the

‘ artillery and powdei through the narrotV with the houses all

‘ burning on each Band.” ’ Fand^ it,-»-and poor shrieking

gone to silepce long since withtheit'i^jiikSi hpt the least wl^sper
left of them. ‘ The Prussians bivouaUk ^ the eacit in the place
‘ that has been marked out. Night extrerUdlydol^’^^, , « '

*» ^ackmantd, ‘TwItch-CSoak,* opfuts Wore ibsii UaSW '

rejpons: name wtuch, says my mMwdfia

doac im (raveliet^ “ cloak/’ajfiyou wUm

those wild mountain spaces. iZrilJw, Plank*

r ^her oW Book, »aa.)

Chap, IX. FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILEllA. *13

3d stflih Apnl 1741 *

In this pAjr Steinaa was a &<fhloss, whick. also went lip in file;
disclosing certain mysteries of an ahaost mythical natujre to the Oerman
Fuhlle, It was tiie SoMoss of a Qrafin von tallwibeiT^; a drei^dful old
iDowaget of Medea^]^e$8a^wls^ t always wore pistols about

her / pistols, and laitedyv with more and more constancy, a brandy-
bqtile,-—who has Wu much on the tongues of men for a gencsation
back. Hen Nussler (readers recollect shifty Nusslei) know her, in the
way of busmtssy at one time; with pity, it also witli horror borne
vreeks ago, she was, by the Austnan Commandant at Neisso, summoned
oat of th^ ^chloss, as in correspondence with Piussian Officem • peas¬
ants breatung-m, tied her with ropes to the bed where she was; put
bed and her mtoliii farm cart, and in that scandalous manner delivered
her at H<bsse to th<^ Commandant; by which adventure, and its rages
and Unspeakabilitld^ thopooi old Callenherg is since dead And now
the ver^ Schloire is dead; and there is finis to i human dust voitex,
such as ir sometime^oisy for a time Perhaps Nussler may again pass
that way, if we wait,**

* April ffeadqumUrs Prudldnd To Piiedland on the fith;—

‘ and do not, as e:|tpected, get away next morning Fnedland is ten

* miles down the NeiSse, which makes a bend of near ninety degiees

* opposite^ Stemau; and runs thtacc stiaight north for the Oder, which

* it reaches some dozen miles or more above Bntg Both Stemau and
Fnedland ate a good distance from the Rivtr, Fnedland, the nearer

*’ofthe two, With Soigau Btidge diiect west of it, is perhaps eight

* miles from dmt important stmetme Iheie, being now toleiably

* tendcavottsed, and m strength for action, Fnednth purposes to cross

* Netsse Elver tomorrow; hoping perhaps to meet Holstein Beck, and

* memp^rate him; anxious, at any rate, to get between the Austrians

* and Onlau, where his heavy Artillery, his Ammunition, not to men-

* tion other mdisptmsablcs, are lying The pecuhanpr of Neipperg at

* tWs time that the ground he occupies beir:> no proportion to the

* ground he commands. His regular Horse are supposed to be the

* best m the world i and of the Pandour kind, who live, horoC and man,

* mainly upem nothing (which means upon theft), his supplies aie un-

* hmat^f lie s4ts like a volcanic reservoir, therefore, not like a com-
' mon fir® ai such nnd such mtensRy and power to bum,—casts the

* ashes of hirti* <wi all sides, to ipauy miles distance

*Fndsp jth dprd, J^rudiofid (stiU Headquarters) ynUickily, on

* trying, there i|t no passage to be had at Sorgau. The Officer on charge
‘ there stiU holds the BlSdgei but h#} been obliged to break away the

* farther ^d of *'X.en,tpttS and Hragoonsuseveral thousands strong”

* (such 1$ tho having taken post there. Fnednch commands

* thahthe Bfidgjsi ho rmioatated; fieldpwces to defend it; Pnnee Leopold

* hJt^fro8»L attd ^0 way?* All Friday, Fnednvh waiting at Fued-

‘ land* was iu these details. X.eopOjcl in due force started for

f Bctfgah# yp^h .Otvalsy in thn van; Leopold dtd sform across,

^

314 FIRST SILESIAN WAR BmUXil

ad^zoth April X74X.

* Mid g<> atl(l/Qaciiig>'90ti)e space, an tbe otbeit ; but, seb-

* -tog that It was m truyi X*teutulus, and Pxagooo® witbbut limits had to

* geu^ report accdrdibgly || bbd then to wittd hJniseMf side,i^ain,

* new order from 5 i& ‘What to be doub/ then? Here is

* no cmssing, Friedrich^ droCdea to go down tbe Rivejr j he hhnaetf to

< ’Loytonj, perhaps near twenty miles farther ddym, btd Where is
‘ a Bridge and HJgliway leading ovesr j BfincoLeopoId, wi& thohbA^er

< divisions and baggages, to Micbelau, some rhilks nearer, and there to

* build Ute Rontoons and cross. Which waA ^ected, with suceej&SL

* And so,

‘ Satur^ji %ih Aprils With great puactuaUty, the iCii|g and Leopold

* met at Michelau, both well across the Neifisc. on PontCMMas,

* Leopold had gol across about noon; and precisely aa be was hiushiug,

* the King’s Column, which had crossed at Ld^en, asrd come up th^

' left bank agam, arrived. The King, much content prith Leopold’s
' behaviour, nominates him General of Infantry, l^^stagp, higher Sn pto^

* motion, there and then. Brieg Blockade is, as n^ral, Up; the

* Blockading Body joining with the King, this moitting, while ho passed
‘ that way. From Holstein-Bcck not least whisper,--^nor to him,

‘ if we knew it.

* Neipperg has quitted Neisse; b|jil walks invisible wjlthjn clouds of
'.Randour&j notliing but guessing as to Neippeig*s motions. Rightly
‘ ^wift, and awake to his business, Neipperg might have^ done, migjht

* still do, a stroke upon us here. But he tak^ It busy; murt^e^ hax^y
‘ five miles a-day, since he quitted Neisse aguhl. From

* Friedrich for his part turns south westward, in ^piest oif ]^Ist«in smd

* other interests; marches towards Grotkau, no|ini|poding mUchf^artKer

* that night. Thick snow blowing in thtir fnte^ ftothitig fo be

* ahead, the Pnis.sian column tramps along.’® In Leipe, u Utde

* sidewards of the road, short way from. Grotkau, our Huasar Vanguasfed
^ had found Aus^'ian Hussnis; captured forty, and from them lehrne 4
' that the Austnan Army K in Grotkau; that they tool^ Grotkau.b&ll

* an hour before, and are there! A pool LieUtenApt:I!d 3 lts<^epfi^(Wh^

I think Fiiednch used to know in Reinsbeigl lay

‘ some sixty recruits and'deseiters” says with Sfe^fel

* hundreds of camp-lnliourers (intended fOr thp* (yenPhb^i* iirhicb. WiB Jnef

* nosy be opened) *•—^Mitschepfal made si bi;^

* hours of it, had to give-in; and there i« ttpldli]^|;Taow Ibr tts at Grc^*,
‘^kau. ‘*11011/’ tlt^eieforel Neippeig is fvlfengly pushing toward#,

* Ohlau, toward^* Breslau, though(in a )[ei#pi^%‘/i^ayr there it will bi^-

* hove us to get the start of him, if hummdy foible* To the tdght

f about) therefore, without delay f The Leipe ,

‘to the wondet of its simple fieoploii

‘ farther, on the road for Ohlau j} and tlmt hr ifidmt %>#

‘ village# there are; the King’s Ccrpe.hi ttVOi
' “Rogrel and Alj^,*’’W-*wmch arb to Jio

* Rogar^U and AFmmm/ on theybed frdhi

Chap. IX FRIEDRICH RETURNS TO SILESIA. 215

sd-ioth Aprtl 1741

• ■ This end of that Marth into tho koujatains, with
Ncisse Siege hanging ttjumpbaiit ahead. ^Thetee are the King's
quarter^, thi^ wintry night, S«yur4ay Sth ;

aptd it IS to be guessed there is inort| w care than of sleep pro-'
vided for )iini there. ' Seldom, in his life, was Fricdrkh in a
mor^ criticaTpositfonj ahd he-well knows it, none better. And
could have his remorses upon it,—were these of the least use
in present Gircumstances. Here are two Lcittrs which he wrote
that night; Veiling, we perceive, a very grim world of thoughts;
betokeningr however* ammd made up. Joidan, Prince August
Wilhf^t Heineft'pparent, and other fine individuals who shone
in the Schweidnits circle lately, are in Breslau, safe sheltered
against this bad juncture; Maupertuis was not so lucky as to
go with them,

Th& iChig £0 Prince August Wilhelm (in Breslau).

* Pogarell, 8th Apnl 1741

‘Ky dearest Brother,—The Fnemjhas jusl got into bileda; We

* are not ihote than a uule {qmf^de milie) fiom them. 1 umorrow must

* decide our fortune:

‘ if I die, do not forget a BiOthei who has always loved you very

* t«aide|rly. I recoinnuirtci to you my most dear Mother, my DomtsUc?,

* 9X^A my I^ir§t Battalion^ {Lt/f^uinl0/Poot^ men puked liom his own
old Huppih Regiment and from the disbanded Gunts, star of all the
^ BatteliOUsh* ‘ ifechel and Schuhmacher’ (I wo of the Three Glerhb)
‘ are informed cl all my testam,ent.uy Mislies. Remember me always

* you; bul console yoatself for my dcatli; the glory oi the Piussian

* Arms, and the honour of the House have set me yr action, and will
‘ guidO mo to my last mohjcot. You aie my sole Heu: T recommend

to yon, in dying, these whom 1 have the most loved duiing my hfO:

* K€ty:3e«Ung^ jForda% Wartenslelien; hLicke, who is a very honest man;

* Ft^der^dorf^ fBactotaih), ‘and hiohel, in vdiom you may place entire

* cin^dence. It bei^ueath 8,000 ciowus (i,aoo/.), which I have with

lo that* I have elsewliere depends pn yon.

* of my Brotheiis and iJLlcts make a present in m) name; a

■’'thousand fefffectidndfe regards {afilUih d compfimeati) le my bister of
’ B^ircttth. Yon loiow wh»t I think on thetr score; and you knoiv
’ hetter thw I could yon, the ttndemess nnd .all the sentiments of
‘ most inviolably which I am, dearest Brother,

’ Yjcmtt wthfnl fecother and Servant till death,

‘FfiDtRIC.’®

T

r. Sosn Ktcotai, JBmhrtd/tmg'Mn Beriin, in ivSa.

3&iiVV Kwdrtchs l«4UittenwUry air»ngeai*at(|

besides dua

Zl6 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXii.

i«th April 1741.

t6 Jordan (m Br^$li^a).

* 8th A.jM *74*‘

* dear Jordan^-—|re going to fight tottiorjcow. Thou kuo’^v*

* est the chances of warj the life of Kings not more regaided than that

* of private people. I know not •whsA ■vs'ill happen to me

* If my destiny is finished, remember a fnetid, who loves thee ai*

* ways tendoriy; if Heaven prolong my days, I will write to thee alter
‘ tomorrow, and thou wilt hear of our victory Adieu, dear fhOnd^ I
‘ shall love thee till death —FfiD£tRlc

The King, we incidentally discover sotuhtil^eTe, *had no
sleep that nightnone, ‘ nor the next ni^t either/—such a
crisis coming, still not come.

CHAPTER X.

BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.

'Tomorrow,' Sunday, did not prove the pay Fight,
after all. Being a day of wild drifting snow, so that you could
npt see twenty paces, there was nothing for it but to sit quiet.
The King makes all his dispositions, sketches out punctually,
to the last item, where each is to station himself, how the Army
is to advance in Four Columns, ready for Newperg wherever
he may be, — towards Ohiau at any rate, imther, it is not
doubted Neipperg is bent. These snowy six-and-thirty hours at
Pogarell were probably, since the Custrin time, the most anid*
ous of Friedrich’s life.

Neipperg, for his part, struggles forward a few miles, this
Sunday April 9th, the Prussians rest under shelter in the wild
weather. Neipperg’s headquarters, this night, ate a anaall Vil¬
lage or Hamlet, called MoUi^itz: there and in the adja^nt
Hamlets, chiefly m Laugwitz and Gruningen, hih Army lodges
itselfhe is now fairly got between us and in She

blowing dri/l, we knew it, or he knew it, But, in this confusimi
of the elements, neither partyr knows pf^he other: Neipperg
has appointed that tomorrow, Monday iqth^ shall be a rest-
day r-^appoxntment which could by po mea^ be jeept, as it

tutned net 1 ^ •

Friedrich had dispatched messetiger^ to OhhtUr
force there should join him; mes$ei%ersm:^ allc^ttide 4 >

BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.

Ch^p' X>

2tf

»Oth Ap»Q 1741.^

like message had already^ gone to Brieg» *s#me days before, and
the Blockading Body, a good few thousands strong, quitted
Brifig, as we saw, and effected thei^ function with him. All
day, this Sunday 0th, it still snows and blows; you cannot see

a yard before you. No hope now of Holstein-Beck, Not the

lea^ from any quarter; Ohlau uncertain, too likely the

wrong way: Whit is to be done? We are cut-off from our
Magazines, '‘have only provision for one other day. ‘ Had this

weather lasted,* says an Austrian reporter of these things, ‘his
Majesty woul^avc passed his time very ill,’^

Of the Battl%rof Mollwitz, as indeed of all Friedrich's Bat¬
tles, there are ample accounts new and old, of perfect authen¬
ticity and scient^K exactitude; so that in regard to military
points the due clearness is, on^ study, completely attainable.
But as to personal or human details, we are driven back upon
a miscellany of sources; most of which, indeed all of which
except Nicolai, when he spfyingly gives us anything, are of
questionable nature; and, without intending to be dishonest,
do run out into the mythical, and require to be used with
Caution. The latest and notablest of these, in regard to Moll¬
witz, is the pamphlet of a Dr. Fuchs; from which, in spite of its
amazing quality^ we expect to glean a serviceable item here and
there,® It is definable as probably the most chaotic Pamphlet
ever written; and in many places, by dint of uncorrccted printing,
bad grammar, bad spelling, bad sense, and in short, of intrinsic
darkness in so vivacious a humour, it has beebme abstruse as
Sanscrit; and redlly is a sharp test of what knowledge you
Otherwise have of the subject. Might perhaps be used in that

way, by the Examining Military Boards, in Prussia and else-
wheroif if no other use lie in il ? Fuchs’s own contributions,
mere ignorance, foUy and credulity, are not worth interpreting:

has printed, and in the same abstruse fonp, one or two
(JutioUs Parish Manuscripts, pmticularly a **Histoty^'^ of this
War, privately jotteS down by the then Schoolmaster of Moll-

^ f t

' {U »}5 eotnplcto TUIc ^atnmiuff^ ftng^dritekter NaeXf

■ri^^n ^9^ nt fyiteftp’Mi dtt Preu^m turn 1740 bis 1979 eri&uierTt, ot

Vf} EiglhH ''vWw Culidetim ff^rraHvts wAk .4 elucuiAts iht Prussian

3 voil. 178**31, l 33 ‘ Eitceljent Narrative*,

Pnv 4 t« aod the like, JOftoy ef thetn eiven alsa

wWth VeiWw hv the sta^^a matt, and creditably charac-

CpHieiim ff^rrai^s ^kkh etneitiats ih* Russian

JW* 3 voll. I78a*3y, I 33. Eaceljent Narrative*,

Imvrgrttm pnvate Biao^aod the like, many ef them given also

Witold

eflimvrgrttm pnvate t>rthem given alsoi

by the tti^hary matt, and creditably charac-

Ptonw br them $0(1 mon in thehi,

M Jlfa/AWI/*, >0*74*

^^S FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BmAxh.

. loth Apnl

a gopd simple jurats old feljow-crof^ture; tifVough whose
ayes it is here there worth while to looh. In regard to
li'ttchs himselil a late Hd^rist says;

* This “ Centenaty^C^AmtEo Pamphlet^ (Celebration itself, so

* ohtQse was the Country, 4id not taHe effect) wa$ by a zealons, noisy
‘ buMiot wise, old Medical Gentleman of these parts, caEed Pr f'nclw

* (/w); who hod set his heart on raising, by subscription, a proper
‘ National Moapment on the Field of Mollwit*, and so closing higE ojd

* career^ Snbscnptiotis did not tpke, in thai Apnl 1^4.1, nor ip ttr

* following months or twelvemonths: the eealpps Poctor, then^ore,

* indignantly drew his own nutse, got a big Granite hewr

‘ ready, with suitable Inscription on it; cart^ hfa bi^Obelidt h’om the
‘ msames of Strehlen; assembled the Country foottd it, op |i$oi{wit2

* Field; and passionately discoursed and pleadeof Thai at least the

* Country should bung block and-tackle, wth pj^per hramewoik, and
set up this Obelisk on the Pedestal he had thme built foi it* The

* Country h'^tened cheerfully (for the old Doctor was a popular man,

' clever though flighty), but the Country was again obtuveln the way
‘ at active fuithemice, and would not even bungbJock-and^acklc, The
' old Doctor liad to answer, “ Wel^ then and go on hi® W®y

‘ more serious errands, i he cattle iiave much undexpinted, and rubbed

* down, his pool Pedestal, which is of mbble-Wotk; bis Obehsfc still

* lies moumfully houzontal, umiijured,—and really ought to be set up,

* by some pansh-rate, or effoit of the community otherwise ’*

From the old Mollwitz Schoolmaster wft tihe foltow-
tag:

* Mollwitz, Sunday Apri, K Country, for tWo dhys back, was in
‘ new alarm by the Austi inn Garrison of now left at liberty, who
^ sallied out upongJic Villages about, and plui^ered blacfc*cattH she<^,

* grain, and whatever tlicy could conie at JSmt this day (Sunday) m
‘ Mollwitz the whole Austrim Army iva upOn. na. , Pilfst, thet'e went
‘ joo Hussars through the Vilhgc to Gryningeu, who ijaiut^red fhem-
‘ selves there, and rusheef hither and thltb«f naifecshinuses, I 3 bbbh%

* plundering From one they tot^ his best borfteii, from hnoiher
‘ took hiien;f clothes, and other fuintture^ and -vlc&iil? General

* burg* (Neippeig) Gialted here at MoUwibs, with the whole Atmfi

* before the Wage, m mind to quaiter* And rjj^rwr ww settled, ao

* diat a jBaufr' (^ow^-Farmer) ‘not fout tocompmd^ to

* and a Gartner* (SpadO-Farmer) *wo Or tltfM bl»»di«d cavalry, The

* hott^ were Ml of Ofltt^rB, the GaUd (Gattb^ * ^ the Fie^ MI

* of horsemen and baggage? aaid aU iroiind|r«;fO^ a^trtbitjg’ but i$fes

< botning? the Zaund (woedfen tailings) fot

* frrewood; tho hay, straw, baieW and

brdugbt to potbif^; and ovt^yfhing frdm tw ^ban» 11^

loth April 1741;,

BATTLE OF MOLLWItZ.

»,&e _ai« Ujp ;', jKing'

Fricdn<;!ji* ^s liad pQt/pr had hardly; at sl^pt

duriiig^those t^cr ixi^; auch; brs anxieties. This morning*, aU
K^.calni, sleeky oMl.,into..^ white; Pogarell and t^c
yd^d a^e aavfe'^a windiri two feet of snow,

yp ^roand ^ir hard.and crisp ; a hot sun possible about ^
^ybreak* we are all astir, rendezvousing*
ready to advance in that fashion
into battle, wherever the Enemy
turn, up- :The..in‘&sWere all given overnight, two nights ago;
were ..all nnderstoi^i top, and known to be rhadamanthine;
andj down to l^e ipw^t pioneer, no man is uncertain what to
dp. If wp but knew where the Enemy is; on which side of
us; what doin^ what intending ?

Spputs* General'Adjutants are out on the quest; to no pur¬
pose hitherto- One young CTeneral-Adjutant, Saldem, whose
name we shall know again* has ridden northward, has pulled
MtBe aoihO'Wa^^ of Pogarell; hangs, gazing diligently
'thro^h his. spyg|aasi there;—can see*nothing but a Plain of
sijfohl^ lhpWi '.Mlith s]^se bearding of bushes (nothing like a
k^ge in,they countries), and here and there a tree, themiser-
. able yeletdh df a poplarwhSn happily, owing to an Austrian
p^S'Sed.^^ (in abridged form) the poor

old ScnpbltttasterVaccdunt of a small thing: ♦

jy^risttvthagpdnr.of the regiment Althan, native of Kriesewite

W bllleted in Christopher Schonwita^s,

^ shirt, anfl**other interior outfit j and

the.man Scholzke, a faJat-
.V , .7 ^ to his, the Dragoon’s, Father in

jto^pi^jalrc siieh shirt or outfit, and to return early with
l^ef ,p^ty .h^B^ohke and his master dare not think

foundering homewards with the but^
into Saidern*s sphere of

know where
y whither I am going!”

the first clear light
■ Thaf or something equivalent, kic

Si®

FIRST SILESIAN WAR.

330

Book Xlt

. loth Apnl

Tl^e King to Feasiaat, '^Thon sl^t Witli me tod^y!’*
Andl Schbkke, Plos.c^e otisep* tall Jilin,—4c^vy(Qot«d national biped
knowing the ground the<^ ]pVf|edcaWyj e'fciijr yn*d it|—did, as ap¬
pears, attend the King all moiiiiingji atod do ae^ce, that \yas recognis¬
able long years sdlerwatds. ‘ For always/ tay'^lhe ]$ooks, ^ when the
' King held review here, Rloschhe htiled not to make appearance pn
* the field of Pogarell, and get recognition and a gift from his

At break of day the ranking and arranging began. Pogav
rell clock is near striking ten, when the last squadron or baty
talion quits Pogarell; and the Four Columi^ punctiliously
correct, are all under way. Two on each side of Ohlau High¬
way; steadily advancing, with pioneers 'al|fia4 to clbaf.any
obstacle there may be. h'ew obstacles; here and there a little
ditch (where Ploschke’s advice may be go<|d, under the Sleek
of tlie snow), no fences, smooth wide Plain, nothing you would
even call a knoll in it for many miles ahead S&4 around. Moll-
witz is some seven miles north from PogaieJl; intermediate He
dusty fractions of Villages more than one; two miles or more
from MoUwitz we come to Pampitz on our left, the next con*
siderable, if any of them can be counted considerable.

* All these Dorft, and indeed niost German ones/ says my Tpurist,

* are made on one type; ah agglomerate of dusty farmyards, with their

* stalls and bams; all the faimyaads huddled together in two rOws; a
‘ broad negligent road between, seldom mended, never swept except
< by the elements. Generally tkere iS nothing to be seen, on each hand,

* but thatched roofs, dead clay walls and mde wooden gates; some-
‘ times a poor public-house, with probable beet in it; never any shop,

* nowhere any patch of swept pavement, or trim gatheting-pkee ror

* natives of a social gossipy turn: the road lies sleej^, ItUeryj g9od

* only for utilitarian purposes. In the middle of the VillUgevst^s

‘ Chnrch and Churchyaid, with probably son&e guailod trfee^ Jtt

* Church often larger than you expected; tjie CJmrchyabd, feUced

•.one-and-morurwall. * ‘

* of the place. MoUwitz, at the piescnt day, ha^ sojpaethiug pf whita-

* wash here nnd there; one of the farmer or mpre, weaihig k

* civilised prosperous look. The belfry oifert; a pleii&aat vipws
spoofs and steeples of Brieg, pllhsaUtly vkil^d^ eastward’;"^lljiges

- tiM tTi I1

‘ th<^, if you look weU, shadowy Towa-j»
»are 3fcrehlistt^ a place aUo <)f

Ottp-X. BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ. 2^1

xoth. April Z74>.

* Ing manner,•while tou study the top<^aphi«B^ P^unpiu, loo, seems
‘ prosperous, in its littdry way; the Church is bijgger arid newer,*-—
owing to an accident we jhear Of soonj--^ Country all about seems

'farmed with some indOstiyi shaiww ploughing; liable to

' drch^ht. It is very sandy in quality; shorn of umbrage; painfully
' nak«^ to an English eye.' 'that is the big champaign, coated with
two feet of snow, where a great Action is now to go forward.

Neipperg, all this while, is much at his ease on this white
He m Just sitting down to dinner at the Dorf-
sehulse’s (Village Provost, or miniature Mayor of Mollwitz), a
composed ma^ when—rockets or projectiles, and successive
anxious sputtmngs from the steeple-tops of Brieg, are hastily
reported t what can it mean ? Means little perhaps;—Neipperg
sends out a Hussar paity to ascertain, and compoi>cdly sets
himself to dine, §n a little while his Hussar party will come
galloping back, faster than it went; faster and fewer;—and
there will be news for Neipperg* during dinner! Better have
had one idle fellow, one of your 30,000, on the Btlfry-top here
looking out, though it was a ^est-day?—

The truth is, the Prussian advance goes on with punctili¬
ous exactitude, by no means rapidly. Colonel Count von Ro-
thenburgjj—the same whom we lately heard of in Pans as a
miracle of gambling,—-he now here, m a new capacity, is warily
leading the Vanguard of Dragoons; wanly, with the Four Co¬
lumns wed to rear of him: the Austrian Hussar party came
upon Rothenburg, not two miles from Mollwitz; and suddenly
drew bridle.'*' Them Rothenburg tumbles to the right-about,
and chases;—finds, on advancing, the Austn^n Army totally
unaware. Xt is thought, had Rothenbui^g dashed forward, and
sent wni^d to ^he rearward to dash forward at their swiftest, the
Austi;ism Army might have been cut in ^pieces here, and never
have got together to try battle a| all. But Rothenburg had no
orders; pay, had orders N6t to get into fighting;—nor had
!l|^'t^rteh himself, in this his first Battle, learned that feline or
leonine^irqmptitud^ of Spring which he subsequently manifested.
Far from it 1 Indeed this puntulious deliberation, and slow
exactitude as on |he review-ground^ is wonderful and noteworthy
at the fimt of Friedrich;—the faithful apprentice-hand

to tjie rjlles of the old shop. Ten years hence,
-haii Friedrich fbund Neipperg In this con-
had heed eoon settled l-*Rothenburg

^ ^ * PbMiistp. 413S.

222

FIKST StLESiAN" WAR.

Bo^JCU.

' ' . . 1 Apiil

bac^ par-

itept^te^iy bad been

iX;' 'P^mpite oftb^bi'ta

; left;: the Prussian Coliitnns'b^t fnrsb^'f i^st^ts; Wse Snib':
fieldrmusic; take to deploying theins^t|s ijiib ^de. 'Tbefe "1,^
solemn wheeling, shootmg-out to tfgbi:4n(l"ieft/do^ Spb>
Jess precision; mice in line, —— ib'4wb:litt'€si‘ ' eafcb three" w j^w ';
deep,’ lines many yards apart.--tbc^'wittja^vanoe^
still solemnly, field-music,guiding» and Which

will be a work of time. That the iCin|^^ ftttgal^d^%n^W
shot away, from its camp-thble near ^

h^rd), is evidently mythical: and eyep' itniwssiblel'f^^^
tnans having yet no cannon within ^iifcs 1|?f him\V'3ind'beipg
intent on dining comfortably themselves, net on firing aVothbr
people^s dinners. . ^ , v . ,

Fancy Neipperg’s state of mibd, busy beginning dinner id,
the little Schuhe's, or Town-Pro\;ost's housbi when the llhsisrs
• dashed-in at full gaUop, shouting T^e Enewyl

All in march there; vanguard this side of PampitzjMtiii^fOr^y
olusr—Quick, your Plan of Battle, then? Whkherwh^* How;
What? answer or perish I Neipperg w^s ihfinitcii'^rpok; dSrb^
knife and fork: “Send for ROmer,. G^era|.dfthe
RSmer did the indispensable: a swift mad, not apt to
Kdmer’s battle-plan, I should hope, is ^nejt4y madepr it will
fare ill with Neipperg and him. But be^, ye drUJ^tnerg ; •
lop. ye aides-d<S-camp as for life* , 'the first thing 1$ to get dur
Force together; and it lies scattered in Th^eptherVil¬

lages besides Mollwitz, miles apart. Neif^rg’s If^^& dlang-
ouf, his aides-de-camp gallop : he lefr;iln| ftirfoed,

■and^the other parts in a state ■

pouring-infrom taugwitz, ‘

sians have ^uife done deploying,t^m»d}vm>hhd ,

' .^ptbf him. Rdmer, by hirt^'KSai^Ji^'^atieidiati* '

- Chants a superior ^Idieri and 1ifxcelJbtiit®iS^a| '■c^Hdr#^''<}0m-

ytatcrah of good

tedr'Heipperg

is tp.be m

4

I I My,"’* v"

Chap-x. BATTlLE OF MOLLWITZ. ^^23

todi April 1741.

IjbVse on e«fth wing, whiclr is orthodox fiilitary ord^r,
length of front, I should gufcss, most have been something better
than two English miles: a sluggish BroOk^ called of Langwltz,
from the Village of that najene whidh lies some way across^ is
on his right hand; sluggish, boggy; stagnating towards the
Oder in those partsunproved faimmg has, in our time,
» mostly dried the strip of bog, and made it into coarse mev\dow*
which IS rather a relief amid the dry sandy clement. Neipperg’s
j?ight is covered by that. His left rests on the Hamlet of Grun-
ingen, a mile>and*half northeast of MoUwitzmeant to have
rested on ll«f!!lsdorf nearly cast, but the Prussians have al-
t^^n thiitup. The sun conung more and more round
West of south (for it is now past noon) shines right in Ncip-
perg^s face, and ii^^against him. how the wind i.s, nobody metit
tion^,—probably there was no wind, tils icgular Cavalry*
600, outnumbers twice or moit that of the Prussians, not to
mention their quality; and hehasfcwci Iniantiy, somewhat in
proportion the entire force on each side is sc^-cely above
3 Q,ooo* the Prussians slight!) m majoiity by count, in field-
pieces Neipperg is greatly outnumbeicd, the Prussians having
dbout threescore, he only eighteen." And now here the
Frus$ian$, close upon our left wing, not yet m contact with
the right,-*-#whiCh in fact is not yet got into existence;—thank
Heaven they have not come before our left got into existence,
as our right (if you knew it) has not yet quite finished doing!—
The Prussians, though so ready for deploy ing, * have had
their own difficulties and delays. Between tU* boggy Broc^
of Laugwitz on their left,-and the Village of Ilermsdorf, twe
miles distant, on wluch their right wing is to lean, there proves
not to be room etiOttSi^ then, owiifig to mistake of Sebtt-
iftpburg (ot^ <?ld ptpc'^oiay frictid^who commands the right wing
of Hprite here, and te not up in time), there is too much room.
Not roQtn enough fon all the Infantry, wc say: the last Three
' Bi^ttaUons of the front line therefore, the three on the outmost
wheel round, sta^td ailiwart; mipcteitce (as soldiers
Bfty)f dr at right to the first line.; hanging to it like a

- kind, ojflidj^in ^between Schulenburg and them,-—

ha^ C9te"up. Thus are the three battalions got

rid of Attleas^t * they cap the First Prussian line rectangulaiiv,

224 FIRST SILESIAN fwAR. UkXa,

• » / ^ xoth AptU 1741.

like a lid/ says^ tny^tliority,—lid which does i?ot reach to
, thfe Second L1ne*by a good way. This accidental arrangement
had material effects on the right whig. tJnfortunate Schulen-
iHjrg did at last com^ up i—had he miscalchfeted the distances,
then) Once on the groundv he will find he doe» not reach to
Hermsdorf after all, and that there is now too much room I
What his degree of fault was I know not; Friedrich has long
been dissatisfied with these dragoons of Schulenhurg; **^good
for nothing, I always told you" (at that Skirmish of Raam^-
garten): and nowhere is the General hims<df fallen blundering 1
-—In respect of Horse, the jrnustrians are more thfxn twh to c^e;^
to make out our dcficienc>> the King, imitating something he
had read about Gust.ivus Adolphus, intercalates the Hors^e-
Squadrons, on each wing, with two Battalions of Grenadiers,
and so lengthens them, — ‘a manoeuvre no^likely to be again
imitated/ he admits “

All these movements and arrangements are effected above
a mile from Mollwitr, no enemy y^it visible. Once effected, we
advance again with music sounding, sixty pieces of artillery
well in fiont,—steady, steady !—across the floor ofsnoW which
is soon beaten smooth enough, the stage, this day, of a great
adventure. And now there is the Enemy’s left wing, Rdmer
and his Hoi sc, their right wing wider away, and not yet, by
a good space, within cannon-range of us. It is towards Two
of the afternoon, Schulenbarg nowon h.s ground, laments that
he will not reach to Hermsdorf,—but it may bC dangerous
now to dttcmpli repairing that eiror ? At Two of the clock,
being now faiily within distance, we salute Romer and the Aus^
trian left, with all our sixty cannon; and the sound of drumi
and clarionets is drowned in universal artillery thunder. In¬
cessant, for they take (by order) to “ swift-shooting,''’ Which is
almost of the swiftness of mifsketry in our Prussian practice;
and from sixty cannon, going at that rate, we mhy fancy some
effect. The Ausbrian Horse of the left wing do not like it; all
the less as the Austrians, rather short of ^rtiflery, have nothing
yet to reply with. ^

No Cavalry can stand long there, g^ing shivered fn that
way; in such a noise, were there nothing morei to

Utand here like miiestones, then, and be all shOi,with«^t d
stroke struck?" *• Steady Answers Rdmer^' But Jan
keep them steady; ‘‘To be shot Ifke dogs (rteV

Ci»p.x. BATTLE or MOLLWm. MS

t<Ah April i74t. * w

<Jod’s sake ^C/m QotUs lead usfirtNrard* Iken, tolkife

a stroke at themr*—ift tot»ea ever more pkiA^^ti plaintivjely
indignant; gtowii^g utigovemable* And Edniier can get no
orders; Neipperg on tke extreme rtghti many things still to
settle there i and here is the cannon-thunder going, and soon
their very musketry will open. And—and there is Schulenburg,
for one thing, Stretching himself out eastwards (rtghtwards) to
get hold of H^misdorf; thinking this an opportunity for the
manceuvre;, “Forward!” cries Rdmer; and his Thirty Squad¬
rons, like botllid whirlwind now at last let loose, dash upon
Schulenburg’s poor Ten (five of them of Schulenburg’s own regi"
mentX-—who are turned sideways too, trotting towards Herms*
dorC at the wrong moment,—and dash them iUio wild luin.
That must have h^n a charge! That was the beginning of
hours of chaos, seemingly irretrievable, in that Prussian right

• s *

wing.

For the Prussian Horse fly wildly; and it is in vain to
rally. The King is among thqm; has come in hot haste, con¬
juring and commanding: poor Schulenburg addresses his own
regiment, ♦' Oh shame, shame ! shall it be told, then ?” rallies
his own regiment, and some others; charges fiercely in with
them again; gets a sabre-slash across the face,—does not
mind the sabre-slash, small bandaging will do;—gets a bullet
through the head (or through the heart, it is not said which)
and falls down dead; his regiment going to the winds again,
and hiS care of it and of other things concludin|^ m this hon¬
ourable manner. Nothing can ially that right wing; or the
more you rally, the worse it fares: they aie clearly no match
for these Prussian Horse. They fly along the front of

their own First Line of Infantry, they fly between the Two
Lines; Rbmer chasing;-^tiU the .fire of the Infantry (intoler¬
able to our enemies, and hitting some even of our fugitive
friends) repels him. For the notable point in all th^s was the
conduct pf the Infantry; and how it stood in these wild vortexes
of ruin; impregnable, ^mmovabl^ as if every man of it were
stone; and poured'Out deluges oPfire,—'five Prussian

'Shot^ fop two Austrian :*-«such is perfect discipline against
imperflht; "and ihe |po^ ramrod against the wooden.

Toe ^re repels Rbmer, when he trenches on

the InliMitiy: however, he captures nine of the Prussian sixty

VQU IV,

jj6 first SILESIAN* war. Book XIJ.

loth Apnl i;4x

guils i hi^s acattereid ttieir If orse to the. iyinid,s; 4 nd char^^s
again and again* hoj^g to brealt the Infantry too,—till a
bullet kills him, the gafiant EjEJmer, and some other has to
charge and try. It was thought* had Ohldlci^ ^*th his Auv
tnan Infantry advanced to support Edtner at this mneture* the
Batde had ^en gained. Eive times* before Rdmer fell and
after, the Austrians charged here; tried the Second Une too;
tried once to take Pnnee Leopold in rear Ihere But
Leopold faced round, gave intolerable fire; on one face as on
the other, he, or the Prussian Infantry anywhere, is not to b©
broken. ‘ Prince Fnednch,* one of th© il^rgr^hs of Schwedt,
King’s Cousin, whom we did not knpw before* fell m thesb
wild lailymgs and wrestlings ; ‘ by a cannomball, at the King’s
hand,’ not said otherwise where He had Come as Volunteer,
few weeks ago, out of Holland, where he wis a rising General:
he has met liis fate heie,—and Margraf Karl, his Brother, who
also gets wounded, will be a mournful man tonight.

The Prussian Horse, this light wing of it, is a mined body;
boiling in wild disoider, flooebng rapidly away to rearwntd*—-
which IS the safest direction to retreat upon. They ' sweep away
the King’s person with them,’ say some cautious people^ others
say, what is the fact, tliat Schwerin entreated, and as it were
commanded, the King to go, the Battle being, to all appear¬
ance, irretrievable. Go he did, with small escort, and op a

long nde,—to Oppeln, a Prussian post, thirty-five miles rear-
waid, where theic is a Bridge over the Oder and a safe country
beyond, So*‘much is indubitable; and that he dispatched an
Aide-de-Camp to gallop into Bmndenburg, and tell the Old
Oessauer, “ Bestir yourself» Here all §eems lost van¬

ished from the FieJd, doubtless in very desperate humour.
Up<?n which the extraneous world has babbit a good deal,
Cowardice ! Wanted courage: Haha t" in its umal foohsb
way; not worth answer from him qr ftonpi US. Friedrich’s
demeanour, in that disaster of his right wipg, was furijws de¬
spair rather; and neither Srhulenburgmor Margraf Fnednch,

hdr any of the captains, kilted or left jfvSng:, was exposed to
have sinned by cowardice’* id degree ''

the Eiihg vanishes Itoto MollwitJ! Fimftattms sixteen

houii, into the regions ofMyt^ FairylaftA'*^ as would
one;© have been said; but ub|mrmed^bi

Oap X BATTLt OF M0LLWIT4 227

joth Apn} T7+r

. dayljight at vUich t^me, i»ot sooner, readers wbat

little IS to be said of this obscute and muc^-dis%nr^d small
aifair For the present we hasten back to Moilwit«r,—-wh^re
the murderous thunder rjlges upabated all this while, the very
noise of it alarming manhmd for thirty miles round At Bres¬
lau, which IS thirty good miles off, horrible dull grumble was
heard from the southern quarter (‘ s«U better, if you put a staff
m the ground, and set your to it’), and from the steeple-
tops, there was dim doudland of powder-smoke discei nible m
the horizon there* ‘ At Liegnitr,’ which ib twice the distance,

♦ the ^arth afcniMbly s|i<^ok, —at least the air did, and the
nerveiSf Of men

‘ Had GOldlein but advanced with his Foot, m support of
gallant Romer 1 ’ say the Austrian Books Bui Goldlcm did
not advance, nor is^t reitain he would have found advantage
m so doing Goldlcm where he st lads, has difhculty enough
to hold hig own For the notable circumstance, miraculous to
mihtary men, stiU is, How the Piussian Foot (men who had
never been m hre, but whom PiiLdnch Wilhelm had uiiUed
for twenty years) stand tlieir ground, in this distraction of the
Horse, Not even the Two outlying Gienadici Battalions will
give way those pooi mt^calatcd Gi enaditrs, when their Horse
fled on the right and on the left, they st ind there, like a fixed
stone-dam m that wild whirlpool of rum Ihc) fix ba>oncts,
^ bung their two field pieces to flank (Wmterfcld was Captain
there)* and, from small arms and big, dt hvt r such a fire as
Was very unexpecteu Nothing to be made of Wmtcrield and
them They mvincibiy hurl b ick charge after charge , and,
with dogged steadiness, manceuvn themselves into the gtneial
Line again, or into contact with the Thicu supeifluous Batta-
ilons, whom we heard of 7 hose 1 hree,

ranged ip this nghf wing V hke a hd,’ between First

Line and sepdnd), maintained themselves m hkc impregnable
fashicttv-^WinterfeH commanding,—and proved unexpectedly,
thmk^ Frfednch, the sayiU^ of thfe^whole. For they also stood
their ground nnnjoy^ihle', hfee rocks, steadily spouting fire-tor¬
rent^ Hye saOcesSiyie chatges storm upon them, fruitless:
“ StOadj mein^JCi'kd^f'j hx hnyotiets. handle ramrods \ There
IS the ^yior^^i^Ug^ ^ttjideriiig in upon yj#; reserve your fire,
tiU you whte Of fheii eyes, and get the word; then

aaS FIRST S 1 LESIA^^»^VAR. ^ Book m

f i ^ Wth ;^»ril I74tf

give it them» and again give it them: see whetll^ any man ot '
ahy horse can stand it T

Keipperg, soon aiter jRdroer tidli had ordered Gdldtein
ward: G6ldlein with his Infantry did advance, gallantly enough i
but to no purpose. Ghldlein was soon shot dead \ and his
Infantry had to fall back again, ineffectual Or worse. Iron
ramrods against wooden; five shots to two; what is there but
falling back ? Neipperg sent fresh Horse from his right wipg,
with Berlichingen, a new famed General of Horse; Neipperg is
furiously bent to improve his advantage, to break those Frus^
sians, who are mere musketeers left bare, and^ thinks that wdl
settle the account: but it could in no wise be done. TheAus«
trian Horse, after their fifth trial, renounce charging; fairly
refuse to charge any more; and withdi^w dispirited Out
ball^range, or in search of things not impracticable. The Hus<
sar part of them did something of plunder to rearward :-<-and,
besides poor Maupertuis’s adventure (of which by and by), and
an attempt on the Prussian baggage and knapsacks, vdliich
proved to be ‘ too well guarded,’—'‘burnt the Church bf Pam*
pitz/ as some small consolation. The Prussians had stript
their knapsacks, and left them in Pampitz: the Austrians, it
was noticed, stript theirs in the Field; built walls of them, and
fired behind the same, in a kneeling, more or less prmected
posture,—which did not avail them much.

In fact, the Austrian Infantry too, all Austrians, hour after
hour, are getting wearier of it: neither Infantry nor Cavalry
can stand being riddled by swift shot in that matmer. »>Xn
spite of their knapsack wails, various regiments have shrunk
out of ball>range; and several cannot, by any persuasion, be
got to come into it .fgain. Others, who do reluctantly advance^

'—see what a figure they n^ake; man after man edging away
as he can, so that the regiment ' stands forty to eighty men
deep, w^th lanes through it every two or thrift! yards , per¬
meable everywhere to Cavalry, if we ‘htd them; and turning
nothing to the Enemy but<5olour-sergftants and bare poles ^
a regiment ( And Romer is dead, and^Gjifidleinof the Infantry
$5 dead. And on their right Vising, skkted by that' ipar^.
Brook of Laugwit^r'A^ustrian right wing had been vreakeated
by detachments, wlhn BerlichmgentSde olTm sucrised''l^itimfr,
—the Austrians are suffering; Fosadowsky*s Hnrse (among-
whom is Roth^hurgi once vanguatd)f strebgthenbd by tem^y

. Chap,x. - BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ. 229

* loth April I7^n ^

Aants who have rallied here, are at last prospering/after re¬
verses, And the Prussian fire of small arms, at such rate, has
lasted npw for five hours. The Austrian Army, becoming
Instead of a web a mere series of flying tatters, forming into
stripes or lanes in the way we see, appears to have had about
enough.

These bidden from Schwerin, Hi? own

ammunition, too, he knows is running scarce, and fighters here
ahd'there are searching the slain for cartridges :—Schwerin
doses his ran0, trims and tightens himself a little; breaks
forth into universal field-music, and with banners spread, starts
immass wholly, “Forwards!" Forwards towards these Aus¬
tria and the sei|io^ sun.

An intelligent Austrian Officer,^ writing next week from
Neisse,^^ confesses he never saw anything more beautiful. »I

* can well say, I never in my life saw anything more beautiful

* They marched with the gref*test steadiness, arrow-suaight,

* and their front like a line {schnurgleich)^ as if they had been

* Upon parade. The glitter of their clear arms shone strangely
' in the setting sun, and the fire from them went on no other-

* wise than a continued peal of thunder.’ Grand picture in¬
deed ; but not to be enjoyed as a Work of Art, for it is coming
upon us I ‘ The spirits of our Army sank altogether,’ continues
he; *the Foot plainly giving way. Horse refusing to comefor-
< ward, all things wavering towards dissolution—so that Neip-
perg, to avoid worse, gives the word to go ;—and they roll off
at double-quick time, through Mollwitz, over Laugwitz Bridge
and Brook,, towards Grotkau by what routes they can. The
sun is just sunk; a quarter to eight, says^the intelligent Aus¬
trian Oificer*-*^while the Austrian^ Army, much to its amaze¬
ment, ttmnbles forth in this bad fashion.

They had lost nine of their own cannon, and all of those
Prussian nine which thejr once had, except one: eig^t cannon
in all prisontfs of them«vere few, and none of much
^mark} two FieZdmarshals, Rfimer and Gaidlein, lie among the
'^dead ; four more of that rank are wounded. Four standards
' ’100 ♦ eertaia kettledrums and the like trophies, not

in great *mhher. ^ Li^ttenant-Ceneral Browfie was of these
^ tetreatifig .^triads i a little fact worth noting: Of his actions
’(hU dajv or^ of, his (which latter surely must have

n o/jr Pmmn (aW* dted), 138.

130 f FIRST SILESIAN WAR. . UookJUI. .

, ^ loth April

bten cbnsidetabk), 5,b bittt aityii^'here. The Austrians
notmuth chased’, fhough^eyiftigHthav^been,afresh Cavalry
Ohiau tegiments, drawn hither by i^e sourtd^^lf having
hung about to rear of them, for some time past; unable to get
into the Fight, or to do any good till how. Schwerin, they
say, though he had two wounds, was for pursuing vtgorOholyf
but Leopold of Anhalt over-persuaded him; urged the dark¬
ness, the uncertainty. Berlichingen, with their own Horae,
still partly covered their rear; and the Tru^ians. Ohlauers
included, were but weak in that branch of the service. Pur¬
suit lasted little more than two miles, and was never hoti, The,
loss of men, on both sides, was not far from equal, and rather
in favour of the Austrian side:—^Austnanff lipunted in kllle 4
wounded and missing, 4,410 men; Prussians 4,613
the Prussians bivouacked on the ground, or quartered in these
Villages, with victory to crown them, and the thought that
their hard day’s-work had beeii well done. Besides hfar^af
Friedrich, Volunteci from Plolland, there lay among the sliHin
Colonel Count von Finckenstem (Old Tutor’s Son), King’s
friend from boyhood, and much loved. He Was of the six:
whom we saw consulting at the door at Reinsberg, during a
certain ague-fit; and he now rests silent here, while the matter
has only come thus far.

Such was Moll Witz, the first Battle for Silesia; which had
to cost many* Battles first and lasL Sdesia will be gained, we
can expect, by fighting of thi<s kind in an hanesf cau$e. But
here is something alieady gained which is contidcrable, and
about which there no doubt. A new Military Powti, it
would appear, has come upon the scene; the Oazetteer-and-^
Diplomatic world will have to make itself feiiuliar with a name
not much heard of hitherto among the hTations. A Nation
which c^n fight," think the Gazetteersj “fight almost as the
very Swedes did ; and is l^d on by j|$ King too,-r-who may
prove, m his way, a*very Charles Xfl, or small Macedonia’s
Madman, for aught one knows?*" which latter branch of^
their prognostic the Gazetteers weVe muoh out.— ^ o ;

The Fame of this Battle, whitdi is^now so sutkiuo^of me¬
mory, was great in Europe; and struck, likeahdge wa^gohg4

o cotrept iicpQWUcf movet&entMMid dlh day 44

fiOQle ^pv}ou\aay«, m Nicplnti, k r

W Oiiich, L xqS; Kaotier, tH 935, cotnopi; fi S95, uiponwct *

CIWP.X BATTLK OF MOI^tWfTZ. * 231

i«th April 1741 ^ *

With long resonance, through the general M. de Voltaire
had run across to Lille m Chose Spnng days: there is a good
Troop of Players m Lille ; a I^iece, Madanie Denls^ wife of
some Military Commissariat Denis, impottaht in those parts,
can lodge the divine Emilie and me,—and one could at las*
see Mahomet^ after five years of struggling, get upon the boards,
if not yet in Paris by a great way, yet in LiUe, which is some¬
thin^. M(^onut is getting upon the boards on those terms ;
and has proceeded, not amiss, through an Act or two, when a
l^Ote from the King of Prussia wns banded to Voltaire, an¬
nouncing the viiitory of Mollwii/ Which delightful Note Vol-
tafre jStopt the performance till he read to the Audience • “ Bra-
VfeSimoi" answered the Audience. “You will see,’* s.nd M. de
Voltaire io the fratnds about him, “this Piect at MoIIwitz will
make mme sttdeet^^t which proved to be the fact.t* For the
French are Anti-Au&tnan, and smell gieat things m the wind,
“That man is mad, your Most Christian Majesty?’” “Not
quite; or at any rate not mad *0017!” think Louis and his Belle-
isles now.

Dimly poring* in those old Books, and squeezing one’s way
into face-to-face view of the extinct Time, we begin to notice
what a clangorous rumour was m Mollwitz to the then genera¬
tion of mankind;—betokening many things ; universal Euro¬
pean War, as the first thing Which duly came to pass, as
did, at a slower rate, the ulterior thing, not yet so apparent,
that indeed anew hour had struck on the Timq Horologe, that
a new Epoch had risen. Yes, my fiiends. New Charles XII.
or not, here truly has a new Man and King come Upon the
scene: capable perhaps of doing soi^cthing ? Slumberous
Europe, rotting amid its blind pedantries, its lazy hypocrisies,
conscious and unconscious: this man is capable of shaking it
a little out of rtf stupid tefuges of lies, and ignominious wrap-
pages^ aa4 hed-clothes, ^Which will be its grave-clothes other¬
wise; mid ol'intiiha^ng to it, afar off, that there is still a Ve-
radly in Thitt|!s, und a MendfSbity m Sham-Thmgs, and that
the difret'ettce of the two is infinitely tnore considerable than
wa^Juj^sed,

' Mol\witz is A most deliberate, regulated* ponderously
imptei^Ye Feat of Arms, as the reader sees;

done aU hy Regulation methods^ with orthodox exactitude; i«
w (Ewtrti Prftfh), U* u

352 FIRST SILESIAK WaR. Bo^XIL

r ^xoCh A{)rii

a bIoWi weighty, alnfbst pedantic^ but highly irrefia^ble man^'
uer. It is the triumph of l^tusshm Discipline; of mltitary ot«
thodoxy well put in prattiice: the honc^ Outcohie of good
natural stuff in those Btandenburgers, and (ff the supremeTir*
tues of Drill. Neippeig and his Austrians had much despised
Prussian soldiering: ** Keep our sOUphot,” Cried the^i on run^
nmg out this day to rank themselves; hot a little, till we drive
these fellows to the Devil t" That was their opinion, about
noon this day: but that is an opinion they have renounced for
all remaining days and years.—It is a Victory dttf properly to
Friedrich Wilhelm and the Old Dessauer, who are far away
from it. Friedrich Wilhelm, though dead, fights here, and the
others only do his bidding on this occasion. His Son, as yet*
adds nothing of his own; though he will evei' henceforth be|^n
largely adding,—right careful withal to lose nothing, for the
Friedrich Wilhelm contribution is invaluable, and the basis of
everything:—but it is curious to see in what contrast this first
Battle of Friedrich's is with his ktrer and last ones.

Considering the Battle of Mollwitz, and (hen, in contrast,
the intricate Pragmatic Sanction, and what their consequences
were and their antecedents, it is curious Once more I This,
then, is what the Pragmatic Sanction has come to? Twenty
years of world-wide diplomacy, cunningly - devised spider-
threads overnetting aU the world, have issued here. YoUr Con¬
gresses of Cambray, of Soissons, your Grumkow-Seckendorf
Macchiavehsms, all these might as well have lain in their bed.
Real Pragmatic Sanction would have been, A welKr^ned Army
and your Treasury full. Your Treasury Is empty (nothing in
it but those foolish 200,000 English guineas, and the pas^on*
ate cry for more); and your Army is not trained as this Prus¬
sian one; cannot keep its ground against tbt^ One. Of all those
long*head 6 (| potentates, simple Friedrich Wilheldl, sbh of Na- ^
turC, who had die honesty to do what N^pre tau^t him, has
come out gainer. You ^ ladghed at hSujaa a rpol: do you
to see now who bras wise, who fool? ’ He has an Army
that * advances onyaa with glittering m#ketry, steady a$ on

* the parade^oun^ and pours out fire^hke one oOntim|ous

* thunder-peal f so that, strange as it seems, you fiudtl^ will
actually be nothing for you but^-^mkihg toymrtieelS, shall we
sayf<^solling off with ^patch* aa'^econd^estl Wesediings

C 1 « 1 >.X. BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ. *33

xoth ^pril 1741. %

kre of singdlar omen. Here stands one tiiat will avenge ?decl-
tidb Wilhelm,—if FriediicK Wilhelm were not already suffici¬
ently avenged by the mere 'Verdict of facts, which is palpably
CQn>m^ out, as TKme pe^s the wiggeries away from them more
and more. MoUwiu and such places are full of veracity; and
no head is so thick as to resist conviction in that kind.

Of Sriedric^s disappearance into Fairyland^ in the Interim ;
and of Maupertuids similar Adventure,

Of the fBhg’s Flight, or sudden disappe.^ ranee into Fairy¬
land, during this first Battle, the King himself, who alone could
have told us fully, maintained always rigorous silence, and no¬
where drops the {^ast hint. So that the small fact has come
down to us involv t fn a great bulk of fabulous cobwebs, mostly
of an ill-natured character, set a-going by Voltaire, Valori and
others (which fabulous process, in the good-natured form, still
continues itself); and, except for Nicolai’s good industry (in
his Auehdoten-Bo 6 k)t we shO’Md have difficulty even in guess¬
ing, xiot to say understanding, as is now partly possible. The
few real particulars,—and those do verify themselves, and hang
perfeedy together, when the big globe of fable is burnt off from
them,—are to the following effect.

“Battle lost,** said Schwerin: “but what is the loss of a
Battle to that of your Majesty’s own Person? For Heaven's
sake, go; get across the Oder; be you safe, till this decide
itself 1 ” That was reasonable counsel. If defeated, Schwerin
can hope to retreat upon Ohlau, upon Breslau, and save the
Magazines. This^ side the Oder, all will be movements, a whirl¬
pool of Hussars; but beyond the Oder, all is quiet, open. To
Ohlau, to Glogau, nay home to Bmndenburg and the Old Des-
sauer with his Camp at Gdttin, the road is free, by the other
side ^thb Oden—Schwerin and Prince Leopold yrging him,
the King did ride away; at what hour, with what suite, or with
what gdventttres (not mostly fabulous) is not known *^but it
was towards Ldwen, ^een mites off (where he crossed Neisse
River, the other 4 ^); and thence towards Oppeln, on the
QdetV^ighteen mlies/arther; knd the pace was sWifr. Leo¬
pold,* 0^ redection^ ordered off ^ ^Squadron of Gens d'Armes
to overtal^ his Majesty, atLdwenor sooner; which they never
^ did. Pamplte, the Kieg threw Frede^orf a wor4 who

334 * FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookJtil^'

r ^oth Ajiil xi^

was aitiong the bag^lg^ tl^fe; “ To Oppefai; bting t^heTu^s<?fi'
jfche Pmjr Writings 1 ”^ W^icft and \

'anoither llerr, who hec%ja& Nicolat^

years) did J and joined thd feiig at Ldi^n j ^hut I ho*^ std^ped v

there. , . '' ''-i'•''' "'

The King’s suite was small, naimeS not gjven; hut Ky the \
time he got to Ldwen, being joined by eayalry fugitives and^e
like, it had got to be seventy persons : too tnany for FiingJ
He selected what was his of them; ordeted the gates to be shut
behind him on all others, and again rode away, .^he Leopold
Squadron of Gens d’Armes did not arrive till after his dej^r-
ture; and having here lost trace of him,' called halt^ and; bil¬
leted for the night. The King speeds silently to Oppelh orf His
excellent bay horse, the worse-mounted gradiajly gMn^ in.' At
Oppeln is a Bridge over the Oder, a free Ctnintry beyond: Ke-
giment La Motte lay, and as the King thinks, still lies tn Op*
peln j—^but in that he is mistaken. Regiment La Motfe is with
the baggage at Pampitr, all this day; and a wandering Htifistdr
Party, some sixty Austrians, have taken possession of Oppeln.
q'he King, and the few who had not yet broken down, arrive
at the Gate of Oppeln, late, under cloud of night: Who goe^?”
cried the sentry from within. “ Prussians I A; Prussian Courier I”
answer they;—and are fired upon through the gratings; and
immediately draw back, and vanish unhurt into Night.again.

** Had those Hussars only let him in 1 ” said Austria aft^wards:
but they had npt such luck. It. was at this point, according to
Valori, that the King burst fortli into audible ejaculations of a
lamentable nature. There is no getting over, then, even to
Brandcnbui'g, and in an insolvent'‘Condition. Not open insol¬
vency and bankrupt disgrace; no, Tuin, add an Austrianjail,
is the one outlook. OA momDim^ 0 Ood* it is too much {c’'m
esi trop )!" with other the like^snatcitei of which

are not intonemvabie in a young
night, in these circumstances; hut whkhyalpr|„knbws.n
of, , except by malicious riunpuf from da§;$»^-rwhohave

misinfbrmed Valori atJout several ■ , ,

: ■ ,The King riding di^ently, wlth ^ ejacqlations,

baolc'.towards tbwen, .c6mcs m an hour,to .the feifl of
. Hilber^idorf, within ai ihi}e*aiid^*fc]ifp,l2ice;': alights'

at th 0 Mill; sends one of hi§ atten^^ts, ^ost the only ohe

. ' S' ' . "j',\ '.'’v ‘'i,''' ''' ' ■ ' Yr

't'r-T- ■ * ' '

BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ.

Chip.X. BATTLE OF MOLLWITZ. 235

'toth ^ril t7ti.

now lelt, to inquite what is in Ldwcn. ^he answer* we know*
is; "A squadron of Gens d’Ames there; furthermore, a Prus¬
sian Adjutant come to say, Victory at MoUwitz T' Upon which
the King mounts again j-^issues into daylight, and concludes
these mythical adventures. That * in Lowen, in the shop at the
‘ corner of the Marketplace, Widow Panzern, subsequently
* Wife Something-eise, made his Majesty a cup ot coffee, and
‘ served a roast fowl along with it,’ cannot but be welcome
news* if true; and that *hi& Majesty got to MoUwit/ again be*
‘ fore darip>that same day,’^® is liable to no controversy.

In this way was Friedrich snatched by Morganteinto Fairy¬
land* carried by Diana to the top of Pindus (or even by Pro¬
serpine to Tartarus, through a bad sixteen liouis), till the Battle-
whirlwind subsided. Friendly imaginative spirits would, in the
antique time, k,ve so construed it: but these moderns were
maheious-valctish, not friendly s and wrapped the matter in
mere stupid worlds of cobweb, which rcquuc burning Fried¬
rich himself was stone-siletit on this matter, all his life after;
but is understood never quitc to have paidoned Schwerin for
the ill-luck of giving him such advice.^"

Friedrich’s adventure is not the only one of that kind at
Mollwitz; there is another equally indubitable,—which will re¬
main obscure, half-mythical to the end of the world. The truth
is, that Bight Wing of the Piu-ssian Army was fallen chaotic,
ruined; and no man, not even one who ha^ seen it, can give
account of what went on there. I he sage Maupertuis, for ex¬
ample, had climbed some tree or place of imilregnabiUty {* tree’
Voltaire calls it, though that is hardljf probable), hoping to see
the Battle there. And ho did see it, much too clearly at last f
In aucb a tide of charging and chasing, on that Right Wiftg
and round all the Field in the Prussian rear; in such wide
bickefihg andboihng of Horse-currents,—which $ing out, round
allth^ Pjtusslan l^r quarters, such a spray of Austrian Hussars
for 0116 dement,—Maupertuil, I have no doubt, wishes much
he were at home, doing his sines and tangents. An Austrian
Hgsear-party gets sight of him, on his tree or other standpoint

^1® *ir»

U Kiicok!, 11. ?8io-J95 (th« otM> tWWaeeouat),' Lawaiix, 1 . Valewri, i 104, &c
&c Irt variottk stages), divti-gctcdly myihic^l of all, wrth the truth

cle ir htfor^i u Is th** lace^ itlsi; oome out, in iVaf skh aftw Sekhner v0m al

$enFrUM«rs&hlem «86o). pp.

*36 FIRST SILESIAN WaR. . 8 »kklt.,

f' ii]r 4 ihv

(Voltaire says elsewhere he was mounted on an assj^ihe mali¬
cious spirit i)—*too certain, the Austrian Hussars got sight of
him: his purse, gold Watch, all he has of movable is giy^n
frankly; all will not do. There ate frills about the man* hhe
laces, cloth; a goodish yellow wig on him, for one thing
their Slavonic dialect, too fatally intelligible by the pantomime
accompanying it, forces sage Maupertuis from his tree or stand¬
point ; the big red face flurried into scarlet, 1 can fancy; or
scarlet and ashy-white mixed; and—Let us draw a veil Over
it I He is next seen shirtless, the once veryhaughtg* blustery,
and now much-humiliated man; still conscious of supreme
acumen, insight and pure science; and, though an Austrian
prisoner and a monster of rags, struggling to believe that he
is a genius and the Trismegistus of mankind. nWhat a picldel
The sage Maupertuis, as was natural, keeps passionately ask¬
ing, of gods and men, for an Officer with some tincture of phi¬
losophy, or even who could speak French. Such Officer is at
last found; humanely advances him money, a shirt and suit
of clothes ; but can in no wise dispense with his going to
Vienna as prisoner. Thither he went accordingly; still in a
mythical condition. Of Voltaire's laughing, there is no end;
and he changes the myth from time to time, on new rumours
coming; and there is no truth to be had from him.^®

Thus much is certain: at Vienna, Maupertuis, prisoner on
parole, glided about for some time in deep eclipse, till the
Newspapers began babbling of him. He confessed then that
he was Maupertuis, Flattener of the Earth; but for the rest,

* told rather a blind story about himself,' says Robihson; spoke
as if he had been of the King's suite, ‘ riding with the King,’
when that Hussar accident befell;—rather a blind story, true
Story being too sad. The Vienna Sovereignties, in the turn
things had taken, were extremely kind; Grand-Duke Franz
handsomely pglled out his own watch, baling wlhat road the
Maupertuis one had gone; dismissed the Maupertuis, with that
and other gifts, home:—^to Brittdny (not to l^russia), till times
calmed for engrafting the* Sciences.

On Wednesday, Friedrich writes this to his Sister;

I ■ - 1 ' , ^

^ 33.4; ami sm Hs latUn f<^ Mtaa weak*

ef;<Kr tbe ttvent.

H^t 4 tn^G*Khieht€, i. 90s; Kotriiasoa^H D4spatck(Vieniiau aad 17418 K* *•)•

Voluir^ tibi supA* v '

P«ip,x. BATTLE OF MOLLWIT 2 . ^37

»th April 1741. •

the first titterance we have from him sjfice thoseVild roamings
about Oppeln and Hilbersdorf Mill:

King to Wilkelmtna (at Baireuth; two days after MoUwiti).

‘ Ohlau, tath April 1741.

‘ My dearest Sister,—I have the satisfaction to inform you that we

* have yesterday’ (day before yesterday; but some of us have only had
one sleep!) ‘ totally beaten the Austiians. They have lost more than

* 5,000 meu, kill^, wounded and prisoners. We have lost Prince
‘ Friedrich, Brother of Margraf Karl; General Schulenburg, Wartens-

* leben of^he Carabineers, and many other Officers. Our troops did
*■ miracles; and the result shows as much. Ii was one of the rudest
‘ Baillca fought within memoiy of man.

‘I am sure you will take i)art in this happiness; and that you will
‘ not doubt of tenderness vith which 1 an. my deaiest Sister,’—
Yours wholly,—

And on the same day there; comes, from Breslau, Jordan’s
Answer to the late anxious little Note from Pogarell; anxie¬
ties now gone, and smoky misery changed into splendour of
flame:

yordan to the King (finds him at Ohiau).

* Breslau, nth April 1741.

* Sire,—Yesterday I was in terrible alaims. The sound of the can-
‘ non heaxd, the smoke of powder visible from the steeple-tops here;
‘ all kd us to suspect that there w as a Battle going on. Glorious con-
‘ fmnation of it this morning! Nothing but icjoicing among all the

* Protestant inhabitants; who had begun to be ir appiehension, from

* the rumours which Ihe other party took pleasuie in spreading. Per-
‘ sons who were in tlie Battle cannot enougli celebiate the coolness and
‘ bravery of your Majesty. For myself, I am at the overllowiug point.

‘ I have run about all day, announcing lids glonous news to the Ber-

* liners who are here. In my hie 1 have never felt a more perfect
' satisfaction.

‘ M. de Camas is liere, very ill for the last tuo days; attack of
‘ fever:, the Doctor hopes to brin^ him through,*—wiiich proved be¬
yond the Doctor: the good Camas died here three days hence (age
sixty-three); an exc^ent Germiui Frenchman, of much sense, dignity
and honesty; familiar to Friedrich from infancy onward.s, and no doubt
regretted by him as deserved. The Widow Camas, a fine old Lady,
Gevnan by birth, wHl again come in view. Jordan continues:

• * One finds, at tlte comer of every street, an orator of the Plebs

* celwtftdng Uie warlike feats of your Majesty’s troops. I have often,

so (Zwntt xxvii. r. xox.

238 FIRST SILESIAN W^R* Book XIL

April sf4Ci.

‘ Ml my idlenep^, aswstetl at these djscouises not trtistic tt

‘ ftiwst be ovme4> tijflt spil^iqg nt<^J^ from the heart ’ * *

Jordan adds in his ne\t Note ‘ This momine; (14th) I qmttcti M
‘ de Cam%s; who it is thouglit, tanuot list the day I hate hardly
‘ left him during Ins illness md Ut that seuxt dost

Neipperg, meanwhile, had filku bifU on Neissc , taken
up a strong encampment in that 1 tighboiirhood, hqlitsthcie-
abouts all summer, ^tietchcd out, is it \sere, m a kind ot
vigil ml dog sleep on tlic tlmsiioltl keeping watch ovci Nubse,
and lues hghting no mou at this time 01 indeed c\ci after,
to speak of And ilw u-* 1 think with dis idv intag® whtn ht
does tiy a little lb li ul bt n (ijand-J)ukt. 1 1 in/ luiu m
"War-mattus, had ot ini') ti nibk it I>el/ra<l once bufou id
■was almost h in ^ofl b) th^ finks i/corjc H hid hc 1 (
ally the btneiit < I Inin ip c nni 1 iri Be fit too se\c
the poor nixn, is the Vu nn i ]n bin w lo In liad omofi 1 s,
though not enough n of Luvcml ’ before I ^

there foi most pul 't bin in bill} i nl iid spend Uk
remainder of his poo ) fe Iic^ s»s ti'ni Ncipi i

noi hiniscll, it tins tiiin Incw the k isi < I ii, ind thi
Would be hiid to lettk vlndi of the i 1 m nh the, Tvor ’ ’ imui
in then hih 1 in ti ssk

Friedrich, in about tl tee, wee,ki h nci,, was fully ready for
opening trenches upon Ijneg did open tienches, aceordmglv,
by moonlight in a o ind rortui 1 il 111 innt i (is uad«is sb 11
sec anon) artd, by ^ i^oioiis c luon t iin^^, M itdf h il ele J/clk
islehuing tome, by tins time, lo t nji th hue speetac h, -
soon possession of Bik , and In Id if thenceforth Neissi
now done nmimed, with \eipp rg vi dmtl) slictehecl upon
the ihieshold of jt Lut the IM uechil Bellei^k,wc >iy h d
come; that was the wei jhb circumstance And beton Nc s <
can be thought of, there’s iwhcje Lurope bickering aloft into
Conflict, embittling itaelf from emd to end, in sequel of Moll
wU/ Battle, a^id si rh a preliminary sea of negotiating, diplo
matic finessing, pulse feeling, projecting and palavering, with
Friedneh for eentie all summeras I ^ish readeis could
imagine without my speaking of it farther! But they cannot,

* Ct'm/rps dt firidinc, Jcidi 99* ^

atoi..xt. THE CO.VENANT-BREAKERS. 339

ApnI-Mjiy 1741

CHAPTER XI,

THE »URSTIKC-P0RTH OF BEDLAMS; BELLEISLC AND THE
BREAKERS OF PRAdMATIC SANCTION.

The Battle of Mollwitz went off like a signal-shot among
the Nations; intimating that they were, one and all, to go bat¬
tling. Which they did, with a witness; making a terrible thing
of It, over all the world, for above seven years to come. Foolish
Nations; doomed to settle their jairing at c ounts m that terrible
manner! Nay, the fewest of them had any accounts, except
imaginary o#es, to settle there at all, and they went into the
adventme graits, spitrred-on by spectralilics of the sick brain,
by phantasms of hope, jihantasms of terror ; and had, sti icily
speaking, no actual business in it whatever.

Not that Molw ? hindled Em ope, Europe was already
kindled for some two years pa''t, --especially smi e the late
Kaiser died, and his Pragmatic S mctioii was superadded to
the other tioubles afoot. But evei miicc tlul Image of yenkims
liar had at last bla/td-up in’ e slow J’.nglish biam, like
fiei) constellation or Sign in the Heavens, synibolK of such
injustices and unendurabilitics, and had lighted the Spanish-
English War, Euiopc was slovily but juitt) surely taking fire.
France “could not sec Spam humbled,” she said: England (in
its own dim feeling, and also in the hut of things') could not
do at all without considerably humbling Spam France, end¬
lessly interested in that Spanish-English m ittcr, was already
sending out fleets, firing shots, - almost, cu altogether, putting
foilli her hand in it. “In which case, will not, must not, Aus¬
tria help us?” thought England,—and was asking, daily, at
Vienna (with intcn$e earnestmss, butvulhout the least icsult),
through Excellency Robinson there, when the late Kaiser ditxi.
Died, poor gentleman; — and left his big Austrian lleiitagcs <
lying, as it were, in the open market-place; elaborately tied by
diplomatic packthread and Pragmatic Sanction, bpt not other- ^
wise protected against the assembled cupidities of mankind! ,
Independently of hfoUwiU, or Sjf Silesia ,iltogether, it was next
to impossible that Europe could long avoid blazing out; espe-
ciall>|^ unless the Spanish-English quarrel got quenched, of which ^
thei;p ^as no likelihood.

But if uot as cause, .then as signal, or as signal and cause
together it properly was), the Battle of Mollwitz gave

I #

440 FIRST SILESIAN ,WAR. Boofcxrl.

^ *74»-

the finishiAg stroke,and set all in motion, T^is^ias 'thelittle
stone broken loose ftom the mountain ;* this, rather than the
late Kaiser’s Death, which Friedrich defined in that manner.
Or at least, this was the first leap it tdok; hitting other stones
big and little, which again hit others with their leaping and
rolling,—till the whole mountainside is in motion und^ law
of gravity, and you behold one wide stone-torrent thundering
towards the valleys; shivering woods, farms, habitations clean
away with it; fatal to any Image of composite Clay and Brass
which it may meet!

There is, accordingly, from this point, a change in Fried¬
rich’s Silesian Adventure: which becomes infinitely more com¬
plicated for him, — and for those that write of him, no less t
Friedrich’s business henceforth is not to be dbnc by direct fight¬
ing, but rather by waiting to see how, and on what side, others
will fight: nor can we describe or understand Friedrich’s busi¬
ness, except as in connexion with the immense, obsolete, and
indeed delirious Phenomenon called Austrian-Succession War,
upon which it is difficult to say any human word. If History,
driven upon Dismal Swamp with its horrors and perils, can
get across unsunk, she will be lucky 1

For, directly on the back of Mollwit*, there ensued, first,
an explosion of Diplomatic activity such as was never seen
before; Excellencies from the four winds taking wing towards
Friedrich; and talking and insinuating, and fencing and fugling,
after their sort,*in that Silesian Camp of his, the centre being
there. A universal rookery of Diplomatists;—whose loud cackle
and cawing is now as if gone mad to us; their work wholly
fallen putrescent and •avoidable, dead to all creatures. And
secondly, in the train of that, there ensued a universal Euio-
pean War, the French and thb English being chief parties in
it; which abounds in battles and feats of arms, spirited but
delirious, afid cannot be got stilled for seven or eight years to
come; and in which FriedriclLand ^lis War swim only as an
intermittent Episode h^ncefortn. What to do with such a War;
how extricate the Episode, and leave the War lying? The War
was at first a good deal mad; and is now, to men’s in^gina-
tion, fallen wholly So; who indeed havi managed njpsily to
forget it; only the Episode (reduced thereby to an w*inteiy
gible state) retaining stiU some claims on them.

24t

Chap. XI. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS.

April'May 1741. •

It is singular into what oblivion th§ huge Pfienomenon
called Austrian-Succession War has fallen ; which, within a
hundred years ago or little more, filled all mortal hearts I The
English were principals on one side; did themselves fight in
it, with their customary fire, and their customary guidance
(“ courageous Wooden Pole with Cocked Hat," as our friend
called it); and paid all the expenses, which were extremely
considerable, and are fell in men's pockets to this day: but
the English have more completely forgotten-it than any other
People. “Battle of Dettingen, Battle of Fontenoy,—^what, in
the Devil’s tfame, were we ever doing there r” the impatient
Englishman asks; and can give no answer, except the general
one: “ Fit of insanity; Delirium Trcmenf, perhaps Furtnsj —
don’t think of it!’’ Of Philippi and Arbela educated English¬
men can render *unt; an<l I am told young gentlemen en¬
tering the Army are pointedly required to say who commanded
at Aigos-Potamos and wrecked the Peloponnesian War: but
of Dettingen and Fontenoy, where is the living Englishman
that has the least notion, or senes for any? The Austrian-Suc-
cession War did veritably rage for eight years, at a terrific
rate, deforming the face of Earth and Heaven; the English
paying the piper always, and founding their National Debt
thereby:—but not even that could prove mnemonic to them ;
and they have dropped the Austrian-Succession War, with one
accord, into the general dust-bin, and are content it should lie
there. They have not, in their language, the least approach
to an intelligible account of it: How it went off, whitherward,
whence; why it was there at all,—are points dark to the Eng¬
lish, and on which they do not wish to be informed. They have
quitted the matter, as an unintelligible huge English-and-
Foreign Delirium (which in good part it was); Delirium unin¬
telligible to them; tedious, not to say in parts, as those of the
Austrian Subsidies, hideous and disgusting to them;—happily
now fallen extinct; and capable of being skipped, !n one’s in¬
quiries into the womiers of tbfs England and this World.
Which, in fact, is a practical conclusion not so unwise as it
looks.

‘ W^rs are not mem^able,’ says 'Sauorteig, ‘ however big they may

* hay^An, whatever rages and miseries they may have occasioned, or

* however many hundreds of thousands they may have been tlie death
^pf,—except when they have something of World-History in them

VOL, IV. •’ R

242 FIRST SILESIAN }VAR. BookXii.

April'May x74*‘

‘ withal. lAhey are found to have been the Iravail-thr^es of great or
‘ considerable changes, %hich continue permanent in tlie world, men of
‘ some curiosity cannot but intjuire into them, keep memory of them.

* But if they were travail-throes that had no birth, who of mortals would

* remember them? Unless perhaps the feats of prowess, virtue, valour
‘ and endurance, they might accidentally give rise to, W'ere very great
‘ indeed. Much greater than the most were, which came out in that

* Austrian-Succession case 1 Wais otherwi'-e aie mere futile transitory
‘ dust-whirl winds stilled m blood; extensive fits of human insanity, such
‘ as we know are too apt to break out;—such as it rather beseems a
‘ faithful Son of the' House of Adam not to speak about again j as in
‘ houses where the grandfather was hanged, the topic ropes is fitly
‘ avoided.

‘ Never again will that War, with ils deliriums, mad outlays of
' blof)d, treasure, and of hope and terror, and far-spread human de-

* stiuclion, rise into visual life in any imagination of living ipan In

* vain shall iJryasdust strive; things mad, chaotift and without asccr-
‘ tainable pur^iosc or lesult, cannot be fixed into human memories.

‘ Fi\ them there by never so many Documentary llisloiies, elaborate
‘ loiig-eaied Pcdantiies, and cunning threads, the poor human memory
‘ has an alchemy agarnsl such ill usage; -it fuiget^ them again; glow.
‘ to know them .as a meie torjior, a stupidity and horror, and nidtiic

‘ lively flics fioin Dryasdust and them.’

Alive to any con siclci able degree, in the poor human im¬
agination, this Editor does not expect or even wish the Aus-
trian-SucccSbion W.ir to be. Enough for him if it could be
understood sufficiently to render his poor History of Friedrich
intelligible. P'or it cnwr.ipa Fricdrich like a world-vortex hence¬
forth ; modifies every step of Ins existence henceforth ; and
apart from it, there is no understanding of his businesb or him.
“ So much as sticks to Friediich that was our original bar¬
gain I Assist loyally, O reader, and we will try to make the
indispensable a mininttirn for you.

W/w was to blame for tJie Austrian-Succession War t

The firit point to be noted is, “Where did it originate ? To
which the answer mainly is, With that l^an Gentleman whom
wc saw with Papers in the (Siil-de-Bceuf on Newyear’s day
last. With Monseigneur the Mar^chal de Belleisle principally;
with the ambitious cupidities and baseless vanities of the French
Court and Nation, as represented by B»Ueisle, George II.'s
Spanish War, if you will examine, had a real necessity in it.
Jenkins’s Ear was the ridiculous outside figure this matter had:

»43

Chap.XI. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS.

Apnl'May 1741. '

Jjenkins's Ear was one final item of it; but the fjpor English
People, in their wrath and bellowings tftiout that small item,
were intrinsically meaning ; “ Settle the account; let us have
that account clcared-up and liquidated ; it has lain too long!"
And seldom were a People more in the right, as readers shall
yet see.

The English-Spanish War had a basis to stand on in this
Universe, The like had .the Prussian-Austrian one; so all men
now admit. . If Friedrich had not business there, what man
ever had in an enterprise he ventured on ? Fiiediich, after
such trial ^nd proof as has seldom been, got his claims on
Schlesien allowed by the Destinies. His claims on Schlcsien;
—and on infinitely higher things ; w'hich were found to be
his and his Nation’s, though he had not been 'n.nibciously think¬
ing of them in m king that .ulventure. For, as my poor Eriend
insists, there arc Laws valid in Earth and in Heaven; and the
great soul of the world is just. Eriedrich had business in this
War ; and Maria Theresa versus Friedrich had likewise cause
to appear in court, and do utmost pleading against him.

But if we ask, What Bclleislc or France and Louis XV.
had to do there ? the answer is rigorously, Nothing. Their
own windy vanities, ambitions, sanctioned not by fact and the
Almighty Powers, but by phantasm and the babble of Ver¬
sailles ; transcendent self-conceit, intrinsically insane ; preten¬
sions over their fcllow-crealiires which were without basis any-
w'herc in Nature, except in the French brain alone : it was
this that brought Bcllcisle and France into a German War.
And Kelleislc and France having gone into an Anti-Pragmatic
War, the unlucky George and his England were dragged into
a Pragmatic one,—quitting their own lousiness, on the Spanish
Main, and hurrying to Germany,—in terror as at Doomsday,
and zeal to save the Kcyslone*of Nature there. That is the
notable point in regard to this Wat: That France is to be
called the author of it, who, alone of all the parties, had no
business there whatever. And the wages due to France for
such a piece of industry,—tht^reader will yet see what wages
France and the other parties got, at the tail of the affair. For
that too is apparent in our day.

We have often ^aid, the Spanish-English War was itself
likely to have kindled Europe; and again Friedrich’s Silesian
War was itself likely,—-France being nearly sure to interfere.

t

344 FIRST SILESIAN ^AR. BookXiL

April-May i74Xi

But ifbothAhese Wars were necessary ones, an^ if Franks
interfered in either of them on the wrong side, the blame wiU
be to France, not to the necessary Wars. France could, itt
no way, have interfered in a more barefacedly unjust and gra¬
tuitous manner than she now did; nor, on any ternts, have
so palpably made herself the author of the conflagration of
deliriums that ensued for above Seven years henceforth. Nay
for above Twenty years,—the settlement of this Silesian Prag¬
matic-Antipragmatic matter (and of Jenkins’s Ear, incident¬
ally, a/ong with this!) not having fairly completed itself till

1763.

Ifo7V Belkisle 7nade Visil to Tadschland; and there 7vas no fit
Hem V the Fowler to welcome l^m. ^

It is very wrong to keep Enchanted Wiggeries sitting in
this world, as if they were things still alive ! By a species of
“conservatism," whnh gets praised in our Time, but which
is only a slothful cowardice, base indifference to truth, and
hatred to trouble m comparison with lies that sit quiet, men
now extensively practise this method of procedure;—little
dreaming how bad and fatal it at all times is. When the
brains are out, things really ought to die;—no matter what
lovely things they weic, and still affect to be, the brains being
out, they actually ought m all cases to die, and with their
best speed get buried. Men had noses, at one time; and
smelt the hori04of a deceased reality fallen putrid, of a once
dear verity become mendacious, phantasmal; but they have,
to an immense degree, lost that organ since, and arc now
living comfortably cheek-by-jowl with lies. Lies of that sad
“ conservative” kind, —and indeed of all kinds whatsoever ;
for that kind is a general mothfcr; and breeds^ with a fecundity
that is appalling, did you heed it much !-—

It was pity that the “Holy Romish Reich, Teutsch by
Nation,” had not got itself buried some ages before. Once it
had brains and life, but now they were out. Under the sway
of Barbarossa, under our old anti-chaotic friend Henry the
Fowler, how different had it been! No fieM for a Belleiftle to
come and sow tares in; no rotten thatch fer a French $ungod
to go sailing about in the middle of, and set fire to 1 Henry,
when the Hungarian Pan-Slavonic Savagery came upon hinij

Chap XI THE toVENANT BREAKERS. 245

»April-May 17^1

had got ready m the interim, and mangy dog was the
** tribute’ he gave them, followed by the due extent of broken
crowns, since they would not be content with that That was
the due of Belleisle too, -—had there been a Henry to meet him
with It, on his crossing the marches, m Trier Country, m Spring
1741 “There, you anaichir Upholstery-Btlus, fancying your¬
self God of the Sun, there is what Teutschland owes you Go
home with that, and mmd youi own business, which I am told
IS plentiful, if } ou had eye for it ’

But tkt sad truth is, for above Four rtnturies now,—and
especially for Three, since little Kaiser Kail IV ' g ive away all
the moneys of it,’ m his pressing occasions, this Holy Romish
Reict^ leutsch by Nation, has been mor^ uid ever more be¬
coming an iin i nary quantity , the Kaisership of it not cap¬
able of being worn by anybody, except a Hapsburger who had
resources otherwise his ow n The fact is palpable And Aus¬
tria, an Anti Reformation Entity “ conservative ’ in that bad
sense, of slothfully abhorri ^ trouble in comparison with lies,
had not found the poison more malodorous m this particular
than in many others And hid cherished its “ Holy Romish
Reich” grown «;«holy, phantasmal, like so much else m Aus-^
trian things , and had held firm gup of it, these Three Hun¬
dred years, and found it a furtheroome and suitable thing,
though sensible it was more and more becoming an Enchanted
Wiggery pure and simple Nor have the consequences failed,
they never do Belleisle, Louis XIV , Henrj II, Frani^ois I.;
It IS long since the I* rench have known this state of matters;
and been in the habit of breaking m upon it, fomenting in¬
ternal discontents, getting up unjust JVars,—with or without
advantage to France, but with endless disadvantage to Ger¬
many. Schmalkaldic Wai, fhirty-Years War, Louis XIV ’s
Wars, which brought Alsace and the other fine cuttings , late
Polish-Election War, and its Lorraine, Austrian Succession
War many are Jhe wits kindled on poor Teutschland by
neighboui France, and laife is the sum of woes to Europe
and to it, chargeable to that score Which appears even yet
no^to be completed ^—Perhaps not, even yet I* or it is the
pej^ijty of being Iqyal to Enchanted Wiggcries, of living cheek-
by-jowl with hes of a peaceable quality, and stuffing your nos¬
trils, and searing your soul, against the accursed odour they
aU have!—For f can assure you the curse of Heaven does

246 FIRST SILESIAN VVAR. Book^IL

4^ril-May 174*.

dv^ell in one and all oV them ; and the son of Adam canndt too
soon get quit of tlieir bad partnership, cost hun what it may.

Belleisle’s Journey as Sungod began in March,—‘end of
March J741,’ no date of a day to be had for that memorable
thing : -— and he went gyrating about through thb German
Courts, for almost a year afterwards ; his course rather erratic*
but always in a splendour as of Belus, with those Hundred-
and-thirty French Lords and Valets, and the glory of Most
Christian King irradiating him. Very diligent for the first six
months, till September or October nexl^it which we may call
his seed-time; and by no means resting after nine or twelve
months, while the harrowing and hoeing went on. In January
1742, he had the great satisfaction to see a Havarian Kaiser
got, instead of an Austrian; and everywhere the fruit of his
diligent husbandry begin to beard fairly above ground, into a
crop of facts (like armed men from dragon’s teeth), and “ the
pleasure of ih-d'—^whom was it the pleasure of?—“prosper in
his hands." Belleisle was a pretty man ; but I doubt it was
not “ the Lord” he was doing the pleasure of, on this occasion,
but a very Different Personage, disguised to resemble him in
poor Belleisle’s eyes !—

Austria was not dangerous to France in late times, and
now least of all; how far from it,—humbled by the loss of
Lorraine ; and now as it were bankrupt, itself in danger from
all the world. Aijd France,, so far as express Treaties could
bind a Nation, was bound to maintain Austria in its present
possessions. The bitter loss of Lorraine had been sweetened
to the late Kaiser by th.3t solitary drop of consolation;—as his
Failure of a Life had been, poor man; “ Failure the most of
me has been; but I have got Fragmatic Sanction, thanks to
Heaven, and even France has signed it!” Loss of Lorraine^
loss of Elsassifjloss of the Three Bishopricks ; since Karl V.’s
times, not to speak of earlier, there has beenjuere loss on loss:

, —and now is the time to^ consummate it, think Belleisle and
France, in spite of Treaties.

Towards humbling or extinguishing Austria, Belleisle has
two preliminary things to do: Firsts Break th* Pragmatic ^bsc-
tion, and get everybody to break it; second. Guide the Kaiseri
wahl (Election of a Kaiser), so that it issue, not in Grand-Duke
Franz, Maria Theresa's Husband, as all exp^t it will, but in

THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 247

,^ril-Majr » 743 t. ^

another friendly to France:—say in l^arlAlberf of Bavaria,
whose Family have long been good clients of ours, dependent
on us for a living in the Political World. Belleisle, there is
little doubt, had from the first cast his eye on this unlucky
Karl Albert for Kaiser; but is uncertain as to carrying him-
Belleisle wjll take another if he must; Kur-Sachsen, for ex¬
ample;—‘any other, and all others, only not the Grand-Duke:
that is a point already fixed with Belleisle, though he keeps it
well in the background, and is careful not to hint it till the
time come.^

In regard to Pr^natic Sanction, Belleisle and France
foiind no difficulty ,—-ot the difficulty only (which we hope must
have been considerable) of eating their own Covenant in be¬
half ofPragmat’” Sanction; and declaring, which they did
without visible blush, That it was a C’ovcnant including, if not
expressly, then tacitly, as all huntan covenants do, this clause,

" Salvo jure iertii ^Saving the rights of Thud Parties),"—that
is, of Electors of Bavaxia, aijd others who may object against
it 1 0 soul of honour, 0 first Nation of the Universe, was

there ever such a subterfuge? Here is a field of llowcring
corn, the biggest in the woikl, begirt with claboiatc ring-fence,
many miles of firm oak-jialing pilc hed and buttressed ;—the
poor gentleman now dead gave you his Lorraine, and almost
his life, for swearing to keep-up said paling. And you do keep
it up,—all except six yards ; through which the biggest team
on the highway can drive freely, and the paltriest cadger’s ass ^
can step in for a bellyful! * •

It appears, the first Nation of the Universe had, at an
early period of their consultations, hit upon this of Salvo jute
iertii^ as the method of eating their Covenant, before an en¬
lightened public. 1 And they jiersistcd in it, there being no
other for them. An enlightened public grinned sardonically,
and was not taken in; but, as so many others were eating
their'Covenants, under equally poor subterfuges! the enlight¬
ened public could* not grin < 4 ong on any individual,—could
only gape mutely, with astonishment,* on all. A glorious ex¬
ample of veracity and human nobleness, set by the gods of
thislower world to their gazing populations, who could read

• * aoth January r/ai, in their Note of Ceremony, recogm<iing M.'uria Theresa as
pueen of Hut^tary, Note which had been due so yeiy long iAdt'/Hn^, it 2^), there
ts cnniootis silence on Firagmatic SancUon, ‘beginning of M.uruh,' there U virtual
avowal of Salvo Jure fill t79};*-open avowal on Belleislc’s advent (ib. 305).

FIRST SILESIAN fWAR.

248

Book XIL
Apnl-M«iy 1741.

in the Gaj^ttes ! What is truth, falsity, human Kingship, hu¬
man Swmdlership ?* Are the Ten Commandments only a figure
of speech, then ? And it was some beggarly Attorney-/)^//
that built this sublunary world and us ^ Questions might rise;
had long been rising ,—but now there was about enough, and
the respotise to them was falling due and Belleisle himself,
what is very notable, had been appointed to get i*eady the re¬
sponse Belleisle (little as Belleisle dreamt of it, m these high
Enterprises) was ushering in, by way of response, a Ragnarok^
or Twilight of the Gods, which, as “ French Revolution, or
Apotheosis of Sansculothsm," is now well known%—and that
is something to consider of I

Downbreak of Pragjuatic Sanction; Manner of thichief
Artists in handling their Covenants^.

The operation once accomplished on its own Pragmatic
Covenant, France found no difficulty with the others. Every¬
body was disposed to eat his Covenant, who could see advan¬
tage m so doing, after that idmirablt example. The difficulty
of France and Belleisle lather was, to keep the hungry parties
back " Don’t eat youi Covenant till the proper time, pa¬
tience, we say! ’ A most sad Miscellany of Royalties, coming
all to the point, “ Will you eat your Covenant, Will you keep
It?”—^and eating, nearly all, in fact, wholly all that needed to
eat.

On the first Invasion o^ Silesia, Maria Theresa had indig¬
nantly complained in every Court, and pointing to Pragmatic
Sanction, had demanded that such Law of Nature be complied
with, according to covcijaiit What Maria Theresa got by this
circuit of the Courts, ever>body still knows. Except England,
which was willing and Holland, which was unwilling, all
Courts had answered, more or less uneasily; ** Law of Nature,
—humph, yps!”—and, far from doing anything, not one of
them would with certainty promise to d^ anything. From
England alone and her fittle Kihg (to whom Pragmatic Sanc¬
tion IS the Palladium of Human Freedoms and the Keystone
of Nature) could she get the least help. The rest hung back;
would not open heait or pocket; waited till they saw. «'Bhey
do now see \ now that Belleisle has done his feat of Covenant¬
eating I—

Chap, XI. THIl CpVENANT-BREAKERS. 249

AprUoMay X741.

*■ Eleven great Powers, some count Tl^^tecn, some Twelve,®
-—but no two agree, and hardly one agrees with himself;—
enough, the Powers of Europe, from Naples and Madrid to
Russia and Sweden, have all signed it, let us say a Dozen or
a Baker's-Dozen of them. And except our little English Pa¬
ladin alone, whose interest and indeed salvation seemed to him
to lie that Vay, and who needed no Pragmatic Covenant to
guide him, nobody whatever distinguished himself by keeping
it. Between'December 1740, when Maria Theresa set-up her
cries in all Courts, on to April 1741, England, painfully drag¬
ging HollaffU with her, had alone of the Bakcr’s-Dozen spoken
word of disapproval; hiuch less done act of hindrance. Two
especially (France and Bavaria, not to mention Spain) had
done the reverse, and disowned, and declared against, Pragma¬
tic Sanction. Ant after the Battle of Mollwit/, when the ‘little
stone’ took its first leap, and set. all thundering, then came,
like the inrush of a fiishion, throughout that high Miscellany
or Baker's-Dozen, the general eating of Covenants (which was
again quickened in August, for a reason we shall sec): and
before November of that Year, there was no Covenant left to
eat. Of the Raker’s-Dozen nobody remained but little George
the Paladin, dragging Holland painfully along with him;—
and Pragmatic Sanction had gone to water, like icc in a June
day, and its beautiful crystalline qualities and prismatic col¬
ours were forever vanished from the world. Will the reader
note a point or two, a personage or two, in this sordid pro¬
cess,—not for the process’s sake, which is very sordid and
smells badly, but for his own sake, to elucidate his own course
a little in the intricacies now coming or come upon him and
me? •

1°. Elecior of Bavaria ,—Karl Albert of Baiern is by some
counted as a Signer qf the Pragmatic Sanction, and by others
not; which occasions that discrepancy of sum-total in the
Books. And he did once, in a sense, sign it, he ^d his Bro¬
ther of Koln; but, before the laj^ Kaiser’s death, he had openly
drawn back from it again ; and counted himself a Non-signer.
Signer or not, he, for his part, lost no moment (but rather the
contrary) in openly protesting against it, and signifying that
he noiifr would ackifuwledge it. Of this the reader saw some¬
thing, at the time of her Hungarian Majesty's Accession. Date

* ^hOsH, U. 386: Adeluug, list, ilj xsj.

250 FIRST SILESIANfWAR* Bb6tX|*.

and circmftstances it, which deserve remembertig, ai^e more
precisely these : October 20th, 1740, Karl Albert’s Ambassa¬
dor, Perusa by name, wrote to Karl from Vienna, announcing
that the Kaiser was just dead. From Miinchen, on the 21 St,
Karl Albert, anticipating such an event, but not yet knowing
it, orders Perusa, in case of the Kaiser's decease^ which was
considered probable at Miinchen, lo demand instant, audience
of the proper party (Kanzler Sinzendorf), and there openly
lodge his Protest. Which Perusa did, punctually in all points,
—^no moment lost, but rather the contrary, as wg said! Let
poor Karl Albert have what benefit thej'e is in that fact. He
was, of all the Anti-Pragmatic Covenant-Breakers (if he ever
fairly were such), the only one that proceeded honourably,
openly and at once, in the matter; and he was, of therfi all, by
far the most unfortunate.

This is the poor gentleman whom Bclleisle had settled on
for being Kaiser. And Kaiser he became; to his frightful
sorrow, as it proved : Ins crown Jike a crown of burning iron,
or little better 1 There is little of him in the Books, nor does
one desire much; a tall aquiline type of man; much the gentle¬
man in aspect; and in reality, of decorous serious deportment,
and the wish to be high and dignified. He had a kind of
right, too, in the Anti-Pragmatic sense; and was como of
Imperial kindred,—Kaiser Ludwig the Bavarian, and Kaiser
Rupert of the Pfalz, called Rupert KU.mm, or Rupert Sriiith's-
vice, if any reader now remember him, were both of his ances¬
tors. He might fairly pretend to Kaisership and to Austrian
ownership,—had he otherwise been equal to such enterprises.
But, in all ambitions and attempts, howsoever grounded other¬
wise, there is this strict question on the threshold; “ Are yoii
of weight for the adventure ; £^re not you far too light for it
Ambitious persons often slur this question; and get squelched
to pieces, by bringing the Twelve Labours of Hercules on Un-
herculean blcks! Not every one is so lucky as our Friedrich
in that particular,—whose baoi:, though "with difficulty^ helil
out. Which poor KarF Albert’s never had much likelihood t6
do. Few mortals in any age have offered such an exairmle of
the tragedies which Ambition has in store for her votaries;
and -what a matter Hope Fuljillcd may bl to the unreff^tmg
Son of Adam.

We said, he had a kind of fight to Agstria, withal. He

Chap.X!. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 251

descended b^the female line from Kaiser dPerdinant? I. (as did
Kur-Sachson, though by a younger Daughter than Karl Albert’s
Ancestress); and he appealed to Kaiser Ferdinand’s Settle¬
ment of the Succession, as a higher than any subsequent Prag¬
matic could be. Upon which there hangs an incident; still
famous "to Qprman readers. Karl Albert, getting into Public
Argument in this way, naturally instructed Perusa to demand
sight of Kaiser Ferdinand’s Last Will, the tenor of which was
known by authentic Copy in Mimchen, if not elsewhere among
thc„kindred^ After some delay, Perusa (4th November 1740),
summoning the other Excellencies to witness, got sight of the
Will; to his horror, there stood, in the cardinal passage, in¬
stead of "*fnannliche'' (male descendants), (lawfully-

begotte^descendants),—fatal to Karl Albert’s claim! Nor could
he prove that the Parchirient had been scraped or altered,
though he kept trying and examining for some days. He with¬
drew thereupon, by order, straightway from Vienna ; testifying
in dumb-show what he thouyiht. “It is your Copv that is
false,” cried the Vienna people : “it has been foisted on you,
with this wrong word in it; done by somebody (your friend,
the Excellency Herr von Hartmann, shall we guess ?), wishing
to curry favour with ambitiou.s foolish pej sons !” Such was the
Austrian story. Perhaps in Miinchen itself their Copyist was
not known;—for aught I learn, the Copy was made long since,
and the Copyist dead. Hartmann, n.amcd as Copyist by the
Vienna people, made emphatic public answer : “ Never did I
copy it, or see it!” And there rose great argtlmcnt, which is
not yet quite ended, as to the question, “ Original falsified, or
Copy falsified?”—and the modern vote, I believe, rather clearly
is. That the Austrian Officials had done* it — in a case of ne¬
cessity.* Possible? But you,wilMose your soul!" said the
Parson once to a poor' old Gentlewoman, English by Nation,
who refused, in dying, to contradict some domestic fiction, to
give-up some domestic secret: " But you will lose your soul,

, MadamTush, '^hat signifinss my poor silly soul compared
witlr the honour of the family *

.2^. King Friedrich. —-King Friedrich may be taken as the

3^ Ad^iwg, ii 150-154 (i4th-20th Novenibcr 1740), gives, the public facts, without
cof^e^iwy. Hormayr {A fUtHonem am dem Ta^etitch eines alien Pil^«rsinanms,
Jehu; iS45j>.i. our- old Hormayr of the Austrian Plutarch, but now Aiio-

S aouii, and iti Opposidon humour) coustdora the case nearly proved against Aus-
^ and that Burteimein aad we Bo^sel, a pillar of the Church, were coucerued

252 FIRST SILESIAN •WAR. Bo6km

f Apiil-May

Anti-PragAatic next»in order of time. He too ket not a mo¬
ment, and proceeded openly; no quirking to be charged upon
him. His account of himself in this matter alwdys was : “By
the Treaty of Wusterhausen, 1726, unquestionably Prussia
undertook to guarantee Pragmatic Sanction ; the late Kaiser
undertaking in return, by the same Treaty, to secure Berg and
Jiilich to Prussia, and to have some progress made in it within
six months from signing. And unquestionably also, the late
Kaiser did thereupon, or even had already done, precisely the
reverse; namely, secured, so far as in him was possible, Berg
and Julich to Kur-Pfalz. Such Treaty, having *m this way
done suicide, is dead and become zero; and I am free, in
respect of Pragmatic Sanction, to do whatever shall seem
good to me. My wish was, and would still be, To maintain
Pragmatic Sanction, and even to support it by 100,000
men, and secure the Election of the Grand-Duke to the Kai-
sership,—were my claims on Silesia once liquidated. But
these have no concern with Pragmatic Sanction, for or against:
these are good against whoever may fall Heir to the House of
Austria, or to Silesia ; and my intention is, that the strong
hand, so long clenched upon my rights, shall open itself by
this favourable opportunity, and give them out.” That is Fried¬
rich’s case. And in truth the jury everywhere has to find,—
so soon as instructed, which is a long process in some sections
of it (in England, for example),—That Pragmatic Sanction
has not, except helpless lamentations, “ Alas that )^ou should
be here to insist upon your rights, and to open fists long
closed!"—the least word to say 10 Friedrich.

3°. Termagant of -Perhaps the most distracted of

the Anti-Pragmatic subterfuges was that used by Spain, when
the She-dragon or Termagant saw good to eat her Covenant;
which was at a very early stage. The Termagant's poor Hus¬
band is a Bourbon, not a Hapsburg at all: “ But has not he.
fallen heir fo the Spanish Hapsburgs; become all one as they,
an alter-ego of the Spanish Hapsburgs^’ asks she. “And
the Austrian Hapsburgs being out, do not the Spanish Haps¬
burgs come in ? He, I say, this . 5 <?«r 3 tf«-Hapsburg, he is the
real Hapsburg, now that the Austrian Branch is gonePresi¬
dent he of the Golden Fleece” (whiiili a certain •'Arch¬
duchess,” Maria Theresa, had been meddling with); “ Proprie¬
tor, he, of Austrian Italy, and of all or mqst things Austrian T.

Chap. XL THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 253

April'liflay 1741.

-*s^d produces Documentary Covenants of Philip 1 >L with his
Austrian Cousins; “to which Philip,” said the Termagant,
“ we Bourbons surely, if you consider it, are Heir and Alter-
Ego 1 ” Is not this a curious case of testamentary right; hu¬
man greed obliterating personal identity itself?

Belleisle had a great deal of difficulty, keeping the Terma¬
gant back till things were ripe. Her hope practically was,
Baby Carlos being prosperous King of Naples this long while,
to get the Milanese for another Baby she has,—Baby Philip,
whom she once thought of making Pope ;—and she is eager
beyond measure to have a stroke at the Milanese. “Wait!”
hoarsely whispers Belleisle to her ; and* she can scarcely wait.
Maria Theresa’s Note of Announcement, “New Queen of Hun¬
gary, mjiy it please you!” the French, as wi' saw, were very
long in answering* The Term.igant did not answer it at all;
complained on the contrary, “ What is this, Madam I Golden
Fleece, you?”—and, early in Maich, mfornied mankind that
she was Spanish Hapsburg, the genuine article; and sent off
Excellency Montijos, a little i*an of great expense, to assist at
the Election of a proper Kaiser, and be useful to Belleisle in
the great things now ahead.^

4°, King of Poland. —The most ticklish card in Belleisle’s
game, and probably the greatest fool of these Anti-Pragmatic
Dozen, was Kur-Sachsen, King of Poland. He, like Karl
Albert Kur-Baiern, derives from Kaiser Ferdinand, though by
a younger Daughter, and has a like claim on the Austrian
Succession ; claim nullified, however, by that, small circum¬
stance itself, but which he would fain mend by one makeshift
or another; and thinks always it must surely be good for
something. This is August III., this* King of Poland, as
readers know; son of August the Strong: Papa made him
change to the Catholic religioit so-called,—for the sake of
getting Poland, which proves a very poor possession to him.
Who knows what damage the poor creature may have got by
that sad operation ;-*-which all ^axony sighed to the heart on
hearing of; for it was always hoped he had some real religion,
and would deliver them from that Babylonish Captivity again !
He married Kaiser Joseph I.’s Daughter,—Maria Theresa’s

♦ SpMKSGolden-Fleece pretensions, 17th January 17^1 (Adclung, ii. yqt, 214);
• PuWishes At Paris,' in March (>b. 203), and on tlie 23a March accredits Monlijus
(ib. 2p3): Italian Wai, held back by l 3 elleisie and the Knglish fleets, cannot get be-
gutt t 4 l October following,

254 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXlt

AprtKMay 1742.

Cousin, an^by an Elder Brother ;—this, too, ought surely fco
be something in the Anti-Pragmatic line? It is true, Kur-Baiern
has to Wife another Daughter of Kaiser Joseph’s; but she is
the younger : “ I am senior thercy at least!” thinks the foolish
man.

Too true, he had finally, in past years, to sign PragTnatic
Sanction; no help for it, no hope without it, in *that Polish-
Election time. He will have to eat his Covenant* therefore,
as the first step in Anti-Pragmatism ; and he is extremely in
doubt as to the H ow, sometimes as to the Whether. And shifts
and whirls, accordingly, at a great rate, in these ^ nonths and
years; now on Maria Ittieresa’s side, deluded by shadows from
Vienna, and getting into Russian Partition - Treaties; anon
tickled by Belleisle into the reverse posture; then again re¬
versing. An idle, easy-tempered, yet gret^dy creature, who,
what with religious apostasy in early manhood, what with flac¬
cid ambitions since, and idle gapings after shadows, has lost
helm in this world; and will make a very bad voyage for self
and country.

His Palinurus and chief Counsellor, at present and after¬
wards, is a Count von Bruhl, once page to August the Strong;
now risen to such height: Bruhl of the Three-hundred and
Sixty-five suits of clothes; whom it has grown wearisome §ven
to laugh at. A cunning little wretch, they say, and of deft
tongue; but surely among tiie unwisest of all the Sons of Adam
in that day, and such .1 Palinurus as seldom steered before.
Kur-Sachsen, b^ing Reichs-Vicai in the Northern Parts,-—(Kur-
Baiern and Kur-Pfiilz, as frierds and good Wittelsbacher Cou¬
sins surely ought, in a crisis like this, have agreed to be Joints
Vicars in the Southcra Parts, and no longer quarrel upon it),
—-Kur-Sachsen has a good deal to do in the Election prelud-
ings, formalities and prearran^ements; and is capable, as Kur-
Pfalz and Cousin always are, of serving as chisel to BeUeisle’s
mallet, in such points, which will plentifully turn up.

5°. Kin^s^ of Sardinia. —Reichs-Vicar ^ the Italian parts i$
Charles Amadeus King of Sardinia (tough old Victor's Son,
whom we have heard of): an office mostly honorary; suit¬
able to the important individual who keeps the Door, of the
Alps. Charles Amadeus had signed the^Magmatic Sanction;
but eats his Covenant, like the others, on example of France;
-^having, as he now bethinks himself, claims on the Milanese.

Chap. XI. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 255

April.May 1741. *

There are claimants on the Milanese, then; ftie Spanish
Temiagant, and he? Yes; and. they will ftave their difficulties,
their extensive tusslings in Italian War and otherwise, to make
an adjustment of it; and will give Belleislc (at least the Door¬
keeper will) an immensity of trouble, in years coming.

In this way do the I’ragmatic people eat their own Cove¬
nant, one after the other, and are not ashamed; —till all have
eaten, or as good as eaten; and, almost within year and day,
Pragmatic Sanction is a vanished quantity; and poor Kaiser
Karl’s life-labour ij> not worth the sheep-skin and stationery it
cost him. •History reports in sum, That ' nobody kept the
' Pragmatic Sanction ; that the few’ (strictly speaking, the one)

* who acted by it, would have done precisely the same, though
‘ there Jiad never been such a Document in existence,' To
George II., it is, ^as and will be, the Keystone of Nature, the
true Anti-French palladium of mankind; and he, dragging the
unwilling Dutch after him, will do gre.at things for it: but no¬
body else does anything at all. Might we hope to bid adieu
to it, in this manner, and ne\ei to mention it again!—

Document more futile there had not been in Nature, nor
will be. Friedrich had not yet fought at Mollwitii: in assertion
of his Silesian claim, when the poor Pope,—poor soul, who
had no Covenant to eat, but took pattern by others,—claimed,
in solemn Allocution, Parma and Piac<-nza for the Holy Sec,^
All the world is claiming. Of the Court of Wurtemberg and
its Protestings, and ‘ extensive Deduction’ about nothing at all,
wo do not speak nor of Montmorency clainiing Luxemburg,
of which ho is Titular “Duke;” nor of Monsignore di Guas-
talla claiming Mantua; nor of—In brief, the fences arc now
down; a broad French gap in those miles of elaborate paling,
which are good only as firewood henceforth, and any ass may
rush in and claim a bellyful. Grdut arc the works of Belleisle I —-

Concerning the Imperial Election (Kaiserwahl) that is to be;

Candidates fog Kaisership.

At' equal step with the ruining of Pragmatic Sanction goes
on that spoiling of Grand-Duke Franz's Election to the Kaiser¬
ship ; these two oper^ations run parallel; or rather, under dif-
ferentTSrms, they are one and the same operation. *' To assist,

* Ad 4 w>gi il $76 (sth, April 1741). ® Ib. xi. 195,403.

e

256 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Bookxn.

April-May 1741.

as a Most*thristian^ neighbour ought, in picking out the tit
Kaiser/’ was Belleisle's ostensible mission; and indeed this does
include virtually his whole errand. Till three months after
Belleisle’s appearance in the business, Grand-Duke Franz never
doubted but he should be Kaiser; Friedrich’s ^offers to help
him in it he had scorned, as the offer of a fifth wheel to his
chariot, already rushing on with four. ‘‘Here is Kur-Bohmen,
Austria’s own vote," counts the Grand-Duke; “ Kur-Sachsen,
doing Prussian-Partition Treaties for us; Kur*Trier, our fat
little Schdnborn, Austrian to the bone; Kur-Mainz, important
chairman, regulator of the Conclave; here are F6ur Electors
for us: then also Kur-Pfalz, he surely, in return for the Berg-
Jiilich service; finally, and liable to no question, Kur-Hanover,
little George of England with his endless guineas and re..ources,
a little Jack-the-Gianikiller, greater than a?l Giants, Paladin
of the Pragmatic and us: here are Six Electors of the Nine.
Let Brandenburg and the Bavarian Couple, Kur-Baiern and
Kur-Koln, do their pleasure!" This was Grand-Duke Franz’s
calculation.

By the time Belleisle had been three months in Germany,
the Grand-Duke’s notion had changed; and he began ‘apply¬
ing to the Sea-Powers,’ ‘ to Russia,’ and all round. In Belle-
isle’s sixth month, the Grand-Duke, after such demolition of
Pragmatic, and such disasters and contradictions as had been,
saw his case to be desperate; though he still stuck to it, Aus«
trian-like,—or rather, Austria for him stuck to it, the Grand-
Duke being carrless of such things; — and indeed, privately,
never did give in, even aftet the Election, as we shall have to
note.

The Reich itself being mainly a Phantasm or Enchanted
Wiggery, its “ Kaiser-Choosirfg" -—now getting

under way at Frankfurt, with preliminary outskirts at Regens*
burg, and m the Chancery of Mainz,—is very phantasmal, not
to say ghastly; and forbidding,, pot inviting, to the human eye.
Nine Kurfiirsts, Choosers ofTeutschland'sreal Captain, in non^
of whom is there much thought for Teutschland or its interests,
— and indeed in hardly more than One of whom (Prussian
Friedrich, if readers will know it) is theie the least tE-ught
that way; but, in general, much indifference to things divine
or diabolic,, and thought for one’s own paltry profits and losses

Chap. XL THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 257

April-Ma> 174.1.

tfnly! So has long been; ana sq it no^v is, morwthan usual.
—Consider again, are Enchanted Wiggeries a beautiful thing,
in this extremely earnest world?—

The Kaiserwahl is an affair depending much on proces¬
sions, proclamations, on delusions optical, acoustic; on pala-
verings, manoeuvrings, holdings back, then hasty pushings for¬
ward; and*indccd is mainly, in more senses than one, under
guidance of the Prince of the Power of the Air. Unbeautiful,
like a World-Parliament of Nightmares (if the reader could
conceive such a thing); huge formless, tongueless monsters of
that spcciA, doing their “three readings,”—^under Presidency
or qhief-pipership as aboye! Bellcisic, for his part, is consum¬
mately skilful, and manages as only himself could. Keeps his
game well hidden, not a hint or whisper of it except in studied
proportions ; spreads out his lines, his birdlime; tickles, en¬
tices, astonishes; goes liis rounds, 4 ikc a subtle Fowler, taking
captive the minds of men; a Phoebus-Apollo, god of melody
and of the sun, filling his net with birds.

I believe, old Kur-Pfalz, foi the sake of French neighbour¬
hood, and Borg-and-Julich, were there nothing more, was very
helpful to him;—in March past, when the Election was to have
been, when it would have gone at once in favour of the Grand-
Duke, Kur-Pfalz got the Election “postponetl a little.” Post¬
poning, procrastinating; then again pushing violently on, when
things are ripe: Bclleisle has only to give signal to a fit Kur-
Pfalz. In all Kurfurst Courts, the French Ambassadors sing
diligently to the tune Bellcisle sets them; aniCourts give ear,
or will do, when the charmer himself arrives.

Kur-Sachsen, as above hinted, was his most delicate opera¬
tion, in the charming or trout-tickling way. And Kur-Sachsen,
—and poor Saxony, ever since, — knows if he did not do it
well I “ Deduct this Kur-SachsCn from the Austrian side," cal¬
culates Belleisle; “add him to ours, it is almost an equality of
votes. Kur-Baiem, our own Imperial Candidate; Kur-Koln, his
Brother; Kur-Pfalz« by geneajpgy his Cousin (not to mention
Bcrg-JuUch matters); here are three Wittelsbachers, knit to¬
gether ; three sure votes; King Friedrich, Kur-Brandenburg,
thereis a fourth; and if Kur-Sachsen would join?” But who
knov&if Kur-Sachsan will! The poor soul has himself thoughts
of "being Kaiser; then no thoughts, and again some: thoughts
which Belleisle knows how to handle. “ Yes, Kaiser you, your

VO)u IV.

258 FIRST SILESIAN,WAR. Booixil.

April-May 1741,

Majesty; excellent l”^ And sets to consider the methods: Hm,
ha, hmt Think, your Majesty: ought not that Bohemian Vote
to he excluded, for one thing? Kur-Bohmen is fallen into the
distaff, Maria Theresa herself cannot vote. Surely question
will rise. Whether distaff can, validly, hand it over to distaffs
husband, as they are about doing? Whether, in fact, Kur-
Bohmen is not in abeyance for this time ?'’ ** So f'' answered
Kur-Sachsen, Reichs-Vicarius. And thereupon meetings were
summoned; Nightmare Committees ,sat on this matter under
the Reichs-Vicar, slowly hatching it; and at length brought
out, “ Kur-Bohmen not transferable by the distafi*; Kur-Boh-
men in abeyance for this time.” Gre^^tly to the joy of Belleisle ;
infinitely to the chagrin of her Hungarian Majesty,—^who de¬
clared it a crying injustice (though I believe legally done in
every point); and by ,and by, even made it plea of Nullity,
destructive to the Election altogether, when her Hungarian
Majesty’s affairs looked up again, and the world would listen
to Austrian sophistries and obstinacies. This was an essential
service from Kur-Sachsen.'^

After which Kur-Sachsen’s own poor Kaisership died away
into “ Hm, ha, hm!” again, with a grateful Bclleisle. Who
nevertheless dextrously retained Kur-Sachsen as ally; tickling
the poor wretch with other baits. Of the Kaiser he had really
meant all along, there was dead silence, except between the
parties; no whisper heard, for six months after it had been
agreed upon; none, for two or near three months after formal
settlement, and f.igning and sealing. Karl Albert’s Treaty with
Belleisle was i8th May 1741; and he did not declare himself
a Candidate till ist-4th July following.® Belleisle understands
the Nightmare Parliaments, the electioneering art, and how to
deal with Enchanted Wiggeries. More perfect master, hi that
sad art, has not turned up ori record to one’s afflicted mind.
Such a Sungod, and doing such a Scavengerism I Belleisle, in
the sixth rnunth (end of August 1741) feels sure of a majority.
How Belleisle managed, after ^that, to checkmate George of
England, and make even George vote for him, and the Kaisen-
wahl to be unanimous against Grand-Duke Franz, will be seen.
Great are Belleisle’s doings in this world, if they were <^aseful
either to God or man, or to Belleisle himjtelf first of aJU •

7 Began, uidistitictly, 'in M^rch’ langruidJic^ serme mortt!ts'(Atl<dtinS» it.

' November 41!^' was Settled in tn« negative, 'Kur«ndhmej} not to vote

{Marin Thertsiem p. 470.). * A 4 e|ung, !i. 357, 4St.

Chap. XI. TriE COV^ENANT-BREAKERS. 259

Apnl-May 1741.

• * w

TmtschiandHo be carved ittio something ojk Symmetry^ should
the BeUeisle Bnterprises succeed.

Belleisle's schemes, in the rear of all this labour, are grandi¬
ose to a degree. Men wonder at the First Napoleon’s mad
notions in that kind. But no Napoleon, in the fire of the re-
volutionafy Element; no Sham-Napoleon, in the ashes of it;
hardly a Parisian Journalist of imaginative turn, speculating on
the First Nation of the Universe and what its place is,—could
go higher than did this grandiose Belleisle; a man with clear
thoughts in ^is head, under a torpid Louis XV. Let me see,
thinks Belleisle. Germany with our Bavarian for Kaiser; Ger¬
many to be cut into, say, Four little Kingdoms; 1°. Bavaria
with thpfclean Kaiserhood; 2°. Saxony, fattened by its share of
Austria; 3°. Prussia the like; 4°. Austria itself, shorn down as
above, and shoved out to the remote Hungarian parts: voiid.
These, not reckoning Hanover, which perhaps we cannot get
just yet, are Four pretty Sovereignties. Three, or Two, of these
hireable by gold, it is to be hop«-d. And will not France have
a glorious time of it; playing master of the revels there, egging
one against the other I Yes, Germany is then, what Nature
designed it, a Province of France: little George of Hanover
himself, and who knows but England after him, may one day
find their fate inevitable, like the others. O Louis, O my King,
is not this an outlook? Louis le Grand was great; but you are
likely to be Louis the Grandest; and here is a World shaped,
at last, after the real pattern! •

Such are, in sad truth, Belleisle’s schemes; not yet entirely
hatched into daylight or articulation; but becoming articulate,
to himself and others, more and more.* Reader, keep them
well in mind: I had rather not speak of them again. They
are essential to our Story; but i!hey are afHictively vain, con¬
trary to the Laws of Fact; and can, now or henceforth, in no¬
wise be. My friend, it was not Beelzebub, nor» Mephisto-
pheles, nor AutolycustApoUo tlu^ built this world and us; it was
Another. And you will get your crown well rapped, M. le
• Mar^chal, for so forgetting that fact! France is an extremely
pretty creature;, but this of making France the supreme Go-
vemoiMmd God’s-Vioegerent of Nations, is, was, and remaps,
■one‘of the maddest nptiqns. France at its ideal best^ and with
a, d'emi|;bdl, for King over it, were by no means fit for such

* .

36o first SILESIAJS: war. Bookxii.

April-May J741.

function js-^nay of n^any Nations is eminently the unfittest for
it. And France at its worst or nearly so, with a Louis XV.
over it by way of demigod-—O Belleisle, what kind of France
is this; shining in your grandiose imagination, in such con¬
trast to the stingy fact: like a creature consisting of two
enormous wings, five hundred yards in potential extent, and
no body bigger than that of a common Cock, xt'eighing three
pounds avoirdupois. Cock with his own gizzard much out of
sorts, too!

It was ‘early in March’® when Belleisle, the Artificial Sun-
god, quitted Paris on this errand. He came by the Moselle
road ; called on the Rhine Kurfursts, K6ln, Trier, Mainz;
dazzling them, so far as possible, witli his splendowr for the
mind and for the eye. He proceeded nexk to Dresden, which
is a main card: and where there is immense manipulation
needed, and the most delicate tiout-tickling; this being a skit¬
tish fish, and an important, though a foolish. Belleisle was at
Dresden when the Battle of Mollwitz fell out: what a windfall
into Bclleisle’s game! Pie ran across to Friedrich at Mollwitz,
to congratulate, to consult,—as we shall sec anon,

Belleisle, 1 am informed, in this preliminary Tour of his,
speaks only, or hints only (except in the proper quarters), of
Election Business; of the need there perhaps is, on the part
of an Age growing in I'bcral ideas, to exclude the Austrian
Grand-Duke; to curb that ponderous, harsh, ungenerous
House of Austria, too long lording it over generous Crcrmany;
and to set-up some better House, —Bavaria, for example;
Saxony, for example ? Of his plans in the rear of this he is
silent; speaks only “by hints, by innuendos, to the proper
parties. But ripening or ripe, plans do lie to rear; favrstretch-
ing, high-soaring; in part, "dark even at Versailles; darkly-
fermenting, not yet developed, in Belleisle’s own head; only
the Future Kaiser a luminous fixed point, shooting beams
across the grandiose Creatioiji-Process geing on there.

By the end of August 1741, Belleisle had become certain
of his game; 24th January 1742, lie saw himself as if winner.
Before August 1741, he had got his Electors manipulated,
tickled to his purpose, by the witchery^ of a PhoebitrsAutoIy-
eas or Diplomatic Sungod; majority secured for a Bavarian

® Adelung, ii. $05,

Chap. XI. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 261

zCtl^Apiil 1741.

Kaiser, and against an Austrian one. A#d in the course of
that Month,—what was still more considerable I—he was
getting, under mild pretexts, about a Hundred Thousand
armed Frenchmen gently wafted over upon the soil of Ger¬
many. Two complete French Armies, 40,000 each (plus
their Reserv(js), one over the Upper Rhine, one over the
Lower; about which we shall hear a great deal in time
coming! Under mild pretexts: "Peaceable as lambs, don’t
you observe? Merely to protect Freedom of Election, in this
fine neighbour country; and as allies to our Friend of Bavaria,
should he chant e to be new Kaiser, and to persist in his
modest claims otherwise.” This was his crowning stroke.
Which finished straightway the remnants of Pragmatic Sanc¬
tion and of every obstacle; and in a shining manner swept
the roads clear. And so, on January 24th following, the Elec¬
tion, long held back by Belleisle’s manceuvrings, actually takes
effect,—in favour of Karl Albert, our invaluable Bavarian
Friend. Austria is left solitArv in the Reich; Pragmatic
Sanction, Keystone of Nature, which Bellcislc and France had
sworn to keep in, is openly torn-ouL by Bclleisle and by France
and the majority of mankind; and Bcllcislc secs himself, to
all appearance, winner.

This was the harvest reaped by Bcllei'=lc, within year and
day, after endless manoeuvring, such as only a Bclleisle in
the character of Diplomatic Sungod could do. Beyond ques¬
tion, the distracted ambitions of several German Princes have
been kindled by Bclleisle; what we called the rotten thatch of
Germany is well on fire. This diligent sowing in the Reich,—
to judge by the 100,000 armed men here, and the counter
hundreds of thousands arming,—has been a pretty stroke of
dragon’s-teeth husbandry on Bell^sle’s part.

Belleish on Visit to Friedrich; sees Friedrich besiege
Briery with Effect.

It was April 26th when Mardchal de Bclleisle, with his
Brother the Chevalier, with Valori and other bright accom-
panimem, arrived in Friedrich’s Camp, * Camp of Mollwitz*
so nam«d; between Mollwitz and Brieg; where Friedrich is
stiU resting, in a vigilant expectant condition; and, except it
be the taking of Brieg, has nothing military on hand. Wed¬
nesday 26th April, the distinguished Excellency,—escorted

*62 FIRST SILESIA^r WAR. BookXIl.

, 9 (}th April t;4i.

for the last three miles by 120 Horse, and the other customary
ceremonies,—^makes his appearance: no doubt an interesting
one to Friedrich, for this and the days next following. Their
talk is not reported anywhere: nor is it said with exactitude
how far, whether ‘Wholly now, or only in part now, Belleisle
expounded his sublime ideas to Friedrich; or'what precise
reception they got. Friedrich himself writes long afterwards
of the event; but, as usual, without precision, except in gene¬
ral effect. Now, or some time after, Friedrich says he found
Belleisle, one morning, with brow clouded, knit« into intense
meditation: “Have you had bad news, M. le Mardchat?''* asks
Friedrich. “No, oh no! I am considering what we shall make
of that Moravia ?”—“ Moravia; Hm t” Friedrich suppresses the
glance that is rising to his eyes: “Can’t yoj’ give it to Saxony,
then? Buy Saxony into the Plan with it!” “Excellent,” ans¬
wers Belleisle, and unpuckeis his stern biow again.

Friedrich thinks highly, and about this time often says so,
of the man Belleisle: but as to the man’s effulgencies, and widc-
winged Plans, none is less seduced by them than Friedrich:
“ Your chickens are not hatched, M. le Mardchal: some of us
hope they never will be,—though the incubation-process may
have uses for some of us!” Friedrich knows that the Kaiser-
ship given to any other than Grand-Duke Franz will be mostly
an imaginary quantity. “ A grand Symbolic Cloak in the eyes
of the vulgar; but empty of all things, empty even of cash, for
the last Two ^fundred Yeais: Austria can wear it to advant¬
age ; no other mortal. Hang it on Austria, which is a selid
human figure,—so.” And Friedrich wishes, and hopes always,
Maria Theresa will Agree with him, and get it for her Hus¬
band. “But to hang it on Bavaria, which is a lean bare pole ?
Oh, M. le Mardchal!—And those Four Kingdoms of yours:
what a brood of poultry, those! Chickens happily yet ««-
hatched-eggs addle, I should venture to hope:—only do go
on incubating, M. le MardchaU” Tha|; is Friedrich’s notion
of the thing. Belleisle staged with Friedrich ‘a few days,’
say the Books. After tvhich, Friedrich, finding Belleisle too,
winged a creature, corresponded, in preference, wit^ Fleury
and the Head Sources;—who are always intensely^ehough
concerned about those ‘aces’falling to him, and how the ^atne
are to be ‘ shared.’^®

Details in Helden-Gesckichte, L 91a, 963, 916; it (Ewres de Frldirtc^ u. 79,
So; &C.

Chap. XI. THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 263

,»7Ui April 1741.

Instead of parade or review in honpur of Bmleisle, there
happened to be a far grander military show, of the practical
kmd. The Si^e of Brieg, the Opening of the Trenches be¬
fore Brieg, chanced to be just ready, on Belleisle’s arrival;-—
and would hhve taken effect, we find, that very night, April
2dth, hadpHOt a sudden wintry outburst, or ‘tempest of extra¬
ordinary violence,’ prevented. Ne’ct night, night of the 27th-

' 28th, under §hinc of the full Moon, in the open champaign
country, on both sides of the River, it did take effect. An
uncommgnly fine thing of its sort; as one can still see by
reading Friedrich's strict Program for it,—a most minute,
precise and all-anticipating Program, which still interests
military men, as Friedrich’s first Piece in that kind,—and
comparing therewith the Narratives of the peiformance which
ensued.^^ *

Kalksiein, Friedrich’s old Tutor, is Captain of the Siege;
under him Jeetz, long used to blockading about Brieg. The
silvery Oder has its due b^d^jes for communication ; all is in
readiness, and waiting mam told as in the slip,—and there is
Engineer Walrave, our Glogau Dutch friend, who shall, at the
right instant, ‘with his straw-rope {Sirohseii) mark out the
first parallel,’ and be swift about it! There are 2,000 diggers,
with the due implements, fascines, equipments ; duly divided,
into Twelve equal Parties, and * always two spademen to one
pickman’ (which indicates soft sandy ground): these, with the
escorting or covering battalions, Twelve Parties they also, on
both sides of the River, are to be in thcir*several stations at
the fixed moments; man, musket, mattock, strictly exact.
They are to advance at Midnight; tlic covering battalions so
many yards ahead: no speaking is ^permissible, nor the least
tobacco-smoking; no drum to be allowed for fear of accident;
no firing, unless you are fire^ on. The covering battalions are
all to * lie flat, so soon as they get to their ground, all but the
Officers and sentries.’ To rear of these stand Walrave and as¬
sistants, silent, wfth their st|iaw-rope;—silent, then anon swift,
and in whisper or almost by dumb-ilhow, “Now, then!” After
whom the diggers, fascine-men, workers, each in his kind, shall
falf-to, silently, and dig and work as»for life.

. All which isMone; exact as clockwork : beautiful to see,

Ord^e X^ispOsitioHfS (sic)j Wtf/rwrtcA tick der Genei^al^LieiUenatU iwi
KalcksMn btiEtvjffhufigdot Trtmcke(ft^c.{CEn'Vrgf deErddene, xxx. 39-44): tba
ProgT»ni. HtliUrv-QgsihichtCf i. 916-28: Ae Narrative.

264

FIRST SILESIAN AVAR.

Book XII.

^ 4th May 174*-.

or half-see, and speak^pf to your Bclleisic, in the sefene moon¬
light! Half an hour’s inarching, half an hour’s swift diggfng ^
the Town-clock of Brieg was hardly striking One, when ‘ they
had dug themselves in.’ And, before daybreak, they had, in
two batteries, fifty cannon in position, with a proper set of
mortars (other side the River),—ready to astonish I^ccolomini
and his Austrians; who had not had the least whisper of them,
all night, though it was full moon. Graf von Piccolomini, an
active gallant person, had refused terms, some time before;
and was hopefully intent on doing his best. And ^ow, sud¬
denly, there rose round Piccolomini such a tornado of can¬
nonading and bombardment, day after day, always ‘three
guns of ours playing against one of theirs,’ that his guns got
ruined; that ‘his hay-magazines took fire,’—and the S^loss
itself, which was adjacent to them, took fire sad thing to
Friedrich, who commanded pause, that they might try quench¬
ing, but in vain);—and that, in short, Piccolomini could not
stand it; but on the 4th of May,,precisely after one week’s
experience, hung out the white flag, and ‘ beat chamade at 3
of the afternoon,’ He was allowed to march out next morn¬
ing, with escort to Neissc; parole pledged, Not to serve against
us for two years coming.

Friedrich in person (I rather guess, Belleisle not now at
his side) saw the Garrison march out;—kept Piccolomini to
dinner; a gallant Piccolomini, who had hoped to do better, but
could not. This was a pretty enough piece of Siege-practice.
Torstenson, with tis Swedes, had furiously besieged Brieg in
1642, a hundred years ago; and could do nothing to it. No¬
thing, but withdraw again, futile ; leaving 1,400 of his people
dead. Friedrich, the Austrian Garrison once out, set instantly
about repairing the woiks, and improving them into impreg¬
nability,—our ugly friend Walrave presiding over that opera¬
tion too.

c

Belleisle* we may believe, so l^ng as he tfontinued, was full
of polite wonder over thcie things; perhaps had critical ad¬
vices here and there, which would be politely received. It is
certain he came out extremely brilliant, gifted and agreeable,
in the eyes of Friedrich; who often aftcrwar<Es, not in the vfry.
strictest language, calls him a great man, great soldier, and by
far the considerablest person you French havg. It is no less

Chip \\ THE COVENANT-BREAKERS. 265

Apnl-Miy 174,1

certain, Befteisle displaced, so far as dftplayable, his magni¬
ficent Diplomatic Ware to the best advantage. To which, we
perceive, the young King answeied, “ Magnificent, indeed
but would not bite all at once, and rathei prefcired corre¬
sponding with Flcury, on business points, keeping the matter
dextrously hanging, m an illuminated clement ofhopc and con¬
tingency, fOk* the present.

Bellcisle, aftei we know not how man) da\s, letiirncd to
Diesden, peifected his woik at Dresden, 01 shoved it well for¬
ward, with ‘that Moravia’ as bait “Yes, King of Moiavia,
)ou, yo’u Pollbh Majesty, shall be!”—and it is said the simple
creature did so style himself, by and by, in ceitain laieMam-
festoe^^ which still exist m the cabmets of tli <"uuoas Beile-
islc next, after Oj^ly a few days, went to Jvtunchen, to operate
on Karl Albert Kur Baicin, a willing subject And, m short,
Belleisle whiiled along inccssanth,‘torch in hand, making his
‘circuit of the German Couits,’ —detail of '^aid ciicuit not to
be followed by us farthei O^iie small thing only I h'^vc found
lemcmbciable, piobably Irue, though \ iguc. Ac Munchen,
still more out at Nymphenbuig, the fine Countiy-Palace not
far oft, thcie was of course long conferencing, long consulting,
sccict and intense, between Belleisle with his people and Karl
Albeit with his Karl Albeit, as wc know, w is himself willing.
But a ccilain Baum von Uneitl,—hcavy^built bavarian of the
old type, an old stager m the Bavaiian Mmistnes, —was of
fai other disposition. One day, out at Nvmj:»hcnbuig, Unertl
got to the Council-room, while Belleisle and Company were
there . Uncrtl found the apaitment locked, absolutely no ad¬
mittance, and heard voices, the Kmfuist s and Fiench voices,
eagerly at woik inside. “ Admit me, Giacious Ilcrr, Gottes
Willm^ me!” No admission, Vnertl, in despaii, lushcd lound
to the garden side of the Apartment, dcspeiately snatched a
ladder, set it up to the window, and conjured the Gracious
Highness. “For the love of Heaven, my Aile?gna{h^iter, don’t!
Have no trade witfi those Fr^ch! Remember your illustrious
Fathei, Kurfurst Max, in the Eugene-Marlborough time, what
ajob^he made of it, building actual architectuie on t/igir hig
promises, which proved mere acres of gilt balloon Words
terriBly prophetic ;*but they were without effect on Kail Al¬
bert,

w Hormayr, Anfmotten (cited above), ii. 159.

266 FIRST SILESIAN *WAR. pookxir.

ApriKMay X74t<

The rest of BelleKle’s inflammatory qircuiting^and jes^ten-
sive travellings; for he-had many first and last in this matter,
shall be left to the fancy of the reader. May 18th, he made
formal Treaty with Karl Albert; Treaty of Nympl^enburg,
“ Karl Albert to be Kaiser; Bavaria, with Austria Proper added
to it, a Kingdom; French armies, French nioneysf and other
fine items.**^® Treaty to be kept dead secret; King Friedrich,
for the present, would not accede. June 25 th, after some
preliminary survey of the place, Belleisle made his Entry into
Frankfurt: magnificent in the extreme. And still dki not rest
there; but had to rush about, back to Versailles, to Dresden,
hither, thither: it was not till the last day of July that he fairly
took up his abode in Frankfurt; and,—the Election eggs, so
to speak, being now all laid,—set himself to^hatch the same.
A process which lasted him six months longer, with curious
phenomena to mankind. Not till the middle of August did he
bring those 80,000 Armed Frenchmen across the Rhine, “to
secure peace in those parts, and freedom of voting." Not till
November 4th had Kur-Sachsen, with the Nightmares, finished
that important problem of the Bohemian Vote, “ Bohemian
Vote excluded for this time—after which all was ready, though
still not in the least hurry. November 20th, came the first
actual “Election-Conference {Wahl-ConferennY in the Romer
at Frankfurt; to whigh succeeded Two Months more of con-
ferrings (upon almost nothing at all): and finally, 24th Janu¬
ary 1742, came the Election itself, Karl Albert the man; poor
wretch, who never saw another good day in this world.

Belleisle during those six months was rather high and airy,
extremely magnificent; hat did not want discretion: ‘ more like

* a Kurfiirst than an .Amibassador;’ capable of * visiting Kur-

* Mainz, with servants purposely in old liveries,*—where the
case needed old, where Kur-Mainz needed snubbing; not other¬
wise.^^ ‘ Tl^e Mar^chal de Belleisle,' says an Eyewitness, of
some fame in those days, ‘ comes out in a variety of parts,

* among us here; plays^ow th^Qeneral, now the Philosopher,

* now the Minister of State, now the French Marquis;—and

* does th^ all to perfection. Surely a master in his art* His

* Brother the Chevalier is one of the sensib^est and best-trained

* persons you can see. He has a penetrating intellect; is al«

w Given in Adelunj^, ii. 35^. lUd. 421.

» Bucliholz, ii. 57 n.

dap. XU. SORROW^ OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 267

April'May y4i«

* TVays occujpiedp and full of great schCmes; and has neverthe-

* less a staid kind of manner. He is one of the most important

* Personages here; and in all things his Brother’s right hand.’^*^
In Frankfurt, both Belleisle and his Brother were much ye-
spected, the Brother especially, as men of dignified behaviour
and shinftig qualities; but as to their Hundred-and-thirty French
Lords and other Valetry, these by their extravagances and ex¬
cesses {Auss^hweifwigen) made themselves extremely detest¬
able, it would appear.^"

CHAPTER XII.

SORROWS OR ms BRII’ANNIC MAJLSil.

George M. did not hear of Mollwitz for above a fortnight
after it fell out; but he had no need of Mollwitz to kindle his
wrath or his activity in that matter. J George II. had seen, all
along, with natural manifold aversion and indignation, these
high attempts of his Nephew. “Who is this new little King,
that will not let himself be snubbed, and laughed at, and led
by the nose, as his Father did; but seems to be taking a road
of his own, and tacitly defying us all ? A very high conduct
indeed, for a Sovereign of that magnitude. Aspires seemingly
to be the leader among German Princes; to reduce Hanover
and us,—us, with the gold of England in our breeches-pocket,
—to the second place ? A reverend old Bishop of Lidgc, twitched
by the rochet, and shaken hither and thither, like a reverend
old clothes-screen, till he agree to stand still and conform. And
now a Silesia seized upon; a Pragmatic Sanction kicked to the
winds: the whole world to be turned topsyturvy, and Hanover
and us, with our breeches-pocket, reduced to--?"

The emotions, theprogncftticatings.and distracted procedures
of his Britannic Majesty, of which we have ourselves seen some¬
what, in this fermentation of the elements, a,re copiously set
down for us by the Englis^ Dryasdust (mostly in unintelligible
form); but, except for sane purposes, one must be careful not
to dwell on them, to the sorrow of readers. Seldom was there
stfeh a feat of Somnambulism, as that by the English and their

* Voft Loen, Sihrtjien (cited in Adejung, H 400).

n BucHIioIf, ii, 54; in Addling, it 3^8 n., a French on the subject, of

sufficient einpha«is.

* MoHwits: fitst heltrd of in London April asth (14th), Subsidy of 300,000/ voted
some day. LoitdotMiasgit^ (April iith'i4th, X741J, Commons journals^ xxuL 705.

268

FIRST SILESIAN WAR. BookXII.

Apiil-May 1741.

King in tlie next Twenty Years. To extract the particle of
sanity from it, and see how the poor English did get their own
errand done withal, and Jenkins’s Ear avenged,—that is the
one interesting point; Dryasdust and the Nightmares shall, to
all time, be welcome to the others. Here are some Excerpts,
a select few ; which will perhaps be our readiest ekpedient.
These do, under certain main aspects, shadow forth the intri¬
cate posture of King George and his Nation, when Bellcisle,
as Protagonistes or Chief Bully, stept down into the ring, in
that manner; asking, “ Is there an Antagonistes, then, Chief
Defender?” I will label them, number them; and, with the
minimum of needful commentary, leave them to imaginative
readers. ^

No. I. Snalth of Parliamentary Eloquence bj, Mr. Finer

(19th April 1741).

'I’lic fuliginous evplosions, moie or less volcanic, which went on in
Parliament and in Lnghsh society, again Fueihicti’s Silesian Knter-
prise, for long years fiom this date, arc now all dead and avoidable,—
though they liave left their effects among us to this day. Peihaps
readers would like to see the one ic.isonable word I have falh 11 m with,
of opposite tendency; hli, Vintr’s word, at the hrst starting of that
question: plainly sciisilile word, Avhich, had it been atteiuled to (as it
was not), might have sa\ed us so much nonsense, not of idle talk only,
but of estremcly seiious deed w'hich ensued thereupon!

^ Lomton^ i^th Aq>nl 1741. 'ihis day’ (MoIhviU not yet known,
Camp of Gotlin too well known!), ‘King Geoigc, m his own high
‘ pci son, comes down to the House of Lords^—whnh, like the Other
‘ House, is sunk painfully in Walpole Controversies, bpaiush-War
‘ Controversies, of a incicly domestic nature;—and informs both Hon-
‘ curable Houses, with extreme caution, naming nobody, That he much
‘ wishes they w'ould think of hcljiing him in these alarming eircunistanccs
‘ of the Celestial Balance, loady apparently to go heels uppermost. To

* which the general answer is, “Yes, sif^elyl”—with a vote of 300,000/.

‘ for her Hungaiian Majesty, a few clays hence. From those continents
‘ of Parliamentary tufa, now fallen so waste and mournful, here is one

* little piece whioh ought to be extricated into dayli^t:

^ Mr Viucr (on his legs): “If Ifrjnistake not the true intention

‘ of the Address proposed,” in* answ'cr to his Majesty’s most gracious
‘ Speech from the Throne^ “ we are invited to declare that w^e will
‘ oppose the Kmg of Prussia in bis attempts upon Silesia; a dcclafii-
‘ tion in which 1 see not how any man can concur i/ho hnorws not the
‘ nature of liis Prussian Majesty^s Claim, and llxe Laws of the German
‘ Empire” {nor do J, Mr. V.)l “It ought therefore, Sir, to have been

* the first endeavour of those by whom this Address 1 as been so zeal-

Chap.XJi. SORRO^Y^S OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 269

ApriUMay 1741

* ously sujpoited, to show that liis Pnissian Majesty’s^laim, so publicly
‘ explainwl” [by k'anzler Ltidmg^, of ivho^ tl seems, has stagger^

‘ or comituedMl. Viner), “so fiimly urged and so strongly supjKirted,

‘ is imthotit foundation and reason, and i-, only one of those imaginary
‘ titles -uhicli Ambition may always find to the dommioiis of another."

* [Jhtir, Ml. Vinerl\‘ * *

A most indispcnsnlrle thing, surely. Which was never done, nor
can ever tie done; but was aisumcd a^ cilhti nnncccisaiy or else done
of Its onn aiooid, by that Colh^live Wisdom of 1 nghind (wnth a sage
Geoige 11 . at'the head of it); who plunged into Dettmgen, Fontenoy,
Anstuan Subsidies, Aix la-Chapelle, and foundation of tnc Enghdi
Nation^ Dtbt, among othei stiauge lhing>5. m con f’quence'—

Upon that of Kanzler Ludwig, and the “ so public Expla¬
nation” (which we slightly heard of long since), here is another
No^e,—unless vcadtis prefer to skip if

*Uki 1 the yijdomitic and Political -world is imivtisallv in travail
‘ at this time, no u idn need be told; Lurope eveijulico in dim anxiety,

‘ heavy Uulni expectation (which to us Ins fallen so \acant); looking
‘ tow aids inevitiblo c hinges and the huge mane. All m tinvail;—and
^ aliead) uficimg piintul '\ 1 jiii 1 lsIols, I\itenLs, J')eductions, aiv] other
‘ public liavail of that knid. Punted ; not to '-j^i-ak of the un-

‘ punted, ot the oral vi Inch i amdied on the spot; oi even of the written
‘ which went* diot forth by bicathle'-s estafettes and unhappily did not

* vanish, but be 111 archivestill humming upon us, “ Won’t you icad

* me, tlieti.-'”—Alas, except on eonipulsion. No! Life bong piecions
‘ (and time, wdnch is the stuff of life), No!—

‘ At Reinsberg a^^ elsewhere, at Remsberg fust of all, it had been
‘ felt, in October last, that ihtie would be Mamfcstoc-. needed; Icained
‘ Proof, the muie iiiefragable the bettci, of oui Light to Silesia. It

* -was settled theie, Let Ludwig, K.aiulei of IheJ'niveisity ot Halle, do
‘ it.’ (Herr Ivrn?lei Ludwig, monster of Antiquarian, Legal and other
Learning there: wealthy, too. and elose^sted; whom we have seen
obliged to open his closed fist, and to^do building in the Friedrich
Strasse, befoie now; Nitssler, his son-iii-law', having no money;—as
careless readeis have perhaps fomotten?) ‘Ludw’ig set about his new
‘ task with a proud joy. Ludwig "knows that story, if he know anything.
‘ Long yc'ai's ago he put forth a Chapter upon it; weighty Chapter; in
‘ a Book of weight, said Judges;—Book w eighiiig, jji pounds avoirdii-

* pois andotherwiijj;, none of us now knows wdiat —but, 111 after years,

’ Tindal, XX. 491, gives tlie Royafspeedi [dMe in a very slobbery conduion). see
also Coxc, House of Austria^ lii. 365 Viner's Fragment of a Speech is in lliackeray.
Life oj Chatham, i. 87.

i^litle of tins weighty Performance (see Preuss, Thranhc'itei^iHS, p 433) is, o»*
was (biM not aiven), CertnaniaJPrincefs (Halse, 1703). Pieuss s.iys farther, ‘That
‘ Book ii c 3 handlesthe Prusaan claims: Jhgemdorf being§13, Liegnitz, ^14, On*
’' peln and Ratibor, 516and that Ludwig had sent a Copy of this Argu ment’ (weighty
Performance altogether? Or Book ii. c. 3 of it, which would have had a bettor chance?)

* U> King Friedrich, on the death of Kmser Karl VI.'

«

270 FIRST SILESIAN WfR. Bookxn,

Apnl-May xf4t

* it used to be ?S;id by flatterers of the Kanzler, ** Ilerjr KAnzler, see '

* the eifect of Learning. 5 t was you, it was your weighty Book, that
‘ caused all this World-tumult, and flung the Nations into one another's
‘ hair!” Upon which the,old Kanzler would blush; “ You do me too

* much honour!”

* Ludwig, directly on order given, gathered out his documents again,

* in the King’s name this time; and promised something yjeighty by

* New-year’s day at latest.’ Doubtless to the joy of Niissler, who has
still no regular appointment, though w'dl deserving one. ‘ And sure
^ enough, on January 7th, at Berlin, ‘'in three languages,” I^idwig’s

* Deduction had come out; an eager Public waiting for it :*—and at
*• Berlin it was generally thought to be conclusive. I hav6 leaked into

* Ludwig’s Deduction, stern duty urging, in this instance for one: such

* portions as I read are nothing like so .stupid as was expected; and, in

‘ fact, are not to be called stupid at all. but fit for their purpose, and
‘ moderately intelligible to those who need them,'—-which happily we
do not in this place. ‘ a

Judicious Mr. Viner availed nothing against the Proposed
Address; any more than he would against the Atlantic Tide,
coming-in unanimous, under influence of the Moon itself,-—a.s
indeed this Address, and the triumphant Subsidy which was
voted in the rear of it, may be said to have done.® Subsidy
of 300,000/. to her Hungarian Majesty; which, with the '
200 ,0001. already gone that road, makes a handsome Half-
miUion for the present Year. The first gush of the Britannic
Fountain,—which flowed like an Amalthea’s Horn for seven
years to come; refreshing Austria, and all thirsty Pragmatic
Nations, to defend the Keystone of this Universe. Unluckily
every guinea of it wbnt, at the same time, to encourage Austria
in scorning King Friedrich’s offers to it; which perhaps are
just offers, thinks Mr. Viner; which once listened to. Prag¬
matic Sanction would be safe.®

This Parliament is strong for ^pragmatic Sanction, and has
high resentments against Walpole; in both which points the
New Parliament, just getting elected, wijl rival and surpass it,

v

•* Title is, Rfchtsgpgr^MdetnEigen.ihttm(y^^''i Latin copf,*s, Pairimonium, and
Pro^riitS/ond^e eti Droit in lUe Fr^chcopifls)^«< 2 i^<r.,—that is to LogoiRt^kt
of Property in ike Reyal-ElectoraJHottse ^Brandenburg to the Duchies and Prin-.
cipaluies^ Jdgemdotf, Luguitz, Brieg, fPoklau (Berlin, 7th January 1741).

5 iii. a65.

® Mr. Viner was of Pupham, or Fapholm, in Lincolnshire, for wliich County he
sat then, and for many years before and after,—-from about £713 till 1761, when, he
died. A solid, instructed man, his COntempor.'ilries. “He was a friend of Boling-
broke’s, and had a house near Bolingbroke's Battersea one." He is Great great-
grandfather to the present Mr. Viner, and to the Countess de Grey and Ripon; whu^
IS an interesting little fact.

Chap XII SORROVS OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 271

April May 1741 *

•—especially m the latter point, that of uprooiyig Walpole,
which the Nation is bent on, with a singular fury. Pragmatic
Sanction like to be ruined, and Walpole furiously thrown out
what a pair of sorrows for poor George! During his late Caro¬
line’s time, all went peaceably, and that of "governing was a
mere pleasure, Walpole and Caioline cunningly doing that for
him, and making him believe he was doing it But now has
come the crisis, the collapse, and his poor Majesty left alone
to deal with itT—

No *». ComtituUonal Hi'iiofian on the Phenomenon of
Walpole 2n JLninland

abo>e Ten Years Walpolt, hnrself,’ siys ny Constitutional
Historian (unpubl^icd), ‘for almost Twenty Years, Walpole virtually
‘ and through others, has what they call "governed” England , that is

* to say, has adjusted the conflicting Parliamentary Chaos into counter

‘ poise, by what methods he had and allowed England, with Walpole
‘ atop, to jumble whithci it w uj,l(l ind could Of ciooked things made
‘straight by Walpole ofhercic performance or intentior>, legislative
‘ or idmmistiatue, by Walpok, n >1 dy oer heard, never of the least

* hondbieadlh game<l from the ISighi Realm in England, on Walpole’s

* part enough if he could manigc to keep the Parish Constable walk

* mg, and himself float atop Inch task (though intrinsically zero for

* the Community, but all important to the Walpole, of Constitutional

* Countries) is a task almost bejond the faculty of man, if the careless
‘ reader knew it'

‘This task Walpole did,—in x sturdj', deep bellied, loig headed,
‘ John Bull fashion, not unworthy of leeognition ^ A man of \eiy for

* cible natural eyesight, strong natiual heart,—courage in him to all
‘ lengths, a very block of oak, or of oak roof, for natural stiengtli He
‘was always very quiet with it, too, given to digest his victuals, and

* be peaceable with everybody He had one rule, that stood in place

* of many lo keep out of every business which it vva^ possible for
‘ human wisiiora to stave aside ^ ‘ What good will you get of going
‘ into that? Parliamentarj cnticism, argument and botheration? Leave

* well alone And even leave ill alone —ate you tl^p tradesman lo
‘ tinker leaky vesseisjn England? You will nbt want for woik Mint!

* your pudding, and say little At honj^ and abroad, that was the
‘ safe secret For, m Foreign Politics, his rule was analogous "Mind
‘ your own affairs. You are an Island, you can do without Foieign

* Polices, Peace, keep Peace with everybody: what, in the Devil’s

* name, hove you to Mo with those dog worryings over Seas? Once

* more, mind yeur pudding I” Not so bod a rule, indeed it is the better

* part of an extiemely good one,—and you might reckon it the real

S7 J FIRST SILESIAN Wa6 , B«V 3 tM.

^ Apnl*}iifey tf 4 t.

* ruk for a pms Bntannic Island {reverent of God, and oontemptuone

* oS the Devil) in times ofgeneral Doivnbreak and SpintnalBankfuptiy,

' vthcn quarrellings ot Sovereigns are- apt to be mere dog*wOiityingsi aild

* Devil’s woik, not good to interfere in

‘In this manner, Walpole, by solid John Bull faculty {and methods
‘ ot his o\in), had balanced the Parliamentary swaggings and cldsbin^

‘ for a great while, and Fnghnd had lumbled whither it could, aliyays
‘ in a stupid, but ils,o in a peaceable way As to those saAe “metlto^

* of Ills o\in,” the> were—in fact they were Bnbery Actual purcHaae

* of votes by monej slipt mto the hand Go straight to the ppiftt

* “ The duect leal method this,” thinks Walpole: “is there m xeaHly

* any othei? ’ A ternlik question to Constitutional Countries; wbmb*

‘ I heai, has. nc\er bten resolved m the negative, by the Saodem im+

‘ provements of bcicnce Changes of forni have introduced thems^ves;

‘ the outw ml pioctss, F hear, is now quite different According as the
‘ fashions and conditions alter,—according aw you have a fourth Estate
‘ developed, oi al ourth I statr still iii the grub stage and only dcVelop-
‘ mg,—much vauation of outward piocess is lonceivable

‘ Biit\otLS, undei pain of Death Official, are necessary to 3rour poor
‘ Walpole and votes, I hear, arc still bidden for, and bought You
‘ may buy tliem b> money down (which is felony, and theft simple,

* against tin poor Nation), or b> pitfernunls and appointments of the
‘ unmentoiious nian, — which is felon) double distilled (far deadlier,
‘though moie refined), and theft most compound, theft, not of the

* poor Nation’s money, but of its soul and body so fa^, and of

‘ moneys and tempoial and spintml interests whatsoever, theft, you
‘ may say, of collops cut fiom its side, and poi'on put mto it& heart,

‘ poor Nation' Oi again, von may buy, not of the Third Estate in

* such ways, but of the I ourth, oi of the* Fourth and Third together,

* m other still moie ftlomoiis and deadly, though lefined wa)?s. By
‘doing claptraps, namely, lettiny off Pailiamentary blue hght§, to

* awaken the Sleeping SwineriPi, and charm them mto diapasoh for

* you,—^what a music ’ Or, v ithout cl lOtrap or previous felony of your
‘ own, you may feloniously, m the pinch of things, make truce with
‘ the evident Demagogos, and Son of Nox and of Perdition, yfho has

* got “within those walls” of yours, and is grown important to you by
‘ the Awakened Swineries, risen rido alt, that follow him Him you

* may, in your dire hunger of votes, consent to comply with; his

* Anarchic® you will pass for him into "Laws,” as you are pleased to

* term them;—instead of pointing to the whipping-post, and to his

* wicked long ears, w Inch ire so fifcio be nailea there, and of sternly

* recommending sdenee, wfech were the aalutaiy thing —*Buying may
‘ be done m a great variety of ways. The quesUon, How you buy?

‘ not, on the moral side, an important one. Hay, as there is
‘ m going straight to the pomt, and by that conree there is hhely to hQ

* the mimmum mendacity for you, pmrhaps the direct }noii^-inef^|R>d

* is a shade i&i damnable than any of the oth^ s^oe dtsooreiMjff^

Chap. XII. SORROWS tOF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 273

.^pril-May 1741.

‘ while, in r^ard to practical damage resulting, it is of cllildlilic liarm-
‘ lessne.ss in comparison 1

‘That was Walpole’.s method; with tin's to aid his givat natiml
‘faculty, long*headed, deop*bellifd, suitable to the JCnglish l*.arhauicnl
‘and Nation, he went along with perfect success for ten or tueiity
‘ years. it might have been for longer,—liad not the Kiiglisli

‘ Nation ac\dcntally come to wish, that it should jumbhng no
‘ whither; and try to jumble ifo/n'whithei, at leastf<.ir a little while, on
‘ important busljiess that bad xisen for ICngland in a certain (juarlcr.
‘Had it not been for Jenkins’s Ear blazing out in the dark Jsnglisli
‘ brain, Walpole might have lasted still a long while, But his fate lay
‘ there:—first Uusiuess vital to England which might turn up; and
‘ this chanced to be the Spanish War. How vital, rcadcis shall see
‘ anon. Waljiole, knowing well enough in what stale his W.t .-otparatiis
‘ was, ^nd that of all his Apparatuses there was none in a workitig
‘ state, but the I’arli amen (ary one,—resisted the Spanish War; stood
‘ in the dooi agaiiR,t it, wiili a rhinocsTos dclermmation, n.iy almost
‘ .somctliing of a mastiff’s; resolute not to admit it, to admit death as
‘ soon. Doubtless he h.ul a feeling it would be de.ttli, the .s.agacious
‘m.an;—and such it is now piovnig; the Walpole Ministry dying by
‘ inches fiom it; dying h.ud, biff inemetliably.

‘ The Ivnglish Nation nas imuieusely astomslicd, which Walpole was
‘ itot, any more than at the other i.aws of Nature, to find Walimle’s
‘ War-apparatus in such a ooiidition. All his Appaiatuses, Waljiole
‘ guesses, arc in no better, if it be not the Parliamentary one. 'I'he
‘ Pinglish Nation is immensely a.slonished, wb’cli W.nlpolc again is not,

* to find that his Parliamentary Apparatus has been kept in gear and
‘ .smooth-going by the use of <?//.• “ Miiaculoiis Scandal of Scandals !”
‘ thinks the English Nation. “ Miiacle ? Law of Nature, you fools

‘ thinks Walpole. And in fact there is such a storm roaring in Paig-
‘ land, in those and in the late and the coming iRonths, as threaten.^
‘ to be dangerous to higli loofs,—dangerous to Walpole’s head at one
‘ time. Storm such as had not bei'ii witnessed in men’s memory; all
‘ manner of Counties and Constituencies, witlf solemn indignation, charg-

* ing their representatives to search into that miraculous Scandal of
‘ Scandals, Law of Nature, or wlialever it may be; and abate the

* same, at their peril.

‘ 'Po the now reader there is something almost pathetic in these
‘ soleirth indignations, and high resolves to have Puritf of Parliament
‘ and thorough AfhniMslrative ]v<%)rm, in spite of Nature and the (.'(ui-
‘ stitutional Stars;—and nothing I have mtl with, not even the I’lUi-
‘ sian Dryasdust, is so unsuffevahly wcarisiime, or can pretend to equal
‘ in da^th of dull inanity, to ingenuous living readers, our jioor ling-
‘ lish Dryasdust’s inte^ninablc, often-repeated Narratives, volume after
‘ volume, of the debatings an<l colleaguings, the to.s.sings and tumults,

* fruitless and endless^ in Nation and National Palaver, which ensued

VOL. IV. T

274 FIRST SILESIAN \VAR. HookXH.

April-May 1741.

‘ thereupon. .^Valpole Hu about a year hence)/ thouglifhe stuck to
‘ the ground like a rhinoceros, '\\as got rolled out, And a Successor,

* and series of Successors, in the bright bmnd-new slate, was got rolled
‘ in j with immense shouting from mankind:—^but up to this dale we
‘ have no reason to believe that the I-aws of Nature were got abrogated

* on that occaNion, or that the constitutional stars have nauch altered

‘ their courses since.’ /

That Walpole will probably be lost, goes much home to
the Royal bosom, in these troublous Spring months of 1741,
as it has done and will do. And here, emerging from the
Spanish Main just now, is a second sorrow, which wght quite
transfix the Royal bosom, and drive Majesty itself to despair;
awakening such insoluble questions,—furnishing such proof,
that Walpole and a good few other persons (persons, aiyi also
things, and ideas and practices, deep-rooted in the Counlr>’^)
stand much in need of being lost, if England is to go a good
road 1

The Spanish War being of moment to us here, we will let
our Constitutional Historian expkan, in his own dialect, How
it was so vital to England; and shall even subjoin what he
gives as History of it, such being so admirably succinct, for
one quality.

No. 3. Of the Sfanisk Wai% or the jenhins's-Ear Question.

* There was leal cause for a War with Spain. It is one of the few
‘ cases, this, of a war fiom necesMty. Spain, by Ijccree of the Pope,

‘ —some Pope long ago, whooc name ue will not remember, in solemn

* Conclave, drawing accurately “his Meridiem Line,” on I know not
‘ whdt Telluric or Uranic pimciples, no doubt with great accuracy,

‘ “ between Portugal and Spain,”—was proprietor of all those Seas
‘ and Continents. And now ICnglarul, in the interim, by Decree of the
‘ Eternal Destinies, had cleaily come to have property there, too; and

* to be practic.ally much concerned in that theoretic question of the
‘ Pope’s Mei id lan. There u .i"- no icconcihng of theory with fact. “Ours
‘ indisputably,” sai^jl Spain, with loud articulate voice; “ Holiness
^ the Pope motle it oui^”’—while fact and the linglish, by Decree of
‘ tlie Eternal Destinies, had been giinj^ibliiig inartitulately the other way,
‘ for almost Two Tlundicd^’cars past, and no result had.

* In Oliver C>omwcll’s time, it used to be said, “ With Spain, in
‘ Europe, there may be peace or war; but between the Tropics te‘is al-
‘ ways war.” A stale of things well recognised Oliver, and acted on,

7 Febniary 13th (jii), 1742, quitting tbo House after bad usage there, «aid h®
would never enter >t agauji, nor did: February aad, resigned in favour of Pulteuey
and Company (Tinda), xx. 5^0; Tb.i<,keray, i. 45).

Ch3i),xii. SORROWS OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 275

ApviUMay 1741. •

'*• according to liis opportunities. No settlement was<^ijad in Oliver's
‘ brief time* nor could any be got since, whfn it was becoming yearly

* more pressing. lJucaniers, desperate naval gentlemen living on boucmiy
‘or hung beef; who .are also called Flibustiors {Flib&iiers^ “ Frce-
‘ boolers," in French pronunciation, which is since grown strangely into
‘ Filibusters^ Fillibuslier',, and oilier mad lonns, in the Yankee Ncv\s-
‘ papers ii^v cunent); readers have heard ot tl)ose dumb methotis ot
‘protest. \)iimb and fuiioiijj; which could bring no settlementj but
‘ which did astonish the I'ope s Decree, slasliing iL witli cutl-isses and
‘ sea-cannon, in that manner, and oiicuitously foiviardwl a settle-
‘ ment. Settlement was becoming yearly more needful; and, ever since
‘ the Trebly of Utrecht especially, Ihete had been an incessant haggle
‘going on, to produce one; without the hast effect hitherto. What
‘ embassy mg'-, bargainings, h.ii gam-breakings; what gallo(hng ot csla-
‘ fette.s; acics of diplomatic jiaper, now fallen to the spi Ici,, .who always
‘ privttely were the leal owners! Not in the Treaty of Utrecht, not
‘ in the Congressij^ of t’anibray, of Sois'-ons, Convention of [‘aido, by
‘ Ripperda, Horace Walpole, or the wagging of wigs, could this mat-
‘ ter be settled at all. Xc.iv two limidud yeais of chrome misery;—

‘ and had theie been, undei my of tho^e wigs, a Head c.apable ofread-
' ing the Heavenly IM.iiKh te''-, ^vith luMit ca]jablc of following them,

‘ the miseiy might have bei ii brieily (tided, by a direct method. With
‘ what immense saving in all kind , complied with theoblitpie method
‘ gone upon! In (luanlity of bloodshed neciled, of money, of idle talk

* and estafettes, not to speak of higher ronsideralions, tlie saving had
‘ been incalculalile. Foi it was Fitgbnd’s one Cause ot War during
‘ the Ceiituiy we are now upon; and poor ICnghmd’s cour-^e, when at
‘ last driven into it, went ambiguoudy circling round the whole Uni-
‘ verse, instead of straight to the mark. Had Oliver Cromwell lived
‘ ten ye.ars longer;—hut Olivu' Cromwell did not live; and, instead of
‘ Heroic Heads, there came 111 Constitutional Wigs.which makes a great

* difference.

‘The pretensions of Spam to keep I falf the Woild locked-up in
‘ embargo were entirely chimerical; plainly contradictory to the Laws
‘ ol Nature; and no amount of Pope’s Donation Acts, or Ceremonial
‘ in Kota or Propaganda, could redeem them from unlenability, in. the
‘ modem days. To lie like a dog*in the manger over South America,

‘ and say snarling, “None of you .shall trailc here, though I cannot!”

* —what Pope oribody of Popes tan s.anclioii such a pjjoccdurc? Had
‘ Engfand hail a Head, instead of Wigs, amid its diplomatists, England,
‘ as the chiel party interested, w^uld have Jong since iulimntcil gently
‘ to such dog in the manger: “ Dog, will you be so obliging as rise!
‘ 1 am grieved to say, we shall have to do nnplLMbatU thing-. «)rherv\ise.

* Do^ have doors for their hutches: but to pieteiifl barring the Tropic
‘ ol Cancer, —that is*too big a door for any dog. ('an noboily but you
‘ have business here, then, which is not displeasing to the i'od.s? We
‘ bid you risel” And in this mode there is no doubt the dog, bark, and

276 FIRST SILESIAN 'V^AR. Bookxii.

April-May 1741.

* bite as he mi^t, would^have ended by rising; not only Jjjngland, but *

* all the Universe being agniast him. And furthermore, I compute
‘ with certainty, the quantity of fighting needed to obtain such result
‘ would, by this mode, have been a minimum. The clear right being

* there, and now also the clear might, why take refuge in diplomatic
‘ wiggerics, in Assiento 'I'reatics, and Arrangements which are mi ana-
‘ logons to the facts; which arc but wiggecl mendacities, thjj/efoie; and
‘ will but aggravate in quaiUity and in quality the fighting yet needed?

' Fighting is but (as has been well said) a battering-out of the monda-
‘ cities, pretences, and imaginary elements; well battered-out, these,

‘ like dust and chaff, lly lorrcntwisc along the winds, and darken all
‘ the sky; but these ome gone, there remain the facts and tlj''ir visible

* relation to one another, and peace is sure.

‘ The Assiento Treaty being fixed upon, the English ought to have
‘ kept it. But the English did not, in any mea.sure; nor could pretend
‘ to have done. They were entitled to supply Negroes, in sut^i and

* such number, annually to the Spanish Plantation‘ir and besides this
‘ delightful branch of trade, to have the privilege of selling certain quan-
‘ titles of their manufactured articles on those coasts; quantities regu-
‘ lated briefly by this stipulation, That their Assiento Ship was to be

* of 600 tons burden, so many and nowmoie. The Assiento ship was
‘ duly of 600 ton's accordingly, pionu,e kept faithfully to the eye; but
‘ the Assiento Ship vi.is attended and escorted by provision - sloops,

‘ .small craft said to be of the most indispensable nature to it. Which

* provision-sloops, and indispensable .small craft, not oi\ly carried mcr-
‘ chandisc as well, but went and came to Jamaica and back, under
‘ various pretexts, with cvei new supplies of merchandise; converting

* the Assiculo Ship into a Floating Shop, the Tor-, burden and Tons
‘ .sale of which set atithmctic at defiance. This was the fact, perfectly
‘ well known in England, veiled over by mere smuggler pretences, and
' obstinately persi.stal in, so profitable was it. Perfectly well known

* in Spain also, and to the Spanish Guarda-Costas and Sea-Captains in

* those parts; who w’ere naturally kept in a perennial state of rage by
‘ it,—and disposed to fly,out nito flame upon it, when a bad case
‘ turned up! Such a case that of Jenkins had seemed to them; and their
‘ mode of treating it, by learing-off^r. Jenkins’s Ear, proved to be,—
‘ bad shall we say, or good ?—intolerable to England’s thick skin; and
‘ brought matters to a crisis, in the ways we saw.’ * • *

1 ! «

The Jenkin&’s-Ear Question, which the^j looked so mad to

everybody, how sane hae it nov 5 ^ grown to my Constitutional
Friend! In abstruse ludicrous form there lay immense questions
involved in it; which were serious enough, certain enough, though
invisible to everybody. Half the World lay, hidden in embryo
under it. Colonial-Empire, whose is it to be ? Shall Half the
World be England’s, for industrial purposes; which is inno-

Chap.xn. SORROWS OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 377

. 'April-Mny 1741.

cent, laudable, conformable to the MuU?plication-tabIc at least,
and other plain Laws ? Or shall it be Spain’s for arrogant-
torpid sham-devotional purposes, contradictory to every Law?
The incalculable ’S'ankee Nation itself, bigjjest J^henonienon
(once thauglit beautifulestj of these Ages,—this loo, little as
careless imders on cither side of the sea now know it, lay in¬
volved. Shall there be a Yankee Nation, shall there not be;
shall the New World be of Spanish type, shall it be of Eng¬
lish ? Issues which we may call immense. Among the then
extant S»ns of Adam, where was he who could in the faintest
degree .surmise what issues lay in the Jenkins’s-Ear Question ?
And it is curious to consider now, with what fierce deep-breathed
dogggdncss the poor English Nation, drawn b^ iheir instincts,
held fast upon i^ and would take no denial, as if they had sur¬
mised and seen. For the instincts pf simple guilclc.ss persons
(liable to be counted stupid, by the unwary) are sometimes of
prophetic nature, and spiing from the deep places of this Uni¬
verse !-My Constitutioha’ Friend entitles his ne.vt Sec¬

tion Carthagena; but might more fitly have headed it (for
such in reality it is, Carthageiia proving the evanescent point
of that sad business).

Succinct History of the Spanidi IVor, which began in 1739;
and ended—When did it end?

I®. War^ and Forto-Belto {^Nuvemher 1739 —March 1740).—‘ No-

* vcmber4lh, 1739, War was at length (after abeverfour-nionths abscure

* quasi-declaring of it, in the shape of Orders in Council, Letters of
' Marque, and so on) got openly declared ; “ Heralds at Anns at the
‘ usual places” blowing trumpets upon it, ajid reading the loyal Mani-
‘ feslo, date of which is five days earlier, “ Kensington, October 30th

* (19th).” The principal Events that ensue, arrange themselves under
‘Three Heads, this of Porto-Bel fl") being tlic bnt i and (by intense
‘ smelting) are dateable as foUow.s

‘Tiiesday Evening, 1st December 1739, Admiral Veijpon, our chosen
‘ Anti-Spaniard, finding, a while ago, that he had missed the Az-ogue
‘ Ships on the Coovst of Spain, aft! must tr^r America and the Spanish
‘ Main, in that view arrives at Porto-Bello. Next day, December zd,
‘ Vernon attacks Porlo-Bello; attacks cerlaiti CastlC'. so-ealletl, with
‘ furicJUs broadsiding, followed by.sealading; gets surrender (on the 3d);
‘—seamen have allowance instead of plunder;—^blows-up what Castles
‘ there are; and returns to Port Royal in Jamaica.

9 Gentlemaris Maganhu, ix. 551, x. 194, 143, 144, 350; Tindal, xa. 430 ' 3 » 44 *«
&C. •

27S FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Book XII.

, A]|^-May 1741.

‘ Never-linaglncd joy in England, and fame to Vernon, when the
‘ ncwb came: “ Took it with Six Ships” cry they; “ the sctirvy Mi-
‘ uibtry, who had hcaid him, in the fire of Tarliainenlary debate, say
‘ Six, wtmld grant him no more: invincible Vernon!” Nay, next Year,

‘ I “^ec, “London was illnminated on the Anniversary of Poido-Hello
' —day settled in permanence as one of the TIigh-lidcs of tly^Calciidar,

* it would appear. And “ Vernon’s Birthday” withal,—how touching

* ib stupidity when loyal!—was celebrated ama/.ingly in all the chief
‘ Towms, like a kind of Christmas, when it came round; Nature having

* deigned to produce such a man, for a poor Nation in difficulties. Tn-
‘ vincible Vernon, it is thought by Gazetteers, “will look-in<ft*^ Cartha-
‘ gena .shortly;” much more important Place, where a certain Governor
‘ Don Bias has been insolent withal, atid written Vernon letters.

* 2". Jh'climiuaru's to Carthas^ina [JSfarch—Novemher 1740).—^Mon-

* day 14th March 1740, Vernon did, acconlingly, kok-in on Cartha-

* gena;® cast anchor in the shallow svasic of surfs there, that Monday;
‘and tned .some bombarding, with homh-ketches and the like, from

* Thursday till Saturday hdlow ing. Veinon hopes he did hit the Jesuits’
‘ College, South Bastion, Custom-housi' and other principal edifices;

* hut found that there W'as no getting near enough on that seawaul side.
' Found that you must force the Tnlonor Harbour,—a big Inland Gulf
‘ or Lake, wdiich gu-hes-in by what they call Little-Mouth (Boca-C.)hica),
‘ and has its Ikiouis, Castles and Defences, which are numerous and
‘ strongish;—and that, for this end, you must have Seven or Eight
‘ Thousand Land Forces, as well as an addition of Ships. On Satur-
‘ clay Evening, therefore, Vernon callb-in his bomb-ketches; sails past,
‘ examining these things; and goes forth on other small adventures.
‘For example,—

‘Sunday 3CI Aptil 1740, “about ro at night,” opens cannonade

* on Chagrcs (place often enough taken, by cutlass and pistol, in the
‘ Bucanier times); and, on Tuesday 5th, gets* surrender of Chagres:
‘ “ Custom-house crammed with goods, which we set fire to.” On news
‘ of which, there is again, in England, joy over the day of small things.
‘ The poor English People are set op, this business of avenging Jenkins’s
‘ Ear, and of having the Ocean Highway unbarred; and hope always
‘ it can be done by the Walpole Apparatuses, which ought to be in
‘ working ordet, and Are not! “Support this hero, you Walpqle and

* Company, in his Carthagena views ^ it will be letter for you!”

‘ Walpole and Company, aware of that fact, do take some trouble
‘ about it; and now', may not we say, Paidh majora ceimmus ? All
‘through that Summer 1740’—w'hile King Friedrich went rushing
about, to Stra.sbiirg, to Wesel; doing his'Herstals and Practicalities,
with a light high hand, in almost an entertainftig manner; and in¬
tent, still more, on his Vollaircs and a Life to the Mnses,—‘ there was,

* ill England, serious heavy tumult oi activity, secret and public. In

9 Gentlemmis Magazine, x. 330, *

Chap.xn. SORROWS*OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 279

•April-May 1741.

‘ the Dockyards, on tljc Dei 11 -grounds, wha,t*a stir: Camp in the Isle
‘ ol Wight, not to mention Portsmouth and the Sea industries; 6,000
‘ Maiiiu's are to be einbarkcd, as well Land Kegimenis,—can any-

* body guess whither? America its( If is to iurai'>li “one Regiment,

‘ with Scotch Officers to discipline it,” if they (an.

‘ Ilere^s real haste and effort; but by no means such speed, as
‘ could be wished; multiplex confusions and coulradiclious occurring,

* as is usual, when your luachineiy luu, hml. Nor .no the Gazctteeis
‘ without their guesses, though they study to be disciect. “ Here is
‘ something considerable in the wind; a grand idea, foi coitaiu;”—and
‘ to men^f discernment it points surely low'aids Caithagcna and heroic
‘ Vernon out yonder? Government is dumb altogether; and lays oc

‘ casional cnibargo; trying haid (without success), in the ddays that
‘ occurred, to keep it secret Irorn Don Bias and others. The f aitconie of
‘ all ^hich was,

‘ 3". it\df {A\f;imhcr 1740 —April 1741),—On No\cm-

‘ ber 6th,—by no means “July 3d,” as‘your first toiul progiam bene;
‘which delay was itself likely to be fatal, unlc-s the Almanac, and
‘ course of the 'I'ropicnl beaboii'i u ( uld dckiy along with you k-^we say,

‘ Oil Sunday 6tb Niwemlxa 1*74 ’ (Kaiser Karl's ffimcral |. >-1 over,
and great thought', going on at Kcinsbcrg), ‘ Kcai-Admual Sir Cha-
‘ loner Ogle,—so many wcik-. and numdis aftci the -.ct tune,—does
‘sail irtmi Si. llelciiL (guessed, for Cartliagcna); all pc(;plc sending

* blessings u ith him. Tucnly-bvc big Ships of the Line, with llnee
‘ Half-Regiments on boaid; fiiesliip'., bomb ketcho, m abundance;

‘ and eighty Transpoil^, with 6,000 dulled A’ainus: a Sca-aud-Land
‘ Force fit to stiengtlun iTc'-o Veuioii a\iih a \\itiie‘'S. tnd lealive liis
‘ Cartbageiia view!:. A veiy gieai day at I'oitsmoulli and St. Helen’s
‘ for these Sunday folk.'*

‘Most obsciiie among the other items in fhat*Annada ol Sir fiha-

* loner’.s, just taking leave ol England; most obscure oi the items then,

‘ but now most noticeable, or almost alone noticeable, is a young Sur-
‘ gconVMate,—one Tobias Smollett; looking over the waters there
‘ and the fading coasts, not without thouglil.s. A proud, soft-hearted,
‘ though somewhat stern-visaged, «caustic and indignant young gcntlc-
‘ man. Apt to be caustic in speech, having soirorvs of his own under
‘ lock and key, on tliis axul .subsequent ociasiouc-. Excellent Tobia,s;
' he has, little as lie hopes it, sometliing cousiderabl# by w'ay o» mis-
‘ sion in tliis Expe'Mlion. and ig this Universe gcueially. Mission to
‘ take Portraiture of English Seamanhood^ with the due grinme.s, due
‘ fidelity; and convey the same to remote generations, before it vanidi.
‘ Courage, my brave young Tobias; through endless sen rows, coutra-
‘ dictions, toils and coniusions, you will do your errand in some mca-
< sure; and that will be something!—

Tindal, xx. 463 (Lists Ssfic. there; date wrong, ‘31st October,* instead of 9(ith
(o. s.),—many things wrong, and all things left loose and flabby, and not right! As
IS poor Tindal's way). •

28o first SILESIAN WAR. Bookxii.

Apnl-May *741.

^Five wedks before ^9th September 1740, which waf also several

* months beyond time set), there had sailed, strictly hidden by em-
‘ bargees which were little efTectual, another Expedition, all Naval;

‘ intended to be subsidiary to this one; (’(jinmodorc Anson’s, of Three
‘ inconsiderable Ships; wdio is to go round Cape Horn, if he can; to
‘ bombard Spanish America from the other side; and stretclyout a liand
‘ to Vernon in his grand Caithagtna or ulterior views. Tcgether they
‘ may do some execution, if we judge l>y the old Hucanicr and Queen-
‘ Fdizabeth experiences ? Anson's Expedition has become famous in
‘ the world, though Vernon got no good of it,’

Well! Here truly was a business; not so ill-contrived. Somebody
of bead must have been .at the ccnlie of this: and it mightf m result,
have astonished the Spaniard, and tumbled him much topsyturv'y in
those latitudes,—had the machinery for executing it been well in gear.
Under Fiiedrich Wilhelm’s captaincy and management, every jjgrson,
cveiyitem, correct to its time, to its place, to its function, what a thing!
Uul with mere Walpole Macliiiiery: alas, it was fa^ too wide a Plan
for Machinery of that kind, habitually out of order, and only used to
be as correct as—as it could, 'fhose (Mays themselves, first to Anson,
then to Ogle, since the 'fropical Almanac would not delay along with
them, had ihrowm both Enterprises intf) weather such as all-but meant
impossibility in those latitudes! Tin was iriemeduible;—had not been
r»,nic'diat)lc, by cllbrls and push mg ■> liere and there. The best of man¬
agement, as under Anson, could not get the better of this; w'oist of
management, as in the other case, was hk<iy to make a fine thing of
it! Let us hasten on:

* January 20th, 1741, We arrive, through much lough weather and
‘ other confused hardships, at Port Royal in Jamaica ; find Vernon
‘ waiting on the slip; the Amciican Regiment toleiably drilled by the
‘ Scotch Lieutenants, in full readiness and cquijiment; a body of Ne-
‘ groes superadded, ‘oy way of pioneer labourers fit for those hot cli-
‘ mates. One sad loss iheie had been on the voyage hither: Land

* forces had lost their Commander .and did not find another. General
‘ Cathcart had dial of sicitfnc'.s on the voyage; a Charles l.ojd Calh-
‘ cart, wlio was understood to povses-> some knowledge of his business;
‘ ami his Successor, one Wentworrii, <bd not happen to have any.

‘ Which w'as reckoned unlucky, by the more observant. Vernon, though
^ in haste for (^arthagena, is in some anxiety about a pow^erful French
‘ Fleet which lAs been manctuviing in those w'uters for some “time;

* intent on no good that Venion can ijnagine. TRe first thing now is,
' Sec into that French Fleet French Fleet, on our going to look in
' the proper Island, is found'to be all off for home; men ''mostly
‘ starved or otherwise dead,” we hear; so that now, after this last^&hort

* delay,—To Carthagena with all sail.

‘Wednesday livening 15th March 1741, "We anchor in the Pla]^
‘ Grande, the wa.ste surfy Shallow which washes Cartliagena seaward;
‘ 124 sail of us, big and little. We find Don Bla^ in a very prepared

Chap. XU. SORROW!^ OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 281

Apnl-May 1741.

‘ posture, ^on Bias has been doing his b^^t, this tweIVcmonth past;

‘ that Boca-Chica (Little-Mouth) Ingatc, with I)atterios,

‘ booms, great ship.s; and has castles not a few therenbouts and in Oie
‘ Interior Lake or ITarboin; all which he lias pnl m tolerable defence,

‘ M) lar as can be judged ; noL an lu.iclivi', il .ni indolent Don. We
‘ spend ll|£ next five days m considc-nng and .suntying these l*crfonn-
‘ auces of^s: What is to be done with them ; hon, in the fiiisl place,

‘ we may force 15 uca-t'Idea; and get in upon his Interior Castles and
‘ him. After consideiation, and plan fixed :

‘Monday aofh March, Sir Chaloner, with broadside-), -.weeps away
‘ some small defences which he to left of Boea-Chica’ (to our lefty to
Boca-Chin’s n\^tit, if anybody caics to be particiil.n). ‘Whereupon
‘ the Troops land, some of iheiii that same evening; and, uiiliin the
‘next two days, are all ashore, implements, Ncgioes and the re-,t;

* buikling batteries, felling wood; intent to captuie L'oca-Cliic.a Castle,

‘ .and^demolish the War-Ships, Booms, and fry of Fascine and other
‘ Batteries; and tlierebyti) get in iqion I)on Bias, ami have a siroke at
‘ his Interior Ckastles and Carlhagena itself. Till April 5th, lieie .are
‘ Sixteen days of furious intiicate weak; not ill done:—the ]ihysical
‘ labour itself, the buijdin > of balti ries, with Boea-Chica finin’ on you
‘ ovei the wood.s, scauely ridMi' bv Kuro[.(Mns in that season; and
‘the Negroes, who ate .dtle foi ib “ lling down their burdens, and
‘ scamper, whenevei a gun goes oft. ’ Knnou-) fighting, too. there was,

‘ by seamen and l.mdsmen; not ill done, tonsideiing circmnstauecs.

‘ On the sixteenth day, A]>nl <;lh’ (King I'liednch huriying from
the Mountains that same day, towards Stcinan, Avhicb took fne uith
him at night), ‘ Boca-Chicn Castle ami the inti Late War-Ships, Booms,

‘ and Castles theieabouts (Don Bl.is lunning olfwhen the push became
‘ intense), are at last got. So that inm-, through Boca-Chica, \vc enter
‘ the Interior Harbour or Haiboui". “ Harboms'’ wdiich are of wide
‘ extent, and deep enough ; being in fact .1 Lake, or rather Pair of
‘ T.akes, with Castles {Cashllo CrnnJcy “Castle Craud,” tlio chief of
‘ them), with War-Ships sunk or alloat, and nuseellaneons obdiucthms;

‘ beyond all wdiicb, at the farther .shore, somfe live miles off, C'.uihagena
‘ Itself docs at last lie potentially accessible; imd we hope to get in
‘ upon Don Bias and it. Theic eiisue five days of intreate se.a-work ,
‘ not uuich of broadsiding, mainly tugging-out of sunk War-Ships,

‘ and the like, to get alongside of Castle Grand, which is the chief
‘ obstrmclion. *

‘ April loth, Caslic Giand it^df is got; nobody found in it ulicn

* we storm. Don Bias and the Sjianiards .teem much in terror; burn-
‘ ing any Ships they still have, near C’arthagcna; as if theie weic no
‘ chai>§2 now left/ This is the very day of Mollwdti Battle; near aliour
the hour when Schwerin broke into field-music, and advancctl with
thunderous glitter against the evening sun! ‘Carthagena F.xpedition is,
‘ at length, fairly in contact with its Problem, —the question rising,
“ Do you understand it, then?"

282 FIRST SILfiSIAN WAR. BookXiI.

April-May 1741'.*

* Up to this point, mfetakes of management had beeif made good

* by obstinate energy of execution; clear victory had gone on so far,

‘ the Capture of Carthagena now seemingly at hand. One thing was
‘ uniortunate: ‘'the able Mr, Moot” (mciilorious Captain of Foot, who,

* by accident, had spent some .sfucly on his bu.siness), “ the one real
‘ Fnginecr we had,” got killed in that Boca-Chica stniggl^an end to
‘poor Moor! So that the Siege ot Carthagena will have to go on
‘ imtJiont Engineer science henceforth. May bo import.anl, that,—who
‘ knows? Another thing was still more palpably important: Sca-Ge-
‘ neral Vemoii had an undisguised contempt for Land-General Went-
‘ worth. “A mere blockhead, wdiose Brother has a Borough,” thinks
‘ Vernon (himscll an Opposition Member, of high-sniffmg, S&'igry, not
‘ loo magnanimous turn);—and withdraws now to his Ships; intimut-
‘ ing: “ Do your Problem, then; I have set you down beside it, which
‘ was my part of the aftair!”—Let us give the attack of Fort Lazar,

‘ and end this sad business.

‘Sunday 16th April, Wentworth, once masterthe Upperaiost
‘ Lake or Harbour (what the Natives call the or Anchorage

* Proper), had disembaiked, high up to the light, a good way south of
‘ Carthagena; meaning to attack therclioin a certain Fort Lazar, which
‘ stands on a Hill between Carthagena and him : this Hill and Fort once
‘ his. he has Carthagena under his cannon: Carthagen.i in his pocket,

‘ as it were. “Fort not to be had without batteries,” Ihiuks Went-
‘ worth; though the sickly rainy season has set in. “Batteries? Scal-
‘ ing-ladders, you mean!” answers Vernon, with undisguised contempt.

‘ For the two are, by this time, almost in open (luarrcl. Wentworth
‘ starts building batteries, in spile of the rain-de! ages; then stops huild-
‘ ing;—decides to do it by scalade, aftei all. And, at two in lliemorn-
‘ ing of this Sunday April 16th, sets foul), in certain columns,-—by
‘ roads ill-known, with arrangements that do fit like clockwork,—
‘ to storm said Hill and Fort, The Fnglisli are an obstinate people;
‘ and strenuous execution will .sotnetimes amend defects of plan,—some-
‘ times not.

‘ The obstinate Englislf, nothing in them but sullen fire of valour,

‘ which has to burn «/«luminous, did, after mistake' on mistake, climb

* the rocks or heights of I.azar IWi, in spite of the w'orld and Don
‘ Blas’.s cannonading; but found, when atop, That Fort Lazar, raining
‘ cannon-shot, was still divided from them by chasms; that the scaling-

* ladders had nf)t come (never did come, owing to indiscipline *some-

* where),—and that, without wings or ol eagles, they could not reach
‘ Fort Lazar at all! For cAout four hours, they struggled with a des-
‘ perate doggalness, to overcome the chasms, to wrench aside the Laws
‘ of Nature, and do something useful for themselves; patiently, iiough

* sulkily; regardless of the .storm of shot which killed 600 of them, the

* while. At length, finding the Laws of Nature too strong for them,

* they descended gloomily; “ in gloomy silence” marched home to their
‘ tents j^ain,—in a humour too deep for words, ,

Cliap.xil. SORROWS bF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 283

ApriUMay I74I0 •*

‘ Yes; .ind wefmd they fell sick in mullitudcs, that night; and, “in

* two days more, were reduced hom 6,645 to 3,200 cffettivc;'’ Veruon,

‘ fnun the sea, looking diidainkilly on: -ami i( hncame evi<lciit iluu
‘ the big Ihojeet had gone to v\atcr; and that nolliing would ninain
‘ but to u'luin straightway to Jamaica, in l>mkrupt comiiiioii. Which
‘ aocordingl\was set about. And ten <lays hence (A»)1 j 1 26th), the liual
‘ paity ol them did get on boaid,—punctu d to like three tents/' their
‘ last lag of .Sioge-funutuie, rdong with them; “lest Don Idas have
‘ tiophic-,” thinks poor Wentuoith. And sailed away, -viitli their sad

* Siege finished in such fashion. Strenuous Siege; wbuh, had tlie Wav-
' Scicnee^irjeen foolishness, and tlie Ivews of IMatuio and the rigours of

* Arilhii'ctic and C/eonicliy hceu stretchable entities, might have sue-
‘ ceeded better!’**-—

“jivening of April 26th — I perceive it was in the very
hours while licllysle arrived in Friedrich’s Camp at Molhvitz ;
cve of that Siege of Brieg, which we saw performing itself with
puncUial rcg.ird to said Laws and rigours, and issuing in so
different a manner ! Nothing that my Constitutional Historian
has sanl ec[uals in pungent if irmity the matter-of-faoL ri(.ture,
left by Tobias Smollett, of the sick and wounded, in the in¬
terim which followed that attempt on l^’ort Lazar and the Lavi'S
of Nature;

“ At- for the sick and wounded,” says Tobias, “ they were, next
“ day, sent on Imul ot tiic tnnspoils and ve-^Acls called hosi>ital'sliipa;
“ vvheic they languishL I in wail of cveiy neccssaiy comfort and acconi-
“ modalion. '^1 hey wcie d< tilulc ol ^lllg■.ons, nuiscN, cooks and pro-
“ pci piovision; theyv.LU pent up between dciks ui'-mill vesicls, wlicrc
“ they had not 100m to at upiignt; they viallouedinu filth; myriads of
“ maggots weie hatched in the putici.a non of their sores, which had
“ no other dres.sing than ilut ol being wadied by tliemselves with their
“ own allowance ot brandy; and nothing w .c, heaul but gioans, lament-
“ ations and the language of despair, invoking dcatli to delivei them
“ from their misedes. What scrvjjfl to encourage this despondence,
was the prospect of those pom wretches w'ho had strength and oppor-
“ tuniiy to look around them; toi there they beheld the naked bodies
“ of tljrf:ir fellow-boldiois and coniiades lloaling up ani^down the har-
“ boui, affording presto the carrion-crow■> and sharks, which tore them
“ in pieces without iuteiTiiption,*and contwhuting by their .stench to
“ the mortality that pn vailed.

“ '^his picture cannot fail to be shocking to the humane leader,
“ especially when he is infoi'mcd, that while those nii'.crable objects
“ pried in vam for as^Bstance, and actually perished for want of proper
“ attendance, every ship ot war in the fleet could have spared a couple

•• Smollett's A.zcoMtit^\^iscellaneous IVorAs (Edihbureh, 1806), iv. 445-460, is that
of a highly intelligent Eyewitness, credible and intelligible in every particular.

FIRST SILESIAN 'WAR.

284

Book XII.

April-May 1741.

‘ Qfsnrgeons for their relief; and many younja^ gentlemen of mat profession
‘ '.ulicitcd their captains in vain for leave to go and administer help to
‘ ilie sick lud wounded. The necessities r>fthe poor people were veil

• known; the remedy was easy and aj>pareni; but the discord between
‘ the chiefs was indamed to such a degree of diabolical rancour, that
‘ llto one chose rather to see his men peiish than ask helj^'Sf the other,

* who disdained to offer his assistance una.'.ked, though it might have
‘ saved the lives of his fe]low-.subjects.”*2

In such an amazing condition is the English Fighting Ap¬
paratus under Walpole, being important for England\sclf only ;
while the Talking Apparatus, important for Walpole, is in such
excellent gearing, so well kept in repair and oil! By Went¬
worth’s blame, who had no knowledge of war; by Vernon^, who
sat fiiiTious on the Opposition side, yet wanted loyalty of mind;
by one’s blame and another’s, ‘ivhosc it is idl(f arguing, here is
how your Fighting Apparatus performs in the hour when needed.
Unfortunate General, or General’s Cockeil-Hat (a brave heart
too, they say, though of brain too vacant, too opaque) ; unfor¬
tunate Admiral (much blown away by vanity, ili-nature and
Pailiamentavy wind); — doubly unfortunate Nation, that em¬
ploys such to lead its armaments ! Flow the English Nation
took it ? The English Nation has had muc'h of this kind to
take, first and last; and apparently will yet have. ‘Gloomy
silence,’ like that of the poor men going home to their tents,
is our only dialect towards it.

This is .a dreridful busine.ss, this of the wrecked Carthagena
Expedition; such a force of war-munitions in every kind,—•
including the rare kind, human Courage and force of heart,
only not human Captaincy, the rarest kind, — as could have
swallowed South America at discretion, had there been Cap¬
tains over it. Has gone blundering down into Orcus and the
shark’s belly, in that unutterable manner. Might have been
didactic to England, more than it was ; England’s skin-being
very thick against Icssojis of tha* nature. Might have broken
the heart of a little Sovereign Gentleman, Curator of England,
had he gone hypochondriacally into it; which he w^as far
from doing, brisk little Gentleman; looking out elsewhither,
with those eyes d fleur de tHe^ and nothifig of insoluble ad¬
mitted into the brain that dwelt inside.

>2 Smollett, ibid. (Anderboa's Edition), W. 4^.

Chap. XII. SORROWS OF BRITANNIC MAJESTY. 285

ApriUMa.y 1741. *

*’ What became subsequently of the S^nish W^ we in vain
inquire of History-Books. The War did not die for many years
to come, but neither did it i^ublicly live; it disappears at this
point: a River Niger, seen once flowing broad enough; but
issuing—Docs it issue nowhere, then ? Where does it issue ?
Except fcHt my Constitutional Historian, still unpublished, I
should never have known where.—By the time these disastrous
Carthagena tidings reached England, his Britannic Majesty
was in Hanover; involved, he, and all his State-doctors, English
.ind Hanoverian, in awful contemplation on Pragmatic Sanc¬
tion, Kaiflbr-Wahl, Celestial Balance, and the saving of Nature’s
Keystone, should this still prove possible to human effort and
contrivance. In which Immincncy of Doomsday itself, the
small <English-Spanish matter, which the Official people, and
his Majesty as ij^uch as any, had bitterly disliked, was quite
let go, and dropped out of view. Forgotten by Official people;
left to the dumb English Nation, whose concern it was, to ad¬
minister as // could,

Anson,—with his three slops gone to two, gone ultimately
to one,—is henceforth what. Spanish War there officially is.
Anson could not meet those Vernon-Wentworth gentlemen
•from the other side of the Isthmus of Darien,’ the gentlemen,
with their Enterprise, being already bankrupt and away. An¬
son, with three inconsiderable ships, which rotted gradually
into one, could not himself settle the Spanish War: but he did,
on his own score, a series of things, ending in beautiful finis
of the Acapulco Ship, which were of considiirable detriment,
and of highly considerable disgrace, to Spain;— -and were, and
are long likely to be, memorable among the Sea-heroisms of
the world. Giving proof that real Captains, taciturn Sons of
Anak, are still born in England; and Sea-kings, equal to any
that were. Luckily, too, he had !R)nie chaplain or ship’s-surgeon
on board, who saw good to write account of that memorable
Voyage of his; arid did it, in brief, perspicuous tejms, wise and
credible: a real Pq^m in its kind, or Romance all Fact; one
of the pleasantest little Book? in the World’s Library at this
date. Anson sheds some tincture of heroic beauty over that
otherwiise altogether hideous puddle of mismanagement, plati¬
tude, disaster; and^vindicalcs, in a pathetically potential way,
the honour of his poor Nation a little.

Apart from Official Anson, the Spanish War fell mainly,

286 FIRST SILESIAN WAk n..oi.xir.

^ April-May 1741.

we may sayi. into the hands ot—of Mr. Jenkins himself, anci
such Friends ot his, &t Wapping, Bristol and the Seaports, as
might be disposed to go privateering. In which course, after
some crosses at first, and great complaints of lossesSpanish
Privateers, Wapping and Bristol did at length eminently get
the upper hand; and thus carric<l on this Spanydi War (or
Spanish-French, Spain and Franre having got intfe one boat),
for long years coming, in an entirely inarticulate, but by no
means quite ineffectual manner,—indeed, to the ultimate clear¬
ance of the Seas from both French and Spaniard, within the
next twenty years. Readers shall take this little ExCA pi, dated
Three Years hence, and set it twinkling in the night of their
imaginations:

Biiifoly Monday %\st (loM) September 1744. * * ‘ Nothrfig is to

‘ be seen heie but reioicings fn the nunibei of Fr^Mich prizes bionglit
‘ into Ibis port. Our Sailors me in bi^li spirit-i, and lull ot money;
‘ and Avhile on shore, spend tbeir whole lime in <‘aiousing, \isUing duir
‘ mistrchiCs, going to plavN seicividin*',, dies-.('d out with l.iccd
‘hats, loisels (s/t), sv^uids uith swoj'l I'nots, and every other way of
‘ spending their money,’*®

Ciirthagena, Walpole, Viners : here are Sorrows for a Bri¬
tannic Majesty; — and these arc nothing like all. But poor
readers should have some respite; brief breathing-time, were
it only to use their pocket-handkerchiefs, and summon new
courage I

chaptp:r XIlI.

«•

SMALL-WAU: FIRST EMF.KGENCe OF ZIRTHKN THE HUSSAR
GENERAL INTO NOTICE.

After Brieg, Friedrich undertook nothing militar)*, except
stiict vigilance of Neipperg, for a couple of months or more.
Military, especially offensive operations, are not the methods
just now. Rest on your oars ; see how this seething Ocean of
F.uropean Poiitics, and Peace or War, will settle itself irfto cur¬
rents, into set winds; Iwwhichv'tfthem a ftian may steer, who
happens to have a fixecT port in view'. Neipperg, too, is glad
to be quiescent; “my Infantry hopelessly inferior,” hc^writes
to headquarters: “ Could not one hire 10,000 Saxons, think
you,”—or do several other chimerical thifigs, for help ^ £x-

Extract of a Letter firom Bristol, iu Getttlema»’s Magasiu$e, xiv. 504.

ciup. XIII.- ZIET!iEN the hussar general. 287

17th May 1741.

s^:cpt with his Pandour people, working what misthicf they can,
Neippcrg floes nothing. But this Hungarian rabble is exten¬
sively industrious, scouring the country far and wide; and gives
a great deal of trouble both to Friedrich and the peaceable in¬
habitants. So that there is plenty of Small War alw<iys going
on:—not^mentionable here, any passage of it, except perhaps
one, at a jllace called Rothschloss; which conccins a remark¬
able Prussian Hussar Major, their famed Ziethen, and is still
remembered by the Prussian public.

We have heard of Captain, now Major Ziethen, how Fried¬
rich Wiihtdm sent him to the Rhine Campaign, six years ago,
to learn the Hussar Art from the Austrians there. One Ba-
ronay {Baroniny^ or even Baranyai, as others write him), an
exceljpnt hand, taught him the Art ; — and how well he has
learned, Baronay now sadly experiences. The Affair of Roth-
sdiloss (in abridged form) befell as follows:

* In these Small-War Imsinesse?, Baron.iy, Austrian Major-General
‘ of fliis&ars, had been excei’clmgly mischievous hitheito. P was hut
‘ the other day, a Prussian icguTai j nly bad to go out upon him, just
‘iu time; aitd to 7 't’-wreiich “ si\ly cailloads of meal,” wrenched Ijy
‘him from suffering individuals; witli which lie was making off to
‘ Neisse, when the PrU'.suns’ (from their Camp of Mollwitz, whcie
they still are) ‘ came iu siglit.

‘ And now .again (May i6th) news is, That Baronay, and 1,400 Hus-
‘ sars with him, has another coiniderablo set of meal c.irls,—iu the
‘ Village of Rothschloss, about twenty miles southward, Frankenstein
‘ way; and means to match with them Neisso-waid tomonow. Two
‘ uiiuches or so will bung him home; if JVussiau d^igence prevent not.

‘ “Go iiutanlly,” otders Friedrich,—apjioinllng TAbnterleld to do it:

‘ Wmterfeld with 300 dragoons, with Ziethen and Tlussais to the .amount
‘ of 600; which is more ih.in one to two of Austrians.

‘ Winterfeld and Ziethen march th.1l same day; are in the neigh-
‘ bourhood of Rothschloss by nightf.iH; and lake their measures,—
‘ block the road to Neisse, and do ^her necessary things. And go in
‘ upon Baronay next morning, at Uie dne rate, ficiy men both of them;
‘sweep poor Baronay away, minus the meal; who fiucL even his
‘ road ♦docked (biidge bmsling into cannon-shot upon him, at one
‘ point), instead of bfldge a strcim, or slojpr cuirent of cpiagmiie for
‘ liim,—and is in imminent h.i/.ird. Ziethen’s behaviour was siijierla-

, ‘live (details of it uuinlelligible oflf the ground); and Haronay Jlod
‘ totally in wreck;—^lii.s onm horse shot, .md at the moment no other
* to be had; sw.im th|j quagmiie, or swashed through it, “ by help of
’ a-trecand had a near miss of capture. Recovering himself on the
‘ other side, Baronay, we can fancy, gave a grin of various expression,

288 FIRST SILESIAN WAR. Eookxn.

17th May 1741,

* ns he into^’saddle aggin: “The arrow so near killing Aj^as feathered
‘ from one’s own Aving, too!”—And indeed, a day or two aftei, he
‘ wrote Zictheii a handsome Letter to that effect. ’*

Ziethen, for minor good feats, had been made Lieutenant-
Colonel, the very day he marched; his Commission dates May
16th, 1741; and on the morrow he handsels it in this pretty
manner. He is now forty-two ; much held dowrf hitherto ;
being a man of inarticulate turn, hot and abrupt in his ways,
—liable always to multifarious obstruction, and unjust contra¬
diction from his fellowicreatures. But Winterfeld’s report on
this occasion was emphatic ; and Ziethen shoots ra\ti(lly up
henceforth; Colonel within the year. General in 1744; and
more and more esteemed by Friedrich during their subsequent
long life together.

Though perhaps the two most opposite men in Nature, and
standing so far apart, they fully recognised one another in their
scveral spheres. P'or Zicthen too had good eyesiglit, tliough
in abstruse sort:—rugged simple son of the mooiLinds; nour¬
ished, body and soul, on orthodox frugal oatmeal (so to speak),
with a large sprinkling of fne and iron thrown m ! A man
born poor: son of some poor Squirclet in the Ruppin Country;
—‘used to walk five miles into Ruppin on Saturday nights,'
in early life, ‘ and have his hair done into club, which had to
‘ last him till the week following.’^ A big-headed, thick-lipped,
decidedly ugly little man. And yet so beautiful in his ugliness;
wise, resolute, true, with a dash of high uncomplaining sorrow
in him;—not tho ‘bleached rigger' at all, as Print-Collectors
sometimes call him! No; but (on those oatmeal terms) the
Socrates-Odysseus, the valiant pious Stoic, and much-enduring
man. One of the best Hussar Captains ever built. By degrees
King Friedrich and he grew to be,—with considerable tiffs
now and then, and intervals of gloom and eclipse,—what we
might call sworn friends. On which and on general grounds,
Ziethen has Ijecomc, like Friedrich himself, a kind of mythical
person with the soldiery and common people; more of a demi¬
god than any other of r-ricdriclis Captains.

Friedrich is always eagerly in quest of men like Ziethen;

* fleldin-Geschitkte,\ 327; Orlich, i. lao, 'I'lte Lifehf Gfneral de 7 ieten{)Lnf^
lish Translation, very ill printed, Berlin, 1803), by Frau von Blumentknl (a vaguwi
eloquent L^dy, but with acceb!> to infonnalioii, being n connexion of Z.’&), p. 84.

’ Mihtair-Lexikon, iv. 310.

Chap xiit. ZIETHEN the hussar general. '289

171 Fi J^Iay 17(1 r.

specially |o at this time. He has meditated mf^h on the bad '
figure his Cavalry made at Mollwitz ; and is already drilling,
them anew in multiplex w'ays, during those leisure days he now
has,—'With evident success on the next trial, this very Summer.
And, as his wont is, will not rest satisfied there, , But strives
inccssaiTlly, for a series of summers and years to come, till he
bring thetn to perfection; or to the likeness of his own thought,
which probably was not far from that. Till at length it can be
said his success became world-famous ; and he had such Seid-
litzcs and Ziethens as were not seen before or since.

END OF VOL. TV.
